DIATRIBAE. DISCOURSES ON DIVERSE TEXTS OF SCRIPTVRE: Delivered upon several
occasions,

BY JOSEPH MEDE, B. D. late Fellow of Christ's College in CAMBRIDGE.

Printed by the Authors own Copy.

The Contents you shall find in the next leaf.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for JOHN CLARK, and are to be sold at his Shop under
S. Peter's Church in Cornhill.

M DC XLII.

The Contents of the several Texts of Scripture, delivered in this Treatise.
S. MATTHEW. 6. 9. Thus therefore pray ye, Our Father, etc. page 1. MATTHEW. 6. 9.
LUKE 11. 2. Sanctified, or, hallowed be thy Name. p. 17. ACTS 17. 4. There
associated themselves to Paul and Silas of the worshipping Greeks a great
multitude. p. 82. 2 PETER 2. 4. For if God spared not the Angels which sinned,
[(...)] but cast them down to hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness
to be reserved unto Judgment, etc. so we translate it: To which of S. Peter,
answers that of S. Jude, (as almost that whole Epistle does, to this) verse 6.
And the Angels which kept not their first estate [or principality] but left
their own habitation, he has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness
unto the Judgment of the great Day. p. 99. 1 COR. 4. 1. Let a man so account
of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God. p.
108. S. JOHN 10. 20. He has a Devil, and is mad. p 120. PROVERBS 21. 16. The
Man that wandreth out of the way of understanding, shall remain in the
Congregation of the Dead. (...), in coetu Gigantum. p. 132. GENESIS 49. 10. The
Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet,
until SHILOH come, and unto him shall the gathering of the People be. p. 144.
PSALM 8. 2. Out of the Mouth of Babes and Sucklings, thou have ordained
strength, because of thine enemies; that thou might quell the Enemy, and the
Avenger. p. 155. ZACH. 4. 10. These seven are the Eyes of the Lord, which run
to and fro through the whole earth. p. 172. S. MARK 11. 17. Is it not written,
My House shall be called a House of Prayer, [(...)] to all [the] Nations? p.
187. S. JOHN 4. 23. But the hour comes, and now is, when the true worshippers
shall worship the Father in spirit and truth; For the Father seeks such to
worship him. page 197. S. LUKE 24. 45. Then opened he their understanding, that
they might understand the Scriptures. 46. And said unto them, Thus it is
written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the
third day. p. 210. EXODUS 4. 25. Then Zipporah took a sharp stone; and cut off
the foreskin of her son, and cast it at his feet, and said (...), Sponsus
sanguinum tu mihi es. page 222. EZEKIEL 20. 20. Hallow my Sabbath, and they
shall be a sign between me and you, to acknowledge that I Jehovah am your God.
page 234. 1 COR 11. 5. Every woman praying or prophesying with her head
uncovered, dishonors her head. p. 246. TITUS 3. 5. By the washing of
Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. p. 262. JOSH. 24. 26. And
(Iosh^ah) took a great stone, and set it up there (viz. in Sichem) under the
Oak, which was in the Sanctuary of the Lord: Alii, by the Sanctuary. Heb.
(...). page 274 1 TIMOTHY 5. 17. Let the Elders that rule well be counted worthy
of double honor: especially they that labor in the Word and Doctrine. p. 296.
ACTS 2. 5. And there were [(...)] sojourning at Jerusalem Iows, devout men, out
of every Nation under heaven. p. 311. 1 COR. 9. 14. Even so has the Lord
ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel; (...)
page 324.
Three other Treatises by the same Author formerly Printed, which may be added,
viz.
1. The Name ALTAR, or (...). 2. CHURCHES, that is, Appropriate Places for
Christian Worship. 1 COR. 11. 22. Have ye not houses to eat and drink in?
[(...)] Or despise ye the CHVRCH of God? 3. The Reverence of GODS HOUSE.
ECCLESIASTES 5. 1. Look to thy foot [or feet] when thou come to the House of
God; and be more ready to obey, then to offer the sacrifice of fools; for they
know not that they do evil.
Errata.
FOlio 9. line 10. testimonies, in, r. testimonies. In. fol. 24. l. 16, 28. the
Hebrew words are false printed, and misplaced. fol. 87. 2. (...), the words
inverted, fol 88. line 8. (...), r. (...). fo. 125. line 19. the Hebrew words
are inverted. line 18. (...) r. (...). fol. 130. line 14. siqui r. siquis. fol.
150. line 11. (...) r. (...). fol. 162. ult. (...) r. (...) fol. 184. in the
margin the Hebrew is amiss. fol. 229. the Hebrew is transposed, and
mis-printed. fo. 273. line 14. imitation, r. initiation. so. 284 line 3. Act^
21. r Acts 16. fol. 334. line 21. (...).

DISCOURSES Mat. 6. 9.
ON DIVERSE TEXTS of SCRIPTURE.
S. MATTHEW 6. 9. Thus therefore pray ye, Our Father, etc.
IT was well hoped, after the question about the lawfulness and fitness of a
set form of Prayer had been so long debated in our Church, that the sect of
those who opposed it, had been ere this well-nigh extinguished; but experience
tells us the contrary; that this fancy is not only still living, but begins, as
it were, to recover and get strength afresh: In which regard, my discourse, at
this time, will not be unseasonable, if, taking my rise from these words of our
Savior, I acquaint you, upon what grounds and example this practice of the
Christian Church has been established, and how frivolous and weak the reasons
are, which some of late do bring against it. To begin therefore; You see by
the Text I have now read, that our blessed Savior delivered a set form of
prayer unto his Disciples, and in so doing has commended the use of a set form
of prayer unto his Church; Thus therefore (says he) pray ye, Our Father which
art in heaven, etc.

Is not this a set form of prayer? and did not our Savior deliver it to be
used by his Disciples? They tell us, No. For Thus, say they, in this place is
not thus to be understood, but for, in this manner, to this effect or sense, or
after this pattern; not in these words and syllables. To this I answer; It is
true, that this form of prayer is a pattern for us to make other prayers by;
but that this only should be the meaning of our Saviors Thus, and not the
rehearsal of the words themselves, I utterly deny; and I prove it out of the
eleventh Chapter of S. Luke, where the same prayer is again delivered in these
words, (...), When you pray, say, Our Father which art in heaven -- that is,
do it in haec Verba. For what other phrase is there to express such a meaning,
if this be not? Besides, in this of S. Luke, the occasion would be considered.
It came to pass (says he) as Jesus was praying in a certain place, that when
he ceased, one of his Disciples said unto him, Lord teach us to pray, as John
also taught his Disciples. From whence it may not improbably be gathered, that
this was the custom of the Doctors of Israel, to deliver some certain form of
Prayer unto their Disciples, to use, as it were a Badge and Symbolum of their
Discipleship; at least John Baptist had done so unto his Disciples; and
thereupon our Saviors Disciples besought him, that he also would give them in
like manner some form of his making: that they might also pray with their
Masters spirit, as John's Disciples did with theirs. For that either our
Saviors, or John's Disciples knew not how to pray till now, were ridiculous to
imagine; they being both of them Jews, who had their certain set hours of
prayer, which they constantly observed, as the third, sixth, and ninth. It was
therefore a form of prayer of their Masters making, which both John is said to
have given his Disciples, and our Saviors Disciples besought him to give them.

For the fuller understanding whereof, I must tell you something more, and the
rather because it is not commonly taken notice of; and that is, That this
delivery of the Lords prayer in S. Luke, is not the same with that related by
S. Matthew, but another, at another time, and upon another occasion: That of S.
Matthew in that famous Sermon of Christ upon the Mount, whereof it is a part;
that of S. Luke upon a special motion of the Disciples at a time when himself
had done praying: That of S. Matthew in the second; that of S. Luke in the
third year after his Baptism: Consider the Text of both, and you shall find
it impossible to bring them into one and the same: whence it follows, that the
Disciples, when it was first uttered, understood not that their Master intended
it for a form of prayer unto them, but for a pattern or example only, or it
may be to instruct them in special, in what manner to ask forgiveness of sins:
For if they had thought he had given them a form of prayer then, they would
never have asked him for one now; wherefore our Savior this second time utters
himself more expressly, (...), When ye pray, say, Our Father which art in
heaven -- Thus their inadvertency becomes our confirmation; For as Joseph said
to Pharaoh, The dream is doubled unto Pharaoh, because the thing is
established by God; so may we say here; The delivery of this prayer was
doubled unto the Disciples, that they and we might thereby know the more
certainly, that our Savior intended and commended it for a set form of prayer
unto his Church.

Thus much of that set form of prayer, which our Savior gave unto his
Disciples, as a precedent and warrant to his Church to give the like forms to
her Disciples, or members; a thing which from her infancy she used to do. But
because her practice is called in question, as not warranted by Scripture, let
us see what was the practice of the Church of the old Testament, then whose
example and use, we can have no better rule to follow in the New.

First therefore, we find two set forms of prayer or invocation, appointed by
God himself in the Law of Moses: One, the form wherewith the Priests were to
bless the people; Number. 6. 23. On this wise, says he, shall Aaron and his sons
bless the children of Israel, saying unto them: The Lord bless thee and keep
thee, the Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee; The
Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace. Is not this a set
form of Prayer? For what is to bless, but to pray over or invocate God for
another?

The second, is the form of profession and prayer to be used by him, who had
paid his Tithes every third year, Deuteronomy. 26. 13. O Lord God, I have brought
away the hallowed things out of mine house, and also have given them unto the
Levite, and unto the stranger, to the Fatherless and unto the widow, according
to all thy commandments, which thou have commanded me: I have not transgressed
thy Commandments, neither have I forgotten them. 14. I have not eaten thereof
in my mourning, neither have I taken away ought thereof for any unclean use,
etc. 15. Look down from thy holy habitation, from heaven, and bless thy
people Israel, and the Land which thou have given us, as thou swarest to our
Fathers, a Land that flows with Milk and honey.

But what need we seek thus for scattered Forms, when we have a whole book
of them together? The Book of Psalms was the Jewish Liturgy, or the chief
part of the vocal service wherewith they worshipped God in the Temple; This is
evident by the Titles of the Psalms themselves, which show them to have been
commended to the several Quires in the same, to Asaph, to the sons of Korah,
to Ieduthun, and almost forty of them to the Magister Symphoniae in general.
The like we are to conceive of those which have no titles; as for example, of
the 105 and 96 Psalms, which, though they have no such Inscription in the
Psalme-booke, yet we find 1 Chronicles. 16. 7. That they were delivered by David
into the hands of Asaph and his Brethren for forms to thank the Lord. This a
man would think were sufficient to take away all scruple in this point;
especially, when (...) solve^, and all the reformed Churches, use to sing the
same Psalms not only as set forms, but set in Meeter, that is after a humane
composure. Are not the Psalms set forms of Confession, of Prayer, and of
Praising God? And in case there had been no prayers amongst them, yet what
reason could be given, why it should not be as lawful to pray unto God in a
set form, as to praise him in such a one? What therefore do they say to this?
Why, they tell us, that the Psalms are not sung in the Church unto God, but so
rehearsed for instruction of the people only; namely, as the Chapters and
Lessons are there read, and no otherwise. But, if either we do, ought, or may
sing the Psalms in the Church, with the same end and purpose that the Church
of the old Testament did, (and it were absurd to say we might not) this
exception will not subsist: for what is more certain, then that the Church of
Israel used the Psalms for Forms of praising and invocating God? What mean
else those forms, Cantemus Domino, Psallite Domino, and the like so frequent
in them? But there are more direct and express testimonies: In the 1 Chronicles.
25. it is expressly said of Ieduthu^ and his so^^es, that their office was, to
prophecy with a Harp, to give thanks and to praise the Lord. In the second of
Chron. 30. 21. we read, that the Levites and Priests praised the Lord day by
day, singing with loud Instruments unto the Lord. And as ye heard even now out
of 1 Chronicles. 16. that David, at the time when he brought up the Ark unto
Jerusalem, then first delivered the 105. and 95 Psalms into the hands of A^ and
his sons, to confess or give thanks unto the Lord. And lastly, to leave no
place for farther doubt, we read Ezra 3. 11. That the Levites the sons of
Asaph were set with Cymbals to praise the Lord, after the ordinance of David
King of Israel. And that, they sung together by course, in praising and giving
thanks unto the Lord, because he is good, for his mercy endures for ever. For
this reason, the four and twenty Courses or Quires, into which the singers of
the Temple were divided by King David to serve in their turns, consisted each
of them of twelve, according to the number of the tribes of Israel; that so
every Tribe might have a mouth and voice, to praise and to give thanks unto God
for him in the Temple.

Thus we have seen, what warrant to pray, and call upon God in a set form
has from the practice of the Church of God in the old Testament; And, if
reason may have place, in the public service of God, where one is the mouth of
many, there is none so proper and convenient. For how can the Minister be said
properly to be the mouth of the Congregation in prayer unto God, when the
Congregation is not first made acquainted, and privy to what he is to render
unto God in their names? which in a voluntary and extemporary Prayer they are
not, nor well can be. I am sure neither so properly, nor conveniently, as in a
set form, which both they and the whole Church have agreed upon, and offer
unto God at the same time, though in several places, in the self-same form
and words: And this may be a second reason; I mean from Uniformity, For how
can the Church, being a mystical Body, better testify her unity before God,
then in her uniformity in calling upon him? especially our Savior telling us,
that if but two or three shall agree together on earth, as touching anything
that they shall ask, it shall be done unto them of his Father which is in
heaven; So prevailable with Allmighty God is the power of consent in prayer.

Let us now, in the last place, see what reasons they bring, who contend
altogether for voluntary prayer, and would have no set forms used. First, they
say, it is the ordinance of God, that the Church should be edified by the gifts
of her Ministers, as well in praying as preaching. Ergo, their prayers should
be extemporary or voluntary; because in reading a set form this gift cannot be
shown.

To this I answer: First, that there is not, in this point, the same reason for
Prayer, and for Preaching; for in prayer (I mean Public) the Minister is the
mouth of the Church unto God, and therefore it were convenient, they should
know what he puts up to God, in their names; but in preaching, he is not so.
Secondly, Why should not the Pastors and Ministers of the Church, edify the
Church by their gift of prayer, as well in composing a set form of prayer for
her use by general agreement, as in uttering a voluntary or extemporary prayer
in a particular Congregation? Thirdly, Are not the members of the Church to be
edified, as well by the Spirit of the Church, as the Church or some part
thereof by the Spirit of a member? But how can the Church edify her members by
her gift of prayer, otherwise then by a set form agreed upon by her consent?
Fourthly, Ostentation of gifts is one thing, but edification by them another.
Ostentation of the gift of prayer is indeed best shown in a voluntary or
extemporary prayer; but the Church may be edified as well by a set form; Yea,
such a form in the public service of God is more edificative, then a
voluntary. And that, both because the Congregation is first made acquainted
therewith; and secondly, because they are better secured from being engaged in
ought that might be unfit to speak unto God, either for matter or manner, or
such as they would not have given their consent to, if they had been aware of
it. For, now that extraordinary assistance of the Holy Ghost, which was in the
Primitive and Apostolical times, is long since ceased; And all men, to whom
that office belongs, to speak to God for others, are not at all times
discreet and well advised, when they speak to him at will, and extempore, but
subject to miscariage. Lastly, I answer, That the Church is to be edified by
the gift of her Ministers in voluntary prayer, loco and tempore, in fit place
and upon fit occasions, not in all places, and upon all occasions. And thus
much to this objection.

But they object secondly; that the Spirit ought to be free and unlimited, and
that therefore a Book or set form of prayer, which limits the spirit in
praying, is not to be tolerated or used.

To this I answer: it is false, that the acting of the Spirit in one Christan,
may not be limited or regulated by the Spirit of another; especially, the
spirit of a particular man in the public worship, by the spirit of the Church,
whereof he is a member. For does not the Apostle tell us, 1 Cor. 14. that even
that extraordinary spirit of Prophecy, usual in his time, might be limited by
the spirit of another Prophet? Let the Prophets, says he, speak two or three,
and let the other judge: If any thing be revealed to another that sits by,
let the first hold his peace. Is not this a limiting? He gives a reason: For
the spirits of the Prophets, says he, are subject to the Prophets. Besides,
are not the spirits of the people, as well limited and determined by a
voluntary prayer, when they join therein with their Minister, as they are by a
set form? True; the spirit of the Minister is then free; but theirs is not so,
but tied and led by the spirit of the Minister, as much as if he used a set
form. But to elude this, they tell us, that the Question is not of limiting
the spirit of the people, but of the Minister only; For, as for the people, no
more is required of them, but to join with their Minister, and to testify it
by saying Amen; but the spirit of the Minister ought to be left free, and not
to be limited. But where is this written? that the one may not be limited as
well as the other. We heard the Apostle say even now, The spirit of the
Prophets, is subject to the Prophets; If in prophesying, why not in praying?
And what show of reason can be given, why the spirit of a particular Minister
in the public worship of the Church, may not, yea ought not to be limited, and
regulated by the spirit of the Church representative, as well as the spirit of
a whole Congregation, by the spirit of a particular Minister? For every
particular Minister, is as much subordinate to the spirit of the Church
representative, as the spirit of the Congregation is to his; So much for this
objection.

There remains yet a third, which may be answered in two or three words. No
set form of prayer, say they, can serve for all occasions: What then? Yet why
may it not be used for all such occasions as it serves for? if any sudden and
unexpected occasion happen, for which the Church cannot provide, the spirit of
her Ministers is free: Who will forbid them to supply in such a case, that by a
voluntary and arbitrary form, which the Church could not provide for in a set
form? And this is what I intended to say of this argument.

THE Mat. 6. 9. Luke 11. 2.
SANCTIFICATION OF GODS NAME.
MATTHEW. 6. 9. LUKE 11. 2. Sanctificetur nomen tuum.
Sanctified, or hallowed be thy Name.

ALthough I make no question, but that which we so often repeat unto Almighty
God in our daily prayers, is for the general meaning thereof, by the most of
us, in some competent measure understood: Yet because by a more full and
distinct explication, the knowledge of some may be improved, and the
meditations of others occasioned to a further search: I hope I shall not do
amiss, nor be thought to have chosen a theme, either needless, or not so fit
for this Auditory; if I shall inquire what that is we pray for, in this first
Petition of the prayer our Lord has taught us, when we desire, That Gods Name
may be sanctified: For perhaps we shall find more contained therein, then is
commonly taken notice of.

The words are few, and therefore shall need no other Analyze, then what their
very number presents unto us, viz. Gods Name, and the sanctifying thereof;
Sanctificetur Nomen tuum. I will begin first with the last in order, but first
in nature, Nomen tuum, Gods Name. By which, according to the style of holy
Scripture, we are to understand in this place, first of all, God himself, or
his sacred Deity, to wit, abstractly expressed, according to the style of
eminency and dignity; (...). Dei (...), The Divine Majesty; as we are wont for
the King, to say His Majesty, or the Kings Majesty, and of other persons of
honor and eminency, Their Highness, Their Honor, His Excellency, and the
like; So of God His Name, and sometimes with the selfsame meaning, His Glory,
as Ier. 2. 11. Has any Nation changed their Gods, which yet are no Gods? but
my people have changed their Glory (i. their God) for that which is good for
naught. So Psalm 106. 20. of the Calf made in the Wilderness: They changed
their Glory into the similitude of an Ox that eats grass. And S. Paul,
Romans 1. 23. They changed the Glory (i. the Majesty) of the incorruptible God
into an Image made like to corruptible man, etc. Such is the notion; but much
more frequent, of Gods Name. In a word, Nomen Del, in this kind of use, is
nothing else but Divinum Numen. Whence it is, that in Scripture, To call upon
the Name of God, To blaspheme the Name of God, To love his Name, To swear by
his Name, To build a Temple to his Name, for his Name to dwell there: And in
the New Testament, To believe in the Name of the Lord Jesus, To call upon the
Name of the Lord Jesus; these I say, and the like expressions, have no other
meaning, then to do these things to the Divine Majesty, to the Lord Jesus,
whose is that Name above every Name, where at every knee must bow. Accordingly
here, Sanctificetur Nomen tuum, Hallowed be thy Name, is as much as to say,
Sanctificetur Numen tuum, Sanctified be thy Divine Majesty.

Secondly, under the Name of God here to be sanctified or hallowed, understand,
besides the Majesty of his Godhead, that also super quod invocatum est Nomen
ejus, whereupon his Name is called; or that which is called by his Name, (as we
in our Bibles commonly express this phrase of Scripture;) that is, all
whatsoever is Gods, or God is the Lord and owner of by a peculiar right; such
as are things sacred, whether they be persons, or whether things by distinction
so called, or Times, or Places, which have upon them a relation of
peculiarnesse toward God. For such as these are said in Scripture, To have the
Name of God called upon them, or To be called by his Name; that is, To be His.
Thus we read in Scripture, of an House which had the Name of God upon it, or
which was called by his Name, that is, of Gods House, (1 Kings 8. 43. Ier. 7.
10. etc.) Of a City upon which the Name of God was called or named, to wit, the
Holy City, Jerusalem the City of the great King, the Lord of hosts, (Ier. 25.
29. Dan. 9. 18.) Of an Ark upon which the Name of God the Lord was called (1
Chro. 13. 6. 2 Samuel 6. 2.) that is, the Lords Ark, or the Ark of his Covenant,
as it is elsewhere named. Of a people upon which the Name of the Lord was
called, or which were called by his Name (Deuteronomy. 28. 10. Dan. 9. 19. and
elsewhere) that is, were his peculiar and holy people; as is said in like
manner, and with like meaning of the Church of the New Testament; James 2. 7.
Acts 15 17. I represent not these places of Scripture at large, because I know
that every ear that is acquainted with Scripture, can bear witness unto them.
And for the meaning of this expression of Gods Name to be called upon a thing,
or a thing to be called by his Name, that it is all one as to say it to be His,
(besides the evidence of the matter wherabout it is used) appears by the same
phrase used in two other places, of the like relation of men to that which is
theirs, as Genesis 48 16. Where Jacob blessing Joseph's sons says The Angel which
redeemed me from all evil, bless the lads, and let my name be called upon
them; That is, let them be mine, namely, as Reuben and Simeon are mine, as he
says a little before; for they are words of adoption. Again in the fourth of
Esaias, where it is said, That seven women should take hold of one man, and say,
We will eat our own bread, and wear our own apparel; only let thy Name be
called upon us to take away our reproach; That is Do thou own us, or let us be
thine, that it may not be a reproach unto us, that we have no husband. The
Ancients were wont to set the Names of the Owners upon their houses, and other
possessions; which they called Tituli, Titles: Chrysologus Sermon. 145. Sicut
dominos praediorum liminibus affixi Tituli proloquuntur. S. Augustine in Psalm.
21. Quando potens aliquis invenerit Titulos suos, nonne jure rem sibi vendicat,
and dicit, Non ponere^ titulos meos, nisi res mea esset? Whether this phrase of
Scripture, of Gods Name to be called or named upon a thing, has reference unto
any such custom, I cannot affirm, but surely the meaning is the same; to wit,
that God is the Lord and Proprietar of them. And thus ye have heard what is
this Name of God we pray here to be sanctified; to wit, a twofold Name: First,
His Name and Majesty which we call upon; Secondly, that also which is called by
his Name: The first we may call his Personal, the other his Denominative or
participated Name.

Having learned what Nomen Dei imports, and so cleared the object of what we
pray for, let us next enquire, What that is, which the word Sanctify, or To be
sanctified, implies, being that which our vote witnesses, ought to be done
thereunto. And this I intended for the main and principal Argument of my
present Discourse, being a matter not so well traced as the former, and perhaps
not altogether freed of obscurity and difficulty to be understood. For our more
certain and assured discovery whereof, we will first examine the abstract
thereof, Sanctity, and find out the notion of it; namely, what is the ratio
formalis, the formal state, or nature of that which the Scripture entitleth in
the general, (...) or (...), that is, Holy; not regarding what notion the
Greeks or Latins had respect to in their Languages; but what the holy
Scripture properly intends under that name: For because to be Sanctified can
have but these two senses, either To be made holy, or To be used and done unto
according to, or as becomes its Holiness; and that the Majesty of God, which
is the prime object of this Act, is not capable of the first sense (viz. to be
made holy,) but of the second only: if we therefore once rightly understand
what is the condition and property of Sanctity, according to the notion of
Scripture, we shall not be long ignorant, what it is either for the Name or
Majesty of God, or that which is called by his Name to be hallowed or
Sanctified, namely, to be done unto according to their Holiness.

Now R. David Kimchi upon the 56 of Esaias, ver. 2 [ Blessed is the man that
keeps the Sabbath from polluting it] has these words, The sanctification of
the Sabbath (says he) (...) to separate or distinguish it from other days:
because every word of Sanctity (...) imports a thing separated or divided from
other things, by way of preeminence or excellency. Thus the Rabbi. And that
this which he says is true, namely, that sanctity consists in discretion and
distinction from other things, by way of exaltation and preeminence, may
appear by these instances and examples, which I shall now produce out of
Scripture.

And first from that Law touching the holy oil, Exodus 30. 31. where, after the
composition thereof described; This (says the Lord) shall be an holy anointing
oil unto me. what is that? it follows, Upon man's flesh shall it not be poured,
neither shall ye make any other like it, after the composition thereof. It is
Holy, therefore it shall be Holy unto you: that is, As this Oil is Holy and
discrete from other Oils, so shall it accordingly by you be used with
difference and discrimination: For the Text goes on; Whosoever compoundeth any
like it, or puts any of it upon a stranger, (that is, upon any besides those
it was appropriated to) shall be cut off from his people. What else means all
this, but that this Oil should be a singular or peculiar Oil, set apart and
distinguished from all other Oils, both in its composition and use, and that
to be such, was to be Holy or Sacred?

The like we shall find in the 35. verse of the same Chapter, concerning the
Holy perfume there described: Thou shall make it, says he, (to wit, with the
the ingredients he before mentioned) a perfume, a confection, after the art of
the Apothecary, tempered together, pure and Holy. verse 37. You shall not make
to your selves (i. not for your own use) according to the composition thereof.
It shall be unto you holy for the Lord. ver. 38. Whosoever shall make the like
unto it, to smell thereto, shall be cut off from his people.

But above all others this notion of sanctity or holiness is most expressly
intimated and taught us in those divine periphrases or circumlocutions, which
the Lord himself more then once makes of an Holy People, as Lev. 20. 24.
speaking on this manner; I am the Lord your God which have separated you from
other people. -- And ye shall be Holy unto me: for I the Lord am Holy, and have
severed you from other people, that ye should be mine. Mark here, that to
separate is to make Holy, and that to be Holy is to be separated from others of
the same rank. Again, Deuteronomy. 26. 18, 19. The Lord has avouched thee (to wit,
Israel) this day to be his peculiar (or appropriate) people, as he has
promised thee. -- And to make thee high above all Nations, which he has made,
in praise, in name, and in honor; namely, that thou may be an Holy people
unto the Lord thy God, as he has spoken. What is this but Rabbi Kimchi's
definition almost verbatim? That to be sacred or Holy is to be separated or
set apart from other things by way of excellence; or which is all one, To be
set in some state of singularity, or appropriatednesse, whereby it is advanced
above the common condition of things of the same order. He that will, may
compare also two other passages, Deuteronomy. 7. 6. and 14. 2. parallels to those I
have produced; where to be an holy, and to be a peculiar people, are made one
and the same, or the one expounded by the other.

It may be yet further confirmed by comparing Deuteronomy. 19. 2, 7. with Ioshuah 20.
7. For whereas in the former of these places it is said, concerning the Cities
of refuge: Thou shall separate, (...), three Cities for thee, in the midst of
thee: In Ioshuah, where this commandment is put in execution, we read in stead
of separated, (...), they sanctified three Cities, Kedesh, Shechem, and Hebron.
Where that the one is equivalent to the other, the Septuagint so well
understood, that even in this place of Ioshuah, for (...), which is,
Sanctificarunt, they rendered By which they are wont otherwise to render the
verb, (...). or (...).
(...), separarunt, or discreverunt.

The same notion of Holiness may be gathered also from the Antithesis, or
opposite thereunto, to wit, unholy, or unclean, which the Scripture is wont to
express by the name of Common. So S. Peter in his Vision, Acts 10. Lord, says
he, I have never eaten any thing that is common or unclean, (...). For know,
because that which is Holy ought to be kept pure and clean, or rather, because
cleanness imports a separation from filth, as Holiness does from common,
thence clean and holy, and so also unholy and unclean are used the one for the
other: whence 1 Cor. 7. 14. Unclean and Holy are opposed. But to go on; The
voice from heaven answers S. Peter in the same language: What God has cleansed
(that is, sanctified) (...), account not thou common. So in 1 Mac. Chap. 1.
(...) are unclean beasts, and (...), to eat unclean things.

The like Antithesis of holy and common is to be found Heb. 10. 29. where the
Apostle says of a Believer or Christian that lives an ungodly and wicked life;
He has trodden under foot the Son of God, and counted the blood of the
Covenant wherewith he was sanctified, (...), as a common thing; that is, he
has profaned it. Our translation renders it an unholy thing, the opposition
thereof to sanctified, witnessing that to be the meaning. Now then, if to be
unholy or unclean be to be common, surely it follows by the Law of opposition,
that to be holy, is to be separated from the common, and to be singular and
appropriate in some manner or other.

Lastly, it is to be observed, that whereas in the Law given Numbers 6.
concerning the Vow of Nazarisme (which signifies separation, of Nazar, to
separate) the words, To separate, and separation come very often in As the 70.
once or twice in this place, and elsewhere sometimes render the same word.
the Text; the vulgar Latin renders for them above ten times, Consecrare,
consecratio, sanctificare, and sanctificatio: which shows, that this notion,
namely, that Holiness consists in a state of separation, is no new conceit,
but such as Antiquity took notice of.

The nature of Holiness, wherein it consists, according to the idiome of
Scripture being thus found out and cleared, that which was aimed at in this
inquisition, to wit, what the same means by To sanctify, and to be
sanctified, will be no hard matter to resolve. For sanctity, and to sanctify
being Conjugates, or Denominatives, as Logicians call them, the one opens the
way to the knowledge of the other. If therefore Sanctity or Holiness be a
condition of discretion and distinction from other things, as we have showed it
to be; then To sanctify must either be to put a thing into that state, which
we call, To consecrate; or if it be such already, To use, and do unto it, as
becomes the sanctity thereof; that is Habere cum discrine, to put a difference
between it and other things by way of excellency, or in a dignifying wise, by
appropriating and severing it in the use thereof from things of ordinary and
common rank: or, which is all one, To use it singularly, appropriately, and in
a word, uncommonly. For not to use it so, it being such, were to abuse it;
which the Scripture calls to profane; to sanctify, and to profane being
opposites. Whence Ezekiel. 22. 26. To profane, is expounded by not putting a
difference: The Priests (says the Lord) have violated my Law, and have
profaned my holy things, they have put no difference between the holy and
profane.

This to be to sanctify, all the places almost which I have alleged out of
the Law, for the notion and nature of sanctity, do apparently proclaim: for
the one is so nearly linked to the other, that they could not well be
separated. Thus was Israel, Gods holy people, to sanctify themselves by a
discriminative manner of living, or usance, because the Lord their God had
discriminated or separated them from other people. So Lev. 20. 24, 25, etc. I
am the Lord your God, which have separated you from other people. Ye shall
therefore put difference between clean beasts and unclean, and between unclean
fowls, and clean: and ye shall not make your souls abominable by beast or by
fowl, or by any manner of living thing that creeps on the ground, which I
have separated from you as unclean. But ye shall be holy unto me; for I the
Lord am holy, and have severed you from other people, that ye should be mine.

After the same manner were the Holy Ointment, and Holy Perfume or Incense to
be sanctified by a discriminative, singular, appropriate usance of them, and
not to be used as other Ointments and Perfumes: to wit, the one not to be
poured upon man's flesh, nor the other used for man's smelling unto; yea none of
the like composition to the one or the other, to be made for any profane or
common use, upon pain of his being cut off from his people, who should dare to
do it. That is, not the particular or Individuum only, but even the whole
kind of that composition was to be accounted sacred; otherwise this caution
needed not, since for the Individual, all sacred things ought to be
appropriate and incommunicable in their use.

And to this notion it is not altogether improbable, but the Apostle may
allude, 1 Cor. 11. 29. when he expresses the profanation of the Holy Supper
in coming to it, and using it as a common banquet, by (...), by not
differencing the Lords body; i. not sanctifying it, or using it, as became so
holy a thing.

HITHERTO I have considered the words of my Text apart: but now let us put them
again together, and see, how the Name of God ought to be Sanctified, in the
manner now specified, both in it self, and in the things which it is called
upon; as in the beginning I distinguished. For the better understanding of
which, we are to take notice of a twofold Holiness; One original, absolute
and essential in God; the other derived or relative in the things which are
His, properly (according to the use of the Latin) called Sacr^, Sacred things.
Both these have their several and distinct Sanctifications belonging unto
them: for whatsoever is Holy, ought to be sanctified, according to the
condition and proportion of the Holiness it has.

To speak of them distinctly; The first, original or absolute Holiness is
nothing else, but the incommunicable eminency of the divine Majesty, exalted
above all, and divided from all other (...), or Eminences whatsoever. For that
which a man takes to be, and makes account of, as his God, (whether it be such
indeed, or by him fancied only) he ascribes unto it, in so doing, a condition
of eminency, above, and distinct from all other eminencies whatsoever, that is
of Holiness. Hence it comes, that we find the LORD the God of Israel, and the
only true God, in Scripture so often styled Sanctus Israelis, The Holy One of
Israel, that is, Isreal's most eminent and incommunicable one, or which is all
one, His God: as namely Psalm. 89. 18. The Lord is our defense, the HOLY ONE of
Israel is our King. Esaias 17. 7. At that day shall a man look unto his MAKER,
and his eyes shall have respect to the HOLY ONE of ^srael. Habak. 1. 12. Art
not thou from everlasting, O LORD my God, mine HOLY ONE? Agreeably whereunto
the Lord is said also now and then, To swear by his HOLINESS, that is, by
himself: as in the Psalm before alleged v. 35. Once have I sworn by my
HOLINESS, that I will not lie unto David, etc. Amos 4. 2. The Lord God has
sworn by his HOLINESS, that lo, the days shall come upon you that he will take
you away with ^ooks, etc. According to this sense I suppose also that of Amos
8. 7. is to be understood: The LORD has sworn by the Excellency See Es^y 24.
14. Micah 4. 3.
of Jacob, (that is, Jacobs most eminent and incommunicable One, or by Jacobs
HOLY ONE) Surely I will never forget any of their works, etc. For indeed the
Gods of the Nations were not properly and truly Holy, because but partially and
respectively only; Forasmuchas the Divine eminency, which they were supposed
to have, was, even in the opinion of those who worshipped them, common to
others with them, and so not discriminated from, nor exalted above all. But the
God of Israel was simply and absolutely such, both in himself and to them ward
who worshipped him, as who might acknowledge no other; and therefore (...), and
by way of distinction from all other Gods called Sanctus Israelis, The Holy One
of Israel; i. That sole, absolute, and only incommunicable One, or (...) (as
the Author of the Book of Wisdom calls him chap. 14. v. 21.) that God exalted
above all, and divided from all, without pareil, there being no other such
besides him. There is none Holy as the Lord (says Hannah) for there is none
besides thee, [The Septuagint, none Holy besides thee] neither is there any
ROC^ like our God. Wherefore it 1. S^m. 2. 2
is to be observed, that although the Scripture every where vouchsafes the
Gentiles Demons the name of Gods, yet it never, I think, calls them Holy Ones,
as indeed they were not. Thus you see that as Holiness in general imports a
state of eminency and separation, so this of God, as I have described it,
disagrees not from that general notion, when I affirm it to consist in a state
of peerlesse or incommunicable Majesty: for that which is such, includes both
the one and the other. But would you understand it yet better? Apply it then to
his attributes whereby he is known unto us, and know that The Lord is Holy, is
as much to say. He is a Majesty of peerlesse Power, of peerlesse Wisdom, of
peerlesse Goodness, and so of the rest. Such a one is our God, and such is his
Holiness.

Now then to Sanctify this peerlesse Name or Majesty of his, must be by doing
unto him according to that which his Holiness challenges in respect of the
double importance thereof: namely, To serve and glorify him; because of his
eminency; and to do it with a singular, separate and incommunicated worship,
because He is Holy. Not to do the former is Irreligion and Atheism, as not to
acknowledge God to be the chief and Sovereign eminency: not to observe the
second is Idolatry. For as the Lord our God is a singular and peerlesse
Majesty, distinguished from, and exalted above all things and eminencies else
whatsoever; so must his worship be singular, incommunicable and proper to him
alone. Otherwise (says Ioshuah to the people) You cannot serve the Lord. Why?
For (says he) He is an Holy God: he is a jealous God (that can endure no
corrivall,) he will not forgive Josh. 24. 19
your transgressions nor your sins, if ye forsake the Lord and serve strange
gods, etc.

Whence in Scripture, those who communicate the worship given unto him with any
besides him, or together with him, by way of Object, that is, whether
immediately, or but mediately, are deemed to deny his incomparable Sanctity,
and therefore said to profane his Holy Name: See Ezekiel. 20. 39. 43. 7, 8.

In a word, all that whole immediate Duty and service, which we owe unto God,
whether inward or outward, contained under the name of Divine worship, (when
either we confess, praise, pray unto; call upon or swear by his Name) yea all
the worship both of men and Angels, is nothing else but to acknowledge in
thought, word, and work this peerlesse pre-eminence of his power, of his
wisdom, of his goodness and other attributes, that is, His Holiness; by
ascribing and giving unto him that which we give and ascribe to none besides
him, that is, To sanctify his most Holy Name: This is that the Holy Ghost
would teach us, when describing how the Seraphims worship and glorify God,
^sa. 6. he brings them in crying one unto another Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord
God of hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory; that is, Sanctifying him.
From whence is derived that which we repeat every day in the Hymn: To thee all
Angels cry aloud, the heavens and all the powers therein; To thee Cherubim and
S^raphim continually do cry. Ho ly, Holy, Holy Lord God of Sabbath; Heaven and
earth are full of the Majesty of thy Glory.

And because the pattern of Gods holy worship is not to be taken from earth,
but from heaven; the same Spirit therefore in the Apocalypse expresses the
worship of God in the new Testament with the same form of hallowing or holying
his Name which the heavenly Host uses. For so the 4. Animalia representing
the Apoc. 4.
Catholic Church of Christ in the four quarters of the world, are said when
they give glory, honor and thanks to him that sits upon the throne and
lives for ever and ever, to do it by singing day and night this Trisagium;
Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come: that
is, the sum of all that they did was but to agnize his Sanctity or Holiness,
or which is all one, to Sanctify his holy Name. When therefore the same 4.
Animalia are afterward brought in chanting; Worthy is the Lamb that was slain,
to receive power, riches, wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and
blessing And again; Blessing, honor, glory and power be unto him that sits
upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever: all is to be understood,
as comprehended within this general Doxologie, as being but an exemplification
thereof; and therefore the Elogies or blazons As Genesis 31. 42, 43. Psalm. 76. 11.
So the Chaldee uses their (...), and more then once ^enders I A H the name of
God by it
mentioned therein to be taken, according to the style of Holiness, in an
exclusive sense, of such prerogatives as are peculiar to God alone.

And according to this notion of sanctifying Gods name which I contend for,
would the Lord have his Name Sanctified Esa. 8. 13. when he says; Fear ye not
their Fear; (that is, the Idolaters (...) or Gods; for so Fear here signifies,
to wit, the thing feared) neither dread ye it: But Sanctify the Lord of Hosts
himself, and let him be your Fear, and let him be your Dread; that is, your
God. Again chap. 29. 23. They shall sanctify my Name, (says he) even
Sanctify the holy One of Jacob, and shall fear the God of Israel. The latter
words show the meaning of the former.

The like we have in the first Epist. of S. Peter chapter 3. v. 15. (...) OBON
(...) (i. Gentilium) (...), etc. Fear ye not their Fear, nor be in dread
thereof, that is, Fear not nor dread ye the gods of the Gentiles which
persecute you) but sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, that is, Fear and
worship him with your whole hearts. For that this passage (howsoever we are
wont to expound it) ought to be construed in the same sense with that of Esaias
8. before alleged, and the words to be rendered sutably; I take it to be
apparent for this reason, because they are verbatim taken from thence, as he
that shall compare the Greek words of S. Peter with the Septuagint in that
place of Esaias, will be forced to confess.

Besides this evident and express use of the word Sanctify, in the notion of
religious and holy worship and fear of the Divine Majesty; there is yet another
expression sometimes used in holy Scripture, which implies the self-same
thing: that namely, to worship God with that which we call holy and divine
worship, is all one with to agnize his holiness, or to sanctify his Name.
Those speeches I mean, wherein we are exhorted to worship the Lord, because he
is Holy. As Psalm. 99. 5. Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his
footstool, for he is holy. Again, in the end of the Psalm: Exalt the Lord our
God, and worship at his holy hill, for the Lord our God is holy. The same
meaning is yet more emphatically expressed by those that sing the song of
victory over the Beast, Apoc. 15. Great (say they) and mavelous are thy
works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy ways, thou King of Nations. Who
shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name? (...) So Editio Complu.
Andreas, and exempl. 15.
(...), (for that I believe is the true reading, not (...)) for thou only art
Holy; therefore all the Nations shall come and worship before thee: i. they
shall relinquish their Idols and plurality of Gods, and worship thee as God
only. For this was the Doctrine both of Moses in the Old Testament, and of
Christ Jesus the Lamb of God in the New; That one God only, that made the
heaven and the earth, was to be acknowledged and worshipped, and with an
incommunicable worship: In respect whereof, as I take it, these Victors are
there said to sing the Song of Moses, and the Lamb; that is, a gratulatory Song
of the worship of one God; After that his (...), ^^ra.
Ordinances were made manifest. For otherwise the Ditty is borrowed from the
86. Psalm, the 8, 9, and 10. verses, where we read, Among the gods there is
none like unto thee, O Lord, neither are there any works like unto thy works.
All Nations whom thou have made shall come and worship before thee, O Lord, and
shall glorify thy Name. For thou art great, and do wondrous works: Thou art
God alone; that is, Thou only art Holy. Compare Ier. 10. ver. 6, 7.

I have one thing more to add, before I finish this part of my Discourse, lest
I might leave unsatisfied that which may perhaps seem to some to weaken this my
explication of the sanctification of Gods Name. For the word, to sanctify, or
be sanctified, is sometimes used of God in a more general sense then that I
have hitherto specified, namely, as signifying any way to be glorified, or to
glorify; as when he says, He will be sanctified in the destruction of his
enemies, or in the deliverance of his people, and that before the Heathen, and
the like; that is, he would purchase him glory, or be glorified thereby. I
answer, it is true, that to be sanctified is in these passages, to be
glorified; but yet always to be glorified as God, and not otherwise. Namely,
when God by the works of his power, of his mercy, or justice extorts from men
the confession of his great and holy Godhead; he is then said to sanctify, or
make himself to be sanctified amongst them; that is, to be glorified and
honored by their conviction and acknowledgement of his power and Godhead. For
although men may be also said to glorify, or purchase honor unto themselves,
when by their noble acts they make their abilities and worth known unto the
world: yet, for such respect, to be said to be sanctified, is peculiar unto him
alone, whose Glory is his Holiness; i. unto God.

THUS we have learned how the Name or Majesty of God is to be sanctified
personally, or in it self; which is the chiefest thing we pray for, and ought
so to be in our endeavor; namely, to worship and glorify him incommunicably,
according to his most eminent and unparalleld Holiness: and so, O Lord,
Hallowed be thy Name. But there is another sanctification or hallowing of Gods
Name yet behind, which must be joined therewith; which is, To sanctify him
also in the things which have his Name upon them; that is, are separate and
dedicate to his service, or in a word, which are His, namely, by a peculiar
relation. For otherwise it is true: The whole earth is the Lords, and the
fullness thereof, the World and those that dwell therein. But there are some
things his, not as other things are, and so as they are no longer ours, such as
according to the style of Scripture (as I have already noted) are said, to be
called by his Name, or to have his Name called upon them. These are things
sacred. Therefore I told you before of a twofold sanctity or Holiness: The one
original, absolute, and essential in God: the other derived, or relative in
that which is set apart to be in a peculiar and appropriate manner His. For
whatsoever belongs unto him in this manner, is divided from other things with
preeminence, whether they be things or persons which are so separated. For in
such separation we showed the nature of sanctity in general to consist. Now as
the Divine Majesty it self is separate and holy, so know, it is a part of that
honor we owe unto his most Sacred Name, that the things whereby, and wherewith
he is served, should not be promiscuous and common, but appropriate and set
apart to that sacred end. It is an honor which in some degree of resemblance
we afford unto Kings, Princes, and other persons of dignity, (of infinite less
eminency then God is) to interdict the use of that to others, which they are
wont to use; sometimes the whole kind, sometimes the individual only. As we
know in former times, to wear purple, to subscribe with the Ink called
Encaustum, of a purple color, and other the like, which the diligent may
find, were appropriate to the use of Kings and Emperors only. In the Book of
the Kings, we read of the Kings Mule, so appropriate to his use, as to ride
upon him was to be made King, 1 Kings 1. 33, 34. In the Book of Esther, Chap.
6. v. 8. of the Horse that King Ahasuerus used to ride upon, put in the same
rank with the Crown and royal apparel, which none but the King might wear.
And of individual Utensils thus appropriated, and as it were dedicated to the
alone use of persons of eminency, our own times want not examples. Whence
natural instinct may seem to prompt unto us, that such appropriation is a
testimony of honor and respect. Sure I am, that Almighty God has revealed it
to be a part of that honor we owe unto him. Thus all the Utensils of the
Tabernacle and Temple were sacred and set apart to that use; and not the
Utensils of the Altar only, but even the instruments of music, which David
ordained to praise the Lord with in the Temple, were not common, but
consecrated unto God for that end, whence they are called, 1 Chronicles. 16. 42.
(...) Instrumenta musica Dei, The musical instruments of God; that is, sacred
ones: And 2 Chronicles. 7. 6. (...), The musical Instruments of the LORD. Agreeably
whereunto those who sung the fore-alledged song of victory over the Beast, are
said to have had in their hands, (...), The harps of God, that is, not profane
or common, but sacred Harps, Apoc. 15.
the Harps of the Temple, for there they sung this their Antheme, standing upon
the great Laver or Sea of glass which was therein.

Nay, our blessed Savior, Mark 11. would not suffer a profane or common
vessel to be so much as carried through his Fathers House, accounting it as
great a profanation, as to buy and sell there. And yet was not this abuse
(which is a thing well to be marked) within those Septs of the Temple, which
the Jew^ accounted sacred, but in the outmost. Court called Atrium gentium and
immandorum, the place in which together with such as were unclean, the
Gentiles, and uncircumcised were admitted to pray; as that of the Prophet cited
by our Savior, rightly rendered, intimates, My house shall be called a house of
prayer, to (or for) ALL NATIONS. Consider Esaias 56. 6, 7. This Court therefore
the Jews made no other account of, then as of a profane place; but our Savior
proved by Scripture, that this Gentiles Oratory was also part of his Fathers
house, and accordingly not to be profaned with common use. Lastly, there was
never any age of the Christian Church (till of late) wherein it was not
commonly believed, that God was to be honored by such appropriation or
consecration as we speak of; that is, that Gods Name was in this manner to be
sanctified. But are there any (will you say) now that deny it? Yes, there are
some in our age so far carried away into a contrary extreme to that they fly
from, that they hold that no oblation or consecration of things unto God, by
the devotion of men, in the New Testament, whether of Utensils, goods, times,
or places, ought to be esteemed lawful; but that all distinction between
sacred and profane in external things, by virtue of such consecration
(excepting only the Sacraments) is flat superstition: Yet to him that seriously
considers it, it cannot choose, me thinks, but seem strange and absurd to
affirm, (as this assertion does) that men now in the time of the Gospel, are
exempted and freed from agnizing God to be Lord of the creature, by giving some
part thereof unto him; then which no part of Divine Worship is more natural,
and which has been used by mankind ever since the beginning of the world.
Yea, in the state of Paradise, among all the trees in the Garden, which God
gave man freely to enjoy, one tree was Noli me tangere, and reserved to God as
holy, in token he was Lord of the Garden. So that the first sin of Mankind,
for the species of the fact, was Sacrilege, in profaning that which God had
made holy.

They say, It is true, that in the Old Testament, this way of honoring and
acknowledging God was warranted by the Divine Law: but in the New we find no
precept given concerning it nor confirmation of that which was before. Now God
is not to be worshipped with any worship, but what he has himself prescribed
in his Word. I answer, What though there be no particular pr^cept in the New
Testament for this, no more then for diverse other duties, which a Christian is
bound to; yet if a general warrant be, the particular needs not. But our
Savior says in his Gospel, in that Evangelical Sermon he preached upon the
Mount, That he came not to dissolve the Law and the Prophets, but to fulfill
or perfect them. Think not (says he) that I am come to dissolve the Law and
the Prophets [that is, to take away the obligation of that rule of the duty of
man to God and his neighbor, given first by Moses in the Law, and afterward
repeated and inculcated by the Prophets; for so Prophets are here to be
According as in that Mat. ^2. 40. On these two Commandments [viz To love God
above all, and our neighbor as our selves] hang all the Law and the Prophets;
and in that Luke 16. 29 They have Moses and the Prophets.
understood, and not of predictions] (...)* but to fulfill them, that is, to
supply, accomplish, or perfect those rules and doctrines of just and unjust
contained in them, by a more ample interpretation, and other improvement
befitting the state of the Gospel. For surely, this must be the meaning of this
speech of our Savior, if we be more willing (as we should) to take a sense
from Scripture, then to bring one to it. Does not the whole context following
evince it? Indeed the Law, that is, the Legal Covenant, or Covenant of works
(as Law is often taken in the New Testament) together with all the rites
depending thereon, is dissolved by the coming of Christ; and a better Covenant
with new rites established in stead thereof: But the Law, that is, the Doctrine
and Rule of life given by God contradistinct from those ordinances, which were
only appendages of that Covenant, (though these were also in some sense
perfected by bringing the truth and substance, in stead of the figure and
shadow thereof) is not disannulled, but confirmed and perfected by him, in such
manner as became the condition of the Covenant of the Gospel. For that this
confirmation is not to be restrained to the Decalogue only, is manifest;
because our Savior in the following words, insists upon other precepts besides
it. If it be said, they are reducible thereto; this will not serve the turn,
for so are all the rest of Gods Commandments. Unless therefore it can be
shown, that to honor God by an oblation of his creature, is no part of the Law
here confirmed by our Savior: Let no man be so daringly bold, as to exempt
himself and others from the obligation thereof; unless he means to be one of
them of whom our Savior speaks immediately, saying, Whosoever therefore shall
break one of the least of these Commandments, and shall teach men so to do,
(mark it) he shall be called (i. he shall be) the least in the Kingdom of
heaven. The word is (...), i. loose, or dis-binde, as he does, both that
abrogates, and that observes it not; much more, he that affirms it unlawful
to be observed.

Nay how dare we disbind or loose our selves from the tie of that way of
agnizing and honoring God, which the Christian Church from her first
beginnings durst not do? Irenaeus, witness of that age which next succeeded
the Apostles, is plain. Lib. 4. c. 34 Offerre oportet Deo (says he) primitias
creaturae ejus; sicut and Moses ait, Non apparebis vacuus ante conspectum
Domini Dei tui. -- Et non genus oblationum reprobatum est: oblationes enim and
illic, (sc. in V. T.) oblationes autem and hic; sacrificia in populo,
sacrificia and in Ecclesia: sed species immutata est tantum; quippe cum jam non
a servis, sed a liberis offeratur. Vnus enim and idem Dominus; proprium autem
character servilis oblationis, and proprium liberorum, uti and per oblationes
ostendatur indicium libertatis. -- It behooves us (says he) to offer unto God
a present of his creature; as also Moses says, Thou shall not appear before
the Lord thy God empty. -- For offerings in the general are not reprobated:
there were offerings there, (viz. in the Old Test.) there are also offerings
here in the Church: but the specification only is changed; For as much as
offerings now are not made by bond, but free men. For there is one and the same
Lord still; but there is a proper character of a bond or servile offering, and
a proper character of freemens; that so even the Offerings may show forth the
tokens of freedom. -- Now where in Scripture he believed this doctrine and
practice to be grounded, he lets us know in the XXVII. chap. of the same Book:
Et quia Dominus naturalia legis, per quae homo justificatur, (quae etiam ante
legisdationem custodiebant, qui fide justificabantur, and placebant Deo) non
dissolvit, sed extendit, sed and implevit, ex sermonibus ejus ostenditur. i.
That our Lord dissolved not, but enlarged and perfected the natural precepts
of the Law, whereby a man is just, which also before the Law was given they
observed, who were justified by faith and pleased God, is evident by his words.
Then he cites some of the passages of that his Sermon upon the Mount Mat. V.
20. etc. And a little after adds: Necesse fuit auferre quidem vincula
servitutis, quibus jam homo assueverat, and sine vinculis sequi Deum,
superextendi vero decreta libertatis, and augeri subjectionem quae est ad
Regem, ut non retrorsus quis renitens indignus appareat ei qui se liberavit. --
Et propter hoc Dominus, pro eo quod est, Non moechaberis, nec concupiscere
praecepit; and pro eo quod est, Non occides, neque irasci quidem; and pro eo
quod est Decimare, omnia quae sunt pauperibus dividere. i. It was needful, that
those bonds of servitude, which man had before been inured to, should be taken
off, that so he might without Gives follow God: but that the laws and
ordinances of freedom should be extended, and his subjection to the King
increased, lest that drawing backward he might appear unworthy of him that
freed him. -- And for this reason, our Lord in stead of, Thou shall not commit
adultery, commands not so much as to lust: in stead of, Thou shall not kill,
not so much as to be angry: in stead of to Tith, to distribute all we have to
the poor, etc. All which says he, in the same place, are not solventis legem,
sed adimplentis, and extendentis and dilatantis, not of one that dissolves the
Law, but fulfils, extends and enlarges it: alluding still to that in our
Saviors Sermon upon the Mount.

Besides, those who are acquainted with Antiquity can tell, that the Primitive
Christians understood the holy Eucharist, to be, A commemoration of the
sacrifice of Christ's death upon the cross, in an oblation of bread and wine.
It Is witnessed by the Fathers of those first ages generally. Whereupon the same
Irenaeus also affirms, That our Savior by the institution of the Eucharist
had confirmed oblations in the new Testament. Namely, to thanksgive or bless a
thing in way to a sacred use, he took to be an offering of it unto God. And was
not David's Benediction and thanksgiving at the preparation for the Temple an
Offertory? Where note well that as he, upon that occasion, blessed the Lord,
saying: Thine, O LORD, is the greatness, the power and the glory -- all that
is in heaven and earth is thine, thine is the Kingdom -- Both riches and
honor come of thee -- Ergo, because all things come of thee, of thine own have
we given thee. So do Christ's redeemed in their Evangelical Song, Ap^^. 5.
ascribe no less unto him, saying, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to
receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory,
and ^g. Yea, the 24. Elders, which are the Christian Presbytery, expressing
(chapter 4. ult.) the very argument and sum of that Hymnology which the Primitive
Church used at the offering of bread and wine for the Eucharist, worship God,
saying: Thou art worthy, O Lord* to receive glory, and honor, and power: for
thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are, and were created.

TAKING therefore for granted, that which the practice of the Church of God in
all ages; yea, I think, I may say the consent of mankind from the beginning of
the world, bears witness to; that among those duties of the Sanctification
of Gods Name, wherewith his Divine Majesty is immediately and personally
glorified (of which I have before spoken) this is one, and a principal one; to
agnize and confess his peerlesse Sovereignty and dominion over the creature,
by yielding him some part thereof toward his worship and service, of which we
renounce the propriety our selves; and that accordingly there are both things
and persons now in the Gospel (as well as were before the Law was given) in
this manner lawfully and acceptably set apart and separated, by the devotion of
men, unto the Divine Majesty, and consequently relatively Holy (which is
nothing else, but to be Gods by a peculiar right:) I say, that these are
likewise to be done unto according to their degree of sanctity, in honor of
him, whose they are: Not to be worshipped with divine worship, or the worship
which we give unto God, communicated to them, (far be it from us, to defer
to any creature the honor due unto the Divine Majesty, either together with
him, or without him;) but yet Habenda cum discrimine, To be regarded with a
worthy and discriminative usance, that is, used with a select, and differing
respect from other things: as namely, if Places, not as other places; if Times,
not as other times; if Things by way of distinction so called, not as other
things; if Persons set apart unto the service and worship of God, neither to be
used by others, nor they to carry themselves in their fashion of life, as other
persons, (for that which in other things sacred is their use; in persons sacred
is their conversation, demeanor or carriage of themselves) but all to be
sanctified with a select, appropriate, or uncommon usage; that as they are Gods
by peculiar relation, and have his Name called upon them, so to be separate, as
far as they are capable, from common use, and employed as instruments and
circumstances of his worship and service: which is the highest and most
singular honor that any creature is capable of. Nay, (as I have said before)
even this is to the honor of God, that as himself is that singular,
incommunicable, and absolutely Holy One, and his service and worship therefore
incommunicable: so should that also which has his Name thereon, or is
consecrated to his service, be in some proportion incommunicably used, and not
promiscuously and commonly as other things are. They are the words of
Maymonides the Jew, but such as will not misbecome a Christian to make use of,
concerning that Law, Levit. V. 15. If a soul commit a trespass; and sin
through ignorance in the holy things of the LORD: then he shall bring unto the
Lord for his trespass, a Ram, etc. Behold, says he, how great weight there
is in the Law, touching sacrilegious transgression And what though they be
wood, and stone, and dust and ashes? when the Name of the Lord of all the world
is called upon things, they are sanctified (i. made holy.) And who so uses
them to common use, he transgresses therein; and though he do it through
ignorance, he must needs bring his atonement. Yea, it is a thing worthy to be
taken special notice of, that, that so presumptuous, and most dreadfully
vindicated sin of Korah, Dathan, Abiram, and their company, in offering incense
unto the Lord being not called thereunto, did not discharge their Censers of
this discriminative respect due unto things Sacred. For thus the Lord said unto
Moses, after that fire from heaven had consumed them for their impiety: Speak
unto Eleazar the Son of Aaron the Priest, that he take up the Censers out of
the burning, and scatter thou the fire yonder, for they are hallowed: The
Censers of these Sinners against their own souls, let them make of them broad
plates for a covering of the Altar: for they offered them before the Lord,
therefore they are hallowed, or holy. Number. 16. 37, 38.

Now that by this discriminative usance or sanctification of things sacred, the
Name of God is honored and sanctified, according to the tenor of our
petition; is apparent, not only from reason, which tells us that the honor and
respect had unto ought that belongs unto another, because it is his, redounds
unto the owner and Master; but from Scripture, which tells us, that by the
contrary use of them, his name is profaned. Hear himself, Lev. XXII. 2. Speak
unto Aaron, (says he) and his Sons; that they separate themselves from the
Holy things of the children of Israel, and that they profane not my Holy Name
in the things which they hallow unto me. Also in the Chapter next before, v. 6.
The Priest that should not discriminate himself according to those singular
observations, or differing rules there prescribed, is said, To profane the
Name of his God. Again, Ezekiel. XXII. 26. When the Priests profaned Gods holy
things, by putting no difference between the Holy and Profane: I (says the
Lord) am profaned amongst them. Likewise Chap. XLIII. ver. 7. together with
other abominations there mentioned, the Lord says, that his Holy Name had been
polluted, or profaned, by the carcasses of their Kings, that is, of Manasse
and Amon buried in the Kings Garden hard by the walls of the Temple: for so by
the Hebrews, and others that place is understood. See 2 Kings XXI. ver. 18, 26.
by the pollution of the Temple, the Lord esteemed his own Name profaned. Take
in also if you will, that of Malachi Cha. 1. where the Lord says of those, who
despised and dishonored his Table, or Altar by offering thereon for sacrifice,
the lame, the blind, and sick, which the Law had made unclean and polluted,
that they had profaned his Holy Name. But if the Name of God be profaned by
the disesteem and misusage of the things it is called upon, then surely it is
sanctified, when the same are worthily and discriminatively used, that is, as
becomes the relation they have to him.

I have already specified the several kinds of Sacred things which are thus to
be sanctified: yet lest something contained under some of them might not be
taken notice of, by so general an intimation, it will not be amiss a little
more fully and particularly to explicate them, then I have yet done. Remember
therefore that I ranged all sacred things under four heads. 1. Of Persons
Sacred; such as were the Priests and Levites in the Old Testament, and now in
the New, the Christian Clergy, or Clerus; so called from the beginning of
Christian Antiquity, either because they are the Lords (...), or Portion, which
the Church dedicateth unto him out of her self, (namely, as the Number. X. 11
Levites were an offering of the Children of Israel, which they offered unto
him out of their Tribes,) or because their inheritance and livelihood is the
Lords portion. I prefer the first; yet either of both will give their Order
the title of Holiness, as does also more especially their descent which they
derive from the Apostles; that is, from those, for whom their Lord and Master
prayed unto his Father, saying, Father, (...), [(...) for (...)] Sanctify Joh.
17. 17, 18, 19.
them unto, or for thy Truth: thy Word is Truth; that is, Separate them unto
the Ministry of thy Truth, the word of thy Gospel, which is the truth and
verification of the promises of God. It follows, As thou have sent me into the
world, so have I also sent them into the world, (this is the key which unlocks
the meaning of that before and after.) And for their sakes I sanctify my self,
that they might be sanctified for thy Truth; that is, And for as much as they
cannot be consecrated to such an Office, without some sacrifice, to atone and
purify them; therefore for their consecration to this holy function of
ministration of the new Covenant, I offer my self a Sacrifice unto thee for
them, in lieu of those legal and typical ones, wherewith Aaron and his sons
first, and then the whole Tribe of Levi were consecrated unto thy service in
the old. An Ellipsis of the first Substantive in Scripture is frequent. So here
(...) only, is put for (...), Truth, for the Ministry of Truth.

Now that the Christian Church (for of the Jewish I shall need say nothing)
has always taken it for granted, that those of her Clergy ought, according to
the separation and sanctity of their Order, to be distinguished, and
differenced from other Christians, both passively in their usance from others,
but especially actively, by a restrained conversation, and peculiarnesse in
their manner of life, is manifest by her ancient Canons and Discipline. Yea, so
deeply has it been rooted in the minds of men, that the Order of Churchmen
binds them to some differing kind of conversation and form of life from the
Laity; that even those who are not willing to admit of the like discrimination
due in other things, have still in their opinions some relic thereof
remaining in this, though perhaps not altogether to be acquitted of that
imputation, which Tert^llian charged upon some in his time, to wit, Quod quum
excellimur and inflamur De Monog^^i^. ca. 2.
adversus Clerum, tunc unum omnes sumus, tunc omnes Sacerdotes; quia Sacerdotes
nos Deo and Patri fecit. Quum ad per equationem Disciplin^ Sacerdotalis
provocamur, deponimus infulas, and impares sumus. When we va^nt, and are puffed
up against the Clergy, then we are all one, then we are all Priests; For he
made us Priests to God and his Father. But when we are called upon, to equal
in our lives the example of Priestly Discipline, then down go our Mitres, and
we are another sort of men.

Another sort of things sacred, which I named, was Sacred PLACES, to wit,
Churches, and Oratori^s, as the Christian name (...), implies them to be, that
is, The Lords. A third, Sacred -Times. i. dedicated and appointed for the
solemn celebration of the worship of God, and Divine duties: such are with us,
(for those of the Jews concern us not) (...), our Lords days, with other our
Christian Festivals, and holy days. Of the manner of the discrimination from
common, or sanctifying both the one and the other, by actions some commanded,
others interdicted to be done in them, the Canons and Constitutions of our
Church will both inform, and direct us. For holy Times and holy Places are
Twins (Time and Place being, as I may so speak, pair-circumstances of action)
and therefore Lev. XIX. 30. And again XXVI. 2. they are joined together,
tanquam ejusdem ration^s: Keep my Sabbaths and reverence my Sanctuary.

The fourth sort of Sacred things is of such as are neither Persons, Times, nor
Places, but Things in a special sense, by way of distinction from them. And
this sort contains under it many particulars, which may be specified after
this manner.

1. Sacred Revenue of what kind soever: which in regard of the dedication
thereof, as it must not be profaned by sacrilegious alienation, so ought to
be sanctified by a different use and employment from other Goods; namely such a
one as becomes that which is the Lords, and not man's. For that Primitive
Christian Antiquity so esteemed them, appears by their calling them (...), as
they did their Place of Worship (...), and their Holy day (...); all of the
Lord, as it were, Christening the old notion of Sacred, by a new name. So Can.
Ap^stol. XL. Manifestae sint Episcopi res propriae (si quidem res habet
proprias) and manifesta sint (...), i. res Dominicae -- Author Constitut.
Apost. lib. 2. c. 28. al. 24. Episcopus ne utatur (...), Dominicis rebus,
tanquam alienis aut communibus, sed moderate. See also Balsamon in Can. 15.
Concilii Ancyrani, and the Canon it self.

Secondly, Sacred Vtensils, as the Lords Table, Vessels of ministration, the
Books of God, or Holy Scripture, and the like. Which that the Church, even in
her better times, respected with an holy and discriminative usance, may be
learned from the Story of that calumnious crimination, devised by the Arrian
Faction against Athanasius, as a charge of no small impiety; namely, that in
his Visitation of the Tract of Mareotis, Macarius, one of his Presbyters, by
his command, or instinct, had entered into a Church of the Miletian
Schismatiques, and there broken the Chalice, or Communion Cup, thrown down the
Table, and burnt some of the Holy Books. All which argues, that in the general
opinion of Christians of that time, such acts were esteemed profane and
impious; otherwise they could never have hoped (as they did) to have blasted
the reputation of the holy Bishop by such a slander.

Touching the Books of God, or holy Scripture, (which I referred to this title)
especially those which are for the public service of God in the Church, I
add this further; That under that name I would have comprehended the senses,
words and phrases appropriated to the expression of Divine and Sacred things;
which a Religious ^are cannot endure to hear abused with profane and
scurrilous application.

Thirdly, under this fourth head of things Sacred I comprehend Sacred Acts;
such as are the Acts of Gods holy worship and administration of his Sacraments.
For albeit these Acts are duties of the first and personal Sanctification of
Gods Name, whereof the immediate object is God; yet are the Acts themselves
sacred things, and therefore have some sanctification due to them also, as
other sacred things have: of which, although it be most true, that the unfeigned
devotion of the heart (as before him who alone knows the hearts of the
children of men) be the main and principal requisite; yet unless even in the
outward performance, they be, for the manner and circumstances, discriminated
from common acts, by a select accommodation befitting their holiness, their
sanctification is defective, and by such defect, if voluntary, Gods Name is
profaned, even then when we are worshipping him. How much more, when our
carriage therein comes short even of that wonted reverence, wherewith we come
before an earthly Potentate? May not God here justly use the same expostulation
with us, that he did with those in the Prophet Malachi, who presented
themselves before him with such an offering, as was in regard of the blemishes
unworthy of, and unbefitting so great a Majesty, and therefore to be accounted
rather an affront then an act of honor and worship? Ye have, says he,
despised and profaned my Name -- Offer it now unto thy Governor: will he be
pleased with thee, or accept thy person? -- yet I am a Malac. c. 1. v. 6, 8,
12, 14.
great King, says the Lord of hosts. And this is the document or lesson, which
this place naturally and unavoydably ministers to us; That to come before the
Divine Majesty, with less reverent and regardfull deportment, then we do
before earthly Kings and potentates, is to despise and profane his holy Name.
And not that, which some would shelter under this text, and lean too much upon;
namely, That the acts of Gods external worship ought to be wholly conform to
the use of the semblable actions performed unto men, and not differ from them:
and upon this ground charge the Christian Liturgies with absurdity in their
forms of praying, and praising God with responsals, singing by turns, and
speaking many together. For this principle is directly repugnant to the nature
of Sanctification, which consists in discrimination and difference. And
therefore, though the material of our gestures and other expressions vocal or
visible, be borrowed from the use and custom of men; yet for the formality of
them, not only they may, but ought to be differenced from them. Moreover,
touching this reproof of the Prophet; take notice that it is grounded upon the
Law, Levit. XXII. where we are taught, that when that is not observed
concerning the Rites of Gods service which the sanctity of them requires, as
in other particulars, so in this of a not defective or unblemished offering,
his Name is thereby profaned. See v. 32. with the rest of the chapter
foregoing it. And if so, then by the contrary it is sanctified.

Lastly, Unto this head of sacred Acts I reduce Oaths and sacred Covenants,
that is, such as are made either with God, or between men; Gods Name being
called upon, which therefore 1 Samuel 20. 8. are styled Covenants of the Lord:
For that the observance due touching both is a sanctifying of them, as things
upon which the Name of the Lord is called, is apparent; forasmuch as when they
are violated by falsehood, they are said to be profaned, as Levit. 19. 12.
Psalm. 55. 20. Ier^m. 34. 15.

Thus together with my explication of these several sorts of sacred things, I
have briefly and in general pointed at that also wherein the proper
sanctification of each consists, which though far short of such a tractation
as the matter requires: yet if it may serve but to give occasion only to
others who are better able, to bend their thoughts upon this argument (which
perhaps the times call for) I shall fully attain the end I aimed at. For mine
own part, to descend to particulars would be a task too high for me, and as I
suspect, not very acceptable. For it is ten to one (if the grounds I have laid
be true) but that the most of us would be found faulty in some things, and some
of us in all. Well, the sum of my argumentation has been this: Is there any
thing in the New Test. Gods by a peculiar right? To say there is not, is absurd
and against the perpetual tradition of Christianity. If there be, then it is
holy; if holy, then to be sanctified; if sanctified, then to be discriminated
in the usance and respect thereof, from that which is of common condition.

NOW out of this discourse, which I have hitherto made, you may see and take
notice, That (contrary to the vulgar opinion) the Prohibition of Idolatry and
the discriminative observance of things sacred; not to profane them by a
promiscuous and common use; are derived both of them from one and same
principle, sc. Gods Incommunicablenesse, which derives a shadow and resemblance
upon the things which have his Name called upon them, to wit, a state of
appropriatnesse and singularity. Wherefore the Apostle, Romans 2. not without
good reason, compares together the transgressions of the one and the other
kind, as parallel sins, or sins of affinity: Thou that hat^st Idols (says he)
do thou commit Sacrilege? Where by Sacrilege understand not only the
usurpation of things sacred, but the violation of that which is sacred, in
general: And it is as if he had said, thou have mended the matter well indeed,
for still thou dashest against the same principle. For it is one of the
exemplifications of that he says in the beginning of the Chapter: He that
judges or condemns another, and does the same, or the like himself, is
inexcusable. By this it appears how much they are mistaken, who under pretense
of avoiding Idolatry and superstition, cannot endure that any distinction
should be made between things sacred and common. Is not this to unhallow Gods
Name one way, that so we might not profane it another? Far be it from me to be
a patron of idolatry or superstition in the least degree: yet I am afraid, lest
we who have reformed the worship of God from that pollution (and blessed be his
name therefore,) (...), as S. Basil speaks, that is, by bending the crooked
stick too much the other way, have run too far into the contrary extreme, and
taken away (some of us) all difference in a manner between Sacred and profane;
and by this our transgression in doing Gods work, made our selves liable to
that upbraid of the Apostle; Tu qui idola abominaris sacrilegium (i. sacrarum
^^rum profanationem) admittis? Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit
sacrilege? that is, prophanest thou Gods Name by violating that which is
sacred?

Let no man think it strange or incredible, that such an enormity should be
committed, or an occasion at least given thereof, in the manage of so holy and
glorious a work: seeing the experience of all ages sufficiently witnesses, how
prone the nature of man is, in flying one extreme, to run too far toward the
other. Why then should we think it unlikely, or rather not think it very
likely, that we also may have miscarried in the same manner? unless we will
arrogate unto our selves that privilege of infallibility, and freedom from
error, which we condemn as intolerable presumption in our Adversaries.

Besides, it is to be taken notice of, because of the prejudicate misprision of
many to the contrary; That the measure of truth and falsehood, best and worst,
is not the greater or lesser distance from Popery, (forasmuch as Popery also
contains much of Christianity) nor that which is most destructive of the man
of sin, always most warrantable and safe to be embraced. If it were, there be
some in the world, (whose religion we would be loath to admit of) that would be
found more orthodox and better reformed Christians then any of us all.

Nay, give me leave, without offense, for the better awakening of some out of
their deafness to whatsoever else may be said to this purpose, to propound
such a Demand as this: Who knows, whether this transgression I speak of, be
not a main and principal ingredient of that guilt, which the Divine Majesty
admonishes us to take notice of, in this his so long and so severe visitatioh
of our neighbors and brethren? whether he does not visibly, or, if some
passages be considered, almost vocally, upbraid them; Thou that hate Idols
do thou commit Sacrilege? I know right well, that rashly to assign the
particular causes of Gods judgments, without rule or precedent of Scripture,
is a sin of presumption, and a bold intrusion into Gods secrets; and therefore
I affirm not, but demand only, whether there be not here some cause which may
minister such a suspicion. But whatsoever it be, the compassion of their woeful
affliction calls upon me rather to pray for them, then to follow this harsh and
unpleasant passage any further. Only thus much, If that which the Apostle
says in particular of the things which befell the Israelites, Gods first
people, in the Wilderness; These things happened unto them for ensamples; and
they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come:
If this be to be extended also unto those punishments and their analogy, which
befell them afterward: then may perhaps two things further not un^easonably be
enquired into. First, for what other sins, it is remembered in Scripture, that
God gave his people, during that his first Covenant (especially after they came
to dwell in their own Land) under the sword of an external enemy, or his
worship thereby at any time to be trodden under foot; besides these two,
Idolatry, and Profanation of that which was holy, or Sacriledg^? Examples of
the first who knows not? of the second, see the Story of Achan, Josh. the vii.
of Elies sons, 1 Samuel Chap. II. the punishment of the Sacrilege of the
seventh, or Sabbaticall year, (2 Chronicles. XXXVI. and the parallel places) for by
the Law every seventh year, not only the whole Land, but all servants and
debts were holy unto the Lord, and therefore to be released, Levit. 25. 2, 4.
Deuteronomy. 15. Exodus 21. Secondly, What was that Transgression, after the return
from Babylon, mentioned in that Prophecy of Antiochus Epiphanes, Dan. 8. 12.
for which it is there foretold, that An host should be given him against the
daily Sacrifice, and that it should cast down the truth unto the ground, and
practice and prosper? Perhaps the Story in the 2, 3, and 4. Chap. of the second
Book of Maccabees will tell us.

To that which is commonly alleged, That such distinction and reverent regard
of things Sacred, as we contend for, opens a way for Idolatry: I answer, No
otherwise, then the eschewing of Idolatry, may also, through the perverseness
of men, be made a bridge to profaneness, that is, by accident, not from it own
towardness, but our distemper. Otherwise this Discrimination or distinction,
if we would understand or heed the ground thereof, prompts the clean contrary;
for we should reason thus: If the things which are Gods, ^o nomine, in that
name, and because they are His, are therefore to be held segregate in their
use; then surely God himself, who is the Fountain of Holiness, ought to have a
prerogative of segregation in the most eminent and absolute manner; namely,
such an one, as that the worship due unto him must not be communicated with any
thing else besides him. And indeed, unless both be done, Gods Name is neither
fully, nor rightly sanctified.

AND here I should now make an end, but that there is one thing yet behind of
principal consequence, which I have deferred hitherto, because I could not
elsewhere bring it in conveniently without somewhat disturbing the coherence of
my discourse. There is an eminent species, or kind of Sanctification which I
may seem all this while to have neglected, for as much as it seems not to be
comprehended under this notion of discretion and separation, wherein I place
the nature of Holiness, and that is Sanctif^cation, or Holiness of life. To
which i answer, That all notions of Sanctity and Sanctification in Scripture
are derived from discretion and separation, and that this now mentioned is
likewise derived thence. For it is to be reduced to the Sanctification of
Persons Sacred, and set apart unto God. By which, though in the strict and
proper sense, are intended only Priests, and such as minister about Holy
things, yet in a larger sense, and, as it were, by way of resemblance, the
whole body of the People of God are a Royal P^i^sthood, and (...) Symb. Apost.
Holy Nation, which the Almighty has selected unto himself, out of the rest of
the world, and set apart to serve him in a peculiar and different manner, from
the rest of men: For you have heard it is a requisite of that which is Holy, to
be used in a peculiar and singular manner, and not as things common. Hence it
is, that the observation of that peculiar and different from of life, which God
has commanded those, whom he has called, and set apart from the world unto
himself, in Scripture carries the name of Holiness, or Sanctity, (especially
in the New Testament) that is, such as becomes those that are Holy unto God;
According to that, Be ye Holy, as I am Holy.

And here, I might have a large discourse, to show how the Name of God is
sanctified by the lives of his Children, when they conform not themselves to
the fashions of the world, but as the Apostle speaks, are crucified thereto,
and keep themselves unspotted from the pollutions and vanities thereof. But
this I leave, to be supplied by your meditations according to the general
intimation given thereof.

ACTS 17. 4. Acts 17. 4.
There associated themselves to Paul and Silas of the worshipping Greeks a
great multitude.
PAul and Silas preaching in the Jewish Synagogue at Thessalonica, and proving
out of the Scriptures, that Me^siah, or Christ, was to suffer, and to rise
again from the dead, and that Jesus was that Christ, it is said, That some of
them which heard, believed; and that there associated themselves to them a
great multitude (...), of the worshipping Greeks. Of these (...), there is
elsewhere mention in the Acts of the Apostles more then once; But what they
were, our Commentators do not fully inform us; Nor can it be understood,
without some delibation of Jewish Antiquity. The e^plication whereof will give
some light not to this passage only, but to the whole Story of the Primitive
Conversion of the Gentiles to the Faith, recorded in that Book.

We must know therefore, that of those Gentiles, which embraced the worship of
the God of Israel, (commonly termed Proselytes) there were two sorts: One of
such as were circumcised, and took upon them the observation of the whole Law
of Moses. These were accounted as Jews, (to wit, facti, non nati) bound to the
like observances with them, conversed with, as freely, as if they had been so
born; neither might the one eat, drink, or keep company with a Gentile, more
then the other, le^t they became unclean. They worshipped in the same Court of
the Temple, where the Israelites did, whither others might not come. They were
partakers with them in all things, both divine and humane; In a word, they
differed nothing from Jews, but only that they were of Gentile race.

This kind the Jewish Doctors call (...), Proselyti ^^stiti^, or (...),
Proselyti f^d^ris, namely, because they took upon them the sign thereof,
Circumcision. In the New Testament they are called simply, Proselytes, without
addition. Of which Order was Vriah the Hittite, Achior, in the Book of Judith,
Herod the Idumae^n, Onkelos the Ch^ld^^ Paraphrast, and many others both before
and in our Saviors time.

But besides these there was a second kind of Gentiles, admitted likewise to
the worship of the true God, the God of Israel, and the hope of the life to
come; which were not circumcised, nor conformed themselves to the Mosaicall
rites, and ordinances; but were only tied to the observation of those
precepts, whch the Hebrew Doctors call the precepts of the sons of Noah;
namely, such as all the sons of Noah were bound to observe.

These precepts are in number seven, recorded in the Gemata Sanhedrin, in Perek
(...)
Talmud, Maiem. Hal. Melachim. c. 9. vide Shick. de jure Regio Hebraeoru p.
128, 129
Maymonides and others, under these following titles. First, the precept (...),
to renounce Idols, and all Idolatrous worship. Secondly, (...), to worship the
true God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth. Thirdly, (...), Bloodshed; to wit,
to commit no murder. Fourthly, (...), detectio nuditatum, not to be defiled
with fornication, incest, or other unlawful conjunction. Fifthly, (...),
Rapina, against theft and robbery. Sixthly, (...), concerning administration of
Justice: The seventh, (...), Membrum de vivo, so they call the Precept, of not
eating the flesh with the blood in it, given to Noah, when he came out of the
Ark; as Maymonides expressly expounds it, and adds besides. Quicunque haec sep
tem praecepta exequenda susceperit, ecce is est, (...), ex piis gentium mundi,
habetque partem in seculo futuro. Note that he says [ex piis Gentium,] for
this kind were still esteemed Gentiles, and so called, because of their
uncircumcision; in respect whereof (though no Idolaters) they were, according
Act. 10. 28. 11. 3.
to the Law, unclean, and such as no Jew might converse with; wherefore they
came not to worship into the Sacred Courts of the Temple, whither the Jews, and
circumcised Proselytes came; but only into the outmost Court, called Atrium
Gentium and immundorum, which, in the second Temple, surrounded the second, or
great Court, whereinto the Israelites came, being divided therefrom by a low
wall of stone made battlement-wise, not above three Cubits high, called (says
Josephus, from whom I have it) in the Hebrew Dialect (...), in the Greek (...),
that is, Lorica, close by which De Billo Judaico lib. 6. ca. 6. Graec. 1.
stood certain little pillars, whereon was written in Latin and Greek Letters,
(...). In atrium sanctum transire alienigenam non debere; And this I make no
question, is that which Saint Paul, Ephesians. 2. alluded unto, when he says, That
Christ had broken down the (...), the partitionwall, (namely, that Lorica,
which separated the Court of the Gentiles from that of the Circumcision) and so
laying both Courts into one, has made the Jews and Gentiles Intercommoners;
whereby those that were sometime far off, were now made nigh, and as near as
the other, unto the Throne of God. But in Solomon's Temple, this Court of the
Gentiles seems not to have been, but in the second Temple only; the Gentiles
formerly worshipping without at the door, and not coming within the Septs of
the Temple at all. This second kind of Proselytes, the Talmudists call (...),
Proselyti portae, or (...), Proselyti inquilini; because they were under the
same condition, with those Gentile strangers which lived as inquilini in the
land of Israel. For all Gentiles dwelling within the Gates of Israel, whether
they were as servants, taken in war, or otherwise, were bound to renounce vid.
Lev. 17.
their false Gods, and to worship the God of Israel; but not to be circumcised,
unless they would, nor farther bound to keep the Law of Moses, then was
contained in those precepts of the sons of Noah. These are those mentioned (as
often elsewhere in the Law, so) in the fourth Commandment by the name of the
Stranger within thy gates; whereby it might seem probable, that the observation
of the Sabbath day (so far as concerns one day in seven) was included in some
one or other of those precepts of the sons of Noah; namely, in that, of
worshipping for their God, the Creator of heaven and earth, and no other;
whereof this consecration of a seventh day, after six days labor, was a badge
or livery; according to that, The sabbath is a sign between me and you, that I
Jehovah am your God; because in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the
sea and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: vide Exodus 31. 16, 17.
Ezekiel. 20. 20. From the example of these inquilini, all other Gentiles,
wheresoever living, admitted to the worship of the God of Israel upon the same
terms, were called (...), or (...), Proselyti Portae, or Proselyti inquilini;
of which sort there were many in all Cities and places of the Gentiles, where
the Jews had Synagogues; and used to frequent the Synagogues with them, (though
in a distinct place) to hear the Law and the Prophets read and expounded.

But in the New Testament they are found called by another name, to wit of
(...), or Worshippers, so often mentioned (though not observed) in the Acts of
the Apostles. For first, these are those meant in that of the Acts 17. 4.
alleged at my entrance into this discourse, where it is said that (...), a
great number of the worshipping Greeks believed, and adhered to Paul and Silas;
which the Vulgar rightly translateth, de colentibus Gentilibus multitudo magna,
taking the name of Greeks, here, as elsewhere in the New Testament, to be put
for Gentiles in general. And this place will admit of no evasion: For that
they were Gentiles, the name of (...) betokens expressly, being given them by
way of distinction from the Jews, then and there present also. That they were
worshippers of the true God, the God of Israel, their coming into the
Synagogue, their name (...), their capablenesse of S. Paul's discourse, (which
was to prove out of the Scriptures, that Messiah was to suffer death, and that
Jesus was he) argues sufficiently; yea, abundantly. For who could have profited
by such a Sermon as this, but those who already had knowledge of the true God,
and believed the reward of the life to come? This place therefore, may serve as
a key to all the rest of the places in this Book, where these (...) are
mentioned.

To that in the same Chapter, ver. 17. where it is said, that Saint Paul in the
Synagogue at Athens, (...), disputed with the Jews and the worshippers.

To that Acts 16. 14. where Saint Paul preaching the Gospel in the Jews
Proseucha, or Oratory at Philippi, a woman named Lydia, a seller of purple, of
the City Thyatira, (...), A proselyte worshipper, was converted unto the faith,
and baptized with all her household.

In the like manner, to Acts 18. 4. when S. Paul is said at Corinth, to have
reasoned in the Synagogues every Sabbath, and to have persuaded the Jews and
the Greeks: For these Greeks were (...), what did they in the Synagogues else
so regularly every Sabbath day? True, the name of (...) is here wanting; But it
presently follows, when the Jews opposed Paul, (there testifying Jesus to be
Christ) and blasphemed; that he shook his raiment, and said, Your blood be on
your own heads: From henceforth I will go to the Gentiles. And he departed
thence, says the text, and entered into the house of one Iustus, (...), a
Gentile-worshipper, whose house joined hard to the Synagogue.

But above all, that narration Acts 13. deserves our consideration and
attention: There ver. 43. it is said, that Saint Paul having preached the
Gospel in the Jews Synagogue at Antioch of Pisidia, there followed him (...),
many of the Jews and worshipping Proselytes; and verse. 42. That when the Jews
were gone out of the Synagogue, the Gentiles, that is, the (...), besought the
Apostles, that the same things might be preached unto them the next Sabbath;
which being accordingly done, and many of the other Gentiles (who were not
(...)) upon the same of such a new Doctrine, unwontedly assembling with them,
it is said, that the Jews when they saw the multitude, were filled with envy,
contradicted and blasphemed. That then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold, and said;
It was necessary that the word of God should first be spoken unto you, but
seeing you put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of eternal life;
Lo, we turn to the Gentiles; as the Lord says, I have set thee to be a light
to the Gentiles, etc. 48. That when the Gentiles heard this they were glad, and
glorified the word of God, (...) that is, the (...), who were already in
procinctu, and in the posture to eternal life. The Jews blasphemed; the rest of
the Gentiles were incapable; only the (...), (who were already Candidati vitae
aeternae, having been instructed in the worship of the true God, and hoping for
the reward to come) they believed: Yet perhaps not all of them neither, (the
words require not For (...) is often put for (...), and the sense then but
indefinite.
so much) but that none but such: And it follows, that the Jews found out some
(...), worshipping women, such as were of fashion (who yet perhaps had not been
at the Apostles Sermon) by whose means they stirred up the chief men in the
City, and raised persecution against Paul and Barnabas. This I take to be the
true and genuine meaning of this passage, upon which no charge of Pelagianism
can be fastened; nor needs it any spinous Criticisms for its explication. The
use of the word (...), de acie and collocatione Militum, de ascriptione in
ordinem vel classem, (in which signification the passive is most frequent) is
well enough known: (...), Xenophon: In came classem me ascribo. Plutarch, in
Solone; (...), In pauperum ordinem se redigit, inter pauperes se numerat:
(...), dicuntur milites, unde and (...) appellantur: (...), est in numerum
virorum ascribi. Compare the 1 Cor. 16. 15. (...). According to which sense and
notion, the words might be rendered, Crediderunt, quotquot nomina suae dederant
vitae aeternae, or, [per Ellipsin Participii] Qui de agmine and class fuerant
sperantium, vel contendentium ad vitam aeternam: otherwise, Qui in
procinctussabant ad vitam aeternam: or most fitly, (sensu modo militari)
Quotquot ordinati fuer ant ad vitam aeternam. De re tota judicent viri docti,
and a studio partium alieni.

Besides, it will not be impertinent, as a Mantissa to these quotations for
(...), to note that the same persons are otherwise (namely, twice)
characterised by the title of (...) As first of Cornelius, concerning whom
there is no question but he was a Gentile worshipper: The Text says, There was
a man in Caesarea, called Cornelius, a Centurion of the Italian Band, (...),
(i.) (...). Again in that 13. of the Acts (whereon we have dwelt so long) S.
Paul speaking at first to that mixed multitude assembled in the Synagogue,
consisting partly of Jews, and partly (...), he compellates them, verse 16.
both distinctly in these words, (...) By the former, meaning the Jews; by the
latter, the (...), or Gentile worshippers.

Of this kind of Converts (as I have in part already intimated) were in our
Savior and his Apostles time, very many in every Nation and City, where the
Jews lived and had their Synagogues; yea, far more in number, then of that
other sort of Proselytes which were circumcised. The reason being, because it
was the more easy condition, and not so prejudicial to their outward liberty,
as the other; in as much, as they might notwithstanding still live, and
converse with their friends, kindred, and Countrymen, bear office and enjoy
honors among them, (as Naaman the Syrian did, who was of this kind) which the
other might not do.

These impediments being out of the way, the hope of the Resurrection from the
dead, and the reward of the life to come, were powerful inducements to draw
many to the worship of that God, who only among the Gods For since then, the
Devil has been Gods Ape.
at that time, promised this reward to such as worshipped and served him, and
no other, which was the bait wherewith the Jews allured them, and that to their
own no small emolument; this kind, as it were to recompense their want of
Circumcision, seeming to be very bountiful toward their Nation, as may be
gathered both from Cornelius, who is said to have given much alms to the
people, (namely of the Jews;) And the Story of that Centurion, Luke 7. whom the
Jews besought our Savior so instantly for, alleging that he loved their
Nation, and had built them a Synagogue, and therefore deserved that favor they
sued for, on his behalf.

Now, out of this discourse (besides the clearing of the passages
aforementioned,) we may learn two things: One, how so many of the Gentiles, by
the preaching of the Apostles, could so soon and so readily be converted to the
faith of Christ. It was because they had already embraced the principles which
led thereunto. For we are to take notice, that the foundation of the Church
among the Gentiles, was laid of these (...), who had already embraced the
worship of the true God, had knowledge of his promises, believed and hoped for
the life to come. For was not S. Peter (to whom the instructions for this
Embassage were first given) sent first to Cornelius a Centurion, a Gentile, the
first of this order? wherefore? but that this might be for a pattern for them,
with what kind of men they were first to deal in this great work; namely, with
such as were idonei Auditores Euangelii; those which were puri puti Gentiles,
being not so; as who knew nothing of the principles requisite thereto. This
will appear, if we consider well the tenor of the Apostles Sermons, to such
Gentiles as they converted; which we shall observe to presuppose that they
already knew the true God, and the promise of eternal life, to such as
worshipped him, and so had no more to learn, but the way and means now revealed
by God, for attainment thereof, which was by the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

The other thing we may learn, is, what was the true state of the Question,
which the Apostles met to decide in the Council at Jerusalem; whether the
Gentiles which believed in Christ, were to be circumcised or not, and so bound
to keep the whole Law? It was this, to resolve (that, whereas all such as
embraced the worship of the God of Israel, conformed to one of these two kinds
of Proselytes) to whether of them the Gentiles, which had or should receive the
Gospel of Christ, were to conform themselves, whether to the Proselytes of the
Covenant, or to the (...), and Proselytes of the Gate. Saint Peter standing up
in the Council, demonstrates it to be the will of God, that they should
conform to the latter, and not to the first; and that upon this ground; because
that Cornelius, the first Christened Gentile, unto whom himself was sent by
Divine Commission, was no circumcised Proselyte, but a Proselyte of the Gate,
or a (...) only; yet received he no Commission to circumcise him: Yea, the
holy Ghost, as he was Preaching, fell upon him and his household, being
uncircumcised, as it did upon those of the Circumcision: whereby it appeared,
that God would have the rest of the Gentiles, which embraced the faith, to be
after the pattern of Cornelius; and to have no more imposed upon them, then He
had. And accordingly the Council defines, That no other burden should be laid
upon them, but only to abstain from pollution of Idols, from blood, from
things strangled, and from fornication: and as some copies Together with
Irenaeus twice, Lib. 3. cap. 12. Cyprian. (...) Lib. 3. Tistimon. in sine.
have, (...) To do as they would be done to; that is, they should as (...),
observe the praecepta Filiorum Nohae, which here [by a (...)] are briefly
reckoned up.

(...).

2 PETER 2. 4. 2 Pet. 2. 4.
For if God spared not the Angels which sinned, [(...)] -- but cast them down
to hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness to be reserved unto
Judgment, etc. so we translate it:

To which of S. Peter, answers that of S. Jude, (as almost that whole Epistle
does to this) verse 6. And the Angels which kept not their first estate, [or
principality] but left their own habitation, he has reserved in everlasting
chains under darkness unto the Judgment of the great Day.


THese two places are brought to prove, that the Devils or evil spirits, are
now in Hell, before the day of Judgment: Which I cannot see how it can
possibly stand with the rest of the Scripture, which testifies every where that
they have their mansion in the Air, and here about the earth, where they tempt,
seduce, and do all the mischief they can to mankind; hence their Chieftain
Satan is styled, The Prince of the power of the Air, that is, of the airie
Dominion or Princedom. Therefore hither they were with their Prince exiled from
Heaven, and no further, nor shall be until the Day of Judgment. And of this I
shall speak at this time: First, to clear these Texts which seem to make for
the contrary; Secondly, to enquire what was the opinion of the Ancients about
this point.

As for this place of S. Peter, and that imitation thereof in the Epistle of
Jude, I can believe the translation of neither: Piscator (not conceiving how
that of S. Jude (especially because of the word [(...)] eternal) could be
reconciled with other Scripture, and experience, which shows us that the Evil
spirits are not yet bound with eternal chains, having so much liberty of
gadding about) supplies in the Text vinciendos, as if there were an Ellipsis,
reading it thus, Iudicio magni illius Diei vinculis aeternis (vinciendo)
reservasse.

In that of S. Peter, if I understand him, he takes (...), not for Dativus
instrumenti, with chains of darkness, but as Dativus acquisitionis, for chains
of darkness; and construes it with (...), as if it were, He delivered them for
chains of darkness; namely, supposing a trajection of the words.

But for my part I take both (...) in S. Peter, and (...) in S. Jude, to be
neither of them Dativus instrumenti, but both Acquisitionis, or Finis, and
governed the one of (...), and the other of (...) that is, (...) to be put for
(...), and (...) for (...) -- As in the Hebrew, the preposition (...), serves
for the proposition (...), and for the Dative Case, whose propriety the style
of the Greek Testament every where imitates, and why not in this? (...)
therefore and (...), are here (...), not (...): Nay, among the Greek
Grammarians we find observed, that the Dative Case is sometimes put for the
Accusative with the proposition (...) As in this example, (...), that is, (...)
much more in the sacred Greek, which so frequently imitates the Hebrew
Construction.

Next for the word (...) in S. Peter, it is (...), and so not bound by any use
or example to the signification we here give it, to wit, throwing down to hell.
I would therefore render it, ad poenas tartareas damnavit, to wit, thus,
Angelos qui peccaverunt, cum ad tartari supplicium damnasset, catenis caliginis
servandos tradidit ad Diem Iudicii. For (...) here is (...), as S. Jude has
it: So also Mat. 12. 24. The Queen of the South shall rise in judgment with
this Generation, (that is) in, or at the Day of Judgment: Or I would render
it, not casting down to hell, but casting down to hell ward: So the meaning in
both places will be, That the wicked Angels were cast down from heaven, to this
lower orb, there to be reserved for chains of darkness at the Day of
Judgment: which sense the ninth verse in this Chapter of Peter, plainly
intimates by way of reddition; Novit Dominus pios in tentatione eripere, as he
did Noah and Lot, Injustos vero in diem Iudicii cruciandos servare, as he does
the wicked Angels. Moreover verse 17. where the same hellish darkness is
spoken of, it is said, to be reserved for the wicked, (...), to whom that
hideous darkness is reserved for ever; whence it is probable, that S. Peter in
the foregoing passage of Angels, referred also those chains of darkness, to
reserving, and not to delivering; that is, not that the evil Angels were now
already delivered to chains of darkness, but reserved for them at the day of
Judgment.

And thus much for clearing of the words of these two parallel Texts; now what
has been anciently the current opinion of this point? And first, for the Jews,
it is apparent to have been a tradition of theirs, that all the space between
the earth and the firmament, is full of troops of Evil spirits, and their
Chieftains, having their residence in the air; which, I make no doubt S. Paul
had respect to, when he calls Satan the Prince of the power of the air. Drusius
quotes two Authors, one the Book called (...), Munus novum; another, one of the
Commentators upon Pirke Aboth, who speak in this manner, Debet homo scire and
intelligere, a terra usque ad firmamentum omnia plena esse turmis, and
praefectis, and infra plurimas esse Creaturas laedentes and accusantes,
omnesque stare and volare in aere, neque a terra usque ad firmamentum locum
esse vacuum: sed omnia plena esse praepositis, quorum alii ad pacem, alii ad
bellum, alii ad bonum, alii ad mulam, ad vitam and ad mortem incitant. By
praepositi, I suppose, he means such among the Spirits as are set as Wardens
over several charges, for the managing of the affairs of mankind subject to
their powers. This was the opinion of the Jews; which they seem to have learned
by tradition from their ancient Prophets: For in the Old Testament we find no
such thing written, and yet we see S. Paul seems to approve it.

Now for the Doctors of the Christian Church, S. Hierome upon the sixth of the
Ephesians, tells us, that their opinion was the same; It Is the opinion of all the
Doctors, (says he) that Devils have their mansion and residence in the space
between the heaven and the earth. And that the Fathers of the first 300 or 400
years, nor did, nor could, hold the evil Angels to have been cast into Hell
upon their sin, is evident by a singular Tenet of theirs. For Iustn Martyr, one
of the most ancient, has this saying; that Satan before the coming of Christ
never durst blaspheme God, and that (says he) because till then he knew not he
should be damned. The same is approved by Irenaeus in his fifth Book and
twentysixt Chapter; Praeclare (says he) dixit Justinius, quod ante Domini
adventum Satanas nunquam ausus est blasphemare Deum, quippe nondum sciens suam
damnationem; Post adventum autem Domini, ex sermonibus Christi and Apostolorum
ejus, discens manifest quoniam ignis aeternus ei praeparatus sit, -- per
hujusmodi homines (he means those Heretics who blasphemed the God of the Law)
blasphemat eum Deum, qui judicium importat. Eusebius 4. Hist. Cap. 17. cites
the same out of both, with approbation: So does Oecumenius upon the last Chap.
of the first of S. Peter. Epiphanius against Heresy 39. gives the same as his
own assertion, almost in the same words with Justin and Irenaeus, though not
naming them; Ante Christi adventum (says he) nunquam ausus est Diabolus in
Dominum suum blasphemum aliquod verbum loqui, aut contra elationem cogitare:
expectavit enim Christi adventum -- put avitque se misericordiam aliquam
assecuturum esse. I will not enquire how true this Tenet of theirs is, but
only gather this, that they could not think the Devils were cast into Hell,
before the coming of Christ. For then how could they but have known they
should be damned, if the execution had already been done upon them?

Saint Augustine, as may seem, intending to reconcile these places of Peter and
Jude with the rest of Scripture, is alleged to affirm, that the Devils
suffering some hell-like torment in their aerie Mansion; the Air may in that
respect in an improper sense be called Hell. But that the Devils were locally
or actually in Hell, or should be before the day of Judgment, it is plain he
held not; and that will appear by these two passages in his Book de Civitate
Dei. First, where he says, Daemones in hoc quidem aere habitant, quia de Coeli
superioris sublimitate dejecti merito irregressibilis transgressionis in hoc
sibi congruo velut carcere, praedamnati sunt. Lib. 8. Cap. 22. The other where
he expounds that of the Devils Videatur etiam Origin. in Numer. c. 22. Non vult
Deus Daemonum genus ante tempus damnare; Sciunt enim and ipsi Daemones, quia
tepus eorum praesens hoc seculum continet: Propterea and Dominum rogabant, ut
non torqueret cos ante tempus, etc. Et ob hoc neque Diabolum removit a
principatu hujus seculi, etc.
Mat. 8. Art thou come to torment us before the time, (that is, says he) ante
tempus Iudicii, quo aeterna damnatione puniendi sunt, cum omnibus etiam
hominibus qui eorum societate detinentur. Lib. eodem Cap. 23. in fine.

The Divines of later times, the Schoolmen and others, to reconcile the
supposed Contrariety in Scripture, divide the matter; holding some Devils to be
in the Air, (as Saint Paul and the History of Scripture tells us,) some to be
already in Hell, (as they thought, Saint Peter and S. Jude affirmed:) which
opinion seems to be occasioned by a Quaere of Saint Hieroms, upon the sixth of
the Ephesians; though he speaks but obscurely, and defines nothing. But what
ground of Scripture, or reason can be given, why all the Devils, which sinned,
should not be in the same condition? especially Satan, the worst and chief of
them, should not be in the worst estate, but enjoy the greatest liberty? It
follows therefore that these places of Saint Peter and Saint Jude, are to be
construed according to the sense I have given of them; namely, that the evil
Spirits, which sinned, being adjudged to hellish torments, were cast out of
Heaven into this lower Region, there to be reserved, as in a prison, for chains
of darkness at the Day of Judgment.

1 COR. 4. 1. 1 Cor. 4. 1.
Let a man so account of us, as of the Ministers [(...)] of Christ, and
Stewards of the Mysteries of God.
A Man would think at first sight, that this Scripture did exceedingly warrant
our use of the word Minister, in stead of that of Priest, and leave no plea for
them who had rather speak otherwise. Howsoever I intend, at this time, to show
the contrary, (and even out of this text) that we have very much swarved herein
from the Apostles language, and abuse that word to such a sense, as they never
intended; nor is any where found in Scripture; I favor neither superstition,
nor superstitious men; yet truth is truth, and needful to be known; especially
when ignorance thereof breeds error and uncharitableness. My discourse
therefore shall be of the use of the words Priest and Minister, wherein shall
appear how truly we are all Ministers in the Apostles sense, and yet how
abusively and improperly so called in the ordinary prevailing use of that word:
I will begin thus.

All Ecclesiastical persons or Clergy men may be considered in a threefold
relation. First, To God. Secondly, To the People. Thirdly, One toward another.
In respect of God, all are Ministers of what degree soever they be; because
they do what they do by commission from him, either more or less immediate:
for a Minister is he, qui operam suam alicui, ut superlori, aut domino praebet.
In respect of the People, all are Bishops, that is, Inspectores, or Overseers;
as having charge to look unto them: But lastly, compared one to another, he
whom we usually call Bishop is only Overseer of the rest; Inspector totius
Cleri. Deacons are only Ministers to the rest; Ministri Presbyterorum and
Episcoporum, and in that respect have their name (...) Bishops are a degree of
Presbyters of divine ordinance, to be as Heads, Chiefs, and Presidents of their
Brethren: All other Ecclesiastical Ministers, whether in Ecclesia, or Foro
Ecclesiastico (I mean whether they attend divine Duties in the Church, or
Jurisdiction in Ecclesiastical Courts) are all a kind of Deacons, being to
the Presbyters, either single or Episcopal, as the Levites were to the
Sacerdotes in the Old Testament, namely, to minister unto, or for them.

These grounds being forelaid and understood, I affirm, first, that Presbyters
are by us unnaturally and improperly called Ministers, either of the Church, or
of such or such a Parish: we should call them, as my text does, Ministers of
God, or Ministers of Christ, not Ministers of men.

First; Because they are only Gods Ministers who sends them, but the Peoples
Magistri to teach, instruct, and oversee them: Were it not absurd to call the
Shepherd, the sheeps Minister? If he be their Minister, they surely are his
Masters. And so indeed the People by occasion of this misappellation, think
they are ours, and use us accordingly. Indeed we are called Ministers, but
never their Ministers, but as you see here, Gods Ministers, Christ's Ministers,
who imployeth us to dispense his Mysteries unto his Church.

There are three words in the New Testament translated Minister, (...) the
first is most frequent; but not one of them is given to the Apostles, in the
whole Scripture, with relation to the Church or People; you shall never find
them called (...), or (...), which is so frequent with us, but Ministers of
God; 2 Cor. 6. 4. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 2. Ministers of Christ, as in my text, and 2 Cor.
11. 23. Col. 1. 7. Ministers of Jesus Christ. 1 Timothy 4. 6. or Ministers of that
which they minister, as Ministers of the New Testament, 2 Cor. 3. 6. Ministers
of the Gospel, Ephesians. 3. 7. Col. 1. 23. but not Ministers of them to whose behoof
they minister: Yet might this speech, Minister of the Church, if rightly
construed, be admitted; namely, if it be spoken by an Ellipsis, for Minister of
God, for, and over the Church; so the Apostle Coloss. 1. 17. A faithful
Minister of Christ for you: that is, Christ's Minister, not theirs; yet not for
Christ, but for them; But those who use this speech commonly mean otherwise.

Secondly, Angels are called ministering spirits, but not our Ministers, but
Gods Ministers to usward, or for our behalf: So Ministers of the Gospel, not
the Peoples, or Congregations Ministers, but Gods Ministers for their behoof.

Thirdly, this speech [Minister of the Church, or, of this or that Church] is
so much the more incommodious, because it has begotten (as incommodious and
unapt speeches do) an erroneous conceit, not only among the vulgar, but some
of better understanding; namely, that a Minister is not lawfully called,
unless he be chosen by the People, because he is their Minister, and so to be
deputed by them: And indeed if he be their Minister, in proper relation, they
are his Masters, and so it is good reason they should appoint him, as Masters
do those who are to serve them: But if in proper relation they are Gods
Ministers, and not theirs, (though for them) then God is to appoint them, or
such as he has put in place to do it. It is an erroneous opinion, that some
maintain, That the power of Sacred Order, and of the Keys, is given by God
immediately to the body of the Congregation; and that they depute him who is
their Minister, to execute the power which is originally in them; That power is
conferred by God immediately to those, who are Bishops and Pastors, and, by and
through them, belongs to the whole body, and no otherwise: Sed tantum potuit
incommodi sermonis usus.

Some perhaps object against my whole assertion, that of S. Paul, 2 Cor. 4. 5.
We preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, (to wit, esse Dominum) and
our selves your servants for Jesus sake: If the Apostles were the Churches
servants, why not their Ministers? I answer, the Apostle says not, they were
the Corintbians servants, but that he had made himself so, in his Preaching to
them: So he says expressly 1 Cor. 9. 19. For though I be free from all men, yet
I have made my self a servant to all, that I might gain the more: Yet he
confesses the Corinthians began to vilify him for this condescent, 2 Cor. 11.
7. Have I committed an offense in abasing my self, that you might be exalted,
because I have preached unto you the Gospel of God freely? This was that
wherein he carried himself toward the Corinthians as a Servant, but to other
Churches he did not so: It would be a strange assertion, to say the Apostle
were the Corinthians Servant, in a proper relation; we know he says, Gal. 1.
10. If I pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ; And Romans 6. 16.
Know ye not, that to whom you yield your selves servants to obey, his servants
you are to whom you obey?

I come now to a second assertion, which is, that howsoever any Ecclesiastical
person may be rightly called a Minister, (so it be in a proper relation to
Godward) yet the word Minister is again most unfitly used by us, for a name of
distinction of one Ecclesiastical Order from another: As when we call those
which are Presbyters, Ministers, by way of distinction from Deacons; for so we
speak Ministers and Deacons, in stead of Priests and Deacons.

The reason we thus speak, is to avoid the name Priest, which we conceive to
signify Sacerdos, that is, one that sacrifices, such as were those in the
Law. But our Curates of holy things in the Gospel, are not to offer Sacrifice,
and therefore ought not to be called Sacerdotes, and consequently, not Priests.
This is the reason; but if it be well examined, Priest is the English of
Presbyter, and not of Sacerdos; there being in our Tongue no word in use for
Sacerdos: Priest, which we use for both, being improperly used for a
Sacrificer, but naturally expressing a Presbyter; the name whereby the Apostles
call both themselves, and those which succeed them in their charge. For who can
deny that our word Priest is corrupted of Presbyter? Our Ancestors the Saxons
first used Preoster, which by a farther contraction came Priest, and Priest.
The high and low Dutch have Priester, the French Prestre, Italian Prete, but
the Spaniard only speaks full Presbytero. But, to come more near the point,
our men in using the word Minister, for a distinctive name in stead of Priest,
incur four Solecisms: I mean when we use the word Minister not at large, but
for a distinction from the Order of Deacons, saying Ministers and Deacons.

First, we run into that we sought to avoid: For we would avoid to call the
Presbyters of the Gospel, by the name of the Sacrificers of the Law; and yet
run into it in such sort, that we style those of the Gospel by the legal name,
and those of the Law by the Evangelical name; the Hebrew calls them of the Law,
Cohanim, of (...), which properly signifies to minister, and thence comes the
Greek word (...), and (...) but we call those of the Gospel, Cohanim, when we
style them Ministers. On the contrary, the Apostles style those of the Gospel,
Presbyteri; but we transfer that name to those of the Law, when we call them
Priests: This is counterchange;

Incidit in Scyllam, qui vult vitare Charybdim.

Secondly, It is a confusion or tautology, to say Ministers and Deacons, that
is, Ministers and Ministers: For (...) is in Greek, what Minister is in Latin;
both signifying a Minister; as if one should say, Homo and (...), or Dilavium
and Cataclysmus, and think so to distinguish things of several natures or
conditions.

Thirdly, We impose upon that Order, a name of a direct contrary notion to what
the Apostles gave them: The Apostles gave them a name of Eldership, and
Superiority in calling them Presbyteri, we of inferiority, and subordination in
calling them Ministri: The Jews had no name more honorable then that of
Elders, (...), for so they called their Magistrates: so we read of Elders of
the people, and Elders of the Priests and Levites, meaning the chief in both
sorts; This honorable name the Apostles gave, as a name of distinction to the
Evangelical Pastors, whereby they dignified them above those of the Law; whose
name in the Hebrew (as I said before) is but a denomination of ministry: And
we have rejected the name of Dignity, of Fathership, and Eldership, and assumed
in stead thereof, a name of under-service, of subjection, of ministry, to
distinguish our order by; I say to distinguish our order; For in a general
sense, and with reference to God, we are all his Ministers, and it is an honor
unto us so to be, more then to be other men's Masters, as our Apostle in my text
intimates.

Fourthly, in the Churches beyond the Seas, there is a worse Solecism by reason
of this misapplied speech. They have a kind of Officers, who are the Pastors
assistants in Discipline, much like to our Churchwardens, these they call
Elders, we style them Lay Elders; These are but a kind of Deacons at the most,
and of a new erection too; And yet these are dignified by the name of Elders
and Presbyters, who are indeed but Deacons or Ministers; and the Pastor himself
is called a Minister, who in the Apostles style is the only Presbyter or
Elder. For so they speak, The Minister and his Presbyters, or Elders.

To conclude, it had been to be wished, that those whom the term of Priest
displeased, as that which gave occasion by the long abuse thereof, to fancy a
Sacrifice, had rather restored the Apostolical name of Presbyter in the full
sound, which would have been as soon, and as easily learned and understood, as
Minister; and was no way subject to that supposed inconvenience. But the
mis-application of the word Presbyter in some Churches, to an Order the
Apostles called not by that name, deprived those thereof, to whom it was
properly due. Howsoever when they call us Ministers, let them account of us as
the Ministers of Christ, and not of men: Not as deputed by the Congregation to
execute a power originally in them, but as Stewards of the mysteries of God.

S. JOHN 10. 20. Ioh. 10. 20
He has a Devil, and is mad.
IT is a matter of greater moment, then perhaps every man thinks of, under what
notions things are conceived, and from what property or Character the names we
call them by, are derived. For hereby, not seldom, it comes to pass, That the
same things, presented to us under different notions, and names derived
therefrom, are not taken to be the same they are. Even as he, that meets a man
well known unto him, in an exotic disguise, or antic habit, takes him to be
some other, though he knew him never so well before. For example; a man would
wonder that a Comet, (as we call it) being so remarkable and principal a work
of the Divine power, and which draws the eyes of all men with admiration
toward it, should no where be found mentioned in the Old Testament: Neither
there, where the works of God are so often recounted to magnify him, (when as
Hail, Snow, Rain, and Iee, works of far less admiration are not pretermitted)
neither by way of allusion and figured expression, in the Prophets predictions
of great calamities and changes, whereof they were taken to be presages;
especially, when we see them borrow so many other allusions, both from heaven
and earth, to paint their descriptions with. Should a man therefore think,
there never appeared any of them in those times, or to those Countries? It is
incredible: Or that the Jews were so dull and heedlesse as not to observe them?
That is not like neither: What should we say then? Surely, they conceived of
them under some other notions then we do, and accordingly expressed them some
other way: As what if by a Pillar of fire, such a one perhaps as went before
the Israelites in the Wilderness; or by a Pillar of fire and smoke? as in that
of Joel, I will show wonders in the heavens, and in the earth, Blood, and Fire,
and pillars of Smoke: Or by the name of an Angel of the Lord, (whereby no doubt
they are guided) according as is said of that Pillar of Fire which went before
the Israelites, That the Angel of the Lord, when they were to pass the Redsea,
came and stood between them and the Egyptians, when that Pillar did so. And
who knows, whether that in the 104 Psalm; may not have some meaning this way?
He ma^eth his Angels Spirits, (or winds) and his Ministers a Flame of fire, to
wit, because they are wont to appear in both. It comes in, in the Psalm, among
other works of God, in a fit place for such a sense; both in regard of what
goes before, and follows after. These, I say, or some of these may be
descriptious of those we call Comets; which because they are disguised under
another notion, and not denominated from Stella, or Coma, hence we know them
not.

Now, to come toward my Text; a like instance to this, I take to be that of the
Daemoniack, so often mentioned in the Gospel: For I make no question, but that
now and then the same befalls other men; whereof I have experience my self, to
wit, To marvel how these Daemoniacks should so abound in, and about that
Nation, which was the people of God; whereas in other Nations, and their
writings, we hear of no such; And that too, as it should seem, about the time
of our Saviors being on earth only; because in the time before, we find no
mention of them in Scripture. The wonder is yet the greater, because it seems
notwithstanding all this, by the Story of the Gospel, not to have been
accounted then by the people of the Jews, any strange or extraordinary thing,
but as a matter usual; nor besides is taken notice of by any foreign Story.

To meet with all these difficulties, (which I see not how otherwise can be
easily satisfied) I am persuaded (till I shall hear better reason to the
contrary,) that these Daemoniacks were no other then such as we call madmen,
and Lunaticks; at least, that we comprehend them under those names, and that
therefore they both still are, and in all times and places have been, much more
frequent then we imagine. The cause of which our mistake, is that disguise of
another name, and notion, then we conceive them by; which makes us take them to
be diverse, which are the same.

That you may rightly understand this my Assertion, (before I acquaint you with
the reasons which induce me thereunto) you must know, that the Masters of
Physic tell us of two kinds of Deliration, or alienation of the
understanding; One, ex vi morbi, that, namely, which is with or from a Fever,
called Delirium, or Phrenitis (the latter being a higher degree then the
former;) Another kind sine Febre, when a man, having no other disease, is
crased and disturbed in his wits.

And this, they say, is either simple dotage, proceeding from some weakness of
the brain, or intellective faculty; or Melancholia and Mania, which they
describe and distinguish thus: Both of them to be when the understanding is so
disturbed, that men imagine, speak, and do things, which are most absurd, and
contrary to all reason, sense, and use of men. But their difference to be in
this; that melancholia is attended with fear, sadness, silence, retiredness and
the like symptoms: Mania with rage, raving, and fury, and actions suitable;
which is most properly styled madness. Now then, I say, that those Daemoniacks
in the Gospel were such as we call madmen: understand me to mean, not of
Deliration ex vi morbi, or of simple dotage, but of these two last kinds,
Melancholici and Maniaci; whereunto add morbus Comitialis, or the falling
sickness, and whatsoever is properly called Lunacy.

Such as these, I say, the Jews believed (and so may we) to be troubled and
acted with evil Spirits: as it is said of Saul's Melancholy, That an evil
Spirit from the Lord troubled him; and therefore, passing by all other causes
and Symptoms, they thought fit to give them their Name from this, calling them
(...), or (...). An occasion of the more frequent use of which expression, in
our Saviors time, and the ages immediately before him, then formerly, had
been, or may seem to have been given by the sect of the Sadduces, which, after
the time of Hyrcanus, had much prevailed, and affirmed (as S. Luke tells us)
that there was no resurrection, neither Angel, nor Spirit. To affront, and cry
down whose error, it is like enough the Pharisees, and the rest of the
right-beleeving Jews who followed them, affected, to draw their expressions
(wheresoever they could) from Angels and Spirits: as presently they did, in the
Acts, when Saint Paul awakened their faction in the Council, saying I am a
Pharisee, and the son of a Pharisee, etc. We find no evil, say they, in this
man, but if a Spirit or an Angel has spoken unto him, let us not fight against
God.

Having thus sufficiently stated, and explicated my assertion, now you shall
hear what grounds I have for the same: First therefore, I prove it out of the
Gospel it self, and that in the first place from this Scripture, which I have
chosen for my text, (...), he has a Devil and is mad. Where I suppose the
latter words to be an explication of the former.

Secondly, I prove it out of Mat. 17. 15. where it is said, There came to our
Savior a certain man kneeling down to him, and saying; Lord have mercy on my
son, (...) because he is Lunatic, and sore vexed: For often times he falls
into the Fire, and often into the water. That this Lunatic was a Daemoniack, it
is evident both out of the 15. ver. of this Chapter, where it is said, Our
Savior rebuked the Devil, and he departed out of him, and the child was
cured from that very hour: As also out of the 9. of the Gospel of Saint Luke,
where it is said of the self-same person, Lo, a spirit takes him, and he
cries out, and it teareth him, that he foameth again, and bruising him, hardly
departs from him. By comparing of these places, you may gather what kind of
men they were, which the Scripture calls (...).

Now I come to other Testimonies: And first, take notice, that the Gentiles
also had the like apprehension of their madmen; whence they called them
Larvati, and Cerriti, where Larvati is as much as Larvis, id est, Daemonibus
acti: so Festus, Larvati, says he, furiosi and mente moti, quasi Larvis
exterriti. And for Cerriti, they were so called, quasi Cereriti, hoc est, a
Cerere percussi. And therefore you may remember, that when Menechmus in Plautus
fains himself mad, and talks accordingly, the Physician, who was sent for to
cure him, asks the old man who came to fetch him, whether he were Larvatus or
Cerritus. If the Gentiles thought thus of their madmen, should we think it
strange the Jews should? I could tell you here, that the Turks conceit of their
madmen, is not unlike this; but that they suppose the spirit that works in
them, to be a good, rather then an evil one. But I let this pass.

My next testimony shall be out of Justin Martyr, who in his second Apology ad
Antoninum, to prove (at least to a Gentile) that the souls of men have
existence and sense after death, brings for an argument their Necyomantia, and
their Evocationes Mortuorum, together with other the like: and in the last
place this of Daemoniacks; where by his description of them, we may easily
gather what kind of people they were, which were so taken to be. Item illi
(says he) qui a mortuorum manibus corripiuntur (for such were these Daemonia
taken to be) atque humi abjiciuntur homines (...) which all call Daemoniacks
and madmen: (...) therefore and (...) were all one, as men then conceived.
Note here that these (...) were taken to be the souls of men deceased, and that
not among the Gentiles only, but (as may seem) among the Jews also. For
Josephus in his seventh Book De Bello Iudaico, Cap. 25. mentioning these (...)
upon occasion of a certain herb, supposed to be good for them, says expressly
by way of Parenthesis, (...) (sc. (...), Spiritus sunt pessimorum ^om^num vivis
immersi. I tell not this meaning to avouch it for true; but only that you might
understand, how Justin Martyrs argument proceeds, to prove that souls have
existence after Death, from Daemonia^i.

My last proof is taken from those Energumeni, (which are all one with (...))
so often mentioned in the Church Liturgies, in the ancient Canons, and in other
Ecclesiastical writings, many ages after our Saviors being on earth; and
that, not as any rare and unaccustomed thing, but as ordinary and usual. They
were wont to send them out of the Church, when the Liturgy began; as they did
the Poenitentes, Auditores, and Catechumeni, which might not be partakers of
the holy Mysteries. If those were not such, as we now adays conceive of no
otherwise then as madmen, surely the world must be supposed to be very well
rid of Devils, over it has been; which for my part I believe not. Nay, that
these (...) or (...), were such as I speak of, Balsamon and Zonaras both in
their Scholia upon the Canons of the Church, will, I think, inform us: For to
reconcile two Canons, concerning these Energumeni, which seem contradictory,
one (called of the Apostles) in these words; Si quis Daemonem habet, ne fiat
Clericus, sed neque cum fidelibus precetur: Another of Timotheus, quondam
Patriarch of Alexandria, speaking thus, Si qui fidelis (...), debet esse
sanctorum mysteriorum particeps. To reconcile these, I say, they affirm, the
former (which admits them not) to be meant (...), or (...), of him that is
continually and always mad; ne forte quid mali aut inhonesti agat, aut
Daemoniac as voces emittat, ita ut populum Dei conturbet, atque divinum
officium impediat. But that of Timotheus which admits them, to be understood
(...), of him that is mad but by fits, and has his Lucida intervalla. And thus
I have acquainted you with what I have observed, to confirm me in Vide
Chrysostomi epistol. (...). Item de precibus in ecclesia pro Energumenis; Hom.
4, and 5. de incomprehensibili Dei natura, versus finem inter Sermon. ad Pop.
Antioch.
this opinion, and make no doubt, but there are more passages yet to be found,
this way, then I have met with.

PROVERBS 21. 16. Pro. 21. 16.
The Man, that wandreth out of the way of understanding, shall remain in the
Congregation of the Dead. (...), in coetu Gigantum.
IT is a question sometimes moved amongst Divines, and worth resolving; How,
and by what name the place and condition of the damned (which in the Gospel is
called Gehenna) was termed, or expressed in the Old Testament before the
Captivity of Babylon, and whilst the first Temple stood: For presently after
the Return, the aforementioned name Gebenna began to be frequented; as appears
both by the second of Esdras, the Chaldee Paraphrast, and other Jewish
writings, where that name is often found; as also by the Gospel, where our
Savior uses it, as then vulgarly known amongst the Jews. But it is as
certain, that before the Captivity or second Temple (for so the Jews call the
time of their state after their return) this name was not in use; both because
it is no where to be found in the Canonical Scriptures of the old Testament,
which were all written within that time; and especially, because the ground and
occasion thereof was not till about that time in being; which was the pollution
of the valley of the sons of Hinnom, or Tophet by King Josiah, and the
dreadful execution of divine vengeance in that Place: Hence it became to
posterity to be a name of execration, and applied to signify the place of
eternal punishment.

For this valley of Hinnom (Gehinnom, or, as afterward they pronounced it,
Gehenna) was a valley near Jerusalem, in a place whereof, called Tophet, the
children of Israel committed that abominable Idolatry, in making their children
to pass through the fire to Moloch, that is, burnt them to the Devil. For an
eternal detestation whereof, King Josiah polluted it, and made it a place
execrable, ordaining it to be the place, whither dead Carcasses, Garbage, and
other unclean things should be cast out: For consuming whereof, to prevent
annoyance, a continual fire was there burning. Yea, not man only, but the
Lord himself, as it were consecrated this place, to be a place of execration,
by making it the field of his vengeance, both before and after. For first, this
was the place where the Angel of the Lord destroyed the host of Senacherib,
King of Assyria, where one hundred and eighty thousand of their Carcasses were
burnt, according to that, Esaias 30. Through the voice of the Lord shall the
Assyrian be beaten down. For Tophet (this was a place, I told you, in the
valley of Hinnom) is ordained of old; yea for the King it is prepared, he has
made it deep and large, the pile thereof is fire and much wood, the breath of
the Lord like a stream of brimstone does kindle it. This was also the place,
where the Idolatrous Jews were slain, and massacred by the Babylonian armies;
when their City was taken, and their Carcasses left, for want of room for
burial, for meat to the fowls of heaven, and beasts of the field; according
to the word of the Lord, by the Prophet Jeremy in his seventh and nineteenth
Chapters, The children of Judah have built the high places of Tophet, which is
in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to burn their sons and daughters in the
fire, which I commanded them not, neither came it into my heart. Therefore
behold, the days come, says the Lord, that it shall be no more called Tophet,
nor the valley of the son of Hinnom, but the valley of slaughter. For they
shall bury in Tophet till there be no place. And the carcasses of this people
shall be meat for the fowls of heaven, and the beasts of the field, and none
shall fray them away.

Hence, as I said, this place being so many ways execrable for what had been
done therein, especially, having been as it were the gate to eternal
destruction, by so remarkable judgments, and vengeance of God there executed
for sin; it came to be translated to signify the place of the damned, as the
most accursed, execrable, and abominable place of all places; the invisible
vall^y of Hinnom. For such was the property of the Jewish Language, to give
Denominations unto things unseen, from such analogicall, and borrowed
expressions of things visible. By all which it is apparent, that this notion of
that name took its beginning after the Captivity, and was not in use before.

Still therefore we are left to seek, by what other name, and under what notion
this place of the damned was expressed, before the word Gehenna, or Gehinnom
came to be used. I answer, out of my Text, it seems to have been called Domus,
or Coetus Gigantum. Vir qui erraverit a via intelligentiae, in Coetu Gigantum
commorabitur. In the Hebrew, in Coetu Rephaim, which word properly signifies
Giants, and to that sense is always rendered by the Seventy, (...), though we,
and the later Interpreters, both in this, and some other places, take it for
manes, or mortui; but the ancient, I think, deserve the more credit, especially
it being confessed, that the word elsewhere so signifies. In Coetu Gigantum
therefore, that is, of those Giants, and Rebels against God, of whom we read
Genesis 6. Those mighty men, and men of renown of the old World, whose wickedness
was so great in the earth, that it repented, and grieved God he had made man;
and to take vengeance upon whom, he brought the general Deluge upon the earth,
and destroyed man and beast from the face thereof. Vir qui erraverit a via
Doctrinae, The man that wandreth out of the way of understanding, shall go and
keep them company; that is, go to that accursed place, and condition which they
are in.

That this construction of Coetus Rephaim is not improbable, may appear, first,
by the gloss of Rabbi Solomon upon this Text, in Coetu Rephaim, that is, says
he, (...), in Coetu Gehennae; This notion therefore is not altogether new.

Secondly, it is strengthened by comparing with it other places of Scripture,
where the like expression is used; as twice more in this Book of Proverbs;
First, Chap. 2. 18. where we read according to the Vulgar, Domus mulier is
alienae inclinata est ad mortem, and ad inferos semitae ejus; Here for ad
inferos, the Hebrew has (...), ad Gigantes; And the Seventy render it with an
exegesis: (...), She has put, or set her paths in Hades, or Hell, with the
Giants. Again, Chap. 9. 18. Aquae furtivae dulciores sunt, and panis
absconditus suavior. Et ignoravit, (namely, he that goes in to a strange woman)
quod ibi sint Gigantes, and in profundis Inferni convivae ejus. Here in some
Editions of the Vulgar are added these words: Qui enim applicabitur illi,
descendet ad inferos, and qui abscesserit ab illa salvabitur: an Argument how
this place has been understood; For the meaning of both these places seems to
be no other, but, That the strange woman will bring them who frequent her, to
hell, to keep the Apostate Giants company.

There is another place in the Hagiographa, where these Rephaim are mentioned,
to wit, Job 26. 5. which though of a more ambiguous sense, and scope, yet as it
is translated by the vulgar Latin, and well enough to agree with the Hebrew,
seems to be no other, but a description of Hell with the former; Gigantes,
says he, gemunt sub aquis, and qui habitant cum iis. Nudus est infernus coram
illo (id est, Deo) and nullum est operimentum perditioni. The meaning hereof
seems to be this. The place where the old Giants mourn, or wail under the
waters, and their fellow-inhabitants, the rest of the damned with them, even
Infernus, and the place of Perdition it self, is naked and open to the eyes of
God, from whom nothing is hid; which is agreeable to that, Pro. 15. 11. Hell
and destruction are before the Lord, how much more then the hearts of the
children of men? In this place the Jews take the word Abaddon, which we render
destruction, for Gehenna; that is, elliptically, for Beth Abaddon, the House of
destruction. And why then should not the same word be so taken in that place of
Job? and Nullum est operimentum perditioni, be as much as, Nullum est
operimentum Loco perditionis, or Gehennae?

Compare with these places in the Hagiographa, two in the Prophets; One in the
14. of Esaias; where by way of a Poetical or Prophetical hypotyposis of the
destruction or fall of Babylon, the King thereof is brought in coming to the
Rephaims, or Giants in the other world. Hell (says the Text) from beneath is
moved for thee, to meet thee at thy coming: it stirs up the Rephaims for
thee, even all the chief ones of the earth: And they shall say unto thee, Art
thou also become weak as we? art thou become like unto us?

The other is the 32 of Ezekiel, concerning the fall of Egypt, where their
slain are bestowed in like manner, in the nethermost parts of the earth, with
the Gibborim; which signifies not only mighty men, but Giants, and so is
rendered in this place by the Seventy: And thus much from comparison of places
of Scripture.

A third Argument to make this notion probable, which I have represented, is
this; Because all the expressions almost in Scripture, whereby this place of
eternal punishment is represented, relate and allude to some places or Stories
remarkable for Gods exemplary vengeance executed upon sinners. As that of
Gehenna to the notorious Judgments of God in the valley of Hinnom, for
Idolatry, and Blasphemy. That of the Lake of fire and brimstone, so often
mentioned in the Apocalypse, to the Lake Asphaltites, the lasting monument of
those showers of fire and brimstone from heaven, wherewith Sodom and Gomorrah
with the rest of the Cities of the plain perished for their abominable lusts.
Our Saviors expression in his sentence of condemnation, (Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels) seems to relate to
the punishment of the Apostate Angels, who for their rebellion were delivered
unto chains of darkness against that great Day.

And was not the destruction of the old world, by the general Deluge of water,
as famous as any of these? Yea, not to be paralleld by any, but that second
Deluge of fire, at the last Judgment? How improbable is it then, that this
should not lend a denomination to the place or state of eternal punishment, as
well as the rest?

Nay, which is more, S. Peter in his second Epistle, and second Chapter recites
these last three together, as if they had been intended, as patterns of the
eternal Judgment and punishment of sinful men. For (says he) if God spared
not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to Hell, and delivered them to
chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment. 5. And spared not the old
world, but saved Noah the eight person, a Preacher of righteousness, bringing
in the Flood upon the world of the ungodly, (that is, of the Rephaim, for so
the Seventy sometimes turn it.) 6. And turning the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah
into ashes, condemned them with an overthrow, making them an ensample, or
pattern (mark it well, (...), (i.) (...), of the punishment) of such, as should
after live ungodly: (Hence, as I told you, was the Lake Asphaltites, or the
Lake of fire and brimstone, borrowed by Saint John, for a denomination of
hell.) 7. And he delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy conversation of the
wicked; (If God did this) 9. He knows how to deliver the godly out of
temptations, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of Judgment, to be
punished. Ye see the application, or reddition, and accordingly, how prone the
destruction of the world, of the Rephaim or ungodly by the Deluge, is, to give
denomination to the punishment of Hell, as well as the other two.

And now, I suppose, you look for my Application, and putting the whole Text
together, which I shall do: He that goes astray from the way of understanding,
(that is, he that wandereth from the Law and Discipline of God; For that indeed
is the true wisdom. Timor Domini principium sapientiae, The fear of God is the
prime wisdom; that is the meaning; or to speak after our Academicall notion,
the chief Philosophy; whence, through all this Book of the Proverbs, the wicked
man who has no skill in this Divine Philosophy, or Discipline of God, goes
for a Fool, and so is called) must one day go even to his Fellow-giants; who,
as Baruch says in his third Chapter, were destroyed, because they had no
wisdom, and perished through their own foolishness. Vir qui erraverit a via
Doctrina, in Coetu Gigantum commorabitur. They who thus go astray, shall go to
those Rephaims of the old World, whose true sons they are; that is, unto the
place of everlasting punishment; From which God deliver us.

GENESIS 49. 10. Genesis 49. 10.
The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his
feet, until SHILOH come, and unto him shall the gathering of the People be.
IT is a Prophecy of the coming of Christ, and the time thereof; namely, when
the Scepter shall depart from Judah; then should the coming, reign, and Scepter
of Messiah begin, and not till then. The end of the one, should be the
beginning of the other: Whence arises our demonstration against the Jew; If
the Scepter be already departed from Judah, as we know it is, many hundred
years since; then must Christ needs be come. For the Scepter was not to depart
from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh came.

For, that Shiloh here, is the name of Messiah, appears by the subjunction
annexed, That the People or Nations (for it is (...), in the plural number,)
should be gathered, or obedient, unto him: Ergo, he is to be a King of the
Nations; and who should this be but Christ?

That the ancient Jews so understood it, appears by all the three Targums, or
Chaldee Paraphrasts. The Targum, called of Jerusalem, renders expressly: Until
the time when (...), King Messiah shall come: Jonathan: parvulus filiorum ejus,
that is, of Iudahs sons, which one of the late Rabbis (says Buxtorf.)
expounds, Rex Messiah, qui venit ex David, qui fuit minimus inter filios Isai
Patris sui: Onkelos; Until Messiah come, whose is the Kingdom. Likewise in
their Thalmud, Shiloh is reckoned among the names of Messiah.

Thus we and the Ancient Jews agree, about the aim and purport of this
Scripture. But we Christians believe further, that it is long since fulfilled:
Howsoever for the very point of time, when this Scepter departed from Judah, we
vary in our opinions. Some will have it to have been, when Pompey first brought
the Jewish State under the Roman subjection. Others a little after: when Herod,
an Idumean stranger, yet formerly incorporated into the Jewish State and blood,
was by the Romans invested to be their King, and the Hasmonaean, or Maccabaean
race (which till then had born the chief rule) by him extinguished. Others, not
till the destruction and final dissolution of the Jewish State by Titus.

These are principal moments of time, to be pitched upon: But against the
first, the subjecting of the Jewish State to the Romans, is objected; First,
that it anticipates the time of Christ's birth too much, being sixty years
before it. Secondly, that it might as well be affirmed, that the Scepter
departed from Judah, when Nebuchadnezzar carried them captive to Babylon; or
when they were subject to the Persian or Greek Monarchies, as when they were
made subject to the Romans.

Against the second, of Herod, lies the same exception that did against the
former; that it was too early, being thirty years and more, before the birth of
Christ; and more then twice as much, before his passion and ascension, at what
time he began his Kingdom. Secondly, that under the reign of Herod, the Scepter
of Judah might seem rather to be advanced then departed; for as much as they
had then a King of their own, reigning over them; and though not of Jewish
original, yet a Proselyte, and so one of their own body. And, if the Scepter
were departed from Judah, because one not of their own Tribe had the sovereign
rule over them; why was it not departed all the time, the Hasmonaean or
Maccabaean families, who were Levites, reigned? No man would say, that the
Scepter were departed from Poland, though the Polanders should choose a Swede, a
German, or a Frenchman, for their King. So neither from Judah, though a Levite,
or Idumaean Proselyte were their Prince.

Against the last point of time, the dissolution of the Jewish State by Titus,
is excepted, that it is as much too long after, either the Nativity or the
Passion of Christ, as the other two were before it; to wit, seventy years after
the one, and near forty after the other.

I mean not to enlarge my self any further, in acquainting you with each
particular passage, agitated concerning these differing opinions, or alleged
in the disputing of them: I have selected only so much, as I thought requisite
for the understanding of what I aim at, which is to show you such a
construction of these words, with but a little alteration of the common
translating; as being admitted, will leave no more place for those
difficulties, wherewith this question is entangled.

For the handling whereof, I will divide the remainder of my discourse into
these two parts: First, I will unfold the words of my Text, which seem to have
any difficulty or obscurity in them: Secondly, I will apply them to the time,
wherein they were fulfilled.

For the first; I begin with the word Scepter, which is not to be restrained to
Kingly Dominion only, but signifies any power, or Majesty of Government, under
what form or name soever; whereof a rod, or staff, was anciently the ensign,
whence every Tribe is called (...), (by the word here used) as being united
together under one staff, or power of Government: The meaning therefore is
not, that Judah should never cease from having a King, or being a Kingdom; but
that it should not cease from being a State, a body Politic, or Commonwealth,
having a power of Government, and Jurisdiction within it self, until Messiah
came: wherefore the Septuagint here for Sceptrum, or (...), translate (...),
not (...), say they, (...). For it is certain, that Judah was so far from being
a continued Kingdom, until Messiah should come, that there was no Kingly
Royalty in that Tribe, for more then two third parts of that time, namely, not
till David, nor after Zedekiah, saving that of the Maccabees, (who were
Levites) and of Herod, (by original an Edomite) which both put together, will
not make fourscore years; yet were they never without some Ruler, or Rulers of
their own, at that time.

The next word I consider, is Law giver, which will not be hard to understand,
if we mark well, what is implied by Scepter; for (...), the word here
translated Law giver, signifies not only a maker of Laws, but qui jus dicit,
he that exercises Jurisdiction; and so differs not much from the former, if
they be not altogether Synonyma.

As for the phrase, from between his feet, it means nothing else, but of his
posterity; For so the Scripture modestly expresses the place of generation; as
it does also by the word (...), Femur, or Crus. For where we read in the 26.
of this Book of Genesis, and again in the first of Exodus; All the souls that
came out of the loins of Jacob, were seventy souls: in the Hebrew it is, all
the souls that came out of his thigh: whence, by the way, you may observe the
occasion of that Fable, that Bacchus or Dionysius was born ex femore Iovis;
which according to the Oriental expression, (whence that whole story of
Bacchus came) implied no more, then that he was Jupiters son; but the Greeks,
not understanding the meaning, converted it unto that Fable, which you all know.

Now for the word Shiloh, if we derive it, as I think we should, it will
signify a Peacemaker, or Savior, of the verb (...), which signifies
Tranquillus, Pacificus, or Salvus fuit. And if the Masorites had so pleased,
they might have pointed it (...), which was the name of the eldest son of Judah
that survived; and in the Hebrew Etymology, can signify nothing else, but
Peaceable, or Peacemaker. And whether the Patriarch Jacob, or the Holy Ghost
directing him, might not choose this name, before any other, to design Messiah
in this Prophecy, in respect of the allusion it had to one of Iudahs sons, I
will not affirm; but leave to your better consideration. Others, following the
Jewish Rabbis, go farther about, to bring the word Shiloh, to signify Filius
ejus, that is, Iudahs; construing the Prophecy thus: The scepter shall not
depart from Judah, till his son (namely, Messiah) come: For (...) they will
have put for the affix Vau, as sometimes it is elsewhere (...), to be for
(...), Secundina, (that wherein the infant is wrapped in the womb) and so by a
Metonymie to signify here, the Child it self. In a word, they will have
(...), to be for (...), Secundina ejus; and that to mean Filius ejus. But this,
me thinks, is somewhat too ambagious, and therefore less probable; but let
every one follow his own judgment.

And now I am come to the Application, to show at what point of time this
prediction was fulfilled: To make the way plain whereunto, I must first alter a
little the construction of the remaining words; namely, And unto him shall the
gathering of the People, or the Nations, be. For here the word, shall be, or
shall, is not in the Hebrew, but added in translating, and so may be left out;
the words in the original being only, Et ei aggregatio, or obedientia
populorum: I construe therefore the word (...), or Until, (...), as common to
this with the former sentence; namely, thus: The Scepter shall not depart from
Judah, etc. until Shiloh come, and the gathering of the people be to him:
(that is) Until Messiah come, and the People or Nations be gathered unto him,
the Scepter shall not depart: Where note, that two things are specified to come
to pass, before the Scepter departs from Judah, or Judah ceases from being a
Commonwealth: First, the coming of Christ, or Shiloh into the world:
Secondly, the gathering of the Nations, or Gentiles unto him. For I construe
the word Until, as I told you, as common to both sentences, Until Shiloh
come, and until the Nations be gathered unto him.

And now, me thinks, your thoughts might almost prevent me, in designing the
time when this prediction was fulfilled: namely, neither when the Jews came
first under the Roman subjection, for then Shiloh was not yet come: nor under
Herod, or as some will seven years after him, when his son Archelaus being
banished, Judaea was reduced into a Province: For though Christ was then born,
to wit, in the end of Herod's reign, yet were not the Nations or Gentiles yet
gathered unto him: But at the destruction of the Jewish State by Titus, when
both these things were come to pass, Christ being come, and the Gentiles
converted unto his obedience, then did the Scepter depart from Judah, and they
cease from being any more a Commonwealth.

That this is the true application of this prediction, besides the evidence of
the event, appears by our Saviors Prophecy of this destruction of the Jewish
State, in the Gospel of S. Mat; where, after he had named some other things to
precede it, he adds this for the last sign; And this Gospel of the Kingdom,
says he, shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all Nations,
and then shall the end come: that is, the end of the Jewish State; when the
Gentiles, by the preaching of the Apostles, should be gathered unto Christ,
then should the Jewish Church and Commonwealth be utterly dissolved; which
till then had continued united under some Polity, and form of Government from
its first beginning; For so it pleased the wisdom of Almighty God, when he
would reject the Jews, not to dissolve their State, till he had erected him a
new among the Gentiles.

PSALM 8. 2. Psalm. 8. 2.
Out of the Mouth of Babes and Sucklings, thou have ordained strength, because
of thine enemies; that thou might quell the Enemy, and the Avenger.
THese words are alleged by our blessed Savior, Matthew. 21. 16. and three more
of the verses following this by S. Paul, to prove, that Christ must reign till
he had subdued all his enemies under his feet: As Heb. 2. 4. What is man, that
thou art mindful of him? or the son of man, that thou visitest him? 5. For
thou have made him little lower then the Angels, and have crowned him with
glory and honor. 6. Thou have made him to have dominion over the works of
thine hands; thou have put all things under his feet. Again, 1 Cor. 15. 23.
Christ, (says he) shall deliver up the Kingdom to God the Father, when he
shall have put down all rule, authority and power. 25 For he must reign, till
he has put all enemies under his feet. 26. The last enemy that shall be
destroyed is death. 27. For he has put all things under his feet. This is the
quotation; for it follows presently; When he says all things are put under
him, it is manifest that he is excepted, which did put all things under him.

How principal a part of the Argument of this Psalm, what is in these two
places cited by S. Paul, contains, every man may see, that reads and compares
them. But how it should be consonant to the meaning of the Psalm, seems
somewhat difficult to apprehend. For he that reads the whole Psalm, would
think it were nothing else, but a description of man's excellency; whom God had
made next to the Angels in dignity, and given him dominion over all things he
has made. For so after those words, Thou have put all things under his feet;
it follows immediately, All sheep and Oxen, yea and beasts of the field, the
fowls of the air, and the fishes of the Sea, and whatsoever passes through the
paths of the Sea. But what is the dominion over these, to subduing of enemies,
which the Apostle cites it for? or how is that, which is a description of
mankind in general, a Prophecy of Christ in special?

Some therefore, as in other citations of the Old Testament, so here also,
betake themselves to the covert of an Allusion; namely, that the Apostle only
borrows the words of the Psalmist, to express his own, and not the Psalmists
meaning. But, howsoever this may have place in some other allegations of the
Old Testament, which are for Illustration or Exornation only; yet when the
testimony is brought for proof and demonstration, as this is, it can in no wise
be admitted. For how can that testimony be of force to conclude any thing,
where not the Authors meaning is brought, but his words only made use of?
Others therefore say, that whatsoever is spoken of the Dignity and Excellency
of Man in general, is to be understood by way of eminency of Christ, the chief
of the sons of men. This indeed is something, but not enough. For what is the
dignity of man, in regard of his Dominion and Lordship over the creature, to
conquering and subduing of enemies? which is that the Apostle seeks to
demonstrate thence.

Well, to hold you no longer in suspense, the key of the interpretation of this
Psalm, and the ground of S. Paul's accommodation of that passage (Thou have put
all things under his feet) to Christ's victory, is to be sought in the words I
have now chosen; Out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings, etc. which being
first alleged by our Savior in the Gospel, in defense of that acclamation
given unto him by his followers, Hosanna, (that is, Save now) to the son of
David; (which the Pharisees thought too high an attribute, to be deferred to
flesh and blood) this application thereof by Christ to himself, gave the
Apostle good warrant, to interpret the Psalm as he did, and to ground a
Demonstration thereon.

I shall therefore divide my discourse into two parts; First, I will show the
meaning of the words as they stand in the Psalm: And secondly, make it appear,
that our Savior in the Gospel cites them according to that meaning.

The whole drift therefore of the Psalm, is to praise and glorify God for the
dignity wherewith he has invested Man: What is man (says he) that thou art
mindful of him, or the son of man that thou visitest him? For thou have made
him little lower then the Angels, and have crowned him with glory and honor.
This glory and honor is exemplified in two particulars: First, that God has
ordained man, even that weak and feeble creature, Man, to subdue and conquer
his enemies; which is that my Text expresses in the words before named; Out of
the mouth of Babes and Sucklings, thou have ordained strength, because of thine
enemies, that thou might quell the Enemy, and the Avenger. Secondly, that
he has made man the Lord of all his Creatures: Thou have made him, says he)
to have dominion over the works of thine hands: then follows, as it were the
summing up of both in a word: Thou have put all things under his feet. For
having ordained him, both the Champion to conquer thine enemies, and made him
at his Creation the Lord and Ruler of the works of thine hands, Quid reliquum
est? what honor could thou have given him, which thou have not? Lord!
(therefore) what is man, that thou art mindful of him, or the son of man that
thou visitest him? Where is to be observed, that the Corollarie, Thou have put
all things under his feet, comes in before his time, namely, before the
description of this exemplification of man's dominion over the creature, was
fully ended: as if the Prophet, out of admiration, could hold no longer from
telling us the sum of that Dignity, wherewith man was invested. Thou have
made him (says he) to have Dominion over the works of thine hands, and so one
way or other, Thou have put all things under his feet. Then follows the other
part of the Description, All Sheep and Oxen, over these thou have made him have
Dominion, The Beasts of the field, the Fowls of the air, and the Fish of the
Sea: whereas in direct order it should have stood thus; Thou have made him have
Dominion over the works of thine hands, over all Sheep and Oxen, the Beasts of
the Field, and Fowls of the Air, and Fish of the Sea; And so in the upshot;
Thou have put all things under his feet.

For this last particular of man's dignity, to have Dominion over the Creatures,
is so plainly and evidently intended in the Psalm, that I shall need speak no
more of it: I return therefore to the former, to make it clear also. That God
ordained man, not only to exercise Dominion over the visible creatures, but to
be the Champion to conquer and subdue his Enemies; which is the drift of the
words I have chosen for my text.

Out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings (says he) that is, of mankind, who
springs from so weak and poor a beginning, as of Babes and sucklings; namely,
out of the mouth of babes, not in sensu composito, but diviso: Of such whose
condition is to be babes and sucklings; not that they should exercise this
strength he speaks of, To quell the enemy and the Avenger, while they were
babes; but that this power should be given to those, whose condition was to be
such. And this is mavelous enough, that God should advance so weak a
creature, and of so despicable a beginning, to such a power, as to grapple with
the Enemy, and overcome him. But behold, there is yet something more admirable,
namely, that this should not be done by the strength of his Arm, but by the
breath and power of his Mouth. Out of the mouth of Babes and sucklings thou
have ordained strength because of thine enemies. etc. What Enemies? Thine,
says the Psalmist, and such too, as are ultores, avengers, the enemies both of
God and mankind: And who are those, but Satan, and his Angels? those
Principalities and Powers of the Air, those (...), and Rulers of the Darkness
of this world, as Saint Paul speaks: For when mankind is the one party, what
can the other be but some Power that is not of mankind? Besides, who are the
Enemies both of God and mankind but these? And of mankind especially; I put
enmity, says God to the serpent, between thee and the woman, and between thy
seed and her seed: Hence he is called Satan, the adversary, or Fiend, and the
enemy (...). Behold, I give you power (says our Savior to the seventy
Disciples, Luke 10. 19.) to tread on serpents, and scorpions, and over all the
Power of the Enemy; Your Adversary the Devil (says S. Peter) And this is he
as I conceive who is here called the (...), the Enemy and the Avenger; man's
tormentor; which words being found again in the 44. Psalm, may, for ought I
know, by warrant of this place, be taken for the same Enemy, and the usual
distinction altered, and the place read thus. By reason of the Enemy and the
Avenger, all this (to wit, the Calamity and confusion he spoke of before) is
come upon us; that is, by the malice of Satan. Now that such Enemies as these,
should be subdued by an arm; yea, by a mouth of flesh, is a thing which might
justly make the Prophet cry out; Lord what is man, etc.

Now that this, which I have given, is the true meaning of this place, may be
gathered from S. Paul^ inculcating the word Enemy; when 1 Cor. 15. he
demonstrates out of this Psalm, that Christ, before the end, shall abolish
(...), For He must reign, says he, till he has put all enemies under his
feet: The last Enemy which shall be destroyed (...) Death: and then he alleges
for his proof, that Corollary in this Psalm, For he has put all things under
his feet: But, in all this Psalm, there is no mention of Enemies, or subduing
them, but only in the verse I have in hand; which unless it be thus
expounded, S. Paul's allegation from hence will be too narrow, to prove what he
intends.

Having thus cleared the words I chose for my Theme, I shall not spend much
time to show you, how directly and literally, the purport of them was fulfilled
in our blessed Saviors incarnation: You have, in part, heard such Scriptures
already, as do evince it. The sum is this: The Devil, by sin, brought
mankind under thraldom, and became the prince of this world, himself, with his
Angels, being worshipped and served every where, as Gods; and the service and
honor due to the great God, the Creator of heaven and earth, cast off, and
abandoned; and all this to receive at last, for reward, eternal woe and
everlasting death. To vanquish and exterminate this enemy, and redeem the world
from this miserable thraldom, the Son of God took upon him, not the nature of
Angels, (which might have been the enemies matches) but the nature of weak and
despicable man, that grows from a babe and suckling: Who (says Esaias, in that
famous Prophecy of Messiah) has believed our report, and to whom is the Arm of
the Lord revealed? (namely, that works such powerful things by weak means:)
for he shall grow [(...)] as a tender plant, or sucker; (it is the very word
here used in my Text, for a sucking child, and translated by the Seventy
(...)) and as a root out of a dry ground; that is, a small and little one.

This is that whereof S. Paul discourses so divinely, in the Epistle to the
Hebrews: To which of the Angels said he at anytime, Sit thou on my right hand,
till I make thine enemies thy footstool? For unto the Angels has he not put in
subjection the world to come, whereof we speak: but unto him, of whom it is
said, What is man that thou art mindful of him, or, etc. Again, We see Jesus,
who was made little lower then the Angels, (that is, was made man; that is the
meaning) for the suffering of death, crowned with Glory and Honor: what can be
so plain as this? It is the Son of man, by whom in part we are, and more fully
shall be, delivered out of the hands of our enemies, that we might serve the
true God without fear; as Zachary says in his Benedictus. It is the Son of man
that delivered us from the power of darkness, Col. 1. 13. The Son of man, that
spoiled Principalities and Powers, and made a show of them openly, Col. 2. 15.
It was no Angel, that did all this; but the Son of man; even as was prophesied
from the beginning, when the Devil first got his Dominion; That the Seed of
the woman should break the Serpents head.

Nor is this all; for this Son of man enables also other sons of men his
Disciples and Ministers to do the like in his name: The seventy Disciples, in
the Gospel, return with joy, saying, Lord, even the Devils are subject to us
through thy name: Yea, not these only, but as many as fight under his Banner
against these enemies, have promise they shall at length quell and utterly
subdue them: Yea, at that great Day shall sit with their Lord and Master, to
judge and condemn them. Do ye not know, says S. Paul, that the Saints shall
judge the world? know ye not that we shall judge Angels?

Lastly, this victory, as for the event, so for the manner of atchieving it, is
agreeable to our Prophecy. For as much as Christ our General, nor fights, nor
conquers by force of Arms, but by the power of his Word and Spirit; which is
the power of his mouth, according to my Text; Out of the mouth of Babes, etc.
Hence, in the Apocalypse, Christ appears with a sword going out of his mouth:
In the 2 Thessalonians. 2. it is said, He shall consume Antichrist with the Spirit of
his mouth: Esaias prophesies, Chap. 11. 4. That the Branch of Iesse should smite
the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips should
stay the wicked. That is, he does all nu^^ and verbo, as God made the world: By
the word of the Lord were the Heavens made, and all the Hoasts of them by the
breath of his mouth, Psalm 33. 6. So does Christ vanquish his enemies, and
enable his Ministers to vanquish them, Verbo and Spiritu oris, according to
that Hos. 6. 5. I have hewed them by my Prophets, and slain them by the words
of my mouth.

I come now to the second thing I propounded; namely, to show, that our Savior
in the Gospel, when he cited this place, alleged it for, and according to
this, and no other meaning. The Evangelist relates it thus; When the chief
Priests and Scribes saw the wonderful things that Jesus did, and those in the
Temple crying, and saying, Hosanna to the son of David, they were sore
displeased; and said unto him, Hear thou what these say? how they ascribe
the power of salvation, (which is Gods peculiar) to thee, who art a son of man?
Is that solemn acclamation of Save now, wherewith we are wont to glorify God,
fit to be given to thee? Our Savior answers, Yes; for have ye not read, (says
he) Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings, thou have ordained strength?
Consider what that means. You will wonder perhaps, that a thing so plain, could
be taken in a differing meaning. For, it is commonly supposed to be alleged,
only to prove that children should glorify Christ, whilst the great ones of
the world despised him: And there are two things which have occasioned this
mistake, and drawn the sense awry; The first is, because the Septuagint,
(according to which the Evangelist reads this place) in stead of strength,
translate here (...), praise; Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings, thou
have ordained praise. Secondly, because those who made this acclamation, are
said to have been (...), When they saw the things which Jesus did, (...), To
the first, I answer, Our Savior alleged not the words of the Psalm in Greek,
but in Hebrew; where it is (...), strength, which is the constant signification
thereof, through the whole Bible, and never Praise: Nor do the Seventy
themselves ever translate it otherwise, save, as it seems, in this place. But
whatsoever the use of the word (...), be otherwise, it must be here regulated
by the Hebrew verity; according to which our Savior alleged it, and must
signify not simply, praise, but Robur praedicandum, or Robur laud dignum,
Robur celebrandum, or the like. To the second, that they are called (...), who
made this acclamation of Hosanna, to our Savior; I answer, Be it so: yet I am
sure, they were no babes and sucklings, but of reasonable years; How then would
our Saviors quotation have, in such a sense, been pertinent? Besides, young
children are not properly called (...), but (...). Again, the Pharisees found
no fault with the speakers, but with the thing spoken; which they thought too
much for a man; and therefore our Savior, when he alleged this Scripture,
answered to that, and intended not to Apologize for the speakers. Fourthly, in
all reason, those who cried here Hosanna in the Temple, were the same company,
that brought him crying Hosanna all the way thither. But these (says Saint
Mark) were of the multitude which followed him; and S. Luke of the multitude of
the Disciples; who also tells us, that the Pharisees, who were offended thereat,
bad him rebuke his Disciples. (...) therefore here signifies, either Christ's
Disciples, or the retinue which followed him, and brought him up thither, as a
King. Take which ye will, you shall not fasten upon the word, any notion other
then usual: I shall not need to tell you the Disciples of the Prophets are
called, sons of the Prophets, that is, (...) or that Herod's Courtiers, Matthew.
14. are termed his (...) He said (...), This is John the Baptist, etc. Christ
calls his Disciples (...), John 21. 5.

ZACH. 4. 10. Zach. 4. 10.
These seven are the eyes of the Lord, which run to and fro through the whole
earth.
IT is hard to keep a mean; which, as appears in many things else, so, in the
Doctrine and speculation of Angels, whereunto men were heretofore so much
addicted, as they pursued it, not only to vain and ungrounded Theories, but
even to Idolatry and superstition. There were in the Apostles times, who
intruded into things they had not seen: there were then, who beguiled men with
a voluntary humility in worshipping of Angels, Col. 2. what after times brought
forth, I shall not need speak. That ancient, and high soaring (though
counterfeit) Dionysius, describes the Hierarchy of Angels, as exactly as if he
had dwelt amongst them, delivering unto us nine Orders of them, out of nine
words, found partly in the Old, partly in the New Testament; Seraphims,
Cherubims, and Thrones, Powers, Hosts, and Dominions; Principalities,
Archangels, and Angels; and tells us the several natures, distinctions, and
properties of them all: Whereas it cannot be shown out of Scripture, either
that some of these names concur not, (as Angels, not to be a common name to
all the rest, especially to comprehend Archangels) or that these are
denominations of the natures of Angels, and not of their offices and charges
only; yet have these nine Orders passed for current through so many ages of
the Church.

But we, who (together with diverse superstitions) have justly rejected also
these vain and ungrounded curiosities, are fallen into the other extreme; having
buried the Doctrine of Angels in silence, making little or no enquiry at all,
what God in his Word has revealed concerning them: which yet would make not a
little for the understanding of Scripture, wherein are so many passages having
reference to them, and therefore questionless something revealed concerning
them.

I shall not therefore do amiss, if I choose for my discourse at this time, a
particular of that kind, which Dionysius in all his speculations has not a
word of; and yet seems to have strong footing in Scripture: It is this:

The Jews have an ancient tradition, that there are seven principal Angels,
which minister before the Throne of God, and therefore called Archangels; Some
of whose names we have in Scripture, as Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, and in the
second Book of Esdras, mention is made of Ierechmiel the Archangel. This
Tradition we shall find recorded in the Book of Tobit (whose antiquity is
before the birth of our Savior:) For there the Angel, who in the shape of
Azariah had accompanied his son into Media, when he discovers himself, speaks
in this manner; I am Raphael, one of the seven Angels, which stand and minister
before the glory of the holy One. The Vide Cyp. adv. Iud. li. 1. 20. H lar. in
Psalm. 129. vel. 130.
Greek has, which present the Prayers of the Saints, and go in and out, before
the holy One. But neither Saint Hierome, who translated it out of the Chaldee,
nor the ancient Hebrew Copy set forth by Paulus Fagius, (and in likelihood
translated out of the same Chaldee Original) has any such matter; but reads
as I first quoted. And therefore it seems to be an addition, or liberty of the
Greek Translator, who thought their Ministry to consist in presenting the
Prayers of the Saints, and so translated accordingly.

This tradition is farther testified by Jonathan ben Vziel, the Chaldee
Paraphrast, Genesis 11. 7. where the Lords words, spoken in the plural number,
Venite, descendamus, and confundamus linguam eorum, are paraphrased in this
manner. Dixit Dominus septem Angelis, qui stant coram eo, Venite nunc, etc.
Whether rightly or fitly in this place, it matters not: The testimony is
sufficient for the Jewish tradition of seven Archangels, that stand before the
Throne of God.

This tradition Iunius says is magical; and not a little triumphs therein, as
an undoubted Argument to evince the Book of Tobit not to be Canonical: But
whatsoever the Book of Tobit be, I hope to show this tradition to have firm
ground, and footing in Scripture, and not so rashly to be rejected.

The chief and most clear place is that I have now read; which gives us to
understand, that these seven Angels were represented by that Candlestick of
Seven Lamps, which continually burned, in the Temple, before the vail, over
against the Mercy seat; which was the Throne of God. For in the beginning of
the Chapter, the Prophet being showed this Seven-lamped Candlestick in a
Vision, and two Olive-branches on each side, ministering oil to the Lamps
thereof: The Angel asks him, if he knew what these meant: The Prophet
answers; No, my Lord; Then the Angel, discoursing a little by way of Preface,
tells him what they were: These seven, says he, (that is, the seven Lamps) are
the seven eyes Angeli dicuntur (...) magni Regis. Philo. Lib. de Somni is.
of the Lord, which run to and fro through the whole earth: that is, those
Seven Vigiles, or prime Ministers of his Providence, the seven Archangels, As
for the two Olive Trees on each side; These are, says he, two anointed ones,
which stand before the Lord of the whole earth; that is, Zorobabel, and Iesua;
the Prince and Priest, at that time; which should be Gods two instruments on
earth, whereby his Church (signified by the Candlestick) should be
re-established, and his Temple builded; and that not by force, or strength, as
he says in his Preface, but by the Spirit of God, working with them; as the
olive trees here conveyed oil to the Candlestick, not after a natural and
usual, but a supernatural and secret manner. This interpretation of the
latter, has the suffrage of the best Expositors, both Jews and Christians; and
so I shall need say no more of it: but betake my self to make good the first,
concerning the words I chose for my Text, That those seven eyes of God,
signified by the seven Lamps, are seven Angels.

That this is so, I prove out of two places in the Apocalypse, derived from
hence; where as well the Seven Lamps before the Throne, as the Lambs Seven eyes
are said to be the Seven Spirits of God: I saw (says Saint John, cap. 4. 5.)
Seven Lamps before the Throne, which are the Seven Spirits of God. And again,
cap. 5. 6. I saw in the midst of the Throne, and of the four Beasts, (as we
translate it) and of the four and twenty Elders, a Lamb, as if he had been
slain, having seven horns, and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God,
sent forth into all the earth. Here first, we have Zacharies very words, Seven
eyes sent forth into all the earth: Secondly, That these seven eyes are the
seven Spirits of God: Thirdly, that these seven Spirits were represented by the
seven Lamps burning before the Throne. If this be not sufficient to make my
interpretation of Zachary good, I know not what can be. For who can now but
think, that the Jews derived their tradition of these seven Angels, from this
place of Zachary, and the Apocalypse from them both?

And that indeed the Jews supposed some such thing meant by the seven Lamps in
the Temple, appears by the report of Josephus, though depraved and fashioned
unto the capacity of the Gentiles: For he tells us (both in his Antiquities,
Lib. 3. cap. 7. and in his De Bello Iudaico Lib. 6. cap. 14.) that the seven
Lamps signified the seven Planets, and the most holy place within the vail,
(ibid. cap. 5.) the heaven of God, or heaven of Glory; and that therefore the
Lamps stood slopewise, as it were to express the obliquity of the Zodiac: Now
it is true, that the Jewish Astrologians, savouring of Gentilism, make these
seven Angels the prefects of the seven Planets, which they seem to have learned
in part from the Greek Philosophy; which conceit, howsoever it be vain and
groundless, yet may be as a key to understand the meaning of this of Josephus.
And one thing more; If the visible things of God may be learned, as Saint Paul
says, from the Creation of the world; why may not the invisible and
intelligible world be learned from the Fabric of the visible? the one (it may
be) being the pattern of the other. But to let this pass, and return again to
the Apocalypse.

Where concerning the places alleged, there may be two things objected: First,
That the seven spirits there mentioned, are and may be expounded of the Holy
Ghost, thus represented in respect of those sevenfold, (that is, manifold)
Graces he communicates unto the Church: I answer, that many indeed have so
taken it; but, besides the uncouthnesse of expressing one spirit by seven,
there is a reason in the Text why they cannot be so taken; namely, because not
only the seven Lamps are said to be those seven Spirits of God; but the seven
Eyes, and seven Horns of the Lamb also, to be the same: Now it will be very
hard and harsh to make the Holy Ghost, the Horns and Eyes of Christ, as he is
the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world; that is, as he is a
Man: Above Angels indeed the Man Jesus is exalted, and that too for the
suffering of death, that is, as the Lamb: but not above the Holy Ghost. This
made not only Drusius, but even Beza himself, in his Notes upon this place, to
affirm, it could not be meant of the Holy Ghost, but of seven created Spirits.

A second scruple is, how (if they be created spirits) John could pray for
Grace, and Peace from them? Grace be unto you, (says he) and peace, from him
which is, which was, and is to come, and from the seven spirits, which are
before his Throne, and from Jesus Christ the faithful witness, etc. would he
pray for Grace, and peace from Angels? I answer, Why not? For first, he prays
not to them, but unto God, unto whom such votes are tendered: Secondly, he
prays for Grace and Peace from them, not as Authors, but as the Instruments of
God, in the dispensation thereof: Are they not (...), sent forth to minister
for them, who are heirs of salvation? And if it be no Idolatry to pray unto
God, to give Grace and Peace from the outward Ministry of his word; no more is
it to pray unto him for it, from the invisible Ministry. For certainly, it is
lawful to pray unto God for a blessing from an instrument, which he is wont to
give us by an instrument. Secondly, it may be said, that the words, Grace and
Peace, need not to be taken in that special and strict sense; but in the large
and general, wherein Grace sounds favor at large, and Peace all manner of
prosperity. In which sense, no man will deny, but the blessed Angels have an
interest in the dispensation of the favors and blessings of God to his Church:
and so God may be prayed to, to give them, as he is wont, by their ministry.
Grace and Peace from him which is, which was, and is to come, as the Author and
Giver; and from the seven Spirits, as the Instruments; and from Jesus Christ,
as the Mediator. There is yet one place more in the Apocalypse, to confirm this
tradition, chap. 8. 2. I saw, says Saint John, (...), The seven Angels which
stood before God. Is not this as plain as Tobit? Why should then the one be
accounted Magical, and not the other?

I add moreover, that these Angels are those (...), Principes primarii, or
chief Princes, mentioned in the 10. of Daniel, Michael one of the Princes
(says the Angel there) came to help me: Now, Michael, we know, is one of the
Archangels: And why therefore may not these chief Princes be those (...),
whereof Saint Paul speaks in his adjuration to Timothy? I charge thee (says
he) before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Elect Angels; not the good
Angels at large, but those Angeli eximii, the seven Archangels, which stand
before the Throne of God.

And it may, not without reason, be conjectured, that those seven chief Princes
fained in the Persian Monarchy, took their beginning from hence; And that
Daniel (who in respect of his account for wisdom, and of his power under
Darius the Mede, had a main stroke in the moulding and framing the government
of that State) caused the Persian Court to resemble that of heaven; ordaining
seven chief Princes, to stand before the King. Of which we find twice mention
in Scripture, as in the book of Esther, where they are recorded by name, and
styled, The seven Princes of Media and Persia, who saw the Kings face, and sat
first in the kingdom: And in the Commission granted to Ezra by Artaxerxes, Ezra
7. 14. they are called, The Kings seven Counselors: Forasmuch as thou art sent
by the King, and his seven Counselors, etc. And it may be, the Church of
Jerusalem, when they chose seven Deacons to minister unto their Bishop, had an
eye the same way.

Hitherto of the number of these Archangels; now a word or two of their office:
And that is; first, to be the universal Inspectors of the whole world, and the
Rulers and Princes of the whole Angelical host: which appears in that they are
called Principes primarii, (...), and (...) (1.) (...) their universal
jurisdiction is meant by the words, sent forth into the whole earth, whereas
the rest are limited to certain places. Secondly, to have the peculiar Charge
and Guardianship of the Church, and affairs thereof, whilst the rest of the
world, with their Polities, Kingdoms and Governments is committed to the care
of Clemens Alex. Strom. Lib. 7. (...) (sc. Filius Dei) (...). Vide and
Clementem Romanum Epist. ad Corinth. ubi citat Deuteronomy. 30. 8, 9. secundum
versionem (...) LXX. (...) qui non (...) sed (...) legisse videntur.
subordinate Angels, who, according to their several charges, may seem to
carry those names of Origin seems to acknowledge but four Orders, (...). Cont.
Cells. l. 4.
Thrones, Principalities, Powers, and Dominions. That the charge of the Church,
qua talis, belongs thus peculiarly and immediately to the seven Archangels, may
appear by S. John's saluting the Churches with a Benediction of Grace and Peace
from their ministry; and the typing of them by the seven Eyes and Horns of the
Lamb; as Powers, which the Father, since he exalted Him to be Head of his
Church, has annexed to his Jurisdiction: Hence it comes to pass, that we
find these Angels peculiarly, both before, and in the Gospel, to have been
employed about the Church affairs: In the Old Testament, the Angel Gabriel (one
of the seven) revealed to Daniel the time of the restoration of the Jewish
State, and coming of Messiah: And the Angel Michael (one of the chief Princes)
was his assistant, when he strengthened Darius the Mede; who founded the
Monarchy which should restore them, and is in special termed (Dan. 12.) the
Prince that stood for Daniels people. In the Gospel, we find the same Angel
Gabriel employed both to Zachary, and the Blessed Virgin, with the Evangelical
Tidings; and that Zachary might take notice that he was one of the seven, he
says unto him, I am Gabriel that stand in the presence of God. Likewise in the
Churches combat with the Dragon, Apoc. 12. Michael and his Angels are said to
be her Champions, and in her quarrel, to have cast the Dragon and his Angels
down to the Earth: And in this Prophecy of Zachary, it is said, that these
seven eyes of the Lord took care of one stone, which Zorobabel laid for the
foundation of the Temple, and therefore the work could not be disappointed, but
should certainly at length be finished. So as, by this time, we may guess the
meaning of that which Hanani the Seer told King Asa (2 Chronicles. 16. 9.) The Eyes
of the Lord (that is, these seven Eyes) run to and fro through the whole Earth,
to show themselves strong in the behalf of those, whose hearts are perfect
toward him.

S. MARK 11. 17. Mar. 11. 17.
Is it not written, My House shall be called a House of Prayer, [(...)] to all
[the] Nations?
THey are the words of our Blessed Savior, when he cast the Buyers and Sellers
and Money Changers out of the Temple, and forbad to carry any vessels through
it: Concerning which story, it is worth observation, that our Savior, whilst
he was upon earth, never exercised any Kingly, or coactive Jurisdiction, but in
vindicating his Fathers house from profanation; and this he did two several
times; once at the first Passover after he began his Prophecy, whereof you
may read John 2. And now again at his last Passover, when he came to give his
soul a sacrifice for sin. This is that, which Saint Mark relates in this place,
as do also two other of the Evangelists, Saint Matthew and Saint Luke. The
vindication of Gods House from Profanation (how little account soever we are
wont to make thereof) was with our blessed Savior the Alpha and Omega, the
first and last of his care; Vbi incipit, ibi desinit. The consideration of
which, how momentous it is, I leave to your selves to judge: Thus much by way
of Preface.

Now for understanding of the words I have chosen, I will divide my discourse
into a Question, and an Observation. The Question is; In what part of the
Temple this Market was kept? A thing not commonly enquired after by Expositors,
much less defined. The Observation, That this fact of our Savior more
particularly concerns us of the Gentiles, then we take notice of. For the
first, (in what part of the Temple this was done) The Jews Religion, and
scrupulosity to keep their Temple from profanation, was such, as might seem to
make this story incredible. Those who were so chary, that no uncircumcised or
unclean person should come therein; who trod the pavement thereof with so much
religious observance and curiosity, who would not suffer (as Josephus relates)
any other building, no not the Palace of Agrippa their King, to have any
prospect into it, lost it should be polluted with a profane look; how unlikely
is it, they should endure it to be made a place of buying, selling, and
bartering; yea, a Market for sheep, and Oxen, as John 2. it is expressly said to
have been? Neither will it serve the turn, to excuse it, by saying, it was to
furnish such as came thither with offerings: For the sheep, and oxen, whilst
they were yet to be bought to that purpose, were not sacred, but profane, and
so not to come within the sacred limits: You see the difficulty. But I answer,
that this market was kept in the third, or Gentiles Court, which was the
outmost of the Temple: For the Temple, in our Saviors time, had three Courts,
each surrounding one another. First, the inmost or Priests Court, wherein stood
the Temple, and the Altar of burnt offering: Into this none but the Priests,
and Levites came. Secondly, the middle or great Court, which surrounded that of
the Priests: whereinto the Jews of all sorts, and circumcised Proselytes came
to worship. Without this was a third Court for the Gentiles, which surrounded
the Israelites Court, as that did the Court of the Priests: The two first they
accounted sacred; calling them (...); into which therefore none might enter,
but such as were circumcised and clean, according to the Law. The third was
without the sacred limits, and so accounted profane and common; which may be
learned out of Josephus, who Lib. 6. de Bello Iudaico. ca. 6.
tells us of certain little pillars, or columns, placed by the Lorica, or
Septum, which severed this Court from the rest, whereon was inscribed in Greek
(and Latin) (...) That no stranger pass within the sacred limits; (...), says
he, (...) The second part of the Temple was called Holy, as implying that the
outmost was not so. Into this Court therefore, which had no legal sanctity,
and was without the sacred limits, the Gentiles were admitted, and had their
station, together with such of the Jews, as were in their uncleanness; further
they might not go. By Gentiles here I mean such, which though uncircumcised,
yet worshipped the God of Israel, and were called (...).

In this Court therefore the Jews made no scruple of doing profane and secular
acts, being in their opinion no better then a common place. Nay, it is very
probable, that to show their despiciency of the poor Gentiles (according to
that in the Apocalypse, (...), without are Dogs) and to pride themselves in
their prerogative and discretion from them, they affected to have such acts
there done. And hence it came to pass, that they permitted a Market of Oxen
and Sheep, Doves and other bartery, to be kept there, for the use of the
Temple, and those who came thither to worship. And thus the poor Gentiles, or
(...), were stabled amongst Oxen, Sheep, and stals of Money Changers, and in
that tumultuous place fain to offer up their devotions and prayers unto the
most high God, whom they had chosen.

But our blessed Savior, who came to redeem, not the Jews only, but the
Gentiles also, and to make them a principal part of his fold, would not suffer
them to be thus neglected, but in this act of his gave them a praeludium of his
further favor intended toward them, and he that was to vindicate their souls
from death, and take away the partition wall between them and the Jews, first
vindicates their Oratory from profanation; alleging for his warrant this
place of the Prophet Esaias, My House shall be called a House of Prayer, (...) He
did not say, My Fathers House is holy: For the Jews would soon have replied,
That the Gentiles Court was without the sacred limits; But, It is written,
says he, My House shall be called a House of Prayer for all the Nations, Ergo,
the place of prayer for all Nations is a part of my Fathers House. If my
Fathers House, then holy, and not to be thus profaned. For whatsoever is his,
is holy; Relative Holiness being nothing else but the peculiarity a thing has
to Godward.

Though therefore the Gentiles Court had no sanctity of legal distinction, yet
had it the sanctity of such peculiarity, and therefore not to be used as a
common place. The illation proceeds by way of conversion; My House shall be
called the House of Prayer 1 Kings 8. 41. 42.
to all Nations, or People; Ergo, The House of Prayer for all Nations is my
Fathers House. And the emphasis lies in the words, (...), which our Translators
were not so well advised of, when following Beza too close, they render the
words thus; My House shall be called of all Nations the House of Prayer, as if
the Dative Case here [(...)] were not acquisitive, but (as it is sometimes with
passive verbs) in stead of the Ablative of the agent for (...). Which sense is
clear from the scope and purpose of the place, whence it is taken, as he that
compares them will easily see, and I shall make fully to appear in the next
part of my discourse, which I tendered by the name of an Observation.

Which was, that this fact of our Savior more particularly concerns us of the
Gentiles, then we take notice of. Namely, we are taught thereby, what reverent
esteem we ought to have of our Gentile Oratories and Churches, howsoever not
endued with such legal sanctity, in every respect, as was the Temple of the
Jews; yet Houses of prayer as well as theirs. This observation will be made
good by a threefold Consideration: First, of the story, as I have related it.
Secondly, from the Text here alleged, for warrant thereof. And thirdly, from
the circumstance of time. For the story, I have showed it was acted in the
Gentiles Court, and not in those of the Jews: It cannot therefore be alleged,
that this was a place of legal sanctity: For according to legal sanctity, it
was held by the Jews as common: only it was the place for the Gentiles to
worship the God of Israel in; and seems to have been proper to the second
Temple: the Gentiles in the first worshipping without at the Temple door in the
holy Mountain only. Secondly, the place alleged to avow the fact speaks
expressly of Gentile worshippers, not in the words (...) only, but in the whole
body of the context: Hear the Prophet speak, Isa. cap. 56. verse. 7, 8. and then
judge; The sons of the stranger, that join themselves to the Lord to serve him,
and to love the Name of the Lord to be his servants; every one that keeps the
Sabbath from polluting it, and takes hold of my Covenant, (namely, that I
alone shall be his God) even them will I bring to my holy Mountain, and make
them joyful in my House of Prayer; their burnt offerings and sacrifices
accepted upon mine Altar. Then follow the words of Text; For my House shall be
called (shall be; it is an Hebraism) a House of Prayer, for all People.

What is this but a Description of the (...), or Gentile worshippers? And this
place alone makes good all that I have said before, That this vindication was
of the Gentiles Court: Otherwise the allegation of this Scripture had been
impertinent; for the Gentiles of whom the Prophet speaks, worshipped in no
place but this. Hence also appears to what purpose our Evangelist expressed the
words, (...), namely, as that which showed, wherein the force of the
accommodation to this occasion lay; which the rest of the Evangelists omitted,
as referring to the place of the Prophet, whence it was taken; those who heard
it being not ignorant of whom the Prophet spoke. Thirdly, the circumstance of
time argues the same thing; if we consider, that this was done but a few days
before our Savior suffered; to wit, when he came to his last Passover: How
unseasonable had it been to vindicate the violation of legal and typical
sanctity, which within so few days after he was utterly to abolish by his
Cross, unless he had meant thereby, to leave his Church a lasting lesson,
what reverence and respect he would have accounted due to such places, as this
was which he vindicated?

JOHN 4. 23. John 4. 23.
But the hour comes, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the
Father in spirit and truth; For the Father seeks such to worship him.
THey are the words of our Blessed Savior to the woman of Samaria, who
perceiving him by his discourse to be a Prophet, desired to be resolved by him
of the great controverted point between the Jews and Samaritans; whether Mount
Garizim by Sichem, (where the Samaritans sacrificed) Jud. 9. 7. The Evangelist
here calls it Sichar. ver. 5. alias Shechem.
or Jerusalem were the true place of worship. Our Savior tells her, that this
question was not now of much moment: For that the hour or time was near at
hand, when they should neither worship the Father in Mount Garizim, nor at
Jerusalem. But that there was a greater difference between the Jews and them,
then this of place; namely, even about that which was worshipped: For ye (says
he) worship that ye know not: But we (Jews) worship that we know. Then follow
the words premised: But the hour comes, and now is, when the true
worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and Truth.

It is an abused Text, being commonly alleged to prove, that God now in the
Gospel, either requires not, or regards not external worship, but that of the
Spirit only: And this to be a characteristicall difference between the worship
of the Old Testament and the New. If at any time we talk of external decency
in rites and bodily expressions, as fit to be used in the service of God; this
is the usual Buckler to repel whatsoever may be said in that kind: It is
true indeed, that the worship of the Gospel is much more spiritual, then that
of the Law: But that the worship of the Gospel should be only spiritual, and
no external worship required therein (as the Text according to some men's sense
and allegation thereof would imply) is repugnant, not only to the practice and
experience of the Christian Religion in all ages, but also to the express
Ordinances of the Gospel it self. For what are the Sacraments of the New
Testament? are they not rites, wherein and wherewith God is served and
worshipped? The consideration of the holy Eucharist alone, will confute this
Gloss. For is not the commemoration of the sacrifice of Christ's death upon the
Cross, unto his Father, in the Symbols of Bread and Wine, an external
worship? And yet with this rite has the Church, in all ages, used to make her
solemn address of Prayer, and Supplication, unto the Divine Majesty; as the
Jews in the Old Testament did by Sacrifice: when I say, in all Ages, I include
that of the Apostles. For so much Saint Luke testifies of that first Christian
society, Acts 2. (...) They continued in breaking of Bread, and in Prayers.

As for bodily expressions by gestures and postures, as standing, kneeling,
bowing, and the like; our blessed Savior himself, lift up his sacred eyes to
heaven, when he prayed for Lazarus; fell on his face when he prayed in his
agony: Saint Paul (as himself says) bowed his knees to the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ: He and Saint Peter, and the rest of the believers, do the like
more then once, in the Acts of the Apostles: What was imposition of hands, but
an external gesture, in an act of invocation for conferring a blessing? and
that perhaps sometimes without any vocal expression joined therewith. Besides
I cannot conceive any reason, why in this point of Evangelical worship,
Gesture should be more scrupled at, then Voice. Is not confessing, praising,
praying, and glorifying God by voice, an external and bodily worship, as well
as that of Gesture? why should then the one derogate from the worship of the
Father, in Spirit and Truth, and not the other? To conclude, there was never
any society of men in the world, that worshipped the Father in such a manner,
as this interpretation would imply: And therefore cannot this be our Saviors
meaning, but some other. Let us see if we can find out what it is.

There may be two senses given of these words; both of them agreeable to
reason, and the analogy of Scripture; let us take our choice. The one is, That
to worship God in Spirit and Truth, is to worship him not with types and
shadows of things to come, as in the Old Testament; but according to the verity
of the things exhibited in Christ, according to that; The Law was given by
Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ. Whence the mystery of the
Gospel, is elsewhere by our Savior in this Evangelist, termed Truth, as Cap.
17. ver. 17. and the Doctrine thereof by Saint Paul, The word of truth. See
Ephesians. Cap. 1. ver. 13. Romans 15. ver. 8. The time therefore is now at hand,
said our Savior, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father, no longer
with bloody sacrifices, and the Rites and Ordinances depending thereon; but in,
and according to the verity of that which these Ordinances figured. For all
these were types of Christ, in whom being now exhibited, the true worshippers
shall henceforth worship the Father.

This sense has good warrant from the state of the Question between the Jews
and Samaritans, to which our Savior here makes answer: which was not about
worship in general, but about the kind of worship in special, which was
confessed by both sides, to be tied to one certain place only; that is, of
worship by Sacrifice, and the appendages; In a word, of the typical worship
proper to the first Covenant, of which see a description Heb. 9. This Josephus
expressly testifies, Lib. 12. Antiq. cap. 1. speaking of the Jews and
Samaritans, which dwelt together at Alexandria: They lived, says he, in
perpetual discord one with the other; whilst each labored to maintain their
Country customs; those of Jerusalem affirming their Temple to be the sacred
place, whither sacrifices were to be sent; the Samaritans, on the other side,
contending they ought to be sent to Mount Garizim. For otherwise, who knows not
that both Jews and Samaritans had other places of worship, besides either of
these? namely, their Proseucha's, and Synagogues, wherein they worshipped God,
not with internal only, but external worship; though not with sacrifice,
which might be offered but in one place only. And this also may seem to have
been a type of Christ, as well as the rest, namely, that he was to be that one,
and only Mediator of the Church, in the Temple of whose sacred body, we have
access unto the Father, and in whom he accepts our devotions and services:
according to that, Destroy this Temple, and I will rear it up again in three
days: He spoke, says the Text, of the Temple of his Body. This sense diverse
of the Ancients hit upon, Eusebius Demon. Euang. Lib. 1. Cap. 6. (...) Not by
Symbols and Types, but, as our Savior says, in Spirit and Truth. Not that in
the New Testament men should worship God, without all external services; (for
the New Testament was to have external and visible services, as well as the
Old.) But with such as should imply the verity of the promises already
exhibited, not by types and shadows of them yet to come: we know the Holy Ghost
is wont to call the figured Face of the Law, the Letter, and the Verity thereby
signified, the Spirit. As for (...), both together, they are (...), but once
found in holy Writ; to wit, only in this place. And so, no light can be
borrowed by comparing of the like expression any where else, to expound them:
Besides, nothing hinders, but they may be taken one for the exposition of the
other; that to worship the Father (...), is the same with to worship him (...).

But howsoever this Exposition be fair and plausible, yet, me thinks, the
reason which our Savior gives in the words following, should argue another
meaning: God (says he) is a Spirit, therefore they that worship him, must
worship him in Spirit and Truth: But, God was a Spirit from the beginning: If
therefore, for this reason he must be worshipped in Spirit and Truth, he was so
to be worshipped in the Old Testament, as well as in the New.

Let us therefore seek another meaning: For the finding whereof, let us take
notice, that the Samaritans at whom our Savior here aims, were the
offspring of those Nations which the King of Assyria placed in the Cities of
Samaria, when he had carried away the ten Tribes captive. These, as we may
read in the second Book of the Kings, at their first coming thither,
worshipped not the God of Israel, but the gods of the Nations from whence they
came. Wherefore he sent Lions amongst them, which slew them; which they
apprehending, either from the information of some Israelite, or otherwise, to
be because they knew not the worship of the God of the Country, they informed
the King of Assyria thereof, desiring that some of the captived Priests might
be sent unto them, to teach them the manner and rites of his worship; which
being accordingly done, they thenceforth (as the Text tells us) worshipped the
Lord, yet feared their own gods too, and so did (...), as Saint Chrysostom
speaks, mingle things not to be mingled.

In this medly they continued about two hundred years, till toward the end of
the Persian Monarchy. At what time it chanced, that Manasse, brother to Iaddo,
the High Priest of the returned Jews, married the daughter of Sanballat, then
Governor of Samaria; For which, being expelled from Jerusalem by Nehemiah, he
fled to Sanballat his Father in Law, and, after his example, many other of the
Jews of the best rank, having married strange wives likewise, and loath to forgo
them, betook themselves thither also: Sanballat willingly entertains them, and
makes his son in Law Manasse their Priest. For whose greater reputation and
state, when Alexander the Great subdued the Persian Monarchy, he obtained leave
of him, to build a Temple upon Mount Garizim; where his son in Law exercised
the office of High Priest. This was exceedingly prejudicious to the Jews, and
the occasion of a continual Schism, whilst those that were discontented, or
excommunicated at Jerusalem, were wont to betake themselves thither: Yet, by
this means the Samaritans (having now one of the sons of Aaron to be their
Chief Priest, and so many other of the Jews, both Priests and others, mingled
amongst them) were brought, at length, to cast off all their false gods, and to
worship the Lord the God of Israel only. Yet so, that howsoever they seemed to
themselves, to be true worshippers, and altogether free from Idolatry;
nevertheless, they retained a smack thereof, in as much as they worshipped the
true God, under a visible representation; to wit, of a Dove, and circumcised
their Children in the name thereof, as the Jewish Tradition tells us: who
therefore always branded their worship with (...), or spiritual (...) id est,
Cultus externus; sic Idololatria^ oppellant. Heinsii Aristarch. p. 881.
Fornication: Just as their predecessors, the ten Tribes, worshipped the same
God of Israel, under the similitude of a Calf.

This was the condition of the Samaritan Religion in our Saviors time: and if
we weigh the matter well, we shall find his words here, to the woman, very
pliable to be construed with reference thereunto: You ask, says he, of the
true place of worship, whether Mount Garizim, or Jerusalem; which is not so
greatly material, for as much as the time is at hand, when men shall worship
the Father at neither: But there is a greater difference between you and us,
then of place; though you take no notice of it; namely, about the object of
worship it self; For ye worship what ye know not, but we (Jews) worship what we
know. How is that? Thus, Ye worship indeed the Father, the God of Israel, as we
do; but you worship him under a corporeal representation; wherein you show,
you know him not: but the hour comes, and now is, when the true worshippers
shall worship the Father in Spirit and Truth: In spirit, that is, conceiving of
him no otherwise then in spirit; And in truth, that is, not under any
corporeal or visible shape: For God is a Spirit, and they that worship him
must worship him in Spirit and Truth; that is, (...), not fancying him, as a
body, but as indeed he is a Spirit. For those who worship him under a
corporeal similitude, Jer. 3. 10.
do belly him; according as the Apostle speaks, Romans 1. of such as change the
glory of the incorruptible God, into an Image made like to corruptible man,
Birds or Beasts: They changed, says he, the truth of God into a lie, and
served the creature, (...) juxta Creatorem, as, or with the Creator who is
blessed for ever. Hence Idols in Scripture are termed Lies; as Amos 2. 4. Their
Lies have caused them to err, after which their Fathers walked: The Vulgar
has, Seduxerunt eos Idola ipsorum. And Isa. 28. 15. We have made Lies our
refuge. And Ier. 16. 19. Venient gentes a finibus terrae, and dicent, Vere
mendacium possederunt (the Chaldee has, coluerunt) Patres nostri, vanitatem,
in qua non est utilitas. Nunquid faciet sibi homo Deos, and ipsi non sunt Dii?

This therefore I take to be the genuine meaning of this place, and not that
which is commonly supposed against external worship; which I think this
demonstration will evince; To worship what they know, See the Homily against
the peril of Idolatry. p. 3. where this Text is peculiarly applied against
worshipping of God in an Image.
(as the Jews are said to do) and to worship in spirit and truth, are here
taken by our Savior for equivalents; else the whole sense will be
inconsequent: But the Jews worshipped not God without Rites and Ceremonies (who
yet are supposed to worship him in spirit and truth;) Ergo, to worship God
without Rites and Ceremonies, is not to worship him in spirit and truth,
according to the meaning here intended.

S. LUKE 24. 45. Luke 24. 45.
Then opened be their understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures.
46. And said unto them, Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to
suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day.
OUr Blessed Savior, after he was risen from the dead, told his Disciples, not
only that his suffering of death, and rising again the third day, was foretold
in the Scriptures; but also pointed out those Scriptures unto them, and opened
their understanding that they might understand them; that is, he expounded, or
explained them unto them: Certain it is therefore, that somewhere in the Old
Testament these things were foretold should befall the Messiah. Yea S. Paul, 1
Cor. 15. 3, 4. will further assure us that they are; I delivered unto you,
says he, first of all, that which I received, how that Christ died for our
sins, according to the Scriptures. 4. And that he was buried, and that he rose
again the third day, according to the Scriptures. Both of them therefore, are
somwhere foretold in the Scriptures, and it becomes not us to be so ignorant,
as commonly we are, which those Scriptures be which foretell them. It is a main
point of our Faith, and that which the Jews most stumble at, because their
Doctors had not observed any such thing of Messiah. The more they were ignorant
thereof, the more it concerns us to be confirmed therein. I thought good
therefore, to make this the Argument of my Discourse at this time, to inform
both you and my self, where these things are foretold, and if I can, to point
out those very Scriptures, which our Savior here expounded to his Disciples.

Which that I may the better do, I will make the words foregoing my Text, to
be as the Pole Star in this my search; These are the things, (says our
Savior) which I spoke unto you, while I was with you, that all things must be
fulfilled, which were written in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in
the Psalms concerning me. Then follow the words I read, Then opened he their
understanding, etc. These two events therefore of Messiahs death and rising
again the third day, were foretold in these three parts of Scripture, in the
Law of Moses, or Pentateuch, in the Neb im, or Prophets, and in the Psalms;
and in these three we must search for them. And first for the first, that
Messiah should suffer death.

This was fore-signified in the Law, or Pentateuch, first in the Story of
Abraham, where he was commanded to offer his son Isaac, the son wherein his
seed should be called, and to whom the promise was entailed, That in it should
all the Nations of the world be blessed. What was here acted else, but the
mystery of Christ's Passion? to wit, that the promised seed should make all the
Nations of the world blessed, by becoming a sacrifice for sin: which that it
might be the more evident, the place is also designed, the region of Mount
Moriah; there Abraham was bid to offer his son Isaac, even where Messiah, who
was then in the loins of Isaac, was one day to be offered upon the Cross.

The second prediction in the Law, of Messiahs suffering death, was by the
slaying of Beasts, for the atonement of sin in their sacrifices; which were
nothing else but shadows and representations of that offering upon the Cross,
which Messiah was one day to make of himself for the sins of the world. Which
mystery of the end of those legal sacrifices, was showed in the former story
of Abraham's offering Isaac: For when he had now brought his son to the place
appointed, and had built an Altar, and was now ready to slay him, as he was
commanded; the Angel of the Lord stayed his hand, and showed him a Ram caught
in a thicket by the horns, which Ram Abraham took, and offered for a burnt
offering in stead of his son, to signify, that the offering of the blessed
seed was yet to be suspended, and that God in the mean while would accept the
offerings of Bulls and Rams, as a pledge of that expiation, which the blessed
seed of Abraham in the loins of Isaac, should one day make.

And thus much for the Law; now I come to the Prophets, wherein I find three
evident Prophecies that Messiah should suffer death. The first is that famous
one in the 53. of Isay the whole Chapter through; I will not repeat it all, but
some two or three passages thereof: ver. 5. He was wounded, says the Prophet,
for our transgressions, he was bruised for (...) in^quities, the chastisement
of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed: And ver. 7. He
was oppressed, he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth; he was brought as
a Lamb to the slaughter, (...) as a Sheep before his Shearers is dumb, so he
opened noi his mouth. Ver. 8. He was cut off out of the Land of the living; for
the transgression of my people was (...) smitten. Now that this Prophecy was
one of those by which the Apostles used to prove this verity, appears by the
story of the conversion of the Eunuch Acts 8. unto whom Philip coming whilst
he was in his Chariot, reading this place of Scripture, and h^ thereupon asking
Philip, of whom the Prophet spoke these words, the Text tells us, that Philip
began at the same Scripture, and preached unto him Jesus.

The second place, which foretells that Christ should suffer, is that in the
ninth of Daniel, who pointing ou^ the time of Messiah's coming by seventy
weeks, limits his account, not at his birth, but at his suffering; as the most
principal moment of his story. From the going out of the commandment, says
he, to restore, and build Jerusalem unto Messiah the Prince shall be seven
weeks, and sixty two weeks: -- and after sixty (...) weeks, shall Messiah be
cut off: what can be more plain then this?

A third place in the Prophets, is to be found Zachary 12. 10. where, at the
time when the Jews shall be converted, Christ is brought in speaking in this
manner; I will pour out, says he, upon the House of David, and upon the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and supplication, and they shall
look upon me, whom they have pierced. Hence it follows, that the Jews should
have pierced Messiah before they received him to be their Redeemer. And that
this place also was one of those applied by the Apostles to this purpose,
appears by S. John's twice alleging it. Once in his Gospel, when a Soldier
with a Spear pierced our Saviors side; Then, says he, was fulfilled that Ioh.
19. 37.
Scripture, which says, They shall look upon him whom they have pierced.
Again, in the beginning of his Revelation, Apol. 1. 7.
Behold (says he) he comes in the clouds, and every eye shall see him, and
they also which pierced him.

Now for the third division of Scripture, the Psalms, the principal place
there which I dare warrant, is that Acts 2. 26, 27. 13. 35.
of the 16. Psalm, quoted both by S. Peter, and S. Paul in the Acts of the
Apostles; My flesh shall rest in hope, for thou will not leave my soul in the
grave, neither suffer thine Holy One to see corruption. For David, as S. Peter
and S. Paul say, was buried, and his body saw corruption, therefore it cannot
be spoken of him; but of Messiah in the person of David, as a type in whose
loins Messiah was. Now then if Messiahs body were to be laid in the grave, it
follows he was to die, and to be in the state of the dead.

And thus I have done the first part of my task, and proved that Messiah was to
suffer death, according to the Scriptures; namely, foretold in that threefold
division of Scripture, mentioned here by our Savior: The Law, the Prophets,
and the Psalms. Now I come to prove the other part, that it behoved him also,
to rise again the third day, according to the Scriptures.

And this was first foreshewn in the same story of Isaac, wherein his sacrifice
or suffering was acted. For, from the time that God commanded Isaac to be
offered for a burnt offering, Isaac was a dead man, but the third day he was
released from death. This the Text tells us expressly, that it was the third day,
when Abraham came to Mount Moriah, and had his son, as it were, restored to him
again; which circumstance, there was no need nor use at all to have noted, had
it not been for some mystery: For had there been nothing intended, but the
naked story, what did it concern us to know, whether it were the third, or the
fifth day, that Abraham came to Moriah, where he received his son from death?
Now, that I have not misapplied this figure, S. Paul is my witness, who
expressly makes this release of Isaac from slaughter, a figure of the
Resurrection: For thus he speaks of this whole story, Hebrews 11. By faith,
Abraham, when he was tried, offered up Isaac; and he that received the
promises, offered up his only begotten Son. Of whom it was said, that in
Isaac shall thy seed be call led. Accounting that God was able to raise him up
even from the dead: from whence also he received him in a figure.

The same was foreshewn by the Law of sacrifices, which were to be eaten before
the third day; some sacrifices were to be eaten the same day they were offered,
but those which were deferred longest, as the Peace Offerings, were to be eaten
before the third day. The third day no sacrifice might be eaten, but was to be
burnt: If it were eaten, it was not accepted for an atonement, but counted an
abomination: To show, that the sacrifice of Messiah, which these sacrifices
represented, was to be finished the third day by his rising from the dead; and
therefore, the type thereof determined within that time, beyond which time it
was not accepted for atonement of sin, because then it was no longer a type of
him.

Thus far the Law; as for the Prophets, I find no express prediction in them,
for the time of Christ's rising (for that of the Prophet Jonah, I take to be
rather an allusion, then a Prophecy:) only in general it is employed, that
Christ should rise again; both in that famous Prophecy of Esaias, the 53. and
that of Zachary 12. In the former it is said, that after he had made his soul a
sacrifice for sin, He should see his seed, and prolong his days, and the
pleasure of the Lord should prosper in his hand. And again, that the Lord
should divide him a portion with the great, and that he should divide the
spoil with the strong, because he had poured out his soul unto death: which
argues that he should not only live again, but be victorious after he had
died. In that of Zachary it is said, the Jews should look upon, or see him whom
they had formerly pierced; and, that in that day he would power upon them the
spirit of grace and supplication: therefore he was to live again after they had
pierced him.

I come to the Psalms, where not only his rising again is prophesied of, but
the time thereof determined; though at first sight it appears not so namely, in
that fore-alledged passage of the sixteenth Psalm, Thou will not leave my soul
in Hell, nor suffer thine Holy One to see corruption. All men shall rise again,
but their bodies must first return to dust, and see corruption: But Messiah was
to rise again before he saw corruption: if before, then the third day at
farthest; for then the body naturally vi. Meurs^i Glos. sar. Graeco. barba.
rum, in (...). citat ev Triodio.
begins to see corruption: this may be gathered by the story of Lazarus in the
Gospel, where Jesus commanding the stone to be rolled from his Grave, Martha
his sister answered, Lord, by this time he stinketh; for he has been dead four
days. Also by that rule, given by the Masters of Physic, that those who die
of the Apoplexy, suffocation of the Mother, or like sudden deaths, should not
be buried till seventy two hours were past; Because within that time, they
might revive; and examples are given of those who have done so. They give also
a reason of it in nature; because, say they, in that time the humors of the
body make their revolution; the phlegm in one day, or twenty four hours; the
choler in two days, or forty eight hours; the melancholy in three days, which
is seventy two hours: and this to be the reason why an Ague, founded in an
inflammation of phlegm, returns every day; an Ague, which comes from choler,
every other day; from melancholy, every third day: Now if a body may be kept so
long unburied, it is supposed it may be kept so long uncorrupted; (namely,
where a corruption is not begun before death, as in some diseases) but longer
it will not continue. When therefore it is so often inculcated in the New
Testament, that our Savior should rise again the third day; the Holy Ghost, in
so speaking, respects not so much the number of days, as the fulfilling of
Scripture, that Messiahs body should not see corruption, but should rise before
the time, wherein dead bodies begin to corrupt: and indeed our Savior rose
again within forty hours, after he gave up the Ghost, and was not two full
days in the grave. Therefore, if there be any other Scripture, which implies
Messiah should rise before, his body should see corruption, that Scripture,
whatsoever it be, shows he should rise again within three days.

EXODUS 4. 25. Exodus 4. 25.
Then Zipporah took a sharp stone, and cut off the foreskin of her son, and
cast it at his feet, and said (...), -- Sponsus sanguinum tu mihi es.
THEN; that is, when she saw the Angel of the Lord ready to kill Moses her
husband in the Inn, because his son was not circumcised; she took a sharp
stone, ((...)) that is, she took a knife, which, according to the custom then,
was made of stone sharped. This we may learn out of Ioshuah 5. 2. where the
Lord says to Ioshuah, Make thee (...), (sharp knives, say we) ad verbum,
cultros petrarum, and circumcise again the children of Israel: The Chaldee
Paraphrast has, Make thee novaculas acutas: the Septuagint, (...).

Thus far all is clear; but for the rest, we are to seek: First, on whom the
fault lay, and what was the reason of this omission of circumcision: Then, who,
and what is meant, when it is said, she cast, or made the foreskin to touch his
feet; and above all, what is meant by sponsus sanguinum.

Zipporah is commonly reputed to have been a perverse and froward woman; and
Moses, the meekest man on earth, to have had that mishap in his choice, which
many a good man has. The reason, because she not only hindered her child from
being circumcised, out of some nicety and aversation thereof, as a cruel
ceremony; but also, when she saw there was no remedy, but she must do it, to
save her husbands life, yet she did it with an upbraiding indignation, telling
him, that he was a bloody husband, who must have such a thing done unto his
poor child. But I see no ground either for the one, or the other.

For, that the circumcision of the child was not deferred out of any
aversation of hers of that ceremony, may be gathered; First, because she was a
Midianitesse, and so a daughter of Abraham, by Ketu rah, and therefore well
enough acquainted, and inured to that Rite, which not only her Nation, the
Midianites, but all the Nations descended of Abraham observed, as may be seen
in the Ismaelites, or Saracens, who learned not this ceremony first from
Ma^met, but retained it as an ancient custom of their Nation. Secondly, she
had suffered already her elder son Gershom to be circumcised; wherefore then
should we think she was averse from the circumcision of this? For that this
child, for whom Moses was now in danger, was Fleezer his youngest son, it
cannot be denied; for as much as it is evident, that Moses at this time was the
Father of two sons, which, by reason, as may seem, of this disturbance, he sent
back with his wife, unto her Father Iethro, as we may read in the eighteenth
Chapter of this Book: By which it may be gathered, that the cause of this
omission of circumcision, was not any averseness in Zipporah from that rite,
but rather, because they were in their journey, when the child was born; and
so having no convenient time or place to rest in, till the wound might be
healed, and thinking it might endanger the infants life, to be tossed up and
down, whilst the wound was green, in so long and tedious a voyage, they
resolved to defer the circumcision. And that Zipporah was delivered of this
child, when they had begun this journey, for Egypt, may be gathered by this;
because Moses, before Gods sending him, has but one child mentioned, namely,
Gershom: For what reason can be given, why, if Eleezer had been then born, he
should not have been mentioned also? But howsoever this case of travel
afterward excused the Israelites in the Wilderness, for deferring the
circumcision of their children then, yet could it not excuse Moses here; in
regard it was necessitas accersita, he being not forced to take his wife and
children with him, (especially his wife being in that case) but might have sent
her and them, back presently to her Father; as upon this admonition he did. Nor
was it indeed fit, when God sent him upon such a business to carry such an
encumbrance with him.

Thus have we freed Zipporah from the first charge of being the cause of this
omission out of any averseness to the Divine Ordinance: Now I come to show
likewise, that the words she spoke at the time of circumcision, Sponsus
sanguinum to mihi es, were no words of upbraiding indignation to her husband
(as is supposed) but have a far other meaning.

For I believe not, she spoke these words to Moses, but to her Child, whom she
circumcised, as the Formula then used in circumcision; namely, that as the
foreskin fell down at her childs feet (not Moses, or the Angels feet) she
pronounced the Verb (...) solennia, Tu mihi sponsus sanguinum.

My reasons are; First, because a Husband is not wont to be called sponsus,
after the wedding solemnity is past; nor can there any such example be shown in
Scripture; Ergo, it is not like that Zipporah, after she was the mother of two
children, should say to her Husband, Sponsus sanguinum tu mihi es.

Secondly, because (...), the word here translated Sponsus, properly signifies
Gener, a son in Law, and Sponsus only by way of equivalence or coincidence,
(because to be made son in Law to the Parents, is by being the daughters
Sponsus) My meaning is that (...), the word used, signifies not the relation of
the Bridegroom to his Bride; but his relation to his Brides Parents, by taking
their daughter to wife. And therefore in the whole Scripture, we shall never
find it relatively used, or with an affix, but only in respect to the wives
Father or Mother: And of the same condition is the word (...), which we often
by equivalence translate a Bride, but properly signifies Nurus; wherefore we
shall never find the Bridegroom call the Bride his (...) nor the Bride the
Bridegroom her (...), or that they are called so by others. But only the
Husband his Father and Mother in Laws (...), and the wife her Father and
Mother in Laws (...): In a word, there is no word in the Hebrew Tongue, which
signifies a Bridegroom and Bride, as they stand in relation each to other, but
as to each others Parents only: whence it is remarkable that in the Canticles,
when this relation comes to be expressed on the Brides behalf, it is always
done by addition of the word (...), that is, Soror mea, as (...), the Callah,
or Nurus my sister, which we translate aequivalenter, Soror mea sponsa. Now if
this be true, I see not how Zipporah could call Moses here her (...), by saying
to him (...) sanguinum tu mihi es; For she should have called him her son in
law, and not her Husband: Ergo, she spoke the words to the child, and not to
him.

Thirdly, for a farther probability hereof, the Jewish Rabbis tell us, that it
was the custom of women to call their children when they were circumcised,
(...); the word here turned sponsus. Aben Ezra upon this place, Mos mulierum,
(says he) vocare filium cum circumcisus est (...). Rabbi Levi, (...) in
principio connubii vocatur, qui alicui promissus est. Inde translatum ad
initium rerum aliarum, ut cum infans recens circumcisus a mulieribus sponsus
vocatur. Nam tunc primum incipit Deo servire. The like has Rabbi David Kimchi,
in his Lexicon, who conjectures withal, that (...) should have some
signification of causing new joy, and thence to be used both at the day of
marriage, and day of circumcision.

Fourthly, from this custom to call a child at his circumcision (...); with
the Arabians (who are of Abraham's posterity, and still use, and anciently used
this Rite) Chatan is is to circumcise, Chiten circumcision, (...), circumcised,
as is ordinarily seen in their Translation of the New Testament: whence comes
this? but from the manner of calling a child (...), when he was circumcised;
Even as we, because a child in Baptism is made a Christian, use the word
Christen for to Baptize, and Christened for Baptized: And Zipporah was an
Arabisse, and the Arabian tongue of near affinity with the Hebrew.

Fifthly, this exposition is agreeable to the following words, (...), and he
let him go, when he had said, Sponsus sanguinum, hoc est, circumcisionis; that
is, the Angel let Moses go, as soon as those solennia verba, Sponsus
sanguinum, were out of Zipporahs mouth: so the Vulgar rightly translates it: Et
dimisit eum, postquam dixerat, Sponsus sanguinu^ tu mihi es ob circumcisionem.
For (...), is here, as elsewhere, for (...), ex tunc, ab eo tempore, postquam,
not simply tunc, as we translate it: Namely, as the destroying Angel, Exodus
12. when he saw the blood of the Paschall Lamb upon the lintels and sideposts
of the Israelites doors, passed by them, and destroyed them not; so the Angel
here, when he saw the blood of the circumcision upon Moses child, let Moses
go, and slew him not: In these words, if you mark it, the Holy Ghost expounds
what Zipporah meant by those words, Sponsus sanguinum, that is, Sponsus
circumcisionis. Et dimisit eum postquam dixit (...), -- Sponsus sanguinum, id
est, circumcisionis; then are not these words spoken of, or to Moses, but unto
the child.

Having thus proved what I took in hand; that these words were not spoke by
Zipporah to Moses, but as solennia verba, in that case to her child, whom she
circumcised; it remains, I should now tell you how they are so construed. I say
therefore, Tu mihi sponsus sanguinum, in Zipporahs meaning, is as much as Si^
mihi initiatus circumcisione: It is well known, how tropically those words of
relation of kindred, Father, Mother, Sister, Son, are used in the Hebrew
Tongue; and Son, beside other notions, to be often the circumlocution of our
vox concreta, as Filius percussionis, is he that is stricken; Filius foederis,
he that is foederatus; Filius mortis, he that is condemned to die, or worthy of
death; and the like. And why may not then (...), Gener sanguinum, that is, as
the Holy Ghost expounds it, circumcisionis, be as much as circumcisus, and
Gener sanguinum tu mihi es (for so I told you (...) signifies) be as much as,
(...) pronounce thee circumcised? As if the circumcised person, by being
married to circumcision, were made the circumcisers son in Law, and
circumcisions Bridegroom; as Es, or sis, mihi in generum desponsatus
circumcisioni.

Or if blood, or circumcision, note the Instrument, the Formula may be thus
explicated, that the person circumcised becomes Gods son in Law, as being
wedded and joined to his Church, by the blood of circumcision, as with a ring;
and then the pronoun mihi, must not be taken relatively to Zipporah, as before,
but efficienter only in this sense, Per me factus es gener Deo, per sanguinem
circumcisionis: or Feci le generum, Deo: or (if you like better the notion of
sponsus) I have espoused thee to the Church of God, by this rite of
circumcision, or Thou art, or be thou espoused, etc. Thus, as you see, may the
Formula be either way explicated, to one and the same sense. But the first I
like the best, because of mihi the relative to Zipporah, Tu mihi in generum es
desponsatus circumc^sioni.

Now lastly, to free my interpretation from novelty, the sense I have given of
these words, is that, which both the Septuagint, and the Chaldee Paraphrast
directly aim at; the Paraphrast expounding it thus; In sanguine circumcisionis
istius, datus est sponsus, or gener mihi; The Septuagint, as we now read, thus,
(...), Stetit sanguis circumcisionis filii mei: where the Text is corrupted,
and I believe the Septuagint translated not (...), but (...) -- sit hic sanguis
circumcisionis Filii mei; a Periphrasticall, but evident sense, with the change
of one letter only.

From the sense of this place thus proved, I will point out two observations,
and so conclude.

The first is, that it is lawful to use some fitting form of words in the
exhibition of a Sacrament, though not expressly ordained by God at the
institution thereof; as appears by this form, that Zipporah used, no doubt ex
more then, whatsoever the form were after that time.

The second is, that the neglect of the circumcision of a child then, and so
consequently of baptizing it now, makes not so much the child, as the Parents
liable to the wrath of God; as here the Angel sought not to kill the child, who
was uncircumcised; but Moses the Father, who should have circumcised it. Both
which observations I mean to amplify no farther, but to leave to your exacter
meditations; and so I conclude.

EZEKIEL 20. 20. Ezekiel. 20. 20.
Hallow my Sabbaths, and they shall be a sign between me and you, to
acknowledge that I Jehovah am your God.
THis Commandment, with the end thereof, the Lord bids Ezekiel tell the Elders
of Israel, that he gave to their Fathers in the Wilderness. And it is recorded
in the Law; so that I might have taken it thence: but I rather chose to make
these words in Ezekiel my Text, as expressed more plainly, and so a Comment to
those in the Law: the place is Exodus 31. where this, which my Text contains,
is expressed thus, Verily my Sabbaths ye shall keep, for it is a sign between
me and you throughout your generations, to acknowledge that I Jehovah am your
sanctifier, that is, your God; as the expression in Ezekiel tells us. For to be
the Sanctifier of a People, and to be their God, is all one, whence also the
Lord is so often called in Scripture, the Holy One of Israel; that is, their
Sanctifier, and their God.

That which I intend at this time to observe from these words, is the end why
God commanded this observation of the Sabbath to the Israelites; to wit, that
thereby, as by a Symbolum, they might testify and profess what God they
worshipped: Secondly, out of this ground, to show how far, and in what manner
the like observation binds us Christians, who are worshippers of the same God,
whom the Jews worshipped, though not under the same relation altogether,
wherein they worshipped him.

All Nations had something in their ceremonies, whereby they signified the God
they worshipped; so in those of the celestial Gods, (as they termed them) and
those which were Deified souls of men, were differing rites, whereby the one
was known from the other. Those gods which were made of men, having funeral
rites in their services, (as cognisances that they were souls deceased) and
each of them some imitation of some remarkable passage of the Legend of their
lives, either of some action done by them, or some accident which befell them;
as in the ceremonies of Osyris and Bacchus is obvious to any that reads them:
And indeed it is a natural Decorum for servants and vassals, by some mark or
cognizance to testify who is their Lord and Master: In the Revelation, the
worshippers of the Beast receive his mark, and the worshippers of the Lamb
carry his mark and his Fathers in their Foreheads. Hence came the first use of
the cross in Baptism, as the mark of Christ, the Deity to whom we are
initiated; and the same afterward used in all Benedictions, Prayers, and
Thanksgivings, in token they were done in the name, and merits of Christ
crucified: so that in the Primitive Church this rite was no more, but that
wherewith we conclude all our Prayers, and Thanksgivings, when we say, Through
Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior; though afterward it came to be abused, as
almost all other rites of Christianity, to abominable superstition.

To return therefore unto my Text: Agreeably to this principle, and this
custom of all Religions, of all Nations, of all vassals, the Lord Jehovah,
Creator of heaven and earth, ordained to his people this observation of the
Sabbath day, for a sign and cognizance, that he should be their God, and no
other. It is for a sign, says he, between me and you, that I Jehovah am your
God. In the place I quoted before, in the 31. of Exodus are these words; The
Children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath, to observe the Sabbath throughout
their generations, for a perpetual Covenant; it is a sign between me and the
children of Israel for ever, for in six days the Lord made heaven and earth,
and on the seventh day he rested: As if he had said, it is a sign that the
Creator of heaven and earth is your God.

But for the distinct understanding of this signification, we must know that
the Sabbath includes two respects of time: First, the quotum, one day of seven,
or the seventh day after six days labor: Secondly, the designation, or
pitching that seventh day, upon the day we call Saturday. In both, the
Sabbaticall observation was a sign, and profession that Jehovah and no other
was the God of Israel: the first, according to his attribute of Creator; the
second of Deliverer of Israel out of Egypt. For by sanctifying the seventh day,
after they had labored six, they professed themselves vassals and worshippers
of that only God, who created the heaven and the earth, and having spent six
days in that great work, rested the seventh day; and therefore commanded them
to observe this suitable distribution of their time, as a badge and livery that
their religious service was appropriate to him alone. And this is that which
the fourth Commandment in the reason given from the Creation intends, and no
more but this.

But seeing they might profess this acknowledgement, as well by any other six
days working, and a sevenths resting, as by those they pitched upon; there
being still (what six days soever they had labored, and what seventh soever
they had rested) the same conformity with their Creator; let us see the reason
why they pitched upon those six days wherein they labored, for laboring days
rather then any other six; and why they chose that seventh day, namely
Saturday, to hallow and rest in, rather then any other.

And this was, that they might profess themselves servants of Jehovah their
God, in a relation and respect peculiar and proper to themselves; to wit, that
they were the servants of that God, which redeemed Israel out of the Land of
Egypt, and out of the house of bondage; and upon the morning watch of that very
day which they kept for their Sabbath, he overwhelmed Pharaoh, and all his Host
in the Red Sea, and saved Israel that day out of the hand of the Egyptians.
This I gather from the repetition of the Decalogue, Deuteronomy. 5. where that reason
from the worlds Creation (in the Decalogue given at Horeb) being left out,
Moses inserts this other of the Redemption of Israel out of Egypt in stead
thereof; namely, as the reason, why those six days rather then any other six
for work, and that seventh day rather then any other seventh for rest, were
pitched upon, as Israel observed them. Remember, says he, thou were a servant
in the Land of Egypt, and that the Lord thy God, brought thee out thence
through a mighty hand, and a stretched out arm: therefore the Lord thy God
commanded thee to keep the Sabbath Day: Not for the quotum of one day of seven,
(for of that another reason was given, the example of God in the Creation) but
for the designation of the day.

But whether this day were in order the seventh from the Creation or not, the
Scripture is silent; for where it is called in the Commandment the seventh
day, that is in respect of the six days of labor, and not otherwise: and
therefore, whenever it is so called, those six days of labor are mentioned
with it. The seventh day therefore is the seventh after six days of labor, nor
can any more be inferred from it: The example of the Creation is brought for
the quotum, one day of seven, as I have showed, and not for the designation of
any certain day for that seventh. Nevertheless, it might fall out so, by
disposition of Divine Providence, that the Jews designed seventh day was, both
the seventh in order from the Creation, and also the day of their deliverance
out of Egypt. But the Scripture no where tells us it was so, (howsoever most men
take it for granted) and therefore it may as well be not so: Certain I am, the
Jews kept not that day for a Sabbath till the raining of Manna: For that which
should have been their Sabbath the week before, had they then kept the day,
which afterward they kept, was the fifteenth day of the second month; on which
day we read in the 16. of Exodus, that they marched a wearisome march, and
came at night into the wilderness of Sin; where they murmured for their poor
entertainment, and wished they had died in Egypt: that night the Lord sent them
Quails, the next morning it rained Manna, which was the sixteenth day, and so
six days together; the seventh, which was the two and twentieth, it rained
none, and that day they were commanded to keep for their Sabbath: now if the
two and twentieth day of the month were the Sabbath, the fifteenth should have
been, if that day had been kept before; but the Text tells us expressly, they
marched that day; and, which is strange, the day of the month is never named,
unless it be once, for any station but this, where the Sabbath was ordained;
otherwise it could not have been known, that that day was ordained for a day of
rest, which before was none. And why might not their day of holy rest be
altered, as well as the beginning of the year was, for a memorial of their
coming out of Egypt? I can see no reason, why it might not, nor find any
testimony to assure me it was not.

And thus much of the Jews Sabbath, how and wherein it was a sign, whereby they
professed themselves the servants of Jehovah, and no other God.

Now I come to the second thing I propounded, to show how far, and in what
manner the like observation binds us Christians.

I say therefore, that the Christian as well as the Jew, after six days spent
in his own works, is to sanctify the seventh, that he may profess himself
thereby a servant of God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth; as well as the Jew.
For the quotum therefore, the Jew and Christian agree, but in designation of
the day they differ. For the Christian chooses for his Holy day, that which
with the Jews was the first day of the week, and calls it Dominicum, that he
might thereby profess himself a servant of that God, who on the morning of
that day, vanquished Satan, the Spiritual Pharaoh, and redeemed us from our
Spiritual thraldom, by raising Jesus Christ our Lord from the dead, begetting
us in stead of an earthly Canaan, to an inheritance incorruptible in the
Heavens: In a word, the Christian, by the day he hallows, professes himself a
Christian; that is, as S. Paul speaks, To believe on him that raised up Jesus
from the dead; so that the Jew and Christian both, though they fall not upon
the same day, yet make their designation of their day upon the like ground; the
Jews, the memorial day of their deliverance from the temporal Egypt, and
temporal Pharaoh: the Christians, the memorial of their deliverance from the
spiritual Egypt, and spiritual Pharaoh.

But might not (will you say) the Christian, as well have observed the Jewish
for his seventh day, as the day he does? I answer, No; he might not: For, in so
doing, he should seem not to acknowledge his Redemption to be already
performed; but still expected. For the deliverance of Israel out of Egypt by
the Ministry of Moses, was intended for a type and pledge of the spiritual
deliverance, which was to come by Christ: their Canaan also to which they
marched, being a type of that heavenly inheritance, which the redeemed by
Christ do look for: Since therefore the shadow is now made void by the coming
of the substance, the relation is changed, and God is no longer to be
worshipped, and believed in, as a God foreshewing and assuring by types; but as
a God who has performed the substance of what he promised. And this is that
which S. Paul means, Colossians 2. 16, 17. where he says, Let no man judge you
(henceforth) in respect of a Feast day, New Moon, or Sabbath days, which were a
shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ.

1. CO^. (...). 5. 1 Cor. 11. 5.
Every woman praying or prophesying with her head uncovered, dishonors her
head.
I Have chosen this of the woman, rather then that of the man going before it,
for the Theme of my Discourse; First, because I conceive the fault, at the
reformation whereof the Apostle here almeth, in the Church of Corinth, was the
women's only, not the men's. That which the Apostle speaks of a man praying or
prophesying, being by way of supposition, and for illustration of the
unseemlinesse of that guise which the women used. Secondly, because the
condition of the sex in the words read, makes something for the better
understanding of that which is spoken of both; as we shall see presently.

What I intend to speak upon this Text, shall consist of these two parts;
First, of an enquiry, what is here meant by prophesying, a thing attributed to
women, and therefore undoubtedly some such thing as they were capable of.
Secondly, what was this fault for matter and manner, of the women of the Church
of Corinth, which the Apostle here reproves.

To begin with the first, and which I am like to dwell longest upon; Some take
prophesying here, in the stricter sense, to be foretelling of things to come;
as that which in those Primitive times, both men and women did, by the pouring
out of the Holy Ghost upon them; according to that of the Prophet Joel, applied
by S. Peter to the sending of the Holy Ghost at the first promulgation of the
Gospel: I will power out my Spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and daughters
shall prophecy, and your young men shall see visions. And that such
Prophetesses as these, were those four Daughters of Philip the Evangelist,
whereof we read Acts 21. 9.

Others take prophesying here in a more large notion, for the gift of
interpreting and opening Divine mysteries contained in holy Scripture, for the
instruction and edification of the hearers; especially, as it was then inspired
and suggested in extraordinary manner by the Holy Spirit, as Prophecy was given
of old; according to that of S. Peter, Prophecy came not in old time by the
will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. So
because many, in the beginning of the Gospel, were guided by a like instinct in
the interpretation and application of Scripture, they were said to Prophecy.
Thus the Apostle uses it in the fourteenth Chapter of this Epistle, where he
discourses of spiritual Gifts, and before all prefers this of Prophecy;
because he that prophecieth, (says he) speaks unto men to edification, and
exhortation, and comfort.

But neither of these kinds of Prophecy suit with the person in my Text, which
is a woman: For it is certain the Apostle speaks here of prophesying in the
Church, or Congregation; but in the Church a woman might not speak, no not so
much as ask a question for her better instruction, much less teach and
instruct others. This the Apostle teaches us in this very Epistle, Chapter the
fourteenth; even there where he discourses so largely of those kinds of
Prophecy: Let your women (says he) keep silence in the Churches: For it is not
permitted unto them to speak, (...) but to be subject: And if they will learn,
let them ask their husbands at home. Again in the first of Timothy, the second
and the eleventh, Let the women learn in silence with all subjection. 12. But I
suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man, but to be in
silence. Note here, that to speak in a Church Assembly, by way of teaching or
instructing others, is an act of superiority, which therefore a woman might not
do, because her sex was to be in subjection, and so to appear before God in
that Garb and Posture, which consisted therewith; that is, they might not speak
to instruct men in the Church, but to God she might.

To avoid this difficulty, some would have the word (...) in my Text, to be
taken passively, namely, to hear, or be present at Prophecy, which is an
acception without example, either in Scripture, or any where else. It is true,
the Congregation is said to pray when the Priest only speaks; but that they
should be said to preach, who are present only at the hearing of a Sermon, is a
Trope without example. For the reason is not alike: In prayer the Priest is the
mouth of the Congregation, and does what he does in their names, and they
assent to it by saying, A men. But he that preaches or prophecies is not the
mouth of the Church, to speak ought in their names, that so they might be said
to speak too; but he is the mouth of God speaking to them. It is not likely
therefore, that those who only hear another speaking or prophesying to them,
should be said (...), no more, as I said, then that all they should be said to
preach, who were at the hearing of a Sermon.

What shall we do then? Is there any other acception of the word prophesying
left us, which may fit our turn? Yes, there is a fourth acception, which if it
can be made good, will suit our Text better (I think) then any of the former;
to wit, that prophesying here should be taken for praising God in Hymns and
Psalms. For so it is fitly coupled with praying: Praying and praising, being
the parts of the Christian Liturgy. Besides, our Apostle also in the fourteenth
Chapter of this Epistle, joins them both together; I will pray, says he, with
the spirit, and will pray with understanding also: I will sing with the spirit,
and I will sing, that is, prophecy, with understanding also. For, because
Prophets of old did three things: First, foretell things to come: Secondly,
notify the will of God unto the people: And thirdly, uttered themselves in
musical wise, and, as I may so speak, in a poetical strain and composure:
Hence it comes to pass, that to prophecy in Scripture, signifies the doing of
any of these three things, and amongst the rest, to praise God in verse or
musical composure.

This to be so, as I say, I shall prove unto you out of two places of
Scripture; and first out of the first of Chronicles, chapter 25. where the word
Prophecy is three several times thus used: I will allege the words of the
Text at large, because I cannot well abbreviate them; These they are; v. 1.
Moreover David and the Captains of the Host, separated to the service of the
sons of Asaph, and of Heman, and of Ieduthun, who should prophecy with Harps,
with Psalteries, and with Cymbals: and the number of the men of Office
according to their service was, 2. Of the sons of Asaph, Zaccur, and Joseph,
and Nathaniah, and Asarelah, the sons of Asaph under the hands of Asaph, which
prophesied according to the order of the King. 3. Of Ieduthun, the sons of
Ieduthun, Gedaliah, and Zeri, and Ieshaiah, Hashabiah, and Mattithiah (and
Schimei) six, under the hands of their Father Ieduthun, who prophesied with a
Harp to give thanks, and to praise the Lord. Lo here, to prophecy Vide etiam 2
Chr. 29. 3^. and 35. 15.
and to give thanks, (or confess) and to praise the Lord with spiritual
songs, made all one. Nor needs such a notion seem strange, when as even among
the Latins, the word vates signifies both him that foretells things to come,
and a Poet: for that the Gentile Oracles were given likewise in verse: And S.
Paul to Titus, calls the Cretian Poet, Epimenides, a Prophet; as one, says he,
of their own Prophets said, (...) And the Arabians (whose language comes the
nearest both in words and notions to the Hebrew) call a chief Poet of theirs
(Princeps omnium Poetarum (says ^rpenius) quos unquam vidit mundus)
Muttenabbi, that is, Prophetizans, or Propheta (...). Now then if Asaph,
Ieduthun, and Heman prophesied when they praised God in such Psalms, as are
entitled unto their several Quires; as we find them in the Psalm-Book, (for
know that all the Psalms entitled to the sons of Korah, belonged to the Quire
of Heman, who descended from Korah,) why may not we, when we sing the same
Psalms be said to prophecy likewise? namely, as he that uses a prayer composed
by another, prays; and that according to the spirit of him that composed it;
So he that praises God with these spiritual and prophetical composures, may
be said to prophecy according to that spirit, which speaks in them.

And that Almighty God is well pleased with such service as this, may appear by
that one story of King Iehoshaphat, in the second of Chronicles, who when he
marched forth against that great confederate Army of the children of Ammon,
Moab, and Mount Seir, the Text there tells us, that having consulted with his
people, He appointed singers unto the Lord, that should praise the Beauty of
holiness, as they went out before the 2 Chronicles. 20. 21.
Army, and to say, Praise the Lord, for his mercy endures for ever, (that is,
they should sing the one hundred and sixth Psalm, or one hundred thirty sixth,
which begin in this manner, and were both of them not unfit for such an
occasion;) And when they began to sing Verse 22.
and praise, (says the Text) the Lord set ambushments against the children of
Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir, which were come against Judah, and they were
smitten.

A second place where such kind of Prophets and prophesying, as we speak of,
is mentioned, is that in the first of Samuel, in the story of Saul's election,
where 1 Samuel 10. 5 10.
we read, That when he came to a certain place, called the Hill of God, he met
a company of Prophets coming down from the high place, (or Oratory there) with
a Psaltery, a Tabret, and a Pipe, and a Harp before them, and they prophesied,
and he with them. Their Instruments argue what kind of Prophecy this was;
namely, praising God with spiritual songs, and melody. In what manner, is not
so easy to define or specify: But with an extemporary rapture, I easily
believe. And if we may conjecture by other examples, one of them should seem to
have been the Praecentor, and to utter the verse or ditty; the rest to have
answered (...), the extremes or last words of the verse; For after this manner
we are told by Philo Iudaeus, that the Essens (who were of the Jewish Nation)
were wont to sing their Hymns in their (...), or worshipping places. And after
the self-same manner, Eusebius tells us, did the Primitive Christians, having in
all likelihood learnt it from the Jews, whose manner it was; the same is
witnessed by the Author Constitutionum Apostolicarum in his second Book, and
fifty seventh Cha. where describing the manner of the Christian Note to sing
(...), i. alternis choris, and answer (...) are diverse. Vid. Hook. l. 5. p.
261.
service; after the reading of the Lessons of the Old Testament, (says he)
(...) Let another sing the Psalms of David, and the people, succinere, or
answer, (...). ((...).) (...), the extremes of the verses. Some footsteps of
which custom remain still with us (though perhaps in somewhat a different way)
when in those short versicles of Liturgy, being sentences taken out of the
Psalms, the Priest says or sings the first half, and the People answer the
latter; quasi (...). As for example, in that taken out of Psalm. 51. 17. the
Priest says, O Lord open thou our lips; The People or Chorus answer, And our
mouth shall show forth thy praise. But whatsoever the ancient manner of
answering was, thus much we are sure of, that the Jews in their divine lauds
were wont to praise God after this manner, in Antiphones or Responsories; as
(to let pass other testimonies, and the use of their Synagogues to this day
derived from their Ancestors,) we may learn by two special Arguments; one from
the Seraphims singing, Esaias the sixth, where it is said, that the Seraphims
cried one unto another saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts, the whole
earth is full of his Glory. Note, they cried one unto another. Secondly, from
the use of the Hebrew verb (...), which in the proper and native signification
thereof being to answer, is also used for to sing: as in the Psalm, where we
translate, Sing unto the Lord with thanksgiving, Psa. 147. 7.
sing praise upon the Harp unto our God; in the Hebrew it is (...), Answer unto
the Lord in thanksgiving, sing praise upon the Harp unto our God. And Isay 27.
2. In that day sing ye unto her, a vineyard of red wine. In the Hebrew, Answer
ye unto her. And Numbers 21. in Isreal's song of the Well; Spring up, O Well,
sing ye unto it. In the Hebrew it is, Answer unto it. And Moses speaking of
those that were worshipping the golden Calf, Exodus 32. 18. It is not the voice
of them that shout for mastery, nor the voice of them that cry for being
overcome, but the noise of them that sing do I hear; In the Hebrew, the voice
of them that answer one another. And so in other places. But to put all out of
doubt, look Ezra 3. 11. where it is expressly said, The Levites, the sons of
Asaph, sung together by course, in praising and giving thanks unto the Lord,
because he is good, for his mercy endures for ever. Hence was derived the
manner of praying, and praising God in the Christian service, alternis vicibus,
in a musical way, and, as it were, by way of prophesying and versifying; even
though we do but speak it only; as you know the Poet says, Amant alterna
Camaenae. Thus I have taken occasion somewhat to enlarge this particular; That
we our selves might the better understand the reason of what we do, and what
precedents, and whose example we follow therein. And thus much of prophesying.

I come now to the second thing, I propounded to speak of; namely, what was
that fault among the Corinthians, which the Apostle here taxes: For the right
understanding whereof, I say two things; First, for the offenders, that they
were the women, and not the men. That which the Apostle speaks concerning
men, being by way of supposition only, and to illustrate his Argument against
the uncomly guise of the women a pari: this appears, because his conclusion
speaks of women only, and nothing at all of men. Secondly, for the quality of
the fault, it was this; that the women at the time of praying and prophesying
were unveiled in the Church; notwithstanding it was then accounted an unseemly
and immodest guise, for women to appear open and barefaced in public. How
then, will you say, should it come to pass, that Christian women should so
much forget themselves, as to transgress this decorum in Gods House, and
service which they observed other where? I answer, from a fantastical
imitation of the manner of the she-Priests and Prophetesses of the Gentiles,
when they served their Idols, as their Pythiae, Bacchae, or Maenades, and the
like; who used, when they uttered their Oracles, or celebrated the rites and
sacrifices of their Gods, to put themselves into a wild and extaticall guise,
having their faces discovered, their hait dishevelled, and hanging about their
ears: This these Corinthian women (conceiting themselves when they prayed or
prophesied in the Church, to be acting the parts of she-Priests, uttering
Oracles like, the Pythiae, or Sibyllae, or celebrating sacrifice, as the
Maenades, or Bacchae) were so fond, as to imitate (as that sex is prone to
follow the fashion) and accordingly cast off their veils, and discovered their
faces immodestly in the Congregation, and thereby (as the Apostle speaks)
dishonored their heads; that is, were unseemly accoutred, and dressed on their
head: which he proves by three Arguments; partly from Nature, which having
given women their hair for a covering, taught them to be covered, as a sign of
subjection; the manner of this covering being to be measured by the custom of
the Nation: Lastly, by an Argument a pari, from men, for whom even themselves
being Judges, it would be an uncomely thing to wear a vail, that is, a woman's
habit; so by the like reason, was it as uncomely for a woman to be without a
vail, that is, in the guise and dress of a man. And howsoever the Devils of
the Gentiles, sometimes took pleasure in uncomelinesse, and absurd garbs and
gestures; yet the God whom they worshipped with his holy Angels, who were
present at their devotions, loved a comely accommodation, agreeable to Nature
and Custom, in such as worshipped him. For this cause therefore (says he)
ought a woman to have a covering on her head, because of the Angels. Lastly, he
concludes it, from the example and custom both of the Jewish and Christian
Churches, neither of which had any such use, for their women to be unvailed in
their sacred assemblies: If any man (says he) be contentious, (that is, will
not be satisfied with these reasons) let him know, that we, (that is, we of the
Circumcision) have no such custom, nor the Church of God. For so, with S.
Ambrose, Anselme, and some of the ancients, I take the meaning of the Apostle
to be in those words.

Thus you have heard briefly, what was the fault of these Corinthian Dames,
which the Apostle here taxes. From which we our selves may learn thus much;
That God requires a decent and comely accommodation in his House, in the act of
his worship, and service; For if in their habit and dress, surely much more in
their gestures, and deportment; he loves nothing that is unseemly in the one,
or in the other.

TITUS 3. 5. Titus 3. 5.
By the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost.
THese words, as it is easy to conceive, upon the first hearing, are spoken of
Baptism; of which I intend not by this choice, to make any full or accurate
tractation, but only to acquaint you (as I am wont) with my thoughts
concerning two particulars therein: One, from what propriety, analogy, or use
of water, the washing therewith was instituted for a sign of new birth,
according as it is here called (...), the washing of regeneration. The other,
what is the counter-type, or thing which the water figureth in this Sacrament.

I will begin with the last first, because the knowledge thereof must be
supposed, for the explication and more distinct understanding of the other. In
every Sacrament, as ye well know, there is the outward Symbol or sign, res
terrena, and the signatum figured and represented thereby, res coelestis. In
this of Baptism, the sign or res terrena, is washing with water: The question
is, what is the Signatum, the invisible and celestial thing, which answers
thereunto? In our Catecheticall explications of this mystery, it is wont to be
affirmed to be the blood of Christ; That as Water washes away the filth of the
body, so the blood of Christ cleanses us from the guilt and pollution of sin.
And there is no question but the blood of Christ is the fountain of all the
grace and good communicated unto us, either in this or any other Sacrament, or
mystery of the Gospel. But that this should be the (...), the counterpart, or
thing figured by the water in Baptism, I believe not, because the Scripture,
which must be our guide and direction in this case, makes it another thing; to
wit, the Spirit or Holy Ghost; this to be that, whereby the soul is cleansed
and renewed within, as the body with water is without; so says our Savior to
Nicodemus, Ioh. 3. Except a man be born of water, and the Spirit, he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God. And the Apostle in the words I have read,
parallels the washing of regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, as
type and countertype. God (says he) has saved us (that is, brought us into
the state of salvation,) by the washing of regeneration, and the renewing of
the Holy Ghost: where none, I trow, will deny that he speaks of Baptism. The
same was represented by that vision, at our Saviors Baptism, of the holy
Ghosts descending upon him, as he came out of the water, in the similitude of a
Dove: For I suppose, that in that Baptism of his, the mystery of all our
Baptisms was visibly acted; and that God says to every one, truly baptized* as
he said to him, (in a proportionable sense,) Thou art my Son, in whom I am well
pleased.

And how pliable the analogy of water is to typifie the Spirit, well appears by
the figuring of the Spirit thereby in other places of Scripture; As in that of
Isay, I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and slouds upon the dry
ground: I will pour my Spirit upon Isa. 44. 3.
by seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring, where the latter expounds the
former: Also by the discourse of our Savior with the Samaritan woman, John 4.
14. Whosoever (says he) drinks of the water that I shall give him, shall
never thirst; but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of
water springing up to everlasting life: By that also, Ioh. 7. 37. where on the
last day of the great feast, Jesus stood and said, If any man thirst let him
come unto me and drink. He that believes on me, as the Scripture says (that
is, as the Scripture is wont to express it, for otherwise there is no such
place of Scripture to be found in all the Bible) out of his belly shall flow
rivers of living water. But this (says the Evangelist) he spoke of the Spirit,
which they that believe on him should receive.

Nor did the Fathers or ancient Church, as far as I can find, suppose any
other correlative to the element in Baptism, but this; of this they speak
often, of the blood of Christ they are altogether silent in their explicatio^s
of this mystery: many are the allusio^s they seek out, for the illustration
thereof, and some perhaps forced, but this of the water, signifying or having
any relation to the blood of Christ, never comes amongst them; which were
impossible, if they ^ad not supposed some other thing figured by the water,
then it; which barred them from falling on that conceit.

The like silence is to be observed in our Liturgy, where the Holy Ghost is
more then once paralled with the water in Baptism, washing and regeneration
attributed thereunto; but no such notion of the blood of Christ. And that the
opinion thereof is novell, may be gathered, because some Lutheran Divines make
it peculiar and proper to the followers of Calvin.

Whatsoever it be, it has no foundation in Scripture, and we must not of our
own heads assign significations to Sacramental types without some warrant
thence. For whereas some conceive those two expressions, of (...), or
sprinkling of the blood of 1 Pet. 1. 2.
Christ, and of our being washed from our sins in (or by) his blood, do
intimate some such matter, they are Apoc. 1. 5.
surely mistaken; for those expressions have reference not to the water of
Baptism in the New Testament, but to the rite and manner of sacrificing in the
Old; where the Altar was wont to be sprinkled with the blood of the Sacrifices,
which were offered, and that which was unclean purified with the same blood:
whence is that elegant discourse of Saint Paul, (Heb. 9.) comparing the
sacrifices of the Law, with that of Christ upon the Cross, as much the better.
And that whereas in the Law, (...), Almost all things were purified with blood;
so much more the blood of Christ, who offered himself without spot to God,
cleanses our consciences from dead works: But that this washing, that is,
cleansing by the blood of Christ, should have reference to Baptism, where is
that to be found? I suppose, they will not allege the water and blood which
came out of our Saviors side, when they pierced him; For that is taken to
signify the two Sacraments ordained by Christ, that of blood the Eucharist, of
water Baptism, and not both to be referred to Baptism: I add, because perhaps
some men's fancies are corrupted therewith, that there was no such thing as
sprinkling, or (...), used in Baptism in the Apostles times, nor many ages
after them; and that therefore it is no way probable, that (...) in S. Peter
should have any reference to the Laver of Baptism.

Let this then be our conclusion; That the blood of Christ concurres in the
mystery of Baptism, by way of efficacy and merit, but not as the thing there
figured; which the Scripture tells us not to be the blood of Christ, but the
Spirit.

And so I come to my other Quaere. From what property or use of water, the
washing therewith is a Sacrament of our new birth; for so it is here called,
the washing of regeneration; and our Savior says to Nicodemus, Except a man
be born of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. For
in every Sacrament there is some analogy between what is outwardly done, and
what is thereby signified: therefore in this. But what should it be? It is a
thing of some moment, and yet in the tractates of this mystery, but little or
seldom enquired after; and therefore deserves the more consideration. I answer;
this analogy between the washing with water, and regeneration lies in that
custom of washing infants from the pollutions of the womb, when they are first
born; for this is the first office done unto them when they come out of the
womb, if they purpose to nourish and bring them up. As therefore in our
natural birth, the body is washed with water from the pollutions wherewith it
comes besmeared out of the matrix; so in our second birth from above, the soul
is purified by the Spirit, from the guilt and pollution of sin, to begin a new
life to Godward.

The analogy you see is apt and proper, if that be true of the custom, whereof
there is no cause to make question. For the use at present, any man, I think,
knows how to inform himself: For that of elder times, I can produce two
pregnant and notable testimonies; one of the Jews and people of God; another of
the Gentiles. The first you shall find Ezekiel. 16. where God describes the poor
and forlorn condition of Jerusalem, when he first took her to himself, under
the parable of an exposed Infant; As for thy nativity, says he, in the day
thou wast born, Ezekiel. 16. 4, 5.
thy navell was not cut, neither was thou washed in water, to supple thee; thou
wast not salted at all, nor swadled at all: None eye pitied thee, to do any of
these things unto thee, to have compassion on thee; but thou wast cast out in
the open field, to the loathing of thy person in the day that thou wast born.
Here you may learn what was wont to be done unto infants at their nativity, by
that which was not done to Israel* till God himself took pity on her, cutting
off the navell string, washing, salting, swaddling: upon this place S. Hierome
takes notice (but scarce any body else, that I can yet find) that our Savior,
where speaking of Baptism, he says, Except a man be born of water and the
Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, alludes to the custom here
mentioned of washing Infants at their nativity.

The other testimony (and that most pertinent to the application we make) I
find in a story related by Plutarch, in his Quaestiones Romanae, not far from
the beginning, in this manner: Among the Greeks, if one that were living were
reported to be dead, and funeral obsequies performed for him, if afterward he
returned alive, he was of all men abominated, as a pro phane and unlucky
person; no man would come into his company, and (which was the highest degree
of calamity) they excluded him from their Temples and the Sacrifices of their
gods: It chanced that one Aristinus being fallen into such a disaster, and not
knowing which way to expiate himself therefrom, sent to the Oracle at Delphos,
to Apollo, beseeching him to show him the means whereby he might be freed and
discharged thereof. Pythia gave him this answer, (...),
(...): What women do, when one in childebed lies,
That do again, so may thou sacrifice.


Arastinus rightly apprehending what the Oracle meant, offered himself to
women, as one newly brought forth to be washed again with water; from which
example it grew a custom among the Greeks, when the like misfortune befell any
man, after this manner to expiate them; they called them Hysterop^tmi, or
Postlimini^nati: How well does this befit the mystery of Baptism? where those
who were dead to God through sin, are like Hysteropotmi, regenerate and born
again by water and the Holy Ghost.

These two passages discover sufficiently, the analogy of the washing with
water in Baptism to regeneration or new birth; according as the Text, I have
chosen for the scope of my discourse, expresses it; namely, that washing with
water is a sign of spiritual infancy; for as much as infants are wont to be
washed, when they come first into the world.

Hence the Jews before John the Baptist came amongst them, were wont by this
rite to initiate such, as they made Proselytes, (to wit) as becoming infants
again, and entering into a new life and being, which before they had not. That
which here I have affirmed, will be yet more evident, if we consider those
other rites anciently added and used in the celebration of this mystery, which
had the selfsame end we speak of; namely, to signify spiritual Infancy. I
will name them, and so conclude; As that of giving the new baptized milk and
honey, ad infantandum, as Tertullian speaks; ad infantie significationem, so S.
Hierome; because the like was used to infants new born; according to that in
the seventh of Isay, of Immanuels infancy; A Virgin shall conceive and bear a
son; butter and honey shall he eat, Isa. 7. 14, 15.
that he may know to refuse evil and choose good. Secondly, that of salt, as is
implied in that of Ezekiel, Thou wast not washed with water, nor salted with
salt: that of putting on the white garment, to resemble swaddling: All these
were anciently (especially the first) used in the Sacrament of our Spiritual
birth, out of reference to that which was done to Infants at their natural
birth. Who then can doubt, but the principal rite of washing with water, the
only one ordained by our blessed Savior, was chosen for the same reason? to
be the element of our initiation; and that those who brought in the other, did
so conceive of this; and from thence derived those imitations.

JOSH. 24. 26. Josh. 24. 26.
And (Joshuah) took a great stone, and set it up there (viz. in Sichem) under
the Oak, which was in the Sanctuary of the Lord: Alii, by the Sanctuary. Hebr.
(...).
THE Story whereupon these words depend is this; Ioshuah a little before his
death assembled all the Tribes of Israel at Shechem, or Sichem; there to make a
solemn Covenant between them and the Lord, to have him alone for their God,
and to serve no other Gods besides him: which they having solemnly promised to
do, saying, The Lord our God will we serve, and his voice will we obey: Ioshuah
for a testimony and monument of this their stipulation, erects in the place a
great stone or pillar under an Oak, which was by (or, as the Hebrew has it,
in) the sanctuary of the Lord. Of this Oak, or rather collectively, Querce^um,
or Oaken-holt of Sichem, is twice mention made elsewhere in Scripture. For this
was the place where Abraham first sat down, and where the Lord appearing unto
him, he erected his first Altar in the Land of Canaan, after he came out of
Haran thither; as we read Genesis 12. 6. in these words; And Abraham passed
through the Land unto the place of Sichem, unto the Oak, or Oak-grove of Morch,
where the Lord appeared unto him, saying, Unto thy seed will I give this Land;
and there he builded an Altar unto the Lord, who appeared unto him. And what
place more fit for Abraham's posterity, to renew a Covenant with their God, then
that where their God first made his Covenant with Abraham their Father? Again,
it was this place, where in the aftertimes of the Judges, one hundred and
seventy years after the death of Ioshuah, the Sichemites made Abimelech, the
base son of Ierubaal or Gideon, King, as we read Judge. 9. 6. That all the men
of Sichem gathered together, and all the House of Millo, and went and made
Abimelech King, by the Oak of the Pillar which was in Sichem: The words are
(...), even the Oak, where Ioshuah here in my Text set up this great stone for
a witness to Israel. For the word (...) here, and (...), or (...), in the
other two places, signify one and the same thing, to wit, either an Oak,
Terebinth, or some other kind of tree; as the Septuagint perpetually render
them.

Yea, that of Judges must of necessity so be rendered, by comparing it with this
of my Text, to which it has reference: Nevertheless our last Translation in
the first of these places. Genesis 12. concerning Abraham, chose rather to follow
S. Hierome (wherefore I know not) who follows not himself, and translates it a
plain, not an Oak, to wit, the plain of Morch: by which Translation, the
identity of that place with the other two, where it is translated Oak, is
obscured and made the less observable. If there be any difference between the
words (...), and (...), it should rather be this, that (...), should signify a
tree, and (...), a grove, holt, or wood of such trees; as the Septuagint in
that place of the ninth of Judges, have expressly rendered it, namely, (...) the
Quercetum, Oak toft, or holt in Sichem. And so, I believe, it ought to be
understood in the other places, that is, to be taken collectively; of which we
shall hear more hereafter.

But this is no great matter of difficulty, that which follows is; namely, how
this Oak, or Oaken-holt of Sichem, is said here in my Text to have been in (for
the Hebrew is (...)) or by the Sanctuary of the Lord. For how comes the
Sanctuary of the Lord to be at Sichem, when as the Tabernacle, and the Ark of
the Testimony were at Shiloh, there set up by Ioshuah himself, and so remained
(as the Scripture elsewhere tells us) until the time of the Captivity of the
Land; which without doubt was not till after Ioshuah was dead and buried: and
is usually understood of that time, when the Ark was taken captive by the
Philistims. And yet is not only here a Sanctuary mentioned at Sichem, but in
the beginning of the Chapter, the Elders and Officers of the Tribes are said,
upon Ioshuahs summons, to have presented themselves there before the Lord,
which speech uses to imply as much.

If we say, the Ark of God was taken out of its place at Shiloh, and brought to
Sichem by the Levites, upon occasion of this general Assembly, yet the
difficulty will not be removed: For first, how could the Ark alone give
d^^oinin^tion to the place where it stood, to be called the Sanctuary of the
Lord? Or secondly, if the Altar were there with it, how was the Law of God
observed, which says, Thou shall not Deuteronomy 16. 21
plant a Grove of any trees, (or any tree) near unto the Altar of thy God,
which thou shall make thee; Neither shall thou set up a pillar, which the Lord
thy God hates; when as here are both, an Oak or Quercetum, in the Sanctuary of
God, and a Pillar or Statue erected under it?

Thirdly, this Sanctuary, whatsoever it was, must be something which had a
constant and fixed station, and was not temporary or mutable; because the Oak,
under which this pillar was erected by Ioshuah, is here designed and appointed
out by it, as by a constant and standing mark: else to what purpose had it been
to sign out the Oak by it, if it were such as would be here to day and not to
morrow? For these reasons it appears that this Sanctuary could not be the
Tabernacle, where the Ark and Altar for Israel were, but that it was something
else: And what that should be, is to be enquired.

I answer, it was a Proseucha, or praying place, which the Israelites (at least
those of Ephraim, in whose lot it was) after the Country was subdued unto them,
had erected in that very place at Sichem, where God first appeared to Abraham,
and where he built his first Altar, after he was come into the Land of Canaan;
The place where God said unto him, Unto thy seed will I give this Land.

For the understanding whereof, you must take notice, that the Jews besides
their Tabernacle or Temple, which was the only place for sacrifice, had first
or last two sorts of places for religious duties: The one called Proseuchae;
the other Synagogues: the difference between which was this; Proseucha was a
plot of ground, encompassed with a wall, or some other like mound or enclosure,
and open above, much like to our Courts: the use properly for prayer, as the
name Proseucha imports: A Synagogue was aedificium tectum, a covered edifice,
as our houses and Churches are, where the Law and Prophets were read and
expounded, and the people instructed in divine matters; according to that Acts
15. 21. Moses of old time has in every City them that preach him, being read
in the Synagogues every Sabbath day. From whence also ye may gather, that
Synagogues were within the Cities, as Proseucha's were without; which was
another difference between them, as you shall hear confirmed.

That Proseucha's were such places as I have described them to be, I prove out
of a notable place of Epiphanius, a Jew bred and born in Palestine; who in his
Tract against the Messalian Heretics, after he has told us that the
Messaliam built themselves certain houses, or large places, (...), Fororum
instar, which they called Proseuchae; he goes on thus; Et habuisse quidem
Iudaeos jam olim, ut and Samaritas* certa quaedam ad precandum loca extra
urbes, quas Proseuchas dicerent, ex Apostolorum Actibus liquet, ubi purpurae
institrix Lydia Apostolo Paulo occurrisse dicitur; De quo ita Scriptura narrat,
(...), it seemed to be a place of prayer, (of which I shall say more anon;) He
goes on still, Est and Sicimis, says he, quae hodie Neapolis dicitur,
Proseuchae locus extra urbem Theatro similis, secundo ab urbe lapide situs;
Quem ita aperto coelo and area subdiali extruxerunt Samaritae Iudaeorum in
omnibus imitatores. Out of these words you may collect every part of my
description. First, that Proseuchae were out of the Cities in the fields.
Secondly, that they were (...), like the ancients Forum, or place of market,
and The like he has a few lines after of the Sataniani; (...).
(...), under the open air, and without roof, such as the Courts of the Temple
also were, whither the people came to pray; so that they were as it were a kind
of dis-joyned, and remoter Courts unto the Temple, whither they turned
themselves when they prayed in them. Thirdly, that they were ordained for
places of prayer; All these are in this passage of Epiphanius; and moreover
that such a one was in his time remaining at Sichem, the place my Text speaks
of, there erected by the Samaritans, in that, as in all things else, imitators
of the Jews: What better testimony could be desired?

These Proseucha's of the Jews, both name and thing, were not unknown to the
Poet Iuvenal, when describing in his third Satyr, in what manner proud and
insolent fellows in the City of Rome, used in their drunken humors, to abuse
and quarrel with those they met in the streets, in the night time, whom they
took to be of mean estate and condition, he brings them in speaking thus: Ede
ubi consistas; in qua te quaero Proseucha? where dwell you? in what Proseucha
should I seek or enquire for you? intimating that he was some poor fellow,
either that dwelt in an house that could not keep out wind and weather, but was
like a Jews Proseucha, all open above; or he alludes to the banishment of the
Jews out of Rome, by Domitian, in his own time, and then fresh, as who had no
where else to bestow themselves, but in their Proseucha's out of the City, or
who used to assemble in the Proseucha's; according to some of these senses is
Iuvenall to be understood.

For that the Jews had Proseucha's about the City of Rome, appears by Philo
Iudaeus in his De legatione ad Calum; where commending the clemency and
moderation of Augustus Caesar, he says, (...) That he knew the Jews of Rome
had their Proseucha's, and that they used to assemble in them, especially on
the Sabbath days, and yet never molested them, as Caius did. The same Philo
mentions Proseucha's elsewhere, though it be not to be dissembled, Vide de
vita Mosis. Lib 3.
that he seems to comprehend Synagogues also properly so called under that
name, as being better known to the Gentiles, who called both by that name*
Josephus in his Life tells us of a Proseucha at Tiberias in Galilee, in these
words, (...) On the next day, the Sabbath, the whole people were gathered
together in the Proseucha, which is (says he) (...) a large edifice, fit to
receive a great multitude.

In the New Testament, the name of Synagogue is frequent, but that of Proseucba
seldom; whence may be conjectured that both are comprehended under that name,
as in Philo both are termed Proseuchae: yet once or twice, as learned
Interpreters think, we read of Proseucha's in the new Testament; as namely Acts
16. 13. (which Epiphanius even now alleged to that purpose) where S. Luke tells
us, that S. Paul being come to Philippi in Macedonia on the Sabbath Day, they
went out of the City to a river side, (...), where there was taken to be a
Proseucha, or where was famed to be a Proseucha; (...), will bear both. The
Syriack has; Quia ibi conspiciebatur Domus orationis; the Arabic, Locus
orationis. For if (...) were taken here for prayer it self, as if the sense
were; where prayer was used to be made; it should rather have been said, (...),
and not (...) yet, if it were so taken, it would still argue no less, then
that there was here an appointed place for prayer, and that out of the City,
which is all one, as to say there was a Proseucha: so I take (...), in the 16.
verse of the same Chapter, where it is said; It came to pass, (...), as we
went to the Proseucha: especially since we read not in the Text, that S. Paul
went thither to pray, but to preach, where he deemed there was an assembly that
day according to custom: And we sat down, (says S. Luke) and spoke unto the
women, which were come together there.

A second place where a Proseucha is mentioned in the New Testament, may be
that Luke 6. 12. where it is said, that our Savior went out into a high
Mountain to pray, and continued all night, (...), in Proseucha Dei, so Drusius
thinks (...) is here to be taken for a place, and the Article helps the sense;
otherwise it seems an odd and unaccustomed expression for (...), to mean, in
prayer made unto God; and why should it not be as likely, that our Savior
might sometimes pray in their Proseucha's, as teach in their Synagogues?

Thus we have seen the testimonies for Proseucha's, their use and difference
from Synagogues. Now for Synagogues, the common opinion is, that they were not
before the Captivity of Babylon; and that necessity first taught the Jews the
use of them in that Captivity, which afterward they brought with them at their
return into their own Country. The reason why men so think, is, I suppose, the
absolute silence of them in Scripture, until the time of the second Temple;
but though the name were not, it is possible the thing might be: howsoever,
because it is most received, that they were not, we will let it pass for
current. But as for Proseucha's, such as we have described them, none, that I
know, have affirmed or determined ought of their antiquity; it may be, not
taken it into consideration, either because they had no occasion to think of
any such matter, or because they confounded them altogether with Synagogues.

The matter therefore being free and undecided, I will make bold to affirm,
that if Synagogues were not, yet Proseucha's, that is, open places for Prayers,
were a long time before the Captivity, yea even from the days of Ioshuah the
son of Nun. And though the Jews had, or were to have but one Altar, or place of
Sacrifice, that namely, which the Lord should choose, to place the Ark of his
Covenant there, the Tabernacle or Temple; yet had they other places for
devotion, and religious use. And that this Sanctuary of God here mentioned in
my Text at Sichem (which was a Leviticall City) was such a one; my reasons are
these; First, because it is incredible, that the Israelites, having but one
Temple for the whole Nation, whereat they were bound to appear, and those the
males only, but thrice a year, should have no other places of prayer nearer
their dwellings, whither they might resort on Sabbath days, the Temple or
Tabernacle being from some of them above an hundred miles distant at the least.
Secondly, because (as I have already showed) this sanctuary at Sichem could not
be the Tabernacle, which was then at Shiloh, not at Sichem, and yet must have
some stable and fixed place, because the situation of the Oak is designed by
it: yea, must have been still there, when this story of Ioshuah was written;
which is thought to have been long after his death: surely this Chapter was
written after it, where both his death and burial are recorded: wherefore to
say the Ark was brought thither upon this occasion, will not serve turn.
Thirdly, this place should be a Proseucha, because of that circumstance of
trees growing in it; which, as it proves it not to have been the Tabernacle,
(where no such thing was lawful to be) so seems it to be a Characteristicall
note of a Proseucha.

For though it were not lawful to have trees near the Altar of God, that is,
in or about the Court of the Tabernacle; Yet was it not so with Proseucha's,
yea they seem to have been ordinarily garnished and beset with them. This may
be gathered from a passage of Philo Iudaeus, where relating the barbarous
outrage of the Gentiles at Alexandria, against the Jews, there dwelling in the
time of Caius, (...), says he, (...), of some of the Proseucha's they cut down
the Trees, others they demolished to the very Foundations.

The same is implied by that of Iuvenal, speaking of a Jewish Wizard or
Fortune Tellers, -- conducta sub arbore conjux. And again in his sixth Satyr,
Arcanam Iudaea tremens mendicat in aurem,
Interpres legum Solymarum, magna sacerdos
Arboris, ac summi sida internuncia coeli.
Interpres legum Solymarum, that is, of Moses Laws, Magna Sacerdos Arboris,
because of the Trees in their Proseucha's, or Places of worship. The same
appears also out of those verses of his third Satyr, complaining that the once
sacred Grove of Fons Capenus, where Numa used to meet with the Goddess
AEgeria, was then let out to the beggarly Jews for a Proseucha, and that every
Tree (such were the times) must pay rent to the people: by which means, the
woods which formerly had been the habitation of the Muses, were become dens for
beggarly Jews to mutter their Orizons in; hear his words: Hic ubi nocturne Numa
constituisset amicae,
Nunc sacri Fontis nemus, and delubra locantur
Iudaeis, quorum cophinus foenumqu^ supellex;
Omnis enim populo mercedem pendere jussa est
Arbor; and ejectis mendicat sylva Camoenis.
Whence comes this connection of Jews and Trees, but Vide Psalm. 52. 10. Sicut
olea in Domo Dei.
from their having trees in their Proseucha's? unto which their situation
without the Cities conduced; as also it did for privacy and retirement.

Thus you see how well the description and mark of a Proseucha agrees to this
Sanctuary in my Text. And that the Jews had many other such in other places, as
well as at Sichem, even in those elder times, as at These three places are
called by the LXX. (...) Samuel. 6. 16. (...), though in the Original there be
no such thing.
Mispah, Bethel, and Gilgal, I make little doubt; which we read to have been
places of Assembly for the people; and the two last sanctified of old by Divine
apparition, as Sichem was. Of Mispah the Author of the first of Maccabees, in
his third Chapter, if I understand him, testifies as much; when he tells us,
that whilst the holy City lay desolate, and the Sanctuary was trodden down by
the tyranny of Antiochus Epiphanes; Judas Maccabaeus, and those of the people
which adhered unto their God, assembled together at Maspha to make there their
supplications unto their God, (...), because at Maspha or Mispah had been a
place of prayer in former time for Israel; as much as to say, there had been a
Proseucha of old. And do we not read in that story of the ^jamiticall war in
the Book of Judges, That the Iabernacle being at Shiloh, (as appears by the
last Chapter) yet (in the Chapter going before) it is said, that the whole
Congregation of Israel was gathered together as one man unto the Lord in
Mispah? and that in the twenty sixth verse is mention of an house of God there,
where the people prayed and fasted? It is said indeed that the Ark of the
Covenant was upon that extraordinary occasion brought thither, but it being
certain, out of the next Chapter, that the Tabernacle was still at Shiloh, this
House of God could be none of it: Nay perhaps, we may hence learn, that when
the Ark upon occasion of such a general and extraordinary assembly was to be
removed, they used to bring it to such places as these, which were as holy
Courts, ready prepared for it, and that then it was lawful, but not else, to
sacrifice in them.

Of these Courts for prayer, we may understand that also in the seventy fourth
Psalm; They have cast Fire into thy Sanctuary, they have burnt up all the
Conventicula Dei in the Land, namely, in the Captivity by Nebuchadnezzar, who
destroyed both their Temple, and their Proseucha's. For if we understand it of
the persecution of Antiochus, as some do, it must then follow, that some
Canonical Scripture was written after Malachi, and the ceasing of Prophecy,
that is, in the time of Maccabees; which will not easily be granted; Besides
that we read not, that Antiochus cast any fire into the Temple. Now if it
speak of the vastation by Nebuchadnezzar, then had the Jews before that time,
not only a Sanctuary for sacrifice, but also (...), Co^ticula Dei, that is,
either Proseucha's, or Synagogues; for either will serve my purpose.

But now you will say, what profit is there of this long discourse? were it so,
or were it not so, as I have endeavored to prove, of what use is the knowledge
thereof to us? yes, to know it was so, is useful in a threefold respect:
First, for the right understanding of such places of the Old Testament, where a
House of God, and assembling before the Lord are often mentioned, there where
neither the Ark of the Covenant, nor the Tabernacle at such time were: as
besides the places before alleged, we read in the tenth of the first Book of
Samuel, of Saul's meeting with three men going up to God to Bethel, and of a
place 1 Samuel 10. 3. 5. (...)
called, The Hill of God, whence a company of Prophets came from the high place
there, prophesying with a Tabret, Pipe, and Harp before them; in neither of
which places can we find that ever the Tabernacle was: and as for the Ark we
are sure it was all this time at Kiriathjearim, till David solemnly fetched it
thence: and if at any time the Ark might (as now it was not) be transferred to
any of them upon occasion of some general Assembly of the Nation, that so they
might have opportunity to ask counsel of the Lord, and offer Sacrifice, yet
were they not the ordinary station thereof.

Secondly, we may learn from hence, that to have appropriate places, set apart
for prayer and Divine duties, is not a circumstance or rite proper to legal
worship only, but of a more common nature: For as much as though Sacrifice,
wherein the legal worship (or worship of the old Covenant) consisted, were
restrained to the Ark and Tabernacle, and might not be exercised where they
were not; yet were there other places for Prayer besides that; which are no
more to be accounted legal places, then bare and simple prayer was a legal
Duty.

Lastly, we may gather from this Description of Proseucha's, which were as
Courts, encompassed only with a wall or other like enclosure, and open above;
in what manner to conceive of the accommodation of those Altars, we read to
have been erected by the Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Book of
Genesis; namely, that the ground whereon they stood, was fenced and bounded
with some such enclosure, and shaded with trees, after the manner of
Proseucha's, as we may read expressly of one of them at Beersheba: That Abraham
there planted a Grove, and called upon the Name of the Lord, the everlasting
God. Yea, when the Tabernacle and Temple were, the Altar of God stood still in
an open Court, and who can believe that the place of those Altars of the
Patriarchs were not bounded and separated from common ground? And from these
patterns in likelihood, after the Altar for Sacrifice was restrained to one
only place, the use of such open places, or Courts for prayer, garnished with
trees, as I have showed Proseucha's to have been, continued still.

1 TIMOTHY 5. 17. 1 Timothy 5. 17.
Let the Elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor: especially
they that labor in the Word and Doctrine.
THere are two things in these words to be explicated; First, what is meant
here by Elders: Secondly, what is this double-honour due unto them. For the
first, there is no question but the Priests or Ministers of the Gospel of
Christ were contained under this name: for so the New Testament uses the word
(...), or Presbyter, for the Ministers of the Word and Sacraments in the
Gospel; whence comes the Saxon word Priester, and our now English word
Priest. And the Ancient Fathers thought these only to be here meant, and never
dreamed of any other. But in our time those who obtrude a new Discipline and
Government upon the Church, altogether unknown and unheard of in the ancient,
will needs have two sorts of Elders or Presbyters here understood: one of such
as preach the Word and Doctrine, whom they call Pastors; another of Laymen,
who were neither Priests nor Deacons, but ned as assistants to them in the
exercise of Ecclesiastical Discipline in admonitions and censures of manners,
and in a word, in the execution of the whole power of the Keys.

These our Churchmen call Lay Elders, and the Authors of this new device,
Presbyterians; these Presbyters or Elders they will have meant in the first
words, (...), Elders that rule, or govern well, whom therefore they call
Ruling-Elders; the other whom they call Pastors, to be described in the latter
words; they who labor in the Word and Doctrine, whom therefore they
distinguish by the name of Teaching-Elders.

This is their exposition, and this exposition the ground and foundation of
their new Discipline; but none of the Fathers, which have commented upon this
Place, neither Chrysostom, Hierome, Ambrose, Theodoret, Primasius, Oecumenius,
or Theophylact, (as they had no such, so) ever thought of any such Lay Elders
to be here meant; but Priests only, which administered the Word and Sacraments.

But how (will you say then) is this Place to be understood, which may seem, as
they allege, to intimate two sorts of Elders, some that ruled only, others
that labored also in the Word and Doctrine? The Divines of our Church, who had
cause, when time was, to be better versed in this question, then any others,
have given diverse expositions of these words; none of which give place to any
such newfound. Elders, as the Fautors of the Presbyterian Discipline, upon the
sole Authority of this one place, have set up in diverse forain Churches, and
would have brought into ours. I will relate four of the chief of these
expositions, to which the rest are reducible.

The first is grounded upon the use of the participle in the Greek tongue,
which is often wont to note the reason or condition of a thing, and accordingly
to be resolved by a causall, or conditional conjunction. According whereunto
this Text, (...), duplici honor digni habeantur, (or dignentur) (...), is to
be resolved thus; Elders or Presbyters that rule or govern the Flock well, let
them be accounted worthy of double honor, and that chiefly in respect, and
because of their labor in the Word and Doctrine. And so this manner of speech
will imply two duties, but not two sorts or orders of Elders, and that though
this double honor be due unto them for both, yet chiefly and more principally
for the second, their labor in the Word and Doctrine: and this way goes S.
Chrysostom and other Greek Writers.

A second exposition is taken from the force and signification of the word
(...), which signifies not simply (...), to labor, but to labor with much
travel and toil; for (...) is derived from (...), vexor, laboribus and
molestiis premor, and so properly signifies molestiam, or fatigationem ex
labor. Thus the meaning will be; let Elders that do been praesidere, i. govern
and instruct their Flock well, be counted worthy of double honor; especially
such of them as take more then ordinary pains in the Word and Doctrine: Or
thus; let the Elders that discharge their office well, be, etc. especially by
how much the more their painfulnesse and travel shall exceed in preaching the
Word and Doctrine, etc.

Thus we have seen two expositions of these words, neither of them implying two
sorts of Orders of Presbyters, but only distinguishing several offices and
duties of the same Order, or implying a differing merit in the discharge of
them: But if they will by no means be persuaded, but that two sorts of Elders
are here intimated, let it be so; two other expositions will yield them it, but
so as will not be for their turn; for their Lay Elders will be none of them.

The first is this, That the Apostle should speak here of Priests and Deacons,
considering both as Members of the Ecclesiastical Consistory or Senate, which
consisted of both Orders, and in that respect might well include them both
under the name of Elders; it being a common notion in Scripture, to call the
Associates of a Court of Judicature by that name Senatus in Latin has its name
a senibus, i. senioribus, of Eldership; and is as much to say, as (...).
According to this supposall, the Apostles words may have this construction: Let
the Elders which rule well, whether Priests or Deacons, be counted worthy of
double honor, but more especially the Priests who besides their government
labor also in the Word and Doctrine. Now what can be opposed against such an
exposition I see not. For it is not improbable, but the Apostle should make
provision as well for the maintenance of Deacons, as of Priests, seeing he
omits it not, of Widows in the verse going next before this. But unless he
includes them under the name of Elders, he makes no provision for them at all.
Besides this is not the only place (some think) where Deacons are comprehended
under the name of Elders. For the Council of Jerusalem, Acts 15. where they
inscribe their Synodicall Epistle thus; The Apostles, Elders, and Brethren to
the Brethren which are of the Gentiles in Antioch, etc. may seem to comprehend
the Deacons under the name of Elders or Presbyters, otherwise they should omit
them, which without doubt were part of the Council.

There is another exposition, which allows also of two sorts of Elders to be
here implied, but makes them both Priests; namely, that Presbyters or Priests
in the Apostles time, were of two sorts, one of Residentiaries, and such as
were affixed to certain Churches, and so did (...), praesidere Gregi. Another,
of such as had no fixed station, or charge over any certain place, but
traveled up and down to preach the Gospel where it was not, or to confirm the
Churches where it was preached already; such, as are elsewhere known by the
names of Evangelists and Doctors or Prophets: that these were those (...),
spoken of here by the Apostle: that both these sorts of Presbyters were to be
counted worthy of double honor, as well (...), as those that traveled up and
down to preach the Gospel, (...), but especially these latter, because their
pains were more then the others. This is confirmed from the use of the word
(...) which in Scripture signifies not only corporal labor, as may appear in
many places; but seems to be used by S. Paul even in this very sense we have
now given, as 1 Cor. 15. where he says, comparing himself with the other
Apostles, (...), I have traveled up and down more then they all, as is
manifest he did.

These are the principal expositions given by the Writers of our Church, upon
this passage of Scripture, which is the foundation and only place whereon they
build this new Consistory, and are so much in love with it. But this being
capable, as you see, of such variety of exposition; how much too weak and
insufficient it is to establish any such new order of Elders never heard of in
the Church from the time of the Apostles until this last age, any man may
judge.

But give me leave to propound a fifth exposition, which shall be more liberal
to them then any of those yet given. For it shall yield them all they contend
for so eagerly to be implied in this Text, namely, that there are not only two
sorts of Elders here implied; but also that the one of them are Lay Elders,
such as have nothing to do with the administration of the Word and Sacraments;
what would they have more? yet they will be never the nearer for this
concession; for the Lay Elders here implied, may be no Church Officers, but
Civil Magistrates, which in Scripture language we know are called Elders: as
when we read of the Elders of Israel, of the Elders of Judah, of the Elders of
the Priests, and Elders of the people, of Priests and Elders, and the like;
according to such a notion the words may be construed by way of Transitus a
thesi ad hypothesin, as Rhetoricians call it, to wit, in this manner; Cum omnes
Seniores, sive Reipublicae, sive Ecclesiae, qui been praesident, duplici honor
dignandi sint, tum maxim Seniores Ecclesiastici, qui laborant in verbo and
Doctrina: Or thus, Let all Elders that govern well, of what sort soever, be
counted worthy of double honor, especially the Elders of the Church which
labor in the Word and Doctrine; Is not this good sense? and does not the
Apostle in the beginning of this very Chapter, use the name Elder, in the
larger and more general sense, when he says, Rebuke not an Elder, but exhort
him as a Father, and the younger men as Brethren, the Elder women as Mothers,
the younger as Sisters: why may he not then do so here? And does not S. James
in his last Chapter call the Ministers of the Word and Sacraments, (...), as it
were in distinction from (...)? But it will be objected that this exposition is
too ambitious, because it makes the Apostle to prefer the Elders of the
Church before the Elders of the Commonwealth, that is, the Priest before the
Civil Magistrate, when he says that all Elders, whether of Church or
Commonwealth, are to be accounted worthy of double honor, so especially those
Elders which labor in the Word and Doctrine, which are the Presbyters of the
Church.

But here know that the name of Elder is never given in Scripture to the
Supreme Magistrate, but to the subordinate only; and why the Ministers of the
Word and Doctrine should not be accounted as worthy of double honor, as they,
or more worthy, I know not; especially if S. Paul here says it; sure I am, this
objection is not sufficient to refute my interpretation.

Thus I thought good to acquaint you how many ways this place may be expounded,
without importing any such new Elders, (neither Priests nor Deacons) as they
would impose upon us for Church Officers, by the sole authority thereof; for
though this Disciplinarian controversy of our Church stirred up by the admirers
of the Genevian platform were in the heat before our time, yet the sect is not
yet dead, but ready upon every occasion to surprise such as they find unarmed,
or not forewarned.

And thus having informed our selves who they are, which are here termed Elders,
we will now see also, what is that honor which is due unto them, which was the
second thing I propounded, (...), let them be accounted (says the Apostle)
worthy of, or deigned double honor. That by honor here, is meant honor arium
stipendium, or a tribute of maintenance, is manifest by the following words,
which the Apostle brings to enforce it; For the Scripture says, (says he)
Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn; and, The
labourer is worthy of his hire: Who sees not what these proofs infer? The first
of them he alleges also in the same argument, 1 Cor. 9. where he adds, Does
God take care for Oxen? Or says he it altogether for our sakes? (ours namely,
that preach the Gospel) For our sakes no doubt this is written, that he which
ploweth should plow in hope, and he that thresteth in hope, should be partaker
of his hope. The case is plain; It is an Hebrew notion, to bring honor, that
is, to pay tribute, or bring a present, as Apoc. 21. 16. (...) to wit, the new
Jerusalem. And thus much of the word Honor.

But what is meant by double honor? Some (as among the Fathers S. Ambrose,)
will have this double honor, to be honor of maintenance, and honor of
reverence. But because the Apostles proofs here infer only maintenance; I take
it to be meant in this place only of it. And as for double, there seems to be
an allusion to the right of the firstborn, to whom at first the office of
Priesthood belonged in their Families, and into whose room the Levites were
taken, and whom the Presbyters of the Gospel now succeed. As therefore they had
a double portion among their Brethren, in like manner should the Presbyters of
the Gospel be counted worthy of double honor.

And if you will admit of that construction of these words, which I gave in the
fifth place, namely to comprehend as well the Elders of the Commonwealth, as
the Elders of the Church, (that both were to be accounted worthy of double
honor, but especially those of the Church, who labor in the Word and
Doctrine) it will agree yet far better; because both the one and the other
succeed in the place of the First born; to whom belonged both to be Priests and
Civil Governors in their Tribes and Families.

Yet howsoever the ancient Christians were wont in their Agapes or Love Feasts,
to give their Presbyters a double portion, (...), with some reference to this
Text, as appears by Tertullian; nevertheless, I think double honor is not
here to be so precisely taken, but only to note a liberal and ingenuous
maintenance, such as might set them above the vulgar, as the Firstborn by
their double portion were preferred above the rest of their Brethren.

But I have not yet done with the word (...), for from this that the Apostle
here styleth the Priests maintenance, honor; it follows, that the Priests
maintenance is not to be esteemed of the nature of Alms, as some would have
it, but is a Tribute of honor, such as is given by an inferior to his
superior. For Alms and honor, Nec been convenient, nec in una sede morantur,
the one respecting those to whom it is given, as miserable, the other, as
honorable. I mean if alms be taken, as we use the word, for a work of mercy.
From the same ground also it follows, that the Priests maintenance is no
ordinary mercenary wages, but such as is given by way of honor, as well as of
reward: for such as is given to ordinary workmen is reward and wages only, and
not a Testimony or Tribute of honor: But that which is due to the Priest, as
you see, is (...), namely, of the same nature with that which is given to
Princes and Magistrates, by those which are under them. For as the Ministers of
the Gospel are in the nature of Presbyters or Elders, unto the people over whom
they are set; so is their maintenance from them, such as is suitable to the
condition and Dignity of an Elder; not a common wages, which the superior
often gives to his inferior, or servant, but honorarium, or (...).

ACTS 2. 5. Act. 2. 5.
And there were [(...)] sojourning at Jerusalem Jews, devout men, out of every
Nation under heaven.
AT the Feast of Pentecost, when that wonder happened of the holy Ghosts descent
upon the Apostles in the likeness of Fiery tongues, there were present at
Jerusalem (as the story a little after my Text informs us) men of several
Nations, as Parthians, Medes, Elamites, and dwellers in Mesopotamia, Iudaea,
and Cappadocia, Pontus, and Asia, Phrygia, and Pamphilia, Egypt, and the parts
of Lybia about Cyrene, and strangers of Rome, (or stranger-Romans) both Jews
and Proselytes, Cretes and Arabians; all these, upon the noise of this strange
accident came together unto the Place, and were confounded, because that every
man heard them speak in his own language, wherein he was born.

Many when they read this story, suppose the people here mentioned, the most
of them to have been Gentiles, and some Expositors cannot be excused from this
mistake. For the more clear discerning whereof, and their better information,
who may perhaps be overtaken with the same error; I have made choice of the
words before read, for the argument of my present discourse; which tells us in
express terms, that these Parthians, Medes, and Elamites, these Mesopotamians,
Cappadocians, and the rest after mentioned under those National names, were
Israelites, or Jews of the dispersion; Jews born in Parthia, and Media, Jews of
Elam, or Persia, Mesopotamian Jews, and so the rest of the Countries there
named; all of them of the Circumcision; for so says my Text, beginning to
speak of them: There were so journing, (or if you will, dwelling) at Jerusalem,
Jews of every Nation under heaven; that is, of every Nation where the Jews were
dispersed.

This is yet further confirmed by S. Peter's speech unto them; as when having
cited the words of the Prophet Joel, verse the 22. he says unto them, Ye men
of Israel, hear these words; Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God among
you, etc. Him being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of
God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain: Men of
Israel, and such as had slain their Messiah; surely those were no Gentiles.
Likewise when at the hearing of this, they were pricked in their hearts, he
says unto them; Repent and be Baptized, every one of you, in the Name of Jesus
Christ, for the remission of sins. For the Promise is made unto you and your
children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord shall call.
The Promise, says he, is made unto you and your children; were these then any
others then Jews, or Israelites of the seed of Abraham?

Lastly, we find that of these Parthians, Medes, and Elamites, and of the rest
named with them, there were added unto the Church by this Sermon of S. Peter
three thousand souls; But it is certain that Cornelius the Centurion was the
first Gentile that was converted unto the Faith; Therefore these first Converts
were no Gentiles. Perhaps you will say, they were Proselytes of these several
Nations, and therefore called Jews. I say, not so neither; because Proselytes
are by name rehearsed among them, when it is said of those Romani advenae,
(verse the tenth) that they were Jews and Proselytes; Ergo, the rest were Jews
by race, and not by Religion only. But what need I to have heaped together all
these proofs, when my Text alone is sufficient to evince it?

I come now therefore to a more particular illustration thereof, according to
what I have thus in general premised. And first, for the word (...), which I
translate sojourning, rather then dwelling; (for so I understand it, that they
were not proper dwellers, but such as came to worship at Jerusalem from those
far Countries at the Feasts of the Passover and Pentecost; and so had been
continuing there some good time) It is true that in the usual Greek (...) and
(...), signify a durable mansion; But with the Hellenists, in whose Dialect
the Scripture speaks, they are used indifferently for a stay of a shorter or
longer time; that is, for to sojourn, as well as to dwell; as these two
examples out of the Septuagint will make manifest: one, Genesis 27. 44. where
Rebecca says to her younger son Jacob, Son arise, and flee unto Laban thy
brother to Haran, (...), and tarry with him a few days, until thy brothers
fury turn away; (...) is here to tarry but a few days. Another is in the first
Book of Kin. 17. 20. where Eliah cries unto the Lord, saying, O Lord my God,
have thou also brought evil upon the widow, (...), with whom I sojourn, by
slaying her son? here (...) is to sojourn only: In a word, (...), and (...)
answer to the Hebrew verb (...), which signifies any stay, or remaining in a
place.

Next for the persons here specified, Jews out of every Nation under heaven;
for the right understanding thereof we are to know that before the last
dispersion of the Jews by the Romans, after their Temple and City were
destroyed by Titus (which at the time of this story was not, nor many years
after it) there had been already two Captivities, and great dispersions of that
Nation, besides some smaller scatterings: The first was of the ten Tribes, by
Salmanassar King of Assyria, who is said to have planted them in Hala, and
Habor, by the river of Gozan, and in the Cities of the Medes; and these never
(I mean any considerable part of them) returned to dwell again in their own
Country; of these therefore we are (chiefly) to understand, to have been those
which the story here calls Parthians, Medes, and Elamites; Elamites, that is,
Persians of the Province of Elymais. For in those Countries which these names
comprehend, were the ten Tribes placed by the Assyrian, and there still dwelt
or thereabouts, in our Savior and his Apostles time, and long after. S.
Hierome upon those words in the third of Joel, Et Filios Judah and Filios
Jerusalem vendidistis Filits Graecorum, (which he understands of the Captivity
by Vespasian and Titus) tells us thus much; Filit (says he) Judah and Jerusalem,
nequaquam Israel and december Tribuum, qui usque hodie in Medorum urbibus and
montibus habitant. The second Captivity was by Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon,
of the two Tribes, Judah and Benjamin, more then a hundred years after that of
the ten. Now a good part of these at seventy years end returned again, under
Cyrus and his successors, to dwell again in their own land, re-edified the
Temple, and City of Jerusalem, re-erected their Commonwealth, which continued
till our Saviors time and a little after. Notwithstanding all those that were
Captives in Babylon returned not: it may be not much more then the half of
them; certain it is, that a great number of them stayed there still, those
especially which were rich, and so well accommodated, having no mind to stir;
whence in our Saviors, and the Apostles times, there were an innumerable
company of them in those parts, where they flourished with Academies, and
Schools, and had Doctors not inferior to those of Jerusalem it self: Yea, from
them proceeded the Chaldee Paraphrase; and that great Doctor and Patriarch of
Rabbis, R. Hillel. Of these therefore, we have reason to think, were those
which are here enumerated by the name of dwellers in Mesopotamia, (...): where
note by the way that (...), are comprehended in the number of those, whom my
Text says were (...), which confirms my interpretation, that (...) there
signifies sojourning, and not dwelling, for that they could not be said to
dwell in both places.

These two dispersions beyond the river Euphrates, how numerous they were, in
our Savior and the Apostles times, we may gather from those words of King
Agrippa, in Josephus, in that Oration he made unto the Jews before that fatal
siege, dissuading them from rebelling against the Romans, their party being too
much too weak to maintain themselves against that mighty Empire: Quos igitur
(says he) ex orb non habitato socios in Bellum assumetis? Siquidem omnes, qui
in orb habitabili degunt, Romani sunt: Nisi forte quis vestrum spes suas ultra
Euphratem porrigat, and in Adiabenorum Regione Gentiles suos aestimet
adjuturos; (Adiabenorum Regio, is that of Assyria; he goes on) Verum nec illi
propter irrationabilem causam tanto se Bello implicabunt: nec, si tam probroso
operi assensum darent, Parthus tamen sineret. Mark then, that they were under
the dominion of the Parthians, Josephus himself testifies as much in his
Prologue to his Tract de Bello Iudaico; where he informs us, that that History
of his he had first penned patria lingua, for the use of those of his Nation in
the East; which he thought soon after to publish in Greek, for the better
information of the Greeks and Romans concerning the true gests of that war.
Indignum esse ratus (says he) Parthos quidem and Babylonios, Arabum, que
remotissimos, and ultra Euphratem Gentis nostrae incolas, itemque Adiabenos mea
diligentia vere cognoscere unde coepisset Bellum, quantisque cladibus
constitisset, quove modo desiisset: Graecos vero, and Romanorum aliquos, qui
militiam secuti non essent, figmentis seu adulationibus captos, ista nescire:
Observe here the rehearsal of his Nation; Babylonii, Parthi, Arabes,
Transeuphrateni or Mesopotamienses, and Adiabeni: Besides he tells us in the
same place, Quod Iudaei quidem cunctos, etiam qui trans Euphratem essent,
Gentiles suos secum rebellaturos esse crediderant.

Besides these two captivities by Salmanassar and Nebuchadnezzar; the first
whereof never returned again into their own land, and the second but in part;
there happened a third Captivity and dispersion in the days of Ptolomeus Lag^^
one of the Greek Kings, reigning in Egypt, who surprising the City of
Jerusalem, carried many of the People of the Country, of the offspring of
those who returned from Babylon, captives into Egypt, planting them at
Alexandria, and the places thereabouts; whom many others followed of their own
accord, partly allured by the Kings favor, (who gave them equal privilege
with those of Alexandria) and partly by the fertility of the Country: so that
this Colony became a very great one. These were called Hellenists, because they
spoke the Greek tongue, and used the Translation of the Septuagint (which was
made in Egypt) in their Synagogues. Of these three principal dispersions,
came those lesser scatterings in all parts of the Roman Empire, and elsewhere.
From that of Babylon and Mesopotamia, was spread that of Pontus, Galatia,
Cappadocia, Asia, Bithynia, to which S. Peter as an Apostle of the
Circumcision, writes his two Epistles; which may be gathered, because in his
second Epistle, he salutes them from Babylon, which was their Metropolis. The
Church, says he, at Babylon, elected together with you, saluteth you; that is,
the Church of the circumcision there. From those of Alexandria and Egypt, were
derived those plantations in Lybia and Cyrene, and all other Hellenists
whatsoever in several parts of the Roman Empire. Add to these, that many of
those of Judaea it self, that could not live well at home, upon some occasion
or other, either alluring them or constraining them, seated themselves abroad
among the Gentiles, and in their Cities, being together with themselves under
the same Dominion of the Roman Empire. Insomuch that King Agrippa, in that
forementioned oration of his, before that last siege, dissuading them of
Judaea from rebelling against the Romans, in regard of the evil they might
bring thereby, not upon themselves only, but upon their whole Nation
wheresoever living among the Gentiles, sticks not to say, (...): For there is
no people in the whole world, which has not some part of ours dwelling amongst
them; marvel not therefore, that S. Luke says in my Text, Jews of every
Nation under heaven.

All this is confirmed out of the New Testament it self; forasmuch as before
the last Captivity by Titus, which was not till almost forty years after our
Saviors Ascension, and whilst their Commonwealth in the holy Land, was yet
standing; we read that almost in every City of the Gentiles, whither the
Apostles came to preach the Gospel, they found Jews with their Synagogues in
them: To which add that S. James directs his Epistle, To the twelve Tribes
scattered abroad, or as the Greek has it, (...), as I have also before noted,
that S. Peter does his unto the dispersion of Asia.

This is that I had to speak for the illustration of this Story, and Text: out
of which besides the right understanding of Scripture, whereto it conduces,
you may observe these four things: First, the wisdom and providence of Almighty
God, in so ordering the first publication of the Gospel, that the fame thereof,
and of that convincing miracle, which gave authority thereunto, might be
carried unto all Nations, by so many both ear and eyewitnesses of the same as
these Jews were.

Secondly, a probable reason why the Apostles were so ignorant at the first, as
they seem to have been, that the Gospel was to be peached unto the Gentiles,
notwithstanding our Saviors Commission unto them; Go preach this Gospel unto
all Nations. For it may be, they thought this command might be satisfied, in
preaching the Gospel to those of the Circumcision only, which were of every
Nation under heaven.

Thirdly, the Elogium here given to those who made conscience (as we speak) or
Religion, to come unto the House of God to worship; they were (...), so says
my text, Thete were sojourning in Jerusalem, Jews, devout men, etc. For there
apppears no other respect why they are so called, but because they came so long
a journey to worship God in his House or Temple at Jerusalem.

Fourthly, the blessed opportunities and means for salvation which they meet
with, which come thither to worship. For had these Jews staid at home, as the
rest of their brethren did, they had not bin partakers of such a blessing; nor
witnesses of so wonderful a miracle for confirmation of their faith, as now
they were.

1 COR. 9. 14. 1 Cor. 9. 14.
Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live
of the Gospel; (...).
MY purpose, in choosing this Text, is not to make the maintenance of the
Ministry under the Gospel, the direct aim of my discourse; but only to enquire
what is meant by these last words, (...)* Which that we may the more readily
and certainly find, let us examine, and consider the (...), whereof the words
I have now read, are the (...) Know ye not, says the Apostle, that [(...)]
those that minister about holy things, [(...)] do eat of the holy thing, or,
as we turn it, of the things of the Temple: [(...)] they which wait at the
Altar, [(...)] are fellow-shares with the Altar? [(...)] So has the Lord
ordained, that they which preach the Gospel should (...).

Here, (...), those who were employed about holy things, are the Levites who
lived (...), of the holy thing, or if you had rather it should be a
substantive) of the Temple: that is, of that which belonged thereto; namely, of
the Tithes which belonged to the Temple, but were no offering of the Altar.
(...), they who did incumbere, or assidere altari, were the Priests,
whoseproper office it was to offer sacrifices thereon, and hadpart of the same
for their proper maintenance; as the breast and left shoulder before it was
burnt, and after so much as was reserved from burning: so they did (...), as
the Apostle speaks, they were fellow-shares with the Altar; the Altar having
one part of the Offering, they another.

Thus you see, the Apostle in both, suits the maintenance with the office: The
office of the Levites was (...), their maintenance, (...), the holy thing, or
the revenue of the Temple; (...), they eat of the (...). The Office of the
Priests, (...); their maintenance, (...), to share with the Altar. Now then
must not the Apodosis answer the Protasis? what manner of similitude, what
analogy will there be else? Ergo, as (...) is the office of the Ministers of the
Gospel, so is their maintenance noted by (...). Those therefore who interpret
these words, as if (...) in the last place, were taken in no other sense, then
it was in the first; namely, to note the function or calling of the Ministers;
(as if the sense were no other, but that the Ministers of the Gospel, whose
calling it is to preach the Gospel, should get their living by their Calling of
preaching the Gospel;) make S. Paul the Author of a lame and inconsequent
similitude, whose Apodosis answers not unto his Protasis. For what an (...),
what an even so, or analogy would this be? The Levites lived of the holy
portion, or revenue of the Temple, as their (...), or wages; Even so the
Ministers of the Gospel must live by there Calling and Function: The Priests
were maintained out of the share they had of the Offerings of the Altar; Even
just so, the Ministers of the Gospel must live by their Calling and Function of
Preaching the Gospel: May not any one see that the Apodosis answers not the
Protasis? For that speaks of the wages, this of the service, for which the
wages is due. Well therefore, as in the Protasis the wages was compared with
the work; so must it be in the Apodosis too; and consequently (...), must here
express the wages, as (...), does the work.

But now here is the quaere; If (...), note not the function, but the wages,
and maintenance due to the Euangelick Ministers, in what notion then is (...)
here to be taken, and how to be expounded? Oecumenius would have (...), in this
last place to signify (...), the believers of the Gospel, (...), and the
meaning to be, that those who preach the Gospel, should be maintained by those
which believe the Gospel: But this would make our Apodosis to answer the
Protasis, little better then the former: For that speaks of the maintenance,
and wages of the Levites, and Priests, not a word of the maintainers. Philo de
Sacerdotu honoribus. (...), etc. (...)
Besides, to speak properly, it is not true, that the people maintain the
Ministers: They are not their Ministers, but Gods; and he maintains them, out
of his own revenue, and not at other men's charges. Quis militat suis
stipendiis? (says our Apostle, at his entrance upon this Argument;) Who goes
to war at his own charges? Now I ask; Cujus stipendiis militat, qui militat?
nonne Imperatoris? To which purpose note also by the way, that it is not said
here (as we translate it,) So has God ordained, that those which preach the
Gospel, should live of the Gospel: But, So has God appointed, or given order
to those which preach the Gospel, that they should live of the Gospel; that is,
Non dicit Dominu^ mandasse aliis, ut eos alerent, sed mandasse ipsis, ut ex
Euangelio viverent.

But to return again to the interpretation of (...), which others therefore had
rather take here for (...), for that which in the Gospel is consecrate to God;
to wit, as the Priests and Levites had their maintenance Jol. 18. 7. The
Priesthood of the Lord is their [the Levites] inheritance.
out of that which was offered unto God in the Law: So God had ordained, that
the Ministers of the Gospel should be maintained of that which is consecrate to
him in the Gospel. And this sense is straight and good.

But what need we fly to a Trope, when the natural sense of the word (...)
will serve our turn; yea do it much better? For howsoever in the New Testament
it most commonly signifies good tidings; yet, in other Greek Writers, the more
usual signification in the singular number is (...), praemium quod datur
laetum afferenti nuncium; the gift or reward wont to be given for good tidings.
Homer (Odyss. 14.) brings in Ulysses in a poor travelers disguise, stipulating
with his servant Eumaeus, what his reward should be, for the good news he
promised to tell him of his Masters life and speedy return, (...) let this be
my (...), or Reward, says he, (...) To whom Eumaeus answers, (...) Neither am
I able to give such an (...), neither will Ulysses ever come home again.
Plutarch (in his De gloria Atheniensium) relates, that the Lacedaemonians to one
that brought them tidings of the victory at Mantinea, having been no actor, but
a spectator only, sent for an (...), only a dish of meat from one of their
common suppers, called Phiditia: The words are, (...). The same Author (within
three or four lines after) affirms, that Historians, who relate and describe
battles and victories in such perspicuous styles, deserve an (...) from those
who first read them: And (in his Demetrius) he tells, that when one Aristodemus
brought news to King Antigonus, of a notable victory his party had obtained
against Ptolomaeus Lagi, but put the King first in great perplexity, by
discovering nothing, either by word or countenance, what his tidings were, till
he came to the Kings presence, then saying, Salve Rex Antigone, vicimus praelio
navali Regem Ptolomaeum: The King answered, Et tu quoque hercle salve; quia
vero ita nos torsisti, lues poenam, nam tardius (...) accipies; which is a
sufficient testimony both of the use of the word, and the custom. Cicero (in
one of his Epistles Ad Atticum) uses the Li. 2. Ep. 8.
plural number: O suaves tuas Epistolas, (says he) uno tempore mihi datas
duas! Quibus (...) quae reddam nescio; deberi quidem plane fateor.

Besides, in the plural number, (...), signifies a sacrifice for good tidings;
Hence Plutarch (in his Phocion) has (...) Isocrates (in Areopagitico) (...),
ob tot successus bis quidem sacrificavimus (...) Xenophon (in his Hellanica)
(...). To conclude; it is apparent by these examples, that (...) signifies a
gift, or tribute due for good tidings; whether as an offering to the Gods, the
Authors, or as a reward to men, the messengers and bringers.

Now the most blessed and happy tidings that ever came to the ears of the sons
of men, is salvation by Jesus Christ our Lord; whereof his Priests and
Ministers are the daily messengers: Is there not then an (...) due for this?
And is not this that our Apostle means when he says; The Lord has ordained
that they who preach the Gospel should (...). So that which of old was required
only for acknowledgement of the Divine Dominion, under the bondage of the Law,
is now turned into the nature of an (...) in the liberty of the Gospel; I mean
that which we offer now unto God for the maintenance of the Evangelical
Ministry, and other uses of his service: The sense is most fit and agreeable,
and makes the Apostles expression (if so understood) passing elegant.

But you will say; What probability is there the Apostle should use (...) in
this notion? For though profane Authors do so, yet the Scriptures meaning,
both here and elsewhere, is to be measured by its own Dialect. Have therefore
the Hebrew, the Chaldee, the Septuagint any such notion as this? I answer, Yes;
all three of them. For in the Hebrew, (...), the only word for good tidings,
signifies also Praemium boni nuncii; Yea, being not above five times found in
the Old Testament, some will have it thrice taken in that signification, and
twice will be easily yielded them. Likewise in the Chaldee, (...), and (...),
signify as well the one as the other; both nuncium and nuncii praemium. As for
the Septuagint, the word (...) is but thrice found with them, and once so
apparently in this signification, as leaves no place for contradiction. It is 2 Samuel 4. 10. where they have, (...), Cui oportet me dedisse Euangelia. They are
the words of King David, when Rechab and Baanah brought Ishbosheths head unto
him; When one told me, says he, Behold Saul is dead, (thinking he had brought
good tidings) I took hold of him, and slew him in Ziklag, when I should have
given a reward for his tidings. The Hebrew word rendered here reward for good
tidings, is (...): The Septuagint, as I said before, have (...). The Vulgar, or
S. Hierome, mercedem pro nuncio: The Chaldee Paraphrast, Donum boni nuncii.

Thus you see, this notion was familiar to all the Languages that S. Paul was
brought up in. Why should it then be improbable, he should use it when he had
occasion? And no marvel it is to be found no oftener; For, unless it be in this
Chapter, in the whole New Testament the thing it self (reward for good tidings)
is never mentioned, intimated, or alluded to. How then could the word be used?
But in this Chapter, me thinks I hear it used a second time, ver. 23. I will
only propound it to your consideration, and so conclude.

The matter stands thus; S. Paul, though he received no reward at the hands of
the Corinthians for his pains in making known the glad tidings of salvation
unto them, but did it gratis to them-ward: yet he looked for an (...) from God,
stored up in the heavens, for all his faithful Messengers, and to be received
at the great Day: In expectation whereof, he not only preached the Gospel to
them freely, but endured all things, and made himself a servant to all: (...)
(says he) (...) this I do for the (...), that I might be partaker thereof.
What (...) should it be, that Paul here aimed to be partaker of? Surely, it
should seem (...) here notes some Proemium, even by that which immediately
follows; Know ye not that they which run in a race, run all, but one receives
the brabeum; So run that ye may obtain. I leave it to your better meditations,
and so conclude.

FINIS.
DIATRIBAE. OR, A continuation of certain DISCOURSES ON SUNDRY TEXTS OF
SCRIPTURE: Delivered upon several occasions,

BY JOSEPH MEDE, B. D. late Fellow of Christ's College in CAMBRIDGE.

Never before published, being exactly printed according to the Authors own
Manuscripts.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for JOHN CLARK, and are to be sold at his Shop under
S. Peter's Church in Cornhill.

MDCXLVIII.

The Texts newly added.
LUKE 2. 13, 14. AND suddenly there was with the Angel a multitude of the
heavenly Host, praising God, and saying, Glory be to God on high, (or, in the
highest) and on earth peace, good will toward men. page 241 MATTHEW. 7. 21. Not
every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
heaven; but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven. 264 ACTS 10.
4. And he said unto him, Thy prayers and thine Alms are come up for a
memorial before God: Or, (as it is verse 31^) are had in remembrance. 285
PSALM 112. 6. The Righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance. 311 NEHEM. 13.
14, 22. Remember me, O my God, concerning this, and wipe not out my good deeds
[Heb. (...)] that I have done for the house of my God, and for the offices
thereof. And spare me according to the greatness of thy mercy. 324 MATTHEW. 10.
41. He that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a
Prophets reward. 356 DEUTERONOMY. 33. 8. And of Levi he said, Let thy Thummim and thy
Vrim be with thy Holy One. 350 ACTS 5. 3, 4, 5. But Peter said, Ananias, why
has Satan filled thine heart to lie to the Holy Ghost, and to purloin of the
price of the land? Whiles it remained, was it not thine own? and after it was
sold, was it not in thy power? why have thou conceived this thing in thine
heart? Thou have not lied unto men, but unto God. And Ananias hearing these
words, fell down and gave up the Ghost, etc. 379 JOEL 2. 17. Let the Priests,
the Ministers of the Lord, weep between the Porch and the Altar, and say, Spare
thy people, o Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach. 404 GENESIS 3. 13,
14, 15. And the Lord God said unto the woman, What is this that thou have done?
And the woman said, The Serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. And the Lord God
said unto the Serpent, Because thou have done this, thou art cursed above all
cattle, and above every beast of the field: upon thy belly shall thou go, and
dust shall thou eat all the days of thy life. And I will put enmity between
thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed: It shall bruise thy
head, and thou shall bruise his heel. 414 MALACH. 1. 11. For from the rising of
the Sun, even unto the going down of the same, my Name shall be great among the
Gentiles; and in every place Incense shall be offered unto my Name, and a pure
offering: for my Name shall be great among the Heathen, says the Lord of
Hosts. 471
Four other Treatises by the same Author formerly Printed: viz.
1. The Name ALTAR, or (...) THPION. 2. CHURCHES, that is, Appropriate places
for Christian Worship. 1 COR. 11. 22. Have ye not Houses to eat and drink in?
[(...);] Or despise ye the CHVRCH of God? 31. B. 3. The Reverence of GODS
HOUSE. ECCLESIASTES 5. 1. Look to thy foot [or feet] when thou come to the
House of God; and be more ready to obey, then to offer the sacrifice of fools;
for they know not that they do evil. 81. B. 4. Daniels WEEKS. DAN. 9. 24, 25,
26, 27.
24. Seventy Weeks are allotted for thy people, and for thy holy City, to
finish transgression, and make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for
iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to fulfill Vision and
Prophecy, and to anoint the most Holy. 140. B. 25. Also know and understand,
that from the going forth of the Commandment to cause to return and to build
Jerusalem, unto MESSIAH the PRINCE, shall be Sevens of Weeks; even threescore
and two Weeks; the street shall be built again and the Wall, even in a strait
of Times. 146. B. 26. And after threescore and two weeks shall MESSIAH be cut
off, but not for himself, and the people of the Prince that shall come, shall
destroy the City, and the Sanctuary; and the end thereof shall be with a flood,
and unto the end of the War Desolations are determined. 158. B. 27. And he
shall confirm the Covenant with many for one Week: and in the midst of the Week
he shall cause the Sacrifice and the Oblation to cease, and for the
overspreading of Abominations, he shall make it desolate, even until the
consummation; and that determined, shall be poured upon the desolate. 163. B.

A Luke 2. 13, 14.
CONTINVATION OF CERTAIN DISCOURSES ON Sundry Texts of SCRIPTURE.
LUKE 2. 13, 14. 13. And suddenly there was with the Angel a multitude of the
heavenly Host, praising God, and saying, 14. Glory be to God on high, (or, in
the highest) and on earth peace, good will toward men.
AT the Creation of the world, when God laid the foundations of the earth, and
stretched out his line thereon, the stars in the morning (as God himself
describes it Job 38. 7.) sang together, and all the sons of God (that is, the
holy Angels) shouted for joy. This in my Text is so like it, that a man would
think some new Creation were in hand; nor were it much wide of truth to affirm
it: for if ever there were a day wherein the Almighty Power, the incomparable
Wisdom, the wonderful Goodness of God again the second time appeared, as it
did at the worlds Creation, it was this day, whereof S. Luke our Evangelist now
treats; when the Son of God took upon him our flesh, and was born of a
Virgin, to repair the breach between God and man, and make all things new. The
news of which restoration was no sooner heard and made known to the Shepherds
by an Angel sent from heaven, but suddenly the heavenly Host descended from
their celestial mansions, and sung this Carol of joy; Glory be to God on high,
welcome peace on earth, good will toward men. A Song renowned both for the
singularity of the first example, (for until this time, unless it were once
in a Prophetical Vision, we shall not find a Song of Angels heard by men in
all the Scripture) and from the custom of the Church, who afterward took it up
in her Liturgy, and has continued the singing thereof ever since the days of
the Apostles until these of ours. Yet perhaps it is not so commonly
understood, as usually said or chaunted, and therefore will be worth our labor
to inquire into the meaning thereof, and hear such instructions as may be
learned therefrom. Which that we may the better do, I will consider first the
Singers or Chaunters, The heavenly Host: Secondly, the Caroll or Hymn it self,
Gloria in excelsis Deo: Glory be to God on high, etc.

For the first, the heavenly host here spoken of, is an Army of holy Angels:
For the Host of Heaven in the language of Scripture is twofold, Visible and
Invisible. The Visible Host are the Stars, which stand in their array like an
Army, Deuteronomy. 4. 19. Lest thou lift up thine eyes (says the Lord there) unto
heaven, and when thou see the Sun, Moon, and Stars, even all the Host of
heaven, should be driven to worship and serve them. The Invisible Host are
the Angels, the heavenly Guard; according to that of Micaiah, 1 King. 22. 19. I
saw the Lord sitting upon his Throne, and all the Host of heaven standing by
him, on his right hand and on his left. So Psalm. 103. Bless the Lord ye his
Angels, that excel in strength, that do his Commandments. Bless the Lord all
ye his Hosts, ye ministers of his that do his pleasure: Where the latter words
do but vary that which is expressed in the former. From this it is that the
Lord Jehovah, the true and only God, is so often styled the Lord or God of
Sabbath, or of Hosts, that is, King both of Stars and Angels: according to that
Nehem. 9. Thou art God alone; -- and the Host of Heaven worshippeth thee. By
which Title He is distinguished from the Gods of the Nations, who were some of
the Host, to wit, of the Stars or Angels, but none of them the Lord of Hosts
himself. For the same reason, and with the same meaning and sense, in the Books
written after the Captivity, he is styled Deus coeli, the God of heaven, as in
Ezra, Nehemiah, Daniel; in which Books, together with the last of Chronicles,
the title of Deus Sabbath is not to be found, but the title of Deus Coeli only,
and as may seem taken up for some reason in stead of the other.

But to return to what we have in hand: It was the Angelical Host, as ye hear,
who sang this Song of joy and praise unto the most High God. And wherefore? For
any restitution or addition of happiness to themselves? No; but for Peace on
Earth, and Good Will toward men. He that was now born took not upon him the
Nature of Angels, but of men: He came not into the world to save Angels, but
for the salvation of men. Nor was the state of Angels to receive advancement in
glory by his coming, but the state of men; and that too in such a sort as
might seem to impeach the dignity, and dim the luster of those excellent
creatures, when an inferior nature, the nature of man, was now to be advanced
into a Throne of Divine Majesty, and to become Head and King not only of men,
but of the heavenly Host it self. O ye blessed Angels! what did these tidings
concern you, that ruined mankind should be restored again and taken into
favor; whereas those of your own Host, which fell likewise, remained still in
that gulf of perdition, whereinto their sin had plunged them, without hope of
mercy or like promise of Deliverance? what did it add to your eminent Dignity,
the most excellent of the creatures of God, that the Nature of man should be
advanced above yours? that at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow, of
things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and things under the Earth?

The Observation therefore which this Act of the Angels first presents unto us,
is the ingenuous goodness and sweet disposition of those immaculate and
blessed spirits, in whose bosoms Envy, the Image of the Devil and deadly
poison of charity, has no place at all: For if any inclination to this
cankered passion had been in these heavenly creatures, never such an occasion
offered, nor greater could be, to stir it up to envy. But heaven admits of no
such passion, nor could such a torment consist with the blissful condition of
those who dwell therein. It is the smoke of that bottomless pit, a native of
hell, the character and cognizance of those Apostate Angels, which kept not
their first estate, but left their own habitation, and are reserved for chains
of everlasting darkness. These indeed grieve no less at the happiness of men
then the Angels joy; witness the name of their Prince Satan, which signifies
the Fiend, or malicious one, who out of envy overthrew mankind in the
beginning; out of envy he and all his fellow-fiends are so restless and
indefatigable to seduce him still.

The Use of this Observation will not be far to seek, if we remember the
admonition our Savior has given us in the prayer left unto his Church; which
is, To make the Angels the pattern of our imitation in doing the will of our
heavenly Father; for so he teaches us to pray, Let thy will be done in earth,
as it is done in heaven; that is, Grant us o Lord to do thy will here, as thy
holy Angels do it there. And as we should imitate them in all things else; so
in this affection toward the happiness and prosperity of others. And good
reason I think, if we mean at all to approve our selves unto God our Father,
why we should endeavor rather to be like unto them, then unto Devils: But in
nothing can we be more like them, then in this, to rejoice at the good, and not
repine at the happiness of our brethren: Hoc enim Angelicum est; This is the
Character of the Angelical nature, and consequently of those, who one day
shall have fellowship with them. To be contrarily affected Diabolicum est, the
badge and brand of Devils and Fiends; and those who wear their Livery, reason
good they should keep them company. Let every one therefore examine his own
heart concerning this point, that he may learn upon what terms he stands with
God, and what he may promise himself of the blessedness to come. Do the gifts
of God? Does his favor or blessing vouchsafed to thy brother, when thou see
or hear of them, torment and crucify thy soul? Do thou make their
happiness thy misery? Is thine eye evil to thy Brother, because Gods is good?
If this be so, without doubt thy heart is not right before God; nor does his
Spirit, but the spirit of Devils or Fiends reign therein. But if the contrary
appear in any reasonable measure, with a desire to increase it; (for we must
not look to attain the perfection of Angels in this life, but in some measure
and degree only) if thou can rejoice at another good, though it concerns not
thy self; the Spirit of God rests upon thee: For emulations and envyings (says
the Apostle, Gal. 5.) are the fruits of the flesh, but the fruits of the Spirit
are (...) and (...), kindness and goodness: So he calls the opposite virtues
to those former vices.

But as any good that betides our brother ought to affect us with some degree
of joy, and not with grief and envy; so chiefly, and most of all his spiritual
good, and that which concerns his salvation, ought so to do. This was that the
holy Angels praised God for in my Text, on the behalf of men; that unto them a
Savior was born, who should save them from their sins, and reconcile them unto
God. Which sweet disposition of those good and blessed spirits our Savior
himself further witnesses, when he says, (Luke 15. 17.) There is joy in
heaven (namely, among the holy Angels) for one sinner that repents. But is
there any man, will you say, such a son of Beliall, as will not do this, will
not imitate the holy Angels in this? Judge ye: There is an evil disease which
commonly attends upon Sects and Differences in opinion: that as men are curious
and inquisitive into the lives and actions of the adverse party; so are they
willing to find them faulty, and rejoice at their falls and slips, hear and
relate them with delight; namely, because they suppose it makes much for their
own side, that the contrary should by such means be scandalized, and the
Patrons and followers thereof disreputed. But should that be the matter of our
grief, whereat the Angels joy; or that the matter of our joy, whereat the
Angels grieve? How is this to do our Fathers will on earth, as the Angels do in
heaven? Nay, if this be not to put on the robes of darkness, and to shake
hands with hellish fiends, I know not what is. O my soul, come not thou into
their secret; unto their assembly mine honor be not thou united.

There is another Lesson yet more to be learned from this act of the Angels;
namely, that if they glorify God for our happiness, and the favor of God
toward us in Christ, much more should we glorify and magnify his goodness
our selves, to whom solely this Birth, and the benefit of this Birth redounds.
If they sing, Glory be to God on high, for his favor toward men; we to whom
such favor is shown, must not hold our peace; for shall they for us, and not
we for our selves? No, the Quire of heaven did but set us in, we are to bear a
part, and it should be a chief part, since the best part is ours. As therefore
the Church in her public Service, has ever since kept it up: so must every
one of us in particular, never let it go down or dye on our hands.

Thus much of the Quaere; Now come we to the Antheme or Song it self: whose
contents are two; First, the Doxology or Praise; Glory be to God on high.
Secondly, a gratulation rendering the reason thereof; Because of Peace on earth,
Good will toward men. For the conjunction (...) is not to be taken here for a
copulative, but as Vau is frequently in the Ita Zonar. ad c. 74. Trullan.
Hebrew, for a conjunction causall, or for (...). Glory to God in the highest;
for that there is Peace on earth, Good Will toward men. Or if we retain the
copulative sense, yet we must understand the words following as spoken by way
of gratulation: Glory be to God on high, and welcome peace on earth, good will
toward men. Or both causally and gratulatorily thus, Glory be to God in the
highest; for (o factum been!) there is peace on earth, and good will toward
men.

To begin with the first, the Doxology or praise; Glory be to God in the
Highest: that is, Let the Angels glorify him, who dwells on high: for (...) is
to be referred to Glory, and not to God; the sense being, glorified be God by
those on high; and not God, who dwells on high, be glorified. This may appear by
the like expression in the 148. Psalm, whence this Glorification seems to be
borrowed: Praise ye the Lord from the heavens, praise him (...), ^rat^e ye him
all his Angels, praise ye him all his Host. Therefore Iunius for Praise ye the
Lord from the Heavens, has Laudate cum coelites: The Chaldee, for Laudate eum
in excelsis; Laudate eum Angeli excelsi. In like manner here, Gloria in
excelsis ^eo, are the words of the Angelical Quire, inciting themselves and
all the Host to give glory and praise unto God for these wonderful tidings.
Now therefore let us see what this Glory is; and how it is given to God.

To tell you every signification of the word Glory in Scripture, might perhaps
distract the hearer, but would inform him little. Nor will it be to purpose to
reckon up every signification it has, when it is spoken of God: I will
therefore name only the two principal ones: And first, Glory when it is
referred to God, often signifies the Divine Presence, or (...), as in this
Chapter, a little before my Text, when it is said, The Glory of the Lord shone
round about the Shepherds, and they were sore afraid. But this is not the
signification in my Text, but another which I shall now tell you. For Glory
besides signifies in Scripture the high and glorious Supereminency or Majesty
of God, which consists in his threefold Supremacy of Power, of Wisdom, and
of Goodness. And as words of eminency and dignity with us (as Majesty,
Highness, Honor, Worship) are used for the persons themselves to whom such
Dignity belongs, (as when we say, His Majesty, his Highness, his Honor, his
Worship:) so in the Scripture, and among the Hebrews, His Glory, or the Glory
of the Lord, is used to note the Divine Essence, or Deity it self. As in 2 Pet.
1. 17. There came a voice (says S. Peter) from the excellent Glory; (that is,
from God the Father) This is my welbeloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Romans
1. The Gentiles are said to have changed the glory of the incorruptible God,
into the likeness of things corruptible. As it is said (in the 106. Psalm. ver.
20.) of the Israelites in the Wilderness, That they changed their Glory into
the similitude of an Ox that eats Jer. 2. 11.
grass. S. John cap. 1. 14. of his Gospel says of the Son, We beheld his
glory, the glory as of the only begotten Son of God. According to which sense
he is called Heb. 1. The brightness of his Fathers glory, and the express
Image of his person; where the latter words are an exposition of the former,
Image expounding brightness, and person or substance expounding glory.

If Glory therefore signify the Divine Majesty or Greatness; to glorify or
give glory unto God is nothing else but to acknowledge this Majesty or
greatness of His; namely, his supereminent Power, his Wisdom, and Goodness:
for in the peerlesse supereminency of these three, (under which all his other
Attributes are comprehended) his glorious Majesty consists. Take this
withal; That all the religious service and worship we give unto God, (whether
we praise him, pray, or give thanks unto him) is nothing else but the
acknowledging of this glory, either in deed or word; namely, by confessing it,
or doing some act whereby we acknowledge it. To come to particulars: By our
Faith we confess his Wisdom and Truth; by our thanksgiving, his Goodness and
Mercy: when we pray, we acknowledge his Power and Dominion; and therefore the
form of prayer our Savior taught us, concludes, For thine is the kingdom,
power, and glory. In praise we confess all these or any of them, according to
that in the Hymn of the Church, Te Deum laudamus, Te Dominum confitemur; We
praise thee, O God, we acknowledge thee to be the Lord. All which is evident by
those forms of glorification set down in the Apocalypse, which are nothing else
but express and particular acknowledgements of the greatness or Majesty of
God, and his peerlesse prerogatives. When the four Wights are said to have
given glory, honor and thanks to him that sat upon the Throne: what was their
Ditty but this? Thou art worthy, o Lord, to receive glory and honor and power;
for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were
created. When the Lamb opened the book with 7. Seals, the Wights, the Elders,
and every creature in heaven, in earth, and under the earth, sung, Worthy is
the Lamb to receive power, and riches, and strength, and honor, and blessing.
And again; Blessing, honor, glory, and power be unto him that sits upon the
throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever. In which we may observe the whole
glorification to consist in the acknowledgement of these three sovereign
prerogatives of the Divine Majesty, his Power, his Wisdom, his Goodness: The
two first, Power and Wisdom, are express; and Riches and Strength belong to
Power: The third is contained in (...), Blessing, or thanksgiving; which is
nothing else but the confession of the Divine goodness.

Hence it is, that the Septuagint and Vulgar Latin commonly render the words
(...) and (...), which signify to praise, and glorify, (...), confiteor:
Confitemini Domino quoniam bonus, quoniam in saeculum misericordia ejus. Psalm.
106. 107. 136. Confitebor tibi Domino in toto cord meo, quoniam audisti verba
oris mei. Psalm. 138. Confitemini Domino, and invocate nomen ejus. Psalm. 105.
and the like. And in the 148. Psalm. Confessio ejus super coelum and terram:
that is, His glory is above the heaven and the earth. The Holy Ghost in the New
Testament uses the same language, Luc. 11. 25. (...), because thou have hid
these things from the wise and prudent, and revealed them to babes; where we
have, I thank thee o Father, Beza and Erasmus read, Gloriam tibi tribuo; which
I think is the better. So also in this Chapter Luke 2. 38. it is said of Anna,
(...), Deo lauds gratiasque agebat. So Heb. 13. 15. By him therefore, (that
is, by Christ) let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that
is, (...). the fruit of our lips confessing to his Name. By all which it is
evident, that to praise and give glory unto God, whether by praise at large, or
prayer and thanksgiving in special, is nothing else (as I have said) but to
confess and acknowledge his peerlesse Majesty over all and in all; which the
Scripture calls his glory. And if ever there were a work of God, wherein all
these peerlesse Prerogatives of Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, all together
appeared in the highest degree, it was undoubtedly in this wonderful work of
the Incarnation of the Son of God for man's redemption: well therefore might the
heavenly Host sing, Gloria in excelsis Deo; The Power, the Wisdom and Goodness
of the glorious God be acknowledged by the holy Angels and all the Host of
heaven for ever and ever. This is the meaning of the Doxology.

Come we now to the gratulation, which contains the cause thereof; glory be to
God on high; for (o factum been! o happy news!) there is peace on earth,
good will toward men. One and the same thing two ways expressed: for it is an
Apposition, or (...), the latter words declaring the meaning of the former;
Peace on earth, that is, good will toward men, (...). 'Ev for (...); to wit,
in imitation of the Hebrew construction, where (...) and (...) verbs, which
signify (...), and (...) the nown signifying (...), are construed with (...),
which is (...) in Greek, and accordingly both the Septuagint and New Testament
express the same. But the Vulgar Interpreter reads here, Pax in terris,
hominibus bonae voluntatis, as if the Greek were (...), and not (...), as now
all our Copies constantly read, and I believe ever did: yet Beza seems here to
favor the Vulgar Latin, expounding Homines bonae voluntatis of those whom God
wills well to; to wit, of the Elect, to whom this Peace by Christ belongs: and
from the convenience of this sense, inclines to believe, that the Greek
anciently read so; quoting to this end Irenaeus, Origin, and Chrysostom (as he
says) in diverse places. But he trusted too much the Latin Translation of
Chrysostom; for the Greek Chrysostom has no such matter; but both in those
places Beza points to, and in diverse others reads constantly (...), as our
Copies do. And so I make no question Irenaeus and Vide cont. Celsu lib. 1. p.
46. gr.
Origin did too in the Greek Originals if we had them to look into. But the
Latin Translators thought not fit to alter the words of the Hymn so
ordinarily sung in the Liturgy, and so expressed it in Latin, as the Latin
Church used. And for the meaning, I believe the Vulgar Latin aimed at no other
sense, then what the Greek implies; namely, that this Peace was no earthly
peace, but the peace of Gods good will to man, referring the Genitive Case
voluntatis, not to hominibus, but to pax. Pax in terris: what pax? Pax bonae
voluntatis hominibus. That which makes me think so is, because Origin and his
Translator, in the place Beza quotes for this reading, expressly expounds it so.
And so there will not be a pin to choose; save that the Greek expresses this
sense by way of Apposition more naturally; the Latin by way of Rection,
somewhat harshly; and yet perhaps the Translatour thought, less ambiguously.

Well then; this peace on earth is (...), Gods good will or favor to men: and
Gods (...), is the peace on earth, the Angels gratulate; namely, the
reconciliation of God to men in Christ: For by reason of Sin, heaven and earth,
God and man were till now at enmity: but by Christ this enmity is taken away,
and man, by the forgiveness of his sin, restored unto peace and favor with
God. And as by this Nativity God and man became one Person, so by this
conjunction Heaven and earth, Angels and men, become one Fellowship, one City
and Kingdom of God: the Kingdom of Satan, that Prince of the powers of the
Air, who by reason of sin had captivated, and brought under his service the
whole Earth, and thereby held the same at open war and enmity with Heaven,
being now by degrees to be destroyed and rooted out. And this is that admirable
mystery of our Redemption by Christ, which the Angelical Host here gratulates,
by the name of Peace on earth, and good will toward men.

And that we may not doubt, but we have hit the meaning, that this peace on
earth, is Gods good will to men, and therefore expounded by it; besides that in
the Old Vid. Number. 6. 27. Judge. 6. 24. Psalm. 85. 7. etc. Cant. 8. 10. Jer. 16.
15. 29. 11.
Testament peace is often taken for Gods favor and mercy to men; (as in that
of Isay 54. 10. The mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my
kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my peace be
removed, says the Lord that has mercy on thee.) So if we examine the Use
thereof in the New Testament, we shall find it in special applied to this our
Reconciliation to God in Christ by remission of sin. S. Peter to Cornelius Act.
10. describes the Gospel thus, The word which God sent to the children of
Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ. And S. Paul, Col. 1. It pleased God
the Father, that in Christ all fullness should dwell. And (having made peace
through the blood of his Cross) by him to reconcile all things unto himself.
What can be plainer then this? The same, as I take it, he means Ephesians. 2. when he
tells us, That Christ came to preach peace both to those that were afar off,
and to them that were nigh; that is, both to Jew and Gentile. But what peace?
namely, that through him, we both might have access by one Spirit unto the
Father. Hence the Gospel is called the Gospel of peace; and God so often in the
New Testament, the God of peace; that is, of reconcilement and favor: and the
Evangelical salutation is, Grace, mercy, and peace, from God our Father and
Jesus Christ our Lord.

The meaning of this Angelical gratulation being thus cleared, let us see now
what may be learned and observed therefrom. Where my first Observation shall be
this: S. Peter tells Cornelius, That to Christ give all the Prophets witness,
that through his name, whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of
sins. Our Savior after his Resurrection, expounding the Scriptures to his
Apostles says, the same, Luke 24. 47. Thus it is written (says he) and thus
it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day, and that
remission of sins should be preached in his Name among the Nations. But where
is this publication of remission of sins by Christ written? for in those
formal words we shall hardly find it. Let us take here the Angels key, and we
shall: for they tell us that peace on earth is this good will toward men. Now
do not the Prophets speak of some peace on earth, which Messiah should bring
with him when he comes? yes surely: well then, let us look for this publication
of remission of sins under that name, and we shall find it, Isay 9. 6. Unto us
a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the government shall be upon his
shoulder; and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God,
the Father of eternity, the Prince of peace, that is, of peace not between men
and men, but between God and men) and of the increase of his government and
peace shall be no end. Isay 52. 7. How beautiful upon the mountains, are the
feet of him that brings good tidings, that publishes peace, that brings
good tidings of good, that publishes salvation, that says unto Zion, Thy God
reigns: which place S. Paul, Romans 10. 15. interprets of the publication of
the Gospel of Christ. Esaias 53. 5. The chastisement of our peace was upon him;
that is, he suffered for the remission of our sins. Is. 57. 19. quoted by S.
Paul to the Ephesians, Chap. 2. Peace to him that is afar off, and to him
that is near, says the Lord, and I will heal him. Ezekiel. 34. 24, 25. I the Lord
will be their God, and my servant David (King Messiah) a Prince among them. --
And I will make a Covenant of peace with them. So Chap. 37. 26. Hag. 2. 9. The
glory of this latter house shall be greater then of the former, says the Lord
of Hosts; and in this place will I give peace, says the Lord of Hosts. Zech.
9. 10. Shout o daughter of Jerusalem; behold, thy King comes unto thee, --
and he shall speak peace unto the Heathen, and his Dominion shall be from Sea
to Sea, and from the River unto the end of the earth.

Thus much of the Use to be made of the Angels expression in this heavenly
Carol: Now I shall propound to your consideration another, and that taken from
the argument it self; namely, that if Almighty God, our heavenly Father, be so
graciously disposed to usward, as to be reconciled unto us, by forgiving us
our trespasses: then ought we semblably to be reconciled to our brethren and
forgive them their trespasses, when they have wronged or offended us. Leo Sermon.
6. de Nativit. Natalis Domini, natalis est pacis, ergo singuli fideles offerant
Patri pacificorum concordiam filiorum. The Illation is good; we have the
authority of the Apostle S. John to back it; 1 Ioh. 4. 10. God (says he) so
loved us, that he sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. What
follows? Beloved, (says he) if God so loved us, we ought to love end another.
So I say, if God be so gracious, to forgive and be reconciled to us, we ought
as it were, to echo this his loving kindness, and to forgive, and be
reconciled one to another.

This congruity and semblablenesse of our actions and affections one toward
another, with Gods favor and mercy toward us, is the Rule and Reason not only
of this, but of many other duties he requires at our hands. Thus the Jews were
every seventh year to manumise their servants, as an act of congruity and
thankfulness to God, who had delivered them, when they were servants, out of
the land of Egypt, and house of bondage. They were bidden to use a stranger
kindly, because themselves had been strangers, and God when they were
oppressed, had been compassionate and kind toward them, and redeemed them
from their thraldom. Likewise we read in the Gospel, Luke 8. 36. Be ye
merciful, as your heavenly Father is merciful: And Matthew. 5. Blessed are the
merciful for they shall obtain mercy. In a word, God has revealed, he will
show mercy to none, but such as appear before him with this congruity. James 2.
13. He shall have judgment without mercy, that shows no mercy: and therefore
the tenor of our sentence at the last judgment runs, Come ye blessed, and be
partakers of mercy, because ye have showed it: But, Go ye cursed without all
mercy into Hell fire, because ye have showed no mercy.

Thus we see how God requires this congruity in general: and as for the
particular of reconcilement and forgiving our brother, it is written in
capital letters, and urged in such sort as it might not unfitly be termed the
Livery of Christianity. In so much that if we consider it duly, it cannot but
breed astonishment, that the evidence and necessity should be so apparent, and
the practice among those who look for the benefit of Christ and call upon his
Name, so little regarded: when as I dare boldly pronounce, there is no
remission of sins to be looked for at the hands of God without it.

An invincible argument whereof is, That our Savior himself, in the prayer he
has taught his Church, has put in a bar against asking it, but upon this
condition, Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against
us. If we ask not with this disposition, there is no promise that any such
prayer shall be heard: nay, our Savior tells us in plain terms, it shall not:
If (says he) you forgive not men their trespasses, no more will your heavenly
Father forgive you your trespasses. How then can any man whose heart is fraught
with malice, and meditates revenge against his brother, hear this and not
tremble? Is it not a fearful thing for a man to carry in his own bosom, not
only an evidence that his sins are unpardoned, but a bar too, that he cannot
ask the forgiveness of them? Let no man deceive himself: Etsi enim multis
bonis conscientiis abundemus, says S. Chrysostom, reconciliatione tamen
contempta, nullum possumus promereri solatium. As the fifth Commandment is
called by the Apostle the first Commandment of promise, so is this petition
for forgiveness of sins, the only petition with condition: and such a
condition too, as our Savior dwells upon and enforces, when he had delivered
this form of prayer to his Disciples: For he passes by all the rest of the
petitions, and singles out this alone to comment upon, as that wherein the
chiefest moment lay, and without which all our prayer would be uneffectuall,
and to no purpose.

A further confirmation of which we have in that parable of Servus nequam,
Matthew. 18. whom his Lord being moved with compassion, when he besought him,
forgave a debt of ten thousand Talents: But he finding one of his
fellow servants which ought him an hundred pence, though he fell at his feet
and besought him, yet would not hear him, but cast him into prison. Then his
Lord was wroth, and said, O thou wicked servant! should not thou have had
compassion on thy fellow servant, even as I had pity upon thee? And he
delivered him unto the tormentors, till he should pay all that was due to him.
The Application is terrible: So likewise, says our Savior, shall my heavenly
Father do unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his brother
their trespasses. We are this Servus nequam, if when our heavenly Father
forgives us thousands of Talents, we stand with our brethren for an hundred
pence. There is no proportion between the offenses wherewith we offend God, and
the offenses wherewith our brother offends us. And therefore we have no excuse,
has our brother wronged us never so often, never so much, never so hainously:
For whatsoever it be, or how unworthy or undeserved soever; our sin, our
ingratitude to Almighty God is and has been infinitely greater, even much more
then ten thousand Talents surpass an hundred pence.

To these two testimonies add a third, and that also as the former, out of our
blessed Saviors own mouth: Mat. 5. If thou bring (says he) thy gift to the
Altar, and there remember, that thy brother has ought against thee: leave
there thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way; First be reconciled to thy
brother, and then come and offer thy gift: (...), the word whereby the
Septuagint constantly render that which the Law calls Corban; and the Gospel
concurres with them, Mar. 7. (...). Now Corban in the Law is in special used
for those offerings, which were made for atonement of Sin, as the
Burnt-offering, Sin-offering, Trespasse-offering, and Peace Offering, called
Offerings by Fire or Sacrifices. So that this precept of our Saviors here, is
the same in effect with the former, when thou come to offer an offering unto
God for an atonement of thy sin; Go thy stay first, and be reconciled unto thy
brother, for without this thy sin shall not be forgiven thee. I shall not need
tell you, that now in the Gospel, Christ is the Sacrifice, is the gift which a
Christian by faith offers unto God for the propitiation of his sin; and that
this sacrifice is commemorated, sealed and communicated unto us in the blessed
Sacrament of the Lords Supper; whereby it will easily appear, how this precept
of our Saviors uttered after the style of the legal worship is appliable to
the Evangelical.

Hence in the ancient Church, when they assembled to celebrate this Sacrament,
the Deacon was wont to proclaim, (...), Ne quis contra aliquem; Let no man have
ought against his brother: And then, (...), Salute one another with an holy
kiss: which accordingly they did, first the Bishop and Clergy, then the Laity,
the men apart by themselves, and the women by themselves; and this was a
profession of friendship and reconciliation, and therefore called Osculum
pacis, the kiss of peace. In aftertimes the Priest gave this kiss of peace
unto the Deacon, and he to the chief of the Congregation, and so it was given
from one to another. In stead of which at length was brought in that foolish
ceremony, still used among the Romanists, for the Priest to send a little
gilded or painted Table, with a Crucifix or some Saints picture thereon, to be
kissed of every one in the Church, before they receive the Holy Bread; which
they call the kissing of the Pax. So oftentimes profitable and useful
Ceremonies degenerate into toys and superstitions. Our Church, though she
uses no ceremony, retains the substance; when the Priest in his exhortation to
the Communicants, says, If any of you be in malice or envy, or any other
grievous crime, bewail your sins, and come not to this holy Table: and by the
Rubric the Priest, if he know any such, is to turn them back, unless they
will be reconciled.

Lastly, the necessity of this duty is testified by that pious and generally
received custom amongst Christians, to exhort those that are dying to forgive
all the world, that so themselves may find mercy and forgiveness at the hands
of God. Is it needful at the hour of death, and not as needful in the time of
our health? Is there no forgiveness to be expected at the hands of God without
it, when we are dying, and is there while we are living? No certainly; All
times are alike here; and there is no time wherein God will forgive us, unless
we forgive our brother. What then remains, but that we do every day, as we
would do, if we were to die the next? It is a blessed disposition to have a
becalmed heart to those who have wronged us, and not to let the Sun go down
upon our wrath: To be able to come before God with confidence, and say; Lord
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.

MAT. 7. 21. Mat. 7. 21.
Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
heaven; but he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven.
THere are three sorts of men in the world; some which call not Christ their
Lord, as Turks, Jews and Infidels: some which call him Lord, as all Christians,
but not all in like manner, for there are two sorts of them; some which call
him Lord, and that is all; others which both call him Lord, and do the will of
his Father, the administration whereof is committed to him. The first of those
three sorts, those who do not so much as call Christ their Lord, it is plain
they cannot be saved; for there is no other name to be saved by, but the name
of Christ only. For the second sort, those who call Christ their Lord, that
is, are Christians, and profess to believe in Christ, and hope to be saved by
him, and yet do no works of obedience unto God; though such as these may think
themselves in a good estate, yet our Savior here expressly excludes them from
entering into the Kingdom of heaven: But the third sort, which do not only
call Christ their Lord, but do the will of his Father, these are the only
true Christians; for these there is hope, but for none other: Not every one
(says our Savior) that says unto me, Lord, Lord, etc.

Our Savior foresaw there would be among those who believed on his Name, such
as should think their faith sufficient, and that as for works they might be
excused, having him for their Lord and Captain of their salvation, who himself
had both undergone the punishment due for their sins, and fulfilled that
obedience which they should have done. So that now there remained nothing on
their part for to obtain salvation, but to trust and rely upon him, without any
endeavor at all to please God by works, as being now become unusefull to
salvation. If ever there were a time when Christians thus deceived themselves,
that time is now, as both our practice shows plainly by a general neglect of
such duties of piety and charity, which amongst our Forefathers were frequent;
as also our open profession, when being exhorted to these works of piety to
God, and of charity toward our brethren, we stick not to allege, we are not
bound unto them, because we look not to be saved by the merit of works, as
they, but by faith in Christ alone; as though faith in Christ excluded works,
and not rather included them, as being that whereby they became acceptable unto
God, which of themselves they are not: or as if works could no way conduce unto
the attaining of salvation, but by way of merit and desert, and not by way of
the grace and favor of God in Christ, as we shall see in the handling of this
Text. We greatly now a days, and that most dangerously, mistake the error of
our forefathers, which was not in that they did good works; I would we did so;
but because they knew not rightly the end why they did them, nor where the
value of them lay: they thought the end of doing them was, to obtain eternal
life, as a reward of Justice due unto them, whereas it is only of grace and
promise in Christ Jesus: They took their works to have such perfectness in them
as would endure the touchstone of the Law of God, yea such worth and value as
to merit the reward they looked for; whereas all the value and acceptablenesse
of our works, issues from the merit of Christ, and lies only in his
righteousness communicated unto us and them by faith, and no otherwise. But
setting aside these errors of the end, and of the value of works, we must know
as well as they; That not every one that says unto Christ, Lord, Lord, etc.
but he that does the will of his Father, etc.

Now for the Explication of the words: To call Christ, Lord, is to believe in
him, to acknowledge him, to look for salvation by him, or, as the Scripture
expresses it, Luke 6. to come unto him, every one, (says our Savior there,
explaining this very Text we have in hand) Every one (says he) that comes
unto me, and hears my words, and does them, I will show you who he is like:
where to come unto Christ, is put in stead of that which in the former was, to
say unto him Lord. The doing of his Fathers will, is the doing of those works
of obedience, which his Father has commanded in his Law, and now committed to
his Son, whom he has made the head and King of his Church to see executed and
performed by those he brings to salvation. But how, and in what manner, we
shall see by and by.

The Text consists of two parts; The one negative; Not every one that says
unto Christ, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven. The other
affirmative; But those who do the will of his Father shall only enter
thither. But these are so nearly linked together, that they cannot be handled
asunder: And the observations which I shall draw thence depend on the whole
Text; the first and chiefest whereof is this; That faith in Christ without
works of obedience, and amendment of life, is not sufficient for salvation, and
consequently not that faith whereby a Christian is justified. For if it were,
it would save us: If it be not sufficient to save us, it cannot justify us:
This flows directly from the Text, and cannot be denied; if ye remember what
I said before; that to call Christ, Lord, is to believe in him.

For the better understanding of this, you must take notice that there is a
threefold faith whereby men believe in Christ: There is a false faith: There is
a true faith, but not saving: and thirdly, there is a saving faith. A false
faith is, to believe to attain salvation through Christ any other way then he
has ordained, as namely, to believe to attain salvation through him, without
works of obedience to be accepted of God in him; which is a faith whereof there
is no Gospel. A true faith is, to believe salvation is to be attained through
obedience to God in Jesus Christ, who by his merits and righteousness, makes
our selves and our works acceptable to his Father.

A saving and justifying faith is, to believe this so as to embrace and lay
hold upon Christ for that end. To believe to attain salvation through obedience
to God in Christ, so as to apply our selves, and rely upon Christ, for that
end, namely, to perform those works of obedience, which God has promised to
reward with eternal life: For a justifying faith stays not only in the
brain, but stirs up the will to receive and enjoy the good believed, according
as it is promised. This motion of election of the will, is that which makes
the difference between a saving faith, which joyneth us unto Christ, and that
which is true indeed, but not saving, but dogmaticall and opinionative only.
And this motion, or applying of the will to Christ, this embracing of Christ
and the promises of the Gospel through him, is that which the Scripture (when
it speaks of this faith) calls coming unto Christ, or the receiving of him,
Joh. 1. 12. As many as received him, to them he gave power (or privilege) to
be the sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name: where receiving and
believing one expound another. So for coming; Come unto me (says our Savior)
all ye that are heavy laden, and I will ease you. The last is very frequent,
John 5. 40. Ye will not come to me (says our Savior) that ye might have life.
And Chap. 6. 37. All that the Father gives me shall come unto me. ver. 44. No
man can come unto me, unless the Father draw him. 45. Every man that has
heard, and learned of the Father comes unto me; and such like. All which
express the specification of a saving faith, which consists in the embracing,
receiving and applying of the will to the thing believed.

What this embracing, receiving, or applying unto Christ is, I will farther
make plain thus: He that believes that Christ is an atonement to God for the
sins of all repentant sinners, (and surely he is an atonement for none else)
must repent and turn from all his sins, that so Christ may be an atonement
for him, else he embraces not what he believes.

He that believes that God in Christ will accept and reward our obedience and
works of piety, though short of perfection, and of no worth in themselves, must
apply himself accordingly to do works of Religion and Charity, that God in
Christ may accept and reward them. For our belief is not that saving belief,
until we apply our selves to what we believe. To believe to attain salvation
through Christ, without works of obedience to be accepted in him, is, as I have
already said, a false faith whereof there is no Gospel, no promise: To believe
the contrary, that Christ is given of God to such only as shall receive him, to
perform acceptable obedience to God through him, and yet not to apply, and
buckle our selves thereto, were indeed to believe what is true, but yet no
saving faith, because we embraced not the thing we believed, as we believed it.

Thou say then thou have faith, and beleevest that Christ is the atonement
to God, for the sins of all such as leave and forsake their sins by repentance;
Why then repent thee of thy sins that Christ may be an atonement for thee. Thou
say thou have this faith, that God in Jesus Christ will accept thy
undeserving works and services unto eternal life; why then embrace thou
Christ, and rely upon him for this end, that thou may do works of piety
toward God, and charity toward men, that so God in Christ may accept thee and
them unto eternal life.

Now if this be the faith which is saving, and unites us unto Christ and no
other, then it is plain that a saving faith cannot be severed from good works,
because no man can embrace Christ as he is promised, but he must apply himself
to do them. For out of that which has been spoken three reasons may be
gathered for the necessity of them. First, it is the end of our faith and
justification by Christ, yea the end why he shed his blood for us, that we
being reconciled to God in him, might bring forth fruits of righteousness,
which else we could never have done. This is no speculation, but plain
Scripture. S. Peter 1 ^p. 2. 24. tells us, that Christ his own self bare our
sins in his own body on the tree, that we being dead to sin, should live unto
righteousness. S. Paul, Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14. The grace of God (says he)
that brings salvation, has appeared unto all men; (wherefore?) teaching us
that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, and
righteously, and godly in this present world; looking for that blessed hope,
the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ; who gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto
himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. These words contain the sum
of all I have hitherto told you: That Christ is therefore given us, to be a
propitiation for our sins, and to justify us, that in him we might walk before
God in newness of life; so to obtain a Crown of righteousness in the world to
come.

Answerable is that place Ephesians. 2. 10. where the Apostle having told us, we
are saved by grace through faith, and not of works, lest any man should boast;
he adds presently, (lest his meaning might be mistaken, as it is of too many)
that we are Gods workmanship created in Jesus Christ unto good works, which God
has before ordained ((...)) that we should walk in them: as if he should say,
Those works of obedience, ordained by God aforetime, in his law for us to walk
in, which we could not perform of our selves; now God has as it were new
molded us in Jesus Christ, that we might perform them in him; namely, by way
of acceptance, though they come short of that exactness the Law requires.
And thus to be saved, is to be saved by grace and favor, and not by the merit
of works, because the foundation whereby our selves and our services are
approved in the eyes of God, and acquitted of guilt, (which the Scripture
calls to be justified,) is the mere favor of God in Jesus Christ, and not
any thing in us. And this way of salvation excludes all boasting; for what have
we to boast of, when all the righteousness of our works is none of ours, but
Christ's imputed to us; whereby only, and not for any merit in themselves, they
become acceptable, and have promise of reward. But that men should be saved by
Christ, though they be idle and do nothing, I know no such grace of God
revealed in Scripture.

Now that in Christ we may perform works of righteousness, which God will
accept and crown, is plain by the tenor of Scripture. S. Paul, Philip. 1. 11.
desires that the Philippians might be filled with the fruits of righteousness,
which are by Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God. And the same
Apostle tells the Romans, Romans 6. 22. that being made free from sin, and become
servants to God, they have their fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting
life; that is, as the Syriack turns it, Sunt vobis fructus sancti, they have
holy fruits, whose end is life eternal.

And if we would seriously consider it, we should find, that the more we
believe this righteousness of faith in Christ, the more reason we have to
perform works of service and obedience unto God, then if we believed it not:
For if our works would not be acceptable with God, unless they were complete
in every point, as the Law required; if there were no reward to be looked for
at the hands of God, unless we could merit it by the worthiness of our deeds:
who that considers his own weakness and insufficiency, would not sooner
despair, then go about to please God by works? He would think it better to do
nothing at all, then to endeavor what he could never hope to attain, and so
lose his labor. But we, who believe that those who serve God in Christ, have
their failings and wants covered with his righteousness, and so their works
accepted, as if they were in every point as they should be; why should not we
of all men fall to work, being sure by Christ's means and merit, we shall not
lose our labor?

A second motive why we should do good works is, because they are the way and
means ordained by God to obtain the reward of eternal life, without which we
shall never attain it: Without holiness no man shall see God, Heb. 12. 14.
Look to your selves (says S. John Ep. 2. ver. 8.) that ye lose not those
things ye have wrought for, but that ye may receive a full reward. The Angels
message from heaven to devout Cornelius was, Thy prayers and thine alms are had
in remembrance in the sight of God: whereupon S. Peter inferred, that in every
Nation, he that fears God and works righteousness, is accepted with him,
Acts 10.

Hence it is that we shall be judged, and receive sentence at the last day,
according to our works: Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world: For I was hungry, and ye
gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye
took me in; naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in
prison, and ye came unto me: For in as much as ye have done these unto one of
the least of my brethren, ye have done it unto me. Lord, how do those look to
be saved at that day, who think good works not required to salvation, and
accordingly do them not! Can our Savior pass this blessed sentence on them?
think they he can? If he should, they might truly say indeed, Lord, we have
done no such matter, nor did we think our selves bound unto it; we relied
wholly upon our faith in thy merits, and thought we had been freed from such
services. What? do they think Christ will change the form of his sentence at
that great day? No certainly: If the sentence for Bliss will not fit them, and
be truly said of them, the other will, and must, for there is no more; Depart
from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels:
For when I was hungry, ye gave me no meat, etc. This must be their doom
unless they suppose the righteous Judge will lie for them.

And it is here further to be observed, that the works named in the sentence of
Judgment, are works of the second Table, works of mercy and charity; Feeding
the hungry, clothing the naked, visiting the sick; all Almesdeeds, which men
are now adays so much afraid of; as if they looked toward Popery, and had a
tang of meriting: For now adays these costly works of all others are most
suspicious; but will it be so at the day of Judgment? True it is, they merit
not the reward which shall be given them: but what then? Are we so proud we
will do no works, unless we may merit? Is it not sufficient that God will
reward them for Christ's sake, though they have no worth in themselves?

The third and last motive to works of righteousness is, because they are the
only sign and note whereby we know our faith is true and saving, and not
counterfeit: For 1 John 1. 8. If we say we have fellowship with Christ, and
walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth. Chap. 2. ver. 3. Hereby we
know that we know him (viz. to be our Advocate with his Father, and the
propitiation for our sins) if we keep his Commandments. And Chap. 3. 7. Little
children, let no man deceive you: He that does righteousness, is righteous,
even as Christ is righteous. The same almost you may find again, Chap. 2. 29.
For if every one that believes in Christ truly and savingly, believes that
salvation is to be attained by obedience to God in him, and not otherwise, and
therefore embraces and lays hold upon him for that end; How can such an ones
faith be fruitless? how can he be without works, who therefore lays hold on
Christ that his works and obedience may be accepted as righteous before God,
for his sake, and so rewardable? It is as possible for the Sun to be without
his light, or the fire to want heat, as such a faith to be without works.

Our Savior therefore himself makes this a most sure and never failing note to
build our assurance of salvation upon, Luke 6. 46. where the mention of the
words of my Text gives the occasion, Why call ye me, Lord, (says he) and do
not the things which I say? 47. Whosoever comes to me, and hears my
sayings, and does them, I will show you to whom he is like. 48. He is like a
man which built an house, and dug deep, and laid the foundation on a rock.
And when the flood arose, the stream beat vehemently upon that house, and could
not shake it, for it was founded upon arock. 49. But he that hears and does
not, is like a man that without a foundation built an house upon the earth;
against which the stream did beat vehemently, and immediately it fell, and the
ruin of that house was great. Whom these three motives or reasons will not
persuade to good works, let not my soul o Lord be joined with theirs, nor my
doom be as theirs must be.

A second observation out of these words, and near akin to the former is; That
it is not enough for a Christian to live harmlesly, and abstain from ill, but
he must do that which is good. For our Savior excludes not here those only,
who do against the will of his Father, but those who do not his Fathers will:
It is doing good which he requires, and the not doing evil only. This is an
error which takes hold of a great part of men, even of those who would seem to
be religious. He is a reformed man, and acquits himself well, who abstains from
fornication, adultery, who is no thief, no couzener, or defrauder of other men;
who will not lie, or swear, or such like: But as for doing any works of piety
or charity, they think they are not required of them.

But they are much deceived: For God requires some duties at our hands, which
he may reward not out of any merit, but out of his merciful promise in Christ.
But not doing ill is no service rewardable: A servant who expects wages, must
not only do his Master no harm, but some work that is good and profitable:
otherwise the best Christian would be he that should live altogether idly;
For none does less harm, then he that does nothing at all. But Mat. 25. 30. He
that increased not his Masters Talent, though he had not misspent it, is
adjudged an unprofitable servant, and cast into utter darkness, where is
weeping, and gnashing of treth. So also Mat. 3. The tree that bears no good
fruit, is hewn down, though it bore none that was evil: The axe is laid to the
root of the tree, every tree that brings not forth good fruit is hewn down
and cast into the fire. Mat. 21. 19. The sigtree is cursed for having no fruit,
not for having evil fruit. And the sentence of condemnation, as you heard
before, is to pass at that great day, for not having done good works, not for
doing ill ones: Go ye cursed, for when I was hungry, ye fed me not, etc.

Thus having let you see how necessary it is for a Christian to join good works
with his faith in Christ; I will now come to show you, how you must do them,
hoping I have already persuaded you that they must needs be done.

First therefore, we must do them out of faith in Christ, that is, relying
upon him only for the acceptance, and rewarding of them: for in him alone God
is well pleased with us and with what we do, and therefore without faith and
reliance upon him, it is impossible to please God. We must not think there is
any worth in our works, for which any such reward as God has promised, is due;
For, alas! our best works are full of imperfections, and far short of what the
Law requires. Our reward therefore is not of merit, but of the merciful
promise of God in Christ: which the Apostle means, when he says, We are saved
by grace, and not by works: That is, it is the grace and favor of God in
Christ, which makes our selves acceptable, and our works rewardable, and not
any desert in them or us.

Having laid this foundation; the next thing required is sincerity of heart in
doing them: we must do them out of the fear of God, and conscience of his
Commandments, not out of respect of profit, or fear, or praise of men; For
such as do so are hypocrites: Not every one, says our Savior, that says unto
me, Lord, Lord, but he that does the will of my Father; Now it is the will of
our heavenly Father that we serve him in truth and uprightness of heart: I
know (says David, 1 Chr. 29. 17.) that thou my God triest the heart, and have
pleasure in uprightness. And so he said to Abraham, Genesis 17. 1. I am the
Almighty God, walk before me, and be thou upright, or be thou sincere. This
manner of serving God Ioshuah commended to the Israelites, Josh. 24. 14. Fear
the Lord (says he) and serve him in sincerity and truth: and the Prophet
Samuel, 1 Samuel 12. 24. Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth with all
your heart. This sincerity, uprightness and truth in Gods service is, when we
do religious and pious duties, and abstain from the contrary out of conscience
to Godward, out of an heart possessed with the love and fear of God. It is
otherwise called in Scripture, perfectness, or perfectness of heart: For it
is a lame and unperfect service, where the better half is wanting, as the heart
is, in every work of duty both to God and men. And therefore it is called
perfectness, when both go together, when conscience as the soul, enlives the
outward work as a body. And indeed this is all the perfection we can attain
unto in this life, to serve God in truth of heart, though otherwise we come
short of what we should: and therefore God esteems our actions and works, not
according to the greatness or exactness of the performance, but according to
the sincerity and truth of our hearts in doing them: As appears by the places I
have already quoted, and by that 1 King. 15. 14. where it is said, that though
Asa failed in his reformation, and the high places were not taken down,
nevertheless his heart was perfect with the Lord his God, all his days.

A note to know such a sincerity and truth of heart by, is, If in our privacy,
when there is no witness but God and our selves, we are careful then to
abstain from sin, as well as in the sight of men. If when no body but God shall
see and know it, we are willing to do a good work, as well as if all the world
should know it. He that finds himself thus affected, his heart is true, at
least in some measure, but so much the less by how much he finds himself the
less affected in this manner. When we are in the presence and view of men, we
may soon be deceived in our selves, and think we do that out of conscience and
fear of God, which indeed is but for the fear or praise of men, either lest we
should be damnified, or impair our credit, or the like: but when there is none
but God and us, then to be afraid of sin, and careful of good duties, is a
sign we fear God in truth and sincerity, and not in hypocrisy.

The special and principal means to attain this sincerity and truth of heart
is, to possess our selves with the apprehension of Gods presence, and to walk
before him as in his eye: wheresoever thou art, there is an eye that sees
thee, an ear that hears thee, and a hand that registreth thy most secret
thoughts. For the ways of man (says Solomon Prove. 5. 21.) are before the eyes
of the Lord, and he pondereth all his doings: How much ashamed would we be,
that men should know how much our hearts and our words and actions disagreed?
How would we blush that men should see us commit this or that sin, or neglect
this or that duty? what horrible Atheism then does this argue, that the
presence of man, yea sometimes of a little child, should hinder us from that
wickedness which Gods presence cannot? This having of God before our eyes, and
the continual meditation of his all-seeing presence, would together with
devout prayer for the assistance of Gods grace, be in time the bane of
hypocrisy and falsehood of heart, and beget in stead thereof that truth and
sincerity which God loves.

Another property of such obedience as God requires, is universality: we must
not serve God by halfs, by doing some duties and omitting other, but we must
with David, Psalm. 119. 6, 20. have respect to all Gods Commandments; to those
of the second Table, as well as to those of the first; and to those of the
first, as well as those of the second. The want of which universality of
obedience to both Tables is so frequent, as the greatest part of Christians are
plunged therein, to the undoubted ruin of their souls, and shipwreck of
everlasting life, if they so continue.

For there are two sorts of men, which think themselves in a good estate, and
are not: The one are those who make conscience of the duties of the first
Table, but have little or no care of the duties of the second. And this is a
most dangerous evil, by reason it is more hard to be discovered: those which
are guilty thereof, being such as seem religious, but their Religion is in
vain. Such were those in the Church of Israel against whom the Prophet Esaias
declaimeth Chap. 1. from the 10. ver. to the 17. To what purpose are your
sacrifices and burnt offerings, says the Lord? your oblations and incense are
an abomination. Your new Moons, Sabbaths, calling of Assemblies; even the
solemn meeting, I cannot away with; it is iniquity. Would you know what was
the matter? see the words following; Learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve
the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow. Lo here a want of
the duties of the second Table. Such is that also of Hosea Chap. 6. I desired
mercy, and not sacrifice; which is twice alleged by our Savior in the Gospel
against the Pharisees hypocritical scrupulosity in the same duties of the
first Table, with a neglect of the second. But here perhaps some may find a
scruple, because that if sacrifice in this or the like places be opposed to the
duties of obedience required in the second Table, it should hereby seem, that
the duties of the second Table which concern our neighbor, should be preferred
before the duties of the first, which concern the Lord himself; forasmuch as it
is said, I desire mercy, and not sacrifice; that is, rather mercy, which is a
duty of the second Table, then sacrifice, which is of the first. I answer, The
holy Ghosts meaning is, not to prefer the second Table before the first,
taking them simply, but to perform the duties of both together, before the
service of the first alone: Be more ready to join mercy, or works of mercy with
your sacrificing, then to offer sacrifice alone.

To go on: The duties of the first Table are by a special name called duties
of Religion; those of the second Table come under the name of Honesty and
probity: Now as a man can never be truly honest, unless he be Religious; so
cannot that man (what show soever he makes) be truly religious in Gods esteem,
who is not honest in his conversation toward his neighbor: Religion and
Honesty must be married together, or else neither of them will be in truth what
it seems to be. We know that all our duty to God and our neighbor is
comprehended under the name of love, as in that sum of the Law; Love God
above all things, and thy) neighbor as thy self. This is the sum of the
whole Law contained in both Tables. But S. John tells us 1 Ep. 4. 20. He that
says, I love God, and hates his brother, is a lier; which is as much as if he
should say; He that seems religious toward God, and is without honesty toward
his neighbor, he is a lier, there is no true religion in him.

If you would then know, whether a man professing Religion, by diligent
frequenting Gods service, and exercises of devotion, keeping sacred times, and
hearing Sermons, be a sound Christian or not, or a seeming one only; this is a
sure and infallible note to discover him, and for him to discover himself by:
For, if notwithstanding his care of the duties of the first Table, he makes no
conscience to walk honestly toward his neighbor; If he be disobedient to
Parents, and lawful Authority; if he be cruel and uncharitable; if he be
unjust in his dealings, fraudulent, an oppressor, a falsifier of Covenants and
promises, a backbiter, a sclaunderer, or the like: his Religion is no better
then an hypocrites: For such was the Religion of many of the Pharisees, whom
therefore our Savior terms Hypocrites; Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites: They were scrupulous in the duties of the first Table, they paid
tithe even of mint and annise, they fasted twice a week, they were exact
observers of the Sabbath, and other ceremonies of Religion; but judgment,
mercy, and faith in their conversation toward men, our Savior tells them, they
regarded not.

Besides our Saviors woe denounced against such, there are two dangerous
effects which accompany this evil disease, which should make us beware thereof:
First, those who are addicted to Religion without any conscience of honesty,
are easily drawn by the Devil to many intolerable acts under color and in
behalf thereof, as they imagine^ We see it in the Papists and Jesuits, whose
preposterous zeal to their Religion, makes them think Treasons, Murders,
Rebellions, or any other such wicked acts, are lawful and excusable, so they
be done for the good of the Catholic cause, as they call it. And if we search
narrowly amongst our selves, we shall light upon some examples of indirect and
unlawful courses, undertaken otherwhile on the behalf of Religion, and all
through want of this conscionable care of maintaining honesty toward our
neighbor, together with our zeal for Religion toward God. Even as we see an
horse in some narrow and dangerous passage, whilst he is wholly taken up with
some bugbear on the one side of the way, which he would eschew, and in the mean
time minds not the other side, where there is the like danger, he suddenly
slips into a pit or ditch, with no small danger to himself and rider: So is it
here, with such as look only to the first Table, and mind not the second,
whilst they go about as they think to advance the duties of the one, they fall
most foully in the other.

The second evil is a most dangerous scandal, which follows profession of
Religion without honest conversation toward men: It is a grievous stumbling
block and stone of offense, making men out of love with Religion, when they see
such evil effects from it, and those who seem to profess it. Those who are not
yet come on are skared from coming, resolving they will never be of their
Religion, which they see no better fruits of. Those who are entered, are ashamed
and discouraged, forsaking the duties of Religion, that they might shun the
suspicion of hypocrisy and dishonesty. But woe be unto them by whom scandal
comes: Let us all therefore take heed to adorn and approve our profession, by
bringing forth fruits, not only of piety and devotion toward God, but of works
of righteousness and charity to our neighbor.

ACTS 10. 4. Acts 10 4.
And he said unto him, Thy prayers and thine Alms are come up for a memortall
before God; or (as it is ver. 31.) are had in remembrance.
WHen the Jews had crucified our blessed Savior, the Lord and Prince of Life,
though their impiety were most horrible, and such as might seem to admit of no
expiation or atonement, yet would not God for that reject them; but after he
was risen from the dead, his Apostles, and Messengers were sent to offer and
tender him once more unto them, if so be they would yet receive him as their
Messiah and Redeemer, which was promised to come; telling them that what they
had formerly done unto him, God would pass by it, (namely, according to our
Saviors prayer upon the Cross, Father forgive them, for they know not what
they do) as done of ignorance on their part, whilst himself was by the
dispensation of his Providence, fulfilling that which was long before spoken by
the mouth of all his Prophets, that Christ or Messiah should suffer death: All
which you may read in the Sermon which S. Peter preached unto them in the
Temple, Acts 3. Thus the Lord showed himself according to his style, A God
gracious and merciful, long-suffering, and slow to anger.

But when these Jews, notwithstanding this second tender, not only continued in
their former obstinacy, refusing to accept him for their Redeemer, but also
misused and persecuted his Ambassadors sent unto them, this their ingratitude
was so hideous and heinous in the eyes of God, that he could bear with them no
longer, but resolved thenceforth to cast them off, and choose himself a Church
among the Gentiles.

To prepare a way whereunto, he sent a Vision much about the same time, both to
Peter, (who was then by reason of the Jews persecution fled to Ioppa) and to
Cornelius a Gentile, Captain of the Italian Band, living at Caesarea upon that
coast; ordaining the one (Peter) to be the Messenger and Preacher; and the
other (Cornelius) to be the first Gentile which should be partaker of the faith
of Christ: Therefore accordingly Peter's Vision was to admonish him, not to make
scruple, as all Jews did, of conversing with a Gentile as unclean; signified by
a sheet let down from heaven, wherein were all manner of four-footed beasts of
the earth, and wild beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the air, that
is, of all both clean and unclean; wherewith came also a voice, saying, Peter,
kill and eat. Whereunto when Peter answered, Not so, Lord, for I have never
eaten any thing that is common or unclean: the voice replies, What God has
cleansed, that call not thou unclean. Now as this Vision was to give Peter
commission to go unto Cornelius; so was Cornelius his Vision to command him to
send for Peter; For he saw a Vision at the ninth hour of the day, an Angel of
the Lord coming unto him, and saying, Cornelius. Whom when Cornelius looked
on, being afraid, he said, What is it, Lord? The Angel said unto him, Thy
prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial, or had in remembrance
before God. And now send men to Ioppa, and call for one Simon, whose surname is
Peter, and he shall tell thee what thou ought to do. And thus have I
brought the Story as far as my Text; which is as you see a part of this Message
of the Angel to Cornelius, namely, his Report; And he said unto him, Thy
prayers and thine alms, etc.

Wherein two things are to be considered; First, who was the man, and what was
the condition of this person to whom the Angel spoke, namely, Cornelius. And
the Angel said unto him. Secondly, what the Message or Report he brought
imports; Thy prayers and thine almesdeeds are come in remembrance before God.
To begin with the first; The man here spoken to, (as you may read in the
beginning of the Chapter, and as I have in some part told already) was
Cornelius, a Gentile, Captain of the Italian Band at Caesarea, and so no doubt
himself of that ^tion. To understand which, ye must know, that at t^ (...) the
Land of Jury, like as most other Nations were, was under the Roman Empire, and
ruled by a President of their appointing: which President had his Court and
Seat at Caesarea, a great and magnificent City upon the Palestine coast, some
seventy miles from Jerusalem, where was continually a guard of Soldiers both
for the Presidents safety, and awing the subdued Jews: And among these was our
Cornelius a Commander, being Captain of the Italian Band. But howsoever he were
by race and breeding a Gentile, yet for Religion he was no Idolater, but a
worshipper of the true God, the God of Israel, or God the Creator of heaven and
earth: For the Text tells us, that he was a devout man, and one that feared God
with all his house, who gave much alms to the people, and prayed to God always:
which is as much as to say, he was a Proselyte, for so were those converted
Gentiles called, who left their false Gods, and worshipped the true. Yet was he
not circumcised, nor had taken upon him the yoke of Moses Law, and so was not
accounted a member of the Church of Israel: wherefore according to the
Ordinances of the Law he was esteemed unclean, and so not lawful for Peter, or
any other circumcised Jew to accompany with him, had not God given Peter an
Item that he should thenceforth call no man unclean, for as much as that badge
of separation was now dissolved.

For the better understanding of this, we must know, there were, while the
legal worship stood, two sorts of Proselytes, or converted Gentiles: One sort
which were called Proselytes of the Covenant; These were such as were
circumcised, and submitted themselves to the whole Mosaicall paedagogy: These
were counted as Jews, and conversed with as freely as those which were so born.
But there was a second sort of Proselytes inferior unto these, whom they
called Proselytes of the Gate: These were not circumcised, nor conformed
themselves to the Mosaicall Rites and Ordinances, only they were tied to the
obedience of those Commandments, which the Hebrew Doctors call the
Commandments of Noah, that is, such as all the sons of Noah were bound to
observe; which were, first, to worship God the Creator. Secondly, to disclaim
the service of Idols. Thirdly, to abstain from blood, namely, both from the
effusion of man's blood: and fourthly, from eating flesh with the blood therein.
Fifthly, to abstain from fornication, and all unlawful conjunction. Sixthly, to
administer justice: and seventhly, to abstain from robbery, and do as they
would be done to. And such Proselytes as these, howsoever they were accounted
Gentiles, and such as with whom the Jews might not converse as being no free
denizens of Israel; yet did they yield them a part in the life to come. Such a
Proselyte was Naaman the Syrian, and of such there were many in our Saviors
time; and such an one was our Cornelius.

Hence it was, that when afterward there arose a controversy in the Church,
Whether or no the Gentiles which believed, were to be circumcised, and so bound
to observe the Ordinances and rites of Moses; S. Peter in the Council of the
Apostles at Jerusalem determined, It was the will of God they should not; and
that upon this ground, because Cornelius the first believing Gentile was no
circumcised Proselyte, but a Proselyte of the Gate only, and yet nevertheless
when himself was sent (as ye have heard) to preach the Gospel of Christ to him
and his house, the Holy Ghost came down upon them as well as upon the
Circumcision; whereby it was manifest, that God would have the rest of the
Gentiles which believed, to have no more imposed upon them, then Cornelius had:
and accordingly the Council concluded, that no other burden should be laid
upon them, but only those precepts given to the sons of Noah; To abstain from
pollutions of Idols, from blood, from things strangled, and from fornication,
and the rest, which they had received already in becoming Christians, and so
needed not to be expressly mentioned.

Now that I may not seem to have held you with so long a story without some
matter of instruction: Let us observe by the example of this Cornelius, how
great a favor and blessing of God it is, to live and dwell within the pale of
his Church, where opportunity and means of salvation is to be had. If Cornelius
had still dwelt among his Countrymen the Italians, where he was bred and born,
or in any other Province of that Empire; he had in all likelihood never come to
this saving and blessed knowledge of the true God, but dyed a Pagan as he was
born. But by this occasion of living at Caesarea, within the confines of the
land of Israel, where the Oracles and worship of the most high God were daily
resounded and professed; he became such an one as ye have heard, a blessed
Convert unto the true God, whom with all his house he served and worshipped
with acceptance.

If this be so, then should we our selves learn to be more thankful to God
then most of us use to be, for that condition wherein by his Providence we are
born; for we might, if it had pleased him, have been born, and had our dwelling
among Pagans and Gentiles, who had no knowledge of his word and promise; (and
such our Nation once was:) But behold his goodness and mercy! we are born of
Christian Parents, and dwell in a Christian Country, and so made partakers of
the name and livery of Christ as soon as we were born: How great should our
thankfulness be for his mercy? Nay, we might have been born and bred in a
Christian Nation too, and yet such an one where Idolatry, false worship, and
Popery so reigned, as there had been little hopes or means to have been saved:
But behold, we are born, bred, and dwell in a reformed Christian State, where
the worship of God in Christ is truly taught and practiced; where no God is
worshipped but the Father, and in no other Mediator but his Son Jesus Christ.
How should we then magnify our good God for his so great and abundant mercy
toward us? Luther, or some other tells a story of a German pesant, who on a
time beholding an ugly Toad, fell into a most bitter lamentation and weeping,
that he had been so unthankful to Almighty God, who had made him a man, and
not such an ugly creature as that was. O that we could in like manner bewail
our ingratitude toward him who has made us to have our birth and habitation,
not among Pagans and barbarous Indians, a people without God in the world, but
in a believing and Christian Nation, where the true God is known, and the means
of salvation is to be had! Thankfulness for a less benefit is the way to
obtain a greater: To acknowledge and prize Gods favor toward us in the means,
is the way to obtain his grace to use them to our eternal advantage: whereas
our neglect of thankfulness in the one, may cause God in his just judgment,
to deprive us of his blessing in the other. Consider it.

And thus much concerning the person to whom the Angel spoke, Cornelius, And he
said unto him. Now I come to the message it self, Thy prayers and thine alms
are come into remembrance before God. Where before I make any further entrance,
there is an Objection requires to be answered; namely, how Cornelius his
service could be accepted of God, (as it is said to be) when as he had no
knowledge of Christ, without whom no man can please God. I answer; Cornelius
pleased God through his faith in the promise of Christ to come, as all just men
under the Law did: which faith God did so long accept after Christ was come,
till his coming and the mystery of Redemption wrought by him, were fully and
clearly made known and preached, which had not been to Cornelius till this
time: for though he had heard of his preaching in Galilee and Judaea, and that
he was crucified by the Jews, yet he had not heard of his Resurrection from the
dead, and Ascension into glory, or was not assured of it, till it was now
confirmed unto him, by one sent from God himself. And it is like that having
heard somewhat of the Apostles preaching, and of the Jews opposing their
testimony, and so knowing not what to believe, he had earnestly besought God in
his Devotions to lead him in the way of truth, and make known unto him what to
do.

This being premised, I return again unto the Angels words; wherein I will
consider three things: First, the conjunction or coupling of Almesdeeds with
Prayer; Thy Prayers and thine Alms. Secondly, the efficacy of power they have
with God; Thy Prayers and thine Alms are come up into remembrance before God.
Thirdly, I will add the reasons why God so much accepts them; which are also
so many Motives, why we should be careful and diligent to practice them.

For the first, the joining of Almesdeeds with prayer: Cornelius we see joined
them, and he is therefore in the verses before going commended for a devout
man, and one that feared God. And by the Angels report from God himself, we
hear how graciously he accepted them; giving us to understand, that a Devotion
thus armed, was of all others the most powerful to pierce into his dwelling
place, and fetch a blessing from him. Therefore our Savior likewise, Mat. 6.
joins the precepts of Alms and Prayer together, teaching us how to give alms,
and how to pray in one Sermon, as things that ought to go hand in hand, and
not to be separated asunder. It was also the Ordinance of the Church in the
Apostles times, that the first day of the week, which was the time of public
prayer, should be the time also of Alms. So says S. Paul, 1 Cor. 16. 1. Now
concerning the collection for the Saints (says he) as I have given order to
the Churches of Galatia, even so do ye. 2. Upon the first day of the week (that
is, upon the Lords day) let every one of you lay by himself in store as God
has prospered him, that there be no gatherings when I come. Which institution
seems to be derived from the Commandment of God in the Law twice repeated; Let
no man appear before the Lord empty: For the words annexed to that Law Deuteronomy.
16. (where it is applied Exo. 23. 15 Deu. 16. 16
to the three great feasts, when all Israel was to assemble to pray before the
Lord in his Tabernacle) the words I say there annexed, sound altogether like
unto these of S. Paul concerning the Lords day; Three times a year (says the
Text there) shall all the males appear before the Lord: and they shall not
appear before the Lord empty. Every one shall give as he is able, according to
the blessing of the Lord thy God which he has given thee. Is not this the same
in sense with S. Paul's, Let every one lay by himself in store, as God has
prospered him? The Primitive Church after the Apostles followed the same
president, and our own Reformed Church has ordained the same in her
Service Book, were it accordingly practiced as was intended: For after the
Epistle and Gospel she appoints diverse choice sentences of Scripture to be
read, which exhorts us to Alms and other Offerings to the honor of Almighty
God; and then as supposing it to be done, in the Prayer for the whole estate of
Christ's Church, We humbly beseech him most mercifully to accept our Alms, and
receive our prayers, which we offer unto his Divine Majesty.

Shall I now need to exhort Christians thus to furnish and strengthen their
prayers which they daily offer unto God, to couple them with Almesdeeds, to
come before God with a present, and not empty-handed? Whom neither Gods
Commandment, the practice of his Church, the example of his Saints, nor the
acceptance of such prayers as the hand which deals Alms, lifts up to him;
whom these will not move, no words of mine will do it. But some may say, Would
you have us always give Alms when we pray? No; I say not so, but I would not
have you appear before the Lord empry; that is, such as are not wont to give
them, nor mean to do: for you may give them before, or second your prayers with
them after; you may have set and appointed times for the one, as you have for
the other; or when the Law of man injoyns you any thing in this kind, do it
heartily, faithfully, and with a willing mind, without grudging, that so God
may accept it as a service done to him. Or lastly, thou may do as the holy
men of Scripture were wont, vow and promise unto God if thy prayer be heard to
offer something unto him either for relief of the poor, the Widow, the Orphan,
and distressed one, or the maintenance of his service and worship. If God will
be with me, (says Jacob, Genesis 28.) and keep me in this way that I go, and will
give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, etc. Then shall the Lord be my
God, and this stone which I have set for a pillar, shall be Gods house: and of
all that thou shall give me, I will surely give the tenth unto thee. (See the
use of vowing by such as came to pray in Gods House, Eccles. 5. 4.) If thou
come before God in any of these ways, thou shall not come empty-handed. But
send not thy prayer single and alone; the prayer with Alms is the prayer God
loves: Hear what himself says Psalm. 50. 14. Offer unto God thanksgiving (Alms
is an Offering of Eccl. 35. 2
Thanksgiving) and pay thy vows unto the most High. So call upon me in the day
of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me.

Now I come to the second thing I propounded, The power and efficacy which
Prayer and Alms have with God. Thy prayers and thine alms (says the Angel) are
come up for a memorial (or, are had in remembrance) in the sight of God. God
is said to remember our prayers when he grants them, our Alms and good deeds
when he rewards them, or in a word, when he answers either of them with a
blessing: as on the contrary he is said to remember iniquity, when he sends
some judgment for it. So God is said to remember Hanna, when he heard her
prayer for a Son, 1 Samuel 1. 19. and Nehemiah speaking (cap. 5. 19.) of his
deeds of mercy and bounty showed unto his poor brethren returned from
captivity, says, Think upon me, or remember me o my God for good, according to
all that I have done for this people. Thus were Cornelius his prayers and alms
remembered. Prayers therefore and alms, be they performed as they should be, are
powerful and approved means to obtain a blessing at the hands of God. To speak
first of prayer: What is it that prayer has not obtained? It has shut and
opened heaven; see the story of Eliah. It has made the Sun and Moon to stand
still; read the book of Joshua. It is the key that opens all Gods treasures
and blessings both spiritual and corporal: for spiritual blessings,
Cornelius we see obtained thereby illumination and instruction in Gods saving
truth. And S. James says, If any man lack wisdom let him ask of God, who
gives to all men liberally, and it shall be given him Ephraim in the 31. of
Jeremy prays for converting grace, Turn thou me, o Lord, and I shall be turned:
To whom God presently replies, Is Ephraim my dear Son? Is he a pleasant Child?
For since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him still: Therefore my
bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy on him, says the Lord.
Prayer obtains remission of sins; I said (says David Psalm. 32.) I will
confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my
sin. For this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee in a time when thou
may be found. Prayer also obtains corporal blessings; When heaven was shut
and it rained not, Eliah prayed for rain and it rained: Hannah prayed for a
Son, and she conceived: If we be sick (says S. James cap. 5.) The prayer of
faith shall heal the sick: Nehemiah prayed that he might find favor in the
sight of King Artaxerxes, and found it. Chap. 2. 4.

But some man will say, If prayer have such power and efficacy, how comes it to
pass that many even godly men, often pray, and yet speed not? I answer, There
are diverse causes thereof; Either we pray not as we ought, or we are not
disposed as we ought to be when we pray; We pray not as we ought, either when
we pray not heartily, or not constantly: For God regards not formal and
superficial prayer, but prayer that comes from the heart, and loves to be
importuned before he grant, as our Savior tells us in the parable of the woman
and the unjust Judge, whom though at first he would not hear, yet importunity
made him do her justice. Or secondly, we rely not upon God as we ought, when
we pray, but trust more to second means, to our wit, to our friends or the
like, then to him. And this seems to be that wavering in prayer S. James speaks
of, when he bids us pray in faith, without wavering, Chap. 1. that is, without
reeling from God to rest upon second means: but as with our mouth we pray to
him, so should our hearts rely upon him to give us what we ask; we often pray
to God for fashion, but indeed we look to speed by others; and so God takes
himself mocked, and then no marvel if he hears us not: If it were our own case
we would not listen to such suitors. Or thirdly, we pray and speed not, when we
make not Gods glory the end of what we ask; Ye ask (says S. James) and receive
not, because ye ask amiss, that ye might consume it upon your lusts. Or
fourthly, we may ask something that crosses the rule of Divine providence and
justice, and then also we must not look to speed: David prayed for the life of
his child by Bathsheba, Vriahs Wife, but was not heard, because it stood not
with the rule of Divine justice, that so scandalous a sin, which made the
Enemies of God to blaspheme, should not have an exemplary punishment. In like
manner sundry times when the children of Israel rebelled against the Lord, and
murmured against Moses and Aaron their Governors; Moses poured forth very
earnest prayers to God for removing his judgments from off the people, but God
would not hear him, because their sins were scandalous, and committed with so
high a hand, that it could not stand with the rule of his justice, not to
inflict punishment for them.

Again, sometimes, and that too often, we are indisposed for God to grant our
request; as first, when some sin unrepented of lies at the door, and keeps Gods
blessing out; Psalm 66. 18. If I regard (says David) iniquity in my heart, the
Lord will not hear me. Psalm. 50. 16.
And his Son Solomon observed it, Prove. 28. 9. where he says, He that turns
away his ear from hearing the Law, even his prayer shall be abomination. So
God would not hear Joshua praying for the Israelites, when they fled before the
men of Ai, because of Achans Sacrilege; Get thee up, (says God) why lie
thou thus upon thy face? Israel has sinned -- for they have taken of the
accursed thing; that is, the thing that cursed were those that meddled
therewith: Therefore the children of Israel could not stand before their
Enemies, -- because they were accursed: Neither will I be with you any more,
except ye put the accursed thing from among you.

Or lastly, our Prayers often are not heard, because we appear before the Lord
empty; we do not as Cornelius did, send up prayers and alms together: we should
have two strings to our bow, when we have but one. This is another
indisposition, which unfits us to receive what we ask of God: For how can we
look that God should hear us in our need, when we turn away our face from our
brother in his need? When we refuse to give to God, or for his sake, what he
requires, why should he grant to us what we request? Hear what an ancient
Father of the Church, S. Basil by name, in concione ad Deum; Novi quosdam
(says he) qui jejunarunt, qui orarunt, qui ingemuerunt, verum ne unum quidem
obolum in egenos expenderunt: Quae utilitas hic est reliquae virtutis? I have
known, says he, many who would fast, who would pray, who would sigh; but not
bestow one halfpenny upon the poor: But what then will their other devotion
profit them?

Add to all these reasons of displeasure, a reason of favor, why God
sometimes grants not our requests; namely, because we ask that which he knows
would be hurtful for us, though we think not so. We ask sometimes that which
if he granted us would utterly undo us: As therefore a wise and loving Father
will not give his child a knife, or some other hurtful thing, though it cries
never so much unto him for it: so does God deal with his children. And how
wise soever we think our selves, we are often as ignorant in that which
concerns our good, as very babes are, and therefore we must submit our selves
to be ordered by the wisdom of our heavenly Father.

Moreover, we must know and believe, that God often hears our prayers, when we
think he does not; and that three manner of ways: As namely first, when he
changes the means, but brings the end we desire another way to pass: we ask to
have a thing by our means, but he likes not our way, but gives it us by another
means which he thinks better. S. Paul that he might the better glorify God in
serving him, desires the prick of the flesh might be taken from him: God denies
him that means, but grants him grace sufficient for him; that so being humbled
by the sight of his own infirmity, he might glorify God for his power in man's
weakness. And is it not all one, whether a Physician quench the thirst of his
Patient by giving him Barberies, or some other comfortable drink, as by giving
him Beer which he calls for? Secondly, God often grants our request, but not at
that time we would have it, but defers it till some other time which he thinks
best. Daniel prays for the return of the Captivity in the first year of Darius,
but God defers it till the first of Cyrus: we must not therefore take Gods
delays for denials. The souls of the Saints under the Altar, Rev. 6. cry out
aloud for vengeance; God hears that cry, and cannot deny the importunate cry of
innocent blood; yet he defers it for a little season, says the Text; and why?
because their fellowservants and Brethren that should be slain as they were,
might be fulfilled. Lastly, God sometimes grants not the things we ask, but
gives us in stead thereof something which is as good, or better: And then we
are not to think, but that he hears us.

And thus much concerning the power and efficacy of prayer. Now I come also to
show the like of Alms, how powerful a means they are to procure a blessing
from God: Not thy prayer only, says the Angel, but thine Alms also are come
up for a remembrance in the sight of God. For Alms is a kind of prayer,
namely, a visible one, and such an one as prevails as strongly with God for a
blessing, as any other. Hear David in the 41. Psalm, Blessed is he that
considers the poor, the Lord will deliver him in time of trouble. 2 The Lord
preserve him and keep him alive, and he shall be blessed upon earth; and thou will not deliver him unto the will of his enemies. 3. The Lord will strengthen
him upon the bed of languishing: thou will make all his bed in his sickness. A
place so evident as flashes in a man's eye. But hear Solomon speak too, Prove.
19. 17. He that has pity upon the poor lends unto the Lord, and that which
he has given, he will pay him again. And Pro. 28. 27. He that gives unto the
poor shall not lack; but he that hides his eyes shall have many a curse. Also
Prove. 11. 25. The liberal soul shall be made fat; and Pro. 21. 13.
he that waters, shall be watered also himself. Likewise Eccles. 11. 1. Cast
thy bread upon the waters, for thou shall find it after many days. These are
for corporal blessings, and of this life; but hear also for spiritual
blessings, and those of the life to come. David, Psalm. 112. (quoted by S. Paul,
2 Cor. 9.) He has dispersed, he has given to the poor, his righteousness
remains for ever, etc. That is, he shall be remembered, not only in this
life, but in the life to come. Luke 16. Make to your selves (says our Savior)
friends of the unrighteous Mammon, (that is, of these deceitful and uncertain
riches) that when you fail, they (that is, the friends you have made) may
receive you into everlasting Tabernacles: that is, that God looking upon the
Almesdeeds you have done, and hearing the prayers and blessings of the poor,
may reward you with eternal life. So S. Paul, 1 Timothy 6. 17, etc. Charge them
that be rich in this world, -- that they trust not in uncertain riches, but in
the living God, -- That they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready
to distribute, willing to communicate: Laying up in store for themselves a good
foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life.
Non memini (says S. Hierome) me legere mala morte mortuum, qui libenter opera
charitatis exercuit, habet enim multos intercessores, and impossible est
multorum preces non exaudiri. What should I say more? Shall we not receive our
sentence at the last day according to our works of mercy? Come ye blessed of my
Father, and inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
world: For when I was hungry, ye gave me meat, when I was thirsty, ye gave me
drink, etc. ye know the rest: O the wonderful efficacy of Alms in prevailing
with God! What favor do they find in his sight? how are they remembered? but
not for any merit in them, which is none, but of his mere mercy and merciful
promise, who accepts them in Christ our Savior. Whence is that prayer of
Nehemiah c. 12. concerning this case of good works, Remember me o my God,
concerning this, and spare me according to the greatness of thy mercy.

Thus much of the efficacy and prevalency which prayer and Alms have with
Almighty God, to procure a blessing from him. Now I come to the third thing
propounded, The reasons why God requires them, and why they are so pleasing
unto him: which reasons when they are known, will be also strong motives to us
why we should frequent them: For though indeed their efficacy alone were a
motive sufficient to invite any reasonable man to do them; yet will these
reasons add a further enforcement thereunto. To begin then with prayer; the
reasons why God requires this duty at our hands (I will name but the chief) are
these: First, that we might acknowledge the property he has in the gifts he
bestows upon us: otherwise we would forget in what tenure we hold those
blessings we receive from his hands; Though therefore he be willing to bestow
his benefits upon us, yet he will have us ask them before he does it. Even as
Fathers do with their children, though they intend to bestow such things upon
them as are needful, yet they will have their children to ask them. Unless
therefore we ask of God the things which are his to give, as we shall not
receive what we have not, so we cannot lawfully use any thing we have.

Secondly, Another reason is, that we might be acquainted with God: Acquaint
now thy self with God, says Eliphaz Job 22. 21. and be at peace; thereby good
shall come unto thee. Now acquaintance we know grows amongst men by conversing
together, by intercourse and speaking to one another. So it is here, by
accustoming to speak to God in prayer we grow acquainted with him: otherwise if
we grow strangers to him, and he to us, we shall not dare to behold him.

Thirdly, Prayer is the way to keep our hearts in order: For to come often into
the presence of God, breeds an holy awe in our hearts: It makes us to call our
sins to remembrance with sorrow and shame, and to be afraid to commit them: we
may know it by experience; men are afraid to offend those into whose presence
they must often come to ask and sue for favors, and if they have offended,
they are presently ashamed, and the first thing they do, will be to sue for
pardon.

These are the reasons for prayer: Now let us see the reasons also why Alms are
required; which are near of kind to those for prayer. For first, we are to
offer Alms to testify our acknowledgement of whom we received, and of whom we
hold what we have. For as by prayer we ask Gods creatures before we can enjoy
them; so when we have them, there is another homage due for them, namely, of
thanksgiving, without which the use of the creature, which God gives us, is
unclean and unlawful to us. Every creature of God (says S. Paul, 1 Timothy 4.)
is good, if it be received with thanksgiving; not else. And the same Apostle 1
Cor. 10. tells us, that even those things, which according to the manner of the
Gentiles, were offered unto Idols, (that is, to Devils) a Christian might
lawfully eat, so it were done with thanksgiving to the true and only God: for
so he should profess, he eat not meat of the Devils gift, or Devils Table, but
of the Lords, whose of right was the earth, and the fullness thereof: Whether
therefore, says he, ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do else, do all to the
glory of God; that is, give him the glory of the Lordship of his creature by
your thanksgiving. Now our thanksgiving to God for his creature, must not
express it self in words only, but it must be also in work and deed; that is,
we must yield him a rent and tribute of what we enjoy by his favor and
blessing, which if we do not, we lose our Tenure. This Rent is twofold; either
that which is offered unto God, for the maintenance of his worship and
Ministers; or that which is given for the relief of the poor, the Orphan and
the Widow, which is called Alms. For not only our riches, but our Alms are an
offering unto Almighty God; So Prove. 19. 17. He that has pity on the poor,
lends to the Lord: and Chap. 14. 31. He that has mercy on the poor,
honors his Maker. And our Savior will tell us at the day of Judgment, that
what was done unto them, was done unto him. This then is the reason why we must
give Alms, because they are the tribute of our thanksgiving, whereby we
acknowledge we are Gods Tenants, and hold all we have of him; that is, of the
Manor of heaven, without which duty and service we have not the lawful use of
what we possess. Whence our Savior tells the Pharisees, who stood so much upon
the washing of the Cup and Platter, lest their meat and drink should be
unclean; Give alms, says he, of such things as you have, and behold all things
are clean to you. Luke 11. 41.

Now that this acknowledgement of Gods Dominion was the end of the Offerings of
the Law, both those wherewith the Priests and Levites were maintained, and
those wherewith the poor, and the Orphan, and the Widow were relieved, appears
by the solemn profession of those who paid them were to make, Deuteronomy. 26. where
he that brought a basket of first fruits to the house of God, was to say, I
profess this day unto the Lord, that I am come unto the Country which the Lord
swear unto our Fathers for to give us. And when the Priest had taken the
basket, he was to say thus; A Syrian ready to perish was my Father, and he went
down into Egypt and sojourned there with a few, and became there a Nation great
and mighty, and populous. And the Egyptians evil entreated us, etc. And the
Lord brought us forth out of Egypt with a mighty hand, and outstretched arm,
etc. And brought us into this land, and has given us this land, even a land
that flows with milk and honey. And now, behold, I have brought thee the
first fruits of the land, which thou (...) Lord have given me: and thou shall
set it (says the Text) before the Lord thy God, and worship before the Lord
thy God. This was to be done every year. But for Tithes the profession was made
every third year, because then the course of all manner of Tithing came about.
For two years they paid the Levites Tithe and the Festival Tithe, the third
year they paid the Levites Tithe and the poor man's Tithe: So that year the
course of Tithing being finished, the party was to make a solemn profession:
When thou have made an end (says the Lord) of Tithing all the Tithes of thine
increase, the third year, which is the year of Tithing, (that is, when the
Tithing course finisheth) and have given it to the Levite, the Stranger, the
Fatherless, and the Widow, that they may eat within thy gates and be filled:
Then thou shall say before the Lord thy God; I have brought away the hallowed
thing out of mine house, and also have given it to the Levite, and to the
Stranger, to the Fatherless, and to the Widow, according to all the
Commandments which thou have commanded me. -- Look down from thy holy
habitation from heaven, and bless thy people Israel, and the land which thou
have given us, as thou swarest to our Fathers, a land that flows with milk
and honey.

What we have seen in these two sorts, is to be supposed to be the end of all
other Offerings in pios usus, (which were not sacrifices) namely, to
acknowledge God to be the Lord and giver of all. As we see in that royal
Offering which David with the Princes and Chieftains of Israel made for the
building of the Temple, 1 Chronicles. 29. where David acknowledges thus; Thine o
Lord is the Kingdom, and thou art exalted as Head over all: Both riches and
honor come of thee, and thou reignest over all, and in thine hand is power and
might, and in thine hand it is, to make great and to give strength unto all.
Now therefore our God, we thank thee, and praise thy glorious Name. -- For all
things come of thee, and of thine hand have we given thee.

For this reason there was never time since God first gave the Earth to the
sons of men, wherein this acknowledgement was not made by setting apart of
something of that he had given them, to that purpose. In the state of Paradise
among all the trees in the garden, which God gave man freely to enjoy, one tree
was Noli me tangere, and reserved to God as holy, in token that he was Lord of
the garden: So that the first sin of Mankind for the species of the fact was
Sacrilege, in profaning that which was holy. For which he was cast out of
Paradise, and the Earth cursed for his sake, because he had violated the sign
of his fealty unto the great Landlord of the whole earth. Might I not say, that
many a man unto this day is cast out of his Paradise, and the labors of his
hands cursed for the same sin? But to go on.

After man's ejection out of Paradise, the first service that ever we read was
performed unto God, was of this kind: Abel bringing the best of his flock, and
Cain of the fruit of his ground for an Offering or Present unto the Lord. The
first spoils that ever we read gotten from an Enemy in war, paid tithes to
Melchisedek the Priest of the most high God, as an acknowledgement that he had
given Abraham the Victory. Melchisedek blessing God in his name to be the
possessor of heaven and earth, and to have delivered his enemies into his hand.
To which Abraham said Amen by paying him Tithes of all. Jacob promises God,
that if he would give him any thing, (for at that time he had nothing) he would
give him the tenth of what he should give him: Which is as much to say, as he
would acknowledge and profess him to be the giver, after the accustomed manner.

For the time of the Law, I may skip over that; it is well enough known, no man
will deny it. But let us come to the time of the Gospel, which though it has
freed us from the bondage of typical Elements, yet has it not freed us from
the possession of our Fealty unto God as Lord of the whole earth. 'Twere
strange me thinks to affirm it: I am sure the ancient Church next the Apostles
thought otherwise. I will quote for a witness Irenaeus, who Lib. 4. cap. 32.
tells us that our Savior, when he took part of the Viands of his last Supper,
and giving thanks with them, consecrated them into a Sacrament of his body and
blood, set his Church an example of dedicating part of the creature in
Dominicos usus; Dominus (says he) dans discipulis suis consilium primitias Deo
offerre ex suis creaturis, non quasi indigenti, sed ut ipsi nec infructuosi,
nec ingrati sint, eum qui ex creatura panis est, accepit and gratias egit, etc.
Et novi Testamenti novam docuit oblationem, quam Ecclesia ab Apostolis
accipiens in universo mundo offert Deo, ei qui alimenta nobis praestat,
primitias suorum munerum in novo Testamento. But this is no proper occasion to
follow this argument any further: I will therefore leave it, and add a second
reason why God requires Alms and such like offerings at our hands.

Namely, that we might not forget God: our blessed Savior Mat. 6. and Luke 12.
33, etc. speaking of this very matter of alms, Lay not up (says he) for your
selves treasures upon earth; but ^ay up for your selves treasures in heaven: --
For where your treasure is, there will your heart be. The proper evil of
abundance is to forget God and our dependence upon him: the remedy whereof most
genuine and natural is, to pay him a rent of what we have: So shall we always
think of our Landlord, and lift up our hearts to heaven in whatsoever we
receive and enjoy. Yea, when this service is so acceptable to God, that he
promises a great reward to those who thus honor and acknowledge him, how can
it choose but detain our hearts in heaven in that respect also; when we shall
so often think of God, not only as the Lord and giver of what we have, but as
the rewarder also of the acknowledgement we perform?

PSALM. 112. 6. Psa. 112. 6.
The Righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance.
A Word fitly spoken, says Solomon, is like Apples of Gold in pictures of
Silver; that is, graceful and comely: so is a Text of Scripture fitly chosen,
and rightly applied to the occasion. Such an one, as I take it, is this I have
now read, not chosen by me, but appointed by order to be used at these times of
commemoration. I shall need no other preface to commend it to your attention:
Let us therefore see what is the sense and meaning thereof.

The Righteous; that is, the bountiful: shall be in everlasting remembrance:
In remembrance with God; in remembrance with men: with God; in the world to
come, and in this world: with men, how, and in what manner? These are the
several heads I shall treat of; and first of the first, the Subject; The
Righteous, or the bountiful man.

Righteousness in a special sense, in the Hebrew and the rest of the
Oriental Tongues of kind to it, signifies Beneficence or Bounty, both the
Virtue and the work; and therefore by the Hellenists or Septuagint is it
translated (...), the word so frequent in the New Testament, for that we call
Alms. It Is a known place, Dan. 4. according both to the Septuagint and vulgar
Latin; Peccata tua Eleemosynis redime, and iniquitates tuas misericordi is
pauperum: where in the Original for Eleemosyna is (...) Iustitia, as we in our
English render it; Break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquity by
showing mercy to the poor. This notion of righteousness is to be found thrice
together in the 12. of Tobit, ver. 8. Prayer (says old Tobit there to his son)
is good with fasting, and with alms, and righteousness: A little with
righteousness is better then much with unrighteousness: It is better to give
alms, then to lay up gold. 9. For alms does deliver from death, and shall purge
away all sin. Those that exercise alms and righteousness, shall be filled with
life. Here in the Greek copy, alms and righteousness are exegetically put the
one to expound the other, but in the Hebrew there is but one word (...) for
them both, that being the word in that language for (...). Hence in the Syriack
Translation of the New Testament (...) is rendered by (...) Iustitia, and so in
the Arabic. Hence Mat. 6. 1. for, Take heed that you do not your alms before
men, (as we read it) the vulgar Latin and some Greek Copies have, Attendite,
ne justitiam vestram faciatis coram hominibus: (...) for (...). Namely, as the
word charity with us, though in the larger sense it signifies our whole duty
both to God and man, is restrained to signify our liberality to the poor; so
is the word Righteousness in the Oriental Languages.

If Righteousness therefore signify Beneficence and Bounty, then is the
righteous according to this notion the bountiful man, or as we speak the
charitable. And that it is so taken in my Text, both the general scope of the
Psalm, and the connection with the words before and after, is proof sufficient;
for before goes this; A good man shows favor and lends: he will guide his
affairs with judgment: Surely he shall not be moved for ever: Then come the
words of my Text; The righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance. After it
follows this; He has dispersed, he has given to the poor; his righteousness
remains for ever: which S. Paul alleges 2 Cor. 9. to promote their
collection for the poor Saints at Jerusalem.

For illustration of this and our further information, it will not be amiss I
hope, to commend to your observation some other places of Scripture where the
word righteous is thus taken; as namely Psalm. 37. 21. The wicked borrows and
pays not again; but the righteous shows mercy and gives. Again, Psalm. 25.
26. I have been young and now am old, yet have I not seen the righteous for
saken, nor his seed begging their bread. He is ever merciful and lends, and
his seed is blessed. Here the righteous is the merciful and bountiful; to
whom namely this blessing, that his seed shall not want, is proper and
peculiar. The same use is, Prove. 10. 2. Treasures of wickedness profit
nothing, but righteousness delivers from death. The same is repeated again
cap. 11. 4. Riches profit not in the day of wrath, but righteousness
delivers from death. Where righteousness to be taken for alms is apparent
out of Tobit 12. where it is so applied and rendered, namely, Alms does deliver
from death. I could add also another place, Prove. 21. 28. but these shall be
sufficient.

Hence appears their error who conceive of the nature of Alms, as of an
arbitrary thing, which they may do if they will, or not do, without sin; as
that which carries no obligation with it, but is left freely to every man's
discretion. And this makes some contend so much, to have the Priests
maintenance granted to be eleemosynary, that so they might be at liberty to
give something or nothing as they listed. But if that were so, yet if Alms be
Iustitia in the Hebrew tongue, and the language which our Savior spoke. If our
Savior called them Iustitia, when he mentioned them, who dare affirm then,
that Iustitia implies no obligation, or that a man may leave it undone without
sin?

So much for the subject, The Righteous: The next is the Praedicate, shall be
in everlasting remembrance: In remembrance, I said, with God and men: with God,
in the life to come, and this life: Let us consider the first, The world to
come.

It is certain, that at the day of Judgment we shall receive our doom,
according to our works of charity and mercy; and that of all the works that a
Christian man has done, these alone have that peculiar privilege to be then
brought in express remembrance before God: Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. For I
was an hungered, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was
a stranger and ye took me in; naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye
visited me; I was in prison, and ye came unto me, etc. For as much as ye have
done thus unto the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. Matthew.
25. What does my Text say? The righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance;
God remembers our good deeds, when he rewards them, (as he does our prayers
when he hears them;) If to remember then, be to reward, an everlasting reward
is an everlasting remembrance. It Is remarkable that this privilege which the
works of Bounty and Mercy shall have at the day of Judgment, was not unknown
to the Jews themselves: for so we read in the Chaldee Paraphrast upon
Ecclesiastes; Futurum est ut Dominus mundi dicat omnibus justis ante se
constitutis, Vade, gusta cum gaudio panem tuum, ut statutum est, pro pane quem
dedisti pauperibus and obscuris qui esuriebant; and bibe cord bono vinum quod
repositum est tibi in horto Eden, (id est, Paradiso) pro vino quod miseuisti
pauperibus and obscuris qui sitiebant: quia ecce modo accepta sunt opera tua
bona coram Domino.

The reason of this prelation of works of mercy at that great day is, because
all we can expect at the hands of our heavenly Father is merely of his mercy
and bounty: we can hope for nothing but mercy, without mercy we are undone;
according to that of Nehemiah in his last Chap. Remember me, o Lord, concerning
this, and spare me according to the greatness of thy mercy. Now in those that
are to be partakers of mercy, the divine wisdom requires this congruity, that
they may be such as have been ready to show mercy unto others, judging them
altogether unworthy of mercy at his hands who have afforded no mercy to their
brethren: for so the Scripture tells us, that they shall have judgment without
mercy, that have shown no mercy. The tenor of our Petition for forgiveness of
sins in the Lords Prayer, runs with this condition, As we forgive them that
trespass against us. And who can read without trembling the Parable of the
unmercifull servant in the Gospel, to whom his Lord revoked the Debt he meant
to have forgiven him, because he showed no mercy to his fellow servants, who
owed him a far less Debt? Should thou not, says he, have showed compassion
to thy fellow servants, as I showed compassion unto thee? This rule of
congruity, I say, is the reason why at the day of our great account, we shall
be judged according to our works of mercy and bounty: To do as we would be done
to, has place not only between man and man, but between God and men.

Nor is this I speak of, manifest by the form of our last sentence only, but
by other Scriptures beside: what else means that of our Savior, Luke 16. Make
unto your selves friends of the unrighteous Mammon, (that is, of these slippery
and deceitful riches, for (...) in the Scriptures Dialect is (...)) that when
ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting Tabernacles? Or what means that
of S. Paul 1 Timothy 6. 17. Charge them that be rich in this world, -- that they
trust not in uncertain riches, but in the living God, -- That they do good,
that they be rich in good works, laying up in store for themselves a good
foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life?

Laying up a good foundation, etc. in the Greek, (...) (...). Here it is
observable that works of Beneficence are said to be (...), or the foundation of
the reward we shall receive in the life to come. If any but S. Paul had said
so, we should have gone near to have excepted against it for an error: Works
the foundation of eternal life? No, that shall not need: but the foundation of
that blessed sentence we shall receive at the last day for them, and that is
evident by the form thereof, which we have alleged: whatsoever is meant, a
great privilege sure is hereby implied, that these works have above others. A
like place to this we have in the old Testament, with application particularly
to Alms or works of mercy, Tobit 4. 9. For thou layest up for thy self a good
treasure against the day of necessity: in the Greek it is, (...), etc. which
answers to the Hebrew word, (...). Here give me leave to tell you what a late
sacred Critic has observed concerning the word (...) in that place of
Timothy; namely, that the signification thereof there is not Vulgar, but
Hellenisticall, agreeable to the use of the Hebrew word (...) whereto it
answers; for (...) signifies, as it does, Radix or fundamentum; but besides
this in the Rabbinicall Dialect it is used for Tabula contractus, a Bill of
contract, a Bond or Obligation whereby such as lend are secured their loan
again. That therefore (...) which answers (...) in the first sense, does answer
the same likewise in the second; and accordingly the Apostles meaning to be,
that those who exercise these works of beneficence do provide themselves as it
were of a Bill or Bond, upon which they may at that day sue or plead for the
award of eternal life, Vi pacti, but not Vi meriti.

In the same sense he takes (...), 2 Timothy 2. 19. The foundation of God stands
sure, having this seal: The Lord knows them that are his. And let every one
that names (or calls upon) the name of Christ, depart from iniquity. The
mentioning of a Seal here, implies a Bill of contract; for Bills of contract had
their Seals appendent to them; each side whereof had his Motto, the one suiting
with the one party contrahent; the other with the other: That to this S. Paul
alludes; Gods (...), says he, stands sure; (that is, Gods Bill of contract,
or his Chirographum,) having a Seal according to the manner; the one side
whereof carries this Motto, The Lord knows them that are his: the other
this, Let every one that calls upon the Name of Christ, depart from iniquity.

Thus God remembers the Righteous, or charitable man in the world to come. He
remembers him also in this: For that which the Apostle says of godliness
that it has the promise of this life, as well as of that to come, is most
properly and peculiarly true of this righteousness of bounty and mercy: other
righteousness indeed must not look for reward till hereafter, but this is wont
to be rewarded now.

For spiritual blessings we have the example of Cornelius, who for his
Almesdeeds found favor with God, to have S. Peter sent unto him, to instruct
him in the saving knowledge of Christ: Thy prayers and thine Almesdeeds, said
the Angel, are come up in remembrance before God; Now therefore send to Joppa,
and inquire for one Simon Peter, etc.

For temporal blessings hear what David says, Psa. 37. 25. (quoted before) I
was young, says he, and now am old, yet have I not seen the righteous
forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread. He is ever merciful and lends,
therefore his seed is blessed. This blessing is the merciful and charitable
man's peculiar, that his children shall not want, who was liberal and
openhanded to supply the want of others. But think not that God remembers the
charitable man with a temporal blessing in his posterity only; for he
remembers him also in his own person: Thus the same David, Psalm. 41. 1. Blessed
is he that considers the poor, the Lord will deliver him in time of trouble.
2. The Lord will preserve him and keep him alive, and he shall be blessed upon
the earth, and thou will not deliver him unto the will of his enemies. 3. The
Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing, etc. And does not his Son
King Solomon say the same? Prove. 19. 17. He that has p^ty upon the poor
lends unto the Lord, and that which he has given, he will pay him again. But
this perhaps some will think, may be applied to the reward in the life to come:
If it be, it would much illustrate that of S. Paul's (...) I now spoke of. But
Prove. 28. 27. is a place not capable of this exception; He that gives to the
poor shall not lack: but he that hides his eyes, shall have many a curse.

Thus we have seen, how the righteous man is in remembrance with God: Now let
us see how the same is and ought to be in remembrance with men: And it may be
inferred from the former; for why should not we remember those whom God does?
The practice in the Church of God has been accordingly.

The Jews, when they make mention of any of their deceased Worthies, are wont
to do it with this Encomium, (...), id est, Memoria ejus sit in benedictione:
Otherwhile with this, (...), Memoria ejus sit ad vitam futuri seculi. And of
their Rabbis in general, when they mention them, they say, (...), Magistri
nostri, quorum memoria sit ad benedictionem. Which encomiasticall scheme is
taken from that of Solomon Pr. 10. 7. (...), Memoria justi sit ad benedictonem:
which therefore they sometimes use unaltered to the purpose aforesaid;
sometimes with addition, as Memoria Justi sit in benedictione ad vitam futuri
saeculi; sometimes, Memoria Justi and Sancti sit ad benedictionem. These
formulae are frequent in their writings: Nor has this commemorative Scheme
been taken up by them (as some perhaps may suppose) since the coming of our
Savior in the time of their dispersion; but was used long before, as may
appear Ecclus. 45. 1. where Moses is thus remembered, Moses beloved of God and
men, (...), whose memorial is blessed. And in the next Chapter like mention is
made of the Judges of Israel; namely, The Judges every one by name, whose heart
went not a whoring, nor Eccl. 46. 11
departed from the Lord, (...), Let their memory be in benediction. So of Judas
Maccabaeus, 1 Mac. 3. 7. He grieved many Kings, and made Jacob glad with his
acts, (...), His memorial is, or let his memorial be blessed for ever.

But what is the meaning of this Formula? what is it for the memory of the
righteous to be (...), or in benedictionem? The Septuagints Translation of that
Prove. 10. 7. (whence, as I told you, this form of honorable remembrance is
taken) will soon resolve us; for they in stead of the words (...), Memoria
justi in benedictione, (...), the memory of the just is with praises. To make
mention therefore of the righteous by way of benediction, is to praise them,
for the word (...), or (...), to bless, in Scripture has a treble notion:
First, to speak well of: Secondly, to speak well for: Thirdly, to do well unto.
To speak well of, is to praise; So we are said to bless God, when we praise
and glorify him: Benedic anima mea Domino; Bless the Lord o my soul; that is,
praise him. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel; that is, praised. Bless the
Lord all ye Nations; that is, praise him: and so every where in the Psalms. The
second notion, to speak well for, is to pray for: So the Priest is said to
bless the people, when he prays for them: The Lord bless you, and save you,
the Lord make his holy countenance to shine upon you, and be merciful unto
you: So other blessings of the like kind, are prayers for those, over whom
they are pronounced. The third notion of blessing is, to do good unto, to
bestow some gift or good upon: Thus God is said to have blessed man, when he
said unto him, Increase and multiply, replenish the earth and subdue it; that
is, He endowed him with these gifts. In thy seed shall all the Nations of the
world be blessed; that is, receive some great benefit. So God is said to have
blessed the Patriarchs when he made them to thrive, and gave them wealth and
riches; according to that of Solomon, Prove. 10. 22. The blessing of the Lord
makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with it; namely, such as is wont to
accompany riches gotten without Gods blessing. Hence (...), or (...) in
Scripture signifies a gift or present, bounty or beneficence: the present of
cattle which Iaacob provided for his brother Esau, when he went to meet him,
is all that Story through called his Blessing: The Presents which David sent of
his prey to the Elders of Judah, 1 Samuel 30. 26. are there called Blessings. And
in the New Testament, 2 Cor. 9. the collection at Corinth for the poor Saints
at Jerusalem, is thrice called (...), their blessing, which we translate
Bounty. I thought good to be a little diligent in this explication, that we
might be the better able to discern what kind of remembrance of righteous men
deceased is commended unto us in that Scripture, The memory of the righteous is
with blessing: whence not the Jew only, as you have heard, but the Christian
also seem to have derived their practice in that particular, which I am now to
show.

For the Christian in this point has been no whit short of the Jew, but
exceeded them rather, not in the later only, but in those better and primitive
times: witness those anniversary remembrances of the Martyrs and Saints
deceased; the appointing of Festival days for their memorial; the custom to
assemble at their Sepulchers, to make Panegyric orations in their honor; and
above all, that ancient and so long continued custom without known beginning,
to commemorate at the Holy Table, when the Eucharist was celebrated, the
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Martyrs, and Confessors: All which
tended to this, that the memory of the righteous might be with blessing. In the
extent of which blessing the Christian went beyond the Jew: for of that
threefold notion of blessing I now spoke of; first, to speak well of, or to
praise: secondly, to speak well for, or to pray for: thirdly, to do well unto;
the Jews seem (not only anciently, but of Vid. Buxtorf c. 35.
late) to have used none but the first in their commemorations, namely, that of
praise. But the Christian added the second of prayer and good wishes for the
Saints departed, namely, for their public acquitall and consummation at the
day of Resurrection: which, had it continued in the first and original
meaning, could not be disliked; but having roved in time, (the Mother of many
Superstitions and Errors) and kindled the fire of Purgatory, it was thought fit
by the Authors of our Reformation, to be disused, and the blessing of the Dead
to be confined to that of praise only, namely, of praising and commending
them, by recounting their worthy deeds; and then secondly, of praising God for
them.

NEHEM. 13. 14, 22. Nehem. 13. 14, 21.
14. Remember me, O my God, concerning this, and wipe not out my good deeds
[Heb. (...)] that I have done for the house of my God, and for the offices
thereof.

22. And spare me according to the greatness of thy mercy.


THese words are the words of Nehemiah himself, by way of a short ejaculatory
prayer, or Apostrophe unto Almighty God: But what were those good deeds, will
you ask, which he speaks of, done for the house of his God, and the offices
thereof? Of this the words going before will inform us; v. 10. I perceived,
says he, that the portions of the Levites had not been given them, whereby the
Levites and the singers that did the work, were fled every one to his field.
11. Then contended I with the Rulers, and said, Why is the house of God
forsaken? And I gathered them together, and set them in their place (or
station.) 12. Then brought all Judah the tithe of the corn, and the new wine,
and the oil, unto the Treasuries (or storehouses.) 13. And I made Treasurers
over the Treasuries; -- such of the Priests and Levites as were accounted
faithful, and their office was to distribute unto their Brethren. 14. Remember
me, o my God, concerning this, etc.

There needs no more for understanding the meaning of the words: Now therefore
let us see what Lessons we may learn therefrom. And in the first place, that
which is most pregnantly to be gathered thence, and best fits our turn; namely,
That to make provision for the maintenance of Gods worship, and the Ministers
thereof, is a worthy work, and of high esteem and favor with God: forasmuch as
Nehemiah commends himself unto the Divine favor and remembrance, under that
name of having done good deeds or kindnesses unto the House of God, and the
Offices thereof; a manifest argument he took them to be most pleasing and
acceptable unto him. The truth of the observation appears not only by this, but
by other places of Scripture both of the Old and New Testament: Let us take
some survay of them. And first for the furnishing a place for Gods worship,
take notice of that famous benediction and prayer of King David, when his
people offered so willingly and liberally toward the building of the Temple;
In the uprightness of my heart (says he) I have willingly offered all these
things: and now I have seen with joy thy people which are present here, to
offer willingly unto thee. O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel our
Fathers, keep this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of
thy people, and prepare their hearts unto thee. 1 Chronicles. 29. 17, 18. Surely
therefore it was a most excellent disposition, and such as he knew, God prized
and esteemed.

For, entertainment and provision for his Prophets and Ministers, in what
account God has it, appears by his great solicitude in his Law that they
should not be neglected: Take heed to thy self (says he, Deuteronomy. 12. 19.) that
thou for sake not the Levite, as long as thou live upon the earth: What
expression can go beyond this? Again, by that story of the Shunamite woman, 2
King. 4. 9. who entertained the Prophet Elisha and made provision for him, when
he should have occasion to pass that way: Behold, (said she to her husband)
this is an holy man of God, which passes by us continually. 10. Let us make I
pray thee a little chamber on the wall, and let us set for him there a bed, a
table, and a stool, and a candlestick, and it shall be when he comes unto us,
then he shall turn in thither. How acceptable to Almighty God was this good
office done to his Prophet, appears by the double miracle he wrought for her,
both in giving her a child, when her husband was now so old she despaired; and
in raising him again to life, when he was dead.

But let us come now to the New Testament, and see whether the like be not to
be found there; lest otherwise any might think (as some are prone enough to do)
the case were now altered. And first also to begin here with the provision of a
place for Gods worship; the story of that Centurion of Capernaum in S. Lukes
Gospel is worthy our consideration; Who when he heard of Jesus (says the Text)
sent unto him the Elders of the Jews, beseecbing him, he would come and heal
his servant. The Elders came to Jesus, and besought him instantly, saying, He
was worthy for whom he should do this. Why so? For (say they) he loves our
Nation, and has built us a Synagogue. Luke 7. 4, 5. Then Jesus (says the
Text, without any more ado) went with them; namely, as well approving of their
motive, that he who had done such a work deserved that favor should be deigned
him. Also concerning provision and entertainment for his Apostles and
Ministers; Are they not our Saviors own words and promise when he sent them
forth? He that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet shall receive a
Prophets reward: Nay, He that should give them but a cup of cold water, should
not lose his reward. According to which S. Paul speaking of the Philippians
bounty and communication toward him; I have received (says he) of
Epaphroditus the things which were sent from you, an odor of a sweet smell, a
sacrifice acceptable, wellpleasing unto God. And 2 Timothy 1. 16. concerning the
like good office done him by Onesiphorus, he speaks in this manner; The Lord
(says he) give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus, for he often refreshed me,
and was not ashamed of my chain. The Lord grant unto him, that he may find
mercy of the Lord in that day. Which is not much unlike this of Nehemiah in my
Text, if it had been spoken in the first person by Onesiphorus himself, as it
is in the third by Saint Paul: Howsoever, who will deny, but it implies the
same thing?

Now then, if this be so as I think we have proved; What shall we think of the
times we live in, when men account them the most religious to Godward, who do,
or would unfurnish the House of God most, who rob his Priests most? But they
have an excuse sufficient to bear them out, and what is that? The Priests they
say have too much. If this excuse would serve turn, some of themselves perhaps
might soon have less then they have: for sure some body else as well as the
Priest, have more then they need, and might spare some of it. But whether the
Priests have too much or not, will not be the question: Suppose they had; has
God too much too? For these men consider not that the propriety of such things
as these is Gods, and not the Priests; and that to change the propriety of what
is sacred, by alienating thereof to a profane and private use, (I say not, by
diverting it from the Priests livelihood to any other holy use, in case the
Priest have more then needs;) is to rob God himself: yea, God tells us so much,
Malach. 3. 8. Will a man (says he) rob his God? (as if it were a thing
intolerable, and scarce ever heard of;) yet ye (says he) have robbed me. But
ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In Tithes and Offerings. Ye are cursed
with a curse, because ye have robbed me. (For that is the burden that goes with
things consecrated, Cursed be he that alienates them.) This Malachi lived at
the same time with Nehemiah, and the Jews say, 'twas Ezra; whence this
exprobration of his, and this fact of Nehemiah in my Text, may justly seem to
have relation one to the other. And thus much of my first Observation.

My second is; That God rewards these, and so all other our good deeds and
works, not for any merit or worthiness that is in them, but of his free mercy
and goodness; Remember me, o my God, (says Nehemiah) and wipe not out my good
deeds: Why, is there any reward due to them of Justice? No; But remember me, o
my God, and spare me according to the greatness, or multitude of thy mercy.
Thus he expounds himself: And S. Paul taught us even now the self-same thing in
his Votum or prayer for the house of Onesiphorus, for like good service done to
the Offices of Gods House; The Lord (says he) grant unto him, that he may
find mercy of the Lord in that day; that is, the day of Judgment, which is
Tempus (...), when every one shall receive according to his work.

The controversy therefore between the Romanists and us, is not, whether there
be a reward promised unto our works: we know the Scripture both of the Old and
New Testament is full of testimonies that way, and encourages us to work in
hope of the reward laid up for us: We know that in keeping of Gods
Commandments there is great reward; Psa. 19. 11. And that unto him that sows
in righteousness, shall be a sure reward; Prove. 11. 18. We know our Savior
says, Mat. 5. 12. Blessed are ye, when men revile and persecute you, -- for
great is your reward in heaven. Also that he that receives a Prophet in the
name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward. And whosoever shall give a
cup of gold water only, to one of his little ones in the name of a Disciple,
shall not lose his reward, Mat. 10. Again, we read Luke 6. 35. Love your
enemies, Do good and lend, -- and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be
the children of the Highest: we know also what S. John says, 2 Ep. v. 8. Look
to your selves that ye lose not those things which ye have wrought, but that ye
may receive a full reward. But the Question is, Whence this Reward comes;
whether from the worth or worthiness of the work, as a debt of Justice due
thereto; or from Gods mercy, as a recompense freely bestowed, out of Gods
gracious bounty, and not in justice due to the worth of the work it self? Which
Question, me thinks, Nehemiah here in my Text may determine when he says,
Remember me o Lord for my good deeds, according to thy great mercy. And the
Prophet Hosea, Chap. 10. 12. when he bids us, Sow to our selves in
righteousness, and reap in mercy. And S. Paul, Romans 6. 23. where though he
says, that the wages of sin is death, yet when he comes to eternal life, he
changes his style, But (says he) eternal life is (...), the gracious gift of
God through Jesus Christ. For as for our works they are imperfect, and
whatsoever they were, we owed them to him, in whom we live, and have our being,
whether there were any reward or not promised for them.

Neither do we hereby any whit detract from that Axiom, That God rewards
every man according to his work: For still the question remains the very
same, Whether there may not be as well merces gratiae, as merces justitiae; that
is, Whether God may not judge a man according to his works, when he sits upon
the Throne of Grace, as well as when he sits upon his Throne of Justice. And we
think here, that the Prophet David has fully cleared the case in that one
sentence, Psa. 62. 12. With thee, o Lord, is mercy; for thou rewardest every
one according to his work.

Nay more then this; we deny not, but in some sense this reward may be said to
proceed of Justice: For howsoever originally and in it self, we hold, it
comes from Gods free bounty and mercy, who might have required the work of us
without all promise of reward, (for as I said, we are his creatures and owe our
being unto him) yet in regard he has covenanted with us, and tied himself by
his word and promise to conferte such a reward; the reward now in a sort
proves to be an Act of Justice, namely, of Iustitia promissi on Gods part, not
of merit on ours: Even as in forgiving our sins (which in it self all men know
to be an Act of Mercy) he is said to be Faithful and Just, 1 Ioh. 1. 9.
namely, of the faithful performance of his promise: for promise we know once
made, amongst honest men is accounted a due debt. But this argues no more any
worthiness of equality in the work toward the obtaining of the reward, then
if a promise of a Kingdom were made to one, if he should take up a straw; it
would follow thence, that the lifting up of a straw, were a labor of a work
worth a Kingdom, howsoever he that should so promise were bound to give it.

Thus was Moses careful to put the children of Israel in mind touching the
Land of Canaan, (which was a type of our eternal habitation in heaven) that it
was a Land of promise, and not of merit, which God gave them to possess, not
for their righteousness, or for their upright heart, but that he might perform
the word, which he swear unto their Fathers, Abraham, Isant, and Iaacob.
Whereupon the Levites in this book of Nehemiah, say in their prayer to God;
Thou made a Covenant with Abraham, to give to his seed the Land of the
Canaanites, and have performed thy word, because thou art just; that is, true
and faithful in keeping thy promise. Now because the Lord has made a like
promise of the Crown of life to them that love him, S. Paul sticks not in like
manner to attribute this also to Gods Justice; Henceforth (says he, 2 Timothy 4.
8.) is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the righteous Judge
shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but to all them that love his
appearing. Upon which S. Bernard most sweetly, as he is wont; Est ergo quam
Paulus expectat, corona Iustitiae; sed justitiae Dei, non suae: Iustum quippe
est, ut reddat quod debet, debet autem quod pollicitus est.

Lastly, for the word merit; It is not the name we so much scruple at, as the
thing wont now adays to be understood thereby; otherwise we confess the name
might be admitted, if taken in the large and more general sense, for any work
having relation to a reward to follow it; or whereby a reward is quocunque modo
obtained; In a word, as the correlatum indifferent either to merces gratiae or
justitiae: For thus the Fathers used it; and so might we have done still, if
some of us had not grown too proud, and mistook it, since we think it better
and safer to disuse it: even as Physicians are wont to prescribe their Patients
recovered of some desperate disease, not to use any more that meat or diet,
which they find to have caused it.

And here give me leave to acquaint you with an Observation of a like
alteration of speech, and I suppose for the self-same cause happening under the
old Testament; namely, of (...) changed into (...), Righteousness into that
which finds mercy: for so the Septuagint and the new Testament with them
render the Hebrew word (...) Iustitia; not only when it is taken for
beneficience or alms, (as in that Tongue it is the ordinary word) in which use
we are wont to expound it works of mercy; but where there is no relation to
Alms or Beneficence at all. Whence I gather that by (...), the Septuagint meant
not, as we commonly take it, works of mercy, but rather works whereby we find
mercy at the hands of God. I will give you a place which me thinks is very
pregnant, Deuteronomy. 6. 24, 25. where we read thus, And the Lord commanded us to do
all these Statutes, (you may see there what they are) to fear the Lord our God,
for our good always, that he might preserve us alive, as at this day. And it
shall be our Righteousness, if we observe to do all these Commandments before
the Lord, as he has commanded us. Here the Septuagint (for, And it shall be
our Righteousness) have, (...), and it shall be our (...), that whereby we
shall find mercy at the hands of God, if we observe to do all these
Commandments, etc. This place will admit no evasion; for there is no reference
to Alms here: And indeed all our Righteousness is nothing else but (...), that
whereby we find mercy at the hands of God; and no marvel if works of mercy,
as to relieve the poor and needy, be specially so called, for they above all
other are the works whereby we shall find mercy, and receive the reward of
Bliss at the last day. And so much of my second Observation.

I come now to my third; That it is lawful to do good works, Intuitu
mercedis: It is plain that Nehemiah here did so; Remember me, o my God,
concerning this, etc. So did Moses of whom it is said, Heb. 11. That he chose
rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures
of sin for a season; esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches then the
treasures of Egypt; for, says the Text, (...) (aspiciebat vel intuebatur
(...), He had respect unto the recompense of Reward. And I confess, it seems
an unreasonable thing to me, that that which is made the end (though but in
part) of the Action, should not be at all looked unto by the Agent, when as
Finis is principium Actionis; and that which God has promised unto us, as an
encouragement to make us work with the more alacrity, should not be thought on,
nor looked to in our working. Do not they, who would persuade this, go the way
to discourage men from good works, by removing out of their sight, the
encouragement which God has given them?

But they object: The obedience of Gods children ought to be filial, that is,
free and not mercenary, as that of hirelings. I answer; Obedience, which is
only for reward, without all respect or motive of love and duty, is the
obedience of an Hireling; not that which acknowledges the tie of obedience
absolute, and the reward no otherwise due, then of his Fathers free love and
bounty, as every true child of God does, and ought to do.

They object again that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. 5. Charity seeks not her
own: now say they, the works of Gods children must proceed from love and
charity. I answer; what though Charity seeks not her own, may not a charitable
man so much as look or hope for his own, or have an eye to what is promised
him? But this place is altogether misapplied and abused: For that property of
charity now mentioned (as some also of the rest of that Chapter) concerns only
our charity toward men, and not our charity toward God: the meaning thereof
being, That a charitable man will sooner lose his own, then by seeking or
contending for it, break the band of charity.

To conclude: The Use that follows from all this Discourse shall be only this;
That if Almighty God remember them, who have done good deeds unto his House and
the Offices thereof; much more ought we who are partakers of the comfort and
benefit of such bounty, to remember and honor them with a thankful
celebration of their Names.

MAT. 10. 41, Mat. 10. 41
He that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets
reward.
OUR blessed Savior giving his Apostles their mission to preach the Gospel,
unfurnished with outward things, and forewarning them what harsh and unkind
usage they and their successors were like to find amongst men: for the better
encouragement of such as should entertain and minister unto them; he
pronounces, That whosoever received them, received him, and he that received
him, received him that sent him: Whereby it appears how honorable an office
it was to afford them entertainment, and such as the noblest need not be
ashamed of. But because the hope of reward is the most forcible spur to all
undertakings, he adds that too in the words of my Text, He that receives,
says he, a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward:
that is, he that receives a Prophet, not for any respect, but quatenus talis,
because he is a Prophet, shall have a Prophets reward.

Which words contain in them evidently these two Propositions: First, that
there is some special and eminent degree of reward due unto a Prophet above
other men. Secondly, That he that shall entertain a Prophet, and do any good
office unto him under that name, that is, for his office sake, shall be
partaker of that Reward. Of these two I intend to treat, beginning with the
first, the more general.

That there shall be differing degrees of Reward in the life to come, is
evident by sundry places of Scripture: As first, from that so often iterated
passage, wherein God is said to reward every man according to his works; which
is not to be understood only of the differing quality of our works, good and
evil, which God rewards accordingly, the one with everlasting bliss, the
other with eternal fire, (as some here except) but also of the differing works
of just men compared together, as is manifest by that 1 Cor. 3. 8. where the
Apostle comparing his own and Apollo's work together, saying, He had planted,
and Apollo watered; adds, That both should receive their reward, according to
their work; that is, as their work differed, so should their reward do. In the
second place the same is represented by that Parable, Luke 19. of the ten
servants who received of their Lord, being to go into a far Country, ten
pounds to trade with till his return. At what time he that had increased his
pound to ten pounds, was made ruler over ten Cities; He that had gained but
five pounds, over five Cities, and so the rest, according as they had improved
the stock given them. A third place is that 1 Cor. 15. 42. There is one glory
of the Sun, another of the Moon, and another glory of the Stars, for one star
differs from another in glory. So also is the Resurrection of the dead. Here
is the full stop, and not the words to be referred to that which follows, to
wit, That the body is sown in corruption, and rises again in incorruption, as
some would have them. For the Apostle speaks here of the difference of things
heavenly and glorious, (one star, says he, differs from another in glory;) and
not of the difference between glorious, and inglorious, corruptible and
incorruptible: For this belongs to his other similitude; There are celestial
bodies, and bodies terrestrial, but the glory of the celestial is one, and
the glory of the terrestrial is another. A fourth place is that 2 Cor. 9. 6.
where the Apostle speaking of the reward of beneficence, avoucheth, that he
which sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly, and he that sows bountifully,
shall reap bountifully. Fifthly, that speech of our Savior to the twelve, Mat.
19. imports as much; Behold, we, says S. Peter, have forsaken all and followed
thee: (...); what shall we have therefore? Verily I say unto you, that ye which
have followed me, (...), in the Regeneration, or Resurrection, when the Son of
man shall sit upon the throne of his Glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve
thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. S. Luke relates it upon another
occasion; whereby it appears our Savior uttered it more then once, You (says
he to the Twelve) are they which have continued with me in my temptations:
Therefore I appoint you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me, that ye
may eat and drink at my Table in my Kingdom, and sit on Thrones, judging the
twelve Tribes of Israel. Luke 22. 28, etc. Whatsoever is meant by the reward
intimated in this expression, for the quality thereof: It Is plain there is some
peculiar and more eminent degree of glory here promised the Apostles, which
shall not be common to others with them: First, because it is the reward of
their proper and peculiar service unto Christ, as the Text shows. Secondly,
because these twelve thrones in regard of their number, can befit no more but
these twelve. Thirdly, supposing the twelve Tribes of Israel here mentioned, to
be likewise in a condition of bliss and happiness; it must needs be, that
those who sit upon twelve Thrones to judge, that is, to govern them, must be in
a higher degree of dignity, then those over whom they shall be set: Whatsoever
therefore the meaning of the reward be, thus much may be gathered from the
description thereof, That there shall be differing degrees of glory in the
Kingdom of Christ to come. To conclude; It has been the ancient and constant
Tradition of the Church, testified by the unanimous consent of all the Fathers,
was never questioned by any, until that Peter Martyr in this last age Age
first began to doubt thereof, and others since more boldly adventured to
contradict it.

Their main reasons or objections are these two: First, that the Reward to come
depends not upon the virtue or dignity of our works, but only upon the merit
and satisfaction of Christ: But his merits and satisfaction is uniform and the
same to all: Ergo, The Reward also which is to be given by virtue thereof shall
be so. This Objection proceeds from that scrupulosity, which many of ours have
to admit of any relation or connection between our works and the reward to come:
Whence also is that, that they should not be done intuitu mercedis; which is an
assertion repugnant to the tenor of the Scripture, where the Holy Ghost is
wont to ground his Exhortations upon the hope and promise of reward. Now what
an unreasonable conceit is it to think that where wages is promised for the
encouragement of the labourer, the labourer should be bound to work without
having any eye or respect to his wages? But to the objection I answer thus;
That it is true, the merits and satisfaction of Christ is the foundation of our
reward, namely, that alone which makes our works capable thereof, without which
they were not: nevertheless it is true also, that our works are the subject of
Reward; and the same merit of Christ, makes differing works capable of a
different reward.

Their other objection has a little more likelihood, and seems therefore
somewhat more difficult to answer: It is taken from the Parable, Mat. 20. where
the Kingdom of heaven is compared to a Vineyard, the Master whereof went out
in the morning to hire laborers, and agreed with them for a penny a day: Three
hours after, or at the third hour, and so again at the sixth and ninth hours;
yea at the eleventh, but an hour before Sun went down, he did likewise. And
when they came all to receive their wages, he gave the last hired as much as he
had agreed with the first, to wit, every one a penny, neither more nor less:
Whence it seems to follow, that the reward to come, signified by the penny,
shall not be proportioned according to the difference of works, but be one and
the same to all.

I answer; First, the Parable proves no more but this; that the sooner or later
coming of men into the Vineyard of the Church, (for all were not to be called
at one time, nor in one age) shall not make their reward greater or lesser: not
that the reward shall not be different according to the diversity of our works.
Secondly, I add, that this Parable has respect to the Churches of the Jews
and Gentiles not called, nor to be called at the same time: For the Jews were
hired into the Vineyard betimes in the morning, the Gentiles not till the day
was far spent; yet shall they by the goodness of their heavenly Master receive
the same reward of eternal life, which was promised to the Jew, with whom the
Covenant was first made, and who bare the heat of the day, whilst the other
stood idle. Besides, in the new Vineyard of the Gospel the turn is changed; for
into it (because the Jews would not) the Gentiles have first been hired, though
at several hours, the Jew being not to come in until the eleventh hour; yet
when Christ comes to give us wages, shall receive his penny, that is, eternal
life as well as we.

This to be the genuine scope of the Parable, may be gathered by that which is
presently subjoined by our Savior as it were to be the key thereof. So the
last (says he) shall be first, and the first last; (...), for many are called,
but few are chosen: which I understand thus; The last, that is, the Gentiles
who came in last, shall be the first partakers of Christ's Kingdom. The Jews
who were first in Covenant, and had wrought so long before us in Gods Vineyard,
shall be last in the Covenant of Christ, and not converted till the fullness of
the Gentiles be come in: For though many of them were invited at the first
coming of Christ, yet few or none obeyed, and so the Nation became not of his
peculium, but stands yet rejected; (...). To the like purpose is the same
speech used by our Savior, Luke 13. They shall come, says he, from the East,
and from the West, and from the North, and from the South, and shall sit down
in the Kingdom of God. And behold, there are last, which shall be first, and
there are first, which shall be last. What means this? Out of the eighth of S.
Matthew, where the same passage is related, we shall hear it expounded; for
there the words run thus, Many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit
down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of heaven: But the children
of the Kingdom (that is, the whole generation of Israel, who received not the
Gospel, at the Preaching of Christ and his Apostles, and all the generations
since, who have continued in unbeleef) shall be cast out into utter darkness.

And here by the way, because the Parable uses the notion of a day, to
signify a time of many ages; it will not be altogether unseasonable to note,
that the Metaphor may appear the easier, how that the Scripture often elsewhere
calls the whole time of man's pilgrimage in this world, by the name of a Day; As,
To day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. S. Paul, Heb. 3. 13.
Exhort one another (...), every day, whilst it is called to Day; where we say
Day to include every day. And I believe we are thus to understand Day in the
Lords Prayer, in that Petition, Give us this day our daily Bread; that is, the
whole time we live in hoc seculo. For in stead of S. Matthews This Day, spoken
after the Hebrew notion, Saint Luke has in the same Petition, (...), that is,
every day. Therefore S. Matthews Hodie, must comprehend S. Lukes Every day, if
the sense of the Petition in both of them be the same, as I believe it is. Nay
more then this; The world to come, even seculum aeternitatis, or eternity it
self is likewise termed a day, 2 Pet. 3. ult. Domino nostro, says he, and
servatori Jesus Christo, sit gloria and nunc, (...), and in diem aeternitatis: A
long Day indeed. But this obiter.

Thus having cleared my Proposition in thesi, or in general; That there shall
be differing degrees of glory in the reward to come: It remains that I make it
good in the hypothesis concerning a Prophet; namely, that to them who instruct
others in the ways and will of God, which is the Office of a Prophet, there
belongs a pre-eminence of reward, above and besides that which is common to all
Saints. This pre-eminence of glory the Schoolmen term Aureola, that is, an
Additament of felicity to that essential glory in the Vision of God, which
they term Aurea: This Aureola or Coronet to be added to the Crown of glory,
they ascribe to three sorts of persons; To Virgins, to Martyrs, and to Doctors
or Prophets. The two first are out of my scope: The third, of Prophets, let us
see how it is proved out of Scripture. First therefore it is apparent from my
Text, He that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a
Prophets reward; Ergo, there is some special or peculiar reward belonging to a
Prophet, and that too an eminent one; otherwise our Saviors speech will have
no enforcement in it, as he that considers thereof may easily see. The second
is, Dan. 12. 3. where the Angel prophesying of the Resurrection to be at the
end of Time, and saying, That many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth,
shall awake; some to everlasting life, and some to shame, and everlasting
contempt; he adds, And those that be wise (that is, have learned the true
wisdom, which consists in the fear of God) shall shine as the brightness of
the firmament. But those that turn many unto righteousness (that is, the
Teachers and Instructers) as the stars for ever and ever. Here the difference
between those that teach and are taught, is as much as between the light of the
Stars, and the brightness of the Firmament. Some will have the whole sentence
to speak of the eminency of glory laid up for Prophets, Translating (...) in
the first place not docti or intelligentes, but Doctores: The Teachers shall
shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many unto
righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever: but I have followed that
interpretation, which our Translators thought most likely. Thirdly, to this
eminency of glory the Angel seems also to have respect in the end of that
Chapter, when he says, But go thy way Daniel, till the end be; for thou shall
rest, and stand up in thy lot at the end of days: in sort tua, i. in sort
Prophetarum. And this perhaps may be that too which our Savior intends, Mat.
5. Qui fecerit and docuerit, magnus vocabitur (i. erit) in regno coelorum. The
reason of all this is, because those who teach and convert others to
righteousness, have an interest and a kind of title to all the good works which
they shall do: How then can their reward but be great and eminent, when not
only their own works, but the works of their converts and disciples, shall be
brought into their account?

A matter, if we consider it, of no small encouragement and comfort unto us,
whom God has placed in this condition to be Teachers and Instructers of
others, if so be we bury not our Talent in a Napkin, but employ it for the
advantage of our Lord and Master. For it is not the habit or faculty, but the
work, which shall reap the reward we speak of: Happy are we therefore, if we
neglect not this opportunity of bliss, which God has given us.

And thus having done with the first Proposition I undertook, I come unto the
second; which is, That he that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet,
shall be partaker of a Prophets reward: He that receives, that is, does any
good office, or deserves well of a Prophet: For this to be the meaning, may
appear by that which follows; He that receives a righteous man, in the name of
a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward; where righteous is to
be taken by way of eminency, for one of eminent sanctity, such as among the
Jews had therefore the surname of Iusti, as Simeon Iustus, Iacobus Iustus, and
other the like. Then in the next words the expression is varied; Whosoever
shall give to drink to one of these little ones, a cup of cold water in the
name of a disciple, shall not lose his reward: whence I say we may gather what
good office, the word receiving before used, intimated to us, namely, to
relieve, maintain, support, and the like. He therefore that thus receives a
Prophet, shall be partaker, says our Savior, of a Prophets reward; that is,
have an eminent reward, or of the quality of a Prophet, though himself be none.

The reason is, because he that supports and enables a Prophet for his duty,
has an interest in his work, and consequently in the reward that belongs unto
it: This appears by the contrary, because he that maintains and abets those,
who commit an evil act, makes himself guilty of their sin, and so of the
punishment due to the same. An example whereof we have in that of the
Benjamites in the Book of Judges, who by abetting the men of Gibeah, who
committed that foul abomination with the Levites Wife, made themselves guilty
of their sin, and brought that hideous judgment, which at first was deserved
only by a few sons of Beliall, upon the Heads of the whole Tribe: It is a known
story. Now it is par ratio for a man to entitle himself to another good works,
as to his ill.

But there is a modification in the Text, whereupon this reward we speak of
depends, otherwise not to be looked for: And that is, This good office must be
done in nomine Prophetae, not for any other respect, then as he is, and because
he is a Prophet: He that receives a Prophet in nomine Prophetae, shall receive
a Prophets reward: not he that receives him only for some personal or
by-respect, because he is his kinsman, friend, or friends ally, or which is the
ground of the most respect the Prophet gets among the most now adays, because
he is one of their own side and faction; but setting all such respects aside,
eo nomine quia Prophet^, with mere respect to their office and calling, or
because they are (as Valens and Valentinian in their Rescript apud Theodoretum
calls them) (...), Procuratores magni Regis. I may tell you that this is no
ordinary thing now adays; we may perhaps find some that can be content to make
much of the Prophet for some personal qualities of his, or perhaps because he
has abilities above ordinary, or because it may be he is like to further the
way they wish good luck to, or that they may gain repute among some sort of
men, or other respects of like nature. But are there many which regard them in
nomine Prophetae? How then comes it to pass that their courtesies are so
appropriate to the persons of some, that they show no respect or esteem to the
calling in others?

Whence comes that Unchristian, or indeed Atheistical language, A base Priest,
A paultry Priest? It would never have grieved me, if any other had served me
thus, but to be served thus by a base Priest, who can endure it? Tell me in
good earnest, is this to honor a Priest or a Prophet in nomine Prophetae; or
not rather point blank unto it, to reproach and dishonor him under that
reverend Name; that is, to despise and reproach the Calling it self? For can a
man honor that condition, the name whereof he thinks to be a reproach? Is any
man wont to say, A base Lord, A base Knight, A base Gentleman, A base
Christian? No: And why? because he accounts them all terms and titles of
honor. Judge then by this, what account they make of Gods Ambre, who turn the
very title of their Calling into a name of reproach, and what reward by
proportion they are like to merit at Christ's hands: Not a Prophets I am sure;
and whether a Christians or not, themselves may judge. It Is often, and too
often true indeed, that for our persons we are unworthy of any better respect,
but even then it best appears, whether a man has respect to the Calling eo
nomine, when there is nothing in the Person to move him to it.

But there is another sort of men, who honor not a Prophet in the name of a
Prophet, yet behind, namely, such as rob and spoil them of their livelihood
and daily bread, and not only themselves give nothing to enable and encourage
them the better to perform their Ministry; but take from them several ways,
that which the piety and bounty of their Ancestors has allotted them; yea to
many, if not to the most, no gain or theft is more sweet, then that which is
gotten out of the Priests portion: But whether it will prove so at that day,
when the just God shall reward every man according to his works, may be greatly
feared. I told you a little before, that the reason, why he that receives a
Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall be partaker of a Prophets reward, is,
because he that supports and enables a Prophet to do his duty, has thereby an
interest in his work, and consequently to the reward due to the same. If this
be so; what can they look for, who by subtracting their daily bread from them,
hinder and disenable them from the free and cheerful performance of their
duty, by distracting them with the cares of providing for their bodily life? Do
they not derive upon themselves the guilt of whatsoever impediment comes hereby
to the propagation of the Kingdom of Christ? Shall not the loss of every soul
that perishes for want of due provision to maintain an able Minister, be cast
in their account at the last day? I will speak nothing now of the burden which
Sacrilege it self, being a robbing of God, carries with it, (see Prove. 20. 25.
It is a snare to the man who devoureth that which is holy; and after vows to
make enquiry;) nor of those dreadful execrations, which the Donors of such
things were wont antiquo ritu, to lay upon the heads of all such as should
divert them to profane uses, wherewith these men willingly and wilfully involve
themselves. But for a close, let us join in an humble and hearty
acknowledgement of Gods goodness and mercy, and say, Blessed be God our
heavenly Father, who notwithstanding the malignity of many, has not left us
destitute, but in every age has raised up some to show kindness unto the
Prophets, and to provide entertainment for them: Witness the goodly
structures, and liberal endowments in our two Seminaries for the entertainment
and education of Prophets and Prophets Sons; being the bounty of those
Worthies, the fruits of whose Piety and Devotion, the whole Church of God by
his Divine goodness does enjoy; To whose blessed Names, as their deserts
challenge from us, let all due honor and thankfulness be for ever rendered.

DEUTERONOMY. 33. 8. Deuteronomy. 33. 8.
And of Levi he said, Let thy Thummim and thy Vrim be with thy Holy One. (...).
THis verse is part of that blessing wherewith Moses the man of God blessed the
children of Israel before his death; and these words are part of the blessing
of Levi: a blessing which much exceeds those that went before it, and is far
above all that come after it: For as S. Paul proves Melchisedec to be greater
then Abraham, because he blessed Abraham, and worthier then Levi, because he
tithed Levi in the loins of Abraham; so may we say of this blessing, that it is
the greatest of all, because it is the blessing of him who by his Office was to
bless all the rest, and the worthiest of all, because by it the party blessed
is enabled to bless the rest of his Brethren: (...), Always that by which
another is, that thing it self is more then the other.

In the words themselves we will consider first the subject blessed, and then
the quality of the blessing it self: The subject blessed is expressed both by
name, and by description; by name, Levi; by description, Gods Holy One. The
blessing it self is contained in words few, in substance plentiful; Vrim and
Thummim; nay more then so, Thy Thummim and Thy Vrim; that we might know whence
this blessing comes; how that it is (...), and (...), a divine thing, the gift
of God, who is the Author and giver of all good things: And of Levi he said,
Let thy Thummim, etc.

To begin first with the Subject Levi: What Levi was is so well known, that it
were needless to say much to make it better known. Only this, that Levi was
the Tribe which God had especially bequeathed to himself, and set apart for the
Ministry of the Altar. Concerning whose name, (though observations drawn from
names are like an house raised upon the sand, yet because of old, and among the
Patriarchs Names were given by the Spirit of Prophecy;) it will not be
altogether unworthy our speculation, to remember the reason why this Name Levi
was imposed; which we shall see as truly verified in that Function, to which
God did advance his posterity, as it was by his Mother fitly given to himself,
upon the good hope she conceived at his birth.

For Levi signifies a Conjoyner, an Uniter or maker of union; for thus said
Leah when she bare him; Now at this time will my husband be joined to me,
because I have born a third son: And she called his name, Levi. She called him
Levi; but for ought we read, in regard of her self, she found him no Levi as
she hoped; but she prophesied of that sacred office, whereby all the sons of
Levi became conjoyners, became makers of union, not between Jacob and Leah, but
between God and Man, between Christ and his Spouse, between the spiritual
Jacob and his deformed Leah. For as truly as ever Leah spoke, might the Church
then, and may the Church now, affirm, when she has born these sons unto her
husband; Now I know my heavenly husband, my Lord my God, will be joined to me,
because I have born him these (...), these sons of Union, these Ministers of
reconciliation. Plato could say, a Priest was (...), A friend-maker between God
and men: Nay, his whole office is nothing but the service of peace, and that
not only between God and man, but between man and his brother; for how can he
love God, who loves not his brother? or how can he be at peace with God, who is
at variance with his brother? Needs must he therefore that is Minister of the
one, be Minister of the other also; and he that is so, nay he alone that is so,
is a right Levite, and a true son of Union.

How unworthy then of this holy name, how unworthy to succeed in the holy Order
of Levi, are those who are Ministers of division, who by their lives, doctrine,
example, or any other way divide God and his Church, and the Church within it
self; who neither have peace with God themselves, nor will suffer others to
have it; who neither agree themselves with others, nor suffer others to agree
among themselves? Beati pacifici, Blessed are the peacemakers, especially in
the sons of Peace. This Christ prayed for in his Apostles, Ioh. 17. saying,
Holy Father, keep them through thy name, that they may be one as we are one.
Christ is so one, that he makes all one, who are one in him; so should every
son of Levi be one. In sum, the Ministers of God are called Angels, and
therefore should sing a song like unto that song of Angels, Glory be to God on
high, peace on earth, and good will amongst men. That Church which has such a
Levite, such a Minister, such a son of Union, may truly take up the words of
Micah, Judge. 17. and say, Now I know the Lord will do me good, seeing I have a
Levite to my Priest.

And thus much of the name Levi: Now I come unto the Tribe it self; concerning
which there may be two things asked: First, why God did confine the Priesthood
to one Tribe alone, and not suffer it to be common to all, as it was before the
Law, and is now since the Law? Secondly, why Levi was chosen to this holy
Function rather then any other Tribe?

To the first, why God did limit this holy Function to one Tribe only, some of
the Jews make this answer: That one of the sons of Israel with his whole
posterity was due unto God by virtue of Jacobs vow, Genesis 28. which was, that if
God would be with him in his journey, and bring him back again unto his Fathers
house, of all that thou shall give me, says he, I will give the tenth unto
thee; Now because God gave children, as well as beeves and sheep, therefore
they also must fall within compass of his Vow. And that there might be no
difficulty about tithing the odd children, because there were more then ten,
they devise this way to make all even: for first, say they, the full number of
Jacobs children was fourteen, because that Joseph's two sons Ephraim and
Manasseh go in the number of Jacobs sons: for Jacob Genesis 48. said unto Joseph,
Thy two sons which are born unto thee in the land of Egypt before I came into
Egypt, shall be mine, as Reuben and Simeon are mine; but thy lineage which
thou begettest after them shall be thine. Now of these fourteen, four were the
Lords by his right unto the firstborn, for so many there were which first
opened the womb of their four Mothers, Rahel and Leah, Bilhah and Zilpah,
Jacobs two Wives and his two Concubines: Now of the remainder being ten, one
falls to Gods share for Tithe, as being comprised within their Fathers Vow.

This reason, though it be as you see handsomely framed, yet has no great
likelihood, because men use not to be tithed; and therefore this extent of the
Vow, is beyond the intent of the Vower. And whereas they urge the words, of all
that thou shall give me; they seem to forget, that God gave unto Jacob besides
his sons, great store of man-servants and maidservants, and yet we read not
that any of these were dedicate unto God, or that he challenged any of their
posterity.

The only or chief cause (if I am not deceived) why God restrained the Priestly
Function to one Tribe, was for a sign and band of restraint of his Church to
one people: For, as the Church cannot be without the sacred Function of holy
Ministry; so likewise the condition thereof must follow the condition of the
Ministry. As long therefore as none could be a Priest but of the Tribe of
Levi, so long there could be no Church, but of that people whereof Levi was a
Tribe. A point of sacred Policy so to order the choice of Ministers, as shall
be most fit to uphold the present state of an established Church.

The other question we propounded was, Why God chose Levi before any other
Tribe? And of this many reasons may be given: As first, for Moses sake, whom
God would honor by advancing the house of his Father to the highest pitch of
dignity that mortal man could attain to: for what greater honor then to be
Ambassador of the Lord of Hosts, to be admitted unto the inspection of his
most secret mysteries; to be Gods (...), his proper and peculiar portion. Would
God they either knew or believed this, who think their house disgraced, and
their blood stained, if any of their Kin become of the Clergy. It was not so in
Gods opinion, no, nor Moses his neither, for had it been, Levi of all Tribes
should not have been Gods holy one.

The second Reason was the Nobility of this Tribe, for Levi was enabled both
generally, as being the son of a lawful Wife, and not the son of an Handmaid;
and specially as being of kin to Moses the Prince of the Congregation: In the
first respect he was nobler then many of his brethren; in the second, more
noble then any of them. This example of Gods own choice of men for his holy
Service, if we would look unto, we would not sin the sin of Jeroboam, to make
Priests almost of no other but of the lowest of the people: I speak not only of
the lowest for external condition, but of the lowest for the gifts of their
mind; for I know it is true which the Virgin has in her Magnificat, That God
often puts down the mighty from their seats, and exalts them of low degree.
(...). I know it is true that he often fills the hungry with good things, and
the rich he sends empty away: but we should know that whenever we offer unto
him, he requires the best thing in our hands; and therefore for this worthy
Calling we are to give unto him, as far as may be, the worthiest among the sons
of men.

Another reason why God chose this Tribe before other, may be the smalnesse
thereof, being not above the sixtieth part of the people: A number which God in
his wisdom saw fit for that Church, as being both sufficient for instructing
the people, and discharge of the duties of their order; and not too great to
live of Gods ordinary, his Tithes and the other offerings of the Altar, whereas
the least of the other Tribes were as big as three of it.

But the last Reason, and as it seems one of the chiefest, is that which Moses
intimates in the very verse following my Text, speaking thus of Levi, that he
said unto his Father and to his Mother, I have not seen them; neither did he
acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own children; but observed Gods word and
kept his Covenant. In which words Moses alludes unto their forward zeal to
avenge the Lord of the people which worshipped the golden Calf, Exodus 32. where
it is said, that Moses stood in the gate of the camp and cried, Whosoever is on
the Lords side, let him come unto me. And all the sons of Levi gathered
themselves unto him. Then said Moses, Thus says the Lord God of Israel, Put
every man his sword by his side, and go in and out from gate to gate throughout
the Camp, and slay every man his brother, and every man his companion, and
every man his neighbor. And the children of Levi did according to the word of
Moses, etc. For Moses had said, (so it follows in the Text) Consecrate your
selves unto the Lord this day, even every man upon his son, and upon his
brother, that there may be given you ablessing this day. This blessing here
spoken of is our Urim and Thummim, the blessing of Sacred Order: So bountifully
did God reward them who were so forward to be on his side when Moses called
them, that himself vouchsafed to call them unto his side for ever.

Whence, first, we may learn whom we are chiefly to prefer unto this holy
Function, namely, those who are zealous for the Lord of Hosts, who prefer the
glory of God above all worldly respects whatsoever: This got Phinehas the son
of Eleazar the High Priesthood; this got all the sons of Levi the guerdon of
Urim and Thummim, the blessing of holy Orders.

Secondly, we may see by the advancement of this Tribe, how merciful our God
is: We know that Levi's fury did once as much offend him, as his sons zeal now
pleased him; and yet for this one action he forgot the sin of their Father in
the bloody slaughter of the Sichemites: He remembered not the curse of Jacob,
Into their secret let not my soul come: My glory be not thou joined with their
assembly. Cursed be their wrath, for it was fierce, and their rage, for it was
cruel. Genesis 49. 6, 7. Nay, he turned the very curse of Jacob into a blessing,
By dividing them in Jacob, and scattering them in Israel. Here mercy and Truth
met both together, and Justice and Peace kissed each other. Lastly, here God
verified his own description of himself, That though he be a jealous God, and
visits the sins of the father upon the children unto the third and fourth
generation, yet he is also a merciful God, and shows mercy even unto the
thousandth generation of them that love him and keep his Commandments.

And thus have you seen why of Levi Moses said this Blessing. And of Levi he
said. Now I come to the description of this blessed Tribe in these words, Gods
holy one: Let thy Vrim and thy Thummim be with thy holy one. How is Levi here
called Holy? how is this Title given to him above the rest of his Brethren? Are
not all the Lords people holy? certainly whatsoever is meant hereby, it is
something more specially belonging to Levi, then to any other Tribe. Which,
that we may the better find, we must take notice of a threefold holiness;
Essential, Habitual, Relative. Essential holiness is the holiness of God,
all one with God himself, and this is a glorious holiness: Who (says Moses)
is like unto thee o Lord among the Gods? who is like unto thee, glorious in
holiness? Exo. 15 11. Habitual I call an inherent holiness, such as is the
holiness of righteous men, integrity of life, or righteous holiness, whereof
Abraham, Job, David, and all the Patriarchs are called Saints and holy men:
This is that which the Greeks call (...), the Latins Sanctimonia. Relative
holiness I define a special relation, or relation of peculiarity which a
thing has unto God, either in regard of propriety of possession, or speciality
of presence: that which is holy after this manner the Greeks call (...), the
Latins, Sacrum. The first of these three is proper to God alone, for he only
is essentially holy. The second is proper to reasonable creatures; for they are
only habitually holy, or endued with holy qualities. But the last is common to
all manner of things; for all things animate or inanimate are capable of
relative holiness, or pecularity toward God: Persons, Things, Times, Places.
Persons, so the Nazarites of the Law are called holy; thus was Sampson, thus
was Samuel holy from their Mothers womb. Things, so the Offerings of the Law,
yea and of the Gospel too, are holy things: The censers of Korah and his
company were Holy, because (says the Text) they offered them unto the Lord.
Times, so the Sabbath day and other Festival days are holy days. Places, so
the Temple of the Lord is an holy Place; Mount Sion an holy Mount; yea the
ground about the bush where God appeared to Moses is called Holy ground. And of
these four, Persons, Things, and Times are holy, because of Gods peculiar
propriety in them, in that they are his Persons, his Things, and his Times: But
Places are holy in another regard, because of Gods special manner of Presence
in them.

Now let us see in which of all these three ways, Levi may be said to be holy:
Essentially holy he cannot be, for he was not God, but the holy one of God.
Habitually holy the event shows he was not more then the rest, though he should
have been. The Tribe of L^vi was always Tribus sacra, holy unto the Lord, but
was not always righteous before the Lord. It was not always true of Levi, that
he walked before God in peace and equity, and turned many from iniquity; but
often, yea too often they were gone out of the way, and caused many to fall by
the Law. Phinehas the son of Eli, was not like Phinehas the son of Aaron: Annas
and Caiaphas high Priests, as holy as any for their order, as unholy as any in
life and conversation.

It should therefore seem, that Levi should be only called holy by a Relative
holiness; namely, because he was Gods peculiar one, because his offered one,
because his peculiar of peculiars; that is, his peculiar Tribe of his peculiar
People; for in this Levi had a privilege above the rest, in the other none:
and this Ezra gives unto him cap. 8. 28. when he delivered unto the Levites the
holy Vessels, Ye are holy (says he) unto the Lord, and these Vessels are holy
also: that is, Ye are holy as the Vessels are; for he says not, they were holy
before the Lord, for so he had meant holy in life; but holy unto the Lord;
(...), which always implies a Relative holiness.

But though this be true that Levi was holy after this manner, yet the word
which in my Text is turned Holy, seems scarce to admit of this construction:
for the word here used is not (...), but (...), which signifies favorable and
gracious, and in Religion charitable and godly: All which leans to an
habitual, not to a respective holiness. But because Levi was not in this sort
holy above other, as I said before; It may seem therefore it should be thus
construed: That (...) is taken actively or passively: Actively it signifies
favorable, benign and gracious. Passively, he that is favored or graced. And
thus Iunius expounds (...) in this place, Let thy Thummim and thy Vrim be with
thy favored one; not (...) as the Septuagint, but (...) which word and sense
the Angel uses in his salutation to the blessed Virgin, (...), Hail, thou
highly favored one; Hail thou whom God has especially graced to be the Mother
of his only Son: So Levi is here described to be one upon whom God bestowed a
special favor or grace, a special (...), or (...), the grace of holy
Ministry: for so S. Paul calls this power of Order, a grace or favor, (...)
and (...), as Ephesians. 3. 8. Unto me who am less then the least of all Saints is
this grace given, to preach among the Gentiles, investigabiles divitias
Christi. And of Timothy the same Apostle speaks, Neglect not that (...), or
grace in thee, which was given by prophecy and imposition of hands. With this
grace was Levi graced, with this favor was he highly favored, and well might
be called, (...), Gods highly favored one.

And thus the issue will be all one, (...) in this sense will fall out to be
Gods holy one in the last sense: for to be specially favored of God, is to
have a special relation to Godward, to be Gods more especially; and this is
to be holy with a relative holiness. Now which soever of these we take to be
here meant, we see that that is in special given to Levi, which otherwise was
common to all the other Tribes. If you take it in the first sense for holiness
in life, as it were to put Levi in mind, how it behoved him above all to be
holy; were not all the Tribes as holy as Levi? and yet Levi alone is called
Gods holy one. If you take it in the second sense for a relative holiness;
were not all the Tribes of Israel thus holy unto God? were not all his own
people, his peculiar people, and a chosen Nation? and yet Levi alone is called
Gods holy one. If you take it in the last sense, for Gods favored one; were
not all Israel a Nation favored of God above all Nation? and yet Levi alone is
especially called Gods favored one.

We therefore whom God has set apart to minister about holy things; we who are
holy unto the Lord, and Gods own in a peculiar manner; we who have a special
relation unto God; we who have received a special favor from God; we must
remember we owe a special thankfulness unto him: we who are Gods peculiars,
must demean our selves peculiarly both toward God and man: we are unto God as
other men are not, and therefore may not always do as other men do; we cannot
reason from others to our selves, no not in things of themselves lawful, Why
should not we do as every man may do; for all that is lawful for others, will
not be seemly for us; for we are the household servants of the most High, we are
special men, of whom God requires a special demeanor in life and actions.

This was one cause why God enjoined the Jews so many peculiar rites and
special observations differing from the fashions of other people, because they
were his peculiar people, an holy Nation; because they were toward him as no
other was, though all the world were his, and therefore would have their
manners differ from the fashion of all other Nations, as a badge and
acknowledgement of that special relation they had to him above other. Levit.
20. 25. I (says God) am the Lord your God, which have separated you from other
people; ye shall therefore put difference between clean beasts and unclean,
unclean fowls and clean, etc. And ye shall be holy unto me: for I the Lord am
holy, and have severed you from other people, that you should be mine. This was
also a cause why God restrained the Priests of the Law from that which was
lawful for the rest of the people; They might drink no Wine; they might not
mourn for their kin; they might not marry a divorced woman: the reason of all
this is given, because they were holy unto the Lord; that is, with a relative
holiness, as being Gods men in a special manner, and therefore required they
should specially demean themselves in their lives. These observations indeed
were ceremonial, but there is something moral in them: And therefore in the
Gospel we hear of some special things required in a Minister; as that he
should have a good report of those who were without; this was not required in
every one who was to be a Christian. Again, S. Paul requires in a Bishop, that
he should be the husband of one wife; this was not in those times required of
every one who was to be a Christian. I shall not need to tell you what special
demeanor the ancient Church bound her Clergy unto: but it came to pass at
last this rule was over practiced by them, for hence it was that a Bishop might
not marry at all, that Priests and Deacons might not marry being once in
Orders, and at last marriage was quite forbidden them all. Thus our Fathers
erred on the right hand, but we go aside on the left: they restrained their
Clergy from that which was lawful for, and beseemed all men; we think almost
that lawful for us, which is lawful for no man, at least we think that which
any man may do we may do also: But there is a golden mean between these
extremes, happy is he that finds it, for he alone shall demean himself like
himself, like a Levite, like Gods holy one.

Secondly, from this special title given to Levi, we may note how causlesly
some are offended to hear those who minister about holy Things, distinguished
from others by names of holiness and peculiarity; to hear them called Clerus,
and Clerici, as it were the Heritage of God; for so says S. Hierome, Clerus
dicimur, quia sors Dei sumus. But say they, are not the People also Gods
heritage? Does not S. Peter call them (...), when he forbids Presbyters, (...),
to domineer over Gods heritage? I confess he does: But those who reason after
this manner come too near the language of Dathan and Abiram, Number. 16. Moses and
Aaron, you take too much upon you; Is not all the Congregation holy, every one
of them? and is not the Lord among them? why then lift ye your selves above the
Congregation of the Lord? If this reasoning had been good, wherein had these
Rebels offended? It could not be denied them, that all the People were an holy
People; for they might have alleged the testimony of God himself, avouching
them to be his peculiar People, and an holy People unto the Lord their God; All
the earth (says he Exodus 19.) is mine, but you shall be my Segulla, my
peculiar people, a Kingdom of Priests, and an holy Nation.

But it might be answered them, Though all the people were Gods peculiar
people, and therefore his holy ones, yet Levi was his peculiar Tribe of his
peculiar people, and therefore comparatively his only holy one. All the Land of
Canaan was the Lords; The Land is mine, says he, and therefore it could not be
alienate beyond the year of Jubilee, and yet for all this there were some parts
of the Land specially called Holy unto the Lord: All the increase of corn, all
the increase of wine, all the fruit of the field was the Lords, and yet the
offerings alone were called holy unto the Lord. God himself calls them his
(...), his inheritance, and therefore gave them unto that Tribe alone, which
alone he had made his (...), the Tribe of his inheritance: So the offered Tribe
lived of Gods offerings, the holy Tribe on the holy things. Again, why may we
not call our Clergy Gods inheritance, when God himself calls the Levites his
Levites? Thou shall (says he Number. 8.) separate the Levites from among the
children of Israel, and the Levites shall be my Levites; that is, my (...), my
Clergy. Why may not we call the Ministers of Christ his (...), when he himself
calls them the gift his Father gave him out of the world? for so he says Ioh.
17. I have declared thy name unto the men thou gave me out of the world,
thine they were and thou gave them me: and again, Holy Father, keep them in
thy name, even them whom thou have given me. If you say he speaks here of all
his Elect, the words following prove the contrary; for those (says he) whom
thou have given me, I have kept, and none of them is lost but the child of
perdition. Here he plainly affirms, he lost one of those his Father gave him,
wherefore he speaks not of his elect ones, for those no man can take out of his
hands. Again, ver. 18. As thou did send me into the world, says he, so I
send them into the world: but I hope all the Elect are not sent, as Christ was
sent by his Father. I conclude therefore, so long as God in the Law says
specially of the Levites, They are mine: so long as Christ in the Gospel of his
Apostles, They are mine, o Father, which thou have given me out of the world;
it is neither arrogance, nor injury, to style those who minister about holy
things with the name of (...), the inheritance of the Lord.

What Levi was, and what is meant by this Title Gods holy one, we have now
showed sufficiently. It remains we should come unto the words containing the
blessing it self, which is called Vrim and Thummim; the words themselves
signify light and perfection, Illumination and Integrity: good endowments
certainly, whosoever shall enjoy them.

But because they are not only Appellative words, but also proper names of
certain things, we must enquire further what is meant by them; and that in a
twofold consideration; First, specially and properly as they are names of
certain things belonging in special unto the High Priest: Then generally, as
they are applied by Moses unto the whole Tribe of Levi. The first again shall
be twofold, what they were in the High Priest personally; or what they
signified in him typically, himself being also a Type.

For the first, what is meant by these things, as they belong unto the High
Priest personally, is a matter full of controversy; and therefore that we may
the better proceed, we will first see the generals wherein all or the most
agree; and after come unto the particulars wherein they disagree. The first,
wherein all agree ^s, that this Vrim and Thummim was some thing put in the
Breast Plate, which was fastened to the Ephod over against the heart of the High
Priest: And thus much the Scripture witnesses, Exodus 28. 30. where God says
to Moses, And thou shall put in the Breast plate of Judgment, the Vrim and the
Thummim which shall be on Aarons heart, when he goes in before the Lord. And
for this cause as most think, was the Breast Plate made double, that the Vrim
and Thummim might be enveloped therein.

The second thing wherein all agree, is that this Vrim and Thummim was a kind
of Oracle whereby God gave answer to those that enquired of him; and from hence
the Septuagint call the whole Breast Plate (...), which some turn Rationale, but
might more truly be turned Orationale, for an Oracle is as it were (...), the
Voice of God, though this Voice or Revelation were of diverse kinds; for at
sundry times, and in diverse manners (says S. Paul) God spoke in old time to
our Fathers. The Jews therefore make four kinds of Divine Revelation: First,
(...), or Prophecy, which was by dreams and Visions: The second (...), afflatus
Spiritus sancti, as was in Job, David, and others. The third Vrim and Thummim,
which was the Oracle. The fourth, (...), filia vocis, which was usual in the
second Temple after the Oracle had ceased; as Mat. 5. at Christ's Baptism there
came a voice from heaven, saying, This is my welbeloved son, in whom I am well
pleased: and Ioh. 12. when Christ said, Father glorify thy name: There came a
voice like thunder, saying, I have both glorified it, and will glorify it
again.

But to return again to our purpose; That Vrim and Thummim was an Oracle of
God, besides the consent of Jews and others, it is plain by Scripture, Number. 27.
when God had commanded Moses to put his hands upon Joshua, and to set him over
the congregation in his stead; he adds, And he (that is, Joshua) shall stand
before Eleazar the Priest, who shall ask counsel for him by the judgment of
Vrim before the Lord. So 1 Samuel 23. when David was to ask counsel of the Lord,
he called for the Ephod, wherein the Oracle was: and whereas before he had once
or twice asked counsel of the Lord concerning Keilah, to prevent the objection
how the Lord answered; it follows in the next by way of a Prolepsis, That
Abiathar then Priest, when he fled to David to Keilah, brought the Ephod with
him. ver. 6. Lastly, in the second of Ezra, when certain of the Priests which
returned from Captivity, could not find their names written in the
genealogies; it is said, that Ezra commanded they should not eat of the most
holy things, till there rose up a Priest with Vrim and Thummim; that is, till
God should by Oracle reveal whether they were Priests or no: whereby it also
appears that this Oracle had then ceased.

And for more light to that we have in hand; it will not be amiss to observe,
that Teraphim among the Idolaters, was answerable to the Vrim and Thummim of
the holy Patriarchs. Both were ancient, for Rahel is said to have stolen away
her Fathers Teraphim: And Vrim and Thummim seems to have been used among the
Patriarchs before the Law was given, because the making of it, is not spoken of
among other things of the Ephod: And because God speaks of it to Moses
demonstratively, (...), the Vrim and the Thummim.

Both also were Oracles; for the Jews and others agree, Teraphim were small
Images made under a certain constellation, which they used to consult both in
things doubtful, and things future, supposing they had a power to this effect
received from heavenly influence; much like to puppets made of wax and like
matter, which our Wizzards still use unto like purpose. And therefore Ezekiel. 21.
we read that the King of Babel among other divinations, consulted also of
Teraphim: And the King of Babel (says the Text) stood at the head of the two
ways, to use divination, consulting with Teraphim, he looked in the liver. And
Zac. 10. 2. Surely (says the Text) (...), The Teraphims have spoken vanity,
and the Soothsayers have seen a lie, and the Dreamers have told a vain thing.

Besides, from this like use of Teraphim with the holy Vrim and Thummim, we may
read Ephod and Teraphim joined both together as things of like kind, as Hosea
3. The children of Israel, says the Lord, shall remain many days without a
King, and without a Prince, and without an Offering, and without an Image, and
without an Ephod and Teraphim. Yea, of so near a nature was this Teraphim unto
the Vrim and Thummim, that Micah, he that had an house of Gods, when he had
made an Ephod, because he had no Vrim and Thummim, he put Teraphims in stead
thereof, as we may gather Judge. 17. 18. where we may see also that when the
children of Dan enquired of the Lord concerning their journey, it pleased him
to give answer by the Idolish Teraphim. So we may gather likewise that the
Israelites after Ieroboams schism, having no Vrim and Thummim, used Teraphim in
the Ephod, and therefore it is that Hosea threatens that they shall be without
Ephod and Teraphim.

Having hitherto shown how far it is agreed about Vrim and Thummim, in the next
place the points of difference ought to be considered; which are either about
the matter whereof it was made, or in the manner how God answered by it.

For the matter, some will have it to be nothing else but the writing or
carving of the great name Jehovah, which was put within the folding of the
breast plate; and that it was called Vrim and Thummim, because by the knowledge
of the mystery of Jehovah in the Trinity, our minds are enlightened, and
understandings made perfect.

Some other there are of the same opinion, but they will have it called Vrim
and Thummim, because by the virtue of that name written, Sacerdos verba sua
illustrabat, and perficiebat: And moreover they say the breast plate was called
(...), the breast plate of judgment, because by it the Lord gave as it were
sentence and judgment, what was to be done in hard and doubtful matters. And
this is the opinion of Rabbi Shelomo.

Some other will have it called the breast plate of judgment, because that by
it the judgment of the Judges, if it were amiss, was hereby as it were
pardoned: because the High Priest was to bear the sins of the people: The
Authors of this opinion are mentioned by R. Shelomo.

Aben Ezra says, it was so called because by it the judgment and decrees of
the Lord were known: And he thinks also that Vrim and Thummim were something
made by the hand of the craftsman.

But Nehemanides and R. Shelomo say, it was opus divinum, and given to Moses in
the Mount, or at least that God showed him how to make it.

Some think it was nothing but the stones in the breast plate, by the shining
whereof God did annuere, by the not shining, abnuere. But Kimchi confutes this,
because it is spoken of as a differing thing in the same place, where the
stones are described: But he himself says, it is not certainly known what it
was.

Nehemanides says, it was certain sacred names, by the virtue whereof the
letters of the breast plate were enlightened and ordered, so that the Priest
might read the answer of God: and that which caused shining was called Vrim;
and that which made them legible, Thummim.

The sum of these Opinions laid together is, That this Oracle was either the
stones of the breast plate themselves, or something in the folding of the
breast plate, which by a divine virtue did cause the stones to shine, and by the
letters of the Tribes names in them, as it were to express the answer of God.

For concerning the manner of this Oracle, the Talmudists report thus much:
First, no private man might consult with Vrim and Thummim, but either (...), he
that was King or chief of the Consistory, or (...), the Consistory or Judges
themselves, and that in matters difficult and of great importance.

Secondly, (...), he that enquired must stand with his face looking full upon
(...), the Priest whom he asked; and the Priest stood with his eyes fixed upon
his breast where was the Vrim and Thummim.

Thirdly, the voice was to be a soft still voice, and not above one thing to be
asked at one time: But if they asked two things at once, the answer was only
unto the first; but in case of extremity, unto both: and such was David's case,
1 Samuel 30. when he asked concerning the Amalekites, who had burnt Ziklag, Shall
I follow this company, says he, and shall I overtake them? The Lord answers,
Follow, for thou shall surely overtake them, and recover all.

Now if you ask how the Priest knew the answer of the Lord? First, you must
remember, there were twelve stones in the breast plate, and in those stones the
twelve names of the sons of Israel, either set or carved; and that there might
be a full Alphabet of letters, there was also, say they, written upon the
breast plate, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and these two words (...), the Tribes
of Israel or Jeshurun. Now when the Lord answered, the letters expressing the
answer, by the divine virtue of the Vrim and Thummim became (...), i.
prominentes; that is, showed forth themselves with a splendour, that the Priest
might read the answer of God: As 2 Samuel 2. when David asked the Lord (...),
Shall I ascend into any of the Cities of Judah? the letter (...) in Shimeon,
(...) in Levi, and (...) in Iehudah, put themselves forth, or shone forth with
a splendour, that the Priest might read (...), Ascend: Though some of the Jews
say the letters became (...), that is, joined themselves together and made a
word: which as I cannot conceive how it should be, so I think it less probable.

And thus hitherto have you heard the diverse opinions of the matter and manner
of this Oracle of Vrim and Thummim: Here is variety enough, I leave to every
one to make his own choice which he will believe; only give me leave to add
thus much in way of censure of them, which is, that all seem against reason and
likelihood, to confound Vrim with Thummim, in making them one and the same
thing called by diverse names, in regard of diverse effects and uses: which I can
the less believe, because I find Vrim alone used in matter of consultation
with God, whereby it seems Thummim had some other use. In the 27. of Numb.
Moses commands Ioshuah in all business to consult the High Priest, by the
judgment of Vrim before the Lord; but no speech of Thummim. Again, 1 Samuel 28.
it is said, that Saul asked counsel of the Lord, when he was to go against the
Philistims; but the Lord answered him not, neither by dreams, nor by Vrim, nor
by the Prophets. Here also is Vrim spoken of, but no word of Thummim.

If I may therefore speak what I think; I would say, that Vrim and Thummim were
a twofold Oracle, and for a twofold use. And that Vrim was the Oracle, or part
of the Oracle, whereby God gave answer to those who enquired of him in hard and
doubtful cases; therefore called Vrim, or lights, because as ignorance is
called darkness; so is all knowledge a kind of illumination or enlightening;
and that which brings knowledge is fitly called a light, because it dispels
the darkness of our minds.

But Thummim was that Oracle or mean whereby the High Priest knew whether God
did accept the Sacrifice or no; therefore called Thummim, that is, Integrity;
because those whose Sacrifice God accepted, were accounted Thummim, that is,
just and righteous in the eyes of God; because their Sacrifice was a shadow of
Christ's Sacrifice, by acceptance whereof we are justified and made righteous
before God. For without doubt the Patriarchs and legal Church had some
ordinary mean to know when their Sacrifice was accepted, else had they been
behind the Gentiles; for they had a sign to know when they did Litare, that
is, when their false Gods accepted their false sacrifice; and as the Devil was
Gods Ape in giving Oracles, so I verily believe he was in this also. Nay
Josephus expressly affirms it of the Jews, though for the particular I suppose
he is mistaken: For he says, that whenever God did accept the Sacrifice, the
Onyx stone on the Priests left shoulder shone with an admirable splendour; but
this, says he, ceased certain hundred years before his time: and no wonder,
for when the Sun of righteousness drew near unto his rising, those dimmer Vrim
and smaller stars must needs lose their light. Now that which Josephus affirms
of the Onyx stone on the left shoulder, I suppose was mistaken for the Thummim
on the left part of the breast plate.

And lastly, as I said before of Vrim, so I think of Thummim, that it was in
use among the Patriarchs of old, and that by some such means as this Abel knew
that God accepted his Offering, and Cain that his was refused.

And thus much of Vrim and Thummim considered personally in the High Priest;
now I come to consider it typically: for as the High Priest himself was a type
of Christ, so must these Adjuncts of his also be types of something in Christ;
which we shall not be long a finding out, if we remember again the
signification of the words, and the use of the things themselves: Vrim is Light
and Illumination; Thummim Integrity and Perfection. By Vrim the Jews were
ascertained of the counsel and will of God; By Thummim of his favor and good
will toward them. All this agrees to Christ both in himself, and in regard of
us.

In himself, his breast is full of Vrim, full of Light and Understanding, in him
dwell all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, as S. Paul says; He is the
Wisdom of the Father by which the world it self was made. His heart is also
endowed with Thummim, with all kind of Perfections; He was conceived without
Original sin, lived without Actual sin; fulfilled the whole Law of God, which
is the Law of Thummim, the Law of all Perfection.

Thus to Christ himself agrees both Vrim and Thummim, and so it does also in
regard of us, for he is an Vrim and Thummim both to us and for us: To us he is
Vrim, a light which enlightneth every one which comes unto the world: He is
the light which shone in darkness, but the darkness could not comprehend it.
He was that light by which the people (as it is said in Matthew 4.) which sat
in darkness saw great light. And of this Light John came to bear witness,
that all might believe in him, Ioh. 1. In sum, Christ is (...) and (...)
Patris, the Word and Oracle of his Father, by whom we know and learn the
Fathers will: for so S. John says, cap. 1. No man has seen God at any time,
but the Son who is in the bosom of the Father, he has revealed him unto us.

Neither is Christ only an Vrim, but also a Thummim to us: For as by Thummim
the Jews were ascertained of Gods favor toward them in accepting their
Sacrifice: so by Christ coming in the flesh is revealed the unspeakable mercy
of God to mankind, in that he would accept his Sacrifice once offered for the
expiation of the sins of the whole world. This is that Good Will toward men,
which the Angels sung of as soon as he was born; Glory be to God on high, peace
on earth, and good will toward men: Yea, glory be to God on high for this
peace on earth, and for this good will toward men.

Thus we see Christ an Vrim and Thummim to us: now let us see how he is the
same for us; and that is when his wisdom and righteousness is made ours by
imputation: So his Vrim becomes our Vrim, his Thummim our Thummim, that is, his
wisdom is made ours; his righteousness and favor with God made ours; for
this is my welbeloved Son, said a voice from heaven, in whom I am well pleased.
In brief, S. Paul comprehends both these together, where he says, Christ Jesus
is made unto us Wisdom, Sanctification, and Redemption. And so Lord, let thy
Vrim and thy Thummim be with thy holy one.

And thus much for the special consideration of this Vrim and Thummim, both
personally and typically: Now I come unto the general meaning thereof, as it
concerns not the High Priest only, but the whole Tribe of Levi, for this is the
blessing of that whole Tribe. And in this large respect, the meaning cannot be
proper, for so it belongs unto the High Priest to have Vrim and Thummim; nor
typical, because the Priests only, and not the under Levites were types of
Christ: but the sense must be analogicall, signifying some endowments common to
all Levites, which resemble the Vrim and Thummim upon the breast of the High
Priest.

Now what these are, the words themselves import, namely, Light of
understanding and knowledge; this is their Vrim; and Integrity of life, this is
their Thummim. The first makes them Doctores, the second Ductores populi: He
that wants either of these two, wants the true ornament of Priesthood, the
right character of a Levit.

For though these endowments may well beseem all the Tribes of Israel; yet
Moses specially prays for them in Levi, because by him they were to come to all
the rest; and the want of them in him, could not but redound to all the rest;
It a populus, sicut sacerdos: the Priest cannot err, but he causes others to
err also; the Priest cannot sin, but he causes others to sin also. And this
is it that Malachi says from the Lord, Mal. 2. 6, 8.
unto the Priests of his time; Ye are gone out of the way, and have caused many
to fall by the Law: But the Levites of old, (says the same Prophet) The Law of
Truth was in their mouth, and iniquity was not found in their lips: they walked
with God in peace and equity, and turned many from iniquity. Here you see when
the Levites err, the people err also; when the Levites walk in equity, the
people are turned from iniquity.

The Ministers of Christ must be Lux mundi, the light of the world; Vos estis
lux mundi, ye are the light of the world; ye are the worlds Vrim, says Christ
unto his Apostles; for the lips of the Priest should preserve knowledge, and
they should learn the Law at h^s mouth. This light of knowledge, this teaching
knowledge is the Vrim of every Levite; and therefore Christ when he inspired
his Apostles with knowledge of heavenly mysteries, he sent a new Vrim from
above, even fiery tongues, tongues of Vrim from heaven: He sent no fiery heads,
but fiery tongues; for it is not sufficient for a Levite to have his head full
of Vrim, unless his tongue be a candle to show it unto others. There came
indeed no Thummim from heaven, as there came an Vrim, for though the Apostles
were secured from errors, they were not freed from sin: And yet we who are
Levites, must have such a Thummim as may be gotten upon earth, for S. Paul bid
Titus in all things to show himself an example of good works: and this is a
Thummim of Integrity.

But besides this Thummim the Ministers of the Gospel have received from God
more especially another Thummim, like unto that which was proper to the High
Priest; namely, the power of binding and loosing, which is as it were a power
of Oracle to declare unto the people the remission of their sins, by the
acceptance of Christ's Sacrifice: And this directly answers to Thummim in the
first sense.

ACTS 5. 3, 4, 5. Act. 5. 3, 4.
3. But Peter said, Ananias, Why has Satan filled thine heart, to lie to the
holy Ghost, and to purloin of the price of the Land?

4. Whiles it remained, was it not thine own? and after it was sold, was it not
in thy power? why have thou conceived this thing in thine heart? Thou have not
lied unto men, but unto God.

5. And Ananias hearing these words, fell down and gave up, etc.


IN the 110. Psalm, where our Savior is Prophetically described in the person
of a King, advanced to the Throne of Divine Majesty, glorious and victorious;
The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand till I make thine enemies
thy footstool, etc. amongst other Kingly Attributes and Graces, it is said, (if
it be translated as it should be) That his people in the day of his power
should offer him freewill offerings; that is, bring him Presents at the day of
his Inauguration or investment, as a sign of their Homage: For so was the
manner of the East to do unto their Kings; and therefore when Saul was anointed
King by Samuel, it is said of those sons of Belial, which despised and
acknowledged him not, that they brought him no presents: But of Messiahs people
it is said, Thy people in the day of thy power, (that is, the day when thou
shall enter upon thy power, or the day of thy Investment) shall be (...), a
people of free presents, or shall bring thee free will Offerings. It is an
Ellipticall speech (...), for (...), or (...), and rightly expressed in the
Translation of our Service Book.

This we see fulfilled in the story of the foregoing Chapter, when after our
Saviors ascension into heaven, to sit at the right hand of God, which was the
day of his power or inauguration in his Kingdom, as soon as this Investment was
published by sending of the Holy Ghost, presently such as believed in him, that
is, submitted themselves to his power, and acknowledged him to be their King,
dedicated their goods and possessions to his service, selling their lands and
houses, and laying down the money at the Apostles feet; namely, to be
distributed as were the sacred Offerings of the Law, partly to the maintenance
and furnishing of the Apostles for the work whereabout they were sent, and
partly for the relief of the poor believers, which belonged to Christ's
provision.

According to this example one Ananias with Sapphira his wife, consecrated also
a possession of theirs unto God, and sold the same to that purpose; but having
so done, covetousness tickling them, they purloyned from the price, and
brought but a part of the sum, and laid it down at the Apostles feet: Then
said Peter, according to the words of the Text, why has Satan filled thine
heart (that is, made thee so daring: the like phrase we have Fsth. 7. 5. (...),
where is he whose heart has filled him (we read it, That durst presume) to do
so? and again, Eccles. 8. 11. The heart of the sons of men is fully set in them
to do evil. In the former the Septuagint has (...), emboldened; in the
latter, (...), is filled) to lie unto the Holy Ghost, and to purloin from the
price of the field, etc.

Which words contain two things; Ananias his sin, and his punishment therefore:
His sin in the third and fourth verses: His punishment in the fifth, Ananias
hearing these words, fell down and gave up the ghost.

Concerning his sin, it appears by the relation I have already made, it was
Sacrilege, namely, the purloining of what was become holy and consecrate unto
God, not by actual performance, but by vow and inward purpose of the heart:
for as it is well observed by Ainsworth, on Levit. 7. 16. out of Ma^mony in his
Treatise of offering the Sacrifice, Chap. 14. Sect. 4, 5. etc. In vows and
voluntaries it is not necessary that a man pronounce ought with his lips; but
if he shall be fully determined in his heart, though he has uttered nothing
with his lips, he is indebted. And this is no private Opinion of mine, the
Fathers so determine it: S. Augustine, that Ananias was condemned of
Sacridedge, Quod Deum in pollicitatione fefellisset, (Sermon. 25. de verb. Ap.)
And in another Sermon, Ananiam d^traxisse de pecunia quam voverat Deo. (Sermon.
10. de diversis.) S. Chrysostom in his 12. Homily upon this place; Pecuniae
illae, says he, deinceps crant sacrae. Igitur qui voluerat suum vendere and
distribuere, and postea de illis acceperit, sacrilegus fuerat. Again, Vides
quod hoc crimen imputatur, eo quod pecunias suas accepit quas consecraverat;
or, as the Greek, sacras fecerat. S. Jerome in his 8. Epistle, Ananias and
Sapphira dispensateres timidi, imo cord duplici; and ideo condemnati, quia
post votum obtulerunt, quasi sua, and non ejus cui semel ea voverant; partemque
sibi alienae substantiae reservaverunt, praesentem meruere vindictam non
crudelitate sententiae, sed correctionis exemplo. Caesarius brother to Gregory
Nazianzen, in his fourth Dialogue expresses the sin of Ananias thus; Semel Deo
dicatum aurum, says he, sacrilegio vulneratus alienaverat, interrogatus
negaverat: He alienated the money dedicated unto God, being wounded with
Sacrilege, and when he was asked thereabout, denied it. Lastly, Oecumenius, in
whom we have the current interpretation of the Greek Fathers, thus expounds the
words of S. Peter to Ananias, Neque enim invitos vos trahimus; sed cum ultronee
vobis placuerit offerre Deo victimam, rursus vos ipsos ad proprium usum
insumere, Sacrilegium indubie est: And then adds, Ideo and Sacrilegorum poena
sunt percussi: Quanam? morte. Also Asterius Bishop of Marpurg in Germany, who
lived near the time of Julian, in his Hom. in Avaritiam, calls Ananias and
Sapphira, (...).

I quote these Fathers the more fully, because many of our late Commentators
omit the main sin, and dwell upon the circumstances only, as hypocrisy,
vainglory, covetousness, and the like. But we must distinguish between
Ananias his fact, and the manner and circumstance thereof: The fact was
Sacrilege: In the manner of doing, other sins attended as handmaids. It will
be plain, if we ask but these two questions: First, what Ananias did? The Text
will make answer, (...), He purloined of the holy money. This was his fact. Ask
secondly, how and in what manner he purloined? The story will tell us,
dissemblingly and hypocritically, making an appearance to the contrary. This
then was but the manner and circumstance of his fact, and so the species of the
fact not to be placed therein.

Now this Sacrilege or Sacrilegious act committed by Ananias, is in the words
of the Text partly expressed, partly aggravated from the inexcusablenesse
thereof. In the expression is spent the third verse; the aggravation is in the
fourth. The crime or fact of Ananias is expressed two ways: First, by (...),
purloining of the sacred price. Secondly, by (...), by lying unto, or deceiving
the Holy Ghost. For both these I suppose to mean one and the same thing;
namely, the same fact of Ananias two ways expressed. The first, (...), I
translate by stealing or purloining, for so the word signifies: our English
which renders it, Keeping back of the price, does not sufficiently express the
propriety thereof in this place: In another place it does, Tit. 2. 10. where it
renders (...), purloining; Exhort servants, says the Apostle, to be obedient
unto their Masters, and to please them well in all things, (...), not
purloining, but showing all good fidelity. The Vulgar in both places uses
Fraudare, defrauding. In a word, the true signification of (...) is surripere,
suffurari, aut clam subducta in commodum nostrum convertere: whence Beza turns
it by Intervertere, Intervertit ex pretio; and in Titus, Intervertentes. In the
same sense it is used by the Septuagint in two several places, both pointing
at the sin of Sacrilege: One is in Achans story, Josh. 7. 1. where what we
read, Achan took of the accursed thing, the Septuagint renders, (...), he
purloined the accursed thing; that is, the thing that was consecrated to God,
as all the silver and gold was, chapter 6. ver. 19. for which cause when God
relates to Joshua Isreal's sin, as the reason of their flying before their
enemies, he makes a distinction between Achans Sacrilege, and his theft and
dissembling, ver. 11. of the 7. Chap. saying, For they have even taken of the
accursed thing, and have also stolen and dissembled also, and they have put it
even among their own stuff. The other is, in 2 Mac. 4. 32. Menelaus his
Sacrilege (who stole the sacred Vessels) is expressed by it; Menelaus (says
the Author) supposing he had got a convenient time, (...), stole certain
vessels of gold out of the Temple, and gave some to Andronicus, and some he
sold into Tyrus and the Cities round about.

The second expression of Ananias his Sacrilege is by (...), deceiving or
lying to the Holy Ghost; or as it is repeated immediately after, (...), lying
unto God. (...) is fallo, frustro, mentior, To deceive, cozen, lie; (as also
the Hebrew word (...), which peculiarly signifies Sacrilegious transgression,
as Lev. 5. 15. and in the story of Achan, is in all those places (as elsewhere)
rendered in Targum, (...), to lie, and the substantive (...), a lie) and in
Oaths and promises, Non servo, frango, not to keep, or to break them. So
Ananias his sin, was a lying unto, or breaking of promise with God: for having
vowed, or promised unto him in his heart the whole price of the field, he
brought him but part thereof. Both expressions point out the same fact; which
in regard of the matter, was stealing or purloining: in regard of the Vow and
Consecration, a breach of promise or lying unto God. So that when Peter says in
the third verse, Why has Satan filled thine heart; to lie unto the Holy Ghost,
and to purloin of the price of the land? The latter is the explication of the
former; and is, as if it had been said, Why has Satan filled thine heart to
lie unto the Holy Ghost, in purloining the price of the land?

But what, will some man say, means this special expression of the Deity in
the Person of the Holy Ghost? why is Ananias said, to have lied to the Holy
Ghost, rather then to have lied unto God only? For lying unto God would bear
the sense I speak of; should not then lying unto the Holy Ghost, seem to have
something else, or something more in it? I answer, Ananias his lie or breach of
promise is applied thus in special to the Holy Ghost, in respect of the
prerogative of that Person, as to stir and sanctify, so to take notice of the
motions of the heart: forasmuch therefore as Ananias his Vow and Promise which
he broke, was not such as men could witness or take notice of, but such as his
own heart or conscience only was privy to; hence it is said to have been done
under the privity of the Holy Ghost, and he in the breach thereof to have lied
unto him; because that which none but the inward man knows of, and is yet but
in the purpose of the heart, is under his privity. There is a plain place Romans
9. to this purpose, I say the truth in Christ, says the Apostle, I lie not, my
conscience also bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost: that is, the Holy Ghost,
who is privy to my conscience, bearing me witness, or my conscience which the
Holy Ghost is privy to. Some other places of Scripture I could name, which may
receive light from this notion, but I am loath to meddle with them.

But for their interpretation, who expound this lying unto the Holy Ghost, of
Ananias his hypocrisy, I cannot well see how it can stand; For Ananias
dissembled not with the Holy Ghost, but with men; the Holy Ghost knew his heart
well enough. And the hypocrite properly lies unto men, who guess only by the
outside, and not unto God, who knows the heart.

Others expound lying unto the Holy Ghost, as if it were lying to try whether
the Holy Ghost in the Apostles could discover him or not: But this is an harsh
and forced sense. As for that in the 9. verse, whereon it is grounded; viz. How
is it that ye have agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord? The word
Tempt, or (...), is mistaken, the notion thereof in Scripture being otherwhile,
to provoke God by some presumptuous fact to anger; as it were to try whether he
will punish or not, to dare God. There is an evident place for this sense,
Numb. 14. 22. Those men, says the Lord, which have seen my glory and my
miracles which I did in Egypt and in the wilderness, and have tempted me now
these ten times, and have not hearkened to my voice. 23. Surely, they shall not
see the land which I swear to their Fathers, neither shall any of them that
provoked me, see it.

And thus much of the bare description of Ananias his sin: Come we now to the
aggravation thereof; While it remained, was it not thine? and after it was
sold, was it not in thy power? That is, before it was sold, was it not thine?
and being sold, was not the money paid thee? was not the price in thine hand?
Thou have therefore no excuse for what thou have done. For there were two cases
which might have excused Ananias for bringing but part of the price: If either
he had not been Dominus in solidum, the full Proprietary of what was sold; or
had not received the whole price it was sold for. For, as for the first, it is
a rule in Law, Quoties Dominium transfertur ad a^ium, tale transfertur, quale
apud eum fuit, qui tradit. A man can sell no more then is his. So that if
Ananias had been owner but in part, he had power to dispose but in part.
Secondly, though he were Dominus in solidum, the full Proprietary of the field,
and so had right enough to sell it, yet had not the whole price been received,
and in his power and possession, he might still have been excused for bringing
but part thereof. But Ananias could plead neither of these: for says S. Peter,
(...); whilst it remained unsold, did it not remain th^ne? or were not thou
owner? (...); and when it was sold, was not the money it was sold for in thy
possession? The first words, (...); (though there be no such speech again in
Scripture) yield the sense I speak of plainly enough, nor will they bear any
other meaning, unless somewhat forsaking the letter, we should with others
construe them to imply, that Ananias was not constrained or urged to sell his
possession at all, but might have kept it still: Which sense is most commonly
followed, and has the authority of Oecumenius in the words before alleged;
Neque enim (says he) invitos vos trahimus, sed quum ultronse vobis placuerit
offerre Deo victimam, rursus vos ipsos ad proprium usum insumere sacrilegium
est. Therefore Beza translates the words, Nonne, si servasses (so he renders
(...)) manebat tibi?

True it is, this sense makes as much for the unexcusablenesse of Ananias, as
the other: for could he have alleged that what he had done for the sale of his
land, was done not sponte, but coacte, not willingly, but by way of constraint,
it might have excused him: because that act only is taken to be of force in
Law, which a man consents unto: But that which is done by constraint or
compulsion, is not done with full and free consent, and therefore binds not.
So this sense agrees well enough with the story, only it may seem somewhat to
strain the words: Howsoever if you had rather follow it, because of the
authority, I will not contend. Only note thus much, that the Syriack Translator
inclines to the first sense; for he translates, (...); Nonne tuus erat antequam
venderetur.

A second plea for the excuse of Ananias might have been in case he had not yet
received the full price, and so had not the whole money in his hand. But this
S. Peter also takes from him, (...) (says he) (...); was it not when it was
sold, in thy power? that is, was not the price it was sold for in thine hands?
For (...) must here be understood for the price of what was sold, or the field
reduced to money: otherwise the contrary would be true to that which Peter
intimates, namely, that when it was sold, it was now no longer in his power,
because he had sold it. But the same words, (...), in thy power, I understand
to be as much as, in thy possession, or in thine hand; meaning, as I have said,
that he had received the price. For not only that which a man has dominion and
propriety in, but that also which he has but in bare possession, is rightly
said to be in his power: for in the Law Ius possessionis extends farther then
Ius dominii, namely, as far as habere, to have a thing; Habere autem dicitur,
non solum qui rei dominus est, sed qui rei quidem dominus non est, sed rem
tenet; that is, as they speak, corpore possessioni insistit. And in this sense
the price which Ananias had received, is said to have been (...), in his power,
that is, in his possession: which will not seem a forced exposition, if we
consider that (...) has the same sense with (...), or in manu in the Hebrew;
which implies not dominion only, but also bare possession. As it is said of
Abraham's servant, Genesis 24. 10. That all the goods of his Master were in his
hand; as well as of the rich misers son, Eccles. 5. 14. That there was nothing
in his hand; that is, he was a beggar. Both which might be expressed by (...),
as manus in Hebrew, yea and in Latin too, is well enough known to be put for
(...).

I confess there is another exposition usually given of these words, but it is
such an one as directly contradicts the story; namely, that Was it not in thy
power? should be, was it not in thy power to have kept the price when it was
sold? But first there is no such word in the Text as to keep it, and so we are
not bound to understand it. It is only said, was it not in thy power? And if
any verb be to be understood to supply the sense, why should it not as well be
the contrary? was it not in thy power, to dispose it according to thy Vow?
intimating there might be some just impediment after the sale, whereby he could
not; especially he could not get the money. But to expound, was it not in thy
power? to be, was it not in thy power to have kept it? is directly against the
drift of the story: For how did Ananias sin in bringing but part of the price,
if he might have kept all? Is not his sin expressly placed in that he purloined
of the price? what other fact of his is mentioned save only this? Nay, if this
should be the meaning of the words, it would follow, a man might vow a thing
unto God, and yet be at liberty when he had done, whether he would perform it
or not: He might lie unto God, and yet be guiltless. Without doubt this
exposition was it that so obscured the whole narration, that it could not
appear, wherein Ananias his sin consisted. But his sin as I have already showed
out of the Fathers, was Sacrilege, and of that kind whereof Solomon speaks,
Prove. 20. It is a snare to the man who devours that which is holy, and after
vows to enquire. He had dedicated the whole value of the field in his
conscience, and the purpose of his heart was evident by the sale thereof to
that end; and yet when he had done, he repented him, and brought but part
thereof. This meaning is evidently contained in the body of the narration, and
therefore such a sense of any part as cannot stand with this, is in no wise to
be admitted. He that considers it, will perceive the necessity of what I say.

Having thus cleared the words of the Text where there was any doubt or
obscurity: Let us come to the Observations to be deduced thence; whereof the
Relation affords us three evident ones: First, that Sacrilege is a sin against
God, and not against men. Secondly, that that which is consecrate to God, must
not be alienated to other uses. Thirdly, that it is an heinous sin which God
thus severely punished. For the first, that Sacrilege is a sin against God,
and not against men, is plain by the Text, Thou have not lied, said Peter, unto
man, but unto God. For whatsoever is sacred is his; yea, to be sacred is
nothing else but to be set apart from man's interest to be Gods in a peculiar
propriety and relation. To steal then or allenate that which is sacred, is to
rob God and not man; for he is robbed whose the propriety is, but of sacred
things God is the Proprietary and not man. It is an error therefore to be
observed among the Expositors of the Decalogue, who rank Sacrilege as a sin of
the eighth Commandment, when Sacrilege as Sacrilege is a sin of the first
Table, and not of the second: A breach of the loialty we immediately owe to
God, and not of the duty we owe to our neighbor. True it is, he that
commits Sacrilege, indirectly and by consequent, robs men too, namely,
those who live of Gods provision; but Sacrilege it self is the robbing of God.
This is evident by that of the Prophet Malachi, Mal. 3. 8. Will a man rob God?
yet ye have robbed me; (says the Prophet in the person of God) But ye say,
Wherein have we robbed thee? In Tithes and Offerings. ver. 9. Ye are cursed
with a curse: for ye have robbed me, even this whole Nation. 10. Bring ye all
the Tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove
me now herewith, says the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open you the windows of
heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to
receive it, etc.

The observation of this would be useful in the question of the due of Tithes;
for the state thereof is not rightly framed, when the Quaere is made, Whether
Tithes are due to the Ministers of the Gospel, meaning as a duty of the people
unto them: we should say rather, Tithes are due unto God; for so is the style
of the Scripture, All the Tithes are mine: these I give to Levi, and not you.
God maintains not his Ministers at others charges, but out of his own Revenue
which he has reserved to himself: As was well observed by Philo the Jew, in
his Book de Sacerdotum honoribus, where speaking of that (...), that honorable
maintenance, and without bodily toil, which God had provided for his
Priesthood; to take away from them out of whose labors this maintenance did
accrue, all occasion of upbraiding those who by Gods assignment were to receive
it, he says, (...), etc. The people were commanded to bring their offerings
first to the Temple, that thence the Priests might fetch them: It being not
unworthy God himself, in token of gratitude for his infinite bounty and
benefits, to take some part back again from him upon whom he had conferred so
great benefits; and seeing himself the giver of all good gifts, stood in need
of nothing, it pleased him to transfer that honorable maintenance, which was
so returned him by way of thankfulness, upon those that served at his Altar,
and ministered about holy things: (...), (as he gives the reason) (...) because
they (the Priests) might take that their provision without being ashamed, as
not coming from men, but from God the giver of all good gifts to every one.
For they are his Ministers, and not the peoples, and therefore to receive their
wages from their own Master who imploys them, and not from them. The stating of
the question thus, would make the way to the resolution of the controversy
more easy, and less invidious, whilst we should plead for God and not for
our selves: for it is not needful that all which is given unto God should be
spent upon his Ministers, though it be true that their maintenance should be
out of his Revenue, and that honorable and competent. But there are many other
uses for the imploiment of bona sacra, if there be more then is competent for
them and theirs, building of Churches, defraying of such as are sent to Synods,
and employed upon other occasions of the Church, furnishing of treasures for a
Holy War, the relief of the poor, the Orphan, the Widow, the Captive, and the
distressed: All which belong to Christ's provision.

The second Observation is, That that which is consecrated to God, may not be
alienated to other uses. The reasons whereof are; First, because none can
alienate but he that has the propriety, and is owner: Dominium transfer non
potest, qui ipse Dominus non est: But in things consecrate to God, none has
the propriety but God. For certainly, a man cannot be said to have given that
unto God, wherein he still reserves the Title to himself as the Owner: he that
gives, transferres the Dominium from himself, unto him to whom the gift is
made. If therefore that which is given to God, be Gods, then must those who go
about to alienate it, dispose of that which is none of theirs: which, whether
it be just or not, let any man judge.

Secondly, to alienate that which is given unto God, is a breach of vow or
promise made unto him; A lying unto him, as my Text speaks. And if it be a sin
not to perform what was vowed in the purpose of the heart only, as we see it
was in this story of Ananias, much more is it to revoke a vow already
performed. Nor will it serve turn to say, This reason may indeed concern the
person himself that vowed, that he should not revoke again what he has vowed;
but does not take away from the Commonwealth, or public Magistrate their
power to dispose of things subject to them. For howsoever it be true that every
private person and his goods are under the tuition of the Public, and the
interest the Public has in either, cannot be given away by the sole act of a
private person: yet in this case that rule has place which is given by
Almighty God, Numb. 30. concerning a Maidens vow in her Fathers house, or a
woman's vow under covert; That if the Father or the Husband hear the Vow, and
the bond wherewith she bound her soul, and disallow it not, but shall hold his
peace; then the vow shall stand: So when the Commonwealth or public
Magistrate consents to and allows what is done, as in this case it is supposed
they do, the vow and dedication is also irrevocable on their part.

Hence in Scripture it is made an inseparable property of that which is sacred
or Gods, not to be alienable: As in Ezekiel. 48. 14. it is said of the portion of
land to be laid out for the Levites, They shall not sell it, neither exchange,
nor alienate the first fruits of the land; (mark the reason;) for it is holy
unto the Lord. This was the reason likewise, why a Jew might not sell outright
his possession in the land of Canaan, but only for fifty years term, or until
the year of Jubilee, because the whole land was holy, and Gods land, and they
but usufructuarii: So says God, Levit. 25. 23. The land shall not be sold for
ever, or outright; for the land is mine, for you are but strangers and
sojourners with me: therefore in all the land of your possession, ye shall
grant a redemption for the land. Where he says, ye are strangers and
sojourners with me; the meaning is, that as the Gentiles who became Proselytes,
had no inheritance in the land, but dwelt therein as sojourners; so was all
Israel in the sight of God, who would have none accounted Proprietaries of that
land but himself, having acquired it by his own powerful conquest from the
Canaanite. For although in the same land, some part were yet in a more special
manner the Lords land, yet comparatively, and secundum quid, the whole land was
sacred and His: As all Israel was a peculiar and holy people, though the Tribe
of Levi were in a more special sort the holy Tribe. Now if that which was but
in a more general sense holy and the Lords, might not be alienated; what shall
we say of that which is holy and His in the most special manner of all? I
speak all this while of that which is dedicate unto God absolutely, and not
with limitation or for term of time only, for such Dedications I suppose there
may be.

Now if any shall ask me, whether this assertion, That things dedicate to God
are unalienable, admits not of some limitations? I answer, It may be; and that
in two cases; If either it can be proved, that the donation made unto God were
a nullity; or showed, that God has relinquished the right which once he had.
But here the water begins to grow too deep for my wading; yet I hope I may say
thus much, That whosoever he be that shall plead either of these two cases to
acquit himself of Sacrilege, had need be sure in a point of such moment, that
his evidence be good, and such as he can show good warrant for out of Gods own
book: To go upon bare conjectures will not be safe. And for direction and
caution in this case, I will add further, That not every sinfulness of the
person who is the Donor, nor every default or blemish in the consecration,
makes the act it self void. It appears in the story of Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram, in that oblation of Incense made by the two hundred and fifty Princes
of the Congregation, whose service though it were so displeasing unto the Lord,
that he sent fire from heaven to consume them; yet when all was done, he gave
this commandment to Moses, Speak (says he) unto Eleazar the son of Aaron the
Priest, that he take up the censers out of the burning; and scatter thou the
fire yonder, for they are hallowed. The censers of those sinners against their
souls; Let them make of them broad plates for a covering of the Altar: For they
offered them before the Lord, therefore they are hallowed, Number. 16 37, 38. Mark
here; though they were offered by sinful men, and in a sinful manner, and
were not to be used any more for censers, yet must they be applied to some
other holy use, because they were become sacred by having been offered unto the
Lord. So Rabbi Solomo Iarchi, (...), Unlawful for common use, because they had
made them vessels of Ministry.

My last observation is raised from the judgment which befell Ananias; That it
must needs be a heinous sin which God so severely punished, namely, with death:
For there is no example to be found again in the whole New Testament, of so
severe a punishment inflicted by the mouth of the Apostles, for any sin
whatsoever. But this was the first consecration of goods that ever was made
unto Christ our Lord, after he was invested to sit at the right hand of God:
And this transgression of Ananias and Sapphira, the first Sacrilege that ever
was committed against him; wherefore it was requisite that by the severity of
the punishment thereof, he should now manifest unto men, what account he made,
and how heinous he esteemed that sin; that it might be for an example to the
worlds end unto all that should afterward believe in his name to beware
thereof. So says S. Hierome, Ananias and Sapphira quia post votum obtulerunt
quasi sua and non ejus cui semel eavoverant, praesentem manner vindictam, non
crudelitate Sententiae sed correction is exemplo. For the first in every kind
is the measure of that which follows; and though Sacrilege be not since
punished by God as often as it is committed, by such a visible death, yet was
it his purpose that by this first punishment we should take notice how great
that sin was, and how displeasing in his sight, which was a punishment by the
greatest visible judgment that could be.

The like severe example to this, and for the like end, was that upon him who
at first profaned the Sabbath day in the Wilderness by gathering sticks, Number.
15. 32, etc. who by the sentence of God himself was put to death, and stoned by
the whole Congregation: That the Jews hereby might know, that howsoever the
like were not ordinarily afterward to be inflicted for the like sin, yet that
the gravity thereof in the eyes of God was still the same, which that first
severity intimated.

Furthermore, it is worthy to be noted, that we find three examples of such a
kind of coactive jurisdiction, (if I may so term it) exercised either by our
Savior when he was here on earth, or by his Apostles; and all three for the
profanation of that which was sacred. The first two by our Savior himself
against those that profaned his Temple, by buying and selling therein as a
common place: For which at the first Passover after his beginning to Preach
the Gospel, he made him a whip and whipped such profaners out of it, saying,
Make not my Fathers house a house of Merchandise, Ioh. 2. 13. Another time,
which was at his last Passover, He overthrew the Tables of the Money Changers,
and the seats of them that sold doves, and would not suffer any to carry a
Vessel through the Temple, telling them, that his house was made for an house
of prayer, but they had made it a den of Thieves; Mat. 21. 12. Mark. 11. 15.
Luke 19 45. The third example is this which the Apostle Peter exercised upon
Ananias and Sapphira for Sacrilege. Whereby it should appear that how small
account soever we are now adays wont to make of these two sins, yet in Gods
esteem they are other manner of ones then we take them for.

Another argument of the heinousness of the sin of Sacrilege is, that there
was no sacrifice appointed in the Law to make atonement for the same, if it
were committed willingly and wittingly; but only if it were ignorantly done:
For so we have it, Levit. 5. 15. If a soul commit a trespass, and sin through
ignorance in the holy things of the Lord, he shall bring for his trespass unto
the Lord, a ram without blemish out of the flock. -- And he shall make amends
for the harm that he has done in the holy thing, and add the fifth part
thereunto. -- And the Priest shall make an atonement for him, and it shall be
forgiven him. Thus if it were done ignorantly; but if wittingly and
presumptuously, there was no atonement appointed for it: though for other sins
there be, even to perjury it self: For, as it is in Mal. 3. 4. Will a man rob
his God?

Another proof and testimony of the heinousness of this sin, is that so
ancient a custom in Dedications todade it with a curse; which to be no late
custom (as some may suppose) taken up among Christians, but used both by Jew
and Gentile before Christ was born, may appear by that Decree of K. Darius for
the building of the Temple of Jerusalem, which concludes with this execration;
The God that has caused his name to dwell there, destroy all Kings and People,
that shall put to their hand to destroy this house of God, which is at
Jerusalem. I Darius have made a Decree, let it be done with speed. Ezra 6. 12.

From this custom it came, that Anathema signifies such a Donary given unto a
Temple, and an accursed thing, or that which has a curse with it. So (...) in
Hebrew, a thing cursed and destined to destruction, and also a kind of
offering or consecration which had a curse laid upon it, namely, a curse to him
that should meddle with it. Which kind of consecration had this peculiar, that
even the very individual might never be altered, changed, or redeemed upon any
terms, Levit. 27. 28. whereas other offerings might, so that a valuable thing
or better were given for them. Such a consecration (I mean a Cherem, or
consecration under pain of a curse in the very individual) was that of the
City Jericho, as the First Fruits of the conquests of Canaan.

To these Arguments I will add two or three examples to this of Ananias, of
the punishment of this sin, and so conclude. To begin then with the beginning
of all: Was not the first sin of Mankind, for which himself, his posterity,
and the whole earth was accursed, a great and capital sin? But this if we look
well into it, was no other for the species and kind of the Fact, then
Sacrilege: Such the ancient Jews conceived Adams sin to have been; namely, a
species of theft; as may be gathered out of the Book De morte Mosis, where
Moses is brought in deprecating death, and answering God that his case was not
such as Adams; for he transgressed by stealing, and eating what God forbad him
to meddle with, and so was justly condemned, (...); But who could Adam steal
from, save from God only? And therefore I say the first sin of mankind for the
Fact, was the sin of Sacrilege: For whereas among all the trees of the Garden,
which God gave man freely to enjoy, there was one Noli me tangere, which he had
reserved unto himself as holy, in token he was Lord of the Garden; Man by
eating of this as common, violated the sign of his Fealty unto the great
Landlord of the whole Earth, and committed Sacrilege: for which he was cast
out of Paradise, and the whole earth accursed for his sake. Might I now say,
that to this day many a son of Adam is cast out of his Paradise, and the
labors of his hands accursed for meddling with this forbidden fruit? But to go
on:

Achan for nimming a wedge of gold, and a Babylonish garment of the devoted
thing of Jericho aforementioned, brought a curse both upon himself, and the
whole Congregation of Israel.

For the Sacrilege of Eli's sons, who not content with those offerings which
God allowed them for their maintenance, robbed him of his Sacrifices to furnish
their own Tables; God gave not only his people, but even the Ark of his
Covenant into the hands of the Philistines.

For the Sacrilege of the seventh or Sabbaticall year, God caused his people
to be carried captive, and the land lie waste 70. years. By the Law of Moses
every seventh year the whole land was sacred unto the Lord; so that no man that
year might challenge any right of propriety, either to sow his field, or prune
his vineyard, or reap that which grew of it self, or gather the fruits of his
vineyard undressed, only he might eat thereof in the field, as at other times
any might of that which was none of his, as he traveled by, otherwise every
man's field and vineyard was that year free as well to the Servant as the
Master, to the Stranger as the Owner, to beasts as well as to men. The same
year also were all servants and all debts sacred unto the Lord, and so to be
released; whence that year was called The Lords Release. See Exodus 21. Levit.
25. Deuteronomy. 15. This consecration, being as much as the forgoing of the seventh
part of every man's profits, the covetous Jews for many years neglected the
observation thereof; For which sin the Lord, as himself professes, caused them
to be carried captive, and the land to lie waste seventy years without
Inhabitant, till it had fulfilled the years of Sabbath which they observed not.
For their Idolatry he gave them into the hands of the Gentiles their enemies:
for their Sabbaticall Sacrilege, he added this unto it, that they should
beside their bondage, be carried captives into a strange Country, and their
land lie desolate 70. years.

For the Sacrilegious profanation of Belshazzar, in causing the Vessels of Gods
House to be made his Quaffing-bowls for himself and his Lords, his Wives and
his Concubines to carouse in; was the hand writing upon the wall sent, which
did so affright him, that the Text says, His countenance was changed, and his
thoughts troubled him so, that the joints of his loins were loosed, and his
knees smote one against another. And the same night Gods vengeance light upon
him, Dan. 5.

Lastly, in the days of the Greek Kings, God gave his own Temple and worship to
be profaned, and his people to be trodden under foot by Antiochus Epiphanes a
Gentile King; because they themselves had a little before profaned the same
with sacrilegious hands, having betrayed the Treasures and Offerings of the same
unto a Gentiles coffers, and sold the sacred Vessels to the Cities round about
them. 2 Mac. 3, 4. and 5. cap.

JOEL 2. 17. Joel 2. 17.
Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, weep between the Porch and the
Altar, and say, Spare thy people, o Lord, and give not thine heritage to
reproach.
THese words are part of a description of a Fast, as the Context before and
after will tell you; and they contain a Rite or Custom wont to be used in such
solemn deprecations, namely, for the Priests of the Lord, (who are to be the
Intercessors and Mouth of the Congregation) not then, as at other times, to
enter into the Temple, to offer and sanctify with Incense the prayers of the
people at the Golden Altar before the vail, but to prostrate themselves without
the door, between the Porch and the Altar of burnt-offering, as unworthy to
approach the Throne of the Divine Majesty, or come over his Threshold, and
therefore keeping a distance; as it is said also of the Publicane in the
Gospel, that when he Luke 18. 13
came into the Temple or Courts thereof to pray, he stood, (...), afar off,
saying, God be merciful to me a sinner. For ye are to know, that the great or
brazen Altar, called the Altar of burnt-offering, whereon the sacrifices were
offered, stood not within or under the roof of the Temple, but sub dio, over
against the door or Porch thereof in the middle of the Priests 2 Chr. 15. 8
Ezekiel. 8. 16.
Court. For at the entrance into the Temple or House of God, Solomon built a
large vestibulum, or Porch, on each side whereof stood those two famous Pillars
of brass, the one called Iachin, and the other Boaz: Between this Porch and
the great brazen Altar (which stood without it) the Priests the Ministers of
the Lord are here commanded to weep, and say, Spare thy people, o Lord, and
give not thine heritage to Reproach.

This Rite of humiliation, we find mentioned in two other places of the Book
of Scripture: As first, in that humiliation of Ezra for the peoples marrying of
strange wives, Ezra 9. and Chap. 10. 1. where having rent his garment and
mantle, he cast himself down (says the Text) before the House of the Lord,
(viz. before the door or Porch thereof;) weeping, and confessing, and said,
Lord, I am ashamed to lift up my face to thee my God, for our iniquities are
increased over our head, and our trespass is grown up unto the heavens.
Another mention we have thereof in 1 Mac. 7. 38. when Nicanor proudly
threatened, that unless Judas Maccabeus and his host were delivered into his
hand, if ever he returned in safety, he would burn up the House of God: Then
the Priests, says the Text, entered in (namely, into the Courts of Gods House)
and stood between the Altar and the Temple, weeping and praying. Which passage
the Greek Interpreter of that Book, did not well understand, when he rendered
it, (...), before the Altar and the Temple. For Joseph Ben Gorion has expressly
in the Hebrew, (...), the very words of Joel in my Text, between the Porch and
the Altar.

A like custom whereunto, and as is probable taken up in imitation thereof, is
that of ours, To read the Letany (or our Parce Domine, parce populo tuo)
kneeling at a low desk in the body of the Church before the Chancell door, (as
was ordered by the first Injunctions of our Reformation when Procession was
taken away) or at the bottom of the steps or ascent unto the Altar, as is used
in the Cathedral and Collegiate Churches.

And this may suffice for explication of the Rite which the Prophet here
describes: Now the Lesson we are to learn from hence is, That the nature of a
right and religious Fast consists in an humble demission and abjection of our
selves before Almighty God, out of the apprehension of the greatness of his
Majesty, and our unworthiness to find any favor at his hands, whom we have
so much provoked by our sins. For this to have been the meaning of that
Ceremony, besides the natural signification of the deportment it self,
appears by the Exordium I but now quoted of Ezra's confession, when he thus
cast himself down before the Porch of the House of the Lord, weeping; Lord, I
am ashamed (says he) and blush to lift up my face to thee, my God: For our
iniquities are increased over our head, and our trespass is grown up to the
heavens. Besides, thus to humble and bring us down, is the end why God sends
his judgments of Plague, Famine, or the like, for the aversion whereof these
solemn supplications and assemblies are ordained. And therefore rightly at the
beginning of our public worship of God are we admonished to be humble, by
some of the first words we are to utter; O come let us humble our selves, and
fall down before the Lord with reverence and fear. Hence fasting and humbling a
man's self go in Scripture for equipollent terms: My clothing was sackcloth,
(says David, Psalm. 35. 13.) I humbled my self with fasting. So Ahab humbled
himself, and thereby deferred his judgment, 1 King. 21. 29. Hezekiah humbled
himself, both he and all the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 32. 26.
Manasseh is said likewise to have besought the Lord and humbled himself greatly
before the God of his Fathers, 2 Chr. 33.

No disposition fit so and apt for devotion as humility; no more powerful
means to prevail with God and appease his wrath, then this abjection of our
selves; Satis est prostrasse Leoni; Let me with reverence apply it unto the
Majesty of God.

For all Eminency is worshipped with humility, reverence, and submission, that
is, as we are wont and rightly to speak, by keeping a distance. Therefore the
sovereign or supreme Excellency of God must be adored with the lowest demission
and greatest stoop the soul can make. We find by experience that that
disposition of the eye, which fitteth us to behold the visible Sun, makes a
man blind when he looks down upon himself: So here, the apprehension of the
transcendent excellency of God, ten thousand times brighter then the Sun, if
truly admitted into our hearts, will darken all our overweening conceit of any
worthiness in our selves. The greater we would apprehend his power, the more
sensible must we be of our own weakness; The greater we acknowledge his
goodness, the less goodness must we see in our selves: The more we would
apprehend his wisdom, the less we are to be puffed up with our own
knowledge: As in a pair of skales, the higher we would raise one skale, the
lower we pull down the other; so the higher we raise God in our hearts, the
lower we must depresse our selves.

Hence we find the humblest natures, and the most humbled condition, to be the
fittest for devotion; I say, the humblest natures are the most pliable and
aptest to Religion: whereas those which the world is wont to commend for brave
spirits, of all others buckle the worst thereto: But let the world fancy what
it will, God sees not as man sees; It is not the tallest Eliab, but the
humblest David who is the man after Gods own heart; He that humbles himself as
a little child, the same is the tallest and goodliest soul for the Kingdom of
God: The Stars in the Firmament howsoever they here seem small to us, yet are
bigger then the earth; so he that is despicable and small here in the eyes of
men, is there a great one in the eyes of God. Let those therefore that think
all worth resides in a lofty and brave spirit, remember, that the Devil was a
braver fellow then any of them all, and that his high and lofty spirit, was the
cause of his downfall and Apostasy from his Creator, and so of that damnation
to everlasting fire prepared for him and his Angels.

And as the humblest nature, so the humblest or most humbled state and
condition, is the fittest also for the exercise of devotion, as the poor and
mean, rather then the rich and full. Wherefore Agur desired of God, not to give
him more then food convenient for him, lest being full he should deny him, and
say, Who is the Lord? Such likewise is the state of adversity and affliction,
whence it is that God uses this discipline of his corrections and judgments,
to make us crouch and bow down unto him, when he sees us ready to forget him.
Whence David, Psalm. 94. 12. pronounces the man blessed whom the Lord
chastises; and Psalm. 119. ver. 67, 71. Before I was afflicted, says he, I
went astray, but now I have kept thy word. It is good for me that I have been
afflicted. For diseases, say the Physicians, must be cured by contraries: It
was pride that caused the disloialty and rebellion both of men and Angels
against their God and Maker; Whence it is that Syracides says, Ecclus. 10. 12.
The beginning of pride is when one departs from God, and his heart is turned
away from his Maker. 13. For pride is the beginning of sin, and he that has
it, shall pour out abomination. If pride be the beginning of our rebellion
against God, then must lowliness be the proper disposition of those who fear
and worship him; And so Tanto quisque est vilior Deo, quanto est pretiosior
sibi.

Now then to return to our Argument of Fasting; we may observe beside the
ceremony specified in my Text, that all other Rites or Ceremonies used by the
Ancients in this solemn devotion, or yet continued by us, imply nothing else
but lowliness and humility, partly to work and beget it, partly to express
and signify it. They are reducible to three heads: 1. of habit; 2. of gesture;
3. of diet. For habit, it was anciently sackcloth and ashes, by the coursenesse
of the sackcloth they ranked themselves, as it were, amongst the meanest and
lowest condition of men; by ashes, and sometimes earth upon their heads, they
made themselves lower then the lowest of the creatures of God: For the lowest
of the elements is the earth, then which we use to say a man cannot fall lower,
Qui jacet in terra, non habet unde cadat. For gesture, they sat or lay upon
the ground, which in the Primitive Church was called, (...), humicubatio; a
natural ceremony both to express, and ingenerate or increase this disposition
of lowliness and abjection of our selves; and as frequently practiced by our
devout Forefathers, as it is seldom or never used amongst us. It were a thing
most comely, and undoubtedly most profitable, if either these ceremonies, or
some other answerable to them, were revived amongst us at such times as these.
If we were all of us this day attired, if not in sackcloth, (which perhaps
suits not so well with the custom of our Nation) yet in the dolefullest habit
of mourners; if we lay all grovelling upon the ground; would not such a rufull
spectacle, would not the very sight of so uncouth an assembly, much afflict and
move us? The mournful hue of Funeral solemnities, we know by experience, will
often make them to weep, who otherwise have no particular cause of sorrow; how
much more when they have?

But the principal ceremony, and which we still retain, is abstinence from
meat and drink, whence this kind of supplication has the name of Fasting: the
end thereof being as to bring down our bodies, thereby the better to humble our
souls, so to express and testify the same. Mores animi sequuntur temper
amentum corporis: If the body be full and lusty, the mind will be lofty and
refractory, and most unfit and uncomposed to approach the Divine Majesty with
reverence and fear. How uncomposed is that heart to sue to God for mercy, and
aversion of his judgments, which is fraught with rebellious, unclean and
lustful thoughts, like so many dogs barking within it? But these are all
engendered and cherished by full feeding, and cannot be easily quelled unless
they be starved: When I fed Israel to the full (says the Lord Ier. 5. 7, 8.)
then they committed adultery and assembled by troops in harlots houses, etc.
Ieshurun (says Moses in his Prophetical song Deuteronomy. 32. 15.) waxed fat and
kicked, and forsook the Lord that made him, and lightly esteemed of the Rock of
his salvation.

Wherefore S. Paul was fain to pinch his body, and bring it down with Fasting;
I keep under my body (says he 1 Cor. 9. ult.) and bring it into subjection,
l^st that by any means when I have preached unto others, I my self should be a
castaway. Hilarion a religious young man, when after much abstinence and
course diet he felt his flesh still unruly and rebellious; Ego, inquit, Aselle,
faciam ut non Calcitres, nec te hordeo a^am, sed paleis, Fame and siti te
conficiam: such is the danger of a pampered body, and such the necessity of
keeping it under.

But as Fasting is a Physical means (if it be used to purpose) to take down
the loftiness of our minds and affections, by subtracting the fuel and foment
of our lusts, which is full feeding; so is it a ceremony chosen for that
natural effect it has to signify and testify, that by reflection upon our
vileness and unworthiness, we strike the sail of our high flying affections,
and humble our selves before the Majesty of Almighty God upon such occasions as
these. For as we use feasting not only to beget, but also to express and
testify our erection and cheerfulness of heart in times of joyfulnesse,
(whence in the Old Testament, to rejoice before the Lord, is put for to feast
before him;) So is fasting, when we would intend our devotions, used, not only
as a means to further, but also as a ceremony; whereby we testify our
sorrowful dejection and humiliation of mind before God.

Well then, you see what is the chief end we are to aim at in this our solemn
abstinence, namely, to take down our proud hearts, and bring them to a state of
lowliness and humility, a disposition so acceptable and prevailing with God;
to check our high-mounting passions, and allay the smoking flames of our
unruly lusts; which as it is at all times requisite in some measure, whenever
we approach the Majesty of God to sue for mercy and forgiveness; so then
especially, and in a more then usual manner, when God shakes the rod of his
judgments over our heads, and bids us down and prostrate both soul and body
before him, lest his wrath break us in pieces if we will not bow.

He that has attained this, has fasted well; he that has not, may hereby
know, he has not done enough, or not as he should do. If the boiling of our
lusts be cooled and calmed; if the swelling conceits of worth in our selves be
taken down, with a true and feeling apprehension of our vileness and
wretchedness through sin, which makes us the most unworthy creatures in the
world; if those ramping weeds of contempt and despising of others, be cropped
and withered, (and these I can tell you will quite spoil a garden where many
good flowers grow;) If after this manner we be affected, then are we humbled.
If not, we are not sufficiently taken down; all our service is hypocrisy, nor
will our devotions be accepted of that all-seeing Majesty who resists the
proud, but gives grace to the humble.

GENESIS 3. 13, 14, 15. Genesis 3 13, 14, 15.
13. And the Lord God said unto the woman, What is this that thou have done?
And the woman said, The Serpent beguiled me, and I did eat.

14. And the Lord God said unto the Serpent, Because thou have done this, thou
art cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the field: upon thy
belly shall thou go, and dust shall thou eat all the days of thy life.

15. And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and
her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel.


THE Story, whereof the words I have read are part, is so well known to all,
that it would be needless to spend time in any long preface thereof; Who knows
not the story of Adams fall? who has not heard of the sin of Eve our Mother?
If there were no Scripture, yet the unsampled irregularity of our whole nature,
which all the time of our life runs counter to all order and right reason, the
woeful misery of our condition being a scene of sorrow without any rest or
contentment: This might breed some general suspicion, that Ab initio non fuit
ita, but that he who made us Lords of his creatures, made us not so worthless
and vile as now we are, but that some common Father to us all, had drunken some
strange and devilish poison, wherewith the whole race is infected. This poison
says the Scripture, was the breach of Gods commandment in Paradise, by eating
of the forbidden fruit: for which Adam being called to an account by the great
Judge, and laying the fault upon the woman which God had given him for an
helper, God vouchsafes, as ye hear in my Text, to examine the Woman, saying,
What is this that thou have done? And she answers, The Serpent beguiled me and
I did eat.

These words contain in them two parts; First, Gods Inquisition accusing.
Secondly, the woman's Confession excusing her fact. The first in the first
words, And the Lord said unto the woman, etc. The second in the last words, And
the woman said, The Serpent, etc. For the first words which God speaks being
considered absolutely, are an indictment for some crime; as they are
interrogative, they are an inquisition concerning the same, and therefore I
call them an Inquisition accusing. So the second are a Confession, as the woman
says, I have eaten; but with an excuse when she says, The Serpent beguiled me;
and therefore I call them, a Confession excusing.

In the Inquisition are two things to be considered, First, the Author and
Person who makes it, which is the Lord God himself; So says my Text, And the
Lord God said unto the woman. Secondly, the Inquisition it self, What is this
that thou have done? In the Person who comes and makes this Inquest, being the
Lord God himself, we may observe and behold his (...), his wonderful
goodness, and unspeakable love to mankind, which here reveals it self in four
most remarkable circumstances: First, in his forbearance; And the Lord said;
When said the Lord? namely, not till Adam had accused her; she who was first in
the sin, was last questioned for the same; and that too because her husband had
appealed her. God knew and observed well enough the first degree, and every
progress of her sin, he needed no information from another, yet as though he
were loath to take notice thereof, as though he were loath to find her guilty,
yea as though he were loath to denounce the punishment which his Justice
required, he comes not against her until now; and that as though he were
unwilling to come at all.

If we look back into the story, we shall yet find a further confirmation
thereof: How long did God hold his hand before he stripped the woman
especially, of that glorious beauty of her integrity, and made her with opened
eyes to see her shameful nakedness? She had at the first onset of her
conference with the Serpent, sinned a sin of unbeleef of God, and yet God
spared her: In the progress she sinned more in her proud ambition of being
like to God himself, and to be wise above what was given her; and God yet
spared her: She sinned when she coveted and longed once to eat of the forbidden
fruit, when it began to seem more pleasing and desirable unto her then
obedience to Gods Commandment; and God yet spared her: At last she takes and
eats thereof, and so came to the height and consummation of her sin, and yet
behold and see the clemency and longanimity of our good God, he paused yet a
while until she had given unto her husband also, and then, and not till then,
he opened their eyes to see their woeful misery.

A lesson first to us men, if so be we think the example of God worthy our
imitation, to bear long with our brother as God bears with us; to admonish him,
as it is in the Gospel, the first, second and third time, before we use him
like an Heathen or a Publican; to forgive him seven times, yea, (as Christ says
to Peter) if he repent and ask forgiveness, seventy times seven times.

Secondly, this may be a cordial of spiritual comfort unto us sinners, though
we make a shift to keep our selves from the execution of sin, yet we find our
hearts full of sinful thoughts, ungodly desires, and unclean lusts, and such
like sinful motions from the infirmity of our flesh: which notwithstanding we
cannot ever expel or be rid of, yet let us hope that God out of his mercy will
bear with our weakness, and pass by our infirmities, who bore with the sin of
our first Parents until it came to execution.

The second circumstance is the temper of his Justice; in that he vouchsafes
first to enquire of the offense, and examine the fact, before he gives sentence
or proceeds to execution. The like example we have Genesis 11. where it is said,
The Lord came down to see the City and Tower which the children of men had
builded, before he would confound their language, or scatter them abroad from
that ambitious Babel, upon the face of the earth. Again, Genesis 18. the Lord
says, I will go down, and see whether they of Sod^me have done altogether
according to the cry of it, which is come unto me; and if not, I will know. He
from whom no secrets are hid, he that formed the heart of man, and knows all
the works we do; he that tries and searches the heart and reins, even he will
first examine the fact, will first hear what miserable man can say for himself,
before his sentence shall pass upon him: not out of ignorance of what was
done, for how should the omniscient God be ignorant? but out of his wonderful
clemency, and unspeakable moderation toward man: I say, toward man, for to
him alone he shows this favor; for as for the Serpent, we see, he vouchsafes
not to ask him one question, nor to expect what he could say for himself, but
presently without examination proceeds to judgment against him.

Does the great God, the Almighty Creator of heaven and earth, deal with so
unspeakable a temper with his creature, and is vile man, a base earth-worm, so
austere unto his brother? It was the height of Eves whole ambition to be like
unto God, but her offsprings ambition is to be most unlike unto him; He
glories in mercy and clemency, we in rage and rash austerity: He hears his
creature speak before he condemns him, we condemn our brother before we hear
him speak. Be wise and learned ye Judges of the earth, let this great example
of God be the pattern of your imitation; yea let no private man condemn
another rashly, until he has heard what he may say for himself, as God
himself here vouchsafed to go before us.

The third circumstance is Gods condescent unto man, in that he sends neither
Angels nor Ministers to examine our first Parents, and to make inquisition of
their offense, but he comes himself in person to take notice thereof. When men
are offended, especially great men, they will not deign to look upon, or to
admit into their presence those that have offended them: How great therefore is
this indulgence of Almighty God, who deigns here his presence to our most
wretched and most naked Parents, who had so grievously sinned against him? How
happily graced would a poor offender think himself, if he might be admitted to
the presence of his Prince, there to say what he could either for his defense
or excuse, or else to sue for mercy and move compassion? By how much therefore
God is greater then the greatest Monarch of the world, even as much as they are
greater then nothing; so much is this indulgence of God here expressed in my
Text to Eve, as before to her husband, surpassing all the favor and condescent
of men, who sent not for man, but came himself unto him; yea, who vouchsafed
then to seek them out, when they ran away from him.

Now all this is spoken (...), after the fashion of men, and therefore not so
much to express what God himself did, as what men ought to do: Let it be a
lesson therefore to those who are set over others, not to be too hard of
access to such as are obnoxious unto them. If God himself vouchsafed so far
unto his creature so wretched, much more should man unto his brother.

The fourth circumstance is the manner of his speech to Eve, in that he that
was the Lord God should so mildly speak unto her, What is this thou have done?
The Lord God said it, says my Text, but who would not think it rather the
speech of a familiar and condoling friend, then of so great a Judge, so greatly
offended: here is no word of asperity, but of lenity, no menacing, no
upbraiding terms, but only, What is this thou have done?

And should not we learn hence not to insult over such, whose offenses make
them liable either to us or others? should we upbraid, rail, triumph, and vomit
our impotency upon them? certainly we seem not to remember what a gentle and
commiserating Judge God is, or that our selves are men, and have to deal with
humane frailty, and man's miserable condition, which we ought to behold with
pity, and not handle with bitterness.

THE next thing is, the inquisition it self; What is this thou have done? Some
read, Why have thou done this? expounding (...) for (...). But Eves answer
following where she says, I have eaten, plainly argues the question was what
she had done, and not why she had done it: And therefore I take the words as
our Translation has them, and understand this manner of asking by God to be a
scheme of admiration, and to imply an exaggeration of the woman's sin, as if he
had said, O what an horrible sin is this thou have committed? How grievously
have thou transgressed? O what have thou done? And therefore, God enquiring of
her sin with exaggeration, she makes answer with diminution; Indeed, she had
offended because she had eaten, but yet the offense was the less, for the
Serpent had deceived her.

This then being the meaning of the words, let us behold in them the greatness
of the sin of our first Parents, which made the Lord God himself to say, What
is this thou have done? The greatness of this sin I will first consider as it
concerns them both in general, and then as in particular: The greatness of
the sin in general appears in these four considerations.

First, it was a transgression of such a Law, as was given only to prove man
whether he would be under God or no: For the moral Law which was written and
engraven in the hearts of our first Parents, and was for the doing of things
simply good, and abstaining from things simply evil; such things as a good man
would do, were there no commandment, and such things as he would not do, were
there no prohibition; so that in these there was no trial whether man would
obey God or no, only because he commanded him, and merely for obedience sake.
And therefore had God ordained this Symbolicall Law, prohibiting a thing in it
self neither good nor evil, neither pleasing nor displeasing unto God, but
indifferent, that man's observance thereof might be a profession and testimony,
that he was willing to submit himself to Gods pleasure, only because it was his
pleasure. And that it might yet the more appear, God made not choice of such a
thing as man cared not for, but of a pleasant and desirable thing, whereunto
the more his inclination was carried, the more by his abstaining might his
willing subjection be approved: The violating therefore of this Law, was an
open profession, that he would not be under God, and renouncing of him to be
his Lord. And this is the first respect, wherein appears the greatness of
Adams sin.

The second consideration arguing the same is, that he on whom God had bestowed
so many glorious endowments, whom he had as it were stuffed with so many
excellent abilities, and adomed with so many precious graces, that he should
sin against him, and set so light by his commandment: for of those to whom God
had given so much, he might justly require and expect much: Therefore those
whom God has furnished with the best gifts, either of knowledge or other
abilities, they, if they sin, sin most grievously: so that in this respect the
sin of Adam and Eve exceeded the sins of their posterity, as much as their
integrity did our corruption. The greater the person, the greater his sin: The
sin of a Prince greater then the sin of a vulgar person, and therefore in the
Law there was a greater Sacrifice to be offered for the sins of the Prince and
Priest, then of the people.

The third circumstance aggravating his sin, was the easiness of the
commandment, and the easiness man had to keep the same, both in regard of
himself, whom no itching concupiscence urged, as being altogether free
therefrom; and not as we his offspring are continually vexed with the boiling
thereof: Secondly, in regard of the thing it self he was to abstain from, being
only one fruit, in so great a liberty of all the garden besides. How easily
might he have abstained from one, to whom God had given the use of all saving
this one? he wanted not to feed him, he wanted no variety of food, he had even
enough to surfeit on; only to approve his obedience to Him who had given all the
rest unto him, he was to abstain from one, and yet he would not: Quanta fait
(says S. Aug.) iniquitas in peccando, ubi tanta erat non peccandi facilitas?

The fourth circumstance aggravating this sin, was the place, which was
Paradise, as it were in Gods own presence, even before his face: for as heaven
above other parts of the world, is the place of Gods special presence; so was
Paradise above other parts of the earth, as it were an heaven upon earth: the
place wherein he singularly revealed himself, and therefore an holy place and
the Temple of God. Do not men, otherwise giving the loose rein to wickedness,
yet abhor to commit it in Gods Temple? How impudently contumelious was this
sin therefore which was committed in Gods very Presence Chamber?

All these aggravations are common to both our Parents, which all laid together
makes their sin as great as ever any was, saving the sin against the holy
Ghost; for so the best Divines do think. But Eve adds one aggravation more to
her weight, in that she was not content to sin her self alone, but she allured
and drew her husband also into the like horrible transgression with her,
whereby she was not only guilty of her own personal sin, but of her husbands
also. And this added so much unto her former sum, that S. Paul, 1 Timothy 2. 14.
speaks of her as if she had been the only transgressour; Adam was not deceived,
but the woman being deceived, was in the transgression: So great and horrible a
thing it is in the Eye of God, to be cause or mover of another sin: woe be
unto them, who by any means are the cause of another fall: And justly might
God say to Eve for this respect though there had been no more, What is this
that thou have done?

Now I come to the woman's excuse, The Serpent beguiled me. In which words are
three things considerable: The author, the Serpent. The action, Guile. The
object, Me.

Concerning the author, the Serpent; two things are inquirable: first, what the
Serpent was indeed* secondly, what Eve supposed him to be? For the first; I
think none so unreasonable as to believe, it was the unreasonable and brute
Serpent: for whence should he learn, or how should he understand Gods
commandment to our first Parents? Or how is it possible a Serpent should speak,
and not only so, but speak the language which Eve understood? For though some
there be who think that beasts and birds have some speech-like utterings of
themselves, yet none that a beast should speak the language of man. It remains
therefore, that according unto the Scriptures, it was that old deceiver the
Devil and Satan, who abused the brute Serpent, either by entering into him, or
taking his shape upon him. The last of which I rather incline unto, supposing
it (as you shall hear presently) to be the law of spirits, when they have
intercourse or commerce with men, to take some visible shape upon them, as the
Devil here the Serpents, whence he becomes styled in Scripture, The old Serpent.

Now for the second question, what Eve took him to be, whether the Serpent or
Satan? If we say she thought him to be the brute Serpent, how will this stand
with the perfection of man's knowledge in his integrity, to think a Serpent
could speak like a reasonable creature? who would not judge her a silly woman
now that should think so? and yet the wisest of us all is far short of Eve in
regard of her knowledge then. Again, if we say she knew him to be the Devil; I
will not ask why she would converse at all with a wicked spirit, who she knew
had fallen from his Maker; but I would know, how we should construe the meaning
of the Holy Ghost in the beginning of this Chapter, where he says, The Serpent
was the subtillest of all the beasts of the field which God had made; and so
implies the woman's opinion of the Serpents wisdom was the occasion why she was
so beguiled: otherwise to what end are those words spoken, unless to show that
Satan chose the Serpents shape, that through the opinion and color of his
well-known wisdom and sagacity he might beguile the woman.

For the assoiling of which difficulty I offer these propositions following:
First, I will suppose there is a law in the commerce of spirits and men, that a
spirit must present himself under the shape of some visible thing: For as in
natural and bodily things there is no intercourse of action and passion,
unless the things have some proportion each to other, and unless they
communicate in some common matter; so it seems God has ordained a Law that
invisible things should converse with things visible, in a shape, as they are,
visible: which is so true, that the conversing presence of a spirit is called a
Vision or Apparition. And experience with the Scriptures will show us, that not
only evil Angels, but good, yea God himself converseth in this manner with men.
And all this I suppose Eve knew.

Secondly, I suppose further, that as spirits are to converse with men under
some visible shape; so is there a law given them, that it must be under the
shape of some such thing as may less or more resemble their condition: For as
in nature we see every several thing has a several and suitable physiognomy
or figure, as a badge of the inward nature, whereby it is known as by a habit
of distinction; so it seems to be in the shapes and apparitions of Spirits. And
as in a well governed Commonwealth, every sort and condition of men is known
by some differing habit, agreeable to his quality; so it seems it should be in
Gods great Commonwealth, concerning the shapes which spirits take upon them.
And he that gave the law, that a man should not wear the habit of a woman, nor
a woman the habit of a man, because as he had made them diverse, so would he
have them so known by their habits; so it seems, he will not suffer a good and
a bad spirit, a noble and ignoble one to appear unto men after the same
fashion. And this also I suppose Eve knew.

Now from these grounds it will follow, that good Angels can take upon them no
other shape but the shape of man, because their glorious excellency is
resembled only in the most excellent of visible creatures; the shape of an
inferior creature would be unsuitable, no other shape becoming those who are
called the sons of God, but his only who was created after Gods own image. And
yet not his neither according as now it is, but according as he was before his
fall in that glorious beauty of his integrity. Age and deformity are the fruits
of sin; and the Angel in the Gospel appears like a young man, his countenance
like lightning, and his raiment white as snow as it were Mar. 16. 5. Mat. 28. 3.
resembling the beauty of glorified bodies in immutability, sublimity and
purity.

Hence also it follows on the contrary, that the Devil could not appear in
humane shape, whilst man was in his integrity, because he was a spirit fallen
from his first glorious perfection, and therefore must appear in such shape
which might argue his imperfection and abasement, which was the shape of a
beast: otherwise no reason can be given, why he should not rather have appeared
unto Eve in the shape of a woman then of a Serpent; for so he might have gained
an opinion with her both of more excellency and knowledge. But since the fall
of man the case is altered, now we know he can take upon him the shape of man,
and no wonder, since one falling star may well resemble another: And therefore
he appears it seems in the shape of man's imperfection, either for eyes or
deformity, as like an old man, (for so the Witches say;) and perhaps it is not
altogether false, which is vulgarly affirmed, that the Devil appearing in
humane shape, has always a deformity of some uncouth member or other; as
though he could not yet take upon him humane shape entirely, for that man
himself is not entirely and utterly fallen as he is.

By this time you see the difficulty of the question is eased: now it appears
why Eve wondered not to see a spirit speak unto her in the shape of a Serpent,
because she knew the law of spirits apparitions better then we do. Again, when
she saw the spirit who talked with her to have taken upon him the shape though
of a beast, yet of the most sagacious beast of the field, she concluded
according to our forelaid suppositions, that though he were one of the abased
spirits, yet the shape he had taken resembling his nature, he must needs be a
most crafty and sagacious one, and so might pry farther into Gods meaning then
she was aware of. And thus you may see at last, how the opinion of the Serpents
subtilty occasioned Eves fall; as also why the Dev^^, of all other beasts of
the field, took the shape of a Serpent, namely, to gain this opinion of
sagacity with the woman as one who knew the principles aforesaid.

Here I observe that overmuch dotage upon a conceived excellency, whether of
wisdom or whatsoever else, without a special eye to Gods commandment, has
ever been the occasion of greatest errors in the world, and the Devil under
this mask, uses to blear our eyes, and with this bait to inveigle our hearts,
that he may securely bring us to his lure. It was the mask of the Serpents
wisdom and sagacity, above the rest of the beasts of the field, whereby he
brought to pass our first Parents ruin. The admired wisdom of the long
living Fathers of the elder world, having been for so many ages as Oracles to
their offspring, grown even to a people and Nation while they yet lived, was
the ground of the ancient Idolatry of mankind, whilst they supposed that
those to whom for wisdom they had recourse being living, could not but help
them when they were dead. This we may learn out of Hesiod, The men, says he,
of the golden age being once dead, became (...) they became godlings and
Patrons of mortal men, etc. So the opinion of the blessed Martyrs superlative
glory in heaven, was made the occasion of the newfound Idolatry of the
Christian Churches, wherewith they are for the greater part yet overwhelmed.
And the esteem which Peter had above the rest of the Apostles in regard of
chiefdome, even in the Apostles times was abused by the old Deceiver to install
the man of sin: This made S. Paul to say, the mystery of iniquity was even then
working; and therefore labored as far as he could to prevent it, by as 2 These.
2. 7.
much depressing Peter as others exalted him. Nay, he puts the Churches in
mind of this story of the Serpents beguiling Eve, that her mis-hap might be a
warning to them; 2 Cor. 11. 2, 3. I am jealous over you (says he) with a godly
jealousy, for I have espoused you to one husband, that I might present you as
a chaste Virgin to Christ. But I fear lest by any means as the Serpent beguiled
Eve through his subtly, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity
that is in Christ. And to come a little nearer home, have not our Adversaries
when they would get Disciples, learned this of the Devil, to possess them
first with an opinion of superlative learning in their Doctors surpassing any
of ours? I will say no more in this point, but that we ought so to prize and
admire the gifts and abilities of learning which God has bestowed upon men,
that the pole-starre of his sacred word may ever be in our eye.

THE next thing to be spoken of is, the action, Guile: and first, I shall show
what it is: To beguile is through a false faith and persuasion wrought by some
argument of seeming good, to bereave a man of some good he had or hoped for, or
to bring upon him some evil he expected not. Practice has made it so well
known, that I should not need to have given any definition or description
thereof, but only for a more distinct consideration: whereas therefore I said,
that guile wrought by forelaying a false persuasion or belief, I would
intimate, that it was nothing else but a practical sophism, the premises
whereof are counterfeit motives; the conclusion an erroneous execution. Now as
all practice or action consists in these two; The choice of our end; and the
execution of means to attain thereunto: so is this practical sophism we call
Guile found in them both, either when an evil end is presented unto us in the
counterfeit of a good, and so we are made to embrace Nubem pro Iunone, and find
our selves deceived in the event whatsoever the means were we have used: or
else we apply such means as are either unlawful or unsufficient to attain our
end, as being so masked that they appear unto us far otherwise then they are.
With both these sorts or parts of guile the Devil wrought our first Parents
ruin; first, by making it seem a thing desirable, and by all means to be
labored for, to be like unto God: which was an ambition of that whereof man
was not only not capable, but such as little beseemed him to aspire unto, upon
whom God had bestowed so great a measure of glorious perfections, as he seemed
a God amongst the rest of the creatures. What unthankfulness was this, that he
upon whom God bestowed so much, as he was the glory of his workmanship, should
yet think that God should envy him any degree of excellency fit for him? for
this was the mask wherewith the Devil covered both the unfitness and
impossibility of the end he insinuated; but he beguiled them. Secondly, he puts
the same trick upon them in the choice of the means to be used, which was to
transgress the severe commandment of Almighty God: Had the aim been
allowable, yet could not the means have been taken for good, but only of such
as were beguiled, in that the Devil made the woman believe with his questioning
the truth of Gods commandment, that the danger was not great, nor so certain
as it seemed; or that evil which might be in the action, would be counterveiled
with the excellency to be attained thereby; the gloriousness of which end the
Devil so strongly sounded, that it drowned in her imagination the least conceit
of evil in the means. And as a man which always looks upward, sees not the
danger in the path and way he walks in, until he tumbles into a pit; so was it
here with our first Mother, when thus the Devil beguiled her.

This first act of the Devil is that wherein we may behold as in a glass, the
art he still uses to tempt Ephesians. 6. 11.
us unto sin, and bring us to utter destruction: All his method is nothing else
but guile; he presents all things fair unto our face, and suffers not evil to
appear before us in its own ugly shape, for so every man would fly from it:
when he would tempt a man to covetousness, he calls it thrift; when to bribes,
he calls them gratuities; when to intemperance, forsooth it is good fellowship;
when to cruelty, it must be called justice; when to prodigality, it must be
taken for no other but liberality, and such like. This is that which the
Scripture says, The Devil transforms himself into an Angel of light: when he
draws to vice, he would seem to mean nothing but virtue; when he tempts to
works of darkness, he presents them as the works of light; when he plots our
ruin and everlasting undoing, he bears us in hand, that all aims at our
welfare and felicity.

This is that which is meant in the following verse, where it is said, The seed
of the woman should bruise the Serpents head, but the Serpent should bruise his
heel; as though the Serpent should love to assault at unawares, and so as he
might not be seen to intend any such matter before he had done the feat, and
therefore his fashion should be to come behind a man, and as it were to catch
him by the heel. For that this was the emblem of guile and deceitful dealing,
it may be gathered from the story of Jacob and Esau, when as Esau being
beguiled of the blessing by the craft of his brother Jacob, makes an allusion
to his name; Well, says he, may he be called Jacob, for he has beguiled me
now these two times: Now Jacob had his name in the beginning because he caught
his brother by the heel, when he came out of the womb; for (...) signifies the
heel, and (...), is as much to say, as an Heeler, whence the allusion of Esau
has this sense, if we take it verbatim; My brother may well be called an
Heeler, for he has heeled me these two times: Now because to come behind a
man, and take him by the heel was foul play, therefore of (...) an heel comes
(...), (dolus, fallacia) guile, and (...), a verb signifying to deceive or
beguile, which is the second sense that Esau would imply by his allusion, that
his brother might well be called a Beguiler, because he had beguiled him now
these two times. But of this I shall have occasion to speak more hereafter.

Since therefore we have seen the Devils practice, and learned that he works
altogether by deceit, how wary should the consideration hereof make us to be in
all the ways of our life? If we knew we had to deal with a man that used to
beguile all that came into his fingers, in what continual jealousy and
suspicion would we be? how would we cast about to find which way he might not
circumvent us? how wary would we be to entertain any proffer from him? there
could be nothing made seem so fair, but we would suspect some foul meaning to
be in it. If we would be thus disposed in matters of lesser moment, how
careful should we be in greater? if where the ability of deceiving is lesser,
what manner of men should we be when we know the Arch-deceiver of the world is
continually attending upon us, laboring to beguile us? should we here
adventure upon any action rashly? No surely; but be first well advised. We
should not be too confident in our own persuasions, lest they may prove the
Devils suggestions: and though the reasons we apprehend be never so good, and
the case seem never so clear, and the way we are to walk in never so secure,
yet ought we to make some pause, and act a fit of jealousy before we adventure.

And thus much of the Serpents action, Guile: Now I come to the object, Me. Me,
that is, the weaker of the two. Me, so much endeared in the affection of my
Lord, that he could not but do any thing at my request. Of these two respects I
will speak in order; and first of the first. The Devil assaults us there where
he finds us weakest, as here in this first sin he attempts the woman the weaker
vessel; The Serpent beguiled me: for he knows this is the readiest way to
overcome. A skillful Commander being to take a City, will not make his battery
on that part of the wall, which is strongly fortified, (for so he might make
his shot in vain;) but will assault it there where it is least defensible,
where a breach will be easily made, and yet entering he becomes Master of the
whole, how well fortified soever: even so the Devil will be sure to force us
there where we are least able to resist; if he finds any part not well
bulwark'd with resolution, there he plants the Cannon of his temptation, and
with an easy breach becomes Master of the whole piece.

Hence we may learn what to esteem of those imperfect courses concerning the
Commandments of God, too frequent among the sons of men: There are many who
resolve firmly against diverse kinds of sins, that they will never be drawn by
any means to commit them, but they have always some one wherein they demurre
whether they should resolve to yield to or not, if occasion should be offered.
Many will fortify themselves very strongly against the assaults of bribery, of
covetousness, of theft, of promise-breaking, of drunkenness; but as
concerning their lust they are unresolved what to do, if a temptation should
assault them; and so in others, there is some other inclination but slenderly
guarded, when for the rest they could glory how strongly they are fortified.
But we must know, that when the Devil comes to assault us, he will pass by us
where we are strength, and attempt us only there where our weakness lies; and
then we shall find all our labor lost, and all our other strength to have
stood us in little stead: For what will it boot to guard the walls of our City
never so strongly, if but one part be left unguarded for the enemies to enter?
Is not all the enemies? A Ship though in other parts never so sound, will sink,
if but one leaking hole be left unstopped. Let us therefore survey our hearts
diligently, and finding where we lie exposed to danger, there most to
strengthen our selves with resolution.

And thus I come to the second respect, why the Devil made choice of the woman,
namely, because of the vehemence of her husbands affection toward her; so that
to have gained her was to have gotten him also: for he seemed to think that her
strength in her husbands affection was more powerful to prevail with him, then
his subtle motives were to overcome him; and indeed the event proved he was
not much deceived. Hence we are to observe that the Devil takes advantage of
the vehemence of our passions, to work our overthrow, if he once find these to
fasten his hold by, he then thinks he may lead us whither he list. To have
gained our affections is as it were to have gotten a party within, which is a
dangerous advantage to further the invasion of an enemy; especially when most
of our passions are our favorites, which we can deny nothing they ask, and if
they be once bribed, will work us wholly to the dispose of our archenemy. Ephesians.
4. 27.


That we may not therefore afford the Devil this advantage, and as it were
reach him a rope to hang us withal, it behooves us so to govern and temper our
passions and affections, that they transport us not into the Devils
jurisdiction: which that we may the better do, it will not be unfit to set down
some rules for performance thereof,

First, therefore it is best to resist our passions at the beginning, and to
use the same policy which Pharaoh did with the Israelites, that they might not
overrun his Country, in killing all their infants as soon as they were born.
While the sore is green Surgeons seldom despair, but festered once, they hardly
cure it: So it is with the passions of our mind, when they are first growing,
they are soon curbed, but being a little entertained, they will hardly be
subdued.

The second means is, to inure our selves to cross our passions when there is
no danger, and to bridle our selves sometimes from ordinary and lawful
desires, that we may do it with more ease when we are in danger; for how can he
hope to be able to master his passions when dangerous temptations assault him,
who never used them to it in the time of his security? We know that men who
would fit themselves for the Wars, will practice in the time of peace when
there is no enemy near, and will toil and labor when they might be at rest,
will lie hard when they may command a soft bed, will watch when they might
sleep, and all to make themable to endure the like when they shall have need:
the like must we do, that we may get an habit to cross and subdue our passions
when we shall have need.

The third means is, to fly occasions which may incense the passions whereunto
we are inclined: Occasiones faciunt latrones, says the Proverb, Occasion makes
him a thief, which else might have been an honest man; wherefore he that
commits himself to Sea in a boisterous tempest is worthy to suffer shipwreck;
and he that willingly puts himself in the company of infected persons, may
blame himself if he fall into their diseases.

Lastly, but chiefly, when thy passions are most vehement, then seek for
succor from heaven, fly under the wings of Christ as the chickens under the
hen, when the kite seeks to devour them: beat at the gates of mercy, and crave
grace to overcome thy misery: He is thy Father and will not give thee a
Serpent, if thou ask him Fish: humble thy self before him, open thy sores and
wounds unto him, and the good Samaritan will pour in both wine and oil, and thy
passions shall melt and fall away as clouds are dispelled and consumed by the
Sun.

VERSE 14. And the Lord said unto the Serpent, etc.
THese words contain in them the Serpents doom and destiny, pronounced upon him
by the great Lord of Heaven and Earth; They contain in them two parts: First,
the reason of this sentence in the words, Because thou have done this:
Secondly, the sentence it self in the words following, Thou art cursed above
all cattle, etc. The reason of this heavy doom is, Because he had done this.
What This? namely, because he had beguiled the man and woman, which God had
made, and caused them to transgress his great commandment. He therefore that
is the cause and occasion of another sin, is as hateful to God as the door,
and is liable to as great, or rather a greater punishment then he: for the
Serpent here for causing has this doom, as well as the man and woman for
doing. Nay, which is to be observed, his doom is the first read unto him, as if
he were the archoffender, and not to the man or woman till he was done with:
What should this mean, but that his fault being the mover, was more grievous in
the eyes of God then theirs? which is the reason also, why the woman comes in
the next place to have her sentence, because she had been a sin-maker, and was
guilty not only of her own personal sin, but of her husbands also; whence the
man who had sinned only himself, and not caused others to sin, had his
judgment last of all. I might also confirm the same from the quality of their
several judgments, in that the Serpent alone is doomed to be accursed, and no
such word spoken either of the man or the woman.

But I shall not need to tarry here to prove how horrible and fearful a thing
it is to be the author of another sin: We know they are the words of our
Savior, Mat. 18. 6, 7. Woe unto the world because of scandals, and woe unto the
man by whom a scandal comes; it were better for him that a millstone were
hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea. And S.
Paul (1 Cor. 8.) would eat no meat as long as the world lasts, rather then
make his brother to offend. Would they would consider this, who are not content
alone to sin themselves, but play the Devil in corrupting others. It seems they
long to be double damned. I would also they would think of this, who make no
conscience at all by extremities and vexations, and other grievances, to drive
a man to perjury, and other grievous sins, and yet think themselves free, when
they should know, that he that is the author of another sin, makes another
guilt his own, and shall share in the punishment every whit as deep as he.

But this shall suffice to have observed in the first part, the reason of the
Serpents doom. Now I come to the second, the doom it self: wherein the words as
you see have all relation to the Serpent, for the Lord said unto the Serpent,
Thou are cursed etc. Thou shall go upon thy breast, etc. But because this
Serpent was more then a brute Serpent, the Devil himself being the chief agent
in this his instrument, it is a thing much controverted, upon which of these
this curse is here pronounced. Some would have it spoken only of the brute
Serpent, because here is a comparison made with cattle and beasts of the
field, thereby accounting the Serpent one of that number. Besides, Satan they
say was accursed before this time, and some of the words in this curse cannot
well be applied to any but the brute Serpent, as that he should eat the dust of
the earth, etc. Others would have this curse pronounced only upon the
spiritual Serpent the Devil, because the brute Serpent was only an instrument
abused by the Devil, and neither knew what was done, nor could do withal; and
why should it therefore be punished? Others would divide the controversy,
applying the first part of the curse in the 14. verse, to the brute Serpent,
the latter in the 15. verse, to the Devil or spiritual Serpent; because as the
latter of the promised seed of the woman, which should destroy the Serpent and
his seed, must needs be meant of Christ and Satan; so the former words are most
fitly appliable to the brute Serpent only: But against this may be said, that
the same Thou and Thee spoken of in the first part of the curse, is all one
with the Thou and Thee in the latter; and therefore of whatsoever the first is
meant, of the same is also meant the latter. There is therefore a fourth
opinion, that this curse is throughout pronounced upon both, both upon the
Serpent and the Devil: In which, though there be some difference about the
manner how, yet I embrace it as the truest, as not only conceiving it may be
so, by the fitness of all the parts so applied to both; but think moreover
that this only ought to be the meaning and no other, if it be conceived as I am
now to show.

For in the first place, the Devil when he beguiled man, came not as a naked
spirit, but in the shape and figure of a Serpent, (as I have showed
heretofore;) and therefore that his punishment in the manner might be suitable
and answerable to his offense, he was to receive his doom likewise under the
figure of a Serpent, and the style thereof framed unto a Serpents condition:
for it is the constant method of the allwise God to brand the punishment with
the stamp of the sin, that the offender thereby might not only know what he
felt, but also read why he suffered. Why was Adonibezeks thumbs and great toes
cut off, but that he might read therein, as he did, his former cruelty?
Threescore and ten Kings having their thumbs and toes cut off, gathered meat
under my Table. As I have done, so God has requited me. Why was Pharaoh with
his Host rather drowned in the Sea, then slain in the field, but that all the
world might read it was for his cruel Edict to drown all the male children of
the Hebrews? Why did Absalom lie with David's Concubines, but to put David in
mind that he had lien with Vriahs wife? And why was the curse of the Devil
shaped here in and unto the condition of the Serpent, but because he had
beguiled man in a Serpents shape?

Secondly, for the Serpent; The fashion, excellency and subtilty of the Serpent
above all the beasts which God had made, the Devil had abused to gain credit
with the woman, that he was an excellent and a most sagacious spirit, and
therefore might be able to pry farther into Gods meaning then she could, which
was the cause of her attention, and so of her ruin. For I have showed
heretofore that the woman in the state of integrity knew well enough, that as
it was the law of spirits in their commerce with men, to present themselves
under the shape of some visible thing: so it must be likewise under the shape
of some such thing, as may more or less resemble their condition: And that as
the glorious spirits might take no other shape but of man, the glory of visible
creatures: so the fallen spirits could not then before man's fall, take any other
shape but of a beast, thereby to bewray his abasement: yet because the Devil
here took upon him the shape of the most wise and most excellent of beasts, he
so bleared the woman's eyes with an opinion of his excellency and sagacity, that
in a manner she forgot, or regarded not, that he was one of the evil and abased
spirits, which was the ground of her miserable ruin and overthrow.

Now because the excellency and sagacity of the Serpent had thus been the
occasion of man's confusion, by being made the lying counterfeit of the Devils
excellency and wisdom, and the mask whereby he so covered his vileness, that
the woman took him not to be as he was indeed: Therefore God in his wisdom
thought good to change the copy, and henceforth to blurre and deface that
unhappy physiognomicall letter, and by abasing the Serpent for the time to
come, to make him an everlasting emblem and monument, wherein man might
hieroglyphically read the malice, vileness and execrable baseness of that
wicked spirit which had beguiled him, to hate him (as now we do the Serpent)
with mortal hatred, and by his unlucky and brained fortune, to expect the
Devils destiny: In a word, that which was once used for a mask to cover the
Devils knavery, should for the future be a glass wherein to behold his villainy.

These being the reasons which have led me to understand this curse in an
equal sense, both of the brute Serpent and the Devil, and in the literal
applied unto the Serpent, yet therein shaping out the malediction of the Devil,
as truly as the Devil had taken upon him the Serpents shape: Let us now come to
the particular handling of the words; and first consider them, as they are the
curse of the unreasonable Serpent. Secondly, as they include the Devils
malediction.

But for the better understanding thereof, before we can proceed, two things
are to be resolved: First, how it could be just with God to punish the brute
Serpent, who was Instrumentum (...), and had neither will to sin, nor yet
knowledge of what the Devil had done; especially, if we suppose as I have
hitherto, that the Devil took only the shape of a Serpent, which the Serpent
could not do withal? for this argument has driven some to affirm, that the
whole curse was to be understood only of the spiritual Serpent, and not at all
of the natural. But why should this stumble them more as concerning the
justness of God, then that in Adams censure in the 17. ver. where the whole
earth is cursed for Adams sake, Cursed be the earth for thy sake, etc. But what
had the earth done? or how was it guilty of Adams transgression? Again, in the
sixth Chapter following it is expressly said, That because God saw the
wickedness of man was great in the earth, he said, I will destroy both man and
beast, and the creeping things, and the fowls of the air. But how were the
beasts, the creeping things, and the fowls of the air partakers of man's
wickedness? what had they done more then been abused by him? which they could
not avoid he being their Lord and Master. And should not we think that Law of
God just, Levit. 20. where if a man commit abomination with a beast, the beast
is commanded to be slain as well as the man, who only had sinned? This proves
that objection to be wholly insufficient: But yet the difficulty of the
resolution, How this may stand with Gods justice, remains as before; which
therefore comes now to be resolved.

First, we know that all the beasts of the field, all the fowls of the air, and
the fishes of the Sea were made for the use and service of man in one kind or
other, as he should have occasion to use them. Secondly, if man had stood in
his first creation, the service of the creatures should have been suitable to
his excellency and integrity, and so far more noble then now it is, that even
the creatures might be partakers of his happiness then, that since they yet
look for the glorious liberty of the sons of God to come. Thirdly, but when man
was once fallen, the service of the creature was altered, and became a bondage
of corruption, as S. Paul terms it, that is, gnoble and suitable to the corrupt
condition of man under sin: those which should have been employed excellently
for the use of his integrity, are now to serve him ignominiously according to
his sin and misery; namely, either to be the means to punish him for his sin,
or to relieve him in his misery. To punish him, all the creatures for his use
are become base, corrupt and unworthy, and so nothing so useful for him as
they had been: The earth will not bring forth for him, but with his labor and
toil, and then too when it should bear him corn, it brings forth thorns and
thistles: The creatures which should serve and honor him, do often seize upon
him, and destroy him. And thus are the creatures employed for man's use, indeed
but a woeful use to afflict and punish him for his sin all the days of his
life. Another way notwithstanding they are useful and serviceable for his
good, as helps to relieve and better him in this his condition of sin; as to be
made documents of the wrath of God to move him to repentance, and emblemes to
know the condition of his most deadly enemy the Devil, and how he ought to
abhor and hate him, and the hope and expectation of conquering and triumphing
over him in the blessed seed of the woman. And for this use and service was the
Serpent abased and made vile, according to his curse in my Text; that as he was
made excellent to serve him in integrity, so he was now abased, to be made fit
to do him the best service in his misery. And what injustice could this be in
God? when he made him at first so as he made him for the service of man, and
now when he marred him, he marred him likewise for man's service.

The second thing to be resolved is, Whether this curse were pronounced only
upon one individual Serpent; or whethet upon all Serpents in general; or upon
some one only kind which the Devil had thus abused? Of one individual Serpent
it cannot be, because there is mention here of the seed of the Serpent, and
seed of the woman, which implies a generation of many Serpents; and besides,
this curse was to be a monument not only to him but to all his posterity, as
long as the world lasted, but one individual Serpent lived not so long.
Neither is it credible to be spoken of all kinds of Serpents in general,
because there is almost as great a variety of Serpents as of four footed beasts
of several kinds and species, and why should any kind suffer, save that only
which had been abused to offend? Besides, I make no doubt but diverse kinds of
Serpents went at the first Creation upon their breasts as now they do, and were
every whit as base as now they are, excepting the general decay of all
creatures since the fall. It remains therefore that it was only one kind of
Serpent which bore this special malediction; and that such a kind as was not
only the noblest of all the kinds of Serpents, but as it seems far excelling
all the Creation besides (man only except) for beauty, wisdom and sagacity,
but afterward by this curse became not only baser then the rest of the beasts
of the field, but even as base and vile as the vilest kind of Serpent. And
therefore it could not be the Basilisk, as some have held, though it be the
most poisonfull of all others, and as it were a King among Serpents, as the
name imports; for if Pliny and Solinus, who report the former, say true, this
Serpent here accursed, should rather be any other kind then that, because the
Basilisk (upon their report) goes with his breast and forepart of his body
advanced, (erectus a medio incedens, says Pliny, or as Solinus, media
corporis part serpit, media arduus est and excel sus) but this Serpent here
was from the hour of his doom, to go for ever upon his breast, which I wonder
they considered not, who from the advanced posture of the Basilisks body have
conceived the clean contrary: For as by this example we may believe that the
Serpent now accursed, did so before his curse; so that he should still do so,
it is a most direct gainsaying of Scripture to imagine.

But to come to the words of the doom; which, as you see, are first general;
then particular. General in these, Thou art cursed above all cattle, and
above, etc. What it is to be accursed, we shall know, if we first understand
what it is to be blessed. To be blessed or happy, is nothing else, but an
all-fruition of good, or to have a sufficient provision and furniture of good,
both for being and well-being: So therefore that creature is happy and blessed
which has a sufficiency of all good for the being and preservation of it self;
which wants neither endowments inward, nor means outward for the attaining of
that end, whereof it is by nature capable. To be accursed is to have the
contrary of this; to be despoiled either of indowments internal or inherent,
without which it has no dignity among the creatures; or external, without
which it cannot live or preserve it self, but with much penury, difficulty,
toil and danger. Whatsoever therefore among the beasts of the field, (for with
such only is the comparison made) is for inherent perfections of all the most
unworthy and base; or for the outward furniture of means for the preservation
of that ignoble being by unprovision of all others the most wretched and
miserable; this is that which is accursed above all cattle, and above every
beast of the field. And such was the Serpents condition to be for the general.

And now for the particulars; Let us go on and see how they are expressed, and
that is in three things: First, To go upon the breast, or to have the posture of
the body grovelling on the earth; whereby (as I shall show presently) is implied
the abasement of the creature. Secondly, to have for meat the dust of the
earth; wherein is shown its unprovision of food for the maintenance of its
life, being of all beasts of the field to have the basest and coursest fare.
Thirdly, to be in continual, mortal, and irreconcilable enmity with man, both
his Lord and the Lord of the rest of the creatures: from whom it should be in
continual danger and fear of its life, and once espied be sure to have its
brains dashed out by him. And which makes the misery so much the greater, to be
no way able to be revenged of his enemy other then to come unawares behind him,
and then neither not able to reach above his heel; as being most unequally
matched, he walking aloft with his head and whole body advanced, while the
miserable Serpent shall lie grovelling on the ground, ready to be trodden
apieces under his feet.

Of these three particulars let us speak severally; and first of the first,
Upon thy breast shall thou go. In the Hebrew it is (...), which some turn, upon
thy belly: which interpretation has been one great cause of the difficulty to
understand the meaning of this malediction: For if the shape of the Serpent
were after the fashion it is now, it is not possible to imagine how it could
ever have gone otherwise then upon the belly; for to think that ever it went an
end, were a conceit more worthy to be derided then to be believed. By which
means there appeared no other way of evasion out of this difficulty, but to
affirm that the Serpent indeed went upon his belly from the beginning; but
either it was not so toilsome to him, or not for a curse unto him till now,
which for my part, it being so far from the letter of the Text, I could never
yet believe. I had much rather in this follow the Vulgar, or Ieromes
Translation, which reads, super pectus tuum gradieris; for upon the belly I
believe the Serpent went from the first Creation, but not upon the breast until
this present malediction. The breast of the Serpent I call the upper part of the
Serpents body, from the navell to the head; the other part of the other half
downward, with which though at the first he walked prone to and upon the earth,
yet was the other part, his breast and head, reared up and advanced, until for
having been abused to the ruin of mankind, he was now with his whole body to
creep grovelling upon the earth. And perhaps thus much the Septuagint meant to
insinuate by their Translation, which is (...), upon thy breast, and thy belly;
where it may seem that they rendered two words for one in the Text, for
illustration, and for intimation of this, that whereas the Serpent before went
only upon his belly, (...), now he should from henceforth walk (...)* upon his
breast and belly too.

As for the Hebrew (...) here used, there is no necessity at all to translate
it, the belly, but rather some probability of the contrary in the etymology of
the word: for though in the Hebrew the theme be not used, yet in the Chaldee
(...), which signifies incurvatus fuit, to bow downward, and seems to mean the
inclination of the head and breast, or upper part of the body, to the earth, as
may be gathered from that of Eliah, 1 King 18 42. where it is said, that Eliah
went up to the top of ^armel, and pronum se abjecit in^terram, and put his face
between his knees; for here the Targum uses this word (...), the radix of
(...). Again Mark 1. 7. in those words of John Baptist, There is one comes
after me, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to stoop down and unloose;
here for the Greek word (...), stoop down, the Syriack has (...), of as near a
kin to (...) as is the Syriack to the Chaldee. The word (...) it self is of
rare use in the Bible besides in this place, and therefore we can receive no
great help from the comparing of places. It is read again Levit. 11. 42. and
that with a singular mark, as the Masorites have observed, for the Vau cholem
in the last syllable is (...), a great Vau, and exactly the middlemost letter
of all the Law of Moses; if their Arithmetic failed them not. But no
particularity of signification can from that place be gathered, the speech
being of creeping things, which go as well upon the breast as the belly, and the
belly as the breast.

Since therefore the word here used neither hinders our opinion, nor much
furthereth it, we will come to such other grounds as may prove our assertion,
for the Serpents going with breast advanced before the fall of man, and not
grovelling till his malediction. And first let it be considered there is no
impossibility of it in regard of the frame of the Serpent, which appears both
by their advancing themselves when they assault a man, (which the Painters
express in their Pictures) and also when they swim through the water, which is
with their head and some part of their breast raised above water, even as a Swan
holds up her neck, as I have heard affirmed by such as have been
eyewitnesses: and lastly, Pliny and Solinus report of the Basilisk, that the
Basilisk walks so still; as I showed a little before. And it may be as when the
Giant-like stature of mankind was diminished after the stood in a manner
throughout the world, and for many ages, yet was there by Gods disposition,
still a race of Giants left even till the time of David, for a monument and
witness of the truth of a far bigger stature in former times, which else could
not so easily have been believed or imagined. Such were the Zanzummims in
Abraham's time, the sons of Anak in Moses, and Goliath in the time of David; and
it may be there are yet some in some part of the world to be found. So I say,
as these seem to have been preserved by God, as a memorial unto men, that they
were not now as at the first; so it may be it was the will of God and is,
amongst so many kinds of Serpents to preserve this one, that it should not as
the rest go grovelling upon the earth, but might be as a monument of the truth
of the malediction of the rest to all posterity. Thus much of the possibility,
which would be far greater, if we should with S. Basil, Ephrem, Bar Cephas, and
many others affirm that the Serpent had feet, namely, some short ones beneath
the navell: for feet are not essential to the nature of a thing, as appears by
the lame, who can live without them, and by others, sometimes by the defect of
nature born without them. And those who can believe the wonderful change of
man by his fall, of an immortal creature to become mortal; of one to have
been born with all glorious endowments both of body and soul, now to be brought
into the world the most unfurnished of the creatures. Those who believe the
great alteration of the earth it self, when it was accursed for man's sin; the
diminution of the time of man's life, and of his stature, even since the flood.
Can any who believe these things, think it so incredible for the Serpent once
to have had some small feet, and afterward to have had none, being a creature
wherein God intended to leave a monument for ever? But of this I will determine
nothing, neither does my assertion simply depend upon it, but may well enough
consist without it.

But because possibility is not sufficient of it self alone to infer a
probability, I have therefore one thing to add more thereto, namely, the
reason and cause even in nature (supposing still Gods abasing of the Serpents
first creation) of this alteration of the posture of the Serpents gate from
that it was at the beginning.

First, we know the more excellent and sublime the nature of a creature is, the
more it raises it self upward; the more ignoble and baser, the more it falls
downward. This we see in the elements themselves; the fire the most excellent
and operative of the four, raises it self above the rest: The earth the basest
and most unactive of all, is also of all the most dejected.

Secondly, as there is this difference in the elements, so there is in the
mixed bodies; some consisting of a more sublime and excellent temper, others of
a more base and ignoble mixture: and that as in other, so amongst such
creatures as live and move upon the earth.

Thirdly, this their nobleness within discovers it self in the body without,
by advancing them naturally in their gate and gesture; whence man being of all
creatures living upon the earth of the most excellent temper and sublimed
condition of nature, is therefore of all other the most advanced in body:

Pronaque cum spectant animalia caetera terram,

Os homini sublime dedit, etc. Yea, experience will tell us, that even amongst
men themselves, those who are of a more exalted nature, either by heroic
temper, or predominancy of heat, are also more advanced in the posture of their
bodies. Among beasts themselves, the basest is the most creeping, the noble
Lion advances his head and breast so far as the frame of his body is thereof
capable, and so the rest: and of all creatures we may observe besides, that
such creatures have the most sagacity, who come most near to walk upright as a
man does.

If therefore the Serpent were of so sublime a nature at the first, as thereby
it was more subtle then any beast of the field which God had made, how could so
excellent a temper, the ground of so much sagacity, but advance the body
thereof, as far as the frame and shape thereof could admit? On the contrary, if
afterward the Serpent became the most abased and accursed of all the beasts of
the field, how should not this alteration of his former temper and disposition
of nature, make the gesture of his body also suitable, by stooping and grovelling
upon the earth? Who knows not that the natural position of man is erected
agreeable to his excellency above other creatures having life and motion? and
yet notwithstanding so much has the dejection of his primitive nature for sin
weakened in him this propension, that were it not for education, it is supposed,
yea and by experience confirmed, that he would walk upon all four like a beast.
And shall we wonder that the malediction of the Serpent, exceeding that of
man's, should produce as much as this?

So then to conclude this first particular of the Serpents curse; I understand
it, from the ground aforesaid, as insinuating the cause by the outward and
sensible effect, according to the manner of the Scripture; namely, the
abasement and fall of the Serpents whole nature from his primitive perfection,
discovered by the fall of his once advanced body, thenceforth to go grovelling
upon the earth: Even as the despoiling of the nature of man, of the inward
indowments of perfection, is by the same sacred trope, insinuated by his
outward nakedness; that is, the obsruration of that glorious and celestial
beauty, which he had before his sin: The difference whereof was so great; that
he could not endure afterward to behold himself any more, but sought for a
covering, even to hide himself from himself.

And now I come to the second particular; Dust shall thou eat all the days of
thy life. The coursest diet that any living creature has allowed him: None of
the beasts of the field with whom he is compared, are thus poorly provided for;
nay, not any other, unless the base earthworm, not worthy to be named among
the creatures. Even with this vilest of creatures is now ranked that once so
noble a creature, the Serpent. Which yet is not so to be understood, as though
the Serpent did not sometime eat something else, for they sometime devour
birds, frogs, and such like; but that this is the ordinary fare which God has
provided him, and if at any time he gets any other, he goes beyond his
limits. Whence Esaias 65. among the blessings of the new Jerusalem, this is
reckoned for one, That the Serpent should eat dust; that is, be made contented
with the diet God had appointed him, and not to encroach upon the food
appointed for others.

But why did God appoint him this food? I answer, even to continue him in that
accursed and vile condition to which he had dejected him: For food is for the
repairing and preservation of nature, and the goodness and badnesse thereof
does make the temper of the body better or worse. Hence according to the
degrees of excellency in the creatures, their food is finer or courser: Plants
suck the moisture of the earth; beasts live most upon plants, but man of the
flesh of cattle, fowl, and fishes: Since therefore the Serpent was to have no
better fare then the dust of the earth, as it argues the baseness of his
nature, which can with such food be nourished; so does it necessarily imply his
continuance in that his dejection and vileness: whereas otherwise it were not
impossible, because his nature for the essence is still the same it was, if his
diet were as it had been, for him to improve himself more near to his primitive
temper then now he is. But God who had decreed he should ever remain under this
malediction, appointed also the means to retain him therein.

VERSE 15. And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, etc.
THE third and last particular remains to be treated of; I will put enmity
between thee and the woman, etc. This no doubt intends in some things, more
directly the spiritual Serpent then the brute; yet for the general it may and
ought as well as the rest, to be expounded of the brute Serpent, as a glass
wherein to behold the malice and destiny of the other the Devil. It contains
two parts; The Enmity, and the Event and managing thereof. For the enmity, how
it is verified concerning the brute Serpent, experience tells: It is some
part of the happiness of the creature, to be the favorite of man who is the
Lord thereof; what honor could betide it greater then this? But between the
Serpent and Man is the most deadly enmity, and the strongest antipathy that is
amongst the beasts of the field: Such an one as discovers it self both in the
natural and sensitive faculties of them both: For the first, their humors are
poison each to other; the gall of a Serpent is man's deadly poison; and so is
the spittle of man affirmed to poison the Serpent. For the sensitive antipathy,
it appears in that the one does so much abhor the sight and presence of the
other; man's nature is at nothing so much astonished, as at the sight of a
Serpent; and like enough the Serpent is in like manner affected at the sight of
man; And that more especially, as the Naturalists affirm, of a naked man, then
otherwise. As though his instinct even remembered the time of his malediction,
when he and naked man stood before God to receive this sentence of everlasting
enmity.

And whereas the words of the Text do in special point out the woman in this
sentence of enmity; the Naturalists do observe, that is greater and more
vehement with that sex, then with the male of mankind: Insomuch that Rupertus
affirms, that if but the naked foot of a woman does never so little press
the head of a Serpent before he can sting her, both the head and body presently
dies, which no cudgel, or other weapon will do, but that some life and motion
will still remain behind: Hoc (says he) ita est, ipsorum, qui per industriam
exploraverunt, fide relatione comperimus. Lib. 3. de Trin. c. 20. You know my
Author.

The remaining words of my Text do express the managing and event of this
enmity, which is far more dangerous and unlikely on the Serpents part then on
Man's; for man is able to reach the Serpents head, where his life chiefly
resideth, and where a blow is deadly: but as for the Serpent he shall not be
able to prevail against man otherwise then privily and unawares, and that but
in his lowest part, namely, when he shall pass him unseen, to sting him by the
heel. And that this is the nature of a Serpent it appears in the words of
Dans blessing, Genesis 49. Dan shall be a Serpent by the way, an Adder in the
path, that biteth the horse heels, so that his rider shall fall backward. And
to make an end of this discourse also, it is a thing to be observed in the
nature of a Serpent, that as soon as he perceives man ready to throw or strike
at him, he will presently roll his body for a buckler to save his head; even as
though he had some impression of that doctrine, which God here read him in my
Text, Ipse conteret tibi caput; Beware thy head.

And thus hitherto I have considered these words as they are the curse of the
brute Serpent; now I am to go over with them again, to show how they are
propounded unto us by God, as a glass wherein to behold the Devils
malediction: the Serpent being made now the discovery of his vileness, which
once he abused for a mask to hide it from the woman. As therefore the Serpent
is the most accursed of all the cattle and beasts of the field; so is the
Devil the most accursed spirit amongst all orders and degrees of spirits;
namely, of the highest of Angels become the abjectest of spirits, more base and
accursed then the most cursed damned soul, having little or nothing left him of
that good which was suitable to a spiritual condition: and this is the state of
the Devil for the general, answerable to that of the Serpent.

Now for the particulars: The first is, Upon thy breast shall thou go: How does
this befit the Devil? The Devil has no bodily breast to go upon: But as I
showed in the Serpent, that this grovelling signified the abasement of his whole
nature from his primitive excellency; so in the Devil it signifies, his
stooping down and falling from his most sublime and glorious condition. A
wonderful stoop this was, when that which had been advanced as high as heaven,
was made to fall down as low, yea lower then the earth it self; This is the
Devils going upon his breast, this the grovelling of that once so highly reared
posture; according to that description of Jude ver. 6. who calls them the Angels
that kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation: agreeable to
that of S. Peter 2 Ep. c. 2. v. 4. God spared not the Angels that sinned, but
cast them down to hell.

The second particular is, The dust of the earth shall thou eat all the days of
thy life. The food wherewith spirits are fed, is analogicall, spiritual and
not corporal, we must therefore here seek out that, which in them has the
fittest resemblance with corporal food. The life of Angels consists in the
continual contemplation of the excellent greatness, wonderful goodness, and
glorious beauty of the essence of God, both as it is in it self, and as it is
communicated unto his creatures. This is that which our Savior intimates, Mat.
18. 10. Their Angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven.
The food of Angels whereby this their intellectual life and vegetation is
strengthened and continued, is that unspeakable joy and delight which
accompanies this contemplation of God, and which they find in the beholding of
whatsoever else has any conformity or sutableness with him, his power, his
wisdom, his glory, his goodness: According to that in the Gospel, There is
joy in heaven, and in the presence of the Angels of God, for one sinner that
repents. This is that Manna which feeds the blessed Angels, and which makes
them unweariable and unsatiable in their contemplation, and imitation of God,
as corporal food enableth the body for the continuance of corporal works.

And such as this had been the Devils fare, had he not fallen from his first
estate by sin: whereas now in stead of that Manna, he is fain with the Serpent
to feed of a food as course and as base as the dust of the earth; for as of a
glorious Angel he is fallen to be a damned spirit; so is his diet answerable to
continue him in that damnable estate; namely, a food clean contrary to that of
the blessed Angels, and a very earth to their heaven; A most execrable joy, and
a malicious delight in whatsoever is opposite to the power, the wisdom, the
goodness, the glory of God his Creator: this is that he hungreth and hunteth
after, and nothing but this. If there were no sin, no confusion, no misery of
creatures in the world, the Devil would be soon starved; for this is that he
preys after, this is that carrion he seeks for, when he goes about, as S.
Peter says, like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour. I have read of a
people of America, that will eat no flesh before it be stinking rotten, and
then it seems to them most tender and delicate: These are of a diet like unto
the Devil, for nothing but garbage and carrion are his dainties, the more
rotten with sin, the more pleasing to his palate, that which stinks most in
Gods nostrils, that smells the sweetest in his.

The last part of this curse remains, I will put enmity between thee and the
woman, and between thy seed, etc. In which we will first consider the parties
who are to be at this deadly feud: Secondly, the event and success they have
one against the other: For the first, the parties are on one side said to be
the Serpent and his seed: on the other side, The woman and her seed. By the
Serpent we are to understand Satan the Prince of darkness and Father of
Devils: This Serpents seed in the first place are the whole crew of Devils and
damned spirits, who are fallen from their first estate and condition. These are
the Serpents firstborn, begotten by him not by corporal generation, nor as
they are spirits, but by spiritual deformation, as they are Devils: For it is
the opinion of Divines, that Satan fell first himself, and afterward propagated
his Apostasy by drawing others after him, over whom therefore he worthily
deserves to have the principality and chiefdome; in which respect also were
there no other, yet he might be called their Father, and they his sons or seed,
as we know the use of the Scripture is, to call Princes Fathers, and Subjects
sons. The latter offspring of the Devil being a second brood, are the whole
company of wicked and reprobate worldlings: for that such as these are the
spawn of that foul fiend, it appears clearly by the words of our Savior to the
Pharisees, Ioh. 8. 44. Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the lusts of your
Father ye will do. And again, 1 Ioh. 3. 10. The children of God are opposed to
the children of the Devil: Therefore Christ calls Judas a Devil, Ioh. 6. And
Paul Act. 13. 10. calls Elymas the Sorcerer, A child of the Devil. The case is
plain: And as the Vanguard consisted of the first crew, so these latter are the
Rere of Satan's Army.

Now on the other side against this Army of Hellhounds, stand the Woman and the
Woman's seed. The woman though only named, excludes not the man, who was to be
at enmity with the Devil as well as the woman: But the reason of this unusual
Trope, which calls the kind by the name of the weaker and inferior sex, is
because of the words following, of ^he seed, wherein is contained the great
mystery of Christ's Incarnation, under whose colors, and in whose power alone
this Army is both to march and overcome: for this great Captain was to be, as
you know, the seed of the woman only, and not of the man; A Virgin should
conceive a Son, whose name is called Emmanuel. Whence it comes to pass, that
some by seed, will have no other seed to be understood, but the person of
Christ only; both because he is alone that seed of the woman, which is not the
seed of man; and because S. Paul, Gal. 3. 16. in those words, In thy seed shall
all the Nations of the earth be blessed, expounds seed singularly and
individually of Christ himself alone. But if it be well observed, the case here
is not the like; for the seed of the woman, is opposed to the seed of the
Serpent, which seed cannot choose but be taken collectively for Satan and all
his regiments of Devils and hellhounds. And why should not also the seed of the
woman be understood of Christ mystical, that is, of Christ the Head with all
his members, who are incorporate into him by faith into one mystical body? For
although they are naturally the seed of man as well as of the woman, yet
spiritually by this incorporation, they are the feed of the woman only, as is
their Head with whom they are one: And this it is which makes them of the party
against the Serpent, for till they once became the seed of the woman only,
there was no enmity betwixt them.

The seed therefore of the woman, I expound to be Christ and his Members: He
(...), the seed of the woman by nature, they (...), by their spiritual
engra^ment into him. Hence appears the difference of these two Armies; First,
in Satan's Army all march under their Father, who begot them; but Christ's Army
sighteth under the Colors of their elder brother, the first begotten seed of
the woman. Secondly, in their ranging Christ and his Army are as one body
informed by one Spirit; the Devil is far more disunited. Thirdly, in their
fighting, for in Satan's Army every Soldier uses his own strength, and fights
with his own weapons; but in Christ's Army the whole strength lies in Christ
their General: All our Armor is on his back, and our weapons guided by the
power of his hand. So we may learn out of S. Paul, Ephesians. 6. 11, 12. Put on
(says he) the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the
wiles of the Devil. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness in this
world, against spiritual wickedness in high places.

Thus then having seen the marshalling of these two Armies, which are at so
deadly an enmity, let us at last see the success of their skirmishes, and of
the stratagems which they practice one against the other: these are described
on the Devils part very terrible, that his head should be mauled. But on
Christ's side the loss should be very small, the Devil prevailing but to the
wounding or bruising of his heel.

But what is this Head of the Serpent? and what the Heel of the woman's seed?
Those who understand the seed of the woman singularly of the person of Christ
only, make his head to be the Godhead, against which the Serpent could prevail
nothing; but his heel to be the manhood, which the Serpent so bruised at his
Passion, that the grave became his bed for three days together: This indeed is
true, and no marvel, for the head is as it were the whole bodies epitome. But
we who have expounded the seed of the woman collectively, of Christ and his
Members, must also in this mystical body find a mystical head, and a
mystical heel: and so in like manner for the Serpent and his seed.

The Head therefore, or if you had rather, Headship, is nothing else but
Sovereignty: The Serpents head is the Devils Sovereignty, which is called
^rincipatus mortis, the Sovereignty of death; namely, both objective and
effective; that is, such a Sovereignty as under which are only such as are
liable to death both temporal and eternal; and such a Sovereignty whose power
consists not in saving and giving of life, but in destroying, and brings unto
death both of body and soul. Under the name also of death understand, as the
Scripture does, all other miseries of mankind, which are the companions of this
double death I speak of: This is that damnable head of the Serpent, the
Devilish Sovereignty of Satan. Now the Sword whereby this Sovereignty was
obtained, the Scepter whereby it is maintained, or as S. Paul speaks, the sting
of this Serpents head, is Sin: This is that which got him this Kingdom at the
first, and this is still the right whereby he holds the greatest part thereof:
Imporium iisdem artibus conservatur, quibus acquiritur.

This Sovereignty of the Devil, which once overwhelmed nigh all the world, the
woman's seed should break in pieces and destroy, which according to this
Prophecy, we see already performed in a great measure, and the grounds laid
long ago for the destruction of all that remains. As says S. John Ep. 1. c.
3. v. 8. The Son of God is revealed for this purpose, that he might destroy the
works of the Devil. And Christ himself said, that the time was come that the
Prince of this world should be cast out; and bade his Disciples be of good
cheer, for he had overcome the world. If you would see what a wonderful
victory he has long ago gotten of the Serpent, when after a terrible battle
he overcame and destroid the Sovereignty of the Serpent in the Roman Empire,
see it described in the 12. of the Revelation, where a Michael (that is,
Christ) and his Angels, fought against the great Dragon and his Angels, till
the Dragon with all his Army was discomfited, and their place found no more in
heaven, that is, he utterly lost his Sovereignty in that state; whence there
was a voice in heaven, Now is come salvation, strength, and the Kingdom of our
God, and the power of his Christ. And what he will at the length do with the
remainder yet of the Devils Sovereignty, you may find in the 19. and 20 of the
Revelation; For he must reign, as S. Paul says, until he has put all his
enemies under his feet, until he has destroyed all power, rule, and authority
adverse unto him: And then, last of all destroying death by giving immortality
to our raised bodies, shall surrender up his Kingdom unto his Father, as it is
1 Cor. 15.

But Satan, says my Text, shall prevail something against him, for the Serpent
shall bruise his heel. What is this heel? Those who understood the seed of the
woman singularly, as I told you, made it Christ's Manhood. But how we expound
the seed Christ's mystical body, what shall we make the heel thereof? I could
say that by it were only meant a light wound; or the Devils assaulting the Body
of Christ ex insidiis, at unawares, for that is his fashion since the great
overthrow, which our Michael gave him, to work his feats underhand, and to
undermine our Lord in his members: But this though true is not full enough. It
may seem therefore the fittest, to make hypocritical Christians, who profess
Christ outwardly, but inwardly are not his, to make those the heel of his
mystical body: for against such the Devil we know prevails somewhat, and by
them annoyeth the rest of the Body with his venom, though he be far enough yet
from impeaching our Lords Headship, and Sovereignty. But will you give me leave
to utter another conceit? If the blessed souls in heaven be the upper part of
Christ's mystical Body, the Saints on earth the lower part of the same; may not
the bodies of the Saints deceased, which lie in the earth, be accounted for the
heel? for I cannot believe, but they have relation to this mystical Body,
though their souls be severed from them, and yet must that relation be as of
the lowest and most postick members of all. If you will admit this, then it
will appear presently, what was this hurt upon the heel, when Christ had once
mauled the Devils head; for the Text seems to intimate that the Devil should
give this wound after his head was broken.

I will hold you in suspense no longer; read the 13. of the Revelation, and see
what follows upon Michaels Victory over the Dragon, what the Devil did when he
was down: He forms a new instrument of the wounded Roman Empire, by whose means
under a pretense of the honor given to the precious relics of the Saints and
Martyrs, he conveyed the poison of Saint-worship, and Saint-invocation into the
Kingdom of Christ, with which wound of the heel, the Devil coming on the
blind side, the true Church had been long annoyed and limpeth still.

THE Christian Sacrifice, OR, The Solemn Worship in the EVCHARIST: Foretold
by the Prophet Malachi, Taught by our blessed SAVIOR, AND Practiced by the
Primitive CHVRCH.

BY JOSEPH MEDE, B. D. and late Fellow of Christ's College in CAMBRIDGE.



LONDON, Printed by M. F. for JOHN CLARK, and are to be sold at his Shop under
S. Peter's Church in Cornhill. MDC XLVIII.

THE Christian Sacrifice.
MALACHI 1. 11. Abortu solis usque ad occasum, magnum erit nomen meum in
Gentibus, and in omni loco offeretur Incensum Nomini meo, and Munus purum; quia
magnum erit nomen meum in gentibus, dicit Dominus exercituum.
THIS place of Scripture, howsoever now in a manner silenced and forgotten, was
once, and that in the eldest and purest times of the Church, a Text of eminent
note, and familiarly known to every Christian, being alleged by their Pastors
and Teachers, as an express and undoubted Prophecy of the Christian Sacrifice
or solemn worship in the Eucharist, taught by our blessed Savior unto his
Disciples to be observed of all, that should believe in his Name: And this so
generally Mal. 1. 11.
and grantedly, as could never have been, at least so early, unless they had
learned thus to apply it by tradition from the Apostles.

For, in the age immediately succeeding them, being the second 100 year after
Christ, we find it alleged to this purpose by Justin Martyr, and Irenaeus, the
Pillars of that Age: The former of them flourishing within little more then 30
years after the death of S. John, and the latter a Disciple of Polycarp S.
John's Scholar. In the Age following, or third Seculum it is alleged by
Tertullian, Zeno Veronensis, and Cyprian: In the fourth Seculum by Eusebius,
Chrysostom, Hierome, and Augustine, and in the after ages by whom not? Nor is
it alleged by them, as some singular opinion or private conceit of their own,
but as the received Tradition of the Church; whence in some Liturgies, (as that
of the Church of Alexandria, commonly called the Liturgy of S. Mark) it is
inserted into the Hymn, or Preface, which begins Dignum and justum est, the
conclusion of the Hymn or Laud there being, Gratias agentes offerimus
rationalem and incruentam, (...), seu, oblationem hanc, quam offerunt tibi
Domine, omnes Gentes, ab ortu solis ad occasum, quoniam magnum Nomen tuum in
omnibus Gentibus, and in omni loco incensum offertur Nomini tuo, and
sacrificium purum.

Thus you see the antiquity of Tradition, for the meaning and application of
this Prophecy.

But for the Christian Sacrifice it self, whereunto it is applied, what the
ancient Church understood thereby, what, and wherein the nature of this
Sacrifice consisted, is a point, though most needful to be known, yet, beyond
belief obscure, intricate, and perplexed. He that shall make trial, will find
I say true. A reverend and learned Prelate of ours acknowledges as much: Apud
veteres Patres (says he) (ut quod res est libere fateamur) de sacrificio
corporis Christi in Eucharistia incruento, frequens est mentio, quae dici vix
potest quantopere quorundam, alioqui doctorum hominum, ingenia exercuerit,
torserit, vexaverit. The reason of this obscurity has grown partly from the
changing of the notion of the Church thereabout in following times; partly by
the violence of the controversies of this last Age; whilst each party finding
the knot, and studying not so much the right way of untying it, as how to give
the least advantage to the adverse party, have infinitely entangled the same,
and made it more indissoluble then before.

I have acquainted my self long with this Argument, and spent many a thought
thereabout; using the best means I could conceive to be informed. Namely, Not
so much to rely upon the opinions of modern writers, as to peruse and compare
the passages of the Ancients themselves, and their Forms of Liturgies, out of
which I was assured the truth might be learned, if I were but able to
understand them.

What I have found and learned, I desire to give an account of in this place,
as I shall have occasion; the Argument being such as befits no other Auditorie,
but the Schools of the Prophets. Nor will the discourse be unprofitable for
such, as mean to be acquainted with the writings of the Fathers and Antiquities
of the Church: there being nothing in them so like to stumble the reader as
this.

To come then to the matter: where I will chalk out my discourse in this order.

First, I shall premise, as the ground thereof, a Definition of the Christian
sacrifice, as the ancient Church meant it.

Secondly, Explain the meaning of my Text, by application thereto.

Thirdly, Prove each part of the Definition, I shall give; by the Testimonies
of the Fathers, Councels, and Liturgies of the first and best Ages, interlacing
therewith such passages, as may make for the better understanding either of the
Testimonies I bring, or of the matter it self, for which they are brought.

SECTION 1.
TO begin with the first; The definition of the Christian sacrifice; under
which name first know, That the ancient Church understood not, as many suppose,
the mere Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, but the whole sacred Action
or solemn Service of the Church assembled, whereof this sacred Mystery was
then a prime and principal part, and as it were the Pearl or Jewel of this
Ring; no public service of the Church being without it. This observed and
remembered, I define the Christian sacrifice, ex mente antiquae Ecclesiae, in
this manner:

An oblation of Thanksgiving and Prayer to God the Father through Jesus Christ,
and his Sacrifice commemorated in the Creatures of Bread and Wine, wherewith
God had first been agniz'd. So that this sacrifice as you see has a double
object, or matter; First, Praise and Prayer, which you may call Sacrificium
quod. Secondly, The commemoration of Christ's sacrifice on the Cross, which is
Sacrificium quo, the sacrifice whereby the other is accepted. For all the
Prayers, Thansgivings, and Devotions of a Christian, are tendered up unto God in
the name of Jesus Christ crucified. According whereunto, we are wont to
conclude our Prayers with Through Jesus Christ our Lord. And this is the
specification, whereby the worship of a Christian is distinguished from that of
the Jew. Now that which we in all our Prayers and Thanksgivings do vocally,
when we say Per Iesum Christum Dominum nostrum, the ancient Church, in her
public and solemn Service, did visibly, by representing him according as he
commanded, in the symbols of his Body and Blood: For there he is commemorated
and received by us for the same end, for which he was given and suffered for
us; that through him we receiving forgiveness of our sins, God our Father
might accept our service and hear our prayers we make unto him.

What time then so fit and seasonable to commend our devotions unto God, as
when the Lamb of God lies slain upon the Holy Table, and we receive visibly,
though mystically, those gracious Pledges of his blessed Body and Blood? This
was that sacrifice of the ancient Church, the Fathers so much ring in our ears.
The sacrifice of praise and prayer through Jesus Christ, mystically represented
in the Creatures of Bread and Wine.

But yet, there is one thing more my definition intimates, when I say through
the sacrifice of Jesus Christ commemorated in the Creatures of Bread and Wine,
wherewith God had first been agniz'd. The Body and Blood of Christ were not
made of common Bread and common Wine, but of Bread and Wine first sanctified,
by being offered and set before God as a present to agnize him the Lord and
giver of all: according to that, Domini est terra and plenitudo ejus. And, Let
no man appear before the Lord empty. Therefore as this sacrifice consisted of
two parts, as I told you, of Praise and Prayer, which in respect of the other I
call sacrificium quod: and of the commemoration of Christ crucified, which I
call sacrificium quo: so the symbols of Bread and Wine traversed both; being
first presented as symbols of Praise and Thanksgiving to agnize God the Lord of
the creature, in the sacrificum quod: Then by invocation of the Holy Ghost,
made the symbols of the Body and Blood of Christ, in the sacrificium quo. So
that the whole service throughout consisted of a reasonable part, and of a
material part; as of a Soul and a Body of which I shall speak more fully
hereafter; when I come to prove this I have said, by the testimonies of the
Ancients.

SECTION 2.
ANd this is that Sacrifice which Malachi foretold, the Gentiles should one day
offer unto God; In omni loco offeretur incensum Nomini meo and Mincha purum,
quoniam magnum erit Nomen meum in Gentibus, dicit Dominus exercituum. Which
words I am now, according to the order I propounded, to explicate and apply to
my Definition.

Know therefore, that the Prophet, in the foregoing Words, upbraids the Jews
with despising and disesteeming their God; forasmuch as they offered unto him
for sacrifice, not the best, but the lame, the torn and the sick; as though he
had not been the great King, Creator, and Lord of the whole World; but some
petty god, and of an inferior rank, for whom any thing were good enough. If I
be a Father, where is mine honor? If I be Dominus, where is my fear? says the
Lord of Hosts unto you, O Priests that despise my name! and ye say wherein have
we despised it? Ye offer polluted bread upon mine Altar, and ye say, Wherein
have we polluted thee? In that ye say, The Table of the Lord is contemptible;
or, not so much to be regarded: that is, you think so; as appears by the
baseness of your offering: For the Present shows what esteem the giver has
of him he honors therewith. But you offer that to me, which ye would not
think fit to offer to your Prorex, or Governor, under the King of Persia:
which shows you* have but a mean esteem of me in your hearts, and that you
believe not, I am He that I am; because you see me acknowledged of no other
Nation, but yours; and that ye have been subdued by the Gentiles, and brought
into this miserable and despicable condition, wherein you now are; you imagine
me to be some Topicall god, and as of small jurisdiction, so of little power.
But know, that howsoever I now seem to be but the Lord of a poor Nation; yet
the days are coming, When from the rising of the sun to the going down of the
same, my name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every place, incense
shall be offered to my name, and a pure offering: for my name shall be great
among the Heathen, says the Lord of Hosts; it follows, though you have
profaned it, in that ye say, the Table of the Lord is contemptible; whereas I
am a great King, and my Name shall be dreadful among the Heathen.

This is the dependence and coherence of the words. Now to apply them: Incense
(as the Scripture it self tells) notes the Prayers of the Saints. It was also
that, wherewith the remembrance was made in the sacrifices, or God put in
mind: Mincha which we turn Munus, is oblatio farrea, an offering made of meal
or flower baked, or fried, or dried, or parched corn. We, in our English, when
we make distinction call it a meat offering; but might call it a
bread-offering, of which the Libamen, or the drink offering, being an
indivisible concomitant, both are employed under the name Mincha, where it alone
is named.

The Application then is easy; Incense here notes the rational part of our
Christian sacrifice, which is Prayer, Thanksgiving, and Commemoration: Mincha
the material part thereof, which is oblatio farrea, or a present of Bread and
Wine.

BUT this Mincha is characterised, in the Text, with an attribute not to be
overpast; Mincha purum: in omni loco offeretur incensum nomini meo and Mincha
purum; The meat offering, which the Gentiles should one day present the God of
Israel with, should be munus purum, or as the Septuagint (...); Let us learn if
we can, what this Purity is, and wherein it consists, or in what respect the
Gentiles oblation is so styled. Some of the Fathers take this Pure offering, to
be an offering, that is purely or spiritually offered: The old sacrifices both
of the Jew and Gentile, were offered modo corporali, by slaughter, fire, and
incense: but this of Christians should be offered only (...), as Justin Martyr
expresses it; whence it is usually called (...), a reasonable and unbloody
sacrifice; namely, of the (...) etc. Constable. in Orat. ad Sanctor. coet. c. 12.
manner of offering it; Not that there was no material thing used therein, as
some mistake, (for we know there was Bread and Wine) but because it is offered
unto God immaterially or (...) only; which the Fathers in the first Council
of Nice call (...), to be sacrificed without sacrificing rites: This sense of
Pure sacrifice is followed by Tertullian, as may appear by his words ad
Scapulam; where speaking of the Christian Liturgy, Sacrificamus (says he) pro
Imperatore, sed quomodo praecepit Deus, pura prece; Non enim eget Deus,
Conditor Vniversitatis, odoris aut sanguinis alicujus. Also in his third Book
against Marcion, cap. 22. In omni loco offertur incensum Nomini meo -- and
sacrificium mundum; that is, (says he) gloriae relatio, benedictio, and hymni,
which he presently calls munditias sacrificiorum: The same way go some others:
But this sense, though it fitly serves to difference our Christian sacrifice,
from the old sacrifices of the Jews and Gentiles, and the thing it self be most
true; yet, I cannot see how it can agree with the context of our Prophet, where
the word Incense (though I confess mystically understood) is expressed
together with Munus purum: For it would make the literal sense of our Prophet
to be this; In every place Incense is offered to my Name, and an offering
without Incense. And yet this would be the literal meaning, if Pure here
signified without Incense.

Let us hear therefore a second Interpretation, of this Purity of the
Christian Mincha, more agreeable to the dependence of the words; and that is a
conscientia offerentis, from the disposition and affection of the offerer,
according to that of the Apostle, Tit. 1. 15. To the pure all things are pure,
but unto them that are defiled and unbeleeving, is nothing pure, but even their
mind and conscience is defiled: They profess they know God, but in their
works they deny him. The Jews offering was profane and polluted, because it
proceeded not out of a due belief, and a conscience thoroughly persuaded of the
greatness of their God; that he was the Creator and Lord of the whole earth,
but rather some petty and particular god, like the gods of other Nations: But
the Gentiles, who should see him not only the God of one Nation, but
universally acknowledged over all the earth, should have no such reason to
doubt, but firmly believe him to be the Great God, Creator of heaven and earth,
and worship him as such, and so their offering be a pure offering, not polluted
with unbelief. And it is to be observed, that all the ancient Christian
Liturgies begin with this acknowledgement: For the sum of the Eucharisticall
Doxologie, when the Bread and Wine is first presented before God, is
comprehended in that of the Apocalypse, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive
glory, honor, and power: for thou have created all things, and for thy
pleasure they are and were created.

And to this way of interpreting the purity of the Christian sacrifice; to wit,
from the conscience, and affection of the offerers, the Fathers mostly bend:
Irenaeus, lib. 4. cap. 34. Sacrificia non sanctificant hominem (non enim
indiget Deus sacrificio) sed conscientia ejus, qui offert, sanctificat
sacrificium, pura existens. Quoniam igitur cum simplicitate Ecclesia offert,
just munus ejus purum sacrificium apud Deum deputatum est. And a little after,
Oportet enim nos oblationem Deo facere, and in omnibus gratos inveniri
fabricatori Deo, insententia pura and fide sine hypocrisi, etc. Neither is
Tertullian, whom I alleged before for the other interpretation, averse from
this; for in his fourth Book Con. Marc. c. 1. Sacrificium mundum, that is,
says he, simplex oration de conscientia pura. But this conscientious purity
they seem to restrain, at least chiefly, to freedom from malice; as that
singular purity whereby this Christian sacrifice is differenced from that of
the Jew; because none can offer it, but he that is in charity with his brother;
according to that in the Gospel, When thou bring thy gift unto the Altar,
and remembrest thy brother has ought against thee -- go first and be, etc. And
therefore in the beginning of this Christian service, the Deacon was anciently
wont to cry, (...), Let no man have ought against his brother; and then
followed osculum sanctum, the kiss of reconciliation. Thus the Fathers of the
first Council of Nice, took Sacrificium purum, as appears Can. 5. where they
expound (...), that which is offered omni simultate deposita.

But according to this exposition, the purity of the Christian sacrifice will
not be opposite to the pollution of the Jewish, in the same kind, as it would,
if more generally taken, but in another kind, and so the sense stands thus:
You will not offer me a pure offering, but the Gentiles one day shall, and that
with a purity of another manner of stamp, then that my Law requires of you.
And thus I have told you the two ways, according to which the ancients
understood this purity; and I prefer the latter, as I think they did.

But there is a third Interpretation, were it backed by their Authority, (which
I confess it is not) which I would prefer before them both: and I think, you
will wonder with me, they should be so silent therein: Namely, that the title
of Purity is given to the Christian Mincha, in respect of Christ whom it
signifies, and represents; who is a sacrifice without all spot, blemish, and
imperfection. This the Antithesis of this sacrifice, to that of the Jews, might
seem to imply: For the Jews are charged with offering polluted Bread* upon Gods
Altar; whereby what is meant the words following tell us: If you offer the
blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? And if you offer the lame and sick, is it
not evil? And in the end of the Chapter, Cursed be the deceiver, who has in
his flock a male, and voweth and sacrifices to the Lord a corrupt thing. Now,
if the sacrifice of the Gentiles be called pure, in opposition to this; is it
not so called, in respect of that most perfect, unblemisht, and unvaluable
sacrifice it represents, Jesus Christ the Lamb of God? I leave it to your
consideration.

SECTION 3.
HAving absolved the two first things I propounded; given you a definition of
the Christian sacrifice; and explained the words of my Text: I come to the
third, and longest part of my task, to prove each particular contained in my
Definition, by the testimonies and authorities of the Fathers, and writers of
the first Ages of the Church. The Particulars I am to prove are in number six.

First, That this Christian service is an Oblation, and expressed under that
Notion by the utmost Antiquity.

Secondly, That it is an Oblation of Thanksgiving and Prayer.

Thirdly, An Oblation through Jesus Christ commemorated in the creatures of
Bread and Wine.

Fourthly, That this Commemoration of Christ, according to the style of the
ancient Church, is also a Sacrifice.

Fifthly, That the Body and Blood of Christ, in this mystical Service, was made
of Bread and Wine; which had first been offered unto God, to agnize him the
Lord of the Creature.

Sixthly, That this Sacrifice was placed in Commemoration only of Christ's
sacrifice upon the Cross, and not in a real offering of his Body and Blood
anew.

When I shall have proved all these by sufficient Authority, I hope you will
give me leave to conclude my Definition for true; That the Christian sacrifice,
ex mente antique Ecclesiae, was, An Oblation of Thanksgiving and Prayer to God
the Father, through Jesus Christ and his sacrifice, Commemorated in the
creatures of Bread and Wine, wherewith God had first been agnized.

SECT. I.
LEt us begin then with the first: That this Christian service is an Oblation,
and under that 2.
Notion expressed by all Antiquity. The names whereby the Ancient Church
called this Service are, (...), (i. Oblatio, Sacrificium) (...), (a word if
rightly understood of aequipollent sense) (...); Sacrificium Mediatoris,
sacrificium Altaris, Sacrificium precis, sacrificium Corporis and sanguints
Christi. It would be infinite to note all the Places and Authors, where and by
whom it is thus called. The four last are S. Augustins; (...) and (...) are to
be found with Justin Martyr, and Irenaeus; whose antiquity is the Age next the
Apostles. But, you will say, the Fathers even so early had swarved from the
style of the Apostolic Age, during which these kind of terms were not used;
as appears, by that we find them not any where in their Epistles and writings:
But what if the contrary may be evinced? that this language was used even while
the Apostles yet lived: For grant they are neither found in the Acts of the
Apostles, nor in S. Paul and S. Peter's writings; yet this proves not they were
not used in the Apostles times, no more then that (...), was not; whose case in
this point is the same with the other. But to confine the Apostles Age, within
the limits of Saint Paul's and S. Peter's lines, is a general mistake: For the
Apostles Aage ended not till S. John's death Anno Christi 99. and so lasted as
long within a year or thereabouts, after S. Paul and S. Peter's suffering, as it
was from our Saviors Ascension to their Deaths; that is, one and thirty years.
And this too for the most part, was after the Excidium of Jerusalem; in which
time, it is likely the Church received no little improvement in Ecclesiastical
Rites, and Expressions; both because it was the time of her greatest increase,
and because, whilst the Jews Polity stood, her Polity, for its full
establishment, stood in some sort suspended. This appears by S. John's writings,
which are the only Scripture written after that time, and in which we find
two Ecclesiastic terms of (...), for the Deity of Christ; and (...), for the
first day of the week; neither of both seeming to have been in use in S. Paul
and S. Peter's time; and why may we not believe the like happened in others, and
by name in these now questioned?

Which, that I may not seem only to guess, I think, I can prove by two
witnesses, which then lived; the one Clemens, he whose name, S. Paul says, was
written in the Book of life; and the other Ignatius. Clemens in his undoubted
Epistle ad Corinthios (a long time missing, but now of late come again to
light;) In this Epistle the word (...) is three times used of the Christian
service, page 52. Debemus omnia (says he) rite and ordine facere, quae Dominus
nos per agere jussit, (...), praestitutis temporibus Oblationes and (...)
obire: And a little after; Qui igitur praefinitis temporibus oblationes suas
faciunt, accepti and beati sunt, Domini enim mandata sequentes, non aberrant.
The other, Ignatius in his Epistle Ad Smyrnenses, has both (...) and (...);
Non licet (says he) absque Episcopo (...); where (...) he calls, in a stricter
sense, the first part of this sacred and mystical Service; to wit, the
Thanksgiving, wherein the Bread and the Wine, as I told you, were offered unto
God, to agnize his Dominion. (...), he calls the mystical Commemoration of
Christ's Body and Blood; and (...) the receiving, and participation of the same.
For (...) and (...) are sometimes used for the whole Action, and sometimes thus
distinguished: Of this Epistle the learned doubt not; but if any one do, I
suppose they will grant, that Theodoret had his genuine Epistles. Let them hear
then a passage which he, in his third Dialogue, cites out of the Epistles of
Ignatius, against some Heretics; Eucharistias and oblationes non admittunt,
quod non confiteantur Eucharistiam esse carnem Servatoris nostri Jesus Christi,
quae passa est pro peccatis nostris. Here you see oblationes and Eucharistias
exegetically join together. And so, I think, I have proved these terms of (...)
and (...), to have been in use in the Church, in the latter part of the
Apostles Age.

But what if one of them, namely (...), were used sooner even in S. Paul's and
S. Peter's time? In the first Epistle of Peter 2. 5. You are (says he, speaking
to the Body of the Church) a holy Priesthood, to offer (...) to God by Jesus
Christ. In the Epistle to the Heb. 13. 15. By him (that is, through Christ our
Altar) let us offer (...), the Sacrifice of praise to God continually. Why
should I not think, S. Paul and S. Peter speak here, of the solemn and public
Service of Christians, wherein the Passion of Christ was commemorated? I am
sure the Fathers frequently call this sacrifice (...). And in some ancient
Liturgies, immediately before the Consecration, the Church gives thanks unto
God for choosing them, to be an holy Priesthood to offer sacrifices unto him,
as it were alluding to S. Peter. Thus you see, first or last, or both, the
words (...) and (...), were no strangers to the Apostles Age.

I will now make but one Quaere, and answer it, and so conclude this point:
Whether these words were used (seeing they were used) properly, or improperly
((...)) of the subject we speak of. I answer briefly. This Christian service,
as we have defined it, is an Oblation properly; for wheresoever any thing is
tendered or pretended unto God, there is truly and properly an Oblation; be it
spiritual or visible, it matters not. For oblatio is the Genus; And Irenaeus
tells me here, Non Genus oblationum reprobatum est; oblationes enim and illic,
oblationes autem and hic; sacrificia in populo, sacrificia and in Ecclesia, sed
species immutata est tantum. But as for (...), or Sacrifice, according to its
prime signification, it signifies a slaughter-offering as in the Hebrew, so in
Greek, of (...), macto. As the Angel in the Acts says to S. Peter, (...),
Peter, kill and eat. Now we in our Christian sacrifice, slay no offering, but
commemorate him only that was slain, and offered upon the Cross. Therefore
our Service is called (...), improperly, and metaphorically. But if (...) be
synecdochically taken, for an offering in general, as it is, both in the New
Testament and elsewhere, then the Christian sacrifice is as truly called (...)
as (...), or (...).

SECT. II.
NOw I come to the second particular contained in my Definition; to prove that
the Christian sacrifice according to the meaning of the ancient Church is an
Oblation of Thanksgiving and Prayer.

My first Author shall be Justin Martyr in his Dialogue with Tryphon the Jew;
where, to the evasion of the Jews, laboring to bereave the Christians of this
Text (by saying it was meant of the Prayers which the dispersed Jews at that
time offered unto God in all places, where they lived among the Gentiles; which
Sacrifices, though they wanted the material Rite, yet were more acceptable
unto God, in regard of their sincerity, then those profaned ones at Jerusalem;
and not that here was meant any Sacrifice which the Gentiles should offer to
the God of Israel; to this evasion) Justin replies, Supplicationes, and
gratiarum actiones, quae a dignis peraguntur, solas perfectas esse, and Deo
charas (...), ipse quoque affirmaverim; Has vero solas facere Christiani
traditione acceperunt. If you ask, where, and how? he tells you, Nempe in
commemoratione Alimoniae suae aridae juxta and liquide, in qua and passionis,
quam per seipsum pertulit Dei filius, memoria celebratur: It is a description
of the Eucharist, wherein, as I have already told you, the Bread and Wine were
first presented unto God, as the Primitiae to agnize him, the Giver of our
food, both dry and liquid; and then consecrated to be the Symbols of the Body
and Blood of Christ.

My next Author shall be Tertullian ad Scap. in the place before alleged,
Sacrificamus (says he) pro salute Imperatoris; -- sed, quomodo praecepit Deus,
pura prece: Non enim eget Deus, Conditor Vniversitatis, odoris and sanguinis
alicujus: Haec enim Daemoniorum pabula sunt. The Gentiles so thought, that
their Gods were refreshed and nourisht with the smell and savor of their
Sacrifices: Besides, in his third Book contra Marcionem cap. 22. In omni loco
sacrificium nomini meo offertur, and sacrificium mundum, (to wit, says he)
Glori^ relatio, benedictio and hymni; And Lib. 4. ca 1. Sacrificium mundum,
scilicet simplex oration de conscientia pura.

Thirdly, Clemens Alexandrinus Lib. 7. Stromat. (...). We (Christians) honor
God by Prayer; (...). And this we send up unto him, as the best and holiest
sacrifice, honoring him by that most sacred Word, whereby we receive
knowledge; that is, by Christ. Again, (...). The sacrifice of the Church is an
oration exhaled from sanctified souls: He speaks not of the private Prayer of
every Christian, but the public Prayer of the Church, as a Body, as will be
evident to him that reads the place, and appears by the words quoted; (...),
The Sacrifice of the Church; and (...), exhaled, not from a sanctified soul,
but, from sanctified souls. For to private prayer was not given this title of
the Christian Sacrifice, but unto the public, which the Church offered unto
God, when She presented her self before him, as one Body in Christ, by the
mystical communion of his Body and Blood.

This my next Author, Cyprian, will make plain in his 16 Epist. ad Mosen and
Maximum. Nos quidem (says he) vestri diobus and noctibus memores, and quando
in sacrificiis precem cum pluribus facimus, and cum in secessu privatis
precibus oramus; where we see the sacrifice of prayer to be, cum precem cum
pluribus facimus; and distinguished from that we do, cum in se^essu privatis
precibus oramus.

These Authorities are all within the first three hundred years: to which I
will add one of the fourth; Optatus Milevitanus Lib. 6. contra Parmenianum,
where he thus expostulates with the Donatists for breaking and defacing the
Altars of the Catholics: Quid est enim tam sacrilegum (says he) quam Altaria
Dei (in quibus and vos aliquando obtulistis) frangere, radere, removere? in
quibus Vota* opuli, and membra Christi portata sunt; quo Deus omnipot^ns
invocatus sit. Gather hence what parts the Christian Sacrifice consisted of;
Vota populi, are the Prayers of the Church, Membra Christi, the Body and Blood
of Christ, which the Prayers were offered with; both of them upon the Altar;
For it is worthy your notice, that the ancient Church had no other place
whereat she offered her public Prayers and Orizons, but that, whereon the
memory of the Body and Blood of Christ was celebrated; that as they were joined
in their Use, so might they not be severed in their Place.

According to which use, and agreeable to this passage of Optatus, speaks the
Council of Rhemes, commanding the Table of Christ to be reverenced and
honored, Quia Corpus Domini ^bi consecratur, and sanguis ejus hauritur; Preces
quoque and Vota populi in conspectu Dei a Sacerdote offeruntur.

Furthermore, that the Christian Sacrifice was an Oblation of Prayer, and
consisted in Invocation, is also another way to be evinced; Namely, because the
Fathers, when they speak thereof, use the terms of Prayer, Oblation, and
Sacrifice promiscuously, and interchangeably one for the other, as words
importing the same thing.

Tertullian Exhort. ad Cast. dissuading a Widower from marrying again, because
it would be uncomely in the Sacrifice of the Church, to make mention (as the
manner then was) of more Wives then one, speaks thus; Etiam repete apud Deum
pro cujus spiritu postules; pro qua oblationes annuas reddas; stabis ergo ad
Deum cum tot uxoribus, quot illas oratione commemoras; and offerres pro duabus,
and commemorabis illas duas per Sacerdotem de monogamia, ob pristinum de
virginitate sancitum, circundatum virginibus and univiris; and ascendet
sacrificium tuum cum libera front? Here postulatio and oblatio; oration and
offerre; oration and sacrificium are interchangeably put one for the other. So
also in his Book De Oratione, are Oration and Sacrificium; where he speaks of
the kiss of Peace, and Reconcilement, used at the Eucharist; Quae oration
(says he) cum divortio sancti osculi integra? quale sacrificium, a quo sine
pace receditur?

Augustine De Civit. Dei Lib. 8. cap. 27. speaking of the honor of Martyrs;
Nec Martyribus (says he) sacrificia constituimus -- quis audivit aliquando
fidelem stantem ad Altar (etiam super sanctum corpus Martyris) ad Dei honorem
cultumque constructum, dicere in Precibus; Offero tibi sacrificium, Petre, vel
Paul, etc. Here Sacrificium is expounded by Preces, and Preces put for
Sacrificium.

And Lib. 22. cap. 8. concerning one Hesperius, a man of quality in the City
whereof Austin was Bishop, who, by the affliction of his cattle, and servants,
perceiving his Country-Grange liable to some malignant power of evil spirits,
Rogavit nostros (says S. Austin) me absente, Presbyteros, ut aliquis little
illo pergeret, cujus orationibus cederent; Perrexit unus, obtulit ibi
sacrificium corporis Christi, orans, quantum potuit, ut cessaret illa vexatio;
Deo protinus miserante cessavit. The Priest was entreated to pray there, he
went, and offered sacrifice and so prayed.

For this reason the Christian Sacrifice is among the Fathers, by way of
distinction, called (...), Sacrificium laudis; that is, of Confession and
Invocation of God; to difference it from those of Blood and Incense. Augustine
Lib. 1. contra Adversarios Legis and Prophetarum cap. 20. Ecclesia immolat in
corpore Christi sacrificium laudis, ex quo Deus Deorum l^cutus vocavit terram a
solis ortu usque ad occasum; Again Epist. 86. Sacrificium laudis, ab Ecclesia
toto orb diffusa, diebus omnibus immolatur; and elsewhere. And amongst the
Greek Fathers this term is so frequent as I shall not need to quote any of them.

Now this joining of the Prayers of the Church, with the mystical
commemoration of Christ in the Sacrament of his Body and Blood, was no
after-Invention of the Fathers, but took its original from the Apostles times,
and the very beginning of Christianity: For so we read of the first believers
Acts 11. 24. that they were (...) which the Vulgar Latin turns, Erant autem
perseverantes in doctrina Apostolorum, and communicatione fractionis panis, and
orationibus; But the Syriack, Perseverantes erant in doctrina Apostolorum, and
communicabant in Precatione, and fractione Eucharistiae; hoc est, Assidui erant
in audiendis Apostolis, and sacrificio Christiano celebrando. Both which
Translations teach us, that (...), and (...), Breaking of Bread, and Prayers,
are to be referred to (...), as the Exegesis thereof; namely, that this
Communion of the Church, consisted in the breaking of Bread and Prayers; and so
the conjunction, (...), to be exegetically taken, as if the Greek were rendered
thus, Erant perseverantes in (audienda) doctrina Apostolorum, and in
communicatione; videlicet fractione panis, and orationibus: And who knows not
that the Synaxis of the ancient Christians, consisted of these three parts, Of
hearing the Word of God; of Prayers; and commemoration of Christ in the
Eucharist? Our Translation therefore here is not so right, which refers (...)
to (...), and translates it, The fellowship of the Apostles.

The Antiquity also of this conjunction we speak of, appears out of Ignatius,
in his Epistles to the Ephesians, where speaking of the damage which
Schismatics incur, by dividing themselves from the communion of the Church,
he utters it in this manner: Let no man (says he) deceive himself; unless a
man be within the Altar, he is deprived of the Bread of God: And if the prayer
of one or two be of that force, as to set Christ in the midst of them, how much
more shall the joint prayer of the Bishop and whole Church, sent up unto God,
prevail with him, to grant us all our requests in Christ? These words of
Ignatius directly imply, that the Altar was the place, as of the Bread of God,
so of the public Prayers of the Church; and that they were so nearly linked
together, that he that was not within the Altar, (that is, who should be
divided therefrom) had no benefit of either.

SECT. III.
THE second Particular thus proved, the third comes next in place, which is,
That this oblation of thanksgiving and Prayer was made through Jesus Christ
commemorated in the creatures of Bread and Wine: Namely, they believe, that our
blessed Savior ordained this Sacrament of his Body and Blood, as a Rite to
bless and invocate his Father by, in stead of the manifold and bloody
Sacrifices of the Law; For that those bloody Sacrifices of the Law were Rites
to invocate God by, is a truth, though not so vulgarly known, yet undeniable;
and may, on the Gentiles behalf, be proved out of Homer and other Authors; Sec
1. Sam. 7. 9. Ezra 6. 10. Psalm. 116. 13. Prove. 15. 8. Baruch. I. 10. 11. 1 Mac.
12. 11. 2 Chronicles. 7. 1^.
on the Jews, by that speech of Saul, 1 Samuel 13. 12. when Samuel expostulated
with him, for having offered a burnt-offering; I said, says he, The Philistims
will come down upon me to Gilgal, and I have not made supplication to the Lord;
I forced my self therefore, and offered a burnt-offering: upon which place
Kimchi notes, that (...), (hoc est) Per manus holocaustorum precatio eorum, ut
plurimum, vel preces suas, ut plurimum per holocausta Deo offerebant. The same
is likewise true of their Hymns and Doxologies, as is to be seen 2 Chro. 29.
27. and by the words of the Chaldee Paraphrast Jonathan, upon Exodus 38. 8.
concerning the women that assembled at the door of the Tabernacle. Stabant
(says he) mulieres quae veniebant ad orandum, in Porta Tabernaculi juxta
oblationem elevationis suae, and laudabant, and confitebantur, deinde
revertebantur ad viros suos, and pariebant filios justos.

It is further confirmed for Invocation in general, by that which the
Scripture so often reports of Abraham and Isaak, That they built Altars where
they called upon the Name of the Lord: The Altar was a place for Sacrifice.

In stead therefore of the slaying of Beasts, and burning of Incense, whereby
they called upon the Name of God in the Old Testament; the Fathers, I say,
believed our Savior ordained this Sacrament of Bread and Wine, as a Rite
whereby to give thanks, and make supplication to his Father in his Name.

The mystery of which Rite they took to be this; That as Christ by presenting
his Death and satisfaction to his Father, continually intercedes for us in
Heaven; so the Church on Earth semblably, approaches the Throne of Grace, by
representing Christ unto his Father, in these holy Mysteries of his Death and
Passion. Veteres enim (says Cassander) in hoc mystico sacrificio, non tam
peractae semel in cruce oblationis, cujus hic memoria celebratur, quam perpetui
Sacerdotii and jugis sacrificii, quod in Coelis sempiternus Sacerdos offert,
rationem habuerunt; cujus hic Imago per solennes Ministrorum preces exprimitur.

This a Reverend and famous Divine of blessed memory, once of this Society, and
interred in this place, saw more clearly, or expressed more plainly, then any
other Reformed Writer I have yet seen; in his Demonstratio Problematis, and
title de Sacrificio Missae: where he speaks thus: Veteres Coenam Domini, sen
totam coenae actionem and formulam, vocarunt Sacrificium; tum aliis de causis,
tum quia est commemoratio, adeoque repraesentatio Deo Patri, sacrificii Christi
in cruce immolati: He goes on, Hoc modo fideles, etiam inter orandum, Christum
offerunt Deo Patri victimam, dum scilicet mente affectuque ad sacrificium ejus
unicum feruntur, ut Deum sibi habeant faciantque propitium: that which every
Christian does mentally and vocally, when he commends his prayers to God the
Father, through Jesus Christ; making mention of his death and satisfaction:
that in the public service of the Church, was done by that Rite, which our
Savior commanded to be used in Commemoration of him.

These things thus explained, Let us now see, by what testimonies and
authorities, it may be proved, the ancient Church had this meaning. I will
begin with Saint Ambrose, because his testimony is punctual to our
explication. Offic. lib. 1.mo cap. 48.o Ante (says he) Agnus offerebatur;
offerebatur and vitulus; nunc Christus offertur, sed offertur quasi homo, quasi
recipiens passionem, and offert se ipse quasi sacerdos, ut peccata nostra
dimittat; hic in imagine, ibi in Veritate, ubi apud Patrem pro nobis quasi
advocatus intervenit. And in his Missa or Liturgy after the confractorium, the
Priest prays in this manner; Ipsius praeceptum est Domine quod agimus, in
cujus nunc te praesentia postulamus; Da sacrificio Authorem suum, ut impleatur
fides rei in sublimitate mysterii; ut sicuti veritatem coelestis sacrificii
exequimur, sic veritatem Dominici corporis and sanguinis hauriamus.

An Author, which Cassander in his Consultations quotes without name, expresses
this mystery fully; Non impte a nobis (says he) Christus occiditur; sed pie
sacrificatur; and hoc modo mortem Domini annunciamus donecveniat: hoc ^nim hic
per eum humiliter agimus in terris, quod pro nobis ipse potenter (sicut filius
pro sua reverentia exaudiendus) agit in Coelis; ubi apud Patrem pro nobis quasi
advocatus intervenit; cui est pro nobis intervenire, carnem quam pro nobis and
de nobis sumpsit, Deo Patri quodammodo pro nobis ingerere.

My next Author shall be Eusebius; Demonstrat. Euangel. lib. 1. cap. 10. where
mentioning that of the 23 Psalm, Thou have prepared a Table before me, etc.
Thou anointest my head with oil: Palam, says he, in his mysticam significat
unctionem: (...): veneranda mensae Christi sacrificia; (he means the Symbols of
the Body and Blood of Christ) (...), hoc est, per quae litantes, aut
propitiantes, supremo Deo rationales, incruentas, eique suaves victimas, in
tota vita per eminentissimum ipsius Pontificem, offerre edocti sumus. Here
Eusebius affirms, that Christians are taught to offer unto God reasonable and
unbloody sacrifices; that is, Prayer and Thanksgiving: (...) propitiating, or
finding favor with God, through the venerable mysteries of Christ's Table; For
(...) is, litare, propitiare, or placare Numen, votum impetrare, (...), gratum
facere.

Next I produce Cyrill of Jerusalem (or more likely John his successor) Author
of those five Catecheses Mystagogicae; In the last of which, relating and
expounding the meaning of that, which was said or done in the celebration of
the Eucharist, according to the use of his time, amongst other things he says
thus; Post absolutum spiritale illud sacrificium and incruentum cultum, after
the thanksgiving and invocation of the Holy Ghost, upon the Bread and Wine, to
make it the Body and Blood of Christ (of which he was speaking before) was
done, (...), Super illa propitiationis hostia obsecramus Deum 1 Mac. 12. 11.
pro communi Ecclestarum pace, pro tranquillitate mundi, pro Regibus, pro
militibus, pro socils, pro aegrotis and afflictis, and in summa, pro omnibus
iis qui egent auxilio; And this is the manner of the Greek Liturgies,
immediately upon the consecration of the Dona, to be the Symbols of the Body
and Blood of Christ, and the commemoration thereon of his Passion,
Resurrection, and Ascension, (...): Dionys. Areop. Ep. ad ^emoph. Therapeutam.
to offer to the Divine Majesty, as it were over the Lamb of God then lying
upon the Table, their supplications and prayers, (...). Eusebius. de Vita
Constant. lib. 4. c. 45.
for the whole state of Christ's Church and all sorts and degrees therein,
together with all other their suits and requests; and that ever and anon
interposing the word (...) we offer unto thee, for these and these; that is, we
commemorate Christ, in this mystical Rite for them. This Prayer therefore our
Author Cyrill in the place aforequoted calls (...), supplicationem sancti and
tremendi praejacentis sacrificii; and says, that it is a most powerful
prayer, as that wherein we offer unto the Divine Majesty, (...); Christ that
was once slain for our sins (...), propitiating the merciful God, for our
selves and others we pray for.

And this is that, if I mistake not, which Tertullian means lib. de oratione
cap. 11. where he says of the Christians, that they did Dominica passione
modulari, and orare: Nos vero (inquit) non attollimus tantum manus, sed etiam
expandimus; and Dominica passione modulantes, and orantes confitemur Christ's;
id est, Christum. According to the dialect of the Scripture; Confitemur Domino,
for Confitemur Dominum; For by commemorating Christ, and offering our prayers
to the Father in his Name, we confess and acknowledge him, to be our Mediator;
so Eusebius de Laud Constable. calls it, (...), To send up Prayers in his Name to
the God of all.

The same with Tertullian, means Saint Austin, describing the Christian
sacrifice to be; immolare Deo in Corpore Christi sacrificium Laudis, lib. 1.
contra Adversarios Legis and Prophetarum: cap. 20. Ecclesia (says he) immolat
Deo, in Corpore Christi, sacrificium Laudis, ex quo Deus Deorum locutus vo avit
terram, a Solis ortu usque ad occasum, Psalm. 40.

Lastly, that the representation of the Body and Blood of Christ in this
Christian service, was intended and used as a Rite, whereby to find grace and
favor with God, when the Church addressed her self unto him, (which is that I
undertook to prove,) is apparent by a saying of Origin Hom. 13. in Levit. where
treating of the shewbread, which was continually set before the Lord with
incense, for a memorial of the children of Israel; that is, to put God in
mind of them: he makes it in this respect to have been a lively figure of the
Christians Eucharist; For, says he, Ista est commemoratio sola, quae propitium
facit Deum hominibus.

All these testimonies have been express for our purpose: That the
Thanksgiving and Prayers of the Church in the Christian sacrifice, were offered
unto the Divine Majesty through Christ commemorated in the Symbols of Bread
and Wine, as by a Medium whereby to find acceptance.

There is, besides these, an usual expression of the Fathers, when they speak
of the Eucharist; which though it be not direct and punctual, as the former,
yet, I verily believe, it aimed at the same Mystery. Namely, when they say,
that in this Sacrifice they offer Praise and Prayer to God the Father, through
Jesus Christ, the great High Priest. I will quote an Example or two; Clemens,
or the Author of the Constitutions, lib. 2. cap. 29. Vos hodie (says he) o
Episcopi, estis populo vestro sacerdotes and Levitae: -- assistentes ad Altar
Domini and Dei nostri, (...), per Iesum Christum, magnum Pontificem.

The same Clemens in a more undoubted writing of his, to wit, his Epist. ad
Corinthios, quoting that of the 50. Psalm after the Septuagint, (...); the
sacrifice of Praise shall glorify me; (...); -- and there is the way wherein I
shall show to him that sacrifices the salvation of God. This is the way says
Clemens, that is, the sacrifice of Praise is the way, (...) (...), wherein we
have found our salvation, Jesus Christ, the High Priest of all our offerings.
The Fathers are wont to expound this place, of the Eucharist; and therefore I
doubt not, but Clemens means of the same, and tells us that in this Sacrifice
Christ the High Priest of our offerings is found; that is, represented and
commemorated.

In the same style speaks Just. Mar. Dial: cum Tryphone. Ne unum quidem est
genus Mortalium, sive Graecorum, sive Barbarorum, sive quocunque nomine
appellantur -- inter quos per nomen cruci fixi Jesus (...), Patri and
fabricatori omnium non fiant. He is speaking of the Christian sacrifice, and
our Text in Malachi; In omni loco offeretur incensum nomini meo, where by Nomen
Dei he understands Christ, through whom, in this Sacrifice, our devotions are
offered. So does Ireneus, and others; Iren. lib. 4. cap. 33. Quod est aliud
Nomen, quod in Gentibus glorificatur, quam quod est Domini nostri, per quem
glorificatur Pater, and glorificatur homo: -- quoniam ergo Nomen filii proprium
Patris est and in Deo omnipotente per Iesum Christum offert Ecclesia, been ait
secundum utraque, Et in omni loco offeretur incensum Nomini meo, and
sacrificium purum.

Now how this Incense and Sacrifice, which the Prophet says the Gentiles
should offer to the Name of God, may be expounded, Offered by the Name of God,
to wit, by Christ, Origin lib. 8. contra Cells. will inform us; Vnum Deum (says
he) and unum ejus filium, ac verbum imaginemque, quantum possumus,
supplicationibus and honoribus veneramur; offerentes Deo universorum preces per
suum unigenitum; Cui prius eas adhibemus, rogantes ut ipse, qui est propitiator
pro peccatis nostris, dignetur tanquam Pontifex preces nostras and sacrificia
and intercessiones offerre Deo super omnia. That, which we offer to the Father
by Christ, we offer first to Christ; that he, as our High Priest, might present
it to his Father. More passages has Origin in the same Books of this kind.

But I will not weary you too much in this rugged way; out of this which we
have hitherto discoursed and proved, may be understood the meaning and reason
of that Decree of the third Council of Carthage and Hippo. Vt nemo in
Precibus, vel Patrem pro Filio, vel Filium pro Patre, nominet. Et cum Altari
assistitur, semper ad Patrem dirigatur oration. The reason; because the Father
is properly the Object, (...) to whom; the Son only, (...), by whom, in this
Mystical service; and therefore, to direct here our Prayers and Thanksgivings
to the Son, were to pervert the order of the Mystery, which is, as has been
proved, An oblation of Praise and Prayer to God the Father, through the
Intercession of Jesus Christ, represented in the Symbols of Bread and Wine.

SECT. IV.
THe fourth particular propounded was this; That the Sacrament of the Body and
Blood of Christ, or Lords Supper is a Sacrifice, according to the style of the
ancient Church.

It is one thing to say, that the Lords Supper is a Sacrifice, and another to
say, that Christ is properly sacrificed therein. These are not the same; for
there may be a Sacrifice, which is a representation of another, and yet a
Sacrifice too: And such is this of the New Testament, a Sacrifice wherein
another Sacrifice, that of Christ's death upon the Cross, is commemorated: Thus
the Papists gain nothing by this Notion of Antiquity, and our asserting the
same; For their tenet is, that Christ in this Sacrifice is really and properly
sacrificed; which we shall show in due time that the Ancients never meant.

To begin with this: As in the Old Testament the name of Sacrifice was
otherwhile given to the whole action in which the Rite was used; sometimes to
the Rite alone: so in the Notion and Language of the ancient Church, sometimes
the whole Action or Christian service (wherein the Lords Supper was a part) is
comprehended under that name; sometimes the Rite of the sacred Supper it self,
is so termed, and truly, as you shall now hear.

The resolution of this Point, depends altogether upon the true Definition of a
Sacrifice, as it is distinguished from all other Offerings. Which, though it be
so necessary, that all disputation without it, is vain; yet shall we not find,
that either party interessed in this question, has been so exact therein, as
were to be wished. This appears by the differing Definitions, given and
confuted by Divines on both sides; the reason of which defect is, because
neither are deduced from the Notion of Scripture, but built upon other
conceptions: Let us see therefore, if it may be learned out of Scripture, what
that is which the Scripture, in a strict and special sense, calls a Sacrifice.

Every Sacrifice is an oblation or offering: but every offering is not a
Sacrifice, in that strict and proper acception we seek. For Tithes,
First Fruits Heavofferings in the Law, and whatsoever indeed is consecrated
unto God, are oblations or offerings; but none of them Sacrifices, nor ever so
called in the Old Testament: What offerings are then called so? I answer,
Burnt-offerings, Sin Offerings, Trespasse-offerings, and peace offerings.
These, and no other, are called by that name.

Out of these therefore must we pick the true and proper ratio of a Sacrifice:
It is true indeed, that these Sacrifices were offerings of beasts, of beeves,
of sheep, of goats, of fowls; but the ratio of any thing consists not in the
matter thereof; As the gowns we wear, are still the same kind of apparel,
though made of differing stuffs: These Sacrifices also were slain, and offered
by fire and incense: But neither is the modus of any thing the ratio or
essential form thereof. That therefore may have the nature and formale of a
Sacrifice which consists of another matter, and is offered after another and
differing manner; Those we call Sacraments of the Old Testament, Circumcision
and the Passover, were by effusion of blood; ours are not, and yet we esteem
them nevertheless true Sacraments; and so it may be here.

To hold you therefore no longer in suspense, a Sacrifice, I think should be
defined thus; An offering, whereby the offerer is made partaker of his Gods
Table, in token of Covenant, and friendship with him, etc. more explicately
thus: An offering unto the Divine Majesty, of that which is given for the food
of man; that the offerer partaking thereof, might, as by way of pledge, be
certified of his acceptance into Covenant, and fellowship with his God, by
eating and drinking at his Table. S. Augustine comes toward this Notion, when he
defines a Sacrifice (though in a larger sense) opus quod Deo nuncupamus,
reddimus, and dedicamus, hoc fine, ut sancta societate ipsi adhaereamus; for to
have society and fellowship with God, what is it else, but to be in league and
covenant with him?

In a word, a Sacrifice is oblatio foederalis; for the true and right
understanding whereof, we must know, that it was the universal custom of
mankind, and still remains in use, to contract covenants and make leagues of
friendship, by eating and drinking together. When Isaac made a covenant with
Abimelec the King of Gerar, the Text says, He made him and those that were
with him, a feast, and they did eat, and drink, and rose up betimes in the
morning, and swear one to another, Genesis 28. When Jacob made covenant with
Laban, after they had sworn together, he made him a feast, and called his
brethren to eat Bread, Genesis 31. When David made a league with Abner, upon his
promise to bring all Israel unto him, David made Abner and the men that came
with him a feast, 2 Samuel 3. Vide eti am Ios 9. 14. 15. Psa. 41. 10. Vir pacis
meae in quo fidebam; qu^ comedibat panem meum.
Hence in the Hebrew tongue, a covenant is called (...) of (...), to eat; as if
they should say, an eating; which derivation is so natural, that it deserves
to be preferred, before that from the other signification of the same verb,
which is eligere. And this will suffice for the custom of the Hebrews.

Now for the Gentiles, Herodotus tells us, the Persians were wont to contract
leagues of friendship, inter vinum, and Epulas, in a full feast, whereat their
wives, children and friends were present. The like Tacitus reports of the
Germans: Amongst the Greeks and other Nations, they eat bread and salt
together. Unto which comes near that ceremony, somewhere used at weddings;
that the Brdegroom, when he comes home from Church, takes a piece of cake,
tastes it, then gives it to his Bride to taste it likewise; as a token of a
covenant made between them. The Emperor of Russia at this day, when he would
show extraordinary grace and favor unto any, sends him bread and salt from his
Table: And when he invited Baron Sigismond the Emperor Ferdinands Ambassador,
he did it in this form; Sigismunde comedes sal and panem nostrum nobiscum.
Hence that Symbol of Pythagoras (...), Break no bread, is interpreted by
Erasmus, and others, to mean, Break no friendship: Moreover the Egyptians,
Thracians, and Lybians in special, are said to have used to make Vid. Turcicum
ritum apud Busbequium, Epist. 1. 11.
leagues, and contract friendship, by presenting a cup of wine one to another;
which custom we find still in use amongst our Western Nations; and what is
our To pledge, but to take as a pledge of league and friendship? Yea it is a
rule in Law, that if a man drink to him, against whom he has an accusation of
slander, or other verbal injury, he loses his Action, because it is supposed
he is reconciled with him.

Such now, as were these covenant-feastings and eatings and drinkings, in token
of league and amity between men and men; such are Sacrifices between man and
his God; Epulae foederales, wherein God deigneth to entertain man, to eat and
drink with or before him, in token of favor and reconcilement. For so it
becomes the condition of the parties, that he which has offended the other,
and seeks for favor, and forgiveness, should be entertained by him, to whom
he is obnoxious; and not e contra, that is, that God should be the Convivator,
and man the Conviva. To which end, the Viands for this sacred Epulum, were
first to be offered unto God, and so made his, that he might entertain the
offerer, and not the offerer him. For we are to observe, that what the fire
consumed was accounted as, and called by himself, the meat of his
fire-offerings; the rest was for his guests, which they were partakers of,
either by themselves, as in all the peace offerings, or by their proxies, the
Priests, as in the rest; to wit, the Holocausts, the sin and
trespasse-offerings. The reason of which difference was, I suppose, because the
one was ad impetrandum, or renovandum foedus; where therefore a Mediator was
needful; the other, to wit, the peace offerings, ad confirmandum and
consignandum, only: wherein therefore they addressed themselves before the
Divine Majesty with greater confidence. If any shall object, that the Holocaust
was wholly burnt, and consumed, and so no body partaker thereof; I answer, it
is true, the beast, which was slain, was wholly burnt, and so all of it, as it
were Gods Mess. But there was Levit. 23. 13, 18. Number. 8. 8. and 15. 24. and
28. 20, 28, 31. and 29. 6, 11 19.
a meat offering, and drink offering annexed thereunto, as a part of the holy
feast; of which a handful only was burnt for a memorial, the remainder was
for the Lev. 7. 9.
Priests to eat in the holy place; Besides, burnt-offerings were regularly
accompanied with peace offerings (as you shall find them in Scripture
ordinarily joined together,) now in these the people that offered had the
greatest share. In a word, that those who offered sacrifice, both among Jews
and Gentiles, were partakers of the same, is a thing to be taken for granted;
as appears by the warning God gave the Israelites, Exodus 34. That they should
make no covenants (...) ^e inhabitants of the land; lest when they went a ^g
after their gods, and offered a sacrifice unto the^ ^ey might call them, and
they also eat of their sacrifice. And by that Psalm. 106. They joined themselves
to Baal-Peor, and eat the sacrifices of the dead. By that of S. Paul; Hebr. 13.
We have an Altar, whereof they have no right to eat which serve at the
Tabernacle; So that of this, there needs be no question.

It remains only, we prove that these sacred Epulae, were Epulae foederales;
and so our Definition will stand good: Now this will appear, first in general,
by that expression of Scripture, wherein the covenant, which God makes with
Man, is expressed by eating and drinking at his Table, Luke 13. Those, to whom
the Lord opens not, plead for themselves: We have eaten and drunk in thy
presence, and thou have taught in our streets, etc. Cap. 22. Our Saviors tells
his disciples; I appoint you a kingdom, as my Father has appointed me; that ye
may eat, and drink at my Table in my Kingdom. Apoc. 3. 20. Behold I stand at
the door and knock; If any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in
unto him, and sup with him and he with me: But these passages, you will say,
show rather how fitly sacrifices might be feasts of amity between God and men,
then prove they were so indeed: Hear therefore such proofs, as I think come
home to the point.

First, Every sacrifice, says our Savior, Mark 9. is salted with salt. This
salt is called Levit. 2. The salt of the Covenant of God; that is, a Symbol of
the perpetuity thereof. Now if the salt, which seasoned the sacrifice, were sal
foederis Dei: what was the sacrifice it self, but Epulum foederis?

Secondly, Moses calls the blood of the burntofferings and peace offerings,
wherewith he sprinkled the children of Israel, when they received the Law, the
blood of the Covenam, which the Lord had made with them: This is, says he, the
Blood of the Covenant, which the Lord has made with you.

Thirdly, and above all, this may most evidently be evinced, out of the 40.
Psalm; the whole Argument whereof is concerning sacrifices: There God says,
Gather my Saints together unto me, which make covenant with me by sacrifice,
(...). And verse. 16. of the sacrifices of the wicked, and such as amend not
their lives; Unto the wicked God says, What have thou to do to declare my
statutes (...), and take my Covenant in thy mouth? seeing thou hate
instruction, etc. Statutes here, are Rites and Ordinances, and particularly
those of Sacrifice, which who so brings unto God, and thereby supplicates and
calls upon his Name, is said, to take the covenant of God in his mouth;
Forasmuch as to invocate God with this Rite, was to do it by way of
commemoration of his Covenant, and to say, Remember Lord thy Covenant, and for
thy Covenants sake, Lord hear my prayer and supplication. For what has man to
do with God, to beg any favor at his hands, unless he be in Covenant with
him? whereby appears the reason, why mankind, from the beginning of the world,
used to approach their God, by this Rite of sacrificing; that is, ritu
foederali.

I add in this last place, for a farther confirmation; That, when God was to
make a Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 15. he commanded him to offer him a
Sacrifice; Offer unto me (says he, so it should be turned) a heifer, a
she-goat, and aram, each of three years old, a turtle Dove, and a young pigeon;
All which he offered accordingly, and divided them in the midst, laying each
piece or moity one against the other; and, when the sun went down, God in the
likeness of a smoking furnace, and burning lamp past between the pieces, and
so, as the Text says, made a Covenant with Abraham, saying, Unto thy seed will
I give this land, etc. By which Rite, of passing through the parts, God
condescended to the manner of men; And note here, that the Gentiles, and Jews
likewise, in their more solemn covenants between men and men, (which were made
under pain of curse or execration) used this Rite of Sacrifice, whereby men
covenanted with their God, as it were to make their God both a witness, and a
party with them. And here the Jews cut the Sacrifice in sunder, and past
between the parts thereof; as God did here with Abraham: which was as much, as
if they had said, Thus let me be divided, and cut in pieces, if I violate the
oath, I have now made in the presence of my God. The Gentiles, besides other
ceremonies, used not to eat at all of these sacrifices, but to fling them into
the sea, or bury them in the earth; as if they had said, If I break Covenant,
thus let me be excluded from all amity and favor with my God; as I am now from
eating of his Sacrifice. Hence came those phrases; secare foedus, in the
Hebrew; of ferire, percutere and icere foedus; in Latin: of (...), in Homer, a
feriendis, percutiendis, and secandis sacrificiis in foederibus sanciendis;
Though this manner of speech may be also derived from their ordinary Epula
foederales, wherein they killed beasts, which the Ancients in their ordinary
diet did not.

Having thus seen what is the nature of a Sacrifice, and wherein the ratio
thereof consists, it will not be hard to judge, whether the ancient
Christians did rightly, in giving the Eucharist that name, or not: For that the
Lords supper is Epulum foederale, we all grant, and our Savior expressly
affirms it of the Cup in the stitution; (...), This Cup is the Rite of the new
Covenant in my Blood, which is powered out for many, for the remission of sins;
evidently implying, that the bloody sacrifices of the Law, with their meat and
drink offerings, were Rites of an old covenant, and that this succeeded them as
the rite of the Eusebius (Demonst. Euang. lib. 9.) vinum mysticum sacrosanctae
Eucharistia vocat (...). Casaub. exerc. ad Ann. 32. N. 26.
new. That, that was contracted with the blood of beevs, sheep, and goats; but
this founded in the blood of Christ: This parallel is so plain, as I think none
will deny it. There is nothing then remains to make this sacred Epulum, a full
sacrifice, but that the Viands thereof should be first offered unto God, that
he may be the Convivator, we the Convivae or the guests.

SECT. V.
MY last task was to prove, that the rite of the Lords Supper is indeed a
Sacrifice, not in a Metaphorical but a proper sense; and this, if the nature
of Sacrifice be truly defined, is no whit repugnant to the reformed Religion.

To evidence which I showed, that a Sacrifice was nothing else but a
Sacred-feast, wherein God mystically entertained man at his own Table, in token
of amity and friendship with him: which that he might do, the Viands of that
feast were first made Gods by oblation, and so eaten of, not as of Man's, but
Gods provision.

There is nothing then wanting to make this sacred Epulum, of which we speak,
full out a Sacrifice, but that we show, that the Viands thereof were in like
manner first offered unto God; that so being his, he might be the Convivator,
man the Conviva, or the guest: And this the ancient Church was wont to do; this
they believed our blessed Savior himself did, when, at the institution of this
holy Rite, he took the Bread and the Cup into his sacred hands, and looking up
to heaven gave thanks and blessed: And, after his example, they first offered
the Bread and Wine unto God, to agnize him the Lord of the Creature, and then
received them from him again in a Banquet, as the Symbols of the Body and Blood
of his Son. This is that, I am now to prove out of the testimonies of
Antiquity, not long after, but next unto the Apostles times, when it is not
likely the Church had altered the form they left her, for the celebration of
this Mystery.

I will begin with Irenaeus, as the most full and copious in this point; He, in
his fourth Book cap. xxxii, speaks thus; Dominus Discipulis suis dans consilium
Primitias Deo offerre ex suis Creaturis, non quasi indigenti, sed ut ipsi nec
infructuosi, nec ingrati sint* eum, qui ex Creatura est panis, accepit, and
gratias egit; dicens, Hoc est corpus meum; and Calicem similiter, qul ex
Creatura est, quae est secundum nos, suum sanguinem con fessus est; and Novo
Testamento novam docuit oblationem, quam Ecclesia ab Apostolis accipiens offert
Deo, ei qui alimenta nobis praestat, primitias suorum munerum in Novo
Testamento.

And Cap. xxxiii. Igitur Ecclesiae oblatio, quam Dominus docuit offerri in
universo mundo, purum sacrificium reputatum est apud Deum; and acceptum est ei;
non quod indigeat a nobis sacrificium, sed quoniam is qui offert glorificatur
ipse in eo quod offert, si acceptetur munus ejus: Per munus enim erga Regem
honos and aff^ctio ostenditur. He alludes to that in the first of Malachi, I am
a great King, says the Lord of Hosts.

Ibid. Oportet nos oblationem Deo facere, and omnibus gratos inveniri
Fabricatori Deo, Primitias earum, quae sunt ejus, Creaturarum offerentes; and
hanc oblationem Ecclesia sola puram offert Fabricatori, offerens ei cum
gratiarum Action ex Creatura ejus.

In the same place, Offerimus autem ei, non quasi indigenti, sed gratias
agentes Dominationi ejus, and sanctificantes creaturam. He alludes again to
that in this Chapter of Malachi, Si Dominus sum, ubi est timor meus, O
sacerdotes, qui offertis super Altar meum panem pollutum?

My next witness shall be Justin Martyr, in time elder then Irenaeus; He in
his Dialogue with Tryphon, (the place defore alleged) telling the Jew, that
the Sacrifices of Christians are Supplications and giving of Thanks; Has vero
solas (says he) facere Christiani traditione acceperunt, in commemoratione
Alimoniae suae, aridae juxta and liquidae; in that thankful remembrance of
their food both dry and liquid; in qua and passionis quam pertulit per se ipsum
Dei filius, memoria celebratur: Here is a twofold commemoration witnessed to be
made in the Eucharist; The first, as he speaks, of our food dry and liquid;
that is, of our meat and drink by agnizing God, and recording him the Creator,
and giver thereof: The second, of the passion of Christ the Son of God, in one
and the same food. And again in the same Dialogue, Panem Eucharistiae in
commemorationem passionis suae Christus fieri tradidit ((...), etc.) ut simul
gratias ageremus Deo, cum ob id, quod mundum, cum omnibus in eo Creaturis,
hominis gratia condiderit, tum etiam, quod ab omni in qua fuimus miseria nos
liberarit, Principatusque ac potestates perfecta dissolutione dissolverit, per
eum qui de consilio and voluntate ejus factus est patibilis. To which he
immediately subjoins the Text, and applies it to the Eucharist. Thus Justin
Martyr.

My third witness is Origin in his VIII. Book Contra Cells. Celsus (says he)
thinks it seemly we should be thankful to Demons and to offer them (...), but
we think him to live most comely (...), that remembers, who is the Creator:
unto whom we Christians are careful not to be unthankful, with whose benefits
we are filled and whose Creatures we are; (...); that is, And we have also a
Symbol of our thanksgiving unto God, the Bread which is called (...): Where
note, that the Eucharisticall Bread is said to be a Symbol, not only of the
Body and Blood of Christ, but a Symbol of that Thanksgiving, which we render to
the Creator through him.

Again, in the same Book, where Celsus likewise would have mankind thankful
unto Demons, as those to whom the charge of things here upon earth is
committed, and to offer unto them, (...), Primitias and supplicationes. Origin
thus takes him up. Celsus Deum nesciens, (...) persolvat Daemonibus; nos mundi
Creatori placere students (or gratum facientes, Gr. (...)) Panes, cum
gratiarum action and precibus pro datis, oblatos comedimus, Corpus sanctum
quoddam per precationem factos. Mark here, Bread offered unto God, with Prayer
and Thanksgiving pro datis, for that he has given us, and then by prayer made
a holy Body, and so eaten.

Thus much out of Fathers, all of them within less then two hundred and fifty
years, after Christ; and less then one hundred and fifty, after the death of
Saint John.

The same appears in the forms of the ancient Vide etiam Can. Apostol. II. (al.
III.) Can. XL. Synod. Carthag. Can. VII. Edicti Theophili Alexandrini apud
Balsamon.
Liturgy, as in that of Clemens, where the Priest in the name of the whole
Church assembled speaks thus: (...), Offerimus tibi Regi and Deo, secundum ejus
(id est, Christi) ordinationem, (...), hunc panem and hoc poculum, gratias tibi
agentes, eo quod nos (he speaks of the whole Church) dignos fecisti astistere
in conspectu tuo, and fungi sacerdotio tibi. Rogamusque te, ut benign aspicere
digneris super haec dona, proposita in conspectu tuo; Tu qui nullo indiges
Deus, and complaceas tibi in ipsis, in honorem Christi tui, etc.

Again, Pro dono oblato Domino Deo oremus, ut bonus Deus suscipiat illud, per
intercessionem Christi sui in coeleste Altar suum in odorem suavitatis.

Yea, in the Canon of the In Ordine Romano, dimissu Ca techamenis. Rubrica
habet; Postea incipiunt cantores cantare offertorium, and populus dat
oblationes suas, id est, panem and Vinum; and offerunt cum Fanonibus, id est,
velis candidis; primo malculi, deinde Foeminae, novissime Sacerdotes and
Diaconi; sed solum panem, and hoc ante Altar: Tunc acciplens Archidiaconus a
subdiaconis oblat^s, ponic tantas super Altar, quantae possunt populo
sufficere ad communionem. Videatur Theod. in hist. de Theodosio offerente,
(...), etc. l. 4. c. 17. Consule Cyprian. de Op. and Eleemos. -- Quae in
Dominic^m sine sacrificio venis; quae partem de Sacrificio, quod pauper
obtulit, sumis: August, de Temp. Sermon. CCLI. Oblationes quae in Altaria
consecrantur offerte; Erubescere debet homo idoneu, si de aliena oblatione
communicaverit.
Roman Church, though the Rite be not used, yet the words remain still; as when
the Priest, long before the Consecration of the Body and Blood of Christ,
prays, Te clementissime Pater, per Iesum Christum Dominum nostrum supplices
rogamus, ut accepta habeas, and benedicas haec dona, haecmunera; and other like
passages, which now they wrest to a new found oblation of the Body and Blood of
Christ, which the ancient Church knew not of.

But, of all others, this Rite is most strongly confirmed, by that wont of the
Ancient Fathers, to confute the Heretics of those first times (who held the
Creator of the world, to be some inferior deity, and not the Father of Christ)
out of the Eucharist: For, say they, unless the Father of Christ be the
Creator of the world, why is the Creature offered unto him, in the Eucharist,
as if he were? would he be agnized the Author, and Lord of that he is not?

Here Ireneus, Adversus Haeres. lib. 4. cap. 34. Haereticorum Synagogae (says
he) non offerunt Eucharisticam oblationem quam Dominus offerri docuit; Alterum
enim, praeter fabricatorem, dicentes Patrem, ideo, quae secundum nos Creaturae
sunt, offerentes ei cupidum alieni ostendunt eum, and aliena concupiscentem:
and a little after, Quomodo autem constabit eis, eum panem, in quo gratiae
actae sunt, Corpus esse Domini sui, and Calicem sanguinis ejus, si non ipsum
Fabricatoris mundi filium dicant; id est, verbum ejus per quod lignum
fructificat, and defluunt fontes, and terra dat primum quidem gramen, post
deinde spicam, deinde plenum triticum in spica?

From the same ground Tertullian argues against Marcion; contra Marc. lib. 1.
cap. 24. Non putem (says he) impudentiorem, quam qui in aliena aqua alii Deo
tinguitur; ad alienum Coelum alii Deo expanditur; in aliena terra alii Deo
sternitur; super alienum panem alii Deo gratiarum actionibus fungitur; de
alienis bonis ab alium Deum nomine ele^mosynae and dilectionis operatur.

Origin against the same Heretic uses the same Argument; Dialog. Advers.
Marc. 3. paulo ante finem. Dominus aspiciens in coelum gratias agit: Ecquid non
agit conditori gratias? cum panem accepisset, and poculum, and benedixisset,
quid? alterine pro Creaturis conditoris benedicit? an potius illi qui effecit
and exhibuit?

Lastly, this oblation of the Bread and Wine is employed in S. Paul's parallel of
the Lords Supper, and the Sacrifices of the Gentiles: You cannot (says he) be
partakers of the Table of the Lord, and the Table of Devils; namely, because
they imply contrary Covenants, incompatible one with the other. A sacrifice, as
I told you, being Epulum foederale; Now here the Table of Devils is so called,
because it consisted of Viands offered to Devils, (so S. Paul expressly tells us)
whereby those that eat thereof, eat of the Devils meat; Ergo, The Table of the
Lord is likewise called his Table, not because the Lord ordained it, but
because it consisted of Viands offered unto him.

Having thus, as I think, sufficiently proved what I took in hand, I think it
not amiss, to answer two questions, which this discourse may beget. The first
is, How the Ancients could gather out of the Institution, that our Savior did
as has been showed? I answer, they believed, that he did as the Jews were wont
to do; But they did thus. How will you say does this appear? I answer, it may
appear from this, The Passover was a Sacrifice, and therefore the Viands here,
as in all other holy Feasts, were first offered unto God. Now the Bread and
Wine, which our Savior took when he blessed and gave thanks, was the Mincha or
meat offering of the Passover: If then he did as the Jews used to do, he
agnized his Father and blessed him, by oblation of these his Creatures unto
him, using the like or the same form of words, Benedictus tu Domine Deus
noster, Rex mundi, qui producis panem e terra; And over the Wine; Benedictus tu
Domine Deus noster, Rex mundi, qui creasti fructum vitis: Moreover the Church
ab initio applied that precept of our Savior, Mat. 4. 23. If thou bring thy
gift to the Altar, etc. to the Eucharist; for they believed, that he would not
enact a new law concerning legal Sacrifices, which he was presently to
abolish; but that it had reference to that oblation, which was to continue
under the Gospel.

The other question is: If all this be so, how is not our celebration of the
Eucharist defective, where no such oblation is used? I answer, this concerns
not us alone, but all the Churches of the West of the Roman communion, who, as
in other things they have depraved this mystery, and swarved from the primitive
pattern thereof, so have they for many Ages disused this oblation of Bread and
Wine, and brought in, in lieu thereof* a real and hypostaticall oblation of
Christ himself; This blasphemous oblation, we have taken away, and justly, but
not reduced again that express and formal use of the other: Howsoever, though
we do it not with a set ceremony, and form of words; yet in deed and effect we
do it, so often as we set the Bread and Wine upon the Holy-Table: For
whatsoever we set upon Gods Table, is ipso facto dedicated, and offered unto
him: According to that of our Savior Mat. 23. (...), The Altar sanctifies the
gift; that is, consecrates it unto God, and appropriates it to his use: In
which respect, it were much to be wished, that this were more solemnly done,
then it is usual; namely, not until the time of the administration, and by
the hand of the Minister, in the name and sight of the whole congregation,
standing up, and showing some sign of due and lowly reverence, according, as
the Deacon was wont to admonish the people in Ancient Liturgies, (...): erecti
ad Dominum, cum timore and tremore stemus oblaturi.

SECT. VI.
THe sixth, and last thing to be proved was, That Christ is offered in this
Sacrifice commemoratively only and not otherwise. Though the Eucharist be a
Sacrifice (that is, an Oblation) wherein the offerer banquets with his God, yet
is Christ in this Sacrifice no otherwise offered, then by way of commemoration
only, of his Sacrifice once offered upon the Cross; as a learned Prelate of
ours has lately written, objective only, not subjective. And this is that,
which our Savior himself said, when he ordained this sacred Rite, (...); This
do in commemoration of me.

But this commemoration is to be made to God his Father, and is not a bare
remembering or putting our selves in mind only, (as is commonly supposed) but
a putting of God in mind; For every Sacrifice is directed unto God, and the
Oblation therein, whatsoever it be, has him for its Object, and not man. If
therefore the Eucharist be Sacrificium Christi commemorativum, as ours grant,
then must the commemoration therein be made unto God: and if Christ therein be
offered objective, that is, as the object of the commemoration there made, (as
that learned Bishop speaks) if the commemoration of him, be an oblation of him,
whom is this oblation, that is, commemoration, made unto, but God?

Well then, Christ is offered in this sacred Supper, not hypostatically, as the
Papists would have him, (for so he was but once offered) but commemoratively
only, that is, by this sacred Rite of Bread and Wine, we represent, and
inculcate his blessed Passion to his Father; we put him in mind thereof, by
setting the Monuments thereof before him; we testify our own mindefulnesse
thereof unto his sacred Majesty, that so he would, for his sake, according to
the tenor of his Covenant, in time be favorable and propitious unto us
miserable sinners.

That this, and no other offering of Christ in the blessed Eucharist, the
Ancient Church ever meant, or intended, I am now to show, by authentical
testimonies.

First, by the constant form of all the Liturgies; in which, after the reciting
of the words of Institution, is subjoyned, (...), commemorantes, or
commemorando offerimus.

Clemens, (...), etc. (...), etc. That is, commemorantes igitur Passionem ejus,
and mortem, nec non ex mortuis resurrectionem atque in coelos ascensionem --
offerimus tibi Regi Deo hunc panem and hunc caliem; Mark here, commemorantes
offerimus, that is, offerimus commemorando; Commemorando autem apud Deum, cui
offerimus. This is the tenor of all the Greek Liturgies, save that some, in
stead of offerimus tibi hunc Panem and hunc calicem, have (...), offerimus tibi
tremendum hoc, and incruentum sacrisicium; as that of Jerusalem (called S.
James his Liturgy.) Others, (...), as that of S. Chrysostom: Others (...),
tua ex tuis, as that of Basil; and of Alexandria (called Saint Marks:) but all
(...), commemorantes offerimus.

In the same form runs the Ordo Romanus, Memores Domine nos servi tui, sed and
Plebs tua sancta Christi Filii tui Domini Dei nostri, tum beatae Passionis, nec
non ab inferis resurrectionis, sed and in Coelum gloriosae ascensionis,
Offerimus praeclarae Majestati tuae, de tuis donis ac datis, hostiam puram,
sanctam, hostiam immaculatam, panem sanctum vita aeternae and calicem salutis
perpetuae; note here also memores offerimus.

Which Ivo Carnotensis explains thus; memores offerimus Majestatituae, (id est,
says he, oblatam commemoramus per haec dona visibilia) hostiam puram --
sanotam, immaculatam, etc. Et hanc very sacrificii commemorationem postulat
sacerdos ita Deo Patri fore acceptam, sicut accepta fuerunt munera Abel, etc.
Thus he.

Memores therefore, in the Latin Canon, is commemorantes, which the Greek
expresses better (...), of the sense whereof that we may not doubt, hear the
explication of that great Council of Ephesus in this manner. Annunciantes
Mortem unigeniti Filii Dei, Jesus Christi, and resurrectionem ejus atque in
coelum ascensionem pariter confitentes, incruentum in Ecclesiis celebramus
sacrificii cultum.

(...) therefore is Annunciantes and confitentes. But unto whom should we
confess, but unto God? To him therefore, and not unto our selves is that (...)
to be made, which Christ commended to his Church, when he said, Do this (...),
for my commemoration, or in remembrance of me.

In the Council of Ephesus, Cyril of Alexandria was chief Actor and President;
and it is to be noted, that the Liturgy of the Church of Alexandria (usually
called S. Marks) has in stead of (...) the self-same words, Annunciantes and
confitentes, which I now quoted out of the Council for an explication of the
same: which argues, as I take it, Cyrill to have been the penman of the Decrees
of the Council, and the Liturgy of his Church to have then run in this form.

I shall need allege no more of the Latin Liturgies; there is no material
difference amongst them: So that, if you know the form of one, you know of all:
I will add only out of S. Ambrose an Explication following those words, of
the Institution, Do this in remembrance of me; expressed in this manner, Mandans
and dicens ad eos, Quotiescunque hoc feceritis, toties commemorationem mei
facietis, Mortem meam praedicabitis, resurrectionem meam annuntiabitis,
adventum sperabitis donec iterum adveniam.

This may suffice for Liturgies* Now let us hear the Fathers speak.

I quoted heretofore a passage out of Justin Martyr, affirming a twofold (...),
to be made in the Eucharist; The one of our food, dry and liquid, (as he
speaks) that is, of our meat and drink, by agnizing, and recording him the Lord
and giver of the same: The other an (...) in the same food (...), of the
passion of the Son of God: The first of these commemorations is made unto God;
for to whom else should we tender our thankfulness for the Creature? Ergo, The
second commemoration of the Passion of the Son of God, is made to him likewise.

My next Father is Origin, Homily 13. In Lev. c. 24. where comparing the
Eucharist to the Shewbread which was every Sabbath set for a Memorial before
the Lord: Ista est, says he, meaning the Eucharist, commemoratio sola, quae
propitium facit Deum hominibus. Where note, that both this commemoration is
made unto God, as that of the Shewbread was; and that the end thereof is to
make him propitious to men: According to that of S. Augustine l. 9. c. 13. Illa
quae in coena Christus exhibet, Fides accepta interponit inter peccata nostra
and iram Dei, tanquam satisfactionem and propitiationem.

My next witness is Eusebius Demonst. Evan. li. 1. cap. 10. Post omnia, says
he, speaking of Christ, mirabilem quandam victimam sacrificiumque eximium Patri
suo operatus, pro nostra omnium salute obtulit (...), Memoriam nobistradens
loco sacrificii Deo continue offerendam. And again toward the end of that
Chapter having cited this place of Malachi, which I have chosen for my Text,
and alluding thereunto, Incendimus, says he, propheticum illud Thymia^a --
sacrificamus and incendimus alias quidem memoriam magni illius sacrificii,
secundum mysteria ab ipso tradita, celebrantes, Eucharistiamque pro salute
nostra religiosis hymnis and precibus Deo offerentes; alias nosmetipsos totos
ei consecrantes, ejusque Pontifici verbo corpore animoque dicantes.

But above all other, S. Chrysostom speaks so full and home to the point, as
nothing can be more; to wit, Hom. 17. in Epist. ad Hebraeos, upon these words
cap. 9. v. 26. But now once in the end of the world, has he appeared to put
away sin by the sacrifice of himself: Quid vero, says he, nos nonne quotidie
offerimus? He answers, Offerimus quidem, sed mortem ejus commemorando, and ipsa
una est hostia, non multae: Quomodo una est, non multae? Quoniam semel fuit
oblata; Illa illata fuit in sancta sanctorum, hoc est, illius figura and ipsa
illius [veritas:] And a little after, Pontifex illo noster est, qui hostiam
illam obtulit, quae nos mundat. Illam nunc quoque offerimus, quae tunc fuit
oblata, nec consumi potest. Hoc (...), Hoc in commemorationem fit illius, quae
tunc fiebat. Hoc enim facite, inquit, (...). Non aliam hostiam, sicut pontifex
[Iudaicus,] sed eandem semper facimus, vel potius sacrificii Memoriam operamur;
Graece, (...); what can be more expressed then this is? Primatius is short, but
no less to the purpose. Offerunt quidem, says he, Sacerdotes nostri, sed ad
recordationem mortis ejus, in 10. cap. ad Hebraeos. S. Augustine calls it
Memoriale sacrificium in his Book against Faustus.

In a word, the Sacrifice of Christians is nothing but that one Sacrifice of
Christ once offered upon the Cross, again and again commemorated; which is
elegantly expressed by those words of S. Andrew, recorded in the History of his
Passion, written by the Presbyters of Achaia: where AEgeas the proconsull
requiring of him to sacrifice to Idols, he is said to have answered thus;
Omnipotenti Deo, qui unus and verus est, ego omni Die sacrifico, non thuris
fumum, nec taurorum mugientium carnes, nec hircorum sanguinem: sed immaculatum
agnum quotidie in Altari crueis sacrifico; cujus carnes postquam omnis populus
credentium manducaverit, and ejus sanguinem biberit, Agnus qui sacrificatus est
integer perseverat and vivus. This Riddle though AEgeas the Proconsull were not
able to unfold, I make no question but you are: And here I conclude.

FINIS.

