THE SPEECH Of His GRACE GEORGE EARL OF MELVILL, Their Majesty's HIGH
COMMISSIONER; At the Opening of the Second Session of the First Parliament of
Their Majesty's Ancient Kingdom of SCOTLAND. The 15th of April, 1690.

Published by Authority.

Edinburgh. Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Anno DOM. 1690.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
THis Session of Parliament had been Honored with the Presence of my Royal
Master, had not the great weight of Affairs on his Hand, the Meeting of the
Parliament of England, and the designed expedition into Ireland, deprived you
of that Happiness and Satisfaction He really intended for you.

And tho He still Resolves, so soon as His Important Affairs can allow Him, to
Visit this His Ancient Kingdom; Yet such a regard has he to what may be for
the Satisfaction of His People, that He would no longer delay your Meeting, for
giving such a Settlement to this Nation, as may be a real Security to its most
valuable Concerns of True Religion, and Just Liberties.

Can you reflect upon the great Things that He (as the Instrument in the Hand
of God) has done for you? Can you think of those Eminent Dangers, to which
(when living in the greatest Honor, Plenty and Peace) He did so magnanimously
expose Himself for the Rescuing you from these greatest of evils, Popery, and
Slavery; and Delivering you from the Fears you were ready to sink under, and
not cheerfully concur in doing all things that may be for the Satisfaction, and
Safety of your Deliverer, when Linked so much with your own Interest?

I believe there are few true Protestants, and good Countrymen who would not
give freely the half of their Estates, for so great a Blessing, were it yet to
be purchased.

His Desires are Confined unto, and Regulated by your true Interest: He Demands
a Subsidy, but it is only what is necessary for your Safety, the Securing of
what is dearest to you, and the Support of the Government; He has spared no
expense hitherto, for your Protection; and it is but reasonable, He should now
have your effectual Assistance; let it never be the Stain of our Nation, that
the best of our Kings was the worst Treated.

He refuses nothing that can be justly demanded, His uncontraverted Rights are
only Valued by Him, as they are useful for your Good and Security.

I am Commanded by the King (my Lords and Gentlemen) to tell you, That as He
Resolves to live and die in the sincere profession of the True Protestant
Religion; For the maintenance whereof, He is again about to expose His Royal
Person, so He is willing to concur with you, for the Settlement of Church and
State, upon such solid Foundations, as you need not again fear a relapse into
your former evils.

He is ready to give His Royal Assent to what in Justice can be proposed to
Him, for Securing Religion, Liberty and Property, from all future
Encroachments, and for Redressing of other Grievances, and you cannot with
reason demand any thing, which He is not willing to grant.

His Majesty offers Redress to the oppressed, Pardon and Peace to submitting
Enemies, and protection to all His good Subjects.

I am further Empowered by His Majesty, to give His Royal Burrows, such
Encouragement and Redress in the matter of Trade, and such ease, in relation to
the proportion of their Burdens, as the Parliament shall think fit.

What then remains, but that you behave with such Zeal for the Good of your
Country, as to its Religious and Civil Concerns, and the Honor of your
Prince, as this Session of Parliament may have an Issue, which may be to the
satisfaction of both.

I should be injurious to you to doubt of this, or to think you need any
persuasions, to set about these things effectually, which are so much your own
concern.

You know the eyes of those whom you represent, as also of your Neighbors, and
even of your Enemies, are upon you; expecting what may be the result of your
Meeting; In which the King's Allays, as well as all His Subjects, and our
Protestant Friends abroad are not a little concerned.

You need not that I recommend to you the laying aside all Animosities,
Picques, and Quarrels, and shunning all occasions of Contention, seeing this is
so much your own Interest, and that you will endeavor to evidence to the
World, that it is not private, or selfish Designs, but Zeal for God and the true
Religion, and love to your King and Country, which influence you.

I with there may be many found amongst you in this meeting, like those who
represented the Tribe of Issachar for settling the Kingdom in the Hands of
David; men who had understanding of the times to know that Israel ought to do.

I hope you will not take it ill, that I mind you of that useful precept of
the Apostle, Let your Moderation be known unto all Men; for the unfriends of
our Nation have taken occasion to reproach us more for the vehemence of our
temper, than any thing else.

As for My Self, My Lords and Gentlemen, (whom His Majesty has honored with a
Character far above my Ambition) I shall not say much, having no design before
my Eyes, but the Public Good, and what is clearly your own interest. I have no
Apology to make as having been either an Actor in, or Complyer with what has
been grievous to you, or prejudicial to the Nation; I hope my Deportment and
Sufferings the by past part of my Life will, (at least ought to) secure me from
all Suspicions of being a Fromover of Arbitrary Power; and I am sure my Master
whom I serve, is far from designing or desiring any such thing, whatever His or
Our Enemies may suggest.

I acknowledge that what Trust His Majesty has been pleased to Confer upon me,
is above my Strength; but it shall be my endeavor to supply my other Defects,
by an entire Faithfulness to the King my Master, a sincere respect to you, and
a zealous application for promoting of the true Religion, and Common-good of
all.

FINIS.

