MEeting accidently at a Coffee-House with a Scandalous Paper, reflecting on
two Eminent and Worthy Physicians, Dr. Morton, and Dr. Goodall; my Curiosity
led me to enquire the truth of Fact, believing nothing ill or mean, as that
Paper would insinuate, could come from Men of their Rank and Figure: Upon true
Information the Story runs thus:

Dr. Morton being sent for to a Patient, prescribed the Jesuits Bark, as a
Remedy he believed would cure the Disease. The Patient refused, alleging it
had been often taken by the advice of one Blackstone an Apothecary in
Newgate-Market, (which by the way is more than Blackstone dare justify, being
punishable for him to give repeated Doses without a Physician;) however Dr.
Morton modestly told the Patient, he would not answer for Blackstone's
Practice, or Powder; but if they would please to send to Dr. Goodall, who he
knew to have a good sort by him, which might be depended upon, he believed Dr.
Goodall, upon his Note, would supply them with such a proportion as was
needful. Accordingly a Note was writ, and Dr. Goodall sent two Ounces, at the
rate mentioned in the Paper.

But this was purely accidental, without any design of Dr. Morton or Dr.
Goodall, to sell, or get advantage by the Medicine, Dr. Goodall taking that
Money of the Patient, purely in regard and tenderness to the Apothecary, the
most moderate of the Trade taking that or a better Price for the Medicine; for
being it was not to a Charitable Patient, he was not obliged to give it Gratis;
so on the other hand, he was not willing to give any advantage against the
Apothecary.

This being the Truth of Fact, betrays the great Malice, Ignorance and
Weakness, nay Madness of that Paper; which I further prove by this ensuing
instance.

I sent a Bill to Blackstone's Shop, for some Doses of the same Powder, and
instead of 4 s. per Ounce, they took at the rate of 12 s. per Ounce, several
times, and told the Maid that fetched it, they did not use to sell it so cheap,
but they let her have it so, in hopes to get her Mistresses Custom: Now the
design of the Paper being to insinuate Extortion in the Doctors, let the world
Judge where lies the Extortion.

I publish this for real Public Good, to show the Candor, Justice, and
Civility of the two Physicians, and the Baseness, Folly, and horrid
Extravagance of the Authors of that Paper, who (because Dr. Morton was just to
his Patient, to prescribe a good Medicine, Dr. Goodall kind to let the Patient
have it, and that with so much respect and kindness to the Apothecary,)
reflects upon these worthy Persons for so doing; chiefly too, because a more
rotten sort of Stuff, perhaps, would not do the feat; is a piece of Villainy, to
be punished by the Civil Magistrate, and not by any further notice from the
Doctors; who are too Great, Generous and Good, to bark against such little
Curs; who, as their own Paper does conclude Nothing, are Nothing, and sit for
Nothing, Purely, Simply, (and if possible) less than Nothing.


