Memorandums for those that go into the Country to dispose the Corporations to
a good Election for Members of Parliament. To be read by them often.
1. ITs necessary you weigh well the difficulty of your Work, and Consider that
you will meet with all manner of Deceit and Combination to frustrate your
Endeavors, the Clergy will engage the Centry, and both Endeavor to render you
unaceeptable, and your Works fruitless, if not top upon you false Men under the
semblance of real Friends.

2. Consider the evil Effects that will attend a Miscarriage in this Matter.
It Is not only a frustration of the Good expected, but ruinous to your own
Interest, and exposing you to Contempt, you must expect that no weakness or
inadvertency of yours in this Work will pass unobserved, and the best of your
actions mistepresented, and every failing magnified, and that happily to the K.
or some of his Ministers, which therefore calls for the highest Care and
Circumspection.

3. You have as full an account of the Persons, and things for each
Corporation, and place as has hitherto been Collected, which consider from
time to time in the respective places as you come at them, and for your
Guidance in these places find one or two of the best, prudentest and
acceptablest Person or Persons, and engage them to your Assistance, and know
from them the temper and humor of the respective Persons with whom you are to
converse, and accordingly endeavous to suit your discourse to their temper and
humor.

2. Take from place to place Letters recommendatory for the strengthening your
interest and acceptance, get fit and acceptable Persons to accompany you to
such Gentlemen as you will have occasion to discourse, for you must expect to
meet with discerning Men, and Men of great Parts, and for that purpose be wary
in your expressions and conversation, and be not too ready and open in
discourse till such Persons become by their own declarations engaged.

5. It Is of very great import to this Service, that very good Correspondents by
settled in each Town, to whom Letters and Papers to be dispersed may be sent,
and who shall receive every Post such Prints and Advices as shall be fit and
proper for them, and in this you must consider, that the Persons so to be
engaged, must be right Men, not only by Inclination, but also Men of Prudence
and Intrest (if possible)

6. Where the Corporations do fix upon their Members, inform your selyes fully
what probability there is of their Election, and what methods will be taken in
order thereunto, and when you have fully satisfied your selves, that such
Persons are right and like to answer the K's expectation (in which by your
Instructions you are not restrained to the Persons Named in your List, in case
there be Exceptions to any of them, or fitter Persons can be provided). If
possibly you can get the Electors to write Letters of Invitation to such their
intended Members, that by Subscription under their hands, their Election may be
ascertained, and where they shall consent to elect such as his Majesty shall
nominate or recommend, that they do in like manner express their desire that
such Nomination, and Appointment be made in order to their Election, in which
all prudent care is to be had, and the Leading Persons of such Corporations to
be consulted.

7. You are from time to time to give an account of all Occurrences that are
material, and of all Suggestions, Books, and Libels, that are dispersed in
prejudice of his Majesty's service.

8. You must be very careful to give a full and distinct account of all the
Proceedings every Post, and therein an impartial account of the Sentiments of
the Persons with whom you converse, their inclinations, and resolutions, what
expedients are necessary to render the Election certain; which account you are
to give from time to time to Robert Brent Esquire at his Chamber in the Temple. The
respective Correspondants are in like manner to send their Letters to him, and
to follow such Directions as from time to time they shall receive from him, or
Mr. Edward Roberts, to whom they may write, directing their Letters to Mr.
Brents Chamber; but not to give an account of your proceedings to any other
Persons whatever.

9. You are likewise to consider the Correspondents in each Corporation,
whether they are fit and proper, and if not, that others more fit and proper be
named, as also to enquire whether the Correspondants do disperse the Books and
Papers according to the directions sent them; and particularly, whether they
are exposed in Coffee-houses, and Houses of public Entertainment for the
Information of the Country, that in case they be defective therein, it may be
rectified.

10. You are to send for the Persons in the respective Counties underwritten,
and to desire their help and assistance, in managing the Trust committed to
you, and to engage them and their Correspondants, that are in the respective,
Corporations, to manage such matters and things, as upon debate you shall find
requisite to promote this Service, for inclining and disposing Men to Elect
Persons you shall agree upon, and engage them in your absence to keep a
constant correspondence with Mr. Brent, or Mr. Roberts, that such Advice may be
sent from time to time as may be proper.

11. You are also to consider what Employments such Correspondents are capable
of, that are in the K's dispose, to the end they may be recommended to such
Employments as may compensate for the service they have done, or shall do.

12. You are likewise to inspect the present state of each Corporation, with
respect to the Magistrates in being, whether there be any in that are not fit
and proper, or whether any are omitted to be put into the Government, which if
placed therein, may be useful and serviceable for promoting and securing good
Elections, as also any other methods and expedients that have a tendency
thereunto.

13. You are likewise to confider what Mayors and Sherins in being are active
in his Majesty's service, and to be depended upon, and which of them are fit to
be removed before the Election, either in order to their being chosen to serve
in Parliament, or to promote the Election of others, and to engage the Sheriffs
to attend in person at the Election, not only in the Counties, but in each
respective Corporation, and to take care of the Returns, and also to give an
account of the Inclination and behavior of the respective Town-Cleks, Clerks
of the Peace, and sub-Sheriffs, whose Places render them capable of his
Majesty's service, in case they be right, but otherwise dangerous and
prejudicial thereunto.

14. Inform your selves what Members each Corporation intend to choose, and if
they are contrary to his Majesty's interest, and you find the Corporation
resolved upon them out of prejudice, consider then how to give a divertion to
their intentions by seeming to promote such Persons Election, which they
observing may create an avertion to them, and dispose them to Elect others,
which they are inclyned to, as suspecting those they before designed, to have
privately warpt to the K's interest, and thereby room will be made for the
Electing such as are right, --

Persons proposed as Assistants to those that go into the Country for Chester
Sr. Tho. Stanly Will Ferner Mr. Manwaring
all of Chester
Salop Tim Seymour Rich Newton
of Salop. Christop Morrall of Math-Wenlcck. of Salop.



Instructions for those that shall go into Wales.
1. You shall make the K's Declaration the chief subject of your Discourse with
such persons as you shall think fit to speak with, etc.

2. You must make it your principal care to settle the minds of people,
especially of those that are designed for Members of Parliament, or such who
do, or are likely to come up to the K's measures, in relation to the Penal Laws
and Tests, against all endeavors, which may be made by the K's adversaries,
for diverting the effects of his good intentions, and it being very probable
that when-the Parliament shall meet, this will be chiefly endeavored by some
indirect means, as by attempting to make some difference between the K. and his
two Houses of Parliament, or eather of them, or by starting somewhat, which may
be a despute between the two Houses, you are particulerly to sorewarn and
caution all persons who are likely to be Members against this Artifice.

3. You are to assure those that are of the Chapter of England that his Majesty
will maintain the same according to his word.

4. You are to engage all people of what persuasion whatever to live friendly
together as becomes fellow Subjects, desposing them to unite their endeavors
to render effectual his Majesty's gracious Intentions, for their ease and
advantage, and you are to tell them, that his Majesty will favor them most as
shall be of that peaceable disposition, as to sacrifice all private animosities
to the public good.

5. You are to remove as much as may be all fears and jealousies out of peoples
minds, by telling them his Majesty only designs the universal happiness of all
his People.

6. You are to make acquaintance with the leading active, and interested Men in
the Country, or in the Towns and Corporations, who are inclinable to abrogate
the Penal Laws for Religion, and the Tests, and engage them to improve their
Interest for effecting it.

7. You are to inform your self (as privately as may be) whether the persons
proposed to be chosen, by the list given you, be rightly principled and so
disposed to part with the Laws, as may be depended on.

8. You are to inform your self whether the regulations made in the respective
Corporations have been of proper persons for his Majesty's Service.

9. You are to inform your self, who are the Electers in the respective
Corporations and Buroughs, and by what manner Elections are made, who
influences them, and who are fittest to be chosen in those places where none
are yet proposed.

10. -- of the behavior of the Officers of the several Branches of his
Majesty's Revenue in relation to Elections, whether they promote his Majesty's
interest as they ought to do, and further what in them lies the repeal of the
Penal Laws and Tests.

11 To acquaint your selves with the Preachers of the Dissenting Congregations,
and encourage them to employ their interest, for the abrogating those Laws and
Tests, and if you find any of them dissatisfied, inquire who they correspond
with in London and give notice of it.

12. To inform your self of some fit person in each Corporation with whom a
Correspondance may be held for the knowledge of the true state of the same, and
to whom Books and Papers may be sent, to desperse them for the peoples better
information.

13. You are from time to time to advise with the Catholic Gentlemen.

14. You are likewise to inform those you converse with that Liberty of
Conscience has been the cause of the Hollanders great Trade, Riches and Power,
etc.

15. You shall take care to make all persons understand that the late
proceedings against the Bishops were necessary to support his Majesty's
Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, which the King will always maintain, as
likewise his Prerogative on which it is founded.

16. That their Dissobedience and their Petition, were designed only to
obstruct the meeting of the Parliament, and to prevent the Establishing of what
they apprehend, etc. which is so far from discouraging his Majesty, that he is
more resolved than ever to pursue this great work, not doubting to effect it,
whatsoever opposition he may meet with.

FINIS.

