A TRUE RELATION Of the former Faithful and long service, WITH The present most
unjust Imprisonment of ANTHONY MELLIDGE, Sometime called a Captain; NOW In scorn
called a QUAKER.
WHerein is also declared how he was convinced of evil, with the Light of
Christ in his conscience; and how he came to be obedient unto it, and by it
departing from evil is now become a prey, and deprived of that outward liberty
which he so long fought for: also how he came to be Imprisoned, in visiting his
Mother in the flesh a Widow, and the Fatherless, who also inhabit in the same
County of Dorset, and how Humphry Smith, who was with him was also sent to
prison with him.

Hearken diligently all you whose ears have been open to mischief, and are
still persecuting the children of God, and haling of them to prison, though
they have not broken any Law of God or man, but live in the fear of the Lord,
and are obedient unto the Law of God written in the heart, according to the
promise of God, who in obedience to the Commands of Christ dare not swear at
all, but are out of this swearing, and deny all Swearers and Persecutors of
those who in obedience to Christ's Commands cannot swear.

And all you who do thus persecute, your faith is vain, and you are yet in your
sins and are out of the Faith of Christ, which Faith purifies the heart even as
he is pure; and this is the Faith which all the servants of the Lord contend
for, which is the Faith that respects no man's person, yet are subject to every
Ordinance of man for the Lords sake; for if he that is called a Magistrate
makes an Order to go to prison, they are subject to it, though they have not
transgressed, as to this I can witness; for now it is so with me, as Truth will
make it appear.

My natural birth was in Purbick, in the Town of Corfe, in the County of
Dorset, where by my Parents I was brought up until I was about the age of
fifteen years, in which time I was brought up by the Education of them, as the
people of the world bring up their children; but I was kept by something in me
from many gross evils which others lived in, yet I was without the fear of the
Lord, for iniquity did abound in me all that time.

Afterward I lived sometime with a Master of a Ship, who was to teach me the
Art of Navigation; but before I had been with him five years I was pressed into
the service of King and Parliament; so then I served in the Rainbow until she
was paid off. Afterward some of my Friends would have preserved me to the
honor of the world; but then there was something in me which showed me that
honor would puff me up so I was in a measure obedient, and at that time
refused honor.

About three years after I had freedom to go into the Parliaments service, in a
Ship called the Triumph against Prince Rubert, in which Voyage I had that in me
which kept me from eating any thing that I did know was stolen, whilst we had
other provision to eat, but yet I did not know then that it was the Light of
Jesus Christ; for I was then in my natural condition, and did not perceive this
thing in me to be of God; so I remained a stranger to the Covenant of promise,
and without God in the world. In this Voyage I was a Quarter Masters Mate,
which was contrary to the Light in me, yet I stood in my own will, not
resisting it in the least, and so deceit ruled in me all that time.

That Voyage being ended, I was cleared; and afterward I went in a Ship called
the Liberty, then under the Command of Cap. Edward Hall; and in the term of
that Voyage I was put into another Ship, which was taken by the same Captain,
who orderd me to go in her as a Masters Mate, which Vessel had in her Sack, and
Sugar, and other provisions for the Army that was at Peston Pans and
Musselbrough near Leeth in Scotland.

And after that Voyage was ended I was with Captain Hall again in the Straits,
in a Ship called the Triumph; in which Voyage I had a time of sickness, and
some came to visit and comfort me after the manner of men; but I had that then
in me which told me that they were miserable comforters, because they did not
Administer comfort to that which lay in prison in me* But yet all this while I
did not know that this was the Light of Jesus Christ, which lights every man
that comes into the world; neither was I obedient unto his Commands to learn
of him in all things; but I learned of the wisdom of the world which brought
death to me.

When the Wars began between England and Holland, I was in a Ship called the
Andrew, then under the Command of Major Boorene, who then loved me, and would
have preferred me in the service, either to a Gunner or Boat swains place, but
I denied it; for there was that in me that told me, either of these two places
would be a snare unto me; yet for all this I did not then know that this which
did discover it unto me was the grace of God, that has appeared unto all men,
which teaches us all things.

Afterward I was in two fights, under the Command of Captain Nikolas Heaton in
the Sapphire Frigot, where I was then beloved by him, and he put me in the place
of a Masters Mate, for the space of above two years, and I was in three or four
fights against the French; but many times I had many convictions in my
conscience, that I did not walk uprightly with the Lord; and many times the
afflicting hand of God was upon me, which brought sickness; yet all this while I
did not consider that it was for my disobedience, neither was I changed from
the people of the world, though I was free from many gross sins that the world
takes notice of; yet I lived in the vanity of my mind, as all the world do at
this day, and many times when I have been in foolish jesting, I have felt that
in me which struck me silent; and yet at that time I did not know that this was
the Light of Christ which condemns the world of sin; but now I see that people
perish for want of knowledge.

About the time the Wars began between England and Spain, the Captain of the
Sapphire being sick, I was then ordered by Commissioner Hatsel to Command the
Sapphire in the absence of Captain Heaton; so I had the Command of her about
fourten weeks, and within four days after I had the Command of her, I took a
Brist man of War, and then with it a secret pride grew up in me to see that
honor was coming upon me so fast, and that I was in estimation with Captains,
and in favor with great men of the world; yet when I was at Sea, many times
the afflicting hand of the Lord was upon me, yet I walked in the vanity of my
mind, and was not obedient to the Commands of Christ, who says, I am the
Light, learn of me, but I followed still the teachings of men, but I did not
profit at all by them.

At length I was called forth, (from among them called Baptists, whom I had
followed for a time) to hear those people whom the world calls Quakers; and
the first time I heard them, that of God in me did witness, that they were the
people of God, yet I could not join with them; for I was then out of their
life; but I went to comprehend it in my wisdom, and so I lost my own condition
again, and then I followed the Baptize again; and afterward I heard more of
those called Quakers, and then I was really convinced that they were the
Ministers of Jesus Christ, that did walk in the ways of God, and in the
Commands of Christ; and that their Ministers was to turn peoples minds from
darkness to Light, and from the power of Satan to God, according to that in
Act. 26. Verse 18. Yet afterward I was going to hear the Baptize again; and as
I was in the way something in me ^^^d me, I was seeking the living among the
dead, so to it then I hearkened and returned back, and sat in silence most part
of that day, with some of the people of God, who were waiting upon the Lord in
a silent meeting, then I was under some judgment for some time after for my
former disobedience, and many times wept much in secret, and then my former
acquaintance, (who lived in the vanity of their minds) would be pitying of me.

And sometime after I was released out of the Ship that I had served the
Commonwealth in almost three years, then I went to London for my pay; but then
those who formerly would have preferred me to honor, would take little notice
of me, because I could not respect persons.

After all this I came to Lyme where my outward being was then, (and is) where
I found the love of but* few in the Town, because I could not respect persons,
(and I went but seldom out of the house of my abode) unless it were sometimes
about my occasions.

And after this I went to visit Friends that were imprisoned at Exon, and there
was the Captain and others of the Brist man of War, which I had formerly taken,
his name was George God, who knew me as I was passing along in the prison, and
came in a rage, and beat and kicked me, so that some of my blood was spilt by
it, and he was not restrained by the keeper until he had had his will of me, for
I was brought to stand still, and not in the least to resist; yet there was
something in my will, which would then have sought for revenge; but that which
is pure of God in my conscience, said vengeance is mine I vvil repay, and to
that I was obedient.

Afterward when I was at Lyme at my outvvard habitation, one of my Friends
who is called Humphrey Smith, whom I had visited at the prison in Exon, there
he was kept some four vveeks by Mayor Blakemore, after an order was come into
his hand from the Protector and his Counsel, for the releasing of him and the
rest; he being at last released, came to visit me upon the thirteenth day of
the twelfth Month, who was intended also to pass unto Pool and back again,
nigh unto the place of my natural birth, where she does inhabit that is my
Mother according to the flesh, whom it has layn upon me sometime before to go
to visit, both she that is a Widovv and the Fatherless.

So I having such an opportunity to Travel a Foot with that Friend Humphrey
Smith; on the morrow we past on not knovving or intending any other but that
he might in his freedom pass with me by my Mother, and I might pass with him
to Pool, and so back to my habitation again within seven or eight days, the
journey being not much above thirty six miles, for Lime and Corf is both in the
County of Dorset.

But when we came to visit the Widow and Fatherless, the Priest and Rulers made
insurrection against us, being moved with envy against the Lambs of Christ as
their fore Fathers were Acts 5.17.

For we coming into that Town called Corf, and so presently into my Mothers
house, in the latter part of the day, and we went not that night into any other
house, neither did we walk the streets, which if we had were free, but remained
in the house; and in the evening some came to see me, it being the place of my
former acquaintance, when I used the customs of the people that are vain Jer.
10.3.

So that it is like there might be some six or seven more then us, and them of
the house; who being all quiet, my Friend Humphrey Smith was moved of the Lord
to speak unto them, who heard with patience the words of Truth, and were all
very peaceable until the Priest, and Mayor, and the Bailiff as they are called,
came in and disturbed us who were in the fear of the Lord, contrary to their
own Law; (read the Instrument of the Government about the 37. Article.)

For as Humphrey Smith was speaking the word of God with boldness, the Priest
came in like a Sorcerer, making signs with his fingers in a scoffing manner,
and Richard Jones who is called the Bailiff, spoke hastily in a rage without
the fear of God, unto Humphrey Smith as he was speaking, and also with his
harsh word he plucked Humphrey Smith with violence, as though he thought thereby
to fright him, and so at last forced him to stop; then the Priest examined
Smith by what Authority he did these things, after that manner the Priests,
Scribes, and Elders came to Christ Luke 20.1. And the Priests were still some
of the foremost in persecuting formerly, as they are also now in England.

Now the Priest being desired by H.S: yet would not let him have liberty to
answer the Question, but went on in many words from the first wisdom: among
which words he confessed that H. S. had spoken the very words of the Holy
Ghost, and being spoke to again to give liberty to answer the Question, he
said he would speak but one word more; and when he still continued in many
vain words, I then charged him to be a Liar in speaking so many words, when
he said he would speak but one word more, then the Priest Nicholas Gibbens
who is called Doctor Gibbens said, one might speak that which is not true, and
yet not be a Liar; mark that, so with his many vain words and light carriage,
he caused the people to laugh and began to be uncivil, being himself in the
same nature of the false Prophets of old, who caused the people to Err by
their lies, and by their lightness Jer. 23.32. so after there had been some
stir in words among the people, by reason of this Priest Gibbens who with
the Mayor and the Bailiff, who did all three at last depart as they might
with shame; then were the many people that were then come in very quiet
again, and attended to what was then spoke to them by H. S. and many confessed
to the Truth, and departed all peaceably.

On the morrow Rich. Jones brought a Warrant with ones hand to it, as they
said, that is called Justice Due; but there was neither of our names in it, but
the name of another man. So we said it was nothing to us; and after many words
the Major was deparring, then Richard Jones said, though our names were not in
it, yet he would have us away, and he would answer it; so with violent hands he
pulled and thrust H. S. out of my Mothers house, and brought us to an Ale
house, and set a Watch to keep us; and thence he took us away to bring us
before one called Justice Clavil; so Richard Jones charged men with Horse to
guard us along unto that Roger Clavil, who is set to do Justice, and the Priest
Nicolas Gibbens came also; and when we were come before him called Justice,
then the Priest Gibbens and also Priest Pitfild were there to lay snares for us.

But we acquainted him that is set to do Justice, how I came and my Friend with
me to visit my Mother a Widow and the Fatherless, and if we had transgressed
any Law, we were ready to suffer: But this Priest Nicolas Gibbens, who with the
Major and this Richard Jones had disturbed us, that were peaceable before they
came, and after, and also that there were them that were drunk, that came in
with or after them, Richard Jones, being a Beer brewer and keeps an Ale house,
and that the said Richard Jones was accused to his face for swearing that time
he came in upon us.

Then Roger Clavil that should have done Justice upon these Offenders, asked if
we would take our Oaths that Richard Jones did swear, and when he understood
that we durst not go out of the Doctrine of Christ to swear, then he fetched
that called the Oath of abjuration to ensnare us by, but we told him if it were
his will to send us to prison, he might do it without laying that snare for us,
and we said also he might offer that to the Papists of the County. Now Roger
Clavil took occasion against me, because I had told Priest Gibbens that he was
a liar, when he did lie, and Roger Clavil said that though one did tell a lie,
he must not be called a liar.

So he made a Mittimus, which was afterward interlined with false accusations,
and sent me to prison, and also my Friend Humphrey Smith; and being brought and
watched in a room in an Ale house that night and people kept from us: in the
morning before the Sun was up, Richard Jones came to hale us out of the Bed;
also as we were passing peaceable and silent along toward the Prison, Richard
Jones Rid at H. S. and stopped him, and being very wroth he alighted, and pulled,
and haled him in the dirt; but H. S. spoke not a word to him at that time, nor
some time before; and when he had done what he would to us we rise up, and
passed on toward the prison.

And when we were come to Dorchester, Richard Jones stayed at an Inn, and let
us stay with him, and the rest he had to guard us, and there the said the
Justice Roger Clavil commanded him to search us, and also to take our moneys
from us; mark that; so afterward he brought us to the prison where we yet
remain.

Now let all people honestly consider with that of God in their consciences, if
this be ruling for God; for I went but from my habitation, Wife, and Children,
to the place of my nativity, it being both in one County, to visit my Mother
and Brethren according to the Flesh, and truly I had no other end but the good
both of their bodies and souls; and I did not in the least either break any
Law, or do or speak any thing that I know of which might be called an offense
to any Creature: Only that I proved the Priest a liar; and I am not only sent
to prison my self, but also my Friend that came in love with me; and the
Drunkards, and Liars, and the Swearers went free. A. M.

These unjust Imprisonments are acted in the Protectors name, contrary to his
Instrument of Government.

Dorset, from the Prison in Dorchester, the 25. day of the twelfth Month 1656.
By him that now rejoices in sufferings with the rest of the Lambs of Christ,
who is now the Teacher of him that is known to many of you by the name of
ANTHONY MELLEDGE.

A dreadful Cry against the Oppressors.
HEar O ye Heads of the people, and consider O ye rulers of the Nation, for I
am even weary with holding in the word of the Lord; it is like fire in my
bones, and my Bowels within me are pained. O woe is me, because of you and the
evil of your doings, and the wickedness of your ways, and the continual
transgression wherewith all you provoke the Lord God of Hosts; surely I will
write that I may be eased, and declare that I may be unburdened; for my burden
is too heavy for me to bear, and the hand of the Lord is upon me, and to you O
ye men am I moved to write, and to declare in the Name of the Lord against your
unrighteous ways, and the evil of your doings, who are lifted up on high, and
have forgot the day of your distress, and broken Covenant with the Lord your
maker, and now provoke him to Jealousy day by day, and are hardened in your
wickedness, and give not ear to the word of reproof, not yet regard the
warnings of the Almighty; the multitude of your sins are numberless, and the
weight of your iniquity is great; who can declare your Abominations, or
discover the multitude of your Treacheries against the Lord and the word of his
power! O who have had warning like unto you, and how often have you been
reproved, and yet you are still double minded, and seeking your own glory, and
extolling your selves; will you not at all regard until the judgments of the
Lord come upon you, who are found in the way of sinners, and in the paths of
unrighteousness; are you not found in the way of them whom the Lord cut off
before you? were they wicked? and are you not worse? had they the warning that
you have had, or did they see the deliverances of the Lord as you have done? or
did they promise both to God and man as you have done, to serve the Lord, and
free the Land of oppression; and is not the oppression and cruelty greater now
then before? have not even hundreds suffered Imprisonment, and loss of goods
(if not some death it self) who have not broke any known Law? and has not the
Cry of the oppressed been great these two years? and did not the Lord cut off
the Oppressors before you? and did they Imprison so many for conscience sake as
you have done? and will not the Lord reward you at last according to your
deeds, and hear the Cry of the oppressed which have even groned under your
oppression these two years, wherein you have turned your backs upon the Lord,
and set your faces against his servants, and turned your sword also backward
against the Lambs of Jesus Christ? and your Law have you turned into a lie, and
made it a snare for the innocent, your courts that should do Justice are
corrupt, your judges are light and vain, and your Officers are men of sin, and
your Councels are not of the Lord, the great power of the Devil is by you
upheld, and the whole Host of Antichrists are by you supported, the word of the
Lord God is become a ginne and a snare unto you, that you may go backward and
fall, and now behold, the Ancient of days will sit upon you, who are of the
wicked, among whom the grave is found, and in whom the seed lies slain, and the
stone at which you stumble will even grind you to powder, and once more will
the Lord of Hosts overturn, and bring down the high and mighty, and lay low the
loftiness of the terrible who are but as smoke in his sight.

Therefore hear ye this, O ye Heads and rulers of England, and if there be any
yet among you who will now humble themselves, before the Lord God of hosts, and
let righteous Judgments run down as water, and righteousness with it as a
mighty stream, and break the yoke of the Oppressors, and let the Oppressed go
free; let such hear while it is called to day, and feel the word of power that
breaks the hard heart, and so return to follow the Lord God of Israel, who has
the hearts of Kings and Rulers in his own hand, and he respects not the persons
of the mighty but whosoever loves mercy, and works righteousness is excepted of
him.

Written by the hand of him that has learned to pray for his Enemies, and
desires the good of all your souls, being a Friend to the peace of the people,
and all that rule for God who has made me willing to suffer for his Names sake
in outward bonds, by the dark world unto whom I am known by the name of
HUMPHREY SMITH.


