A SERMON Preached to Those who had been Scholars of St. Paul's School, IN St.
Michael's Cornhil, London, At their Anniversary-Meeting ON St. PAUL's Day.
1675/6.

By Richard Meggott D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for John Baker, at the three Pigeons in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1676.

PROVE. 19.2. That the Soul be without Knowledge, it is not good.


OF so great Advantage is a careful and proper Education, that some have
questioned whether they had not as great an obligation to them that bred them,
as to them that begot them. And were it not that it is the prudence and
kindness of Parents that does provide and in some measure recompense these too,
it could be no question at all. For if that of the Philosopher be so true, that
we are born only Animals, afterward instituted Men, certainly we owe so much
more to them that do this for us, as arriving to the excellency of our own
species is a Prerogative above being mere Creatures.

Upon such considerations several of the most extraordinary Persons of the
World have bestowed such Honors and Favors upon them that were their Tutors
and Governors, as if they had concluded it had been impossible to requite them.
He that observes how Homer brings in Achilles making his Master Phoenix a
sharer with him in all his Glories; Iliad. 9.
that affection which Dion writes Augustus expressed to Mecaenas both in his
Life and Death; Di n Hist. l. 55.
that the Decree of the Senate for a public Statue which Capitolinus says M.
Antoninus obtained for Junius Rusticus, Hist. August. Script. p. 297. L. Bat.
1661.
may see how very highly excellent and worthy Men have still esteemed them who
were the Guides of their first years for their Works sake. And though for want
of just encouragement in most places now, such obnoxious Persons are in this
employment, as makes the very office it self reproachful and despised; yet of
such benefit and concernment to Mankind it is, that by the Imperial Laws it was
provided that they who had taught Youth diligently for twenty years together,
should among other privileges be numbered among them that were vicariae
dignitatis. Cod. l. 10. tit. 15.


Religion does not teach us to be less respectful to them, but more thankful to
God for them. I account it therefore no vainglorious Capricio, but becoming
the Ingenuity and Piety of the Assembly, to see so many considerable Persons
this day in the Temple, blessing that Providence that placed their Childhood
in an eminent and accurate School of Learning. That you may be the more
sensible of the Mercy, I have chosen to remember you what an infaelicity it is
to be left in the Chaos of our Original Ignorance, as you have it here adjudged
by Solomon in the Text, That the Soul be without Knowledge, it is not good.

In which words we shall take notice as observable of a Supposition and an
Assertion.

That which is supposed is, that Men may be without those intellectual
accomplishments that belong to, and adorn their beings, Their Souls may be
without Knowledge.

That which is asserted is, that it exposes to manifold inconveniences and
mischiefs where it is so: this is that which according to the Hebrew way of
speaking is here meiotically expressed by It is not good.

I begin with that which is here supposed, That Men may be without those
intellectual Accomplishments that belong to, and adorn their beings; their
Souls may be without Knowledge. It is true, Reason is put into the very
definition of our Natures, and is potentially contained in it: so the Flowers
and Fruits of the Earth lie latent in their several Seeds; yet as they, if
either they fall into barren ground, or are committed to a negligent hand, will
never appear and come forth: so is it here also. In two cases not altogether
unlike to these, our Reason may be choked and buried.

The First is when the Soul dwells in an unmeet Body. If there be an
impotency or defect in this, according to the degree of the indisposition, it
will be hindered from attaining Knowledge: The Organs which it employeth being as
necessary, while it is in this state, to produce its operations as the Soul it
self: Both the Apprehension, that beautiful Gate that lets all Knowledge in,
and likewise the Memory, the Golden Key that when it is there locketh it up,
depend absolutely upon the disposition of the Brain, and the Animal Spirits,
for the performance of their several Offices. Vide Willis de Anima brut p. 2.
c. 13.
According to the Figure, the Temperament, the pores of the Brain: according to
the number, the activeness, the orderliness of the Spirits, are what we
commonly call Men's Parts: it is from their different mechanism in these that
they are quick or dull, slight or solid. And though defects here oftener than
every one thinks, are only accidental, mere Diseases, which Experience has
proved are curable by Art and Physic, yet must not this be granted so
universally as to deny that sometimes they are irremidiable and providential.
God that gives to every one a Body as it pleases him, gives such to some, as
their Souls while they are in them cannot expeditely act with.

It is not for the Clay to say to the Potter, why have thou made me thus? for
us with the Jews malapertly to ask, who has sinned, he or his Parents, that
this Man is born Blind? His Ways are unsearchable, and his Paths past finding
out. Whether it be that He, who where he gives little will also require
little, does it for the lessening their accounts; or whether it be that He who
has made others to differ, does it to excite their thankfulness; or whether it
be that He who may do what he will with his own, does it for the exercise of
his absolute Prerogative; wherever he sees it good that a Soul should by
this means be without Knowledge, it becomes us humbly to adore, not sawcily to
cavil at it. But this is a case which we rarely and seldom meet with.

2. The Common One wherein the Soul is without Knowledge, is, when it has
wanted fit instruction. Beasts are perfected by Nature, but Man by Art.
Dissert. de Methodo.
The witty Descartes makes this an argument to prove all Souls in themselves
to be equal, that every one stomacketh so much that another should call him
Fool; a sign, says he, that wherein soever they fall short of others
seize, it is not so much from want of inward endowments as of discreet
and suitable cultivation. It is granted that where this is, it will not have
the same success in all. Such things as but now I mentioned will cause that in
some to bring forth but Thirty, which in others would bring forth Sixty, and in
others, a Hundredfold; yet so much it would have in every one, that there is
no Knowledge necessary for their well-being, which all but them we call stark
Idiots, by timely and prudent pains might not be brought to.

And yet there is some truth in Pliny's fanciful complaint, that Man is exposed
to the World in a more forlorn and destitute Condition than any of the other
Creatures: The Fishes of the Sea have Scales or Shells; Plin. not. Hist. l. 7.
Proaem.
The Birds of the Air have Wings or Feathers; The Beasts of the Field have Hair
or Fleeces; these can go, or swim, or feed themselves, do what is sufficient
for their present Subsistence; but we (as he very melancholily rhetoriciseth)
are naked, impotent, and shift less. It is plain at first they as far exceed us
actually, as we do them virtually.

It was the good pleasure of him that made us, to give us only Faculties and
Capacities, and so commit us to Management and Industry; which if we should
altogether fail of, there is nothing in this World would be so hideously
miserable. We are capable of going upright, but if not looked after, our upper
parts being so much heavier than our lower, there is nothing more probable than
that we should go on all four. We are capable of speaking diverse Languages; but
if left to our selves (as appears by them that are born Deaf, who are always
Dumb) we should send forth none but confused and inarticulate noises. We are
capable of admirable Arts and Sciences; but if we had no teaching, as we are
born (in Job's phrase) like the wild Asses Colt, so we should continue too, as
illiterate and almost as stupid. It is not with the eye of the Mind as it is
with that of the Body, which is perfected in the Womb, and sees necessarily:
no, it must be opened and anointed, cleared and strengthened with Skill and
Care, or it will be of little or no use to us. And yet though it be so evident
that all our Knowledge is acquired, and not to be had without strict and
diligent institution, Men do not generally set that value upon it, as to
provide it any otherwise than by the by: for them that are most dear to them,
their great care is that they may be rich enough, they think any little thing
will make them wise enough; and so for want of those improvements that they
might have, such numbers of all degrees and conditions of Men are ignorant and
imperfect, superficial and without Knowledge.

Having thus accounted for the Supposition, whence it comes to pass, that the
Souls of Men may be without Knowledge; We should now proceed to the Assertion,
and show you how ill it is, the lamentable consequences of it when it is so.

But to enable us to make the better estimate of these, it will be requisite in
the first place to enquire, what that Knowledge is which is here commended to
us, and which the Soul of Man should be imbued with?

If we would speak properly of it, we must as Menedemus does of Virtue; (...),
Plutarch (...), etc.
as but one entire thing: only as the Sea takes several names from those
several Shores it washes on, so does this from the several Objects about which
it is exercised. Now these are all reducible to one of these two heads, either
they are spiritual things or temporal: and both of them (no doubt) are here
intended: both those things that concern the Interests of this Life, and those
that concern our welfare in the other; Neither of them is to be neglected.

First, let me say something in commendation of that Knowledge that reaches no
further than temporal and civil things: in so doing I shall not wander from my
Text at all. For when Solomon speaks of Knowledge, it would be as impertinent
always to interpret it of Spiritual Knowledge, as they are who, when he speaks
of Wisdom, are still expounding it of Christ. I will not therefore so far
magnify my own Office, as to overlook all that is heterogeneous to that: No,
as there is one glory of the Sun, so there is another glory of the Moon. He
that any way benefits the world glorifieth God. And therefore such kind of
Knowledge, as it has its uses among Men, so it has its praises in the
Scriptures. Jubal's Knowledge in Music, and Tubal-cain's in vvorking Brass and
Iron, are recorded for their immortal Honor, Genesis 4.21. Bezaleel's Knowledge in
embroidering Gold and Silver is called a Gift of the Spirit of God, Exodus 31.3.
David's Captains Knowledge in Military Affairs obtain them the report of
Worthies, 2 Samuel 23.8. Solomon's Knowledge in the Nature of Plants and Herbs is
related as an excellency to all Generations, 1 Kings 4.33. Innumerable are the
Arts that tend to the preservation of the Lives, Health, Peace, Plenty, Safety,
Comfort of Mankind, and he that has Knowledge but in the meanest of these, if
we would judge righteous judgment, is to be prized as much above the richest
and greatest of those unprofitable Lumps, that know only how to Waste and Riot,
to hang on their Clothes and mispend their time, as a Be above a Butterfly.

It is the Observation of Sr. Francis Bacon, that whereas Founders of States,
Advancement of Learn. l. 1. c. 7.
Lawgivers, Deliverers of their Country, such as Theseus, Minos, Romulus, and
such like, were honored with the Titles of Heroes only; the Inventors and
Authors of new Arts, such as furnished Man's Life with new Commodities, such as
Ceres, Bacchus, Mercury and others, not by any formal Decree or Act of Senate,
but freely by the general Assent of Men, were consecrated and related among
their great and entire Gods. It is confessed there is great difference to be
put between the first Inventors of Arts, and them that in after-ages exercise
them; but if the other were so extravagantly honored, considering how oddly
and untowardly we should live without them, these surely should not so
superciliously (as they often are) be oppressed or vilifyed.

I am not such a Mohammedan as to believe that every Man upon pain of Damnation
is obliged to learn some manual Trade or other, it is sufficient that there be
a competent number of such; He that has no manner of Knowledge in any of them,
may in other ways be as much or more beneficial to his Generation: but this I
say, that though it is not a Rule for men to proceed by, yet that God, who made
all Men of one blood, will one day judge him, who has no way qualifyed himself
to be serviceable to others, very unworthy to have been served and drudged for
by others. This is one Kind of Knowledge to be sought, such as is good and
profitable unto men as to the Interests of this present Life.

There is another of a higher Nature, The Knowledge of those things that relate
to our Everlasting Happiness. He that has not this, however otherwise
qualified, is blind on his best side, and sees with only his left Eye. Other
Knowledge it is sufficent that mankind have it collectively among them; there
another's skill may be bought with Money, and be as serviceable to us, as if it
were inherent in us; but this Knowledge I am now speaking of, like health, we
cannot be profited by it, except we have it of our own, every one must have it
personally.

Mistake me not; when I speak of Knowledge in things Spiritual, I mean not that
Science falsely so called, whose whole is only a superficial smattering in
doubtful disputations, a pragmatical knack in talking of those questions that
gender strife: this the Apostle bids us avoid and take heed of, 1 Timothy 6.20.
No nor yet a subtilty in thorny Controversy, an ability in the intricate
Mysteries of Religion: this is not every ones province: even those plain heads,
that can neither toil nor spin an argument, may be as richly arrayed in the
Knowledge I am pressing, as Solomon in all the Glory of his Wisdom. I mean no
more then a wholesome sense of what God the Lord requires of us as we are his
Creatures, a true discerning between good and evil in the several circumstances
of our Lives; and this is necessary for every one. What will People be? what
will they prove without it? they can be neither Magistrates nor Subjects,
Husbands nor Wives, Parents nor Children, Masters nor Servants, Traders nor
Neighbors, such as they ought, without its guidance.

Of the things that might be spoken of it, I shall mention but this one, That
it is not for us to conceive, how a Soul can be converted that has it not;
there being no other way to prevail with the Will but only by the Mediation of
the Understanding. We are not to doubt, but that the Spirit of God being
Omnipotent can work Grace in any; but then it must be remembered, he does not
work as natural agents always according to the utmost of his power, but as the
Apostle phraseth it, after the Counsel of his own Will. And as Christ infused
not life into Stones or Trees, but into Bodies organized for a fit Habitation
for the humane Soul: so neither does he ordinarily bestow Supernatural Grace
upon every one that has a reasonable Soul, but on such whose Judgments being
seasoned with divine Things are passively prepared for it. Others may have
their sensitive affections accidentally fired by vehement and loud harangues,
but what do these blazes signify, that quickly go out again for want of Fuel,
and can last no longer than a Building that has a false Foundation? of such
concernment is it by reason of use to have our senses exercised to discern in
these matters.

And this shall suffice to have been spoken to both those sorts of Knowledge the
Soul of Man should be instructed in. They are, you see, like the two Pillars in
Solomon's Temple, that upheld the Fabric. Spiritual Knowledge that is like the
Jachin on the right hand, God's establishment: Civil Knowledge that is like the
Booz on the left, our own strength. I now go on to show you the manifold
inconveniences and mischiefs that it does expose to when the Soul is without
them: and so make out

The Assertion, the other general of the Text, That it is not good that the
Soul should be without Knowledge. It is not in favor of it, that it is worded
here so mildly; the coolness of the expression is used with rhetorical Art the
more to provoke our imagination. In saying it is not good, he insinuates to us
it is a dangerous and deplorable case to have it so. Plutarch (...).
The elegant Moralist, in his discourse whether the Diseases of the Body or the
Soul are more grievous, strongly concludes for the latter of these: and then
if it be so hard to set out the great calamity of blindness, the unhappiness of
them that have no sight: how much more difficult will it be to show you the sad
estate of those whose Understandings are darkened, the Eyes of whose inward
man are out? And yet that you may in some measure be sensible of it, we will
consider it under these two Heads.

First as to the Persons themselves; and then,

As to the public where they are.

First let us look upon such in themselves as to their own persons: and so the
evil of it does appear both

In the Sin, and In the Misery it does expose them to.
First, in the Sin. All kinds of this are so dangerous and unbeseeming, so
menaced by God, and so reproachful to us; that one who was no Christian,
Plotinus, could affirm (...), Ennead. 1. l. 1. c. 9.
it is from false opinions that Men are so fond of their Vices; had they but
right apprehensions, their lusts would not look tempting. Who is the Proud Man?
who is the Hasty? who is the Drunkard? who is the Glutton? who is the Covetous?
who is the Voluptuous? who is the Prodigal? who is the Adulterer? Solomon
tells us all along it is the simple, and he that lacks Wisdom, the Fool,
and he that has no understanding. They that are not such will not allow
themselves in any such ways, though never so agreeable to their inclinations.

Xenophon gives this great commendation of the of Persians, Cyr^paed. l. 1.
that whereas other Nations content themselves to forbid crimes by Laws, to
command Men that that they should not Kill, Steal, etc. these (...), These
(says he) take care to prevent their ever doing them, so to inform and
principle their minds of the odiousness and unreasonableness of such things,
that of their own accords they may abhor them. Much of this is very
practicable: for though Reason does not always wholly master our appetites, it
never fails to reprehend and check them. But if the plague be in the Head, he
is utterly unclean: if this be neglected and unmanured, Men have nothing you
can call by the name of Conscience, they will have no remorse for their
miscarriages, but bruitishly and desperately rush on any thing, as the Horse
rusheth headlong into the Battle.

And though this is so very bad, yet even this is not the worst of it; where
they are without Knowledge, they will be apt not only to commit, but also to
consecrate their Wickedness; to do such things, but it may be be very proud of
them. Chamaeleon-like, being of the same color with what they touch, according
to the company they fall into they may hate the misfortune of misnaming their
actions, and calling Evil Good, valuing themselves for their very abominations.
So some have run into Rebellion, which is as the sin of Witchcraft, and
comforted themselves, they were helping the Lord against the mighty: departed
into Schism, which is a Work of the Flesh, and been wheedled to believe it was
the Communion of Saints: been guilty of Sacriledg, which is a robbing of God,
and thought so verily it was Gospel-reformation, as to fancy themselves the
Elect, the Saints, the peculiar People of Christ for it. I speak not this to
make contemptuous reflections, but to point out to you the Fruits of being
without Knowledge as to Sin. Which was the first thing.

After the same manner it is, if we speak of Misery. It was a notable answer
that Socrates gave to Gorgias asking him whether he did not reckon the King of
Persia a very happy Man? Plutarch(...)
(...), I cannot tell (says he) what measure of Knowledge he has: supposing
that without this, let his circumstances be what they could, he would be
Wretched. We are told, Eccl. 7.11.
Eccl. 7.11. Wisdom is good with an Inheritance. Then indeed it is best when
these two meet, but if they must be parted (as too often they are) he that has
Wisdom will much better live without an Inheritance, than he that has the
fairest Inheritance can without Wisdom. Wisdom will supply the want of an
Inheritance; helping always to a sufficiency, Vide Plin. not. Hist. l. 18. c.
28.
it may be if they apply themselves to it to an abundance: but what Inheritance
can supply the want of Wisdom? the Merchandise thereof is greater than the
Merchandise of Silver can purchase, and the gain thereof than fine Gold can
help to. Though Knowledge will defend from the evils of pinching Poverty, no
Wealth can shield from the mischiefs of untutored Ignorance. Alas! it is so far
from protecting Men from them, that it does but involve them the deeper in
them. That sore evil seen under the Sun, namely Riches laid up for the owners
thereof for their hurt, is never seen so dismally verified, as when Riches are
in such owners hands as these. Unhappy Creatures! what are they but the booty
of bad Men, and the pity of good? Offenses to others, and Snares to
themselves? How do they spend their time? how do they appear in Company? how do
they choose their Friends? how do they employ their Abundance? It is Plutarch's
gloss upon that complement of Alexander, which he passed upon Diogenes, when he
met him at Corinth, and embracing him told him, If he were not Alexander, of
all Men he would choose to be Diogenes; (...).
that he should so much rather have wished himself to be Diogenes because he
was Alexander; (...), because in sueh a condition he would have need of the
greater Wisdom and Virtue to govern and behave himself. This is the Salt that
seasoneth every state of Life and makes it Savory. Wealth without Knowledge is
a dangerous Temptation, and certain to be abused or wasted: Want without
Knowledge is an insupportable vexation, and can neither be borne nor remedied:
Power without Knowledge is a hated station, and will be either lost or lessened:
Subjection without Knowledge is a brutish drudgery, and will be neither valued
nor pitied: Honor without Knowledge is an empty Title, and will be either
envied or slighted; Disgrace without Knowledge is an insulting Evil, that can
neither be warded nor yet weathered; so it is when the Soul is without Knowledge
as to the Miseries that will ensue upon it.

These being the Fruits of it as to particular Persons, let us now view it as
to the public, and we shall find they are no whit better there; whether we
consider the Prosperity or the Peace of it.

First, the Prosperity.

The Jesuit that writes the story of the late great Revolutions in China, S^m
in. hist. China.
gives this as the Reason of that vast Country being so quickly overrun by
the Tartars, that their addicting themselves so much to Learning, had quite
Effeminated and Unfitted them for Action. Such kind of Learning as theirs is
reported to be (only fair Writing and Painting) may deserve so severe an
Animadversion: but if we speak of such as best deserves that Name, real and
useful, manly and substantial Knowledge, it is a most scandalous Imputation;
There is nothing so advantageous to a People. The most flourishing times Rome
ever saw was from the Death of Domitian to the Reign of Commodus, under the
succession of those six intervening Princes, when Arts and Sciences were at the
height among them.

If a People make themselves considerable, it must be one of these two ways,
either by Trade or War. Now these are indispensibly necessary for both. If we
speak of Trade, what can be done in that without Cosmography to know other
Countries, Languages to converse with Foreigners, Navigation to pass the Seas,
Arithmetic to state Accounts? etc. these are the things that promote that.
When Solomon reigned over Israel, whose Wisdom put his Subjects upon these, 1
Kings 10.27. we read he made Silver to be in Jerusalem as Stones, and Cedars to
be as Sycamore Trees in the Valley for abundance; he had Ships at Ezion-Geber,
and fetched Gold from Ophir. And so it is in War too. As contrary as Arms seem
to Letters, they cannot be managed successfully without them: it is not a
fierce and brutish Courage is sufficient here, there must be Heads as well as
Hearts and Hands in it. Mathematics are requisite for Fortifications, History
to acquaint with Stratagems, Tacticks to martial their Forces, Eloquence to
prevent or appease Mutinies. The greatest Captains the World ever had were Men
so qualified. What Julius Caesar was appears by his Commentaries: Alexander
was bred by Aristotle: and Xenophon's works gave him that credit in
aftertimes, as to be called the Athenian Be for them.

Nor does it make against what I am affirming, that some Countries have, and do
acquit themselves well enough in both these, that are not famous for
speculations: for even they are trained up by rigid Use and Exercise in the
Practicks, which is the end of the other. So a Man attain a Language, as to his
occasions, what is matter whether it be by the rules of Grammar, or by
conversation with them that speak it? That which I insist upon is this, that in
all places, where such Knowledge is not regarded, they abandon the properest
Instruments and Means of making themselves Rich and Great, renowned and feared,
and must truckle to their more ingenious Neighbors: So ill is it for the
public, that Souls should be without Knowledge, as to their Prosperity.

Peace of it. Not only the Profit of a Nation, but their Quiet does much depend
upon it. We read Geese once did save the Capitol; but for that once they saved
it, hundreds and hundreds of times they have destroyed it. Who are the Tools
the Turbulent and the Factious, the Discontented and the Ambitious work with?
are they not the Ignorant? while Understanding and Knowing, Sober and
Discerning Persons see through them, it is odds but these admire them: they are
taken with any Pretenses, possessed with any Jealousies, stumble at any Straws,
catch at any Shadows: and as the Man in the Gospel that was born Blind, before
he was perfectly cured and did but glimmer, saw Men as Trees walking: so do
these look upon reasonable things as senslless, and again upon the most
senseless things as very reasonable. Although Absolom's designs were selfish and
Traitorous, there were people that went after him in the simplicity of their
Hearts, 2 Samuel 15.11. Though Theudas was no better than a Confident Rebel, yet
a number of Men joined themselves to him, Acts 5.36. Such Disturbances and
Combustions often spring, where there is want of Knowledge in Civil things.

But these are not to be spoken of, if compared with those that have ensued
upon it when it has been in things Sacred. O the Flames! the Confusions! the
Tragedies it has caused then! This the Seditious, and they that are given to
change, know so well, that they seldom, if ever, fail to have recourse to it. A
thing so well understood by elder times, that since Christianity the Canons of
most Churches, as well as our own, have charged the Authorizing and Licensing
of all who taught Schools, and had the instilling of first principles of
Religion into Youth, upon the Bishops. They suffered not any one to take this
Employment that had a mind to it, but such as upon Trial appeared fit to be
trusted with it, considering of what concernment it is to the Public, to
prevent their being Abused and Poisoned here: If they are, there is nothing so
wild and desperate they may not be put upon. This has been evidenced so often
among Christians, that the Turks have observed and learned it. Knoles Hist.
Turk. Mab. 1.
It was Burgluzes Counsel to Bedredin, puzzled and at a loss how to raise a War
against Mahomet the first, to broach a new Sect among the People: and it took
so well (they themselves and other of their Creatures, with wonderful Gravity
turning Preachers) that of their Proselytes they formed such a Force, as met
those Forces that were sent out under Amurath against them, and fought very
bloodily, though unfortunately.

But I need not enlarge upon this among Englishmen, nor give them instances
what Pageantries and Shows, uncouth Words and affected Names will do in
Religion among Souls that are without Knowledge; and had rather use a Mantle to
cover these things, than a Pencil to set them out with.

I shall conclude the whole that I have been saying, with a short Address to
you who make this Days Solemnity.

I think my self happy (Brethren and Companions of my earliest years) that I am
to speak this Day before you touching these things: especially because I know
you to have had Advantages of being expert in all such kinds of Knowledge as
may accomplish you: and Wisdom will be justified of her Children. So that I
have no more to do than to stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance; that
you would improve it to proper purposes, Let your Light so shine before Men,
that others may be convinced of the worth of it, by the use they see you make
of it. Let it be a defense to you both against the Vices and Errors of the Age
you live in, both against the Immoralities and Imprudencies, that the weak, and
they that have not had your Advantages so often run into. Let us not sleep, as
do others; but let us watch and be sober: for they that sleep, sleep in the
night; 1 These. 5.6, 7.
and they that be drunken, are drunken in the night. The Poets say, that when
the Gods and Goddesses were choosing the Trees they would have sacred to them,
and that after Apollo had chose the Laurel, and Venus the Myrtle, Pluto the
Cypress, and Hercules the Poplar; when Minerva chose the Olive, Jupiter in
transport embraced his Daughter, and for that action called her Wise. Those
Trees the other chose were for little but show and fancy, but this bore Fruit
fit both for Food and Physic. This is that denominateth Men truly knowing,
when they know those things which are material and really useful, to secure
their Souls, to discharge their duties, to govern their Passions, to adorn
their Stations, to support their Families, to serve their Generation. Employ it
so, whatsoever the measure that you have of it be.

Some make no use of their Knowledge any further than by their impertinent
affected significations of it to affront themselves with it: be above the
pitiful humor of contenting your selves with this. If it lie in you as Wind
in the Hollow of a Bladder, only to puff you up; or as a tinkling Symbol in the
Hand of a Child, only to make a sounding noise with; it will speak you only the
more aggravated Fools, as being both the more inexcusable ones, and the more
incurable. Others make an ill use of it. Have all the Workers of iniquity no
Knowledge? It is too notorious that this may be abused as much as any of the
rest of God's Blessings, it may be abused, as Achitophels, to the fomenting of
public disturbances; as the Pharisees, to the disparaging of Christ's
Doctrine; as Simon Magus's, to the bewitching of the People with Sorceries; as
the Devil's, to the coloring the worst of Vices. But though it is a Fountain
that if not cleansed and looked to may send forth such bitter waters, it is
more natural to it to send forth sweet ones, such as may refresh both our Souls
and Bodies, both our selves and others. Your Consciences bear you witness that
this benefit you may reap by it: and therefore bless God for every degree of
it: and that not slightly and cursorily in some empty formal words, but by some
agreeable and worthy deeds.

Those which are most proper for me at this time to press you to, are such as
may express your gratitude to the place of your Education, that flourishing
happy School where the day first dawned and began to break in upon you. What
our Savior says of the Mustard Seed, (It is the least of all Seeds, but when
it is grown it is the greatest among Herbs, and becomes a Tree, so that the
Birds of the Air lodge in the Branches thereof) I may apply here, little and
inconsiderable as Schools seem, they are of mighty consequence and importance.
All the superstructure that is built afterward still bears a proportion to
this Foundation, and the falling into unskilful Hands here, experience shows
is e'ne as hard to be overcome and corrected afterward, as an error in the
first Concoction. Let me for this reason desire you to look to the Rock from
whence you were hewn; you ow more to it than without some consideration you
will be sensible of. By the Piety and Liberality of a worthy Churchman its
Founder, Dr. Colet sometimes Dean of St. Paul's, it has indeed a fair and
honorable maintenance of its own: but though the condition of it be such as
not to stand (...) need of your Alms, yet there are some things wherein it is
capable of your respects; there was a Library, furnished with the choicest
Books of Philological Learning, burned by the late dreadful Fire, that is not
yet recruited: there are several poor Children taught there (above the number
that Foundation allows any thing in the University to) who with your
encouragement may be one day Ornaments to the Nation. I might exhort

-- Per spem crescentis Juli: but you are Persons of so much Ingenuity that I
know it would be but needless to provoke, and yet more needless than that to
dictate to your Charity.

I end therefore with one Observation of Quintilian. In his Chapter whether
Private or Public Schools are best for Children to be brought up in; J^lit l.
(...) ^.
preferring Public ones, among many other reasons he gives this for one, the
Acquaintance and Friendships which Youth of all degrees there gain and contract
with one another, which leave such impressions as usually are not worn out with
time, but last to Manhood and Maturest Age. Non enim (says he) est Sanctius
Sacris iisdem quam studiis initiari. I hope that this days Meeting will show it
so, wherein we are come to a Love-Feast, to renew and tie faster that knot of
Kindness we had for one another so long ago. This I know not how better in my
Station to encourage and promote, than by expressing the Sentiments of my own
mind to the Scholars of that School which bears the Name and Memory of St.
Paul, in the words of that Apostle, Phil. 1.8, 9, 10. with which I shall
dismiss you: God is my record how greatly I long after you in the Bowels of
Jesus Christ. And this I pray that your love may yet abound more and more in
Knowledge, and in all Judgment, that ye may approve things that are excellent,
and that ye may be sincere and without offense till the day of Christ.

To him, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed by us, and the whole
Church, The Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Errata, Page 4. line 14. dele the. Page 23. line 12. for hate read have.

Imprimatur,

Ex Aedibus Lambethanis Jan. 27. 1676.

Antonius Saunders Reverendissimo Archi-Episc: Cant: a Sacris Domesticis.


