The Faithful SCOUT: Giving an Alarm to Yorkshire, (especially to the
East-Ryding) and all other places at this time freed from the misery of WAR.

OR, A Treatise tending to stir up men from security which possesses them,
because (as they think) all danger is past, now that the Seat of WAR is
removed from them.

Written by Will. Meek.

Hypocritae si vident ab omni part omnia tranquilla, nihil periculi metuunt:
quod si Deus illis minatur, et non ostendit statim flagella sua, derident aut
spernunt. Call. Praelect. in Jer. Printed at York by Tho: Broad, and are to be
sold by Nathanniel Brooks in London, at the Angel in Cornhill. 1647.

To all Honest, Religious, and well-affected Persons in Holdernes, (in the
East-Ryding of Yorkshire) more especially, to the Inhabitants of Skipsey, the
Author wishes Peace and Truth.
GReat and manifold have the blessings and favors of the Lord been to this our
part of the Kingdom (loving Contrymen and Neighbors) ever since the
beginning of these miseries and distractions in the Kingdom. For though the
first spark of this unquenched fire broke out the first of all among us; our
men being (I think) the first that were called to stand Brother against
Brother; At the Leaguer at Paul in Holdernes against Kingston upon Hull
and we the first that saw the beginning of miseries; in the first planting and
using Engines of War, to Beleaguer; Batter, and Depopulate, our own Cities
and strong Holds: and therefore, had cause to fear our troubles would be
greater then we could avoyde; yet it pleased God on a sudden to turn our
apparent fear into more joy then we could have expected, by the sudden
dissolving of that Army, gathered by our Kingdoms foes, in the pretense of the
Kings defense, and releasing of that place which at that time contained the
Instruments of safety to the whole Kingdom; and this was done so suddenly,
that our enemies and cruel disposed ones to Church and State, (of which we had
many) had not power to perform their intents in raising more forces according
to their desires; either to obtain what they longed for, or to bring into
subjection those they hated; but even in a moment had all their hopes dashed,
by being called away before they expected; to the great comfort of all bearing
good will to Sion.

After which time, we, for a good space, only heard of war and miseries, but
were our selves free from them, or the fear of them; and so might have
remained, if those, to whom the Countries welfare was committed, and in whom
trust was reposed, had as faithfully discharged that which was committed to
them, as with ease they might have done: but God (who disposes of all things
to his own glory, and knows how to extract good from evil) seeing our ways
and doings nothing answerable to his benefits and favors, made way to bring
upon us a sharper correction then formerly we had felt; and to this end,
(because in what they did they aimed more at their own ends then his glory, and
to let us see that men trusting to carnal wit or policy, cannot prosper) he
gave our Governors over to themselves, to be seduced to betray the trust in
them reposed, and to give our Forts, Strongholds and Armies, and with them the
Country, into the ^ands of the enemy, to be used and abused by them at their
pleasure; which traitorous dealings, although they wrought not so effectually
as was by some desired, and by them sought for, yet did they make way for
ensuing dangers; for by the deceitfulness of one Scarbrough Castle.
Hold (which secured our part of the Country) that division which then was
spread into the most parts of the Kingdom, broke in amongst us, and set one
part of the Country against another, in great danger to destroy it all.

And by the traitorous dealing of him *, who had the chief command of that
party from which we expected safety, Sir John Hotham
our enemies prevailed and got the upper hands afar, as that they had the
Country at their pleasure, and confined our Forces into a little strong Hold,
which alone was left of all their former liberty.

Kingston upon Hul which was then again Besieged
And here again begun our miseries, which for a long time we had put far from
us; for then were we left in the hands of merciless miscreants, whose
tyrannical exactions at that time were so great, that our miseries were
unexpressable, and our woe increased to that height, that we knew not which way
to take to seek comfort: our condition was lamentable, for even all hope
almost of expecting deliverance or safety was excluded, and the Sun of Gods
favor seemed to be set upon us, and the Lord showed as if he would not be
entreated of us.

But then again, when we were in the lowest ebb of adversity, when I say we
had no hope left of recovery, it pleased the Lord to rowse up himself as a
Giant new awakened from sleep, and (even when our enemies thought they would had
all things sure, and us in their wills) to put power, courage, and magnanimity
into the hearts of an handful, which discouraged and bet to repulse an Army
seeming invincible; by that means raising that Siege that had been so
enjurious to the whole Country, Raising the Siege at Hull.
and not only were they at that time bet back; but presently that part of the
Country was so freed, that no constant Army durst abide in it.

Here begun the Lord again to shine upon us with the comfortable rays of his
mercy, and to dispell those clouds of sorrow which so long had overspread our
Horizon; still many showers of troubles rained down upon the borders (as it
were) betwixt the parties, for presently after raising the Siege, and a good
space after (our Garrison Soldiers not daring, because of their weak
strength, too fast to enlarge their Quarters) the enemy dared to prey upon the
Country near them adjoining by plunder and taxations; making those parts, to
which they did resort, to live in continual fear. In which distress and
fear they continued, until, by Gods assistance, our Army gained so much
ground, and that with so good footing, that they wholly chased them away, and
put them in such fear as that they durst not come among us; and at length
through Gods good kindness toward us, and the care, vigilance, and courage of
that small party, (if they should be compared with the numerous Forces which at
that time the enemy had) brought the work into so good maturity, that they
cleared the coast, and brought them, who formerly had with so much audacity
triumphed over them and the Country) into such subjection, that they were
forced to betake themselves to their Scarbrough Castle.
strong Holds, being not able to abide the Field, to retain and keep their
former liberty: which being done, the Country begun to enjoy again its former
tranquillity in some good measure, and at length, through Gods especial favor
toward us, and the infaligable endeavors and unmatched valor of those
against it, that which so long had been an occasion of misery and mischief to
the whole Country, was surrendered and yielded into the hands of our
Commanders, to be kept for the Countries safety.

Since which time, praised be God, we have lived (in comparison of our
neighbors round about us) in peace and tranquillity, without the least fear
of danger, not being molested or troubled by unruly guests, or affrighted by
horrid Massachres, nor disquieted in our houses by night or day; not having our
houses spoiled, our corn destroyed, our horses or cattle violently taken from
us, or molested with any other miseries that go along with War; but have all
things so in peace, as if it were generally proclaimed in our Kingdom.

And nor only we enjoy this favor, but now, when in many places where the
Sword has played its part, the plague of Pestilence follows, consuming those
the sword has left; we still in these parts are freed from any contagious or
infectious disease; but enjoy freely our health, wealth and liberty, in a
larger measure then any almost could expect in these troublesome times into
which we are fallen.

All which favors we must acknowledge we receive from the Lord, of his free
mercy toward us, and not for any amendment of life or humiliation that is
seen in any of us, more then our neighbors: for truly (I may speak it to
our shame) the corrections we have had, have wrought very little humiliation in
us for our formers 2 Kings 13.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Our c^se is like theirs, and as
they did so do we.
ways; and now since his anger has been removed, we are turned again to our
old by as, and have betaken our selves to our beds of security, sleeping
without fear in our sins, putting the evil day far from us, and resting our
selves assured of peace, by thinking no other miseries can come upon us any
more; quite forgetting to ascribe unto the Lord due thankfulness for his
favors, or to render unto him the praises due unto his Name: Nay, in stead of
this, we dare God even to his face again to punish us, and even presume upon
his favor, dreaming of, nor dreading any further evil that he has to send
against us.

I wish it were not thus with us, but alas, who is he, though but half sighted
in spiritual matters, that sees not this? and yet who is there that seeks a
remedy? Who would not be loath to feel the judgment of War again upon us,
and yet who goes the right way to prevent it? True it is indeed, Is^. 22.8, 9,
10.11
like the Jews, we prepare our weapons, and build up our walls, and uses all
means that earnall policy can invent to save us, but we never look to do
what God commands; he calls for weeping and mourning, baldness, and girding
with sackcloath: But behold among us joy and gladness, 12, 13
killing oxen, and slaying sheep, etc. Is this the way to enjoy peace? Can we
expect to have Gods favor shining upon us and do thus? Nay, let us not
deceive our selves, this iniquity shall not be purged away till we dye, if we
thus hold on in our courses.

For what though no danger (to our thinking) is near, shall we therefore
conclude that we are free from danger? as if God had no other judgments then
those we have already felt? or if he had not, he is the same God he was, and
and therefore as able to bring them back again as he was at the first to bring
them. Oh Brethren! let us take heed that we persuade not our selves of peace,
and yet walk according to the imagination of our wicked hearts; for then Gods
wrath will fly out against us in a fearful manner; and the greater his
favors have been toward us, if we have not made good use of them, the greater
will his judgments be when they come. And truly, I say, we may justly fear
that the Lord has not yet done with us, but that he has a controversy still
with us, and one way or other will bring upon us some fearful jugdement.

Now therefore, that security may not too far get into the hearts of men, or
other miseries or judgments come upon this Country before it have warning, I
have thought good to take a little pains to write, and adventure to divulge
this ensuing Treatise, wherein you may see that the Lord has more plagues then
War to inflict upon rebellious and stubborn people; and from that, have laid
down many things which tend to stir up men to repentance, or to prepare
against future Judgments.

To you (dear Contrymen) I send it, because first undertaken for your
causes, in hope that it may be to means to row se^up your dullness from that
security, which too much possesses you; It is not for any vain glorious end,
or to gain applause in the world that I have writ it; for there is no thing in
it either for matter or manner that will relish with the worlds appetite: But
as I am assured in my self that I a^de at nothing more then Gods glory, and
you my Countrey-mens welfare, so with more boldness do I send it abroad, as
it is, never doubting but that it will, not only find friends, but be kindly
accepted of among honest-hearted and religious people, for the censures or
respects of Malignants, wicked and godless men, I regard not.

But if there shall be any, who, in stead of taking warning by this alarm sent
abroad by me, shall let loose their tongues against me to defame me with any
manner of malicious, idle, or wicked speeches, their words shall no further vex
me, then that they no more respect their own safety, in refusing warning
because given by me; for I have formerly taken notice of, and yet do see,
tempora et ingenia hominum ad invidiam proniora, quam ad aequitatem: and
therefore have put on a resolution to undergo what false imputations or
slanders soever shall be raised of me, without grieving or vexing my self for
it.

But if this shall but work that for which I send it into the world, it will
rejoice me exceedingly, and cause me to think all my labor not only well,
but happily bestowed, and I shall be further encouraged to go on in my Studies
for the furtherance of my Countries welfare.

Accept of it loving Contrymen, though not as a work of eloquence and
learning; yet as a work needful, as the case now stands with us, and as a
work which in token of my good affection, I dedicate unto you; let it not, I
beseech you, be in vain unto you, but as God has hitherto graciously wrought
for your deliverance from your enemies, and has been and is so favorable unto
you, that you enjoy such great tranquillity: so likewise account it as a
favor, that now, when security possesses you, he raises up still some to put
you in mind of watchfulness, and endeavor to answer his expectation who
looks now to find and have some fruit from you, whom so carefully he has not
only suffered to stand, but even manured about: If he find none, take heed
what follows, he has more judgments then one, and knows how to make this
part that now flourishes, an astonishment and byword to all the earth.

But I doubt not, but as God has hitherto been merciful unto us, in sparing
us, so likewise he will open our eyes to behold our sins with repenting
hearts for them, and raise us up from security, that still he may delight to
dwell among us.

That he may be thus merciful unto us, shall be my daily prayer; and to stir
men up thus to meet him, shall be my constant endeavor, leaving the success
to God.

W. M.
From my Study in Skipsey February, 16. 1645.
To the Reader, concerning the occasion of writing this Book.
ONce did I think to have withheld my Pen
From writing ought, to be for public view;
Because I see men's labors with disdain
Rejected are; receiving not their due.
Yet must I write, although not having hope
Then other men to be rejected more;
But in mere love, to all men to lie open
What danger still this Country hangs over.
It may be that my words will counted be
As idle, as some men's before me were,
And those perhaps, that blinded, do not see,
Will for my love, my harmless musings jeere:
But let them do it, if they but some men rowse,
I Will blame them not, although they stir not thos^^
I see, 'cause God in mercy toward this part
A while has stayed his hand, removed the Sword;
And does as yet the Pestilence divert,
Which now in many places flies abroad,
And suffers us (if we with them compare
In many places) for to live in peace;
To hear of only, not to feel the War
Which totally upon the Land does ceaze,
That we (in stead of giving thanks to God
For his removal of the Plagues away,
And for correcting us with easy rod;
When othe^s bear the burden of the day)
Go on in sin, grow careless and secure,
Forget the troubles which our neighbors dure.
In truth, I see, and cannot hold my tongue,
Oppressions mighty still on every side;
Those men the first in doing all men wrong,
In whom the power of righting does reside;
Yea, some there are who should our wrongs redress,
Who heavy burdens daily on men throw*
And, with injustide, poor men do oppress,
And boldly do work mischief by a Law.
Under pretense of public good, the State
Is robbed by some, to serve their private ends*
And open Foes our Cause does not defeat
So much, as those who seem to be our friends.
Which makes some fear, that some among us are,
Who mean more falsely, then they let appear.
Nor they alone; our Ministers, who should
Be as our guides and leaders, even they
To cleave to their old courses still are bold,
And so to Reformation stop the way.
Yea, still they stand for Superstitious Rites,
And betwixt God and Antichrist do halt;
And still cry up, to blind the peoples sight,
Those Orders that apparent are in fault.
Like the Ephesians, they do stand for still
Their old Diana, to increase their gain;
The Altars and the Groves on every hill,
By Arguments they stiffly would maintain,
And like that flattering Amaziah Amos 7.10.
Priest of Bethel, make
Betwixt the Prince and people great debate.
Nay, some of those who would Reformers seem,
And against men backward in the work do cry:
These either of themselves too highly deem,
Or else continue still in vanity.
As covetous as ever they remain,
As careless still for ought but their own ends;
Striving those whom they hate for to defame,
Men's ruin wishing, rather then amends.
Walking before men so disorderly,
That many take offenses at their ways:
Too much addict to singularity,
Gods glory seeking not so much as praise.
Too busy, factious, rending Churches peace;
Denying that, to which themselves they prease.
What honest heart does now not grieve to hear
The strange confusions that are us among?
What base impostors still there does appear,
The Country, truth, and Gospel still to wrong?
How few there are now zealous for Gods Cause?
But still Lukewarm, and careless how things go.
How many are there who are great in shows,
Who merely for themselves their pains bestow?
Who for the public Cause does purely sight;
But have their actions mixed with private ends?
Or who does stand so for his Countries right,
As to oppose those who its freedom rends?
All look for gain, all do themselves respect;
Gods glory, and the Public they neglect.
Nay, and not only so, but men do strive
To vex us more, new mischiefs they invent,
Themselves of Gods good favor they deprive,
And move him daily unto punishment.
Where is our mourning? where is humility?
What sins are yet repented of or left?
Who sees not pride, oppression, bribery,
With covetousness, adultery, and theft?
With profanation of the Sabbath Day,
And still contemning of Gods Ordinance,
Seeking how one another may betray,
Their covetous desires to advance.
In every place, sin still a bounds yet none
Smites on his thigh, or cries, what have I done?
Where are our days of Fasting? when do we
One day, among so many, separate,
To seek our God by true humility,
His plagues to turn away from Church and State?
When have we one Thankesgiving for this favor,
Of peace and plenty, which we now enjoy:
Even in this time, when as the Armies savor
On every side, our brethren do annoy?
We lie secure, we naught respect this love,
Nor once acknowledge that it is from God:
We still within our wonted courses move*
Nor fears nor dreams of any future rod.
We naught respect our brethrens miseries,
Nor pity take on their calamities.
For all our sins, we still our selves persuade
To live in peace, without 'en danger more;
No threatening still does make us once afraid,
Though we have found true what is threatened heretofore,
Our confidence is in our Armies strong,
That they will from us keep all dangers clear;
No plagues that may arise our selves among,
Or other dangers, we no whit do fear.
We think it is not possible that we
In these our parts, should suffer any way;
Because far from us now is the Enemy,
Thus put we far from us the evil day.
And by our deep security do dare
The Lord again, to bring upon us War.
But do we think thus to escape his wrath,
And live in sin without control at all?
Think we it is not true the Scripture says,
Which threatens wrath, against men that thus do fall?
Let us not thus deceive our selves, our God
Has as much power still as he had before:
Think not fond people, that he wants a rod
To punish those who do despise his power.
He still has plagues in store, though none we see,
His armory as yet not empty is,
Though now we do enjoy tranquillity,
H'ath plagues to vex us, if we do amiss.
"War is not all he uses to chastise
"Those people with, that do his name despise.
Believe me I am sorry to behold,
(And too to well I do behold it now)
That such securenesse should this Land infold,
That naught men's hearts to watchfulness can bow;
In pity therefore, least the plagues should come
Before men be awaked; I have writ,
And this my writing to the view have shown,
That every one may notice take of it.
Oh! let it now awake you Contrymen,
Your selves deceive not, judgments still are near;
Rowse up your selves from sleepiness again,
See, see, how wrath does round about appear.
Prepare your selves, for judgemens else will take
In sin you napping, e're you be awake.
Let no untruth, prejudicate affection,
Disdain, or hate which any against me bear,
Cause you to disrespect my sound direction,
Which stirs up, and persuades you to prepare.
Disdain me not, what e're I seem, I may
Now speak to purpose, though I simple be;
Alth^ugh my writing be not deek'd, or gay;
I nothing write but needful verity:
And none can tax me that I ever writ
Any to warn, but what has proved true;
Credit therefore my words may sooner get,
Seeing at this time, needful things I show.
Not that I seek to get my self applause;
But that I would advance the public Cause.
I would be loath to see, now War is gone,
A pestilent infectious disease;
To come our Towns and People now among,
To fetch them hence to death without release.
Or that the Lord should cause the earth deny
To bring forth fruit our people to sustain;
Or bring upon us dearth, or penury,
Or vex us with some secret fear or pain:
Or that he should into our strong Holds send,
Or to our Armies, death, them to devour*
Or vex us, as he once did Egypts Land,
With plagues unknown to any man before.
Or make this part, envied by its foes,
A laughing stock to all that by it goes.
I say, I should be loath such things should come
To light upon this Country to its harm;
And that because that I do hold my tongue,
And does not men of what I fear forwarne:
Who knows but God has raised me up for this,
To write, that men may warning take, and rise
From that securenesse, which does them possess.
And to amend of their iniquities?
In hope of this I write; but if that still
Men in their dull security persist,
And take no warning by what now I tell,
Surely, with hardened hearts they are accursed:
And God a while his judgments takes away,
That he may plague them more another day.
But thus in writing, I my duty shall
Discharge, by giving warning to prepare,
And though fierce judgments shall upon us fall,
To all the world I guiltless shall appear:
And these my words shall once respected be,
And be observed by those that do them read:
And other places, though these will not see,
Shall warning take, and fly their sins with speed;
And those that will not by them warning take,
Shall, when as plagues shall fall upon them, say
That it was true which unto them I spoke,
And wish they had been warned at this day.
And those in whom no watchfulness is seen,
Shall wish that they had far more watchful been.
My prayer shall be, that this may take effect,
And bring to pass that for which forth I send it;
I will not grieve, although with disrespect
I hated be, by men through it offended.
For as I seek not for to flatter any,
So neither I against private persons braule:
I send it forth for to awaken many,
To all therefore I write in general.
What is amiss, pass by, that favor do me,
If ought you reap that is good, give God the glory;
No greater praise or favor you can show me,
If not, there is naught that can make me more sorry.
Read over the Book, observe, and mark it well,
Awake from your security. Farewell.
W. Meek.

The Faithful Scout. Giving an Alarm to Yorkshire (especially to the
East-Ryding) and to all other places, at this time, freed from War.
CHAPTER. I. That God has variety of Judgments to punish sinful and
rebellious people withal.
IT was not without cause that the Apostle said, It is a fearful thing to fall
into the hands of the living God: Heb 10.31.
For surely most miserable and wretched is their condition, that by their evil
actions have made God at sen^ity with them; it were better for such (if they
might so be free,) that a millstone were tied about their neeks, and they cast
into the bottom of the Sea, then that they should live to abide all the
plagues, judgments, and miseries which the Lord has to inflict upon them: for
who can name or reckon up all those sorts of punishments that he has in his
Amory, ready at any time upon occasions, to send to execute his fierce wrath
upon those who walk perversely before him? many several sorts the Egyptians
felt in their Land, and them so strange as were never before that time heard
of; and yet the Lord threatens his own people, that if they would not be
obedient but walk untowardly before him, Deuteronomy. 28.61.
he would send plagues upon them which were not written in the Book of the
Law, even new plagues which were never before sent upon any: and yet if we
look upon the curses threatened, we shall find them many, Deuteronomy. 28.15, 63.
Lev. 16.18, 22.
strange, and fearful; for he not only threatens to turn every Blessing into
a Curse, but, if that will not serve to deter them from their evil ways, he
tells them he will bring seven-times more plagues upon them then before; and if
they would not be reformed by them, but still walk contrary unto him; then he
would walk contrary unto them, and punish them yet seventimes more: nay, and
if that would not serve, he would plague them yet seven-times more.

Yea, and if for all this they still would walk stubbornely before him, he
threatens that still he would increase his judgments, Verse 29.
and walk contrary to them in fury, and chastise them yet seven-times for
their sins.

By all which fearful threatenings, he would have us to observe what variety of
plagues he has to inflict upon stubborn and stiff-necked people, Dicit
Propheta Deum aperire Thesaurum suum, nempe quoniam habet varios and
multiplices modos, qui humano sensu comprehendi nequeunt, ubi vuli impios
perdere. Call. in Jer. 50.25 Lob 5.14. Psalm. 18.26. Ps. 7 11, 12.13
who will not be reformed to walk according to his command; seeing that every
time he punishes, he can change his judgments, and yet make them every time
more fierce and fearful then other: well therefore may he be said to have an
Armory stored with weapons of indignation and wrath, when he has not only
one or two, but many, yea, infinite several sorts, and them too so strange
that no man can conceive of them: for contrary to all expectation, and against
all means oft-times he brings punishments upon the ungodly and wicked men; For
even in the day time wicked men meet with darkness and grope at the noonday.
The Sun he causes to loose his brightness, and the clear day its light; in
vain can any expect safety if he walk in his evil ways, for with the
froward, God will show himself froward, and to those that walk contrary to
him, will he walk contrary; for what is man that he can strive against God?
For if he were never so strong he could not be free, seeing God can (if he
pleases) meet with him in any place, at any time, upon any occasion.

This Doctrine the Prophet taught the Jews, when they thought, because one
judgment was past, that then they should have lived in safety for ever: nay,
says the Prophet, Rejoice not thou Palestina, Isa. 14.19.
because the rod of him that smote thee is broken: for out of the Serpents root
shall come a Cockatrice, and his fruit shall be a fiery flying Serpent. So that
though one judgment were taken away, yet should they not be free, for as much
as two in its room, more fearful, should follow; in vain should they expect
immunity, for out of the root of one plague should spring another, until they
should be consumed utterly from the face of the earth.

And it is no marvel that he has such store, seeing it is he that created
darkness and evil; if there were no punishments apparent, he could presently
bring them, for why, he can produce them from nothing: Isa. 45.7.
when men think the coast is clear, and there is no dange^ near, nor fear of
any; when they cry, Peace, peace, then shall sudden destruction come upon them
as upon a woman in travel, and they shall not know which way to escape. This
the Jews found to their woe, the Egyptians had raised the Siege from before
Jerusalem, and all the Army of the Caldeans were gone, so that there was no
danger feared or expected: Jer. 37.10.
But what says the Prophet? If (says he) ye had smitten all the Army of the
Caldeans, so that there had remained no more then wounded men, yet should they
burn this City with fire; for as it is as easy for him to save by many as by
few, 1 Samuel 14.^ Si Deus statuit homines perdere, quamvis nemo sit hostis,
posse tamen solo statu eos omnes inte fi^ere. Call. pre^ect. in Jer.
So is it as to destroy by few as well as many. For he that could turn away the
Assyrians from Jerusalem alone, could likewise streng^hen a weak Army to
destroy it when he pleased; but though they were not a ware of it, yet did he
bring again the same Army which they least feared; for no doubt but they were
little or nothing afraid of the Army of the Caldeans, which was chased from
them, and yet that danger came the soonest upon them: for thus sometimes the
Lord meets with men, and again sometimes quite See an example of this in the
hystory of Serpents.
contrary; for sometimes when men seem to be afraid of a judgment, and
therefore prepare against it, because they think nothing can hurt them but
only that which then they fear; perhaps before they be aware, some other falls
on them which they least expected. Thus in a manner i^ befel^ those Israelites
that came from Egypt with Moses, they cried out against him and Aaron, that,
because they brought them from Egypt into the Wilderness, their children and
their little ones would all be destroyed in the Wilderness: but quite
contrary it fell out to them, For, Deuteronomy. 1.39.
(says the Lord) those little ones which you said should be a prey, etc. they
shall go in thither and they shall possess it: but as for ye, turn, etc.
Verse 40.


We ourselves in this Land may by experience know this, for we once supposed
and feared that Foreign foes by invasion might work our ruin; and to this
end prepared our Ships, etc. but now And now perhaps he may destroy us by them
contrary to our fear.
quite contrary to the expectation of most (though indeed always feared by
some) God has met with us, by sending a spirit of dis-unity among us, which is
now like, without Gods especial mercy, to work our utter destruction. I might
therefore show how he has sometimes feared a place with one plague and punished
it with another, but what has been spoke may show sufficiently his variety,
etc. For who can number his armies. Job 25.3.
(says Job) he has so many none can tell the number of them. And yet besides
all his visible judgments (and the Earth, the Sea, and all things in them are
ready to excute his command: the Heavens, the Stars, etc are all at a beck to
do what he pleases) he has an invinsible Army consisting of twenty thousand
charets; nay, even thousands of Angels who are without number: Psalm. 68.17.
Dan. 7.10.
therefore who can but assent to this truth, that God has variety of
punishments to inflict upon wicked men, etc.

Which yet will more manifestly appear, if we consider how he has met with
men in those places where they expected safety, and where it was thought no
fear could come: nay, which were so strong or free shot, that it was thought
impossible for any harm to enter; from which It was thought troubles were so
far, that they were reforted unto by men to take delight in; even in those
places, I say, God has oftentimes vexed men with una^oydable misq^ies. Thus he
met with those rebellious Jews, who; notwithstanding they were fore-warned,
would needs go into Egypt, because, as they thought, there they should neither
see nor feel any evil; but even there, contrary to their expectation, the
Lord threatened evil should find them out; The sword (says he) that you
feared shall overtake you there in the Land of Egypt, Jer. 42.14, 15, 16.
and the famine whereof you were afraid shall follow close after you into
Egypt, and there ye shull dye. And the very like does another Prophet threaten
against those who expected help or deliverance from Egypt: Isa. 30.3.
The strength of Phraoh shall be your shame, and the trust in the shadow of
Egypt, your confusion: Even there where they hoped to find comfort, and by
whom they expected deliverance, there they sound sorrow, and they became a
snare unto them, and their hopes not only failed, but they were in a worse
condition then otherwise they would have been in; for they on whom they leaned
did not only break, out wonnded them: And indeed it befalls many times thus
to men that fly from danger, they find worse entertainment then they departed
from. Those five Kings that warred against Josh^, Josh. 10.16, 24, 25, 26.
thought they had been past danger when they escaped from the Field and fled
into a cave at Makkedah: but destruction followed after them, and a worse death
(more shameful and ignominious) happened unto them then that from which they
fled. In a word, there is no place free from dangers, Ezekiel. 9.6. Vid. infr^.
or that can privilege those whom God will have punished: judgments
oftentimes begin at the Lords Sanctuary, and in those places where men think
themselves safest, they there meet with the most dangers, so that by this
likewise the point is more clearly proved, etc.

And as the inflicting punishments upon men in all places does witness the
Lords variety of punishments, so does his sending them upon all sorts of men:
the rich man is not spared for his wealth, nor the poor man for his poverty,
nor the noble man for his honor, nor the Magistrate for his authority, etc.
but all sorts, and all conditions, if they offend, are met with, one way or
other.

God can do unto wicked men for their destruction, as he did unto Job for his
correction, and you know what sundry means he had to make him poor, though a
very rich man, and one whom men in the world might think almost a thing
impossible to make poor: he had the Sabebeans, the Caldeans, Job 1.15, 16, 17,
18, 19.
a fire from Heaven, and a great wind from the wilderness to bring to pass
what he had determined; so that nothing could save Job from these judgments,
which, though to him they were but fatherly corrections, yet, I say, may show
us what several sorts of puments he has to meet with the richest man that is,
if he walk otherwise then he would have him.

Ahab's Army, 1 King. 22.30.31.
nor his greatness, nor his shifts could save him from that death which the
Lord had threatened against him; subtle indeed he was, in that he disguised
himself, and advised Jehoshaphat to go like a King: by that means, in all
likelihold, he was like to escape, seeing the Syrians were to sight with
neither small nor great, but only with the King of Israel, whom they might
take (as they did) to be Jehoshaphat, he being only in Kingly robes; and yet
for all this, could not Ahab escape; for an arrow, s^^t from a bow at a
venture, hi^ him betwixt the joints of his armor, and slew him: worthy is the
story observation, for it does plainly set before our eyes, how God, to execure
judgments upon offenders, will use even strange and unknown means, to the
admiration of the beholders, and the setting forth his power and wisdom to all
the world. For thus wonderfully met he with the Tyrant Maximinus, Eusebius. de
vita Constantine Lib 1. cap. 51
who having lost the day in the Field, threw from him his princely robe, and
thrust himself among the common Soldiers; and after disguised himself in the
habit of a servant, and hid himself in Towns and villages. But, (says the
story) he could not hide himself from the watchful eye of Divine providence,
for after he thought himself in safety, (mark it) he was struck with a
thunderbolt to the ground, his body being so withered he could scarcely be
known: such strange judgments were sent upon Nabuchadnezzar, Belshazzar,
Herod, Pontius Pilate, Dan. 4.31, 32 and 5.30. Acts 12.23. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist.
lib. 2. cap 7. Socrat. eccl Hist. lib. 1* cap 38.
Arius the Heriticke, etc. and many other which I could name, who were punished
with strange judgments which were not before heard of.

I could further enlarge this Chapter by other proofs and arguments, to
testify the truth of the point in hand; but I know it is needless, and it may
be will be accounted foolish by some, that I have already, or should heap up
so many testimonies to prove an undeniable truth: Therefore I conclude, that
God has variety of judgments to punish obstinate and rebellious sinners
withal.

CHAPTER, II, Showing why, and when the Lord uses variety of judgments, etc,
WHo can search into the unknown depths of the Lord; for who ever has been his
counselor? Romans 11.34. Deuteronomy. 29.29.
yet those things that are revealed, belong unto us and our children. And as
far as God has been pleased to reveal himself, so far may we lawfully search
into; to the comfort of the godly, the terror of the wicked, and edification
of all men in the way of truth. And surely not in vain has the Lo^d appointed
such variety of judgments to take hold of and devour those who walk
stubbornly before him: but he sends abroad his unknown plagues to the end to
cause the glory of his power to shine the world over; that every one may take
notice of his unsearchable wisdom, in providing judgments unavoydable for his
enemies: for this cause did he send such strange and unheard of plagues among
the Egyptians, Exodus 10.2.
that his power and mighty acts might be told to their posterity which should
come after; and that all the earth might know that he was the Lord, and that
none could do such wonders, or produce such plagues, as he could do: for
this, through his many sorts of plagues, he caused the Magicians to confess,
when he t^^^ed their dust into lice, which they could not do, but were forced
to confess that that was the finger of God; Exodus 8.19.
thus, even against their wills, acknowledging his power, far above the power
of any creature: and if that had not caused in them an acknowledgement of his
power, he further would have made known his unspeakable strength to their
terror; for the Lord always punishes those that will not worship him, Eusebius.
Eccles. Hist. lib. 4. cap. 13.
more grievously, then even wicked Tyrants can invent to punish those whom they
hate, as a Tyrant confessed: for he will have it known, that he is the Lord,
and that from the rising of the Sun, and from the West, there is none besides
him, Isa. 45.5, 6.
that he is the Lord, and there is none else.

And therefore it is that he does many times many strange wonders, and brings
to pass, without any means, or at such times when as no other can be said to
have any thing to do besides him, even that all men may witness that he is
God; Isa. 43.12. See Exodus 12.12. and 7.5.
thus he threatened to bring many sorts of judgments against Gog: as the Sword,
and the pestilence, and Blond, and overflowing Rain, Hailestones, Fire and
Brimstone, and why so? Even to magnify himself, Ezekiel. 38.21.22, 23.
and sanctify himself, and that he might be known in the eyes f many
Nations, and that they might know that he is the Lord.

So that you see, how that one cause why God uses variety of judgments, is,
that so his power and might may be known, and confessed of all the world; and
therefore, when God has done many strange things for a people or nation, when
he has wrought many strange deliverances, Read Ezekiel Chap. 5. and note it
well.
and exalted himself in their eyes, and made it apparent before them that he
is the Lord, and that he only brought down and subdued their enemies under
them, etc. and yet they forget to acknowledge the Lords power and strength, and
to ex^oll it, and show it forth to all about, etc. such a people may justly
expect other judgments then formerly they felt. See Deuteronomy. 4.32, 33, ^4, 35, 39,

Again, he does bring forth such strange plagues and such variety of, etc.
that all the ^a^th may fear before him whose power is so mighty, Eccles. 3.14.
that no creature is able to resist it. For it is very usual, that when men
(after punishments be inflicted) will not yet fear the glorious and fearful
Name Jehovah, Deuteronomy. 28.58, 59, ver. 61. Lam. 1.12. See Ezekiel. 5. ver. 5. to the
end.
then the Lord will make the plagues of such people wonderful, even such as
none before them ever felt, and such as are not written in the Book of the
Law: thus the Jews were punished, as the Lamenting Prophet complains, they
felt that sorrow which none before them ever felt: God punished them more
severely then ever he did any before them, their miseries were un-utterable,
and all this was because they feared not the Lord, though formerly he had sent
many judgments to call them to repentance: such indignation he has against
those that no bette^ take notice of his power, to fear his great and excellent
Name, to humble themselves under his mighty hand, and to tremble at his
judgments when they are abroad in the world.

Now, again, consider this, and if you see any place or people who have heen
corrected with heavy and sharp afflictions; and yet now that they are removed,
they fear not the Lord, but go as boldly on in their sins as formerly they
did; then may you conclude, that he will again be upon that people with more
fearful and strange plagues then ever yet they felt:

And as he multiplieth plagues, etc. to cause men to fear before him; so to
beat down the swelling pride of wicked Tyrants, who vaunt and boast themselves
of their strength and power against the Almighty, Isa. 37. ver. 29. to 36.
as did Senacharib, with whom the Lord met after an unusual manner, and cut
down his pride at once to his shame: if he had not thus cut him short, he
would have continued in his blasphemous opinion, that the God of Israel could
not deliver his people from his hand; but, I say, to disappoint these proud
boastings of his, he brought down his high looks in a moment, and sent him
away without doing any harm to his people.

Morever, he does thus use variety of judgments and manner of workings, to
comfort his own people, who, otherwise, because of many exigences they are
brought into, would not know which way to turn themselves to look for safety:
for many times his Church and people are so beset about with enemies and cruel
tyrants, that there is not the least hope of deliverance left unto them, to
man's thinking, but only that they trust in the Lord, knowing that he is both
able and knows how to deliver them, notwithstanding of all their foes. In this
distress were the Israelites at the Red Sea, which way to betake themselves
they knew not, to the sight of man there was no hope of safety for them; Exodus
14.13.
yet Moses, who knew that God had more ways then one to destroy their enemies,
and deliver them, comforts them, and bids them that they should not fear, but
that they should stand still, and see the salvation of God. For (says he) The
Lord shall fight for you, Ver. 14.
and you shall hold your pe^ce. And yet, though he thus comforted them, it is
very likely that Moses himself at that instant, knew not how the Lord would
deliver them, for, while he spoke to them, he cried unto the Lord for
deliverance, Ver. 14.
tru^ting on his power for their safety, and accordingly, otherwise then they
expected, God did show forth his mighty power; and destroyed their enemies with
a judgment never before shown upon any people. In such a case was Jehoshaph^^
when the children of Moah and Amm^n and others besides them raised an Army
against him; he was in such a condition, that he had no might at all to
withstand them, all that he and his people could do was to lift up their eyes
to heaven (weak strength to make resistance to such an army, 2 Cro. 20.12.
to any man's thinking) knowing that the Lord was able, and knew how to work
their deliverance, though they knew not: and so did God work for them, and sent
a Spirit of dis^nity among their enemies, whereby they destroyed one another, 2
Chro. 20.23, 24, 25.
and left no other service for them to perform then to gather the spoil; so
graciously working for their good by such means as they thought not of.

And not only to comfort his people, but to keep them in awful reverence
toward him: for the dearest of Gods children would go ne^r to forget him, if
he did not sometimes put them in mind of their duties by correcting them by
sundry sorts of corrections: Deuteronomy. 8.2.
thus he dealt with the Israelites in the wilderness, they were afflicted with
hunger, and had no other bread but what the Lord gave them from Heaven, Ver. 3.
that they might know that man lived not by bread alone, but by every word that
proceeded out of the mouth of the Lord. Ver. 15.
And he led them through the bypathes of the wilderness into places where
they knew not which way to take, or whither to go, Ver. 16.
and deprived them of water, and affrighted them with fiery serpents, etc. and
all this he did to humble them, and to prove them, and to keep them in
obedience to him who, other ways perhaps would have forgotten him, and have
attributed all to their own power and strength: for this all men are prone to
do, and therefore does he always exercise them in afflictions, that they may
be ever more ready to under go patiently what ever they shall endure; and may,
in what state soever they b^ learn to be content; and that they may
contin^^lly watch, because they know not either in what hour, or in what
manner he will send afflictions upon them.

Again, he uses variety of punishments that none may (through any policy) know
which way to escape his hand; man who is always careful to free himself from
that whi^hi^e thinks is troublesome, See Gen 11.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 to this
purpose
invents many ways and means to provide for his own safety; nature being
alwaye^ s^^^ions to preserve it self, and therefore we see how (to sed^^^
themselves against the stratagems of War) men have (...) means whereby they
remain safe in the, midst of ^anger^ and s^^e, though the instruments of death
surround them.

And likewise to ^ee themselves from infection by contagious diseases, they
have their cordial preservatives, p^esumes, etc. wh^r by they can walk
without fear or danger where death cuts down on every side of them, so that,
I say, If the Lord used not many sorts of plagues, men would s^eke to hide
themselves from him (though they can never do^ it) or to devise means to keep
themselves from danger, and so to escape punishment; but the Lord prevents
their escaping by his variety of punishments which he has in store, that they
cannot ^ell how to prevent them, because they know not how they will come or
what they will be; for all the policy or devises that any can devise, cannot
free them from Gods hand when he will punish: seeing he has not some few but
many, and them so strange that none knows how to shun them, they can find no
evasion but he will meet with them by one plague or other, if by their doings
they have provoked him.

Lastly we must know that God uses variety of judgments, etc. that so it may
be known that he has an hand in all judgments that are sent upon the earth;
for if sometimes strange^ and unusual things were not heard or seen, Isa.
42.9. and 43.12, 13.
if the Lord did not punish sometimes after one manner sometimes after another*
men would ^^lye the Lord, and say, it were not he that sends judgments abroad
in the world, but they w^h^d ascribe it to Fa^e* Fortune, etc as if the Lord
had forsaken the earth and suffered all things to run at random without
disposing or guiding; or if no destruction came upon the enemies of his people,
but by chance, or that he were impotent and could do nothing but as i^
happened according to the course of times, etc. Thus the Syrians thought, for
they would not believe that the God of Israel could do any thing for his
peoples safety in any place but on the hills; 1 Kin. 20.23
they thought if they got the Israelites into the valleys there they should
have them out of Gods protection or power, Ver. 28.
and there they should vanquish them; not considering that their former
overthrows was from and by the Lord: and therefore to let them know their
destruction was from him, he showed himself as well a God in the valleys as
on the hills, and delivered all that multitude into the hands of his people.

And as the Syrians were thus incredulous or heedlesse that judgments came or
were sent from God, and therefore stood need to be awakened: so are many even
as yet in the same disease, and therefore the Lord sends such judgments and
plagues sometimes, that all men may know that no plagues can come from or by
any, but from and by his command; and shows, by the variety that is in the
world, that he alone is he that creates evil, and has his armory stored with
all sorts of punishments that he will at any time use.

CHAP. III. ^eeing the Lord has many sorts of Judgments, men ought to examine
their estates how they stand before God, whether they (...) expect peace or
dangers. A disco^^ty of many s^m^es in these parts found out by a sl^^^^^
examination.
YOu have heard now the Lord is stored with variety of Judgments, either to
inflict upon his enemies, or to comfort this peoples, or to delive^ them from
dangers or the Tyranny of the wicked. It behooves us therefore all in these and
all o^he^ p^^ts, that are, by Gods especial favor, in some good measure freed
from the misery of War, to examinie our esta^es that we may know what we may
expect from the Lord, whether again more plagues to punish us, or a further
freedom from troubles.

For to being us into a sure and certain knowledge of this, we are to take
notice of what was delivered in the precedent Chapter, which has shown, why
and when the Lord uses variety of judg^ments against a people; and if, by
examination, we find our selves in some reasonable measure to have answered
Gods expectation, by taking warning by former judgments, and a^cribing the
glory, power, and Majesty the unto him, and in fea^ing his greatness
accordingly as he desires, and submi^^ing our selves under his mighty hand with
reverence and humility; not stubbornely exalting our selves against his
judgments, but thankfully embracing what he shall send: we may then hope that
our God will no more reiterate his judgments upon us, but in time more perfect
this happy begun work of our enjoying of peace; and that we shall be a
selected peculiar people, in whom he will ^ake delight, and who shall be as a
brand plucked from the fi^e, or as a remnant whom he will save, to declare the
dangers, from which we have been delivered, to all the world, to his praise.

But if on the contrary, by due and unpartiall examination, we find that as yet
Gods former corrections have not wrought those effects fore mentioned in us;
but we that still remain presumptuous, stiff necked, etc. then we may have
cause to fear, that though the fear of War be removed from us, yet it is
but to make us more unexcusable before God, but that still we shall have sent
upon us other punishments, that we little as yet fear or dream of.

Now therefore let it not be offensive to any, if I a little examine our
estate, and, by searching our doings, show what we may expect. And in very
truth, when I look over our people, and see what security, carelessness and
presumption possesses them; how they bless themselves in their iniquity, and
put far from them ^he evil day* it causes me to fear that us yet there is not
wrought that humility or reformation in any among us, as God requires in those
whom he will establish in peace.

For as yet (for ought I can perceive) the fearful name of the Lord is not
feared among us as it ought to be, nor his mighty power and strength feared as
it ought to be, if they were, the judgments that our brethren now suffer,
should as much make us ^fraid, as though we our selves did beat them: the
Lion has roared, who can but fear? or who is there but should fear? Amos 3.8.
yet he roares but who does fear? the voice of the Lord was so fearful to
Ad^^, that (when he had sinned) when he called he hid himself, Genesis 3.10.
and for shame durst not appear, for he was afraid, because he was naked. When
the Lord descended down upon Mount Sinai, though it were for their good, ye^
his dreadful Majesty made them so afraid that they neither durst approach
nigh unto him, nor hear him; yet the Lord, Exodus 20.18, 19.
as I said, has roared among us, and has called upon us by his terrible voice
of War, and not only so, but descended down in judgments upon us, and by
fearful and terrible sights, has spoken unto us to prove us that we may
fear before him, and not sin ^ound yet for all this we fear not, not come in
humility, trembling before our God, or show that we have any desire that the
Lord may no more speak unto us after that manner, Exodus 20.20.
or in such terrible sort; but rather by our actions, say with those godless
men, When will the day of the Lord come? Let it make haste that we may see it,
Isa. 5.19.
etc. which does evidently demonstrate unto us, that as yet we are in the
number of those stubborn ones, for whom the Lord has many fearful plagues in
store.

And as our fearlesse carriages, so our untameable actions, notwithstanding of
Gods judgments threatened and executed, do testify to our faces that we are
as yet a stubborn and rebellious people, even surpassing men and places of
extreme wickedness. Idolatrous Ahab, a Tyrant, and a brazen-faced Varlet, at
the denouncing of judgments against him by Elijah, at the length humbled
himself in sackcloath and ashes, 1 King. 21.25, 26, 27. Jonah 1.2. and 3.5, 6,
7, and c.
and became some what like a repentant. Nineveh, a wicked city, and a place of
all manner of heathenish Idolatry, pride and oppression, etc. yet at the
preaching of Jonah repented, and no doubt but for a while they somewhat amended
of their former courses.

But we have not only plagues denounced and threatened against us, but, for our
abominations, executed upon us, and yet have not we left our evil ways; nay,
not so much as humbled our selves for them, but still look as high as ever, and
oppress and tyrannize over the poor, and guinde their faces by extortions,
and squeeze them like spunges, to fill our own bottles; and proudly presume
upon our own ways, to follow them at our pleasure without controllment; but
in very deed such deeds as these will proclaim us wicked, and will cry loud
unto the Lord to cause him arise to hear the sighings and tears of the needy,
Psalm. 12.5
and come down in wrath upon us to deliver them; and, in the mean time, while
we retain them unrepented of, we may assure our selves that by them we are
liable to other of Gods judgments which he has in readiness to power down
upon us when he pleases.

Again, ^^uly it is a token of small amendment, when men, after they have been
corrected, still proudly and undecently carry themselves toward the people of
God, and such as desire to live blameless amidst a crooked and froward
generation; I wish, by examination, we could find none such among us; but
there stands need of no candles to s^arch in corners for them, seeing they are
as soon to be found as flies in Summer, for daily we may hear them railing
upon, nick-naming, scornefully using, and deriding such whose care exceeds the
common sort in religious performances, and what is this but a mocking of God
himself and shamefully making it appear, that yet our hearts are estranged
from the truth, and that our love is yet far short of what the Lord requires
toward himself or people for while we thus despise our brethren whom we do
see, how can we love our God whom we see not? Alas, 1 John 4.20
it i^^^ c^^^pity that the form corrections which we have had have wrought no
more love in us, or how ever have no better reformed us, but that as yet we
should make mocking stocks of those whom God loves: O, me thinks the woeful
effects that followed Ishmaels mocking of holy Isua should have detered us from
this sin! Genesis 21.9.
much more when we had both his example and Gods judgments to affright us; but
still, I say, it has not, but as much bitterness and hate is against them as
ever, as little love or affection to them as ever, as much striving to defame
them as ever, and as much mocking them for their holy performances as ever; and
therefore assuredly thi^ sin, among the rest, will be a further provocation to
cause the Lords wrath to arise, to send some other plagues, besides those we
have already felt, upon us.

And if we look again upon our ways by unpartiall examination, we shall
find unthankfulness for our deliverances which God has wrought for us, among
the rest of our sins, which can never escape without further punishment; the
Lord has in some good measure caused our enemies to fall from among us, and
has let us see our desires upon them: in a word, the limbs of Antichrist are
cut off, and brought into subjection as much, or more, with us then in any
place of the Kingdom, yet we forget to rejoice with an holy joy, Rev. 18.20.
because God has avenged us of them, or to ascribe or render salvation, and
glory, and honor, and power unto the Lord our God whose judgments are true
and righteous, Chap. 19.1, 2
and who has judged the great Whore, and her adherents, and has avenged the
blood of his servants at her hands: this we have so fane neglected to do,
that some among us are sorry it is done, and few, I fear, esteem of it as
such a blessing as indeed it is; which cannot choose but be very displeasant to
God, who always expects, at the least, thankfulness from those for whom he
works deliverances, and ever takes notice how they do show their
thankfulness, and if they neglect he will punish their ingratitude with other
punishments; Thus the Lord made a promise to David and his seed, he promised
that the enemy should not exact upon him, etc. and that he would beat dawne his
foes before his face and plague those that hated him. Psalm. 89.22.
Yet, (says he) if his children forsake my Laws, and walk not in my
judgment, Ver. 23.
etc. then will I punish their transgressions with the rod, and their iniquity
with stripes: And that which the Lord promised there in favor, Ver. 32.
we may justly expect to be performed aganist us in wrath, even because we
forget to render to the Lord due thankfulness, etc. that he will come upon us
with other plagues, to visit our neglect severely, for nothing more certain,
then that such a sin at one time or other shall be punished.

Moreover, we are to know, that it is no small provocation to cause the Lord
bring upon us other judgments, when as now, while we have time and fit
opportunity without interruption or hinderance, we do not reform those abuses
in Church and State which have so long been displeasant to God, and offensive
to good people: and, for to have liberty to do which, we have so long stood
engaged in military affairs, I am loath to give the least occasion of
wrangling to those who hatefully and scoffingly ask what we have been doing
all this time, and for what did we fight, etc. because that Reformation which
we have so long expected is not perfected.

But this I must needs say, that I much marvel that so many needful things,
which might (in these parts that are freed from all apposites that are able to
resist) be performed, are so long left undone; to let pass many things and
instance in one, whose neglect it is I know not, but me thinks the Churches
affairs among us go very slowly forward: one maine cause of our former
miseries was, the want and negligence of Pastors; many places, whose stipends
were sufficient to have maintained able Ministers, have, through the
covetousness of men formerly in authority, been deprived of all teaching,
which has occasioned great inconveniences. And still, this is no whit
amended, for those in authority can be content to look over these things
without reforming them; nay, even to take the in-comes of such places, and yet
never look to provide any to teach the people; a fearful neglect, for I dare
say, until people be better instructed, we shall find our desires longer in
performing then we expect; and if this be the way to instruct the ignorant,
it is a new one, which none of the faithful ever knevv of, and I believe
good Nehemiah would have scorned to have done it, for his chiefest care was
to provide teachers for the people, Neh. 13.10, 11.
and maintenance for them, and for that contended with the Rulers, and why
should not the like be done by us who pretend Reformation?

Besides, the sloathfulnesse of Pastors would be looked too, that they be not
idle and negligent, as formerly they were; this was Josiahs care, 2 Chronicles. 35.
to stir up the Priests and Levitee to the work, and this ought to be the
care of men in authority, but as yet it has been carelessly neglected, which
makes so many Ministers as yet continue in their former sloathfulnesse. So
likewise how many profane or ill-affected Ministers are removed? have we
not still drunkards, c^rders, swearers, and all manner of lewd livers and
scandalous persons in the Ministry? though they vvallovv in impiety, and by
their? lives and conversations might shame even honest Heathen men; though by
them the people can learn nothing, except all manner of sin and
wickedness, though their doings are so evil that they were more fit to be
cast out from hearing, then be set in the place of Teachers: yet even such as
these are still in the Ministry, uncast out, nay, unreproved.

Again, those that have had a great stroke in raising these Tumults, who
have been great sticklers in unholding the Popish Army, who have adventered
estates and lives with the adverse party (I mean Malignants and Papists)
against the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and those who have stood for it, these
are not only admitted to have their liberty among us, but to enter our Pulpits
again to sovv sedition among the people, without restraint or rebuke.

And as in restraining of these, so in neglect of Church Discipline, and the
keys for the correction of manners, we are as greatly to blame; every man's
will is his law, which makes our Assemblies full of disorders, and scandalizeth
our profession not a little: and truly, now when we have this opportunity,
nay, and have bound our selves in a Covenant to do it, and still neglect it, I
know not what to think, but truly we may justly fear, that such doings will
bring upon us other miseries, besides these which we have already undergone;
for how can we but think that now, when, according to our desires, the Lord
has granted us opportunity to reform what is amiss or displeasant to him,
and yet we do it not, that again he will send upon us such woeful times,
that, if we would, we cannot? I wish it may not be so, but I assure you we may
have cause to fear it To this add our breach of our Covenant which we have so
solemnly taken almost (I think I may say altogether) in every point, the
fearefulnes of which may appear by these and the like places. Isa. 24.1. to the
13. and 33 8, 9. See the Addition to the faithful Scout.
.

Moreover, with these sins already named, we may put in our profanation of the
Lord's Day, as a sin which, unrepented of, will bring other of Gods judgments
upon us; it is the opinion of many good men in this Kingdom, that the
profanation of that Day has been one of the chiefest causes of our miseries;
and indeed, to prevent this, I see our Nehemiahs has taken care In the
Directory for public Worship. Neh. 13.17.18 Si unquam futurum sit ut haec
Domini nostri in externo ministerio suo praesentia auferatur, id accidat
propier mundi istam ingratitua^uem. Roll in Joh. p. 579 Isa. 30.9, 10, 11, 12,
13, 14.
, but that as yet has taken small effect among us, for we as much profane it
as ever, even in times of greatest liberty, by drinking, playing, revelling,
riding, talking of earthly affairs, and doing our own pleasures upon it, etc.
To these parts I Will say no more, then Nehemiah did to the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, What evil thing is this that you do? and profane the Sabbath day:
did not you fathers thus, and our God brought all this evil upon us, and upon
this part of the Country? yet ye will bring more wrath upon us, by profaning
the Sabbath.

And as the profaning the Sabbath, so the contemning of the Word preached,
will help to bring forward more wrath upon us, we do not secretly whisper, but
even openly speak against the Ministers of the Gospel, despising them that
are sent of the Lord, and the Word preached by them, carelessly refusing to
hear it, as if it naught concerned us; hence come our seldom Lectures, days
of humiliation, or Thankesgivings, our sloathfulnesse at Sermons, and desires
to have them over, etc. these do testify we contemn Gods Word, and our
security, and loathing to hear of any thing against our pleasures, proclaim,
that we desire not the knowledge of the Lord, or any thing that may be good
for us; but rather that our teachers should sooth us up in our vilde courses,
and speak unto us smooth things, and prophecy unto us deceits, etc. like
those stubborn and rebellious Jews, whom Isaiah speaks of, against whom, for
that sin, very fearful judgments are threatened: and without doubt this now
will provoke the Lord against us, for there is scarcely any sin which does so
much displease him, as to have his Word and Messengers despised; as I could
show, by many examples of his wrath, executed upon diverse places for this sin,
but I have writ of this at large in another Treatise Called Britains
Hicrophanta, Part. 4. Chap. 21.
which I purpose (God assisting me) to send abroad, when I have a fitting time,
to it therefore I refer you.

Neither are we free from Pride, which always cries loud for vengeanee; for
pride always goes not long before destruction: and the efo^e what we may
expect let any judge, Pro. 16.18.
who still carry our selves as haughtily as ever; especially in those places
who as yet have not felt the rage of the enemy, men and women of all sorts do
there behave themselves so prou lly toward their neighbors, Isa. 3.16, 18,
19, 20, 21, 22 23, 24, 25, 26
as if it were pleasant to the Lord to behold their actions: the women of
Jerusalem were never more haughty then ours are still, compare their ornaments
with the fashion of our Country, and see if we do not surpass them in all
manner of bravery; fearful were the judgments that the Lord threatened against
them, and let us not be high-minded, but fear; for he that is always the
same, has the like (or worse) still in store for us.

Again, (the consideration of which may make us to tremble) we are not as yet
convinced for our oaths, and vain idle, and wicked swearing, and blaspheming,
and taking the Lords Name in vain: walk the streets, and without listening,
you may hear most horrid oaths and curses on every side, and do we think the
Lords Word is in vain, who says, He will not hold those guiltless that take
his name in vain? And who knows but for swearing formerly, our Land was
caused to mourn; Ie^* 23.10.
and if still we continue in the same s^n, we must needs look for the same or
the like punishment, but many think they take not Gods name in vain, when
they swear by their faith, troth, by light, or by bread, etc. but let not such
deceive themselves, for the^ (...) Gods name in vain, and fearfully too, as
our Savior tells us, Mat. 5.34, 35. Iam. 5.12, See Mr. Boltons Treatise called
the Saents solfe-inriching examination. Page 245 Ier. 5.7. Deus ostendit se
quadem necessitate constringi, ut tam severas poenas exigat de Iudeis, etc.
Call. praelect. in Ier
for they should not swear at all, neither by heaven, nor by earth, nor by
Jerusalem, nor by their heads, etc. for all these oaths are displeasant to
God; yea, and to swear by false gods, or idolatrous things, as the Mass, etc.
is more abominable and displeasant to him, and a sin which he will hardly
pardon, without inflicting punishments upon the offenders. How shall (says the
Lord) I pardon thee for this? thy children has forsaken me, and sworn by them
that are no Gods: as if he should have said, There is a necessity, laid upon me
to punish you, for should I not, I should suffer my glory to be exposed to be a
laughing stock? to all men, etc. and therefore while thus we sin, we may fear
every moment some plague or other to be sent upon us.

To conclude in few words, (because it were too much to name all these sins
that as yet are practiced among us) if we make but a slender search, we may
find us in these parts, guilty of so many crying abominations, and so little
true humiliation wrought in any among us, that if the Lord has variety of
judgments to send among wicked and ungodly men, we may conclude and think
with our selves, that he has them in store for us, for we are as yet of that
number, and cannot say we are free from those sins, for which the Lord does
always send sharp and fearful plagues.

CHAP. IIII. We cannot expect any Peace or Tranquillity, or to be free from
Gods judgments, or plagues, as long as we continue in our sins. Objections
answered: many fearful plagues discovered.
YOu have heard in what a slate and condition we are, how that, as yet, it
cannot be said, that, by the former corrections we have had, we have any thing
at all amended our ways, or humbled our selves before the Lord; and that
therefore we may think of our selves no better, then to be in the number of
wicked men, for whom the Lord has variety of judgments in store: and not
without cause may we think so, seeing it is in vain for wicked men to expect
peace, because the Spirit of God has proclaimed openly, that there is no peace
to the wicked: true it is, it is the nature of wicked men, to persuade
themselves of peace, though they walk according to the imaginations of their
wicked ways; but that arises out of a false and ungrounded conceit, that God
will spare them because of some gracious promises which he has made unto his
people, which presumptuously, and falsely they apply unto themselves; but the
Lord, observing this hypocrisy to be in men, Deuteronomy. 29.19.
denounces very fearful judgments against them for it; and says, That if
there shall he such a man, Ver. 20.
that shall bless himself in his iniquity, and think he shall have peace,
though he walk. etc. He will not spare such a man, but his anger and jealousy
shall smoke against him, and all the curses that are written in the bocke of
the Law, shall come against him, and lie on him, and his name shall be blotted
out from under heaven. Observe the place, I beseech you, for it concern^ all
men that are buried in security, as I fear too many in these parts are, who
bless themselves oftener in their iniquity, then they do God for his benefits;
and puts far from them the evil day, as if for ever they should enjoy peace,
never looking into their own ways, or perceiving that sin has been, is, and
will be the cause of their disquietnesse and misery; nay, they so behave
themselves as if God were bound to continue this peace unto them; or how ever,
as if there could be no war, or further trouble: and because there is no
appearance of danger, therefore they feed themselves with foolish hopes of
perpetual tranquillity, as if all judgments threatened against sinners were
but in jest; or, as if men might go on in their folly without controlment, and
in their sins without punishment.

But I would have such to consider what they do, and be not too presumptuous
or secure, for in a day when perhaps they little dream of it, will Gods
judgments thunder about their ears, to their terror; for sin cannot escape
unpunished, by one judgment or another, Job. 37.12.
if men will not obey the Lord, They shall perish by the sword, and dye without
knowledge, says Elibu: but I know our people are fearelesse, because (as they
suppose) all danger is past; nay, but that will not serve to deliver them, for
so long as they sin, so long may they expect punishments. Isa. 1.20.
If they refuse and rebel, they shall be devoured by the sword, for the mouth
of the Lord has spoken it, says the Prophet: Ezekiel. 38.22. Psalm. 91.5, ^. Ier.
14.18.
But what though the fear of the sword should be gone? yet be has pestilence
to plead against men withal, which walks in darkness, and is an arrow that
hilleth at nome-day. Nay, and if they shall escape both sword and pestilence,
yet he has famine that kills many thousands where it enters; and if they by
any means escape all these, he has still in store, fear, pit, and share: if
they seek to fly from the fear, Ier. 48.43, 44
they shall fall into the pit; and if they get out of the pit, they shall be
taken in the snare; while they think to escape one judgment, they run into
Incidit in Scyllam qui vult vitare Carybdim. Job. 20. las^ v.
another: for, as Zophar very well observes, the condition of the wicked is
miserable at all times, and in all places, for vengeance follows him
whitherfoever he goes; all the means he uses to comfort him proves no better
then vexation unto him; in a word, as he concludes, misery is the portion of a
wicked man from God, and the heritage appointed him by God. There is no hope
for him of immunity, no way to escape unpunished, it is as certain as a
portion, for it is appointed by God himself, Iam. 1.17. he trope is aposniasma
Isa. 5.25. and 9.11, 12, 17.
in whom is no shadow of turning; nay, and when all these plagues are come upon
them for their iniquities, if for all that they do not amend, Gods anger will
not be turned away, but his hand will be stretched out still: though his
judgments have been searefull and terrible, and now are past, yet let none
think to escape for that, for as long as his hand is stretched out over the
Land in wrath, they, continuing in their sins, shall likewise feel wrath, If
you do not repent, you shall all likewise perish.

True it is indeed, Luke 13.3. Objection.
these parts have felt the judgments of God, as much as others have done, and
the overflowing scourge has past over it, and therefore now, when the storm
is over, it may perhaps by some be thought, and for a little while God did
seem to forsake us, to the end that now with mercies he may gather us, Isa.
54, 7.
and that in a little wrath he hid his face from us for a moment, that with
everlasting mercies he might now comfort us, as he promised his people after
their affliction. Ver. 8. Answer.
But let us know, that fresh sins require fresh judgments; if by his former
corrections we had received instruction, and so amended our ways, as that they
might have been acceptable in his sight, then no doubt but he would have
perfected his begun works, and established this peace which as yet w^ enjoy
upon weak assurance; but seeing that, on our parts, is left undone, but rather
the contrary done, we may have cause rather to fear judgments, then hope for
mercy; for it is not Gods forbearance of us for a while, that can, without
presumption, breed in us a true persuasion of Gods love toward us; for we
cannot say aright, that it is, because that God loves us, that he does not
correct us, but rather the contrary, seeing he corrects every one he loves,
and when he suffers men to go on in their sins unpunished, it is a fearful
token that he intends the destruction of such. Isa, 1.
Why should you, (says he to the J^wes) he smitten any more, ye will revolt
more and more? giving us to understand, that it is a kindness to be smitten:
but because I purpose to speak of this toward the end of the Chapter,
therefore, now I Will speak sparingly of it, but to come to the matter again. I
say, we ought not to think to escape, punishments, because (now for the
present) we enjoy peace; for as our pride, luxury, etc. security formerly begot
War among us, and that war has begotten us Peace; so will this our short peace
ripen our former sins, and bring forth new ones, N^te.
which, without speedy repentance, will beget some other judgments to our
grief and misery.

But you will say, Objection.
this time of peace which we now enjoy is employed in, and toward the
advancement of Gods glory, in forwarding the work of Reformation, and
establishing the Churches peace; which works hitherto, God (after the gloomy
days were over) always blessed, with granting peace and joyful days, until
they were with happy success accomplished; and it is Gods own promise, that
when the victory is obtained by his people, over the Beast of Rome, the Papists
and their adherents, Rev. 19.
that then they shall enjoy prosperity, and rejoice over their enemies with
exceeding great joy; and we, by Gods goodness toward us, have obtained such
victories over our enemies (those whom we take to be the Popish Army) that in
some good measure they are brought into subjection; and therefore now we may
hope these times of joy are begun among us, and that therefore the Lord will
not gloome again upon us, until the work of Reformation be thoroughly
finished: this in effect is the opinion of some, who living in security,
persuade themselves of peace.

Now, though this requires a larger Answer, Answer.
yet let this following, at this time, suffice; true it is indeed, that in the
time of Reformation in Nehemiahs days, after they had wrought through the
miseries and difficulties which opposed them, in setting it forward, and
bringing it about (as the malicious slanders, and letters which their enemies
broached and writ against them, to hinder them) after, I say, they had
over-rowed these, which were sent to try their patience, and faith, etc. the
Lord was pleased to shine upon them in mercy, as to give them a nail in the
place, Ezra 9.8,
and grant unto them some peace and quiet rest; yea, Ver. 9.
he was pleased to extend his mercy unto them in the sight of the Kings of
Persia, to give them a reviving to set up the house of God, and to repair the
desolations thereof, and so forth. But who ever reads there (and understands
what he reads) may quickly perceive what those men thought of that their peace;
surely, not that God was so bound, or that he had so promised, or that he would
so continue that peace, because of the building of the Temple, or the
Reformation which they did intend, as that (how ever they carried themselves
before him) it should continue: I say, neither Ezra nor Nehemiah thought so;
for Nehemiah tells them, that if they still continued in their sins (as
profanation of the Sabbath, etc.) notwithstanding that God had delivered them,
to the end, to perform the work in hand to his glory; yet he would again
bring the same judgments upon that remnant, as he had done formerly upon their
fathers. Neh. 13.18. Ezra 9.13, 14, 15.
Consider of those places in the Margent.

The like ought we to think of this our Peace which we now enjoy, not that God
is so bound to continue it, or that he will so continue it, merely because of
Reformation, except withal, we reform our ways, and do better then our fore
fathers have done; may we steal and commit adultery, and serve, and swear by
other Gods, and profane the Sabbath, etc. and say, we are delivered to do
these things? or think because we stand for, and pretend the Reformation of
abuses in Church and State, that therefore we may do any thing, and yet God
not punish us? let no such vain thoughts deceive us, if we do those things
that others have provoked God against them by, we must expect to feel what
they have felt: Romans 2.11.
For God is no respecter of persons.

I, Objection.
but will some say, shall the Papists flourish again among us? Nay surely,
that they shall never do, for God has threatened a final overthrow to them,
which is in part executed against them in this part, and if they do not again
make head against us, no other can harm us.

This Objection is a branch of the former, Answer.
but we will answer it particularly at large, because I find, in discoursing
with men, many too much addicted to think, that as long as we can keep the
Papists in subjection, there is no fear nor danger of further misery; as if
God could or would punish us by none but them they I know hitherto have been
the only instruments of our miseries, and indeed (if they should continue
among us in any power) they would be so still; but yet to think that God
cannot or will not punish us by any other means then by them, were presumption
intolerable; and yet why may not the Lord give them power over us again,
because of our abominable sins, and cause them again to triumph? this he may
do, and yet have decreed their fall nevertheless; and I wish we do not so
far provoke him, as cause him to do it; the Lord had determined the fall of the
Canaanites, and yet gave them victory over his people more then once. Though
the Benjamites were to be destroyed by Gods own command, yet two days
together they prospered in battle, and slew the Israelites, Judge. 20.
and so it may be with us if we offend our God: But though he should bring them
down every day more and more, and suffer them no more to insult, yet can he
bring judgments upon us by other means; he may (let us pray he do not) cause
disunity to arise among our selves, which may breed us much misery: he may
bring in enemies by Sea upon us (where a more fitting place in all the
Kingdom? considering our security, nakedness of weapons, and unpreparednesse,
and withal the many open, secret, and unknown enemies, and disaffected ones,
and hollow-hearted, lukewarm, and men not earing which way things go, that
are among us; nay, in authority, and place, ready to take part with any, be
they French, Spanish, Turks, or Devils incarnate, or what they will, so they
but oppose the Parliament, they would be for them) and these, I say, may work
our ruin, before ever we dream of them, and make our part o'th Country the
seat of a more fearful, bloody, and destroying War, then ever as yet, either
we, or the Kingdom in any part have felt. God in his mercy divert such
judgments from us.

But if none of these punishments by War come upon us, let us but call to mind
the point we have in hand, viz. That God has variety of judgments, etc. and
then, continuing in our sins, we can have but small hope to escape without
punishment; and the consideration of that, may likewise answer that other
objection, namely, that the maturity of our enemies sins, as blasphemies, etc.
may assure us of their destruction; and so of our peace: for we must know the
Lord can both destroy them and us, if we be wicked; yea, though them by us, yet
may we be destroyed by other means, for in that we are made instruments to
bring them to ruin, it is no ground or sign that we shall not be destroyed.
Isa. 10.12.
See that place in the Margent.

But again, many say, The Lord is a merciful God, and will not deal with us
after our deserts, Objection.
though we by our sins have and do still provoke his incomprehenble Majesty,
and so deserve no other favors then continual miseries, yet for his Names
sake, and Covenants sake, etc. he will spare us, and suffer us still to enjoy
peace and quietness.

Answer. Passim caelebratur and paterna ejus bonitas voluntas ad benesicientiam
proclivis: sed exempla traduntur severitatis, quae justum scelerum ullo rem
esse osten^^nt, praesertim ubi tolerantia-sua contra obstinatos nihil proficit.
Call. Inst. lib. 1. cap. 10 Sect. 1. Isa. 48.11.
That God is a merciful God, this Kingdoms experience may at large testify,
and that he spares and will spare, (men deserving wrath) for his own sake, the
Scripture does * witness; as likewise, that he is a just God, a true God, a
God that will not suffer the least sin to go unpunished, especially when men
continue in sin, and yet expect favor, such men will suddenly cause the Lords
patience to be out of date, for he cannot endure that they should commit ill,
and expect that he should patronage them for their ill; by such means he is
enforced to strike when he would not, otherwise, he would be accounted as one
of * them, or such a one as they are, ever, Psalm, 50.21.
copartners with them in sin. I could wish he had not the like cause to strike
in this Country, but I fear, we, by our sins, have so far stirred up his
wrath, that there is almost no remedy, but that his ever-loving mercy, must
give place to justice, in that the time of mercy has not wrought those effects
that he expects; for it is always expected, that patience and long-sufferance,
should lead men to repentance; which, seeing we have altogether (in a manner)
neglected, and not only so, but by his long-forbearance are lulled asleep in
security, and in a strange manner, (because God has formerly been merciful
unto us) persuade our selves, that therefore he can or will be no otherwise;
thus heaping up more sins, in and by the same means, which should draw us to
repentance: these our doings therefore, (I say) duly marked, may rather cause
us fear that there is wrath laid up for us, and that it shall suddenly be
revealed against us; then that the Lord will any longer continue his mercy, and
loving kindness unto us, to spare us by diverting those plagues from us, that
he has not only in store, but in part executed upon many of our brethren, who,
though their offenses (to man's sight) seemed less then ours, have already
suffered more then we have done; and therefore, while we now see wrath against
them, (notwithstanding of their former sufferings,) let us never flatter our
selves with hope of immunity, seeing we are in as great, if not greater fault.
I Will say no more, but that I would have every one to know, that God is
merciful, but yet let them know, that it is to such as hate, or, at least have
a desire to hate and leave off sinning; which when I see but in some reasonable
manner practiced among us, I will then hope to see the Lords mercy, not only
continued, but increased to us; in the mean while, I will trust in Gods mercy,
and hope the best, but I will prepare and advise all I can to prepare to be
ready at all times, to undergo what ever it shall please God to inflict upon
us.

I know again, Objection.
what men possessed by security will object. viz. That there is no appearance of
evil toward us, one way or other, therefore what need we fear?

Now I would have all men, Answer.
(such men especially) to confider, how void of understanding they are to
think, that, because no plagues are in sight, therefore, God has none in
store; we cannot see into Gods armory what is within it, or if we could, we
neither know nor can know how he will bestow them, and therefore how can we
think our selves secure, especially, seeing most commonly when men think
themselves furthest from danger, then it is nearest at hand: Genesis 19.23.
That very morning that Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed, the Sun shone
clear upon them.

But grant there be no danger apparent, nor fear of any, nor likelihood of
fear, yet have we forgotten that the Lord can create evil; Raro antecedentem
scelestum deseruit pede poena claudo. Hor. lib. 3. Od. 2. Ioh. 23.14, 15
even send such plagues as never before were heard of and this is certain, sin
seldom goes unpunished, even on earth, one way or other, though perhaps Gods
punishments are not perceived by many; there are who are sick of Gods wrath,
and yet know not so much; for as he calls many times upon men when they little
take notice of it, so likewise does he punish, and that severely and
fearfully, when they little Isa. 47.11.
know it, or take notice of it; for he does not always punish alike, or
openly, not always generally, but sometimes partieularly, as a Town in a
Country, a Family in a Town, or a person in a Family; and them perhaps with
judgments not apparent to all men, but with more private, though fierce
enough, as with terror of conscience, with inward vexation of mind, etc. and
these inward plagues are the fearfullest of all, Pro. 18.14.
and the most troublesome; For the spirit of a man will sustain his
infirmities, but a wound spirit who can bear? says Solomon: it is far more
troublesome then any corporal punishment that can be inflicted, because, Impii
poenas luunt non tam judiciis quam augore conscientiae fraudisque cruciat^^.
Cic. sev. p. 127
a spotless conscience is a faithful comforter in time of distress, having
on its side a witness, clearing the party before him, before whom alone he
stands guilty, that however he appear to man, yet to God, before whose
tribunal all must appear, he is accounted not as an enemy, but as a son,
one acceptable in the sight of the Judge; and so, by the enjoyment of patience,
not feeling that fierceness in temporal afflictions, that others do which are
not so provided, Sua quenquo fraus, and suus error maxim vexat, suum quenque
seelus agitat, aamentiaque afficit, suae malae cogitationes conscientiaque
animi maxim torrent: hae sunt impiis assiduae domesticaeque furiae quae dies
notesque po^nes a sceleratissimis repetunt. Externa ista omnia leviter nec in
longum nos tangunt: interna sunt, quae angunt. Just. lipsi. dae. Constant. lib.
2. cap. 14
when on the contrary, if conscience accuse of sin, and misdemeanors
committed against the supernall Judge, it is not only an accuser, but a judge,
and a condemning judge; which condemination pronounced in that inward
judicature, works and produces horrors and fears past belief of any; but
the woeful sufferers in such torments, for the curing of which maladies, no
remedies can be applied; all outward and temporal comforts, being but as fuel
heaped on, to the end, to assuage the fury of a fierce fire, which rather will
increase the flame; for, from the greater enjoyment of earthly comforts,
conscience in its unpartiall judgment takes a further occasion to condemn,
aggravating the condemnation, and consequently the horror, by how much the
neglect has been of doing well, by the helps of these comforts which at any
time they have enjoyed; by which means, no joy can extirpate that inward
grief, no comfort dispell that sorrow, no carelessness expel that call, nor
no temporal blessing exceed that plague, in so much, that many have accounted
it to be the next a kin, and the nearest by comparison, to the torments of
Hell: yea, some have not sticked to say, that it alone was Hell; such a
fearful plague is this internal fear, and terror of conscience, which God
lays upon many, which is not seen or perceived outwardly to other men. I
cannot so largely speak of this as I would, but if God spare me life, and
grant me leisure, it may be, I may henceforth, upon some other occasion, handle
it more at large.

But to our matter again, we must likewise know, that as the Lord thus
secretly punishes from the worlds view, so sometimes (as I partly touched
before) when the party punished regards not; Deus justissimo judicio punit
peccata Peccatis. Piscator in Romans 1. Ob. 25.
and that is fearful, for his case is more dangerous; thus it falls out when
God punishes sin by sin, small sins by greater, as in justice he often does,
when men will not be reclaimed from their evil ways, by any means, as
neither by chastisements, nor favors, then gives he them up to their own
hearts lusts, even to drink up iniquity as a fish does drink up water, to
heap up, by that means, wrath against the day of wrath, and so to run
themselves into such deep pits of despair, that they cannot return; thus fast
binding themselves in the snare of Satan, hiding themselves in the puddle of
sin, further from Gods favor every day more then other; and yet, through the
delight, which long custom in sinning breeds in them, they plague themselves
willingly, and think they can enjoy no greater happiness; when as (God
knows) their case is not only dangerous, but their misery great, the plague
upon them as destructive to them, as all the plagues sent by God, were to
Egypt, and they the more to be accounted miserable, and plagued, because they
know not themselves to be so; from such a plague the Lord deliver us, for it is
observed, that a greater or more fearful threatening cannot be pronounced, then
when the Lord says, He that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he that is
filthy, let him be filthy still. Rev. 22.11.
For when God leaves him, what can man do? if he prevent him not, into what
courses will he run? Oh therefore let us beware least we so highly provoke the
Lord, Hosca 9.12.
as to cause him to say so unto us, or cause him to give us over to such sins,
as to make his sore displeasure to arise against us, to our destruction.

Let us repent betime of our ignorance, infidelity, contempt of Gods Word,
uncharitableness toward ou^ brethren, dis-unities, and contentions, pride,
drunkenness, gluttony, profanation of the Sabbath, halting betwixt two
opinions, inconstancy in Religion, Lukewarmnesse, Superstitious observations of
Days; Meats, etc least God give us over to Popery, hardness of heart, Mat.
13.15. Acts 28.27.28. Luke 3.20 Roma. 21, 24 26. Act. 19.9.
or into a reprobate sense unnatural uncleanness, bestiality, open tyranny,
or to fall into Sects, or Heresies, etc. for which these and the like crying
sins, he often punishes the forenamed sins, as by those places of Scripture in
the Margent may appear.

Again, let us not think that we shall escape punishment, continuing in our
sins, seeing God may (and many times does) punish men, in, and by those ways
and means, which they take to be the comfortablest, wherein they can walk, as
in and by their pleasures, preferments, wealth, beauty, etc. yea, making peace
it self a plague, and prosperity a a snare to catch them to their destruction;
for, as one observes, it is a plague to many, that they are not plagued, even
the want of punishment is their punishment: I know it is a thing desired of
many to be rich, and most men wish they may never be worse hurt, but even
wealth very often p^oves no less hurtful, then the most fearful plagues that
ever are sent; this the Apostle very well observes, Those that will be rich
(says he) fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and
hurtful lusts, 1 Timothy 6.10.
which drown budizousi In profundum objiciunt.
men in destruction and perdition^ they suck in so much pleasure by them, that
they forget all other happiness, while in the mean time they are ensnared by
Satan, to their destruction, which surely is a punishment greater then any
earthly sufferings; the consideration of this, Pro. 30.8, 9.
caused Agur to pray so fervently, that he should not be made rich, for he
feared wealth would exalt him, and cause him to forget his Maker; and the
Philosopher thought, to make his enemies rich, was the greatest displeasure he
could do them, and indeed very often abundance of wealth proves a great deal of
trouble to the possessours of it. Who would be in so much care, trouble, and
perplexity, as with rich men in these days of danger? for in their height of
pleasures, fears of danger perplex them, and they scarcely can take rest,
because of continual molestation, that so one need wish their enemy no more
trouble then to be rich, for they may be assured, that by that means they
shall not be without vexation. Mat. 19.23.


But besides the vexation riches brings with them on earth, Defipile est
stare in alta dignitate, and carere cogitationibus elatis. Stella de contemptu
mundi. lib. 1. ca. 13 See Mal. 2.2 Psalm. 69.22.
they are in danger to deprive them of those celestial pleasures, which as far
surpass those earthly vanities, as heaven does hell.

And what vexations do often come by preferment and honor? even when men have
their whole desire in enjoyment of pleasures and dignities, they most commonly
are either inwardly vexed, or their envyed happiness does procure unavoydable
misery, which likewise by God are inflicted as punishments upon them, though it
may be not perceived, and therefore the more fearful.

To be brief, who knows but even this small time of tranquillity, which now
we enjoy, may be made a plague unto us; for if the Lord do by it give us over
to security and carelessness, we shall presently be in a very deplorable
condition, and yet not to be pitied, because we shall not know wherein we stand
need of pity; thus may we be severely plagued, Eccles. 7.2, 3.
even with judgments, wounding us deeply, in and by the same means which we
take to be our only comforts; and the less that any take notice of this, the
more is the plague upon him, Miserius inihil est mis^rose non miserente
for sencelesnes of Gods judgments, is the greatest judgment of all; and how
much more a man thinks himself happy, though he sin and yet enjoyes all
temporal pleasures, so much the mo e miserable is he.

Let every one that reads this, consider of it, and observe and mark how the
case is with him, whether or no he perceive or find any of these secret
judgments creeping in upon him, and, while there is time, let us all beware we
do not provoke God to send them upon us; and above all, let us observe how sin
decreases or increases, if we see men rather growing more bold in sin every
day more then other, other, let us then assure our selves, the plague of God is
against us, and just cause we may have to fear, Isa. 22.14.
that such iniquities shall not be purged till we die.

Or if we see men every day more then other, given over to security, and
pleasures, and careless of threatenings denounced against them, by the
Ministers and servants of God, let us then likewise fear, that the Lords hand
is stretched out against us.

But if we see none of these secret judgments, nor open plagues, but that we
still live under Gods protection, in peace and tranquillity, yet let us not
grow bolder in sin, See Psalm. 69.22, 23, 24, 25, 27, 28. Let us take heed
that none of those or such like judgments fall upon us.
but always call to mind this point, and fear to offend, and in the midst of
prosperity, beseech the Lord, that our table may not become a snareunto us,
but, that we may so be delivered from curses, that Gods blessings may be upon
us, and all we have at all times, in all places, upon all occasions; this if we
do, we shall enjoy with increase our already begun peace, but continuing in
sin, may cause us to expect nothing but wrath, for there is no peace to the
wicked.

CHAP. V. We may not only fear that God has Judgments in store for us, but
that wrath, in some sort, shall shortly be powered down upon us.
OUr unmatched security causes me to stand upon this Point longer then
otherwise I would, and makes me break order and method, that, if by any
means it may, this my Scout may be faithful to give an alarm to all sorts of
men, that they may be stirred up, either to prevent by unfeigned repentance, or
to prepare against further danger.

Let it not seem strange to any that I, more then any, should be thus fearful
of that, of which as yet, there seems no likelihood of appearance, or that I
should continually strike upon this string, for truly, me thinks they are
either blind, or quite fearlesse, or careless what come, that see not, as
well as I, still clouds of wrath hanging over us, ready again to dissolve into
showers; it pities me, that so few see it, or fear it, and those who do see
it, or at least fear it, should no better take notice of it, or so little take
care to prevent it, or prepare against it: and therefore, to put them in mind
that forget, and instruct those who know not, or consider not, and to let all
men know the ground of my fears, in this Chapter, as freely as I can, I will
show why we may fear that there is some plague or judgment hanging over us,
ready to be executed.

And first, we may fear some other plague or judgment shall, (ere it be long)
fall upon us, because the Lord has corrected us with heavy judgments, and yet
they have not wrought upon us so, Lo^ke back in Page 28, and 35.36.
as to cause us to return unto him; when that is not effected by one judgment,
which he would have done, most commonly he sends another after it, even at its
heels, as we may say; when want of bread, and cleanness of teeth, does not
cause a people to return unto the Lord, Amos 4.6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
then he will withold the rain from them, and cause it to rain upon one
place, and not on another; when that will not serve, then he will send blasting
and mildew upon the fruit of the ground; and if still they persist in their
rebellion, then shall the pestilence follow, after that the sword, etc. To
conclude, if those he punishes will not return unto him, (for to this end
does he afflict men, that they might seek Hos. 5.15.
him) then their plagues shall be fearful; thus the Lord threatens, The people
turn not to him that smites them, Isa. 9.13, 14.
neither do they seek the Lord of Hoasts, therefore the Lord shall cut them
off from Isael, head and tail, branch and root, in one day. And therefore, I
say, in regard we have not yet amended, by his former corrections, we must
expect that he will again be upon us suddenly.

Secondly, because we do not separate our selves (or them from us) from that
cursed brood of Babylon, from Papists, and from popishly affected persons, but
still have communion with them, and are familiar with them, and delight in them
and their abominable Idolatries and Superstitions, because of this, we may
justly fear wrath, for the Holy Ghost says, Come out of Babylon my people,
Rev. 18.4.
that you be not partakers of her plagues. God has plagues he will powne
down upon them, and if we love their company so well, that we will not leave
them, we must likewise be content to be sharers with them in their punishments,
and in those plagues which God has denounced against them, and shall shortly
execute upon them,

Thirdly, (for I would be brief) our deep security, and putting far from us
the evil day, and living so as if there were not (nor yet like to be) any
trouble in the Kingdom, we These things of themselves are not hurtful, but
only as they are signs of deep security. Diluvium suit ciroa finem Aprilis,
cum orbis quasi reviviseit, cum aves cantillant, and exultant pecudes; etc.
Luther in Genesis 7. Mat. 24, 38, 39. Jude 18, 27. 1 The. 5.3 ou me cephu gousin.
marry, and give in marriage, we eat and drink, we build and plant, we think
of no danger, nor fear any trouble, and this is even an infallible token of
some judgment not far off. Thus they were doing in the old world when the
flood came, and swept them all away, they thought the least of it when it came;
thus were the people of Laish, a secure people, they feared nothing, until
they were smitten with the edge of the Sword. And the Apostle says, That when
men shall say peace and safety, then shall sudden destruction come on them, as
upon a woman intravell, and they shall not escape: their punishment shall be so
certain, as nothing can be more certain, for so the Greek plirase Gemina
negatio fortius negat.
imports. Now let us look upon our selves, and consider whether or no we be
not secure, and consequently, may not look for some other miseries, more then
as yet we have felt.

Fourthly, we may fear more plagues will be upon us, because we so little
regard our brethrens calamities, nor take no more warning by their miseries;
they are afflicted to give us warning, but we will not be warned, but rather
judge uncharitably of them, because of their afflictions; and flatter our
selves, thinking we are in an happy condition, because of our long peace; now
such people God will not spare, as our Savior says, Think ye (says he to
the Jews) that those whose blood Pilate mingled with their Sacrifices, or
those upon whom the Tower at Silve fell, Luke 13.1, 2, 3, 4.
were sinners above all the rest? I tell you nay, but except ye repent, ye
shall all likewise perish. If men be not warned by others sufferings, they
themselves shall feel the like in as heavy a manner.

Fifthly, it is a fearful sign of some judgment near approaching, when a
Kingdom, County, or City, has been blessed by God, exceedingly and
extraordinarily, both by Temporal and spiritual blessings; so that he expects
to find at least some fruit on it, and from it, and yet finds none; and then
again, does yet more abundantly bless with all manner of blessings that
place: and yet for all that can find no fruit to his liking, I say, that this
is an evident token of some destroying judgment not far off. Observe the
Parable of the Pig-tree, Luke 13.6.7, 8, 9.
the lord of the vineyard came three years and found no fruit on it, he would
have had it then cut down, but by the persuasion of the dresser of the
vineyard, he manured it once again, but upon that condition, that if it did
not bear, it should no longer stand: See Isa. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Ver. 7.
Our estate may be compared unto it; God has this many years expected fruit
from us, and yet he found none, or if any, wild grapes; he has looked for
judgment, but behold oppression; for righteousness, but behold a cry: and yet
once again, he has manured us about, granted us, not only to enjoy his
ordinances and means of grace, but them in more purity then formerly; if now,
when he comes, he sindes fruit on us, well; if not, we may justly fear that he
will say to his devouring Angel, as the lord of the vineyard said to the
dresser, ^ut them down, why trouble they the ground.

Sixthly, when men break spromise, with disrespect, or lightly regard those on
whom, next under God, their safety depends, and who have wrought through many
dangers, to bring to pass that they enjoy, peace and quietness; I say, when
such are disrespected, and defrauded, or have kept back from them what is their
due, etc. this is no good token, but even a sign of fierce wrath, See Iam.
5.4, Mal. 3.5.
^re long to be revealed against such people.

Seventhly, domineering covetousness, as I may call it, that is, when through
pride and covetousness, men, in a braving and lordly manner, do exact and
commandingly call for what ever they please, and when and how they will, of,
and from those who are under them: 1 Kin. 20.3.
This was in Benhadab, not long before his overthrow, first he sent Ahab word,
That his silver, and his gold, and his wives, Ver. 4.
and his children, etc. were his, and Ahab sent him word, they were so; upon
which, he grew so shameful audacious, Ver. 5.
and out of measure proud, that he sent another messenger to tell him, That he
would not only have his silver, and his gold, etc. but he would send his
servants to take what they liked from him, Ver. 6.
and from whom they would; but what followed this braving domineering
covetousness of his? presently he was brought low, and was forced to crouch
for his life to him, whom formerly he had so scornefully used. The like became
of Nahash the Ammonite, who, in a proud manner, 1 Samuel, 11.2, 11. 2 Samuel 13.17
18, 19. etc.
domineered over the men of Jabesh-Gilead, and of the Philistims, for their
spoiling Israel in such a boasting and lordly manner.

And in the height of their bravery, that Army, which falsely bears the name of
the Kings, and those of that party, were thus domineeringly proud and covetous
over, and of the estates, and persons, of those whom they had in their powers.
Who knows not, that in the time of the Siege of Kingston upon Hull, we in
those parts, were, (for that) in Ahabs condition, and they as proud and
covetous and Benhadab? all we had was theirs, what they would command, we were
forced to grant, and not only so, but they came into our houses, and took
what they liked without leave, but shortly (their pride being at the height)
they were cast down, to their shame and confusion.

These examples are for our learning, and happy are they that can take warning
by other men's harms; let us therefore, take heed we do not after this manner,
least we feel, as they have felt, in some sort or other, but if else such
doings in a manner be found among us, let us fear. I have said.

Eighthly, the pride, security, and sinfulness of our Armies, they are not to
be excused, their faults are great, and worse they are made, by casting out
honest, civil; and religious men, and entertaining deceitful, deboyst, and
profane persons; they are full of Achans, of drunkards, of what not? the
scarcest of good men: We hear daily their boasting of strength, of victories
obtained, without thankfulness to God who gave them; they are full of pride,
and vain security, and therefore what followed Benadabs security, the like we
may fear; 1 Kin. 20.16 Judge. 5.30.
remember Sisera who was deviding the spoil before he got the victory, if
there be such in our Armies, (as I fear one by a slender search might find
many) it prognosticates no good.

Other symptoms there are, which might be named, which betoken wrath in some
sort against us, because in other places, where they have appeared, some
judgments have speedily followed; but these already named at this time shall
suffice, and let them be noted so, that we either by repentance take them away,
that they be not found among us, or else by preparation and patience, we
provide to undergo what ever they may foreshew, or follow after them; what
that may be, (I say) I know not, nor how soon or how long it may be, I know
not, that time that may seem long to us, is but short to God, and therefore,
perhaps, when we little think of any harm approaching, then will such be
upon us, as we cannot escape.

But if God does spare us, and still suffer us to enjoy peace and prosperity,
notwithstanding, that these forenamed signs do show, or seem to show to the
contrary; let us not for that grow proud, but with Niniveh, set us repent at
the hearing or seeing the signs of wrath. If we do not, Quum Deus nonstatim
no, punit, ut meriti sumus, hae illius benigniiate, and tolerantia, ac lenitate
moveri debemus, ut mature and absque ulteriori mora recipiscamus: ne
benignitatem Dei contemnentes, and peceata sicute accumulantes, accumelamus
quoque nobis, justam Dei iram, and poenam gravissimam. Deus enim tarditatem
supplicei gravitate compensat. Piscator. in Romans 2.
though for a while God may stay before he punish, yet assuredly, he will
recompense his long stay, with more grievous punishments.

CHAP. VI. The folly of those, who think to escape Gods judgments by
departing (for the present) to any other place; or that think they shall not
at all suffer, because they have escaped some dangers.
THat the Lord has not only some judgments in store, but that it is near
approaching, the signs forementioned may cause us to fear, yet perhaps, many
will flatter themselves, either by some hope they may have of some unexpected
safety, or strange deliverance, or at worst, escaping from dangers by flying
into some places of refuge, where nothing can harm them, etc. Now therefore,
it remains we speak somewhat to beat men off from having any confidence in
such an uncertain and weak foundation, for if they prepare no better to
prevent, or escape his judgments, if they only think to fly from them, and
not from sin that brings them, they may hope, but yet have small cause to
expect safety; Mr. Bolton in his Tre^tise of the Saints-soule exalting
hum^^iation. Page 164.
for as Gods wrath is against nothing but sin, it being (as one observes) the
only object of Gods extremest hatred, so it is not any place, that can free
men from that hatred, if they continue in their sins, how strong, or how free
from danger soever it may be thought; for no Fortification can keep out Gods
wrath, his devouring Angel strikes in any place, no place is privileged, there
is no hiding place for him, all the corners of the earth are open before him;
nay, even hell is naked before him, Job 26.6.
and destruction has no covering, which made the Psalmist to cry out, Whither
shall I fly from the presence of the Lord? Psalm. 139.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
if I ascond up into heaven, thou art there, if I make my bed in hell, behold
thou art there, if I take the wings of the morning, and fly unto the uttermost
parts of the earth, even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand find
me out. If I say, behold darkness shall cover me, even the night shall be
light about me, etc. And shall we think that that God, who thus (as the
Psalmist confesses) could in every corner find him out, is not the same that
formerly he was? nay, Heb. 13.8.
let us not deceive our selves, he that is, I AM, the same yersterday, to day,
and for ever, does behold men now, Praecipue considerare oportet quorsum vide
at Deus, nempe ut tandem vocet ad judicium quae^unque geruatur ab hominibus.
Call. Jer cap. 23. Ver. 24.
as well as formerly, and that not with a bare idle speculation, but with
noting narrowly their ways, to punish or reward as he sees cause; foolishly
therefore do they think to escape Gods judgments by departing from places
visited, to other places free, as if God could not as well send plagues to
those places to which they flee for refuge, as to them from which they
departed; but yet thus will men (drowned in security) flatter themselves with
hope of immunity from dangers, against all likelihood, for if the judgments of
War, Pestilence, etc. be sent upon any place for sin, as without question they
are, when one place is smitten, another may tremble, seeing it is in the same
fault, and knows not how soon it may be in the same condition; and the flying
of men from a place visited, to any other as yet free, may be a means to
lessen the punishment of the place in distress, and bring is upon the place
that was free; T^cium and in pectore isto circum feras fontem fomi, temque tui
mali. Just. lipsi de Constan. lib. 1. cap. 2. Job. 34.21, 22
seeing sin is removed from one place to another by the removing of such, and
so Gods wrath and vengeance will follow them, as Joab followed Sheba, into what
place soever they enter, for be sure, their sin, (that is, punishment due to
sin) shall find them out. Cain cannot fly from his tormenting conscience, no
more can any marked out to destruction escape whithersoever they enter, or
betake themselves, The mountains cannot cover them, nor the bottom of the sea
hide them from those plagues that God has appointed, therefore, whither should
they fly?

But what if they do fly? Does it not often befall such, as if they should fly
from a lion, and a bear should meet them? Amos 5.19.
or go into a house for safety, and a serpent should bite them? Yea, God
threatens such things against those who provide no otherwise to suffer then by
flight. Isa. 30.7, 15, 16.
He cries to all men that their strength is to sit still, and that in returning
and rest they shall be saved; but men by their action, say no: But we will
flee upon horses, and ride upon the swift: therefore (says God) shall ye flee,
and those that pursue you shall be swift, one thousand shall flee at the rebuke
of one, etc. An example of this we have in Zedichiah, Jer. 38.17.
who could not be persuaded to abide in Jerusalem, to abide there what God had
appointed for him to suffer, but he would escape and flee away from danger, and
so he thought he should be safe, but that his flight was his utter overthrow,
for while he thought to escape, he run himself into dangers, that he could not
avoyde, and far worse then that he should have undergone if he had submitted
himself into the hands of the Caldeans. Ier. 39.4, 5, 6
Thus it befalls many men even at this instant in this our Kingdom, they flee
from one judgment, Mors and fugacem persequitur virum Hor. li, 3. od. 2.
and meet with other more grievous, how many are there who flying from the
fear of War into other places, there feel the misery of War in the oxtreamest
manner? and how many flying the Country into strong Holds, are there in
distress and misery, by famine, or pestilence, or some other disease, from
which they cannot escape: finding true by experience, that which was threatened
against wicked people, that while they escape from one misery, another should
take hold on them; which seeing by woeful experience, I say, many feel, let
all that reads this, be as wise as learn to get courage to stand in
affliction, without flying away from that which they can have small hope to
escape; and the rather, because they hear of, and see Gods judgments so
various, and withal so terrible, that when they may think themselves safest,
then they may be in greatest danger.

Again, let such consider, from whom they seek to hide themselves, it is from
the Lord; now, who can fly from his presence, Psalm. 24.1.
The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof, it cannot hide them; at the
command of him the sea shall cast up and deliver her dead; in it therefore they
cannot be safe: in a word, The Lord fills heaven and earth, where then is room
for any to remain from his presence, Ier. 23.24.
or from his judgments, seeing he has (as is before said) in evevery place
some thing to arrest them, and b^ing them before him?

But if by flying, such could save themselves from all trouble and outward
affliction, yet in so doing, they provide the worst for themselves; for the
Wiseman, that had experience of all estates and conditions, says, It is better
to be in the house of mourning, Eccles. 7, 2.
then in the house of laughter: It is better to suffer affliction then
otherwise; for many times great dangers come unto the soul by continual
pleasures, Tribulatio prodest animae prosperitus vero spiritum bonum ex^^^guit.
Stella de contem. mundi, lib. 2. ca. 31
and much good by affliction, for while men stay encompassed about by
calamities, it causes them to look up toward heaven for aid and assistance of
the Almighty, and strengthens in them their faith, patience, and other graces;
yea, and teaches them love, brotherly kindness, and pity toward their
brethren, and chaseth out of their thoughts all desire of pleasure, or ^o^ght
in sinning, and works in them care to please God, (...) to offend him, etc. in
a word, Ne fugias infirmitates and t^ibulationes, quae conducunt ad salutem
animae, admit adversitates, si modo velis sanari. Stella de contem. mundi,
li. 2, ca. 23
it is not to be expressed what good afflictions, or staying where afflictions
are, may work unto men; when on the contrary, when men are escape^^, (as they
think) from danger, (...) manner of evil (...) in upon them, and so are they
pl^^ged in the depth of pleasures, that it is hard for them ever to escape out
again; for most commonly such forget all love, pity, or fellow-feeling of their
brethren ^^lamities, which, in time, dangerously hardens their hea^^ and works
in them by little and little a contempt of their brethren in distress, and by
and by such an high conceit of their own happiness, that they are rocked
asleep in the cradle of s^cusity, until they become senseless of their
s^^ules, danger to their everlasting destruction. If these things were
seriously pondered, surely, it could not choose but work in men a resolution to
stand against all dangers, and make them even rejoice to be accounted worthy to
suffer, and to think themselves the most happy, when in the worlds eyes they
seem to be most miserable.

Moreover, in flying from Gods judgments, they do not only rob themselves of
that which is good, but they show their folly, in thinking themselves wiser
then God, he is the best physician both of soul and body, and he sends
afflictions to places, no doubt but for their good seeing that all things work
together for good, of those that fear him; men in flying refuse that which God
prescribes, and so prefer their own wisdom before Gods. He says, this it
best for you, they say, hay^^ he bids them stand, if they would be safe, seeing
he that s^^kes to save his life, shall loose it, and he that se^kes to loose
his life shall find it: but they say to the contrary; so calling good evil,
and evil good, extolling their own ways, before those whom God has set
before them to walk in and if no other danger might follow, but what this
would pr^cures, it were sufficient, for God tu^nes such wisdom into folly, and
catches such wise men in their own craftiness, and, in their supposed safety,
throws them down into many troubles.

By these things it may appear, their folly is great, and their offense not
little, who think to escape punishment by flying: and as theirs, so likewise
they are much to blame who, because they have escaped some dangers, presume
upon perpetual immunity, and fear no other dangers; many there be infected
with that disease, the root of which, I take to be an inconsideration of the
variety of Gods judgments, and a presumptuous, and unwarrantable conceit of
Gods mercy toward them, which causes them to think that all is well, when
only one storm is past; but as the Mariner growing secure and careless after
a storm, to provide against another, may suddenly be overwhelmed before he be
aware; even so may these, to their discomfort and terror, be drowned in
perdition and destruction, or ever they know from whence their overthrow
comes; for it is no sure token of freedom from danger, because they have
escaped once or twice, no more then to conclude, it shall never be rain,
because some clouds pass over, but rather, as after a long drought, we make
our selves surer of rain; so ought men after long escaping, to assure
themselves of punishment, if not by one means, yet by another, for as much as
God has many waves to bring to pass what he will have performed, and long may
he suffer men to live in prosperity, and yet at length meet with them in wrath,
when once the appointed time of recompencing comos. It was Ahabs overthrow,
that, because he had formerly been delivered twice, therefore he would go to
Ramoth-Gilead, assuring himself, he should as safe return from thence, as he
had done formerly; but there destruction met with him strangely, as you may
read in the story.

And let none among us be overtaken with this fault, to think we shall for
ever escape, because those miseries, which by War we suffered, are removed
from us, and we for the present live in peace; but rather let us think and
know, that his judgments will not be slack against such presumptuous ones,
and let our peace, (in stead of making us high minded) cause us to provide to
suffer: take heed, that, because sentence is not pronounced against us
speedily, Eccles. 8.11.
therefore we will take liberty to offend or persuade our selves of peace; for
though it be not at first, yet, assuredly it shall not go well with us, Ver.
13.
if we offend and provoke the Lord to wrath. Abimelech for a long time escaped
many dangers, Judge. 9.53.
and yet at last was slain by the hand of a woman, and though perhaps he
thought his evil had been forgotten, which he committed in slaying his
brethren, in that he was so long spared; yet, the Text says, That God rendered
the wickedness of Ahimelech, which he did, unto his father, in slaying ^is
seventy brethren; Ver. 56.
and so assuredly will he do to us, if we repent not, although we escape not
only this, but many other.

CHAP. VII. A particular warning to these places, who as yet, have ^^t felt the
punishment of War; or, because of their supposed strength fear it not,
seeing God may, and (...) punish them, either by it, or by other plagues.
AS there are many who hope to escape by flying, so are there likewise many,
who confidently presume upon the strength of the place where they remain, and
so will not be brought to fear any thing, and some of these either being in
places, where they have not seen the miseries which are the companions of War,
or at most so seen them, that they have been only presented to their eyes
without the least feeling of them, upon that grow so proud and presumptuous,
that they both forget others and themselves; as if they had assurance of
continual peace: now such men as these, would I have always to have in mind
what has been so often spoken in this Treatise, namely, how that God is not
without variety of judgments to meet with them, and therefore perhaps he has
spared them hitherto, that he may reserve them to a further trial, and sharper
sufferings, the fear of which, ought rather to cause them to prepare to suffer
then to be proud or fearlesse; to suffer, I say, for now can they assure
themselves of a free enjoyment of tranquillity in a time or general
disquietnesse? they must expect that the overflowing scourge will pass over
them, Isa. 28.15, 19.
as well as their brethren yea, though they seem to have a covenant with death,
an agreement with h^ll, yet all that shall do them no good, but even among the
rest shall they be trodden down; the time is uncertain; it may be that God
has reserved them the last to be devoured by the sword, now raging, or some
other; perhaps as yet the charge is not given against them, because their sins
are not yet ripe, or their measures not yet full; but when the appointed time
shall come, they (as well as others) shall have their share, Genesis 15.16.
and it may be, act their parts in this woeful Tragedy. Or if they (as the
Gi^eonites among the Ganaanites) escape the sword, they yet cannot assure
themselves from some misery or other, i^ not appearinges ill yet to them may it
prove as ill, or worse then War, being armed with the fierceness of Gods
wrath; for who knows what God has intended or prepared for them, seeing his
armory is stored as it is? therefore it behooves them to be ever careful and
ready, that at what time, or after what manner soever he come, they may be
prepared to undergo all with patience.

Let never security, in what manner or form soever it disguise it self, have
any entertainment in such places, what pretended ground of assurance soever, of
liberty, peace, or immunity there may be shown, yet always let them have in
mind that powerful hand, that always is ready, and careful to do justice
upon offenders, and never let the least thought of assured safety enter, until
there be a perfect and certain reconciliation made betwixt the offenders and
the party offended; for till then, it is not the forbearance or want of any
judgment executed, for a small time, that can promise a full certainty of
continual immunity: for though the judgments of Grasshoppers, and fire were by
Amos prayer diverted from Israel, Amos 7.1, 2, 3 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
yet the Lord threatened to set a plumbe line in the midst of them, and then he
would not pass by them any more; so, though there be some places which may
escape this War (I mean the miseries of it in the extremest manner) yet still
let them fear, for, their sins retained, a time will come when God will not
pass by them any more.

What shall I say more? let me beseech all, in all places, who (as yet) by Gods
special favor toward them, have not undergone these heavy burdens of
sufferings, which many of their brethren have suffered; that they would
consider the great kindness they thus long have enjoyed, and endeavor to
frame themselves to be unfainedly thankful to the Lord for the same, and
strive to get themselves affected with a fellow-feeling of their brethrens
calamities and miseries, that with sorrow of heart they may grieve for them as
their own, and with all manner of humble intercessions, desire the Lord to
remove his hand from these parts that are afflicted; and still, for his mercies
sake, divert and turn away the judgments that are on the Land, from them,
that, as hitherto they have, so still they may enjoy his favor; and, if it
shall please him to bring any other correction upon them, that he would so stir
them up to be prepared at all times, that they may not murmur, but take
patiently all manner of afflictions, and be made more ready to obey him,
calling upon them, in what manner soever he speak unto them: and withal,
while they enjoy this rest, when their brethren are in troubles, let them
strive so to take warning by their sufferings, that they do (what God calls
for by afflictions) the works of repentance, and good works one toward
another, even so and as well, as if they were afflicted; this doing, will
witness to themselves and the world, that they are lowly, and obedient
children, who tremble at the sight of the rod, and therefore the Lord does to
them, as (in mercy) he did to Josiah for his tender-heartednesse, even spare
them, that they may enjoy peace in their days: the consideration of which may
add inward comfort to their outward tranquillity, 2 King. 22.18, 19, 20.
and assure them, that they are a peculiar people to the Lord.

But on the contrary, if this peace and immunity from punishments work (in
stead of repentance, etc.) vain security, pride, and an increase of evils,
and impieties, they then may have cause to fear, and all other may think,
without breach of charity, that, because they are suffered to have their swinge
in pleasures, and earthly contentments, God hates them, and that they are
bastards and not sons, Heb. 12.8.
even men who are allotted to most fearful punishments to their destruction: I
might go on, but so much shall suffice to have spoken concerning those, who as
yet have not suffered the miseries of this War.

Now, to such as have by the strength of the Holds wherein they have remained,
been safe and free from those troubles which many of their brethren have
undergone, let this word of exhortation come and be acceptable; beware of
growing proud by your deliverance, or to a cribe that to the instrument which
is due to the Author; think not, because you were delivered, that your strength
preserved you, but give glory to God, and praise him, for it was he that
delivered you; and likewise, take heed you do not again provoke him to wrath,
for though you as yet have escaped, though formerly your enemies durst not, or
could not meddle with you; yet, I say, grow not secure, for if he once send
your foes against you, though your holds seem invincible, Ezekiel. 28.8.9
yet will he deliver them and you both into your enemies hands; if he but once
say, Sword, go against such a place, it cannot be still, until it has made
it desolate; therefore it is a dangerous thing to have God as an enemy to fight
against a place; for why, he has many ways and means to bring down strong
Fortifications; yea, the strongest that can be made. Strong was the fort of
Sion when it was held by the Jebusites against David, they were so confident
Sam. 4.6, 7 Willet ibid. Quest 6. takes that to be the meaning of the words.
of its strength, that they thought the blind and the lame were sufficient to
keep it against all David's force, for they thought David could not come
thither; yet, notwithstanding of its strength, it was delivered into David's
hands: and the Lord tells the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, which place, while it
was in prosperity, all the Kings of the earth durst not look at, that though
there should remain but wounded men of the Caldeans Army, Psalm. 48.5, 6. Ier.
37.10. Isa. 10.4.
yet should they take it and burn it with fire, so strong are weak armies sent
and set a work by God against any place: all the policy in the world cannot
disappoint what God, that is infinite in wisdom shall determine to be done
upon a place; for as many ways as men have to build up, so many, and far more,
has the Lord to pull down.

Of mighty strength surely was populous No, Nahum. 3, 8, 9,
that was situate amongst the rivers, that had the waters round about it,
whose Rampart was the sea, and her walls was from the sea; Ethiopia and Egypt
was her strength, and it was infinite, etc. Yet was she carried away, Ver. 10.
she went into captivity, her children were dashed in pieces at the tops of
all the streets, and they cast lots for her honorable men, and all her great
men were bound in chains.

Now, where among all those strong Hold^ and Castles, which hitherto have
withstood the force of the enemy, is there one stronger then populous No,
which, you hear was thus destroyed? why then should any place or people presume
upon their strength, or think they can feel no trouble because of it? Alas,
you see there is no resistance where God will have his judgments to enter, how
strong soever your works have been formerly, if Gods wrath be against you,
they shall be but like Fig Trees with the first ripe figs, Nahum 3.12
if they be shaken, they shall even fall, etc. Observe the place, even the
strongest works, when the Lord shall shake them, shall be but as ripe figs,
which the least touch causes to fall down: moreover, that none may put any
confidence in men for their number or strength; though Works fall, the Prophet
tells them, Ver. 13, 14, 15, etc.
That their people shall be as drunkenmen, and as women, and the gates shall be
set wide open to their enemies, and their bars shall be burned with fire. Read
the places in the Margent, there you may see at large described, how weak all
strong holds are, Ob^d. 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. Isa. 26.5, 6, and 27.10.
to save men from the fierce anger of the Lord: so that, I say, all this
considered, may serve to beat down those presumptuous and vain thoughts of
safety, because of strong holds, or any other temporal defense whatever.

But let us suppose that Walled Towns may free men from the stroke of War, if
it should be so that God should no more send the sword against those places
that have already escaped, have they for that cause to boast themselves in
their iniquity, or to presume upon freedom from punishment? nay, let them not
do so, for God has not his quiver so poorly furnished, that he has but one
arrow, or his armory so empty that he has but one judgment; but he has many
other which may by him be inflicted upon them although they escape the
judgment of War; how many places are consumed by fire, which have escaped the
ruin attending on War? and seeing these things are daily heard of, except they
make a sanctified use of these examples, they themselves are in danger to be
made examples to others; therefore let them take heed of security, and vain
confidence in the arm of flesh, seeing they know not what is reserved for
them, it may be when God has given the cup of his fury to others to drink up,
that he will give the dregs to them to suck out; most commonly those whom he
long spares, and on whom he has bestowed the greatest favors; those, I say,
suffer the sorest when his judgments are once let loose against them; however,
while men continue in their sins, even the least creature is ready (if
commanded by God) to rise up in arms against us, and the least plague is
sufficient punishment, if but sent by God: therefore, let none desire again to
see the day of the Lords vengeance, for it will be a gloomy day, a day of
darkness and not light, a day of sorrow and grief, to all that see it and
feel it. A fearful thing it is to fall into the hands of God, if he be
provoked to wrath; men may be withstood, but who is able to withstand, or stand
before the Lord when he is angry? little therefore do they know what they do,
who in a boasting manner vaunt of their strength, as if they were not at all to
be meddled with, when alas, they are weak, and easy to be thrown down, while
they harbor within them their sins, for they undermine their foundations and
weaken their strength, and lays them open to all the miseries that fly abroad;
they unfortifie more then they can build up, and make all the means and
endeavors which are used to prevent dangers, instruments to further what they
should prevent; they bring back again the troubles past, they cry aloud for
vengeance to be poured down upon those who delight in them, and at the last,
cause the most famousest places to be destroyed with utter destruction and
overthrow.

Consider of this you that have been saved by your strong hold as hitherto, and
if you would not have your houses destroyed, your wives ravished, your
daughters defloured, your estates wasted, the fire of God to consume you, the
pestilence to cut you off, terror to affright you, in any of your habitations;
then repent and bewail your sins, and take warning by what you have already
seen, and by what you hear others do feel, and so iniquity shall not be your
ruin; which otherwise will make your famous places as much disrespected as
now admired, and bring down their glory, Micah 6.16.
and make them as a byword and an hissing to all the earth; for God will have
a controversy with you, Terra Sodomitica o lim tam fructibus quam substantia
civitatum fortunata, nuncautem omnis exust a, at que habitatorum impietate,
fulminibus conflagrasse memoratur. Josep. de bellis Judaicis. lib. 5. cap. 5.
Luke 13.3.
and will not show pity toward you as long as you harbor such a guest as he
hates, and will not show favor too or pity, viz. Sin. Think not to be spared
for any splendor or outward beauty, Sodom and Gomorrah and the cities about
them, were situate in pleasant and fruitful places, yet for their sins were
destroyed; for the famousnesse of places is not regarded by God, as long as
within they are full of ravening and wickedness; we daily see how the sword
and other of Gods judgments devoures as well one place as another, and without
partiality lies full low as well the lofty palace, as the humble cottage;
populous cities are spared no more then peoplelesse villages, what therefore
can more men to think of immunity.

To concludes me think that Doctrine laid down so plainly without exception,
by him, who being Truth it self, cannot die, viz. Except ye repent, ye shall
all likewise perish, should be a sufficient warning to all men, to stir them up
from sin and security; for if men would but seriously ruminate upon it, there
could no objection or thought arise concerning hope of freedom from punishment,
which the very repeating it over would not answer and beat back; how and by
what means it is not fet down, that men may be prepared at all times, and
upon all occasions; but if they continue in their sins without repentance, that
they shall perish nothing more certain: who then can say we shall escape? who
can promise safety to himself and Country? let none cry peace when there is
no peace, nor let any hearken to a voice of peace, so long as the cry of sin is
so loud; for my part, I wish this Country peace, and I wish that all places
that have not suffered may still enjoy peace, and those that are free from
sufferings may continue free; but as yet, I dare not promise to them that peace
I wish them; I dare not say, the Lord has said, you shall no more hear the
sound of the trumpet, the alarm of War, etc. or if I could, yet durst I not
say the Lord had no more judgments in store for you; I say, I dare not say it,
for neither I nor any have assurance of it, but rather the contrary; because of
the abounding of sin in every place; why should I flatter any, to make them
think they were in an happy condition when they are miserable? why should I
nuzzle men in security, or make them put far from them the evil day, when it
may be near at hand? what I have said and will say, is to stir up men from
security: and therefore fear the Lord, for he has still judgments in store
to punish, if men by their sins offend and provoke him.

CHAP. VIII. Because God has variety of Judgments, it behooves a^ men to
prepare at all times to suffer.
Videntur omnia repentina graviora. Tuscul. Quest lib. 3. Multa sunt incommoda
in vita quae sapientes commodorum compensatione leniunt. Cie. Sent. lib. 1.
number, 14.
THat is always the sharpest and hardest to be borne that comes suddenly,
before men be aware, sudden falls, unforeseene and feared, breed great
confusions and miserable events; when on the contrary, men by timely foresight
and preparation may either prevent, or so provide, that they may make the
matter easy to be borne, although it seem intolerable: and surely well may
that man be accounted negligent of his own safety, who, knowing dangers
approaching, fits not himself either to prevent or bear them; and in such a
case may we be said to be in these parts; we hear of sundry sorts of
judgments that the Lord has in store, and that there is no hiding or escaping
from them, therefore should we either look (out by some means how to prevent
them, or else prepare against them, to suffer and undergo them patiently,
Istuc est sapere non modo quodant te pedes est videre, sed etiam illa quae
futura sunt prospicere. Terent.
least coming suddenly before we be provided, they be more fearful and more
intolerable. And truly they do greatly bewray their folly and carelessness,
who do not in time do this, seeing wise men look to provide against future
dangers, because they know not how soon a change may be contrary to their
expectation; and always, in things uncertain, special care ought to be had
to provide against the worst, now I say, our case is uncertain, we can have no
sure hold of that peace which we now enjoy; true it is, one storm is over, but
still clouds appear, and for ought we know may dissolve into showers of wrath
before we be aware; it were to be wished we would follow the examples of those
of Pharaohs servants who feared the Lord, that, when the judgment of hail was
denounced, forthwith got home their cattle that were in the field, and so had
them preserved; Quod possit accidere diu cogitare oporteat: haec cogitatio una
maxima omnes molestias extenuit and diluit. Cic. Tusc Quest. lib. 3.
when those who believed not, had their cattle all destroyed with the tempest;
for why may it not thus happen to us? yea, it may to our discomfort; therefore,
let us watch and be prepared: far better it will be to say when afflictions
come, with holy Job. 3.25.
Job, That which we feared is come upon us; ^hen to say, that which we never
thought is come upon us; for when a thing is long feared, when it does come, it
is no more then was expected, and so patiently undergone; but when it is not
feared, the suddenness of it makes it grievous.

An approaching enemy does nothing dismay a well-armed and ordered army, which
with expectation stands ready for an assault; when on the contrary, a sudden
assault made upon an army in disorder, strikes not only terror at the first,
but at last brings confusion and overthrow.

A man clothing himself against a storm, fears not although it come, when
another deceived by the seeming fairness of the day, not carrying his cloak,
fares hardly in a storm: it is even thus by men unprepared, when jugdements
come, if they have provided, then the approaching of them do nothing dismay
them; but if not, then how hardly will they seem, though but momentary? What
is said of death, (that the remembrance of it is grievous, Eccles 41.1.
and bitter to a man that is in rest in his poss^ssions) may be truly said of
the judgments of the Lord to men in security and unprepared, the very thought
of them are grievous, how much more to undergo them?

How hard would it go now with many, suddenly (before they were aware) to be
set upon by loss of goods, friends, children, or such things as are near and
dear unto them, and yet how soon this may be, none knows: Jobs miseries came
all upon him at once, at such a time when he little expected, for it was upon a
day of Feasting; if therefore he had not been well prepared and furnished with
patience, it would have gone very hard with him; and yet seeing he had formerly
feared such a thing, and so did as it were expect it, when it came he could be
as well content to praise the Lord for it as for better; contrary to his mind
was his unstable wife, who would have had him to have cursed God; and contrary
were these spoken of in the Revelations, who, in the time of affliction through
impatience, bite their tongues and blaspheme God, verifying that saying of the
Wiseman, Pro. 19.3.
The foolishness of man perverteth his way, and his heart fretteth against the
Lord. These, having not provided patience, how murmuringly they undergo the
Lords afflictions? now let any judge whether Jobs patience be not more seemly,
then such impatience; and by that consider, whether it be not better to
prepare, then to live in security, and that chiefly when they know not what may
befall them?

Or if men will not yet prepare to suffer by other men's examples, yet let them
follow the counsel of the Holy Ghost, who exhorts them to prepare against all
evils; Seeing it is so that I will come against thee, Amos 4.12,
etc. therefore (says he) prepare to m^e^ thy God, O Israel: So I say, because
God has so many several sorts of judgments, that none knows how or when he
will come against them, therefore let them prepare to meet him, and be always
ready, that at what time, or after what manner soever he do come, he may not
find them in security or unprepared; this is that which our Savior would have
men to do, when so often he exhorts them to watch; if they do not watch he
tells them, Mat. 25.13. Rev. 3.3,
That he will come as a thief, and they shall not know what hour he will be
upon them.

Thus he came upon the old world in Noah's days, they were exhorted by Noah to
prepare against the deluge; every knock, as one observes, which he gave in
making the Arc, put^ing them in mind of it; but they scorned to follow his
counsel, and so, before ever they knew, the fl^ud came and swept them all
away. And the Lord says, that, at such as will not take warning to prepare
against his judgments, he will laugh when destruction comes upon them, he will
be so far from pitying them, that the sight of their misery shall be pleasant
unto him: nay, and not only so, but he will mock them, as formerly they mocked
his counsels, Pro. 1.26.
when fear comes upon them that they cannot escape: and experience teaches
us, that to be mocked at in the time of misery is grievous, and yet more
precious will the misery be, when, though they call upon the Lord he will not
hear them, Ver. 28.
but turn his ear from them and refuse to answer, and this he has threatened;
wherefore then should any thing hinder us from careful preparation against the
Lords coming? If the Soldier to keep himself from the hands of the enemy,
will watch and ward night and day, and stand upon his guard, etc. how much more
should we watch and prepare, least misery coming upon us, we be rejected and
scorned by the Lord our God.

And the rather we ought to do so, because we are so continually warned, there
is not one day wherein we hear not of some affliction o^ misery, which in one
place or other our brethren do suffer, all which, are as so many exhortations
to stir us up to duty of preparation; shall God give us so many warnings, and
shall we still be careless? shall he let us see so many objects of his fierce
wrath, and shall we not fear? shall the lion roar ^ound about us, and yet we
not tremble? shall he let us see how hardly afflictions go with other places
for want of due preparation, and shall not we prepare? let us beware of this,
otherwise our miseries shall be greater, and so harder to be borne, then ever
hitherto by any have been suffered:

For always it is ordinary not to pity those, who might have prevented, by
their own industry, what through their negligence, comes upon them; so for us,
who have time to fly unto the Lord before the floods of great water encompasse
us, if we do not, in the time of affliction, what pity can we expect?
therefore, that our neighbors round about us may not have cause to laugh at
our folly, let us prepare to meet our God, either by repentance to prevent, or
else by patience to endure, what it shall please him to inflict upon us; this
will not only be useful, and great comfort to our selves, but pleasant to
God, and exemplary to our neighbors, to stir them up to do the like, and
likewise of great joy to the people of God, and our brethren, who will rejoice
to see us with patience undergo the Lords afflictions: thus rejoiced the
Apostle Paul, that the Hebrews could with such patience under go the spoiling
of their goods, Heb. 10.34.
etc and this would be of excceding great comfort to all those whose eyes are
now upon us, to see how we would behave our selves in afflictions; and let us
the rather remember to do this, because there is no hope of escaping, when
once the floods of afflictions do encompasse us: God will not be entreated to
spare us after the time of mercy be once over, and we shall find patience (if
not formerly sought for) hard to obtain in the midst of misery; let this
therefore stir us up to prepare, if nothing else will, that we may with Eli
say, It is the Lord, let him due what seems him good; and with patient Job,
though the Lord kill us, yet will we trust in him, that come what will,
nothing may be able to separate us from God, but that we may cleave close to
him in the midst of affliction, and make a sanctified u^e of all his
corrections, to our comfort in this and the world to come.

CHAP. IX. How to prepare against particular affliction, as War, Pestilence,
etc. to unde^g^e them patiently.
WHat afflictions the Lord may lay upon us we know not, no how soon we know
not: therefore, as I have before said, it stands us in hand to prepare our
selves for all conditions; and because perhaps some would and cannot, others
can and will not, to instruct the one, and leave the other without excuse, I
will briefly lay down how, and after what manner men may prepare themselves for
all estates and conditions whatever.

And first to undergo patiently the burden and misery of war, which, for
ought we know, the Lord may again bring upon us, It is necessary that we
repent us of, and forsake all our sins which formely have, Insium et tena^em
propositi virum, non civium ardor prava jubentium, n^n vultus instantis
tyranai, m^^^e quatit s^lid^^, etc. H^r^ lib. 3. Od. 3.
or again may provoke the Lords wrath against us (and always remember that
this must be a principal general rule in preparing against all other
afflictions) that so though our enemies should rise in a tumult against us, yet
they may not be aided against us by the Lord, as set a work by him, to punish
and destroy us: but only fatherly to chastise us: and we, being reconciled
unto God through Christ, having that inward peace of conscience, may, by such
corrections, be rather made better then worse; for an outward war is never
grievous to a man that has inward peace, as long as men are reconciled to God,
and at peace with him, an earthly enemy may hardly entreat them, but cannot
utterly dismay them; for they fear not them that can but only kill the body,
but him that can cast both soul and body into hell. So, I say, if we do but
truly repent, what afflictions soever come, they will not be as punishments to
take Psa. 1 19.12
vengeance on us for sin, but as fatherly chastisements to warn us from sin;
which will not seem intolerable and hard, but light and easy to be borne: and
instead of making us murmr against God, we shall say with holy There is in
afflictions, vindicta divina, castigatio, paterua. Vindicta divina est poena
qua Deus ulciscetur peccata improborum and eos destruet. Castigatio paterna est
poena qun Deus electos proprer peccata corripit, ut cos ad resipiscentiam
excitat, corrigat and cautiores tardioresque ad peccandum in post^rum reddat,
utquesiceos ^rudiat, ne cum hoc mundo condemnentur. Afflictions to the godly
are not timoriai, but paideiai, not Revengements, but Inftructions. Polan
Sintag. lib. 6. cap. 4. page 340. col. 2. and Calvin. Instit. lib. 3. cap. 4.
Sect. 31, 32.33, 34. Where you may read of this at large.
David, It is good for us that we have been afflicted: when on the contrary,
the judgment of War coming upon men in their sins, and so at enmity with
God, will be a heavy judgment, and so will cause them to fret and repine, and
murmr against God, to the further hardening of their hearts to their
destruction; for they are so far from being amended by afflictions, or taking
any profit by them, that rather by such beginnings, they are prepared for hell,
which at length abides for them, says Master Instit. lib. 3. cap. 4. sect. 32.
Calvin.

Secondly, if men will be prepared against War, etc. let them get themselves
disingaged from earthly pleasures, profits, etc. (for while their hearts are
set upon such things, they never can) without a great deal of grief and inward
trouble, think of the coming of such times wherein they must loose them all; a
man with patience, will never undergo any hardship, as long as he has any way
to free himself from it, nor can one ever think of affliction, as long as he
has all delights about him; and to such as have placed their delights in
temporal transitory things, will the besome of destruction, which sweeps all
away, seem trouble some; Isa, 14.23.
how hard would it go with a man, whose delight is in wealth and worldly
riches, to have them before his eyes taken from him? the very relating it to
Nabal, made his heart as dead as a stone within him, 1 Samuel 25.17
and it is to be feared there are many such Nabals: the like may be said of any
other earthly contentment, the loss of it, with men in love with it, go very
hard; and it is unknown, how the Lord punishes men in taking away that on
which their delight is most. Now therefore, that the loss of any thing may not
cause too much grief, let men follow the Apostles exhortation, who advises
them to use the world as though they used it not; 1 Cor. 7.29.
to set no more love or affection upon any thing they enjoy, then only for
present use.

Let no man think himself richer for what he does possess, or rejoice in it,
or because of it, as if he should enjoy it for ever; but ever think when God
should call him to an account for it, or it from him, and he be left destitute
without it; and let him learn, possessing all things, to account of himself
as if he had nothing, and to esteem no better of the precious things of the
world, then as loss, dross and dung; and sure I am, to a man, that has or
can thus curb his affections from earthly things, the loss of them cannot be
grievous; for what does the loss of a dog move or grieve a man whose delight
is in other pastime? no more does the loss of an earthly habitation grieve a
man who looks for a continuing city above in the heavens; or the loss of
earthly treasure, him who has laid up treasure in heaven; Sperne bona
corruptibilia, ut acquiras bona aeterna. Stella de contemp. mundi, lib. 1. cap.
22.
or of any titles, him, who has his name written in the book of life: or the
loss of earthly friends, him, whose only delight is in Jesus Christ.

Endeavor therefore to conteme the world and worldly vanities, and so the
loss of them will not be troublesome; but if (as it was said of Jacob, that
his soul was bound up in Benjamins life) your whole delights be set upon
worldly treasures or delights, etc. the loss of them will so discourage you,
that you shall not be able to hold up your heads in the day of trouble.

Thirdly, if men would be armed to suffer, let them consider that nothing is or
will be inflicted upon them, but what others have suffered or do now suffer;
and it is always a great comfort to have companions in adversity, to see
others in the same condition that they are in (for no estate almost would be
accounted miserable, but that it is compared with others, seeming more happy)
now if war should come again upon us in these parts, when we consider the
misery of war to be raging in every part of the Kingdom, why should we repine
to be companions with our brethren in such sufferings, seeing no temptation
takes hold on us which is not common to others? if we only should feel the
misery of war, it would seem more grievous, but when we consider how others
more holy then we, as David, Hezekiah, Jeremiah, Baruch, etc. and now many in
our own Kingdom have, and do undergo heavy punishments by war, it is not for
us to murmr, but patiently to prepare against it; for when the wrath of the
Lord is against all, Ier. 45.4, 4.
even to pluck up that which he has planted, etc. shall we seek great things
for our selves? nay, let us not, but be willing to suffer with our brethren and
neighbors as they suffer.

Fourthly, let us know that if war do come, Nulla afflictio nulla calamitas
casi^, aut caeco infortunio, and sine voluntate Dei contingit. Polan. Syntag.
li. 6. ca. 39. col. 1.
it comes not by chance, but by Gods especial providence and decree, that
which God has decreed must stand, and why should not we submit our selves to
what the Lord will lay upon us. Eli, when he knew what was determined by God
against his house, referred himself to the Lord, saying, It is the Lord, let
him do what seems him good: so, if such afflictions do come, they come from
the Lord, and therefore let him do what he pleases; and we may assure our
selves, they cannot trouble us any further, then as they have commission from
God, nor can they cease troubling us, until he Ier. 47.6, 7.
forbid them.

Fifthly, or a fifth means to be used to prepare against war, is, to lay aside
security, and exercise our selves in using the means appointed by God for our
safety; I hold it no discretion in time of peace to cast away our weapons, and
unarme our selves, and so leave our selves naked and unable to defend our
estates, wives, etc. or offend our enemies if occasion be: I am sure, God that
has provided means, works not without means, and if we neglect or despise
them, in danger he will not save us. David would have the children of Judah
taught the use of the bow, A. Willet in 2 Samuel 1.17. Quest. 5.
as one observers, in the midst of sorrow and mourning, he forgot not what was
useful for the commonwealth; so we in the midst of our tranquillity, let us
not forget our own safety, to use means to prevent dangers which may ensue. A
place or people ready prepared for war, are the likeliest the longest to live
in peace, for where the least advantage can be espied, there the enemy will
have the least mind to make an assault; Judge. 18.7.
when on the contrary, secure and unarmed places lies open to all dangers: let
us always have this in our minds, to think we hear the trumpet sounding to
battle, and let us be as ready, as if our enemies were again among us, then
(whether they be or not) we need not fear.

But I hope that this will not be forgot, and therefore I need not stand to
press the performance of it much, only let this caveat take place, that with
the Jews we build not the wall, etc. and neglect to seek for help from the
Lord. See Isa. 22.

But again, if it shall be so that we again no more feel the judgment of
War, it may be that God will send among us a devouring sickness, as the plague
of Pestilence, severs, etc. to prepare to suffer them, let us always remember
(as I said before) to make peace with God, that how ever it go with our
bodies, yet our souls may be in health that though our bodies be full of
sores, as was Lazarus, yet our souls may be made certain of Abraham's bosom,
Luke 16. eis ^on colpon tou Abraam id est In locum quietis, sive solat^i; nempe
in coelum, ubi tum e^at anima Abrahae Piscator in loc.
of heaven, where the soul of Abraham is; this will make us so joyful, that
naught we can suffer can be accounted as painful; for while we are at peace
with God, he will make our bed in our sickness, and so comfort us with
inward and spiritual comfort, arising from the assurance of our souls
happiness, that whatever, or how great pains soever we fuffer, we shall
account them but momentary, and not worthy to be compared to that immortal
crown of glory, which we are sure to attain through faith in Christ Jesus.

And moreover to prepare us constantly to undergo such and the like
afflictions, let us alvvayes think, that God, who knovves how to dispose of
all things to the best, sends or will send nothing upon us, which he sees not
we stand need of, if we be afflicted with pestilence, let us assure our
selves that we are proud, presumptuous, and overloaden with heavy provoking
offenses; and therefore God (to bring us into the right way) sends his
devouring Angel, to cut down our vain glorious boasting, and to cause us to
fear before him: and if he did not so, we would run into greaten crimes
which would work us more misery; if we will but thus consider, and thus
think of divine acts in afflicting, we shall be so far from murmuring, that
we shall be ready to submit our selves unto Gods will, and judgments, be
they what they will, knovving that all things shall work together for good,
to those that love and fear God.

We know, if a man be once certainly persuaded, by an undoubted assurance,
grounded on, long experience, that his friend, in all his actions, aims at and
seeks his good, though sometimes his carriage seem to thvvart his dispotion,
yet being confidently persuaded of his integrity, he will be vvilling to
prepare himself to do what he vvishes; even so, when we are once assuredly
persuaded of Gods care over us for our welfare, we will then be ready to do
what he would have us to do, or suffer what he would have us to suffer,
although it seem somewhat hard and painful: there is yet in man a kind of a
desire to seek for, and follow that which his judgment informs him may tend
to his good or happiness, which if it be enlightened by Cods Spirit, and
directed to seek God as the Summum bonum, the chiefest Good, then with a
following delight, relying upon him, and rejoicing in him; what ever he
commands, how harsh soever it may seem to others, or to his own flesh and
blood, that with pleasure he performs, and without murmuring suffers, See
Abraham's example Gen 22.2, 3. Of Moses, Neh. 11.25. Of Paul, Acts 21 13.
because he is persuaded, there is nothing commanded or inflicted, which
proceeds not from love, and consequently may one way or other tend to his
happiness.

When on the contrary, being not directed aright, he sets his love on other
objects, as wealth, honor, etc. and has a settled persuasion that they are the
chiefest good, then, having his delight upon them, and his desires altogether
longing after them, there is nothing which he will not willingly perform to
enjoy them; and he meets not with the least opposition or disturbance in
following these his delights, but it seems a burden intolerable, a misery
sufficient, etc. so that instead of preparing to undergo afflictions with
patience, he is (through his immoderate delight in such things) stirred up to
murmr, and repine, and grieve, and so is dejected and cast down, as a man
bereaved of his chiefest delights.

To prevent this, let every one endeavor to take his afflictions from beauty,
etc. which sickness may spoil, let it not be accounted as a thing worthy the
name of Good, that so we may not have any thing on which our delights are
placed, that any sickness may bereave us of, which will make us not fearful
to see any such affliction approaching: as for example, if two men should dwell
in one place, the one has much treasure in another place, whereunto an enemy
is approaching, with hopes of entrance; the other he has nothing there to care
for, the man that has the treasure will be fearful, and careful, and
desirous of the enemies return; when the other fears not, nor cares not what
comes. Even thus it is with men whose delights are in friends, beauty, etc. and
those whose affections are placed upon no such inferior objects, if any thing
approach which may endanger the loss of them, how hardly, and with what grief
that is thought upon? and no marvel, for in loosing them, they loose their
chief delights, when men, I say, not delighted in such things, can with
patience, without fear or grief, think of, and see such afflictions come,
nay, and behold these inferior delights taken from them (by such troubles)
without murmuring, because their delights are above, where no earthly trouble
can touch them; therefore, I say, this considered, let us all endeavor to
disingage our selves from the love of these earthly delights, which sickness
may bereave us of, then we shall not fear although it come, nay, it will make
us prepare against it come, and rejoice to bear it.

Or if the Lord shall be pleased to send a famine among us (as who knows for
all our present plenty but he may) that we may be prepared to suffer patiently,
let us now in the time of plenty, use moderately, and with an holy sparing Gods
creatures; let us not eat and drink too excessively, or use our selves to
needless variety; for if we would thus by degrees be taught to be content with
a little, if forced want should come, it would with more ease be undergone; for
want always goes the hardest with those who have been accustomed to variety;
one brought up from a youth in hardship, will not hunch at any thing, but
undergo all with patience; when as a man brought up delicately, will with a
great deal of grief and trouble, labor under any hard burden. And thus it
would be with men and women, who pamper their bodies, and feed their appetites,
with all manner of delightful viands the want of such would go hard with them
in a time of scarcity, when as men who accustom themselves to moderation and
temperance, would as well be content with a dish of herbs as a stalled ox,
Pro. 15.17.
and as well suffice nature with a little, as with all the variety that can be
gotten.

Again, the consideration of other godly men suffering in this kind, should
hearten us, and cause us not to fear too much, or tremble to hear of it, or
to undergo it, for God will always provide for his servants, even when such
plagues are the greatest.

Ja^ob found corn in Egypt, Genesis 41.54. Chap. 42.1.
though famine was all the world over; the Prophet Jeremiah, in the time of the
hard Siege at Jerusalem, sound such favor at the hand of his enemies, Hic
significat Proph^ta se suisse respectum divinitus, ut in fame and in edia
totius populi pinis tamen ei d^retur, etc. Ca^ in Jer. cap. 37. ver. 21. page
299.
that as long as any bread lasted in the City, he was to have every day a
piece; so greatly was he beloved of God, that even when all the City was in
want, and he hated of all in the City, yet was he provided for: now these and
the like examples of Gods kindness toward his people in such distress, may
imbolden us to suffer with patience, seeing God is the same he was, and as
careful over his people as ever formerly, and will assuredly relieve those
that are in distress, if they do but truly confide in him.

Suppose two men were to go to prison, or to such a place where they were sure
to find want of all things; the one he knows of a friend that will relieve
him in necessity, and therefore he, with better heart, and more comfort, enters
the undelightfull place; the other he know^ of none that will at all help, be
his want never so extreem, and therefore sorrowfully enters, and with bitter
grief undergoes such unwelcome wants. It is even thus with Gods people, and
ungodly men, with men that have faith, and unbeleeving persons; those who trust
in the Lord, they fear not to hear of famine, they know of a friend who will
one way or other relieve them; 1 King. 17.6.
the ravens shall feed them, if men will not, or cannot; in prison they shall
have bread, when men that have liberty shall want; pulse shall make them fat
and fair; Dan. 1.15.
when others shall idye because they cannot undergo hardness; one handful of
meal shall hold out to preserve them, when full barnes shall waste and be
empty: in a word, 2 Kin. 17.14. Psalm. 34.1^.
they know that God will provide for them, and therefore they fear not, but
considently and constantly rely upon him.

On the contrary, wicked and unbeleeving men (in time of dearth) know of no
succor, 2 King. 6.27
if the Barn floor or the Wine Press fail them, they are at a stand, they
know not which way to turn themselves, and so the very thought of famine
terrifies them, and to undergo it seems intolerable; therefore, I say, let us
put our confidence in God, and consider what favor other of Gods servants have
had in such distresses, and let that work in us an assurance of Gods favor
toward us, and then having that assurance, we shall be ready to undergo with
patience, this, or the like calamity.

Again, if none of these forenamed judgments do molest us, but that the Lord
has decreed that we shall be destroyed by Foreign Foes (let us pray night and
day to the Lord to keep them from us) or led Captives from our own land to
strange places, 1 Pet. 1.11.
etc. to prepare to suffer this patiently, os paroimois, etc. Vita nostra
eleganter dicitur paroimia, (id est) Peregrinatio, nam Deus nobis hic
Domicilium non habitandi, sed commorandi de dit.
let us remember that we are but strangers and pilgrims here on earth, we no
continuing Heb. 13.14.
city here, we are not now at home, but even while here we live, we are in a
strange Country, where only for a while we must abide to endure afflictions;
that we may have algreater desire to be fetched home to that city above, which
is the mother of us all; have we any more to do then holy men before us have
had? and they counted the time which they spent upon earth but as a pilgrimage,
and themselves as strangers in the earth, what assurance or title soever they
had of, or to what they did possess, therefore we are no more now; to
strangers all places are alike, they can be as well content in one place as
another; Gen 47.7. and 12.10. Heb. 11.13.
should it not then be so with us, although we should be driven or carried
away? our God is in all places, and to him we may have free access in all
places, seeing in every place those that lift up pure hearts and hands to God,
Sapiens, ubicunque est, perigrinatur.
are accepted, his watchful eye of providence looks upon us in all places,
and he is ready to assist all that call upon him, with necessaries; therefore,
what need we care whither we be carried, if God have so decreed that it shall
be so? for let us not doubt but he will provide for our safety even in greatest
extremity; Psalm. 90.1.
let us not fear, but he that gave Jeremiah favor in the sight of his
enemies, Jer. 40.4.
so that, in a time of general captivity, he had free liberty ^o go whither
he would; and likewise, Genesis 39.4. Dan. 2.48.
caused Jeseph and Daniel to find such favor in strange land^, that they were
advanced to places of trust and dignity; and in the time of the greatest
bondage, blessed his people with all manner of blessings in a strange land;
Exodus 1.7.
but the same God will provide for us likewise, if we put our trust and
confidence in him, as they did; for the Lord has always a special care over
his servants, chiefly in the time of dangers; so that how ever it go with the
wicked, it shall go well with them? To be brief, let us take the words speken
to Ebedmelech, as spoken to us, and that may cause us stand firm against all
approaching danger. Jer. 39.16, 17, 18.

But yet perhaps it may seem an hard thing to be borne with patience to many,
to see strangers enjoy their labors, lands, houses, and what was theirs, and
they themselves either be as slaves to them, or forced to fly for their own
safety, or carried by force to places where there is no hope of safety.

This indeed may seem hard to flesh and blood, therefore let all men (as I
before showed) endeavor to draw their love and delight from them, and withal
consider, that of all we do possess, we are but tenants at will; and shall we
not be as well content to suffer the Lord to do what he pleases with his: as
that our temporal Landlords should dispose of theirs as they please? it is
nothing to us to whom an owner of land lets or gives it; why therefore should
we repine at what the Lord does, The earth is the Lords, and the fullness
thereof, he may therefore dispose of it as he pleases; which thing seriously
considered of, should teach us to lay our hands upon our mouths, and not
murmr, though all we had we taken from us and given to others.

But again, if it should be so, le^ us consider, to further and procure in us
patience to endure it, that we are not alone in such a condition, but even the
dearest of Gods children have been in the like. Abraham, Genesis 15.13.
the Father of the faithful, had a Land promised to his seed for an
inheritance, but it was possessed by strangers four hundred years before they
enjoyed it; nay, in the most of that time, they suffered hard and cruel
bondage in Egypt.

David, by the Lord, was chosen King of Israel, but he lived in exile, and in
great distress along time before he enjoyed it, and after he had possessed it,
was banished for a while by his own Son, and brought into great straits. And
so when captivity was threatened to Hezechiah, he was so patient that he said no
more, Isa. 39.8.
but good is the Word of the Lord; for he knew there was no resisting the Lord:
and did not his own people (I mean the Israelites) suffer captivity threescore
and ten years in Babylon? what shall I more say? have there not been many of
the dear children of God, of whom the world was not worthy, that have ^andred
in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens, and in caves of the earth, having
no constant habitation, Heb. 11.38. 1 Cor. 4.11.
but tossed from place to place, from one Kingdom to another; why therefore
should we be afraid to suffer in this kind? but rather let their examples stir
us up patiently, to hear of, and abide what ever in this case shall be
inflicted.

Lastly, to comfort us, let us assuredly know, that though we be tossed from
place to place, and be deprived of those things which now we enjoy, and
strangers possess what we have labored for, so that we have not where to lay
our heads, Romans 8.17.
etc. yet let this comfort us (if we do truly believe in Christ) that we are
heirs apparent to a kingdom, that far suspasseth all the kingdoms in the
world; Psalm. 145.13.
for it is an everlasting kingdom, a kingdom that has no end, which cannot be
taken from us by any. Heb. 11.9, 10, 14, 15, 16.
This is that kingdom which the fathers sought, for which they endured so many
afflictions even with joy, because they knew, that this momentary affliction
which they suffered, Romans 8.19.
was not worthy to be compared with the glory which they should receive in that
kingdom. The consideration of this, Phil. 3.8.
caused the Apostle to count all earthly things as dung in comparison of it,
and even willingly to suffer the loss of all things to obtain it: and no
marvel, seeing to have it, is to have an assurance of all things that are
good, as our Savior himself testifies; Mat. 6.33.
What need we then take such care, though we be destitute of dwelling, seeing
God himself is our dwelling place, our rock of defense, and place of hiding?
Psalm. 90.1.
though our cities be destroyed, we have a city above, of which we are
Citizens: though other get our treasure and wealth, we have treasure in heaven
which i^ safe, being without the reach of all our earthly enemies; the
consideration of which, I say, ought to make us patiently endure the loss of
all things, seeing we have an assured title to heavenly things, which are
better, and more enduring substances.

Again, if God shall give us over to be oppressed by tyrants, many or few,
domesticke or foreign, whether they tyrannize over us in our estate, persons,
or consciences; whether by heavy and grievous taxations, or by bondage and
slavery, or by forbidding or hindering us in the practice of religious and holy
duties, the means to be used to prepare to suffer such afflictions patiently,
are,

First, to reflect upon our selves, and lay the blame on our own sins, which
have provoked God, thus to punish us by See Judge. 2.13, 14. and 3.12. and 4.1.
Isa. 10.5, 6. Neh. 9.26, 27.
oppressors, our own actions are always the causes of our miseries, why
should we then murmur at that which our selves procure? but rather patiently
endure it, and confess we are punished less, Ezra 9.13.
then our iniquities deserve; until we do thus, we can never patiently suffer
afflictions, but there will be in us a fretting and a murmuring while we
suffer; when we are chastised, We shall be like a bullock unaccustomed to the
yoke, as Ephraim was, Ier. 31.18, 19.
until he beheld and considered the cause and end of his sufferings; and then
he was instructed, and smote upon his thigh. So, if we but duly consider what
we have done, and how we have provoked God, we shall be willing to suffer what
ever he shall send upon us, because we have deserved far more then we endure.

Magna solet jucunditas esse, quae manat ex optima conscientia.
Secondly, if we be oppressed, it will mightily strengthen our patience under
oppression, if we have so carried our selves toward all men, of what degree or
place what ever, that we have given no just occasion of offense to any, or
cause to them to deal so rigorously with us: a good conscience is an excellent
companion in affliction, such a conscience as is void of offense, Acts 24.16.
aproscopon suneidesin 1 Pet. 2.20. Mat. 5.11.
that can testify that we have done harm to no man, or wronged any man; if
we have such a testimony within our selves, we shall even rejoice with
exceeding great joy, that we should be accounted worthy to suffer after that
manner.

This was David's comfort when he was oppressed by Saul, and wicked and bloody
men, Neque iniquitas mea fuit in causa, neque peccatum meum quare me
persequeretur. Ra^er. Snoyg paraphras in Psalm. 59.3. Romans 13.7.
that what they did it was without cause, though they laid wait for his soul,
and gathered themselves against him; yet his conscience told him that it was
not for his transgression or his sin, it was not for any fault that he had
committed against them, etc. even so let us endeavor to give no offense either
to one or other in any thing; but render to every one what is their d^le:
Tribute to whom Tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear,
honor to whom honor, and then if we be still oppressed, it will be without
cause; and then, (as I said) we shall be comforted, which will increase our
patience to endure oppressions.

Again, See these places Judge. 2.15 and 3.12. and 4.3, and 6.1.2, 3 4, 5, 6.
Ver 11.
thirdly, in this likewise, let us consider that we are not alone; how often were
the Israelites given into the hands of cruel oppressors, even many years
Judge. 13.1. 1 Samuel 13.19
together? and sometimes were in such bondage and fear, that they were forced
to hide themselves in holes of rocks, and caves, etc. and forced to hide what
they had in any place where they could to save it, yea, in such servitude that
they had not a Smith among them.

And so likewise by taxations, they were so oppressed, that sometimes they were
forced to take the hallowed things of the Temple, 2 Kin. 12.18 and 17.3.
Socrat. Eccles. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 12.
and pay them to their oppressors, to the end to pacify them; thus were the
Christians in the time of Julian the Apostate taxed exceedingly; this has
been a common oppression among wicked men, and if we be with others in such a
condition, let us endeavor to bear it patiently, as others have done.

Or if we be oppressed because of Religion or not suffered to enjoy the liberty
of our consciences, or communion and fellowship with God in his public
Ordinances, etc. let us likewise know this is no new thing; was not David so,
who by reason of the cruelty of his enem^es (who by their actions did what they
could to cause him serve other gods, 1 Sum. 26.19.
as he complains) was debarred from the Temple? were not the Christians so,
who in the time of the before named Julian, were forbidden to use liberal Arts
or Sciences, to the end, that they might be kept in ignorance? Where not our
Forefathers thus used by the Papists? and were not we of late thus our selves?
therefore, as God upheld and comforted them and us formerly, and wrought
graciously for them and us, to deliver us both from such Tyranfly; so still he
will do the same in due ^ime, though again we be brought into the like
condition.

But yet further to comfort us, in, or against such tyrannical exactions and
oppressions; let us know, and with comfort consider, Mat. 10* 28.
that the cruel lest oppressors can but at most kill the body, our better part
cannot not by them be touched. But I have spoken of this before.

Lastly, let us not fear but that God in his due time will ease us from
oppression; The red of the wicked shall not always lie upon the backs of the
godly: Psalm. 125.3.
Tyrants shall not always oppress, and have their wills upon the people of
God; but to deliver them, he will either raise up Saviors, as he did in the
time of the Judges, or else he will take them away as he did Senacharib, and
such Tyrants as he, or else change their hearts from hating, to love his
people; let us not God has many ways and means to destroy his enemies, and
such is he pleased to account those, who are enemies to his Church and people,
only, Let us wait on the Lord, and we shall not be ashamed: Isa. 49.23.
God never yet forsook those that put their trust in him, nor ever were there
any so oppressed by Tyrants at any time, as that they found not comfort in the
midst of their greatest sufferings.

Let these and the like considerations arm us patiently to endure all manner
of afflictions, and to this end, let them not only be read, but put in
practice that we may be fitted for fiery trials, and sharper sufferings then
as yet we have felt, if it shall so please God to deal with us. And yet know
this, that all we do will be to no purpose, except Gods blessings be upon our
endeavors; seeing therefore, Iamer 1.17.
preparation against, and patience to endure afflictions, are both Gods gifts,
let us ask them of him, even desire him to measure unto us such a measure of
his patience, as we may not murmr under afflictions, but be willing to
submit our wills to his will in all things whatever: thus doing, no doubt but
we shall find the Lord extending his mercy unto us, either to keep judgments
from us, or else with them to strengthen us, that we shall be as willing and
able to undergo afflictions, as any other of Gods mercies and favors.

CHAP. X. The conclusion of the Book, with a short Exhortation to all sorts of
men.
A short repetition of what has been formerly spoken of,
I Have already shown now the the Lord has Chap. 1.
variety of Judgments to inflict upon wicked, and rebellious sinners, and
likewise, why, and when he uses Chap. 2.
them; and that we, as we now Chap. 3.
be have our selves, are in that number for whom he has them in store; and
therefore, Chap. 4.
may expect, (without speedy repentance) other Judgments, but no constant
peace or tranquillity: and the rather, Chap. 5.
because, by many apparent signs, there is some judgment emergent, and ready
to be cast down upon us. Then Chap. 6.
have I shown their folly, and the weak ground they stand on, who hope of
safety by flying from places visited, and then I have given Chap. 7.
particular warning to those places, who either have not as yet folt the misery
of war, or think by reason of their str^ngth they cannot, that they presume
not, or grow proud, because God has other Judgments (besides war) to bring
down their state and glory; and, after that thus I have warned all men and
places; I Chap. 8.
exhort them to be prepared at all times, and upon all occasions, because they
know neither the day nor the hour, or in what Judgment the Lord will come:
and because none should have any excuse, and to help those that are willing, I
have briefly showed how to be prepared Chap. 9.
against what dangers soever do come. Further I might have gone, and enlarged
the work a great deal more, both in speaking more largely of what I have
touched, and in adding many things, which very fitly might here have been
spoken of, but as my chiefest aim, was to stir up men from security, so my
desire was to write that which I conceived might tend the most to that purpose;
and therefore purposely took liberty, rather to stray from the rules of method,
then to leave undone what I desired; therefore my desire is, that the Readers
would not so much respect the manner of writing, as the matter contained in it;
for the matter is good and needful to be considered, though perhaps not so
elegantly performed as might have been done by one of better pa^s but however,
how much the matter here spoken of is needful, and may be useful for the
Readers, so much respect let it find, although it may come fa^re short of what
may be expected from such a Subject.

All that I aim at and desire, is, that this may stir up all sorts of men to
fear the Lords sacred Majesty, who is so stored with variety of Judgments;
and therefore to conclude, let me exhort all estates and degrees to stand in
awe and sin not, to kiss the Son least he be angry, and so they perish from
the right way: to break off their sins by repentance, and iniquity by mercy:
that there may be an healing of their errors, and that Gods wrath may be taken
away, and no other misery be sent to work desolation in the Kingdom; for be
they well assured, that though this judgment of War, (under which the Land now
groans,) should be taken away, yet, while the same or such like abominations
remain (for which formerly the Land was punished) they cannot expect peace or
freedom from all afflictions.

But more particularly, First, let me exhort all those who bear good will and
affections toward the Parliaments Cause, that they beware of pride, security,
vain glory, and presumption, because their Party prospers; let them take heed
of living in sin, be it what it will, and yet think themselves safe, because
their present foes go to wrack, for the same God that gives them victory over
their enemies, can and will do the like to them, if by their ways they
provoke him; or plagne them with some other judgments, as fierce and fearful;
let the consideration of this move them to behave themselves humbly in the
sight of God, and to acknowledge, that this favor which God has done for them,
is not for their desert or worthiness, but only of his free mercy toward his
Church, in freeing it from its enemies, that always have sought its ruin. And
let them not rejoice with carnal joy, I mean, not only because they have
liberty to enjoy their estates* etc. but let the chief cause of their joy be,
in that God has wrought for his own glory, and peoples deliverance; and
withal, humbly and willingly confess, that God might as justly have given
them into the hands of their enemies, to have been in subjection under them, as
he has given them into their hands, and under their subjection and, because
all things are at his disposing, humbly let them desire of him to perfect this
begun work, and to keep in subjection those that do oppose Reformation, and to
divert those plagues which by their manifold failings, by respects, and
selfe^nd^ justly he might bring upon them; chiefly that he would be pleased,
(if again he do afflict them) to let them fall into his own hands, and not in
the hands of their former, or any as bloody and cruel enemies, or if he do,
that he would furnish them with such a measure of patience, that they might,
without murmuring, undergo it, until he sent them an happy and joyful
deliverance out of all their troubles.

Next, let me entreat all Soldiers, and those that are employed in fighting
the battles of the Lord, both Commanders and others, that they forget not to
ascribe the glory of their many worthy victories to the Lord, who teaches
their hands to War, Psalm. 144.1, 2 Psalm. 140.7.
and their fingers to fight; and covers their heads in the day of battle, and
subdues their foes under them. Let them take heed of saying or thinking that
their strength has brought to pass this great work, neither let them rest so
secure or persuaded that it is not possible for them to be removed, or to loose
what they have won, or that because God prospers them, that therefore they may
continue (...) Drinking, etc. but let them sinner, as Swearing, if thus they
continue in their vain, idle, know, that ly courses, when the Lord has
performed his whore godby them against the Papists, and popishly affected
persons, that then he will cast them (his rod) into the fire, by bringing upon
them some judgment which shall destroy them.

Let them therefore not be high-minded but fear, and behave themselves as
Soldiers, under the banner of Jesus Christ, blameless, without offense, that
their civil and upright dealing may win love where ever they go; and so may
honor their profession and Cause they stand for, that none may have any just
occasion to tax them for any thing amiss.

Again, be likewise exhorted all you who are put in authority in these
distractive times, to dispose of the affairs of the Country, in what kind
soever, you especially, who are in authority to call for, and receive those
taxations (of what sort soever) which in regard of present necessity, are
imposed upon; and called from the Country, for the maintenance of this
un-civill War, receive not such sum^ with rejoicing, but with a soule-grieving
sorrow, because you are forced to do it: and to this end, consider, that such
rates are ever paid in to you with the bread and clothing of poor laborers,
and helpless children, which, I say, (although for the present it cannot be
helped) ought to cause pity and compassion in you toward them, to ease them of
such burdens as soon as urgent necessity will give leave. And in the mean
time, beware of looking for your own private profits, under pretense of a
public cause, never look to build your own houses by the ruins of other
men's, especially the poor, for that will occasion your ruin with a greater
fall; but as these are times of sufferings to all, so be content to suffer with
others, and like good Nehemiah, (...) then you be to chargeable, or cast (...),
eat not the bread o^ too great burdens upon the take only maintenance; for
Governors, or at even any gain in or by those places it is a shame (...) have
had their beginnings and shall have or o^^ends with these troubles, which only
are conferred upon you (because esteemed honest and just) not that you should
make a gain of them, but that in them you might further the public Cause;
therefore, carry your selves in them so uprightly and justly, without
covetousness or desire of private gain, that when you come to make up your
accounts to the Public, you may say with Samuel, Whose Ox have we taken, 1 Samuel 12.1.
(...) whose Ass, or whom have we defrauded or oppressed, or of whose hands
have we received any bribe, to blind our eyes therewith? If your consciences
can say as yet the people said to Samuel, it will be great comfort unto you,
and then no doubt but the Lord will reward you.

But if on the contrary, you make a gain of the peoples losses, if you aim
not at the Public, but at your own ends, and exact with pleasure, and delight
these heavy taxations, if you oppress and defraud the Country or Public,
etc. then, how ever you may escape for a while, yet shall you not always be
free; for God will meet with you one way or other, and recompense upon your
heads your deceitful dealings.

So likewise, you that are placed in authority, to guide the affairs of the
Country, and to rectify what is amiss, and to see he oppressed relieved, and
the needly ^e^ free; see you do justly according to equity, and give not the
people cause to curse you; for if you do, God will hear them; but rather
walk so before them, that they may bless you, for that is the way to have the
Lord prosper you in all your actions.

Take heed of making your wills your laws, but as you stand for the Law, so be
tuled by Law, and let your proceedings be according to Law; when you are forced
to do what you would not, do it with sorrow, and always grieve for the
calamities, which by force (without remedy) are brought upon the people by
these unhappy divisions; if thus you do, God will continue his kindness
toward you, and increase your honor, and not only so, but posterity that yet
are to come, shall honor your name, as often as they hear of you, for your
care, pains, and constant endeavors, and your unpartiall justice and equity,
in managing the Public affairs committed to your charge.

But if you do contrary to this, and neglect those you ought to succor, then,
though now while you enjoy your pleasures, you fear no danger, in an hour
when you think not of it, will destruction and misery fall upon you, to your
amazement and terror.

You likewise who are Ministers, remember to put in mind your people committed
to your charges, of Gods great favor toward them, in this their enjoyment of
peace, and do you walk so before them in uprightness of heart, adorning your
profession with good works; and (as it becomes Ministers seeking Reformation)
take heed you give no cause to your enemies, to say, you carry your selves
unbeseeming your callings, or cause you stand for; let not this small time of
tranquillity lull you asleep in security, but always stand upon your watch,
and be as ready to suffer as to live; in the time of Gods patience and
long-suffering, arm your selves for fiery trialls, as yet, God has not so
purified his Church as he intends to do. Oh therefore, prepare to suffer, and
do the work of the Lord with diligence, that how ever iniquity may abound,
and the love of many wax cold, yet you may be zealous for Gods glory, and
careful to save those souls to you committed; and likewise by your examples,
may strengthen others to undergo with you, all manner of afflictions, of what
kind or quality soever they be of; take heed that security possess not you,
for if the watchmen fall asleep, the city is in danger of the enemies
surprisall: be therefore always awake, for unto you is committed the charge;
neglect not but give warning, blow the trumpet betimes, that all may put on
their armor and be ready for an assault; if you give warning, your duties are
discharged, but if you neglect, the blood of all that is lost shall be required
at your hands.

I know the Devil goes about busily, as Mercury did with Argus, by his
al^uring pleasures, and delightful sounds to bring all your eyes asleep, but
let him not have his desire, but endeavor to keep your eyes open; and to this
end, disdain not to let this my Scout give you warning: and let me likewise
entreat you, that if any of you shall seem forgetful of what I put you in
mind of, to do the same to me, that I have done to you all in general, and
your wholesome admonitions shall engage me to be thankful.

Lastly, let me exhort all sorts of people in these parts, and all over the
Kingdom, to consider seriously what God has done for them, and let them not
think of say (as the most part of common people do) that if this War were at
an end, there were no danger of any other trouble, and upon that grow secure
and Careless how they live; but let them know, that as God formerly sent his
spirit of disunity into the Kingdom, for the sin of the Kingdom, so if the
same or like sins remain, he will again send the like or some other as
fearful. But if they would enjoy this peace, let them learn to prize it as
they ought, Propter praesentem aliqua^ conditionem prosperam, non obliviscamur?
prteritae miseriae, sed subinde ad eam oculos reflectamus. E^ enim re fit, ut
melius sentiamus beneficii and gratiae magnitudinem; et ex sensu illo Deum
magis glorificemus, in eoque gloriemur. Fit etiam ut inspecta superiori
miseria, in rebus prosper is nos submisse ge^amus, neque altum sapiamus. Vnde
existit hc superbia, etc. Nimirum ex eo quod non recordentur prioris suae
conditionis, quare vel hac causa ut humilis simus, jumin sublimi aliquo loco
constitutis nunquam recedere ab oculis nostris, debet pristina and misera
no^^ra condition. Rolloc, in loha^. Page 576, 577.
by being truly thankful unto God for it; and to this end, let them always
bear in mind former miseries, and be not puffed up with pride or presumption,
because of their present happy condition, but let them behave themselves as if
they still were under the red, and that will work in them, not only
thankfulness for this their happiness, but likewise fear to provoke the Lord
to bring any more such judgments upon them as formerly they have felt; for
according to the old Proverb, A burnt child dreads the fire, so a people that
have been smitten, should fear to be in the like condition again.

Thus fearful was the holy man of God, Moses, when the Reubenites and Gadites
came unto him, Number 32.
to desire him co suffer them to build tents and strong holds on that side
Jordan: he was fearful that they had desired that for an evil end, and
therefore he puts them in mind of provocations, wherewith their fathers had
formerly grieved God; and of the judgments they suffered for their rebellions;
to the end, that they might fear to do the like, least such miseries should
come upon them and their brethren; this was likewise the practice of Nehemiah,
as you may see in that place in the Margent. Neh. 13.17* 18.
And this ought to be the practice of all them that either desire to please
God, or live free from Gods judgments.

Likewise, let them remember, how in the time of distress, when the Sword was
among them, and death looked in at their windows, when there was no going out
nor coming in safety, but they lived continually in danger; then, what would
they not have done for peace? would not many (as they said) willingly have
parted with half their estates, so that they might have enjoyed a freedom
from the calamities they then suffered?

Now has God done for them, even abundantly, above what they could ask or
think, in sending peace, that they again may sit under their vines, and under
their fig trees. Now let them take heed that they bewray not their Hypocrisy,
and make it appear to all the World, that they are no better then that This
Fellow, being in danger of shipwreck, promised St Christopher that if he might
but come s^fe to land he would off^r to him a wax^n-candle of an incredible
highness: another hearing him, told him he was never able to perform his
promise. Hold thy tongue fool, (said he) I do not speak as I think. If^l but
once get to land, I Will not give him so muchas a tallow candle. Er^s. Coll.
nau^^agium.
Zelander, whom Erasmus tells of, who in a distress promised largely; but with
an intent to perform sparingly, if he attained his desire. But honor God by
their estates which he has suffered them still to enjoy, in doing good to the
poor members of Jesus Christ; as in feeding the hungry, clothing the naked,
releiving the oppressed, and if need be, in offering willingly some part of
their estates to further the Cause of Christ; thus doing, God will bless them
and all they have, and increase his favors toward them, but if they forget
what God has done for them, and in the time of this peace, which God has
granted them, to see how they will behave themselves toward him, take an
occasion to go on in their former courses, with delight; then shall even this
mercy become one way or other a judgment unto them, either by hardening their
hearts to their destruction, or by it, to take away all occasion of excuse,
that so way may be made either to bring some other judgments upon them, or
else War again in a more fearful manner, which God in his great mercy
divert, Amen.

AN ADDITION TO THE FAITHFUL SCOUT.
HAving long since finished the foregoing Treatise, being hindered by some
occasions from publishing of it then: now (since I brought it to the Press) it
pleased God to dispose of our Affairs in these Northern parts, that Fears
have taken hold of many; that which I, in the foregoing Treatise give warning
of, that in some sort, seems to be approaching.

Now therefore, seeing I have begun to give warning, although I have neither
^easure nor means to do what I would, and these actions were fitter Subjects
for more learned pens, yet I will say something to the Kingdom concerning these
second Northern Expeditions; for, though the eye of my judgment be but dim,
me thinks to me they are as a Prospect-glasse, whereby I see things as yet far
off, which have some reference, not only to this part, but to the whole
Kingdom; and that concerning no mean matter, but the welfare or woe of the
Kingdom; either an happy conclusion by a settled Peace, or a bloody confusion
by a new waged War.

For my part, as I never did, so now I do not much fear the Disloyalty of our
Brethren; but yet what God may do by them for the correction of us for sin, I
know not: our abominations may so far incense him against us, that he may make
our dearest and most faithful friends, our deadly enemies; and raise another
Spirit of disunity among us, and cause us to scourge one another, until we be
destroyed one by another. As to set Ephraim against Manasseh, and Manasseh
against Ephraim, and they both against Judab, until a final desolution
overthrow us, Isa. 9.22.
without recovery.

I know there are Jealousies and Fears in the Kingdom of our Brethren the
Scots, least they should revolt from that constancy which was supposed to be in
them; what I think concerning this matter, I shall briefly declare, and,
because I cannot express it better, use the Words of one Writing upon the same
Matter, and these they are That,

If they be faithless, Mr. Withers Vox Pacifica, Cant. 2. page 57.
and we shall be true,
God shall with shame and vengeance send them home.
If we unfaithfully our Vows pursue,
Possessors of out Land they shall become:
In spite of all our Policies, and Power,
Here they shall settle; whither they were set
To do the work of God, who will take care
For to requite the kindness we forget.
But if, without hypocrisies and guiles,
We, (Brethren-like) shall strengthen one another,
In setting up his Throne within these Isles,
By, and in whom, we seem now knit together;
Both shall thereby that happiness enjoy,
Which all the Powers on earth shall not destroy
God has been pleased to make way to bring in many blessings (by their means)
to this Nation, and likewise to correct many in these parts severely by them,
they being as a two-edged sword, have cut both ways, destroying our enemies
and correcting our friends; if we have but thankful hearts for the blessings
we have received by them, and with all take warning by those sufferings we have
undergone by their being among us, we need not fear bu all will be well: that
God will perfect the begun work, and settle us in peace to our everlasting joy.
But on the contrary, if we either ascribe the honor due to God to them, or
murmr for those corrections which have been sent upon us; or forget them, and
grow proud, and secure, now they are over, we may by these doings, greatly
provoke the Lords wrath against us, even perhaps to make them Instruments to
consume (at the least sharply to correct) us.

We and they are entered into a Solemn League and Covenant, binding our selves
one to another, as much as lies in us, not only to continue but to increase
brotherly love and amity betwixt the Nations; this Covenant is no trivial
thing, seeing it was taken so solemnly before the Lord of heaven and earth;
whom we called to witness, with our hearts, our real intentions herein. Let
us take heed that in businesses of such weight we mock not God, beware least
we break it upon any pretense what ever; for if it were contrary to Gods Word,
or needless, why were we so bold as to attempt it? if it were, and be
agreeable to the Word of God, how dare we neglect it? or how dare any think it
a piece of piety not to take it? as too many do: yet indeed, better it is not
to take it, Eccles. 5^5.
then not to make conscience of keeping it when it is taken, as alas to our
great shame, and I fear woe at last; many thousands have done among us, which
will be a strong provocation, to move the Lord against us; for the breach of
this will be an aggravation to all our other sins, for as much as we entered
into this Covenant, to the end, to keep us from sin, and yet (notwithstanding
of it) continues in sin; if we do it without repentance, we may justly expect
God will raise up some (as I said before) perhaps those that are joined in
Covenant with us, to revenge the dishonor done unto him by our mocking him,
for if we wilfully break our Covenant, why may not he justly break the unity
betwixt us? Oh therefore, if ever we desire to see the Kingdoms continue In a
firm and irrefragable unity, let us both repent unfainedly, and that speedily
of our breach of Covenant: and likewise for the time to come, endeavor to be
more careful, and more zealous to keep it, then heretofore we have been.

Me thinks the bitter, malicious, and wicked taunts of our bloodthirsty
enemies, should be sufficient to cause us to beware how we do any thing, which
in the least manner may tend to break this unity; do we not yet see, how by
the occasion only of these supposed fears, which scarcely can be said to be
real jealousies, they seem to gather heart, and in a scoffing manner can say,
See now the trustiness of your Brethren in whom you put so much confidences
etc. Oh! what cause of rejoicing would it be to the enemies of the Truth, to
see the knot of amity broken betwixt us? how ardently they long after it, what
base, wicked, and untrue slanders are raised (if it be possible) to effect it;
the Devil and all his instruments bestir themselves to bring it to pass, it
is now their maine design, yea, of both the open enemy and the secret, Papist
and Schismatic; for, if the unity hold, they know there is small hope for them
to prevail; there is no better way to keep it undissolvable, then to keep our
selves close to God, by walking in the paths of his Commandments; our
breaking with him will cause him break in pieces our greatest hopes, and give
us over to become a shame and reproach to them, who would much rejoice to
behold it.

But that they may never see their desires, let us use all good means to
continue and increase the love and brotherly kindness already begun; to this
end, let us begin to betake our selves to some settled course in Religion, and
be not always like children, carried about with every blast of vain Doctrine.
Heb. 13.9.
I know it is not only lawful but necessary, to search (as much as we are
able) for the truth, but yet it were well that at length we could find*
something whereupon we might pitch, and not always stand in a dubious way,
subject to be curried like a Feather, with every wind* in thus doing we
declare our folly, and makes it apparent, that whereas we might (for the time
the Gospel has been among us) have been reachers, Heb. 5.12.
we stand need to be taught; and gives not only occasion to our enemies to
speak evil of us, but even causes many of our well-wishers not to know what to
think of us, or what to make of us; would we once settle our selves in some
way, we should presently know who would take part with us, and who would be
against us, so should we come to know our friends from our foes, so should we
give satisfaction to many whose eyes are now upon us; so should we hinder Sects
for increasing, and errors from spreading, which otherwise will endanger to
contaminate many, whom it may come to be a difficult business to bring into a
right temper again: so should giddy-headed persons be restrained, whose
delight it is to trouble the Church with needles, idle, and foolish (though
knotty) questions: in a word, so would their plots and intentions be
frustrated, who, secretly in these times of distraction, gather fuel to
increase the flame of our dissentions; and their hopes frustrated, whose
chiefest hate is against ^ll Government; it is too much apparent, that there
among us, who busily go about to raise and not to quench divisions and
discentions; because, they fear to hear of Government, as a thing contrary to
their dispositions they being employed in actions, and walking in such courses,
as, if they came to trial, were unlawful and shameful.

Moreover, if we were once settled, this would give some satisfaction to our
Brethren in Scotland, who no doubt, but heartily desire to see the Kingdoms,
as they are happily united under one King, so to be as near (as conveniently
they may) of one Religion, and grieve to behold the Churches in the Kingdoms
so pitifully dilacerated by these increasing divisions, when both they and we
have sworn to do our endeavors to unite them: I know the obstructions that
have hindered for applying the remedy, have caus^^ the disease to be more
desperate, and therefore the more difficult to becured; yet no doubt if we
would but use the means they used, with as much celerity and so accurately as
they did, we should find as good success as they found.

And were it any discredit for us to follow them as far as they followed the
Word of God? many say, Why should the Scots be our Teachers? why should we
imitate them in their actions, and order our Church according to theirs, etc.
To these I answer, why did not we, who have always been accounted a Learned
Nation, and have so long enjoyed peace and prosperity in a large manner begin
the work, that they might have followed us; but suffer them (a poor dejected,
and despised people) to begin the work; and not only so, but through our
backwardness, hollow-heartednesse, and cowardlinesse; be forced to stand need
of their help to aid us in it? If there be any discredit, it is in that; but
to follow them (as far as they go in a right way) is no discredit, except it
be a shame to do well. We may remember that it has been to our cost, that we
have been so backward in the work; they led the way, but it was in our Borders;
they managed the Field, but it was our loss that got the victory; they called
for the Reckoning, but we paid the shot: shall we blame them or despise them
for this? Nay, let us blame our selves, and our own sins which provoked God
thus to debase us, and moved him to make use of them to begin, and go forward
with his work, who were lightly esteemed of in the world, and accounted no
better then a base and barbarous people before? this is not unusual with the
Lord, to employ the weak things of the world, 1 Cor. 1.27.
to confound the things that are mighty; to cast down the proud, and exalt the
humble.

We are a proud and haughty Nation, and therefore, God has set them above us
whom we despised, and given them the honor, and made us bear the burden; yea,
even caused us to sustain them in the work, and to pay them the charges they
were at in bringing it forward: yea, now. God has made them the head and we
the tail, they have the honor of this great work, and we must now follow
them, if we, as they have done, attain to peace.

Nay, and if we murmr at this, and grow proud, and scorn yet to be tractable
or forward to go on with the work of Reformation, etc. we may justly fear
that for our sins God will more humble us, and exalt them, and cause them still
more to gain by our losses, until they be as wealthy and famous as we have
been, and we as despised as they were.

It is not the way to gain peace, to murmr at Gods dealings with us, or to
despise those whom formerly we have stood need of; let us submit our selves to
God; we may see, by Gods dealings with us, that he as yet is displeased with
us; we are not yet sufficiently humbled for other sins, more especially for
this backwardness to Reformation, for we, some of us account it as a good and
holy act to stand as men yet having their Religion to choose; we are yet
lukewarm and careless, and therefore may justly fear God has yet a scourge
in store to drive us forward against our wills.

Let us therefore be more zealous in this good work then we have been, let
nothing grieve us so much as our backwardness in it; as yet, there is no cause
to fear their disloyalty, whom many (I hope needlessly) suspect: in some things
they have shown themselves more careful of our Nations honor, then many of
its own Inhabitants: and until we see their general actions contradict their
former vows, let us not fear to account of them, and call them Brethren. If
they prove otherwise then we at first took them for, let us blame our own
backwardness in not endeavoring to perfect that which by their assistance is
brought into good forwardness.

Errata.
Page 13. line 6. for rejected, read respected. page 15. line 9. for the read
that. page 23. line 17. for created, read creates. Page 24. line 32. for
invincible, read invisible. Page 25. line 4. for free shot, read shot free.
Page 40. line 15. for unholding, read upholding. Page 41. line 9. for has,
read have. Page 43. line 8. for has read have. Page 43.27. for fea^full read
secret. Page 51. line 3. for ever, read even. Page 52. line 35. for wound, read
wounded. Page 53. line 25. for call, read care. Page 55. line 34. for would be
read are. Page 55. line 35. with rich men, read rich men Page 58. line 13. for
freely, read briefly. Page 58. line 36. for root, read rush. Page 35. line 4
for we that, read that we. Page 84. line 9. for is unknown, read is not
unknown. Page 104. line 13. for seem, read see me. Page 105. line 25. for
safety, read safely

In the Margent,

Page 45. for Tropeis aposniasma, read Tropes aposciasma Page 53. for torrent,
read terrent. Page 53. for notesque read noctesque. Page 55. for budizousi,
read buthizousi. Page 56. for deficile, read difficile. Page ibid. for
miserente, read mise^ante Page 59. for ecphugousin, read ecphugosin. Page 63.
for accumelamus, read accumulemus. Page 80. for oporteat, read oporter. Page
83. f^r excitat, read excitet. Page 91. for paroimois, read paroicois. ibid.
for paroimia, read paroicia. Page 95. for persequeretur, read persequerentur.

The Heads of the several Chapters of this Book.
COncerning the occasion of writing this Book; Fol. 13 CHAP. I. That God has
variety of Judgments to punish sinful and rebellious people withal; Fol. 20
CHAP. II. Showing why, and when the Lord uses variety of Judgments; Fol. 27
CHAP. III. Seeing the Lord has many sorts of Judgments, men ought to examine
their Estates how they stand before God, whether they may expect peace or
dangers. A discovery of many sins in these parts found out by a slender
examination; Fol. 43 CHAP. IIII. We cannot expect any Peace or Tranquillity, or
to be free from Gods Judgments, or plagues, as long as we continue in our
sins. Objections answered, many secret plagues discovered; Fol. 43 CHAP. V. We
may no only fear that God has Judgments in store for us, but that wrath, in
some sort, shall shortly be powered down upon us; Fol. 57 CHAP. VI. The folly of
those who think to escape Gods judgments by departing (for the present) to any
other place; or that think they shall not at all suffer, because they have
escaped some dangers; Fol. 63 CHAP. VII. A particular warning to those places
who as yet have not felt the punishment of War; or, because of their supposed
strength, fear it not, seeing God may, and can punish them, either by it, or
by other plagues; Fol. 69 CHAP. VIII. Because God has variety of Judgments,
it behooves all men to prepare at all times to suffer. Fol. 77 CHAP. IX. How to
prepare against particular afflictions, as War, Pestilence, etc. and to
undergo them patiently. Fol. 82 CHAP. X. The Conclusion of the Book, with a
short Exhortation to all sorts of men. Fol. 98 An Addition to the Faithful
Scout. Fol. 107
FINIS.

