St. CECILY: OR, The Converted Twins.

A Christian Tragedy.

Written by E. M.

Never before Published.

Licensed,

June 11. 1666.


LONDON, Printed by J. Streater, M.DC.LXVI.

To Her Sacred MAJESTY, THE QUEEN-Consort.
MADAME,
THere is so great a distance between the Meanness of a Comedian, and the
Majesty of a Crowned Head, that the presumption of this Address may occasion
some, to charge me with an Oblivion of the former, and want of reverence to the
Sacredness of the latter. It Is true, at the first blush, it might appear so;
but I have this self-encouragement, that my applications are made to a
Greatness surrounded with Goodness; to an equal transcendency of Power and
Piety: and These regard not so much the Merit, as the Humility of the Supplyant.

But, MADAME, when I find represented in this small Piece, the Triumphs of
Divine Love over all the most alluring Concerns of Sublunary Happiness; When I
reflect on a tender Virginity, defying all the charming enjoyments of this
World, nay what is most harsh to the delicacy of that fair sex, Torture; When I
see enflamed Youth, by an Heroic contempt, spurning the greatest Pleasures, to
court the Cross of Christ: When I observe the sudden, yet efficacious
Operations of that Wind which blows where it lists, converting a Saul into
a Paul, a Persecutor into a Sufferer: And lastly, when I consider, how the want
of an humble Perseverance (like an unexpected Wrack within the Port) made way
to the Apostasy of one ready to lay hold on the Crown of Martyrdom: When these
Reflections fill my thoughts, how should I conceive any Patronage too great for
so great Examples.

These, MADAME, were the Inducements prevailed with me, to offer them to that
of your Sacred Majesty: For, where should Innocence, Virtue, Piety, and all the
other amazing heights of Christian life, expect to be more kindly entertained,
than where they are in the highest degree practiced? Whilst then they are
admitted into so Royal a Presence, if I can but press in, as the meanest
Attendant, after so Noble a Train, it will be only with this hope, that Your
Majesty may, though at a great distance shed some providential Graces upon,

MADAME, Your Majesty's most dutiful and most Obedient Servant, M. MEDBVRNE.

THE ARGUMENT.
CECILIE Daughter of Marcus and Flavia, was a young Virgin, beautiful, well
descended, and, though she had secretly vowed Virginity, yet out of compliance
with the disposal of her parents, married to a Nobleman of Rome, named
Valerian, then a Worshipper of Idols, but afterward by her persuaded to embrace
the Christian' Faith: That done, they both join their endeavors for the
Conversion of Tiburtius, Younger Brother to Valerian, and his Corrival; and
these also proved effectual.

The two Brothers, having declared themselves Christians, were by the Praetor
Almachius condemned to die, which Sentence being first executed on Tiburtius,
occasioned his precedence in the Martyrology, before his Elder Brother
Valerian. Maximus (the Principal Officer appointed to see this Execution)
rendering Almachius an account of it, averrs, that he had seen their souls
conveyed to heaven by two bright Angels: which acknowledgement inducing diverse
present to profess Christianity, Maximus is beaten to death with Staves, having
Plummets of Lead fastened to the ends of them.

Cecilie, the Worker of all these Enchauntments as they thought, is for these
Crimes, especially her debauching the Two Brothers from the service of the
gods, condemned to the flames, and to that end disposed into a dry Bath
surrounded with fire; but that not approaching her body in the space of a Day
and Night, order was given for her beheading. In that Execution, after she had
received three blows, which seemed to have severed her head from her body, she
lived three days, during which, she gained her Parents, and made this her last
request, that the House, wherein she had lived, might be converted into a
Church, which it was, and afterward consecrated by Bishop URBAN.

If any be desirous of a more particular Information concerning the persons
before mentioned, as also of the strange and remarkable accident, which
happened between Saphricius and Nicephorus, they may consult the Writers of
Ecclesiastical History, who have given an account of them. But those being not
so obvious, they may shorten their satisfaction by looking into the Collection
of Saints Lives, set out by some late Authors of the Roman Church, wherein they
shall find those of Tiburtius, Valerian, Maximus, etc. on the 14th. day of
April; and that of St. Cecilie on the 22th. of November, in the year of our
Lord CCXXV. in the Persecution under the Emperor Alexander Severus.

To his ingenious and learned Friends, the Author and Publisher of this
Christian Tragedy.
IT is the custom of this brainsick Age,
To boast with boldness and fanatic Rage,
An imitation of that Doctrine pure,
For which the Primitive Christians did endure
Afflictions, Torments, nay the loss of life;
Each vying in a holy Zeal and Strife
t'outgo the other; but if once it come
To feel the Persecutions, that in Rome
First Catechumens suffered; straight they cry
Quis requisivit, such Hyperbole
Of Faith, as should produce in any one
Such Works of Supererogation?
Alas! Weak Fondlings, it is not enough
To cloak Religion with newfangled stuff,
And then cry out Antiquity! You must
Believe and honor the Old Martyrs dust.
Reason and True Religion best agree,
As Discords make compleatest Harmony.
Happy the strain of your ingenious Pen,
That does refresh the memory again.
Of Pious Martyrs, and Thy labor too
For publishing the same, deserves its due,
Which shall be this, still to preserve your Name
To equal date with St. Cecilia's Fame:
Who living did in Virtue so excel,
That even her Death became a Miracle.
And if hereafter you no more shall do,
To second this, yet we will boast, that you
Have so to life the Martyrs drawn herein,
As would invite a Heathen to begin.
To live and do, and then like them to die,
Enrolled in the Records of Eternity.
Cease then, vain World, to rail against a Play,
Since this shows pure Religion; If you say.
Therefore it is Profane, change but the Name
Call it a Sermon, and it is the same,
With Use and Doctrine too; and since you make
Religion so much Droll, never shame to take.
From hence a Pattern, better than have none:
By Acting seem to have Religion.(...)
T. M. Med. Tem. Soc.

WEre I the Author, had an Angel's Pen,
I think, I scarce should ever write again;
Unless the Critics will contract and swear
They Will out of pity pardon me this Year;
And give me leave freely to vend a Book
I hazarded to print, which seemed forsook,
Because the Author had no Name that might
Conjure and charm the Reader at first sight.
As it is with Stationers, so with the Theater too,
The Author must be famous, else 'two'nt do.
But stay -- what need I fear the Critics spite?
While they are ignorant, who it is does write,
They neither know whom to condemn nor praise;
But if they did, his Virtue has Allays,
That can dispense with either passion, and
Submit his Judgment, and withold his hand.
M. M.

Drammatis Personae.
Valerian Twins and Noblemen of Rome. Tiburtius Twins and Noblemen of Rome.
Marcus Father and Mother to Cecilie. Flavia Father and Mother to Cecilie.
Cecilie, their Daughter. Angusta, her Waiting Woman. Metricio, her Poet.
Phantasio, her Musician. Palinodio her Gentleman Usher. Turcius Almachius, a
Judge. Maximus, his chief Officer. Saphricius, Christians. Nicephorus,
Christians. Urbanus, Bishop of Rome. Angel. Devil. Headsman. Officers.
Watchmen. Attendants.
St. CECILIE, OR, The Converted Tvvins.
ACTUS I.
Enter TIBURTIUS SOLUS. Tib. A Younger Brother, -- true; I am but so;
Yet younger is comparative: why then,
I may compare in blood, in worth, in all,
But that of time, when the surrounding Sun,
Rides Circuit in his Sphere. And what are days?
But ever-dying Brothers hatched by light,
Till Sol turns Retrograde? and then good night. --
But now it is morn, to which I open first,
A pair of Chrystals: And in this respect,
While yet Valerian sleeps, I seem to be
The Elder Brother; Say, he did outstrip
Me once, an hour, or such a matter, when
We twins were bedding in one darksome room,
Where first he waked; and from the tyring house,
(The Womb,) came to the Stage of this vast world,
To act the mournful, silly Babe, and cry.
Yet now, as not surviving, he, nor eats,
Nor drinks, nor hears, nor understands so much
As that he lives; have I not (then) gained hours
Of him that sleeps? May seem the elder brother;
At least in one precedence, if the light
His mistress darts, illustrates first my sight. --
This is the house; the Palace might have said,
Where Lady Cecilie the fair is lodged.
Enter Valerian. It were too great a happiness to see
But those her brighter Stars. But ah too soon
My Brother's here. Suspicion is a restless
Inmate; and Jealousy too swift of wing,
Will not permit a Rival in his Love. --
The goodly structure here I must admire,
And not the Beauty that is contained within,
Gaze on the Cabinet not view the Gemme.

Val. Good morrow Brother.


Tib. The gods give you as much.


Val. You Are wondrous godly grown of late: as if
Heaven were your Book; or turned Astronomer
Were rapt in Contemplation, viewing-how,
With equal measure in the Azure plain,
Each Constellation, keeps his course, and round.

Tib. It Is even so. But when I lower stoop,
My greedy ear, from you bright Casement, charmed;
Would hear those sweeter strains of harmony;
To ravish my dull soul with Admiration.

Val. No more: of that. Be Uranoscopos;
A Fish whose goggle-eyes, fixed on his Crown,
Is gazing on the starry spangled sky.
So you -- stoop not t'an earthly Deity.

Tib. Mark but the sway an Elder brother bears. --
Sir, when Gemini predominate, they say,
The heats are doubled. You and I were twins;
May then participate in Love; as well
As heretofore in life.

Val. Know your Devoir.
And let the Nonage, though but of an hour --

Tib. What?


Val. Make you know your self.


Tib. To be your Brother. --
We hadbut one Horoscopus: but one
Ascendent in Nativity. If under
Venus you were born, why not I? or else --

Val. What else, but that you are impertinent.


Tib. Else Mars became my Zenith, and not yours.


Val. Yet I can wield a Sword.


Tib. And I dare fight.


Enter Palinodio in huste. Pal. Gentlemen, or Lords, or whatso'ere you be,
I must be bold to interrupt you.

Val. How?


Pal. Crave but a period to your loud discourse.


Val. Speak that again, and --


Pal. Nay, speak your pleasures,
Gentlemen; and if your voice be consonant
To what you promise outwardly.

Val. What then?


Pal. You Are worthy Gentlemen. Yet I could wish
A moderation of your Dialect.

Tib. Why, what art thou?


Pal. My Name may intimate,
That I am courteous, and respectful too,
Palinodio; not to cant, but to recan,
If I transgress beyond the precincts, of
A Gentleman Usher.

Val. To whom?


Pal. Unto no less, than to the virtuous,
And most incomparable Lady, Cecilie,
Who 'bove the Horizon of this Earthly Ball,
Raised to the service of the immortal power,
Each day outstrips Aurora, in her course.
And cause she is now within her Oratory,
It is my duty to divert from hence,
The obstrepercus.

Tib. The obstreperous?


Pal. Not you,
Gentlemen; but such as are her servants.

Val. Such am I, and thousands mo, my Attendants.


Pal. We have no employment, Sir, for so many.


Val. They are my thoughts, which from an endless source
Spring up, and like a swelling torrent flow,
To rest in her, and find a sweet repose.

Pal. Rest, and repose! if you knew how wakeful
She is, and how she watches night by night,
You Would seek repose elsewhere. That Sir, is the
Short, I cannot say the long of the business:
For her sleeps go, but by snatches, like pocket
Purse raptures; snap and away. Witness here.
Enter Angusta yawning, My Ladies Woman, Mrs. Angusta
By Name, who by watching is as you see.

Ang. Au-gusta. Au-gusta! who calls me there?


Pal. Oh! the ambition of a waiting woman!
Who even yawning, gapeth after honor.
Her Name's Angusta, rather Angustula.

Ang. Au-gusta! Does any body call me there?


Pal. Marry that do I.


Ang. Marry that, marry pish!
Marry such a Skipjack Gentlemen Usher!
No I warrant you.

Pal. Warrant me Gossip!
I am warranted, by a virtuous Lady,
To be an observant, vigilant, and --

Ang. A malapert, impertinent, extravagant
Gentleman Usher. Marry thee! Au-gusta.

Pal. Oh what greatness she yawnes! gapes barn-wide,
To strike in at last, with a threadbare serving creature.

Ang. Gentlemen, or Lords, pardon my exorbitance.
I know not your occasions; but this shadow
Of man, had so distracted my better thoughts,
That, till now, they were not so observant
As the quality of your personages,
Might more than exact, of your humblest servant.

Pal. So: now she begins to collogue to some purpose.


Tib. It seems, you are both servants to one Lady?


Ang. He, as a Cipher; I a digit, I
In her Bedchamber; from thence, he as remote
As our Alps, from the Pyrenaean Mountains.
My Lady is a chaste Lady, lives reserved;
Follows not the vogue of our vainer times.

Val. Yet if you have a privilege 'bove the rest,
May we not by your powerful privacy,
Come to the Speech --

Ang. What of my Lady, Sir?
No, but if I lend your eyes an happiness
To see, and hear her sing, will it not suffice
For the first time.

Val. Most abundantly.


Ang. Next time, the wakeful clock shall notice give,
(Her customary time of prayer expired,)
She on her Organ plays; to which she adds,
The heavenly rapture, of harmonious accents. Clock strikes.
Hark now it strikes. Gentlemen come near; I dare
Contract the Curtain, that the ecchoing Air,
May usher to the heavens, her sweeter voice;
And that you may, be confident I have,
A free recourse unto her private Chamber,
Behold a Sonnet! not composed by her,
But by Metricio, her ingenious Poet.

Pal. I there goes the Hare away: a petulant
Poet, to make her Anagrams, is styled
Ingenious. I shall remember this.

Ang. I think she now will sing it; with your favor,
I Will read, that you may relish it the better:
Our Poet tells me I have a special grace,
In the rehearsal; seldom coincident
To those of our Sex. Which when my Lady chaunts,
Souls may be ravished, 'bove Parnassus height.
Reads the Song.
If each hive, of swarming bees,
Have a King, that careful sees,
To the Manage: and more sage,
Keeps the rest, in vassalage:
If each flock, of tender sheep,
Have a Swain, to feed and keep
From the Wolf, that seeks his prey:
Or if only one must sway;
In a Kingdom: needs must gods,
(Powers divided:) live at odds. --
Then Bees, Sheep, and Subjects, we,
Can but have, one Deity.
Pack ye hence, you many Gods.
Powers divided, live at odds.

Val. Hum! She contemns the gods.


Ang. And goddesses:
Why she her self, may compare with Venus,
For Beauty; with Minerva for Wisdom:
But not with Cuckold Juno, for Malice,
Toward Aeneas that noble progenitor
Of our Roman Worthies.

Tib. Can she be virtuous,
That so neglects, our more immortal Gods?

Ang. Yes, and as far transcending your chaste Vesta's,
In purity; as fulgent stars of heaven,
Shine brighter, than a foggy Ignis fatuus.

Val. Howsoever, let us hear her voice.


Ang. Nor that.
Nay if you vilify her worth: or but
Extenuate this favor; you see your way. Points to the Door. Gives her gold.
Cecile tunes the Organ within.

Val. Come, this will qualify your rising spleen.


Pal. Nay now I see she will be Augusta. It Is
But placing the N with the heels upwards.

Ang. Gentlemen, She Is tuning. Pray make a quick retreat.
To see and not be seen, hear not be heard. --
Now; after her more sweet melodious strains,
Her custom is, to walk a while abroad,
Not far from hence; take the opportunity.
But should she know I had a hand in this
Your interview, I were undone.

Val. Fear not. Exeunt Valerian and Tiburtius.


Ang. Palinodio let us be gone.


Pal. Begone, not I.
My Lady shall know all, or let me have half,
Was given thee.

Ang. Nay then my Lady shall know
What you did Sir, the last night

Pal. What?


Ang. Kissed me.
You Had been better to have kissed elsewhere.
Nay, what you would have done besides, you know;
And she shall know.

Pal. What then?


Ang. What then?
You know full well how she abhors such doings.

Pal. And know your predecessor, was transplanted
For like offense.

Pal. And why I pray transplanted?


Ang. Yes so I say, for a Gentleman Usher,
May well be liken'd to a double Gilliflower,
Which while it so continues, is esteemed;
And so is he, with two good suits of clothes:
But let him wear out one, and be but single,
In a threadbare suit, he is soon transplanted,
As single Gilliflowers, are wont to be:
His Lady then cries up, and out with him.

Pal. This is a parlous wench, how she threatens me?


Ang. Mum then.


Pal. I, Mum.


Ang. See then you tell nobody.


Pal. Not I.


Ang. It Is well you sing a Palinodie.
Come Sir, know your duty, and attend upon me. Exeunt.

Enter Valerian and Tiburtius listening to St. Cecilie, that sings to the Organ
within, then comes forth, and spying Valerian and Tiburtius starts. Cec. Bless
me! where was my Porter? where my servants?
Who has betrayed me to the sight of men?

Val. Of Men, Lady? whom would you see but Man?
The Masterpiece of the Earth, who joys to see
His like in her who is a second self?
What creature to be paralleled with man,
Can you behold? why then should palid fear
Undie those rosy cheeks, and coral lips?
You need not fear.

Cec. Yes, like the trembling tree,
Whose every leaf, shakes at the approach of man.

Tib. We'll not offend.


Cec. But chastity is such,
It cannot be too wary; fear too much. She offers to go out, but courteously
returns.

Val. Nay Lady, leave us not so abruptly.
I would, but dare not say, at first, I love.

Bec. Not love? you told me you were men; not love?
Why it is the noblest passion of the soul;
Sprung from the Will, which cannot love, but good.
Much more the greatest good, whose only Beauty,
Is so attractive, that when it is but known,
It cannot be, but loved: Ah Noble Sir,
Dare you not love?

Val. Not you Lady, I mean,
I durst not say I loved: but know I do.

Cec. Ah! There Is small difference 'twixt woe and woe.

Exit.
Val. Tiburtius, here is a spark, what is thy opinion
Of this Lady?

Tib. That she is like other females,
Who know themselves, to be the weaker vessels;
Like melting wax that is apt for all impressions
At first encounter; therefore by retreat,
(Fearing they should be almost gained, ere courted,
(Which they affect:) they suddenly withdraw;
The better to attract: for after that, we fly,
Which flies from us; neglect, what is achieved:
And what is fair, must hardly be obtained,
By frequent suits; which they affect, as a
Supreme honor, and homage due, to their
Self-seeming, precious, and admired beauties.

Val. This is not all I fear, for I observed,
Both in her Sonnet, and her Maids discourse,
A kind of Superstition, mixed with a
Contempt, of all our gods. If that imposture
Of Christianisme, has infected her,
I fear twill be a Bar to my designs.

Tib. Tush! Take no notice what she young of years,
Has yet but sucked, not turned to nutriment. --
Love soon extirpates what is but newly set.
And taking deeper root, predominates,
Over all the powers of man; and that we call
Religion; but a trifle; and subordinate,
To Love's transcendent passion of the Soul.
Our gods themselves, vanquished by powerful Love,
Have laid aside their Deities to court
A Beauty. Shall not then Religion,
Which but relates, unto those heavenly powers,
Subscribe unto the Sovereignty of Love.

Val. Heavens grant it may, but soft, whose coming here?


Enter Marcus and Flavia. Mar. Come Flavia, my dear sweet wife; where is our
daughter,


Cecilie; the foolish Girl is so pensive
And solitary: She Is never well; but when
She Is in her Chamber. This dull Melancholy, caused
By her too much delight in Music, has brought her
To that pass for want of exercise (poor elfe!)
She Is fallen I fear into that lazy, sad,
And languishing disease called --

Fla. The Green Sickness.
It Is true my dear Marcus, and as you were,
My physician in like case, so must somebody --

Mar. My Lord Valerian! I have no skill in Augury,
But like the Omen, that when my wife said
Somebody, mine-eye was instantly on you;
From thence, it glanced on my Lord Tiburtius.
I lay my life, you come, to some such end.
I read methinks, such speaking Characters,
In face and features, eye, and front, as plain,
And legible, as wrinkles in my Flavia's --
Forehead, was about to say, nay be not angry.

Fla. Well, well, had I not been the honester
I know where, and what had been as legible.

Mar. Nay, I feared thou would be angry, but no matter.
Ladies must nere be old: their husbands may.
Lords you are welcome; but chiefly my Valerian.
That (somebody) was such a boding word.

Val. My Lord you honor me so much, that I
Seem courted by a happiness, to which
My more ambitious thoughts, could hardly yet
Aspire.

Mar. My Flavia, what say thou to the match?


Fla. I like it not: I tell you husband, I
Dislike it utterly.

Mar. How?


Fla. That parents should
Make matches for their children.

Mar. I, now thou speak.


Fla. No, bring them face to face, and let them parley.
Ah! It Is the pretiest thing to hear them chat
So far from the matter: for lovesick wantons,
Are as impertinent, as they, who lie,
Perplexed in burning fevers -- Love's a frenzy,
As I remember forty years ago.

Mar. Twenty wife, the art not so old.


Flav. When one distracted was demanded whether
He were a married man: No, no, (said he)
I am not yet so mad.

Mar. Ha! ha! my Lord:
My Wife has brought you now within the compass
Of --

Fla. Madmen! It Is even so by Juno.
And after this a longing comes in breeders,
And what is this but a fantastic madness?
Ha! ha! Wast not a pretty longing think you:
( Fulvius Torquatus being Consul) when
The Knights of Mauritania, brought to Rome
A savage man, who Polyphemus-like,
Had but one eye: Torquatus Lady, then
Being with Child, and hearing of this Monster,
Longed; infinitely desired to see him,
As he past by her door; but none it seems
Would bring him in: and out she would not go
In the absence of her husband. What pity!
She lost her longing, next her life. But then
You know my Lord what did ensue. The Senate
The Grave Senate decreed that Roman Ladies
Should not fail, but every one should have
Her longing.

Mar. Some come short of that Flavia.


Fla. The more's the pity.


Mar. Else they would not live
Sequestered as they do.

Fla. Are you so waggish still?
But you (my Lord) you have a longing too. -- To Val.
Not to see a one-eyed man, Monoculus,
But a fair Lady, though I say it that should not.

Val. That indeed Madam, is my more humble suit.
And infinite desire.

Mar. That Cis may have her longing, ha! ha!


Fla. Why Cecilie where are you? Palinodio?
No body there to wait? Angustula,
Enter Augustula. You too so narrow eared, you cannot hear?

Ang. Madam your pleasure.


Fla. That your Lady Mistress
Come hither in a trice, instantly approach.

Ang. Approach Madam, she is in her Oratory.


Fla. I, she flows in her Oratory; but
Let her leave that Eloquence, and tell me,
In plain terms expound what means
Our Terence: Accede ad hanc ignem,
-- ut Calefias magis.

Ang. That Madam,
I can enucleat: Come to this female fire
That thou may be enflamed: Lord Tiburtius
I was about to say.

Enter Cecily. Mar. But see (my Daughter,)
For that intent --

Ha. Must come to you, my Lord
Valerian.

Val. I long to have that happiness.


Mar. Is she not yet come? Oh! she is here.


Aug. Come Madam since there is no remedy,
Set a good face on it; that I am sure you have;
Why do you veyl it then? you are not Nupta,
Till then like other Ladies make the best
Of what you have: Beauty and Truth are two
That seek no Covert: Needs will come to light.

Cec. Madam what is your Ladyships pleasure!


Fla. A thing of nothing, only spell Roma backward.


Cec. It Is Amor Madam.


Flav. True; it is Love my Girl.
Be as well versed 'ith Deed, as in the Word,
And by thy Love, this Lord shall be enriched.
But what is Amor passive?

Cec. I am loved.


Val. Here, by your servant, Lady.


Tib. I might have said
As much: but younger brothers must be curbed.

Mar. So, to her, to her, my Lord. She shall be yours
Come Sweetheart, we will sit and see personated,
The lovely Courtships, of our younger years.

Val. Ladies, your Parents have left you to your choice.


Cec. Then, I choose heaven.


Val. Mine, is your self on earth.
Or were I 'bove the spangled Arch with you,
I Would rival Jove himself in point of Love.

Cec. In point of Love!
Beauty and goodness --

Val. Which I admire in you.


Cec. Are the sole Objects of a chaster Love.
Goodness is courted by the Appetite,
As beauty should be by the understanding:
On which two senses properly attend,
To hear, and see.

Val. Witness these happy ears,
Charmed by your Music; and these happyer eyes,
Which gaze on the object of their wished bliss.

Cec. But fair and good affect a Monarchy,
Established by the will, sole Sovereign,
To sway within, the Microcosme of Man,
To which the faculties, of soul, and body,
As motions, habits, actions, passions, are
Subordinate: yea, and concupiscence
(Though a rebellious Vassal to the will,)
May be subjected. -- Now if fair and good.
Be that you seek, it totally consists,
In unity of essence; whence derived
Are all the Fairs, and goodness you behold,
Which scattered here, and there, in several Creatures,
Are but dependants on the sovereign good. --
To reach to this; within the highest Region
Of the Soul, a love divine refiding,
Dos offer sacrifice of awful Prayer,
And Holocaustes to the Divinity.

Fla. Tittle tattle! what is all this to the purpose?
Venus is fair, and Jupiter is good.

Mar. My Lord, a proper man well qualified.


Flav. I, Daughter, and all our hope of Offspring
Must be in thee and good Lucina's aid.

Mar. And, my Lord Valerian's help here! what a la mort.


Val. I am by the stream dismissed to seek the source.
Cast off to search, a fairer then her self.
Ah! if such goodness, as resides in her,
Dos but participate of that supreme,
And only good, to that I must afpire

Tik. had I but such a spark from the immense
She speaks of, my ambition never would seek,
A greater fire t'enflame.

Val. No more would I.


Cec. Nor you, nor you; what earthly souls you bear
Within your breasts! confined to carnal Just:
Heaven is my choice, while here you court but dust. Exit.

Mar. Hi'da! here is a wooing with a witness!
My Lord, the foolish Girl, is not yet capable,
Of the happiness which is achieved by Love:
This was your fault that never would infuse,
Those sweeter drops, distilled from Venus rose.

Fla. Why Sir, who would have thought one of her years,
Being now sixteen and upward, could be so backward,
In learning that of Love, which in their Nonage
Enter Angusta. Of teens others attain unto? why Angustula
Where Is your Lady?

Ang. Gone to her Closet, Madam.
So very sad and pensive that it grieves me --
That she may have her choice of two, and I of neither. Aside.

Mar. My Lord you are welcome, this may now suffice
At the first push of Pike: let her retreat,
She shall come on again.

Fla. I, and at next encounter.
Daign smile for smile, and with a lovely glance
As boldly in the shock of Love advance.

Val. So shall you ever oblige your servant.


Tib. And me.


Mar. Had I another Daughter, she should be yours. Exeunt Val. and Tib.


Tib. Unhappy wooer that has but verbal Cures.


Mar. Angustula! come thou diminitive wagg.


Ang. Sir.


Mar. Call Palinodio.


Ang. My Lord, he is here.


Pal. T'expect your Lordships pleasure.


Mar. Sweet heart! I have it; heareca, it is mine own.
The plot's laid.

Fla. If a Project 'twill never thrive
As we daily see in our projectors.

Mar. This Gentleman Usher shall act Valerian,
And this witty well versed wanton, her maid
Shall personate our daughter to make an
Introduction or Preamble to the grand Volume
Of Love, and teach he the rule of For the due joining.

Pal. Who an't please you shall begin, for I am
Somewhat bashful.

Mar. The woman must always
Have the last word: thou then shall have the first.
But first call my daughter.
Enter Cecilie. Come Daughter, sit by me, and be attentive.

Pal. Fair Cecilie, from whence should, I derive
Your Name Cecilie, but from that richer Sicilie,
An Island famous; Ceres darling, Italies
Delight, Relief, and Granary: whose every
Luxurious Crop prevents from hungry Death,
A thousand famishing for want of Grain.
Ah! then will you so fair and rich a Soil,
So fertiliz'd with a more beauteous Crop,
Permit your servant, languish in your love?

Mar. Hearken to this Daughter.


Ang. Ah good my Lord shall I be the Island Sicilie
Environed with the sea, not married with
The neighboring shore? you teach me then a part
To live, a Virgin, which is my desire. --
As my Lady I spoke it. Aside.

Pal. But how will you, be fruitful then, sweet Lady?


Flav. Well said, now thou come to drive it home.


Pal. How like that fertile Isle? or how shall I
But reap one crop of savours to enrich
Beyond desert, your servant, who protestes --
He Is at a nonplus -- ah! fair would you daign
To sow within my heart one hopeful grain.

Ang. Of Mustard Seed my Lord?


Pal. Which mounting high,
We both reciprocal, shall multiply.

Mar. I, keep her to that my Lord Valerian.


Ang. Now i will be more serious, for my Lady else will be angry.
A Virgins thoughts that spring from a chaste soul,
Are such a crop as fertile Sicily
Cannot produce: whose every lade's a sword,
To slise in two a thousand amorous darts,
With which blind Cupid wounds but the impure.
Each knob, upon the stalk, a stop to vice,
Each ear of corn that rises from her heart,
More highly prized than all your belly grain.

Fla. I, now she comes near the matter in hand.


Ang. Each petty husk, a closet in her breast,
Presents a Viand on a Plate of gold,
To him whose love she vows to live and die.

Pal. But then where is the increase? to multiply
Fair Lady is what Nature has ordained.

Ang. The Crystal cup's more pure that is never stained.


Pal. How should we live, if never were tilled the Earth?


Ang. She was a Virgin first, and by chaste birth,
First fruits were grown e're sown; such shall be mine.

Pal. Tush these are words, Lady you must be mine.
I vow you must, else I shall pine and die.

Ang. Yes, so most Lovers fain, and swear, and lie.


Pal. Yet, I am content to live and love withal;
You have an Organ and a Virginal.

Ang. On which I Will play for solace of my mind.


Pal. Oh that I (happy) might like favor find.


Mar. Now daughter, how like you this? she frowns.
Come wife leave her to ruminate a while.

Fla. Angusta attend on me.


Mar. Palinodio.


Pal. Here my Lord.


Mar. Come away.


Pal. Nor Lord, nor now Valerian, I must say, Exeunt. manet Cecilie.
Madam, I was not serious; did but play. --

Cec. Thus am I taught to be a Pagan's love;
A Child to Parents who adore the Gods.
O Rome! thy Gods obscene, would have me such.
Not live as I have vowed to him above,
Who has assigned a Guardian to protect me.
Maugre the malice of the infernal fiend,
And all his sordid Vassals, still shall spring,
My pure white Lilly, to my Sovereign King. Exit.

Act. II. Scene I.
Enter Palinodio with money and viands in a basket. Pal. NOw my good genius
direct me, and my better Lady Cecilie defend me, who sends me this night, to
seek in Via Appia, for a certain Cave or Grot, where lies hidden a holy man
called Urban, and many Christians with him, in this heavy persecution, Now
there are so many spies that lie in wait; that I have a fearful apprehension, I
shall be apprehended; and carried before that cruel Judge Turcius Almachius. To
prevent the worst, I could find in my heart, to feed here of the best, and keep
this purse of money, for my private expenses. O! but here is one within, called
Conscience, that tells me then, I am a wicked villain. Ha! let me see what hill
have I before me. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, it is the Temple dedicated Deo
Ridiculo, to the God of Langhter. Ha, ha, ha, I cannot but laugh at the
conceit. Even here lay Hannibal and besieged the City, after he had slain forty
thousand brave Romans in the battle at Cannae. Here I say he lay till on the
sudden, there was such laughing, and gigling round about his Army, that
laugh'd-quite out of countenance, the courageous Hannibal, raised his siege,
removed into Campania. Ha, ha, ha, this way is so full of briars and bushes!
some body may lie sculking here. Enter Phantasio, and lays hold on Palinodio's
Cloak. Oh! I yield, I yield, I yield. The Officer has got my Cloak. Oh! how my
heart goes a pit a pat, nine mile an honr: If he would now be scared away like
Hannibal, I would make a shift to strain a laugh. Ha, ha, ha, now I see the
thief, a bramble bush, laid hold of my Cloak. Ha, ha, ha, how I should be
laughed at now, if this were known? but now, now, now, I hear some body at my
heels. Oh! sure I look pale enough now to be taken for a Ghost. Ah! what am I
now like, if not like a puny Sergeant, when he first handles his Mace, and
cries I arrest you, while he himself is fleeting and fluttering backward, most
shamefully discovering the defect in his retentive power. Or I am like a
Cutpurse (a young Practicioner) that seeing a purse hanging by a woman's side
(as he fears he may on the Gallows:) thus with a trembling palsy stands in a
quandary. Stands trembling.


Pha. Who goes there?


Pal. No body for I stand.


Pha. Who stands there?


Pal. No body, for I kneel.


Pha. Who kneels there?


Pal. No body, for I crawle.


Pha. Then who crawles there?


Pal. No body, for I thus -- Lies on his back with his heels upwards, stradling.


Pha. Oh! now I see it is but some old forked stub of a tree, and here is the
twist, which puts me in mind of that robustious Milo, who coming thus to the
twin-like body of a tree, by main force rent them in two, when suddenly he
falling in, they thus clap and closed together. Pha. stretches out his legs,
and claps them hard together


Pal. O! O!


Pha. So Milo was slain,


Pal. O my heels, my heels, O!


Pha. Whom have we here Palinodio topsie turvy?
Not yet delivered the present to the reverent Bishop
Urban? My Lady fearing as much, sent me after you.

Pal. Would you had gone before, for me.


Pha. So I will: Come here is the Grotte.
Thrice with a gentle stamp but give the sign,
And to this darksome Cave shall way be made. They stamp. Urban ascends.

Urb. Who Is there? if friends you are welcome: so must be
Our enemies, who by heavens permission,
Are but the Instruments to cut, and hew,
And square us in this Quarry; we may lie
Fit for the Structure of Heavens Edifice.

Pha. May it please your reverence, my Lady Cecilie
Presents you w th these viands, and a purse
Of an hundred Ducats for your self and yours.
Hopes to be constant in her Faith and Vow,
If you to heaven for her vouchsafe to pray;
Which humbly she desires.

Urb. We are obliged
To do no less. Her charitable hand
May never see corruption: nor that pure
And sanctified vessel, where a treasure,
[Her soul] is habitant midst chaste desires.
Farewell, heaven grant you may as safe return. Descends.

Phan. Come Palinodio now you will lead the way.


Pal. I, I fear nothing, now I have a companion.


Enter Maximus and Officers. Max. Look round, beset the ways, there, there
they go. Phantasio slips away.


Pal. Oh let me come behind that I may not see him.


1. Off. I see but one.


Max. Lay hold, and apprehend him. Palin. feigns himself sick.


2. Off. I have him, but cannot hold him up.


1. Off. Alas! he is in a swoon, fetch him again, he is gone.


2. Off. That I will, were he gone farther than he is. Box in the ear.


Pal. Ay me! what are you my Masters?


1. Off. Villain what art thou? Art a Christian?


Pal. No Villain, Christian I.


2. Off. What art then?
What Is thy Name?

Pal. Palinodio, to cant and recant,
Say and unsay. I am (as many are now adays)
A Nullifidian; have a conscience of Chiverel,
And am content to say any thing for a quiet life.

Max. Betray thy fellow Christians, or so.


Pal. Or so, or so, ha, ha, ha, ha; yet I cannot but laugh
To think, how Hannibal, here in Via Appia, was laughed
Out of countenance. Ha, ha, ha, methinks I should as well
Outlaugh these Officers, out of their little wits, for countenance
They have none to be laughed out of; ha, ha, ha.

2. Off. The fellow's mad.


Palin. Now I sacrifice to the God of Laughter. Exeunt.


Scene 2.
Enter Almachius with Attendants. Alm. Live we not still in Rome? Or is not Rome
The eye of Justice, splendour of the World?
Shall then blind Superstition intrude?
t'obscure the Iustre of our Deities?
Shall that base abject seum, and dregs of the earth
Float on the surface of our Crystal stream?
Christians I mean, who first in Nero's time
Were by the flames which burnt our palaces
Discovered, and convinced to be
The Flambeaux, and the Incendiaries;
Because they could not vindicate themselves
Against our powerful Gods, for which their horrid
And enormous crime, their Coryphaeus
Was on a Gibbet topsie turvy hung,
While his companion (cause in a City born
That was enfranchiz'd) had Roman-like the honor
To have his head struck from his shoulders. These,
These were the traitorous pair who hither came
To sow the Cockle of Sedition; which
As yet could nere be root out; O Romans!
Are you not Romans still? have you not conquered
The vaster Regions of the Universe?
Yet suffer Pismires, Pedants, Boys and Girls,
t'apostatize, scorn, and defy our Gods?
Have you not Tortures? Manacles, and Racks?
Have you not Fire and Sword, and Ravenous Beasts
To tear the Intrails of this cursed brood?
Slice off these Hydra's still increasing heads,
And sindge with flames of fire, like Hercules?
Our Emperor commands, show your Devoir.
Our Gods command, show then your Roman Zeal.
Their Flamins, Sacred Priests, cry shame of you,
That suffer such abortive Impes to scorn
Their Altars. Jove himself though patient long,
Begins to take his Thunderbolts in hand
To be revenged on you; which to prevent
Be vigilant: suppress this creeping Cancer. Be
But Romans, and you are what you should be.
Enter Maximus, Saphricius, and Palinodio. Maximus? Welcome. Thy Name
superlative
Speaks what thou art. Say then, have thou disrouted
Those lurking Squadrons? forced them from their Cavernes,
Where in the night, conscious of fouler crimes,
They with their superstitious rites, and fopperies
Exasperate our Gods against us, who suffer
Such sacrilegious persons; (rather vipers)
T'escape unpunished: Vipers, which in their Birth,
(Pernicious) bring destruction to their Dams. --
So they to the Republic. Speak Maximus,
And if thy service shall deserve reward,
The Gods, and we next to the Emperor,
Shall guerdon thine endeavors.

Max. My Lord, I with my soldiers (ere the morn.
Had banished sable night) as private as we could,
Went to surprise such irreligious persons
As are offensive to the state? yet 'twas
Our fortune but to light on two. A pair
Unparalleled: one for a sturdy Knave,
The Other a fool, or if a rational man;
'Twas then a guilty Conscience, with sad fear,
Which did transport his brains beyond himself.

Alm. Sirrah! why Sirrah! Speak not when I
But Sirrah thee? was not this blast enough
To make thee utter with a faltering tongue,
A more submissive and obsequious plea,
To beg a pardon for thy foul delict.

Sap. The toad is swelling, and begins to belch
The gall and venom of his poisoned breast.

Alm. Sirrah! I have a Rack.


Sap. And I have limbs.


Alm. I have a Torture.


Sap. I patience to endure.


Alm. But I have scorching flames.


Sap. Then let them burn.


Alm. Thou shall by morsels die: but piece by piece.


Sap. All Is one to me: at last I can but die.


Alm. Yes, die a thousand times and live again.
Or, if thou will, do but adore the Gods:
But sacrifice to them, and thou art quit.

Sap. Or die, or quit: A play at fast and loose,
I scorn to live by adoring of thy Gods,
Fear not to die, but dare in spite of them,
Yield this to fire or sword, or beast, or flame,
To raise a Trophy to the Immortal Power.

Max. I told you my Lord, he was a sturdy Knave.


Alm. A Bragadochio this, a Famfarone.
Swells like a bubble, will the sooner break.
Take him aside. Nor Sirrah what are you?

Palin. He Is a wiseman (my Lord) that knows what he is.


Alm. Sirrah are you a servant of Jupiters?


Pal. Jupiter would never entertain me
Into his service, yet my ambition was
To have been a follower of his. Ha, ha, ha,
But his Queen Juno said I had not wit
and craft enough to be a Courtier, ha, ha, ha.
But Venus she is a beautiful Lady:
I have played at span-counter with her boy
Cupid. But he was blind, and so I burst
His Bow and Arrows; since when I never was in love.

Alm. Sirrah, will you sacrifice to the Gods?


Pal. And Goddesses too, tagg and ragg, to Smug,
Vulcan the Blacksmith, and Priapus too,
With his fie for shame, to scare away the birds
That come to eat the Cherries and Mulberries, ha, ha, ha.

Alm. Maximus, what sot have you brought me hither?


Max. My Lord he is servant to a Roman Lady.
And cause a fool he is fitter to be examined.

Alm. In matter of nonsense. Let him be well whipped,
Or else discover what he is, and where
His Lady dwells.

Pal. Ha, ha, ha, my Lady?
She Is fairer than your Goddess Venus, i will stand to it.

Max. At a Pillar thou shall stand and be well whipped.


Pal. Well then, every thing that is well, is not amiss.
Farewell my Lord, I will not say I kiss
Your Lordships hands: for then (if with the lip):
There were more rhyme, than reason in the whip.
Ha, ha, ha.

Alm. Sirrah I Will have you whipped
Out of this laughing humor.

Pal. Bacchus your God
To this invites. Let me drink wine, and quaffe pure,
And sacrifice unto the God of Laugh -- ture, ha, ha.

Alm. Away with them: Justice seems in disgrace,
Until she come to have her time and place. Exeunt.

Scene 3.
Enter Valerian and Angusta. Ang. My Lord Valerian y' are welcome, as I may say.
And what I say I doubt not to make good. --
I have in your behalf solicited
So far my Lady; so urgently, that now
In our discourse the only subject, Love,
Is entertained: Books, Prayers, are laid aside,
But now and then she vents a sigh (good Lady!)
So careful of my good. And why (says she)
May thou not have like fortune? There Is Tiburtiue
My Lord Valerian's brother, methinks he might
Affect thee; as deserving as my self,
Thy features are as good, thy favor such,
As pleasing every lineament: thy Beauty
Exceeding mine, at which (my Lord) I blushed,
When parallels'd with such a Paragon.
And with deep sighs could hardly evaporate
That then intrusive love, which (I unworthy)
Fain would, but durst not entertain. Yet then
As I reflected on our Latin frater,
(As much to say, as fere alter: almost
The same, or else another such) I thought
If one to the other be so near in blood,
And constitution, yea and simpathy,
Propense to love the same (as I am sure)
Tiburtius does my Lady) since they cannot
Both share in one; may not my Lord Tiburtius
Reflect his eye on me, so near and dear
Unto her Ladyship? but then again
I checked my too presumptuous thoughts, and vowed,
Howsoever I were neglected in this kind,
My service should not be extenuated
In all good offices toward your Lordship
That may deserve your favor, though not his love.

Val. Thou'st said enough; and 'cause he riva's me,
Thus to divert the torrent of his love: --

Ang. I think 'twere policy (my Lord) to turn
The Current this way.

Val. Right, I like it well.
Nor wants thy Love a base to build upon.
For it is not long fince thus I heard him speak,
That in his eye thou were not contemptible.

Ang. No more but So:


Val. And though thou were not a
Lady he could make thee one.

Ang. That Is somewhat indeed.
But what more my good Lord I beseech you?

Val. Nay there he fixed a period to his speech.


Ang. And ended with Lady. Noble Tiburtius?
Made a full point at Lady; as if he had
Then pointed at Angusta to make Augusta.
Why should not we fair ones stand on our points?
That Beauty may be Zenith point above:
And Nadir (portion) to be trampled on)
The point beneath. But you my Lord have all;
Beauty and wealth, and virtue to be prized,
In her who now cannot be seen.

Val. Not seen?


Ang. No more than Cynthia with her silver Crest
Which (modest) sometimes veyls her beauteous face.
Yet were my Lord Tiburtius here.

Enter Tiburtius. Val. See, here he comes,


Ang. But not with such a sparkling eye
Nor half so quick as yours my Lord, ay me!

Tib. Now Fair Angusta sigh and I so nigh?
Thou may be Lady yet before thou dy'st.

Ang. Lady! as he ended so he begins.
Indeed my Lord, it is more to make one such.

Tib. As thou art?


Ang. No my Lord, rather as I
Would be.

Tib. She Is in good earnest.


Ang. Earnest my Lord?
Yes, and you may give me earnest, that your love
Shall make me such. You Will love my Lady too;
You will? O the ambition of a younger
Brother! And you my Lord, you can dissemble,
Tell me your brother said that he could make
Me a Lady?

Val. But that he would, I did not say.


Ang. There Is yours, you may be gone, here lies my way. Exit.


Val. So here is a flirt: such as are now adays,
That must be fed with Gold: and not content
With that, must have a husband too, with a
Mischief. Ah! that a Lady's love should be
Thus pandar'd by a Gypsy, it is too true
What her fair Lady spoke 'twixt woe and woe
There Is but small difference.

Tib. My Lord let us go.


Val. And leave this trifling fuit, 'turns woo, to woe. Exit.


Enter Angusta and calls Tiburtius behind as he goes out. Ang. My Lord, a word.


Tib. What say?


Ang. Could you think me
So immodest as to Court you thus?

Tib. Not I.


Ang. No I 'twas your brothers plot, his policy,
That like a Loadstone by attractive power,
I might draw back your love from my good Lady,
(Who Is in affection yours) that only he
Might have free passage to enjoy her love.
Should I be thus magnetique, I were base.
I am wholly yours: My service wholly bent,
That you may gain this precious Gemme, not he,

Tib. Art serious?


Ang. Else were most unworthy.


Tib. Take this. Gives her Money.
A Trifle for the present, shall have more.

Ang. Your Brother may suspect.


Tib. I, I Will away. Exit.


Ang. Adieu most worthy Lord. Ha! ha! thus Love
Is often now adays dear bought and sold. --
If not himself, at least I have his gold. Exit.

SCENE IV.
Enter Nicephorus Solus. Nic. MY troubled thoughts perplex, while Conscience
here
Upbraids me with dissimulation,
To my dear friend Saphricius; whom I long,
With pity have observed, to entertain
Too much of complacence; or which is worse,
Vain glory to add a luster to his actions,
Which dos diminish, not augment their worth.
For though Heaven daigns to promise due reward,
Yet he, reserves the honor to himself;
Which, while my friend usurps, and I connive,
Yea, not so much, as intimate a crime,
I am no faithful friend; which I have sworn
To be till death. -- ah! dissimulation!
Thou should not be a Vice, since nor a King,
Can reign without thee, nor a bosom friend,
Preserve entire that sacred Amity,
Which I unhappily (I fear) may violate --
No, my Saphricius, is so nobly good,
He Will rather render thanks, than deem me harsh,
Chide, cause I Have been too backward in advice. --
A friend in Counsel, must not be too nice.
See here he comes.

Sap. My dear Nicephorus, you are happily encountered.


Nic. My best and only friend Saphricius!
Methinks our daily interviews and kind
Embraces do ensoul each others breast.

Sap. Absent from you
Methought my heart had but the moity
Of life: was but a Cipher, till the digit
(Your heart conjoined) sums up my happiness. --
That Stoic was mistaken who avouch'd
A hearty, true, faithful, and loyal friend
Long sought, is seldom found, and hardly kept;
Whereas our friendship has from younger years,
Been ever pregnant, like a forward Spring,
As lasting as the Plant Live-ever: My Dearest
Nisus.

Nic. My Euryalus!


Sap. My faithful Achates.


Nic. My self.


Sap. Selfly the same, I live in thee,
But should we die (for now Almachius vows
The death of Christians) may our twin-like souls
Be jointly breathed to mount to equal bliss.

Nic. A happy period to our friendship, when
Changed, it is still a more transcendent Love.

Sap. True, but tell me my Nicephorus.
Did I not yesterday confute the Pagan
With whom I disputed; killed him dead with
A Syllogysme: Lodged him in Bocardo
And then you heard, how the miscreant (enraged)
Threatened to complain to Almachius:
Menaced tortures, and death. At this (tell me)
Did I so much as sympathize with terror?
Nay did you not observe a cheerful look,
Like that of morn that ushers a sair day?
Was it not so Nicephorus?

Nic. Most true it was,
But. --

Sap. But? why Sir bring you the But
And then I Will fix the white in the midst; as much of
Candor as a friend can bring. But? and then silent?
On! your too cautious (friend) pray use a freedom
And that impartially.

Nic. Nay, I but gently whisper
(My dear Saphricius) what I have observed.

Sap. As freely vent it forth, as sharply too,
As when rough Boreas blusters in the Air.

Nic. Why then -- but you will be angry, will you not?
Should I but tell you.

Sap. What is it I dare not hear?
What Obloquy can blast mine innocence?

Nic. Nay, it is but a Peccadillo,
Not so much as a defect, or omission; rather
A supererrogation which I many times have noted
When the fact spoke of it self, to blazon it the more
(Like to a curious Limner) you heightened it;
Extolled and magnified the work, yet in
An humble seeming way; which some too rash
Would judge to be vainglory.

Sap. So, so, you mince it.


Nic. Nay good Saphricius wrinckle not your brow;
I may mistake.

Sap. Then I will tell you Sir;
'Twas a reflexive luster from my actions
Whose brighter coruscation was too fierce
For such weak eyes to gaze on.

Nic. Pray be not angry.


Sap. No, must let your pride
And saucy Arrogance curb what is generous.

Nic. Nay dear Saphricius, be not so incensed.


Sap. Hence Sycophant.


Nic. Steep not your tongue in gall.


Sap. Drench it absynth, I -- spurn at my Actions?


Nic. But like the loving Mare which often we see
Spares not to kick her young and tender foal,
Yet hurts it not. I was as wary not to give offense.

Sap. Away, thy friendship is a mere Imposture,
Now Experience tells a friend is hardly found.

Nic. More hardly kept, since you are fleeting thus
But for a word.

Sap. A word? a tempest rather, such a blast
As has for ever shattered that goodly Vessel
Your friend-ship, Sir; a Ship wherein I sailed
Secure these twenty years: but now I find
The Pilot treachetous, and his Sea-starre
But proper interest: then let it split;
For ever suffer wreck: And this bent brow
Contract eternal srowns. Exit.

Nic. Ah! was it not
A fault in me, that did not heretofore
In th'Infancy of friendship make that known
Which now habitual is a second Nature.
But then I feared to lose him in the Nonage
Of Amity: more solid now I thought
It could not but subsist immovable
Yet, I hope I shall recover him, if not,
With that stern Stoic I will not contend
That said, it is hard to find and keep a Friend. Exit.

ACT III. Scene I.
Enter Phantasio and Metricio, with Songs. Phan. M Etricio, Come to the Bar.


Met. Call at the Bar
Thou would say for a quart of richer Wine.

Pha. No, come to the Bar, I say, I must arraign thee
For Theft and Burglary. Theft in a high degree,
Cause in thy Poems thou have enriched thy Verse
With others labors. Burglary, because
The have violently broken, into the Magazines
Of Apollo, ransack't, and robbed, and taken away,
Invito Domino, hos ego versiculos.

Met. Why good my Lord Phantasio, say 'twere so,
Nil dictum quod non dictum prius.

Pha. Nay there
Y' are in an error too: the Orator says
Dixi, the Poet Cecini, the one says
At the end of his Oration, I have said;
The other I have sung, at the end of his Poem;
I will not therefore ask what thou can say
For thy self (Poet) but, what can thou sing?

Met. Then what I speak (my Lord) must be in rhyme.


Phan. Not speak, but sing, I say, and i will keep time.

Song.
Met. Then fraught with Crotchets and with Quavers,
It Is for you we are such shavers.
If by theft we break the Law,
It Is for your Sol, Fa, Mi, La;
That you may have, for your Notes,
Songs, to fill your warbling Throats.
What were else all that you sing,
But a Sol, Fa, sense-less thing?
What Chromatiques, what were Brawles?
What your Ditones, Intervals?
And if all your Songs were gone,
What were Diatessaron?
Diatonicks would not please.
What were all your Syncopes?
What your Mesons, Hypatons?
Or your Hyperboleons?
What your Nothi (bastards) ha!
You beget in Fa, Sol, Fa?
Moods not apt for Diapente,
Yet Fa mi sometimes has twenty.

Phan. Here Poet, here is for thy pains. -- Nothing. ha! ha!
Ut re mi nil donas but Fa, there is wit,
And I am thy Sole Friend, La then we be quit.
But come hither in good earnest, Metricio.
The last Sonnet here, which I have set to the Organ
Pleases me well, but will not so my Lord Marcus.
It Is too serious.

Met. Such only my Lady desires
Otherwise thou know my humor is
For light Airs, and pleasant Madrigales.
But she will have none but grave and substantial. --
A Poet according to the Greek Etymon
Is a Maker, and so as in the Court,
There be some Creatures made, solid, and serviceable;
Others legier and ayrie; so are made by us
Poems, and Sonnets.

Pha. But here too, you entrench
Upon the Musician.

Met. I, when it is for my purpose
A Poet has his Long and his Large sometimes,
With a prolix and tedious Preamble.
Sic costam longo subduximus Apenino.
Another has his Brief in a Spnnet,
And a Seml-brief in an Epigram
When it ends acutely. But will my Lady
Sing that my Sonnet next?

Pha. She will: but his Lordship
Must not hear, nor see it: he is all for light Airs,
Amorous Dities that his Daughter may
Resolve to marry the young Lord Valeran. Phan. snatches the Verses, and
attempts to read.

Pha. Let me see, Mount, mount, my soul.


Met. Nay Phantasio let me read and grace
My own, you in Prick-sing, I better versed
In Coma's, Colons, Semi-briefs, Periods, Et caetera. Reads.
Mount, mount my soul, mount with a higher strain
From this sad vale, where pleasure mixed with pain,
Can have no Alt. Heaven is my dwelling place,
And earth below, for mourning, is the base.
I live to love, but not to match with grief,
A Long, a Large, I rather choose a brief,
Vain Love! short life! ah Heaven new set my Song,
Change but one Note, a Brief into a Long.

Pha. But if my Lord hear this!


Met. Let him, and swear,
By all the gods, his daughter is my Mistress;

Pha. See here comes my Lord Valerian, let us withdraw. Exeunt.


Met. Angusta whispering, she is a very Sharke.


Enter Valerian and Angusta. Ang. Nay my Lord, could you think I could be so
Uncivil, but that I would as well tax you,
As him, that no exceptions might be taken.
You little know his drift. He underhand
Offers me thousands to endear his Love,
Unto my Lady, which I Will never do.

Val. Well said, the sum I promised, shall be thine.


Ang. Thus then my Lord, as I unveyl a heart
Unfaign'd unto your Lordship: I display
This Curtain, where a Voice shall first invite.
Your Ear to listen, next to please your sight. Exit.

Cecilie sings within, Mount, mount, etc. and after sht has sang it, she
enters, Angusta following. Cec. My Lord, you are welcome.


Val. So breaths a sweet perfume,
When milder Zephyres ventilate the Crestes
Of sweet Arabian Spiceries. VVelcome?
This only word, has here infused more heat
Than can bright Phoebus to the chilling earth.

Cec. Mistake me not (my Lord) VVelcom's a word
Of civil Courtesy. I a Roman bred,
And nobly born, should rudely seem to treat
One of your Rank, should I omit this one,
So course a Complement.

Val. Yet, it is to me,
If real, (as I am sure it is) a word,
That bodes a happiness.

Cec. It Is true, my Lord,
A happiness transcendent, to enrich
A soul, with more, than all the beauties, honors,
Pleasures, or wealth, can now, or could confer.

Val. Madam, with your favor, this far fetched strain,
Mounts 'bove the pitch of Love, which is the Aim,
And scope of my Ambition.

Cec. Ah, Sir, how then
Shall we mix soul with soul, as well as loves?
If mine above the daring Eagle soar,
And cleave Heavens glorious Arch, shall your dull soul
Lie wrapped in Earth below? give me a soul
Can tower at least above the waking Lark,
And contemplate 'bove the eternal joys;
Else what is it for me, and my Valerian,
To lie encircl'd in each others Arms?
If ever I shall come to give my hand,
And plight my troth; shall not a mutual hand,
That may cooperate with mine, be joined?

Val. Most willingly.


Cec. And shall not then your heart
Conspire with mine, with an unanimous
Consent?

Val. Most freely.


Cec. If then but to one Essence,
And Power immortal I lift heart and hands,
Will you not join with me and do the like?

Val. I will.


Cec. You Will be a Christian, then?


Val. O! stay.
You urge too far, what by Philosophy
I have learned, you may persuade me to; but more,
Why should you crave? we both will worship one,
Acknowledge one, but sacrifice to one.

Cec. Indeed I was too forward, and hereby
May chance to be, like other Virgins, forced
To be your Love; by menacing of Death.
Or by my father (should you make this known)
May be constrained to entertain your love,
Which wrested, cannot be, what you desire.

Val. No Lady, fear not me; e're I betray
A beauty so endowed with virtues,
Heaven strike me with a Thunderbolt, or,
May love become abortive, and what here,
I have t'express the notions of my soul,
May it be rent from my more treacherous Jaws.
See in a happy hour my Lord and Lady,
Your Parents come.

Enter Marcus and Flavia. Fla. So, hand in hand; so may your hearts be linkt
And after more, but why do frown my girl?
Love has a nosegay all composed of sweets.
Amor, et melle et fell est jucundissimus
Come honey, come gall, Love must abound in joy.
So thou (my Girl.)

Cec. Madam, you are the tree,
I, but the tender bud, yet while you flourish
I cannot droop or wither.

Flav. Bad me no buds.
Thou art a tree thy self, apt to bring fruit,
But with my Lord Valerian's help here, daughter,
You know my meaning.

Mar. I, she must be espoused.


Cec. How my Lord.


Mar. Promised, betrothed, and what not,
That may unite a pair, and make but one?

Fla. I, daughter, it must be so, how say you my Lord?


Val. With her consent you tender that to me,
Which nor the Gods can better.

Cec. How my Lord?
The Gods?

Val. It Is but a word of course sweet Lady:
One day, nor makes, nor can destroy a habit.

Cec. My Lord th'affair in hand does so import
That of it self, besides my humble prayer,
It craves a time to pause, and weigh each --

Fla. Each pudding? tell us of pausing and weighing now?
Tell us of time? he wears his Locks before.
How many beauteous Ladies have I known,
Who in their prime of youth, could not (forsooth)
Nor love this Noble Knight, nor that brave Lord;
Would have they know not what: liked not their Garb,
Or were not so gentile: or else their shape
And personage was not so complete and absolute.
In their eye as they desired: Thus trifling
With time, they lost their better fortunes,
Till Age grew on, and beauty was thereby
Disparaged: Then a husband, nor so rich,
Nor so proper; any then was welcome!
Yet to consider, you would have more time
Daughter? O tempora! O mores! Time?
Why he has wings.

Cec. And so has Love.


Fla. But time
Outstrips him: therefore now my Girl, resolve.

Mar. She Is bashful, here, here, my Lord, she is yours.


Fla. I, silence is consent, take he my Lord.
Hymen, Hymen, O Hymenaee, Hymen.

Mar. So, we will leave you for a while; she alone
My Lord with you, in a familiar way.

Fla. Will be: (doubt it not) she will be tractable.
Daughter, Venus be with thee, and Adoms
Be thy Companion. Come my Lord let us away:
To prepare for the Nuptials.

Mar. Now Is our joy.


Cec. Ah, ha, oh!


Val. O do not blast sweet Lady,
Blast not the tender bud of blooming Love
With such sad sighs.

Ce^c. Daphne your fables tell,
Pursued by your Apollo.

Val. Not mine Madam.


Cec. Was metamorphos'd, and a Laurel grew:
So she escaped -- I must retire awhile. weeps.

Enter Metricio and Phantasio, and Angusta. Val. But do not weep.


Met. No Madam, for my Lord
Your father has commanded me to make
An Epithalamium, to celebrate
This Festival, and solemn day designed
For Hymen's Revels.

Met. And I must be
The Paranymph.

Ang. And I the Pronuba,
For you Madam the Nymph and Nupta too
Ere it be long.

Cec. For me a watery Nymph,
Whose eyes are steeped in tears, and throbbing heart
Involved with grief -- Ah! Heaven new set my Song,
Change but one note, a Brief into a Long. Swounes.

Ang. My Lady swounes away: Help, help my Lord.
Madam! what die before the Wedding Day?

Cec. Day? Day? I saw indeed a glimpse of Day,
And thither I was hastening: Why did call
Me back, t'invest with dismal Night? the Day
Was dawning, as I closed my heavy eyes,
To be made happy by eternal light.

Ang. It Is but a passion of the heart my Lord,
And now the worst is past.

Val. I am glad to hear it.


Ang. O! were Tiburtius mine, would I do thus?
Would I so near the Wedding Day retract,
What I had done? My Lord you heard her say
Retirement now was her desire.

Val. You Will have
A special care?

Ang. Of her, and you my Lord,
For now, your lives are one, as are your Loves,

Val. And let me hear


Ang. Each hour and moment too.


Val. Ah still go linkt together, woe and woo?


Enter Officers and Palinodio in the midst, with his hands tied, and led by a
rope. Off. 1. Come along there.


Pal. I, here is the short and long
Of the business: either to betray my Lady Bishop Urban
By a long mischief, or endure a short, but a sharp whipping.

Off. 2. Sirrah I Will prick you forward.


Pal. Nay forget not
(I prithee) thy Office, good Carman: whip not the Cart, but
The Jade that draws me there: Or let the Cart go before
The horse so now whip and spare not. Skips before his Leader.

Off. 2. Back Sirrah, and keep your way.


Pal. If this be the way to happiness, let them walk in it
That will, not I.

Off. 1. Not you Sirrah? why what are you?


Pal. A Gentleman Usher I am,
But now am ushered by a Rogue, and backed by a Rascal.

Off. 2. Sirrah your hide shall pay for this, printed with Rubric
Letters, like your red rag there, that so saucy.

Pal. Ah! good people was ever Gentleman Usher thus abused?
If gaming or wenching had forced one of my Calling to
Lay his Plush Suit to pawn, and wait on his Lady in
A threadbare Cloak and Clothes? I never did so, though
Another of our Profession stole his Ladies Jewels, and
Pawned them to the Broker; I never did so: yet you see
Innocence may suffer.

Off. 1. Thou an Innocent, a Fool and a Knave thou art.


Pal. Prithee untie me then, and let us shake hands.


Off. 1. Sirrah the Post is near; then --


Pal. Nay then he may bring news for my release,
At least some of my Ladies house may look
Out there. O here comes Madam Angusta.

Enter Angusta. Ang. Why how now Palinodio, dragged home like a runnaway
Apprentce, I thought you had loved my Lady better than so?


Pal. Why she jeers me?


Ang. Nay let me untie thy hands, that it may be said thou come home
willingly.

Pal. As willingly as ever came Wench to her Comrade, when she wanted money.


Off. 1. Why how now bold Beatrice! can you justify this Act?


Enter Tiburtius. Ang. At least, here comes one that will. My Lord you love my
Lady well, and therefore would not see her Dog wronged; much less her Servant
here, and Gentleman Usher.


Tib. You Varlets, let him go.


Off. 2. Why Sir he is a Christian.


Pal. But a Roman withal I am. 'Twould never have grieved me to have been whipped
as a Christian; but as a Roman could never have been able to have washed away
the disgrace.


Tib. Sirrah put on his Doublet, button it you Sirrah, and that speedily.


Pal. Why so now I have my Gentleman and Tailor to wait on me, thus for a good
Cause, honor attends upon disgrace:
And I who whilome was contemned as no-man,
Am treated now, and honored like a Roman.

Off. 2. You Will answer this? my Lord Almachius shall know it.


Tib. Hence Rascals, or --


Pal. Hence you base Canniballs.


Off. 2. Sirrah we shall meet with you again.


Pal. No, if I can help it.


Off. 1. Yes Sirrah this shall reach you, go to.


Pal. First may a halter stretch you, go two;
One halter will serve to hang you both. Exeunt Officers and Palin. at several
Doors.

Tib. Lady, how goes the squares here?


Ang. So, with Lady
He begins again, as he closed the period:
Squares my Lord? Fortune's wheel turns round.
Your Brother, and my Lady were espoused.
Ah my Lord that you had been so near the Mark!
Married in a manner they were.

Tib. And are they not.


Ang. Nay this night was designed for bedding.


Tib. And is it not still?


Ang. Why say my Lord it is.
If you will give what you promised --

Tib. And add more.


Ang. I Will pass my word (and faithful) as I am)
You shall anticipate by free access
Unto her Chamber. And to augment your hopes,
What I avouch is truth. No sooner were
The Espousals finished, but she, drencht in tears,
Fell in a swoun to the earth: and what she then
Was muttering, I best know, who raised her up. --
That what her parents by constraint had done,
Was no act of hers: And other words besides.
Which --

Tib. When thou art, as thou deserve to be Enriched by this, and more which I
will give, Gives her a Purse of money.
Thou will discover.

Ang. And to make all sure,
'Twixt eight and nine, come to the Postern Gate,
I Will let you in, and bring you to her Chamber door.
But I must not be seen: yet if you see
Some counter-mand which comes from her, as yet
To me unknown (but such a thing may be)
Then -- Noble Sir, lay not the fault on me:
But that which sways in Marriage; Destiny.

Tib. But if my Brother come and find me there.


Ang. As though I could not that prevent.


Tib. But how?


Ang. One word can do it, have we not every day
A world of tatling Visitants that come
To see, or to be seen, or idly chat?
To these I say my Lady is not well.
There Is no reply against this. Nor will your brother
Make doubt of this, who lately left her in
Her fainting fits.

Tib. Thou will it not fail?


Ang. Farewell, till then. Exit.


Ang. Fortune attend your Lordship.
He Is gone -- Hum! -- now am I at my wits end,
Like one who his promised two Creditors
To pay the same sum of money, when he has,
But that in all the world. What shall I do?
Or which way turn to dis-engage my self?
Tush! An excuse a woman (sudden) brings
(When taxed) by touching of her apron strings. Exit.

ACT. IV. Scene 1.
Flourish. Enter Marcus, Flavia, Metricio, Phantasio, Palinodio, Angusta,
Cecilie. Mar. THe Negra Night, though she has veiled the skies,
And banished hence the luster of the day,
Seems with the Music to applaud this hour:
And with her flaming tapers shows the way

Fla. I sweet Girl.
There thou must lodge to night with somebody.

Mar. That was a boding word. But Paranymph
Thou have a Epithalamium?

Met. Yes my Lord.


Fla. Quick then let us hear't: I long till she is abed.


Met. Joy to the Bride, whom now you see,
Like to the Isle of Sicilie:
Which round about the Ocean laves,
And gently courts with crystal waves:
Which purling in white foam, may be,
In Tipe, the Zone of Chastity:
Come hither, watery Nymphs, and chide,
The slower pace, of our fair Bride:
Come clearer Rivers, Brooks, and Springs,
Behold, and envy what she brings:
Far purer thoughts, than are your streams,
By the reflection of Heavens beams:
Come Bridegroom, come, and happy be,
With thy fair Isle of Cecilie.
It Is Hymen calls, come tie the Band;
Join with this Isle of severed land:
That with a mutual, free consent,
You both, may make one continent.

Mar. I, that is the way to live honest: now you Pronuba? never a wise word?


Ang. Yes my Lord.
Long may the Bride and Bridegroom joy, and I Be next to share in like
felicity.

Mar. Daughter, here we leave you, so good night --


Fla. This will be good, I know it was such to me. Exeunt. Manet Cecilie.


Cec. Assist me Heaven! -- Here on my Chamber Door.
I fix this sacred spell, to force from hence
Valerian: against which if he resist, Hangs up the Copy of Verses.
Heaven has a stronger Guard. -- Exit.

Enter Angusta, Tiburtius. Ang. Here my Lord, here you may freely pass
Unto her Chamber; so I leave you.

Tib. Do so.
Hum! what have we here? a paper pendant?
She Is musical, and by a Sonnet may
Rather invite me, than by word of mouth. --
Being so modest as she is -- He reads.

Back, back Valerian, hence, away:
Such bold attempts, must have delay.
Here Is no safety to be found,
Back, away; it is sacred ground,
Where a Champion by my side,
Stands to guard me as his Bride.
Back, back Valerian, hence, away;
Such bold attempts, must have delay.
Back Valerian? as much to say, as
Come Tiburtius. But there is a Champion
Within (she says) which guards her as a Bride.
What Paramour? what Rival's this? why should
I hazard life? No, let Valerian come,
To grapple with the Antagonist: who slain,
She will abhor my brother for the fact.
But say Valerian should be slain? what then?
I have the estate, and powerful riches move,
And is the Primum Mobile to Love. Exit.
Scene 2.
Val. The Coast is clear, no lurking Pyrate lies
In wait, no Shelf, nor Rock, nor Quicksand here;
That threatens Shipwreck to my fraighted Bark,
That Is bound for Cecilie: I Will put to shore.
Yet stay: what have we here sixth on her Door?
Back, back, Valerian, hence, away;
What means this Charm? or what infernal Spell
Is this which so conjures Valerian?
Here Is no safety to be found. I am betrayed
Where a Champion by my side,
Stands to guard me as his Bride?
Hum! be what he will, Hector or Hercules;
I dare encounter, Back, back, Valerian? No.
Valerian pulls the Curtain and Cecilie enters. Lady this traverse must no
longer, be,
Partition to our Loves, who are as one.

Cec. I come my Lord, why are you thus incensed?


Val. Come then, and let me like the amorous vine
About the Elm, enfold thee in mine Arms.
Nay fly not back, maugre thy Magic Spells,
Champion or Devil, I Will not be retrograde.

Cec. Keep off, Valerian, touch me not, or die.


Val. The interest I claim is due by promise,
And ratified by Heaven: the art mine: I must
And will enjoy thee.

Cec. Stay good my Lord,
But hear me speak.

Val. Not I.


Cec. Oh! Noble Sir,
Be not too rash: Condemn me not before
You know me guilty.

Val. Speak then, but be succinct.


Cec. I will, and thus a secret do unfold.
There is an Angel Guardian of my soul
And body too. A glorious powerful wight,
Brighter than Phoebus rays, when he with all
His luster darts his fiery-sprakling beams.
Whose eye like burning lamps resplendent shine.
Whose Arms can reach above Olympus height.
Whose breath can blast, as Northern winds do buds,
An host of warriers. Dwarfs your Giants were
That fought against your Gods, compared with him,
Nay more.

Val. Nay, you have said enough: too much,
Beyond belief. But think not thus to scare
Valerian with your bugbears. There within
Thy Chamber, thou false-hearted Cecily,
Thy Paramour lurks, whom, that he may escape,
Thou make so terrible. Tush! I nor fear
His dreadful brow, nor more than humane strength.
This sword shall make a passage through his heart:
Where should I find thee, oh! Could my just wrath
Forbear to quell what most I loved till now.

Cec. And may do still my Lord.


Val. Say then, what is he?
But I must see.

Cec. You shall, but if you now,
Now as you are a Pagan, should attempt
To violate by force, He, though unseen,
Will strike you dead. Which mischief to prevent,
I beg upon my knees you will forbear.

Val. May I not see him?


Cec. He Is a Spirit, Sir,
Has no Corporeal substance, can assume
A shape so dreadful, As no mortal can Behold.

Val. All this is but illusion.


Cec. Then, cause you are jealous, search my Chamber round.


Val. I will. Val. searches within.


Cec. Nay look in every corner, Sir.


Val. I have, and no man find. Why then thou art chaste
And true to thy Valerian:

Cec. Heaven knows I am.
And love you 'bove all mortals. Therefore I
Beg on my knees with tears, not to attempt
To bring me to your Bed, and hasten fate,
Which brings a double death: That of your soul:
It Is that my Lord, which makes mine eyes distill
These dewy drops, which trickling down my cheeks
From thence ascend to the Almighty's throne,
To beg of him to appease and curb your wrath,
And to coustrain your too much daring hand.

Val. Thou have preval'd but it is on this condition
That I may see that Angel; and I vow. --

Cec. Vow to believe, and join with me in faith.
Then shall our souls be linkt, our loves more chaste;
And if I show you not that glorious wight,
Say, I am false, and my Religion such:
Say I am treacherous both to Heaven and you.

Val. I could be curious.


Cec. Be not so my Lord,
But really proceed, and with desire,
Of Heaven, which must be prized above a wife.

Val. Well, I am resolved; what then must next be done?


Cec. Will you be secret?


Val. As thine own heart my Dear.


Cec. In Via Appia, which your Lordship knows,
Not far from hence, in Vaults within the Earth,
Lie many Christians. Amongst the rest there is one,
A venerable Man, our holy Bishop,
Be pleased (attended by my man) to go
To him, who will instruct you in our Faith:
And when the purifying streams shall rinse,
And cleanse the Ordures of your tainted soul,
Return to me: and then you shall behold,
What, next the eternal power, is wonderful.

Val. Methinks a light's transfu'sd into my soul,
And a more powerful fire has seized upon
My now relenting heart, which does add wings
To my desires, Madam, I take my leave:
Till my return, be what you are.

Cec. Still yours. --
It Is but the hand of Heaven which wounding cures. Exeunt.

Enter Tiburtius. Tib. Hum! my brother gone, and not so much as blood shed?
This kill-cow Champion then enjoys her still. Cecily sings within.
List, she is in triumph, singing, and now it is
Back back Tiburtius. Fear not; I am not so forward
To hazard life or limb for a Mistress:
Match less for thee who have a Paramour.
Expect not then Tiburtius bold attempt. --
Yet, Madam! madam!

Cec. What Is he disturbs us there?
Is It you my Lord Tiburtius?

Tib. As you see.
But where is Valerian your Lord and Love? scared hence
By your so dreadful Champion, or your spells?

Cec. Not so, but to return again he is gone.
And when they meet by one sole interview,
All quarrels shall be ended.

Tib. Very good.
And who of three shall then enjoy your love?

Cec. That soon shall be discovered by the event.


Tib. Yet one thing ere we part, I fain would know:
By what Enchantment now, while VVinter clothes
The Earth with snow and hoary frosts, such odours
Breath, as if with rich perfume the Lilly
And sweeter Rose were by a forward Spring,
Brought forth to yield their pleasing savours, here;
No Flowers I see, but Roses in your Cheeks,
No Lillies, but those Ivory fingers there,
Which cannot vent such odoriferous sents,
As now perfume the Air.

Cec. Oh Noble Sir,
Think not, we Christians work by Magic art. --
With Roses here, and Lillies intermixed
My temples with a Coronet are wreathed,
Which though you see not, we no Sorcery
Have used to blind your eyes, which have a filme
That overspreads your sight. Go, go, my Lord;
I pray go to your brother, take his advice;
And then return: then (happy) shall you see,
The Garland which I wear of fragrant Flowers;
And see besides with him, what I have promised.

Tib. Madam, your Charm is powerful; I Will away. Exit.


Cec. May Heaven illumine both as he begins,
And born again shall be these Noble Twins. Exit.

SCENE III.
Enter Almachius, Saphricius, Officers, and Headsman with an Axe. Alm. COme
bring him forth, I Will see the Execution;
Or if he yet relent and sacrifice
Unto our gods, he is pardoned.

Sap. To your gods?
Your Devils, Monsters, Moppets, Puppets, Bugges.

Alm. Out thou blasphemous wretch! away with him.


Sap. I have endured a torture in each joint:
These feet were scorched, these arms with burning torches:
Enter Nicephorus. Yet could I suffer more.

Alm. Take him away.


Nic. O! let me come; it is more than time to speak,
Saphricius! Saphricius!

Alm. What Is he
That interrupts our Justice?

Nic. Saphricius,
I once was thy dear friend, and thou we'rt mine,
Until (unfortunate) we fell at jarres,
And open enmity, yet now at least
Forgive, as I do thee.

Sap. Forgive thee? no.
Thou too injurious were to be forgiven.

Nic. Say all the fault were mine, and only you
Were injured, yet now destined as a Victim
And sacrifice for Heaven, what Heaven commands
For Heaven's sake do not omit.

Sap. I never will forgive thee.
He troubles me here.

Off. Come Sirrah, stand aside.


Nic. Pardon; upon my knees I beg it; forgive me Good Saphricius.


Off. What an absurd fellow art thou?
What need'st fear him, he is going to die.

Nic. Oh there is a Power above; all Charity,
All Goodness, Love; for which he gives his life,
To which his soul relates, and must be like,
In rendering good for ill, and pardoning all:
Therefore upon my knees, again I beg it.

Sap. Away thou hateful and injurious man,
Nor I, nor Heaven, will pardon thy offense.

Nic. Here prostrate on the earth, I kiss your feet,
Though you likewise I thought had wronged me;
Yet be the fault all mine, forgive me, Sir.

Sap. Not I: this fellow vexes me.


Off. Be gone.


Alma. Force him to silence there, or stop his mouth.


Off. Now prepare: you are come to the place assigned.


Sap. Assigned for what?


Off. For Death, by this keen Axe.
Because thou will not offer sacrifice
To Jupiter;

Sap. So, is it for that cause, then --


Alm. Executioner do your Office. Saphr. trembles.


Off. I will my Lord
Instantly. The valiant Saphricius,
Who late endured all kind of Tortures, now
Begins to tremble every joint and limb.
I Will cure him of his Palsy.

Sap. Hold, ah! hold
Thy hand, my friend, and hear one word.

Off. What Is that?
For two thou shall not have, what is it?

Sap. Gods.


Off. Speak that again.


Sap. Unto the Gods I say,
I Will sacrifice.

Alm. What says he there, of Gods?


Off. That he to them will sacrifice.


Sap. Discover
Too I will, what now a Christian Lady
Is perpetrating against two Noble Lords.

Alm. Thou have thy life: The gods are merciful,


Nic. My Lord! my Name's Nicephorus.


Alm. What Is next?


Nic. I am a Christian too, and what this Renegade

Has lost, I come to gain; a Palm of Victory.
A Crown immortal.

Alm. Art thou then a Christian?


Nic. I say, I am; and were it possible
Would give another life, so that I might
Reclaym him there who has renounced his Faith
For want of Love: the badge a Martyr brings,
Else cannot have the honor to be such.

Alm. Jailer, take him to your custody. And to morrow
(If he recant not, as his fellow has done)
Executioner you know your Office, let him dye.
I must away: affairs which much import
Are calling on me. Come Saphricius
I go to offer Incense to great Jove; Exeunt.

Sap. I Will join with you my Lord most willingly. Manet Niceph. and Execut.


Nic. He Is gone; O miserable man! he is lost
For ever lost, I fear. Suffered so much?
So long! and at the last apostatize. -- ay me!
Have you not well observed the Provence Rose,
How every leaf plucked from the Neighboring Chives,
Is tipped as 'twere with Gold? Such are our actions,
Such our thoughts; when golden Charity
And Love dos guild our every leavy thought,
Sprung from the soul: else naught avails, nor death,
Without the hearty love of friend and Foe:
He only dies well, that is living so. -- Exeunt.

SCENE IV.
Valerian and Tiburtius come out of the Vault, Urban appearing to the middle
above the Vault. Urban. MY Lord Valerian (twice the elder Son
By birth and Faith) you will have a special care
Of him that seconds you, your only brother,
Who less instructed, cause the time was short,
Next that of Heaven t'assist, wants your suppport. --
You are my children now, and sheep: farewell.
Doubt not the Lady will fulfill her word.
Remember now you are Combatants for Heaven:
And that your Guerdon, an immortal Crown,
Is that you fight for; not for fading wreathes.

Val. For this Achievement we entreat your Prayers.


Urban. Nor I in that, nor in paternal care
Will be defective, Heaven bless my Children. Descends.

Val. Where we have been, what seen, and what acquired;
Our breasts may better lodge than we can utter.
We Have been in Paradise, beheld a Heaven
In The bowels of the earth: the Christian Flock
Within a Fold, whose darkness is exiled,
As well b' exemplar life, as burning Lamps.
Here some in Prayers, there others chaunting Hymns.
Here some in Contemplation.

Tib. Others I saw
And heard exhorting to a virtuous life,
And some instructing Catechumens, such
As prepare themselves for holy tincture.

Val. Not mine and thine is heard amongst them there,
But all in common, all one heart, one will:
Unanimous they live. Why now methinks
I am armed against all events.

Tib. I Will follow you.


Val. Could pull down Idols, and destroy their Fanes:
O! what a greeting will there be betwixt
That virtuous Lady and our new born selves?
Enter Three Watchmen. Madam I come, I fly with wings of Love,
One soul with thine, one heart and faith I bring,
Now touch thy Organ, and melodious sing.

Tib. But hark, my Lord, ere we set forward, --
I am deceived if I see not some here in Via Appia,
Are wont to lie in wait for Christians.
1. Come my Masters, keep your standing.
2. I see two of 'hem.
3. Then let us comprehend 'hem.
1. No, we will respect 'hem till they come within
Reach, and then down with 'hem.
2. No, no, let us dog 'hem home, and beset the house.
3. That we may do by the sent; for I smell them already,
The are so muskifyed;
1. I follow 'hem close. So, so, when they are housed Have at 'hem, then, hah
for a Booty. Exeunt omnes.

SCENE V.
Enter Flavia, and Marcus, Angusta, Metricio, Phantasio, Palinodio. Fla. A
Ngustula, come ye hither.


Ang. Yes, Madam.


Fla. Tell me, when was your Lady's bed last made?


Ang. Madam, upon the Marriage day in the morning


Fla. And never smce? Mar. looks within.


Ang. Not since indeed, Madam.


Mar. It Is even so: Nay worse, for it is yet made.
Ay me! here is no body. Ah! that bodeing! somebody
Has deceived us Wife. This a Nuptial bed?

Fla. Nay, not so much as tumbled on. Why where?
Where lay my Daughter all this while.

Ang. Alas!
Good Lady! if he came not to bed, was it
Her fault? In former times (I know it well)
She often watched all night: spent it in prayer:
But now what Lady could have been so godly?

Fla. I am vexed.


Mar. And so am I.


Fla. Nay I am
Ashamed to see it, wed and not bed together!

Mar. Now Sir, you with your Epithalamiums, To Met.
Your Epigrams, Anagrams, Chronograms,
Your Raptures, Enthusiasmes, and Whim-whams.
To humor my Daughter, with your Melancholy
Strains, that now she is fit for no-thing, nor no-
-Body, that I see; And you with your Dia- To Phan.
- Pasons, and brainsick Crotchets! you have run
A fair division, have you not, to separate
Man and Wife? And you Gentleman Usher. To Pal.
That look so wild: you that have been rambling --
And now come scared out of your little wits,
What news? what is the matter with you now?

Pal. A matter of matters, nay all my back and sides
Had been Matter, but that Noble Tiburtius came
To succor me. Otherwise I had been stripped and whipped,
Only for saying my Lady was as fair as Venus.

Mar. But where is my Lord Valerian?


Pal. He Will be here
This night, or to morrow morning.

Fla. To morrow morning, will
That be a fit time to visit his wife, Goodman Palinodie?

Pal. Why then to Night Madam, he will be here. money Both give him Exeunt Mar.
and Fla.


Fla. You Are welcome then, here is thy reward. --


Mar. And here; come Flavia let us prepare.


Pal. Poet and Musician, look here. Shows the money.
Will you participate? No.
It Is strange a Poet that stands so much on feet,
Should fall into wants: Or that a Musician
Should not live as well on good aires, as a Sycophant
By an ill breath; but nothing strange that this
Gentleman Usher Kisses his hand, and congies.
by this, and this, is richly clad
In plush here.

Met. So, so.


Pal. Yet that you may not sing with heavy heart
For both your Muses, go, I have a quart.

ACT. V. Scene 1.
Enter Valerian. Val. FEar, with belief, unpowers: disarmes me now
Who late was daring, while (an unbeliever;)
I could not credit what by faith I Have learned,
That there are Spirits called Intelligences,
On whose Majestic brow a terror dwells. --
The gentle plaites I dare not now unfold,
Who once could like a violent torrent rush
Into her Chamber. Might I see Her first,
Whose countenance is angelical, from thence
Mine eye might be transferred, though fearfully
To view her Angel. Enter Devil.

Dev. Here I am: look then,
On me; an Angel.

Val. But not hers, thou art
So monstrous, ugly, and deformed.

Dev. I am.
And that I may evict belief from thee,
A Masque of Ladies, Devils and Satyrs. The Dance ended, when Valerian draws
the Curtain, they all vanish, and Cecilie enter.
See Nymphs and Ladies here which I command,
As fair as thine: Mine rather might have said,
For when she is slumbring in her bed, I stand
And gently fold in mine, her lilly hand.
Which nimbly now shall touch the Organ: and,
While that, and other Music sounds; to advance
The power I have, I here command a Dance. They dance.

Enter Cecilie. Cec. Welcome my Lord, my dearest Love and Spouse.
What means this ghastly look? what is it you fear?

Val. They Are vanished all with him, who standing there
Told me, he was thine Angel; but so ugly,
I could not think a beauty had commerce
With such a monster.

Cec. No; my Lord, 'twas he
Who opposite to my blessed Guardian, seeks
To ruin that, the other does preserve.

Val. But here were Ladies too.


Cec. But airy Phantosmes:
Deluding Devils, they who can assume
What shape they list: yet still are limited
In that, and power by the Almighty's will

Val. And yours it seems; for at the approach of day,
As the black Negra Night with Ravens wings
Posts from the Confines of the Universe,
So did at your aspect, these spirits vanish. -- Enter Angel with two wreaths
of flowers, made of Lilies and Roses.

Cec. My Lord, I need not be inquisitive to know
What now you are: this object shall suffice
To tell how faith has cleared your gloomy eyes.

Val. But not so eagle-sighted yet am I
As to behold this glorious wight.

Cec. Yet, but
A ray, or glimpse of the immortal power.

Angel. Hail to you Virgin, and your happy Spouse,
Blessed be your Loves, which heaven has linkt in one.
I come from you bright Mansion, Paradise;
From thence have brought these fragrant wreaths of flowers
The pure white Lilly and the crimson Rose
That, to denote your spotless, chaster Loves;
This, to present the ardour of your flames,
Which upward tend toward the immortal fire.
Bow, bow yourheads, while crosse-wise thus I crown,
To symbolize, you must stoop low to rise.
And like the Palm be pressed; for with renown,
Without Afflictions Cross, is gained no Crown. Enter Tiburtius and kneels.

Here yet a Crown expects a Champions head,
Who in his first (as he was born from Earth)
Come's now to join, blessed by a second birth.
Join Arm in Arm as you enwombed lay, The brothers embrace.
A loving pair, yet happier twins too day.
Cecilie sings.
So from the Brook return the bathed Doves,
while from your candid breast spring purer Loves.
So from the waters washd, we may behold
The pure white sheep return unto the fold,
So in the dewy Morn, we see the Larkes
So fraighted come a pair of wave-wash'd Barks.
Then welcome Doves with chaster Loves.
Welcome enrolled Sheep in the fold,
Mount pair of Larkes, and for your Barks,
Heaven be your Haven: never disband,
Here cast your Anchor, Hope; and Land.
Angel Time calls away to mount bove liquid skies,
Be armed, prepare, a sudden storm will rise
Lose not your Sea-mark Heaven, but boldlysteer. --
The Tempest past, dark clouds shall disappear;
Next, Day eternal shine; Blessed three adieu, --
None shall behold your wreatths, but such as you. Exit.

Val. Come then Disasters, Fire, and Sword, and Racks.


Tib. Come what can come, what spiteful hell can belch,
Or Heaven shall please to send, or shall permit.

Val. Or come whatsoever it be, as we embrace,
We Will hug their torments. What is it once to die,
To live so many lives, eternally?

Cec. My dear Valerian, now, as fully mine,
As I am yours, and both linkt to a third,
Your dearest brother: summoned now by heaven
To be ingulf'd in a tempestuous Main,
Let Us to his Standard fly, who now invites
His soldiers to a Combat. His pure-white
Of Innocence, and flowing purple, tells,
Ours must be like, although no parallels.

SCENE 2.
Enter Almachius, and Officers, Maximus and Attendants. 1 Off. There my Lord;
those two we dogged from Via Appia.


Alm. Valerian and Tiburtius Christians? I thought as much.


Val. But not so much as we can act of Christians.


Alm. Nor could I think so much of Sorcery,
As can this younger Lady actuate:
Enter Marcus and Flavia. Lay hold of her and those her two Disciples.

Mar. What have we here to do? Disturb me in My own house?


Alm. And carry hence your Daughter too,
That Is more; for Justice has no limit. Take her Away.

Mar. It shall not need my Lord: I pass
My word, she shall be forth coming.

Alm. Nay here,
Your house is ample, we can soon dispatch.
Let first the Brothers come.

Val. We rather fly,
To Embrace the worst of deaths thou can invent.

Alm. You Are Noble; adore our mighty Gods, and live.


Tib. That were to offend the Almighty Power of Heaven.


Alm. You know the penalty, to lose your goods, Confiscate.


Val. Goods? They are but breeding evils:
But now disburs'd amongst the poor, a treasure laid up in Heaven.

Alm. I there she stands who Wrought this policy,
We Will come to hear the fource of all this mischief.
Mean while (my Lords) you (to resolve) retire,
Either to adore the Gods, or be beheaded.

Val. What two extremes are these? Or make a Stock
Or Stone a God (renouncing him above,
t'incur everlasting death) or die.
This I. --

Tib. And I embrace.


Val. To die but once.


Tib. Live ever: Thus I am resolved.


Val. And I.


Alm. Then take 'hem hence. Exeunt Val. and Tib.
Bring in the Lady.

Offic. She Is here my Lord.


Alm. Sitting down.] Cecile, thou art here arraigned for heinous crimes,
Which who could think were lurking in a breast
So young and tender? In a Damosel fair,
And by extraction Noble? But when Vice
Usurpes a hold in better Natures, soon
They are depraved, like richer wines, which once,
Corrupted, taint the Vessel more where the are
Enclosed -- So young! yet could by Magic Art
Enchaunt the Lord Valerian; who enamored,
Was by thy powerful and bewitching charms
Bound in the chains of a prodigious love. --
Then was he wrought upon t'abjure the Gods,
And march among the superstitious rank
Of such Impostors as thy self. -- This done,
(For mischief has no period) you engross
His Goods, his Plate, and Jewels: Was content
To feign a Marriage, more t'endear your self,
Though 'twere by prostitution. Next you were content
He might be publicly traduced
For Christianisme, and now to lose his head,
With his, as Noble Brother, Lord Tiburtius.
Who else might have enjoyed his full estate.
Lastly, to cheat the Emperor of his Right,
Which comes for want of heir, they have I see,
Which was a plot of yours) they have no place,
No other Magazine (where they have hid
Their treasure) but Beggars, Rogues, and Rascals,
Apostates, and such like scum of the earth. --
All Is gone, all given away, by which you hope
(Forsooth) to gratify your poor-born God.
Is not this true, and verified by many
Which I could name; amongst the rest Saphricius,
A holy Convert, who was one of yours,
Well versed in all your plots. But why should I
Exaggerate, what of it self is so,
Enormous? No: I pity Lady your
More tender years, and Noble Parents here:
Pity a beauty which deserves to be
Enthroned upon a Princely Seat, rather
Than be so vilified, and made so base
As to consort with sordid, despicable,
And abject riff-raffe, vipers, vermines, worms,
Which creep in the earth, and lurk in horrid Caves.
What say you Lady, deny? or guilty yield?

Cec. What need I traverse this Indictment? all
Compacted of untruths? know then I am
A Christian; not therefore base; but you
Who in your Gods, do homage to the Devil.
Christian and base! O! had I breath enough,
To echo in the air this glorious Name!
A title it is; Encomium, that transcends
'Bove humane things; by Christian I am made.
More noble than by birth, more powerful than
Your Caesar's; more victorious. Tell me of Goods?
Gold, Plate, and Jewels! These I more contemn,
Than what I trample on. Unworthy Judge
That call'st me prostitute, I defy
Thee, and thy Goddesses, that were but such:
Harlots, and Queans: thy Gods adulterous. Va'erian is my Spouse; but far more
dear
By that which now he is: A Christian.
This our glory, this is our true renown,
To gain by combat an immortal Crown.

Alm. Our patience is abused, our Gods contemned,
To whom, or sacrifice, or die.

Cec. But die?
Die but one death? must I but lose one life
To purchase an eternal? Oh! how good!
How bounteous heaven, which by a quick return,
Renders for death a life for ever happy!

Alm. Bring 'hem forth there; Shall see to what thou'st brought
A wretched pair, who late were Noble Lords. Enter Headsman Val. and Tib. and
Cec.
And if good Nature be not utterly
In thee depraved, thy more relenting heart
Cannot but have remorse. See here they come.
Poor Lords? dejected men! that fix on thee
Their heavy eyes, from whence the mischief sprang.

Cec. Not heavy eyes, not sad, but cheerful, clear;
Made such by the reflexive light of heaven.
My Lords, you my dear Spouse, and you his brother.
You have the honor first t'invest your selves
Within the lists, where I should first have been,
Who first showed you the way: but you have out-stript
Your Leader as less worthy, who shall be
Happier to trace the manly steps you tread.

Val. Dear Spouse and Mistress (not in Venus School,
But that of Heaven) by you we first were taught
A lesson which we now have got by heart:
That humane love is like a coal of fire,
Which lies on the hearth; but by the mounting flame
A love divine is figured, which transcends.
Therefore salute you with a chaste embrace.
Farewell dear Spouse. Embraces her.

Cec. Death parts but for a while,
I Will hasten after; that as our bodies bed
In earth-together, our souls may reunite.

Tib. May I be Paranymph, and lead the way,
Who though I last come hither of us two,
May by this birth precede.

Cec. O! force of love!
Or first, or last, ambitious in desire
Of heaven, you happy twins shall meet again. --
But Lords you suffer here, as Kings shall reign.

Alm. Away with 'hem to the place of execution.
O! now they are coming back, and will recant.

Val. Madam!


Cec. My Lord!


Val. Dear Love adieu.


Cec. Dear Spouse adieu.


Tib. We crave your prayers t'assist us in the way. Exeunt Val. and Tib. Alm.
Peace


Cec. Blessed be your night that brings eternal day.


Alm. Peace, Sorceresse, with thy enchaunting tongue.
Or smoke shall stop the passage of thy breath.
Fire shall consume thee Witch; take her away; into her own dry bath.
Beset her round with fagots, and dissolve
To ashes that polluted corpse. Away with her.

Cec. Thus happy may I be, and lose my breath,
Midst flames of Love, and die a Phaenix death. Exit with Officers.

Al. Maximus.


Max. My Lord.


Alm. Go see them beheaded.


Max. I will, my Lord. Exit Max.


Alm. Dispatch and bring me word. Enter Marcus and Flavia and kneel.


Now my Lord Marcus, and my Lady there,
What is it you now petition on your knee?
Mar. O! Sorrow, till now, denied to give a vent
To my surcharged soul,

Alm. What is it you crave?


Mar. That the execution of the law may be Suspended; our Daughter may be
reclaimed, She Is young.


Alm. No, no, you should have had a care
In time: it is now too late, she is so poisoned Enter Maximus looking up in the
air, an Officer following.

With Christian superstition. Now Maximus
Are the two poppy heads cut from their stems?
Max. Dead the are, and yet not dead, see where, see, see, The are mounting in
the air.


Alm. The fellow's mad.


Max. No, no, the glorious souls I see of that Blessed pair, Valerian and
Tiburtius.


Alm. Imaginary Visions in the air,
Or else the Twins Pollux and Castor, which
We call Tyndarides.

Max. No, 'bove the height of the rich spangled skies,
Two winged Wights, more bright than sunny beams,
I see transporting of their fulgent souls. --
Great is Valerian and Tiburtius God.

Alm. Yet more Witchcraft?


Max. No, the Gods are Devils,
Which have bewitched you with their fopperies.

Alm. Out upon the Villain! blasphemous Renegade.
Enter an Officer. Take him away to burn with the Enchauntresse,
If she already be not burn! Exit Maximus with Officers.

Headsman. Not burnt my Lord,
The flames at distance keep, and dare not touch
So much as that which does her body vest.

Alm. Yet more sorcery! why? have thou not a sword
To sever head from shoulders?

Headsman. Yes my Lord,
Sharp as a razor.

Alm. Have a vigorous arm?


Headsm. And dextrous too, to slice as from the stalk,
A limber Dasie or a Daffadil. --

Alm. Then come with me, I Will be spectator. Exeunt Almach. Attendants.


Mar. Come Flavia, shall we not see our daughter?


Fla. Our Daughter murdered? Can the loving Ewe
Behold her tender lamb snatched from her side,
And see it slaughtered by the Butchers hand?
I cannot husband, be a cruel witness
Of the disasterous death of my dear lamb.

Mar. If flames could not consume, why should the sword,
Be more injurious to an innocent?
Or if her God with a more powerful hand
Could curb the raging fire, why may not he
Contract the Nerves of that more cruel Butcher?
Or arm her Neck against the dint of Steel?
Enter Headsman looking on his Sword. But see our hopes are vain: She Is dead,
she is dead,
Behold his murdering Sword besmeared with blood.

Headsman. Hum! what prodigy is this? my Sword's not dull,
Nor was my arm bereaved of wonted strength,
Why then, while thrice I struck, and thrice my sword
Had passage as I thought 'twixt joint and joint;
Why fell not down her mown off tottring head?
Like ice on cragged rock dissolved by heat?
Enter Cecilie lead by her servants. See here she comes, what soder could she
have?
To cement what this sword dis joynted thrice
Or this is Magic Art, or else she has
An Esculapius 'bove all power of Gods.

Mar. Lives still our daughter, or by your support
Is she but held?

Fla. Breaths still this virgin head,
Which has a languid, yet a sweet aspect?

Cec. Dear Parents yet I live, could you believe
The fabulous story of your Hercules,
Who sliced off Hydru's heads, which grev again
In number more, yet not believe your eyes,
Which see I live, or ears, which hear me speak?

Mar. Still may thou live, whom now we living see.


Cec. Still would you have me live? Dos't not suffice
That bounteous heaven has granted me three days
At my more humble suit to intercede
For your Conversion?

Fla. Alas what are three days
To enjoy a Child?

Cec. This was the boon I begged,
That with your leave, this house may be transformed,
And consecrated to the power above,
To be a Church, where true believers may
Adore their Maker, and by frequent prayer
Appease his wrath, by whose permission now
Enter Angel, and stands by her. They Are persecuted. -- Soft! what whispering
voice
Is that which by prophetic spirit tells,
That this my body to be buried here,
Shall (when a thousand and four hundred years
Are fully past and gone) be found entire.

Mar. I, Daughter, might we live till then and see it.
I then would be a Christian.

Flae. So would I.


Cec. You would. Ah! Infidelity! when thou
Have long been fostred in a darksome breast,
How hard it is for light to be transfused;
Or heat of love into decrepit age?
Happy who young begin to live and love.
Dos't hear Angusta?

Ang. Yes forsooth Madam.


Cec. Thou weep'st I see, there can no richer pearls
Add listre to a virgins face, than tears
Which are distilled for expiation of
A fin-sick soul. Tiburtius thou did love;
Valeaian was my Spouse. They are gone before
T'eternal happiness. I follow mine.
O! may thou emulate, succeed to thine. Palinodio.

Pal. Here Madam.


Cec. Thou'st been
But staggering in thy Faith; suiting too much
With Palinodie, ready to recant,
When but a whipping menaced to thy skin
A transitory pain.

Pal. It Is true, Madam,
I never loved such transitory things,
Which by the world enticed or threatened me.

Cec. Thou'st been my Gentleman Usher.


Pal. Yes forsooth,
I have been so.

Cec. Henceforth shall be no more,
To usher thee to Heaven, I go before. Metricio.

Met. Here sweet Madam.


Cec. Thou have been
My Poet to compose in facred Verse
Spiritual Sonnets, airs that suited best
With th'Organ, my delight at vacant hours.
Yet much ado I had to curb that strain
Of levity, thou had, which too propense
To amorous Ditties, did profusely vent
It self (to please the humor of the time)
In vainer Raptures of Profaning Love.
Desist from this and in a pious way,
Thy strayns shall raise dull thoughts to things on high.
Virtue's the soul of Verse not Vanity. Phantasio! my Musician, where are you?

Phan. Here Madam, I.


Cec. Insist not much on that.
That I, or self-conceit, predominates
In thee too much. What is it to have a Voice
To raise 'bove Ela, while the drooping soul
Below the base of abject things descends.
Thou tun'st mine Organ: Tune thy discordant mind
Which too fantastic, too too vain, discurres.
Mean be thy measure, else thy strains are Slurres.
I want a servant yet: O there he stands;
It Is he that ran devision best: 'Twas he
Which rounded, with a Crimson twist of silk,
This neck with precious Rubies once adorned.
But now more fulgent shines (with that he gave)
With all the splendours of Heaven's richer gemms.
Thanks for this favor Headsman. To forgive Gives him Money in a Purse.
Were small requital. Here; believe and live.

Heads. Fair goddess of the Earth. Kneeling.


Cec. Thou art deceived.


Headsm. O! more than woman then.


Cec. That I deny.


Heads. Then fairest Virgin, this hard heart of stone
You Have mollified. Vouchsafe to take this sword.

Cec. Only to kiss.


Heads. And cut off his right hand,
Which has transgressed.

Cec. O! do not tempt to sin.


Heads. Then I believe, there is a greater power
Of goodness in your soul, than all our gods.

Cec. From one it is derived who raigns above:


Heads. Him I confess; in him believe, --


Cec. And love.
O my dear Parents can you then, not love
That power immortal? not believe in him,
Whom he adores with me, a true Believer?

Mar. Fla. We do, we do, with thee, to live and die.


Cec. In Paradise in joy shall ever last:
Sound music then and let me sing my last.
Sings.
Glorious Sun thy beams display
To the dawning of this day.
That this pair who gave me being
May the light of truth be seeing.
Come dear Parents on each side,
Lead me now who am your guide,
That you may who gave me being The Song ended, horrid Music.
Live in bliss, which is by seeing.

Mar. What hideous noise: what wind is this?


Cec. That which never blows to good. Behold it is he
Who lurking in the Idol's is adored.
Enter Devils leading Saphricius, with a Wreath of Serpents on his head:
Almachius and Officers led in Chains: Leading a Renegade who has rejected
What you embrace: with him enchain'd the Judge
And Officers are led, his Vassals now. Heavenly Music.

Enter Angels and Blessed Spirits, Valerian, Tiburtius, Maximus, Nicephorus;
all with Crowns on their heads: the good go out on the right hand, the bad on
the left. Mar. My Child what musick's this?


Cec. As opposite
To what you heard, as is this glorious Wight
To that infernal monster.

Mar. And what are these?


Cec. Thrice Happy souls, that of Valerian,
This Tiburtius: the third of Maximus,
Whose candid Vests with bloody tincture shine.
Lastly that Nicephorus, who snatched a Crown
That was from Heaven descending on that head
Where now is seen a wreath of poisoning serpents.
Come Parents follow these who lead the way
To endless happiness: forsake that Night
And Fogg of Hell which never shall see light. Exeunt omnes.

Manent Attendentes Ceciliae, to speak the EPILOGUE. Pal. Hum! ha! hum!


Phan. Palinodio what do mean to do?


Pal. Usher the Epilogue to the Stage.


Phan. Thou might,
Were it a Lady.

Pal. Such I Will prove it is.
For as a Lady is cried up for fair
By one, by another but indifferent,
And not so much by a third, but infinitely
Cried down; So are out Plays and Epilogues.

Metr. Yet a good Speaker in the Conclusion,
(Which thou art not) may cry it up again,
Therefore give way to me Phantasio.

Pal. Yes, were the Prologue to be sung, I would.


Met. Tush! how impertinent you are! am not I The Poet?


Pha. What then? so was the Water-man,
Who puffing rowed his Prologue to the Stage
As he was will not to toil against tide and wind.

Ang. Away, you all contend but to no purpose,
Was not the subject of our Play a Lady?
Whom then but Ladies does it most concern?
Or whom, if not one of her sex, does it
Beseem to speak the Epilogue?

Pha. It Is true,
I grant for Ladies this suits well.

Ang. Then Poet
To men make your Addresses.

Met. I will, hum! ha! hum!


Ang. More manners Sir, Ladies must first be served. Ladies,


Angusta, here (who would Augusta shine
In Court like to your selves) lost her design,
Yet still ambitious to be happier now,
Courting the Female sex, I need not bow
In a submissive way; for that would be
To wrong our Poet, who requested me,
Only to tell you, cause you are cried down
As creatures of less merit, less renown)
To set before your eyes what your sex can,
At least as good if not excelling man.
As constant, firm, as resolute in all;
As virtuous every way, now when you shall
Reflect upon the Masterpiece you have seen,
(Applauding that) you needs must have within
A Candid breast, (which fully shall requite
Our Authors labor) that we call delight,
Which ushers Virtue unto higher strayns.
You have his scope, to recompense his pains;
But emulate his Copy, -- In The mean while
It is enough t'obtain a Lady's smile.

Met. Gentlemen,
Sh' has said enough, what then is left for me?
Only t'entreat a quick Reflection; see
And well observe each Ladies Eye and Look,
To sympathize with them is but to brook
What pleases them; -- Ladies example give
By clear Aspects whether we die or live:
For we conclude, -- so sails our Ship to day,
By Ladies we are saved, or cast away.

FINIS.

