A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES For the County of SURREY, Held in the
Borough of SOVTHWARK, March 23. 1681/2.

BY RICHARD MEGGOTT D. D. Dean of Winchester, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His
Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by A. Grover, for Thomas Row Jun. in London-Yard near the
West End of St. Paul's. 1682.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL And My Honored Friend PETER DANIEL, Esquire High Sheriff
of the County of SURREY.
SIR,
IT was not in my Thoughts, that this Discourse should have gone farther than
them for whom it was prepared; but since it was their desire as well as yours
that it should I have submitted: Being preached at your Request, Decency
requires it should not come abroad but with your Name. Sir I have no reason to
doubt, but that you are persuaded of what is here delivered of the Law of God;
and your Actings in this trying Time have shown, you have not so wild a Notion
of Liberty, as to trust those high Pretenders, who would be making way to it by
overturning the Laws of Men: But there are too many who have weak and dangerous
Conceptions of these things. To rectify such was the Design of this Sermon,
wherein I have endeavored to represent Christianity, as Jotham did the Vine
cheering God and Man, directing and completing our Behavior for both Worlds.
If any thing in it may prove useful, that they who outwardly profess the Faith,
may sincerely live according to the Rule of the Gospel; I shall be glad, that
by my Compliance in publishing it, I have shown my self,

SIR, Your very Affectionate and Humble Servant R. Meggott.

JAMES 1.25. -- The perfect Law of Liberty --


THE Solemn business of this time is the same with what we read of Samuel's, 1 Samuel 7.16. where we find that he went from year to year in Circuit to Bethel
and Gilgal and Mizpeh, and judged Israel in all those places. This is a
laudable imitation of that; and no contemptible privilege it is for a People
to have it so; to nave Justice condescend to come to their Doors, and their
Wrongs redressed, not only uprightly, but so conveniently.

And yet though this be so very well, every one must grant it were a great deal
better there were no occasion for it, that all men would be so honest and
orderly as to save the Magistrate such labor. It is well there are Fetters and
Gibbets for Robbers and Murderers; but Oh how much better would it be, that
such would labor with their hands the thing that is good, and do violence to
no man! It is well there are Prisons and Remedies for Cheats and such as are
unjust; but Oh how much better would it be that they would be righteous in
their dealings, and none go beyond or defraud his brother in any matter! It is
well that there are Actions and Damages for Scandals and Defamations; but Oh
how much better would it be that all bitterness, and clamor, and evil speaking
were put away from us, and that there were no backbiting!

Fancifull and Eutopian as such imaginations now look to them that know the
World, so it would be in a Christian Kingdom, were we real in this Religion.
All such enormities this forbids under severer penalties than human Laws are
capable of inflicting; for though every sin against God is not injury unto men,
yet every injury unto men is a sin against God.

And this is that my Discourse at this time shall tend to; to evince, that the
Gospel is so far from dispensing with any of those obligations the light of
nature and reason lay on us, that it requires them with more strictness; it is
a Law.

Not as Men's, in any thing deficient and incomplete, but wholly faultless; it
is a perfect Law.

And that this may not seem inconsistent with the Graciousness of the
Dispensation, I shall show you, that in all this, it is so far from being any
real Incroachment upon our Freedom, that is that which best secureth it; it is
a perfect Law of Liberty.

These are the three particulars which the Text declares of the Gospel of
Christ.

First, The Nature of it that it is a Law. Secondly, The Exactness of it, that
it is perfect Law. Lastly, the Advantage of it, that it is a Law of Liberty.
These considered, may tend something to the clearing our Apprehensions not
only about the Authority, the Excellency and the End of this Royal Law of
Christ; but also the Necessity, Quality, and Obligation of the sundry Laws of
Men; and in pursuance to that I shall speak to each of of them.

The first thing we have here to take notice of, in this Description of the
Gospel, is the Nature of it, that it is a Law. A Law! This sounds a little
unusual, it it is commonly put in Opposition to it. The Evangelist tells us,
The Law was given by Moses, John 1.17.
it is Grace and Truth that came by Jesus Christ. It is true, there is much
difference between this Law and that of Moses; but yet this is a Law too, as
well as that was. A Book of Statutes, to explain and tell us what we should do,
and what we should forbear; a Rule of Life, to instruct and show us the good
that we should embrace, and the evil that we should avoid: So it is called the
Law of Faith, Rom, 3.27. The Law of the Spirit of Life, Romans 8.2. The Law which
we are under to Christ, 1 Cor. 9.21.

The Holy Jesus, as he came into the World revelare credenda, to reveal saving
Truths for our Instructions; tollere peccata, to make satisfactory Atonement
for our Transgressions, confirmare promissa, to establish precious Promises for
our Encouragement: so likewise promulgare praecepta, to publish strict Rules
for our Conversation.

The rest of the Creatures are all easily ordered, the Heavens and the Earth
hear God's Voice; the Winds and the Seas obey his Call; Fire and Hail, Snow and
Vapors fulfill his Word; the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow know all
the times of their coming; but man, man, who in order to future Recompenses is
made a free Agent, abuses his Will most grossly, has been a cross and
masterless, a morose and disobedient Creature from his very first Creation Line
upon Line, Line upon Line, Precept upon Precept, Precept upon Precept, has
been all too little to bind him. Xenophon, elegantly describing him, observes,
Cattle will be kept within their Hedges, Horses made tractable by their Riders,
Wild Beasts tamed by them, that look to them, (...). Xenophon Cyropoed. l. 1.
(...), etc. All these (says he) in time, are brought willingly to obey those
that look to them; but Men, headstrong Men, ever set themselves against those
that rule over them, and will not be kept in Compass.

This is so true, that God who knows us best, did never think fit to trust us
in our own Hands; no, nor only in our Fellow Creatures neither; but himself
has given Laws to us, from the day that he first made us.

In the State of Innocence, there was a Law then. Adam had three Precepts given
him in Paradise, to till the Ground, to cleave to his Wife, and not to eat of
the Tree of Knowledge.

Noah, the Tradition is, had Seven. The Learned conclude the Council had an Eye
to them in their Determination at Jerusalem, Acts 15.20.

Abraham, it is said, had Ten, of which the great one was Circumcision.

Moses, if the Jewish Doctros have reckoned right, had Six hundred and thirteen
Judicial, Ceremonial and Moral.

Yea, the seemingly neglected Heathen, who had none in Scriptis, they had a Law
too: the Apostle tells us, they showed the work of a Law that was written in
their hearts, Romans 2.15.

And can any imagine that he, who was always from the beginning thus under
Tutors and Governors, should now under the best and purest dispensation be let
loose and unbridled? Where there is the same nature, can it be supposed there
will not be the same need? PLACE="marg" Romans 3.31
Do we make void the law through faith? It is St. Paul's question upon this
occasion: Some were scattering that loose and pestilent notion then, but he
replyeth to it with all detestation, God forbid! Yea, says he, we establish
the Law. So far was the Christian faith from that, from making of it void, that
it added new strength to it.

It is granted, our blessed Lord made an alteration in the Law at his coming,
but it was only of what was Ritual and Political; that being Topical, and
Temporary he thought fit to abrogate: but all that was Natural and Moral as
Ecumenical and Eternal, he authoritatively vindicated and refined. In the
first Sermon that he Preached, he instructed the World in this, informing them
that he came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it. So that still we have a
Law to walk, by; and if it be asked what kind of Law it is, the next particular
gives account of it, where it is declared

A perfect Law. Laws will always be according to the persons that make them.
Tyrants will make cruel Laws, Rash men will make dangerous Laws, Good men will
make equal Laws, Wise men will make necessary Laws. Now this being the Law of
Christ, the wisdom of the Father, in whom all fullness dwells, cannot but be
perfect and lacking nothing; so it is an exact summary of virtue and duty, an
adequate instrument to keep mankind within his proper limits.

That this may be the better evidenced (as the scantling of time will suffer)
we will take a particular view of it and consider it,

First, Intrinsically, with reference to the matter that is contained in it.
Secondly, Extensively, with reference to Persons that are concerned in it.
Thirdly, Comparatively, with reference to any other Laws that may come in as
Rivals in competition with it: and see whether upon every of these accounts it
be not above all exception.
First let us consider it Intrinsically, with reference to the matter that is
contained in it. Where is there a body of Laws besides, that time and
experience has not found defects in? None of them but have their casus omissi,
and cunning men upon occasion can be wicked and mischievous in despite of
them. The Golden heads of a Kingdom contrive them, and when they have done,
sometimes the very Petty-toes find ways to elude them. The politic Sinner
gets privileged places for his iniquity to lodge in, where none of these can
reach him. But where can we fly from this Law's presence? Its going forth is
from the Heavens, and its Circuit to the ends of the Earth, and there is
nothing hid from the heat thereof. It needs not the Pharisees (...), nor the
Romanists Traditions, nor the Euthusiasts new: Revelations, to eeke it out: all
that we owe either to God or man is sufficiently comprehended in it; nor can we
turn either to the right hand or the left, but this lays hold of us.

Human Laws can scarcemake clean, as they should, the outside of the Cup and
the Platter: Here are many dirty things the best of them make no provision for:
But however this is all rhat they pretend to, the inward part may be full of
raevning and wickedness for all that they can do: though that be brimfull of
deadly Poison, if it spill not in some overt acts, these can take no notice of
it. But this takes in the whole man, it cleanses from all filthiness both of
flesh and spirit, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.

To all which must be added, that every of the things ordained by it are to be
accounted for in such a manner, as no kind of artifices can avail the offender.
No bespattering the Evidence, for our own Consciences shall accuse us. No
stifling of Proofs, for there is nothing secret that shall not be made
manifest. No packing of Juries, for the Saints shall Judge the World. No Bills
with Ignoramus, for the Books shall be opened. No favoring of Parties, for
every one shall receive according to what he has done. No misrepresenting the
Trials, as it is written, that thou might be justified in thy sayings, and
clear when thou art Judged. So perfect is this Law considered Intrinsically
with reference to the matter that is contained in it. Look upon it,

Secondly, Extensively, with reference to the Persons that are concerned in it;
and you will find it perfect here too. The Net is suited to the waters it is
cast into, and there is nothing can swim either by or through it. This Law
speaks the Psalmists Language, Psalm 49.1, 2. Hear this all ye people, give
ear all ye inhabitants of the World, both low and high, rich and poor together.
Impartial as Death it self

-- aequo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas regumque turres -- It commands the
Master as well as the Servant, and is not more favorable to a Jezabel, than to
her Handmaid. It charge the Magistrate as home as the Subject, and speaks
to the honorable as to the base; for there is no respect of Persons. It does
not condemn intemperance in the Labourer, but allow it in the wealthier
Landlord; forbid uncleanness in the Cottager, but connive at it in the Modish
Courtier; threaten Atheistical profaneness in common People, but applaud it for
Wit in men of Titles; punish spoiling of others in needy Subjects, but adjudge
it conquest and glory in ambitious Princes. No, as there are none so mean as to
be overlooked by it, so there are none so great as to be humoured by it. It Is a
Law can give an answer to Solomon's Problem, it will say even to the King what
do thou?

Yea, it not only reaches to all degrees of men, but to all the individuals of
every Nation, People, and Language under the Cope of Heaven: whereas all other
Laws are confined to their particular Countries and Kingdoms, and have no place
in others; this equally obliges all, Parthians and Medes, and Elamites, and
the dwellers in Mesopotamia and Judaea, etc. it extends from Sea to Sea, and
from the Rivers to the ends of the Earth. It is sent into all the World, and to
be Preached to every Creature. It is not Calculated for this or that Meridian,
but our common needs and nature, and that is a second Perfection.

Once more, Look upon this Law Comparatively, with reference to any other Laws
that may be set up as Rivals in competition with it, and you will find that the
fairest pretenders that can be put in the Scales against it, must all have a
Tekel written on them.

I will not (after but the little that has been said already) spend your time
so needlessly as but to point at the many things wherein it excels the best
and wisest Laws of men, (there need no words to prove the Sun is brighter than
a Candle;) it not only goes beyond all these, but also that which God himself
once made, that which he delivered to the World by the hand of his Servant
Moses. Even by that some Statutes were enjoined, which in their own nature are
expressly pronounced by the Prophet, Ezekiel. 20.25. Not good: others dispensed
with for the hardness of their hearts, which in themselves our Savior tells
us, Mat. 19.8. were not so justifiable.

When the World was in its Childhood, God thought it sufficient that it should
Speak as a Child, that it should Understand as a Child, that it should Think as
a Child, have but rude and imperfect notices of things: But in fullness of time
then he instructed it higher, and taking it off from Childish things, trained
it up in all that perfection of which it was capable.

It is but too notorious, that there are many things fathered upon this Law,
weak and unmanly, wild and wicked in a high degree: there are few things so
absurd or shameful, that some wretches have not been wresting Scripture for.
Barbarousness and inhumanity to all that are not of our our own way, this is
justified for pure Zeal: Dispensing with Oaths, and Deposing of Kings when they
are not for our turn; this is maintained for Church Authority: Perfidiousness
and breach of Faith with those we call Heretics, this is vindicated for
Christian prudence: disturbing the World and taking up Arms upon pretense of
Religion, this is Preached up for Gospel Reformation: doing Evil, and using
indirect means, so it be for a good end, this is asserted for the Saints
Privilege: being Busybodies, and not abiding in those callings wherein they
are called of God, this is pretended the Motions of the Spirit.

But why should any such misshapen Brats be laid at its door? the Religion
has been often canvassed, and that narrowly, by such as Libanius, Porphyry,
Lucian, Julian, men that wanted neither Wit nor Malice; who would not have
failed to have charged such things home upon it, had there been the least
ground for it. And yet not any of them, but how bold soever they made with the
Speculative, as to the practical part of it, were forced to pass the same
Sentence in effect that Pilate did upon its Author, we find no fault in it;
which cannot be said of any other Laws that have been Published to the World,
not the very exactest, and that is another thing that speaks its perfection.

Mathias a Michou, says the reason why the Tartars received Mahometism and not
Christianity, was because the Saracens persuaded them that that Religion was
the more pleasing and indulgent. It may be the high perfection of its Laws may
not only offend strangers, but make even some that profess it startled, and ask
where then is the easiness of Christ's Yoke, if we are under such a Law now? To
remove therefore all prejudices that may arise in you from corrupt and idle
Fancies upon that Soore, pass on to the last particular in its Character: and
there you will find, that severe as it is, so far is it from really incroaching
upon our Liberty, that it is that which best secureth it. This perfect Law it is

A Law of Liberty. Liberty is a Popular word, the very sound of it we find is
charming, and will work wonders. Make people but believe it is for Liberty in
Civil affairs, and Incendiarys shall be magnified for deserving Patriots. Do
but pretend it is for Liberty in Religious matters, and Atheistical men shall
be celebrated for true Protestants. Argue but for Liberty in filthy and
abominable things, and superficial youngesters shall be admired for notable
head-pieces

But it looks very strange to find it coupled with Law here, they who can be
brought to think they shall find it in the unlikeliest places besides, that can
be named to them, imagine it incredible that it should dwell here. They may be
persuaded it is in Vice, in Error, in Anarchy; but that it should be in Law,
looks mere contradiction to them. The Law that tyeth up, Liberty lets
loose; the Law implies restraint, Liberty is to be without control.

In this sense indeed the little-thinking heap most commonly understand it: but
we are generally guilty of wild Misnamers, and do not call things by their
proper names; if we did, we could never imagine these two inconsistent: So far
it is from that, they cannot well be asunder. For though it may be possible for
Law to be where there is no Liherty: yet it is utterly impossible for Liberty
to be where there is no Law. Then we should be slaves to all other men's lusts
as well as our own, and Beasts would be less dreadful than our Neighbors.

Laws there must be to provide against this, and then they attain their true
end, when they protect from all other evils, and are none themselves. Now of
all the Laws the World was ever blessed with, none for that, like Christianity.
It is such an institution as secureth us against all manner of mischiefs and
inconveniences; not, as sometimes it is with men's, by methods almost as
troublesome and vexatious, but such as are sweet, unexceptionable, and
desirable.

That it may appear to be indeed what it is called, and that this taking title
is not misapplyed to it, (not to mention such things as may not be so suitable
to this occasion, though they are to the argument) I shall speak to some
particulars wherein it deserves this name, and show,

1. That in the Precepts of it. 2. That in the Mildness of it, 3. That in the
effects of it, it is a Law of Liberty.
1. A Law of Liberty it is in the Precepts of it, the things which it does
enjoin. It is not a dispensation of carnal beggarly Elements, as St. Paul, a
bundle of cumbersom costly Ordinances, as St. Augustine, calls the Jewish
Economy, which this Law has set us free from: No, It has seemed good to the
Holy Ghost to lay upon us no greater Burden than of necessary things. The Way
is pleasant, the Yoke is easy, the Commandments are not grievous, like
Feathers to the Wings of a Bird, not Loads, but Helps to Motion.

We picture Liberty in our Fancies, as Tully says Clodius did in his
Summer House, not as a Virgin, but a Strumpet, prostitute to all
Extravagancies, Degrade themselves into the manners of Beasts, remove the
Landmarks of the Law of Nature, do those things, and glory in them, that a good
natured Heathen would be ashamed and blush at; This the Debochee calls the
Liberty of the Creature. Be Sons of Belial to all Authority, despise Dominions,
in speaking evil of Dignities, change Times and Laws in Tumults. This the
Seditious calls the Liberty of the Subject. Sow Soul and State disturbing
Opinions, erect Public Houses, for seducing the unstable, separate from the
National Church; but join in Communion with none at all: This the Schismatic
calls Liberty of Conscience. Amuse the People with things out of their Sphere,
Be-libel Superiors to the jealous Rabble, blow upon the Reputation of all that
stand in the way of their Faction: This the Turbulent calls Liberty of the
Press.

Such using of Liberty as an occasion to the Flesh, it is confessed this Law
does not allow of; but how causelessly does that Child complain of his Fathers
Harshness, who has nothing else to say of him, but that he will not let him
fly in his Face, or fall into the Fire, or beat his Brother? Abstain but from
these, from dishonoring of God, from wronging our Neighbors, from ruining our
selves; and there is nothing else we are debarred from.

The Bedlam has as much reason to resent his Keeper, as we the Severity of the
Divine Commands. What do they require of us, but what is rational, decorous,
and perfective of our Being? Nothing but what a wise ingenious Man in his
deliberate Thoughts would chose, if there were neither Heaven nor Hell. Our
Chains are Bracelets, and our Fetters Ornaments, our Obligations Privileges,
and we free in the midst of all these precepts, as the Head of a Prince within
the Circle of his Crown.

Such a Liberty as the Spirits of just men made perfect have; such a Liberty as
the Angels before the Throne have, yea such a Liberty as the Eternal God
himself has (none of these have a Liberty to do evil) such a Liberty is
allowed us. That is one thing that speaks this Law a Law of Liberty, it is so
in the precepts of it. Besides this,

2. A Law of Liberty it is in the mildness of it. It is tender and very
favorable even to them that offend and come short of it. It is not like the
Laws of Draco written in Letters of Blood but Gold. The Law of the Gospel as it
is a Rule, is (as has been said) stricter than the Law of Moses, but then
consider it as it is a Covenant, and so it is not so strict; for though the
(...) be not performed, yet there is an (...) that shall be accepted. That
which I may call the Statute Law of it, indeed is so pure that it casts us
for every infirmity; but that there is a Chancery so kind, it will relieve us,
if there be sincerity.

If thou will be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord, who may abide it?
what would be the condition of the best of men, if cursed were every one that
continues not in all things, that are written in the book of this Law to do
them! but it has compassion on our frailties, and remembers whereof we are
made: and that so, as not only to make allowances for our weakness when we
imperfectly keep it, but to accept of our repentance, when we have wilfully
broke it.

And is this after the manner of men? do they provide such Cities of refuge for
their offenders to fly to? will a nolle factum, a moral revocation, be it never
so hearty, serve the turn there? No though it may in some Cases be favorably
considered, as to the execution of the Sentence; it cannot in any be legally
pleaded in arrest of Judgment. But here it humbly may, insomuch that when we
are so qualified, the Apostle speaking of it, 1 John 1.9. does not say God is
gracious and merciful (though that he is infinitely in it too) but he is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness.

And is it possible for a Law to be more indulgent than this? Would you not
blush to desire more Liberty than so? He that delivered it has procured by the
price of his own Blood, that none but the obstinate and impenitent shall suffer
under it. Not only when we do well it rewards us, but even when we have done
ill, it spares us as a father spares his own son that serves him. That is
another thing that speaks it a Law of Liberty, it is so in the Mildness of
it. And

3. A Law of Liberty it is, in the Effects of it. I mean not now those powerful
effects, which by the operation of the spirit that goes along with it, it has
within, upon the hearts of men; but those happy effects which by the wisdom of
its injunctions, it has without, upon the affairs of men. It procures Liberty
where it is obeyed, and all the World would be at ease and free were it but
submitted to.

They that would insinuate as if Religion were nothing else but a device of
Statesmen to keep the World in quiet, grant thus much however, in their base
Suggestion, that it is excellently useful for such a purpose.

Every one must be convinced of this that but observes how carefully it
circulateth through the Civil body, as the blood does through the natural,
quickening every several member in its office: prescribing and establishing to
Princes and their people, Judges and their Clients, Husbands and Wifes, Parents
and their Children, Masters and their Servants, all of all degrees, that which
is mutually best for all.

The Rules of it are so framed for general and public good, that they who
would be free from them themselves, think it necessary they should be observed
by every body else: and were they conscientiously practiced by all, there could
be no complaining in our Streets.

The Justice and Equity which it does require, would prevent all Oppression,
Robberys, and safer Cousenage. Its Meekness and forgiving of injuries restrain
all Cruelties, Duels, and unnecessary Law Suits. Its Truth and Sincerity banish
all Lying, Falsehood, and Judicial Perjuries. Its Self-denial and Contentment
extirpate all Covetousness, Pride, and dangerous Ambition. Its Charity and
Unity cure all Sects, Animosities and increasing Divisions. Its Industry and
diligence in our Callings take away all Idleness, Beggary and Capricious
Prodigality. Its Sobriety and Chastity hinder all Adulterys, Bastardys, and so
fashionable Fornication. Its Loyalty and Obedience to Superiors, secure against
all Treasons, Rebellion, and most plausible Sedition. In short, all things that
render men injurious or dangerous, burdensome or offensive to one another, it
provideth against so effectually, that nothing could be wished more, but the
careful keeping of it to make all the Sons of Adam happy.

And it being such a Law, as not only takes care of the eternal happiness of
their Souls in the other World, but preserves so carefully, the Persons, the
Estates, the Credit, the Families of men, from all that should prejudice them,
even in this, none but must conclude it deserves the high Elogium here
bestowed upon it, and is indeed a Perfect Law of Liberty.

I shall therefore now conclude with this natural Inference from the whole,
That Religion is the strongest and best support of Civil Government.

Where is, where can there be, any just and wholesome Law of man, that is not at
least virtually comprehended in this perfect Law of God? The Malmsbury
Philosopher need not have been so fond of the Whimsie, as to have put it into
more than one of his Writings, That it is fit there should be as many Statute
Books Printed as Bibles, and that they should be read in the Churches, as Moses
was in the Synagogue every Sabbath day. The divine Statutes faithfully and
solidly explained, will save the labor of so very unseasonable a Publication.
For besides a higher, they serve this purpose also; and in whatsoever tends
to the peace and order, the preservation and prosperity of human Society, speak
the same things with them. Not in particular, that is not to be expected. If
every thing of that kind, among all Nations, should be expressly set down in
holy Scripture (to use St John's Language) I suppose that even the World it self
could not contain the Books that should be Written: but in the general they do;
injoyning the Principles upon which they are founded, and for the several
instances, remitting every one to the Laws of their own Country, commanding us
to be subject to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake.

So that if men were but good Christians, they would be good Subjects, good
Officers, good Neighbors, good in every station that God shall place them in.

And when these are the benefits and happy fruits of it, let it not be thought
affected or immodest, if here I break forth into the Psalmists Apostrophe, Be
wise now therefore O ye Kings, be instructed ye. Judges of the Earth. And
affirm it is not only the duty but even the interest of the higher powers to
uphold and give it countenance. There is nothing so facilitateth the
Magistrates Office, and prepares the way for his Authority; this makes men to
be a Law to themselves, and obey humane ordinances, not only for wrath, but
also for Conscience sake.

It cannot be denied but that the pretenses of this excellent Religion have
wrought no small confusions on the Earth, but I hope the Religion it self shall
not be prejudiced because of this, any more than you will suffer the lawful
Money of England to be Cried down or Clipped, because there is some that is
counterfeit. The Hypocritical pretenses of it, are not more mischievous to a
State, but sound and pure Religion is as beneficial.

And such is that professed in this Established Church of ours. A Church that
does not slight Second Table Duties as Legal Preaching, or Heathenish Morality:
but teaches its members to have always Consciences void of offense as toward
God, so toward men. A Church that does not place the Sprit of the Gospel in
praying extempore and inveighing against ceremonies: but in love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness. A Church that does not flatter men as
Saints and godly for professing themselves of her way: but testifyeth that the
Kingdom of God is not meat and drink but righteousness. A Church that does not
jugle in the Doctrine of obedience to Magistrates, reserving fly distinctions
for deserting or resisting them: but so Loyal, that upon that very score (you
know) it was once ruined, and is at this day maligned and heaved at, by as many
as are given to change. And what can tend more to the quiet and welfare, the
settlement and benefit of a People, than such honest and sober, pious and
prudent principles?

Now when the Church is so assistant to the Tranquillity of the State: for a
recompense in the same, (I speak as unto wise men) let the State be as
assistant to the tranquillity of the Church. When the Religion is such a
faithful support to the Civil Government, let the Civil Government be as
faithful a support to the Religion.

So as God ordained of old, The people shall be lead like a flock by the hand
of Moses and Aaron, and all of all conditions happy, in the wholesome Laws of
the land, and the perfect Law of Liberty.

FINIS.

