SERMON Preached before the QUEEN, AT WHITE HALL, JVLY 5. 1691.

By R. Meggott, D. D. Dean of Winchester, and Chaplain to Their Majesty's.

Published by Her Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard.
MDCXCI.

I. Epistle of S. John 3.20. For if our heart condemn us, God is greater than
our heart, and knows all things.


ONE would be apt to think, that we of our Profession should not speak with so
little effect as generally we do, considering the Matter and Substance of our
Message. We exhort you to nothing, but that which you your selves (as often as
you are serious) judge meet and necessary: reprove you for nothing, but that
for which even your own ingenuity does so too, and cannot but confess you are
to blame for. The things are all so equal and reasonable, that not only the
Modest and Virtuous, but the very Loosest and Wildest sort of People are not
without regrets and reluctancies in their violations of them.

What aileth thee O thou Sea, that thou flyest! We see no affections or
passions in any of the other Creatures but what have some foundation: it is not
for nothing that the Hare runs at the sight of the Dog, or the Lamb
trembles at the approach of the Wolf: so that if those horrors for evil
actions, that are woven into our constitutions, should be in vain and without
any ground; it would have been an error and miscarriage in our very Creation:
which, seeing we cannot in the least discover in any of the rest of the works
of God, (but that in wisdom he has founded them all) why should we suspect and
mistrust it here?

We may much rather conclude, that he who has given instincts to Birds,
Beasts, Fishes, proper and useful for the preservation of themselves from
mischief, has placed Conscience in the immortal part of man for the same end:
namely, to forewarn him of the things that tend to his eternal ruin.

Let no one then despise these involuntary throbbings and recoilings of his
heart upon the irregularities of his conversation; they are not the products of
a childish or artificial superstition, but the prognostics of a real danger.
How else should come such consternations in our minds, at things so agreeable
to our inclinations? If our Spirits upon such occasions speak not good things
concerning us but evil, it is but what they have first received from the Lord;
if they accuse and cast us, whatsoever they bind on earth is bound in heaven:
They are but the Eccho's of that sentence, which the Judge of all the world
(whose Deputies they are) at that time does pass on us: and therefore if these
have ought against us, we may be assured he has much more. This is the
Doctrine our Apostle delivers in the Text, if our heart condemn us God is
greater than our heart and knows all things.

In which words, here are two practical truths to be took notice of,

The One is supposed and this is, that we cannot but disapprove of our selves,
when we take to, and go on in, any sinful courses our own hearts forbear not to
condemn us for them.

The Other is asserted, and this is, that if our hearts do condemn us, so long
as we abide in that state, we can expect nothing but to be condemned of God
also. He is greater than our hearts, and knows all things.

That which I would first propound to your consideration is what is here
supposed. That we cannot but disapprove of our selves, when we take to, and go
on in, any sinful courses. Our own hearts forbear not to condemn us for them. I
need not tell you that the word heart in Scripture is not ordinarily to be
understood literally of that part of our body called so, but metaphorically of
the powers of the Soul. In this sense, it is sometimes put for the
understanding, so Romans 1.21. their foolish heart was darkened. Sometimes for the
will, so Mat. 22.37. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart.
Sometimes for the memory, so Psalm 119.11. Thy word I have hid in my heart.
Sometimes for the Conscience, so Eccles. 7.22. Thine own heart knows also
that thou thy self have cursed others. And in this last acceptance you are to
take it here that our heart condemns us, that is in the Hebrew way of
speaking, which St. John uses, and has no precise, peculiar word for it, our
Consciences. Not that you are to conceive of this as a distinct being of it
self, subsisting separate from any of these faculties I have mentioned (that
were as fantastic as to imagine death to be a person) but the operation and
result of these in conjunction, about our moral actions. So it is, that when
they are evil and unjustifiable, we cannot reflect on them without inquietude
and dissatisfaction.

Among mankind some are Fools, and some are Lunaticks; by the same means and in
the same measure, that a man may be without Reason, he may be without
Conscience too: but when ever this is whole and sound, the other abides so
also. It is as natural to us as that is, being indeed, but the maxims and the
use of it.

The whole element of Fire may as soon be quenched by the spitting of a Child;
or the Wind blow out the light of the Sun that rules the day; as any violence
or sophistry, as long as we are our selves be able to extinguish it.

I grant it does not constantly make the same noise in us* Sometimes it is as
the alarm of a Clock, that goes aloud, and waketh us with its warnings: at
other times, as the hand of the Dyal, that points silently to the figure
without striking: but either as one or the other, here it is immovably fixed in
every one of us, to record and judge our actions. The high as well as the low,
the gay as well as the melancholy, the bold as well as the timorous, have its
company. No greatness can daunt it, no pleasures can charm it, no advantages
can bribe it, from performing its office.

This the daily experience of all ranks and degrees of people does so
manifestly prove, that I should not choose any longer to insist on it, were it
not for the clearing of these two things.

I. How our hearts can be said to condemn us when we do evil, when as such, as
walk contrary one to another in things of mighty moment pertaining to God and
to their duty, neither, have any regret for what they do, but both sides inward
peace and quiet?

Secondly, How our hearts can be said to condemn us, when we do evil, when
several that live in scandalous vices and immoralities are yet so far from any
trouble of mind about it, they rather make a mock of it?

The first objection to be answered is, how our hearts can be said to condemn
us when we do evil, when as such as walk contrary one to another, in things of
mighty moment pertaining to God, and to their duty, neither have any regret for
what they do, but both sides inward peace and quiet? This is notorious in
matter of fact. What with some is Religion, with others is an abomination; what
with some is Devotion, with others is Superstition; what with some is Duty,
with others is absolutely unlawful; and yet each equally well persuaded, each
equally well satisfied in their waves and actings. One of these be sure must be
in the wrong, and yet their hearts as much assure and comfort them, as theirs
that are not. So that in some cases, it seems, a man may do evil, and yet his
heart not condemn Him neither.

It is true, in such where it self is deceived and mistaken it does not. How is
it possible it should? Our hearts are not infallible: by art and education, by
company and custom, they may be miserably abused and imposed upon. In
Christendom, whole Kingdoms and Nations; in Kingdoms numerous Sects and Parties
(let who will be in the right) are sad examples of it.

What shall we say then? Does the heart neglect to do its part in such? No,
even where it is thus, it does its duty to the utmost of its ability. For tho
it may err in judging of the evil, it fails not to condemn us for what it
apprehends to be evil, and flies in our faces, if we attempt it. In
difficult and disputable cases, an upright heart may be out, as to which is the
right and which wrong; but if the man, for any by ends, shall forsake that
which it tells him is the right, and espouse the wrong, it certainly
reproacheth and tormenteth him for it.

Let none say, if this be all, seeing it may be out, as well as in, what need
we so much regard it? For, if in this case we have honestly done what we can to
inform it, then without scruple we may securely follow it.

For the reason but now suggested, we are not hastily and implicitly to follow
its verdict; so we may be accessory to our own delusion: but if we impartially
and diligently weigh the ground of our persuasion; we do all that is in the
power of discreet and good men. Then if our hearts should misguide us, we need
not question, but that he who knows whereof we are made will mercifully
forgive us. So that if after that, our hearts condemn us not, we may have
confidence toward God. And let this suffice for the first Objection.

Object. 2. The other is, how our hearts can be said to condemn us when we do
evil; when as many who live in scandalous vices and immoralities, are so far
from any disturbance of mind, they rather make a mock of it? We read of some
whose Consciences were seared with a hot iron: of others, 2 Timothy 4.2.
who being past feeling, Ephesians. 4.19.
had given themselves over to lasciviousness: and if we did not, we live in an
age can show us such, who go on in ways of gross and palpable wickedness, with
an uninterrupted sanguine security, and are not in trouble as other men.

It is not to be denied, but that too often it is so; but the question is how
such persons come to be so? Were they so always? No, it was time and long
habit brought them to this, they did not presently arrive to it. Solomon
describing the common Harlot, tells us She eats and wipeth her mouth and
says I have done no wickedness: Having used her self to that course of life,
she was so lost to all sense of virtue and honor as to make nothing of it. But
in what a different manner does innocent Thamer resent but an immodest
solicitation? And I whether shall I cause my shame to go!

It is nothing but custom and often repetion, that lessen our apprehensions and
abate our horrors for ill actions. Great sins of any kind, like the Indian
smoke, tho by degrees people may so inure themselves to it they cannot forbear
it, make every one sick at the first time of their taking it. O what struglings
and aversions are there before! what commotions and inquieties afterward! They
who have got over these, and conquered them, cannot but acknowledge themselves
have sometimes felt them. Yes, and before they go out of the world in all
probability will again Conscience, tho, like Abigail, it says nothing less or
more while the wine is in the man, while intoxicated with the strength and
fullness of temptations; when it finds him come to himself and sober, in
retirement, in affliction, in danger, in sickness, then it will take the
opportunity to tell him his own, and make him hear of it. It is a worm that
never dies; tho it be trod upon, at one time or other it will turn again, and
gnaw the man that serves it so. Our hearts are physically good, tho not
morally: tho they delight in the sin, they cannot avoid being disturbed at it;
tho they contribute to it, yet so it is (witness all our experience) they
condemn us for it.

This is the first thing we are here informed of, that we cannot but disapprove
of our selves when we take to, and go on in any sinful course. Taking that
therefore now for granted, let us proceed to consider the consequences of it.
However at present it may be hectored and outbraved, despised and made light
of; it concerns us seriously to mind it. The thing does not end here, there
is another-guess-one than our hearts, that observes and is displeased also,
God himself, who confirms the Sentence and condemns us too.

This is the truth that is here asserted in the other part of the Text which I
am now to speak to, that they whose hearts do thus condemn them, in that state
can expect nothing but to be condemned of God also, He is greater than our
hearts and Knows all things.

It is not said by the Apostle Syllabically if our heart condemn us, God will
condemn us too: but it is at least Equivalently; by an expression, in which
instead of such affirmation, is elegantly couched the reason of it. God is
greater than our hearts and Knows all things.

A judicious interpreter looks upon the former words as a Rhetorical
aposiopesis. If our heart condemn us! a broken exclamation of astonishment at
the dangerousness of such a condition, to be supplied with some such thoughts
as these, what is then like to become of us when God shall enter into judgment
with us! If we cannot answer our doings to our selves, how shall we be able to
answer them before him! If our own Spirits frown on us and upbraid us, how
shall we be able to look on him who is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity!

And tho neither the vulgar nor we have translated it, because in several Greek
manuscripts there is none of it, yet the common Copies before these later words
put (...) for: For God is greater than our hearts, and knows all things. And
so they contain three arguments for a serious regard to the rebukes and
convictions of our own Consciences, to make us sensible that if these be
offended with us, God is so much more.

The first is taken from his Being, He is God.

The second from his Power, He is greater than our hearts.

The third from his Omniscience, He knows all things.

The first Argument here hinted for it, is taken from his Being, He is God. God
whose Deputies our hearts are, and whose mind they speak. These would not
disturb or threaten us in the pursuit of any of our natural appetites did not
he commission them. So that I may say of their verdict, what the Evangelist
does of Caiaphas's, this speak they not of themselves but prophecy. It is not
their own doings, but the word is in our hearts as a burning fire shut up in
our bones, and they are weary of forbearing* Now who has power enough to do
this? to make our selves fall foul upon our selves, but God only?

I grant in some particular cases, other things may do it: an error, a disease
may sometimes be sufficient, and put the heart upon condemning when God does
not. We see it in some weak and melancholy persons, who in the bitterness of
their souls, cry out that they are castaways, past the day of Grace, etc. whom
(if they deal sincerely in the grounds of their complaint, and say all) we may
well hope better things of. But this is rare and accidental, where it is
universal there must be more than so in it. And so it is with men about things
materially moral, it is not the case of here and there one, but of every one to
be so affected. Parthians and Medes and Elamites, the dwellers in Mesopotamia
and Judaea and Cappadocia, etc. Jews and Gentiles, Christians and Heathens,
Ancient and Modern, Civil and Barbarous, have all the same sentiments. Here the
whole world is of one language, and do as much agree about what is virtuous and
vicious, what is good and evil, as what is clean and foul, what is sweet and
bitter. They show the work of the Law written in their hearts, their
Consciences also bearing witness, and their thoughts either accusing or else
excusing them.

Now who can write there in such manner upon all, but only he who has created
all? This is that which the Jewish Doctors mean by their separate intelligence,
the ancient Schoolmen by their Intellectus agens, Adam de Morisco by Elias's
Raven, when they speak of the manifestation of the Law of Nature: they are but
so many affected obscure expressions to signify that it is from the God of
Heaven. And if it be he, we may be sure he does not use lightness, his word
shall not be yea and nay; he will not say one thing to men in this world, and
the contrary in that which is to come; but what he condemns by our hearts
here, he will condemn by himself there. So that if these condemn us, as long as
we go on in these things, and do not reform, we have no reason to imagine that
God will not deal with us in the same manner. That is the first argument
intimated for the proof of it, taken from his Being, He is God. God who now
sets the heart on work, and teaches it to do so.

The second Argument he uses for it, is taken from his Power, He is greater
than our hearts. If we could struggle so, as to bear, or break through the
sharpest stings of these, yet his indignation will be heavier and more
intolerable.

How light soever they may make of it, whose own are yet asleep, to be under
but the positive condemnation of Conscience, is of it self a deplorable and
very fearful circumstance. How comfortless and unhappy do we see this thing
alone can make men, when it seizes their awakened Souls, and thoroughly
possesses their imagination! How does a dart strike through their liver, and a
fire burn in their bowels! How does it drink up all their moisture, and make
their faces gather paleness! How does it break their restless bones, and
sometimes quite overturn their Understandings! Racks are more tolerable, Death
it self has been often flown to, by them that were under it, as the more
eligible.

I mention not these outrageous violences of Spirit, as things either necessary
or commendable (as some would make them) in the conversion of a Sinner. No they
proceed not from any such causes as should deserve it. Ignorance, or Despair,
Ignorance of the nature of the Gospel Covenant, or Despair of what it promises
to the Sinner when he repents, being the usual wombs that bear them and Paps
that give them suck. All that I hint it for, is only to show you what a Hell it
is to be but under the Condemnation of our own hearts.

But let no man fancy(as some perversely have been broaching) that this is the
only Hell. As terrible as this is, there is the same difference between it, and
that which shall come after; as between the sentence pronounced against the
Malefactor, which sometimes does not so much as change his Conntenance, and the
execution that takes away his life. When Conscience tormenteth men so, it is
not by any proper efficiency of its own, by the exercise of any natural power:
For it is but an opinion or judgment of our state as to eternity, that it is
dangerous and damnable: When it has represented this, it has not more that it
can do, But God is greater. What that only threatens, he fulfilleth: What that
only makes us fear, he will make us feel. Now he being provoked by these very
things our hearts are, we have great reason to be concerned if they condemn us,
tho at present we suffer not any alteration by it: For if we go hence in that
state, God will condemn us too: and then we shall not come off so, He is
greater than our hearts. And that is the second Argument.

The last by which he goes about to prove the importance of our hearts
condemning us, is taken from Gods omniscience, He Knows all things. Our
hearts know more ill of us, than all the world besides, but he much more than
they. None knows the things of a man save the Spirit of man that is in him,
none knows so much of them as that does, but yet there are abundance of
things, that even that for want of minding or memory, knows but imperfectly
and confusedly.

But there is not a word in our tongue but he knows it altogether, nor a
thought in our heart, that he understands not afar of. He discovers much
sin by us we do not observe: he remembers much sin by us we have forgotten:
and so knows more cause for our condemnation than our hearts can possibly
represent to us. And therefore if they know enough by us to condemn us, we
cannot but conclude God does much more.

Our hearts in their evidence against us, in matter of-fact we may be sure
speak nothing but the truth, but they are not able to speak the whole truth.
Who can understand his errors? and therefore if they out of their broken notes
draw up such an enditement against us, as is sufficient eternally to undo and
destroy us; how shall we be able to stand before him, to whom all things are
naked and bare?

Our hearts may acquit us, and yet it is not impossible but God may condemn us.
So St. Paul thought I know nothing by my self (says he) my own heart does not
accuse me, 1. Cor. 4.4.
yet am I not hereby justified, I may be mistaken he that judges me (that is
ultimately and unerringly) is the Lord. And if when our own hearts acquit us,
it is not impossible but God may condemn us, surely if our hearts condemn us we
have no pretense for the presumption that God will acquit us.

When a man is condemned by a Judge, who was his friend or near relation every
one will conclude the thing was plain, and he deserved it certainly. Here the
Judge is not only our friend but our very selves. We are very apt to think well
of our selves, that we are sincere, Penitents, Believers; when it may be there
is no reason for it: but if ever we think ill of our selves, that we are
hypocritical, profane, atheistical, we may conclude there is a great deal of
reason for that; more always than appears to us, and all this is open to the
eye of God: Upon this account the Apostle here reckons there is so much
danger of him, whose heart condemns him, because that God is greater than our
heart, and knows all things.

This is the sense of the words I have read to you; which being delivered by
way of supposition, with an (If) a thing that may be, or may not be. I am
unwilling to dismiss you, while I have pressed you to consider of it, every one
as to his own particular.

It cannot reasonably be imagined, that we should all of us be in one and the
same state: there must needs be of both sorts among us. And as I doubt not but
there may be several, whose hearts testify for them and condemn them not: so,
it must be a very extraordinary Assembly, where there is not cause enough to
fear, that there are many, whose hearts cannot but rise up against them, and
do. None can say any thing to this but your selves, and what can be more
becoming you, at this time especially, when some of you this morning already
have, others are going to, eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup, than
carefully and strictly examine your selves about it.

Lorius has a fancy, that when our Savior stooped down and wrote on the
ground, (while the Scribes and Pharisees were asking him the question, What
should be done to the Woman taken in adultery) that he did it so miraculously,
that each of her accusers, when they looked upon it, read all their own
particular sins there; and that this was that which made them slink away so,
one by one abashtd and out of countenance. What he imagines they did by
Miracle, every one of us (if we will) moy do without one. If we would look but
where we ought, every one into our own bosoms, there we may see, if not each
distinct fact that we have done, yet however the great and common habits in
which we live. O search and see then, commune with your own hearts and be
still, awfully mind the report these make to you.

It is said of Herod, Luke 3.20. that to all the evil that he had done, he
added yet this above all, that he shut up John in prison. John was he that
reproved him for his vices, he that admonished him of his sin, he that called
him to repentance: and to shut him up in prison, is called an adding to his
evil above all. What ever your actions have been any of you, whatsoever the
course of your lives, to shut your eyes against this burning and shining light;
to stop your ears at this voice crying within you; to detain the truth which
this tells you, in unrighteousness, is to be guilty of a sin much like to
that. If we will not hear thee, O thou vicegerent of God within us: If we will
not hear thee, O thou Guardian Angel of our better part, when thou tellest us
our faults, between thee and us alone, we shall be worse to thee than even
Heathens and Publicans.

But of all that neglect or refuse to take notice of it, I must by no means
omit to remember you, that there are none who do it with so much danger to
themselves as you whom the providence of God has placed in higher stations,
and raised above the common rank of men. This is all the Monitor that many such
as you, if you fall into temptations, can rely upon. Your quality and condition
of life makes it more than ordinary difficult, for them whose Office it is to
watch over your souls to admonish you; and there are several cases wherein your
servants for Jesus sake can scarce, without exceeding their Commission, be
particular. So that if you gag this faithful Officer within, and will not
suffer him to speak, you will be in greater hazard of miscarrying than those in
a meaner station. But him you have always with you, which will in any wise
rebuke you, and not suffer sin upon you, but as there is occasion say such
things to you, as no other either may, or can.

To end then, Hear this all ye people, give ear all the Inhabitants of the
Earth, both high and low, rich and poor together. When ever you find this
checking, advising, warning you, by all the terrors of the Lord I would
persuade, by all the kindness you have for your selves I would beseech you to
give an ear to it. When it smites you count it for a kindness, when it
reproves you, be thankful as for a blessing. Instead of accosting it as Ahab
did Elijah, Have thou found me, O mine Enemy, salute it as David did Abigail,
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel that sent thee this day to meet me. It really
deserves it at your hands, It Is design is not to torment you before the time,
but to save you from the wrath to come: receive it then accordingly; not as a
Spy or a busy Informer, but as an Apostle, as an Angel of God. So treating it,
you will have praise of the same at last, and rejoice in its testimony. By this
way you may so improve their judging you, as to prevent your being judged by
the Lord, and make their condemning you now a means of God's acquitting you in
the Great Day.

FINIS.

