A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN, AT WHITE HALL, On the FAST, July 15. 1691.

By R. Meggott, D.D. Dean of Winchester, and Chaplain to Their Majesty's.

Published by Her Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard.
MDCXCI.

2 SAMUEL XXIV. 14. And David said unto Gad, I am in a great strait: let us fall
now into the hand of the Lord, (for his mercies are great) and let me not fall
into the hand of man.


THat none who pretend love to their native Country, either upon
dissatisfaction about the manner of the public settlement, or discontent upon
account of any personal disappointment, may be so far prejudiced, as to be cold
or careless in their devotions this day, set apart for the imploring a blessing
upon their Majesty's and their forces, against the threatening ambition of the
common enemy of Europe: That none (I say) may be leavened and sowred to that
degree, as, if not to desire, yet, not dread or regard our ill success, I have
chose to represent to you, the horrid and important consequences of it.

Howsoever it may look at a distance to some men in their passions, it is
certainly one of the greatest judgments that can befall a nation, to be subdued
by, and brought under the power of their professed inveterate enemies.

This appears here to have been the opinion of wise and pious David, who,
when he was commanded by God to make his choice of those three evils, V. 12.
the famine, the pestilence, or flying before his enemies, deprecateth the
last, as incomparably the greatest of them all.

The famine was to have been a long one, to have held for seven years, in which
time what miserable straits must they necessarily have been reduced to! 2 King.
6.25.
In a famine an asses head has been sold for fourscore pieces of Silver, and a
fourth part of a cab of dung, for five pieces of Silver: 6.27.
In a famine there is no help out of the barn-floor, or out of the winepress,
but the hands of the pitiful women have sodden their own children, Lam. 4.10.
and made them their meat: and tho in one of so unusual a continuance, he could
not but expect the most woeful extremities, yet he looks upon flying before
his enemies as more dismal than that.

The Pestilence was to have lasted but three days, but when we consider what a
depopulation might have been made even in that short time, we must conclude,
the thoughts of it could not but be very terrible to him. 2 Kings 19.30.
When the destroying Angel of the Lord went out against the camp of the
Assyrians in one night he smote of them an hundred fourscore and five thousand;
and at that proportion how great must be the number that might have been
smitten in three whole days! and yet this he chooses also, rather than flying
before his enemies: tho either of the other must have been very sore
calamities, yet this he reckoned would be a sorer. So he manifests by the
answer he returns in the Text, David said unto Gad I am in a great strait,
let us fall now into the hand of the Lord (for his mercies are great) but let
me not fall into the hand of man.

That the whole Story of this, as well as what I would infer from it, may
appear the clearer, I shall open these three things to you.

First, wherein the greatness of David's sin in numbering the People, (which was
the cause of this judgment) consisted?

Secondly, Why God punished the People for it (for unto them all three of the
Plagues propounded did extend, which soever he had chose of them) when the sin
was only David's?

Thirdly, Why David so particularly prays against flying before his Enemies,
as so much more dreadful than either of the other two?

The first thing I would open is wherein the greatness of David's sin in
numbering the People (which was the cause of this judgment lay? The thing at
first sight does not look like so heinous a crime, as to deserve so severe a
punishment. It had been done before often, and we do not read any fault was
found with it, any displeasure from God arose upon it. Moses numbered the
People, Numb. 1.19. Saul numbered the people, 1 Samuel 11.8. David himself numbered
the People before, 2 Samuel 15.1 and none of them are blamed for it, no evil
ensued upon it. How comes it now then to be taken so very ill?

Some men indeed are so uncertain and humourous, that what they are well enough
pleased with at one time, they will be much offended with at another. But this
is not to be supposed in God: No, This numbering of the People was of a
different fort from any of them I but now mentioned. Moses's numbering the
people was upon a civil account, by the express command of God, to preserve
their Pedegrees after their Families. Saul's numbering the People was upon a
military account, when he was to march against the Ammonites, that he might
know what strength he had. David's numbering the people before was upon the same
account when they were going to battle to rank them under their several
Officers. But this was for none of these ends, no justifiable reason to be
given of it Upon this account Joab modestly endeavored to put him off from it,
v. 3. of this Chapter, He said unto the King, Now the Lord thy God add unto the
People an hundred fold how many soever they be, but why does my Lord the King
delight in this thing? Humbly intimating that he had better forbear it, that it
was needless and improper.

Exodus 30.12, 13. God says to Moses. when thou take the sum of the
Children of Israel after their number, then shall they give every man a ransom
for his Soul to the Lord, when thou numbrest them: that there be no Plague
among them, when thou numbrest them. This they shall give every one that
passes among them that are numbered half a Shekel after the Shekel of the
Sanctuary. He enjoyneth this so, as that it should be a forfeiture of their
Lives, if they omitted it. And the Jewish Doctors generally reckon this to be
David's sin, that when he numbered them, he did not cause them to pay this money.
But other Interpreters with greater probability, lay it upon another thing,
Namely, his Pride and Vainglory, that, when there was no real occasion that
did require it, he would have, them numbered merely in a vaunting way, that it
might be spread about both in his own, and other Kingdoms, how vast their
number was. So that if now he had made them pay this offering, it had been so
far from making it no sin in him, that (I appreheud) it would but have
aggravated, and made it greater. For then to his Pride, he had added
Oppression, by needless taxing and peeling of his Subjects.

That he was conscious to himself of no good end he had in it, appears by the
10th v. of this Chapter, wherein we find that before Gad came to him, his heart
smote him and he said unto the Lord, I have sinned greatly in that I have done.
So great a sin was it, not only in God's Eye but also in his own, to trust in
man and make Flesh his arm. And may all that fear his name of what Rank and
Condition soever they are, as they expect his blessing, in every circumstance
have a care of it!

It is a dangerous mistake to fancy, that none but sensual Extravagancies, such
as Intemperance and Uncleanness, etc. are displeasing to the Almighty. Odious
as these are, we may learn from this story, he is as highly provoked by
spiritual sins, such as we generally have favorable opinion of, the having our
hearts lifted up with creature enjoyments, and departing from the Lord our God.

But still it being David only that was guilty, it remains to be enquired
into, why God punishes the People for it? How could they help it? It was none
of their Doings. Does not God himself set down this for his rule, Ezekiel. 18.20.
The Soul that sins it shall dye. The Son shall not bear the iniquity of the
Father, neither shall the Father bear the iniquity of the Son? How come then
the Subjects here to bear the iniquity of their King? Shall not the Judge of
all the Earth do right?

Yes, there is nothing here that makes to the contrary. It might be sufficient
to alledg the near relation between Prince and People, and their welfare so
mutually depending on each other, that the Punishment of the one is to others;
and as he sometimes punishes the People in their Prince; The Lord was angry
with Moses for their sakes: Deuteronomy. 1.37
So he sometimes punishes the Prince in his People; the head is out of order,
and the other Members are blistered, or let blood for it.

But we need not have recourse to that in this case, here was sin of their own
to be accounted for. I confess, I am not satisfied with that answer some have
given to it, viz. that the People deserved it for their sin in not opposing
David in this thing, and suffering themselves to be numbered. For tho (as has
been already said) David had no good reason for his doing it, yet he might have
had, which he was not obliged to communicate to them: and it is a principle of
too dangerous a latitude for the Government and Peace of Mankind, to affirm,
that Subjects are not to submit to the commands and orders of their respective
Sovereigns, except they themselves are satisfied in the grounds of them. Tho (I
say) I do not take this to be their sin; yet they had sins, such as did justly
merit this Punishment at the hands of God. Tho they are not express in
particular, yet they are sufficiently employed in the general, v. 1 of this
Chapter, where it is said that the anger of the Lord was kindled against
Israel, and he moved David against them, to say, go number Israel. So that this
act of his seems not so much the cause of their Punishment as the occasion.
God had a controversy with them, for which they deserved as much as this, had
David never done the thing: But upon his doing it, he inflicteth it, in the
same act punishing him too. The wise man tells us, Prove. 14.28. in the
multitude of people is the Kings honor, but in the want of people is the
destruction of the Prince. So that this was really a judgment upon him as well
as them, and, if we consider it, a home one, such as he might evidently read
his sin in His sin was Vanity and carnal Security, in relying and glorying in
the numbers of his people: his punishment is, the lessning and diminishing the
numbers of those people he was so proud of.

And let this suffice for the second Quaery, of which, with the former, having
said thus much, I now proceed to the chief one: Why David does here so
particularly deprecate falling into the hand of man?

As co the other two, some think he was indifferent, leaving it wholly to Gods
disposal, without pitching upon either: only praying against the third.

But the Septuagint is of another mind, adding to the Text these words, (...)
and David chose the plague. v. 5.
And that which immediately follows in the next verse seems much to
countenance it, where it is said, so God sent the Pestilence. As if he had done
it upon his Election and determination. Antiq. Jud. l. 7. c. 13.
Josephus in his history not only affirms this particular of David, but
adds this plausible reason of it, that he did it upon prudent and politic
considerations; to avoid the murmurings and discontent of the People, who (it
was easy to foresee) were like to resent it sufficiently, to undergo any of
those miseries, purely upon his score. To prevent this therefore as much as
might be, he supposes that he chose this, as that wherein he showed the least
respect of all to his own security.

Had he chose the Famine, that indeed would have been very heavy upon the poor,
they would have much to do to live when provisions should be so excessive
scarce and dear, that can so hardly shift for themselves when they are at the
cheapest. Yea, in so many years, it must have pinched even the rich, and they
who used to fare deliciously could not but be put to it, to supply themselves
with necessaries. But it cannot be imagined, that the King himself could have
suffered in his own person by it. If there were any food to be had in the
Kingdom, be sure there would be no want at his table; and if there were none,
he could be furnished from other Countries.

If he had been worsted by his enemies, tho his own courage and gallantry might
be for carrying him into the greatest dangers, yet the people would have
thought themselves too much concerned for the light of Israel, not to interpose
themselves to succor and secure him: or they who before were so tender of him,
that their care made them almost forget their duty, swear unto him he should go
no more out with them unto battle, 2 Samuel 21.7.
would have persuaded him to retire to some of his strongholds, that might be
tenable for three months at least against any army.

But in the pestilence, he who had the command of the Exchequer, would be in
equal danger with him that had no money; he who sat upon the Throne, as
obnoxious as he that grindeth at the Mill. The Pestilence could not be kept off
by the most stout and resolute Guards, nor could it be kept out by the most
impregnable Walls and Bulwarks

This David could not but know when he chose it, but he does it not upon so
mean a principle as that Historian fancyeth, only to decline the clamor and
censure of his People* No, this public spirited Prince had a nobler and more
heroic Soul. He was really content not only to suffer with them, but for them;
to have a share in the Punishment, but to bear it all. He said unto God, Let
thy hand I pray thee be on me and my Fathers house but not on thy People that
they should be plague^ V. 17.
No, it was not so much from design to pacify them, or fear of losing their
good opinion, as from a just persuasion, that all things considered, this was
the least of those three evils propounded to him; or however that flying before
his enemies was the greatest, and therefore he expressly declineth that, let me
not fall into the hand of man.

It would not be passed by here, that he does not speak simply of having war
with men. It appears by his own frequent practices, he did not look on that
as so dreadful a thing as either Plague or Famine. Not only fierce and
ambitious, but just and good Princes, have chosen that, rather than suffer
things much less terrible, without reparation and satisfaction. For tho such
have been universally ashamed to involve those that were under them in such
calamities as this necessarily brings along with it, for slight and frivolous
causes; such as their own Vanity or Glory, Humor or Covetuousness, Pride or
personal Piques; yet breaking their Leagues, injuring their Subjects, invading
their rights, oppressing their Allies, and such like, have always been judged
not only sufficient but necessary grounds for it, notwithstanding all the
expenses, miseries, dangers and bloodshed that attend it. It was not simply
war, but miscarrying in the war that he so dreaded, the being conquered and
overcome, which he here expresses by falling into their hand, let me not fall
into the hand of man.

This he apprehends the saddest of any of the judgments, propounded to him.
And there are Four things, that in his case might well induce him to think so.

First, They were Men. Secondly, They were Enemies. Thirdly, They were
Foreigners. Fourthly, They were Idolaters, haters and persecutors of the true
religion which was professed by him and his people.
First, They were Men. When God lifts up his hand who can contend? when he is
angry, who can stand before him? Here to yield is our duty; to submit and
humble our selves our glory. When smitten by him men are pitied: When
afflicted by him, they are lamented. It does not reflect upon their discretion
when their Harvests are destroyed by unseasonable weather, nor upon their
valor and bravery to be visited, and carried off by a malignant Fever. These
are purely from above; enemies no more contribute to it, than friends can
remedy it; either have more influence one way or other, than they have upon an
Eclipse of the Sun, or an Earthquake. But this was quite another case. Here the
blow was to come from his fellow creatures; those with whom he was at least
equal in all things, and upon the level. So that if these prevailed against
him, the disgrace would be as great as the defeat, and the loss of his Esteem
of as bad consequence as of a battle. How must the news of it lessen his
reputation every where round about him! When it should be told in Gath, and
published in the streets of Askalon, how would the daughters of the Philistines
rejoice, the Daughters of the uncircumcised triumph, to hear that Israel fled!
Israel that had been so renowned for a valiant and warlike nation, whose
ancestors had subdued those people, and been a continual terror to them! Heb.
11.32.
The time would fail me to tell of Gideon, and of Barak of Sampson also, and of
Jephthah, who waxed valiant in fight, and turned to flight the armies of these
aliens: of the bow of Jonathan that turned not back, and the Sword of Saul that
returns not empty from the blood of the slain, 2 Samuel 1.22.
from the fat of the mighty.

It Is granted that time and chance so happen to all, that the battle is not
always to the strong; by surprise and stratagems on one hand, by carelessness or
treachery on the other; by odd accidents and contingencies on both; it may so
fall out that the likelier host may be discomfited? and not suffer much in
their credit neither: But to have it so constantly for three months together,
they needs must fall into an absolute contempt amongst their adversaries. How
must this flush and puff up an insolent and vainglorious people, to find
themselves so long and uninterruptedly successful? This were enough to possess
them with a belief that if ever they had been stout, they were now utterly
degenerated; and would never stand more, who were so constantly routed: and
that is one thing that might make him so averse to this above all, the disgrace
and shame of it: they were men: such men as he and his people had hitherto been
reckoned an over match for. But this was the least thing.

Secondly, They were Enemies. Such as would rejoice in an opportunity to reak
their malice on them, and be sure to do all the mischief they were able to
them. It is the character given of the Almighty that he does not afflict
willingly nor grieve the Children of men, Lam. 3.33.
that he will not always chide, Psalm. 103.9.
neither keep his anger for ever. But that when he is offended he is easy to be
entreated. So he describes himself in the Prophet. At what time I shall speak
concerning a Nation and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up and to pull down, and
to destroy it, if that Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their
evil, Jer. 18.7, 8.
I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them. Upon their Fasting
and Humiliation, upon their acknowledgment and amendment he will receive them
graciously and revoke his sentence. But this is not after the manner of men,
offended men toward them they bear a grudge to, when they have them in their
Power. To humble our selves before them is but to despised by them; to mourn,
but to be derided by them; to pray and beseech them, but the way to be the more
reproached and upbraided by them.

In the story of Susanna, V. 22, 23.
she is represented as making a choice seemingly contrary to this; she sighed
and said to her enemies, I am straightened on every side, for if I do this thing
it is death unto me, and if I do it not I cannot escape your hands, it is
better for me to fall into your hands, etc. But hers was a quite different
case, then the choice was between offending God on one hand, and displeasing
Men on the other. Then it is not in the least to be doubted, but that it is a
more fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, than to fall into
the hands of the most merciless and cruel men; these can but kill the body, and
when they have done that, have not more that they can do, but he can cast both
soul and body into Hell. Accordingly when the question is between sin and
danger, we should rather run the hazard of the most probable apparent danger,
than endeavor to avoid it by direct and known sin. But if we speak of mere
temporal Punishment, it is better to fall into the hand of God: for when he is
angry, upon our sincere and penitent application to him, he may, he has
promised he will be prevailed with to remit and forgive, to relax and mitigate
his sentence. So according to the Sept. he did here: what we have translated
the time appointed, v. 15. they read (...), so the Lord sent a Pestilence upon
Israel from the morning to the hour of noon; understanding by the time
appointed, not the time appointed by God for the lasting of the pestilence, but
for the consuming the daily sacrifice: and so the Chaldee paraphrast, a tempore
quo mactatur juge, quousque adoleatur: by this Interpretation, tho he threatened
it for three days, yet he recalled it in six hours. But to be given up to the
will of men, is a different thing; from them, this is not to be hoped for; tho
upon our turning to him, he mercifully makes his judgments, not only less than
his word, but less than our fears: this is not to be expected from the hand of
men; they are deaf as the Adder that stops her ears, and will not hearken to
the voice of the charmer. And that is another consideration, upon which David
chooses to fall into the hand of God, a punishment immediately from him,
because he might be prevailed with to relent: for his mercies are great, but
prays against falling into the hand of man, being delivered up to their
power, because there was nothing to be looked for but the extremity, they would
not bate a minute of the time permitted for their vexing them.

Thirdly, They were Foreigners. The Tabernacles of Edom and the Ishmalites,
Moab and the Hagarens, Gebal and Ammon, Amalek and Assure, etc. Tho all enemies
are very terrible, yet there are degrees amongst these, they of the same
Country (tho enemies) being neighbors and brethren think themselves to have
some sort of rye on them toward one another, insomuch that when they are so
unhappy as to be engaged in war among themselves, whoever is Victor looks on
himself as under an obligation to be tender. But what can they reasonably hope
for, that fall into the hands of Strangers?

Many and grievous are the calamities that attend a civil war, the frights, the
outrages, the wastes, the violences have been too lately felt in this Nation,
to need yet to be described to you: They who have not seen them with their
eyes, have heard them with their ears, and our Fathers have (with reason
enough) declared to us, the miserable doings that were then. But sad as this
was, it is yet much sadder to bear the fury of Foreigners, their little finger
is heavier than the loins of natives, whereas these chastise with whips, they
chastise with Scorpions.

When God threatens his People with the severest sort of Foes, he adds this
as the most aggravating circumstance, Jer. 5.15. I will bring a nation upon you
from far O house of Israel, etc. a nation whose language thou know not,
neither understandest what they say. What a condition must they be in, that are
at the mercy of such as these! what have these to check or lay restraints on
them! All arguments of compassion soften them no more, than weeping does the
Wolf, or entreating works on Tigers. Who can express the spoils and
insolences, the cruelty and barbarities, the rapes and villainies, the burnings
and bloodsheds that are the delight as well as business of such Invaders! Isa.
13.15, 16.
Every one that is found shall be thrust through, and every one that is joined
unto them shall fall by the Sword, their children also shall be dashed to
pieces before their eyes, their houses shall be spoiled, and their wives
ravished, their bows also shall dash the young men in pieces, and they shall
have no pity on the fruit of the womb, Psalm. 79.2.
their dead bodies shall they give to be meat unto the fowls of the heaven, and
their flesh unto the beasts of the earth: it shall be as when God overthrew
Sodom and Gomorrah. So the Spirit at sundry times describerh the dealings of
such men with those that fall into their hands. What a fearful agony does it
put the man of God in when he saw it but in imperfect Vision, Jer. 4.19, 20. My
bowels, my bowels, I am pained at my very heart, my heart makes a noise in me,
I cannot hold my peace, because thou have heard, O my Soul, the sound of the
Trumpet, and the alarm of war: destruction upon destruction is cried, for the
whole land is spoiled, suddenly are my tents spoiled, and my curtains in a
moment. And when these are the fruits of it who can wonder, if David here pray
so particularly, let me not fall into the hand of man? And yet you have not
heard the worst of it. For

Fourthly, There is to be added to all this, that they were Idolaters, Haters
and Persecutors of the true religion which was professed by him and his people.
Such were the borderers upon Israel all of them; and if these should get the
better of them, they would certainly bring their Gods along with them. And
could there any thing befall them like that! The Law of thy mouth (says David)
is better unto me than thousands of Gold and Silver, but if these prevailed
they must look to be deprived not only of their Gold and Silver, but that too.
And how sad a consideration must it be to a Prince so sincerely pious as he, to
think that his people might by this means lose not only their estates and
fortunes, but the profession and worship of the true God too! They to whom were
committed the Oracles of God, perish for lack of vision! they to whom pertained
the adoption and glory, be without a Priest and without an Ephod! the
abomination of desolation stand in the holy place, and the ark be removed to
make way for Dagon! When he thought of these things how could he but pour out
his Soul in him?

And yet this is the common effect of their Victories with them that hold of
superstitious Vanities they are as eager to rout the faith as the Forces of
them who are more enlightened, and as zealous to spread their errors as their
dominions. Hear how the Psalmist describes such peoples behavior upon their
successes, Psalm. 74. Thine enemies roar in the midst of the congregation they
set up their banners for tokens, they defile the dwelling place of thy name,
and break down the carved work thereof with axes and hammers, they cast fire
into thy Sanctuary, and burn up all the Synagogues of God in the land.

If they would stop here it were not altogether so intolerable, tho they could
not serve God publicly, it were some comfort, if they might be permitted to do
it privately; but as if it were not enough to hinder them from the exercise of
the true religion, they are not content, except they can compel them to be
proselytes to their false one; making use of the most horrid, barbarous and
inhumane ways to compass it. Hebr. 11.36, 37. we read the usage that from time
to time has been the portion of such as would not apostatize and comply, they
had trials of cruel mockings and scourgings, moreover of bonds and
imprisonments, they were stoned, they were sawn asunder, they were tempted,
they were slain with the Sword, they wandered about in Sheeps-skins and
Goats-skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented.

As if it were a small thing to be masters of their Bodies, men of this sort
set up to be Masters of their Souls too; and that they may wear out the Saints
of the most high, are restless while they have changed their Times and Laws.
And when we reflect upon this, that thus the vanquished are generally treated
by such enemies, we cannot but be convinced that David 's choice was a wise
one, and he had great reason to pray, that he might fall into the hand of the
Lord, and that he might not fall into the hand of such men. To conclude then.

These things I have in a figure transferred to David and his Enemies for your
sakes, that you may learn not to think of the Enemy you are now contending
with, otherwise than you ought to think, but to think properly. It is but too
plain that some men's behavior makes it not unneedful; men who are not able to
conceal their satisfaction, when they hear any thing of his power, or joy when
they hear of his advantages. There are a sort of Englishmen, whom (I confess)
I do not much wonder at, (those who arc blind to all considerations besides,
where they apprehend ROME to be any ways concerned or interested) but that any
of our own Communion should be not only so unnatural, but self-contradicting, I
needs must say, is not a little surprising. Admit all their objections, what
can such in all their uneasy frowardness promise themselves, as to the
bettering of things from him. Could I suppose any such to be here, I would
expostulate with them in the Prophet Amos's language, Chapter 5.18, 19. Woe unto
you that desire the day of the Lord! to what end is it for you? The day of the
Lord is darkness and not light. As if a man did flee from a Lion and a Bear met
him, or went into the house and leaned his hand on the wall, and a Serpent bit
him. After what has been already said, it would be next to nauseous to go
about to make a parallel: Your own thoughts must before this have suggested to
you, that there was nothing in the men David so much dreaded falling into the
hands of, more than Plague or Famine, that, without any straining, is not to be
found in these.

But yet there are among us who endeavor to persuade themselves and others
that notwithstanding we need not be apprehensive in our case, because this
Monarch has no design at all on us, all he aims at is only to assist and
restore a distressed Prince that has fled for succor to him. Such a kind of
conceit was once got into the heads of a considerable party among the
Himerians, concerning Phalaris, whom they applied to in their discontents for
help and aid, giving him all such furtherances as they could, And
notwithstanding his tyrannick and ambitious humor was so well known, would not
believe that he aimed at any thing in all his chargeable preparations but only
to gratify and serve them. Stesichorus (their Countryman) making an Oration to
them upon this occasion, Arist. Rhet. l. 2. c. 21.
relates an Apologue, which for its appositeness I shall crave leave to
repeat, and leave it to them who take pleasure in abusing themselves with a
sham of like sort, to consider of it. The Apologue was of a Horse, who being
troubled that the Stag was got into his pasture, desired a Man that he would
help him to drive him out: He seemed ready and willing; but told him, it would
be necessary that he should Bridle and Saddle, and get up upon his back, or
else he should not be able to compass it: The Horse accepts the condition,
and suffers him to do so; but when he was once up, instead of being revenged
of the Stag, the poor creature found his mistake, that he was only subject to
the Rider past recovery. How like the horse and the mule that have no
understanding, are they that can be so credulous, as to imagine such a pretense
in our great enemy, to be any thing more real than the other was, which he
imposed upon the Beast with?

Who would pity them that should put themselves into the hands of such men? who
would pity them that would not do their utmost to keep out of them? It is
granted it must be very expensive, and a charge we have not been used to: but
is not that rather to be chosen than to fall into the hands of men? Such men,
as would not be satisfied with much larger proportions of what we have, but be
insatiable as the daughter of the Horseleech? It is granted it must cost the
blood and lives of many; but is not that rather to be chosen, than to fall into
the hands of men? Such men, who if they spared them, would make all so weary of
their lives, they would not value them?

This excellent King in the text, this tender Father of his country, is content
to suffer any thing from the hand of God, rather than be but three Months in
the hands of such men. But that which now threatens us, is a much sadder
thing; not for three months, but both this and after ages their being Masters
of us. And when this is before us, what earthly calamity as far as lies in us
to determine, should we not choose rather? Tho God does not offer us our
choice, as he did David here, by special revelation, yet in some kind he does
by giving us reason to guide us in difficulties, and putting it into our power
to pitch upon that which looks least perilous.

It is time that I had done; but not to dismiss you without some comfort, I
have yet to tell you, that he deals with us more graciously, than he did here
with David, he must unavoidably have suffered one of those judgments that were
propounded to him, But (tho we have sins much greater to answer for) he puteth
us into a method (if we will hearken to it) how we may escape them all. Neither
fall into the hand of man, nor yet into the hand of God. Assuring us that if we
will break off our sins (every one our sins with which we are conscious to our
selves we have provoked him) by righteousness, and our iniquities by showing
mercy to the poor, it shall be a procuring our tranquillity. He has been
pleased to give an earnest of it already, even in our wilderness, speaking
comfortably, and opening a door of hope in the valley of Achor.

Come then, and let us return unto the Lord, Hos. 6.1, 2, 3.
for he has torn, and he will heal us; he has smitten, and he will bind us
up. After two days he will revive us, in the third day he will raise us up, and
we shall live in his sight, then shall we know, if we follow onto know the
Lord, his going forth is prepared as the morning, and he shall come unto us as
the rain, as the later and former rain upon the earth. For which let us not
only on this, but every day humbly and devoutly make our prayers to him.

FINIS.

