A SERMON Preached before the King and Queen AT HAMPTON-COVRT, July 14th. 1689.

By RICHARD MEGGOTT D.D. Dean of Winchester.

Published by His Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1689.

Dr. MEGGOTT's SERMON Preached before the KING and QUEEN.

A SERMON Preached Before the KING and QUEEN at Hampton Court, July 14th. 1689.
ROMANS 12.5. -- We being many are one Body in Christ, and every one Members
one of another.


LActantius will have the word Religio to come from Religo, which signifies to
bind; because it binds and uniteth the Hearts of Men not only to God, but to
one another too.

This is the Effect of it, in some degree, in all the Religions that are: every
one looking upon himself as having a stricter tie on him, toward those of the
same Religion with him, than he has to the rest of Mankind. But the Christian
Religion may give peculiar Countenance to such a Derivation; the Nature and
Principles of it being above any framed and suited for promoting it.

So it appeared among its Primitive Professors. O! the Entire Agreement! the
Tender Affection! the Cordial Amity which the sense of this begot and cherished
in them toward one another! No humorous Sects, no angry Factions, no proud
censorious Schisms then, to estrange, to sour, to separate them. They all
continued with one accord in Prayers and Supplications, Acts 1.14. With one
accord in one place, Acts 2.1. With one accord in the Temple and breaking
Bread, Acts 2.46. Thus it was as long as Sincerity excluded Secular Interests,
and the Truths of God were unmingled with the Arts of Men.

But (alas!) we do not so often in the Acts of the Apostles read of their one
accord, as in all Ecclesiastical Writers since, we do of their fierce and
scandalous Discords. Discords about Doctrine, Discords about Discipline,
Discords about Ceremonies: and where other Countries and Kingdoms have had
their Thousands; we, unhappy we, have had, O that there were no reason to add,
have, our ten Thousands.

All kind of courses, Christian, and I had like to have said, Unchristian, have
been taken to put an end to them, but with so little effect all, that instead
of being rooted out by them, they have rather run up to seed and multiplied.
This were enough to dishearten from attempting any thing further in it, when
all that has been tried has proved so unsuccessful: But Peoples not doing
their Duty, is no reason why we should cease to tell them of it; whether they
will hear, or whether they will forbear, if we cannot persuade them, however we
must discharge our selves: and that I think we are very particularly obliged to
in this Juncture of Time, when Differences cannot but prove Fatal, as they are
Sinful.

That which every Man pleads for himself is Conscience, I am willing to hope
it is so; for I have something to say to that, which I am sure must be of more
force to Unite, than any thing that can be alleged is to Divide us: And that
is the consideration of the Sacredness and nearness of our common relation,
both to Christ, and among our Selves. It is as unnatural for Christians to
quarrel, as for the Tongue to rail at the Eye, the Hand to scratch the Face,
one Foot to kick or tread upon the other; for as the Body is one and has many
Members, so we being many are one Body in Christ, and every one Members one of
another.

In which Declaration of the Apostle, we have two Things observable.

First, The Christian's mystical Union. All that in every place profess his
Name, how many soever they be, are parts of Christ's Body, being many they are
one Body in Christ. Secondly, Their Spiritual Communion resulting from it; all
being one and the same Corporation, they ought to live in mutual Conjunction,
Correspondence, and Fellowship; every one as Members one of another.
I begin with the first of these, The Christian's mystical Union. That all that
in every place profess his Name, how many soever they be, are Parts of Christ's
Body, being many they are one Body in Christ.

As Christ has a Natural Body, that which was conceived by the Holy Ghost,
born of the Virgin Mary, crucified upon the Cross, and is now ascended into
Heaven; so, he has a Mystical one too: and this is an Aggregation or
Collection of all throughout the face of the Earth, who embrace the Faith he
has delivered. As many Officers and Soldiers are but one Army, many Houses and
Streets but one City, many Parishes and Counties but one Kingdom; so as many as
profess Christianity are but one Body in him: so they are called the Body of
Christ, Ephesians. 4.12.

True, we read in the Scriptures of Churches in the Plural Number: the Churches
of Judaea, the Churches of Samaria, the Churches of Asia, and the like,
speaking as of many: but it is not unworthy your observing, that our Savior in
his Promise has it in the Singular, Mat. 16.18. Upon this Rock I will build my
Church, speaking of it as of one. And why so, but to show us, that though they
are several in respect of their distant situation, several in respect of their
circumstantial constitution; yet they are not several, in respect of Christ's
great Intention, or their own specific Nature, but have the same dependence
upon, and relation to, their Head and one another, as Parts have to their
Whole; so that how many soever they be nominally, they are one really, one Body
in Christ.

There are Three things that speak, and ought to make us so.

First, One we are in our Original sacred Designation. As Christians we are all
(...) Parts of one and the same Building whereof Christ Jesus is the corner
stone, 1 Pet. 2.6. we are all Branches of one and the same Vine whereof Christ
Jesus is the root, John 15.1. we are all Servants in one and the same Household
whereof Christ Jesus is the Master, Gal. 6.10. we are all Sheep of one and the
same Fold whereof Christ Jesus is the Shepherd, Heb. 13.20. we are all Subjects
of one and the same Kingdom whereof Christ Jesus is the Prince, Isaiah 9.6.
Hence the Apostle takes his topic of Address to the dissenting Corinthians, 1
Cor. 1.10. I beseech you, Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
ye all speak the same thing, that there be no Divisions among you, etc. by the
Name of our Lord Jesus Christ? Why, this was the Pretense for all their
Divisions and Separations, they were the Truths of Christ, the Ordinances of
Christ, the Ministers of Christ, that they contended for: yes, so Men may talk
to others, and it may be flatter themselves; but there is no Name under Heaven
can be pleaded for quarrels, more improperly and indecently among Christians
indeed; for if we are such, as Lines of the same Circle, whatsoever distance
there is in the Circumference (...) all meet and unite in him, as in our common
center.

Moses seemed to think it enough to make the two Israelites that were striving,
at one again; to say to them, Sirs, ye are Brethren. Here is that and a great
deal more: we are not only of one Family, but one Body; and if the Spirit which
gives Life be in us, we shall be so far any of us from angry rending our
selves from the rest, that it will not be without feeling real Grief and Pain,
when any other Parts do. Who can lose a Limb and not be affected with it? Now
all that call upon the Name of Jesus, being our Fellow Members we should be as
tender of, and as concerned for them.

This Mystery Athanasius tells us our Blessed Lord did Figure by the Death he
was put to. Athan. De Incarnatione Verbi Dei.
He was not (says he) Beheaded as John the Baptist, nor sawn asunder as the
Prophet Esaias: no, not a Bone of him was broken, not a Member severed; ^o show
the intended and necessary adherence and conjunction, that was for ever to be
preserved and maintained among all his faithful Followers, not only with him,
but with one another too. And that is a first thing wherein being many we are
^ne, one in our Original sacred Designation.

Secondly, One we are in the Fundamentals and ^ssentials of our Profession. It
is a great Mistake to ^^ink that every Difference in Religion is a diffe^^nt
Religion, 1 Cor. 3.11, 12. the Apostle care^^lly distinguishes between the
Foundation and that which is Built upon it. Some parts of the Superstructure
may be of richer Materials, Gold, Silver, Precious Stone: others of baser and
much slighter, Wood, Hay, Stubble, and yet the Foundation the same to both. To
strip his meaning from the Metaphor it is wrapped in, some Churches are more
sound and pure, others more corrupt and superstitious in their Doctrines: and
as in materia^ Buildings, some of the Rooms may be dark^^ than others, yet all
of them belong to one House^ so is it in this Spiritual Building too; all have
no^ equal light, and yet as St. Paul phraseth it, Ephesians. ^^ 20. All built upon
the Foundation of the Apostle^ and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the
chi^^ corner Stone, in whom all the Building fitly fram^ together, grows up
an holy Temple to the Lord.

Should we take a survey of the distinct Profesions of Christianity, that have
any noted Nam^ in the several Quarters of the World; as those (...) the Roman
Catholic in the West, of the Aethiopi^ in the South, of the Greeks in the
East, of the P^testant here in the North: and laying aside (...) those Points
wherein they differ from one another; gather into one Body but those Arti^^^
wherein they universally agree: we shall find e^^^ in those Propositions so
much Truth is contain^^ as being joined with a sincere and Pious Life, the
sober and moderate of all Denominations grant sufficient to Salvation.

For tho some hot heads and narrow minds of all persuasions, lay such stress
upon their particular tenants, as to be ready to damn all that come not
punctually up to them; this excess of zeal is only personal: no Church in the
World (bate that of Rome) is so uncharitable in her censures. So far was the
Ancient Church from it, that all the Credenda she required of them she admitted
to her Communion, for some Ages, was only an acknowledgment of the Articles of
the Creed we call the Apostles, and pressed no more on them: and tho all
Churches since have added others; some more, some less: it appears by their
not judging one another, about receiving or not receiving them, this is not so
much from any opinion they have of the absolute necessity of holding those
Articles, as of the absolute necessity of preserving peace among their own
members, who were like to make disturbances about them.

Now so far all the Christians that are, are agreed, even they who have
super-induced doctrines scarce consistent with these (to give them their due)
retain these, and tho we cannot clear them from contradicting themselves, yet
we must from denying any of these principles; so that our heats about matters
of Religion, are something like our hearts about matters of the World; not so
much for the necessaries of life which we are easily supplied with; as the
unnecessaries of fancy, which our Reason tells us, we may be happy enough tho
we never have. Our contentions are not about the great vital truths of
Christianity; hereunto we have all attained; but some additional notions,
which, if they should be true, our Consciences tell us, men may be saved, tho
they don't believe; and that is another respect in which being many, we are
one; One, in the fundamentals and essentials of our profession.

Once more One we are in our only justifiable and real interests. Interest is
the mighty makebate of mankind, more successful than whispering in separating
chief friends. Interest is deaf as the Adder to the fairest overtures of Peace,
and will carry off the strongest obligations to unity, easily as Sampson did
the Gates of Gaza: Interest will set the Son at variance against the Father,
and the Father against the Son, the Mother against the Daughter, and the
Daughter against the Mother. But there is nothing of that to interpose and make
mischief here. For what is the interest of any Christian, that is not the
interest of all? The glory of God, the Salvation of our Souls, the Edification
of the Church, these are all the interests of Christians, considered as
Christians; and these are common to us all equally.

It is pretended on all sides, that these are the only things they aim at, that
it is the consideration of these makes them stand upon their points so
^tiffly, and contend so earnestly each against their opposites: but who that
reflecteth either upon the matters most contested, or the manner of our
^ontesting them, can bring himself to credit it?

If this were really so, that the design on all hands were only, that Religion
and Devotion, Virtue and ^obriety might be advanced, and flourish in the world;
that God might be more honored upon earth, ^^d sinners kept from perishing
everlastingly; our ^eal, doubtless, would be hotter against vices of ^^l sorts,
which men can help, than errors, which (...) may be, they cannot: and
wherever faith ^^d good works are maintained and regarded in ^^e main, tho
there are visible defects and allays, ^^ey would be compassionately and
prudently bore ^^th, for the good that is found in them.

This was S. Paul's both judgment and practice, in a case, as obnoxious it may
be, as any can be instanced in. There were a sort of men, who not from any
concern for the propagation of the Gospel, but spite at his reputation among
the people, to lessen and ruin both it and him; set up in opposition, heading
any disorderly and discontented meetings. Now, how does he take it? tho he
himself saw well enough through the wretched designs of the ringleaders, the
vile and selfish ends they had in it; yet inasmuch as it might have some good
effects upon several poor creatures that did not, he is so far from being
disturbed, that he declares himself well pleased with it, Phil. 1.15, 16, 17,
18. Some (says he) preach Christ even of envy and strife, of contention, not
sincerely. What then? notwithstanding every way, whether in pretense, or in
truth, Christ is preached, and I therein do rejoice, yea and will rejoice.

I do not doubt but they are much in the wrong who use this Text as an argument
for all sorts of Preachers among us now; there is not the same reason for it
where the Gospel is planted, as where it was to be planted, in a settled
Church, as in a Heathen Country. Yet this I say, if the same Spirit that dwelt
in him, dwell in us; where the good that comes by it, will but preponderate
the evil, we shall not be otherwise affected.

It was a notable passage of my Lord Bacon, that If Divines could but agree
upon the exposition of those two sayings of our Savior, Mat. 12.30.
he that is not with me is against me, and Mark 9.40.
and he that is not against us is on our part, it might well put an end to all
the controversies among Christians: certain it is, it ought. For as whatever
does more dishonor to Christ, than service, we are like concerned to depress:
so whatever does more service to him, than dishonor, we are alike concerned to
promote. If we do not, thinking men will be apt to conclude, it is nothing but
our different interests as men, is at the bottom of it. For that is another
thing, wherein as Christians being many, we are one; one in our only
justifiable and real interests, that we ought to look after.

And this is all I shall say to the first part of the Text, the Christians
mystical union; that all that in every place profess his name, how many soever
they be, are one body in Christ! By which we see, what apprehensions we should
have of, and what behavior to, all those of our Religion, even tho they differ
from us.

The other observable I am now to proceed to, is the means to remedy the
differences themselves; and that is by maintaining such communion among our
selves as properly resuleth from this Union. Being one and the same
corporation, we ought to live in mutual conjunction, correspondence, and
fellowship, every one as members one of another.

This Christians formerly were so very sensible of, that they did not think it
sufficient, that each particular Church should be at unity within it self only,
but they wisely contrived that all the particulars should so agree with one
another too, as to make up one harmonious Catholic; and thus by Ecclesiastical
Canons they ordained it: Spalat. de Reput. l. 7. c. 10.
That all Presbyters should give account of the state of their several flocks
to their Bishops, the Bishops of their several Diocesses to their
Metropolitans, the Metropolitans of their several Provinces to their
Patriarchs, the Patriarchs of all these, and of themselves too, to one another.
Thus as much as in them lay, they took care; every one for all, and all for
every one, that there might be no Schism in the body. And however it is now
disused, and as the present state of the World is, in great part unpracticable;
yet there is the same reason for it still. As we stand in the same relation to
Christ as the Christians of former ages, so we do to one another too; and ought
to be as sollicitous to preserve it.

It is a Duty, the peace and welfare, quiet and good order, of Masters and
their Families, Ministers and their Parishes, People and their Neighbors,
Princes and their Subjects, yea, Princes and Princes, does very highly depend
upon. Few here can be of so little observation, as not to be sensible of the
inconveniences, the fewds, the distractions, the mischiefs, that the rejecting
and condemning each others communion, has been either the cause, or the
occasion, or at least the pretense of, among every one of these.

Seeing then it is of such consequence, not only to private persons, but the
public too; sure it behooves every one in their stations, to look that none of
these offenses come by them, but that they so behave themselves toward all in
every place, that call upon the name of the Lord Jesus, both theirs and ours,
as to their fellow members.

This all will allow a desirable thing; but the great question is, How it is
possible? How we can hold communion with all other Christians? This is
necessary to be enquired into, and resolved particularly in these cases.

First, in the case of that particular Church, which each person does regularly
belong to, how he is to behave himself as a member of that? Secondly, in the
case of other Churches distant from, and independent on us, how we should
behave our selves as Members of them? Thirdly, in the case of such Christians,
as upon dissatisfaction divide from, and will not join with us, how we should
behave our selves toward them?
These comprehending the most considerable difficulties that can arise about
this duty, I will speak distinctly of them.

The first case to be resolved is, about the particular Church, which any
person does regularly belong to, how he is to behave himself as a member of
that? That I call every man's particular Church, not which it may be he himself
does call so, but which the lawful Authority of the Country where he lives,
has made so. This, (if he may acceptably serve God, and finally save his Soul
in) he is to join himself to, owning the Guides, partaking the Ordinances,
observing the Constitutions of it, or he does no^ walk orderly.

Too many well-meaning people among us, are not so sensible of this as they
ought, but think it is no matter though they do not, that though they are obliged to
hear and pray, and receive; yet they have no more obligation to perform these
duties there, than with any other Assembly of Christians, that they have as
good, or it may be, better opinion of.

For such to say that they agree with the Church in Doctrinals, it is only upon
account of Ceremonies, that they separate I needs must say, seems to me so
far from excusing the thing, it really makes it worse. For though it is our
Duty to separate from a Church, where she is corrupt in her Doctrines, and
makes void the Commandments of God by her Traditions: Yet where it is not so
much as pretended to be so, to do it merely upon the score of ceremony, is not
to be defended. For where? When could such Persons have lived? In what Place?
In what Age? In what Established Church that now is? Or heretofore has been?
That upon this Principle they must not have divided from? There is none but
have determined something or other of this kind. It is granted, that every
Church in determining and appointing them, ought to have a careful, tender,
prudent consideration of the temper, the weakness, the circumstances of them
she determines and appoints them for, but if she should have been faulty in
it, and has not; it is a greater fault, rather to break her peace, than bear
with them.

And therefore tho the Recusants here in England are greater Schismatics than
any other Separatists among us; because whereas others for the most part only
forbear communion with our Church, these condemn the Church it self: yet
neither can any of the other that separate well clear themselves from being
such; it being the strict and proper notion of Schism for Persons causelessly to
rend themselves from that particular Church whereof de jure they are Members.

How they under whose Spiritual Conduct such Persons put themselves, can
satisfy their own Minds in entertaining them, I know not. This I am sure of,
it is more than the Pope himself anciently would take upon him. It is a famous
Answer which one of them geve to Marcion when in opposition to his own Church
he came to Rome, (...), etc. Epiphan. adv. Haer. Vol. 1. Com. 3. Haer. 42.
and sued to be admitted into Communion there, that he could not do it, without
the consent of his venerable Father, between whom and him there was one Faith.

The 12th Canon among the Apostolic, forbidding under the Penalty of
Excommunication, the receiving any under the Censures of their own Church,
without Letters Commendatory, was confirmed by the first famous Council of
Nice, Canon 5th. Conc. Nit.
and the Bishop of Rome then thought himself no more exempted from it, than the
rest of his Brethren: And tho now for a long while by a dispensing Power they
have acted otherwise, it is an insolent trampling upon that Rule their
Predecessors walked by. Now they that do the same thing, how opposite soever
they may be to the Pope in other Matters, in this his Usurpation agree with
him, and can no more be justified in it than he; being no more able to show by
what Authority they do these things. I might confront such Persons Practice
with their Judgment, when in other Circumstances, but I spare them. I will only
say, it is an inlet to Disorder. Now God is not the Author of Confusion, but of
Peace, as in all the Churches of the Saints. And so much for the first case,
how far Christians are to behave themselves as Members of that particular
Church they regularly be^ong to.

The second is the case of other Churches di^tant from, and independent on us;
how we should behave our selves as Members of them? St. Paul Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6.
tells us by what sacred Bands and Ligaments we are knit and fastened to all
these. There is (says he) one Body and one Spirit, one Hope of your Calling,
one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all,
and through all, and in you all. These are the same to all of us. And
therefore, tho there be much variety in their Rituals, in their Discipline,
yea, even Doctrines of inferior Nature; every Church ought mutually to allow
and bear them in each other, without censuring or reproaching one another
concerning them.

They who were so superciliously Arrogant as to condemn all other Churches,
that did not in all things exactly chime in with them, such as the Novatians,
Donatists, Meletians, Luciferians, and the Fathers inveigh against as no
Christians for their so unreasonable rash uncharitableness.

The Romanists at this day do all this, and yet nothing will serve them but the
Name of Catholics; but sure it is the absurdest one they could have took upon
them. For Catholic is but another word for Universal, but these Anathematize
and would extirpate all that submit not to the particular, who (notwithstanding
all their boast of Universality) are in truth the major part of Christendom.

They tell us by their Emissaries we may, if we will, be reconciled; they are
contented to be at peace with us. So did 1 Samuel 11.2.
Nahash condescend to the men of Jabesh Gilead, and vouchsafe to signify the
same thing to them; and in earnest, his were the civiller, fairer terms of the
two: He would have been contented, if they would have parted but with one of
their Eyes; but these will not, except we part with both ours, and all our
other Senses.

Christians of old did not deal so with one another: Every Church then, did not
only think herself obliged to a charitable opinion of every other holding the
head; but as they had opportunity, had actual communion with them. St.
Chrysostom complains of Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, because when he came
to Constantinople (...). Chrysostom Ep. Innoc.
, he repaired not to the congregation after the usual manner to their Sermons,
Prayers and Sacraments. And Eusebius takes notice, that Polycarp when he came
to Rome, though there were some other matters besides the controversy of Easter,
they disfered in, (...). Eusebius. Ec. Hist. l. 5. c. 24.
communicated with Anicetus. And it was the general way when they were in other
Countries to apply themselves to the Churches there, and join in their Worship
with them.

Besides these occasional and accidental, there, are other Duties this
Spiritual Relation obliges us to always. These are to pray one for another, be
tender one of another, sympathize one with another, be helpful one to another:
If grieved to comfort them, if in want to relieve them, if in danger to defend
them, if persecuted to succor them, as far as is in our power.

I hope I need not press this on any of ours. If we, who by the blessing of God
have so lately reaped the benefit of these Duties from others, should be
backward upon like occasion, to express them toward others, God and Man would
reproach us for Disingenuous. When we see the Members of Christ so dealt with,
as many thousands have been both in France and Ireland; so endangered, as all
the Protestants in the Neighbor Nations at this day are, should we shut up our
bowels of compassion from them, with what face could we pretend to be of the
Body? If we truly are, it will be impossible to be unconcerned at their
troubles and afflictions; but we shall remember them that are in Bonds as bound
with them, and them that suffer adversity, as we our selves being also in the
body; be weak when they are weak, and burn when they are offended. That is the
second Case, how we should behave our selves as members of the other Churches,
distant from, and independent on us.

There remains the third, and that is relating to such Christians as upon
dissatisfaction divide, and will not join with us, how we should carry our
selves toward them? And this has more difficulty in it, than either of the
other; hard to be spoken of without extremes or offense; but when there are
such numbers of these among us, it is fit people should know what they ought to
do in it.

It is enough to startle a very confident man to hear what the Fathers of the
Church have declared about this matter. Considering the ill effects and
consequences of Schism, they have pronounced it as heinous a sin as any
whatsoever. Vide Euse^ Eccl. Hist. (...) c. 49.
Dionysius in his Epistle to Novatus says Idolatry is not worse. Deus pro
n^lectu manda^ iratus est ir^ magna and q^^ in Sacrilego^ and parricid^ non
fecerat in Schismatico^ cit. Optat. l. ^
Optatus not Sacrilege or Murder: and Unde Joha^nes ex nobis ^trant, sed
(...) evant ex no^^ non ait quo^^ exeundo alie^ facti sunt, (...) quod alieni^
erant cos edeclaravit. Aug. de Ba^ 19.
St. Augustine upon occasion of that passage out of St. John, they went out
from us, but were not of us, declares that they who are guilty of it are not
to be looked upon as Christians.

This surely must be understood only of such as hypocritically and maliciously
make breaches and disturbances in a Church, to revenge or advance themselves by
the ruin of it; for such it is not easy to find expressions that are too
severe or aggravating: But God forbid it should be so with all who withold or
withdraw from communion with a Church; of some we must have compassion, making
a difference.

There are many (no doubt) who do this in the simplicity of their hearts, not
apprehending the evil of it; for such, as God does, so we ought to make
allowances: not rigorously treating, but in meekness instructing them that so
oppose themselves. The Apostle speaking of such as did not obey his word, 2 Thessalonians. 3. and that not in matters of indifferent nature, but purely moral: tho
he bids them note that man, and have no company with him, that he may be
ashamed; gives this caution along with it, v. 15. yet count him not as an
enemy, but admonish him as a Brother. And if that be the rule to be observed by
us toward those that are loose and licentious, doubtless it will hold much
stronger, toward those that are only Weak and Scrupulous.

This is the likeliest way to gain them; for look as gravely and pretend as
highly as they will, people will never believe they have any kindness for their
Souls, whom they find showing spite to their persons.

St. Paul having opened at large the Unity of Christians, 1 Cor. 12. and in the
last verse of that Chapter exhorted them to covet earnestly the best gifts that
might promote that glorious end; adds in the last words of it, yet show I
unto you a more excellent way. What? better than the best? A more excellent way
than what? v. 25. he tells us, than Apostles, than Prophets, than Teachers,
than Governments, than Tongues, etc. he would show them a more excellent way
for keeping the unity of the body, than any, than all of them; and that is
Charity and the grace of Love: which he discourses of, and magnifieth
throughout the 13th Chapter, where he gives us to understand, that without
this, all extraordinary men, all miraculous gifts, all abilities to preach, all
Ecclesiastical power, all prudence in government, (tho. useful in themselves,
and much contributing to it) would prove ineffectual. But where Charity and
Love is, there we shall agree even when we differ; and if we are not so happy,
as in nearness, yet at ^east in tenderness, we shall be as members one of
another.

Of the things we have spoken this is the sum.

That all that in every place call upon the name of Christ, being but one body
in him; having the same relation to him their head, the same fundamentals of
their common Faith, the same holy ends and interests to promote: should not let
lesser matters hinder them from living as members one of another.

Now inasmuch as to be a Member of the Catholic, it is necessary to be of some
particular Church; if he may acceptably serve God and finally save his Soul in
it, every Person ought for peace and order sake to live in the Communion of
that Church where the providence of God has placed him, and not for every
dislike, defect, or blemish to depart from it.

Nor is it enough that we do this with that single Church where we live; but
inasmuch as all other Christian Churches abroad belong to the same Savior;
though they may differ in Rituals, in Discipline, yea in some Doctrines of
inferior nature from us; yet we should all mutually own and acknowledge every
one the other, as far as they own and acknowledge Christ.

And as for those that separate and divide themselves; if they do it, not
Hypocritically and Maliciously, with design to destroy the Body by tearing it
so in pieces; but in the simplicity of their hearts, and real persuasion of
their consciences: we should not any way unnecessarily offend, grieve or
provoke: but show them as much compassion; forbearance and condescension, as is
consistent with the safety and welfare of the Body.

All I shall add is but this one word relating to them we last mentioned. And
that is, that though Christians should thus behave themselves toward those that
so separate and divide from them; yet causeless separation and division is a
great offense against the law of Christ. I would not have this so misconstrued,
as if spoken from any repining at the indulgence, that is now granted the
several Dissenters among us. For tho when it was an illegal snare, the Clergy
of this Church withstood it, with the hazard of their all, yet now it is a
legal ease, I know none of them that are dissatisfied with it.

That which I mention this for, is only to admonish such Persons, and put them
in mind that now they have Liberty of Conscience, they should make Conscience
of their Liberty. Not presume and encourage themselves in it, because the Laws
of the ^and are so favorable to inflict no Penalties upon them for it. These
do not undertake to justify the thing, as if it were no Sin; only forbear
Judge in it, and leave us wholly to the Law (...) Christ, which is immutable
and not to be repeal Seeing then we are all so far remitted to this; (...) us
all make this our Rule: and in the serious consideration of what this enjoyneth
us, all fol^^ the things that make for peace, and the God peace shall be with
us.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
1. A Critical History of the Text of the New Testam^^ where is firmly
Established the Truths of those (...) in which the Foundation of Christian
Religion is laid; (...) Father Simon.

2. Popish Treachery, or a Short and New Account of Horrid Cruelties Exercised
on the Protestants in France ^^ing a true Prospect of what is to be Expected
from the (...) Solemn Promises of Roman Catholic Princes: In a Letter (...) a
Gentleman of that Nation, to one in England.

3. A True Narrative of all the Proceedings against Lord Bishop of London, in
the Council Chamger at White-(...) by the Lords Commissioners appointed by His
Majesty (...) Ecclesiastical Affairs.

4. An Exact Relation of the Persecutions, Robberies, Losses, sustained by the
Protestants of Killmare, in Irel^^

All lately Printed for Tho. Bennet, at the Half-Mo^^^ St. Paul's Churchyard.
1689.


