TITUS OATS.

WILLIAM BEDLOE.

Stephen Dugdale.

Miles Prance.



THE MEMOIRES OF Titus Oats.

Written for Public Satisfaction.

Oats, Bedlow, Dugdale, Prance; whose Breath alone,
Could almost States subvert, and Kings dethrone!
To sculp their Shadow's in the Power of Art:
Ink may be black enough to act that Part.
Drawn to the Life would you their Souls behold,
That Work requires a more Infernal Mould.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Graves, 1685.

THE PREFACE.
THE great and wonderful Exploits of our Hero Titus, have so far outdone the
Feats of Sancho Pancha himself, that the very Atcheivments even of a Garantua,
will bear a fairer Appearance of History and Truth, than the more Romantic
Narrative of our Great and Formidable Salamanca Discoverer. For, truly to
consider how strangely powerful, the Infatuations even of almost three whole
Kingdoms have been, in reposing such implicit Faith in a Discovery made up of
so many Incongruities, Inconsistencies and palpable Contradictions, as are all
along through the Depositions of the pretended Popish-Plot, is enough to make
the English Credulity so universally ridiculous, that all Christendom shall
blush at us; and our very Posterity shall be so much ashamed of their
Forefathers Folleys, and stupidity; till future Generations, even for their own
Reputation, shall as zealously endeavor to cover and conceal this most
Egregious Blindside of their besotted Progenitors, as ever Shem and Japhet did
the Nakedness of their Father.

But because Justice has at last in some part overtaken him, and Frydays and
Saturdays Inquisition into the Innocent Blood, that that Barbarous Wretch has
so solemnly murdered, has set forth the Perjured Murderer in some of his true
infernal Colors; I have thought fit to Publish these farther Memoires of that
ever execrable Fardle of Imposture and Perjury, his pretended Discovery of the
Popish Plot. And the reason of this undertaking is, that notwithstanding the
two last Trials have made his Shams and Lies so notoriously apparent, as to
make him truly deserve the Lord Chief Justices proper character of him of being
certainly the Blackest of Villains that ever lived upon the face of the Earth,
and those two Limbs of his Plot, his Consult, on the 24th of April, and the
August following, have sufficiently assured us that all the rest of his
Discoveryes are but Branches of the same damnable Stock: whilst the same vein
of perjury runs through the whole Mass of his Hellish Lies and Narratives; yet
because the Universal spirit of Delusion is such, that too many of our English
Fools are as fond of their own senceless Dreams as of their very Bibles
themselves; and no doubt there are yet thousands of those unthinking,
unconverted Animals, that have that veneration still for their Darling Titus,
that they pay him even a wild Indian Adoration, and make a God of the Devil
himself, it will not be amiss to examine a few more particulars, by way of
enquiry into the most important Foundation of his whole Plot, and show what
Nonsense and Chymeras have been imposed upon the World.

Titus Oats HIS MEMOIRES.
THe Popish Plot, as delivered by Titus Oats, and the rest of his Zanies,
Bedlow, Dugdale, Prance, etc. is wholly founded on these two Bases:

First, That the Papists had a Design to Murder the late King;

And next, to Massacre Us; Popery being only to be introduced by these two
Desperate and bloody undertakings.

The several Attempts and Designs of Murdering the King are as follows.

The First Bloody Resolve of the Papists for that purpose, was on the 24th. of
April in the Year 78, whilst Oats upon the Holy Evangelists, assures us, that
the Principal of the Jesuits, and other great Popish Agents, to the number of
above fifty, from several parts of the World met together on that day, and came
to this Resolve; That Pickering and Groves should go on with their Attempt of
Murdering the King, for which the one should have 1500 l. and the other 30000
Masses: to which Resolve and promise, they all at several places subscribed
their several hands.

Now we are to know likewise who those two Persons were, that were thus set at
work, viz. Two poor Servants and Retainers to the Romish Priests, and two
Persons, who had been before engaged in the same Design, and had dogged the
King (by Oats his own Oath) from the year Seventy to that very day, with
screwed Guns and Silver Bullets to do the same Execution; and were two such
Wretched Fools at so desperate a piece of service, that one time their Flint
was loose; another time, their Gun was charged with all Bullets and no Powder;
another, with no Powder in the Pan; and another, with all Powder and no
Bullets. Yet nevertheless, after they had always miscarryed at this egregious
senseless Rate, and had been disciplined severely for it. Here meets a consult
of Jesuits from all Quarters of Europe, and after a full Debate upon so
Important a point to their Grand Design, as the Immediate Murder of the King:
they come to no other Result than that these two poor Cuddens, after above
seven Years fumbling before, should go on with the Attempt, without so much as
engageing one hand beside in the Conspiracy (:for all the other Assassionates
were not Embarked in the Design, till August following) so that, had Oats been
able to have proved himself here in Town at the April-Consult, nevertheless,
his Great April-Plot must still have fallen to the ground, and consequently,
all the Blood of the Executed Papists have cried for Vengeance from so Perjured
a Murderer; unless we can imagine, that so many Popish Emissaries, the greatest
of all the Romish Politicians, could be guilty of so ridiculous a Management.

Besides, as the sequel of this King-killing-Blow, Oats particularly swears,
That no sooner was the King to have fallen, but both the Spanish Pilgrims,
thirty thousand strong, and a French Army besides were prepared to Land, and
follow the Blow by Joining with the English Papists already listed for that
purpose, and cutting the Protestants Throats; so that upon the upshot of the
whole matter, unless we can suppose, that the French and Spanish Kings had
their Pilgrims and Armies, and a Fleet ready to land 'em all prepared for seven
whole Years together Winter or Summer, to step over the Water, to nick the
Business, and prosecute the Massacre upon the crisis of the Kings Murder, the
whole Conspiracy comes to nothing.

Besides, we must pardon Mr. Oats his forgetfulness in several main passages
of Pickerings Achievement; First, That in his Narrative he expressly upon Oath,
Assigns the time of Pickerings flint being loose, and his being lasht for it,
to be in January, 77. but at his Trial he possitively swears it was done in
April 78. Secondly, We must not be staggered to imagine how a Fellow in so open
a place as St. James's-Park could present a Gun against the King, and flash in
the very Pan (as another time he swears for Pickering) and yet neither the King
nor one of his Attendants discover him. Neither are we to reflect, how it is
utterly impossible to shoot a Silver Bullet out of a screwed Gun, Silver being
too hard a metal ever to be discharged without tearing the Gun all to Pieces.

For the History of his other Popish Ruffins, his Conyers with his Dagger, his
four Irish Ruffins, (by the by, all Gentlemen of Quality and Fortunes, and yet
all hired for so bold an attempt, as shooting the King, for but poor fourscore
pounds between them, when the little inconsiderable Wretch Groves, was to be
rewarded with no less than 1500 l.) For the History I say of these
Assassinates, and Sir George Wakemans Affair, they were altogether a Mass of
nonsense so nauseously fulsom, that even the all-believing Whiggs themselves,
in the very hottest Dog-dayes of true Protestant Zeal and Euthusiasm turned
stomach at; insomuch, that the terrible Poysoner Sir George himself was
acquitted even by a Whigg Jury: In Defiance of all the Popish Fears and
Jealousies, which in that time of the World were no less than Mountain High.

But to muster the strength of all these last undertakers, and indeed, the
whole force of his whole Plot it self. In his Preface to his Narrative, he
tells the World, that he discovered his Plot first to His Majesty, by the
introduction of Mr. Christopher Kirby on the 13th. of August 78. At which time
you must note, he brought no other credentials to support his Plot, but Words
and Forehead, Oath and Impudence, being utterly unable to produce the least
scrap of one of all his numberless pretended Treasonable Papers, Letters, or
Commissions, to Corroborate his Evidence; notwithstanding his Narrative assures
us, that the Jesuits had long before wrought the King almost to an utter
Deafness and Infidelity, against all Informations whatever against them, and
consequently, his preserving of some of those undeniable Records against them,
all entrusted in his Hands, was the only necessary Introduction to the Credit
and support of his whole Discovery.

But however, though not one syllable of any thing of that Kind, was ever seen or
brought forth from that day to this, and the only lame Excuse that can help
him, is, to say, Truly whilst he plotted with them he was one of them, and
therefore did not seek to preserve any such Convincing Papers or Commission:
Though by the by, it looks a little odd in one of his Trialls, where he downright
swears, he was a Protestant all along, and disguised himself a Papist only to
herd with them to betray them. But let that pass.

The Prodigious oversight and negligence of our Discoverer in this Point, being
forgiven him for once: How comes it to pass, nevertheless that after that very
13th. Day of August, when he returned again to the Jesuits, and plotted with
them once more, only as a Spy and a Trapan, to take an opportunity of betraying
them; when after that very day, he delivered out several new Commissions, met
also at a consult of the Benedictines, and carried their Subscribed Resolve of
Murdering the King, to a second consult of the Carmelites for to sign it; met
likewise another time Conyers with his Broad Dagger in Grays-Inn-Walks, and
Pickering with his Basket of Fireballs at noon day in Lincolns-Inn-Fields,
when he saw Coleman dispatch the Messenger to the four Irish Ruffins: Nay and
all the whole business of Sir George Wakeman was all acted after that Day; when
in fine no less then thirty Paragraphs in his Narrative containing the very
hottest part of his whole Plot, were all Transactions after this first
Discovery to the King: How comes it to pass, I say, after his cold Reception at
Court, and the Kings so obdurate Incredulity, that our Adventurer should set
out a Treason hunting once more, for no other design but for proof and
Demonstrations, and Ocular Testimonials; and yet after all these offered
advantages of both Conspirators and Conspiracies, Traitors and Treasonable
Records in his Power, he should still come to Sir Edmund-Bury-Godfrey, the
September following, with his full and complete Popish Manifesto, and yet
without one scrap of Commissions, Papers, Resolves, etc. and with only his Old
Jargon, Breath and words, noise and Oaths for the support of his pretended
Oraculous Discovery. Good Heaven! How wide was the English swallow? When such
idle ridiculous stuff could go down.

But to leave the Kingkilling part of his Plot, and take a little view of his
Protestant Throat Cutting, viz. The second Act of his Popish Tragedy.

Here we must return to his Spanish Pilgrims, his Black Bills, and his French
Armies before mentioned together with the Armies of English Papists designd to
be raised, to join with them. And to begin at home, here was the Lord Bellasis,
and the Lord Petre, and a great many other of the greatest Roman Catholik's had
Commissions deliverd them to be Generals, Livetenant Generals, and so downwards
to Colonels and Captains, etc. Over severals Popish Armies intended to be
raised to subdue England to the Romish Yoke.

Now here are a great many very odd things in this projection. First, It Is
wondrous, that the Jesuits and the Head Plotters of the Papists were so
Cocksure of the Fidelity of their whole Party; that they durst hope to list so
many Thousands of Roman Catholics, (nay had listed them, if Bedloe may be
believed, being all ready to rise at four and twenty hours warning) and not
have one false Brother amongst them all, to betray so barbarous, and so
Rebellious an Undertaking. There was a time when Thousands of that Religion
ventured both Lives and Fortunes to recover the Kings Right against usurping
Traitors; with scarce one Dissenter amongst the whole Party, against so Loyal a
Cause; and it is a very strange change, that in a matter of thirty odd Years,
they should all be so Universally perverted to the Deposing and Murdering him,
as not to meet so much as one Pendril or one Huddleston amongst so many
thousand, (as this Army was to consist of) that might probably have told tales
beforehand, and, betrayed so Wicked and so Hellish a purpose, and thereby not
only have ruined the whole Plot, but the whole Party besides.

Secondly, We are to take notice, 'twas in May, June, July, and August 78. That
Oats attests his delivery of Commissions for the pretended Popish Armies. And
on the success of these Armies assisted by the Forreighn Popish Auxiliaries
before mentioned depended the whole fortune of the Romish Cause, Popery being
wholly to be Establishst by Military Execution. And yet as the Devil and the
Doctor would have it, Pickering and Groves, as you have been told before had
been seven years together at the Kings very Throat, nay and the Great rewards
of 1500 ll and 30000 Masses, together with Pickerings severe Backside
Castigation, were Motives and Spurs to hasten and expedite the future
performance of these two terrible screwed Gunners. And yet here was the King to
have been shot the very next moment (if possible) and all the while the very
Commissions were not given out, till for some months after, for the raising the
Army so immediately necessary to prosecute the Blow after the Kings dispatch.
Now in the name of dullness where were Our Wits when all this Hideous pieco of
Apocrypha was current Gospel amongst us.

And Lastly, To bring the Foreign Heroes into Play too, Oats swears that upon
subduing of England in manner aforesaid, the French were to be Lord of be
Ascendant, the Government of England being designed to have devolved into their
hands. And pray mark the Riddle of the Business. Here was the Spanish King in
the Year 78. lending no less a Body of Men then thirty thousand Fighting
Pilgrims to help establish the French King in the Monarchy of England at the
very same time, that he was in actual Wars against him, and an utter Enemy to
France, and so harrast by the French, that he was courting almost all
Christendom against him, and imploring all Foreighn Aides and Alliances to
oppose him, yes, though he had already lost so large, and so important a part of
his own Country to him, and was not over able with his best strength to defend
the rest from him, yet is this Spanish King forsooth (if Oats his Evidence
will hold Water) ayding and assisting the French King, with so vast a Succor,
for the enlarging the very Victories of his most hated Enemy by so prodigious
an Acquisition as the Imperial Diadem of England. Oh! The Miracles of a
Romish-Plot, and the more Miraculous English stomach to digest it.

This, Reader, is the great and dreadful Popish Bugbear, that once had Power to
Fright three Kingdoms out of their Senses, and this the Savior of the Nation,
that so many almost prostrate Knees, and up lifted Hands, entertained and
saluted with no less than Palm-Branches and Hosannahs. The particularizing of
all the nonsensical Incongruitys, and Contradictions through the whole Legend of
his Discovery, such as his Swearing at one Trial he was perverted to the Romish
Religion; and at another, that he was still a Protestant, and only played the
Hypocrite amongst the Papists to learn their Secrets, and to detect their
Plots: And then his Swearing before the Council, that he knew not Coleman, when
brought Face to Face before him; and yet at his Trial, to Swear he was his most
intimate Acquaintance, and Co-Plotter in the whole Business of the Four Irish
Ruffins; and consequently was the main Evidence that Hanged him. But most of
all, this his most egregious Perjury, in Swearing before the House of Lords,
that he had Discovered his whole Plot, and had not one Person more to Accuse,
than what he had named and impeached before; and yet after all this, to bring
the very Queen into the Conspiracy to Poison the King; a Princess of that
immaculate Virtue, and unexampled Piety into so damnable and hellish a Design;
that most Arrogant of Impostures and Villainies, as far from the very shadow of
Truth, as the Monster, that uttered it, is from Heaven. The particularizing I
say of all the egregious and impudent Falsities, through his whole Fardle of
Narratives is a Work too long and tedious. Besides the Mystery of Iniquity
(thanks be to Heaven) is already made so tranparent almost to all Eyes and
Understandings: that it is almost impossible that any thing but wilful and
hardened Blindness it self, cannot plainly see through.

The only and last, tho feeble, Argument that his Defenders (if it is possible
he can have any left) can make for him, is to say. How is it possible that all
his Discovery should be such errant Forgery and Imposture, and yet be so
universally believed, even by the most unanimous, and so long Assent of the
greatest and most sensible Men of the whole Kingdom? Why truly, were not an
English-Mans Belief one of the greatest Prodigies since the Flood, this might
be much wondered at. And truly it would appear almost stupendous, how almost a
whole Nation should be so besotted, had not woeful experience convinced, that
truly this is but the second Notorious Blot in our English Scutcheon. For let
us but look back into the dismal Fears and Jealoasies in the first King CHARLES
his Reign, and we shall find the self same Phantom governed then too. And just
such another as senseless and as ridiculous imaginary Plot of setting up
Popery, and Arbitrary Power, O Monstrum Horendum! Blew Three Kingdoms into a
Flame: and from the dismal Effects of that Epidemical Lunacy, has left that
stain upon the English Name and Reputation abroad in the World; that not whole
Ages will wash off. And truly we have no Excuse left, why we should be so
grossly imposed upon again, and run into a second as damnable an Error as the
first, but frankly confessing, that the Frenzy of our Fathers is Hereditary,
and nothing but their Madness running in our Bloods has been the cause of so
enormous a Folly, the extravagant Apprehensions of the Danger of Popery being
that natural impefection that the generallity of English Men are as much born
to, as men are to a Club-Foot, or a Hunch-Back, or any other Deformity; and
really, which they are almost as hardly to be cured of.

And therefore to draw to an End with our Swearing Master Titus, that Hellish
Incendiary, and chief Visible Original of our so many Years Distractions: His
Sentence, though it seem Severe, is much less than he deserves; our English
Lawmakers, as never imagining the possibility of so unexampled an Offender,
having provided no Punishment equal to the Demerits of such unprecedented
Villainy.

FINIS.
Entered according to Order.


