A SERMON Preached before the King and Queen, AT WINDSOR-CASTLE, SEPT. 21. 1690.

By R. Meggott, D. D. Dean of Winchester, and Chaplain in Ordinary to Their
Majesty's.

Published by Their Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard.
MDCXC.

James II. XXVI. For as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without
works is dead also.


MAthias a Michou, l. 1 c. 5. Desarmat. Asiana.
tells us the reason why the Tartars embraced Mahometism, was because the
Saracens persuaded them, that, that Religion was more favorable and fit for
their turn, than the strict and rigid Christian. But had they been acquainted
with those indulging comments which we our selves (as occasion has served)
have made on it; this need not have in the least disheartened them. There is no
Text so severe, no saying so hard in it, that these, with one distinction and
evasion or another, have not softened and sweetened so, that even the most
delicate and wanton Palates may away with them. Finding it irksome to rectify
their Manners by the Rule; to satisfy their grumbling Consciences, Men have
bowed the Rule to their Manners: And to avoid the Reproach of disobeying the
Oracle, found out Devices to Misinterpret it. So the Ethiopian, that he may
seem Beautiful himself, Painteth his God black too.

Though it is but now and then, we meet with a boisterous Athiest so rude, as
impudently to dash the Looking-glass against the ground, because it shows him
sights so unwelcome and affrighting; yet nothing more common than to use such
Arts in ordering and placing it, that it may be sure to flatter, and reflect
things pleasingly.

Though the most Charitable Religion the World was ever blessed with, it has
been quoted in Justification of Cruelty and Persecution: Though the most sincere
Religion, it has been alleged as a Warrant for Perfidiousness and
Aequivocation: Though the most Rational Religion, it has been wrested to hallow
Enthusiasm and Disorder. Pure and spotless, holy and harmless as it is, yet as
if Celsus and Zozimus's Malicious Calumny had been true, that it was indeed an
Asylum where the most Lewd and Scandalous Offenders were promised Protection;
scarce any thing so grossly Vile, that some or other have not pleaded its
Commission for. And notwithstanding the clear obligation which it lays upon
the Professors of it to all good Works, some have taught as if it were a
special Dispensation from the doing them. So instead of Conscientiously paying
these Debts, they deny them, Audaciously appealing to the Book, that they are
already discharged by another for them, and are not now owing.

Even while the Apostles were alive, there arose Men speaking such perverse
things; and against these St. James directs a considerable part of this
Epistle, irrefragably proving the necessity of Universal Obedience, in order to
our everlasting Happiness; that the belief of our Religion will never profit us
without an answerable Conversation: For as the body without out the spirit is
dead, so faith without works is dead also.

In which words here are the Subject and its Praedicat to be considered of.

The Subject is Faith.

What is here Praedicated of it, is, That without Works it is dead, as the body
without the Spirit.

The former of these the Subject here spoken of, is Faith.

Very glorious things are spoken of this in the Book of God; but it is a word
of such various significations, and there are so many things of the Name, that
it seems a little difficult to say, which of them they must be applied to. In
the Latin Concordance of the Vulgar Bible, published by Stephanus, there are
reckoned up no less than twenty two several acceptations of it, with the diverse
places of Scripture set down, that have been accounted to refer to each of
them. Not to take up your time about them, consider it as that Theological
Grace, distinguished from Hope and Charity, and it is but another word for
Believing, and so is an assent of the mind to all the known Revelations of God,
whether Doctrines, or Commands, Promises, or Threatenings, as unquestionably
true and certain.

If this account seem not so accurate as some Scholastic, or so Spiritual as
some Practical, Divines, have given of it, we need not be concerned, because
the Holy Ghost himself speaks of it on this wise, Heb. 11.1. Faith is the
substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. That is, it is
such a Conviction of the truth of those things which God has spoken, though we
have no Ocular or Sensible demonstration of them, as makes us patiently and
confidently expect the fulfilling them. This is the genuine, proper, and
comprehensive Notion of it.

If any shall say it is not such a general Faith the Gospel sets so great a
price up on, but a special one; if by special they mean an undoubting
Persuasion, a certain and full assurance of our own Justification and
Salvation, as In Cap. 48 Genes.
Luther, Just it. l. 3. c. 2. 7.
Calvin, Confess. c. 4. Art. 5.
Beza, Tom. 7. l. 1. de certa salute Ecclesiae.
Zanchy's; and several others, about that time, spoke of this Grace, in their
Definitions of it; with due reverence to the Names of those useful Men in their
Generations; this is so far from being a more excellent kind of Faith, that, to
speak plainly, it is no Faith at all. The Object of faith is Divine Revelation,
which is this case being but general and conditional, such an Absolute and
Particular conclusion, if it be not a Delusion, and over-weaning opinion of our
own State (which it is to be feared too often it is) yet however, if never so
well grounded, it can be at most but a Rational Deduction arising from
Self-examination.

By reason therefore of the Inconveniences they perceived it clogged with,
this since has been generally quitted by the most Vide Baronium Philos. Theol.
Ancil. Exercit. 3. Davenant Determ. Q. 37.
Judicious of them, who in all other things adhered to them who first broached
it, they choosing rather to excuse those Worthies in this, than defend them.

But notwithstanding their wariness in this, instead of contenting themselves
with that plain, simple, and substantial account, the Scriptures give of it,
these also have nicely Coined so many disputable sorts of it, as gave but too
much occasion to Maldonat's spiteful Sarcasm upon the Churches Reformed, that
they had (alluding to the Aequivocalness of the Latin Word) Tot fides quot in
lyra.

Besides that of Miracles (which is now ceased) the most famous distribution of
it, is into these three Kinds: Temporary, Historical, and Justifying.
And yet these Terms, currantly as they have passed, it may be upon
consideration will appear not so much to have explained as confounded the
thing; and indeed, to have been but distinctions without a difference.

For that which they call Temporary Faith, the faith of them that believe but
for a time, is of the same Species with that which they call justifying; the
duration of a thing does not at all belong to the Essence of it: He was as
truly a Man that dyed at Thirty, as he that lives while he is Fourscore. And
our Savior speaking of it, Luke 8.13. does not make it to be another, but the
same kind of Seed that fell upon the Rock, where it withered away after it
sprang up, because it had no Root, with that which fell upon the good ground,
and brought forth fruit with patience.

And so that which is called Justifying Faith, considered in it self, is
nothing else but that which they call Historical, which without all doubt does
Justify, if all those other things which the new Covenant does require to the
justification of a Sinner does accompany it. Every one will subscribe to that
of our Apostle, v. 14. of this Chapter, that if a man say he has Faith and
has not Works, his Faith cannot save him. So that faith of no kind, when it is
alone is justifying; and faith of that kind they call Historical made perfect
by works, will be justifying. And thus upon the whole matter it is evident,
that he who does really believe whatsoever is contained in Gods Word to be
true, has Faith, whatever other Grace he may be deficient in.

But lest any Man should, from some mistaken places of Scripture, flatter
himself that this is sufficient to qualify him for the favor of God, and
admission into Heaven: We are informed, that without a good life it will never
profit.

This is that which is here Praedicated, and declared concerning faith. The
other General of the Text, that without Works it is dead, as a Carcass when the
Soul is departed: For as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without
works is dead also.

And here again there is A Supposition, and an Assertion.


The Supposition is, that faith may be without works.

The Assertion, that wheresoever it is so, it is unacceptable to God, and
unprofitable unto Men it is dead.

The Supposition here is, that faith may be without works.

If it did necessarily draw Obedience after it (as some with plausible shows of
reason Camero praelect. ad Met. 18.
have attempted to maintain) this whole discourse about it, would have been
omitted as impertinent. Why should our Apostle have argued so earnestly and
closely about an utter impossibility.

It is true, there can be no good works without Faith, Hebr. 11.6. Without
faith it is impossible to please God, for he that comes to God, must believe
that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. He that
does not believe this, that God will reward him for it in another World, will
never Mortify his corrupt inclinations in this.

But true as it is, that there can be no good works without Faith, it is as
true, that there may be faith without good works; else why are we exhorted, 2
Pet. 1.5. To add to our Faith Virtue. If this habit could not be in us idle and
un-active, there would have been no more need of it, than to admonish the fire
that it would warm, or make orations to the water, that it would cleanse, or
moisten. It is a Moral motive to good Works, but it is no irresistible Cause;
no, it may be barren and unfruitful. It is so in two very common Cases:

In case of Inconsideration. In case of Presumption.
I. First, in case of Inconsideration, There is no question but that it is
sufficient to produce good works. St. Gregory Expounding that passage of our
Savior, B. Greg. in Ebany. hom. 29.
Mark 16.17, 18. These signs shall follow them that believe, in my name they
shall cast out Devils, they shall speak with new tongues, they shall take up
serpents, if they drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt them, they shall lay
hands on the sick and they shall recover: Because (says he) faith does not
work these Wonders now, shall we say it is not Faith? No, it does now as mighty
things upon the spirits of Men, as then it did upon their Bodies. Where it
really is, it casts out Devils still, the Envious, the Proud, the Unclean,
the Revengeful, every Evil Spirit that possesses Men. It makes Men speak with
new tongues still, that which is good to the use of Edifying instead of
Blasphemies, Slanders, Lies, Oaths, Corrupt and Filthy Communication. It takes
up Serpents still, stinging Scoffs and Censures, when called to it, the
greatest dangers and losses, for the keeping of a good Conscience. If they
drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt such still, the sollicitings and
temptations of bad Company, which is so deadly unto thousands, they shall not
be Poisoned with: They shall lay their hands on the sick, and they shall
recover still, their many Infirmities and Frailties they labor under, by
degrees they shall overcome and conquer, waxing stronger in the Lord: These
(says he) are the wonderful effects of faith still.

But then it must be remembered, it produces them, not as a Charm, but as a
Medicine; not in a Magical way, but in a Moral. It represents Arguments to
our hopes, and Fears of such amazing moment, as are proper and apt enough to
influence the stupidest, or wildest Persons, that will but weigh them; but yet
no Virtue will come out of them except our Minds touch them.

And are there not some, who seldom or never seriously, and in earnest, think
of these things, though they know them? And then what can be expected? The
sharpest Sword will not cut, as long as it is in the Scabard. In this case,
though there be Faith, woeful experience shows, it works no more than the
Potion in a Glass, which the Patient does not take, in the case of
Inconsideration. The other is like unto it, and that is,

II. The case of Presumption. Although Inconsideration with the Philistines,
cutteth the Hair wherein the strength of Faith lies; this will not serve
always; in time it will grow again, and make its fresh assaults on us. Though Men
may for a while, by casual or contrived diversions, have these things out of
their thoughts, they cannot so utterly rid their Consciences of its company,
but that sometime or other it meets them, as the Angel did Balaam, with a
naked Sword in its Hand, so dreadful, that it makes the the most Brutish sort
of Sinners, for the present, to start and boggle in their ways; and yet, for
all this, oft-times they will not go back again.

No, when they dare not run full-butt against it, then they find out a trick
cunningly to slip by it. They suppose the things to be true, but then they
promise themselves selves that they will be wise. They resolve they will repent
before they dye, and then they assure themselves the threatening will not take
place.

Behind this Sconce they stand secure, against the most dreadful Artillery of
Heaven that is discharged at them; having once imbibed this Opiat Principle,
like those Indian Kings, mentioned by Vita Apollorii, l. 3. c. 1.
Philostratus, when they had drunk out of their Enchanted Cup, they conceive
themselves Invulnerable.

That Servant who had not quite lost all fear of his Lord, but believed he
would call him to a reckoning; when once he said in his Heart, that he Mat.
24.48.
delayed his coming, it would be a great while first: At the present makes
bold to do any thing, Smites his fellow Servants, and eats and drinks with
the drunken.

It is a very Atheistical Age we live in, but yet I am very far from thinking
all the loose ones in it to be Atheists; most of them, I persuade my self,
believe there is a God, and that he will by no means acquit the guilty, but
with them in the Prophet, who said, The Vision is for many days to come; Ezekiel.
12.27.
they hope hereafter will be time enough to be reconciled to him; and with this
Salvo it is they sin so unconcernedly, and their faith sits idle all the day
long without works.

God grant it do not so with any of us, while the Night comes, that long and
dismal Night when no Man can Work!

To prevent this mighty Evil, know assuredly, that as long as it is so with any
of us, our state is as dangerous: I might add, more, than if we had no faith at
all.

This is the thing here asserted, the great Truth in the Text now to be
discoursed of concerning faith, that as long as it is without works, it is
unacceptable to God, it is unprofitable unto Men; it is dead. For as the body
without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also.

There is no such plenty of Faith on the Earth now, as to bring down the price
of it; but rare as it is, it is possible to over-rate it. And so we should most
unreasonably to think it is all that God requires of us under the Gospel. This
is to represent the Christian Religion more absurd than any. None so Prodigal,
as to engage its rewards to as many as are of it, merely for believing some of
its Articles, except they are likewise observant of its Precepts; but this were
to make the Commandments of God of no Obligation, to as many as shall but
confidently rely upon his Promises.

If it be so disingenuous an abuse of the kindness of Men, to misconstrue their
words spoke in our favor, and put such an extravagant sense on them, as they
never intended, what would it be to deal so with the words of God? Instead of
blessing his Name for so gracious a Promise, that for the Merits of his Son he
will accept of the sincere (though imperfect) Repentance and Obedience of every
one who by Faith lays hold on him; to pretend, that laying hold of Christ by
Faith is all that he requires to the Justification of a Sinner.

God forbid, but that we should give unto Faith the things that are Faith's,
that we may, and yet not own all those indiscreet and dangerous Hyperboles,
that some in their heats have magnifyed it with; this were to take away from
Works, the things that are works. Now look upon faith as separate from these,
and as great and necessary a grace as it is, there is nothing in it which may
not be found in a reprobate and castaway.

There are but three things that can properly be reckoned up belonging to it.
Knowledge, Assent and Affiance.

As to Knowledge there is none can make any doubt of that, have all the works
of iniquity no Knowledge? have they not known? have they not heard? yea verily,
that Servant who did it not, yet knew his Masters Will as well as any of them.

As for Assent, the Devils go beyond us all in it, they give it without any
mixture of doubting. It fills them constantly with tormenting fears, they
believe and tremble.

And for Affiance, except there were more ground for it, alas! there is but too
much of it among the most sottish of the people. The foolish Virgins, though they
had no oil in their Lamps, were as confident, slept as soundly as the wise.

These things with their due concomitants are glorifications of God, and their
praise is in the Gospel: But alone by themselves, like the unfruitful light of
the Sun in Winter, or the deceptions of a flattering dream; they are mere
entertainment for imagination, they being nothing to perfection. That faith
which is compounded of all these ingredients, if it be not accompanied with a
holy life* the Apostle here compares to a dead body whose spirit is departed
from it.

And there are two things wherein it much resembles it.

1. First as the dead body without the Spirit is imperfect, wanting its best
and noblest part, so is faith without works wanting that which dignifyeth and
compleateth it: without these, it appears by the view we just now have taken
of the parts of it, it is in the sight of God of no price.

This some have not without probability conceived to be one of the chief of
those things, which St. Peter points at in his brother Paul's Epistles, Pet.
23.16.
so hard to be understood, which they that were unlearned and unstable, wrested
to their own destruction, his doctrine concerning faith, because of his
attributing such blessed effects to it (tho he meant it only of such a faith as
works by love, as he expresses himself to the Galatians, Chap. 5.6. telling
the Corinthians, 1 Epist 13.2. that he that has all faith, faith of any
denomination, and has not charity is nothing) yet there were a sort of men who
took occasion from thence to teach, that all he intended was only an inward and
strong persuasion, of the virtue and efficacy of Christ's merits and
satisfaction; and if people but so believed, it was enough; not much matter how
they lived.

Several of the Ancients, and among them St. Augustine, has affirmed, that the
first Epistle of St. John, the second of St. Peter, the Epistle of St. Jude,
and this of St. James, all insisting so peculiarly upon the necessity of
obedience, and keeping the Commandments of God, were written chiefly for the
confutation of that pernicious tenent.

All who carefully, and without prejudice read the Scriptures, will easily see,
that these make repentance and newness of life, as much a condition of our
pardon and salvation, as faith it self. So that when these are attributed so
eminently and peculiarly unto faith, we are not to understand it of this Grace
singly: but of the mother with her daughters, her, with her whole family of
evangelical duties. Thus St. Paul (who is most appealed to in this case)
expounds himself, Romans 10.16. they have not all obeyed the Gospel, for Esaias
says who has believed our report. Where obeying the Gospel in the former part
of the Verse, he calls believing in the latter: accordingly he charge all
that should preach it to the end of the World, Titus 3.8. to teach and affirm
constantly that they that believe in God, should be careful to maintain good
works. Showing that our believing is so far from exempting us from them, that
it is a peculiar obligation to abound in them.

As when Abraham tells Sarah that she was a fair woman to look upon, Genesis
12.11.
he means as she then was, with her soul remaining in her: when that was
departed, she was so ghastly a spectacle, he ordered her to be buried out of
his sight: So does the Apostle, when he speaks of this Grace so highly, he
means it as enlivened by inherent holiness, otherwise, when it is without
that, it is a dead body without its spirit, aptly here compared to it, because
of its imperfection.

2. There is another account may be rendered of it too, why it is resembled to
a dead body without its spirit, and that is because of its uselesness.

These bodies of ours so wonderfully made, whenonce they cease to be animated,
what are they good for? They have mouths, but they speak not; eyes have they,
but they see not; they have ears but they hear not; noses have they, but they
smell not; they have hands but they handle not, feet have they, but walk not;
neither speak they through their throats. And it is no better with faith it
self, when unaccompanied with a religious life. It is altogether as
insignificant to any saving purposes.

We find God in mercy making abatements for matters of faith, where the person
leads a pious and good life. Cornelius had not any explicit knowledge of
Christ at all, yet being a devout man and one that feared God, he is assured by
an Angel that his prayers and his alms were come up for a memorial before him.
Acts 10.4.
But where there is not a pious and good life, God has no regard to the most
orthodox and relying faith. Our Savior tells us plainly, that it is not the
calling him, Lord, Lord, shall give us entrance into Heaven, Mat. 7.21.
but the doing the will of our Father which is in heaven.

They who run down this as legal preaching, and as the more evangelical way,
spend themselves in exhorting their hearers to get Christ, to lean on Christ,
to cast themselves on Christ, one would almost think had discovered some other
Christ, then him the Gospel speaks of. His doctrine was of a different form
and tendency: In the first Sermon that he preached, he cautiously informs the
people of this, that he came not to destroy the law but to fulfill it. Mat.
5.17.
To cancel any part of our duty toward God or man, but to advance it to a
higher degree of perfection. It were to be wished therefore, that they who so
much affect, would take care to explain, expressions of such indefinite and
ambiguous signification, lest their followers should mistake their better
meaning, and instead of being built up in their most holy faith, receive the
Grace of God in vain, and cause the way of truth to be evil spoken of.

Let not any think to shelter loose and dangerous notions in this kind, under
the authority of the reformed Churches. Though these have been much scandalized
by the Romanists upon this account; as licentious in their tenants, and
despisers of good works (because they exclude them from justification,
attributing that to faith only) it is very causelessly; for when they speak of
justifying faith, they do it in such a way, as shows them very innocent and
free from the charge: and that in truth it is the manner of their speaking,
rather than the thing they speak, that gives offense to them. For when they
Rescribe this sort of faith, they put in more ^han is properly faith to
appretiate it. For then they say we are justified by faith only, observe what
they will have this justifying ^aith to be. Because it is best known to, and
may have the greatest sway with, those among us, who have most need to be
disa^used in this matter, I shall only mention ^he Assembly of Divines, whose
words in our confession of faith, are these. Cap. 14.
By this faith, a Christian believes to be true, whatsoever is revealed in the
word, for the authority of God himself speaking therein, and acts differently
upon that which each particular passage thereof contains; yielding obedience
to the commands, trembling at the threatenings and embracing the promises of
God, for this life and that which is to come. They suppose these effects so
inseparable from true faith that when it is proved, not only that considered in
its own nature, it may be; bu^ that often it has been without them: it is
still replied, it is not such a faith which they mean, and call justifying.

The foreign Divines, whom these followed have spoken so much to this purpose,
some making this habitto be in the will, Chamier Panstratiae tom. 3. l. 12. c.
4.
other to contain in it hope and charity; Zegerus in praefat. ad annotat. ad
epist. Pauli.
th^^ that moderate and very judicious writer (...) le Blanc after an exact and
impartial stat^^ the Question about our justification by fai^^ and summoning up
what the most considerable on both sides grant and deny, conclueth, that, tho
the doctrine of the Rom^^ Church in some other points is such, as not so
consistent with the truth which h^^ they have been by their adversaries
compelled to own: Though some writers of the reformation have let fall many
things which seem contradictory, and have need of a very kind interpretation to
reconcile them; though on both sides they charge one another so highly, as if
they struck at the very foundation of Christanity; yet would they have but the
patience to consider what one another say, Vide Le Blanc Theses Theol. Quomodo
fides justificet Sect. 59.
this controversy between us and the Papists would appear not much more, after
all, than a strife of words.

Upon this account such as have spoken most favorably of a deathbed
repentance have justly affirmed it so extremely dangerous to rely on, not only
because there are so many several ways of men's going out of the world, some of
which deprive, of time, others of faculties: but because it bears so little
and so suspicious fruit.

Not but that where such repentance is sincere and cordial, he who foreseeth
all future contingencies, and the effects of things in their causes, may, in
this sense, call the things that are not as if they were, and graciously accept
according to that which a man has, and not according to that which he has
not: But yet it must be said, that throughout all the Bible we have not a
promise, that God will accept the most godly death for a wicked life; good
wishes for good works.

No body therefore need have been so angry with St. James, as to deny the truth
and authority of his Epistle upon this score, as if the contents of it were
contradictory to the tenor of other Scriptures, those passages which have made
any think so, as to him that works not, Romans 4.5.
but believes in him that justifies the ungodly. I desire to be found in him
not having mine own righteousness which is after the law, Phil. 3.9.
but that which is through the Faith of God, and the like; are to be
understood, chiefly of the works of the ceremonial law, which the Jews so
tenaciously adhered to; as is evident by the whole Epistle to the Galatians:
partly of the works of the moral law, which the Gentiles performed by the power
of Nature, as appears by the two first chapters to the Romans; but if we
speak of the works of the evangelical law which proceed from faith, and
assistance of the spirit: If we turn over the whole new Testament we shall be
so far from finding any thing in derogation or diminution of them, that it will
appear they are the great design of our religion, so the Apostle tells the
Ephsians, we are his workmanship, Ephesians. 2.10.
created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before ordained that
we should walk in them. Though there is not such merit in them, that we shall be
saved for them, yet there is such necessity of them, that we shall not be saved
without them. No believing without obedience will avail us; for as the body
without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also.

This being so very clear, gives cause enough to spend more than the remainder
of the time in lamentation, in sad lamentation for the dead, I mean for the
faith of Christians, whose want of works does so plainly manifest it has too
generally given up the ghost. Instead of making it the guide and rule of our
lives, 1 Kings 9.
we use it as a name of faction and distinction; wrangling and clamouring, as
the Harlots did before Solomon about the child; one saying the faith is mine,
the other, nay, but it is mine; only with this woeful difference; theirs was
about a living child, ours (God knows!) about a dead one. What can we think
else, when we see it on all hands to be so very void works?

This is sad in any that call themselves Christians, but we have the least to
excuse our selves, of any, By how much our faith is the sounder, by so much is
our sin the greater. For, however we may flatter our selves, it will be more
tolerable in the day of account for such as have been serious even in a
trifling religion, than for such as have been trifling in such a serious one.
The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, Romans 13.17.
but righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost.

It is a duty indeed, and a commendable one to contend earnestly for the faith
once delivered to the Saints, Jude 3.
but what will it be but a reproach to us, if all our zeal be only for the
profession of it, and we have none, for those fruits of it, as are most
becoming Saints. Be not deceived, God is not mocked, for whatsoever a man
sows, that shall he also reap.

Trust ye not then in lying words, saying the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of
the Lord. The Protestant Religion, the Protestant Religion. It will be but
odious to God, and fulsom to men, if it be not adorned with an unanswerable
conversation.

Who then is a wise man among you, James 3.13.
and endued with knowledge, let him show out of a good conversation his works
with meetness of wisdom: that so our profession and our practices may meet
together, our faith and our works kiss each other, and glory may dwell in our
land.

FINIS.

