A PARAPHRASE AND EXPOSITION of the Prophecy of SAINT PETER, Concerning the
day of CHRIST'S second Coming; Described in the third Chapter of his second
EPISTLE.

AS ALSO, How the CONFLAGRATION, or Destruction of the WORLD by fire, (whereof
Saint Peter speaks) and especially of the HEAVENS, is to be understood.

BY JOSEPH MEDE, B. D. late Fellow of Christ's College in Cambridg.

LONDON, Printed by R. Bishop, for SAMUEL MAN, dwelling at the sign of the Swan
in Paul's Churchyard. 1642.

A PARAPHRASE AND EXPOSITION of the Prophecy of SAINT PETER, Concerning the
day of CHRIST'S second Coming, On the third Chapter of the second EPISTLE.
Verse 1, 2.
SAint Peter exhorts the believing Jews, unto whom he writes to be mindful of
the words of the holy Prophets,(a) Esaias, Daniel, and Malachi, concerning the
coming of Christ to judgment, and the restoration then promised, it being
also confirmed by the Apostles of our Lord and Savior.

(a) IF that which St. Peter here describes were foretold by the old Prophets,
then must Saint Peter be so expounded, as it may be shown in them, and agree
with them.

Verse 3, 4.
For howsoever it were then believed both by Jews and Christened Gentiles, yet
in the last days should come those, who walking after their own desires (or
humors) should deny and deride the expectation of any such promise (b) of that
day of Christ, saying, Where is the promise (c) of his coming? Where is the
new heaven and new earth you talk of?

(b) This (...), or last days, should seem to be the time of the Churches
Apostasy under Antichrist, according to that of Saint Paul, 1 Timothy 4. 1. In
the later times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to spirits of
error, and doctrines of demons. For as the times of the fourth and last of
Daniels Kingdoms were the last times in general, during which Christ was to
come, and found his Church and Kingdom: So the latter times of the fourth
Kingdom, being the period of a time, times, and half a time, wherein the
wicked horn should domineere, are the latemost times of the last times, or
last times in special.

(c) I take Promise here for res promissa, the antithesis implying that to be
the meaning, viz. The scoffers say, Where is the promise of his coming?
Nevertheless we look for a new heaven and a new earth, according to his
promise. But here is somewhat, (Reader) in the application wherein thou may
err; but be not thou uncharitable in thy censure, nor think that I am. For
although the crying down and condemning the opinion of the Chiliasts, will be
found to be near upon the beginning of the times of the Antichristian
Apostasy, (which I suppose to be called the last times;) and that the utter
burying of that opinion falls within these times: yet thou must know, first,
That there is not the like reason of the first Authors of crying down a truth,
and of those, who led by their authority, take it afterward, without further
examination, for an error. Secondly, To scoff, is one thing, and barely not
to believe, is another. Thirdly, it is one thing to deny a promise simply, and
another to deny and question the manner thereof: as also, to reject a truth
sincerely propounded, and when it is entangled with errors, as that of the
later Chiliast may seem to have been.

Verse 4. pars altera.
The reason of this their unbelief being, because they imagine, there has
never yet, since the creation of the world, been any example of such a
destuction and change ensuing it, as this at the coming of Christ should be.
For since the Fathers fell asleep (say they) even since Adam died, all things
have continued as they were from the beginning of the Creation. Therefore the
expectation of any such change of the world, and the state of things therein
(as is supposed) is vain and frivolous, and never to be fulfilled.

Touching the Jews, and the impeachment of this opinion amongst them in the
later times, I find amongst the Doctors of the Gemara, or gloss of their
Talmud, (which was finished about 500. years after Christ) a tenet of one R.
Samuels, (...) That there was to be no difference between the present state of
the world, and the days of Messiah, but in regard of the bondage under the
kingdoms of the Gentiles only; thereby opposing the more ancient opinion and
tradition of the renovation of the world. After this time there appears to
have been amongst the Jews a sect of the followers of the opinion of this R.
Samuel, which at length was greatly advanced by the authority of learned
Maimonides, who having drunk too deep of the Philosophy of Aristotle, (wherein
he was admirably skillful) became a champion against the opinion of the worlds
renovation to be in the days of Messiah; and that upon this ground, Quod
mundus retinet and sequitur consuetudinem suam; which saying he adscribeth to
some other Rabbis of the same opinion before him, which for the sense and
meaning is the self same with that here of the scoffers: All things (say they)
continue, as they were from the beginning of the creation. Nevertheless Aben
Ezra, who lived not long after Maimonides, maintained still (as also others
did) the contrary; and there are extant certain discourses and tractates
amongst them, purposely written of this argument, and confuting the opinion of
Rambam and his followers; as one called (...) coeli novi, proving the necessity
of the renovation of the world, and directed against cap. 29. lib. 2. of
Maimonides his More Nebochim. Another by R. Isaak Abarbinel, (...) Opera Dei,
(ou^ of Psalm. 66. 5.) wherein all the arguments brought against the renovation
are confuted. And no doubt there are more of the like nature, which we know not
of.

Verse 5, 6.
But those who suppose this ((...)) that there has never yet any such
destruction or change befallen the creation, and thence conclude, there is nor
shall such ever be; they weigh and consider not the universal deluge in the
time of Noah, (when the curses laid upon the creature for man's sin first
solemnly took place,) brought as a like destruction, so a like change upon the
world for the degeneration of the creature; As this at the second coming of
Christ shall be for the restoration and renovation of the same in the glorious
liberty of the children of God. For the heavens were of old, and the globe of
the earth, consisting partly ((...)) of water, viz. that of the great deep; and
partly ((...)) amongst (d) water, to wit, the clouds and floodgates of heaven
hanging about it, all framed by the word of God: By the which waters ((...))
the world which then was, being overwhelmed with water, perished; as it is
written Genesis 7. 11. seq. in the 600. year of Noah's life, in the second month,
in the seventeenth day of the month were all the fountains of the great deep
broken up, and verse. 18. and the waters; and 21. and all flesh died.

(d) (...) sometimes signifies inter, amongst, or in the midst of, as if it
were (...): So Herodotus, (...), inter insulas. Howsoever we render the
Preposition, I suppose S. Peter by his (...) means the superior water, which
together with that of the sea, or great deep, concurred to the drowning of the
world, as appears by the place of Genesis alleged.

Verse 7.
But the heavens and the earth (i. e. the world) which is now, by the same word
are kept in stare, reserved unto fire (e) at the day of judgment and perdition
of ungodly men, according to the prophecy of Daniel, cap. 7. who saw a fiery
stream issuing and coming forth before the Judge of the world, and the body of
the fourth beast burned therewith: And of Esaias, cap. 66. who says of that day,
That the Lord shall come with fire, and with his chariots like a whirlwind, to
render his anger with fury, and his rebukes with flames of fire: And that by
fire and by his sword, (i. e. by his sword of fire, (...)) the Lord would plead
with all flesh, and the slain of the Lord shall be many. So also Malachy cap.
4. That the great and terrible day shall burn as an oven, and all the proud,
and all that do wickedly shall be stubble, which at the coming of that day
(f) shall be burnt up.

(e) From this proportion which the judgment to come by fire, has unto that
which was by water in the deluge, Irenaeus calls it Diluvium ignis, lib. 5. c.
29. juxta edit. Fevardentii.

(f) It may be it is of this day that the Prophet Esaias also speaks, cap. 9. 5.
where he says, that the battle of the Messiah should not be as the battle of
the warrior, with confused noise, and garments rolled in blood; but with
burning and fuel of fire. For the old Prophets for the most part speak of the
coming of Christ indefinitely and in general, without that distinction of
first and second coming, which the Gospel out of Daniel has more clearly
taught us: And so consequently they spoke of the things to be at Christ's
coming indefinitely and all together, which we who are now more fully informed
by the Revelation of the Gospel, of a two fold coming, must apply each of them
to his proper time: those things which befit the state of his first coming,
unto it; and such things as befit the state of his second coming, to the
second; and what befits both alike, may be applied unto both.

Verse 8.
But whereas I mentioned (says Saint Peter) the day of judgment, lest ye
might mistake it for a short day, or a day of few hours, I would not, Beloved,
have you ignorant, that one day (g) with the Lord is as a thousand years, and a
thousand years as one day.

(g) Thus I expound these words by way of pre-occupation or premunition,
because they are the formal words of the Jewish Doctors, when they speak of
the day of judgment, or day of Christ, as Saint Peter here does, viz. (...)
una dies Dei S. B. sicut mill anni. And though they use to quote that of the
ninth Psalm, ( mill anni in oculis tuis ut dies hesternus) for confirmation
thereof, yet are not these words formally in the Psalm. So that Saint Peter in
this passage seems rather to have had respect to that common saying of the
Jews in this argument, than to the words of the Psalm; where the words ( one
day with the Lord is as a thousand years) are not, though the later part of the
sentence ( a thousand years as one day) may allude thither; as the Jews also
were wont to bring it, for a confirmation of the former. 2. These words are
commonly taken as an argument, why God should not be thought slack in his
promise (which follows in the next verse: But the first Fathers took it
otherwise; and besides, it proves it not: for the question is not, whether the
time be long or short in respect of God; but whether it be long or short in
respect of us; otherwise not 1000. but 100000. years are in the eyes of God no
more than one day is to us, and so it would not seem long to God, if the day of
judgment should be deferred till then. 3. Let the judicious consider it,
whether this passage so prone to be taken in the exposition I have given, yea
and alleged to that purpose, were not some part of a motive to the zeloticall
Anti-Chiliasts (whereof Eusebius, whom we trust was none of the least) to be so
willing and ready to question the authority of this Epistle, as they did also
at the same time of the Apocalypse. The pretense against this Epistle was, that
it wanted the testimony of allegation by the first Fathers. But ( Dies Domini
sicut mill anni) quoted both by Justin Martyr and Irenaeus, is not out of the
ninth Psalm, as they took for granted, (for there are no such words, but out
of the Epistle of Peter, who applies it to the day of judgment, which he
calls Dies Domini, (...): Consider it.

Verse 9.
And though this day be deferred, yet is the Lord not slack concerning his
promise, (as some men account slacknesse, as if he had altered his purpose, or
meant never to perform it) but the cause of this delay, is his long-suffering
(a) toward as of the seed of Israel, not willing that any should perish at
that day, but that the whole nation should come unto repentance, (b) which, if
that day should surprise them in their unbelief, must inevitably perish with
the rest of the enemies of Christ.

(a) Saint Peter speaks and writes in this Epistle to his brethren the Jews,
as appears by the first verse of this chapter.

(b) So the same Saint Peter in his first public Sermon to his Nation in the
Temple, after the sending of the holy Ghost ( Act. 3. 19, etc.) exhorts them to
repent and be converted (...), for the washing away of their sins, that so
((...)) those times of refreshing and restitution of all things which God had
spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets, might come, which till then were
to be suspended. Object. But God could have hastened the Jews conversion, if
it had pleased him. Resp. But it stood with the economy of Gods justice, when
the Jews had rejected Christ, their expiation, to grant them this grace,
until they should have fulfilled a time of penance for all the sins of their
Nation, even from the first time they were a people, until the last
destruction of Jerusalem. For since they would none of their pardon and
atonement by Christ, (with respect unto whose coming God had so long spared
them; for all their expiation by sacrifice looked unto him) God would not bate
them an ace of the judgment they had merited, but would visit all the former
sins of their Nation upon them, from the golden Calfe, until their
crucifying, and finally rejecting of their Messiah.

Verse 10.
But as for the manner of the coming of this great day of the Lord, it shall
be suddenly and unawares, as a thief in the night, in which the heavens (c)
with a crackling noise of fire shall pass away, and the (...) (c) or host of
them shall melt with fervent heat; the earth also and the works thereof shall
be burned.

(c) What these Heavens are, and why I render (...) the host of them; and how
this conflagration is to be understood, I will show when I have done my
Paraphrase.

(c) What these Heavens are, and why I render (...) the host of them; and how
this conflagration is to be understood, I will show when I have done my
Paraphrase.

Verse. 11, 12.
Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons
ought we to be, in all holy conversation and godliness, to make our selves
fire* proof, and such as may abide the day of refining? as namely becomes
those who by faith look for, and hasten the coming of the day of the Lord,
wherein the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the host of them melt
with servent heat. For our life and conversation ought to be suitable to our
faith, and we are so to walk, as if that were always present which by faith we
look for.

Verse 13.
But this conflagration ended, (whatsoever those scoffers say, who question the
promise of Christ's second coming we look according to his promise Esa. 65.
and 66. for a new heaven and a new earth, (that is, a new and refined state of
the world) wherein righteousness shall dwell, according as the same Prophet
says cap. 60. 20, 21. The Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and the days
of thy mourning shall be ended, thy people also shall be all righteous, they
shall inherit the land, or earth, for ever.

Verse. 14, 15, 16.
Wherefore beloved (seeing that ye look for such things at his coming) be
diligent that ye may be found in him in peace, without spot and blameless, and
account the long-suffering of God, in the delay thereof to be salvation. Even
as our beloved brother Paul also (one of the Apostles of our Lord, who
confirms these words of the holy Prophets) according to the wisdom given
unto him, has written unto you; enforcing the like exhortation unto holiness
of life, from this our faith and experience of the Lord Jesus his appearing to
judgment, which we now make unto you: viz. Heb. 12. 14, 28, 29. As also in all
his Epistles, speaking in them of these things, viz. Romans 2. 4. coll. cum verse.
5. 6, 7. and 1 Cor. 1. 7, 8. and 3. 13. 2 Cor. 5. 9, 10, 11. in initio, and 7.
1. Phil. 1. 10. and 2. 15, 16. and cap. 3. 10. Coloss. 3. 4, 5. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 12.
and 3. 13. denique 5. 23. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8, 11. 1 Timothy 6. 14, 15. Tit. 2. 12, 13.

How this Conflagration of the world, whereof S. Peter speaks, and especially
of the Heavens, is to be understood.
FOr resolution of this question, I must premise some things, to make the way
thereto the more easy.

R. 1. That the old Hebrew language wherein the Scripture speaks, there is no
one word to express the compages of the superior and inferior bodies, which
we call Mundus, but these two words Heaven and Earth ((...)) joined toand put
together, only so that when Saint Peter says (the World that then was,
perished by waters; but the Heavens and earth that are now, are reserved to
fire:) He might as well have said according to his meaning, The Heavens and the
Earth which then were, perished by waters, as the world that now is shall by
fire. For the words Heaven and Earth joined, imply no more in the one
(according the Scriptures notion) than the single word Mundus or World does in
the other, being applied to the history of the great deluge: as also, a New
heaven and a New earth is the same notion with that in our expression, where we
say a New World; that is to say, Nova rerum facies, nova rerum conditio; which
we otherwhile apply to very small, and even particular and domestical changes,
when we say, Here is a new World; which the Hebrew would or might express,
Here is a new Heaven and a new Earth.

2. That it is not like that any other World, or Heaven and Earth, shall perish
by fire, than such a one as heretofore perished by water: for so the antithesis
imports, viz. The World, or Heaven and Earth that then was, perished by
water, the Heaven and Earth which now is, is reserved for a destruction by
fire. Now the world which perished by water was no other than the sublunary
world; the Heaven whereof is that which we call Air, but the Scripture Heaven*
which sublunary heaven, together with the earth, was marred by that general
deluge; and the creatures belonging to them both either wholly destructed, or
marvellously corrupted from that they were before: such a World therefore, and
no other Heaven and Earth, shall undergo the second deluge of fire for
restoration, which before suffered the deluge of water for corruption.

3. Observe also, for the better understanding of Saint Peter's meaning, That
the word (...) which we in this place are wont to turn Elements, is not like to
be understood in the notion of the Greek Doctors, whose terms and notions the
Scripture uses not, but otherwise divides the World. Nay further, in this
place it cannot be so understood, for that the Hebrew division of the World
into Heaven and Earth is here expressed, and the (...) distinguished from them
both. But when the whole world is divided into Heaven and Earth (...), by Earth
is meant the Earthen globe, which Saint Peter says is (...) (...), and so the
water and earth are both included in the sole name of Earth: In Heaven the Air
is included. Thus three of the Physical Elements are bestowed. The fourth is
the Fire: but this is that which is to burn the (...), and so none of the (...)
to be burnt. And if any of these Elements could be exempted from this division
into Heaven and Earth, besides the Fire, viz. the Air, yet could not that, nor
any of them alone be (...) in Saint Peter: For (...) notes more than one. It
must needs therefore be, that (...) here means something else. Let us see if
we can find out what it is. Mark then Saint Peter's order, (...), then (...) By
which correspondence it should seem that (...) should be some furniture
belonging to coelum, as (...) are the buildings and whole furniture of
creatures belonging to terra; which furniture of both, but especially that of
the Heaven the Scripture calls (...) the host of them, Genesis 2. 1. The heavens
and the earth were finished, (...) and all the host of them: LXX. (...). Vulg.
Ornatus eorum. Nay, seeing the whole world is nothing else but the heaven and
the earth, and what is contained in them, ( i. e.) exercitus eorum: and seeing
heaven and earth are both here distinctly named, and (...) put for the host of
the earth; it must needs be that (...), named as distinct things from all
three, should note the host of heaven: And so the meaning of Saint Peter should
be, when he says (...), as if he had said, (...), the heavens and the host
thereof; or (...), as he says, (...), the earth and the works therein. But
how, will some man say, should (...) come to have this notion? I answer thus,
The Hebrew verb (...) signifies, in ordine militaristo, incedo, and so answers
to the Greek verb (...), which is expounded, (...), i. e. in ordine militari
incedo, Vide Scap. ex Etymolog. Accordingly the LXX: render the Hebrew (...),
i. e. in praecinctu sto, instructa acie sto. Now if the verb (...) signify
the same with the Greek (...), why may not the Hebrew Noune (...) (which we
turn exercitus) be rendered (...); the Hellenists or Greekish Jews as in
other words so here following the Etymology from (...), and having eye more to
their own native language, than to the use of Greece. It would be long to show
in how many words they, and the Greek Scriptures written according to their
Dialect, use notions which the Greek used not; ( viz.) respecting some
conformity or other in their own Tongue. The works of the learned in sacred
Criticisme are of late full of such observations, whereby many difficulties and
obscurities in Scripture become clear and easy. Nevertheless the
Gentile-Greekes themselves use (...) and (...) (which come of the same verb
(...)) in the same sense we plead for, viz. for ordo militaris, Military array;
why may not then the Hellenists (so the Sea the Syriack Act. 9 2^. where (...)
are turned ludaei qui loquebantur Graece.
Greek Jews are called) do so with (...), being for the etymology every way
as fit, seeing also they are otherwise wont to permute significations from
vicinity of found.

For a further confirmation of this notion of (...) I contend for, I will add
what I have met with to that purpose. Schickardus, a learned Professor of the
Oriental Languages at Tabingen, in his Bekinath happerushim, page 44. has
discovered out of Rambans, or R. Moses ben Nachmans Preface in Perusche
hattaroth, two passages taken out of the Chaldee copy of the Wisdom of
Solomon, which that Rabbi had seen: whereby the said Schickard proves against
Saint Jerome, that the Greek is not the original, but was translated out of
Chaldee. The passages which this Ramban quoteth thence are cap. 7. 5, 6, 7. and
part of the 8. And again, verse. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. In the last of which
quotations, because there is in the Greek (...), I greedily looked what word in
the Chaldee answered here to (...), which I found to be (...), which those who
have skill know to signify the Planets, 12. signs or constellations of
Heaven, as being the same with the Hebrew I have since looked in the Preface of
R(...)ba^, where I found those Chaldee passages mentioned, which the Rabbin
translateth into Hebrew, and for the Chaldee which answers to (...) (...) he
renders (...) (...)
(...). (...) therefore here are Stars and Planets, which I shall not need
prove to be the host of the Ethereall Heaven: yea, and perhaps too (...) and
(...) are derived of the verb (...) ire, as (...) is of (...). Now we know the
Scriptures make mention of three Heavens; first, the Air or sublunary Heaven:
secondly, the Ethereall and starry Heaven: thirdly, the Heaven of glory, or
Empyreall Heaven. Every of these Heavens have their host or army: the host of
the heaven of glory, or the third, are the Angels and blessed Spirits: the host
of the Ethereall heavens are the Stars and Planets: the host of the Aereall, or
sublunary heaven, are either visible, as the clouds of heaven, (...), and other
meteors, as also the rest of the creatures mansioning therein, as the fowls of
the heaven, (...): or invisible, viz. the wicked Spirits and Devils, whose
Prince Satan, is called the Prince of the power of the Air, Ephesians. 2. 2. and
his host (...), rulers of the world, i. e. the sublunary world; and (...),
wicked spirits in heavenly places, viz. in the lowest or sublunary heavens,
Ephesians. 6. 12. And whether Saint Paul, Gal. 4. 8, 9. and Col. 2. 8, etc.
includes not some of those under his (...), I cannot affirm: let the learned
further consider it, when namely he speaks to Gentiles; and of Gentiles, and
not Jews.

Having hitherto prepared the way, let us now come closer home to S. Peter,
whose words evidently import, that some of these heavens, or all of them, shall
suffer a conflagration at the day of Christ. Not all of them, for who ever put
the Empyreall heaven into that reckoning? And for the Ethereall heaven, he that
considers the supereminent nature and immensity thereof, and of those
innumerable bodies therein, in regard of which the whole sublunary world is but
a point or center; and that it no way can be proved that ever those bodies
received any curse for man's sin, or contagion by the worlds deluge, or that any
enemies of God dwell in them to pollute them: he that considers this will not
easily be induced to believe that the fire of the day of judgment should burn
them. It remains therefore that the sublunary heavens only, with their (...)
are to be the subject of this conflagration.

These heavens (says Saint Peter) (...), i. e. solventur, and their (...)
shall melt with fervent heat: It is a Metaphor taken from the refining of
metalls, quae igne solvuntur ut purificentur: so that (...), is as much as
Coeli igne adhibito conflagrabuntur. This to be the meaning of (...) appears,
because Saint Peter himself interprets solvi to be liquefieri. For having in
the tenth verse said (...), (i. e.) solventur, he in the twelfth verse
repeating it says, (...), (i e.) liquefient; Now melting is for refining and
purifying. Nor is the word (...) averse from this notion, the LXX. using (...)
for the Hebrew (...) as in the Psalms more than once: The words of the Lord are
as refined silver, LXX. (...), Psalm. 12. and so elsewhere. But when the
sublunary heaven shall be thus refined, even the Ethereall lights of the
Stars, of the Sun and Moon, etc. will appear to those on earth much more
glorious than now they do, as sending their rays through a purer Medium; so
that all the world to usward shall be as it were renewed.

As for (...) (or passing away) verse 10. it is an Hebraisme, signifying any
change, or going of a thing from the state wherein it was, and answers to the
verb (...), which signifies both transire and permutari, as (...) in
Chaldianisme does. And Schindler notes, that Psalm 102. the Arabicke for (...)
mutabuntur, has (...) transibunt. In the twelfth verse it is expounded by
(...), but (...) I have already showed is commuted with (...); they therefore
all three of them signify one and the same thing; and I see no reason why we
should imagine a greater emphasis in (...) for an utter abolition in the
destruction by fire, than is before employed in (...), when he spoke of the
destruction by water: (...) ( inquit) (...).

But what shall become of the invisible host, which I named as part of the
(...) of this fublunary heaven, viz. those (...), the army of wicked and
unclean spirits: shall the fire of the last judgment touch these? I answer:
Though the operation of the fire shall not be upon them to burn them, yet
shall they also suffer by this fiery judgment, being thereby to be exiled and
dejected from those high mansions, and bestowed in some lower place: for so
that of Jude seems to imply, The Angels (says he) which kept not their first
estate, but left their own (or proper) habitation, he has reserved to (be
bound with) everlasting chains of darkness, at the judgment of the great
day. Vide Piscat. in hunc locum.

And this seems to me to be the most literal and unforced exposition of this
description of Saint Peter, of the heaven and earths conflagration at the day
of Christ, and so to be preferred before any other.

But if a Prophetical strain or scheme may here be admitted, there is another
way of explication, which yet in the conclusion will come to the same purpose
the former did, although the way thereto be not the same. And certainly our
Savior in the Gospel describing the coming of this day, uses a Prophetical
expression: The Sun (says he) shall be darkened, and the Moon shall not
give her light, and the Stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of
heaven shall be shaken: For if this be taken literally, whither shall the
stars fall from heaven, which are either as big, or many times bigger than
the globe of the earth, where shall be room for them? if such a scheme there
be supposed in Saint Peter's description, the explication may be after this
manner.

Mundus, or the World, (to omit other particular exceptions) is according to
the Scriptures use, either Mundus continens, or Mundus contentus, (give me
leave to use those terms for distinction sake:) By Mundus continens I mean
the compages and frame of the Physical heaven and earth, wherein the rest of
the creatures are contained: By Mundus contentus, the state or body of the
inhabitants or Kingdoms of the earth. Now to whatsoever the notion of Mundus
is appliable, there is also supposed to be an heaven and earth, as being the
names and parts whereby the Scriptures express the World. The heaven then of
this Political world is the sovereignty or sovereign part thereof, whose host
and stars are the powers ruling in the World: In the highest place Gods and
Idols; next, Kings, Princes, Peers, Counselors, Magistrates, and other such
lights shining in the Firmament. And at such a meaning and no other (it being
an Oriental notion) may aim (for ought I can see) that supposed fastuous
style of Sapores King of Persia to Constantius the Emperor; Rex Regum Sapores,
frater solis and lunae, particeps (i. e. socius) siderum, Constantio fratri
salutem. But to go on: Earth is the Pezantry or vulgus hominum, together with
the terrestrial creatures serving the use of man: Of such an Heaven, as this
is, the Lord speaks in the Prophecy of Haggai, cap. 2. verse. 6. Yet once it
is a little while, and I will shake all Nations, and the desire of all Nations
shall come. And again verse 21. I will shake the heavens and the earth, and I
will overthrow the throne of Kingdoms, and I will destroy the strength of the
Kingdoms of the Heathen, etc. Of such an heaven and earth speaks Jeremy,
chapter 4. verse 23. I beheld the earth, and it was without form and void,
((...)) and the heavens, and they had no light: viz. as if the World were
turned into the old Chaos again Genesis chap. 1. See the rest which follows.
Of such Heavens and Earth speaks the Lord in Esaias, chapter 51. verse. 15, 16.
namely, of the Heavens and Earth of the World, or state of Israel. I am (says
he) the Lord thy God, who divided the sea, (to wit, the Red sea) when the
waters thereof roared; the Lord of Hosts is his name: And put my Word (i. e. my
Law) in thy mouth, and covered thee in the shadow of my hand, (i. e. protected
thee in thy march to Canaan) that I might plant the Heavens, and lay the
foundation of the Earth, (i. e. make thee a state, and build the into a
Political World) and say unto Sion, thou art my people. Of such a kind of
Heaven speaks the same Prophet, chapter 34. verse. 2, 4, 5. The indignation of
the Lord is upon all Nations, and his fury upon all their Armies, etc. And all
the Host of Heaven shall be dissolved, and the Heavens shall be rolled
together as a scroll, and their host shall fall down, as the leaf falls off
from the Vine, and as a falling fig from the fig tree. For my sword shall
be bathed in Heaven: Behold it shall come down on Idumea, etc. See the rest,
and know that this destruction of Edom is prophesied of in no less
hyperbolicall a strain by Obadiah, and Jeremy chapter 49. from verse 7. to 22.
Ezech. 35. verse 4. and 25. 12. which I note, lest any man wondering at the
hyperbole of this of Esaias, should think it applyable only to the day of
judgment. And that such schemes as these were usual to the Nations of the
Orient, may appear not only by the Chymicall Philosophy derived thence,
(which makes heaven and earth and stars in every thing) but from the
testimony of Moses Maimonides, who ( more Nebochim part. 2. cap. 29.) affirms
that the Arabians in his time in their vulgar speech, when they would express
that a man was fallen into some great calamity or adversity, used to say,
Coelum ejus super terram ejus cecidit: Compare Lament. 2. 1. No question these
schemes were as familiar to them as our Poets strains and expressions are to
us, though of another genius: Ours are borrowed from fables, stories, places;
theirs more, from the frame of the world, the Sun, Moon, Stars, and Elements,
etc.

If such a notion of Coelum and Terra may have place in this place of Peter,
(and why may he not uttering a Prophecy borrow a Poetical strain) it may
easily appear what Heaven and Earth the fire at Christ's second coming shall
burn up and consume, viz. the Heaven and the earth of the contained world,
such as those which the former judgment by water overwhelmed and destroyed;
the World of wicked states and men, high ones and low ones, Princes and
Pezants, man and beast; according to that twice repeated passage, Esaias 2. 11,
17. (which the ancient Jews interpreted of the day of judgment) The
loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of men shall be
made low, and the Lord alone shall be exalted that day: And the Idols (these
are part of the host of See the Apostasy of the later times.
heaven we speak of) he shall utterly abolish. And of such heavens and (...)
as these, it mattereth not though we understand an absolute destruction ( viz.
of so much as shall be burned) as was in the deluge of Noah. And so likewise
of the earth and works thereof. But whereas by the universal deluge, though
only the Mundus contentus perished, yet notwithstanding the Mundus continens
was therewith corrupted and depraved: In the destruction of fire it shall be
otherwise; for the world of wicked ones being destroyed, the Heaven and the
Earth which contained them shall be purged and refined, for the righteous to
dwell therein. This exposition I put but in the second place, because where the
proper sense of the letter may be kept, I prefer it before any other.

To conclude, if any there yet be, whom neither of the former expositions can
satisfy, but will needs have the fire and burning here spoken of, to be that
whereby the World is to be utterly annihilated; I could answer, that the day
of judgment is a thousand years; and this fire, though it be to be (...), in
that day, yet shall it not be in the beginning, but end thereof, the beginning
being but a destruction of the enemies of Christ, and the Kingdom of Satan,
and then a restoration: The end, a destruction of the whole creature it self
by utter annihilation; and then Saint Peter's words, verse 13. to be construed
after this manner; That howsoever the Heavens and the earth shall at length be
dissolved by fire, nevertheless before that shall be, we look for a new Heaven
and a New Earth (i. e. a new World or restoration) to precede this abolition,
according to his promise, Esaias 65. and 66.

But such an exposition, methinkes, would not suit so well with that which I
take to be Saint Peter's chiefest scope in this passage; nor with the words of
the holy Prophets he points at, which seem to speak only of such a fire,
which should precede a restoration, and not of that which should cause an
utter abolition of the World: And as concerning such an utter abolition of the
whole frame of Heaven and Earth, after the Economy of the Redemption and
victory of Christ shall be finished, it seems to me a mystery which has no
bottom. Howsoever, I am not persuaded this place of Saint Peter should mean
any such thing. Those passages, Job 14. 12. Psalm 102. 26. and Apoc. 20. 11.
may seem to be of more moment. And if any such annihilation shall be, it
stands more with reason it should be by the immediate power of God, without
the instrument of any creature, than by fire; and that he who at first brought
it out of nothing without any creatures help, should reduce it to nothing again
without the help of any creature.

Dxa t THe pantokrtori.
LONDON, Printed for SAMUEL MAN, and are to be sold at his Shop in Paul's
Churchyard at the Sign of the Swan. 1642.


