A MEMORIAL Intended to be delivered to the Lords States, Monday 10 March,
Stilo Novo.

TO THE High and Mighty LORDS the STATES of HOLLAND.

BY THE Foreign Anabaptist Churches, upon the apprehending and giving up
Colonel Barkestead, Colonel Okey, and Mr. Miles Corbet.

To the English Resident.

Written Originally in Dutch, and Translated into English.

Laudabant hanc urbem, quod omnes homines sibi praemetuentes si illuc
perfugissent auxilii compotes faciebat.

Sophocl. London, printed in the year 1662.

A MEMORIAL Intended to be presented to the High and Mighty Lords, the STATES
of HOLLAND.
BY THE Foreign Anabaptist Churches there, upon the Apprehension and yielding
up of Col. Barkstead, etc. to the English Resident.
High and Mighty Lords,
IT is not without great cause, nor without great consideration, that we make
this address to your Lordships; we have been always very unwilling to give
you the trouble, much less the offense of any thing that concerns us, further
then the Public Liberty you have professed to maintain, (and which we think
and always judged to be the Basis and surest foundation of this happy and
famous State and Commonwealth) did license and indulge us.

We cannot but remember those inducements in our selves, that we say not
invitation from the Custom, and Practice and Laws of these Provinces, that
drew us to take up and fix our Residence here; and we cannot but with all
thankfulness of mind as to our particulars, acknowledge the benefits and
favors besides the Common protection we have received in this place of our
sojourning, by which the sorrows and difficulties which attend people Exiled,
or otherwise compelled to Abandon their beloved Native Countries, have been
greatly alleviated and lessened to us, if not wholly Abated and Removed.

Nor shall we ever be wanting in all Humble, Dutiful and Civil Demeanor, in a
peaceable and orderly subjection to the Magistracy set over us (though falsely
traduced by our Adversaries, as if our Principles were enmity against all
Government) to testify our gratitude to your Lordships, whose Glorious and
just Dominion we esteem as raised by God to this Greatness, as having been the
Asylum and Sanctuary of his afflicted and persecuted Churches:

But amidst these Gratulations we crave your pardon my Lords, while we declare
our sentiments of a late state occurrence, which seems in many circumstances
thereof not obliquely to point at our Condition, and to endanger the enjoyment
of those privileges and immunities which have hitherto been so carefully and
inviolably preserved toward all Forraigners. The matter is this:

We understand that some English Exiles coming down out of Germany into this
Province of Holland, as a more convenient refuge and shelter, or rather drawn
hither as to a snare and trap, for the near conveyance of it as to their
reshipping again for England, were seized on at Delfe, by Sir George Downing
the Resident of the King of Great Britain, by a warrant from your Lordships,
and secured for a while in the Prison of that City, where offenders against
your Laws are usually and only ought to be kept and detained.

We shall not meddle with the Conditions of those persons, nor the quality of
their Crimes, which as they are not cognisable before your Lordships, will so
much the less concern us to take notice of; Only thus far we desire to take
this fair advantage and opportunity of declaring our Abhorrance and Detestation
of that Monstrous and Unparalleld Fact, whereby the Life of that Pious and
Excellent Prince King CHARLES the First of Great Britain was so Traitorously
and Barbarously taken away by some wicked Regicides in that Kingdom, to the
great scandal and Infamy of the reformed Churches throughout Christendom, and
more peculiarly imputed to those of our Profession and persuasion.

Every Circumstance of that impious Fact we do from our heart disclaim, and
with fear and trembling admire and adore the Divine Justice in overtaking that
wickedness, and heaping the blood spilt by those men upon their own heads, by
a miraculous restitution of the Son of that blessed Prince to the Throne of his
Ancestors; the extent of whose merciful disposition is justly obstructed and
impeded toward those Persons.

But that which we have to lay before your Lordships, is the naked and
abstracted condition of these men (as Forraigners and as they relate to us)
from any English Charge or Guilt whatsoever, of which as before, we said your
Lordships are not competent Judges, and indeed no Judges at all; and therefore
quo jure or in what in latitude of equity, could your Lordships first apprehend
them by your Order and by your Officer, then secure them in your Prison; and
lastly without cause shown or compeering them, deliver them into the hands of
the English to be sent home to their Trial and Condemnation is our scruple.

In the Articles of the Union of these Confederate Provinces, there is express
caution against any such Deliveries, nothing is more frequent in all the
Records, Registers, and Acts of the several Treaties, Dyets, and General
Councils, which we forbear to recite because they are numerous and most
evident: nor shall we mention the reasons of those Laws and Decrees because
they are as obvious. But so strict has the observation of them been, that an
Offender in one of these Provinces escaping into another, has thereby avoided
the penalty of the Law, and unless for great capital crimes never was remitted
to the place of his Fact.

We shall forbear to name how from (talibus initiis Roma crevit) from such
beginnings (the conflux of all sort of loose people,) great Rome presently rose
unto her Empire, because it may seem a calumny of this State, and by our
Enemies be reflected on our selves: But this is most certain, that no small
additaments of wealth and power, have accrued to the Netherlands, since it has
been the common receptacle of all Nations, by whose joint Arts and Manufactures
as well as Arms they have improved themselves to this puissant Grandeur. Nor is
there any Precedent or Example of this Nature that occurs to us in all your
Histories. The incomparably Learned Hugo Grotius, the Honor of this Country
and best Judge in this case, though he seems to incline to the denying of
subterfuge to notorious and heinous offenders, yet has he an expedient for
them, which we thought fit to reduce to your Lordships Memory. Such then are to
be punished or yielded, or removed at least; so the Cymaei in Herodotus when
they neither would deliver Pactyes the Persian, nor durst retain him, permitted
him to depart to Mitylene. Perseus King of Macedon in his defense to Martius
speaking of those that were said to have conspired against Eumenes; Livy lib.
22. Lib. 37.
So soon as, being admonisht by you, I found the men in Macedonia, I commanded
them away, and charged them never to return into my Dominions. The
Samothracians declared to Evander who had lain in weight for Eumenes, that he
should quit the Temple: so Rudolphus the Emperor removed from him Christopher
Sbovius. And Queen Elizabeth of England answered the Scots, that she would
either render Earl Bothwel or send him out of England. But this right of
requiring to punishment them that had fled their Country in these last Ages in
most part of Europe, is used only in those crimes which do touch the public
State, or are of a very heinous nature, and unless in the Conditions of the
League, it be so provided, and a more close agreement made. That of the English
with the French appointed rebels and Fugitives to be yielded; with the
Burgundians to be expelled.

So it appears that the League with this State, being the half of that Duchy
of Burgundy directs expulsion: and we remember very well, that in the Treaty
this State made with Oliver Cromwell soon after those Naval Fights, 1654. the
most pressed Article by him, as mainly conducing to his security in the
Usurpation, was, that if any of the Enemies of the Commonwealth of England (who
they were then reputed and taken to be, we list not nor is it to our purpose to
mention) should come into those Provinces, the States were enjoined upon notice
and discovery of their being there, to warn them to depart within fourteen
days out of any of their Territories, under penalty of being taken and
delivered to the English. And this was reciprocal on both sides, but was
carefully observed here to the no little scandal and obloquy upon this State
who showed no more respect to the interest of his illustrious Highness the
Prince of Aurange, the English Royalists departing at the prefixed Time.

To say that these men are Hosts Humani Generis, public Enemies of mankind,
in that they have violated all Laws both Divine and Humane, is some i^entive
to incompassion, but no rule of Justice. For first they should have been
declared so in these Provinces, as is usual toward Pirates, who yet
notwithstanding find in some Countries defense and safeguard; For the knowledge
of the cause ought to proceed the dedition and render of the criminal says
Grotius again. It is not meet to give up men untryed says Plutarch in his
Romulus. The King of Scotland in Cambden, Anno 1585. declared to Queen
Elizabeth that he would transmit Ferinharst and the Chancellor too, if they
were convicted by a fair trial, and not before, though their guilt was very
apparent.

It may be objected that the Custom in ancient times was otherwise, deducing
it from that story of the Benjaminites, who were required to deliver up those
wicked men that had committed that horrible villainy on the Levites wife, Judges
20. we will not determine the matter as others do by the success: certainly
it was for some reason of State why the Benjamites refused, as taking
themselves to have the absolute power and command in their own Tribe; as is
also now the practice in these Provinces; besides it fits not the present
matter: that demand of dedition was for a crime committed in a place and
jurisdiction where their power was the proper authority of judging and
punishing it; this crime was committed in a Foreign, and must be tried and
avenged in that, Country. The Philistines also demanded Sampson of the
Israelites as an Evil doer, Judges 15. but we see what succeeds, it took not
effect; besides the Philistines were then Lords over the Hebrews, who out of
fear were constrained to do it as they give an Account of it to Sampson
himself; Know thou not that the Philistines are rulers over us? what is this
that thou have done unto us? we are come down to bind thee that we may deliver
thee into the hands of the Philistines: Moreover here was Sampsons own consent
as a warrant to that action which wanted other then the fear and danger
aforesaid; for he had done nothing but what was justifiable, Hostis Hostem
occidere voluit, as he says himself, as they did, unto me so have they done
unto them. So that there is a great disparity in the case, and which your
Lordships would in no wise admit in any circumstance thereof, as owning no
subjection or dependence on the Crown of England.

And if we might interest our selves and lay claim to the reputation of these
Provinces, we should think they suffered much in loss of Honor by this
Action. For we think with due submission to your wisdoms, that the world will
take this for a great diminution of that Sovereignty which you have so nobly
asserted, since things of lesser moment, we conceive, have as prudentially and
tenaciously been insisted on by you, and which were matters not so congenial to
your Country Rights and Statutes as this case to us seems to be.

We could better express the matter indeed; if the Crown which is acknowledged
the Defender of the Faith were not to be offended; which though some Shelterers
here of that Nation of our way and Separation would offer, yet we assure your
Lordships that we have no Communion with them in that thing.

Indeed there is a Maxim among the Civilians that Vtilitas est matter justitiae
and aequitatis; what justice or equity is in this matter will be shrewdly ghest
whence it proceeds. The advantages and reasons of State we confess are too
high a matter for our understanding, and the concerns of particular persons
such as these men's too low for Statesmens consideration, where they interpose
betwixt the Amity of Princes. And so we would acquiesce, not daring to wade in
those mysteries of Government, though we cannot but be sensible of how great
importance the English Friendship is to these Countries, the continuance
whereof we do congratulate and shall daily pray for. But since poena and crimen
ad paucos, terror ad omnes, the fear of this example reaches us, though the
crime and punishment (from which God has and we hope will preserve us) but
these few; we are bold to implore your Lordships wonted Protection and the
Confirmation of our Privileges in our Liberty and Estates: desiring pardon if
our fear has transported us beyond our Duty (for in small matters and not
criminal, this may chance to be drawn in imitation) which with the greatest
affection imaginable, we profess to you as our Superiors and most benign
Protectours.

We shall always pray for the prosperity and happiness of your High and
Mighty Lordships, and the people of this Country under your obedience, hoping
that in their peace we shall find peace; that what was once said in the praise
of the Athenians, that they were a hiding place and comfort to all afflicted
men every where, may be truly verified of the Hollanders to their everlasting
Glory and Renown.

Si crimen istis aliquot hospitibus dabis, Jus impetrabis, Them. apud Sophoclem.
FINIS.

