THE RIB RESTORED: OR, The Honor of MARRIAGE. A SERMON Preached in
Dionis-Back-Church, occasioned by a Wedding, the 5. day of June, 1655.

By RICHARD MEGGOT, Preacher of the Word, to the Parish of Ford in Sussex.

MARK 10.6,7. But from the beginning of the Creation, God made them Male and
Female: for this cause shall a Man leave his Father and Mother, and cleave to
his Wife.

Chrysostom. tom. 1. (...).

Agellius l. 1. c. 6. Quoniam ita natura tradidit, ut nec cum illis (uxoribus)
satis commode, nec sine illis ullo modo vivi possit: saluti perpetuae, potius
quam brevi voluptati consulendum.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for NATH: WEBB, and WILL: GRANTHAM, at the Black-Bear
in St. Paul's Churchyard, near the little North door of Paul's, 1656.

To the Worshipful John Bayles of Wilbey, in the County of Suffolk, Esquire.
Grace and Peace.
Worthy Sir,
THe Publication of this crude discourse, is a sufficient argument how
incapable I am to resist friends importunities. I am not insensible, that there
are too many defects in it, and I know those of maturer and better seasoned
judgments, may find more: But they that are the most judicious, are the least
censorious. Wherefore upon a supposition that I might be prevailed with, to wave
such things as these, yet notwithstanding I might have reasons enough to oppose
all entreaties; I will not repeat what I have so often urged upon this
occasion, viz. My just desire of a close retirement, and natural aversion,
from any thing that might draw many eyes upon me. Besides all this, I have
often reflected (with a more than common disturbance) upon the miserale
disease, and distemper of the age we live in; the generality of men among us
being compounded of Opinion and Passion, as of a Soul and Body: what one
approves, another disliketh; what one affects, another distasteth. It is
very sad, but it is too true, a Spirit of giddiness and distraction is gone
out upon the Inhabitants of this dis-joynted Nation; and what the Angel of the
Lord said to Hagar concerning Ishmael, is true of each particular Division and
Separation; their hand is against every Man, and every Man's hand is against
them: Genesis 16.12.
each by an uncharitable partiality inveighing against, and condemning of every
one but themselves. And thus pre^udice, a low and sinful prejudice, unworthy
of Men, much more of Christians, is the ascendant upon most men's Spirits. And
they that are the most obscure, no question taste, but those that are most
public, shall be sure to drink a double portion of this bitter cup. But woe
to him that makes the Cross a stumbling block. As we should not do the least
evil, that the greatest good may come of it, that being to distrust Gods
power, as if he could not effect it; so neither should we refrain from the
least good, for the greatest evil that may come of it, that being to distrust
his goodness, as if he would not divert it.

Sir, Your Daughter was the occasion, that emboldneth me to make you the Patron
of this Sermon. I must confess, I could have wished that my libamina, the
first fruits of my labors to the world, had been something more generally
useful for the building up of Souls in their most holy Faith, and promoting
of the power of godliness: this reaches only the particular duties of the
Husband and the Wife. But these indeed are many, and exceeding weighty. The
Spaniard has a proverb, There is more required in Marriage, than two pair of
Legs in one pair of Sheets. It is not to be attempted with a brutish and
sensual mind. O that all that are tied in this sacred knot, would consider in
good earnest, and lay to heart what it is the Lord requires of them! I should
think my self exceeding happy, and account it a mercy to give thanks for,
Evening, Morning, and at Noon: might it please the Almighty, to accompany with
his blessing, these weak endeavors of the unworthiest of all the laborers in
his Vineyard, to make them isntrumental for the rectifying and remedying those
dangerous abuses in choosing of those vile miscariages that are too frequent in
living with this relation.

The seed I sowed in that Judicious Auditory, that was assembled upon this
occasion was good, (O that it might bring forth much fruit!) pardon the hand
that cattered it, it was unskilful. I then drew a Copy, (O that all whom it
may concern, that now shall look on it, would write after it!) not excepting
at the unhandsomnesse, but pondering the usefulness of it. These are the hopes
and prayers of

Sir, Your affectionate Nephew to serve you in the Lord, Richard Meggot.

Errata. p. 6. l. 37. r. infructuosa p. 15. l. 20. r. will p. 16. marg. l. 9.
r. filiorum

THE RIB RESTORED: OR, The Honor of Marriage.
GENESIS 2.18. And the Lord God said, It is not good that the Man should be alone,
I will make him an help meet for him.


WHen the stately structure of this material World first started out of
nothing, at the call of the first Being; the method of the Creation proceeded
commonly by Twins and Paires. If you look upon the Universe, there is a Heaven
and an Earth; If upon the Heavens, there is a Sun and Moon; If upon the Earth,
there is a Sea and Land; If upon the Time, there is a Day and Night; If upon
the Seasons, there is a Winter and Summer; If upon the Creatures, there is a
Male and Female; If upon our Natures, there is a Soul and Body: finally, if
upon our selves compounded, the Flowers and Pinacles of corporeal existencies.
The Lord God said, it is not good that the Man should be alone, I will make him
an help meet for him.

My text is the Banes of Matrimony; the first, that ever was published: where
Adam is asked thrice in once by the Blessed Trinity: None can show any lawful
cause why he and Eve should not be joined together: there is one why they
should: for, The Lord God said, It is not good, etc.

1. An Introduction. 2. An Assertion. 3. A Resolution.


The Introduction is full of transcendent Majesty, And the Lord God said.

The Assertion confirms an experimental verity, It is not go^d that the Man
should be alone.

The Resolution testifies an unwearied bounty, I will make him an help meet
for him.

And the Lord God said.How the Almighty here spoke, whether eternally, in his
own decrees; or Syllabically by the use of instruments; or Miraculously, by
the revelation of Angels; or Internally in the mind of man; or supernaturally
by any other means, were a question not more intricate than unseasonable for
this assembly: wherefore following S. Augustine's counsel, Augustine. in Genesis
ad littram.
quomodo non est quod quaeramus, sed potius quid dixerit intelligamus, to
enquire not so much how he spoke, as what he spoke. I shall wholly wave it,
entreating your attention to the two remaining parts of my text, whereof the
former is the

It is not good that the Man should be alone: wherein take notice of these two
particulars; 1. The Subject, Man alone. 2ly. The Praedicate, It is not good.


Man alone.

For the better understanding whereof, you must know, Man may be taken under
three considerations. Universally. Particularly. Indefinitely.


It were not good for any Man to be alone; but the Apostle tells you, 1 Cor.
7. of being alone in a single life, it is good for a Man so to be; 1 Cor. 7.26.
and in the 19. of S. Matthew, you read of Eunuchs that have made themselves
so for the Kingdom of Heavens sake, Mat. 19.12.
Eunuchs (...). Chrysostom. in loc.
(...), etc. Chrysostom expounds it, not with Origin, by dismembring their
bodies, but with continence by suppressing their desires: an action so far
from being condemned, that it is advised, ver. 12. (...), He that is able to
receive it, let him receive it. To this purpose is that observation of St.
Cyprian, Cum adhuc rudis mundui and inanis est, copia foecunditatis generatur,
propagamur ac crescimus ad humani generis augmentum; cum jam refertus est orbis
and mundus impletus; qui capere cont^nentiam possunt, spadonum more viventes
castrantur ad regnum. Cyprian. lib. de H^b. Virg.
prima Dei sententia crescere and generare praecepit, secunda continentiam
suasit: in the beginning of the World, when it was un-inhabited, Matrimony was
commanded, Genesis 1.28.
Increase and Multiply: in process of time, when more peopled, continency was
commended, 1 Cor. 7.1.
It is good for a Man not to touch a Woman. Good according to the Bifariam crit
ei bonum esse soli, nempe and honestum licitumque and utile ac commodum, etc.
Zanchius lib. 1. cap. 1. de Hom. creat.
Schoolmen two ways; first it is good, that is, it is lawful; there is no
indispensable obligation laid on us, engaging us to Marry: and then secondly,
it is good, that is, it is profitable; by it is avoided the cares of the World,
the 1 Cor. 7.28.
(...), the trouble in the flesh: So that you must not understand it
Universally, when you hear, It is not good that the Man should be alone. But
then Etiam Judaei qui praeceptum esse viris (...) aiust, uno ore concedunt
tamen dispensatum esse cum iis qui assiduo legis studio vacare volunt, alias
etiam immunibus ab acriori carnis stimulo. Maimon. cap 15. Halach, Iskoth.


words will be, It is not good that Adam should be alone; Alone, that is,
conjuge destitutus cum animantes caeterae conjugatae sint, (as Tremellius in
locum.
Tremel. paraphraseth it) without a companion, without a woman, when all the
other creatures had their mates and equals. You may have read (perhaps) of one
who for his perverse and froward disposition, was called (...), a hater of
mankind and company; but he was an Hetroclite, a Monster in nature: Man is a
(...). Aristot. Ethic. lib 8. cap. 14.
sociable creature, to whom a continual solitariness could not but be
exceeding tedious. Imagine our first Parent in the midst of Paradise, of that
flourishing Eden, where he wanted nothing, either for use or pleasure. Suppose
him Lord of the Manor of the Earth, and his table furnished with the Cattle
on a thousand hills; where he had the Beasts of the field for his obedient
servitors, and the Fowls of the Air for a consort of wild Musicians; in so
much that his eyes were satisfied with seeing, and all his senses feasted with
enjoying: even in such a condition, to have no converse, but with the birds and
brutes, to have no acquaintance, but with the Mountains and Rivers; to be
always desolate without any associate, could not but abate his contentment,
but leaven his happiness: you easily perceive it, God graciously foresaw it.
It is not good that the Man should be alone.

Adam, but his posterity. This exposition is sufficiently warranted by the
Apostles Position, Heb. 13.4. Marriage is honorable in all, Heb. 13.4.
not only Cum diserte Apostolus conjugium honoratum esse dicat, quid sentiendum
est de illa Hieronymi sententia, qui Matrimonium non inter bona, sed inter
mi^us mala numerat? Beza. in loc.
(...), but (...), not only lawful but Honorable: in so much that the
Romanists reckon it among their Sacraments, and Cum Matrimonium per sensibilia
signa sanctitatis ^emedium contra peccatum homini exhibeit, sacramentum est.
Aquinas Sup. 3. Quaest. 2. Art. 1. Matrimonium quod in fide Christi contrahitur
habet, quod gratiam conferat ad ca operanda adjuvantem quae in Matrimonio
requiruntur. Idem. Sup. 3. Q. 42. Art. 3.
Aquinas will have it confer gratiam, confer grace on those that enter into
it. Wherefore (by the way) I cannot but wonder why sometimes they are so much
upon the other extreme, to vilify and disparage it, as that Pope Siricius,
who writing to the Bishops of Spain, calls it Zanchius tom. 4. in 7.
praeceptum.
carnis pollutionem and immunditiem, the pollution and defilement of the flesh:
but now I remember me, S. Paul makes it one of the characters of them that
should depart from the Faith, 1 Timothy 4 3. that they should forbid to Marry.
What shall we call that pollution that was instituted before Quem libet hominem
cui non est uxor, minime esse hominem: cum etiam in scriptura dicatur masculum
and saeminam creavit cos and vocavit nomen little, Adam seu hominem. R. Eliezer
dixit in Gem. Bab. quicunque negligie praeceptum de multiplicatione humani
generis habendum esse veluti Homicidam.
corruption? or impiety that was ordained in the state of Innocence? It was the
(...), etc. Chrysostom. in Gen Hom. 21.
Greek Fathers descant upon Genesis 5.22. that in the same verse the Holy Ghost
says of Enoch, that he walked with God, and begat Sons and Daughters, to teach
us (says he) (...), etc. that Matrimony and Piety are not inconsistent: For
though if you consider it absolutely, Man alone may be good; yet if relatively,
It is not good that the Man should be alone; which leads me to the second
Particular of this second General, from the subject, Man alone, to the
praedicat, it is not good that he should so be, It is not good, etc.

It is not good. It Is a known distinction among the Morallists, of a
threefold good, honestum, utile, jucundum, Honest. Pleasant. Profitable.


In regard of the first of these, all is good that is not sin: In respect of
the two latter, it is here meant, It is not good. Wherefore the Septuagint have
aptly translated the Hebrew, (...) not by (...), but (...), and Mercer has
well explained it, non est commodum, utile, expediens: Mercerus in Genesis
it is not convenient, expedient: if you will, It is not so good that the Man
should be alone.

An assertion whereof, according to the fancies of diverse writers, I meet with
diverse reasons. Rabbi Salmo's gloss is, It is not good, R. Salom.
as in regard of Gods honor, who is a jealous God, least if there were but one
man in the world, to whom all the Creatures paid their homage, it should be
thought there were two Gods, Adam should be accounted the God of Earth, and
Jehovah the God of Heaven; but this is but the froth of a Rabbin's brains: if
there were no Man (pray) who should think so?

It is not good (says Pererius) in respect of the Angels, Pererius in loc.
Quorum diminutio ob ruinam malorum spirituum supplemento hominum resarcienda
erat: whose number in Heaven being lessened by the apostasy of them that Jude
6.
kept not their first stations, was to be supplied by the Heb. 12.23.
Spirits of just men made perfect, and because there must be such, It is not
good, etc.

It is not good (says Gerard) Gerard. in loc.
if you look upon Man's nature, and disposition, which being sociable, could not
without irksomenesse bear such a constant solitariness, as to be always
without company.

I am unwilling to tire you with tracing the conceits of the several
expositors I have met with; to pitch upon something I conceive most probable
and profitable, take an account of it in these three particulars.

Florus, l 1. c. 1.
relating their ravishing of the Sabine women, would excuse it with this
reason, res erat unius aet^tis populus virorum, without them mankind would
fail from the earth and perish. Upon this account among the Spartans, there
was a paena (...), and Plato de leg. lib. 6.
Plato in his Laws would have every one that refused to Marry after the 35.
year of his age, punished both in his Estate and Honor: In this regard the
Plut. Amat.
elegant Morallist styles Wedlock, (...), an helper of us mortals; if not the
individual, yet the species to immortality: for as by the fate of humanity,
one generation passes away; so by the fruit of Matrimony, another generation
comes.

and Christi mors (it is Carthusian's note) esset infructuosus, Carthusianus in
loc.
the death of Christ would have been less fruitful, and laid down for a
meaner purchase. Had Adam been always alone, there would have been no Church
Militant, no chosen Generation, no holy Nation, no royal Priesthood, no
peculiar people unto God, zealous of good works, no gathering of Saints
together, no assemblies and multitudes to tune Hosannahs and Hallelujahs; and
all those happy, happy souls, that have tasted the goodness, the converting
and sanctifying goodness of the Lord in the land of the living, would then
have had no being. And then

Adam slept in their first Chaos, obscured in the dark, and barren womb of
nothing; those two eminent and resplendent attributes of his Mercy and Justice,
that glister and sparkle in the Crowns and flames of the elect and reprobate,
had been more concealed and clouded: there would have been no vessels of
Honor in the everlasting mansions, no children of wrath in the consuming
Tophet: he would not have been glorified by the one, nor upon the other: the
Sheep on the right hand had been strangers to his surmounting goodness, and
the Goats on the left hand been unacquainted with his avenging justice.

And thus I have briefly shown you how in regard of God, of the Church, of our
selves, It is not good that the Man should be alone.

Manichees) what then means S. Paeul. 1 Cor. 7.1. It is good for a man not to
touch a woman? do the Old Testament and the New contradict each other?

I know this is a day for Roses and Violets, and as much as may be, I will
decline the thorns of all ominous controversies, only take a short Answer to
take off the objection in these three distinctions.

Moses speaks of Man when Innocent, the Apostle of him when corrupted; and
you know that which before sin was a convenience, by sin may be made a
misery; this being that, which will turn bread into stones, and fishes into
Serpents.

in regard of the proper good of some particular persons, it may be good for a
man not to touch a woman, in respect of the common good of mankind, It is not
good that the Man, etc.

Cor. 7.26. I suppose that this is good for the present distress: a permanent
good has respect to a continual duration, and so you have seen this of my
Text is true, It is not good that the Man should be alone.

To wind up this in a word of Application, that may come home to all.

It is not good that the man should be alone. It is not good. This is the cause
why he will make him an help. God makes goodness the ground of his actions,
Oh that we could learn to imitate him. It is Musculus's observation upon the
place, Non dicit Nolo etc. Musculus in loc.
God does not say, I will not that the man should be alone, but it is not good.
The Almighty that has none to control him, none that can say unto him, what
do thou? confineth himself to the eternal Law of goodness: and what; shall
Man, vain Man, that must give an account for all that he shall do, mind
nothing in his actions, but the fantastic dictates of his own corrupted
will? Learn (my beloved) I beseech you, in all your proceedings, to make God
your pattern; to commune with your own hearts, and consult with your selves,
of what you go about, not only whether it be profitable, or whether it be
honorable, or whether it be pleasant, but also whether it be good or no. Were
this question the preface to all our undertakings, it would be a curb and bar
to hold and bridle us from rash enormities. Then the Hypocrite would leave off
his close dissemblings, the intemperate his excess of Riot, the Swearer his
customary Oaths, the Wanton his enchanting dalliance, the Gallant his
superfluous vanities, yea all of us our particular infirmities and impieties,
because they are not good.

It is not good that the Man should be alone. If you look back upon the
beginning of the verse, you will find it was the Lord God said so; Deus ille
est, qui antequam nos nihil minus cogitemus quam de uxore, praparat, as Z^nc.
l. 1. c 1. de cre^ hom.
you read not of Man's complaining: learn we then hence, how good a God we have
that is sensible of our condition, has a Heb. 4.15. Mat. 6.30,31.
feeling of our infirmities, and takes notice of all our wants, not only
before we mention them, but before we know them. It is our Saviors argument to
his Disciples, to trust in him, in the 6. Chapter of St. Mat. Take no thought what
ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, or what ye shall put on, ver. 31. for
your Heavenly Father knows that you have need of these things. He knows. Oh
how may we cleave and cling to his providence, that thus thinks of what may
be good for us, before we think of it our selves; and not only thinks of it,
but provideth it! What he says here of Adam, he speaks daily by his
providence, to his Saints and Servants, my Servant such a one wants this and
this, I know it. It is not good that my Servant such a one, be so and so, I see
it. O what a comfort and cordial is it to a faithful Soul, to meditate that
thy God is acquainted with, and takes notice of all the burdens thou groanest
under, all the necessities that oppress thee, all the miseries that afflict
thee: yea and withal remember, he is no bare spectator, he has not only eyes
to see thee, but he has hands to help thee. And so I am fallen upon the third
and last General of my Text, when God saw, It was not good that the Man should
be alone; he resolves, I will make him an help.

It is not good, to the Resolution, I will make. I will make him an help meet
for him.

Wherein take notice of these three particulars; 1. The Agent. 2. The Act. 3.
The Circumstance.
The Agent, I will make. The Act, An help. The Circumstance, Meet for him.


I will touch on each, beginning first with the Agent, I will make.

I will make, which has occasioned a question among the Learned.

verse of the 1. Chapter, at the Creation of Man the expression is in the
Plural number, Let us make; here at the forming of the Woman in the Singular,
I will make.

Paraeus, Paraeus in loc.
ut eundem se unum and plures esse declaret, to reveal to us the Mystery of
the Blessed Trinity. To show that in the one God there is three persons: in one
place it is said, Let us make. To convince us that in the three persons there
is but one God; in another place he says, I will make.

I will make. It is an expression that carries in it a double Emphasis;

I will make. I that made Man. I will make Man an help. And so it holds forth
to us the inexhaustible goodness of our God, (...), etc. Ch^ysost. in Genesis
Hom. 14.
(...), he heapeth mercies upon mercies, and crowns one blessing with
another, day unto day shows forth his goodness. What is our life but a
renewing of favors, a succession of loving kindness? Where is the Man, the
Woman whose private experience cannot speak abundantly to this particular? What
a constant variety of love has thy Soul and mine been fed with? his ways are
not as our ways. From men the more we have, the less we must expect, but He
is unwearied in the emanations of his bounty: with him one mercy is but the
earnest of another, a first the Herald and forerunner of a second. In this was
David confident, 1 Samuel 17.37. The Lord (says he) that delivered me from the
paw of the Lion, and out of the paw of the Bear, he will deliver me out of the
hand of this Philistine. He made no question, but he that had done so much,
would yet do more. O that you would all go and do likewise. Upon this
account henceforward (my Brethren) learn to trust him. Let former experience
encourage you to a future confidence. Why fear ye, O ye of little Faith? Mat.
8.26.
Why should we distrust this God, when we have so little cause for it? Trust
him with thy Body, trust him with thy Soul, trust him for Temporalls, trust him
for Aeternalls, trust him for this life, trust him for a better. He is the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever, Heb. 13.8.
he does not repent him of his kindness, but increase it. That is a first
consideration, I. I that made Man, I will make him an help. And then

I will make him an help. It must be I, I per se I, though Man wants an help,
yet Man cannot help his wants: It must come from God, I will make.

It is he that makes all our comforts and enjoyments. What have thou that thou
have not received? 1 Cor. 4.7.
What have thou that is not of his making? Survey thy self what thou have, and
art, and speak if thou can find any thing (except corruption, which is but a
privation) that is not of his making. Thou art a Man, a Woman, a rational
Creature: he might have made thee an Ant, a Worm, a Serpent. Thou have a
plentiful and large subsistence; he might, and for ought thou know, may make
thee a wanderer from door to door. Have thou any Spiritual blessings? they
have all the same Author: Job 24.14. 1 Timothy 4.2.
Have thou a soft heart? surely that is of his making: it was as hard, harder
than the nether Millstone. Have thou a tender conscience? Revel. 18.2. Isa.
1.21. Jam. 1.17.
surely that is of his making; it was seared with a hot Iron. Have thou a
gracious Soul? surely that is of his making: it was a sink of filthiness.
And to allude to that of the Prophet, Esaias 1.21. Thus is the Harlot become a
faithful City. So true is that of S. James, Chap. 1. ver. 17. Every good gift,
and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of
lights. All our springs are in him, and all our streams are from him.

To close up this suitably to the present occasion.

Has God undertaken and promised to make Helps meet for us? Then that I may
speak a word in due season) take this advice along with you: when you look
out for an Help; choose a Help, choose a Wife of Gods making: I do not mean
only of his forming, (so are all the daughters of Adam) but of his reforming.
Choose one that is Religious, Virtuous, Pious. In the 6. Chapter of Genesis,
ver. 2. we read that The Sons of God saw the Daughters of Men that they were
fair, and they took them Wives of all which they chose. Genesis 6.2.
That is too common. Oh that it were inverted, that the Sons of Men would see
after the Daughters of God! These are fair indeed. If you look into the
manners of the world, you may quickly see how much need there is of such an
Exhortation: Non ego illam mihi dotem duco esse quae dos dicitur; sed sedatam
cupidinem, deum metum and parentum amorem and cognatum concordiam. Plautus
Amphitr.
Portion and Proportion, Wit and Wealth, Beauty and Dowry, these Men aim at,
but who takes care for Piety? wanton Dinah, subtle Delilah, scornning Michol
shall be courted, if so qualified; but if not, were she as obedient as Sarah,
as devout as Hannah; as well affected as Lydia, she is contemned and slighted.
I speak not but that it is lawful, yea expedient to make these our subordinate
ends, but they must not be our only ends. Hagar and Sarah may dwell together,
but remember the Mistress have the upper hand. I may apply here the words of
our Savior to the Pharisees in another case. Mat. 23.23.
These things ought ye to have done, but not to have left the other undone.
Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof. Phil. 2.5.
Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus, who in taking the
Spouse he will betroth unto himself for ever, looks not at the 1 Pet. 3.3,4.
outward adorning, but the inward beauty, the hidden man of the heart. He that
brings God for an Husband, his Spirit for a Dowry, and Heaven for a Jointure;
accounts them most worthy, that are most Holy: Be ye therefore Ephesians 5.1.
followers of God as dear Children. It is worth your taking notice of, that it
was the express command of the Lord to the Children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 7.3.
Deuteronomy. 7.3. that they should make no Marriages with the Canaanites. Thy
Daughter (says God there) shall thou not give unto his Son, nor his Daughter
shall thou take unto thy Son. (...) a Lapan loc.
Tantum vetatur hic, ne misceant connubia cum Chananaeis quamdiu manent
Idololatrae; naem si convertantur, etc. These are the words of Lapide upon that
Text; They were forbidden to marry, because they were Idolatrous, and might
seduce them from the Lord their God: therefore, procul hinc, procul ite
profanae: Rom 15.5.
these things were written for our instruction. Nothing makes this relation so
happy as Religion. This is the Salt that seasoneth it, this is the Diadem that
crowns it, this is the perfume that sweetneth it. It is a witty observation
of the Cabbalists, Buxtorfius.
that if the word (...) which signifies GOD, be taken out of the words, (...)
and (...), which signify Man and Woman, there remains nothing but (...)
which signifies fire. Indeed when God, the love and fear of God, is out of
the Man and Woman, the Husband and Wife, there will be little or nothing but
fire; nothing but the fire of Passion in the Man's heart, nothing but the fire
of Pride in the Woman's: and this will quickly kindle the fire of contention
between both. Let this caution then be in all thy thoughts; let it be such a
one that has Grace in Gods eyes, that shall find Grace in thy eyes. Foelices
ter and amplius! How happy are such Marriages! they are like that of John 2.2.
Cana in Galilee, where Christ is at the wedding: in such a contract, you may
see triumphant the welcome labor of love, the masculine delicacies of
friendship, the genuine blessings of society, the obliging union of hands and
hearts. He that chooses his Wife only for her form, her Facies, non uxor
amatur.
fancy makes; he that chooses her for her wealth, her covetousness makes;
but he that chooses her for her Grace, her God makes: and if she be thus of
his making, assure thy self she will be indeed an Help. Which leads me on to
my

I will make, to the Act, I will make him an Help.

An Help. Julian whose accursed wit was never in its element, but when
blaspheming, scoffed at this place of Scripture, Cyril.
objecting it should have been, I will make him an hinderer: for so she proved,
being the occasion of our fall and ruin.

But, to take off this cavil; in a word, briefly you must know, that though
she was so, this must be attributed to Satan's temptation, and Eve's
transgression, not Divine institution. Ambrosius.
God created her for an help.

(...) By the way observe, she must be no more; adjutrix, non Domina; a Helper,
not a Ruler: Let her remember the station where she is placed, the sphere
wherein she must act, not affecting dominion, but yielding submission,
considering her Makers intention in her Creation: non e vertice (as Hierome
excellently) Hieronymus.
sed e late^e; not of the head, that she may not be proud, and claim
superiority; but of the side, that she may be an Help content with an equality.

An Help not for generation only, as some would have it, qui ad generationem
restringunt, non satis considerant quid sit conjugium, says Calvin upon my
Text; Calvinus in locum.
they that restrain it so strictly, do not well weigh what Marriage means.
The word the Holy Ghost makes use of, to describe her by, is of a much larger
extent, (...) the Targum rendereth it by (...), I will make him a prop, an
upholder: the Septuagint (...), I will make him an assistant, an aid, an help:
so she was intended: so she must demean her self in these following
particulars:

Peter, 1 Pet. 3.1,7.
as he exhorts Husbands to dwell with their Wives, as men of knowledge; so
likewise Wives to win their Husbands by their conversations: haec erat ^n
paradiso potissima causa foeminae, etc. says a Learned and Pious expositor
upon my Text: Parae. in loc.
this was her chiefest help in Paradise, that Man and she might be companions
in their Devotions. And (O) that Man and Wife were so still! this would make
the whole Earth an Eden, a Garden of God; then every House would be a private
Bethel, and every Family a Church in Epitome. O how good, and how pleasant a
thing it is for the wedded to live together in Piety! when they take sweet
counsel together, and go to the House of God in company! when by a
reciprocal assistance, sustaining and leaning upon one another, they walk
hand in hand together! But Moses had his Zipporah, and Abigail had her Nabal:
many a good Husband has a vain Wife; and many a godly Wife has a carnal
Husband: thus many are disturbed, if not corrupted. All you therefore, whom God
has joined together, labor what in you lies, to promote and edify; dare
not, however dare not to leaven and seduce each other. If you love, show it, O
show it in that noble and Christian affection, that generous and sublimated
passion, that is tender of the better part. Husbands, will ye suffer your
Wives, the Wives of your bosoms to destroy themselves, and never tell them of
it? where is your love to them? Wives can you see your Husbands, the Husbands
of your vows, without hope, without Christ, without God in the world, and take
no notice of it? where is your care for them? O let your indulgence reach to
the Souls of one another! For what know thou O Wife (to speak the language
of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.16) whether thou shall save thy Husband? or how
know thou O Man, whether thou shall save thy wife? 1 Cor 7.16.
do that, and you wilt do a courtesy indeed, for which (as instruments) in
the world to come, you will thank each other with joyful lips. On the other
hand, consider how sad and doleful a thing it will be at the great account, to
see the Husband and the Wife loading each other with black and tragical
execrations for their silent advancing of their mutual ruin: to hear them
indicting and accusing one another at the tribunal of God, to hear the Woman
cry, the Man, the Man; to hear the Man say, the Woman, the Woman that thou
gave to be with me, she tempted me, and I did sin. Consider the woe that
belongs to those by whom such offenses come.

Hannah does with Samuel, 1 Samuel 1.11.
1 Samuel 1.11. she voweth a vow, that if the Lord will give her a Son, by
bearing him; she will return that Son to the Lord, by serving him. Grace,
though Parents cannot be the Authors to confer it, yet they may be the means
to P^ov. 22.6.
promote it. And how much are they all concerned in it, to phes. 6 4.
bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord? this is the
commendatory testimonial God gives of Abraham, Genesis 18.19. I know that he
will command his children, and his household after him, and they shall keep the
way of the Lord. G^n. 18.19.
Maximus est thesaurus quem parents filiis relinquunt, as the Father pithily,
It is the best Portion they can give them living, the best Legacy they can
bequeath them dying. Quantum putas ^x^etaris adj^er boris parentibus, and
maxim ma^bus, quae majori circa filios solent affectu mov^ri, cum vident vitam
fitiorum, virtutum tramite relicto, vagari per d^via vitiorum? Bern. de
passione do n^c. 30. (...), Plut. de l. educ.
Remember your children have a long journey to go, from Earth to Heaven: O let
them set out betimes in the morning, least they should be benighted. It was St.
John's praise, that he followed Christ when he was young; It was Timothie's
happiness, that he knew the Scriptures from a child. Our Savior bids his
Disciples Mat. 19.14.
suffer little children: do you do something more, help your little children
to come unto him. Difficulter era^ur quod rudes anni perbiberunt: lanarum
conchylia quis in pristinum candorem rev^at, etc. Hieron. Ep. 7. ad Laetam de
inst. filia.
And what Dives would have done for his Brethren when it was too late, do you
do for your children in the accepted time; warn them that they come not into
the place of torment. Provide for their Souls as well as their Bodies, as
knowing those tender plants will either be fuel for Tophet, or a nursery for
Heaven.

Aristotle calls man, (...), Arist. Ethic. l. 8 c. 1.
an affectionate creature, that delights in friendship: now the Woman's
behavior should be such, as to increase this delight, and requite this
affection, that the newborn love may not be blasted before it is rooted; that
it may never be disturbed by contention, nor destroyed by aversation. I read
in Junoni nupti^lirem divinam cum ficerent e victima f^l exemptum post ^ram
^bjicere, moris fuit receptissimi: innuen^e (opinor) ejus, quisquis fuit,
autore, bilem prorsus iramve a conjugali sequestrandam jucunditate Coel Rhodig.
Ant. lect. l. 28. c. 21.
Rhodiginus, that it was a custom, when they sacrificed, (...), to the
Goddess of Marriages, to take out the Gall and fling it behind the Altar, to
show there should be no Gall or anger, no Strife or Bitterness in the
conjugall relation: there must be no provoking of one another here, but only
to good works. Basil Hom. 7. Hexameron.
Basil urges it by way of up braiding, to quarelling, and bitter Husbands,
that Nature has taught even the Viper to cast up his poison, when he joyneth
with his Female. Surely they are worse then Vipers, who for the reverence of
this Sacred Union, will not abstain from all Rancor and Venom; things the
maritall Love must be so far from: this must be pure as Light, sacred as a
Temple, lasting as the World. It is the highest degree of Friendship, the
strictest cord of Amity, and this makes every breach and jar by so much the
more culpable. Learn therefore to bear with infirmities, and pass by each
others saylings. The ancients in their Maritall Hieroglyphics, used to paint
Mercury standing by Venus, to signify, that by fair language, and sweet
entreaties, the minds of each other should be united. Love is not more full of
passion, when it is wholly blind, than it is of discretion, when it will
sometimes wink: This will cover a multitude of sins. 1 Pet. 4.8.


Dinah, nor a Street wife like Thamar, nor a Window-wife, like Jezebel, but an
Housewife. Wherefore Phidias when he should draw a Woman, painted her sitting
under a Snailes shell, signifying that in her life she should imitate that
little Creature, that carries the house upon the back of it. And as such you
may read her description at large, Prove. 31. from the 13. to the 28. Prove.
31.13,14,15,16, etc.
As in the Heavens there are two Lights, the greater to rule the Day, the
lesser to rule the Night; so here on the Earth, there is the Man the greater
light, to rule the Public; the Woman the lesser light, to take care of
domestical affairs. Thus Marriage is called conjugium, from jugum, a yoke;
when those that are joined together, have a reciprocal and relative interest
in each others actions, both promoting the same design, in their several
capacities. Where cattle are yoked together, should one draw, and the other
stand still, much more, if the one pull forward, and the other hale backward,
they would but tire each other, both must put to their strength proportionably:
and so here (...), Aristot. Polit. l. 3. c. 4.
the yoke-fellows have each their task and burden: the Man must do his part,
by providing industriously, the Woman must do her part, by preserving
discreetly: the Man must do his part, not neglecting carelessly; the Woman must
do her part, not wasting prodigally: finally, the Man must do his part
abroad. the Woman must do her part at home: the Man must do his part by
getting, the Woman must do her part by saving. I question not but you are
acquainted with your particular duties; this is not a place to read a Lecture
of Oeconomicks. I pass on.

non tam respiciendum cui juramus, quam per quem juramus, Lomb. 3. sent.
distinct. 39.
you stand bound by promise to the most High, and to him shall the vow be
performed. The wise man tells you, Eccles. 5.5. Better it is that thou
should not vow, then that thou should vow, and not pay. Eccles. 5.5.
Forget not thy engagements, and remember to observe them. Quam gravia vincula
sunt vota! It is Ambrose's exclamation, major est contractus fidei quam
pecuniae. Amb. l. 9. in Lucam ad cap. 20.
You are mistaken that look upon the Matrimonial vows, only as things of
custom and formality: know the Heavens hear, and the Earth hearkneth to them;
and if they are broken, shall testify against you for dissembling with the
Almighty, and deluding of his Creature, by making promises, which you forget
and falsify.

That I may draw to a conclusion of this particular.

Does God call the Woman here an Help? Then this might serve in the first place
to correct the unlawful vanity of such, that employ their wits to vilify and
disparage them; that stuff their discourses with a Catalogue of their
weaknesses, scarce ever mentioning them without a Satyr: whose best language is
to give them Cato's periphrasis, that they are necessary evils, condemning the
frame of all, for the faults of some; as if it were a consequence, that because
some are bad, therefore none are good. Is this their thanks to their Maker, to
rail at the work of his hands? But what Tertullian said of Heretics, I may
say here, detegere est refutare, Many Daughters have done virtuously. Tertul.
Praescript. Prove. 31.29.


Homer.
he is to his Wife; Father, Mother, Brother: and great reason for it, unless
the state of Marriage should be no better than the condition of an Orphan: for
she that leaves all these relations for him, will be a great loser, if she do
not find them all translated in him. I am afraid Medea's complaint in
Euripides may be taken up by too many Wives, (...), etc. Euripides Med.
Ambrose has almost translated it, Ambros Exhort, ad Virgins.
Virgins are with their own Money sold to misery, and their own portion is
the too dear price of a servile subjection. True it is, the Husband is the 1
Cor 11.3. (...), Phil. in Genesis 3.12.
head of his Wife, and so has dominion over her: but it is such as the Soul
has over the Body, to take care for it and help it. Their help is mutual; the
Soul furnishes the Body with light and understanding, the Body requiteth the
Soul with hands and feet: and so it must be here: she that has parted with all
her helps for thee, she that has imparted all her help to thee, has good
reason to expect and meet with all help from thee. As the Earth sends up all
its vapors, and proper emissions at the command of the Sun, and yet
requires them again to refresh her own need, and they are deposited between
them both, in the bosom of a cloud, as a common receptacle; that as they have
ascended to cool his flames, so they may descend to make her fruitful: so are
the proprieties of a Wife to be disposed of by her Husband: they serve the
interest of both, while they serve the necessities of either. Now she is a part
of thy self, corporis dimidium tui, Genesis 2.23.
bone of thy bones, and flesh of thy flesh, and therefore nourish her and
cherish her. It is the Apostles consequence, Ephesians. 5.28,29. Ephesians. 5.28,29


Verus meant it, uxor dignitatis, non voluptatis nomen, Coel. Rhod. Aut. lect.
l. 18. c. 13.
Wife is not a name of Pleasure, but of Honor: you are to be Helps to those,
to whom God has joined you: This was Gods end, I will make him an Help. Potuit
simpliciter dicere, faciam ei foeminam, says Ferus; he might have said, I will
make him a Woman, but he rather makes choice of a Periphrasis, which speaks
what the Woman should be, she should be an Help. So you are styled: walk
worthy of the vocation, wherewith ye are called. Ephesians. 4.1.
I never affected raking of sinkes, or handling sores: but I cannot but tell
you, there are too many of your sex in the world, so far from deserving
their name, that they may more properly be called a Cross, than as here, an
Help. How do these degenerate from the end, for which God intended them,
turning Antipodes to their duty? These are they ( L and G.) that have injured
you, as the fearful spies did Canaan, brought up an evil report of you, and
loaded your sex with such opprobrious Epithets. Num^ 13 32.
Helps to nothing but Vanity, Poverty and coffeehouse. Jerome somewhere has
a quaint deduction from the creating of the Woman. E latere desumpta, etc. He
lost a Rib for her making, with weakened him enough: she had need to do all she
can to requite him by her helping him. We usually say of Women, they are
helpless Creatures: if they are so, the fault is not in Nature, but in
themselves, they were Created to be helpful: or grant (as it is true in many
things) they are helpless to themselves; this should be the greater argument
to incite them, in all they may, to be Helps unto their Husbands, de latere
sumpta non discedat a latere, says Augustine, Augustinus.
She was taken out of his side; let her not depart from his side, but show her
self as much as she was made for, (...) an Help. An Help to promote his Piety,
an Help to breed up their Progeny, an Help to sweeten their society, an Help to
uphold their Family, finally an Help in her whole duty: then indeed she will be

Meet for him, which is the last Particular of this last General, and now
comes forth to crave your attention. I will make him an Help

Meet for him. (...) The Hebrew word is variously rendered by Expositors: some
translate it, ex adverso ejus, some coram ipso, others astans ei, others
commodum ipsi; the sense is almost the same in all, only the words are
different: occasioned perhaps by the fullness of the expression in the
Original, which cannot without some disadvantage be brought into another
language. The Septuagint (I think) come as near as may be, who render it here,
(...), 70.
and in the 20. verse of this Chapter, (...); I will make him an help, juxta
correspondentiam ejus, (as Buxtorfius) Buxtorfius.
suitable to him, correspondent and proportionable. (...), says Chrysostom,
Chrysostom.
(...), etc (...). God had made Man many helps before he placed him in
Paradise, and gave him dominion over the several Creatures, some whereof were
helps to feed him, some to ease him, some to delight him: but among them all
there was not a Help (...) that was meet for him, agreeable to his temper,
adequate to his nature: this is only to be found in the Woman who is properly
adjunctorium simile sibi, as some read the words, a Help meet, fit for him.

Fit and meet she is, (to look no farther) in these four parti^ulars.

of the same enjoyments with her Adam. The Angels were too much above him, the
Beasts were as much below him; the one he could not reach to, the other he
could not stoop to: but the Woman is a Parallel line that runs equal with
him; a competent companion for his several employments, a convenient partner
for his particular engagements. She moves in the same orb, walks in the
same paths, tends to the same center: she is actuated by the same principles,
enjoined the same precepts, made of the same flesh with him. Which is a first
particular, wherein she is meet for him, in regard of her nature.

Aristot. Eudem. l 7. c. 2.
likeness breeds delight, and every creature by a commanding instinct,
associateth it self with those of its own species. Now before the Woman was
created, Man was, (as the Psalmist complains of himself in another case,
even as a Pelican in the wilderness, as a Sparrow on the house top, desolate
and lonely. Psalm 102.6,7.
The rest of the Creatures could go by paires, Turtles had their Mates, and
Males their Females; but Man has none, he is single and solitary. But though
he be so, it is not good he keep so; wherefore that no inconvenience may be
unremedied, that no defect may be unsupplyed, the Lord God provideth, that he
shall have an Help that is meet for him.

Eve is formed, there is no employment upon Earth, there is no requital of
these affections; her being brings occasion for both: now there is a sweet
and ingenuous exchange of themselves, a defecated and reciprocal delight in
one another: nothing that is here before, was capable either of receiving, or
returning such noble Emanations: at length she comes, who in Affections and
for affections is meet for him.

Apollonius Thyaneus vaunted, that he understood the meaning of Birds and
Bruits, by those confused sounds we hear from them: and Gregory tells us,
that the Angels, per sublimes and incognitos modos, Greg. Mor. 2. c. 5.
after a hidden and secret manner speak to one another. Certain it is, that to
all society there is required a communicating of their mutual purposes, an
unveyling and discovering of their several intentions: and this Adam cannot
do to the Rocks and Trees, to the Fowls and Fishes, he cannot disclose his
mind to such things as these: he wants one like himself, to whom he may
unlock his thoughts, and open his Soul. Were there such a one, they might
acquaint each other with the secret and private workings, with the dark and
curtained motions of their hearts, and such a one is the Woman, who as for
other things, so for her discourse likewise is meet for him.

And by this time I suppose you will easily grant me, that of all the helps man
had in Paradise, the Woman only was the Help. (...)

That I may now bring up my discourse to you, and with as much have as may be,
draw all to a conclusion: as you have seen that the Woman among the Creatures,
so learn to see that the Wife among Women, be an Help that is Meet for you: if
she be not; I will assure you, it were better for that Man that he should be
alone.

She must be an Help Meet, that is fitly qualified for a Wife; and then she
must be an Help meet for him that is fitly qualified for his Wife. Of the
former of these before, when you heard in what; of the later now, when we are
to enquire for whom she must be an Help, she must be meet for

Him. Eve for Adam, every Woman for that particular Man, to whom God shall
join her. Lev. 19.19.
Under the Law, seeds of several sorts were not to be sowed in one ground,
Linen and Woollen were not to be mingled in one Garment, and Cattle of diverse
kinds were not to gender. Cajetanus.
Cajetan thinks these things are not to be understood Literally; but
Symbolically. Not to dispute that, thus much we may learn as to our present
purpose, the method and decency, the order and proportion that must be observed
in it: to speak in the language of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6.14. There must be no
unequal yoking. 2 Cor. 6.14.
It is not sufficient that the Wife be good, but she should be also fit; not
enough that she should be virtuous, unless she be to that suitable. Husbands
and Wives are like Locks and Keys, they rather break then open, unless the
Wards are answerable. Diverse Men, though in themselves unblameable, are not fit
for some Women; and diverse Women, though in themselves commendable, are not fit
for some Men. And whence come debates and disagreeings, discontents and
jarings? are they not from hence? make them fit, and there will be no strife;
were they even, there would be no odds. Some Rabbines that held the
pre-existency of humane Souls, were of opinion, that in the beginning of the
world, Souls were created by paires, Male and Female, and from hence (say
they) it came, that Marriages were prosperous, or unsuccessefull: Menasseb ben.
Israol de term. vit. l. 3. sect. 5.
he that matched to that person that was created with him was happy; but he
that missed her, and was joined to another, was miserable. Thus much is true of
it: without doubt those that are coupled together, and are unmeet, will be no
helps. From hence it was, some think, came the first use of that Ceremony of
the Ring in Weddings, viz. to represent this fitness: that, if it be straiter
then the finger, it will pinch; if it be wider, it will fall off; but when it
is fit, it neither paineth nor slippeth: And thus it is with the Wife: if she
be too little, she pincheth with disgrace; if she be too big, she falls off
by disdain: they fit the closest both for use and ornament, that are most fit
and equal. Wherefore Marriages are called Matches, implying they should be, so,
not only upon a Moral, but as much as may be, upon a Civil account. I cannot
stay: take the sum of all in these three particulars. She must be meet in 1.
Religion. 2. Disposition. 3. Education.
A word of each:

Belial? or what part has he, that believes with an Infidel? You heard
before, 2 Cor. 6.14,15
she must have Religion as to her conversation: now know also, she must have
the same Religion as to her profession. This exhortation may to some seem
needless, in this Land we live in, in regard we all worship the same God, and
are called by the same name. But when I have sadly pondered, the many Divisions
and Distractions, the Schism and Factions, the wide breaches, and the wild
confusions that are among us, whereby the Father is divided against the Son,
and the Son against the Father; Luke 12.53.
the Mother against the Daughter, and the Daughter against the Mother, saying,
Lo here is Christ, and there is Christ: Christ in this Church, and Christ in
that Church, and Christ in no Church: this being the juncture, or rather sad
dis-juncture of things among us, I say that consideration prevailed with me, to
premise this caution, that she be meet in Religion.

Athenians, that before they placed out their Children to any settled course of
Life, they brought them into a Room for that end, stored and furnished with all
kind of variety, and narrowly observing, with what there they were most
delighted, bred them up accordingly: Pa^mam have a^que tenenti Nate de^ d^xi,
t^bise peritura reservant Pergama, Nas. 1. M^t. l. 3.
If with Engines, to Manufactures; if with Books, to Learning, etc. First they
studied their Tempers, and then they suited their Employments: something
answerable is to be observed, before the entrance into the state of Wedlock. It
behooveth thee first to be acquainted with thy self well, thy own
propensions, genius, and inclinations; and then with thy choice, whether she be
analogicall, and correspondent, then there will be a Pleasure and Sympathy, a
Consent and Harmony, constant and uninterrupted: she will be thy picture, and
thou will be her looking glass; and you may both enjoy, behold, and cherish
your selves in one another: but Fire and Water, if together, are always
wrangling, the Fire heateth the Water, and the Water quenches the Fire:
contraries will disturb each other.

European Nations are so strict in this particular, that it is against their
Laws, for the Commonalty to Marry with the Gentry; because though other things
might be convenient, yet their breeding has been different: though that be
something too rigorous, always to be observed inviolable: yet common prudence,
and experience tells us, that they live most contented that are most equal,
there being most unity, where there is most symmetry. If the Wife be too much
above her Husband, do you not commonly see, she either ruineth him with
expenses, or revileth him with reproaches? If too much below him, it is as
usual; either her former condition makes her too generous, or her present
mutation makes her too imperious. Wherefore let not thy ambition carry thee
too much above thy self, nor thy indiscretion hurry thee too much below thy
self: he that reaches too high may overstraine, he that stoopeth too low may
fling down himself; but he that stands upright, is probably in far less
danger, either of hurting or falling.



Porus when Alexander (whose Prisoner then he was) asked him how he would be
used, answered in one word, (...), that is, like a King; Alexander again
replied, do you desire nothing more? No, says he, all things are in (...). In
like manner, in the argument we are now about, it will hold as fully. Is it not
good for any of you to be alone, and would you know how to choose an Help upon
a civil account? I may answer also in one word, (...), choose her fit, meet
for you. The direction is but short, but it is exceeding emphaticall, and
comprehensive: would men but follow it, and conform to it, you would see none
of those shameful anomalies, none of those rash and ridiculous inequalities,
that are too often compounded in the conjugall relation. But there are two grand
Enemies to all decency and order, prudence and proportion; you know they are
Money and Fancy; these commit the disturbancies, and are guilty of all the
Riots: where either of these is predominant, they will stick at no
irregularity, they will wink and swallow even the worst of absurdities. Thus
some Fathers will sell their unwilling Children, some Children grieve their
indulgent and more experienced Parents: on the one hand, Parents through a
sordid covetousness, are tyrants to children, on the other hand children
through an unreasonable wilfulness, are disobedient to Parents: the Father
commonly looks only at the Purse, and the Child as usually minds nothing
but the Person; the one looks that the party be Rich, the other looks that
they be handsome: it may be neither questioned whether they be meet for thee.



The Man says of his Wife, when first created, she is bone of his bone, and
flesh of his flesh; Genesis 2.23.
and so the Wife must look upon her Husband, when once they are Married, as
bone of her bone, and flesh of her flesh, they are now united: all her
promotion, interest, contentment, is joined to his: both their particulars are
bound up in one general, and like Hippocrates's twins, they live and dye
together. It behooves her then to remember in all her actions, that nothing is
fit for her, that is not meet for him. Let her then (I see I must have done)
let her show her self so, in every thing meet for him: meet for his Piety, by
her fervent exciting; meet for his Progeny, by her careful nurturing; meet for
his Family, by her provident overseeing; meet for his Affections, by her
endearing complacence; meet for his Will by her sweet compliance; meet for his
Disposition, by her prudent observance; meet for his Estate, by her
proportionable expenses; meet for his Health, by her most tender preserving;
meet for his Sickness, by her most diligent resto^ing; meet for his Prosperity,
by her sober gratulation; meet for his Adversity, by her patient submission:
finally, meet in all things, by her dutiful conversation. Those that have such
Wives as these, what the Almighty decreed in my Text for Adam, he has
performed for them: Seeing it was not good that they should be alone, he has
made them helps that are meet for them.

At length (my beloved) my Text is finished, and I should now dismiss you, but
casting my eye upon this new-joyn'd pair, the occasion of this days
solemnity. I cannot let them go until they have a blessing: and it shall be
that of the people at the wedding of Boaz, Ruth 4 11. The Lord make the Woman
that is come into thy House like Rachel, and like Leah, which two did build the
house of the Lord. Ruth 4 11.
The Lord make her fruitful as Leah, pleasing as Rachel. The Lord make her
like Martha, and like Mary, which two entertained our Savior. The Lord make
her like Mary for her Piety, like Martha for her industry.

The Lord make the Man into whose house thou come, like Jacob, and like
Joseph, which two were famous in their Generations. The Lord make him like
Joseph for his constancy, like Jacob for his frugality. The Lord make him like
Joshuah, and lik^ Caleb, which two fought the battles of the Lord. The Lord
make him like Joshuah for his zealous service, like Caleb for his other spirit.

The Lord make you both like Abraham, and like Sarah, which two walked with
God. The Lord make thee like Abraham for his fidelity and thee like Sarah for
her conformity. The Lord make you both like Zachary, and like Elizabeth, which
two walked in all well pleasing. I he Lord make thee like Zachary for his
holiness, and thee like Elizabeth for her humble esse: finally to pray for all
things in the words of my Text, The Lord make you both mutual Helps one to
another here, and espouse you both unto himself for ever.

FINIS.

