Edinburgh, March 18. 1684.
IT is ordered by the Lords of His Majesty's most honorable Privy Council,
That none shall Re-Print, or Import into this Kingdom, the Book intitutled, The
Institutions of the Laws of SCOTLAND; by Sir George Mackenzie of Rosehaugh, His
Majesty's Advocat, for the space of nineteen years, after the date hereof,
without the consent of the Author; under the pain of confiscation of the whole
Copies to John Reid Printer of the said Book. Extracted by me

Pat. Menzies, Cls. Sti. Cli.

THE INSTITUTIONS OF THE LAW OF SCOTLAND

By Sir George Mackenzie, of Rosehaugh, His MAJESTY'S Advocat.

EDINBURGH, Printed by John Reid, Anno DOM. M DC LXXXIV.

To the Earl of MIDDLETON,
My Lord,
THE Natural way of Learning all Arts and Sciences, is to know, First, the
Terms used in them, and the Principles upon which they are founded, with the
Origins of the one, and the Reasons of the other. A Collection of these Terms
and Principles is in Law called, Institutions; and the Natural and Easy way of
Writing these, is by going from the first Principle to a second, and from that
to a third: The admired Method of Euclid in his Elements, though much neglected
by all, who have written Institutions of Law; in which, not only many things
unnecessary are insert, as almost all the third book of Justinians
Institutions; the Differences betwixt the Sabiniani and Proculiani, etc. Many
Fundamental Titles are ommitted, as all the matter of Restitutions: And many
things are taught in the first Book, which cannot be understood till the fourth
be read.

I have therefore in these my Institutions treated nothing save Terms, and
Principles, leaving out nothing that is necessary, and inserting nothing that
is contraverted; in all which I have proceeded, building always one Principle
upon another; and expressing every thing in the Terms of the Civil Law, or in
the Style of Ours respectively; so that if any Man understand fully this Little
Book; Natural Reason, and Thinking, will easily supply much of what is
diffused, through our many Volums of Treatises, and Decisions; Whereas the
studying those, would not in many years give a true Idea of our Law; and does
rather distract than instruct. And I have often observed, that more Lawyers are
ignorant for not understanding the first Principles, than for not having read
many Books; as it is not the having traveled long, but the having known the
way, which brings a man to his Lodging soon, and securely.

My Lord, You observed very justly to me, that Institutions are a Grammar; and
therefore, (which is a great encouragement to all Readers of Institutions,)
they who understand the Institutions of any one Nation, will soon learn the Law
of any other: For though Terms, Forms, and Customs differ; yet the great
Principles of Justice and Equity are the same in all Nations. I send mine
therefore to your Lordship, not because you need them, but that you may judge,
if my Institutions, will be able to justify your parallel.

Nec Phoebo gratior ulla est, Quam sibi quae Vari praescripsit pagina Nomen.
The INDEX of the TITLES.
PART I.
Title I. OF Laws in General Page 1 Title II. Of Jurisdictions, and Judges in
general Page 9 Title III. Of the Supreme Judges, and Courts of Scotland Page 17
Title IV. Of inferior Jurisdictions and Courts Page 27 Title V. Of
Ecclesiastic Persons Page 33 Title VI. Of Marriage Page 46 Title VII. Of
Minors, and their Tutors and Curators Page 47
PART II.
Title I. OF the Division of Rights, and the several ways of acquiring
Property and Dominion Page 74 Title II. Of the difference betwixt Heritable,
and Moveable Rights Page 83 Title III. Of the Constitution of Heritable Rights,
by Charter and Seasin Page 92 Title IV. Of the several kinds of Holding Title
V. Of the Casualities due to the Superior Page 108 Title VI. Of the Right
which the Vassal acquires by getting the Feu Page 13^ Title VII Of Transmission
of Rights by Confirmation, and of the difference betwixt Base and Public
Infeftments Page 14^ Title VIII. Of Redeemable Rights Page 15^ Title IX. Of
Ser^itudes Page 16^ Title X. Of ^eynds Page 18^ Title XI. Of Inhibitions Page
19^ Title XII. Of Comprysings and Adjudications Page 20^
PART III.
Title I. OF Obligations and Contracts in general Page 217 Title II. Of
Obligations by Write, or Word Page 228 Title III. Of Obligations and Contracts,
arising from Consent, and of accessory Obligations Page 232 Title IV. Of the
Dissolution or Extension of Obligations Page 255 Title V. Of Assignations Page
261 Title V. Of Arr^stments and Poi^^ings Page 265 Title VI. Of Prescriptions
Page 275 Title VII. Of Succession in Heritable Rights Page 282 Title VIII. Of
Succession in Movea^^es Page 323 Title IX. Of ^^st Heir and Bastards Page 330
PART IV.
Title I. OF Actions Page 334 Title II. Of Probation Page 362 Title III. Of
Sentences and their Execution Page 368 Title IV. Of Crimes Page 375
THE INSTITUTIONS Of the Law of SCOTLAND.
FIRST PART.
Tit. I. Of Laws in General.
JUSTICE, is a constant and perpetual Will, and Inclination to give every Man
what is due to him.

LAW, is the Science which teaches us to do Justice.

This Law, in a large acceptance, is divided, In the Law of Nature, Law of
Nations, and the Civil, and Municipal Law of each particular Country.

The Law of Nature comprehends those Dictats, which Nature has taught all
living creatures, instances whereof are Self Defense, Education of Children:
and generally, all those common principles, which are common to Man, and
beasts, and this is rather innate instinct, than positive Law.

The Law of Nations, is peculiar to Mankind only, dictated by right Reason,
and is divided into the Original and primarie Law of Nature, that flows from
the first and purest principles of right Reason; Such as Reverence to GOD,
respect to our Country, and Parents. And the secundarie, and consequential Law
of Nature, consisting of these general conclusions, in which ordinarily all
Nations agree, and which they draw by way of necessary consequence, from those
first principles. And under this part of the Law of Nations, are comprehended,
the Obligations arising from promises, or contracts, The liberties of Commerce,
the ransoming of Prisoners, security of Ambassadors, and the like.

Civil, or Municipal Law, are the particular Laws, and Customs of every
Nation, or people, who are under one Sovereign Power.

The Romans, having studied with great exactness, the principles of Equity, and
Justice. Their Emperor Justinian, did cause digest all their Laws into one
body, which is nowcalled by most polit Nations, (for its Excellency) the Civil
Law; And as this Civil Law is much respected generally, so it has great
influence in Scotland, except where Our own express Laws, or Customs, have
receded from K. J. 6 Par. 8. Act ^31
it. And by the common Law in our Acts of Parliament is meant the K. Ja. 4.
Par. 4. Act 51. K. Jam. 5. Par. 6 Act 80. ^. Mary Par. 5. Act 22. K, Ja. 6 Par.
1. Act 31.
Civil Law.

The Popes of Rome, in Imitation of the Civil Law, made a body of Law, of their
own; which, because it was compiled by Church men, it was called, The Cannon
Law; And though it has here no positive Authority, as being compiled by
private Persons, at the desire of the Popes, especially since the Reformation;
yet our Ecclesiastic Rights, were settled thereby before the Reformation: And
because many things in that Law, were founded upon material justice, and
exactlie calculated for all Church men; Therefore, that Law is yet much
respected among us, Especially in what relates to conscience, and Ecclesiastic
Rights.

Our Municipal Law of Scotland, is made up partly of our written, and partly of
our unwritten Law: Our written Law comprehends, first, our Statutory Law, which
consists of our Statutes, or Acts of Parliament. Secundo, The Acts of Sederunt,
which are Statutes, made by the Lords of Session, by virtue of a particular Act
of Parliament, K. Ja. 5. Par 7 Act 93.
impowering them, to make such constitutions as they shall think fit, for
ordering the ^rocedur, and forms of Admini^trating justice, and these are
called Acts of Sederunt; because they are made by the Lords sitting in
judgment; But are not properly Laws, the legislative power being the Kings
Prerogative. Tertio, The books of Regiam Majestatem, which are generally looked
upon as a part of Our Law, and they, and the leges burgorum, and the other
tractates, joined by Skeen to them, are called the old books of Our Law, by
many express Acts of Parliament K. Ja. 1 par. 3. Act 54. K. Ja. 3. Par. 14. Act
115
. Tho the books of Regiam Majestatem, were originally but the works of one
private Lawyer, writing by way of Institution, and are now very much abrogated
by Custom.

Our unwritten Law, comprehends the constant tract of decisions, past by the
Lords of Session, which is considered as Law; the Lords respecting very much
their own decisions; And though they may, yet they use not to reced from them,
except upon grave considerations. Secundo, Our Ancient customs, make up a part
of our unwritten Law, which have been universally received among us. The tacit
consent of the people, operating as much in these, as their express consent
does, in making Laws; And such is the force of custom, or consuetude, that if
a Statute, after long standing has never been in observance, or having been,
has run in desuetu^e; consuetude prevails over the st^^^^e, till it be renewed
either by a succeeding Parliament, or by a Proclamation from the Council: For
though the Council cannot make Laws, yet they may revive them.

Generally, all Laws should look foreward K. Ja. 6 par. 3. Act 18.
though declaratory Laws regulat what is past, since their design is, to
declare what was Law prior to the statute, and to direct Judges, how to decide
in cases that needed the decision of a Parliament.

Laws should command, not persuade; and though the rubric (or title) and
narrative of the statute, may direct a doubting Judge, yet if the statutory
words be clear, they should be followed in all cases.

All Laws should be so interpreted as to evite absurdities; and as may best
agree with the mind of the legislator, and Analogy, or general design of the
common Law.

Correctory Laws (so we call these which abrogate, or restrict former Laws) are
to be strictly interpreted, for we should reced as little as can be from
received Laws.

Honorable Laws are to be extended, and the Paritie of Reason, often prevails
with our Judges, to extend Laws to Cases, that are founded on the same reason,
with what is expressly determined by the Statute.

Tit. II. Of Jurisdiction, and Judges in General.
HAving resolved to follow Justinians method, (to the end, there may be as
little difference found, betwixt the Civil Law, and Ours, as is possible: And
that the Reader may not be distracted, by different methods) I do resolve,
first, to lay down what concerns the Persons of whom the Law treats: ^at ^do,
what concerns the things themselves treated of, such as rights, obligations,
etc. Tertio, The actions whereby these rights are pursued, which answers to the
Civilians, objecta juris, viz. Personae, res, and Actiones.

The Persons treated of in Law, are either Civil or Ecclesiastic, the chief of
both which are Judges, with whom we shall begin. And for the better
understanding of their Office, it is fit to know, that Jurisdiction, is a power
granted to a Magistrate, to cognosce upon, and determine in causes, and to put
the sentence or decree to execution, in such manner as either his commission,
law, or practice does allow.

All Jurisdiction flows originally from the King K. Chapter 2. Par. 1 Act. 2. Par.
3. Act 18.
so that none have power to make Deputs, except it be containd in their
commission; And if a Depute, appoint any under him, that sub-depute is called
properly a substitute; and every Judge is answerable for the Malversation of
his depute.

Jurisdiction is either Cumulative, or Privative; Cumulative jurisdiction, is
when two Judges, have power to judge the same thing; And generally, it is to be
remembered, that the King is never so denuded, but that he retains an Inherent
power, to make other Judges, with the same power that he gave in former K. C. 2
par. 3.
commissions; And thus he may erect lands, in a regality, within the bounds of
an heritable Sheriff-ship, and burghs Royal, within the bounds of a regality;
And these bounds, within which, a Judge may exerce his commission, is called
his Territory; so that if any Judge exercise Jurisdiction, without his
Territory, his sentence is null: and among those who have a Cumulative
Jurisdiction, he who first cites, can only Judge; and this is called, jus
Praeventionis.

Privative Jurisdiction, is when one Judge has the sole power of judging,
exclusive of all others; such power have the Lords of Session, in judging of
all Competitions, amongst heritable rights, and here there can be no prevention.

Jurisdiction, is founded to any Judge, either, because the defender dwells
within his territory, which is called, Sortiri forum ratione domicilij: or
Secund^ Because, the crime was committed within his territory, which is called
ratione delicti; or Tertio, If the Person pursued, have any immovable estate,
within his territory, though he live not within the same, he may be pursued by
any action to affect that estate, which is called, sortiri forum ratione rei
sitae.

A Jurisdiction, is said to be prorogate, when a person not other ways
subject, submits himself to it, as when he compears before an incompetent
Judge, and propons defenses.

All Judges with us, must take the Oath of Allegiance, K. C. ^ Par. 1. Sess. 1,
Act 11.
and the Test; par. 3 Act 18.
whereby they swear, to maintain the Government of Church and State, as it is
now established; and an oath de fideli administratione, before they exerce
their Office, And no excommunicate person, nor rebel against the Government,
can Judge by Our Law.

If a person be pursued before a Judge, who is not competent, he may complain
to the Lords of Session, and they will grant Letters of Advocation, whereby
they Advocat, that is to say, call that cause from the incompetent Judge, to
themselves; And if after the letters of Advocation are intimat to that Judge,
he yet proceed, his Decree will be null, as given Spreto mandato.

Jurisdiction is either Supreme, inferior, or mixed: These courts are properly
called supreme, from whom there is no appeal to any higher Iudicatory, such as
the Parliament, Privy Council, Lords of Session, the Criminal Court, and
Exchequer: Inferior Judges are such? whose decreets, and sentences are liable
to the reviewes of the supreme Courts, as Sherriffs, Stewards, Lords of
Regality, Inferior Admirals, and Commissars, Magistrates of Burghs Royal,
Barrons, and Justices of Peace. Mixed Jurisdiction, participats of the nature,
both of the supreme, and inferior courts; such a jurisdiction have the high
Admiral, and Commissars, of Edinburgh. Both which are in so far Supreme; that
Maritim Affairs, and confirmations of Testaments, must come in and be tabled,
before the high Admiral, and Commissars of Edinburgh, in the first instance. As
also, they both, can reduce the Decreets of inferior Admirals, and Commissars;
But seeing their Decreets are subject to the review, of the Lords of Session,
they are in so far inferior Courts.

No inferior Judge, can judge in the causes of such as are Cusin-germans to
him, or of a nearer degree, either of affinity, or consanguinity; But there is
so much trust reposed in the Lords of Session, that by a special K. J. 6. par.
14. Act 212
Statute, they can only be declined incases relating to their Fathers,
Brothers, Sons, Nephews, or Uncles; which by a late statute K. C. 2 par. 3. Act
13.
, is likewise extended to the degrees of affinity, and to the Lords of privy
Council, and Exchequer, and the Commissioners of Iusticiary, and to all other
Judges within the Kingdom.

The members of the College of Justice, have this privilege, that they cannot
be pursued before any inferior Judge; and if they be, the Lords will Advocate
the cause to themselves.

Tit. III. Of the Supreme Judges, and Courts of SCOTLAND.
THE King, is the Author, and Fountain, of all power, and is an absolute
Prince, having as much power, as any King, or Potentate, whatsoever, K. J. 6.
Par. 15. Act 251
deryving his power from GOD Almighty alone K. C. ^ Par. 1. Sess. 1. Act 5. and
15* Par. 3. Act 2.
, and so not from the people. The special privileges that he has, are called,
His Prerogative Royal; such as, that he only can make Peace, or War, call
Parliaments, Conventions, Convocations of the Clergy, make Laws Act foresaid
; And generally all meetings called without his special command are punishable
King Chapter 2. Par. 1. Ses. 1. Act. 2.
, he only can remit crimes, legittimate bastards, name Judges, and Councilors,
give tutors Dative, and naturalize strangers; And is Supreme over all persons,
and in all causes, as well Ecclesiastic as Civil K. Ja. 6. par. 18. Act 1 K.
Chapter 1. par. 1. Act 3. K. Chapter 2 par. 2. Ses. 1. Act 1.
.

The Parliament of old, was only the Kings Barron Court, in which all
freeholders were oblidged to give suit, and presence in the same manner, that
men appear, yet at other head courts. And therefore, since we had Kings before
we had Parliaments, it is rediculous to think, that the Kings power flowed from
them.

The Parliament is called by Proclamation, now upon forty days, tho it may be
Adjourned upon twenty, but of old, it was called by brieves, out of the
Chancellary. It consists of three Estates, viz. the Archbishops and Bishops;
and before the Reformation, all Abbots, and Mitred-priors, sat as Church men.
Secundo, The Barrons, in which estate are comprehended, all Dukes, Marquesses,
Earls, Viscounts, Lords, and the Commissioners, for the Shires; for of old,
all Barrons, who held of the King, did come; but the estates of lesser Barrons
not being able to defray this charge, they were allowed to send Commissioners
for every Shire. K. J. 1. Par. 7. Act 101 K. Ja. 6. Par. 11. Act 113
And generally, every Shyre sends two, who have their charges born by the
Shyre. Tertio, The Commissioners for Burghs Royal, each whereof, is allowed one
and the Town of Edinburgh two; Though all the three Estates must be cited, yet
the Parliament may proceed, albeit any one estate were absent, or being present
would disassent. The legislative power is only in the King, and the Estates of
Parliament only consent, and in Parliament, the King has a negative voice,
whereby he may not only hinder any Act to pass, but even any overture to be
debated. The Acts of Parliament must be proclaimed upon forty days, that the
Lieges may know them K. Ja. ^. Par. 7. Act. ^28.
.

To secure the Crown against factions, and impertinent overturs in open
Parliament: Our Parliaments choose before they proceed to any bussiness, four
out of each State, who with the Officers of State determine what Laws, or
Overturs, are to be brought in to the Parliament; and they are therefore
called, the Lords of Articles.

We have another meeting of the three Estates, called the Convention of
Estates, which is now called upon twenty days, and proceeds in the same way
that the Parliament does, diffreing only from it, in that the Parliament, can
both impose Taxations, and make Laws; whereas the Convention of Estates, can
only impose, or rather offer Taxations, and make Statutes for uplifting those
particular Taxations. But can make no Laws. And of old, I find by the Registers
of the Conventions, (the eldest whereof now extent, is in Anno 1583.) that the
Conventions of Estates consisted, of any number of the three Estates, called
off the Streets, summarly by the King; And yet they cried down, or up money,
and judged processes, which now they do not.

The Privy Council is constituted by a special commission from the King, and
regularly their power extends to matters of public Government; in order to
which, they punish all Ryots, for so we call breach of the peace. They
sequestrate Pupills, gives aliments to them, and to wives, who are severely
used by their husbands, and many such things, which require such summar
procedour, as cannot admit of the delays necessary before other courts; And yet
if any of these, dipp upon matter of Law, (for they are only Judges in facto,)
they remit the cognition of it to the Session, and stop till they hear their
report. The Council delay Criminal executions, and sometime change one
punishment into another, but they cannot remit Capital punishments; They may
also Adjourn the Session, or any other court: It has its own President, who
preceeds in the Chancellours absence, and it has its own Signet and Seal: All
who are cited to compeat there, must be personally present, because, ordinarily
the pursuer concluds, that they ought to be personally punished. All dyets
there are peremptor, all debat is in writ, no Advocat being allowed to plead,
because the Council only Judges in matters of fact.

The Lords of Council and Session, are Judges in all matters of civil Rights;
of old, they were chosen by the Parliament, and were a committy of Parliament:
But the present model was fixed and established by King James the fifth, after
the model of the Parliament of Paris K. Ja. 5. par. 5. Act 36, 37, 38, 39, 40.
.

Of old it consisted of seven Ecclesiastics, and seven Laics and the
President was a Church* man; But now all the fifteen are Laics. And there sits
with them four Noble -- men, who are called extraordinary Lords and were
allowed to sit to learn, rather then decide* But now they vote after the
ordinary Lords. All the Lords are admitted by the King* and by Statute cannot
be admitted, till they be twenty* five years of K. Ja. 6. Par. 12. Act 132.
Age, and excep^ they have a 1000 lib. or 20 Chalders of victual in yearlie
rent. Nine are a Quorum.

Crimes of old, were judged by the Justice General, Justice Clerk, and two
Justice Deputes; but now five Lords of Session, are joined to the Justice
General, and Justice Clerk, and they are called the Commissioners of
justiciary; Because, they sit by a special commission only: Four of which
number make a Quorum in time of Session, three in time of Vacance, and two at
Circuit Courts K. C. 2 Par. 2. Sess. 3. Act 18.
.

The Exchequer, is the Kings Chamberlain, Court K. C. 1 par. 1. Act 18.
wherein he judges what concerns his own revenues; It consists of the
Theasurer, (in whose place are sometimes named Commissioners of the Theasury,)
the Theasurer Depute, and as many of the Lords of Exchequer, as his Majesty
pleases.

The High Admiral, has a commission from the King, to judge in all Maritime
affairs, not only in Civil, but also in Criminal cases, where the crime is
committed at Sea, or within flood-mark; nor can the Lords of Session Advocat
causes from him K. C. 2 par. 3. Act 16.
; tho they can reduce his Decreets, as he does the Decreets of all inferior
Admirals, or Admiral Deputes, for many Heritors are constitute Admirals, within
themselves, by a right from the high Admiral, since his Gift, or from the King
before it.

Tit. IV. Of Inferior Jurisdictions, and Courts.
THe Sherriff, is the Kings chief and Ancient Officer, for preserving the
Peace, and putting the Laws in execution K. J. 6. Par. 12. Act 124
, he has both a Civil and Criminal Jurisdiction, and his Commission is under
the Great Seal; he is obliged to raise the huy and cry after all Rebels, and to
apprehend them when required: To assist such as are violently dispos^est: To
apprehend such as say Mass, or trouble the Peace, and take caution for their
appearance K. C. 2 Par. 1. Sess. 3. Act 15.
: He nor no Inferior Judge, can hold Courts in time of Vacance, in Civil cases,
without a dispensation from the Lords of Session; But in Criminal cases, he
needs no dispensation, because crimes should be instantly punished.

He is Judge in all crimes, Except the four Pleas of the Crown, to wit, Murder,
Fir^ rasing, Robery, and ravishing of Women Leg. Make. 2. Act 11. Quoniam
Attach. cap. 79
; but murder he can judge, if the Murderer was taken with red-hand, that is to
say, immediately committing the murder; In which case, he must proceed against
him within three Suns; And in Theft, he may judge, if the Thief was taken with
the fang.

The Shireff, is also judge competent, to punish Bloodwits, for which he may
syne in 50 pounds Scots; but no higher, and for contumacy, he can fine no
higher than 10. pounds.

A Lord of Regality, is he who has the land whereof he is Proprietar or
Superior, erected with a Jurisdiction, equal to the justices, in Criminal
cases, and to the Shirreff, in civil causes; he has also right to all the
movables of Delinquents, and rebels, who dwell within his own Jurisdiction,
whether these movables be within the regality, or without the same; And
because he has so great power, therefore no Regality can legally be granted
except in Parliament K. Ja. 2. Par. 1^. Act 43.
.

The Lord of Regality, has also by his erection, power to repledge from the
Sherriff, and even from the Justices in all K. Ja. 6. Par. 11. Act. 29.
cases except treason, and the pleas of the Crown, that is to say, to appear,
and crave; that any dwelling within his Jurisdiction, may be sent back to be
judged by him, and he is obliged to find caution, that he shall do justice,
upon the Malefactor whom he repledges* within year and day, and, the caution is
called Cul* reach Quoniam Attach, cap. 89.
.

The Stewart, is the Kings Sherriff, within the Kings own proper Lands, and
these were erected, where the lands had been erected, before in Earledoms, or
Lordships; For else the King appointed only a Baillie in them, and these
Jurisdictions are called Bailliaries, the Baillies of the Kings proper lands
having the same power with the Sherriff. And all these, viz. the Sherriff, the
Stewart, and the Lord of Regalitie, proceed in their courts after the same way,
and each of them, has a Head Burgh, where they hold their courts, and where all
letters must be executed and Registrate.

The Prince of Scotland has also an Appange, or Patrimony, which is erected in
a Jurisdiction, called the Principality. The revenues comes in to the
Exchequer, when there is no Prince; but* when there is one, he has his own
Chamberlain.

Justices of Peace, are these who are appointed by the King, or Privy Council,
to advert to the keeping of the peace, and they are judges to petty ryots,
servants fies, and many such like, relateing to good neighborhood, expressed in
the instructions, given them by the Parliament K. C. 2 Par. 1. Act 38.
and are named by the Council; allbeit, be the foresaid Statute, the nomination
is to be by His Majesty, and His Royal Successors, which the King has now
remitted to the Privy Council.

The Justices of peace do name Constables, within their own bounds, from six
months to six months; Their Office is, to wait upon the Justices, and receive
injunctions from them, delate such Ryots and Crimes to the Justices, as fall
under their Cognizance, Apprehend all suspect Persons, Vagabounds, and night
Walkers, as is at length contained in their injunctions, given them be the
foresaid Act.

Every Heritor may hold courts for causing his Tennents pay his rent; And if he
be infeft, cum curijs, he may decide betwixt Tennent and Tennent in small
debts, and may judge such as commit blood on his own ground; tho his land be
not erected in a barronie; But if his land be erected in a barronie, (which the
King can only do:) he may (like the Sherriff) unlaw for blood-wits, in 50 lib.
and for absence in 10. And if he have power of Pit and Gallows, he may hang and
drown in the same manner as the Sherriff can.

Tit. V. Of Ecclesiastic Persons.
SInce the Reformation, the King is come by Our Law in place of the Pope K. Ja.
6. par. 1. Act 2,
, and all rights to Kirklands, must be confirmed by him, else they are null; K.
Ja. 6. Par. 9. Act 7
. His Majesty only can call convocations of the Clergy; (for so we call our
National assemblies K. Ja: 6. parl. ^. Act 131. K. Char 2. par. 1. sess: 1. Act
4. sess. 3. Act 5.
) and His Commissioners sits in them, and has a negative.

We have two Archbishops, and twelve Bishops, and they are thus elected, the
King sends to the Chapter a Conge de Eslire; (which is a French word,)
signifying a power to elect, and with it a letter recommending a person therein
named, And the Chapter returns their electing: Whereupon the Kings grants a
Patent to the persons, and a mandate to the Archbishop, or Bishops, to
Consecrate him: Both which pass the great Seal K: J: 6: Par: 22: Act 1.
.

The Archbishops and Bishops, have the sole power, of calling Synods within
their own Diocies K. J. 6. par. 21. Act 1.
, and in these, they name the Brethren of the conferance: Who are like the
Lords of Articles in the Parliament, and by their advice the Bishops, depose,
suspend, and manage.

Bishops have their Chapters, without whose consent or the major part, the
Bishop cannot alienate K. Ja. 6. par. 18. Act 3.
, which Major part, must sign the deeds done be the Bishops; And it is
sufficient if those of the Chaper, sign at any time even after the Bishop; but
it must be in his lifetime: Nor are Minors, or absents, counted; and one having
two benefices, has two votes; but the Appending of the Seal, is by Special
Statute, declared to be sufficient in deeds done be the Archbishop of St.
Andrews, without the Subscriptions of the Chapters K. Ja. 6. par. 19. Act 8.
.

A Person or Rector Ecclesi^e, is he who is presented to the teiths, jure
proprio; But because of old, Parsonages were bestowed on Monastries, therefore
they sent Vicars, who served the cure for them; and who got a share of the
stipend, for their pains, either ad placitum; And they were called simple
Vicars, or for life, and they were called perpetual Vicars. And after the
Reformation, the Churches, which so belonged to them continued Vicarages still,
The titular, who came in place of the convent, retaining the right to the
Parsonages duties.

There were in time of Popery, Collegiat Kirks built, and doted by Kings, and
great men, for singing of Mass, which were governed by a Provost, and some for
singing, who were called prebends; And because, some parishes were wide, some
were allowed, to build a chapel for their private devotion; And since the
Reformation, these Chaplanaries, and Prebendaries, are allowed to be bestowed
by the Patrons, upon bursers in Colleges, notwithstanding of the foundations
K. Ja. 6. Par. 1 Act 12*
.

For understanding all these, it is fit to know; that the Primitive Church,
either to invite men to build, or dote, or to reward such, as had, did allow
such as either had built, or had bestowed the ground whereon to build, or had
doted a church, already built, to present alone if, they were the only
benefactors, or by turns, if there were more, and they were called Patrons, or
Advocati, Ecclesiarum according to that,

Patronum faciunt, dos, Aedificatio, fundus. When a Church vaikes, the Patron
must present within six months, a fit Person to the Bishop; else the right of
presentation falls to the Bishop, jure devoluto; K. Ja. 6. Par. 2 Act 1.
but if the Bishop refuse to admit and collate the person presented, the Patron
must complain to the Archbishop, and if he also refuse, or delay, the privy
Council will grant letters of horning against the Bishop, to receive the person
presented Act foresaid.
, and during the vacancy upon that refusal, the Patron may retain the vacant
stipends.

Upon this presentation the Bishop causes serve an Edict, on nine days;
wherein all persons are after Divine service, advertised, to object, why, such
a man should not be admitted to the benefice; And if none object, the Bishop
confers the Church and benefice upon the Person presented; and this is called a
Collation, after which, the Bishop causes enter him, who is so collated, by
causing give him the Bible, and the Keys of the Church, and this is called
Institution, Presentation, gives only jus ad rem, and Institution, jus in re,
and is as a Seasme.

If the Bishop be patron himself, he confers pleno jure; and the presentation,
and collation, are the same: Bishops also have mensal churches, so called;
Because, they are de mensa Episcopi, being a part of his patrimony, in which he
serves by his Viccars, and Plants as Diocessian Bishop; and if a town, or
paroch, resolve to make a second Minister, when they are not patrons, he is
called, a Stipendiary Minister, and he is collated, and instituted also; but
the patrons presentation is sufficient in prebendaries, and other benefices,
which has not curam animarum; And that without the necessity of Collation, or
institution, the Bishop having no other interest in the benefices, but in so
far as they concern the cure of souls.

By Act of Parliament, all Ministers must have a competent Stipend, not below
eight Chalder of victual, or 800. merks or above 1000. merks or 10. chalders of
victual: (Except there be just reason to give less) K. Ja. 6. Par. 22. Act 3.
together with a manse and gleib.

The manse, a manendo, is the place where the Minister is to dwell, the Gleib,
from Gleba terra, is a piece of land for Corn and Fother to his Beasts: If
there was a manse of old belonging to the parson, or viccar, the minister has
right to it; If there was none, the parochiners must build one, not exceeding
1000 lib. and not beneath 500 merks K. Ja. 6 Par. 13 Act 161
, at the sight of the Bishop of the Diocie, or such Ministers as he shall
appoint, with two or three of the most discreet men in the paroch: as also the
Heritors are liable to repair the manse; But the present incumbent is obliged
to leave it, in as good condition as they gave it to him K. Ja. 6 Par. 21 Act 8.
.

The Ministers Glieb, is to comprehend 4 Acres of Arrable land, or sixteen
sowms-grass, where there is no arrable land, which is to be designed out of the
lands, which belonged of old to Abbots, priors, Bishops, Friars, or any other
Kirk*lands within the parish King James 6 Par. 3. Act 48.
with freedom of foggage, pasturage for a horse, and two cows, fuel feal, and
divot, which Gleibs are to be designed be Ministers, named by the Bishop, with
the advyce of two of the most honest and godly of the parishoners, and the
designation is to be signed be the designers King James 6 par: 11: Act 161
.

If a Bishop or Minister, be consecrated, translated, or entered, to his
benefice, before Whitsonday; he has right to the whole years fruits, because
they are then presumed to be fully sown, and if he be deposed or transported
before Whitsonday, for that same reason he has no part of that year; But if he
serve the cure a while after Whitsonday, and be transported or deposed before
Michalmas, he has the half of that years Stipend; and if he serve till after
Michalmas, he has the whole years. So that the legal terms of benefices are
Whitsonday, at which time the sowing is ended; and Michalmas, at which time the
fruits are reaped.

They have likewise right to the Annat after their death, which was introduced
by the Cannon Law, and by a special statute with us, is declared to be half a
years rent of the benef^ce, or stipend, over and above what is due to the
defunct, for his incumb^ncie; So that if he survive Whitsonday, he has the half
of that year for his incumbencie, and the * King Charles 2: par. ^ sess: 3: Act
13.
other half a Annat, and if he survive Michalmas, he has the half of the next
year for his Annat.

There is a committie of Parliament, always sitting, called the commission for
plantation of Kirks, or Valuation of teinds, (consisting of so many of every
estate of Parliament;) who have power to modifie, and augment Ministers
Stipends, and to unite and disjoyn churchs, etc. whose decreets; because they
are a commitie of Parliament cannot be reduced by the Session, or any other
inferior Judicature.

The Primitive Christians remitted the cognition of all cases that related to
Religion, as the matters of divorce, bastardi^, the protection of dying men's
estates, to their Bishops; or such as they employed, under them, who were
called Officialls, and with us are called Commissars; and are called therefore
Iudices Christianitatis: And they are therefore the only judges in divorce;
because, it is the breach of a vow: And to scandale, because, it is an offense
against Christianity, and of teinds and benefices; because, these are the
patrimony of the Church: And of all matters referred to Oath, (if the same
exceed not 40 lib. Scots) because, an Oath is a Religious tie.

Every Bishop has his Commissar, who has his commission from the Bishop only;
and this extends no further, than the Constituents Diocy. But the archbishop of
St. Andrews, has power to name four Commissars, who are called the Commissars
of Edmburgh; because, they sit there, and they only are Judges to divorce upon
adultery, and can only declare marriages null, for impotencie and to bastardy,
when it has any connection with adultery, or marriage: And they only may reduce
the sentences of all inferrior Comm^ssars King James 6 Par 29. Act 6.
, though the Lords of Session may reduce even their decreets and sentences;
They have instructions from the King, which are their Rule. And these are
likewise recorded in the books of Sederunt of Session;

Tit. VI. Of MARRIAGE.
Having spoken fully of Persons, at they are considered in a Legal sense; We
shall now treat of Marriage, which is the chief thing that concerns Persons,
and their State in Law.

MAarriage is def^ned to be, the co^^uncto^n of Man and Wife, vowing to live
inseparably together, till death.

By conjunction* ^ere, consent is understood, n^m cons^nsus, non ^oactus, facit
matrimonium.

Consent, is either de futuro or de presenti, consent de futuro, is a promise,
to solemnize the Marriage, which in Law, is called Spousalia; and this is not
marriage; for either party, may resile, rebus integris, notwithstanding of the
interveening Promise, or Espousals, consent, de presenti, is that in which
marriage does consist; and therefore, it necessarly follows, that none can
marry, except these who are capable to consent, and so Idiots, and furious
Persons, durante furore, cannot marry, nor Infants, who have not attained the
use of reason: that is, when they are within the years of pupillarity; which is
defined in Law, to be 14 years, in Males, and 12 in Foemales, nisi malitia
suppleat aetatem.

The Law, in decency, requires the consent of Parents, though a marriage
without it, is valid, if the persons married be capable of consenting.

By our Law, none can Marry who are nearer relations than Cousin germans; which
is suitable to the Judicial Law, of Moses Levit. chap. 18 K. Ja. 6, Par. 1. Act
1.
, and the same degrees porhibited in Consanguinity are also forbidden in
Affinity.

Marriage, is either regular, and solemn, or ^landestine; the regular way of
Marrying, Is, by having their names proclaimed in the Church, three several
times, which we call Proclamation of Banns, without which, or, a Dispensation
from the Bishop, the Marriage is called a Clandestine Marriage; and the parties
are finable for it; but the Marriage is still Valid King Charles 2. parl. 1.
Sess. 1 Act 34.
; Cohabitation also, or dwelling together, is presumed to be Marriage King
James 4 par. 6. Act 77. K Char Par. 2. Act 9. Sess. 3.
, if the Parties were repute, Man and Wife, dureing their lifetime, and so the
Children are not Bastards; though they cannot prove that their Parents were
Married; unless it be clearly proved that they were not Married.

From the coniugal Society, arises, the communion of moveable Goods betwixt Man
and Wife; but the administration thereof during the Marriage is solly in the
Husband; which reaches even to Alienation, and disposing upon the Movables, at
his pleasure though they be not dispon'^ to him by her ( Marriage, being a
Legal Assignation, as to thi^ effect) but he has no further Right to her
Heritage, save that he has Right to the Rents of it, and to Administra^^ and
Manage it, during the Marriage, and this is called Ius Mariti, and is so
inseparable from the quality of ^ Husband; that he cannot b^ Our Law, Renounce
his Pon^^ of Administration, so that the^ are both Domini, by this communion;
but the Husband h^^ a Dominium actu, and the Wife only habitu.

The Husband is liable dureing ^he Marriage to pay her moveable ^ebts; but how
soon the Mar^iage is disolv'd, he is no ^urther liable to pay her debts; than
in as far as he was a Gainer by her Estate.

If the Wife contract any debt, or do any other deed, after the Proclamation
of Banns, the Husband will not be thereby Prejudged.

The Husband is also obliged ^o Aliement his Wife, and if he ^efuse, the privy
Council, or Lords of Session, will modific ^n Aliement to her out of her
Husbands means, suitable to ^is Quality, which they will ^lso grant, ob
saevitiam, if he ^reat her Inhumanely.

The Husband is Tutor, and ^urator to his Wife, and therefor, if she had
Tutors, or Curators, formerly, their power is devolved over by the Law upon the
Husband; and whatever deeds she does without his consent are null, and when s^^
is Cited, he must be Cited for his Interest; or if she Marri^ during the
Dependence of a^ Process, the samen must upon Supplication be continued against
him.

Because, the sole administration, during the Marriage belongs to the Husband;
Law has secured the Wife, th^^ she cannot oblige her self when she is clothed
with ^ Husband, albeit with his consent, and therefore all Bands and
Obligations, granted by ^ Wife stante Matrimonio, are (...) jure, null; but if
she oblige h^^ self, ad factum prestandum, s^^ will be liable, as if she should
oblige her self to Infest any Man in Lands properly belong^ng to her self.

During the Marriage, all donations made betwixt Husband and Wife are
Revokable, at any time in their life, (except in so far as they are suitable
provisions) least otherwise, they might ruin themselves, through Love, Fear,
or Importunity; and that either expressly, by Revocking what is done (though
they obliged themselves not to Revoke) or Tacitly, by disponing to others, what
was so gifted.

All Rights made by a Wife to her Husband, or any third party with his consent
and to his behoof, are valid Rights; if they be Ratified by her before a Judge,
before whom she is to declare without the presence of her Husband, that she was
not compelled to do that deed, and Swear, that she shall nev^^ quarrel the
same: Whereas* if they be not Ratified, they may be quarelled, as extorted vi
and metu, or may be Revokes as donatio inter Virum, and Uxorem, which the
Ratification before a Judge does absolutely exclude, Propter Religionem
Sacramenti, the Ratification, being extra presentiam mariti.

Marriage is disolved either by Death, or Divorce, and (...) the Disolution of
the Marriage be by Death there is a difference, if the samen be within Year and
Day of the Marriage, or thereafter; for if either the Husband or the Wife die
within the Year, all things done in tuitu Matrimonij, become void* and return
to the same condition they were in before the Marriage; except there be a
living Child, Procreat of the Marriage, who was heard cry.

If the Marriage be disolved by Death, after the Year expyres, then the Wife
surviving, has right to a third of the moveable Estate; if there be Children;
and to the half, if there be none, and this is called jus Relictae; and tho
this Right does not hinder the Husband, to give or dispose upon his movables
in his Life, yet he cannot do any deed to defraud his Wife of this Right, the
fraud being palpable; she has also a right to the liferent of the third of the
lands, wherein he dyed infest, and this is called a Widows Terce; and to any
other provisions contained in her Contract of Marriage, which provision if it
exceeds the Terce, it excludes K. C. 2 Par. 3. Act 10.
it; and the Husband surviving has Right to the Tocher: and if he marry an
Heritrix, he has Right to all her Lands, after her Death, during his own life,
if there be a Child of the Marriage who was heard cry, and this is called, the
courtisie of Scotland Reg. Ma. lib. 2. cap. 58. Leg. Burg. cap. 44.
.

Marriage is disolved by Divorce, which is granted either for wilful disertion,
and non adherence, to be procured by a Process before the Commissars of
Edinburgh for non adherence; when either Party refuse to cohabite together,
and remains in their malicious obstinacy four years, and are thereupon
excommunicate K. Ja. 6. Par. 4 Act 55
, or for Adultery, in both which cases the Persuer must give his Oath, that the
Process is not carried on by collusion, and after a Decree of Divorce is
obtained, in either case the Party innocent may marry; but the Party that is
guilty cannot, and besides looses all the benefit that they could expect by
the Marriage.

Tit. VII. Of Minors, and their Tutors, and Curators.
WHilst Persons are within twenty one years, the Law presumes them to want that
firmeness of Judgment, which is requisite, for the exact manadgement of their
Affairs; and during that time, they are called Minors, by a general Term;
though properly, such only are to be called Minors, who are past Pupillarity,
which lasts in Males till fourteen, and in Females till twelve.

Tutory may be defined, a power and faculty, to govern the Estate and Person of
Pupils; and the Law gives Tutors, and Curators, for the manadgement of their
Affairs.

There are three kinds of Tutors, viz. Tutor Nominate, Tutor of Law, and Tutor
Dative, Tutor Nominate, (who is likewise called Tutor Testamentar,) is he who
is left Tutor by the Father in his Testaments, or any other write, and he is
not obliged to find caution, or give his Oath, de fideli administratione;
because it is presumed, the Parent has chosen a sufficient person.

The Father only can name Tutors; but if the Mother, or even a Stranger, give
or dispone any thing to a Child, he may name a Tutor to manadge what he gives;
but if there be no Tutor nominate, or if he accepts not, then there is place
for a Tutor of Law, who is so called, because he succeeds by Law, and
generally, the nearest Agnate (for so we call such as are related by the
Father) who is to succeed to the Minor, being past twenty five years, and would
be Heir to him, is his Tutor in K. Ja. 3 Par. 7. Act 32.
Law: He takes a Brieff out of the Chanc^llary, and serves himself before a
Judge, to whom it is directed, and the Tutor of Law must find caution before he
administrate.

If he do not s^rve within a year after the time he might have served, then any
person may give in a Signator to the Exchequer, and he gets a gift under the
Privy Seal, of being Tutor Dative, and finds caution, acted in the books of
Exchequer: But of old, they found caution in the Commissars books: this Tutor
and he only is oblidged to make Faith, de fideli administratione.

If there be more Tutors than one, the major part must all consent; but the
Pupil needs not subscrive: But if there be a Tutor, sine quo non, he must
always be one of the Consenters.

After the years of Pupillarity there must be a summons raise^ at the Pupils
instance, summonding some of the Fathersside, and some of the Mothersside, upon
nine days warning* to appear before any Judge and at the day, the Minor gives
in a list of those he intends to choice to be his Curators, and those who
accept must Subscrive the acceptance, and they must find Caution de Fideli Q.
M. Par. 6. Act 35.
, upon all which the Clerk extracts an Act, which is called, an Act of
Curatory: There uses to be sometimes, Curators, sine quo non, and the Major
part with him is still a Quorum; except the Minor in his particular Election
has appointed otherwise; for the Quorum is Arbitrarie, and the Act bears how
many shall be a Quorum.

There are these differences betwixt Tutors and Curators, that Tutor datur
Personae, Curator rei, a Tutor Acts, and Subscrives for his Pupil, a Curator
with him; but both must make inventarie of all the Pupills Estate before they
Administrate, with consent of the nearest of Kin on both sides, and if they
neglect to make Inventary, they will get no Expenses allowed them during their
Administration, and may be removed from their Offices as suspect K. C. 2 Par.
2. Sess. ^. Act 2.
; neither have Sallaries: and both are liable to Count, but not till their
Office expyre, as both have Action against their Minors, for what they
profitably expended during their Administration, which is called, Actio tutelae
Contraria.

If the Minor have Curators, and do any thing without their consent to his
prejudice; (for he may make his condition better without them, but not worse,
the advantage being evident and without hazard) then that Act is, ipso jure
null, that is to say, he needs not Revoke; but if he have no Curators, then any
Act he does to his own prejudice is valid; but he must reduce the same thus,
viz. he must writ a Revocation and Subscrive it before two witnesses, and
Registrate it, and thereupon he must raise and execute a Summonds of Reduction
of that Act, ex capite Minoritatis, and laesionis, before he be 25 years of
age, wherein he must make appear, he was both Minor, and was laes'd;
otherwise, the Lords will not repone him: Though this Revocation be not
absolutely necessary, yet the executing of a Summonds before 25 is absolutely
necessary: and though a Minor swear not to Revoke, yet this Oath is declared
null by Law, and the Eliciter of it punishable, and infamous K. C. 2 Par. 3.
Act 19.
; but if he Fraudulently circumveen^ another, by saying he was Major, he will
not be restored against his own fraud.

A Tutor or Curator, cannot pursue his Pupil, *till he has compted for his
intermissions; for its presumed he has his Pupills Estate in his own hands, and
whatever Right he buys of what belonged to his Pupil is presumed to be bought
with his Pupills means; and so the advantage must accress to the Pupil.

So careful has Our Law been to protect minors, and to secure Old Estates,
that minor non tenetur placitare super haereditate paterna Statu^: a Will: cap.
39.
, that is to say, a minor is not obliged to answer any process concerning his
Fathers Heritage; but, yet if his Fathers Right be quarrelled for his Fathers
crimes, or delicts, as in the cases of falsehood, forfeiture, or Recognition,
these cases are excepted, and he is obliged to answer. Secundo, This privilege
extends not to Actions concerning marches, or division of lands. Tertio, It
defends not against the Superior perseuing for his casualities. Quarto, Where
the minors right is only quarreled consequentiallie, the chief right
quarrolled belonging to a major, there is no place for this privilege. Quinto,
It defends not in cases where the Heritage was deryv'd from Collaterals, such
as Brothers, or Uncles. Sexto, It defends only where the Heritage descended
even from the Father, or Grandfather, if they dyed in peaceable Possession,
and if no Process was intented against them in their own life time, Septimo, It
takes only place, where the Father was actually Infeft; but then it is
accounted Heritage, tho it was conquest by the Father.

The privilege of minority, is in some cases allowed to the minors Heir:
Which are comprised in these following rules 1. If a minor succeds to a minor,
the time of Restitution is Regulated by his own minority, and not by his
Predecessors. 2. If the Predecessor be major, and Intra quadriennium utile
restitutione, is competent during the Heirs minority; but he has no further of
the anni utiles, than remained to the defunct, the time of his deceass. 3. If a
major succeed to a minor, he has only quadriennium utile, after the minors
deceass, or so much thereof as was unexpyred at that time.

Minority ends both in Men and Women, when they are 21. years of age complete;
but after that there is 4. years granted, wherein they may reduce what they did
Revoke before they were 21. years complete, and these years are called,
quadrienneum utile.

If a Man be an Idiot, or Furious he must be found to be so by an inqueist, and
thereafter his nearest of kin may serve themselves Tutors; or the Exchequer
may grant a Tutor dative, if they serve not, but the Tutor in Law, will be
preferred to that Tutor dative offering to serve quandocunque, and it must be
proven to the inquiest at the time of the service, that he is furious, and when
he began to be so, and all deeds done by him after that are null, not only from
the date of the service, but from the time that he was found to be Idiot, or K.
J. 6. Par. 10. cap. 18.
Fuirous.

If a Person be Prodigal, or Spend-thrift, he interdicts himself, either
voluntarly, which is done by a Band, whereby he obliges himself to do nothing
without the consent of such friends as he therein condescends upon; and these
are therefore called the interdicters, and if this Narrative be false, so that
the person is not improvident, as he relates in the Band, this voluntar
interdiction will be reduced. Secundo, Interdiction proceeds upon a persute, at
the instance of the nearest of kin, against the prodigal whom the Lords will
interdict if they see cause; or 3. though there be no persute; yet if in
another process they find he has been often, or is obnoxious to be cheated,
they will interdict him, Ex proprio motu, and these are called Judicial
interdictions; and no interdiction lasts longer than the Levitie and
Prodigality which occasioned it, but this requires also the sentence of a Judge.

Upon this voluntar Band, the Lords of the Session grants letters of
Publication, and after these Letters are published, at the Market Cross of the
head Burgh of the Shire, where the person interdicted dwells, and are
Registrat; the person interdicted can do nothing to the prejudice of his
heritable Estate, otherwise the interdicters may reduce these deeds as done
after the publication of the interdiction; (for interdictions extend only to
Heritage; but yet the person himself is still liable to personal execution, even
upon these deeds done after interdiction.

A Father, is likewise in Law Administrator to his own Children, that is to
say, is both Tutor, and Curator, to them, if they fall to any Estate during
their minority, and if either Pupil or Minor have any Legal Action to
prosecute, and want Tutors or Curators, the Lords will upon a Bill Authorize
Curators, who are therefore called Curators, ad lites.

All Tutors and Curators can act and do whatever the Pupil might do if he were
major; except in selling of land, which they cannot sell without a sentence of
a Iudge^; finding the vendition necessar for payment of debt, or setting Tacks
to last beyond their own Office.

All these Tutors, Curators, and Administrators, or any who behave as such, and
who are called in Our Law Pro-Tutors, are liable to do exact Diligence, and
therefore; if any of their Pupills Debitors becomes Bank-rupt, or their
Tennents break, they are liable and the Pupil may pursue any one of the Tutors
for the negligence of all the rest, but he has his relief against the rest:

They are likewayes liable to put the minors Rents, out upon Annuallrent,
within half a year, or a term after they receive them, and to put out his
money* upon Annuallrent within a year, both which times are allowed to get good
Debitors but if his Bands bear Annuallrent, they are only obliged to take in
these Annuallrents once during their Office, and to turn them in a Principal
sum, bearing Annuallrent.

After Tutors and Curators have once accepted they cannot Renounce; but if they
miscarie in their Administration, they may be removed, by an action, as suspect
Tutors.

If there be more Tutors or Curators, the Office upon the death of any of them
Accresses to the Survivers; except they be named jointly; for then the first
Nomination is disolved by the death of any one of them, the defunct not having
trusted any one, and for the same reason, if a certain number be declared a
Quorum, the Nomination fails, if so many dye as that this number survives not,
nor does the Office Accresse to such as Survive.

We have little use in Scotland, of what the Institutions of the Roman Law
teach, concerning slaverie, or Patria potestas, for we as Christians allow no
Men to be made Slaves, that being contrare to the Christian liberty; and the
Fatherly power or Patria potestas, has little effect with us; for a Child in
Family with his Father, acquires to himself and not to his Father as in the
Civil Law.

PART SECOND.
Tit. I. Of the Division of Rights, and the several ways by which a Right may
be acquired.
BEing to treat in the second Book of things themselves, to which we have
Right, and how we come to have right to them, It is fit to know.

That some things fall not under commerce, and so we cannot acquire any
property in them, such as are things common, as the Ocean, (though our King
has Right to our narrow Seas, and to all the Shoars.) Secundo, Things public,
which are common only to a Nation or People, as Rivers, Harbors, and the Right
of Fishing, in the said Rivers. Tertio, res universitatis, which are common
only to a Corporation or City, as a Theater, or the Market place, and the
like: Quarto, Things that are said to be no Man's, but are Iuris Divini, which
are either sacred, such as the Bells of Churches, for though we have no
consecration of things since the Reformation, yet some things have a Relative
Holiness and Sanctity, and so fall not under Commerce, that is to say, cannot
be bought and sold by Private Persons. Quinto, Things that are called sanctae,
so called because they are guarded from the injuries of Men, by special
Sanctions, as the walls of Cities, Persons of Ambassadors, and Laws, Sexto,
Things Religious, such as Church-Yeards.

As to those things which fall within Commerce, we may acquire right to them,
either by the Law of Nature, and Nations, or by our Civil and Municipal Law,
dominion or property is acquired by the Law of Nations either by our own fact
and deed. or Secundo, by a connection with, or dependence upon things belonging
to us, the first by a General term is called Occupation, and the last Accession.

Occupation, is the apropriating and apprehending of those things, which
formerly belonged to none. And thus we acquire property in wild Beasts, of
which we acquire a Right how soon we apprehend them, or are in the prosecution
of them with probability to apprehend them, as also we retain a right to them
whilst they remain in Our possession, and evenafter they have escapt, if they
be yet recoverable by us. Secundo, Property comes by Accession, as for
instance, a House Built upon, or Trees taking root in our ground, and the
product also of our beasts belong to us, and ground that grows to our ground
becomes insensibly ours, and is called, Alluvio by the Civilians. And it is a
general Rule in Law, that accessorium sequitur Naturam sui principalis; and yet
a Picture drawn by a great Master upon another man's Sheet or Table, belongs to
the Painter, and not to the Master of that whereon it is drawn, the meanness of
the one ceding to the nobleness of the other.

There are many other ways of acquiring Right and Property, which may be
referred either to Occupation, or Accession; as if a Man should make a Ship of
my Wood, it would become the Makers, and would not belong to me, to whom the
wood belonged, and this is called Specification, in which this is a general
rule, that, if the species can be reduced to the rude mass of matter, then the
Owner of the matter is also owner of the species, or thing made; As, if a Cup
be made of another man's Silver, the cup belongs not to the maker, but to the
owner of the Mettle; because it can be reduced to the first Mass of Silver, but
if it cannot be reduced, then the Species will undoubtedly belong to him that
made it, and not to the owner of the matter, as Wine, and Oil, made of another
Grapes, and Olives, which belongs to the maker, seeing wine, cannot be reduced
to the Grapes of which it was made.

Property is likewise acquired when two or more Persons mix together in one,
what formerly belonged to them severally, and if the matterials mixed be
liquid, it is called by a special name, Confusion, as when several Persons
Wines are mixed and confounded together; but if the particulars mixed, be dry
and solid, so as to retain their different shapes and Forms, it is called
commixtion, and in both cases, if the confusion, or commixtion be by consent of
the Owners, the body or thing resulting from it, is common to them all; but if
the Commixtion be by chance, then if the matterials cannot be separated, the
thing is yet common; as when the Grain or Corns of two persons are mixed
together by chance, here there must necessarly be a community; because, the
separation is impossible; but if two Flocks of sheep belonging to different
persons should by accident mix together, there would be no community; but every
man would retain right to his own Flock, seeing they can be distinctly known and
separated, and these two ways of acquisition are by accerssion.

The last, and most ordinary way of acquiring of property, is by tradition,
which is defyned a delivery of possession by the true owner, with a design to
transfer the property to the Receiver, and this translation, is made either by
the real delivery of the thing it self, as of a horse, a cup, etc. or by a
Symbolick delivery. As, is the delivery of a little Earth and Stone in place of
the Land it self; for, where the thing cannot be truly delivered, the Law
allows some symbols, or marks of tradition, and so far is tradition necessary
to the acquiring of the prorerty in such cases, that he who gets the last
right, but the first tradition is still preferred by our Law.

If he who was once Proprietar does willingly quite his Right, and throw it
away, (which the Civil Law calls, pro derelicto habere,) the first finder
acquirs a new Right, per inventionem, or by finding it, by which way also men
acquire right to Treasures, and to Jewels lying on the Shore; and generally to
all things that belonged formerly to no man, or were thrown away by them; But
it is a general Rule in Our Law, that what belongs to no man is understood to
belong to the King.

Prescription, is a chief way of acquiring Rights by the Civil Law; but
because, that Title comprehends many things, which cannot be here understood, I
have treated that Title amongst the ways of loosing Rights, it being upon
diverse considerations, modus acquirendi and amittendi.

We also acquire Right to the Fruits of those things which we possess, bona
fide, if these Fruits were gathered in or uplifted, and consumed by us, whilst
we thought we had a good Right to the thing it self, for though thereafter our
Right was found not to be good; yet the Law, judged it unreasonable to make us
restore what we looked upon as our own; when we spent it, and therefore,
whenever this bona fides cease, which may be several ways, especially by
intenting an action at the true owners instance, we become answerable for these
Fruits; though thereafter they be percepti and consumpti, by us.

Tit. II. Of the difference, betwixt Heritable, and Moveable Rights.
HAving in the former Title cleared, how we acquire Rights, we come now to the
division of them.

The most comprehensive division of Rights amongst us, is, that whereby they
are divided into Heritable, and Moveable Rights.

Heritable Rights in a strict sense, are only Lands, and all sums of money,
and other things which can be moved from one place to another are moveable but
that is only counted Heritable in a Legal Sense, which belongs to the Heir, as
all other things which fall to the Executor are moveable, and so sums of money,
albeit of their own nature they are moveable; yet if they were lent for
Annualrent they were of old repute heritable.

For understanding whereof it is necessar to know that albeit by the Cannon Law
all Annualrents were forbidden, as being contrare to the Nature of the thing,
money being barren of its own nature: yet the reformed Churches do generally
allow it; nor were the Jews prohibited to take Annualrent from Strangers.

Before the year 1641 all Bands, and sums, bearing Annualrent, were Heritable,
as to all effects so that the Executor, who is Haeres in mobilibus, had no
interest in, nor share of such Bands, but they belonged entirely to the Heir;
but that Parliament finding that the rest of the Children, beside the Heir had
no provision by Our Law, except an equal share in the movables, they
therefore ordained that all Bands for sums of money should be moveable, and so
belong to the Executors; except either the Executors, were secluded, or the
debtor were expressly obliged to infest the Creditor, which is likewise renewed
since the Kings Resturation K. C. 2 Par. 1. Act 32.
: For in these cases, it was clear that by the distination of the defunct,
(which is the great Test in this case) these sums were to be Heritable; and yet
all sums bearing Annualrent, are still Heritable in so far as concerns the
Fisk, or the Relict; so that if a band bear Annualrent, to this day the Fisk
cannot claim any right to it, as falling under the Rebels single Escheate,
(whereby when he becomes Rebel all his Movables fall to the King;) nor has the
Relict any right to a third of it, as she has to a third of all movables, the
Law* having presumed that Relicts will be still sufficiently secured by their
contracts; but whether the sum be Heritable, or moveable, all the bygone
Annualrents, and generally all bygones are moveable, as to all intents and
purposes, and so fall to Executors, and to the Fisk, and to the Relict; because
bygone rests are looked on as money lying by the debtor, they being already
payable, as all obligations bearing a tract of future Time belong to the Heir.

So far does the Law defer to the will of the Proprietar, in regulating whither
a sum should be Heritable, or Moveable; (the Law thinking that every man is
best Judge how his Estate shall be bestowed;) that if a man destinate a sum to
be employed upon Land or Annualrent, this destination will make it Heritable,
and to belong to his Heir; or though the sum was originally secured by a
moveable band, yet it may become heritable by the creditors taking a
superveening heritable security for it, or by comprising for his security; but
yet the Creditors design is more to be considered, than the supervenient right;
as for instance, a sum may be moveable ex sua natura, and yet may be secured by
an heritable surty; as in the case of bygone annualrents, due upon infeftment
of annualrent, which are unquestionably moveable of their own nature, and yet
they are heritably secured; and even Executors may recover them by a real
Action of poynding of the ground: And, if a Wedset bear a provision, that
notwithstanding of Requisition, the Wedset shall still subsist, the requisition
will make the sum moveable, though it continue secured by the Infeftment; as
also, sumes ab initio Heritable, may be secured by an Accessory moveable
security, without altering their Nature; as for instance, if one take a Gift of
Escheat for securing himself in Heritable sums; this does not alter the Nature
of the former Heritable Right.

Though a sum be Heritable, yet if the Creditor to whom it is due require his
money, either by a charge or requisition it becomes moveable, for the Law
concludes in that case, that the Creditor designs rather to have his money,
than lying in the Debitors hands upon the former security; and if it were lying
in money beside him it would be moveable: and a requisition to one of the
Cautioners will make it moveable, as to the Principal and all the other
Cautioners; But a charge on a band wherein Executors are secluded, will not
make the sum moveable, for the design of the Creditor is presumed to continue
in favors of the Heir, till the sum be paid, or the Band innovated; but it
has been otherways decided of late; And for the same Reason a requisition used
by a Wife, who has a heritable sum, that falls not under the Ius Mariti, will
not make it moveable, since it is presumed she designed only to get payment,
but not to give it to her Husband.

But if the Creditor who required his Money take annualrent after that
Requisition, it is presumed that he again altered his Inclination and resolved
to have it Heritable, and to continue due by virtue of the first Security

Though a Band be heritable, as bearing annualrent, yet before the term of
payment it is moveable, as to all persons.

From all which it is clear, that some sums are moveable as to the Executor,
but not as to the Fisk or Relict, and some may be moveable, as to the Debtor
and his Executors, and yet may be Heritable as to the Creditor and those
representing him, as for instance, an obligation, to employ a sum due by a
moveable band, upon Land or annualrent for the Heirs of a Marriage, that sum as
to the Creditor would be Heretable, yet quo ad the Debtor it would remain
moveable.

Title III. Of the Constitution of Heritable Rights, by Charters and Seasins.
HAving treated in the former Chapter of the difference betwixt Heritable and
Moveable Rights, it is now fit to begin with Heritable Rights as the more Noble.

Our Heritable Rights are Regulate by the Feudal Law, by which Feudum, which we
call a few was defined to be a free and Gratuitous Right to Lands made to one
for service to be performed by him: he who grants this Few, is in Our Law
called the Superior, and he to whom it was granted is called the Vassal; the
Superiors Right to the Fie is called Dominum directum, and the Vassals Right
is called Dominum utile, and if that Vassal dispone the Land to be holden of
himself, then that other Person who receives that Few, is called the
sub-Vassal; whereas the Vassal who granted the Few becomes the immediate
Superior to this sub-Vassal, and the Vassals Superior, becomes the
Sub-vassals mediate Superior, and is so called because there is another
Superior interjected betwixt him and the sub-Vassal.

The Superior dispons ordinarily this Few to be holden of him by a Charter and
Seas^n: The Charter is in effect the disposition of the Few made by the
Superior to the Vassal, and when it is first granted, it is called an Original
Charter or Right, and when it is renewed it is called a Right be progress, and
proceeds either upon Resignation when the Lands are Resigned in the Superiors
hands for new Infeftment, either in favors of the Vassal himself, or of some
third party, or by confirmation, when the Superiors confirms the Right
formerly granted, and if it is to be holden from the Disponer of the Superior
that is called a me, and is a publict Right, and is still drawn back to the
date of the Right Confirmed; But if the Confirmation be only of Rights to be
holden of the Vassal, it is called, de me, and is a base Right, the effect of
this Charter being to secure against forfaulture or recognition of the
Superior, all which are voluntar Rights; but if they be granted in obedience
to a Charge upon Apprising or Adjudication, they are necessar.

If the Charter contains a Clause de novo damus, then it has the Effect of an
Original Right, and secures against all Casualities due to the Superior; in
which the first thing expressed is for what Cause it was granted, and if it was
granted for Love and Favor, Our Law calls that a lucrative cause, or for a
Price, and good Deeds, this we call an Onerous Cause.

The second thing considerable in a Charter, is the dispositive Clause, which
contains the Lands that are disponed; and regulariter with us, the Charter will
give right to no Lands, but what are contained in this Clause, though they be
enumerated in other places of the Charter.

The third Clause is that wherein is expressed the way how the Lands are to be
holden of the Superior, and this is called the Tenendas, from the first word
of the Clause.

The fourth Clause, is that which expresses what the Vassal is to pay to the
Superior, and this duty is called the Reddendo, because the Clause whereby it
is payable begins, Reddendo inde annuatim.

The fifth Clause, is the Clause of warrandice, which is either Personal, or
Real, Personal warrandice is when the Author or disponer is bound personally,
and is either simple warrandice, which is only from subsequent and future deeds
of the Granter; and this warrandice is employed in pure donationes; or secundo,
warrandice from Fact and Deed, which is, that the Granter has not done, or
shall not do any deed prejudicial to the right warranded. Or Tertio,
Warrandice is absolute, and that is, to warrant against all mortals: And in
absolute warrandice, this is a rule that an Adaequate Onerouse cause presums
still absolute warrandice; But absolute warrandice in Assignations imports only
that the debt is truly due, and not that the Debtor is solvent.

All Rights Granted by the King are presumed to be Donations, and import no
warrandice.

Real warrandice, is when Infeftment of one Tenement is given in security of
one another.

The Effect of warrandice is, that if the thing warranded be taken away, there
is competent to the party, to whom the warrandice is granted, an action of
eviction, for relief.

Because Tradition is requisite to the completing of all Rights; therefore the
Charter contains a Command by the Superior to his Bailly; to give actual state
and Seasin, to the Vassal, or to his Attorney by Tradition of earth and stone,
and this is called the precept of Seasin, and upon it the Vassal, or some other
person having a Procuratory from him, gets from the Bailly earth and stone
delivered, in presence of a Notar and two witnesses, which Notar writes out an
Instrument upon all this, which Instrument is called the Seasin. And if the
Superior gives Seasin himself, it is called a Seasin, (propriis manibus;) so
that a Formal Seasin is the Instrument of a Notar, bearing the delivery of
earth and stone, or some other Symbols by the Superior, or his Bailie to the
Vassal, or his Attorney, the Tenor whereof is known and fixed, and now by a late
Statute the witnesses must subscrive the Instrument K. C. 2 Par. 3. Act 5.
; and thus the Vassal stands Infest in the Land by Charter and Seasin.

This Seasin being but the assertion of the Notar, proves not* except the
warrant of it, that is to say, the precept or disposition whereon it proceeded
be produced; But a Seasin given by a Husband to his Wife, or by a Superior to
his Vassal, propriis manibus, (that is to say, by the Granters own hands
without a Precept) is sufficient, when the Competition is with the Granters own
Heirs; or with no more solenin Rights, and is not exorbitant: and after forty
years, there is no necessity to produce either precept of seasin, or
Procuratorie of Resignation by a special statute K. J. 6. Par. 14. act 214.
.

This Seasin must be registrated within 60. days, either in the general
Register at Edinburgh or in the particular Registers of the Shire; Stewartry or
Regality where the land lies, K. J. 6. Par. 22. Act 16.
else the right will not be Valid, against a singular Successor; that is to say,
if any other person buy the Land, he will not be obliged to take notice of that
Seasin; but the Right will still be good against the Granter and his Heirs.

If Lands lie Discontigue, every Tenement must have a special Seasin; except
they be unite in one Tenement; and then one Seasin serves for all; if there be
a special place expressed, where Seasin should be taken; but if there be no place
expressed; then a Seasin upon any part will be sufficient, for the while,
Contiguous Tenements, (these being naturally unite;) but will not be sufficient
for Lands, lying discontigue; And one Seasin will serve for all Tenements, of
one kind; but where they are of several kinds; as Lands, Milnes, etc. they will
require several Seasins; The symbols of Possession being different; for Lands
pass by the Tradition of earth and stone, and milnes by the clap and happour.

Sometimes Lands are erected into a Barronie, (the nature of which is explained
before* Tit. Inferior Judges,) and whenever this is granted, Union is
employed as the lesser degree.

Erection in a Barrony can only be by the King, and is not* Communicable by any
Subaltern rights, albeit the whole Barrony be disponed; tho the Union may be
thereby Communicate. This union can only be granted by the King, which he may
grant either Originally, or by Confirmation; and being so granted it may be
Transmitted by the Receiver to a Sub-Vassal; but if a part of the lands united
be disponed, the whole union is not dissolved, but the Part disponed only; and
this Union, and all other privileges, and provisions, can only be granted in
the Charter; but not in the Seasin.

Tit. IV. Of the Several Kinds of Holding.
THe first division of Feus from the several kinds of holding, is that some
lands, hold ward, some Feu, some Blench, and some Burgage.

For understanding wardholdings, it is fit to know, that at first, all Feus
were Rights granted by the Longo-Bards, and the other Northern Nations, (when
they conquest Italy) to their own Soldiers for service to be done in the
Wars; and therefore Wardholding which is the properest holding, is called
servitium militare, and all Lands are therefore presumed to hold ward* except
another holding be expressed; and servitium debitum and consuetum, is interpret
to be ward-holding.

The advantages arising to the Superior, by the speciality of this holding,
are that the Superior has thereby the full meals, and duties of the
ward-Lands, during the years that his Male-Vassal is Minor Q. Ma Par. 3. Act 5.
K. Ja. 6. Par: 2. Act ^2.
; for the Feu being given originally to the Vassal, for Military service, it
returns to the Superior, during Minority; because the Law presumes, that the
Minor is not able to serve his Superior in the Wars, but in Female-Vassals,
this casualitie lasts only till 14. years complete; because, they may then
marry husbands, who may be able to serve the Superior, and this properly is
called the Casuality of ward; for Marriage, is due in other holdings, as shall
be cleared in the next Title.

Feu holdings, is that whereby the Vassal is obliged to pay to the Superior a
sum of money yearly, in name of Feudutie nomine feudi firmae.

This holding has some Resemblance to the ( Emphyteosis) in the Roman Law; but
is not the same with it; for Emphyteosis was a perpetual Location, containing a
pension, as the hyre which was granted, for Improving and Cultivating Barren
ground; but our Feu-holding, comes from the Feudal Law, (whereof there was no
Vestige in the Civil Law,) and passes by Infeftment to Heirs.

Blench-Holding, is that whereby the Vassal is to pay an Elusory duty, merely
for acknowledgement, as a penny, or a pair of Gloves, nomine albae firmae, and
ordinarily it bears, si petatur tantum.

These Blench duties are not due, whether they be of a yearly growth, or not;
except they be required yearly by the Superior K. J. 6. Par. 18. Act 14.
, as for instance, if the Blench duty be yearly Attendance at such a place* or
a Rose yearly, the Superior can seek nothing for his blench duty, except he
required the same within the year.

Burgage-holding, is that duty which Burghs Royal are obliged to pay the King,
by their Charters, erecting them in a Burgh Royal, and in this the Burgh is the
Vassal, and not the particular Burgesses, and the Bailiffs of the Burgh are the
Kings Bailiffs; nor can Seasin in Burgage Lands, be given by any other than the
Bailly, and Town Clerk K. J. 6. Par. 1. Act 27.
, if the Town have any and they must be Registrated in the Town Clerks Books K.
C. 2 Par. 3. Act. 11.
.

Before the Reformation there was another kind of holding in Scotland, which
was of mortified Lands, granted to the Church, and the only Reddendo, was
prayers, and supplications, in behalf of the Mortifiers.

Title V. Of the Casualities, due to the Superior.
THe Feu being thus Stated by the Superior, in the person of his Vassal, it
will be fit in the next place, to consider, what right the Superior retains,
and what Right the Vassal acquires by this constitution of the Fie.

The Superior retains still dominium directum in the Feu, and the Vassal has
only dominum utile; and therefore the Superior is still Infeft as well as the
Vassal; but the King needs not be Infeft; for he is Infeft jure Coronae, that
is to say, his being King, is equivalent to an Infeftment.

The Superior has different advantages, and Rights, according to the different
manner of holdings, and there are some Rights and Casualities common to all
holdings.

Ward-holdings, gives the Superior a Right, to the meals, and duties of his
Vassal Lands, during all the years that his Vassal is Minor; and this is
properly called the casualitie of ward; but the Superior, or his donatar, are
obliged to entertain the Heir; if he have no other Feu, or Blench, Lands, and
to uphold the house, parks, etc. in as good condition as they found them; and
must find caution for that effect K. J. 4. Par. 3. Act 25. K. Ja. 5. Par. 4.
Act 15.
.

If the Vassal sells, or dispones the half of his ward-lands, to any except his
appearand Heir, who is alioque successionae, without the consent of his
Superior, the whole ward-Lands fall to the Superior, for ever; and this we
call Stat: Rob. 3. cap. 19.
Recognition, which is introduced to punish the ingratitude of the Vassal, who
should not have disponed the Superiors Lands, without his own consent; and to
shun this, the Vassal in ward-Lands gets the Superiors confirmation, before he
takes infeftment; for if he takes infeftment before he be confirmed, the lands
recognosce, as said is; except the seasin be null in it self; since the Vassal
shows sufficiently his ingratitude by the very taking of the Infeftment: And
though the Vassal at first did not sell the half without the Superiors
consent; yet, if he thereafter sells as much as will extend to more than the
half of the Feu, the first huyer will likewise loose his Right, if it was not
Confirmed before he took infeftment.

Not only a Confirmation, or Novodamus, (if it express Recognition) but the
Superiors accepting service, or pursuing for the casualities, are a passing
from the Recognition; because, they infer the Superiors acknowledgement of the
Vassals Right.

Recognition takes place in taxt-ward, as well as simpleward, but in no other
manner of holding; except the same be expressly provided in the Vassals Charter,
for ward-holding, is presumed to be the only proper Feudal Right.

If the Vassal denies the Superior, he losses his Feu, and this is called,
disclamation Stat: Rob. 3. cap. 18. Reg: Majest. lib. 2. cap. 63. Par. 6. and 9.
; but any probable ground of ignorance will take off this Forfeiture.

If the Vassal who holds Ward-Lands dies, having an Heir unmarried, whether
minor, or major, the Superior gets the value of his Tocher; though he offer
him not a Woman to be his Wife; but if the Superior offer him his Equal, for a
Wise, and he refuses to accept, (tho he never Marry any other person;) the
superior gets the double of his tocher, and one of these casualities is called
the single Avail of the Marriage, and the other, the double Avail of the
Marriage; but the modification of this is referred to the Lords of Session, who
consider still what was the Vassals free rent, all debts deduced, and the
ordinary modification is about two years rent, of the Vassals free Estate;
even though the Heir was an Heretrix, and though there were more Heirs
Portioners, there will only one avail be due for them all.

Though this Casualitie of Marriage; be still due in all ward-holdings; yet
they may be due by express paction in other holdings, and there are many in
Scotland, who hold their Lands Feu, cum maritagio; and in both cases, the
Marriage is debitum fundi.

Though as to the casuality of ward, every Superior has Right to the ward
Lands holding of himself where the Vassal holds ward-Lands, of more Superiors;
Yet the casualitie of Marriage falls only to the eldest Superior; because
there cannot be more Tochers than one; and he is the eldest Superior from whom
the Vassal had the first Feu; but the King is still presumed to be the eldest
Superior; because, all Feus originally flowed from him.

It is thought that the Reason why this Casualitie is due, was, because it was
not just, that the Vassal should bring in a stranger to be Mistress of the Feu,
without the Superiors consent; for else he might choice a Wife out of a Family
that were an enemy to the Superior; but I rather think, that both ward, and
Marriage, proceeded from an express paction, betwixt King Malcome Kenmore and
his Subjects, when he first Feued out the whole Lands of Scotland, amongst
them; as is to be seen in the first of his Statutes Leg. Mal. cap. 1*
.

The special duty arising to the Superior in a Feu holding, is, that the
Superior gets a yearly Feu duty paid to him, and if no part of this Feu duty
be paid for two years, even though the whole was offered; or though the Vassal
was minor, then the Vassal looses his Feu, ob non solutum Canonem; for the Feu
duty, is called Canon; and if this provision be expressed in his charter, he will
not be allowed to purge this irritancy, by offering the bygones at the Bar;
but though this provision be not expressed in the charter, yet the feu will be
annulled for not payment of the Feu-dutie, by an express act of parliament K.
J. 6. Par. 15. act 226.
; but the Vassal in that case will be allowed to purge at the bar, and the
reason of this difference is; because the express paction is thought a stronger
Tie than the mere statute.

A clause irritant in Our Law, signifies any provision, which makes a penalty
to be incurred, and the Obligation to be null for the future; as here, where
the Superior gives out his Feu upon express condition, that if the Feu-dutie
be not paid, the Feu shall be null, and reduceable, and a clause resolutive,
is a provision, whereby the Contract to which it is assixt, is for not
performance, declared to have been null from the beginning.

The Casualities that are due, by all manner of holdings, and which arise from
the very nature of the feu, without any express paction, are None-entry,
Relief, and Liferent Escheate.

None-entry, is a casuality whereby the Superior has right to the Meals and
Duties of the Lands, when there is not a Vassal actually entered to him, and
the reason why this is due to him, is, because, he having given out his Feu to
his Vassal or service, when there is no actual Vassal entered, the Law allows
him to have recourse to his own Feu, that he may therewith provide himself with
a Vassal, who may serve him; but though the full Rents of the Lands be due to
the Superior, from the very time that he cites his Vassal, to hear, and see,
it found and declared, that the Land is in None-entrie; yet before that
citation, the Superior gets only the retoured duties; and the reason of the
difference is; because after citation, there is a greater contempt than before,
and so is to be more severely punished.

For understanding which retour duty, it is fit to know, that there was of
old, a general valuation of all the Lands of Scotland, but thereafter* there
was a new valuation, the first whereof is called the old, and the second, the
new Extent, and both are called the Retour duty, because they are expressed in
the Retour, (or Return) that is made to the Chancellary, when an Heir is
served; but both are very far below the Value, to which Lands are now improved,
though in Our Law, the new extent be constructed to be the Value.

But in an infeftment of annualrent, the whole annualrent is due, as well
before declarator, as after; because the annualrent is the retoure duty, it
being retoured, valere seipsum; and that is called an infeftment of annualrent,
when the Vassal is not infeft in particular lands; but is infeft in an yearly
annuity of money, to be paid out of the lands, as for instance, if a man
should be infeft in the sum of five hundred merks yearly, to be payable out of
any particular Lands, being worth 5000. merks yearly, how soon the Vassal who
had right to the 500. merks dyed, the Superior would have right to the whole
500 merks yearly, until the Heir of the Vassal be entered. vide infra Tit.
Servituds, annualrents.

There is no Nonentry due in Burgage Lands; because the Burgh it self is
Vassal, and never dies, and so therefore, neither does the Burgh nor any
private Burgess pay nonentrie, the duty payable by a Burgh, being only by
Watching and Warding.

When the Vassal enters, he pays an acknowledgment to the Superior, which is
called, relief, because its paid for reliving his land out of the Superiors
hands. It is debitum fundi, and affects not only the ground really, but the
Vassal Personally, who takes out the precept for infefting himself; though he
never takes infeftment thereupon.

The value of this Casuality varies, according to the nature of the holding,
for in Blench and Feu holdings, it is only the double of the Feu or Blench
duties; but in Wardholdings, it is the full duty of the land; if the Superior
be in possession, the time of the Vassals entry; but if the Superior was not
in possession; though the Vassal was minor, or if the Vassal be major, before
his Predecessor dye, then the Superior gets only the retour duty; and it is
so far from being presumed to be remmitted by the Superiors entering his
Vassal; that it is still exacted; though it be gifted with the other
Casualities.

For understanding Life-rent Escheates, it is fit to know; that when any man
does not pay a debt, or perform a deed conform to his Obligation, his
Obligation is Registrated; if it carry a consent to the Registration in the
body of it; or if it do not, there must be a sentence recovered, and upon that
Registrated writ, or decree, (for a Registrated writ is a decree in the
Construction of Law) there will be Letters of horning raised, and the Party
will be charged, and if he pay not within the days allowed by the charge, he
will be denounced Rebel, and put to the Horn, and from the very day of the
denounciation, all his movables falls to the King by a casualitie, which is
called, single Escheate; but now single Escheates fall likewise to Lords of
Regalities, if the persons denounced live within a Regality, because the King
has gifted all single escheates when he erected those Regalities.

If the Vassal continue year and day Rebel, without Relaxing himself, (which
Relaxation is expede by Letters under the Kings signet, expressly ordaining him
to be relaxed from the Rebellion;) then he is esteemed as Civilly dead; and
consequently not being able to serve the Superior, the Law gives the Superior
the meals and duties of his Feu, during all the days of the Vassals life; and
this casuality is called Liferent Escheat; so that every Superior as well as
the King, has right to the meals, and duties of the lands holden of himself K.
J. 5. Par. 4. Act 32.
if his Vassal was once infeft; and even though he was not infeft; if he was
appearand Heir, and might have been infeft; for his lying out should not
prejudge his Superior; but if a man have right by disposition, whereupon no
infeftment followed, the King only will have right to his Life-rent Escheate,
as he has for the same reason to the Manses and Gleebs of Ministers, when they
are Rebels; since they are not infeft in these; but all heritable and
Life-rent Rights, requiring no infeftment of their own nature, such as a terce,
and Liferent-tacks fall not to the King, and the Life-rent tacks fall to the
Master of the ground, and the Life-rent by Terce pertains to the Superior
during the Life-renters Lifetime K. J. 6. Par. 22. Act 15.
.

This Life-rent Escheate comprehends only Rights, to which the Vassal himself
had right for his Lifetime; for else it will fall under single Escheate; (
single Escheates comprehending every thing that is not a Life-rent Escheate;)
and therefore, if the Superior having right to the Vassals Liferent Escheate,
become Rebel himself, the Vassals Liferent Escheate will fall under the
Superiors single Escheate, for the Superior had not right to those meals and
duties during all the days of his own Lifetime; and so it could not fall under
his Liferent, and the like, does for the same reason hold in all such as have
assignations to Liferents, or to Liferent Escheats, or to Tacks for any definit
number of years, few or many.

The Superior has also right to the Sub-Vassals Liferent Escheate, which falls
after the Vassals denounciation, for by the denounciation of the immediate
Vassal, the Superior comes in his place; and so has right to the sub-Vassals
Liferent.

The Liferent Escheate falls by the Rebellion, that is to say, by the
denounciation; and the year and day, is given only to the Rebel to relax
himself, so that if he relax not within that time, his Liferent will fall from
the denounciation.

In competition betwixt the Superior of the Rebel, and the Rebels Creditors,
these Rules are observed in our decisions.

Primo, No Legal Diligence, nor Voluntar right for payment of any debt
contracted, after Rebellion, will prejudge the Superior; for else after a
Vassal were at the horn, he might fraudulently contract debt to prejudge the
Superior.

Secundo, If the debt was prior to the denounciation, no voluntar infeftment
will prejudge the Superior; except the Rebel was obliged prior to the
Rebellion, to grant that infeftment, and that the infeftment it self was expede
within year and day of the denounciation.

Tertio, Though Legal Diligence be more favorable then voluntar rights;
because there is less collusion, yet no legal diligence will be preferred to
the Superior; except it was led for a debt prior to the denounciation, and was
completed by infeftment, or charge, within year and day, thereof; albeit the
said Legal diligence was deduced after the denounciation.

Though this be the course in competitions, quo ad liferent Escheates; yet
actual payment made, or diligences done to, or by Creditors for payment of
debts, prior to the Rebellion, or the commission of crimes, will be preferred,
to the donator; if these Rights or Diligences be completed before declarator,
which we owe rather to the benignity of our Kings, than to the Nature of these
Rights, since there is jus questitum fisco, by the denounciation.

Liferent Escheates is proper to all kinds of holding; except Burgage, and
mortification; for the Vassal being a Society or Incorporation dies not, and
so can have no liferent Escheate; and albeit the administrators were denounced
for debts due by the Incorporation; yet that is still presumed to be their
Negligence, which ought not to prejudge the Society:

For completing this Casualitie a general Declarator must be raised at the
Superior or Donators instance, to hear and see it found and declared, that the
Vassal was orderly denounced Rebel, and has continued at the Horn year and day.
And in a competition betwixt Donators, the last gift if first declared, will be
preferred.

If the gift be taken to the behoove of the rebel, it is null, and is presumed
to be to his behoove, if he or his Family be suffered to stay in possession.

The last Privilege of the Superior is, that he may force his Vassal to
exhite his Evidents, to the end he may know what is the nature of the holding,
and in what he is liable to his Superior, which proceeds ordinarily by an
Action of Improbation.

Title VI. Of the Right which the Vassal acquires by getting the Feu.
THE Vassal by getting the Feu settled in his Person, by Charter and Seasin, as
said is, has right to all Houses, Castles, Towers, (but not Fortalices;) Woods,
and other things that are above ground of the Lands expressly disponed; and to
Coals, Limestone, and other things within ground, and to whatever has been
possessed, as part and pertinent of the Land past memory of Man: But there are
some things which pass not under the general dispositive words, and require a
special Disposition, which belong to the King, in an eminent way, and are
called therefore Regalia, and are not presumed to have been disponed by his
Majesty, or any other Superior; except they were specially mentioned, such as
are all Jurisdictions, Forests, Salmond-fishings, Treasures hid within the
ground, and Gold, Silver, and Fine-lead; for other Mines, such as Iron, Copper,
etc. belong to the Vassal.

If Lands be erected in a Barrony by the King, then though the lands lie
discontiguously, one seasin will serve for them all, because, Barrony implies
an union.

This erecting them in a Barrony, will likewise carry a right to Jurisdictions,
and Courts, Fortalices, Forests, hunting of Deer, and Ports, with their small
Customs, granted by the King, for upholding these Ports, Milnes,
Salmondfishings, etc. because; Barronia est nomen universitatis, and possession
of any part of a Barrony is repute possession of the whole; But Mines of Gold,
and Silver, K. J. ^. Par. 1. act 12.
Treasures, and goods confiscate, are not carried with the Barrony.

The Heritor has also power to set Tacks, remove, and in-put Tennents, as a
consequence of his property.

A Tack is a Location, or contract, whereby the use of any thing is set to the
Tacksman, for a certain hyre, and in Our Law it requires necessarly, that the
terms of the Entry, and the Ish, must be expressed, that is to say, when it
should begine and end, and it must bear a particular duty, else it is null;
and if it be a valid Tack, that is to say, if Write be adhibit, ( verbal Tacks
being only valid for one year) to the thing set, the Contracters names,
Tackduty, Ish, and Entry, clearly therein expressed, and clothed with
possession, it will defend the poor Tacksman, against any Buyer *; and even
against K. J. 2. Par. 6. Act 17
the King and his Donators, when they succeed by forfeiture, which was
introduced in favors of poor Tennents, for encouraging them to improve the
land; but it will not defend against a Superior of ward lands, for the ward,
etc. though by Act of Parliament, the Superior be obliged, to continue them in
their possession till the next term of Whitsonday K. J. 4. Par. 3. act 26.
.

Albeit Tacks have not all the solemnities foresaid; yet they are valid against
the Granter and his Heirs.

Tennents cannot assign their Tacks; except they be Liferent Tacks; or that the
Tack bear a power to assign; but they may be comprysed, or adjudged; and if the
Master suffer the Tacksman to continue after the Tack is expyred, he will be
obliged to pay no more than he paid formerly during the Tack; and this is
called in Our Law, the benefit of a tacit Relocation, that is to say, both
the Setter and the Tacksman, are presumed to design to continue the Tack upon
the former terms, till the Tennent be warned.

If the Tack be granted to sub-tennents; then the Tacksman may set a sub-tack,
which will be as valid as the principal Tack, if cled with possession.

Rentals are also a kind of Tacks; but more favorable and easy; because the
Rentaller and his Predecessors have been Ancient Possessors, and kindly
Tennents, and he pays a Grassume, or acknowledgement at his entry, and yet
they last no longer than for a year; if there be no time expressed; and if they
be granted to a man and his Heirs, they last only to the first Heir; for else
they behoved for ever to belong to the Heirs; and so would want an Ish; but no
Tack is accounted a Rental; except it be in write, and the write bear the same.

Rentals cannot be assigned, except that power be granted in the Rental; and if
the Rentaler assign, he looses his Rental; though a Tacksman Forfeits not his
Right, by assigning it, the assignation being only null.

When the years of the tack expyre; or though there be no Tack; yet the Master
cannot Summarly remove his Tennent, or Possessor except from Liferented Lands,
and Houses, or Towers, and Fortalices, and vicious Possessors whom he can
remove by a summonds on six days; but in all other cases he must warn him, 40
days, before the term of Whitsonday; tho the term at which he were to remove,
by paction, were Martinmass, or Candlemass; which warning must be executed,
that is to say, intimated personally to the Tennent, and upon the ground of the
lands; and at the Parish Kirk, immediately after Sermon, and if he then
refuses, he must be persued to remove upon six days, and after this citation,
the Master will get against him violent profits; that is to say, the double of
the avail of the Tenement within Burgh, and the highest advantages that the
Heritor could have got, if the Tennent possessed lands, in the Country; nor
will the Tennent be allowed to defend against this removing; till he find
caution to pay the violent profits Q. Ma Par. 6. Act 39.
.

The Master has likewise a Tacit Hypotheque in the fruits of the ground, which
he sets to his Tennent, in so far as concerns a years duty, that is to say,
they are impignorat by the Law, for that years duty, and he will be preferred
either to a Creditor, who has done diligence, or to a stranger who has bought
them; though in a public market: And a Lands-Lord within Burgh, has a tacit
hypotheque in all the goods brought in to his House, by his Tennent, which he
may retain, a^, and while he be paid of his years rent.

Title VII. Of Transmission of Rights, by Confirmation, and of the difference
betwixt Base, and Public Infeftments.
THE Fie being thus Established in the Vassals person, the same may be
Transmitted, either to universal, or singular Successors, the first is properly
called Succession, which shall be handled in the third-Book. Transmission of
Rights, to singular Successors, is voluntar by disposition, and assignation, or
necessar by apprysing, and adjudication, and Consiscation, when they are
forefaulted for crimes, etc.

If the Vassal sells the Land, the Superior is not obliged to receive the
Sub-Vassal except he pleases, though the charter bear, to him and his
assignies; and if he receive him, there is in Law, a years rent due to the
Superior, as an acknowledgement for changing his Vassal.

Lands are disponed, either to be holden of the disponers Superior, and that
is called a public Infeftment; because, it is presumed it will be publicly
known, being holden of the Superior; and it is likewise called an Infeftment,
a me; because, the disponer gives it to be holden a me, de Superiore meo, and
this Infeftment is null until it be confirmed K. J. 6. Par. 5. Act 66.
by the Superior, which is done by a Charter of Confirmation, wherein the
Superior narrates the Vassals Charter, and subjoyns thereto his own
Confirmation or Ratification of it, and the last right being first confirmed is
still preferred.

Sometimes also the Vassal Dispones Lands to be holden of himself, and this is
called, a base infeftment, and has been allowed by Our Law, contrare to the
principles of the Feudal Law, in Favors of Creditors, who getting right for
payment of their debts, were unwilling to be at the expenses to get a
Confirmation from the Superior, and this is called, an infeftment, de me;
because, the Disponer gives them tenendas de me, and successoribus meis.

These base infeftments being clothed with possession, are as perfect, and
valid, as a public infeftment; for possession, is to an infeftment to be
holden of the Disponer, the same thing that confirmation is to an infeftment to
be holden of the Superior; and therefore, as in a Competition betwixt two
infeftments of the same Land, to be holden of the Superior, the first
confirmation would be preferred, it being a general rule in Law, that amongst
Rights of equal perfection, prior in tempore est potior in jure; so if a base
infeftment be clothed with possession before the public infeftment be
confirmed, the base infeftment will be preferred; though it was granted after
the public infeftment.

For the better understanding of the nature of base infeftments, it is fit to
know, that possession is in Law natural, or Civil, that is Natural possession,
by which a man is Naturally, and Corporally in possession, as by laboring of
the ground; but because sometimes men could not attain to the Natural
possession, for clothing their Right, therefore the Law was forced to allow
another possession by the mind, as that was by the body, and this is called,
Civil possession; because it is allowed, and introduced by the Civil Law, of
which there are many kinds in Scotland; As,

Primo, The obtaining Decreets for Meals and Duties, and even citation upon an
heritable Right.

Secundo, Payment of annualrent, by the debtor to the Creditor who has
infeftment of annual-rent.

Tertio, If a man be infeft in lands, and for warrandice of these lands be
infeft in other lands, possession of the principal lands, is reputed in the
construction of Law, possession of the warrandice lands.

Quarto, If a Woman be infeft by her Husband in a liferent, the Husbands
possession is accounted the Wifes possession.

Quinto, If a Man dispone lands, reserving his own liferent, the Liferenters
possession is accounted the Fiars possession; and a base infeftment is said to
be clothed with possession; if he who is infeft has attained either to
Natural or Civil possession; for the Law cannot punish a Man for not
apprehending possession, who could not apprehend it; and for the same reason,
if the time of Entry was not come, he who is infeft by a base infeftment, will
be preferred in that case, as if he were in possession; and the reason of all
this is, because Our Law considering, that base infeftments were clandestinely
made, betwixt confident, and conjunct persons, to the ruin of lawful
Creditors, who could not know the same; there being then no Register of
Seasins; it therefore declared all base infeftments to be simulat, which were
not clothed with possession; and therefore before the term, at which he who
got the base infeftment could enter to the possession, there could be no
Simulation, nor fraud, in no party; and in this the Law considers much the
interest of lawful Creditors, by sustaining that kind of possession in their
favors, which would not be sustained in favors of near Relations; or where
there is no Onerous cause; and thus a base Infeftment given be the Father, to
his own Son, will not be clothed with possession, by the reservation of the
Fathers liferent, though the reservation of the Fathers Liferent would cloth a
base infeftment granted by him to a lawful Creditor; and the Husbands
possession is accounted the Wifes possession, in so far as concerns her
principal Ioynture; but not in so far as concerns her additional Ioynture, in a
competition betwixt her and her Husbands lawful Creditors.

Sometimes likewise, for the more security a base infeftment, which is given to
be holden of the Disponer, will be confirmed by the Superior; but that
Confirmation does not make it a public infeftment; for no infeftment can be
called a public infeftment; but that which is to be holden of the Superior;
but the use of that Confirmation is, that after the Superior has confirmed
voluntarly the sub-Vassals Right, he thereby acknowledges his Right; and
consequently, can seek no Casuality, which aryses upon want of the Superiors
consent, such as Forfeiture, or Recognition; But because the Disponer is still
Vassal, therefore his Superior will still have right to the Rents of the
Lands, by his liferent Escheate, and to Wards, and None-entries by his death;
but if the Superior enter the sub-Vassal only upon a Charge, (this being no
voluntar act of his,) that does not cut him off from those casualities.

Sometimes likewise, the Seller resigns the Lands in favors of the Superior,
if the lands be sold to the Superior himself, which is called Resignatio ad
Remanentiam; because the Lands are resigned to remain with the Superior, and
in that case, the property is said to be Consolidate with the Superiority, that
is to say, the Superior returns to have all the right both of Property, and
Superiority; nor needs he be infeft of new; because, as we formerly observed
the Superior stands still infeft as well as the Vassal; but the Instrument of
Resignation must be Registrated in this case, as Seasins are in other cases, to
put men in mala side to buy K. C. 2 Par. 2. Sess. 1. Act 3.


The other Resignation, is called Resignatio in favorem, which is when the
Seller having sold his Feu to a third party, resigns the Feu in the Superiors
hands, for new Infeftment to be given by the Superior to that third party.

The warrant of both these Resignations is a Procuratorie granted by the
Seller, to a blank Person, (and this warrant is ordinarily inserted in the
disposition) impowering him to resign the Feu in the Superiors hands; and this
is called a Procuratory of Resignation; and the Symbols of the Resignation are,
that it is to be made by Staff and Baston; and accordingly, the Procurator
compears before the Superior, and upon his Knee, holding a Staff or Pen at the
one end, which the Superior or any having power from him, holds by the other,
he there resigns the Feu, either ad remanentiam, or in favorem, as said is;
whereupon an instrument is taken by the Person in whose favors the Resignation
is made, which is called the Instrument of Resignation; and thereafter the
Person in whose Favors the Resignation is made, (if he be not the Superior)
is infeft, and his Seasin must be Registrated within 60. days, as said is.

The Resignation does not perfectly denude the Seller, until Infeftment be
taken upon it; and therefore the first Infeftment, upon a second Resignation
will be preferred to him, who has but the second infeftment upon the first
resignation; but yet the Lands will be in Nonentrie in the Superiors hand,
after the resignation is made, until the person in whose favors it was made
be infeft, for otherwise the superior would want a Vassal, since he could not
call him Vassal who did resign his to be Vassal; And he had accepted of a
resignation from him; nor is the Person in whose favors the resignation is
made his Vassal; since he is not yet infeft; but yet the buyer has a personal
action, against the Superior, to force him to denude himself in his favors;
since he has accepted the resignation; and he will likewise have an action of
damnage and interest against the Superior; if he accept a second Resignation,
whereby a prior infeftment may be taken to his prejudice, and the Superior
gets all his Casualities, as Ward, Marriage, Liferent Escheat, etc. not by him
in whose favors resignation is made; but by him who resigns, since he remains
still Vassal till the other be infeft quoad the superiors casualities.

Title VIII. Of Redeemable Rights.
ANother Considerable division of Heritable rights with us, is that some are
redeemable, and some irredeemable.

Redeemable Rights, are these which return to the Disponer, upon payment of the
sum, for which these Rights are granted; and are so called; because they may be
redeemed by the Disponer; and they are either Wadsets, infeftments of
annualrents, or infeftments for relief.

A Wadset, is a right whereby lands are impignorated or pledged for security of
a special sum, which passes by infeftment, (like other real Rights) in the
terms of alienation or disposition; and the Disponer does secure himself by
getting a reversion from the Buyer, wherein he grants and declares the Lands
redeemable from him, upon payment of the sum then delivered, and of the
annualrent thereof, which is pactum de retrovendendo; and expresses the place
and time when it is to be delivered, and in whose hands it is to be consigned;
in case the receiver of the Wadset, (who is called the Wadsetter) refuse to
accept his Money.

These Reversions, being against the nature of property, and depending upon the
mere agreement of Parties, are to be most strictly observed; and are
strictissimi juris; so that they are not extended to Heirs or Assigneys; except
they be expressed, and must be fulfilled in the very terms; and it is not enough
that they be fulfilled in equipollent terms: But after an order of redemption
is used; that is, after the Granter of the Wadset has duly premonished the
Wadsetter, and consigned the sums due by the Wadsetter, it may be assigned; and
though the reversion bears that premonition be made at the Parish Church, it
will be sustained if it be made personally to the Wadsetter, for that is a
surer certioration.

Reversions, albeit of their own nature they are personal binding, only the
Granter and his Heirs, yet they are real rights by our Statutes, and affect
singular K. J. 3. Par. 5. Act* 28.
Successors.

They and all Bands to make reversions, or ^ikes to reversions, must be
registrated within 60. days in the same Register with Seasins; for else a
singular Successor is not obliged to regard them K. J. 6. Par. 22. Act 16.
; so that if any buy the Land irredeemably, and complete his right, he will be
preferred; but they are still valid against the Disponer without registration.

When the Granter of the Wadset, is to use an Order of redemption, he must
premonish the Wadsetter to compear, (and take instruments thereupon, called, an
instrument of premonition) to receive payment of the sumes due to him; and at
the time and place appointed by the reversion, offer being made of the Money;
if the Wadsetter refuses voluntarly to renounce, and to accept his money, it is
consigned in the hands of the person designed in the reversion, or if no person
be designed, it may be consigned in any responsal Man's hand; but there must be
a paper taken under the Consignatars hand, acknowledging that it was consigned
in his hand; for though an instrument under a Notars hand, proves that all this
order of redemption was used; yet it will not prove the receipt of a sum
against the Consignatar.

If the Wadsetter receive his Money, and renounce voluntarly, this is called, a
voluntar redemption; But, because though renounciations be sufficient to
extinguish, they are not sufficient to transmit a right; therefore, if the
Wadset was given to be holden of the Disponer, the Wadsetter must resign ad
remantiam, in the Disponers hands as his Superior; and thereafter the Disponer
needs not to be infeft of new; as no Superior needs; but if the Wadset be
given to be holden of the Superior; then the Disponer uses to take a Letter of
regress, whereby the Superior obliges him to receive him back to be his
Vassal, when he shall redeem his own lands; for otherwise after the Wadsetter
is seized, the Superior is not obliged to receive him back.

If the Wadsetter refuses to renounce after the Order is used, the Lords will
force him to renounce, and declare the Lands redeemed, by a Process, called a
Declarator of Redemption; after which Decree is obtained, the Lands are
redeemed, and belong to the Redeemer; and the Wadsetter will upon a simple
charge of horning force the Consignatar to deliver him up the money.

The user of the Order of Redemption, may pass from it at any time before
Declarator; and therefore the sumes for which the Wadset was granted, are still
heritable before Declarator; but after that they are moveable, and fall to
Executors; except the Declarator be obtained after the Wadsetters death, in
which case they remain heritable; And though the Wadsetter require his Money,
he may pass from his requisition, either directly by a clear Declaration that
he passes from it, or indirectly by intrometting with the duties of the Wadset
lands, or by taking annual-rent for terms subsequent to the requisition.

Wadsets are either Proper, or Improper.

Proper Wadsets, are these, wherein the Wadsetter takes his hazard of the rents
of the land for the satisfaction of his annualrent; and pays himself all
public burdens. Improper Wadsets, are these, wherein the Granter of the Wadset
pays the public burdens, and the receiver is at no hazard, but has his
annualrent secure. And if a Wadset be taken, so, that the Wadsetter is to have
more than his annual-rent; and yet the Granter is to pay the public burdens,
this is accounted Usury by Our Law; the punishment whereof is confiscation of
movables loosing of the principal sum and anulling the usury, contract, or
paction K. J. 6. Par. 14. act 222. Par. 15. act 247.
; and by a late Statute, If the Debtor offers security for the Money, and
craves possession, the Wadsetter must either quit his possession, or restrict
himself to his annualrent King Char. 2. par. 1. Act 62.
. And if a Man impignorat his Lands, or Bands, with express condition, that if
the Money be not paid at a precise day, they shall not be thereafter
redeemable: The Law reprobates this unjust advantage, called, pactum legis
commissoriae in pignoribus; and will allow the Money to be offered at the Bar;
or they will allow a short time before Extracting of the Decree for payment of
it.

Taking of annualrent having been discharged by the Cannon Law, men did buy
annualrents out of other men's lands, which was the origin of our present
infeftments of annualrent, and continues still frequent; by which if men
resolve not to rest on the personal security of the borrower, they take him
also obliged to infeft them in a yearly annualrent, payable out of his Lands
correspondent to the sum lent; but if they exceed the ordinarily annualrent
allowed by Law, it will infer usury; and so they have a double security, one
personal against the borrower for payment, and another real against the ground,
it being debitum fundi; for which they may poynd any part of the ground; as
also they have good action against the Intrometters with the duties of the
lands, out of which there annualrents are payable; though they cannot poynd or
exact from the tennents any more then they owe to their master K. J. 3* Par. 5.
act 37.
.

These annualrents require a special seasin, like Wadsets, and other real
rights; the symbols whereof, if the annualrent be payable in money, is a penney
of money; but if it be payable in Victual, it is a parcel of Victual.

This is singular in infeftment of annualrent, that apprysing, thereupon will
be preferred to all prior apprysing, quoad the bygones, of the annualrent, if
the infeftment of annualrent was prior to those apprysings to which the
apprysing will be drawn back, and preferred to any interveening right, which
privilege is continued in the late Act of Parliament, concerning Debtor and
Creditor K. C. 2 Par. 1. Act* 62.
.

These infeftments of annualrent, being properly granted for security of sums
are extinguished not only by resignations, but by renounciations; and even by
intromission with as much as might pay the principal sum, which intromission is
probable by witness, whether the Rent be victual or money, and therefore
singular Successors buying infeftments of annualrent, are not secure by any
register but must rest on the warrandice of the Seller,

Infeftments of relief, are these, which are granted by a debtor to his
creditor, for security of sums owing to him, upon which the creditor cannot
enter to possession, till he be distressed, and when the sum is paid, the
right becomes absolutely null, as being but a temporary right, and so the
debtor who granted the right, needs not be of new infeft, but his former right
revives.

Title IX. Of SERVITUDES.
THE Nature and Constitution of Property, and real Rights, being explained in
the foregoing Titles. We shall now treat briefly of Servitudes; which are
Burdens, affecting Property and Rights.

Servitudes are either Real, Personal, or Mixed.

Personal Servitude, is in desuetude amongst Christians; and therefore is not
proper to be considered here. Real servitude is whereby one Man's Property, or
Ground is affected with some burden, for the use and behoove of another Man;
which are divided in Rural servitudes, and City servitudes.

Rural Servitudes, are Iter, which is, a power of going through our neighbors
land; Actus, which is a power of driving Carts, or Waines; Via, being the
privilege of having high ways in our neighbors ground; and Aquae-ductus,
which is a power and privilege to draw Water along their ground for watering
of our own. Thus Via, includes Iter, and Actus, as the lesser servitudes; so he
that has a Via, has also power to drive carts and waines, and to walk himself
through the Ground burdened with the Servitude.

The City servitudes, called, servitutes Urb^nae, are chiefly five.

The first, is Oneris ferendi, which is a privilege, whereby one who has a
house in the City, can force the Proprietar who has a house below his, to bear
the burden of his house; and he may force the Owner of the servient tenement to
repair it, and make it fit for supporting the dominant tenement, contrare to
the common nature of servitudes.

Secundo, Tigni immittendi, which is the privilege of forceing our neighbor
to receive into his house the jests of ours.

Tertio, Stillicidii, vel fluminis, which, is whereby our neighbor is obliged
to receive the drops which falls from our house, under which, is likewise
comprehended the privilege of carrying away our Water by sinks and channels.

Quarto, Non officiendi Luminibus, whereby he can do nothing that can prejudge
our Lights, or prospect.

Quinto, Altius non tollendi, whereby our Neighbor cannot raise his house
higher, to prejudge the lights of the dominant Tenement.

By Our Law, servitudes may be constitute by write, without any seasin; because
they are incorporeal rights; but though a servitude merely established by
write, be sufficient against the granter; yet they are not valid against
singular Successors; except that right be clothed with possession, which
compleats the servitude and makes it a real right; and they may be likewise
established by prescription without any write, from him who has the servient
Tenement; though he who is to acquire the servitude by prescription, must have
some right in his person, either of a special concession, or else must
prescrive it, as part and pertinent of his land.

The ordinary Servitudes superadded by us, to these of the Civil Law, are the
servitudes of casting Fail and Divot, common pasturage, and Multures.

Common pasturage, is a right of pasturing the Goods and Cattle of the dominant
tenement, upon the ground of the servient, which is constituted frequently by a
Charter, containing the clause of common pasturage; and sometimes by a personal
Obligement, clothed with possession; but albeit it be indefinite, yet it can
reach no further than to the proportion of Goods of the Dominant tenement,
which they keep and fodder in Winter; which is done by sowming and Rowming,
that is to say, the determining the proportion of goods belonging to each
Dominant tenement, according to the several Rowms and rent thereof.

Common Pasturage in our Law, does ordinarily comprehend all the lesser
servitudes; such as the casting of Faill and Divots, presumptively only; for
the one may be possessed without the other; nor will common Pasturage infer a
servitude of casting of fail and divots if he who possessed the Common
Pasturage was interrupted as to the casting of fail and divot.

Mills, are inter Regalia, and require therefore a special Seasin; the Symbols
whereof are clap and happer; but if the mill be in a Barrony transit cum
universitate.

Mills, are ordinarily dispond with multers and Sequels; the Multurs are a
quantity of corn, payable to the Heritor of the mill for grinding. The
knaveship, Lok, and Bannock, are a small quantity payable to the servants for
their pains.

These quantities, that are paid by those that are thirled, are called,
Insucken multurs, and those quantities, that are paid by such as come
voluntarly, are called outsucken multurs.

Thirlages, are constitute by write, or by prescription.

The ways of constituting thirlage by write, are these;

First, When a Master thirles his own Tennents, to his own Mill; in which case
ordinarily he deminishes the rent of his land, in contemplation of what they are
to pay to the Mill, for grinding their Corns, which he does by an act of his
own Court.

Secundo, When an Heritor sells his lands, to be holden of himself, and thirles
his Vassal to his Mill; in which case he sells so much the cheaper, and so the
multures are just.

Tertio, When the Heritor of a Mill, dispons his Mill, with the multure of his
own Lands; in which case the multures are also just; because he gets so much
the more for his mill; and so this servitude is not so odious as it is believed
to be.

Quarto, If a man dispones the mill of a Barrony, cum multuris, or cum
astrictis multuris; in either of these cases, he thereby astricts his whole
Barrony; though not formerly astricted; but if he dispone the Mill of the
Barrony, cum multuris solitis and consuetis; he i^ thereby understood to have
thirled only what was formerl^ thirled.

If the thirlage bears omnigrana crescentia, all the Corn growing upon the Land
will be thirled, with deduction only of seed, and Horse corn, and the ferme;
except it be carried to another Mill, for it is presumed ferms must be sold.

Quinto, When invecta and illata are thirled, all Corns which thole Fire and
Water within the astriction, must pay multur^ though they come not to the Mill;
but being made in Malt are thereafter carried abroa^ out of the thirle.

The way of constituting thirlage by prescription, is immemoral, or 40. years
possession, by virtue of some title; such as a Decree, though in absence; and
even when the Master is not called; and any Act of a Barron court, though made
only by a Bailie, without a special warrant from the Heritor; and though the
coming to a Mill, past all memory, does not astrict the Comers for the future;
it being a general rule in all servitudes, that, ea quae sunt merae facultatis
non prescribuntur; yet in mills of the Kings property, immemorial possession,
constitutes a thirlage; and if Men likewise pay dry multures, that is to say,
such a quantity, whether they come to grind or not, for 40. years; they will be
thereby astricted; for it is not presumable they would have paid dry multure,
for so long a time except they had been thirled.

If the quantity to be paid, be not determined in Write, it is regulated by
the use of payment for 40. years.

Those who are thirled, are also obliged to maintain the mill in its dammes,
water-gangs, and to bring home its Millstones.

If such as are thirled, bring not their Corns, they are persued by an action
called, abstracted multures.

There are two Rules to be observed in all servitudes.

Primo, Res sua nemina servit, no man can have a servitude on what is his own;
and therefore if the Land on which we have a servitude become ours, the
servitude is extinguished.

Secundo, When we have a servitude on any other land, this servitude affects
every foot of that land, unaquaeque gleba servit; but this is to be taken
civiliter, and non judaice; so that it must be reasonably used; And thus, if we
Fen out some Acres, with privilege to the Fever to cast Faill and Divot upon
our Moor, for maintaining his houses; though in strict Law, every part of the
Moor is affected with the servitude; yet the Lords will allow any man to Tile
and Sow his own Moor, leaving such a proportion, as may maintain these houses.

Mixed Servitudes are partly real, and partly personal; and by the Civil Law are
divided in usu fruct, use, and habitation.

Usus-fructus is called liferent in Our Law; which is a right to use and
dispose upon any thing during life, the substance thereof being preserved.

Use and habitation were restricted to the naked use of the Liferenter; whereby
his power of disposing and making profit of the thing liferented was
restrained; and are not in use with us.

Liferents are either constitute by paction; or by Law; liferents by paction,
are either by reservation; as when a Fiar denuds himself of the Fie in favors
of another, reserving his own liferent; or by a new constitution; as when the
Fiar dispons his lands to another, during all the days of his life; the first
needs no infeftment; but the second does; else it is not valid against singular
Successors; but the liferenter being infeft, transmits his right to any by
assignation without infeftment; for being a servitude and personal right, it
neither needs, nor can admit of a subaltern infeftment.

A Liferenter also by reservation, may enter the heirs of Vassals (though he
cannot receive singular Successors) if he was himself infeft; but another
liferenter cannot; and even a liferenter by reservation cannot enter those
Vassals, if he was not once infeft; because he cannot transmit a right which he
has not.

When more persons are jointly infeft, they are called conjunct Fiars; but
though a wife be a conjunct Fiar; yet her Fie lasts but during her life; and
during her life, she may enter Vassals, and has right also to all the
casualities, as other Fiars.

Liferents by Law, are the Terce, and the courtisie.

The Terce is a liferent of the third of all the tenements, wherein the husband
dyed infeft, provided be law to a wife, who is not excluded by express paction;
or is not provided to as much as will be eqvivalent to the Terce K. C. 2 Par.
3. Act 10.
; which Terce is constituted by an inquest, who upon a brief out the
Cbancellary, directed to the Sberriff, or other judge ordinary, do serve her
to a Terce; upon which service, the judge to whom the brief was directed
without retouring it, divids the land betwixt the heir; and Relict, and
expresses the marches in an instrument, and this is called to kenne her to her
Terce; the marches being kenned by the instrument; and though the service gives
her right to the meals and duties; yet she cannot remove tennents, till she be
kenned, as said is, the kenning being equivalent here to the seasin in lifrents.

This Brive contains two points; first, that the bearer, was Lawful Wife, to
the defunct and secundo; that he dyed infeft in such tenements, but if the
Relict was holden and reput lawful Wife, in her Husbands life; no exception in
the contrary will stop the service K. J. 4. Par. 6. Act 77.
.

There is no Terce in Burgage Lands, Feu duties, or other casualities, nor in
reversions, tacks, nor Patronages.

The Courtisie, is a liferent, granted by Law, to him who married an Heritrix,
of all her Heritage, and of that only; It needs neither seasin, nor other
solemnity to its constitution; but is ipso jure, continued to him; if there
were Children procreated of the Marriage, who were heard to cry; though the
Marriage disolve within year and day.

All these Liferenters are obliged to find caution to preserve the thing
liferented, and to leave it in as good condition as they found it, which is
called cautio usu-fructuaria; and they are also bound to Aliment the appearand
Heir if he have not Aliundi, to Aliement himself K. J. 4 par. 3. Act 25.
.

If Liferenters survive Martinmess; or if they die upon Martinmess day, in the
afternoon; their Executors will have right to the whole years rent, whether it
be Land rent, or the rent of a mill; albeit the Conventional terms were after
Martinmess; But if Liferenters labor the Lands themselves, their Executors
will have right to the whole rent thereof, albeit they die before Martinmess.

Title X. Of TEYNDS.
TEynds Tyths or Tenths:
, being a burden affecting Lands, fall in to be considered in this place.

Teynds are designed to be that special and liquid proportion, or quota of our
Goods, and Rents lawfully acquired that is due to GOD, for maintaining His
Service.

It seems Our Law has followed the opinion of those Divines, who think, that
some proportion of our Goods is due by Divine right; for we say, that Teynds
are the Spirituality of the Churches revenue; But that the proportion is not
Iuris Divini; for we alter the proportion by special laws and customs; though
for distinctions sake we call this proportion the Tenth.

By the Canon Law, they are divided into personal teynds, which arise out of
the personal gain and profits, that a Man has by his Trade; Predial teynds
which arise from the Natural Product of the Land that men possess. And mixed
Teynds which arise from the profits, that men by their Personal industry make
out of their Lands.

They are likewise divided into Parsonage teynds, which are due to the Parson;
and Viccarage teynds, which are due to the Viccars; And regularly all teynds
are due to the Incumbent, who serves the Cure; so that if the Incumbent be a
Parson, he has a right to the Parsonage teynds; and if he be a Viccar, he has
right to the Viccarage teynds.

The teynds of Corn, are called Parsonage teynds, or decimae garbales; and the
fifth boll of the free rent is still teynd with us; And all Land must pay
teynd; except they be such as have been Feued out of old by Church men, before
the Lateran Council, by which they were prohibited to alienat the teynds, and
who had right both to stock and teynd; and where the teynds were never known to
have been separated from the stock.

Some Monks likewise got particular exemptions from paying teynds, for these
Lands which they themselves did bring in, and cultivate; and with us the
privileges granted to Temple lands, which belonged of old to the Knights of
St. John, a Religious Order; and to the Monks of the Cisterian Order, are
continued to those who have right to their Lands, with that Exemption: Manses,
and Gleibs, are likewise free from payment of teynds.

Viccarage teynds, are called the small teynds with us; because they are
payable out of inconsiderable things, such as Lambs, Wool, Cheese, Eggs, etc.
and they are said to be local; because they are paid according to the custom
of the place; so that in the same Parishes, some Heritors, will be liable for
Viccarage teynds of different kinds; for though no man can prescrive a liberty
from payment of Parsonage ^eynds, since the Lateran Council; yet, as 40. years
possession is a sufficient right to a Minister, for Viccarage teynds; and as it
does determine the Quota, as well as the species of Viccarage teynds; so by 40.
years Freedom, the Heritour is secure in all time coming, from payment of
Viccarage teynds.

When Popery was suppressed, all the Lands belonging to Monks, and others, were
annexed to the Crown, in anno 1587 K. J. 6. Par. 11. Act 29.
but the teynds belonging to them were not annexed; these being acknowledged by
Our Law, to be the Patrimony of the Church; and they are therefore called, the
Spirituality of the Benefices.

The Monastries of old, having gotten several parish Churches mortified to
them; whereby they had right to their Parsonages teynds; such as got those
Monastries disponed to them, erected in their Favors, became thereby to have
right to other men's teynds; and great emulation as well as prejudice arising
from men's not having right to lead their own teynds.

King Charles the first, did therefore prevail with all the the said Titulars
of erection, to submit what should be paid them, as the price of the said
teynds; and His Majesty did determine, that the rate of all teynds, should be
the fifth part of the constant rent; where the Stock and Teynd were accustomed
to be set jointly; but the fourth part only where the teynds were usually set
separate from the Stock; A fifth part being Deduced by the King in that case;
because ordinarily Churchmen used to draw too great a proportion; and this
deduction is therefore called the Kings ease; as also, that the said teynds
being valued, should be bought at nine years purchase K. C. 1 Par. 1. Act 17.
and 19. K. Chapter ^ Par. 1. Sess. 1. Act 61.
.

For Effectuating this determination, the Parliament 1633. appointed some of
their own number, to value the said teynds, and after a process for valuation
is raised, before these Commissioners, in which the Titular his Tacksman, and
the Minister; are to be cited, the Heritor in the mean time gets the leading of
his own teynds.

The probation is ofttimes allowed to both parties in this court; and where one
party is preferred, it is called; the prerogative of probation; and is much
contended for; and is thus regulated, viz. either the teynds are drawn ipsa
corpora, by the Titular, or Tacksman; and then they have the sole probation
allowed them, to prove what the teynds were worth. (They proving that they led
seven years of 15. before 1628;) or else they have Rental bolls paid them; and
eo casu, they have the sole probation likewayes, they proving 20. years
possession of uplifting Rental bolls, condescending upon quantity and
quality; or Tertio, the Heritors have Tacks of their own teynds, for payment
of Silver duty; and then there is joint prabation allowed both to Heritor, and
Titular.

Ecclesiastic Persons, such as Bishops, Parsons, etc. Submitted only what they
were not in possession of; and therefore, there can be no valuation led of any
teynds, Parsonage, or Viccarage which they were actually in possession of; but
by a Letter from His Majesty thereafter in anno 1634; It is declared, that; if
there teynds be set to Tacksman, they may be valued during the tack; whereas
the teynds they were in possession of cannot; though teynds holden of Collegiat
Kirks may be valued; and so may be bought and sold.

The Burrows are only decerned to sell the Superplus, of the teynds they had
right to, over and above what was due for the intertainment of their Ministers,
Colleges, Schools, and Hospitals.

After the teynds are valued, and the Titular decerned to sell; or if the
Titular be willing to sell without a decree; The Heritor is infeft; and seized
by the Titular, who in the disposition, or Charter reserves to himself relief
of the Kings annuitie, and of all imposition* laid or to be laid upon teynds;
and warrands only from his own, and his Predecessors facts and deeds; and on
the other hand the Heritor who has got a Decree of valuation and not of
vendition; is obliged to infeft the Titular; for security of the valued bolls.

By the foresaid Decree Arbitral, the several Parish Kirks were to be
provided; and therefore the Titular might Allocat any one Heritors teynds, for
provision of the Minister; and so he was excluded from the privilege of
buying, whereas, it had been much better, that the Stipend had been
proportionably laid upon all the Heritors.

Teynds are not debita fundi; and so singular Successors are not liable in
them; but yet the Minister has so far a taci^ hypothique, that he may exact his
modified stipend from any of the Heritors; as far as hi^ teynds will extend,
reserving relief to that distressed Heritor* and if the Heritor sell his Crop,
the Merchant, who buys the same will be liable; but tennents will not be
liable, if they pay a joint duty payable to their Master for Stock and Teynd.

When the tack of teynd* expire; the Titular needs no^ use a warning against
the tacksman as in lands; but he raise^ and executes an Inhibition against the
Tacksman, which interrupts tacit relocation, for that and all the Subseque^^
years, after which the Introme^^tors, are liable to a Spuilie.

The Parliament 1633. did after the said submissions and Decree arbitral,
grant to His Majesty an Annuitie out of all teynds; except those paid to
Bishops, and other pious uses; viz. ^en shilling out of every boll of
teynd-Wheat; out of the boll of the best teynd-Bear, eight shilling; out of
Oats, Peace, and Rye, six shilling, where the boll of these grains did yield a
Boll of Meal; and where the Rent consists of money, six merks out of every
hundred; and this Annuity is debitum fundi; but not being annexed to the Crown,
it may be, and is ordinarily bought by the Heritors, from His Majesty's
Theasurer, or others having right from the King.

Title XI. Of INHIBITIONS.
PRoperty, and Real Rights, with the burdens affecting the same, being
explained: It is fit now to treat of Legal Diligences, by which these rights
may be ^victed, or the free use and disposal thereof Restrained; which
diligences are chiefly three, Inhibition, Comprysing, and Adjudication.

Inhibition, is a personal prohition, by letters under the Signet, Discharging
the party Inhibit to sell, Dilapidate, or put away any of his Lands, in
prejudice of the debt due to the Raiser of the Inhibition; the ground and
Warrant thereof is an Obligation, or Bond for doing and performing any thing;
or a depending Process; And if these Inhibitions be not raised upon Legal and
Relevant grounds, they may be reduced.

Inhibitions reach only Heritage, but not movables* though the style thereof
runes equally against both; but moveable bands may be reduced, in so far as
they may be the Foundation of real diligences to affect Heritage; and they
extend only to posterior voluntary Rights granted after Inhibition; but not to
Apprysings, or Adjudications, though led posterior to the Inhibition, if the
ground thereof was anterior; neither do they extend to posterior dispositions,
and Infeftments depending upon prior obligements; either general or particular,
for granting of these Rights; nor to Renounciations of temporary Rights; albeit
posterior to the Inhibition, these being necessar upon payment.

But by a late Act of Sederunt Act of Sed. 19. Feb* 16. 1680.
, If the Creditor intimat by way of Instrument, to the person having the right
of Reversion, that the Wadsetter, or Annualrenter, stands inhibit at his
instance; and does produce in presence of the Parties, and Notar, the
Inhibition duly Registrated; The Lords will not sustain Renounciations, o^
Grants of Redemption; although upon true payment; unless there be a Declarator
of Redemption obtained, to which the Inhibiter must be cited.

The way of executing Inhibitions is, that the same must be by a Messenger
against the person Inhibit, personally, or at his dwelling place, and at the
mer^at cross of the head Burgh of the shire, Stwartry, or Regalitys where the
person inhibit dwells K. J. 6. Par* 1^. Act 264* and 265. par. 1^. Act 1^.
, and after crying of three several oyeses, and public reading of the Letters,
the whole Leiges are discharged to purchase any Lands or Heritages, from the
person inhibit; and the Messenger leaves or assixes a copy of the letters at
the market cross; all which most be written in a paper, and subscrived by the
Messenger and by two witnesses K. C. 2* Par. 3. Act 26.
; which write, is called the execution of Inhibition; and there* after the
letters and executions thereof must be Registrated within 40 days, after the
execution thereof; either in the general Register at Edinburgh, or in the
particular Register of the Jurisdiction, where the person inhibit dwells; or
the major part of the Lands lie K. J. 6. Par. 7. Act* 119*
; and if any of these Acts be omitted the Inhibition is null, these being de
solenitatibus instrumenti.

Title XII. Of Comprisings and Adjudications.
THE Fie being thus settled in the Vassal it may be either taken from him, and
evicted for his debt, or his crimes; the first, is, by apprysing, and
adjudication, and the last, by confiscation and forefaulture.

Apprising proceeds by letters charging the Debtor to compear before a
Messenger, (who is by the Letters made Judge; and Sherriff in that part in
place of the Sherriff of the shire, whose office properly it is K. J. 6. Par.
5. Act 37.
) and to hear the Lands specified in the letters, apprised by an inquest of 15.
sworn Men, and declared to belong to the Creditor for payment of his debt; but
because Our Law thought it not just that a man's Land should be taken from him
whilst his movables could pay his debt; therefore, in the first place, the
Messenger who executes the Letters must declare, that he searched for
movables; and because he could not find as many as would pay the debt;
therefore he denounced the lands to be apprised on the ground of the Lands, and
at the market cross of the Shire, Stewar^ry, or Regality where the Lands lie,
and left coppies both on the ground, and at the Cross.

At the day appointed by the Letters, the Messenger who is made Sherriff in
that part, Fences a Court, and the Debtor being called, his lands is offered
to him for the money; and if the money be not ready: the Inquest finds that the
Debiors lands should belong to the Creditor for his payment, and this is called
a Decree of Comprising; and the most part of the inquest affixes their seals
thereto; upon which the Compryser gets a Charter past in Exchequer, and is
infeft by precepts out of the Chancellary; if the Lands hold of the King; and
though of old, land apprysed, was proportioned to the money; yet thereafter
whatever land was ^ought to be apprysed was accordingly apprysed; though far
exceeding the sum in value, because seven years was given (which was thereafter
prorogate to ten K. C. 2. Par. 1. Sess. 1. Act 62
) for Redeeming the Land by payment of the true sum, and this is called a legal
reversion; because the Law gives it to the Debtor; and if it be not redeemed
within that time, the land belongs to himself for ever; but that legal runs not
against minors; because they want Judgment to know their hazard; so that they
may redeem at any time before they be 25. years complete; but if the Comprysing
expyre during their minority; the Compryser will thereafter have right to the
whole mails and duties, albeit exceeding his annualrent; But that part of the
Act is altered by a posterior statute, and the appryser is restricted to his
annualrent during the minority of the Debtor K. C. 2 par. 1. Sess. 3. Act 19.
.

If a minor succeed to a minor, whose lands are apprysed, he has right to
redeem, as if the Comprysing had been led against himself; But if a Major
succeed to a Minor, after the Legal is expired, he has only year and day to
redeem; and if the seven years be unexpired in the Minors time, the Major may
redeem within these years that are not run: And if the Rent of the Lands be not
correspondent to the annualrent of the Money; whoever has Right to the
Reversion, whether Major or Minor, must satisfy the whole sums and annualrents
resting before he can K. J. 6. Par. 23. Act 6.
redeem; But the Compriser during the Legal is restricted to the annualrent of
the sums due to him; and the superplus of his Intromission will be imputed in
payment of his principal sum; and if he be paid by Intromission, within the
Legal of his whole principal sum, bygone annualrents, and expenses, with the
composition paid to the superior, the comprising expires, ipso facto K. J. 6
par. 21. Act 6.
.

Though the supiriour be not regularly obliged to receive a singular
successor; yet least by collusion betwixt the debtor and his superior, the
true creditor should be unpayed; Therefore by a special Act of Parliament, the
superior is forced to receive a Compryser upon payment of a full years Duty of
the Land K. J. 3. Par. 5. Act 37. K. J. 6. Par. 23. Act 6.
, and he gets no more from all; though many Comprisers charge him to receive
them; but if the superior pleases he may retain the Land to himself, he paying
the Debt.

The first Comprising, without seasin, carries right to all Tacks, Reversions,
and other Rights, which require no Infeftment; and all posterior Comprisings
need not seasin; because they carry only the Right of Reversion; but yet
ordinarily second Apprisers do infeft themselves, because the first may be null,
or become paid; or the first Compriser may lie out from seeking Meals and
Duties; or the second Compriser would remove Tennents, which none can pursue
without being Infeft, but the Superior comprising needs no Infeftment.

After denounciation of the Lands to be apprised, the Debtor can do no
voluntar deed by Disponing, or Resigning; (because else he might frustrate the
diligence) except he was before denounciation specially obligedto dispone or
resign.

In a competition amongst Apprisers, the first Infeftment, or charge against
the Superior is always preferred; and if the first Compriser did diligence to
be infeft, but was stopped by collusion, as if the Superior to gratify the
second Compriser, should unjustly suspend the first; albeit the second Appriser
be first infeft, yet the first appriser having done diligence by charging, the
Superior will be preferred to the second appriser first infeft.

The Compriser during the years of the legal is not obliged to enter to the
possession, but if he once enter he must be comptable for the Meals and duties
though he leave off to possess; but if the meanest part of the sum be unpayed
after the expyring of the Legal, the whole land comprised belongs to the
Compriser without consideration of what he has intrometted with; to prevent
which the Debtor, or a Second, or any posteriour Compriser, who has comprised
the right of Reversion, does before the Legal expire, require the Compriser to
compear at any day, or place, to receive his Money, in so far as he is not
paid by his Intromission; and having consigned the same accordingly at that
day, he raises an Action of Count and Reckoning before the Lords of Session;
and if it be found that he is paid by Intromission, and the Money consigned*
The Lords decern the comprising to be paid, and extinct; nor needs the Debtor
get new seasin; for the former Right revives; since the Fie was still in his
Person, upon condition, that he would pay the sum within the Legal.

In this Count and Reckoning, the compryser will get allowance of the sherriff
Fie; which is the twenty penny of the sum that was comprysed for, and of the
entry payable to the superior, though the appryser truly paid neither; but
he will not get payment of a Chamberlane Fie for taking up the rent; except he
really paid it.

All apprisings led since the first * K. C. 2 Par. 1. Act 62.
of January, 1652. within year and day of the first effectual comprising by
infeftment, or charge against the Superior, come in pari pasu, as if they were
all contained in one apprising. But the posterior apprisings within year and
day; must pay their proportion of the Expenses of the Infeftment, and
composition given to the Superior by the first appriser;

Because appearand Heirs did frequently acquire Rights to expired apprisings
against their Predecessors, by which they bruicked their ^state, without
paying his Debt, to the ruin of lawful Creditors; Therefore, Our Law did very
justly ordain, all such Apprisings to be redeemed for the sums truly paid out
by the appearand Heir; which proceeds, albeit the appearand Heir acquire these
Rights in his Predecessors lifetime. But if the expired apprising was acquired
gratis, by the appearand Heir, the same is only redeemable by the Creditors,
for the sums contained in the apprising Act foresaid.
.

Because the Parliament thought it exhorbitant to take the greatest Estates for
the smalest sums, and to make a Messenger Judge in affairs of so great
importance.

Therefore in anno 1672. this way of comprising was altered, and in place
thereof the Creditor now gets land adjudged to him by the Lords of the Session,
proportionally to the sum^ due to him for obtaining in^eftment, with a fifth
part more; because the Creditor is obliged to take land for his money; which
Adjudication coming in place of Comprisings is perfected by Charter and Seasin,
as Comprisings; and the Superior is obliged to receive the Adjudger K. C. 2
Par. 2. Sess. 1. Act 18.
; but it is redeemable only within five years by Majors.

If the Debtor compear not to concur for completing the Adjudgers right, by
giving him a progress, and transumpts of the evidents, and ratifying the
Decree of Adjudication; then the whole lands may be adjudged, as they were
formerly apprised; it being unreasonable ^o s^rce a Man to take proportional
land for his money, and yet to be unsecured even for that proportion; and they
are redeemable within ten years; (these Adjudi^ations being now come in the
place of Apprisings), and have the same privileges and restrictions which
comprisings had by the Act of Parliament, made concerning Debtor and Creditor,
in K. C. ^ Par. 2. Sess. 3. Act 19.
Anno 1661. But if the Creditor attain possession upon his comprising, or
Adjudication; he can use no further execution against the Debtor, except the
Lands be evicted.

There are other two kinds of Adjudications, allowed by Our Law; the first is,
when the appearand Heir of the Debtor is charged to enter Heir; and renounces
to be Heir; the Creditor having obtained a Decree, cognitionis causa, for
constituting the Debt, wherein the appearand Heir is only pursued for
Formality; But the Decree can have no effect Personally against him; The
Hereditas j^cens will be adjudged to the Creditor, for payment of the Debt due
by the Defunct; which if it be liquid, and instantly instructed; the Pursuer in
the same Process protesting for Adjudication, the same will be allowed to him,
summarly without necessity of any other Decree, cognitionis causa.

These Adjudications are redeemable within seven years, at the instance of
Con-Creditors, one after another, who have likewise obtained Decreets of
Adjudication; And a Minor renouncing to be Heir, may be reponed, and allowed to
redeem upon payment K. C. 2 Par. 1 Sess. 1. Act 62.
.

And if the Superior be charged to infeft the Adjudger, he will get a years
rent for composition, as in Comprising K. C. 2 Par. 2 Sess. 1. Act. 18.
.

Adjudications, carry right to all which would have fallen to the Heir; as all
Heritable Rights, and the whole bygone rents and duties, since the defuncts
death may be adjudged; because these belonged to the Heir.

There is another kind of Adjudication competent by Our Law; that is for
performing any obligement which consists in facto, and relates to particular
dispositions; or obligements to infeft and after diligence used by Decree, and
Registrated horning against the disponer, and his Heir, for making the same
effectual: the Lords will adjudge the Lands disponed to the pursuer as a
remedium extraordinarum there being no other remedy competent.

This Adjudication extends no farther than to the thing disponed; and has no
reversion; nor does it require charges to enter Heir, or renounciation; but the
Authors right must be instructed.

Confiscation will be handled in the Title of Cryms, and Criminal Processes.

The INSTITUTIONS of the LAWS of SCOTLAND.
Part Third.
Title I. Of Obligations, and Contracts in general.
HAving thus cleared Real Rights; We will now proceed to treat of Obligations,
and Personal Rights.

An Obligation, is de^ined to O^l^gat^on.
be that Legal ^ye; whereby we are bound to Pay, or Perform any thing.

The chief division of Obligations by the Civil Law, and Ours, is, that some
are Natural; because they arise from the principles of right Reason, or Laws of
Nature. Some Civil, because they arise from positive Laws, or Municipal Customs.

Another considerable division of Obligations is, that some arise from
Contracts; some from deeds, resembling Contracts; some from malefices, and some
from deeds which resemble male^ices, Ex contractu, aut quasi contractu; ex
male^icio, aut quasi male^icio; for we become equally tied and obliged to Men;
either by contracting expressly with them; or by doing some deed which induces
an obligation without an express paction; or by committing malefices against
them.

A Contracts.
Contract is an agreement entered into by several persons, inducing an
obligation by its own Nature; Contracts.
and the obligations arysing from Contracts, are divided and distinguished,
according as they are perfected, either by the sole consent of the Contracters;
or by the intervention or tradition of things; or lastly, by Word or Write;
hence is that remarkable division of Contracts in the Civil Law, Qui re,
verbis, literis, aut concensu perficiuntur.

The Contracts which depend upon things, are these which arise either from
borrowing; (which comprehends indebite solutum,) or from loan; or from
depositation; or from impignoration; and are called mutuum commodatum,
depositum and pignus.

Mutuum.
Borrowing, or mutuum, is that contract, whereby a Man getting any thing from
another, is obliged to restore him not the same thing that was borrowed, but
the equivalent; or as much of the same quality in measure, number, or weight;
as when one borrowes a thousand pounds, the Receiver obliges himself to restore
not the same; but another thousand pounds; and therefore the property of the
thing borrowed, being transferred from the Giver to the Receiver; the Receiver
runs the hazard of all the loss that the thing Borrowed can sustain, after it
is delivered: This contract is most strictly interpreted, so that nothing is
understood but what is clearly expressed.

Commodatum.
Loan, or Commodatum, is that Contract whereby a man gets the Loan of any
p^rticular thing Gratis, for some special use, and obliges him to restore the
same thing in specie; and not the equivalent; as when a man gets the Loan of a
Horse, or Coach; and because in this case, the property remains with the
lender, therefore if the thing lent be lost, or perish by chance, the loss
redounds to the lender; for the thing is still his; but if the thing be lent
merely for the advantage of the borrower, he is liable to do most exact
diligence; and therefore, if the thing perish, or sustain any prejudice for
want of exact diligence the borrower must make up the same; but if the thing
was lent for both the borrower and the lenders advantage, then from the same
principal of natural equity, the borrower is only obliged to do such diligence,
and to be so careful of the thing borrowed as he would have been of his own.

In this Contract, the receiver is obliged to restore the same species in as
good condition as he got it; and the Lender is obliged to pay the Receiver any
considerable expense, that he necessarly bestowed upon the thing borrowed, the
Law not allowing inconsiderable expenses; because, the Borrower has the use of
the thing, which should compense these. Precariu^.


Precarium, is, when any thing is lent to be called back at the Lenders
pleasures, wherein it differs from Commodatum; which imports always a
determinate time for making use of the thing lent

Depositation.
Depositation, is that Contract which is entered into by one man's delivering
any thing, into the custody of another to ^e k^pt gratis for his use; and
therefore, because in this Contract, the property remains with him, who did
depositate the thing, if it be lost, it is lost to him; and since depositations
are made for the behoove of him who does depositate; Therefore, the Depositar
(for so we call him, in whose hand the thing is Depositated) is only liable if
the thing Depositate, was lost by the depositars dole, or gross fault; nam
d^^ositarius tantum prest^t dolum, and latam ^ulpam; yet Inns-keepers,
S^ablers, and Masters of Ships, are liable to most exact diligence, in
preserving the goods of Travelers and Passengers, which they bring into their
Houses, and Ships, and to repair and make up all the loss they may sustain,
while they are in the Inns, or Ships, whether the prejudice come by the
Servants, or Mariners, or by Strangers, which special kind of depositation, is
introduced by equity, contrare to the Common Rules of Depositation, and which
we have immediately from the Civil Law, and edictum praetoris, Entitled,
Na^tae caupones Stabularii, etc.

As in this Contract, the Depositar is liable to restore the same thing that is
Depositate, and not the equivalent; so the Depositor is obliged to pay the
Depositar what he bestowed upon it, whilst it did lie beside him, for generally
a Gratuitous Office, ought to prejudge no man.

But he cannot crave Compensation upon any debt due to him by the Despositar,
which is singular in this Contract.

Pledge, is the Contract, Pledge.
whereby one man gives to another any thing, for the Receivers Security for
what he owes him, to be redelivered upon payment; and therefore, because the
thing it self in specie, is to be redelivered; if it perish during the
impignoration, by the gross fault or fraud of him who receives the pledge, it
perishes to the Impignorator; and because Impignorations are made for the
advantage both of the giver and receiver, (the one being concerned to get
money, or some such thing upon the pledge, and the other to get a pledge for
security of his money;) therefore he who receives the pledge, is liable to do
such diligence for preserving thereof as prudent men use to do in their own
Affairs; but he is not liable for culpa levissima; the Contract being for the
behoove of both parties; and he will have repetition from him; for what he
profitably bestowed upon it during the Impignoration.

Sometimes what is Impignorated is not delivered, and then the Pledge is called
an Hypotheque, and the Law sometimes makes such ^acit hypotheques without
express paction, as where it makes the ^orn growing upon land, or the goods
brought in to the House, that was set in Tack, to be liable to the Heritor for
payment of his rent.

If one man pays to another more than is due to him; or what is not due at
all, the Law allows to him Repetition of what was unjustly paid; and this is
called ( condictio indebiti;) because by paying Condictio Indebiti.
to you, I oblige you really and in effect, to repay what shall be found not to
be due; or to have been paid more than was really due; but since this
obligation arises from the payers ignorance, therefore if he knew that what he
paid was not due, he will not get Repetition; but what he paid will be looked
upon, as a donation, but it must be ignorantia facti, for ignorantia juris
avails no man; and since this repayment is only allowed by the principles of
natural equity; therefore if what was paid was due in equity, though it was
not due by positive Law, the payer will not get Repetition.

Title II. Of Obligations by Write, or Word.
SOme Obligations, require Write, to make them Obligation by Write.
binding; whereas others require Write only by way of Probation, that is to
say, cannot be proven without write, though they be valid, and binding without
it.

All Obligations for transmitting the real right of lands, do so far require
Write of their own nature; that though the bargan be solemnly and clearly
ended, by verbal transaction; yet there is still place to resile, or locus
penetentiae, till the write be signed.

Though verbal promises do^ by Our Law, bind the promiser; Promises.
yet because the position and import of words may be easily mistaken by the
hearers; therefore verbal Obligations or promises can only be proven by Oath of
party, and not by witnesses, though the sum be never so small.

Because, Men's subscriptions may be easily counterfitted; therefore by an
express Statute with Us, no Obligation though in write for more than 100 lib.
is valid; except it be signed in presence of two subscriving witnesses, if the
party can write; or by two Notars, and four witnesses; if the party cannot
write K. J. 6. Par. 15. Act 175
; except the write be holograph; and that the writter and witnesses be
specially designed K. C. 2 pa^. 3. Act 5.
; and though the subscriving by two initial letters be sustained, where it is
proved that the subscriver was in use so to subscrive; yet the Granters mark is
not sufficient, except the verity of the affixing that mark be referred to the
granters Oath.

Such is the favor of commerce, and such expedition it requires, that upon its
account, bills of Exchange are sustained; though Bills of Exchange.
they be not signed before witnesses; and delivery of goods, upon bargans are
sustained to be proved by witnesses; though there be no write; and such is the
favor of contracts of Marriage; especially where they are become Nottour by
the subsequent Marriage, that they are sustained though there be no witnesses.

By Our Law, an Obligation in write is not binding; except it either be
delivered, or dispense with the not delivery; by a special clause therein; nam
traditione transferuntur rerum dominia; but tradition is not requisite in
mutual contracts; and if the write be in his hand, in whose favors it is made,
it is presumed to have been delivered; and cannot be taken from him upon the
pretense of not delivery; except it be referred to his Oath that it was never a
delivered evident by the Granter.

Title III Of Obligations, and Contracts arising from Consent, and Accessory
Obligations.
THough all Contracts require the consent of the Contracters; yet there are
four, viz. Emption, Location, Society, and Mandat; which are said in a more
special way to arise from Consent; because these Contracts are perfected by
mere consent of Parties, without any further solemnity, or tradition; and thus
how soon two parties agree, Emo and Vend.
concerning the price of any thing that is to be sold, that Contract is by mere
consent so far perfected, that he has the seller precisly obliged to deliver
the thing bought and perfect the sale; albeit the dominium or property be not
transferred, but remains with the Seller until delivery; and if the thing
bought perish without the Sellers fault, even before delivery, the loss is the
buyers, in respect of the Personal obligement upon the Seller, to deliver it,
and the buyers right is established even before tradition; and though earnest,
or arles be given as a Symbol or mark of agreement; yet the consent without
the earnest or arles (as we call it) compleats the bargan; and if the earnest
be in current money, it is to be imputed as a part of the price. Emption.


In this Contract of Emption and Vendition, their must be a price, consisting
in numerate, and down told money; for if one thing be given for another the Law
calls that Contract, Permutation, or excambion, and not Emption, and Vendition;
and this price must be certain and definite; but if the price be referred to
another, the bargan will subsist; except that third party, to whom it was
referred, either will not, or cannot determine the price.

Location and Conduction, is a * Location.
Contract, whereby a hyre is given, for the use and profit of any thing, or
for the work of persons; It differs from Emption and Vendition, chiefly in
this, that the design of that Contract is, to transferr the property; but in
Location the property remains with the Setter.

This Contract, being entered into by the mutual consent, and for the advantage
of both parties; the conductor is only liable, to use and adhibite a moderate
diligence, for preserving the thing set; that is such diligence as prudent men,
adhibite in their own affairs; so that if the same perish without his gross and
supine negligence; or fraud, he is not liable to make it up to the Locator.

Location or setting of Lands for a certain hyre, (called the Tack-dutie,) is
frequent in Scotland; and it is to be observed that if the Ground yield no
increase, but is absolutely barren, without the Fault of the Conductor; the
hyre will not be due, since that was given for the profit and use of the
ground; But if there be not an absolute Sterility; and that the Land yield some
profit, though never so little; the hyre will be due, if the profit but
exceed the expense of the laboring.

From this Contract there arise two Actions, the one whereby the Conductor is
obliged to pay the hyre agreed unto; and to restore the thing set after the end
of the Location, in as good condition as he got it. The other is an Action
whereby the Locator is bound to refound to the Conductor, the necessary
expenses employed upon the thing hired, during the Location. Vide supra, Part
2. Title 6.

Society, is a Contract, whereby several persons obliege themselves Society
to communicate loss and gain arising from the things common in the Society.

All the Partners in the Society, do by the nature of this Contract share
equally; except it be otherwise provided; and if either the share of the gain
or loss be expressed, the one regulates still the other; but because some Men's
pains are of as great value, as other Men's money, therefore it is lawful and
consistent with the nature of Society to contract so, as that one may have the
half of the gain, and no loss; but the Contract would be null, if it were
provided, that one should have all the gain and no loss, for there could be no
compensation, though the other were never so skilful.

By this Contract, all the Partners are obliged to advance for the affairs of
the Society, according to the shares they have in it.

The Society is extinguished, and the Persons who entered therein loosed
therefrom by the death of any of the Partners; or by their becoming insolvent;
except it be otherwise provided; for this is a Personal Contract, wherein Men
respect the Humor and industry of one another; and so this Contract is
disolved, by the simple Renounciation of any of the Partners; so that every one
has a Negative Vote, and if the Society be entered into, with this condition,
that it should not be dissolved at the option of any of the partners; the Law
did reprobate such Pactions; and from the same principle likewise it is, that
partners in a Society, are not liable for further diligence, then they used to
adhibite in their own affairs; for having voluntarly choosed one another for
partners; it is presumed they are satisfied with one another diligence, the
contract being entered into for the behoove and profit of all the partners.

Mandate.
Mandate, is that Contract whereby one employes another to do, or manage any
business* gratuitously; for if he who is employed get a reward, it is not
properly a Mandate, but Locatio operarum, or a seeing of the person so
employed; but yet if the receiver of the mandate has been at any expense upon
the account of the mandate, the employer must pay it.

He who receives the mandate is obliged to execute the same, according to the
rules prescrived by the employer, and not to exceed the bounds of his mandate;
And therefore if Titius employed Seius, to buy him, such a particular piece of
Land for 10000 lib. Titius is obliged to ratify his bargan; though he buy it
for 9000 lib. because ten comprehends nine; but if he pay 12000 lib. for it; he
is not obliged to ratify the bargan; because he exceeds the bounds of his
Commission.

Mandates, expire either by the revocation of the employer, if the thing or
business in which he was employed be entire; or by the death either of the
person employed, or of the employer, or by the renounciation of the person
employed; but in all those ^ases; if the thing undertaken be not entire; the
person employed may and must proceed to execute the mandate, ^otwithstanding of
the Revocation, death, or Renounciation.

Mandatars are liable for exact diligence, and culpa levissima; because albeit
the Mandate be only gratia Mandantis, yet the very nature of it implies
diligence.

Mandates, are either express arising, from express consent; or tacit, which
are inferred by signs and ta^iturnity; as for instance, if a person present
suffers another to act in his affairs; he is understood to give him thereby a
tacit mandate.

Secundo, Mandates are either Genesis and Par. Mand.
general for managing all affairs; or special, for doing some particular
business, conform to the precise tenor of the commission; and albeit general
mandates contain a most ample power of administration; yet they are not
extended to committing of Crimes: Or,

Secundo, to Donations; albeit where there is any probable cause,
gratifications may be allowed; which will be regulate secundum arbitrium boni
viri; this being contractus bonae fidei, which implies exuberant trust.

Tertio, No General Mandate will imply a power to alienate Immoveables; or to
submit or transact any litigious business.

Quarto, If in the general Mandate some special cases are expressed, it will not
be extended to cases of greater importance, than those expressed.

The great favor of Commerce, has introduced another kind of tacit Mandate; by
which Exercitors of ships, and Prepositors are obliged by the Contracts of the
Masters of the ships, and of the Institors, in relation to the Ships and
Voyage; or to the particular Negotiation wherein they are entrusted.

Exercitor, is he to whom the profit of a Ship does belong; whether he be the
Owner, or has only freighted the ship: Exercitor.
the Master is the person entrusted with the charge of the ship, who has power
to oblige the Exercitor, by contracting for the reparation, and out^igging of
the ship; and in matters relating to the Voyage.

Institors, are entrusted with particular Negotiations at land, such as keeping
of Shops, etc. Institor
and they oblige their Prepositors, in relation to the affair wherein they are
entrusted, as Exercitors are in Maritim affairs.

Neither the Masters of ships, nor Institors, need show their Commission, but
their being in the Office is sufficient to oblige the Exercitors, and
Constituents. And if there be many Exercitors the Masters Contract obliges them
all In solidum; albeit what was borrowed be not employed for the use of the
Ship; only it must be known to the Lender, that the Ship stood in need of such
Reparations; and the facts of the Institors, will oblige their Constituents of
whatsoever Sex or Age they be; and even though they be Pupils, Minors, or
Wives, who cannot validly oblige themselves; for they have themselves to blame
who Entrusted such Persons.

As all those Obligations and Contracts arise from express consent, so others
arise from tacit consent; such as Homologation; as for instance, though a man
be not obliged by a bond granted in Minority; yet if he pay a part of it, or
annualrent for it, after he is Major; the Obligation is thereby homologated or
owned, and becomes valid; not from the time of the Homologation.
Homologation, but from the date of the Write; and therefore it is fit that
such as design not to own, null, or invalid deeds, should abstain from doing
any thing, that may infer an approbation of them; but because Homologa^^on, is
actus animi, therefore it should not be proven by witnesses.

Because all Obligations, cannot be bound up under general and regular names of
Contracts; therefore the Law allows some Obligations, to pass under the name of
Quasi Contractus; because Quasi contractus.
they have the resemblance, and are of the nature of Contracts; and these are
Negotiorum Gestio, whereby if any person manage your business Negotiorum Gestio.
advantagiously for you; you are liable to him for his expense; though you gave
him no Mandate; least such as are absent should be prejudged by the negligence
of their Friends; as the Manager is liable to refound to the Person whose
affairs he managed, any prejudice done to him since, else any man might be
invited officiously, to middle in another man's affairs to his disadvantage, but
this is to be understood, si in utiliter gesserit; otherewise if he acted
profitably; albeit the event do not succeed, he will get his expenses.

The other quasi contractus, are Tutorie, communion of goods, entering to be
Heir, the Obligation of repayment that arises upon payment of what is not due;
for if one be Tutor Tutory.
to you, he enters in a kind of Contract with you, whereby he is bound to
administrate your affairs, and you are bound to pay him his expense; but of all
these I have treated elsewhere in their proper places, as I shall do of
malesices, and and what resembles them, when I come to treat of Crims; of which
these may be properly said to be branches.

Having thus treated of Principal Obligations; the only Accessory Obligation
that I need mention is Cautionary; whereby one man becomes surtie for another;
either to pay a sum, or perform a deed; betwixt Cautioners.
which two, there is this difference, that these that are Cautioners for a sum,
if they be bound conjunctually and severally, with the principal debtor; may
be pursued without pursuing the Principal: and quoad the Creditor they are
Principals; but these who are Cautioners for performing of deeds; as cautioners
for Executors, and for Curators, or Factors, or for Messengers, cannot be
prusued till the principal be discussed, for they being only obliged, that
their Principals shall count, or be honest; therefore they cannot be liable
until the Principals first be cited to count in the one Case; or to answer for
their delinquencies in the other; and they are only liable to make up what is
wanting from their Principals after they are discust.

Because Cautioners for sums are liable as principals; therefore their
Obligation may subsist; though the Obligation of the Principal Party be found
null, or reduced by any privilege given to the Principal by Law; as if a Man
become caution for a Minor; or for a woman who is married, Nam sibi imputet,
who became a Cautioner for such; but if the obligation was absolutely null in
it self; as if the Principal did not sign, then this obligation because it is
but accessory, retains so much of its own nature as to free the Cautioner.

Cautioners, are to get relief from their Principals, not only of the
principal sums, and annualrents; but of all damage, and interest; and whether
the same be Relief of Cau:
provided by the bond or not; and where there are many Co-Cautioners; they are
liable in solidum, quoad the Creditor; but if any of them pay the whole sum to
the Creditor; though he get assignation from him to the whole; yet he must
only seek his relief from the other Cautioners, with deduction of his own
part; which proceeds; albeit there be no clause of mutual relief in the bond;
and they must communicate to their Co-cautioners, what ease they get by way of
Transaction from the Creditor; but if they get the said ease by a mere
Ratification, as by Donation, etc. then they are not bound to communicate what
ease they get; for a Creditor may justly gratify one of his Cautioners as his
Friend, or Relation, without being obliged to gratify the rest.

To make Obligations effectual, it is necessar that the subject matter thereof
be such as will admit of an obligation; For, no man c^^ oblige himself, to do
what is either impossible, unlawful, or dishonest; nor to transmit the property
of things Sacred; (these not being in comercio,) and albeit when the
Performance of obligations becomes imprestable, the Party is liable for the
Value, as Damage and Interest; yet in these the Value is not due, nor will he
be liable in a penalty, in case of not performance.

But yet a Man may oblige himself, to do something not in his own power, as to
cause another dispone Lands; and if he fail, he will be liable pro damno and
inter esse; or for the penalty.

Amongst Obligations, Donation Donations.
is also reckoned, which is an obligation proceeding from a Lucrative cause or
title; For he who voluntarly, and gratuitously promises to give any thing, is
thereby obliged to deliver the same; and this Voluntar giving, is called, a
Donation, which is in Law defined to be A mere Liberality proceeding from no
previous eompulsion.

It may be perfected either by Write, or without it; but if without Write, it
must be proven by Oath.

Donations, are either Simple, Remuneratory, or Mortis causae, that is to say,
Donations made in contemplation of Death.

A Remuneratory Donation, Remuneratory Donations.
called (...), is when a Man bestows any thing not gratuitously, but to
requite and repay some good deed done, or to be done to him; and so is not
purely a Donation.

A Donation in contemplation Donations in Contemplation of Death.
of Death, is, when the Giver designs rather the Person to whom he gifts to
have what is gifted, than any other; but wishes himself to have it, rather than
him to whom he gifts it: And therefore, though pure Donations are not
Revocable, yet a Donatio Mortio causa is; being of the nature of a Legacy; and
no Donation is presumed to be Donatio Mortis causa, except it appear to be so,
either expressly, or by strong presumptions, that the thing gifted, was only
gifted in contemplation of Death.

Gifts, being a mere Liberality, are not presumed; and Gifts.
therefore by Our Law, Debtor non praesumitur donare quam diu est debtor: But
this being only a praesumptio Iuris, may be taken off by stronger Arguments,
justly inferring, that Donation rather than payment was designed.

Title IV. Of the Dissolution, or Extinction of Obligations.
HAving cleared how Obligations are constitute; It remains now to consider how
they are taken off, and extinguished; which is either by a contrary consent, or
by implement and satisfaction.

Since Consent is necessary to Consent.
the constitution of obligations, so a contrary eonsent, whether by a
Discharge, or pactum de non petendo; does dissolve and extinguish Obligations;
nam nihil est tam natural, quam eo genere quidque dissolvere quo colligatum
est; And therefore, if the obligation be constitute by Write, it requires
Write to the dissolution thereof, which is called a Discharge; And Discharges
require the same solemnities Discharge.
that obligations do; but yet, if the obligation was satisfied, via facti, as
by intromission with Rents of Lands, etc. it is probable by Witnesses, as all
Facts are.

Discharges, are either general of all that Parties can ask, or Dis charges
general and particular.
claim; Or particular, of one particular thing or subject: And in general
Discharges, if any particular thing be expressly discharged therein, the general
clause will be extended to particulars of no greater importance, than what is
expressly discharged.

Discharges do ordinarily bear a clause, discharging all preceedings till their
date; and albeit they do not, yet three consecutive discharges, do presume,
that all bygones are satisfied, if they be immediately Apocha trium annorum.
subsequent to one another, and granted by Parties, having power to discharge
as discharges by Heritors, or Chamberlains, to their Tenants; and therefore
discharges of 3. subsequent years granted by Merchants, who bought the Ferm of
these years, will not infer the presumption; but it will be inferred by
Discharges for a part of the three years granted by the Father, and the rest by
his eldest Son, as Heir; the Discharges being in Write, containing a discharge
of the whole years Rent; so that partial Receipts, albeit they extend to more
than the years Rent, will not presume, that all preceedings are paid; neither
one Discharge for three subsequent terms, or years, the presumption being
inferred from renewing of the Discharges each year, without Reservation.

Obligations, are extinguished, and Payment.
dissolved by payment, which is, the performing of the obligation in the
precise terms thereof, and is so favorable, that if it be made bona fide, it
dissolveth the obligation; albeit he to whom it was made, had no right; so
payment made to a Procurator after the Procuratorie was revocked without the
payers knowledge, will be sustained; and payment made to Ministers serving the
Cure, though they have no Title to the benefice, will liberat the Payers.

Obligations are likewise fulfilled by acceptilations, which is an imaginary
satisfaction, as if it were truly performed, and Acceptilation
has the effects and all the privileges of payment.

Secundo, by compensation, whereby if the Creditor of a Compensation.
liquid sum, become Debtor to his Debtor, in another liquid sum, the two
obligations extinguish each other ipso jure; and is equivalent to payment in
all cases, but if the sums be not liquid, or if a species or body be craved to
compense a liquid sum it will not be allowed.

Tertio, Obligations are taken away by Innovation, which is, the changing one
obligation for another, and if the person of Innovation*
the Debtor be changed, it is called delegation.

Innovation is never presumed except it be expressly mentioned, or that the
obligation bears expressly to be in satisfaction of the former.

Quarto, Obligations are extinguished by Confusion; that is to say, when the
Debt and Credit meet in the same Person; as when the Debtor succeeds to
Consusion.
the Creditor, or the Creditor to the Debtor; or a Stranger to both; and the
reason of the Extinction in these cases, is, because the same Person cannot be
both Debtor and Creditor.

Title V. Of ASSIGNATIONS.
ALL Rights, whether Assignation.
Heritable or Moveable, are transmissiable by Assignation; but if a Seasin once
be taken, the Right is not Transmissable by an Assignation, but by a
Disposition; except Liferents, which are Transmissable by Assignation even
after Seasin; because they can admit of no subaltern Cedent and Assig.
Infef^ments.

He who grants the Assignations is called the Cedent, and he who receives it,
is called the Assignay.

Assignation to a Right is completed by Intimation; and therefore in
competition betwixt diverse assignays, the first intimation is always
preferred; This intimation Intimation.
is made by a Procurator, who takes instruments in the hands of a Notar, that
such an assignation was intimat, (so that one man cannot be both Notar and
Procurator;) and if after this the Debtor pay the Cedent, he must repay it to
the assignay; because the Cedent was denuded by the assignation; and for the
same reason, the Cedents oath will not prove against the assignay if the
assignation be for an Onerous cause.

But if the assignation be Gratuitous; or for the Cedents behoof; or if the
matter be litigious, and after a depending Process; in any of these cases the
Cedents oath, will prove against the assignay.

A pursuit or charge of horning upon the Action assigned, has likewayes the
force and effect of an intimation; but an Inhibition against the Cedent upon
the assignation, will not supply intimation.

The Debitors private knowledge of the assignation, is not equivalent to an
intimation; but his paying a part of the sum? or annualrent for it, is
equivalent to an intimation; and much more the writting a letter promissing to
pay; since that is in effect a renewing the Obligation.

Bills of Exchange, and orders by Merchants to pay, need not be intimated;
because in Commerce we are Governed by the Law of Nations; nor need
assignations to reversions be intimated; because the registration is a
publication of them, nor legal^ and judicial assignations, such as apprisings,
adjudications, and Marriage; and that because they are past, and expede
publictly.

A Blank Band is equivalent to an assignation; and so Blank Band.
must be intimated; and in competition with other rights, it is only preferred
according to the date of its intimation, that the receivers name was filled up
in it.

It is a general principle in Our Law, that in the competition of more
Creditors, the first complete diligence is still preferred; And therefore, an
Assignation is preferred to an Arrestment, if it be intimate before the
arrestment; but if the imtimation and Arrestment be in one day, they come in
pari passu; except the Arrester be in mora, and do no diligence upon his
Arrestment.

Title V. Of Arrestments and Poyndings.
THE ordinary Diligences, in Our Law, affecting Of Arrestments. and Poyndings.
Moveable Rights, are Arrestment, which answers to Inhibition in Heritage, and
poynding which answers to Comprising in Heritage.

Arrestment is the cammand of a Judge, discharging any Person in whose hands
the Debitors Movables are to, pay or deliver up the same, till the Creditor
who has procured the Arrestment to be laid on, he satisfied.

Arrestments may be laid on, by any Judge in whose Territories the goods are;
or by the Lords of the Session wherever they lie, and that by special letters
of Arrestment; or by a warrant expressed in the ordinary letters of horning:
these letters are execute by a Messenger, and if after it is laid on the party
in whose hands it is made, pay; he may be forced to pay the same over again, or
may be pursued Criminally for breaking Arrestment, the punishment being
consiscation of Movables and their persons to be in the Kings will K. J. 6.
Par. 7. act 118.
.

Arrestment can only affect moveable sums, and the ground thereof must be for
payment of moveable debts, or sums due on Heritable security, if no infeftment
has followed K. C. 2 Par. 1. Sess. 1. Act 51.
, and it reaches only to the sums already due, or for which the year or term is
current.

How soon on Action is raised against a Person, his Goods may thereupon be
arrested; and this is called an Arrestment upon a Dependence; but this
Arrestment may be loosed by letters for loosing of Arrestment, which passes
upon a Common Bill, and a Band of Cautionry is given to the Clerk of the Bills
K. J. 6. Par. 22. Act 17.
, wherein the Granter of the band obliges himself to pay the sum, if the
Arrestment be found lawful, and the sums or goods decerned, to belong to the
Arrester; but Arrestments upon a Decree or (which is equivalent) on a
Registrat Band, cannot be loosed at all; Except the decree be turned unto a
libel, that is to say, the Lords do only sustain the Decree as a libell or
summonds against the Defender, or that the Arrestment was laid on after the
Decree was suspended; for in either of theses cases Arrestments may be loosed
even upon Decreets.

Arrestment being but a Personal Prohibition against the Defender to pay, it
lasts no longer than the lifetime of him in whose hands the Arrestment is made;
except it be renewed against his Successors; but it dies not with him in whose
favors it was raised, nor with him for whose debt it was * (...) Par. act 118
laid on; and if the debt be not liquid, the Debitors representative must be
called to the Liquidation.

In the Competition amongst more Arresters, preference is granted according to
the Priority even of hou^s; and the first Arrestment is not preferred if the
Posteriour Arrester get the first Decree, to make the Arrested goods
forthcoming; for arrestment; being only an inchoat diligence, it is completed
by the sentence to make forthcoming; and yet if the Arrester did exact dligence
to obtain a Decree; his raising the first pursuit, will prefer him. He also
who arrests on a Decree, will be preferred to him who arrests on a dependence;
and he who Arrests after the term of payment will be preferred to him who
Arrests before the term.

The Kings pensions and gratuities aliments cannot be arrested; because they
are given for a particular and favorable use; and not applicable to the
Arrester.

Poynding may be likewise used against movables, by Poinding:
virtue of letters of horning against the Debitors; containing poinding or any
other inferior Judge, his Decree or precept K. J. 6. Par. 12. Act 10. K. Chapter
2. Par. 1. Sess. 1. Act 29.
which is done by a Messenger after the days of the charge are expired K: C: 2
Par: 2: Sess: 1: Act ^:
, the form thereof is; The Messenger after poynding the goods, apprises them
upon the ground where he apprehends them; and offers them to the Debtor, for
the sum for which they were apprised, and if he compear not, he carries them to
the market cross of the head burgh of the shire, or other Jurisdiction where
they are poinded, and there he apprises them, and delivers them to the Party,
who is called the Poynder: but if any compear, and offer to make Faith that the
goods belong to them, and not to the Debtor; then the Messenger must deliver
them to that Party, else he is liable in a spulzie.

Poynding, is a judicial sentence, and the Messenger is Judge constitute by the
letters; the Messenger writes likewise an execution of poynding and that
execution is better believed than any who offers to prove the contrare; for
that execution is only quarrelable by improbation.

Arrestment, being but an inchoat diligence, discharging the Party in whose
hand the Arrestment is made, to pay, the right to the goods arrested, remain
still in the Debtor, and may be poynded for his debt; for poynding is a
complete diligence* giving an absolute right to the goods poynded.

Laboring Oxen, or other Plough Goods cannot be poynded Labor ing oxen
in time of laboring (least laboring should be otherwise discouraged;)
except there be no other Movables upon the ground to be poinded K. J. 4 par.
6. Act 98.
.

Title VI. Of PRESCRIPTIONS
PRescription being a way of evacuating and annulling both Heritable, and
Moveable Rights comes Pes^r.
in here, after both these are explained.

Prescription is defined, an Acquisition of Property by the Poss^ssors
continuing his possession for such time as the Law determines; Which was
introduced not only for punishing the negligence of the (...), who owned not
his Right for so many years; But likewayes, for securing Possessors, and such
as derived right from them; and least by a constant uncertainty, the Possessors
being unsecure, might neglect the improvement of what they possessed.

Heritable Rights, (under which I comprehend Wadsets, Heritable Offices,
Servitudes, Patronages, etc.) and all Actions depending upon them, or relating
Pres: of Herit. Rights.
to them, prescrive with us in 40. years; if the Possessor being a singular
Successor, have a Chartor, Disposition, or Precept, and Seasin in his Person;
or being an Heir, have a constant tract of Seasins, continuing and standing
together, for the space of 40. years, flowing upon Retoures, or Precepts of
Clare constat; For, the Law did not trust a Seasin alone, it being only the
assertion of a Notar. But Reversions which are in the body of the Poss^ssors
right; or reversions duly Registrated, prescrive not.

All Personal Rights, and Actions relating to them, prescrive likewayes in 40.
years; If a Pres: of personal Rights.
Document be not taken upon that Right, that is to say, If nothing be done,
whereby the true Proprietor declares his intention to follow and own his Right
K. J. 3. Par. 5. Act 29. Par. ^. Act ^^:
.

In both these Prescriptions, the extraordinary length of time, supplies the
want of bona fides in the possessor; But, no length of time can make the
possessor prescrive things Sacred, Religious, or public; nor yet things
stol^e, or robbed, Ob vitium reale, which affects such things.

Actions of Spulzie, and Ej^cti on, prescrive in three years, after committing
thereof; as to the specialities of these Actions, viz. the violent profits, and
Oath in litem; But Minors have three years after their Majority K. J. 6. Par.
7. act 119.
.

As do also Actions for Servants Fies, House meals, and Merchant compts; except
they can be proven after these three years, by the Debitors oath K. J. 6. Par.
6. Act 83.
: And removings, if Action be not intended within three years after the warning
K. J. 6. Par. 6. Act 82.
.

If Assysers err in serving a man wrongously Heir to his Predecessor, the
Retour may be Assyers.
quarrelled within 20 years; but the Assysers themselves can only be pursued
for error, within three years K. J. 6. Par. 22. Act 13.
, but the right of blood it self never prescrives; and therefore a man may be
served H^ir to his Father or Grandfather, after a 100 years, being debarred by
no time; nam jura sanguinis nullo jure ^ivili adimi possunt.

If a Person who is forefaulted possessed lands 5 years before the forefaultur,
without interruption, Forfeiture:
the King is obliged to show no right, in the person of him who was forefaulted
to the lands, or others that he possessed; because its presumed that the person
forefaulted would abstract the writs, which quinquenrial possession is to be
tried by an inquest of the Shire, where the land lies K. J. 6. Par. 9. Act 2.
.

Arrestments on Decreets and depending actions prescrive within five years
after sentence.

Meals and Duties due by Tennents prescrive, if not persued within five years,
after the Tennents removing; Ministers stipends, and multurs pres^rive so that
they cannot be pursued after five years, except they be proven by the Debitors
oath.

Holograph Bands; and subscriptions in count books, prescrive in twenty years;
except they be proven by the debitors oath.

And lastly, all bargans probable by witnesses, all actions on warnings,
spulzies, ejections, Arrestments, Ministers stipends, etc. prescrive within ten
years; unless wakned every five years; but this alters not any shorter
prescriptions of these actions K. C. 2 Par. 2. Sess. 1. Act 9.
.

All these prescriptions run de momento in momentum; so that the prescription
runs till the last moment of the time allowed; but they run only from the time
wherein the debt could have been pursued, since till then the Proprietar could
not be called negligent, which negligence is the foundation of prescriptions;
and therefore prescription runs not against a band from the date of a band; but
only from the term of paymennt; and prescription of an action of warrandice,
runs only from the eviction K. J. 6. Par. 22. Act 12.
; because no man is liable in warrandice, till the lands be evicted; and from
the same principle it is, that contra valentem agere non currit, prescriptio;
and that prescription runs not against Minors, in whom negligence is not
punishable, since it proceeds from no design; but from the unripness of their
Age.

Vassals cannot prescrive against their Superiors; because the Vassals right
acknowledges the Superiors; nor can Laics prescrive a right to ^^ynds being
incapable of such rights after the Lateran Council; but though the right it
self prescrives, in neither of these cases, yet the bygons due by virtue of
these rights before forty years, may prescrive.

Prescription runs against the Kirk, and Mortifications; but on the other hand,
because Prescription
Church men are negligent, and rights may be lost in the change of Intrants;
therefore, 13. years possession, is sufficient to maintain a Church man in
possession; which is called, decennalis and ^riennalis possessio; and is a
presumptive title, and sufficient till a better be showen, by which it may be
excluded; for praesumptio caedit veritati.

Prescriptions run likewayes against the King; except as to His Majesty's
annexed property; or to his unannext property whereof the ferms, duties or feu
ferms, have been compted for in Exchequer, since August 1455. years.

Any deed, whereby the true proprietar owns his right, during the course of the
prescription, is called interruption; and prescription is interrupted in Our
Law, either by a process, or Interruption^
a charge raised within the years of the prescription; though the citation was
only on the first Summonds; and though the Summonds was past from, pro loco and
tempore; But interruption by citation, is not sufficient unless it be made by
Messengers personaly or at the parties dwelling house, and that it be renewed
every seven years K. C. 2* Par. 2. Sess. 1: Act 9.
; and that the Execution be signed by the Messenger and witnesses K: C: 2 Par:
3. Act 5.
.

Interruptions made against the principal party, interrupt as to Caution^rs;
and interruption as to a part interrupts the prescription of the whole; so that
if a man arrest the meals and duties of any part of a Barrony, he interrupts
prescription, as to the whole Barrony.

Title VII. Of Succession in Heritable Rights.
HAving formerly showed how Rights whether Heritable, or Moveable, Real, or
Personal, are constitute, and how they are transmitted to singular Successors:
It remains now to consider how these Rights are transmitted by succession,
beginning first with Succession in Heritage.

An Heir, is he that succeeds universally to all that belonged to the Defunct;
and is therefore Heir:
in the construction of Law, one and the same person with the Defunct.

Though the Executor, be in effect the Heir in moveable Rights; yet we call
those only properly Heirs, who succeed in Heritage; and with us there are
several kinds of Heirs distinguished by their several denominations. Heir of
Line:


The first, and chief kind of Heirs, are the Heirs of line, who are so called,
because they succeed Lineally, according to the right of Blood; and they
succeed thus,

First, Descendants, according to the proximity of their Degree, in which the
eldest Son is preferred to all his Brothers, and all the Brothers to the
Sisters; and if there be only Sisters, they succeed all equally.

The next degree, is Grand Children, and their great Grand Grand Children.
Children, etc. who succeed all in the same way.

If there be no Descendants, then Collaterals succeed, in which, the first
degree is Brothers, and Sisters German, for the whole blood excludes the half
blood; and Brothers the Sisters; Collaterals.
and Brothers by the Fathers side exclude Brothers by the Mothers side; there
being no Succession with us by the Mothers side.

Failing Descendants, and Brothers and Sisters, the Succession ascends; and all
the Ascendants succeed upward, according to their degrees of Proximity, as the
Descendants did downward; and thus the Father succeeds to his own Son; and
failing him, the Grand Father, Great-Grand Father, etc. and failing of
Ascendants in the right ^ine, the Collateral Ascendants succeed in the same
way, and thus the Fathers Brother; or if there be no Brothers, the Fathers
Sister secludes the Grand Fathers Brothers, or Sisters, etc.

It is to be observed that in Heritage, there is a Right of Representation,
whereby the Descendants Representation.
exclude still the Collaterals; though nearer by many Degrees to the Stock, or
comunis stipes; And thus the great Grandchild of the eldest Son secludes the
second Brother; because, he comes in place of, and so represents the elder
Brother, his great Grandfather.

The Heir of Line, has Right to the Heirship movables, and excludes all other
Heirs therein; Heirship movables are the best of each kind of movables, which
is given to the Heir; because he is excluded from Heirs of Line.
all other Movables; if there be pairs, or dozens, he gets the best pair or
dozen; but in others he gets only one single thing; None have right to
Heirship movables, but the Heirs of Prelates, under which are comprehended all
Benefice^ Persons, the Heirs of Barrons, under which are comprehended all who
are infeft in Lands or annual rents, though not erected in a Barrny; And the
Heirs of Burg^sses, by which are meaned, actual Trading, but not honorarie
Burgesses.

If the Defunct had any Lands, Heir of Conquest.
or Heritable Rights, to which he could not succeed as Heir of Line, then he
who succeeds in these, is called, the Heir of Conquest; and the Rule is, that
Heritage descends and conquest ascends; so that if the middle of three brothers
dies, his immediate elder brother would be his Heir of conquest; and if a Son
of a second Marriage dies, leaving three brothers of a former Marriage, the
youngest would succeed in his conquest lands; and this I conceive was
introduced, for enriching the elder brothers, whom Our Law still favors;
whereas heritage must descend according to the Law of Nature.

These Heirs of conquest, have right to all lands, annualrents, heritable
bands, and others; whereupon infeftment Conquest.
did or might follow, but they have no right to tacks, pensions, moveable
Heir-ship; and all other rights, having tractum futuri temporis, and requiring
no infeftment, and so not competent to Executors; all which belong to the Heir
of line.

The Heir Male, is the nearest Male who can succeed; and Heirs Male.
all Heirs of Line, are also called general Heirs; because they succeed by a
general service and represent the Defunct universally.

The Heir of tailzie is he to whom an Estate is tailzed, so called, because the
legal Succession is cut off in his favors from the French word, tailer, to
cut, and the matter of tailzies may be Summond up in these few Conclusions.

Primo, In tailzies, the person first named, needs not be served Heir; as for
instance, If I take my land to my self, which failing to Seius; Seius needs not
be served; because there is no cognition requisite to clear that he is to
succeed; but if I take may lands to my self, and my Heirs; or to me, and the
Heirs of such a Marriage; which failing to Caius; then either Caius in the one
case; or the Heirs of such a Marriage in the other, must be served; because, it
is requisite to inquire, Whether there were Heirs, or who is Heir of that
Marriage?

Secundo, In all tailzies, he on whom the last termination falls is Fiar; as
for instance, If I take my lands to Seius, and failing him to Caius, and his
Heirs; Caius is Fiar, and Seius is only Liferenter.

Tertio, Though the last termination fall on the Wifes Heirs, the Husband
remains Fiar; because of the prerogative of the Sex; as for instance, If I take
my land to my self, and my Wife, which failing to her heirs, my heirs would be
preferred; except the estate belonged to my Wife as Fiar; For then her heirs
would be preferred.

Quarto, Though in Conjunct-Fie Rights, if I take my lands to my self, and my
Wife in Conjunct-fie, which Failing to our Heirs, my Heirs would be preferred,
as to heritable Rights; but in substitutions to movables, the Right would
divide betwixt her Heirs and mine.

Quinto, The Heir of Tailzie, has but a hope of succession, and so the Fiar may
dispone; nor can the substitutes, or remoter members of the Tailzie, hinder him
by Action, Inhibition, or otherwise; except there be a clause irritant, and
resolutive, declaring, that if the first Member dispone, his Disposition shall
be null; in which case, though generally the remoter member must be served
Heir, to the immediate prior who was infeft; yet in that case, the remoter
member may be served Heir to the first Disponer.

Sexto, If one oblige himself to make such a man his Heir of Tailzie, that
Obligation ties him only once to tailzie his estate; but not that he shall not
break that Tailzie; except the Obligation be for an equivalent Onerous cause:
Or if a person oblige himself to do nothing contrare to his Tailzie, he cannot
thereafter make any voluntar gratuitous Right to the prejudice of that Tailzie;
But yet the lands tailzied may be comprised, or adjudged for sums truly due,
and not dolose contracted, to disappoint the tailzie. Heirs of provision.


Heirs of Provision, are these who succeed by virtue of a particular provision
in the infeftment; such as are Heirs of a second Marriage, and as to these
Heirs of Marriages, we may observe two things; first, That if a Father by his
Contract of Marriage, be obliged to employ a sum to himself, and Wife in
Conjunct-^ie; and the heirs of the Marriage, he cannot in prejudice thereof do
any fraudulent gratuitous deed; tho he may provide a Ioynter for a second Wife;
or provisions for his Children of a second Marriage.

Secundo, Though a Father may assign or dispone sums to Children, when extant,
whereby they will be preferred to posterior Creditors becoming Fiars by the
said Rights; yet if the Father dispone to children to be procreat, this will be
considered only as a destination and so will not hinder the Father to make
posterior Rights; or even posterior Creditors to affect by Diligen^es what is
so disponed.

Tertio, Process will be sustained at the instance even of the appearand Heir
of the Marriage, against the Father, to fulfill the special obligations
therein, or to purge any deeds already done by him in prejudice thereof.

Albeit, where Heirs are not designed in any right, the Heirs of Line, exclude
all other Heirs; yet if a man take lands to himself, and his Heirs Male
tailzie, or provision; and thereafter acquire reversions, or tacks of the same
lands to himself and his Heirs; these rights will accress to that special Heir,
to whom the land was provided; for it is not presumable, that a man would give
the lands to one, and the rights of them to another Heir.

When women succeed, all these of one Degree succeed equally, and because the
estate is divided amongst them, they are called heirs portioners; the eldest
not secluding the Heirs portioners.
rest, and having no advantage over him; but where the Rights are indivisible,
such as Titles, Jurisdictions, Superiorities, and all the casualities of these
superiorities: such as Ward* Marriage, Nonentrie, Feu duties, etc. these fall
to the eldest heir Female, without division; together with the Principle
Message, it being a Tower, or Fortalice; for other houses are divided equally.

All these Heirs are liable in solidum, if they once enter Heir; except heirs
portioners, who are only liable pro rata, and heirs substitute in a sum, who
are only liable to Creditors, in the value of the sum, to which they are
substitute; But they have in SCOTLAND a Privilege which they call, the benefit
of Discussion, whereby Discussion*
the Heirs of Line must be first pursued, to fulfill the Defuncts de^ds, or pay
his debts; And next to these the Heir of conquest, the Heirs Male, the Heir of
tailzie, and Heirs of provision; but for fulfilling a deed relating to
particular lands, the Heir who succeeds in these particular lands, must be
first pursued, without discussing; and that which is meant by discussing, is
that the Creditor must proceed by horning, caption and apprising, against the
Heir, who is to be discussed; before he can reach the other Heirs.

An Heir is said with us, to be Heir active, who is served Heir, and may
pursue, whereas he whom the Law makes Heir Active.
liable to be Heir, is said to be Heir passive; As when the appearand Heir is
infeft upon a precept of clare constat by the Superior, or otherwise medles
with his Fathers Estate.

When the Predecessor dies, he who should be Heir, (and Appearand Heir.
therefore is called, appearand Heir,) has year and day allowed him to
deliberate whether he will be Heir, which is called, annus deliberandi Annus
delib. K. ^a. 6. Par. 2^. Act. 27.
; and which is indulged by the Law; because if a man enter once Heir, he is
liable to all the debts though far exceeding the estate; and within that year,
he cannot be pursued, nor obliged to enter; but after the year is expyred, the
Creditor may charge him to enter Heir, and if he resolve not to enter, he must
renounce any Right he has by a writ under his hand.

This year is compted from the defuncts death; except in a posthum child, who
has a year Posthum Child.
allowed him, after his Birth, and not only during this year; but after it
expires, the appearand heir without instructing any Title, may pursue for
exhibition of all Rights made to his Predecessors; and of all rights made by
his Predecssors, to any in his own Family; but not to Sirangers; to the end he
may deliberate, whither he will enter Heir; and the Liferenter is bound to
aliment the appearand Heir, not being able to entertain himself, though he
renounce. vid. supra Part 2. Title 9. Liferents.

If the appearand heir resolves to enter heir to his Predecessor, he must raise
Briefs from the Chancellarie; which Brief is a command from the King. to the
Judge ordinary, where the lands ly, to cause cite 15 sworn men, to try whether
the raiser of the Brief be nearest heir; and this is executed or proclaimed at
the market Cross where the lands lie; and if at the day appointed, these 15.
sworn men find him to be the next person who should succeed, they serve him
heir by a paper which is called a service, and which being returned be them to
the Chancellarie; there is a write given to the heir, whereby he is declared
heir; and which is called, the retour, because it is their answer, and return
to the Chancellarie of the points contained in the brief; and thereafter, the
person who is served heir is infeft by a precepts out of the Chancellarie; and
if the service was to any particular lands, it is called a special service; but
if there was no land designed, it is only called, a general service; and this
general service is sufficient to establish a right to heritable Bands,
Dispositions, Reversions, Jurisdictions, and all other rights, whereupon the
Defunct was not infeft, nor needed to be infeft; and a special service includes
a general service but not E contra.

The general brief has only two points or heads, viz. if the general Brief.
Defunct dyed at the Kings peace; and if the raiser of the brief be the next
Heir; but the special brief, has seven, viz. when the Defunct dyed. Secundo, If
he dyed last vest, and seized, at the Kings peace. Tertio, That the raiser is
next heir. Quaerto, Of whom the Lands are holden in capite. Quinto, By what
manner of holding. Sexto, What is their old and new extent. Septimo, Whether
the raiser be of lawful age; and in whose hands the Lands are at present.

Sometimes likewise, the Vassal without serving himself heir, gets a precept of
seasin from the Superior; wherein, because the Superior declares, that it is
known to him, that such a man is heir to his Father; it is therefore called, a
Precept of Clare constat; which therefore makes the Obtainer liable passive, to
all his Predecessors debts; but gives him only active right, to the Particular
lands contained in the Precept; nor will it give him a right even as to these
lands, except against those who derive right from the Superior who gave it.

Bailiffs also of Burghs Royal, do infeft their Burgesses as heirs in Burgage
lands, giving them seasin: as heirs, by delivering them for a Symbol, the hesp
and staple of the doors; and the seasin in that case, is in place of a service;
as to these lands; but is not in other cases a sufficient active title.

The heir who is Retoured, holds either his lands of the King, and then he gets
precepts out of the Chancellary, to the Judge ordinary, to infeft him; which if
he refuse, the Lords upon a Supplication, will direct Precepts to any other
person, who is thereby made a Sherriff in that part; but if the lands hold of
another Superior, then either that Superior is himself entered or not; if he
be entered, he will be charged by four consequutive Precepts, to enter the
Heir; and if at last he disobey, his immediate Superior will be charged, and
so till the heir arrive at the King who never refuses to enter any; and if the
Superior be not entered, he must be charged upon 40. days to enter, that being
himself entered, he may enter his Vassal; and if he refuse, or delay he losses
all the Nonentries of his Vassal; but no other Casualities; because quoad these
he was not Culpable.

Though the Person who should be Heir, do not enter to his Predecessors
Heritage; yet he may be made liable to his predecessors debt, by two passive
titles, relating to heritable rights; viz. Gestionem pro haerede, and as
Successor titulo lucrativo post contractum debitum, and there is a third
passive title relating to Movables, which is called* vicious intromission.
Behaving as Heir.


Behaving as heir, or Gestio pro haerede, is when the person, who might have
been Heir, immixes himself, and intromets with either the moveable heirship, or
any heritable estate, belonging to the Defunct; in which case, he is liable to
the Creditors, not only according to the value of what he intrometted with; but
as far, and in the same manner as if he had been entered heir; and yet the
Lords will not fasten this passive title upon a man; because of its
extraordinary hazard; where the intromission is very small; or where he has a
colorable title to which he might ascrive his intromission, as a factorie from
the Compryser; or the Donator to the Escheat, or recognition; Gestio pro
haerede, being magis animi quam facti; which factories will defend; though
there was no Declarator; but if the appearand heir had no factorie; it is not
sufficient to allege the Defunct dyed Rebel, and so could have no heir;
except his Escheate was declared before intenting the pursuers action; nor will
this passive title, nor vicious intromission be sustained; except they be
pursued in the intrometters own lifetime, they being kinds of delicts.

But he will not be liable, if the Defuncts Right was reduced, though after his
intromission; And since this passive title was introduced by the Lords of
Session, in Favors of the Creditors, to deter appearand Heirs from fraudulent
intromission; therefore an appearand heirs, paying his Predecessors debt will
not infer this passive title* since that is for the advantage of Creditors; nor
will the getting of money for ratifying a Comprising that is expired, infer
this passive title, since the Creditors would have got no Advantage by that
Right; but if the appearand heir had consented before the Comprising was
expired, it would be a passive title; because as heir, he might have redeemed
the Comprising.

Successor titulor lucrativo, is, where the appearand heir, to preclude Succes.
tit. lucr.
the necessity of entering heir; and so being liable to the Creditors, gets a
Disposition from him to whom he would have been Heir, without any Onerous
cause; the receiving whereof, though it be a small part of the Estate, makes
him liable to the payment of all the Creditors debt; if the Right made, as well
as the infeftment, was posterior to the Creditors lawful debt. But if there be
an Onerous Cause; then either it is not near equivalent to the value of the
Lands disponed; and in that case, it will not defend against this passive
title; Or, if it be near to the value, it will defend against it, but not
against Restitution of that Value. And since this passive title, overtakes such
as might have been Heirs; therefore, a Disposition granted to a Grand Child,
will make him Successor titulo lucrativo, though the Father be alive; since by
the course of Succession, he might in time have been Heir, though he was not
immediate Heir; but since this can only reach appearand heirs; therefore, a
Disposition made by one Brother to another, though the Maker had no Children,
will not make him Successor titulo lucrativo, since the Brother might have had
heirs himself; and so his Brother was not his appearand heir.

The Passive title holds only in heritage; and therefore, the getting a right
to moveable heirship, and tacks, will not infer the same.

Gestio pro haerede, and Successor titulo lucrativo, being passive titles,
whereby in odium of the irregularity of the intromission, they are made liable
as heirs; therefore, these passive titles, can extend no further, than if they
intromet with, or take a disposition to these things to which they might have
succeeded; and so not inferred against an heir of tailzie, intromitting with,
or getting a deposition of what would have fallen to the heir of Line; nor can
they be extended further, than if they had been served heirs; and thus an heir
portioner will be no further liable in these, than pro rata, if she had
entered; for the coppie should go no further than the original.

To conclude, the Succession Rights on Deathbed.
in heritage, it is ^it to know, that by an old statute Stat. Will. Reg. cap.
13.
and our constant practique, a man cannot dispon his heritage upon death bed,
in prejudice of his heirs; (that is to say, neither lands, nor heritable bands,
nor any band, though Moveable, in so far as his heritage may be thereupon
apprised or adjudged;) so jealous was Our Law of the importunity of Churchmen,
and Friends, and of the weakness of mankind, under such distempers; and
therefore, if a man has made any right in prejudice of his heir, after
contracting sickness, though he was sound enough in his Judgment for the time,
and continued sound, for a very long time; yet this right will be reduced, as
done in lecto, or upon death bed; either at the instance of the appearand
heirs, or at the instance of the apprearand heirs Creditors; and it is
sufficient to prove sickness, though it be not proved mortal, and that he was
sick, without proving that he dyed of that sickness, or was sick the very time
of the disposition.

If thereafter, the maker of such a right come to Kirk or market unsupported,
the Law presumes that the Maker was reconvalasced, but since the Law has fixed
upon Kirk and Market, as open places, where the disponer may be seen by all
men, and by unsuspect witnesses; equivalent acts, as going to make visits,
though at a greater distance will not be sustained; and so the deeds
reconvalasce with him; But though a man cannot grant a new right upon
Deathbed; yet he may perfect an old right; or do a deed to which he might have
been otherwise compelled; as for payment of his debt, or may grant a rational
Ioynter to his Wife; though he cannot grant provisions to his Children in that
Condition.

Title VIII. Of Succession in Movables.
THE same Rules are observed, in the Succession of Movables, that were
formerly specified in the Succession of Heritage; except as to these
particulars, viz. all of one Degree succeed equally; and so amongst Brothers
and Sisters, the Elder seclude not the Younger; nor Males the Females, as in
heritage; and in movables, there is no right of Representation as in heritage;
and therefore if there be a Brother and two Sisters alive; and a third Sisters
Children, the Brothers and Sisters, who are living will succeed equally,
excluding the Children of the Sister who is dead.

The Executor, is also only liable, according to the value of the Defuncts
estate; Because, he gives up an inventary of his Inventary
goods; but an Heir is liable for all the Defuncts debts.

A Testament, or Latter will, does require to be in Write, for nuncupative
Testaments, which Testaments.
were so called, in the Civil Law; (Because, the Defunct named his heirs
without Write) are not allowed by Our Law, by which a Testament must either be
holograph, all written with the Defuncts own hand; or at least, subscrived by
him before two Witnesses, if he can Write; or if he cannot Write, by a Notar,
or Minister and two witnesses.

No Heritable Right can be left in Testaments, though the Testator was in
leidge poustie, and perfect health; and though the Testaments be made in other
Nations, where Heritage may be disponed by testament; vet it will not transmit
a right to Heritage lying in Scotland; and yet a Testament made according to
the solemnities of these Nations, will be valid in Scotland; for though they
may regulate us as to solemnities; yet they cannot alter the nature, and so not
the transmission of our Rights.

A Legacy, is a donation left by the Defunct in any Write to be paid Legacy
by his Executor; But if the Legator die before the Testator; or before the
condition is fulfilled, on which the Legacy was left, then the Legacy
evanisheth; and though neither other men's movables, nor a man's own heritable
rights, can be left in Legacy; yet such Legacies are valid, if the Testator
knew that the sum left was heritable, or belonged to others; and the Executor
in those cases must pay the value.

A Minor being above 14. years, may make a Testament, without the consent of
his Curators; but under 14. years he can make none. A Wife may make a Testament
without the consent of her Husband. And a person interdicted without the
consent of the Interdictors; but Idiots, nor furious persons; can make none;
except in their lucid intervals; nor Bastards, except they be Legittimated, or
have Children of their own.

If a Man be Married, the Wife has without paction, a share in his Movables,
of which he cannot defraud her by his testament; and this is called, jus
relictae; and if there be Children, the Law has provided a portion of the
Movables, Jus relicta.
for them; which is therefore called their legittim; and of which their Father
cannot prejudge them by his testament; but there is no legittim due by the
Mothers death; nor have Children who are foris famili^^; that is to say, who
are married, and have renounced their portion natural; any Legittim due to them.

This Legittim is also due only Legittim.
to the immediate Children, but not to Grand Children.

The Remander of the Defuncts Movables, beside what is due to the Relict, and
Children, is called the deads part; and upon that only he can dispone.

If a Man have no Wife, nor Bairns, all is the deads part and may be disponed
by him; If there be either Wife, Deads part
or Bairns, and not both; then the Defuncts Testament receives a bipartite
division; but if there be both Wife and Bairns, then it receives a tri^artite
division.

By the Civil Law, a Testament was null, if the heir was not named; but with us
a Testament is valid, though the Executor.
executor be not named, who is the heir in mobilibus, and is called executor;
because he executes and performs the Defuncts will, and for executing thereof
the Law allows him the third of the deads part, if he be a Stranger; but if the
nearest of kin confirm, he has right to the whole deads part; except the whole
be exhausted by legacies, and the superplus over what is left in legacy, and
the third due to the Executor for his Office, belongs also to the Children, and
they may call the Executor also to an account for it K. J. 6. Par. 22. Act 14.
Colation.
; but the Heir has no share in the Movables; except he collate, that is to
say, ( be content that the rest of the Children share equally with him, in all
that he can succeed to as Heir;) or in case there be but one Child; for then
that Child is both Heir and Executor without Collation.

An Executor Nominate, is he Exec. Nominate.
who is named by the Defunct in his Testament; And is therefore likewise called
an Executor Testamentar; but if there be none named by the Defunct, then the
Commissar will make an Executor dative; and ordinarily Execut. Dative.
they prefer the nearest of kin; but if the nearest of kin being charged, will
not confirm, then they name their own Procurator Fiscal Executor; and if
thereafter, the nearest of kin compear, they use to surrogat him, and this is
called, an Executor surrogat; But no Executor Dative has a third of the
Defuncts third, as others have.

A Creditor may confirm himself Executor Creditor; and Executor Creditor.
so may pursue the Defuncts Debitors, and least that Creditors should wrong one
another by nimious diligence, Our Law has appointed, that all who shall confirm
themselves Executors Creditors, or shall do diligence against Executors, or
Intromitters Act of Sed. 18. Feb. 1662.
within 6. Months one of another shall come in pari passie.

Executors Creditors are only obliged to confirm as much as may pay
themselves; and are for the same reason, only liable to do diligence for what
they did confirm.

Because Movables may be easily concealed from Creditors or dissipated,
therefore the Law appoints, that the Executor shall upon Oath give up Inventar,
and find Caution to make these movables forthcoming; And then the Commissar
confirms him; nor can he pursue, or dispone as Executor, till he be confirmed:
he is only liable for the Defuncts debt, in as far as the goods confirmed will
extend.

Executory being a mere Office, it accresses to the Survivers; if there be more
Executors, and in so far as the Executors have not execute the Testament in
their own Lifetime; that is to say, have not obtained Decreets for the goods
belonging to the Defunct; there will be place for a new Executor, for executing
these; and they are called, Executors quoad non executa; or if the Executor
ommit to give up any thing in the Inventar; or do not give up the said
movables at the full rates; there will be another Executor Dative made by the
Commissar, who is called, an Executor Dative ad ommissa, vel male appretiata.

The Executor only has power of Administration; and the Creditors and Legators
can only pursue him; except where there is a special Legacy left of such a
particular thing, or a sum owing to such a particular person; For then the
special Legator has the dominium transmitted to him, and so he Special Legacy
may himself pursue for his special Legacy; but the Executor must be still
called in the pursuit, to the end it may be known, whether the Debts exhaust
the special Legacies; For, no Legacy can be paid, till the Debts be paid; and
therefore, if all the Legacies cannot be paid, the Legators suffers a
proportional defalcation for payment thereof; but if there be as much free
goods, as will pay the special Legacy, it will be preferred, without
defalcation.

An Executor cannot dispone, till he obtain a sentence, but even the sentence
states him not in the absolute right of the movables; otherwise than that he
may discharge and assign to the respective persons having interest; For, if he
were denounced Rebel, the Executory* goods, even after sentence, would not fall
under his Escheate, nor would his Executors, or his Creditors have right
thereto, in prejudice of the nearest of kin of the Defunct, to whom he was
Executor.

If there be more Executors, whom we call Co-Executors; Co-Execut.
one cannot pursue without the rest, for all of them represent the Defunct only
as one person; but if any of the rest will not concur, they may be excluded
from their Office, by a process before the Commissars; nor can an Executor for
the same reason discharge a debt wholly, since the rest have an equal share in
each debt: but if the other Executors have got as much as their share will
extend to, the discharge even from one of the Executors will be sufficient; nor
are (for the same reason) Co-Executors liable for the whole debt, and so cannot
be singlely pursued, unless they have intromitted with as much; as may pay the
debt pursued for.

An Executor is liable to do diligence for recovering the Diligence of Exe:
debts due to the Defunct; and the diligence required upon his part, is a
sentence, and Registrated horning against the defuncts debitors; but if there
be an universal, or special legatar, whereby an Executor confirmed has no
advantage; then the Executor is not liable in diligence; but only to assign the
Creditors that they themselves may pursue.

The Executor likewise cannot pay any debt without sentence, least otherwise
he might prefer one Creditor to another; but yet the Executor may pay those
debts, that are acknowledged in Testament without Process, providing the same
be paid before the Creditors intent a persute; or these Prvil. Debts.
which we call privileged debts; because they are preferred to all others,
viz. servants fies, medicaments on deathbed, house-meal, and funeral-expenses.

After the Executors have executed the whole Testament, they may get a Decree
of Exoneration before the Commissars, against the Creditors, and all having
interest; wherein they may prove that all they got is exhausted by lawful
sentences; but it is not necessar to have Decree of Exoneration.
such a decree when they are pursued before the Lords, for it is sufficient
when they are pursued there to allege, that they are exhausted by way of
Exception.

If any Person intromit with the Defuncts movables, without being confirmed,
they are liable to the Defuncts whole Vicious Intromission.
debts; whether they were related to himor no; and though their intromission
was very small; and this was introduced to prevent the fraudulent, and
clandestine abstracting of the Defuncts movables, without inventary in
prejudice of Creditors; and therefore this passive title is only introduced, in
favors of Creditors; but of none others, such as Legatars Bairns, etc. But if
the intromitter confirm, before any Action be intented, this purges the
Vicious intromission; and the intromitter is only liable for the value of the
thing intromitted with; or if there be an Executor confirmed, no Person can be
pursued as Vicious Intromitter; for the Intromitter then is only liable to the
Executor; But the Relict, or the Defuncts Children, confirming within year and
day after the Defuncts death, does thereby purge the vitiosity; though they
confirm not till after citation; nor will necessar Intromission infer
vitiositie, and that is called, necessar intromission, when either the Husband
or the Wife, continue their possession of one another Goods, after one
another decease, for preservation; and that because there is no other person
to look after them; and this is for the advantage of the Creditors; since it
hinders the Goods from perishing.

If there be more vicious Intromitters, they are each liable in solidum, if they
be pursued in several Actions; and pro virili, if they be pursued together, but
none of them get Relief, for wrong in our Law has no warrant.

The Heir is obliged to relieve the Executor, of all heritable debts; and the
Executor Relief, etc.
is bound to relieve the Heir, of all moveable debts, as far as the Inventar
will reach.

Title IX. Of last Heirs, and Bastards.
WHilst there is any alive, who can prove even the remotest contingencie of
blood to the Defunct, they succeed to him; but if there be none, the King
succeeds as last ultimus ^aeres.
Heir; for quod nullius est, est Domini Regis; and so the King succeeds to the
Defunct, as last Heir; both in Heritage and Movables; and is preferred to all
Superiors, and others whatsoever; for which end he makes a Donatar, who must
obtain a Declarator before the Lords of Session, against all who are supposed
to have any Relation, whereupon a Decree being obtianed before the Lords,
declaring that the King has right as last Heir,, the Defunct having dyed,
without any Relation. This Decree is equivalent to a service; but if lands be
taken by a man to himself, and his Heirs Male simply; the King will succeed as
last Heir; if there be no Heirs Male; though there be Heirs Female; since the
land was not provided to them; and therefore men ordinarily in their tailzies
adject the Clause whilks failzing to their Heirs whatsomeever.

Because the King succeeds here as Heir; therefore he is liable to pay the
Defuncts debts; but he is only liable as far as the Estate will extend; and
therefore the Creditors may adjudge the Real Estate, and serve themselves
Executors Creditors in the Movables.

A Bastard by Our Law has neither Bastardy.
Heirs nor Executors; but yet he may dispone upon either his Heritage or
Movables inter vivos; though he cannot make a Testament; except he be
legittimated by a letter under the Great Seal, (which extends not to Heritage)
or have Children surviving him; for the Bastards Children will always seclude
the King.

The King in the case of Bastardy, makes a Donatar, who pursues Declarator; and
is liable to the debt; for in effect the King succeeds here, quasi ultimus
haeres, and Creditors use the same execution in this case, as in the other; and
in both ultimus haeres; and Bastardy, the Relict has still her share of the
Movables, as in other cases.

Children procreate betwixt persons divorced; and these with whom they have
committed Adultery can not succeed to them K. J. ^ par. 16* Act 20.
.

The INSTITUTIONS of the LAWS of SCOTLAND.
Part Fourth.
Title I. Of ACTIONS.
HAving finished these Actions
two first parts of the Law, which treat of Persons and Rights; We come now to
treat of the third part, viz. Actions, whereby these Persons, pursue those
Rights.

An Action is defined to be a Right of prosecuting in Judgment what is due to
us; And it suffers very many Divisions; the first whereof is, that some are
Real, and some Personal; A Personal Action, is, that whereby we only Real and
Personal Actions
can pursue the person that is obliged to us; as where I pursue a Man for
payment of a sum due by his Bond. A Real Action is, that whereby a Man pursues
his Right against all singular Successors, as well as the person who was first
obliged; As for instance, if one have an Infeftment of Annualrent, he can not
only pursue the Granter for payment of the Money, by a Personal Action, but he
can by a Real Action, called, an Action for poinding of the ground, pursue all
singular Successors, and poind the Tennents, and Intromitters with the Rent,
for recovering of his annualrent out of the land, that stood affected with his
Infeftment of annualrent.

Actions are also divided i^ ordinary actions, and actions rescissory; For with
us all Actions, are called, ordinary actions; except Improbations, whereby we
pursue papers to be declared False and Forged; or Reductions, Improbation.
Reduction.
whereby we pu^sue Rights to be declared null, and to be reduced.

In Improbations, there are two Terms given to produce the Write; because the
danger is Terms of Imp.
great; And if the Writer and Witnesses of, and in that Write be alive, their
testimonies are only allowed as probation; which Direst Manner of Imp.
is called, the direct manner of Improbation; But, if these be dead, the Lords
try the Verity of the Write by strong presumptions and conjectures; which is
called the indirect manner of Im^robation: But because in Re^uctions, the Write
called for, Indirect Manner of Imp.
(...) only to be declared null, till (...) be produced; therefore, there ^s
only one term granted for pro^ucing.

No certification will be gran^^d against any Writes, made ^y the Pursuer and
his Predeces^^rs and Authors; except he be ^^rved heir to these Predecessors,
and produce a right made by these Certif. in Imp.
Authors: But certification will ^e granted against any Rights made to the
Defenders, or their Predecessors, to whom they may succeed jure sangui^is, or
to their Authors, or any to whom these Authors may succeed jure sanguinis; if
any person be called to represent these Authors.

The ordinary Reductions are ex capite Inhibitionis, whereb^ we pursue Rights
to be declar^^ null as granted after Inhibition is raised by us; or ex capite
interdic^ionis if granted after Interdictio^ is raised by us; or ex capite vis
(...) metus, if the rights were extort^^ from us by force; or ex capit^
fraudis, if the rights were eli^^ from us by circumvention, in bot^ which last
the Pursuer mu^ lybell the Qualifications, or Circumstances from which the
force or fraud are inferred or ex capite lecti, if the deed were done upon
deathbed, i^ prejudice of an appearand Heir^ or upon the Act of Parliament*
1621 K. J. 6. Par. 23. Act 18.
, if the deeds were done in prejudice of prior lawful Creditors, in favors of
conjunct or confident person; that is to say* Relations, or Trusties, without
an onerous cause, or to a Creditor^, though for an onerous cause, in prejudice
of another who had done prior diligenc^, that was habile to affect the subject
disponed; all which, and many others of that Nature are opposed to ordinary
actions; because, they are extraordinary remedies invented by Law, for the
preservation of men's Rights, and are called extraordinary; because they are
never competent, till other ordinary remedies fail.

Actions of Reprobatour, and Reprobatour.
Error are in effect Reductions; and must have the concourse of the Kings
Advocate; In the first whereof, a party against whom witnesses have deponed
unjustly; craves, the Decree pronounced upon these Depositions to be reduced;
because the Witnesses have deponed fasly, circa initialia testimoniorum; and
condescend in his Reasons of Reduction, up on the particulars wherei^ they have
deponed fasly; and also concludes, that the testimonies should be reprobated.

In the summonds of Error; the Pursuer craves, that a service (whereby the
Defender is served hei^ Summonds ^^ Error
to such a man) ought to be reduced; because the Pursuer is a ne^rer relation
to the defunct* than the person wrongously served; upon which he condescends;
and therefore concludes, that the service, and all following thereupon may be
reduced; And that it may be found, that the Inquest who served him heir have
erred; and this is the only summonds that is drawn in L^tine with us.

Some Actions, are called Act prejudicial.
preparal^r^, or prejudicial actions; because, they must be discussed before
other actions are competent; as for instance, If I pursue for a sum, and the
Defender raises an improbation, alleging the write to be false; the trial of
the falsehood, must be first discussed; and so is prejudicial to the action of
payment.

Exhibitions conclude, either merely to exhibit the write, or Exhibitions.
the thing called for; and then it is only a preparatory action; such as
exhibitions ad deliberandum; or else they conclude delivery; and in all
Exhibitions, the ordinar terms lybelled, are that the Defender had, has, or has
Fraudfully put away the papers or things craved to be exhibit; and therefore,
he is not obliged to exhibit, except he had them since the citation, or
fraudfully put them away, to elude a future citation.

Some Actions are called, Actiones, bonae fidei; in which Actiones Bonae fidei.
equity is followed, as Actions upon Mandates, Depositations, Emption,
Location, etc. In which the Judge considers Actiones stricti Juris.
what in equity is to be done by one party to another. And some actions are
stricti juris; in which the Judge is to follow the strict prescript of the
Contract upon which the Action is raised, as in a Declarator of Redemption,
wherein the pursuer craves, that it may be declared that he has lawfully
redeemed the lands, that were Wadseted; in which case the Judge must consider
the very precise terms of the reversion, and that the lands were redeemed
conform to these terms; nor is Equipollency Relevant in these cases.

Some Actions, are called rei persecutoriae, by which we Rei Persecutoriae
pursue that quod patrimonio nostro abest; which is commonly called, damage
and interest.

Some are called, penal actions; because we pursue not only for repetition, and
real damage, Penal.
but for extraordinary damages, and reparation by way of penalty; such as are
spulzies, Actions for violen^ Profits, etc.

Some Actions, are called Arbitrary Actions, wherein the Arbitrary.
Judge is tied to no particular Law; but proceeds ex nobili officio, that is to
say, according to what he sees just and fit; as an Action for proving of the
Tenor of an evident, wherein the Complainer lybels, that he had such a paper,
(of which he must lybel the full tenor verbatim,) and that he lost it by such
an accident; and therefore concludes* that the tenor may be proven by
Witnesses, and adminicles in write, which he must libel; For, no tenor can be
proven, without some adminicles in write: And generally, there being many
things, with which the Law behooved to trust the Discretion and Honesty of the
Judge, since all cases could not be Comprehended under known Laws; it therefore
invested the Judge with this eminent power, which is called, nobile officium,
in opposition to that officium ordinarium, and mercenarium, wherein he is
obliged to follow the will of the Contracters precisely, and hoc officium
mercenarium Iudex nunquam impertit nisi rogatus.

Some Actions, are called, Declarators; because the Pursuer concludes in them,
that some special thing should be Declarators.
declared in his Favors; and ordinarily, wherever the King, or any other
Superior grants a gift, he to whom it is granted pursues a Declarator,
craving, it may be found and declared, that the Casuality gifted to him, has
fallen in the Superiors hands; and that he has right thereto, by virtue of the
gift: And thus Declarators must be raised upon Escheats, Wards, Marriages,
Nonentries, etc. only there needs no Declarator upon a gift of Forefaulture;
And upon gifts of Escheat, they raise Actions, both of general and special
Declarator in one summonds. In the general, the Pursuer concludes, that it
should be found and declared, that the Rebel was lawfully denounced to the
horn; and that thereby his Escheat fell in the Superiors hands: And in the
special, he concludes, that the Tennents of the Rebels lands, whose Escheat is
fallen, may pay him the Meals and Duties, by virtue of his gift, and Decree of
general Declarator. But though this last Action be called, an Action of special
Declarator; it is in effect but an Action of Meals and Duties: In other cases
also, where any thing is craved to be Found and Declared, as a right arising
upon a special matter of Fact, for which no other Action can be found, that has
a special name: Lawiers do now cause raise Actions of Declarator; or at least,
cause adject conclusions of Declarator to other Actions, such as Reductions,
etc. and these are the same with the Actions in factum, mentioned in the Civil
Law.

Some Actions are called Civil, Civil Actions
wherein men prosecute their Civil Rights; and some Criminal, wherein Men
prosecute crimes, ad vindictam publicam.

For further clearing of Actions, and how they ought to be lybelled; I shall
shortly explain the nature of a summonds; Nature of a Summonds.
and shall set done some of those actions which have special names and
conclusions.

The chief parts of a summonds, are the Pursuers interest, that is to say, the
right standing in his person, whereby he has good interest to pursue the Action
he has intented.

Secundo, That all the persons who should be called as Defenders, be called in
the Summonds, and since it is a Relevant exception against a summonds, that all
Persons having interest are not called; Therefore it follows clearly, that for
the more security it is fit to call all Persons, who may be concerned in the
debate. Medium concludendi.


Tertio, The medium concludendi; that is to say, the ground whereupon the
Persons called, are liable to pay and perform what is craved.

Quarto, After all this is Will of the Summonds.
narrated, the King in the Summonds, says, Our Will is, etc. that ye cite such
and such persons, etc. which is called, the will of the Summonds, and which
will of the Summonds does comprehend, a command to the Messenger, to cite the
Defenders; and expresses the number of days, upon which they are to be cited;
and the places to which they are to be cited; and before whom they should
compear: As also, the Conclusion craved by Conclusion.
the pursuer, each of which summonds, almost has it own special Style and
Terms; and by Act of Parliament, Writters are commanded not to alter the
Ancient Style K. J. 6. par. 10. Act. 13*


It is observable, that though the matter of fact be ordinarily narrated before
the will of the summonds; yet Summonses of Reduction, Improbation,
Transferrance, Spulzie, and Declarators of Nonentrie; begin, at, Our Will is,
etc. And then goes on to the interest of the pursuer, etc.

In a Summonds of Transumpt, the Pursuer (who in the summonds is always called
the Complainer) lybells, that he has Transsumpts.
Right to the Lands whereof he craves the papers to be Transumed; and that
therefore it is necessar to him to have Doubles, and transumpts of the rights;
and this is the pursuers interest; and that the Defender has these Rights, or
is obliged to procure him Transumpts; And therefore concludes, that the
Defender should be obliged to exhibit, and produce them, to be judicially
Transumed; and the authentic Transumpts to be declared as sufficient for the
security of the Pursuer in the said lands as the original writes themselves.

In a Summonds of Multiple poinding, the Complainer having narrated, that he is
troubled by such and such Persons, Multiple Poyndings.
who do each of them pretend Right to a sum, in which he is liable; he
therefore concludes against all of them, to compear to hear and see the same
tried; and the Party who shall be found to have best Right to be preferred; and
the other Party to be discharged from troubling and molesting him in all time
coming.

In a Summonds of Transferrence, the Complainer lybells Transferrence
that the Defender is Heir to his Debtor: And concludes, that the debt should
be Transferred in him Passive as Heir; and upon the other Passive Titles; and
therefore, that Letters and Executorials may be directed against him, in the
same manner as they might have been directed, used, and executed against his
Predecessors, before his deceass.

These Transferrences are used when there is an Decree obtained, or bond
Registrated against the Defunct in his lifetime; but if the Bond was not
Registrated, then there is a Summonds of Registration raised in which the
pursuer concludes, that the said Bond Summonds of Regi* stration
should be insert and Registrated in the Books of Council and Session, to have
the Strength of a Decree; and Executorials to be direct thereupon in manner
therein mentioned.

In a Summonds of prevento; The Complainer narrates, Prevento.
that he having raised letters of horning, the same were Suspended upon must
frivolous Reasons, to a very long day; and therefore concludes, that the
Defender should bring with him the said Suspension, the blank day of blank,
prevento termino: to hear and see, the same called, reasoned and discussed,
with Certification, that if he sail, the Lords will cause call the Suspension,
upon a coppie, and admit Protestation therein, and ordain the letters to be put
to further execution.

If an Advocation be raised to Advoca* tion.
too long a day of compearance, there may be likewise a Summonds of Prevento
raised thereof.

In a Summonds of Contravention Contra: of Laborrows.
of Laborrows; the pursuer lybells, that A. B. became surty, and Laborrows for
C. D. that the Complainers, Wife, Ba^rns, Men, Tennents, and Servants, should
be harmless, and skaithlesse in their Bodies, and lands, etc. And then
subsumes upon the prejudice done, notwithstanding of the said caution: And
therefore concludes, that both the Principal and Cautioner, should be decerned
to have contraveened the said Act of Caution, in manner foresaid; and
therethrow, that they conjunctly and severally have incurred the foresaid pain,
the one half to the King, and his Thesaurer, and the other half to the
Complainer, as Party grieved.

In a Declarator of property, the Complainer narrates his right Declar: of
Property.
to the lands, and how long and after what manner, he and his Authors have been
by themselves, their Tennents, and others having Right from them, in the
peaceable possession of the said lands; until of late that he is molested,
and troubled by the Defender; and therefore concludes that it should be found
and declared, that he has the sole, good, and undoubted Right, and interest in
and to the said Lands; and that therefore the said Defender, and his Tennents,
and Servants and others, of their causing, and commanding, should be decerned,
not to trouble, nor molest them for the future, in their peaceable possessioon,
bruiking, and joysing thereof.

If the Complainer designs only to maintain his possession; without bringing
his property in contraversie he raises a Summonds of Molestation; In which he
only concludes, that they should desist, and cease from troubling and molesting
him Summonds of Mole* station.
in the peaceable possession of his lands.

In a summonds for poinding the ground, the Pursuer narrates, Poynding of the
ground.
that he stands infest, and seized in an annualrent of to be uplifted, out of
the lands of and therefore concludes against the Tennents of these lands; and
the Heritor for his interest, to hear and see Letters directed to Messengers at
Arms, Sherriff in that part, to Fence, Arrest, Apprise, Compel, Poind, and
Distrinzie the readiest Goods and Geer, that are presently upon the lands; and
yearly and termly in time coming, during the not redemption of the annualrent.

In a summons of Spulzie, the King commands Messengers, etc. (which is the
style of all Summonses, which begin with, Our Will is,) to Summond, Warn, and
Charge the Defender, to compear and Spulzie
answer at the instance of the Pursuer against whom the spulzie after specified
was committed; that is to say, the Defenders for their Wrongous, Violent, and
Masterful coming by themselves; and their servants, accomplices, and others in
their name; of their causing, sending, bounding out, command, reset,
assistance, and ratiabition, to the lands of upon the day of and for their
Wrongous, Violent, and Masterful spoilziation of the Goods (to be condescended
on) And then concludes, that they should pay the prices extending to and the
profits, that the Complainer might have made of the said* Goods daily since the
said spulzi^tion, extending to etc*

In a Summons of wakning* the Complainer after narrating Wakning.
that he had raised such ^ Summonds, which he had suffered to lie over and
sleep* for a year; (for there need^ no wakning if there was any Judicial Act,
or Minute upon the Summonds within the year) and therefore concludes against
all the Person^ cited in the first Summonds, to hear and see the foresai^
action called, wakned, and begun, where it last left insisted into, and Justice
Administrate therein, till the final decision of the cause.

A Furthcoming is that Action, Furthcoming
wherein the Arrester lybels, that he having raised ^etters of Arrestment, he
caused,

Messenger lawfully Fence, and Arrest all debts owing by ^he Defender to the
Debtor, ^o remain under Arrestment; and to be made furthcoming to him; and
therefore concludes, that the Defender should be decerned to make furthcoming
payment, and delivery to the said Complainer, of the sum of adebted, restand,
ow^nd be him to the said Debi^or. Breach of Arrestment.


If notwithstanding of the Arrestment, the Debtor pay his own Creditor; there
is an summons for breaking of Arrestment, wherein after the Arrestment, and
payment is narrated, the Pursurer concludes, that the Defender should be
decerned to have broken the Arrestment then standing; an^ not lawfully and
duly loosed; an^ therefore to be punished in his person, and goods, conform to
the Laws of the Realm, in example ^^ others.

Though the Accumulati^^ of several actions into one lybell was not allowed by
the Ci^^^ Law; yet it is allowed by Accumulation of Actions
Ours, in which we may no^ only pursue several persons* for several debts in
one lybel^ which we call by a general name, an actions against debitors but we
may likewise accumulate several conclusions, against one and the same person
though they be of different n^tures; as Reductions, Improbations, and a
declarator of property, and actions of general, and special Declarator; in all
which it is a general rule, quot articul^^ tot libelli.

But when many actions are ^ompetent, for one and the same thing, as if a
Messenger be deforced, we may pursue ^he Deforcer Criminally; (which will infer
confiscation of movables, Concu^sus actionum.
or civilly for payment of our debt; and the pursuing of ^he one does not
extinguish, or consume the other; and either the Criminal or Civil action may
be first pursued; and ^n the concourse of all actions, ^f the actions which
concur ^ave different conclusions, as ^n the foresaid instance, where
Defor^ment.
the Criminal action of Deforcement concludes Confiscation, and the Civil
action only payment; Though the Defender be assolzied in the Criminal Pro^^ss,
yet he may be pursued Civillie, and the deforcement referred to his oath.

Title II. Of PROBATION.
FOR understanding the matter of Probation, it i^ fit to know, that al^
Probation is either by Write, by Oath, or by Witnesses. Probation.


Probation by Write, has been formerly explained in the Title concerning
Obligations by By Write.
write.

Probation by Oath, is when either the Party or Judge; referres any thing to
the oath of the contrare party; but regularly, no man's Right can be taken away
by oath; except By Oath.
he who has the Right, referr the same to the adversaries oath; but when there
is a former probation already adduced, the Judge sometimes gives an oath of
supplement, which is so called, because it is given to supply the Probation
already ^ed.

An Oath of Calumny, is that Oath of Calumny.
whereby either the Pursuer, or Defender is obliged to swear that the pursuit,
defense, reply, etc. are not groundless, and unjust, and this may be K: J: 1^
par: 9: act 12^
craved by either Party, at any time during the dependence; and if it be
refused, the pursuer will have no further action; nor the Defender will not be
allowed to insist any further in that defense, Duply, etc. whereon his Oath of
Calumny is craved.

An Oath in Litem, is that Oa^h in Litem.
which Law allows the Judge to deferr to him who is injured; for proving the
quantities of the thing wherein he is injured; V. G. If I pursue Titius, for
having brok up my trunk; and I have proved that he did break it up: the Judge
will refer to my oath, what I had in the Trunk; and this is allowed both in
odium of him who commits the injury; and least the person unjustly injured
should loss his Right for want of Probation.

A qualified Oath, is, that whereby he to whose Oath any thing is referred,
depones, not simply; but circumstantially; which we call to depone with a A
Qualified Oath.
quality; V. G. if I pursue Titius for payment of 100. lib. which he promised
to pay, who compears, and depones, that he did indeed promise; but it is as
true, that he allowed the Pursuer to intromit with goods belonging to the
Deponent, equivalent to the sums due by the promise: with which accordingly he
has intromitted: And those qualified Oaths generally are admitted; if the
quality be intrinsic, that is to say, necessarly employed in the nature of the
thing; As in the foresaid instance.

But if the quality be extrinsick, it in effect resolves in a defense, and so
must be proven otherwise, than by the qualified oath; as if a debt be referred
to a parties oath, who depones, that he acknowledges the debt, but that it is
paid; this will not be admitted as a quality, but is in effect a defense
which must be proven, otherwise than by his oath.

Probations by witnesses, having been allowed in all cases of old, until the
falseness of men forced our Lawgivers, to allow nothing above 100. lib. to be
proven without write, or oath, and promises, to be only proven by oath; this
Probation by witnesses is therefore called, probatio pro ut de jure; and it is
fit to know, that none within degrees defendant, that is to say, who are Cousin
germans, or of neare^ Relations, can be witnesses; no^ Women, nor Tennents, who
have no Tacks, nor persons declared infamous, nor Domestic Servants* nor such
as may gain, or loss by the cause; nor such as have given partial counsel; that
is to say, advice to raise or carry on the pursuit; or such as have told what
they will depone; which we call prodere testimonium; nor such as compear to
depone without being cited; whom the Law calls, Testes ultronios, and rejects
them, because of their suspected forewardness; All others except these may
depone, and are called habile witnesses: And if habile witnesses refuse to come
when they are cited, there will be first horning, and then caption directed
against them; which are called first and second diligences, but their escheates
will Presumption.
not fall upon that horning.

Presumptions, are a kind of probation, and a presumption is defyned to be a
strong ground or argument, whereby a Judge has reason to think, or be
convinced, that such a thing is true; and they are divided into presumptiones
juris, which though they be strong, yet may be taken off by a contrary
probation; as if a man threaten to poison another, if the person was thereafter
poisoned, it is presumable that he was poisoned by the Threatner; and
presumptiones juris and de jure; ubi lex constituit super presumpto; and thus
the Law presumes, that an ultronius witness, who offers him. self, is partial;
and therefore Statutes upon that presumption, that he shall not be received;
and against these presumptions, no probation can be admitted.

Title III. Of Sentences and their Execution.
AFTER a Decrect is extracted, the Obtainer thereof raises letters of horning
thereon; whereby the party decerned is charged to pay or fulfill the will of
the Decree; under the pain of Rebellion; and this Decree can only be
quarrelled by Reduction, or Suspension, in both which the reasons whereupon it
is quarrelled are set down; nor can a Decree of the Lords, be taken away
without Reduction; and if there has been a Debate in the first instance, (for
so we call the action before the Decree; as we call Reduction and Suspension
the second instance;) then nothing that was competent to have been proponed
before the Decree, will be admitted but will be repelled, as competent and
omitted; for else there should be no end of Debate; but yet if any thing have
newly Emerged; or has newly come to the Parties knowledge, these are and must
be received, if he depone, that he knew not the same formerly.

The ordinar effect of a Suspension is to stop the Execution of Sentences for a
time; And it is a Summons, wherein the Party alleged injured by a Decree,
does cite the Party who has obtained the Decree Suspension.
before the Lords, (for no inferior Court can Suspend,) to answer to the
Reasons offered by him, for Suspending Execution upon that Decree: Which
Summons proceeds upon a Bill, wherein the reasons are represented to the Lords;
for though sometimes, the Lords ordains the reasons to be debated upon the
Bill; yet ordinarily they ordain letters of Suspension to be raised: If the
Decreets be in foro, then the Suspension must pass by the whole Lords in time
of Session, and by three Lords in time of Vaccance; but other Decreets may be
Suspended by any one Lord.

There are other reasons allowed to be insisted on beside these in the Bill,
and these are called eiked reasons, and a man may suspend upon new reasons, as
often as he pleases for competent and omitted is not received against Suspensions.

If the Suspension be called, discust, and the letters found orderly proceeded,
that is ordained to be put to further Execution: Then Letters of Caption may be
raised; whereby all the Inferior Judges and Magistrates, Caption
are ordained to concur with the Messenger, in apprehending the Rebel, and
putting him in prison; which if they refuse: or if the Prisoner thereafter
Subsid: Action.
escape out of their prison, they are liable to pay the debt; by a Subsidiarie
action.

Decreets are executed likewise by Poinding, and Arrestment upon the Warrant in
the letters of horning, which are fully treated in their proper places, vide
supra, Tit. Poinding, and Arrestments. Tit. 5. Part 3.

As to execution of immovable goods, which is by Comprising and Adjudication,
the same is formerly treated, Part 2 tit. 12.

If the Decree be, to remove Ejectino.
from lands, then the Party decerned to remove, being denounced Rebel, for not
removing; the Sherriff, or Judge ordinar, is charged to eject, who comes to the
land, and puts out the fire, or casts out some of the plenishing; But if a man
continue to possess in spite of all Law, after Letters of Fire and Sword.
he is legally ejected, the Privy Council will give Letters of Fire and Sword,
to the Party injured; Commissionating the Sherriff, and others whom he will
name, to dispossess him by the Sword, to raise Fire, and use all other
severities, for which the Commission does indemnifie them.

If such as have debatable Rights, choose rather an amicable, than a Judicial
decision; they subscrive a Submission to Arbiters, and if they please, Decreets
Arbitral.
to an oversman, and another blank on the back of the Submission; wherein they
may fill in their Decree Arbitral: And though it be free to these Arbiters to
accept; yet if they once accept, the Lords will grant Letters of Horning to
force them to decide.

Though these Arbiters are not tied to the strict solemnities of Law, yet they
must observe material Justice; and therefore, they must advertise Parties, that
they may give in claims (for a claim to Arbiters is in place of lybels to
Judges;) and must allow Terms to prove; And though Equity is to them a Rule, as
Law is to other Judges; yet if either Party be enormly lesed, the Lords will
suspend and reduce their Decreets. If the Submission bear no special day,
betwixt and which they are tied to decide, they must decide within a year of
the Submission; and if Witnesses will not voluntarly appear before them, the
Lords will upon a Bill, grant letters of horning to force them to appear.

Title IV. Of CRIMES.
CRIMES are either Private, where the injury is committed Crimes.
against private Persons; or Public, where it is committed immediately against
the Commonwealth.

Private Crimes, called also delicta, in the Civil Law, oblige Delicta
the Committers to repair the Damage, and Interest of the private Party.

Crimes are in Scotland either punished capitally, by death; or pecunially, by
a certain fine; or Arbitrarly at the discretion of the Judge.

Capitale Crimes are Treason.
Treason, which is punished by forefaulture of life, lands, and goods.

It is Treason in any man, to Plot, contrive, or intend death, or destruction
to the Kings Majesty; or to lay any restraint upon his Royal Person; or to
deprive, depose, or suspend him K. J. 2. par. 6. act 24. K. C. 2 par. 1. Sess.
3. act 112.
, or to endeavor the alteration or diversion of the Succession K. C. 2 par. 3.
act 2.
; to Levy war against the King, or any Commissionated by him; or to intyse
others to invade him Par. 1. act 2.
, to make Treaties, or Leagues with Foreign Princes; or amongst themselves
without his consent K. C. 2 par. 1. ses. 1. act 4.
. To rise in fear of war against the King; to raise a frey in his host K. J.
2 par. 1^. act. 54. K. J. 2. par. 6. act 24.
, to Assail Castles where he resides K. J. 6. Par. 8. act 129. and 150.
; to impugn the Authority of the three Estates; to decline the Kings
Authority; not to come out to the Kings Host; or to desert it K. J. 1. Par. 1.
Act 4.
; to maintain or reset Treatours Act 97 Par. 7.
; to conceal Treason; to countersite the Kings coin; and to raise wilful fire
K. J. 5. Par. 3. Act 8.
; all which are Species of high Treason.

We have a kind of Treason in Scotland, which we call Statutory Stat: Treason.
Treason; because it is merely introduced by statute, and not by common Law:
viz. Theft in landed men K. J. 6. Par. 11. Act 50.
; because of the danger of that kind of theft; murder under trust Ibid. Act 51.
; as if one man should kill another, when he invites him to his house; or a
Tutor should kill his Pupil; which because of the easiness and attrociousness
of the Crime is made Treason; The fireing of Coals heughs K. J. 6. Par. 12. ast
146.
, assassination K. C. 2 Par. 3. Act 13.
; and the pursueing another for Treason without being able to prove it K. J. 6.
Par. 11. Act 49.
. All Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and traffecking Papists K. J. 6. Par. 12. act
120.
; and all thieves, who take bonds from lealand honest men, for reentering when
they please: All who purchase benefices at Rome; are guilty of Treason K. J. 5.
Par. 7. act 125 K. Ja. 6, Par. 6. Act 69.
.

No Crime can be pursued against a man or his heirs, after his death; except
that Treason which is committed against the Kings Person, or Commonwealth.

The other Capital crimes are Blasphemy, Man's slaughter, or Homicide; for all
Homicide is Capital with us: except it be Casual K. C. 2 Par. 1. Sess. 1. Act
22.
, or Homicide in self defense.

K. J. 1. Par. 13. Act 137 and 14.
Theft is punishable by death; but we call small theft pickery, and it is only
punishable arbitrarly K. J: 3: Par: 7: Act 60.
.

Notour Adulterey, that is to say, where there are Children of the Marriage: or
where the adulterers converse openly at bed and board; or being discharged by
the Church to converse, do continue to converse is punishable by Q: M: Par: 9:
Act 74: K: Ja: 6: Par: 6. Act 105
death; but simple adultery is only punishable arbitrarly. Incest *, Buggery,
Duells K: J: 6: Par: 1: Act 14:
, the invading of any of his Majesty's Officers, for doing his Majesty's
service K: J: 6 p: 16: act 12:
; Forgery K: J: 6 par: 16: act 4:
, Witchcraft, and the consulters of Witches J: 5: p: 6: act 8:
, Sorners; that is to say, such as masterfully take Meat and Drink from the
Kings People without payment Q: M: act 22: par: 7:
: All wilful hearers of Mass K: J: 3: p: 10: act 71:
, and conceallers of the same; Mutilation Q: M: p: 9: act 73:
, which is the disabling of a member, K: J: 1: par: 1: act 5: and 7:
* K: J: 6: p: 14: act 193:
K: J: 6: p: 6: a: 76:
(though de praxi; this be ordinarily punished with an arbitrary punishment: Or
the Authors of infamous Lybells, Seditious Speeches, tending to sedition; the
strickers of any Judge in judgment; mixers of Wine K. J. 3. Par, 12. Act 89.
, and committers of hamesucken, by which we understand the assaulting or
beating any man in his house.

The Crimes to be pecunially punished are the slayers of Red-fish * K. J. 1.
Par: 1: act 1: and Act 16: Par: 14: ^act: 10
* killers of Daes, Deer, Roes K. J 1. Par. 1. act 19.
; destroyers of Bee-hyves, Fruit Trees, Greenwood; kindlers of Mure-burn;
except in the Month of March; Steeping of Green-Lint in running Waters. or
Loches; such as are guilty of abominable Oaths; and Furnication.

Crimes to be arbitrarly punished at the discretion of the Judge, are
negligence in the Kings Judges and Officers K. J. 2. Par. 14. act 76.
, and such as unjustly murmr against them K. J. 5. Par. 7. act 104.
; breakers of the Kings protection K. J. 1. Par. 11. act 134.
: the bringing home of erroneous Books K. J. 6. Par. 7. act 106.
; and the troublers of Churchmen; Crafts-men K: J: 1: Par: 5: act 80: K: Ja:
5: Par: 7: act 111:
who wrongously refuse to fulfill the work which they have taken in hand; verbal
injuries, and scandals, against private Parties.

It is fit to know, that no punishment left arbitrary by the Law, to the
discretion of the Judge, can be by him extended to death; and that wherever
the Law appoints death to be inflicted, the offenders movables fall to the
King; though the Law does not express the same; and though the sentence express
not the confiscation.

There are other Crimes, whereof the punishment is not reduceable to any of
these kinds; and thus perjury, and Bigamie, (which is a kind of perjury;
because, a man who marries two wives breaks his Matrimonial oath,) are
punishable by confiscation Q. Ma Par. 5. Act 19.
of all the Offenders Moveable Goods, Imprisonment, and Infamy.

Deforcers of Messengers, and breakers of arrestment, are punishable by
confiscation of all their Movables K. J. 6. Par. 7. Act 118 Par. 12. Act 150
; Forestallers of Mercats Ibib. Act 148
, by buying things before they be pr^sented to the Market; or before the Market
be proclaimed, are punishable by Imprisonment, and Confiscation of what is
bought.

Ocker, or Usury K. J. 6: Par. 11. Act 52. Par. 14. Act 222 Par. 15. Act 257
, which is the taking more than the annualrent allowed; or the taking
annualrent before the term of payment; is punished by loss of the principal
sum; for the Debtor is to be free from the Obligation, and the write being
reduced, the sum belongs to His MAJESTY.

Stellionat or the making of double Rights; is punished by infamy K. J. 5. Par.
7. Act 15. K: Ja. 6. Par. 12. Act 141
; and their persons are at the Kings will.

The Keepers of Victual to a dearth, are punishable as K. J. 2. Par. 6. Act 22.
K. Ja. 6. Par. 6. act 93.
Ockerers; and by the Civil Law, per leg: Iul: de Annona. Bribing of Judges is
punishable by infamy and deprivation; Plagium or the stealling of men, is a
particular Crime by the Civil Law; but is a species of theft with us. And
Theft-boot which is the saving a thief by fyning with him, is punishable as
theft K. J. 6. par. 13. act 137.
. Baratrie, or the obtaining benefices from Rome, is punishable by K. J. 6.
Par. 1. act 2. Par. 6. act 72
banishment and infamy. Ambitus, or the obtaining offices by unjust means, is
not punishable under Monarchy.

The punishment of Crimes is taken off, either by Remissions, which must pass
the Great Seal; and must express the greatest Crime K. J. 4 Par. 6. act 62.
, for which the Remission is granted: Or by Indemnities, which is a General
Remission granted by the King or Parliament; betwixt which two there is this
difference, that the obtaining a Remission does not free the obtainer, from K.
J. 2. Par. 14. act 74. K. Ja. 5. Par. 3. act 7.
assything the party, that is to say, from repairing his losses; since its
presumed the King does only discharge what belonged to him, which is, vindicta
publica; But not what is the interest of private parties, or vindicta privata;
but because all the people are represented in Parliament: the King and
Parliament may by their Indemnity; discharge both the one and the other.

He who founds on a Remission, acknowledges the Crime; but he who founds on an
Indemnity does not.

The King likewise restores men sometime against forefaultures; which
Restitution is either by way of Justice, finding that the person was unjustly
condemned; and then the Person condemned is restored to all that ever he had;
and he recovers not only his fame, but his estate; though transmitted to third
parties. K. J. 6. Par. 18. Act 4.
Or secundo, the Restitution is by way of grace and mere favor; and then the
party condemned cannot recover, what was bestowed by the King upon third
parties; for the King cannot recall what was once Legally and Warrantably
granted by him.

FINIS.

