A GEOGRAPHICAL DESCRIPTION OF THE WORLD. WITH A brief Account of the several
Empires, Dominions, and Parts thereof. As also the Natures of the People, the
Customs, Manners, and Commodities of the several Countries. With a Description
of the Principal Cities in each Dominion.

Together with a short Direction for Travelers.

LONDON, Printed for William Leake, at the Crown in Fleet Street, between the
two Temple-Gates. 1671.

A GEOGRAPHICALL DESCRIPTION of the WORLD.
Sold by William Leake at the Crown in Fleetstreet.



THE BOOKSELLER TO THE READER.
THis Piece is not published so much for the Profit of the Bookseller, as of
the Reader: For it is but a Little One; and there is but Little to be gotten by
it: So that without any other Recommendation, I shall leave the Work to speak
for it self. The Drawing of the WORLD into this Epitome, is out of pure good
Will to such as have Curiosity enough perchance, but neither Time nor Money to
take a View of it more at large. And this Charitable Intention of the
Abstracter, has been accompanied with a singular Care in the manner of Doing
it; and to supply in Weight, what is wanting in Bulk: That is to say,

Here is a most exact Account given of the Universe it self, and of every Part
of it; the Situation of all the Kingdoms in it; States, Provinces, Cities and
Dominions: together with their respective Limits and Jurisdictions; their
Growth and Commodities; with the principal Rivers, Palaces, and other things
remarkable: The Quality of the Soil, the Temperature of the Climate, with the
Religion, Manners, Dispositions, Laws and Customs of the People: and some
Touches upon their Interests, Alliances, and Dependences.

To which are added, certain Advices for Travelers.

This is the Brief of this Compendium; and the Bookseller has nothing more to
say, but that he wishes Health to the Reader.

W. L.

A TABLE of the Names of the principal Places contained in this Book.
A.
Adriatic Sea Page 286 Africa 214 African Isses 333 Alps 25 America 255
American Islands 338 Arabia 162 Armenia 158 Asia 115 Assyria 166
B.
Baleares 296 Barbary 216 Britain 299 Burgundy 20
C.
Candia 280 Cathaie 189 Chaldea 169 China 206 Cimbrick Chersonese 87 Corsica
294 Creta 279 Cyprus 330
D.
Dacia 135 Denmark 85 Directions for Travelers. 345
E.
East India 192 Egean Sea 274 Egypt 247 England 300 Ethiopia Superior 234
Ethiopia Inferior 240 Europe 1 Euxinus 271
F.
Florence 42 France 11
G.
Geneva 23 Genoa 50 Germany 64 Greece 123
H.
Hebrides 314 Hungary 109
I.
India Extra Gangem 202 Ionian Isles 282 Ireland 310 Isles of the Ocean 298
Islands of the Virginian Ocean 339 Italy 26
L.
Limbourgh 56 Lorrain 21 Low Countries 60 Lucca 52 Lybia 227
M.
Madagascar 334 Malta 291 Mantuan 47 Media 179 Mediterranean Sea 288
Mesopotamia 167 Mexicana 256 Millain 46 Moscovy 97
N.
Naples 29 Narsinga 194 Natolia 138 Negroes Land 230 Netherlands 53 Northern
Isles 319 Norwey 91 Numidia 227
O.
Orcades 313 Oriental Islands 321
P.
Palestine 150 Papacy 33 Parma 50 Parthia 182 Persia 171 Peruana 263 Poland 102
Pontus 271
R.
Rhodes 332
S.
Sardinia 295 Savoy 22 Sclavonia 113 Scotland 306 Sicilia 289 Sorlings 315
Spain 3 Sporades 316 Swedeland 93 Syria 145
T.
Tartaria 185 Transylvania 111 Turkey 118
V.
Venice 36 Urbin 49
W.
Wales 304


ERRATA.
Page 310. line 1. for Virginia, read Vergivian.

OF THE WORLD: And First of EUROPE.

The WORLD is divided into four Parts; Europe, Asia, Africa, America.


LONDON, Printed for William Leake, at the Crown in Fleet Street. 1671.

OF Europe.
EVrope, the least, (as being in length but 3800 miles, and in breadth but
1200) is yet of most renown amongst us: 1. Because of the temperature of the
Air. 2. From the fertility of the Soil. 3. From the study of all Arts. 4.
Because of the Roman and Greek Monarchies. 5. From the purity, and sincerity of
the Christian Faith.

It is joined to Asia by that space of earth betwixt Tanais, and Duina. Asia is
joined to Africa by the Egyptian Istmus; and America is divided from all of
them. Europe is separated from Asia by Duina, Tanais, Palus Maeotis, Pontus,
Propontis, Hellespont, and the Aegean Sea. Asia is parted from Africa by the
Red Sea. Africa from Europe by the Mediterranean. Africa is greater than
Europe; Asia than Africa; and America bigger than all.

Europe is divided into Continent, and Islands. The Continent is subdivided
into Spain, France, Italy, Belgia, Germany, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Moscovia,
Poland, Hungaria, Dacia, Sclavonia, and Greece. The Islands are also in general
either dispersed in the Greek Sea, Aegean, Cretan, Jonian, Adriatic,
Mediterranean, the British, or the Northern Seas.

Europe is so called of Europa, Daughter to Aegenor King of the Phaenicians,
brought hither (as the Poets feign) by Jupiter, in shape of a Bull.

Of Spain.
THe most Western Country of the Continent of Europe, is Spain, environed on
all sides with the Sea, except toward France, from which it is separated by the
natural strength of the Pyrenean Mountains, and the artificial Fortresses of
Pampelune on the North-West, and Perpigna on the South-East.

Situation.
The whole circuit of this Country is 1893 English miles. It is situate in the
more Southerly part of the Northern temperate Zone, and almost in the midst of
the four and six Climates; the longest day being fifteen hours in length.

Natures, and Manners of the People.
They are a people much given to Women; impudent braggers; extreme proud, and in
their gate very stately and majestical. But otherwise they are people very
grave in their carriages, and in offices of piety very devout; to their King
very obedient; and of their civil duties to their betters, not unmindfull; of
an unmoved patience in suffering adversities, accompanied with a settled
resolution to overcome them.

The Women are sober, loving their Husbands or Friends; wonderful delicate;
curious in painting, or perfuming.

Fertility.
This Country is enriched with Sacks, Sugars, Oil, Metals, Liquoras, Rice,
Silk, Lamb-skins, Wool, Cork, Rosin, Steel, Oranges, Raisons, and fruit of the
like nature, which owe most of their being to heat; but in Corn it is very
defective, and receives from Italy, France, and Sicily. Diet.
The Cattle hereof are neither fair, nor many; so that their fare for the most
part is on Sallets, and Fruits of the earth; every Gentleman being limited what
flesh he shall buy for himself and his family.

Division.
This Kingdom is divided into twelve Provinces, which were anciently Kingdoms,
( viz.) 1. Leon, and Oniedo. 2. Navarr. 3. Corduba. 4. Gallicia 5. Biscay. 6.
Tolledo. 7. Murcia. 8. Castile. 9. Portugal. 10. Valentia. 11. Catelogue; and
12. Aragon. Of which in order.

Leon Oniedo.
This Kingdom has on the East and South, Biscay and Castile; North, the Ocean;
and West, Gallicia. The chief Towns of it are, 1. Aviles. 2. Palenza. 3.
Oniedo. 4. Astorga. 5. Leon.

Navarr.
This is the second Kingdom for antiquity in Spain. It has on the East, the
Pyrenean Mountains; West, Iberus; North, Biscay; and South, Aragon. It is a
woodless Champain Country, or Field, naturally fenced about with Trees. The
chief Cities of this Kingdom are, 1. Victoria. 2. Viana. 3. Sanguessa. 4.
Pampelune; the strength of which City is made use of by the Spaniard, as a
Bulwark against France, whose King has the title, though not the possession of
it.

Corduba.
This Kingdom comprehends Andaluzia, the Countries of Granada, and
Estremedura.

This is the most rich and fertile Country in all Spain; the chief City is
Corduba: Hence comes our true Cordovan-Leather, made of the skin of a Sardinian
Beast; and near unto this City is a Wood of thirty miles in length. 2. Xeres,
whence comes our Sherry Sack. 3. Sevil, the fairest City in all Spain; it is
in compass six miles, environed with beautiful Walls, and adorned with
magnificent and stately Buildings: Hence come our Sevil-Oranges. 4. Granada,
from whence come our true Granada Stockings. 5. Mallaca, from hence come our
Mallaca Sacks. 6. Almeria, a great Haven Town. 7. Guadalcanal, famous for her
Mines of gold and silver.

Gallicia.
Gallicia has on the East, Asturia; West and North, the Sea; and South, the
River Nimius. This Country is very mountainous, and almost inaccessible. The
chief Cities are, Compostella, the Seat of an Archbishop, called St. Jago in
honor of St. James, who lies buried here. 2. Baionna. 3. Coronna.

Biscay.
Biscay is betwixt Navarr, East; old Castile, South; Leon, West; and the
Cantabrean Ocean, North. The chief Cities are, 1. Tholosa. 2. St. Sebastians.
3. Fonterabia. 4. Bilbo, from whence come our best Blades, called Bilbo Blades.
It is a Town of great traffic, and great riches; the Country is mountainous
and woody, out of whose Hills arise 150 Rivers, of which Iberus and Duerus are
chief.

Tolledo.
Tolledo is now accounted part of new Castile, and extends over the
South-East of Castile, now called Campo de Calatrava, and so downward toward
Murcia. The chief Cities of it are, 1. Tolledo, seated on the River Tagus, is
passing well inhabited, as well of Noblemen, who reside there for pleasure, as
of Merchants, who resort thither for Commodity. It is now the Seat of an
Archbishop, who are the chief Prelates of Spain, their revenue amounting to
300000 Crowns yearly. The second is Calatrava, seated on the River Ava. The
third is Talboia, seated on Tagus, a very neat Town.

Murcia.
Murcia is environed with Tolledo, West; Granada, South; Valentia, North, and
the Mediterranean Sea. The chief Towns are, 1. Alicante, from whence comes our
true Alicante Wines, made of the juice of Mulberries. 2. Murcia, on the River
Segourg. 3. Nova-Carthago.

Castile.
Castile is bounded on the East with Navarr, Aragon, and Tolledo; West, with
Portugal; North, with Asturia; and South, with Andaluzia. It is divided into
the old and new.

Old Castile.
The old Castile is situate on the North of the new. The chief Cities are, 1.
Soria. 2. Segovia, a Town famous for Clothing. 3. Valadolis; here is a
College for the education of young English Fugitives. 4. Salamanca, the
famousest Academy of this Country.

New Castile.
It is on the South of the old. The chief Cities are, 1. Madrid, the Kings Seat.
2. Alcala. 3. Alcantara.

Portugal.
This Kingdom is about 320 miles long, and 60 broad; the Air is very
healthful; the Country for the most part hilly, and bare of Corn, which
defect is recompensed with abundance of Honey, Wine, Oil, Alum, Fruits, Fish,
white Marble, Salt. Note, that Portugal is at present under a King of their own.
The chief Cities are, 1. Lisbon, upon Tagus, a famous City for traffic; it is
in compass seven miles, and contains 20000 Houses, all of neat and elegant
building. 2. Miranda. 3. Braga, the Metropolis of Portugal. 4. Conimbra, Porto,
or Portus Galloram.

Valentia.
Valentia is environed with Aragon, Castile, Murcia, and the Sea. The chief
Cities are, Valentia, giving name to the whole Country. 2. Cullera, a Sea-Town
standing at the mouth of the River Kucar. 3. Segorbe.

Catelogne.
Catelogne is between Iberus, South; Aragon, West; the Sea, East; and Pyrenean
Mountains, North. The chief Cities of it are, Tyronne, the title of the
Aragonian Prince, seated on the River Betulus; and 2. Barcelone.

Aragon.
Aragon has on the East, Catte; West, Castile; North, Navarr; and South,
Valentia. The River Iberus runs through the middle of the Country. The
chief Cities of it are, 1. Lerida, seated on the River Cinga. 2. Moson. 3.
Tordesillo; and 4. Saragossa.

Thus much of Spain.
The Pyrenean Hills.
Betwixt Spain and France are the Mountains called Pyrenei, and are that neck of
Land which tyeth Spain to the Continent, the highest part whereof is Mount
Canus, whereon if one stand in a clear day, he may see both the Seas. The
French side of these Hills is naked and barren; the Spanish very fertile, and
adorned with Trees. On this side stands the Roncevals, so famous for the
Battle betwixt the Frenchmen and the Moors, in which 20000 of the French were
put to rout, together with Rowland, Cousin to Charles the Great.

France.
FRance is bounded on the North, with Low-Germany; on the North-west, it is
washed with the British Ocean; on the West, with the Aquitain Sea; on the
South, it is thwarted by the Pyrenean Mountains, which part it from Spain;
being toward the East-lickt with the Mediterranean Sea, and on the full East
the Alps divide it from Italy.

The figure of it is almost square, each side of the Quadrature containing 600
miles.

Situation.
The Air hereof in the Northern part of France is purer than that of England,
and being not covered with Clouds drawn out of the Sea, as England is; for that
cause it becomes more cold in Winter, and more hot in Summer, and far less
annoyed with mists and rainy weather. But the parts of France lying toward the
Pyrenei, and near the Equinoctial Line, are subject to intemperate, yet often
allayed by the Winds blowing from the Sea, and by the shadow of the Mountains.

Fertility.
It abounds with all manner of good Fruits, beside store of fresh Fish; but
the chiefest things which draw foreign Coyns unto them, are four especially,
Wine, Salt, Linen coarce Cloth, and Corn. They have plenty of Flax and Hemp,
whereof they make Canv^s, Sails, Ropes and Cables; neither want they Wool,
whereof they make Cloth, though not in quantity to be exported. It also yields
Saffron and Oad, for Dying; besides other things of less moment.

Natures, and manners of the people.
The French are very various and unconstant, and in nothing more they show it,
than in their familiarity, with whom a stranger cannot be so soon at his House,
but he will be acquainted with him, and as suddenly without occasion loose him
again. Also they are great scoffers, and cannot away with patience and modesty.
Likewise he is wondrous talkative, so willing is he to make himself ridiculous.

Diet.
As well the Gentlemen as the Citizens live more sparingly than the English, in
their ordinary private Diet. They dine most with sodden and liquid meats, and
sup most with roast; but their feasts are more sumptuous than ours, and consist
for the most part of made fantastical meats, and Sallets, and sumptuous
Compositions, rather than of flesh or Birds. Their temperancy I cannot commend;
for besides dinners and suppers, they use Breakfasts and Bevers, which they
call Collations, and Gouster, so eating four times a day.

Apparel.
In general Men and Women (excepting Courtiers, and some of the Gentry) wear
light stuffs, and rather delicate than sumptuous Garments. Your Country people
wear close Dublets, with large Breeches, with a large Coat hanging down to
their knees, all of light stuffs, and their Wives in like sort attired, have
their Heads all over wrapped in linen.

Buildings.
Concerning their Buildings, they are magnificent and stately; for in general
all the Towns and Cities in France are fairer than ours in England.

Provinces.
The diverse Provinces of this Kingdom are many; of which are, Picardy,
Normandy, the Isle of France, Beavois, Poictu, Aquitain, Bretaign, Daulphin,
Languedock, Provence, Champaigne, Burgundy: Of these in order.

Picardy.
Picardy is environed with Normandy, Belgium, Champaigne, and the Sea.

It is divided into the higher and lower; in the higher are the Towns of
Calice, distant from Dover about 28 or 30 miles. 2. Bullen, taken by our Henry
the Eight.

In the lower Picardy are S. Quineus, Abenile, and Amiens.

No^mandy.
Normandy has on the South, Main, and the Isle of France; East, the River
Some; and other parts, the Ocean.

This Dukedom contains diverse fair Cities and Towns; the chief whereof are, 1.
Constance. 2. Cane. 3. Bayeux. The chief Haven-Towns are Harflew, Deep, and
New Haven.

Isle of France.
This Isle is sited in the circlings and confluences of Seine, and other petty
Brooks. The chief City of it is Paris, the Metropolis of all France, the
circuit of which (excluding the suburbs) is said to be six miles. The buildings
of this City is for the most part stately, of unpolished stone, with the
outside plastered and rough cast; and the Houses for the most part are four
stories high, and in some places six. The streets are somewhat large, and among
them the fairest is that of St. Dennis; the 2. St. Honor; the 3. St. Antonie;
and the 4. St. Martine.

The Marketplaces which are in this City, are 11 in number.

The chiefest building in this City is the Cathedral Church of the blessed
Virgin, vulgarly called, Notredam. It is supported with 120 pillars, whereof
108 are less, and 12 very great, being all of freestone. The Chauncel is in
the midst of the Church, which has 174 walking paces in length, and 60 in
breadth. It has 45 Chapels in the circuit thereof, which are shut with grates
of iron. In the front it has 2 double doors, with fair statues of 28 Kings.
Upon the sides are 4 Towers, or Belfreys, 34 cubits high. The greatest Bell,
called S. Mary, requires 24 Men to ring it.

The second Town of note is S. Dennis. ^. Charenton. Here is in this Isle the
royal Palace of Fountain-bleau, the fairest House, not of France, but (as they
say) of all Christendom.

Labeausse.
This Province has on the East, France, or the Isle; West, Main; North, No
mandy; and South, the Loyre. The chief Cities are, 1. Estampes. 2. Chartres.
The third and principal City of it is Orleance: It is seated on the Loyre, and
is one of the most pleasantest Cities in all France.

Poictou.
Poictou has on the North, Britain and Anjou; East, the Dukedom of Berry;
South, Xamtoign and Guieon; West, the Aquitain Sea. The chief Cities are
Poicters, seated on the River Claive, being next to Paris for greatness. 2.
Mailsay. 3. Lasson.

Aquitain.
Aquitain contains the Provinces of Gascoign and Xantoign. It is bounded with
the Pyrenean Hills, the Aquitain Ocean, and the Garond.

The chief Cities are, 1. Toulouse. 2. Bourdeaux, a Town famous by the general
concourse of Merchants, trading for French Wines.

Bretaigne.
Bretaigne is environed with Main, Tourein, and the Sea. The chief Cities
hereof are, 1. Nantes on the Loyre. 2. Rhenes. 3. S. Breine. 4. Rhoan, seated
on the North side of the River Seine, partly in a plain, partly on the side of
Hills, and the building is for the most part of freestone.

Daulphine.
Daulphine is environed with Avergn, West; Provence, South; Savoy, East; and
Bress, North. The chief Cities are, 1. Lions, a famous Mart-Town, and
University. 2. Valence. 3. Vienna.

Languedock
Is almost encompassed with the Pyrenean Hills. The chief Cities are, 1. Narbon.
2. Montpelier, seated on the side, and is an University.

Berry.
This Country is environed with Poictu, Toureine, Labeause, Champaign, Bourbon,
and Limosin. The chief City is Burges. The Citizens at six Fairs in the year
sell great quantity of woollen Cloth. 2. Sancerre. 3. Argent. Tourein.
On the South-East of Anjou, betwixt it and Berry, lies Toureine. The chief
City of it is Tours. 2. Amboys. 3. Bloys.

Provence.
Provence is environed with Languedock, Daulphine, Piedmont, and the
Mediterranean Sea.

The principal Towns are, 1. Marseilles, a famous Mart-Town. 2. Aix. 3. Arles,
the Metropolis of the Burgundian Kingdom. 4. Aveignon, a very fair City,
seated on the Rhosne, famous in that it was the seat of the Popes for 70 years.

Champaign
Champaigne, so called because it is a Champain Country. It is environed with
Picardy, Belgium, Lorraine, the Burgundy, Berry, Bourbon, and the Isle.

The chief Cities are, 1. Rheims. 2. Treys. 3. Brir; and 4. Chalons. Within
Rheims is a College for the education of young English fugitives.

Burgundy Duchy.
This Duchy is environed with Champaigne, the County of Bress, and Bourbonoys.
The chief Cities are, 1. Digion. 2. Autum. 3. Beaulne, where there is an
Hospital, equal to the Palace of any Prince in Europe.

Labress.
On the South-East of Burgundy Duchy, and North of Savoy, is the Country of
Labress. The chief Towns of it are, 1. Castilion 2. Monkeal, and 3. Bourge, an
exceeding strong Town.

Within the limits of France are four Provinces, which as yet acknowledge not
the French Command viz The 1. Seignury of Geneva. 2. Savoy. 3. Lorrain. and 4.
the County of Burgundy.

Burgundy County.
THis County is environed with Champaign, Lorrain, Switzerland, Bress, and the
Duchy. The length of it is 90 miles, the breadth 60.

The people are much renowned for warlike affairs, marching under the colors
of diverse Princes, under the name of Walloons.

The Ground is so exceeding fertile, that as France may be called the Garden of
Europe, so this may be accounted the fairest flower of that Garden.

The chief City is Besanson, the Metropolis of both the Burgundies. 2. Dole, a
Town for strength, riches, and beauty, to be preferred before any in Burgundy. 3
Salines, rich in salt-Fountains 4. Castillion. Here also are more than 26
walled Towns, and 160 Lordships.

Lorrain.
THis Dukedom is compassed about with part of Belgium, Alsatia, the County of
Burgundy, and Champaigne. The length of it is about four days journey; the
breadth almost three.

Fertility.
It abounds with Corn, and Wine, an excellent race of Horses, plenty of Mines,
and store of salt Fish.

The chief Towns of it are, Nancy, seated on the Meuse, the Dukes Seat

This City is strongly fortified, and the Houses are fairly built of freestone.
2. S. Nicholas, a strong Town. 3. Vancoleur

Manners.
In Manners these people much resemble the French and German; the French in
their courtesy and civility, and the German in their drinking.

Savoy.
THe County of Savoy is confined with Daulphin, Bress, Switzerland, and
Peidmont. Also it comprehends under it almost all Peidmont on the Italian
side of the Alps.

The chief Towns of it are, 1. Chambiers, the seat of the Duke when he so
journeth in these parts. It is seated in a pleasant valley among the Mountains,
and is full of neat Houses, belonging to the Gentry of this Province. 2.
Tarantaise, 3. Agnabelle.

Piedmont.
Piedmont is a Country now wholly under the Savoyen and Mantuan Dukes; of this
Country the Mantuan possesses Montferat, and the Savoyen possesses the rest.
This Country is seated at the foot of the Mountains, and is bounded on the
East, with Millain; West, with Savoy; North, with the Swizzers; and South, with
the Mediterranean Sea. It is wondrous fertile, and contains besides Lordships
and Barronies, 52 Earldomes, and 15 Marquisates.

The principal Towns belonging to the Savoyen are, 1. Turin, the Dukes Seat. 2.
Aoste. 3. Niza, a Haven Town. 4. Susa. 5. Saluzzes, a Marquisate, and Bishops
See.

The Signeury of Geneva.
Within the limits of Savoy, toward Labress, stands the famous Signeury of
Geneva, the territories of it being yet not 8 leagues, out of which they raise
a revenue of about 60000 Crowns.

The Town stands at the end of the Lake Lemanus, and by the ^hosne; is
divided into two parts, the lower part of which, called vulgarly La bas rue, is
seated in a plain, and the rest upon a hill. The Buildings are of freestone;
the lower part thereof on the North-side, lies close to the South Side of the
Lake, is a little Haven for Galleys, which they have built to keep free the
passage of the Lake; and on the same side is a strong Fort, and there the River
Rodanus coming out of the Lake, enters into the City, and runs through the
lower part thereof, having two Bridges for passage.

Fertility.
It abounds with all manner of good fruits, besides store of fresh fish. It
also stands well for trade of Merchandise, by reason there are many great
Merchants, especially Italians, who deal here; the Inhabitants being most
mechanical persons, making excellent good Muskets and Calevers. They likewise
work Satin, Velvet, and Taffaty. The people are very civil both in their
behavior, speech, and apparel, all licentiousness being severely corrected.

Thus much of France.
The Alps.
THe natural bounds betwixt Germany, France, and Italy, are the Alps,
Mountains which require 5 days to be ascended.

There are 5 passages out of these hills into Italy, viz. 3 out of France, and
2 out of Germany. The 1. from France is through Provence, and so close upon the
Tyrhenean Seas, through Liguria, which is the easiest. The 2. is through the
hill called Geneara, into the Marquisate of Saluzzes, and so to Lombardy. The
3. is over Mount Cenis, and through the County of Turin* ^he 1. way out of
Germany into Italy is through the Country of the Grissons, by the Country of
Valtolin* The other way is through Tyrolis, by the Towns of Inspruch and Trent.

Italy.
ITaly is a most fruitful and goodly Region, situate under a Clime most
temperate, commodious for traffic, and most fertile for Corn and Herbage. It
contains in length 1020 miles, and in breadth at the broadest not above 410.

It is an Island almost in shape of a Man's Leg, being bounded on the East, with
the Adriatic Sea; South and West, with the Tyrrene Seas; and North, with the
Alps.

Fertility.
It abounds with Corn, Wine, and Oil; yields plenty of Orangetrees, and the
like fruit, as Citrons, Limmons, and Cedar-trees: and of these fruits they
transport great store into foreign parts. Also they have Woods of
Chesnut-trees, little esteemed amongst them, only the poor people eating some
of them, and with the rest they seed their Hogs. Also they have plenty of
Almond-trees, and some Pomegranates; and also the Cyprus, Poplar, and the Oak,
so that you would say, the whole Province were but as one Garden.

Natures and manners of the p^ple.
The people for the most part are honorable, courteous, prudent, and grave
withal; to their superiors obedient; to equals respective; to inferiors
courteous; to strangers affable, and desirous by kind offices to win their
love; and in expense and love of his money very wary. Apparel.
In apparel they are modest; in furniture of house, sumptuous.

Diet.
In their Diet, compared with the English or French, they are most sparing;
generally they require small preparation or furniture of their table; they eat
neatly and modestly; they seldom make feasts, but if they make any, they make
them sumptuous, and that much more than ours. Their greatest expenses are about
their Gardens, in fitting places for birding, in drawing water to them, and
adorning the Conduits head with Imagery, in Chapels, and other buildings.

The usual division is into 6 parts, Lombardy, Tuscany, the Land of the Church,
Naples, Genea, and the Land of Venice.

But according to the present diverse Principalities that are, it is divided
into The greater, as The Kingdom of Naples. The Papacy. The Commonwealth of
Venice. The Dukedom of Florence. The Dukedom of Millain.
The lesser, as The Dukedom of Mantua. The Dukedom of Urbine. The
Principality of Parma. The State of Genoa. The State of Luca.



The Kingdom of Naples.
THis Kingdom is separated from the Land of the Church, by the River Axofenus;
on the other parts it is environed with the Sea: the compass of it being 1468
miles.

Fertility.
This Kingdom is the fertilest place in all Italy, abounding with Mines of
diverse Metals, Saffron, Silk, Oil, and Wine.

This Kingdom contains the Provinces of Lavoro, Calabria, Inferior and Superior
Otranto, Apulia, Puglia, and Abruzzo.

Lavoro.
Lavoro: This Province contains in it the City of Naples, being the chief of
the whole Kingdom. Near unto this City is the Mountain Vesuvius, now called
Somma. This Mountain is most high, and the top is dreadful, where is a Gulf
casting out flames; the rest of the Mountain abounds with Vines, and
Olivetrees. This City is seated at the foot of Hills and Mountains, extending
in length from the North-East to the South-West, or rather seems to be
triangular.

The Houses of this City are 4 roofs high, but the tops lie almost plain, so as
they walk upon them in the cool time of the night.

The Buildings are of freestone, and the windows are all covered with paper or
linen cloth, for glass windows are most rare in Italy.

It has 3 fair, broad, and long streets, namely, La Toletano, la Lapuana, and
la Vicaria; the rest are very narrow.

There be 8 Gates toward Land, and as many toward Sea; amongst which the
Capuan Gate is decked with Monuments and Statuaes.

There be in this City many Palaces of Gentlemen, Barons, and Princes.

There be 4 public Houses, called Segii, in which the Princes and Gentlemen
have yearly meetings; and there also is the daily meeting of Merchants. The
exceeding delightful having Gardens on all sides, as well within the City, as
near the same; and the Fields are no less fruitful, bringing forth abundantly
all things for the use of Man.

Also within this Territory are many famous Antiquities, and wonderful things
to be seen. 2. Capua. This City is of little compass, but it has a fair Senate
House, and a fair Church, called l'Annonciata, with a fair Altar. 3. Cuma, the
oldest City in all Italy. 4. Baiae, an ancient City. The situation is most
sweet, but all the Houses near the shore are drowned, except the Bathes. 5.
Nola, built on the ruins of Old Forma.

Calabria.
Calabria is another Region belonging to the Kingdom of Naples. It is bounded
with the River Iano, the Tyrrene, and Ionian Seas. It is in compass about 500
miles, and is divided into the higher and lower. In the higher, the chief
Cities are, 1. Consensia. 2. Salernum, famous for the study of Physic. In the
lower is Caterzara, a strong City.

Otranto.
Otranto has on the West, Puglia; and on the other 3 parts, the Sea. The chief
Towns are, 1. Tarentum. 2. Brundusium, glorying in one of the best Havens in
the world. 3. Otranto. 4. Gallipolis.

Apulia.
Apulia: This Province extends from the confines of Brunduse, to the River
Fortore. It is divided into 2 Provinces, the one called Bari, the other Puglia.
The chief City is Manfredoin; it lies under the Hill St. Angelo.

Puglia.
Puglia is another Province of this Kingdom. It is bounded with the River
Fortore, and the River Tronto. It is a fruitful Country, in the midst rough
and mountainous. The chief Cities of it are, 1. Barlet. 2. Cannae; the wealth
thereof consists in Cattle, and Saffron.

Abruzzo.
Abruzzo is another Province in this Kingdom. The chief Cities of it are, 1.
Aquino, the birthplace of Thomas Aquinus. 2. Sulmo, Ovid's birthplace.

The Papacy.
THe Estate of the Pope is twofold; the one consists in his temporal
dominion, the other in his spiritual jurisdiction As touching his temporal
dominion, he is Lord of a great part of Italy; as of all that lies between the
River Fiore and Cajetta, between Preneste and the Truentian Streights, (except
the Dukedom of Vrbin.) In that compass are incircled the Provinces of
Romandiola, Marchia, Spoletto, and St. Peter's Patrimony.

Romandiola
This Province extends from the Rubicon East, to the Venetians West.

The chief Cities are, 1. Bgononia, the chief University of Italy, and the
retiring place of the Popes. 2 Ferrara. This City is seated in a plain, and
compassed with a fenny bank, and is of a triangular form. In the of the City is
a large Marketplace. The Streets are broad, and very dirty in winter, and no
less subject to dust in the summer. The Houses are built of freestone, and not
near one to another, but with pleasant Gardens between. The whole circuit of
this City is said to contain 7 miles 3. Ravenna This is a most ancient City;
the buildings hereof are of Brick and Flint-stone, and are so old, as they seem
ready to fall* On the East Side the Sea lies some 2 Italian miles distant,
where is the Haven for Ships, so much spoken of in the Roman Histories.

Marchia.
Marchia reaches from Tronto to Puglia, between the Apenine and the Sea. It is
divided into little Hills and plains. It is rich in Wine, Oil and Corn. The
City of greatest trading is Ancona, by reason of the Haven, to which many
Eastern Merchants do resort. It is a very fair City, encompassed with three
Mountains, and has the form of an half Moon. The streets of it are narrow, and
ill paved with flint. The Haven is of a triangular form, about which is
pleasant walking; and the place where Merchants meet, called la Loggia, lying
upon the Sea, is a most sweet open room, but narrow.

2. Ascoli, a very fair City; and 3. Firmo, a strong City.

Spoletto.
Spoletto, of old called Vmbria. The chief Cities of it are, 1. Spoletto. 2.
Onietto, seated on a high Rock. 3. Asis, where S. Francis was born. This
Province is abundantly stored with Wine, Cattle, and some Saffron.

St. Peter's Patrimony.
This Province contains all Latium, (or Campagna di Roma.) In this Country are
the Mountains called Gallicanum. The chief City is Rome, seated on Tyber. It is
in compass 11 miles, within which is not a little waste ground.

The Inhabitants are about 200000, 2 parts of them being Clergymen and
Curtezans. The most worthy places in it are the Church of St. Peter, which were
it once finished, would be the rarest building in the world. Then the Castle of
St. Angelo, impregnable, unless by famine. Next the Popes Palace, called
Betuidere. And lastly, the Library of the Hill Vatican, called commonly the
Vatican Library. 2. Tiber. 3. Preneste 4. Veii, a City of great wealth and
compass.

The Commonwealth of Venice.
IN the very bottom of the Adriatic, called at this day the Gulf of Venice,
is a ridge of Land, reaching from the Lime-kilns, called by them Fornaci, to
the mouth of the River Pi, in form of a Bow, and contains inlength 35 miles,
and in breadth 2, where it is broadest. This Ridge is cut into 7 principal
Islands, the Ports of Brondolo, Chiozzo, Malam Occo, of the 3 Castles of St.
Erasmus, the Lito Maggiore, and the Troports. Between the part of this Ridge
called Lito, and the Continent, stands the Lake of Venice, in compass 90
miles; and in this Lake is seated the City of Venice upon 72 Islands, distant
from the shore 2 miles, and from the firm Land 5. This stately City is in
compass 8 miles, and has 70 Parishes, wherein each Church has a little
Marketplace, for the most part four square; and a public Well, for the common
sort use Well-water, and Rainwater, kept in cisterns. It has 31 Cloisters of
Monks, and 28 of Nuns, besides Chapels and Almshouses. Channels of water pass
through this City, (consisting of many Islands) so that a Man may pass to what
place he will both by land and water. The great Channel is in length about 1300
paces, and in breadth 40, and has only one Bridge called Rialto. The passage
by this Channel is very pleasant, being adorned on both sides with stately
Palaces. And that Men may pass speedily, besides this Bridge, there be 13
places, called Traghetti, where Boats attend, called Gondotr, which being of
incredible number, give ready passage to all Men. The rest of the Channels be
narrow, and over them is many Bridges to be passed under. The Buildings of this
City are very rare, there being at least 100 Houses (or rather Palaces) sit to
entertain any Prince.

The magnificentest Buildings of this City are the Church of St. Mark, which
Saint is the protecting Saint of this City. The Building hereof is become
admirable, for the singular Art of the Builders and Painters, and the most rare
pieces of Marble, Porphry, and Ophites, (stones so called of speckles like a
Serpent) and like stones. 2. The Marketplace of St. Mark, being paved with
Brick, and consists of 4 Marketplaces joined in one. Again, the Houses
opposite to the Palaces of the Procurators of St. Mark, are called the Houses
of State, and they belong to the Church of St. Mark, having some 50 shops under
the Arches of the upper roofs; these yield great Rents to the Church. Also the
Steeple or Belfrey of St. Mark, distant some 80 foot from the Church, and set
over against it; it is to be admired not only for the foundation strangely
laid, but for diverse other causes.

There is also in the second Marketplace of the Palace, the Library, whose
Building is remarkable. Also in the said Marketplace is the stately Palace of
the Duke, all covered with Marble, and most sumptuous in the carved Images and
Pictures, and in the pillars of the arched Walk on the outside. The fourth
square Marketplace of Rialto, is compassed with public Houses; under the
arches whereof, and in the middle partlying open, the Merchants meet.

About this City are seated 75 other Islands, the chief whereof are, Onurano,
and Barano, especially Mucano, which abounds with goodly Orchards and
Gardens, and 1000 other objects of delight and pleasure. Also here are the
famous Glass-houses.

The whole Dominion of the Venetian Signeury, is divided into firm Land and
Sea. On the Land they possess in Lombardy, Marca Trevigiana, Friuli, and Istri.

Again, it is divided into Continent and Island. In the Continent they have
Istria, Dalmatia, Sclavonia, and Albania, or some parts thereof.

The Islands are Corfu, Cephalonia, Zant, Candia, Conigo, and other in the
Adriatic Sea.

Marca Trevigiana.
The State of the firm Land contains Marca Trevigiana, lying East of Frinli, and
the Gulf of Venice.

The chief City is Padua, a very fair City, the Building whereof is with arches
of stone, hanging over the Street, under which they walk dry in the greatest
rain; but the Streets are thereby made narrow, and in the midst very dirty. 2.
Brescia, the Seat of an Archbishop, who is an Earl, a Marquess, and a Duke. The
Cities Building is of Brick; the Streets are large, and paved with flint. 3.
Bergamo, a City seated on a Mountain; and 4. Vicenza.

Friuli.
Friuli, environed with Histria, the Alps, Trevigiana, and the Adriatic. The
length of it is 50 miles, and in the breadth as much. The chief Town of it is
Palma, built by the Venetian, 1583. and the best fortified of any in Italy.

Istria.
The greatest Territory of this Continent is Istria, and the best, unless it
were for that the Air is naturally unwholesome, especially about Nolo. It
yields great abundance of Oil, Fish, and Salt. The chief Cities are, 1.
Istinopolis. 2. Pola.

The Dukedom of Florence.
THe Dukedom of Florence contains the greater part of Tuscany, parted from
Genoa by the Magra; and the West, from Romagna, and Ancona; by the Alpenine, on
the North; by the Pisseo, East; and the Pyrhene Sea, South. The chief City is
Florence, seated nigh the Confluence of Arnus. This City is of a round form,
and upon the Walls thereof lie 8 Forts, whereof the greatest and strongest lies
toward the South. The Houses after the manner of Italy, are built with a low
roof, excepting the Palaces, which are stately built of freestone, engraven.
The Streets are most broad, and have an open Air, and the Pavement is of very
broad and fair freestone. The River Arno running from East to West, divides
this City, but into unequal parts, the greater part lying on the North, and the
Bridge to pass from one to the other is almost in the midst of the City. Also
there be 3 other Bridges over Arno, but far less in bigness and magnificence
than the former.

Toward the North and East this City is encompassed with pleasant Hills,
planted with excellent fruits; and behind them the high Mountains of the
Apenine somewhat removed, are instead of strong Walls to the City.

Also on the South side are the like Hills and distant Mountains; but toward
the West it lies open to the most pleasant Valley Arno. On all sides without
the Walls, Palaces of Gentlemen are most frequent, and Houses of Citizens, not
distant above three or four Closes one from the other.

Within this City the Duke has two Palaces, the one called Palazzo Dipitti,
the other Palace of the Duke is seated in the corner of the Marketplace of
Piazza della Signoria, it being the fairest and largest Marketplace within this
City; there being four more, (viz.) Merchato Vecchio, S. Spirito, Santa Croce,
and Maria Novella.

2. Pisa; the River Arno runs through this City, from East to West. It is
seated in a plain, and toward the North-west-by-North is a Gate, and a fair
Cathedral Church, paved with Marble, and most curiously wrought. In the midst
of this City, upon the Bank of Arno, is the Palace of the Duke of Florence. 3.
Sienna; the situation of this City is most pleasant upon a high Hill; all the
Pavement of the Street is of brick, which lasts the longer because there be
neither Carts nor Coaches, but all burdens are carried on the backs of Asses.
It is vulgarly said, that Sienna abounds with Fountains, Towers, and fair
Women. There is no better place to live in through all Italy, than the State of
Florence, and more especially this City of Sienna. Besides it is commended for
the best Language in all Italy.

4. Massa, famous for her quarries of white Marble.

5. Ligorne; this City is seated in a plain, being somewhat longer from North
to South, than it is broad from East to West, and the Sea lies upon it partly
on the North, partly on the South, and altogether on the West Side; and it has
one Tower on the North-side, and another on the South, reaching into the Sea;
and between these two Towers, full on the West Side, there is a Haven for great
Ships; farther out into the Sea, and also near the City, and compassed with the
Walls thereof, are two Havens for Galleys and small Barks. In this City our
English Factors do reside for the traffic of Italy.

The Dukedom of Millain.
THe Dukedom of Millain has on the East, Mantua and Parma; on the South,
Liguria; North, Trevigiana; and on the West, Piedmont. It is in circuit 300
miles. The chief Cities are, 1. Pavia: This City lies in length from East to
West, and a new fair street divides it in the midst from the North to the
South. On the West Side are two Marketplaces, one greater than the other. The
Buildings of the City are of Brick, and seem to be of great antiquity. 2.
Alexandria. 3. Cremona: The form of this City is like unto a Cardinal's Hat,
with broad brims; seated in a plain. Within this City is a Tower built of
Brick, which requires 492 stairs in the Ascent. 4. Millain: This City is of a
round form, and has 9 Gates; the Building shows antiquity, and the Houses are
of Brick, and low built, excepting some stately Palaces. The Streets are broad,
and the Pavement of Brick, raised in the midst with broad stones. In this City
is thought to be inhabited 200000 souls, of the best Artizans in Italy.

The Dukedom of Mantua.
THe Dukedom of Mantua has on the East, Romagna; West, Millain; North,
Trevigiana; and South, Parma and Placentia. The chief Cities are, 1. Mirabella.
2. Modena. 3. Lucera; and 4. Mantua; a very strong Town, being environed on
three sides with a Water, being a quarter of a mile broad. The form of this
City is round, save that the foresaid Lake on the North and Eastsides, enters
into the City in form of a half Moon. The Buildings are partly of Brick, and
partly of freestone; and the Streets are large and clean. In the midst of this
City is a large Marketplace, wherein the Jews have there, and sell all manner
of Wares; for all traffic is in their hands, growing rich by the poverty of
the Citizens. It is unlawful to wear a sword without license of the
Magistrate, either at Millain, Cremona, or Mantua, or almost in any other City
of Italy; only at Venice and Padua, and the Cities of that State, strangers may
wear swords; and only the wearing of Pistols or short Guns is forbidden.

The Dukedom of Vrbin.
THe Dukedom of Vrbin lies in the midst of the Papal Territories, having on
the North, the Adriatic; on the South, the Apenine; on the West, Romagna; on
the East, Marca Aconitana. The length of it is 60, the breadth 35 miles. Here
are in this Dukedom 200 Castles, and 7 Towns; the chief of the seven being
Vrbin, seated on the bottom of the Apenine, and built in the fashion of a
Miter. 2. Pisauro, a good Haven. 3. Belforto, seated in the Mid-land. The chief
of the Castles are the Rock of St. Leo, and Marivola.

The Principality of Parma.
THis Principate has on the North, Mantua; and on the South, the Apenine; on
the West, Millain; and on the East, the Country of Modena. The City of Parma
is seated on the River Pirnia. Placentia is seated on the Po. To this
Principate belongs Mirandula, with her territories.

The State of Genoa.
THe State of Genoa was once very great, but now they have nothing left but
Liguria and Corsica.

Liguria has on the East, the River Varus; West, the River Magra, by which it
is parted from Tuscany; North, the Apenine; and South, the Ligurian, or Tyrhene
Seas. The chief Towns are, 1. Noli. 2. Sarazena. 3. Savona. And 4. Genoa. This
City is seated upon the sides of Mountains, declining from the highest Mountain
on the West Side toward the East, and to the Seaside. On the South side is the
outward Haven, in form of an half Moon; upon the horn thereof, toward the
East, lies the Sea-bank, called Lamola, about 600 paces long, which keeps off
the waves of the Sea that beat upon the City. On the East Side, and in the
midst of this Bank, is a Fort built to defend the Navy. The whole circuit of
this City is said to be 8 miles. The streets are narrow, but the Palaces are
stately, built of Marble, and the Houses of freestone, 5 or 6 stories high;
and the Windows are glazed, which is rare in Italy; the streets are paved with
flint, and the Houses of the suburbs are almost as fair as within the City.

The State of Lucca.
THe State of Lucca is situate in Tuscany, and comprehends the Territory and
Town of Lucca. This Town is seated in a plain, and strongly fortified, and
compassed with Mountains on all sides, but some what distant, and only lies
open on the Seaside toward Pistoia, being 3 miles in compass. The streets are
narrow, and paved with broad freestone, most easy to be walked on. The
Palaces of the chief Gentlemen are built of freestone, but with a low roof,
after the Italian fashion, and they have many pleasant Gardens within the
Walls. Within this City no Man may wear any weapon, no not a Knife, except the
point be blunt.

Thus much of Italy.
Netherland.
ON the North-west of Italy lies Germany, which is divided into the higher and
the lower; this latter is called Netherland. It is bounded on the East, with
Ems, and part of Germany; on the West, with the German Sea; on the North, with
East- Friezeland; and on the South, with the Some, Champaigne, and Lorrain.

The situation.
The Air of this Country is very intemperate, the winter-cold being excessive,
and the summers-heat far exceeding the ordinary heat of that Clime.

Natures of the people
The Men for the most part are well proportioned, much given to our English
Beer, being excessive in their drinking, so that you shall hardly find a
Dutchman sober in an afternoon. The Women generally are of a good complexion,
well proportioned, especially in their leg and foot; honourers of virtue;
active, and familiar; both within doors and without they govern all.

Diet.
In their Diet, Butter is the first and last dish at the table, whereof they
make all sauces; as well your Men as Women passing from City to City to trade,
carry with them Cheese, and Boxes of Butter, for their food. They use no Spits
here, but see the little pieces of flesh with Roots, and Gobbets of fat
mingled, without any curiosity; or else bake them in earthen Pipkins.

Fertility.
They have abundance of Butter, Cheese, and Roots for Corn, they have not
sufficient for their own use, yet by traffic at Dantzick they furnish
themselves and many other Nations therewith. They have little plenty of River
fish, but Sea fishes salted and dried, they make great traffic therewith.
There is great abundance of Sea-fowl, and they want not Land-fowl.

Commodity.
The Commodities in which they most abound, are Tapistries, Says, Searges,
Worsteds, Frigadoes, and diverse sorts of linen Cloth, with abundance of other
small trifles.

This Country is divided into seventeen Provinces, viz.

Into 4 Dukedoms, 1. Limburg. 2. Luxenburg. 3. Gelderland. 4. Brabant.
1 Marquisate, Of the Holy Empire.
7 Earldoms, 1. Flanders. 2. Artoys. 3. Hainault. 4. Namurre. 5. Zutphen. 6.
Holland. 7. Zealand.
5 Baronies, 1. West-Friezl. 2. Vtretch. 3. Overysell. 4. Machlyn. 5. Groyning.



Limburg.
THe Dukedom of Limburg has Mastrich for the chief City, and the Bishopric of
Liege pertains to it, wherein the City of Liege is the Bishops Seat.

This City is seated on the Meuse.

The Buildings of this Town are very fair, especially the Monasteries and
Abbeys.

This Bishopric comprehends in it 24 walled Towns, and 1800 Villages. Also the
Eastern part (which is properly called the Dukedom of Limburg) contains in it 5
Towns, and 23 Villages. The chief of these is Limburg*

Luxenbu^g
Luxenburg is bounded with Limburg, on the North; Lorrain, South; the
Bishopric of Triers, E^st; and the Meuse, West. It is in circuit 240 miles, in
which are contained 1169 Villages, and 2^ walled Towns; the chief whereof is,
1. Luxenburg, on the River Asnutius, or Elze. 2. Bostonake, a fair Town. 3.
Danvillers. The Inhabitants of the upper part of this Dukedom are Germans, but
the lower part are French, both in language and manners.

Near to this Dukedom is the Forest of Arden, once 500 miles in compass, now
scarce 90 round.

Brabant.
Brabant has on the East, North, and South, the Meuse; and West, the Schald.
It is in length 75 miles; in breadth 60, comprehending under it 700 Villages,
and 26 Towns; the chief being Lovain. It is in compass within the Walls 4
miles, and 6 without; within which compass are many goodly Gardens, Valleys,
Mountains, Meadows. It is a famous University, in which are 20 Colleges. 2.
Bruxels, the Dukes Seat. 3. Bergenapzone; this City is strongly fortified, and
is seated in Brabant. 4. Breda.

The Marquisate.
The Marquisate of the Empire is contained in Brabant. The chief Town is
Antwerp, being in circuit 7 miles. It was a Town of infinite trading, but now
the Hollander has so blockt up the Haven, that the trading is removed from
hence to Amsterdam.

Flanders.
Flanders is divided into Imperialem Gallicam, and Teutonicam; this last is
severed from the other two by the River Ley. The chief Towns of it are, 1.
Gaunt, whose Wall is in compass 7 miles, in which there lies much waste
ground. 2. Burgis. 3 Ypres, a strong Town. The four principal Ports are, 1.
Dunkirk. 2. Scluse; it has a very fair Haven, able to contain 500 good ships.
3. Newport 4. Ostend.

Imperial Flanders is severed from Brabant by the River Dender. The chief Towns
are, 1. Alost, on the Dender. 2. Dendermond, on the mouth of the said River. 3.
Hulst.

Gallic Flanders; so called, because it properly belongs to France. The chief
Towns are, 1. Lisle, the third Town of traffic in all the Netherlands. There
are in all Flanders 35 Towns, and 1178 Villages. It is in length 95 miles, and
in breadth much less.

Artoys.
Artoys contains 754 Villages, and 12 Towns; the chief being, 1. Arras; whence
comes our Cloth of Arras. 2. Lilliers. The chief of the frontier Towns between
this and Picardy, are Hedinfert, a very defensible Town.

Hainalt.
The length of this Province is 60 miles, the breadth 48; in which space are 950
Villages, and 24 Towns. The chief are, 1. Mons, strong, ancient and rich. 2.
Valenciens, so seated that it cannot be besieged but with three Armies at once.
3. Conde

Namarre.
The County of Namarre, so called of the chief City, has Mines of Iron, and
plenty of stony Coal, contrary to ^ll other Coals, in that it is quen^hed by
the infusion of Oil, and burns more clear having water cast upon ^t.

This Country has also quarries of fr^e stone, and Marble of diverse colors.

Machlyn.
Machlyn is a Town in Brabant, and contains besides it self 9 Villages. It is a
goodly strong Town, and seated in the midst of the waters of the River Dele,
that it may on all sides be drowned.

The States of the Low Countries.
THe Provinces united are these, Zealand, Holland, Vtretch, Over-Issel,
Zutphen, Groningen, of Gelderland, with some pieces of Brabant and Flanders.

This Union was made 1581. the Fleets and Forces of which Confederation are
from the chief Province, called altogether Hollanders.

Zealand.
The first of these Provinces is Zealand; broken it is into seven Islands: the
chiefest of the seven is Walcheren; the chief City whereof is Middleburg,
famous for traffic; and the Staple for Spanish and French Wines. Near this
City is Vlisbing, strongly fortified. 3. Vere. All these Islands are fertile,
and yield excellent good Corn, more plentiful than any other Province. Madder
for dying of Wool grows plentiful here, which likewise they export; as
likewise Spanish and French Salt, and like traffic

Holland.
The Country of Holland is in situation the second of the United Provinces, but
the first in dignity; the Cities whereof are, 1. Amsterdam, famous for
traffic. 2. Rotterdam. 3. Leyden, and an University. 4 Harlem. 5. Dort, the
Staple for the Rhenish Wines. And 6. Delph; all very fair Cities. And there is
likewise the most pleasant Village of the Hage, called Gravenhage.

Utretch.
Vtretch contains 70 Villages, and 5 Towns; the chief whereof are, Vtretch,
Rhenen, and Montfoort

Overissel.
Overissel contains 101 Villages, and 11 Towns, the chief whereof are, Swall,
Campene, and Deventree.

Zutphen.
Zutphen is a Town in Gelderland, which long has been an Earldom; it is seated
on the River Issel, and is a Town of very great strength: It was subdued by the
States Army 1591.

Gelderland
This Dukedom contains 300 Villages, and 24 Towns; the chief being, 1. Nimegue,
seated on that part of the Rhene which is called the Whael. 2. Ruremond. 3.
Arnheim; this Country is fit for feeding of Beasts, which grow so great and
fat, that anno 570. a gelt Bull was at Antwerp which weighed 3200 l.

Groyning.
Groyning is a Town of West-Friezeland, containing under her command 45
Villages; the chief being O^dhav^n and Keikirk.

Freizeland
It contains 45 Villages, and 11 Towns; the chief are, 1. Lewarden. 2
Harlingem. 3 Zwichen. This territory abounds with excellent pastures, for
fatting of the greatest herds of Cattle, and yields it self all kinds of
Cattle of extraordinary hig^ess. Also near unto this Province is the Islank
Sekelink, the shores whereof are plentifully stored with Dog-fish

Although this be the lesser part by far, and more poor in respect of the Soil,
yet it is more populous, and by the industry of the people far more rich.

Thus much of Netherland.
Germany.
GErmany is bounded on the West, with France and Belgium; on the North, with
Denmark, and her Seas; on the East, with Prussia, Poland and Hungaria; and on
the South, with the Alps.

The compass of this spacious Country is 2600 English miles: the figure of it
is almost an exact square, each side containing 650 miles.

Situation.
It is situate in the Northern temperate Zone, under the 7 and 11 Climates; the
longest day being 17 hours and an half.

Of all Europe this is the greatest Country, and beautified with the best and
richest store of Cities, Towns and Castles, and Religious places.

Fertility.
It also does abound with many things necessary for life, and many things to be
transported. They have Corn sufficient, and for Cattle they want not of all
kinds, but they are commonly lean and little: so are their Horses many in
number, but little in stature.

Commodity.
The Commodities wherewith it is enriched, are Mines of silver, and other
inferior Metals: Wines, which they transport into other Countries, together
with fresh Fish, Linen, Quicksilver, Alum, Armors.

Natures of the people.
The Inhabitants for honesty of conversation, probity of manners, assurance of
loyalty, and confidence of disposition, setting aside their imperfect customs
of drinking, excelling all people.

Upper Germany, containing Swizzerland.
Germany is divided into the higher, and lower; the upper lying on the Alps is
subdivided into Austria, Bavaria, Suevia, Helvetia, (or Swizzerland,) and
Alsatiae.

Austria.
Austria: This is a goodly and rich Country, yea the best of all Germany, both
for Corn, Cattle, Wine, and Fish. It is separated on the East, from Hungaria,
by the River Leire; West, from Bavaria, by the Ems; North, from Moravia, by the
Tems; and South, from Styria, by the Muer.

The chief Cities of it are, 1. Wien, or Vienna, a famous Fort against the
Turk. The City is of a round form; the Streets are narrow, but the Buildings
are stately of freestone; two Towers of the Church is curiously engraven, the
like whereof is not in Germany, except Strasburg. 2. Emps, so called on the
River Ems, on whose Banks it is seated. 3. S. Leopold. 4. Neustat. 5. Hamburg.
6. Crems.

It contains the Provinces of Styria, Carinthia, Tyrolis, and Carniola.

Styria.
Styria is a small Region in the midst of the Alps. The chief Cities are, 1.
Marpurg. 2. Hall. 3. Greits, the chief City.

Carinthia.
Carinthia: this Country is 75 miles in length, and 5 in breadth. The chief
Towns are, 1. Vellach. 2. Spittal. 3. Veit, the Metropolis of this Country.

Tyrolis.
Tyrolis: this Country is 72 miles in length, and as many in breadth. It has
on the bast, Carinthia; West, the Grisons; North, Schwaben; and South, Marea
Trevigiana. The Soil of this Country is very good, and full of silver Mines.
The chief Towns are, ^. Inspruch. 2. Tyrol. 3. Trent, on the River Odefis.

Carniola.
Carniola: this Country is 150 miles long, 45 broad; it is environed with
Sclavonia, East; Italy, West; Carinthia, North; and Istria, South The chief
Cities are, 1. Newmarcht. 2. Esting, upon the Sanus.

Bavaria.
Bavaria: this Dukedom has on the East. Austria and Styria; West, the Leike;
North, Danubius, and part of Franconia; and South, Tyrolis and Carinthia. This
is a large, rich, and goodly Country, lying in great length on both sides the
Danubius. The chief Cities are, 1. Munchen, upon the River Aser, the Dukes
Seat. 2. Ingulstad, on Danubius, an University. 3. Ratisbone, seated on the
Donaw. 4. Passaw. 5. Saltzbourg; it is seated on the River Saltzech* This City
is honored with a Bishopric, (...) ^venue is the greatest in Germany. 6.
Frising. The whole number of Cities in Bavaria are 34. besides 46 great walled
Towns, the Soil about which is sufficiently fruitful in all things, saving
Wines, with which they are supplied from Austria.

Rhetia.
Rhetia, or the Country of the Grissons, has on the East, Tyrolis; West,
Swizzerland, North, Suevia; and South, Millain. This Country is half in
Germany, and half in Italy, so that they use both Languages. The chief Towns
are, 1. Coyra, the Metropolis of the Grissons, seated about half an hours
journey from the Rhene. For form it is triangular; the Houses indifferent
handsome, but not uniform, one within another. 2. Musocco. 3. Bormia. In this
Country they have free use of Religion, both they of the Romish, and they of
the Reformed Churches.

Suevia.
Suevia, or Schwaben, has on the East, Bavaria; West, Danubius; North,
Franconia; and South, Tyrolis, and the Grissons. The chief Towns are, 1. Vlm,
so called from the company of Elms which inviron it. 2. Lindair: this is a free
City, and it is almost an Island, seated in the Lake called Acronius. 3.
Auspurg: this is a stately City, the beauty whereof lies on the West Side; the
Houses being built upon a Hill, are of Freestone, six or seven roofs high.
Also there be many Palaces built of the Fugares, and other Citizens; but in
other places it is more poorly built. 4. Norlingen. 5. Wherlingen. 6.
Ravensperg, all Imperi^l Towns.

Helvetia.
Helvetia, (or Swizzerland) is almost situate among the Alps, and therefore
supposed to be the highest Region in Europe; and the rather, because the most
famous Rivers in those parts of the world, (viz.) Rone, Rhodan, and Po, falling
from those high plac^s, disperse their channels through Christendom* It is
bounded on the East, with Tyrolis; North, with Lorrain; West, with France; and
South, with Italy. The length of it is 240 and the breadth 180 miles. The chief
Cities are, 1. Zurich: this City is one of the Cantons of Swizzerland, and is
divided in the midst by the Lake Zurechsea, having three Bridges for p^ssage
the greater whereof the Merchants use for their meetings. The Streets are
narrow, and the Houses built of timber and clay, and the City it self is seated
upon and between Hills. 2. Basil, now one of the Swizzers Cantons. Herein was
that famous Council held by Eugenius the Pope, in the year 1431. 3. Constance,
seated on the Bodeuse, over against Lindaw It is within the Confines of
Swizzerland, but belongs to the House of Austria. This Town is famous by a
Council held there, where John Hus was condemned of Heresy, and burned. Near
unto the City in a fair Meadow, is the Stone to which he was bound when he was
burnt; where also his fellow, Jerome of Prague, was burnt in September the year
following. 4. Berne: this City is built upon a Mountain, yet it seems to be
seated on a Valley, because it is compassed with Mountains. The Houses are
uniformly and fairly built of Freestone; and round about this Mountain the
Citizens have their Gardens, so that it is a most fair and pleasant City. 5.
Baden, seated in the midst of the Country, and is for that cause the place of
meeting for the Council of Estate. Near unto this City are the famous hot
Bathes, being 30 in number.

Alsatia.
Alsatia has West, Lorrain; South, Helvetia; East, the Rhene; and North, the
Palatinate. The chief City is Strasburg: this City is in circuit three hours
walking; the Buildings and Churches are fair and high, of freestone; most of
the Streets are narrow, but those divided by the water are broader. Many things
in this City are remarkable, but especially the Steeple of the Cathedral
Church, which is counted one of the 7 miracles of the world: the Clock hereof
is of all other the most famous. 2. Psaltburg. 3. Wesenberg.

The Provinces of Lower Germany, among which Bohemia is reckoned.
The Lower Germany is divided into Franconia, Bohemia, and its territories; the
three Electorates of the Palatinate, Brandenburg, and Saxony, with its members;
Pomerania, Medenburg, Brunswick, Luneberg, Hassia, East- Friezeland,
Westphalia, Cleveland, and Veteravia, or Weteraw.

Franconia.
Franconia is an ancient and noble Nation; it is bounded on the East, with
Bohemia and Saxony; West, with Elsas; North, with Hassia; and South, with
Bavaria.

This Province has many ancient and fair Cities, as namely, Bamberg, a Bishops
Seat: Weirztberg, and Mentz, or Metz, both Bishops Seats; the latter whereof is
the Seat of the chief Elector Bishop, and is a fair City, and well fortified:
it is seated on a Hill, and in a fertile Soil, fruitful of Corn. The free
Cities in this Province that belong to the Emperor, are 1. Norimberg: this
City is seated in a barren sandy ground, yet is very rich by the Citizens
industry. This is a most stately City; the Buildings whereof are of Freestone,
six or seven roofs high. In this City is a Granary, which is so large, as
diverse years provision may be laid up therein. It has also ten Churches,
whereof only four are used for Prayer and Preaching. 2. Rottenberg, a very fair
City. 3. Francford: this City is famous for the Electors meeting here to choose
the Emperor, and for two yearly Fairs. It is compassed strongly with a double
Wall; upon the East Side the Jews have a Street, who are permitted to dwell in
this famous Mart-Town. This City is of a round form, seated in a large plain;
the Streets are narrow, and the Houses being built of Timber and Clay, the
foundation of some being laid of Freestone. All the Province (excepting the
free Cities, and the three Cities belonging to the Bishops) is subject to the
Marquess of Brandenburg.

Bohemia.
The Kingdom of Bohemia contains Bohemia, the Dukedom of Silesia, the
Marquisates of Lusatia, and Moravia. It is in a manner round, and encompassed
with great Mountains. It contains in circuit 550 English miles; in which
compass are comprehended 780 Cities, walled Towns, and Castles, and 32000
Villages.

Fertility.
The Soil is pleasant and fruitful, abounding with Corn, Wood, Wine, and
Grapes, and affords Gold and Silver, Copper, Iron, Tin, and Lead, great
quantity.

Natures of the people.
The people for the most part live in great plenty and delicacy, much resembling
the English. The Women be very beautiful, but somewhat luxurious, and that
with consent of their Husbands.

The chief Cities are, 1. Prage, the Metropolis of Bohemia, seated on the River
Mulda. It is a very great City, as being three Towns in one, each divided from
other by the River Mulda, and all three conjoined together by a wooden Bridge
of 24 Arches. The Streets of this City are filthy; there be diverse
Marketplaces; the Buildings of some Houses are of Freestone, but the most
part of Timber and Clay, and are built with little beauty or art. The second
Town of note is Egra, and the third is Budweis.

Silesia.
Silesia is in length 240, and in breadth 80 miles. It is a most delicate and
plentiful Country, divided in the midst by the River Oder. The chief Cities
are, 1. Breslaw, a Bishopric. 2. Jagendorf. 3. Glogaw.

Lusatia.
Lusatia: this Country although but little, to arm 20000 Foot as good as any
in Germany. The chief Cities are, Gorlitz and Trabell, on the River Nisse.

Moravia.
Moravia: this Country is the most fertile in Corn in all Germany; it abounds
also with good and pleasant Wine; besides it has also no small store of Myrrh
and Frankincence. The chief Towns are, 1. Brinne, the seat of the Marquess. 2.
Almutz, an University. This Country is very mountainous and woody; the people
are very warlike and fierce, especially the Mountainers.

The Electorate of the Palatinate.
The Electorate of the Palatinate: His Dominion contains the upper and lower;
the lower being the chief of the two, as being both richer and larger, and the
Seat of the Elector. It is called the lower, to distinguish it from the upper.
This Palatinate is said to be the most pleasing and delicious part in all
Germany, stored with all Fruits and Metals, abounding with those Wines which
with us are called, Rhenish Wines

It is adorned with many gallant Towns; the chief whereof is, 1. Heidleberg,
the Seat of the Palsgrave It is encompassed with high Mountains on the South,
East, and North sides; but toward the West it has its Suburbs, being longer
than the City. 2. Openheim. 3. Crutznach. 4. Frankendate. On the Eastside of
this Country stands Winheim and Lauden; on the West Side are the Towns of
Newstat and Keifers.

Upper Palatinate.
Upper Palatinate: this Country lies East and North of Bohemia. The chief
Towns of it are, 1. Amberg, the birthplace of the present Elector, whose
silver Mines yield yearly unto the Prince's Coffers 60000 Crowns. 2. Newberg.
3. Castle, where the Palatinates of the Rhene when they journey in this
Country, use to keep their Court.

The Electorate of Saxony.
Saxony is bounded on the East, with Lusatia; West, with Hassia; North, with
Brunswick; and South, with Franconia and Bohemia. It contains the Countries
of Turingia, Misnia, Voitland, and Saxony. Turingia is environed with Hassia,
Franconia, Misnia, and Saxony. The chief City is, 1. Erdford, the Dukes Seat.
This City is large and ancient, and one of the free Cities of the Empire. 2.
Jene, an University of Physicians. Misnia is environed with Bohemia, Voitland,
Thuringia, and Saxony. The chief Towns are, 1. Dresden, seated on the Albis.
This City is very fair, and strongly fortified, in which the Elector keeps his
Court. It is of a round form, seated in a plain, running between two Mountains,
but somewhat distant; and the Houses are fair built of Freestone, four or five
roofs high, whereof the highest roof after the Italian fashion, is little
raised in steepness. 2. Leipzich, a famous University for Philosophers and
Physicians. It is seated in a plain of most fruitful Corn-ground; the Streets
are fair; the Marketplace large and stately; and such are the chief Houses,
built of Freestone, four roofs high. 3. R^lits. 4. Mis^n; and 5 Wittenberg,
seated in a plain sandy ground: one Street lies the whole length of the Town,
being all the beauty thereof. Voitland is a little Country, South of Misnia;
whose chief Cities are, 1. Olnitz. 2 Werda. This Dukedom is seated almost in
the midst of Germany; all of it together is imagined to be about the bigness of
a third part of England.

The Electorate of Brandenburg.
The Electorate of Brandenburg: this Marquisate is limited on the East, with
Poland; West, with Saxony; North, with Pomerania; and South, with Lusatia. It
is in circuit 520 miles; in which are contained 50 Cities, and 64 walled Towns.
The chief is, 1. Brandenburg. 2. Francfort and Oderam. It is an University, and
situate in a Soil most plentifully stored with Corn and Wines It is most famous
for the Mart here kept. 3. Berlin, the Prince's Seat; it is situate on the
River Spre. 4. Havelbourg, the Seat of a Bishop. This Marquisate is divided
into the new and old; the River Odera watering the last; the Albis the first.

Pomerania.
Pomerania has on the East, the River Vistuta; West, Meclenburg; North, the
Baltic Ocean; and South, Brandenburg. The chief Towns are, 1. Stetin, the
Prince's Seat, and the Metropolis of the Country. 2. Wolgast. 3. Wallin, once
a famous Town, and flourished in traffic, but now decayed. 4 Gripswald. 5.
Newtrepon, a Sea-Town.

To this Province belong three Islands, Rugia, Wisedonia, and Volinia.

Me^enbourgh.
Meclenbourg is on the West-part of Pomeren. The chief Towns of it are, 1.
Malchaw. 2. Sternberg. 3. Wismar. 4. Rostock, an University.

Brunswick. Lunebourg.
Brunswick, Lunebourg: these two Dukedomes are bounded on the East, with
Brandenburg; West, with Westphalen; North, with Denmark; and South, with Saxony
and Hassia. The chief Cities are, 1. Brunswick. It is a free City of the
Empire, strongly fortified, and not any way subject to the Emperor. 2.
Wolfehaiten, where the Duke keeps his Court. 3. Halberstad, a Bishops See. 4.
Lunebourg. 5. Cella, the Seat of the Duke of Lunebourg.

Hassia.
Hassia: this Lantgravedom is environed on the East, with Saxony; South, with
Franconia; and West, and North, with Westphalen.

The chief Towns are, 1. Dormstad, the Seat and Inheritance of the youngest
House of the Lantgraves. 2. Marpurg, an University, and the Seat of the second
House of the Lantgraves. 3. Dryes. 4. Frankenburg; and 5. Cassels, three Towns
belonging to the elder House of the Lantgraves, whereof Cassels is chief, as
being the Seat of their residence. This City is seated in a fruitful Country,
and is well fortified with strong earthen Walls, and deep Ditches; yet are the
Houses of no great beauty, being composed for the most part of Wood, Thatch,
and Clay. Unto this Province belongs the County of Waldeck and Corbach.

East-Friezeland.
East-Friezeland has on the West, the Ems; East, the Weser; South, Westphalia;
and North, the Sea. The chief Towns are, 1. Emden. This City lies in the utmost
borders of the Empire, and is only divided by the River Ems, from the United
Province of the Netherland.

This City is fairly built of Brick, and is almost of a round form. It is an
Earldom of it self. 2. Oldenburg, which has an Earl of its own.

Westphalia.
Westphalia is bounded on the East, with Brunswick; West, with Belgium; North,
with the Sea; and South, with Hassia.

The Northern part of this Country is called Bremen, from the chief City Brem,
the Bishop whereof is Lord of this Tract. The next part belongs to the Duke
of Saxony. The chief Cities of which are, Clappenburg, Exenberg, and Alsdrop.
The other parts belong to the Bishoprics of Cullen, Munster, and Triers.

1. The Bishopric of Cullen contains a great part of Westphalia. The chief
City is, 1. Collen; the Archbishop whereof is said to be the second special
Elector of the Empire, and Chancellor of Italy. 2. Ernace, or Andernach. 3.
Lints. 4. Bonna, where the Bishop has a Palace, esteemed to be one of the
fairest Houses of Germany.

The chief Towns under the Bishop of Munster are, 1. Warendorp. 2 Munster,
seated on the Ems.

The chief Towns belonging to the Bishop of Triers are, 1. Bopport, seated on
the Moselle. 2 Engers. 3. Coblents. 4. Triers.

This is the Seat of the Chancellor of France, and third spiritual Elector; it
is built on the Moselle.

Cleveland.
Cleveland: this Duchy contains Cleve, Gulick, Berge. The Duchy of Cleve
conjoyneth to Guelderland. The chief Cities are, 1. Cleve. 2. Calker. 3. Wesel.
4. Emmerick.

2. The Duchy of Gulick: The chief Cities are, Aken, where the Emperor after
his election is invested with a silver Crown.

The Duchy of Berge or Monte, is in compass 130 miles. The chief Towns are, 1.
Duseldorp. 2. Hattingen; and 3. Arusberg.

Veteravia
Veteravia: On the South-West of Hassia is the Country of Veteravia, or
Weteraw containing among others the County of Nassaw, Hannaw, and the free City
of Friberg, situate in the midst of most pleasant and delicious Cornfieldsd.
The City Hannaw is distant from Francford and Moenum ten miles, and is a County
of it self. The next Town of note to it is Windeck

As for the County of Nassaw, it has in it many prime Towns; as 1.
Dillinbourg, the principal. 2. Nassaw. 3. Catzenelbogen, an Earldom of it self;
and 4. Hebron.

Thus much of Germany.
Denmark.
DEnmark has on the East, Mare Balticum; on the West, the German Ocean; on the
North, Sweden; and on the South, Germany.

Situation.
It is situate near the Artick Circle, and therefore must needs be subject to
great cold; howsoever the misty Air caused by the frequent Isles, does in some
sort mitigate the extremity thereof.

Fertility.
The Soil of the Country is rather fit for pasture than herbage; for in regard
of the Clime it cannot be expected that Fruits should grow here, which are only
ripened by the heat of the Sun. They have Corn sufficient; and likewise feed
such a multitude of Oxen, that 50000 are said to be sent hence yearly into
Germany.

Commodity.
Their other Commodities are Fish, Tallow, Furniture for Shipping, Armors,
Ox-Hides, Buck-skins, Wainscot, Firwood, Filbeards, and the like.

Natures of the People
The People are naturally good Soldiers both by Sea and Land, fitter for the
Sea than the Field. The Magistrate is wise rather by experience, than study;
the old Man covetous; the young Man thrifty; and the Merchant ambitious. The
Women are of the same conditions as the Women of Belgium.

Diet.
Their Diet is much like the Germans, and their Neighbors the Saxons. Their
dainties are Bacon, and salt-Meats; but the common people feed most on dried
Fishes.

It contains the Cimbrick Chersoness, the Islands of the Baltic, and part of
Scandia.

The Cimbrick Chersoness.
THis Chersoness has on the South-West, the Albis; on the South-East, the
River Trave; on the South, a little piece of Germany; and on all other parts,
the Sea. It is in length 120 miles, and in breadth 80, and contains 28
Cities, 4 Bishops Sees, and 20 royal Castles or Palaces. It is divided into the
Provinces of Holsatia, Dithmars, Slesia, and Juitland.

Holsatia.
Holsatia is the most Southern Province of Denmark, toward Germany, having on
the North, Slesia, and on the other sides, the Sea. The chief Towns are,
Niemunster, and Bramstede. Upon the Confines of Holst lie the fair Imperial
Cities of Lubeck and Hamburg.

Dithmars.
Dithmars takes up the West Side of this Chersonesus. The principal Towns of
it are, Marnes, and Meldorp.

Slesia.
Slesia has on the North, Juitland; and South, Holst The chief Towns are,
Sleswick, Goterpe, and Londen, an Haven-Town situate upon the River Ender.

Juitland.
Juitland is the most Northern part of this Chersoness. The chief Towns of it
are, Rincopen, Nicopen, Halne, and Arhausen.

The Baltic Islands.
The Baltic Islands are in number 35, and are so called, because they lie
dispersed in the Baltic Sea. Of these, four are of more especial note, viz.
Seeland, Fionia, Bornholme, and Finera.

1. Seeland is in length 64 miles, and in breadth 52. It contains 7 strong
Castles belonging to the King, and about 13 Cities. The chief is Haffen, or
Hafnia, called by the Germans, Copenhagen. It is the Kings Seat, yet of no
great beauty. It is of a round form; and the Houses are of Timber and Clay. It
has a fair Marketplace, and is reasonable well fortified. The Castle of the
King is built of Freestone in a Quadrangle. 2. Helsinura, standing on the
Seaside. At this Town, the Mariners which are to pass the Sound, use to pay
their Custom. 3. Roschilt, the Sepulchers of the Danish Princes; it is not
walled, yet has it the title of a City.

2. Fionia contains in it 8 Towns; the principal whereof are, Ottonium, or
Osel, and Sweinbourgh.

3. Bornholmia is situate on the Baltic Sea, not far from Gothland. The chief
City is called Bornholm.

4. Finera is that Island in which Tychobrahe, that famous Mathematician, built
an artificial Tower, wherein are many rare Mathematical Instruments. The chief
Town is Petersborne.

Scandia.
Scandia is environed with the Seas, save where it is joined to Moscovy. It
lies part on this side, part beyond the Artick Circle; so that the longest day
in the more Northern part is about three months. It contains the Kingdoms of
Denmark, Norwey, and Swedeland That part which belongs to Denmark is situate
on the South of this Peninsula, and is divided into three Provinces, viz.
Hallandia, Scania, and Blescida.

1. Hallandia has on the North, Swedeland; and South, Scania. The chief Town
is Halaenego.

2 Scania has on the South, Hallandia; on all other parts, the Sea. It is in
length 72 miles, and 48 in bread^h, and is the pleasantest Country in all
Denmark, most abundant in Fruits, and most rich in Merchandise. The chief Towns
are, 1. Londen, a great Haven-Town. 2. Elbogen. 3. Falskerbode. Here is
Elsimbourg, one of the Keys which opens into the Sound.

3. Blescida has on the North, Swedeland. It is a mountainous and barren
Country* The chief Towns are, 1. Malmogia. 2. Colmar, a strong Fortress
against the Swedelander.

Norwey.
NOrwey on the East, respects Denmark; on the West, it is bounded with the
Ocean; on the South, lies Suevia; and on the North, it is separated from
Lapland.

Fertility.
The Land of it self is not sufficiently fruitful, and toward the North
yields no sort of Corn, therefore the Inhabitants instead of Bread eat dried
Fish, called by us, Stock Fish, which is transported through Europe, in
exchange of Corn.

Commodity.
The Country, especially the Southern part, transports rich Furrs, Tallow,
Butter, Tann'd-Leather, Train-Oyl, Pitch, Clap-boards, all sorts of
Timber-Works, and Masts, Firr-wood, and that with great ease and little charge.

Natures of the people.
Their Buildings are base and poor; the Inhabitants honest; lovers of Strangers;
liberal of gift; and most serviceable. Amongst them are neither ^ilchers,
Thieves, nor Pirates. Their chief Towns are, 1. Nidrosia, the Sea of an
Archbishop, who is Metropolitan of Norwey. 2. Bergen, one of the four ancient
Mart Towns of Europe. 3. Ansloyn, a Bishops See.

Thus much of Denmark and Norwey.
Swedeland.
Swedeland is bounded on the East, with Moscovy; on the West, with the Dofrine
Hills; on the North, with the frozen Seas; and on the South, with the Baltic
Seas. This Country alone without the adjacent provinces of Lappia, Scricfinia,
and Biarmia, is little less than Italy, and France, joined together; and with
the additions of the said Nations, is bigger by a tract of 900 miles.

Fertility.
The Soil is so fertile, that to see a Beggar is a difficult matter; and the Air
is so healthful, that it is ordinary to see Men of an 130 or 140 years of age.
Commodity.
It abounds with Mines of Lead, Copper, and Silver, which are transported into
other Nations; together with Hides of Bucks, Goats, and Oxen, Tallow, Tare,
Barley, Malt.

Natures of the people.
The People participate much in nature with the Norweians, hospitable and
valiant as they.

It contains the Provinces of Lapland, Finland, Gothland, and Sweden.

Lappia.
Lappia is the most Northern part of all Scandia, and is divided into the
Eastern, containing Biarmia and Corelia, which belongs unto the Duke of
Russia; and the Eastern comprehending Lappia and Scricfinia, which are under
the King of Sweden.

These two Provinces use to give worship and divine honor to that living
creature, what ere it be, which they see at their first going out of their
doors in the morning; and are so poor, that they pay unto the King of Sweden
for tribute, rich Skins and Furrs.

Finland.
Finland is situate between the Baltic Sea, and the Finland Bay. The chief
Towns are, 1. Abo, a Bishops Seat. 2. Narve, a place of great strength; Rangina
and Augo, both famous Mart-Towns; Vames, Viburg, and Casteholme, places of good
strength.

Gothland.
Gothland is the best and richest Province of the North. It is divided into
Island and Continent; the Island is seated in the Baltic Seas, being in length
18 miles, and 5 in breadth. The Continent of Gothia, is the hithermost part of
Scandia, next to Denmark. The chief Cities are, 1. Stockholme, seated after the
manner of Venice. 2. Lodufia, a Town of great traffic. 3. Waldbourge, a well
fortified piece; and 4. Colmar, famous for its impregnable Castle.

Sweden.
Sweden is situate on the South of Gothland. The Country is very fruitful and
delicious, unless in some places, where the cragginess of the Mountains makes
it more barren, and less pleasant. The chief Cities of it are, 1. Vpsal, a
famous Bishopric. 2. Nicopia, a Sea-Town of good strength. 3. Copperdell,
famous for its abundance of Brass. There is also Finmach, bordering on the
Northern Ocean, whose Inhabitants be Witches, and Idolaters; they use to sell
winds to Merchants, to carry their Ship to any Port. Bodia is also under his
Dominion; whose chief Town is Helsinga, honored with the title of a Dukedom.

Thus much of Sweden.
Moscovy.
MOscovy is bounded on the East, with Tartary; on the West, with Lyvonia,
Lituania, and part of Sweden; on the North, with the Frozen Ocean; and on the
South, with Mare Caspium, the Turks, and Palus maeotis. This Country
contains in length from East to West 3300 miles, and in breadth 3065 miles.

Situation.
It is situate partly in Europe, partly in Asia, which separation is caused by
the River of Tanais, bounder of Asia, and running through the middle of the
Country.

The People are for the most part of a square proportion; broad, short, and
thick; gray-ey'd, and bro^d-be^rded; the Commons live in miserable subjection
to the Nobles, and they again in as great slavery to the Duke or Emperor.
Natures of the people
They are persidious, unnatural, and malicious; altogether unlearned; even the
Priests themselves are meanly indoctrinated; it being cautionated by the great
Duke that there be no Schools, lest there should be any Scholars besides
himself. The Women are private, fearful to offend, but once lascivious,
intolerably wanton. It is the fashion of those Women to love that Husband best
which beats them most, and to think themselves neither loved nor regarded,
unless they be soundly swadled two or three times a day.

Cities.
The chief City of this Kingdom is Mosco, where both the Emperor and Patriarch
resideth. Roscovia and Novogrod are the Seats of Archbishops; the latter of
these two contains about 20000 Households, and was one of the four ancient
Mart-Towns of Europe. Vologda, Smolensko, and Plescovia, the only walled Town
in Muscovy; Mosayco, St. Nicholas, Sugana, Vstium, Gargapolia, are Bishoprics.

The Soil, and Climate.
The Soil of this Country is of a slight, sandy mould, yet very much different
one place from another, for such things as grow out of the earth. Northwards
toward the parts of St. Nicholas, and Chola; and North-Eastward toward
Siberia, it is barren, and full of desert Woods, by reason of the Climate, and
extremity of cold. So likewise along the River Volga, betwixt the Countries of
Casan and Astrachan, notwithstanding the Soil be fruitful, it is ill
inhabited, saving that upon the West Side the Emperor has some few Castles
and Garrisons in them. From Vologda, that lies almost 1700 versts from the
Port of St. Nicholas down toward Mosco, and so toward the South-part that
border on the Crim, containing the like space of 1700 versts, it is a very
pleasant and fruitful Country, yielding pasture and Corn, with Wood, and
Water, in great store and plenty. The like is between Rezan, (lying South-East
from Mosco) to Novogrode and Vobsco, that reaches farthest toward the
North-West. So betwixt Mosco and Smolensko, (that lies South-West toward
Lituania) is a very fruitful and pleasant Soil.

For the most part it is covered with Woods and Lakes. Here grow the goodliest
and tallest Trees of the world; an unspeakable deal of Rozin distilleth from
them. Here is the never-wasting Fountain of Wax and Honey; for without the
industry of Man, the Bees make their Hives in the barks and hollows of trees.
Here is also plenty of Cattle and wild Beasts, as Bears, Mastins, Wolves, and
black Foxes, whose skins do bear high prices.

Riches and Commodities.
The native Commodities are, Furrs, Wax, Honey, Tallow, Hides, Train-Oyl,
Cavear, Hemp, Flax, Tar, Slad, Saltpeter, Brimstone, and Iron. These Wares
they barter for Cloth, and diverse other Commodities, which the Armenians bring
to Astrachan by the Caspian Sea, and the English to St. Nicholas, by the Bay of
Graduicam. They will not suffer any Stranger to enter into their Country,
further than the necessity of venting their Commodities, and taking in of
foreign does enforce them.

Government.
This Government is more tyrannical than any other Prince in the world; for he
is absolute Lord and disposer both of the bodies and goods of his Subjects.

In matter of Ceremony they follow the Greek Church. The Priests marry, and
maintain adoration of Images; fast, and compel to Confession.

Thus much of Moscovy.
Poland.
POland is limited on the East, with Boristhenes, which parts it from
Moscovy; on the West, with Vistula, which parts it from Germany; on the
North, with the Baltic Sea, and Sinus Finnicus; and on the South, with Hungary.

Sit^ation.
In general, Poland is subject to as great cold as the lower part of Germany,
lying under the same parallel; and the Countries as they lie more Northerly, so
they suffer more cold. They use stones heated with earthen Ovens, for remedy
against the cold, as the Germans do.

Fertility.
Poland abounds with Beasts, as well wild as tame, and yields excellent
Horses, not great, but quick and stirring; neither do the Gentlemen more
delight in any thing than in their Horses, so as they hang gold Chains and
Jewels at their ears, and paint them half over with exquisite colors. It
likewise abounds with Flesh, Whit-meat, Birds, fresh water Fish, (it being
far within Land) and all kind of Pulse, as pease, and the like. It has some
Mines of gold and silver, toward the Carpatian Mountains of Hungary.

The natural Commodities.
The chief Commodities that go from hence are, Wax, Flax, Linen Clothes made
thereof, Hemp, Pitch, Masts for Ships, Boards, and Timber, rich Furrs, Salt
dug out of Pits, Amber, Sope-ashes, and all kind of Grain, especially Rye,
which has made Dantsick famous for relieving all Nations there with in time of
dearth.

Natures of the people.
The People are very industrious and studious of all Languages, especially the
Latin, in which they are so devoted, that you shall hardly find a mean Man
which is not able in some measure to express himself in that tongue. They are
according to their abilities rather prodigal than truly liberal; and are
generally good Soldiers. The Gentlemen free; the Peasants in miserable
subjection to their Lords; proud they are, and impatient; delicious in Diet,
and costly in their attire.

The Women are for the most part indifferently fair, and rather witty, than
well-spoken.

The chief Provinces of this Kingdom are, 1. Livonia. 2. Lituania. 3. Volinia.
4. Samogitia. 5. Podolia. 6. Russia Nigra. 7. Mazovia. 8. Prussia. 9.
Podlassia; and 10. Poland.

Livonia.
Livonia has on the East, Moscovy; on the West, the Baltic Sea; North,
Finland; and South, Lituania. It is in length 500, in breadth 160 miles, and is
a Country exceeding mountainous and fenny, yet withal so abundantly
fruitful, that no small store of provision is sent hence into other Countries.
The chief Towns are, 1. Riga, an Archbishops See. 2 Derpt, a Town of great
commerce. 3. Rivallia, a strong Fort in the hands of the Swedelander; so also
is Narve.

Lituania.
Lituania is a most large Province, fenny and woody, so as in summertime there
is no passage into it; but in the winter when the Fens are frozen, Merchants
trade with the Inhabitants. The chief Cities are, 1. Vilna, the Metropolitan
City, the Seat of a Bishop, and an University. 2. Vilcomire 3. Brestia. They
have plenty of Honey, Wax, wild Beasts, and rich Furrs, but they scarce know
the use of money.

Volinia.
Volinia is environed with Lituania, Podolia, and Russia; the People are strong
and warlike. The chief Towns are, Kiovia, and Circassia, on the Banks of the
River Neiper; it is a small woody Province, but very fertile.

Samogitia.
Samogitia, whose Inhabitants are most ^dolaters. It has no walled Town, but
the People live in Cottages, being rude, and of great stature. It is a Northern
Region, having Livonia, North; and the Baltic Sea, West. It is very woody, and
in the midst of the trees is found excellent Honey.

Podolia.
Podolia abounds with excellent pastures, and the ground is so fertile, that
of one sowing they have three harvests. The chief Cities are, 1. Camienza,
seated on a rock. 2. Orkzacow. 3 Winiecza.

Russia nigra.
Russia nigra has on the East, Podolia; West, Poland; North and South,
Hungary. The chief Towns are, 1. Leopolis, or Lemburg. 2. Grodeck. 3. Luckzo.
It is a very fruitful Country, well stored with fair Houses, and numerous
herds of Cattle.

Prussia.
Prussia, or Borussia has South, Mazovia; North, the Baltic Sea; East,
Lituania; and West, the River Vistula. This Country yields abundance of
Amber. The chief Cities are, 1. Dantzick, where are daily sold 1000 measures of
Wheat; it is sited in Pomerania, but subject unto the Polonian. This is a very
fair City; the Houses for the most part are built of Stone or Brick, six or
seven roofs high. The Garners for laying up of Corn are very fair, and very
many lying together, in which the Citizens lay up Corn, brought out of Poland,
and according to the wants of Europe, carry it into many Kingdoms. 2. Mons
Regius, called by the Germans, Koningsberg, and by us, Regimount. It is the
most famous University in these parts. 3. Holsperg. 4. Mancburg; and 5. Culme.

Podlassia.
Podlassia has East, Lituania; and West, Mazovia. The chief Towns are, 1.
Tycockzin, a Fort well furnished with Munition, as being the place wherein the
Kings treasure is reserved. 2. Biesco. 3. Knissen, where the Kings of Poland
have a fine retiring House, as being well furnished with fishing-Ponds, and
Parks abundantly stored with Game.

Mazovia.
Mazovia lies West of Podlassia. The chief City is Warsaw, where the
Parliaments of this Kingdom are held.

Poland.
Poland has on the East, Lituania; West, Germany; North, Mazovia; and South,
Podolia. The Metropolis is, Cracovia, seated on the Banks of Vistula; here the
King and Council reside. The Buildings are very fair, of Freestone, four roofs
high, but covered with tiles of wood for the most part. It is of a round form,
but somewhat longer from the East to the West. In the midst of the City is a
large Marketplace, wherein is a Cathedral Church; and in the midst of the
Marketplace is the Senate House for the City, about which are many Shops of
Merchants* 2. Lublin. 3. Guisna, an Archbishopric. 4. Bosnau; and 5.
Ladisiavia, seated on the River Vistula.

Thus much of Poland.
Hungary.
Hungary is bounded on the East, with Transylvania and Wallachia; on the West,
with Austria; North, with Poland; and South, with Sclavonia.

It was formerly called Panonia Inferior, to distinguish it from Austria, which
was called, Panonia Superior.

Situation.
It is situate in the Northern temperate Zone, under the seven and nine Climates.

Fertility.
The Soil is wonderful fruitful, yielding Corn there thrice in a year; the
Grass in some places (as in the Island of Comera) exceeding the height of a
Man, which does feed such a number of Cattle, that this Country alone is
thought to be able to feed all Europe with Flesh. Also they have Deer,
Partridge, Pheasant, in such abundance, that any Man that will may kill them;
which in other places is prohibited, these creatures being reserved as Game for
Gentlemen.

The other Commodities which are transported, are Gold, Silver, Fish, Copper,
Wine.

Turk.
This Kingdom now stands divided betwixt the Turk and Hungarian; the former
having 1. Buda, once the Metropolis of the Country, and Court of the Kings. 2
Gyula, a strong Town in the Confines of Transylvania. 3. Pest, over against
Buda. 4 Alba Regalis, called by the Germans, Weisenberg. 5. Quinque Ecclesie;
and 6. Jaurinum, or Rab.

Emperor.
In the Emperors part the chief Towns are, 1 Presberg, seated hard upon the
edge of Austria; it has been the Metropolis of Hungary, since the taking of
Buda by the Turks. 2. Strigonium, or Gran. 3. Agraria. 4. Comora, in an Isle so
called. 5. Tectax. 6 Camsta. 7. Alkenbourg. 8. Neuheusel.

Transylvania.
THis Country has nature it self both fortified and honored; for the Woods
and Hercynian Mountains do round about inviron it. The length of it is 225
English miles, and the breadth 200.

It is bounded on the North, with the Carpathian Hills; on the South, with
Wallachia; on the West, with Hungaria; and on the East, with Moldavia.

Their chief Towns are, 1. Weisenberg. 2. Clausenberg. The whole Count ey is
fruitful in one Commodity or other; Corn, Beeves, Fish, and Mutton, they have
great plenty, and very cheap. It is very rich in Salt Pits, Stone-quarries, and
Mines both of gold and silver, Iron, Quicksilver, and other Metals.

Thus much of Hungary and Transylvania.
Sclavonia.
SClavonia has on the East, the River Drinus; and a line drawn from thence to
the Sea, on the Westpart of Italy; on the North, Hungary; and on the South, the
Adriatic Sea.

Situation.
It is in length 480 miles, and 120 in breadth. It is situated under the six and
seven Climates; the longest day being fifteen hours and an half.

Fertility.
This Country is more fit for grazing than for harvesting; for the Sheep and
other Cattle bring forth young twice a year, and are shorn four times.

The People are courageous, proud, and stubborn, and use their own Scl^vonian
tongue. They are of the Christian Faith, and follow the Greek Church. It is
divided into Illiris, Dalmatia, and Croatia.

Illiris.
Illiris was once the name of the whole Province, but it is now accommodated to
one part. It has on the East, Danubius; West, Carniola; North, with Dravus;
and South, with Savus. The chief Cities are, 1. Zatha, on Danubius. 2. Zakaocz.
3. Windishgretz, on Dravus; and 4. Sagonna, nigh unto Savus. This is now a
member of the Kingdom of Hungary.

Dalmatia.
Dalmatia has on the East, Drinus; West, Croatia; North, Savus; and South, the
Adriatic Sea. The chief Cities are, 1. Ragusi, situate on the Adriatic Sea; a
City of great traffic and riches; it is tributary to the Turks. 2. Sebenicum,
or Sicum, standing on the Seashore. 3 Zara, or Jadera, on the same shore. 4.
Scodra, or Scrutary; and 6. Lissa. It is now divided betwixt the Venetians,
(who keep the greatest part) and the Turk

Croatia.
Croatia, called by the Ancients Liburnia, and Valeria, has on the East and
South, Dalmatia; North, Savus; and West, Istria, and Carniola. The chief Towns
are, 1. Gardiska, situate on Savus. 2. Bruman. 3. Novigrod, situate on the
Savus also, hard upon Germany; and 4. Sisseghk.

The Croatians are generally called Crabats. Their Country has the title of a
Dukedom, and is subject partly to the Austrian, and partly to the Venetian.

Thus much of Sclavonia.
Turkey.
THe great Turk, commonly called the Gran Seigneur, for wealth, territory, and
command of Soldiery, all other Princes come short of him; witness the
Countries which he possesses: His Countries in Europe.
In Europe he possesses all Dacia, Grecia, all the Aegean Isles, and the
Taurica Chersonesus.

In Asia.
In Asia he possesses wholly Asia minor, now Natolia; with all the Regions
within the Propontis and Hellespont, as Phrygia, Galatia, Bithinia, Pontus,
Lydia, Caria, Paphlagonia, Lycia, Magness, Capadocia, and Comogena. Near the
Caspian he has Georgia Menteglia, and Armenia; next has he Assyria, Syria,
Palestine, Mesopotamia, Judea, the three Arabies: to which if you add the
Empire of Trebisond, you shall find him great Controller of the black Sea.
Likewise all the Islands of the Archipelago, except Candie, and some few
others, are under his subjection.

In Africa.
In Africa he possesses Egypt, and the Kingdoms of Tunis and Algiers, and
whatsoever he has taken from Prester John.

Fertility.
The fertility of the Soil generally through this vast Empire, is exceeding
great, yet have they less plenty of all things than Europe; for they very
sparingly, and only to serve necessity, set, plant, or sow, by reason they have
no free fruition of their own Goods, in the great tyranny under which they
live, as well of the Emperor, as under-Governours, and the general rapacity
and licentiousness of the Soldiers.

They have diverse kinds of Grain, as Wheat, the Grain called Milet, B^y, Oats,
Rye, Pease, and all k^s of Pulse, which for the kinds are like those of ^urope,
but for the bigness (...) preferred before (...) the Fields. They have good
plenty of all kinds of Cattle, yet are they no more industrious in gra^ing and
feeding, than in sowing and planting. They have Hens, Ryce, Honey, Fruits, and
Bread, for daily food: they desire no other dainties, nor greater riches, since
they can neither enjoy their Goods while they live, nor yet bequeath them at
death; and nothing is more dangerous than to be accounted rich.

Natures of the people.
The Turks are generally well complexioned; of good stature; proportionably
compacted; no idle talkers; no doers of things superfluous; hot and venerious;
servile to their Emperor; and zealous in Religion. They nourish no Hair on
their Heads, and therefore keep on of all sides, counting it an opprobrious
thing to see any uncover their Head. In their familiar salutations they use to
lay their Hands on their Bosom, and a little decline their bodies; but when
they accost a Person of Rank, they bow almost down to the ground, and kiss the
hem of his Garment. They prefer as they pass the Streets the ^eft hand before
the right, as being master of his Sword with whom they walk.

The Women are small of stature; for the most part ruddy, clear, and smooth, as
never ruffled with the weather; and often frequenting the Baths: they seldom
go abroad, and then masked; lascivious; within doors pleasing in matters of
incontinency; and they are accounted most beautiful, which have the greatest
Eyes, and are of the blackest hue. These Women live in great awe and respect of
their Husbands, never sitting with him at the table, but waiting till he has
done, and then withdrawing into some byroom.

Diet.
In their Diet they are very sparing, and negligent, not using any pomp or
magnificence. The richer sort sit like Tailors (bending with their knees) upon
Carpets, or on the Grass; and their table is so low, that they may well reach
it sitting on the ground: they use no Knives, but seethe their Meat until it
be very tender, that they may break it with their fingers; neither have they
variety of Dishes, but one, all sitting in a round circle, fall upon one Dish,
and talk not whilst they eat, but silently fall hard to work.

All the Turkish Household Stuff consists in one poor Pot to seethe Meat in; one
Spoon of wood; one Cup of leather or wood, to drink in; a poor Bed or Mattress;
yea often a single Coverled, and the Earth, serves them for Bedstead, Table,
and Stools.

Of those Countries which the Turks term Romania, anciently known by the Names
of Greece and Dacia.
GReece is bounded on the East, with the Aegean Sea, the Hellespont, Propontis,
and Thrace Bosphorus; on the West, with Italy, and the Adriatic Sea; on the
North, with the Mountain Hamus; and on the South, the Ionian Sea.

The situation of this Country is in the Northern temperate Zone, under the
five and six Climates.

Natures o^ the Greeks.
The Greeks were once brave Men; sound Scholars; and addicted to the love of
virtue, and civil behavior; but now are they an unconstant People; destitute
of learning, and the means to obtain it; uncivil; riotous; and so lazy, that
for the most part they endeavor their profit no further than their Belly
compells them. The Women for the most part are brown-complexioned; exceedingly
well-favoured; and excessively amorous. Painting they use very much, to keep
themselves in grace with their Husbands; for when they once grow wrinkled, they
are put to all the drudgery of the House.

The more natural Commodities that this Country affords, and from hence are
transported into other Countries, are Wine, Oil, Copper, Vitriol, some Gold and
Silver, Velvets, Damasks, and Tarquess-Grograms.

The ordinary division of this Country is into Peloponesus, Acbaia, Epirus,
Albania, Macedonia, and Thessalia, Migdonia, and Thracia.

Peloponesus
Peloponesus is a Peninsula rounded with the Sea, except where it is tied to
the main Land of Greece, by an Isthmus of six miles in breadth. This Peninsula
is in compass 600 miles, and is at this day called Morea.

In this Country are contained the Provinces of Aelis, Messenia, Arcadia,
Laconia, Argolis, and Achaia propria.

1. The Country of Elis has East, Arcady; West, the Ionian Sea; North, Achaia
propria; and South, Messenia. The chief Cities are, 1. Elis. 2. Olympicum,
famous for the Statue of Jupiter Olympus, one of the seven wonders, being in
height 60 cubits, composed of Gold and Ivory.

2. Messenia has East, Arcady; North, Elis; South and West, the Sea. It takes
name from the Metropolis, Messene, now called Golfo di Coron. 2. Pilon, now
Navarino.

3. Arcadia has East, Laconia; West, Elis and Messene; and North, Achaia
propria. The chief Cities are, 1. Psophis. 2. Mantinea. 3. Megalopolis.

4. Laconia has East and South, the Sea; North, Argolis; and West, Arcadia.
The chief Cities are, 1. Lacedemon, once a famous Commonwealth. 2. Thalana,
nigh unto which is the Lake Lerna, where Hercules slew the Monster Hydra; and
the Mount Tenarus, from whence he drew the three-headed Dog Cerberus.

5. Argolis, so called from the chief City Argos. It has East and North, the
Sea; West, Achaiapropria; and South, Laconia. The 2d. City is Micene; and 3.
Nema, where Hercules slew the Lions.

6. Achaia propria. The chief City is Corinth, seated at the foot of the Acro
Corinthium Hills.

Achaia.
Achaia has on the East, the Aegean Sea; on the West, Epirus; on the North,
Thessaly; and South, with Peloponesus. It is divided into Attica, Megaris,
Boetia, Phocis, Aetolia, Doris, and Locris.

The chief City of this Country is Athens, seated in Attica. This City has
been famous for many things; especially 1. For the famous Scholars that are
here taught, and flourish. And 2. For the excellent Soldiers it has brought
forth.

2. Megaris is a small Region; the chief City was Megaria.

3. Boetia is a very large Region; the chief City whereof is, 1. Thebes, built
on the Brook Cephisus, by Cadmus the Phenician. 2. Aulis. 3. Platea.

4. Phocis; the chief Towns whereof were Delphis, seated at the foot of the
Mountain Pernassus, having the Temple of Apollo.

5. Locris; this is a small Region. The chief City is now called Lepanto, which
once belonged to the Venetian, but now to the Turk; near unto which the
Christian Navy gave a great overthrow to the Turkish Navy.

6. Aetolia is divided from Epirus by the River Pindus. The chief Towns are, 1.
Chalcis. 2. Thermum, the Parliament-City of all Aetolia.

7. Doris pertains to the Region of Locri. The chief Cities are, 1. Amphissa.

Epirus.
Epirus was once a famous Province, and had in it 70 Cities, now most of them
destroyed; but the chief of the remainder are, 1. Antigonia. 2. Cassiope. 3.
Toronna; and on the Western part is Nicopolis, and Actium.

Albania.
Albania has East, Macedonia; West, the Adriatic Sea; North, Sclavonia; and
South, Epirus. The chief Cities are, 1. Albinopolis. 2. Sfetigrad. 3. Durazzo;
and 4. Croya.

Macedonia
Macedonia has on the East, Migdonia; West, Albania; North, Misia superior;
and South, Epirus and Achaia. The chief Towns are, Scydra, Andaristus, Aedessa,
all mid-land Towns; Eribea on Albania side, now called Pressa; and Pidna,
seated on the Influx of the Ri^er called Alaicmon, into the B^ called Sinus
Thermaicus.

Thessalia.
The Southern part of Macedon is Thessalia, a fruitful and pleasant Country.
Here is the Olympium, of such an infinite height, that it seemed to transcend
the clouds. Here is also the Hills Othris, and the Hills Pelion and Ossa, about
which the Centaurs dwelt; and here lived the Myrmidons, over which at the siege
of Troy Achilles was Captain. The chief Towns are, 1. Tricca. 2. Lamia. 3.
Pharsalia, nigh unto which was that bloody Battle fought between Caesar, and
Pompey 4. Philippi.

Migdonia.
Migdonia: this Country is by some accounted a part of Thrace. Herein is the
Hill Athos, which is 75 miles circuit, three days journey in ascent, and
casts a shadow as far as Lemnos, which is 40 miles distant. The chief Cities
are, 1. Nicalidi. 2. A^polonia. 3. Pallene. 4. Neopolis; and 5. Thessalonica,
vulgarly Salonichi, seated in the Sea, a Town of great traffic; to the People
of this City St. Paul wrote two of his Epistles. It is a populous City,
replenished with Christians, Turks, and Jews, in which there is abundance.

Thrace.
Thrace has on the East, the Euxine Sea, Propontis, and Hellespint; West,
Macedon; on the North, the Hill Hamus; and South, the Aegean Sea.

It is a most noble Province; cold, plain, and admirable populous; stored with
Grain, Pulse, and excellent Wine toward the Seaside, whereof Sestos on the
Hellespont (just over against Abidos) not above two miles different, the one
being in Asia, and the other Europe.

The Castle of Sestos is seated in a most fertile Soil; here the Ships that come
from Constantinople use to be detained some three days, to the end that if
they carry away private men's slaves, the Masters may have time to follow them:
likewise the searchers and customers look that they carry no prohibited wares;
neither can the Ship nor any Passengers be suffered to pass these Castles,
except they bring the Pasport of the great Turk, which is granted by the chief
Visziere, or Basha. 2. Abdera. 3. Cardia, seated in the Thracian Chersonesus,
now called St. George's Arm. 4. Lysimachus. 5. Callipolis, situate on the
Northern Promontory of the Chersonesus, and the first Town that the Turks had
in Europe. 6. Trajanopolis, founded by Trajan. 7. Adrianople, built by Adrian.
8. Constantinople, seated in a most commodious place for an Empire,
over-looking Europe and Asia* It was built (663 years before Christ was born)
by Pausanias a Lacedemonian, and was first called Bizantium. The Turks took
this City from the Christians 1453, and by them is at this day called
Stambolda. It is built in form of a triangle, whereof two sides toward the
North and East lie upon two Seas; and toward the West it lies upon the
Continent of Greece. For many causes this City is famous, and for two
especially may be preferred to any in the world known to us; namely, for
pleasantness of situation, and the largeness and safety of the Haven: the
fruitfulness of the Fields, the sweetness and beauty of the Flowers, and the
goodness of the Fruits, cannot sufficiently be praised. The Haven will receive
an huge number of Ships; and upon both the banks of the City, and Gallata,
Ships of 500 tun once unloaded, may so lie with their Cables fastened on the
Land, as they can pass from the Ships to the Land without any Boats.

The Buildings of this City have no magnificence, being partly of a matter like
Brick, but white, and (as it seems) unhardned by fire; partly of Timber and
Clay, excepting some few Palaces which are of Freestone, but nothing at all so
stately built as may be expected from the pride and riches of the great Turks
servants; and these Houses are built two stories high, with a low roof, without
any windows, after the manner of Italy. The Streets of this City are narrow,
and shadowed with Pent-houses of wood, and upon both sides the ^y r^ised some
foot high, but of (...) breadth, and paved for Men and Women to pass; the midst
o^ the Street being left low, and un-paved, and no broader than for the passage
of Asses, or Beasts loaded.

There are two Houses for the same use as the Exchange is at London, but not to
be compared to it for the Buildings, where Merchants use to meet for the
selling of wares; they are called the great and less Bezestan, and use to be
opened for certain days of the week, and for some six hours; at which time are
to be sold, Jewels, Semiters, or Swords, pieces of Velvet, Satin, Damask, and
the like: and the Marketplace is not far distant, where captives of both sexes
are to be sold; and the buyers if they will may take them into a House, and see
them naked, and handle them, to know their fatness and strength.

The chiefest Buildings of this City, are the Palace of the great Turk, the
Church of St. Sophia, now made a Mosche, the stately Mosche (or Turkish Church)
built upon the Palace, which of old belonged to the Grecian ^triarch; the
Mosches and ^chers of the Turkish Emperors; amongst which that of Solomon is
numbered amongst the Miracles of the world.

Thus much of Greece.
Dacia.
DAcia of old belonged to the Kingdom of Hungary, but at this day is tributary
to the Turks.

It is bounded on the West, with Hungary; on the East, with the Euxine Sea;
North, with the Carpathian Mountains; and South, with Hemus, by which it is
divided from Greece.

The People are generally stubborn and untractable; they read like the Jews,
from the right hand to the left; and are of the Christian Faith, following the
Greek Church.

The Country is sufficiently fruitful, abounding with Mines and Horses, whose
Manes hang down almost to the ground.

It is divided into Transylvania, Moldavia, Wallachia, Servia, Rascia,
Bulgaria, and Bosnia.

Of Transylvania I have already spoken in the Kingdom of Hungary.

Moldavia.
Moldavia is seated on the Northend of Transylvania, and extends to the
Euxine Sea. The chief Cities are, Occazonia, Fucciana, and Falezing.

It is exceeding fertile in Corn, Wine, Grass, and Wood. It affords great
plenty of Beef and Mutton; a fat Ox being sold here for 30 s. and a Sheep for 3
s. To this Moldavia belongs the little Country of Bessarabia: It lies
between Mount Hemus, South; and Lituania, North; and is seated very
commodiously on the black Seas. The chief Towns are, 1. Kilim. 2. Chermen, or
Moncastrum, the Seat of a Turkish Sanziack.

Wallachia.
Wallachia is a plain fertile Country, stored with excellent Horse, Cattle,
Mines of gold and silver. The chief Cities are, 1. Sabrinum. 2. Prailaba. 3.
Tergovista, the Vaivods Seat.

Servia.
Servia lies between Bosnia and Rascia. The chief Cities are, 1. Stonibourgh.
2. Samandria. 3. Belgrade, on the Danubius.

Rascia.
Rascia lies between Servia and Bulgaria. The chief City is Boden, famous for
her annual Fairs.

Bulgaria.
Bulgaria has East, the Euxine Sea; West, Rascia; North, Danubius; and South,
Thrace. The chief Cities are, 1. Sophia, the Seat of the Beglerbeg of Greece.
2. Nicopolis.

Bosnia.
Bosnia has East, Servia; and West, Croatia. The chief Cities, Gazachium the
residence, and Laiza the Sepulture of the Bosnian Kings.

Thus much of Dacia, and of the Continent of Europe.
Of Asia.
ASia is the greatest and vastest part of the world, exceeding Europe and
Africa both in largeness and circuit.

Upon three parts it is bounded with the Vast Ocean, surnamed, the Orient; on
the South, with the Indian; upon the North, with the Scythian; upon the West,
it is somewhere dis-joyned from Europe and Africa with the Red Sea; somewhere
with the Mediterranean; somewhere with the Euxine; and somewhere with the River
Tanais.

Generally it enjoys a most excellent temperature of Air, and is so rich and
fertile, that it excels all Countries whatsoever: For here are to be found
diverse sorts of living creatures, and Plants, the like whereof the whole world
affords not, as Balm, Sugarcanes, Frankincence, Mirth, Cassia, Cynamon,
Nutmegs, Pepper, Saffron, sweer Wood, Musk, and diverse other sorts of Drugs and
Odours; excellent Gold, all sorts of Minerals and precious stones.

Of Beasts it affords the Elephant and Camel, with diverse strange sorts, both
wild and tame.

The People are of excellent wits, exceeding rich, and happy in all good things.

This Country has worn the Garland of super-eminency: 1. Because here Man was
created. 2. Here was our Savior Christ born; wrought his divine miracles; and
suffered for our salvation. 3. Here were done the Actions memorized by the holy
Penmen, mentioned in the Old and New Testament.

The principal Regions are, 1. Natolia. 2. Syria. 3. Palestine. 4. Armenia. 5.
Arabia. 6. Media. 7. Assyria. 8. Mesopotamia. 9. Chaldea. 10. Persia. 11.
Parthia. 12. Tartaria. 13. China. 14. India. 15. The Islands; a great part of
which Regions are at this day possessed by the Turk.

Natolia.
NAtolia was formerly called Asia minor: It has on the East, the River
Euphrates; on the West, the Thracius Bosphorus, Propontis, Hellespont, and the
Aegean Sea; on the North Pontus Euxinus; and South, the Rhodian and Lycian Seas.

This Country was once of great fertility, but is now laid waste and desolate.
The people were once valiant and industrious, but now given over to
luxuriousness and effeminacy.

Here once flourished the Faith of Christ; and here likewise stood the seven
Churches, to whom St. John dedicated his Revelations: All which are long since
removed, so that few Christians remain, and they which are, follow the Church
and Communion of Greece.

This Region comprehends the Provinces of Cilicia, Pamphilia, Lycia, Caria,
Ionia, Lydia, Aeolis, Phrygia major, and minor, Bythinia, Pontus, Paphlagonia,
Gallacia, Capadocia, Lycaonia, Psidia, and Armenia minor.

Cilicia.
On the South-East of Anatolia, is Cilicia: It lies under the Mountain Taurus,
under the bosom of the Mediterranean Sea, or Iecian Gulf, where Alexander the
Great overcame Darius, he having but 30000 and the other 600000 men. The chief
Cities are, 1. Nicopolis, built by Alexander. 2. Pompeiopolis, built by Pompey.
3. Alexandria, built also by Alexander. 4. Tarsus, the birthplace of St. Paul.
The Inhabitants are given for the most part to feeding of Goats, of whose
sleece they make their Chamblets.

Pamphilia.
On the West Side of Cilicia, lies Pamphilia. The chief Cities are, 1.
Seleucia. 2. Perga. 3. Faselis. In this Country are woven these fine Clothes
which we call Chamblets, watered and unwatered.

Lycia.
Lycia lies upon the Sea, between Pamphilia and Caria. The chief Cities are, 1.
Patras. 2. Isaurus. 3. Phaselis.

Caria.
On the West Side of Lycia, is Caria. The chief Cities are, 1. Mindum. 2.
Halicarnassus, in which was the Sepulcher of Mausolius the King, held for one
of the seven miracles of the World. 3. Magnesia.

These four Countries are now called Caramania, and is a Turkish Zanziackship.

Ionia.
On the North-side of Caria, is Ionia, whose chief Cities are, 1. Miletum. 2.
Smyrna. 3. Colophon. 4. Ephesus, where Timothy was Bishop: to the people of
this City did Paul direct one of his Epistles. This Town is famous for the
burial of St. John, and for the Temple of Diana, which was accounted one of the
Worlds wonders; it was 200 years a building. In this Country is the Hill
^atinus, the dwelling place of Endymion.

Lydia.
On the North-East of Ionia, is Lydia. This Country is watered with the Rivers
Caestrus and Maeander; the first is famous for its abundance of Swans. The
chief Cities are, 1. Sardis. 2. Pergamus, where Galen was born. 3. Laodecea. 4.
Theatyra. 5. Philadelphia: of these Sardis was the strongest, but now are they
only known in their names and ruins.

Phrygia mino^.
On the East Side of Phrygia major, is Phrygia minor. The chief Towns are, 1.
Adramitium, mentioned in the 17th. of the Acts. 2. Trajanopolis. 3. Sigeum, the
Haven-Town to Troy. 4. Ilium, or Troy, a famous Town.

Aeolis and Mysia.
On the North of Lydia, is Aeolis. The chief Towns are Merina, and Hidra: nigh
to this Province are both the Mysias, whose chief Towns are Lampsachus, and
Cyzichus.

Ph^ygia major.
Phrygia major lies East of Phrigia minor. The chief Towns are, 1. Gordion. 2.
Mideium. 3 Colosse, where dwelt the Colossians, to whom St. Paul directed his
Epistles.

B^th^ia.
On the North-side of the Phrygias, is seated Bithinia. The chief Towns are, 1.
Nicomedia. 2. Phasso. 3. Heraclia. 4. Nice, where the first General Council was
held. 5. Chalcedon, where the fourth General Council was held, to repel the
Heresy of Nestorian. 6. Prusa, or Bursa, where the Turks eldest Son is sent
until he be dead.

Pontus.
Pontus lies on the North-East of Bithinia. The chief Towns are, 1. Tomos, to
which Ovid was banished. 2. Claudiopolis. 2. Pithius, where Chrysostom lived
in exile: This Country, together with Bithinia, are now called Bursia

Paphlagonia.
On the East Side of Pontus, is Paphlagonia. The chief City is Pompeiopolis,
built by Pompey the Great. 2. Sinope, famous for its plenty of Brass and Lead.
3. Amisus, a Sea-Town, now called Simoso.

Galatia.
On the South Side of Paphlagonia, is Galatia; to this Province did St Paul
direct one of his Epistles. The chief Cities are, 1. Gutia. 2. Ancyra, (now
Angauri) famous at this time for the making of Chamblets. 3. Pisius, a Town of
great Traffic; and 4. Tavium. This Country yields the Stone called
Amethists, which are said to preserve the man that wears them from Drunkenness.

Capadocia.
On the East Side of Galatia, is Capadocia. The chief Cities are, 1. Erzyrium,
situate on the confines of the greater Armenia. 2. Amasia. 3. Mazaca, where St.
Basil lived. 4. Sebastia; and 5. Trapesus, or Trapezond, once the Imperial seat
of the Comneni. This Empire contained the Provinces of Pontus, Galatia, and
Capadocia; here the Amazones are said to have lived, from the destruction of
Troy, to the time of Alexander the Great.

Lycaonia.
On the South of Capadocia, lies Lycaonia. The chief Cities are, 1. Iconium. 2.
Lystra, where Timothy was born; where Paul and Barnabas were adored for Gods,
Paul for Mercury, and Barnabas for Jupiter. 3. Derbe.

Psidia.
On the East Side of Lycaonia, is Psidia, whose chief City is, 1. Antiochia,
mentioned in the 13th. of the Acts. 2. Lysimia.

Armenia minor.
Eastward from Psidia, is Armenia minor, thought to be the Land of Ararat, upon
whose Mountains the Ark of Noah rested after the Deluge. The chief Town is
Malexona, whose territory abounds in Oil and Wine.

Syria.
SYria has on the East, Euphrates; on the West, the Mediterranean Sea; on the
North, Cilicia; and on other parts, Asia minor.

The Inhabitants of this Country are either Mahumetans, or Christians: these
later are divided into the Sects of Melchies, Jacobites, and Maronites: these
last inhabit only Mount Libanus, so much renowned for its goodly Cedars.

In this Country, between it and Armenia minor, live a certain people whom
they call Cardi, or Coordes. These men worship the Devil, and with good reason,
as they think, because God is a good man, and will do no man harm; but the
Devil is a Knave, and must be pleased.

This Country is divided into three Provinces, viz. Phoenicia, Coelo-Syria,
and Syro-Phoenicia.

Phoenicia.
Phoenicia lies South toward Canaan. The chief Cities are, 1. Acon, seated in
a fair plain, within a Creek of the Sea of the same name, and compassing the
City: And such a plain lies all along the Coast from Joppa to Trippoli. This
City was famous for the Armies of Europe passing to conquer these parts. 2.
Sarepta, where Elias was sustained in a Famine by a Widow. 3. Sydon, once a
famous City, now contracted into a narrower compass. 4. Tire, the ruins
whereof witness the old magnificence. This Country abounds with Wheat,
Honey, Oil, and Balm.

Coelo-Syria.
The second Province is Coelo-Syria, whose chief Cities are, 1. Hieropolis,
famous for the Temple and worship of the Syrian Goddess. 2. Damascus: this City
is seated in a very fruitful soil, bearing Grapes all the year long, and girt
round with most curious and odoriferous Gardens. The Syrian Kings mentioned in
the Bible, were of this Syria.

Syro-Phoenicia.
The third Province is Syro-Phoenicia, whose chief Cities are, 1. Beritus, a
famous Mart-Town, nigh unto which St. George is said to have delivered the
Kings Daughter, by killing the Dragon; in memory whereof there was a Castle and
an Oratory built in the same place, and dedicated to St. George. 2. Aleppo;
this City was of old called Aram-Sohab, (mentioned in the 2 Samuel 8. chaep. and
3. verse.) The Traffic in this place is exceeding great, so as the Goods of all
Asia, and the Eastern Islands, are brought hither, or to Cayro in Egypt.

This City lies within Land, (the Port whereof (called Alexandretta by the
Christians, and Scanderona by the Turks) I shall hereafter describe.) The
building of this City, as of all houses of Syria, is one roof high, with a
plain top plastered to walk upon, and with arches before the houses, under
which they walk dry, and keep Shops of Wares. This City is well fortified,
pleasantly seated, and has many fair Gardens. The air here is exceeding hot
and subtle, so as the Christians coming hither from Scanderona, (a most
unhealthfull place, choked with Fens) commonly fall sick and dye; and this is
the cause the English Factors employed here, seldom return into England. Within
this City the English Merchants have three houses, as it were Colleges, where
they live. In these parts they have Sheep, the tail of one wreathed to the
ground, does weigh 30 or more pounds in fat and wool.

The 3. City is Biblis. 4. Tripolis, (so called for difference from Tripoli in
Africa:) The Haven lies on the West Side, and is compassed with a Wall, wherein
were many little Barks, and some Ships of Marseils in France. The Haven is
fortified with seven Towers, and upon it are built many Storehouses for
Merchants. The City lies some half a mile from the Haven, and is seated on the
side of a Hill; near unto this City lies Mount Libanus; this Mountain is very
pleasant, abounding in fruitful Trees, and with Grapes yielding a rich Wine;
upon the North-side without the Gates, they keep many Silkworms, in most
pleasant Gardens. The building of Tripoli, is like to the other buildings in
Syria. The Street which leads to Aleppo is broad, the rest narrow; and the air
and waters are unhealthfull. The chief Traffic of this City is for the most
part removed to Damascus and Aleppo. The 5. City is Antiochia, the Metropolis
of all Syria.

Palestine.
PAlestine has on the East, Euphrates; on the West, the Mediterranean Sea; on
the North, Phoenicia; and on the South, Arabia. This Country was first called
the Land of Canaan, from Canan, the Son of Cham. 2. The Land of Promise,
because the Lord promised it to Abraham. 3. Israel, from the Israelites. 4.
Judea, from the Jews. 5. Palestine, quasi Philistin. 6. The holy Land, because
here was wrought the work of our salvation.

It is in length 200 miles, and not above 50 in breadth, yet of that salubrity
of Air, and fertility of Soil, that it maintained the two potent Kingdoms of
Israel and Juda, wherein David reckoned 1300000 fighting Men, besides the
tribes of Levi and Benjamin.

The People hereof are now accounted a perjured, vagabond Nation, and great
Usurers.

It is divided into the four Provinces, viz. Galilea, Judea, Idumea, Samaria,
and is watered with the Rivers Cedron and Jordan.

Galilea.
Galilea is the most Northern part of all Palestine: it is divided into the
higher and lower; the higher Galilea contained the tribes of Asher and
Nepthali, and part of the tribe of Dan; in Asher the chief Cities were, 1.
Acon. 2. Tire. 3. Sydon. 4. Sarepta; all which we have before mentioned in the
description of Phoenicia. 5. Aphek, whose falling down slew 27000 of Benhadad's
Soldiers. 6. Giscala, the birthplace of Jehu. In the tribe of Nepthali the
principal Towns are and were, 1. Jabin. 2. Capernaum. 3. Genasareth. The chief
Cities of that part of Dan, are Hamath and Ramath.

The lower Galilea contains the tribe of Zabulon and Isacher. In the tribe of
Zabulon the chief Cities are, 1. Hippopolis. 2. Cana, where our Savior turned
water into wine. 3. Bethsaida, the brith-place of Peter, Andrew, and Philip. 4.
Tiberias, on the Sea of Galilea. 5. Nazareth; in this tribe is the Brook
Chison, and Mount Tabor. In the tribe of Isacher the chief Cities are, 1.
Tarichea. 2. Enbadda; near this Saul slew himself. 3. Daberoth, seated in the
valley of Israel: in this lower Galilea was our Savior very conversant.

Samaria.
Samaria is here taken for that part of Palestine seated between Judea and
Galilea; the People whereof were the descendants of such Assyrians as were by
Sallamanser sent hither to possess the Inheritance of the captive Israelites.
This Province of Samaria contained the tribes of Ephraim, Gad, Reuben, and the
two half tribes of Manasses, the one situate on the Mediterranean, the other
beyond Jordan. In the half tribe of Manasses on the Mediterranean, the chief
Cities are, 1. Bethsan. 2. Thebes. 3. Ephra, where Gedeon dwelt. 4. Endor,
where Saul consulted with the Witch. 5. Jesreel. 6. Cesarea Philippi, seated in
a plain 25 miles distant from Joppa, now for the most part ruined. 7.
Antipatris, whither the Soldiers led Paul, by command of Lysias. 8. Megiddo.
In the tribe of Ephraim the chief Cities are, 1. Samaria, the Metropolis of the
Kingdom of Israel. 2. Bethel. 3. Sichem. 4. Lidda. 5. Arimathea. 6. Silo. On
the other side Jordan was the Habitation of the children of Gad, and Reuben,
and the other half of Manasses: the Countries of these last was called Basan,
whose last King was Ogg. The chief Cities are, 1. Edry, the Seat of King Ogg.
2. Astaroth. 3. Gaulon; and 4. Hus, the birthplace of Job. The chief Cities of
the Gadits are, 1. Gergesa. 2. Gilead. 3. Succoth. 4. Ramoth-Gilead, where
Jacob and Laban swore. 5. Rabba, now Philadelphia, under the Walls whereof
Vriah was slain by the command of David. In the tribe of Reuben the chief
Cities are, 1. Macherus; in this Town was John the Baptist slain. 2. Bethbara,
where Moses made his divine exhortations to the People. 3. Abel-Sittim, seated
in the plains of Moab. 4 Ramath-Baal, to which place Baleck brought Balem to
curse the People.

Idumea.
Idumea was the Habitation of the Edomites, the offspring of Esau, who also
inhabited the Country called Mount Seir, in which the children of Israel were
stung with the fiery Serpents.

This Country of Idumea contained the tribes of Dan and Simeon. The chief
Cities of the tribe of Dan are, 1. Joppe, now Jaffa, a famous Mart-Town,
situate very pleasant upon a Hill declining toward the Sea: here the Prophet
Jonas took Ship to fly to Tarsus. 2. Gath, the Country of that huge Giant
Goliath. 3. Ecron, where Beelzebub was worshipped. 4. Asotos, where a Temple was
built in honor of the Idol Dagon. 5. Ciriatharim, where the Ark of the Lord
was kept 20 years. The chief Cities of Simeon are, 1. ^scalon. 2. Gaza, a very
fair and strong Town. 3. Beersheba, where Abraham and Abimelech swore to each
other, where Hagar wandered with her Son Ismael.

Judea.
Judea is of the same extent now, as it was when it was the Kingdom of Juda,
containing the two great tribes of Juda and Benjamin. The chief Cities of the
tribe of Juda are, 1. Carioth, the birthplace of Judas Iscariot. 2. Maresa,
the native Soil of the Prophet Micah. 3. Hebron, the Seat of the Giants called
the Anakims: adjoining to this Town is the Plain of Mamre, where Abraham was
visited by the Angels. 4. Tecoa, the City of Amos the Prophet. 5. Libna, seated
in the wilderness. 6. Ziph, in the wilderness wherein David hid himself from
the fury of Saul. 7. Bethlem, where Christ was born: this Village is from
Jerusalem some three miles. In this Country also are the Hills of Engaddi, in
a Cave of which David cut off a lap of Readiness garment. In the tribe of Benjamin
the chief Cities are, 1. Gilgal, (...) unto which Joshua pitched the twelve
stones, as a memorial that the waters of Jordan divided themselves, to give
passage unto the children of Israel. 2. Mispah. 3. Geba. 4. Ai, a strong Town.
5. Gibbeon. 6. Jericho, destroyed by the sounding of Rams Horns. 7. Mispah. 8.
Jerusalem, the City of the Lord, built by Melchisedeck Prince and Priest of
Salem. This City is strongly seated on Mount Sion, encompassed with stately
Walls of red and black Stone, more than an ell long, and about half an ell
broad. Here are seven Gates well fortified with Ordnance, and is strong enough
against sudden tumults, although no way able to hold out a siege. The Houses
here, as in all parts of Asia; are built very low, of Flint-stone, only one
story high, the top whereof is plain and plastered, and has Battlements almost
a yard high. All the Citizens are either Tailors, Shooemakers, Cooks, or
Smiths, and in general poor rascal People, mingled of the scum of diverse
Nations, partly Arabians, partly Moors, and partly the basest Inhabitants of
neighbour-Countreys. In this City are still to be seen diverse of the places
mentioned in the Old and New Testament, or the ruins of them, if you will
credit your Guides, which show them unto such Travelers and Strangers as come
to behold this City: but let a Man believe no further than his own judgment
will warrant him.

Armenia.
ARmenia has on the East, Media, and the Caspian Sea; on the West, Euphrates,
and the Euxine Sea; on the North, Tartary; and on the South, Mesopotamia, now
Dierbechia.

This Country is very mountainous, which are reputed to be those parts of the
Hills Taurus and Antitaurus, which are called Periadres, Scodrisci, and Amamus.

The People hereof are more famous for nothing, than their want of all things;
stour, cruel, and warlike; maintaining themselves by hunting and stealing, as
Men living in so barren a Soil, that Husbandry were vain and foolish. They are
generally good Archers; merry; careless of honor; desirous of ease;
greatbodyed; comely and willing to be soothed. The Women tall, but homely;
having Children commonly at ten years old; it is accounted a great credit unto
them if they can please and be acceptable to such Guests as the Husbands bring
in.

The whole Country is divided into three Provinces; 1. Colchis. 2. Georgia;
and 3. Turcomania.

Colchis.
Colchis lies on the Euxine Sea, toward the North and the East.

The People are barbarous, defending themselves from the Turks by the rough
Hills, and ragged poverty; they are so inhumane, that they sell their own
Children to the Turks.

The Country of it self is very fertile; but the People are so careless, that
they neither plant nor sow to any purpose.

The chief Towns are, 1. Alvati. 2. Phasis, or Phassum; and 3. Dioscurias.

Georgia.
Georgia: this Country is now called Mengrelia Georgia; is bounded on the
East, with the Caspian Sea; West, with Colchis; North, with the Tartars of
Astracham; and South, with the greater Armenia.

In this Country is a thing monstrous and wonderful; for in it there is a
Province called Hamsem, containing in circuit three days journey; and so far
is it covered with an obscure darkness, that none can see any thing, nor dare
enter into it: the Inhabitants thereabouts affirm, that they have often heard
the voice of Men howling, Cocks crowing, neighing of Horses; and by the passage
of a River it appears to have signs of habitation. This Province was formerly
called Iberia: the chief Towns of it are, 1. Lori. 2. Bascapan. 3. Teflis,
exceeding well fortified by the Turks. 4. Tomanis. For the greater part this
Country is covered with mountains, woods, and thickets; it is notwithstanding
fe^til, and adorned with many large plains and valleys.

Turcomania.
Turcomania is seated on the South of Colchis and Iberia: the chief Towns are,
1. Albanopolis. 2. Van, a strong Bulwark against the Persians Invasions. 3.
Arnimig, the Metropolis of the Country. 4. Artaxata, now Coy. 5. Sebastia, the
residence of the Patriach of Armenia. This Country was formerly called Armenia
the great, to distinguish it from a less in Natolia; is now vulgarly called
Turcomania. It is environed with Mountains, and beautified with Plains, amongst
the which Chalderan and Mons niger are most renowned. The People by nature are
much given to theft and spoil; some of them inure themselves to tillage, and
mechanical trades, in weaving of Chamblets and Hangings, watered and unwatered.

Arabia.
ARabia is bounded on the East, with the Persian Gulf; on the West, with the
Red Sea; on the North, with Mesopotamia and Palestine; and on the South, with
the Ocean.

The People hereof are extremely addicted to theft, which is the better part of
their living. They are mean of stature; swift of foot; raw-boned, and tawny:
they are indifferently called Arabians, Saracens, or Moors. Those that are the
true Arabians live out of Cities in Tents dispersed over Syria, Egypt, and
Africa; these give themselves to feed Cattle, and droves of Camels. Those which
inhabit the Cities are called Moors; these are dispersed over all the Southern
part of Asia, as Pedia, East India; and likewise are advanced to diverse
Kingdoms, famous Cities, and worthy Mart-Towns; yea and over all the
Southcoast of Africa. This Country is 4000 miles in compass: the People use
the Arabic Language, which extends it self through Palestine, Syria,
Mesopotamia, Egypt, and all Barbary, excepting Morocco. It is divided into
Deserta, Petrosa, and Felix.

Arabia Des^ta.
The Desert Arabia has a name answerable to the nature of it, being in great
part without Inhabitants for the barrenness of the Soil; only toward the River
Euphrates, and the Mountains of Arabia Felix, it has some Towns, and is
frequented with Merchants; other-where fed with such roving Arabians, as having
no Houses wander to and fro, seeking where to find pasture for their Beasts,
and lodge in Tents. Bosra the City.

Petrosa.
Arabia Petrosa joyneth on the West and North to Syria; on the East, to the
Desert Arabia; and South, to the Happy, nigh to Syria. This is somewhat fertile,
but otherwhere exceeding barren. Both in this part and the former they had need
go strong and well accompanied, for fear of robbery and spoil which the
Arabians attend. This part is famous for the passage of the Israelites through
the same, and abode therein forty years. The memorable things herein, are the
Mountains Sinai and Horeb; upon the former whereof is built a Monastery of
Christians, following the Greek Church, and the only Receptacle (or Inn) for
wayfaring Christians; other place of relief there is none. Within this Country
are good store of Dromedaries, which will carry a Man an hundred miles a day:
here is also good store of Ostriches. The chief Towns are, 1. Petra. 2. Aresh.
3. Ezion geber, on the coast of the Red Sea, where Solomon's Navy kept station
before they put forth to the Land of Ophir.

Felix.
Arabia Felix contains a Peninsula, girt almost round with the Persian Gulf,
the Red Sea, and the Ocean. In this Country is the Phoenix, which growing old
burns her self to ashes, and from the ashes another Phoenix is engendered.

This is the most fruitful and pleasant Country in all Asia, abounding with
Gold and Pearl, Balsamum, Myrrh, and Frankincence, besides Cassia and Cynamon.
This seems to be the Country wherein Saba stood, the chief City of the
Sabeans, whose Queen visited Solomon. 2. Medina. 3. Mecha, where Christians are
not permitted to enter. Within this City is the Body of Mahomet enclosed in an
iron Chest. 4. Oran, the Key of the South-Ocean. 5. Elter, the only Town of
Arabia, where the Christians are of the greatest number. Besides it is full of
Villages, especially toward the Seaside, where are many excellent places of
trade.

Assyria.
ASsyria has on the East, Media; on the West, Mesopotamia; on the North,
Armenia major; and on the South, Susiana, a Province of Persia.

It is a custom in this Country, that the Maids which are marriageable, are
yearly brought forth in public, and set to sale to such as would marry them,
and the money which was given for the fairest, was given to the most deformed
for their portions.

The chief Cities were and are, 1. Nineve. It was once a great City, containing
66 miles in circuit, but now almost ruined to nothing. To this City was Jonah
sent to preach. 2. Arzeri, whence the whole Region is called Arzeri. 3. Arvela,
nigh unto which Alexander fought his third and last Battle against Darius. 4.
Mosull, the Seat of the Nestorian Patriarch. This City is in fame for its Cloth
of Gold, and Silk, and for its fertility.

Mesopotamia.
MEsopotamia has on the East, Tygris; on the West, Euphrates; on the North,
the Hill Caucasus; and on the South, Chaldea. This Country in the Scriptures
is called Padan Aram: It is environed with the Rivers Tigris and Euphrates,
which overflow the Country, as Nilus does Egypt, making it very fertile; and
now it is called Dierbeck.

Fertility.
The Soil is exceeding fertile, yielding in some places two, and in some three
hundred increase. Here was Abraham born; hither sent he his Servant to choose a
Wife for his Son Isaac; and hither Jacob fled from his Brother Esau; and here
Paradise is by most Men affirmed to have stood; and as some think, in an Island
made by the River Tigris and Euphrates. The chief Cities are, 1. Rechiais,
formerly Edessa. The second Town of note is Caramit, the Seat of a Turkish
Bassa, who is of great command in those parts; it is the Mother-City of the
Country, and is said to be twelve miles in compass. Between this City and
Orpha was the Paradise of Aladeules, where he had a Fortress destroyed by
Selim. 3. Madrin.

Chaldea.
CHaldea is bounded on the East, with Assyria; on the West, with Syria; on the
North, with Armenia; and on the South, with Arabia Deserta.

The chief Cities were, 1. Vr, now Horrea, where Abraham departed when he went
to live at Aram. 2. Erech. 3. Accad. 4. Bagdet, built out of the ruins of
Babylon: this City stands upon the River Euphrates, and is a great, rich, and
strong City, with mighty strong Walls, whereon are planted 120 pieces of brass
Ordnance. It is a Town of great traffic, between which and Aleppo Carriers
travel very often with many hundred Camels laden with Commodities. There are
only two Venetian Factors, who trade for inestimable wealth of all sorts: also
some small number of Armenians, which are all the Christians that are there
resident. They have a custom here of sending Post Pigeons, or sending by
Pigeons Letters of all Occurrences in have. The chief Rivers of this Country
are, 1: Euphrates. 2. Tygris.

Out of Chaldea the three Wise Men are thought to have come, who worshipped
Christ, and presented Gifts unto him:

Thus much of Chaldea, and the Continent of the Turkish Empire in Asia.
The Islands, and his other Dominions, subject unto him, shall be mentioned in
their due places.

Persia.
PErsia is bounded on the East, with the River Indus; West, with Tygris, and
the Persian Gulf; North, with the Caspian Sea, and the River Oxus; and on the
South, with the Main Ocean.

Natures and Manners of the People.
The people of this Country are for the most part valiant and proper, being
Olive-coloured; they have no hair on their head, nor their Chin, only on their
upper lip they have it very long, and turned downwards; their eyes are
generally black, their noses high, as be their foreheads.

Apparel.
In their Apparel they are very fantastical; about their heads they wind great
rowls of Callico, some of Silk and Gold. Their outward Garment is commonly of
Callico, quilted with Cotton; some wear them of party-colored Silks, some of
Satin, and some of rich Gold or Silver Chamblets.

The Women likewise are gorgeous in attire; their stature is mean, but strait
and comely; their hair black and curled, their forehead high, their cheeks fat,
round, and painted; they look wantonly, drink strongly, and covet men's moneys
really.

Household Furniture.
Their Houses, to speak generally, within are poor and sordid; a Carpet, a Pan,
and a Platter, epitomizes all their Furniture. The better sort sleep on Beds
two foot high, matted or done with girth'-web, on which is a shagg or yopanger,
which riding serves as an Vmbrella against rain, and sleeping, for a Bed and
Coverture.

Diet.
They feed most on Rice, boiled with Butter; also Mutton, Hens, and Almonds: The
better sort sit on Carpets, cross-legged, using neither Spoon nor Knife; for
the poorer fort, they feed most on Roots, as Melons, Garlic, Opium, and Honey.

They hate Swines-flesh, Veal, Beef, Hares, and Buffles, because Mahomet
forbids it them.

Provinces.
This Empire contains the Provinces of Persis, Susiana, Caramania, Gedrosia,
Drangiana, Aria, Arachosia, Parapomisus, Saca, Hircania, and Ormus.

The chief Cities of this Kingdom are, 1. Persepolis, now called Siras,
standing within the Province of Persis. This City continued the mightiest in
Asia 230 years, at which time Alexander the Great gave a period to its
greatness, by the Whorish counsel of the Athenian Lais. It is in compass now
some eight or nine miles, and seated at the North-West end of a large Plain,
some twenty miles long and six broad; the sides environed with mighty Hills,
under one of which this City is placed. The prime beauty of this City, is her
Churches and Gardens: there are some 14 or 15 Churches, most of which are round
like Theaters; their outside tyling pargetted with Azure Stones; two of these
have two Pillars or Steeples as high as Paul's in London, covered and wrought
with Blew and Gold.

Their Houses are of Sunburned Brick, flat on the top; the windows trelized
very curiously; and though generally within they have no ornament, yet some
peculiar Houses, as the Dukes and some others, may be Competitors for delicacy
with most in Europe.

The Gardens within this City abound in all kinds of Fruits. In a word, for all
delicacy this City may compare with any part of Persia.

The 2. City of note is Sushan, deriving her name from the Province wherein she
stands: This was once one of the three Royal Palaces of the Median Emperor, one
being at Babylon, and another at Ecbatana. Here it was that Ahashuerus made a
Feast, mentioned 1 Hester; and yearly to this day the King celebrates a Feast
of Roses, and the Duke of Shiras, who is Lord of Sushan, a Feast of
Daffadillies of like continuance.

3. Caramania, famous for Cloth of Gold, and the best Scymitars.

4. Gedrosia, or Geste. 5. Sige. 6. Aria; most of them deriving their names
from the Provinces wherein they stand.

Hyrcania.
Hyrcania: This is now made a Province of the Persian Kingdom. It has on the
North, the Caspian Sea; South, Mount Taurus; East and West, Media: this people
are of late civilized by the Persians.

The Country of old, and yet, abounds with Tigers, Wolves, Lions, Wild-Cats,
Bears, and Scorpions. It is full of Woods, which both befriends them against
Winters cold, and Summers heat, which in their seasons are extreme.

The prime Cities of this Kingdom are, 1. Asharaff; she has in her some 2000
Houses, and is seated in a Plain not above two miles from the Caspian Sea. The
Buzzar in this Town is but homely, nor enjoys she any Mosques or Prophets to be
spoken of. 2. Farabant is a very fair City; this lies one mile from the Caspian
Sea, and five miles West from Asharaff: It is yet the best Town for beauty,
greatness, and wealth, in the Kingdom of Hyrcania. It is furnished with some
long deep Prams sowed together with Hemp and Coord, (but unpitch'd or calk'd)
in these the Muscovian Merchants sail down Volga, over the Caspian Sea, and
arrive at Farabant, to traffic for raw Silks.

This City glories in her two large and beautiful Buzzars, and fragrant
Gardens, and in a sumptuous Palace of the Kings. 3. Omoall is built under Mount
Taurus; it has 3000 Houses, and inhabited by diverse Nations. In this City is a
Church or Mosque, wherein is intombed 444 Princes and Prophets of that Kingdom:
the people of this City are very courteous, and beautified with complements,
and dainty feature.

The people of this Kingdom speak the language of the Persians; their apparel
is like the Irish Trooses: their (...) are very kind and loving unto
Travelers, and upon any signal will receive them; and hold it a point of
rudeness in their Virgins, if they be coy or disdainful unto Strangers.

Ormus.
Ormus is an Isle within the Gulf, it is in circuit 15 miles; at the end of
this Isle appears yet the ruins of that late glorious City, built by the
Portugals, and lately taken from them by the Persians, with the help of some of
our English Ordnance; so that it is now utterly ruined, and not worth the
owning, which was but 15 years ago the only stately City of the Orient; it is
now disrobed of all her bravery, the Persians each month conveying her ribs of
Wood and Stone to aggrandize Gombroone, not three leagues distant, out of whose
ruins she begins to triumph.

Gombroone is by the Natives called Bander, (or Port-Town) it is distant from
Ormus nine English miles. It is seated on the Gulf, and in the Ormusian
Kingdom: It contains well-near 1000 Houses. In January here arrive Ships from
India, English and Dutch; and here the English Agent receives Custom of all
Strangers; that honor being granted for their good service done at Ormus. The
English and Dutch Merchants have their Houses here: this Town in Winter is
inhabited by sundry Nations, as Persians, Indians, Arabs, Jews, all which fly
away in the Summer, to avoid the intolerable heat. In the Winter season there
is abundance of all things necessary, chiefly of Fruits and Flowers. In the
Town also is some Moschees, and Synagogues of Jews.

Media.
MEdia is limited on the North, with the Mountain Taurus; on the South, with
Parthia; East, with Aria, or Sablestam; and West, with Armenia minor.

Fertility.
This Country is generally barren, especially in the Northern parts; so that
they make their Bread for the most part of dried Almonds, their Drink of the
Roots of certain Herbs, and feed ordinarily on Venison.

The great Cities of Media are Casbeene, Tabris or Taurus, Ordavill, Tyroan,
Cashan, and Coom.

Tyroan is situate in the midst of a fair large Plain, which although on some
parts is environed with Hills of stupendous height, yet some ways it affords
an ample Horizon. The building is of Sunburned brick, and it is watered with a
small Stream, which runs in two parts through the Town, and mellows most of the
Gardens and Groves within it. The Town is most beautified with a vast Garden of
the Kings, succinct with a large to wred Mud-wall, larger than the circuit of
the City. The Houses are open at the tops, whereon are spread Carpets, where
each Man sleeps Carpets, where each Man sleeps with his Seraglio; some have
three, some six, and some twelve sleeping by them. It contains some 3000
Houses, and has in her a Caravans Lodge, which exceeds her Mosque.

Tauris, or Ecbatana, derives her Name from the Mountain Taurus, and is now a
City both great and famous; her circuit is six miles; it is placed by a River,
and is shaded by the Hill Baretano, and to the South shows a large Plain;
it is well peopled, and much resorted to for traffic, which makes it famous
throughout all Asia: it has a small Mudwall of little service; the Houses are
flat above, and built of Brick dried in the Sun; her best ornament is a Garden
built toward the South-East, planted by Shaw Tamas.

Cazbeene was of old called Arsatia: this City is situate in a fair even place,
no Hills being near it. The compass of this City is seven miles; her Buzzar is
large and pleasant; the Kings House and Seraglio are near the Market, built of
raw Bricks, but painted and varnished very rarely with blew, red, and yellow:
the Mosques and Hummums are very resplendant with the Azure paint wherewith
they are ceruleated; for their other Buildings they are of no great
magnificence.

Coom is a pleasant City, standing in the halfway betwixt Cazbeen and Spahawn,
and in front of both. It Is a pleasant, fruitful, and healthy City, and the
People courteous: it has in her 2000 Houses well built, sweet, and well
furnished; her Streets are wide; her Buzzar fair; and her Mosque of most
honorable esteem among them. It is watered with a sweet, but small River, and
has plenty of all Fruits.

Parthia.
PArthia is bounded on the East, with Aria; West, with Media; North, with
Hircania; and South, with Carmania.

The chief City is Spahawn, it being the Imperial City; it is situate in a fair
and pleasant Horizon; it is by some called Hispaan. It is a City both great,
ancient, and famous; it is of an Orbicular form, and is some nine miles in
compass; her Inhabitants some 300000 Souls. The chief Ornaments of this City,
are the Mydan, (or great Market) the Hummums, (or Hot-Houses) the Moschees, the
Kings Palace, and Gardens. The Mydan is in the heart of the City; and to say
truth, all the beauty, concourse, wealth and trade, is comprised in her. It is
built in form of Royal Exchange, with four Isles, and Court within called the
Hypodromo: It is stored with all Merchandises, chiefly Drugs; and to this place
daily resort most Nations, as English, Dutch, Portugal, Arabians, Turks, Jews,
Armenians, Muscovians, and Indians; there are many great Surroyes, where are
Houses made of purpose for laying in and keeping Merchants Goods, and to
harbor and lodge themselves, and their Camels, Horses, and other Cattle.
Within this Mydan is nothing sold but things of great value, as Cloth of Gold,
Silver, and Tissue, Sattins, Velvets, Jewels, and Pearls. In one end are
nothing but raw Silks; in another end are twisted and wrought Silks; and in
another those that sell all sorts of Apparel, ready made after the Persian
fashion, very rich, as Suits of Cloth of Gold, Silver, and the like. The
buildings of their Mosques or Churches, are large and handsome. In this City is
a Column compact of several Heads of Men and Beasts; it is at the base above 20
foot in compass, and the height is three times as much.

Cashan is also a famous City in Parthia; the antiquity of it is not much in
this name. It is well seated, well peopled, and well built; the people are
orderly, and more given to Trade than in some Towns about her. Silks, Sattins,
Cloth of Gold, are here in abundance, at reasonable prizes. The Caravans-Raw,
the Mosque, and Hummums, are her only Ornaments, of which the Caravans-Raw
exceeds any in Persia: It was built by Abbas for Travelers to lodge in upon
free-cost, by act of Charity This City is distant from Spahawn some nine miles.
Diverse other Cities there are, but of less note.

Thus much of Parthia, and of the Persian Kings Dominion.
Tartaria.
TArtaria is bounded on the East, with the Eastern Ocean; on the West, with the
Muscovy; on the North, with the Frozen Sea; and on the South, with Mare
Caspium; the Hill Taurus; and the Wall of China.

It extends it self from East to West 5400 miles; and from North to South
3600. It was of old known by the name of Scythia.

Natures and Manners of the People.
They are generally of a swarthy complexion; square stature; broad faces;
hollow-ey'd; thin beards; and ugly countenances; barbarous in behavior,
especially in Antiqua Asciatica; for their Religion, some are Pagans, and some
Mahumetans.

They are given to Divinations, Auguries, Sooth-sayings, Enchantments; and when
they receive answer from the Devil, they attribute the same to God, whom they
call Stoga: they marvelously fear and reverence him, offering him many
oblations.

The Women are suitable to the Men, wanting, and scorning Money; adorning
themselves with Gew-gaws of Copper, Feathers, and Latton.

Division.
It is now usually divided into the Provinces of Precopensis, Asciatica Antiqua;
Zagathay, and Cathaia.

Procopenfis, or Tartaria minor
It contains all Taurica Chersonesus, and the Asciatican Banks of Tanais. The
chief Cities are, 1. Precops. 2. Crim, the ancient Seat of the Tartarian
Rulers. 3. Ozaclow, the residence of the present Princes. 4. Capha, (anciently
Theodosia) a Town of great traffic.

Asciatica, or Deserta.
Asciatica, or Deserta: This called also Moscovitica Deserta, (as anciently
Sarmatia Asciatica) is situate about the Banks of the River Volga. The People
here for the most part live in Tents made of Beasts skins; and account it a
great misery to stay longer in one place than the pasture affords meat for
their Cattle. They sow no Corn, but make Horseflesh their chief food, either
warmed a little at their Saddle-bow, or roasted in the Sun, and drink sour
Mares-Milk.

The chief Cities are, 1. Cashan. 2. Noyhan. 3. Charayckzicke. 4. Astrachan, a
Town well frequented by Merchants.

Tartaria Antiqua.
Tartaria Antiqua is the old Habitation of the Tartars, from whence they
dispersed themselves over Europe and Asia.

The People are of the same life and condition with them of Asciatica, and lie
farthest North, extending beyond the Polare Circle. They have some few Cities,
as 1. Coras, famous for the Sepulchers of the Tartarian Kings. 2. Caracora. 3.
Campanion; these Cities belong to the Kingdom of Tenduc: the People hereof
account it a great honor to have their Wives and Sisters at the pleas^e of
such as they entertain.

In this Country is the Desert of Lop: and in this Country grows Rheubarb,
an Herb of that excellent nature, that the whole World is beholding to these
Barbarians for it, as a sovereign help for many diseases.

Zagathai.
Zagathai: this Country was of old Scythia intra montem imanum. It is situate
East from the Caspian Sea: they are now called Jeselbas, from the color of
their Turbants. They inhabit the ancient Countries of Bactria, Sogdiana, and
Margiana; in times past the Habitation of the Massagetes, so famous in Arms.

These are the most honorable People of the Tartars; indifferent civil; given
to Arts; and Lords of many fair Cities; as 1. Istigias, one of the most
pleasant Cities of the East. 2. Samarchand, which gave both a Cradle and a
Grave to the mighty Tamerlain.

Cathaie.
CAthaie is bounded on the East, with the Oriental Ocean; on the West, with the
other Tartarian Provinces; North, with the Scythick Sea; and South, with China;
this is thought to have been the ancient Habitation of the Ceres. It is said of
this People, that they have neither whore nor thief amongst them.

Fertility.
The Soil abounds with variety of Fruits; superfluously furnished with Rice,
Grain, Wool, Silk, Hemp, Rheubarb, Musk, and excellent fine Chamblets, so that
it scorneth to give precedence to any of the flourishing Provinces of Europe.

Natures of the People.
The People are fearless of the greatest dangers; and patient of labor; they
are of a very good wit; dress themselves gorgeously; and on occasions fare very
sumptuously.

The chief Cities are, 1. Caraian, where the Women use to guild their teeth. 2.
Tebeth, famous for her abundance of Corral. 3. Cambaln, seated on the River
Polysanga, honored with the great Cham's residence, enriched with a mighty
confluence of Merchants of all sorts: beside other Merchandise, there are every
year 10000 Carts loaded with Silks sent thither ftom China. It is in compass 28
miles, besides the Suburbs, which beside other Inhabitants, are 50000
Astrologers, or rather Fortune Tellers. 4. Xamdu: within this City did Cublai
Can build a stately Palace, encompassing 16 miles of plain ground with a Wall,
wherein are fertile Meadows, pleasant Springs, delightful streams, and all
sorts of Beasts of chase and game; and in the midst thereof a sumptuous House
of pleasure, which may be removed from place to place: here he does abide in
the months of June, July, and August.

Government.
The Government of this Emperor is tyrannical, the Great Cham being Lord, and
in his tongue consists life or death: he is called by the simple People the
shadow of Spirits, and Son of the immortal Gods; and by himself is reputed to
be the Monarch of the whole World.

At the Funeral of some of these great Monarchs, they use to kill some of his
Guard-Souldiers, whereof he has 12000 in continual pay.

These Chams for the most part are severe Justices, and punish almost every
small fault with death, especially theft, lying, and adultery.

Thus much of Tartaria.
Of India, commonly called East India.
INdia is bounded on the East, with China; on the West, with the River Indus,
from whence it takes its denomination; on the North, with Tartary; and on the
South, with the Ocean. This is the biggest Country, comprehended under one
name, of any in the World, except Tartary and China.

Rivers.
The chief Rivers of it are, Indus and Ganges: Fertility.
abound it does in all manner of Minerals, except Copper and Lead; and stored
with all sorts of Cattle, except Horses; Riches.
more particularly with Mines of Gold, precious Stones, Spices of all sorts, and
Civet; Wheat only and Vines are wanting.

Natures of the People.
The People are indifferent civil, and ingenious; both Men and Women imitate a
majesty in their frame and apparel, which they sweeten with Oil and Perfumes,
adorning themselves with Jewels, Pearls, and other ornaments befitting.

Several Nations in India.
They are a Nation composed of five several sorts of People: 1. The Indians, or
Natives, which are in part Gentiles, in part Christians. The second sort are
Mahumetans, Persians, Tartars. The third Jews. The fourth Arabians, or Moors:
and the fifth Portugals. The River Ganges divides the Country into two parts,
(viz.) India intra Gangem, and India extra Gangem.

India intra Gangem.
India intra Gangem, called Industan, is divided into 47 Provinces or
Kingdoms; whereof two have yet their proprietary Kings; namely, Narsinga, and
Calecute; the rest are under the Command of the Great Mogull. The chief of the
47 Provinces are, 1. Narsinga. 2. Mallabar. 3. Balassia. 4. Cambaia. 5. Mandao.
6. Bengala. 7. Oristan. 8. Canora; and 9. Delli^.

Narsinga.
NArsinga has on the East, the Gulf of Bengala; West, the Mountain Guate;
North, the Mountain Guadaverno; and South, the Promontory of Comari. It is in
compass 3000 miles; and has a King acknowledging no superior command: he
keeps in continual pay 40000 Nairos, and is able to bring into the Field many
thousands more, as his expeditions in War have specified.

Natures of the People.
The People hereof use to burn their Wives when their Husbands are dead; the
cause some ascribe to their Wives wonted custom to poison their Husbands,
before this Law.

In these parts the chief City is St. Thomas, or Malleaper, where they say St.
Thomas was martyred, and burnt; to his Sepulcher the Indian Christians go on
Pilgrimage, carrying a little of the earth with them for a great relic. The
Portugals now inhabit this Town, almost desolate; the Jesuits also have here a
residence. There is also Narsinga and Bisnagar, fair and great Towns, standing
within this Kingdom.

Mallabar.
Mallabar contains the Western part, which of old was called Aurea
Chersonesus. It is full of People, divided into many States by variety of
Rivers, which causes many Crocodiles, enriches the Soil, and yields easy
transportation of Commodities, which are Spices of diverse kinds. The chief
Kingdoms in this Tract are, 1. Kanonor. 2. Calecute. 3. Cranganor. 4. Cochin.
5. Cariolam; and 6. Travancon. Calecute is the chief of these Cities; the City
is not walled, nor fair built; the ground not yielding firm foundation.

Fertility.
This Kingdom has not above 25 leagues of Seacoast, yet rich both by the
fertility of the Soil which yields Corn, Spices, Cocos, Jaceros, and many
other Fruits; and by the situation, as the Staple (especially before the
Portugals unfriendly Neighborhood) of Indian Merchandise, and therefore in her
variety of Merchants being a Map (as it were) of all the Eastern World. The
Egyptians, Persians, Syrians, Arabians, Indians, yea even from Catay, the space
of 6000 miles, had here their trade and traffic. The People here do yield
divine honor to diverse of the deceased Saints, and build Temples unto Beasts.

The Gentlemen and Merchants have a custom to exch^nge Wives, in token of
great friendship. Some Women amongst them have six or seven Husbands, fathering
their Children on which of them she best pleaseh. The Men when they marry get
others to use them (if they be Virgins) 15 or 20 days, before they themselves
do bed them.

Cranganor is a small Kingdom: the Inhabitants of this City are Christians of
St. Thomas profession, about 70000 in number.

Cochin is now grown great by the Portugals traffic and friendship; of the
rest there, there is not much worth recital.

The King of Coulam's Dominion stretches some 80 miles, in which there is some
23 walled Towns.

Balassia.
Balassia, or the Kingdom of Bocan, is famous for its inexhaustible Mines of
Gold and Silver. The chief Cities of it are, 1. Balassia. 2. Bocan. 3.
Senergian.

Cambaia.
Cambaia is also called Guzant, containing in length from the River Bate to
Circam, a Persian Region, 500 miles of Seacoast, being on other parts
environed with the Kingdoms of Dulcinda and Sanga; on the North, Mandao; on the
East, and on the West, the Gedrosians; the Sea, and confines of Decan, are the
Southerly bounds* It has in it by estimation 60000 inhabited places, watered
with many streams; the chief whereof is Indus.

Fertility.
This Country is very fertile, not yielding to any other in India, in the Fruits
which the Trees and Earth bring forth, beside the store of Elephants, Gems,
Silk, Cotton, and such like.

Natures of the People.
The People are of an Olive-colour; go naked, except about their privy parts;
they eat no Flesh, but Rice, Milk, Barley, and other lifeless creatures.

Their chief Sea-Towns are Daman, Bandora, Curate, Ravellum; and within Land,
Cambaia, Mallabar, Campanel, and Tanaa.

Cambaia has bestowed the name on the whole Kingdom, which they call the
Indian Cairo for the excellency thereof; it stands three miles from Indus.
The Inhabitants of it are a mixture of Mahometans, Moors, Persians, Bannyans,
and from Arabia: they are crafty and deceitful; the Priests are singularly
reputed of the Women proper, but veiled; and obscure in their best aspect,
their faces; they color their teeth black, thinking that shows most delight
and beauty, ard to differ from Dogs, whose teeth are white; their Apparel is
like the other Indians.

Mandao.
Mandao: this Kingdom is so called of the chief City, 1. Mandao, which being 30
miles in compass, held out a siege of twelve years. 2. Molta, where the Women
ride booted and spurred. 3. Scernus. 4. Polymbothia.

Bengala.
Bengala: the Kingdom of Bengala is very large, and has a coast 120 leagues,
and as much within Land; the River Chaberis waters it. Riches.
It is plentiful in Rice, Wheat, Sugar, Ginger, Long Pepper, Cotton, and Silk,
and enjoys a very wholesome Air. The Inhabitants near the shore are for the
most part Mahumetans; Gouro, the State-Royal, and Bengala, are fair Cities;
Chatigan is also reckoned among the Cities.

Natures of the People.
They are a most subtle and wicked People, and are esteemed the worst slaves in
all India; for that they are all Thieves, and the Women Whores; although this
fault is common through all India, no place excepted. Here are found great
abundance of Rhinocerots, whose Horn and all other parts is good against poison.

Oristan.
Oristan: the Kingdom of Oristan has on the Seacoast 350 miles, betwixt the
richer Kingdoms of Bengala, and Bisnagar; poor of Ports and traffic; Raman is
the Royal City. The Inhabitants (except a few Moors) are Gentiles, little or
nothing differing in Rites from their Neighbors.

Canora.
Canora: the chief Cities of this Kingdom are, 1. Vltabat. 2. Danggar. 3.
Lispoe, famous for her quarries of Adamant. Six leagues from Decan is a Hill
out of which the Diamond is taken; this Hill is kept by a Garrison, and walled
about.

Dellie.
Dellie: the Kingdom of Dellie is Northerly, subject to cold and frosts, as in
Europe. The chief Cities of this Kingdom are, 1. Dellie. 2. Besmer, famous for
the study of Magic. 3. Tremell; and 4. Fultabar.

This Prince lives in great state, having a Revenue correspondent thereunto:
his Subjects do reverence him exceedingly, making it Holy Day when he cutteth
his Hair, or shaveth his Beard. He is always carried on Men's shoulders, in a
pompous Chair adorned richly.

Thus much of India intra Gangem.
India extra Gangem.
INdia extra Gangem has on the East, China; West, the rest of India. This
India has formerly been divided amongst 12 Potentates, but now by the
prosperous fortune of the Kings of Siam and Brama, it is wholly subject to
their command. The most remarkable of these 12 Kingdoms are, Machin, Arachan,
Camboia, Cauchin-China, Brama, Siam, and Pegu.

Machin.
Machin: This Kingdom is accounted famous for the Wood called by us Aloes, by
the Latin Writers Lignum Vitae: this Wood is valued at its weight in pure
Silver. The chief City is Machin.

Arachan.
Arachan: This Kingdom is environed round with Mountains, and impenetrable
Woods. The chief Cities are, 1. Arachan. 2. Ava, famous for her abundance of
Gems.

Camboia.
Camboia: This is a great and populous Country, full of Elephants, and Abadas,
(this Beast is the Rhineceros.) The chief City is Camboia, a Town of great
Traffic and Commerce, for its plenty of Gold, Silver, and Aloes, and other
Commodities of great worth.

Treacherous people.
They are a treacherous people, as may appear by their dealing with the
Hollanders in 160^. whom they invited to the shore with promise of certain
Buffs, and then cruelly slew them.

Cauchin-China.
Cauchin-China: This Kingdom is situate between the River Cantan, and the
Kingdom of Siam, divided into three Provinces, and as many Kings. Riches.
It abounds with Gold, Silver, Aloes, Porcelane, and Silk. Their chief City is
Cauchin-^hina, situate on the Sea, much frequented by Merchants for Porcelan^,
or China-Dishes here made.

Brama.
Brama: Of this Kingdom of Brama, the City-Royal is Pegu; the Nation where
began the greatness of the late Kings, not long since. This Kingdom was of no
estimation, but now has he made all his Neighbors his Homagers, having
subjected to his Seigniory 12 Kingdoms, being all of them rich in the best
Commodities that the Indians afford.

Siam.
Siam: This was not long since the Queen or Lady of this part of India, but now
is subject to the King of Brama. The principal Cities are, 1. Malaca, now
subject to the Portugals; they have there their Bishop, and a College of
Jesuits, besides the Castle. It is situate in a very unwholesome air, yet a Town
of great resort unto for Traff^ck of Spices 2. Siam, whose stateliness gives
name to the whole Kingdom; there are besides the Natives, 30000 of Arabian
Households. 3. Odia, consisting of 400000 Families; it is the Seat of the Kings
of Brama. Patane is also another City, standing between Malaca and Siam, chief
of that Kingdom whereto it gives name, in the height of 7 Degrees: The
buildings are of Wood and Reed, but artificially wrought; the Hollanders have
had much Trading here of late.

Pegu.
Pegu: This Kingdom is blessed with a rich Soil, and a harbourous Seashore,
extending 300 miles in length, in which the principal Haven is Martabane. As
for the City Pegu, it is the most fair and elegant City in all India; it is
distant from the Sea 25 miles. This King lives in extraordinary great riches
and Majesty; he keeps four Elephants, three milk-white, and one black, all
which he divinely worships.

Thus much of India.
China.
CHina has on the North, Catay, and the Tartars; on the South, Cauchin-China;
on the East, the Sea; and on the West, Brama. It reaches from 17 Degrees to 42
of Northerly Latitude, and lies after their own description almost foursquare.
On the West it is separated and secure from unneighbourly Nations, by a Sandy
Wilderness. On the North, by a Wall, which Nature has framed partly of high
Mountains, and Art has supplied with the nature and industry of men.

Natures of the people.
The people are in composition of their body, short nosed, and small black eyes;
their beards are thin, not having above twenty hairs: They are white, but not
so much as in Europe; the men as well as the women suffer their hair to grow
long, color it, and gather it into a Net or Cawl on the top of their head;
those which are unmarried, wear their hair curled on the top of their
foreheads. They are for the most part an ingenuous and politic people, much
delighting in the exercise of manual Arts. The air is very temperate, the soil
pleasant and Fertili^y.
fertile; they have two, and somewhere three Harvests in a year. It abounds
likewise in Rice, Wool, Cotton, Olives, Vines, Flax, Silk, all kinds of Metal,
Fruits, Cattle, Sugar, Honey, Rheubarb, Porcelyne Dishes, Camphir, Ginger, all
kinds of Spices, Wood, Musk, and Salt.

The Country is for the most part plain, in so much that they have Coaches and
Carts driven ordinarily with Sails; few Mountains, but plains of an hundred
miles compass. Diet.
They eat thrice in a day, but sparingly, not touching their meat with their
hands, but with two sticks of Ivory, Ebony, and the like.

Provinces.
China is of wonderful bigness, well-nigh equalizing all Europe; it is said to
be 3000 leagues in compass, and 1800 leagues in length. As for the name of
China, it is only used by us, the Inhabitants calling themselves Tamans, and
Tabencos. It is divided into 15 Provinces, to the least of which our European
Countries cannot admit comparison. Six of these border on the Sea, Cantan,
Foquien, Chequiam, Nanquin, Xantam, Paquin; the other nine be Inland, Quiansi,
Huquam, Honan, Xiensi, Xansi, Suchnon, Queichen, Junan, Coansi; some reckon
these names somewhat differently. The King holds his Court in Naquin; his
Predecessors before the Tartarian Conquest, are said to have resided in
Nanquin, or as some say in Quinsay. They have 244 Cities, of name dignified by
the title Fu; and as many smaller Cities, entitled Cheu, with their several
Jurisdictions: and a third sort called Hieu, as big as the meaner Cities of
Spain, above 1120. Two sorts of Castles, both for Fortification and Habitation,
with privileges also of Markets; the greater sort named Huy, 293: the less of
greater number, 2593: their Villages are innumerable.

The Cities generally are like one another, except in greatness; the Streets
are strait, yielding prospect from one Gate to the other. Canton is accounted
the least of the Metropolitan Cities, yet the Walls of it have 83 Bulwarks; the
Streets so broad, that ten men may ride in front, and paved and adorned with
many triumphant Arches and Shops on both sides; the Bridges here and elsewhere
are many, of large Free-Stones, very costly; the Highways which lead to the
Cities, very stately; and the Kings Houses for the public Officers, very
magnificent, after their manner.

Nanquin is some eight or ten leagues from the Sea, with a River leading
thither. It has three fair brick-walls, with large and stately Gates; the
Streets are of two leagues, or of two and a half in length, wide, and paved;
the compass is at least eleven or twelve leagues, and contains by conjecture
200000 houses. It equals or exceeds four of the fairest Cities in Europe; there
are diverse other Cities within a days journey hereof, which are great and
famous for Traffic, of which Hancheum and Sucheum are chief, which are of the
Chinians called Paradise, for the plenty of all things. Sucheum is seated as
Venice is, having her Streets part by water, and part on land; so rich in
Traffic, that 12 millions of Revenue do accrue from hence to the King yearly.

Quinsay, heretofore the Royal Seat of the Kings of Mangi; the situation of it
is in the midst of China, and near the Sea; but now this famous City,
containing heretofore 100 miles in compass, having 12000 Bridges, and 1600000
Households, has bequeathed her Land and greatness unto Nanquin, and her
Sea-treasures unto Sucheum, both succeeding, but not together equalling this
great and famous City.

These Cities of China want that elegance and magnificence, which stately
Temples and sumptuous buildings do afford to our Cities of Europe: Their Houses
are low, without the ornament of Porches, Galleries, Windows, and prospect into
the Streets: besides these habitations, there are many which dwell on Land, but
in their Ships; for their Shipping is of two sorts, one for sail, and another
for habitation also: these also meaner or fairer, according to the wealth of
the Owner: In the one side they carry their Families, in the other their
Passengers. Many Barks are as Victualling-houses by the way, and likewise as
Shops of Merchandise. They buy and sell not with Gold, but Silver, and that not
coined, but every one has his Scales with him to the Market, to weigh his
Silver; and they are subtle and deceitful, if men be not wary. Things are
there exceeding cheap, a hundred pound of Sugar may be bought there for nine or
ten sixpences, and other things proportionable.

Tamen.
This Kingdom is called Tamen, and the Inhabitants Tamegines; China is a mere
stranger in China. Revenue.
The King is absolute Monarch, and in Revenue exceeds all the Princes in
Europe and Africa together; his whole Revenue being reckoned, arises together
to 150 millions: His expenses are exceeding great, all the Mandarines, Eunuchs
or Courtiers, Soldiers, Hospitals, and Priests, receiving Stipends out of his
Exchequer. The King has one Wife, but many Concubines, whose Children inherit
if the lawful Wife be barren. These women are not suffered to go abroad, nor
likewise to speak unto their Kinsfolks. His Courtiers are Eunuchs, whom their
poor Parents have gelded in their youth, in hope of Courtly preferment; of
these there are supposed to be in the Court some 16000.

Burials.
When any of these Chinoys dye, they clothe him in his best Apparel, set him in
his best Chair, and there all his hindered kneel before him, and take their
leave with tears; when he is Coffined, they place him in a room richly
furnished, and set by him a Table full of Viands and good cheer, with Candles
continually burning; and when he has layn thus 15 days, he is carried forth
to his Funeral, where they burn his Body, Men, Cattle, and Provision for his
attendance and sustenance.

Thus much of China, and of the Continent of Asia.
Of Africa.
AFrica is a Peninsula, encompassed almost round with the Red Sea, on the East;
the Atlantic Ocean, on the West; the Southern Ocean, on the South; and the
Mediterranean, on the North. Where the Sea is defective to make it an Island,
there is a little Isthmus which tyeth it to Asia, which is but 60 miles in
length. The form of Africa is like a Pyramid reversed, the Basis whereof is in
breadth 1920 miles, but from the Pyris to the Basis it extends it self 4155
miles; being much less than Asia, and far bigger than Europe, and yet not so
well peopled; Nature having made here her solitary place of retiring, attended
here by scorching heats, and showers of Sands, such are the many Deserts in
Africa; fertile only in barrenness, yet in some places beyond admiration for
fertility. Many are the Creatures which Africa yields, not usual in our
parts: Elephants are there plenty, and keep in great Herds together; also
Lions, Leopards, Crocodiles, Sea-horses, Hyenas, and such like.

The usual division of this Country is into Barbary, Numidia, Lybia, the Land
of Negros, Ethiopia Inferior, Ethiopia Exterior, Egypt, and the Islands.

Barbary.
ALl the Tract of Land between Atlas and the Sea, (stretching in length from
Egypt to the Straights) is called Barbaria. It comprehends both Mauritanias,
Africa minor, Lybia exterior; besides Cyreniaca, and Marmarica.

Division.
It is bounded on the East, with Cyreniaca; West, with the Atlantic Ocean;
North, the Mediterranean; and South, the Hill Atlas.

It is divided into four Kingdoms, Tunis, Algier, Fez, and Morocco; all which
are of the like fertility, and peopled with the like Inhabitants; only the
Cities speak the Arabic, but not pure, and the Country use the old African
tongue.

Fertility.
The fertility consists in Fruits, Figs, Olives, Dates, Sugar, and Horses of
excellent beauty, strength, and service.

Natures of the People.
The Men are of a duskish color; comely of body; stately of gate; implacable in
hatred; constant in affection; laborious, and treacherous. The Women are
sumptuous in Jewels; beautiful in blackness; having delicate soft skins.

Tunis.
Tunis: the Kingdom of Tunis contains all that which the Ancients called
Africa propria, or minor, and Numidia antiqua.

The Soil is healthful, especially the West-part; the Inhabitants are sound
and healthful; seldom vexed with any sickness: hereof are reckoned five parts,
Bugia, Constantia, Tunis, Tripolis, and Ezab; this Ezab is the most
Easterly-part, having many Towns and Regions, amongst which some account
Mesrata: from these parts unto Capes is the Tripolitan Region. The chief Town
is Tripolis, where the Turk has his Bassa, or Viceroy, a receptacle of the
Pirates which rove and rob in those Seas. This Region was named so of three
Cities, whose Colonies planted it, Abrotonum, Tophia, and Leptis; from Capes to
Guadilbarbar is the Tunetan Territory. The chief City is Tunis; it is a great
City since the ruins of Carthage, near unto which it stands. It has in it
about 10000 Households; it has many Temples, especially one of singular beauty
and greatness.

Bizerta is also an ancient City, supposed by some to be Vtica, where Cato slew
himself; from thence unto the Mountain of Constantia, is that Region hereof
bearing name. Constantia is the chief City; it is an ancient City, containing
8000 Families, and many sumptuous Buildings, a great Temple, two Colleges, and
three or four Monasteries, much resorted to by Merchants; every Trade having
their peculiar Streets. In this Region is situate Bona, someime called Hippo,
where St. Austin was Bishop. Bugia, so called of Bugia the principal City,
extends it self 150 miles: this Bugia was once adorned with Temples,
Monasteries, Hospitals, and Colleges of Students in the Mahumetan Law. Ezab is
the most Easterly part of the Tunetan Kingdom; the chief Province whereof is
Mesrata. The Inhabitants are rich, and pay no tribute: there grow Dates and
Olives; and they traffic with the Numidians, to whom they carry the Wares
which they buy of the Venetians.

The Great Turk swayeth with his Ottoman Scepter at this present the Kingdom of
Tunis, and all Africa, from Bellis de Gomora to the Red Sea, (except that
little which the Spaniard has.)

Algier and Telensin.
Algier and Telensin: these Kingdoms were of old called Mauritanica. The
Kingdom of Telensin contains in length from East to West 380 miles, in
breadth not above 25. It has two frequented Haven-Towns, Oram and Mersalcabir,
both taken and holden by the Spaniards. Oran is a fair City, having in it about
10000 Families.

Algier is subject to the Turks: here is the Seat of a Turkish Viceroy or
Beglerbeg, and of Turkish Rovers. It contains about 4000 Families; the
Buildings very sumptuous; Inns, Bath-stones, and Temples, very beautiful;
every Occupation has a several place by it self. It has adjoining Plains very
pleasant and fertile one whereof is 45 miles long, and 30 broad; it was sometime
subject to the Kingdom of Telensin. Within these Kingdoms stands the Desert
of Angad, wherein are store of Roes, Deer, and Ostriches, Arabian Thieves, and
Lions. Guaguido and Tegdemit are two Cities belonging to this Kingdom.

Fez.
Fez: this Kingdom of Fez stretches from Azamor to Tangier; and from the
Atlantic Ocean to Muldia. This River is the Eastern Border; on the North, it
is washed with the Sea; on the South, is the Kingdom of Morocco; and on the
West, the River Ommicabili: the Rivers Sube, Luccus, and others water it;
therein are numbered seven Provinces, Temesna, the Territory of Fez, Azgar,
Elhabet, Errif, Garet, and Chaus; every of which had in old times their several
Governors. The City of Fez is now the Royal Seat; it has this golden title
given it, because the first day of the foundation of it, there was found some
quantity of Gold. This City is now both great and strong; and for the sweet
situation of it, both Nature and Art have played their parts; for it is watered
with a delicate River, which disperseth it self by manifold channels into every
Street and corner of the City, and by Conduit-Pipes closely visiting every
Temple, College, Inn, Hospital, yea and almost every private House, from
whence with an officious service it carries away the filth. Their Buildings
are stately, to admiration; the roofs of their Houses are adorned with Gold and
Azure, and other excellent colors; they are made flat for the Inhabitants use
and p^easure, whose Houses are richly furnished within; besides the
exquisiteness of the Portals, Pillars, Cisterns, and other parts of this Cities
furniture, there are above 700 Moschees, Temples, and smaller Chapels within
this City, which are adorned with Marble Pillars, and other ornaments; the
Chapters thereof wrought with Mosiaque and carved work; every one has his
foundation of Marble, or of other Stones; the Floors are covered with Mats, as
are the Walls, a Man's height, lyned therewith. There is one principal or
Cathedral Church, called the Temple of Carven, containing about a mile and half
in circuit; it has 31 Gates, great and high; the roof is 150 yards long, and
little less than 80 broad; the roof hereof is exceeding high, supported with 38
Arches in length, and 20 in breadth; round about are certain Porches on the
East, West, and North, in length 40 yards, and in breadth 30, under which are
Storehouses, wherein are kept Lamps, Oil, Mats, and other necessaries. Every
night are lighted 900 Lamps, for every Arch has his Lamp. About the Walls are
Pulpits of diverse sorts, wherein the Masters teach to the people such things as
pertain to their Faith. The Revenues of this Temple are 200 Ducats a day. In
this City are two principal and stately Colleges of Scholars, adorned with
Mosiaque and carved works; one of which is most beautiful, adorned with a
goodly Fountain of Marble, and a stream continually running; the Gates of the
College are of brass, fairly wrought; in the great Hall where they say their
prayers, is a Pulpit, which has Stairs all of Ivory and Ebony. All the
Colleges in Fez have some resemblance to this; and in every of them are
Readers, and Professors of diverse Sciences. There are many Hospitals in Fez,
not inferior to the Colleges, where Learned Men and Gentlemen receive
entertainment, and poor Men relief. There is another Hospital for diseased
Strangers, which have their Diet, but not their Physic. Inns here are almost
200, built three stories high, and have 120 Chambers a piece; but here is no
provision of Bed nor Board for Strangers. These Innkeepers are so odious, that
(unless base fellows) none of the better sort will speak to them. Each Trade in
Fez has his Street allotted thereto.

In the Suburbs of Fez are 150 Caves, hewn out of excellent Marble, the least
of which will hold 1000 measures of Corn: this is the sink of Fez, where every
one may be a Vintner, and a Bawd. Another Suburb has 200 Families of Lepers,
which are there provided for. In New Fez the Jews have a Street, wherein they
have their Houses, Shops, and Synagogues.

The other Cities of this Kingdom, Septa, now in the hands of the King of
Spain, Tangier, and Alguer, nigh unto which the three Kings, Sebastian King of
Portugal, Mahomet, and Abdelmelech, Competitors for this Kingdom, were slain in
one day.

Mo^occo.
Morocco: this Kingdom is divided into seven Provinces, Hea, Sus, the Region of
Morocco, Gazzula, Duccala, H^scora, and Tedles. Morocco is the chief City, and
was once the Metropolis of Barbary, as containing 100000 Households, but now
inferior unto Fez for populousness, spaciousness, and beauty. The chief
Buildings hereof are the Church and the Castle; the Church is bigger, though
not so beautiful as that at Fez, and has a Tower so high, that the Hills of
Azafi being 120 miles distant, may be thence easily discerned. The Castle is
very large, and on a Tower thereof stands three Globes made of pure gold,
weighing 130000 Barbary Ducats; diverse Kings have gone about to take them
down, but have desisted, by reason of some misfortune or other that have
befallen them.

The other Towns of note are Tongovista, Fisedet, and Massa, abounding in Amber.

Revenue.
The Revenue of the Xeriffs are very great, which they levy out of the tenth of
their Subjects gains; besides a Duckat for every Pole, male and female, above
15 years of age. In Merchandise of a Citizen he receives two in the hundred; of
a Stranger, ten; Church and Colledge-Lands are escheated to him.

Thus much of Barbary.
Numidia and Lybia.
BEfore we come to Numidia, we must pass over Mount Atlas, (now called
Anchisae, or Montes Clari) a Hill of that height, that the top of it cannot be
seen.

It is bounded on the East, with Egypt; West, with the Atlantic Ocean; North,
Atlas; and South, Lybia.

Natures of the People.
The people to this day spend their lives in Hunting, and stay but three or four
days in a place, as long as the Grass will serve their Camels. This is the
cause the Country is so ill peopled, the Towns so small in themselves, and so
remote from others; for Teffet, a great City in their esteem, contains but 400
Households, and has no Neighbors within 300 miles of it.

Fertility.
This Country abounds with Dates, which is the chief Diet of the people; but
this sweet meat has sour sauce, for it commonly rotteth their teeth betimes.
The air is of that nature, that if any one be troubled with the French Disease,
he shall here find remedy.

Peoples.
Of the Numidians and Lybians are five peoples, Zenaga, Guenzaga, Terga, Lemta,
and Berdeua, and live all after the same manner and order, that is, without
order or manners at all.

Apparel.
Their Garments are of base Colth, scarce covering half their bodies: The
Gentlemen to be distinguished from the rest, wear a Blue Jacket with wide
sleeves: their Steeds are Camels, which they ride without saddle or bridle:
their Beds are Mats made of Rushes, and their Food is oft-times Patience with
an empty belly. This Country abounds with Serpents and Scorpions, so that
daily some are found dead by their venomous biting.

Their chief Cities are Staphilet, Dansen, Dara, and Techoret, a Town very
courteous to Strangers.

Lybia.
Lybia has on the East, Nilus; West, the Atlantic Ocean; North, Numidia; and
South, the Land of the Negros.

This Country is a Desert, dry and sandy, utterly void of Springs and Rivers,
so that a man may travel eight days or more without finding water. The Deserts
are of diverse shapes, some covered with Gravel, others with Sand, both without
water; here and there is a Lake, sometimes a shrub, or a little Grass. The
Merchants that travel to Tombuto, or other places this way, carry water with
them on Camels; and if water fail, they kill their Camels and drink the water
which they wring out of their guts. They live without form of Law, in manner of
brute Beasts; they are most notorious Thieves, and very dangerous to Merchants;
yet there live among them many Africans, civil, courteous entertainers of
Strangers.

Thus much of Numidia and Lybia.
Of the Land of Negros.
NIgrarum Terrae, or the Land of the Negros, either is so called of the River
Niger, or of the black color of the Inhabitants. It has on the East, Ethiopia
Superior; West, the Atlantic Ocean; North, Lybia; and South, the Kingdom of
Manicongo in Ethiopia Inferior.

Natures of the People.
The Inhabitants at most want the use of reason; most alienate from dexterity of
wit, and all Arts and Sciences; prone to luxury, and are for the greater part
Idolaters. Riches.
The Country is abundantly stored with Gold and Silver, very fine and pure. The
River Niger here, as the River Nilus in Egypt, overfloweth the adjacent Fields
for the space of 40 days, and in so many more recollects his waters into his
proper Channels.

The chief Provinces or Kingdoms (of which here are 25) are,

Kingdoms or Provinces.
Gualata; this Province was subdued by the King of Tombuto; a beggarly,
thievish, lying Country, as any is in the World; they anoint their hair every
day with the fat of Fish, for great gallantry, whereof they stink exceedingly.
The women esteem it their chiefest parts of goodly feature, to have large
breasts, which by art and stretching some have them hanging to their Navel.

Guinea confineth with Gualata; here there is neither Town nor Castle, but
Mina, built and fortified by the Portugal, for their better trading here. They
have some Snakes here of 30 foot long; Spiders as big as the palm of ones hand;
slore of Camelions, blue Parrots, and many sorts of Apes. They esteem it a
great part of beauty to have a flat Nose.

Tombutum: this is the richest Prince in all this part of Africa, keeping a
Royal Palace; he has some Scepters that weigh 13000 pound weight a piece: The
King will admit no Jews into the City, he hates them so, yet he loves and
maintains a great number of learned men.

Melli, a Country of 300 miles in length, has the richest, civilest, and
industriousest Inhabitants of any amongst these Negrites.

Cano is a Country abounding in Lemmons and Pomegranates.

Gialofi; the people hereof are of that admirable nimbleness, that they will
leap on a Horse when he gallopeth, and stand upright when he runs fastest.

Benin; here the people go naked until they are married, and then are clothed
from the wast to the knees: the King hereof has 600 Wives, with all which
twice a year he goes in pomp; the Gentlemen have some 80, some 90, the meanest
1^: Men and Women pinck their bodies, putting thereon grease mixed with color;
here they offer their Wives to Strangers.

Nubia stretches from Gaoga unto Nilus, having the Egyptian confines on the
North, and the Deserts of Goran on the South: Dangala is their chief Town, and
has 10000 Families; but ill built, their Houses being Chalk and Straw: the
Inhabitants with their Traffic to Cairo become rich; there is in this Kingdom
great store of Corn, Sugar, Civet, Sandal, and Ivory. They have a strong poison
here, the tenth part of a Grain whereof will kill a man in a quarter of an
hour; one Ounce is sold for 100 Ducats.

Bornum; here the people have neither Children, Wives, nor Names, but are
distinguished by some external accident.

Gaoga; this Kingdom has neither civility, letters, nor Government. The chief
Towns of these Provinces are Tombutum, Genni, Agadez, Guangara, Songum, and
Choninam, the third City in estimation of all Africa.

Thus much of the Land of the Negros.
Ethiopia Superior, or the Empire of Prester John.
THis is the greatest and powerfullest Prince in all Africa; his Dominion
begins at the entrance of the Red Sea, and stretches to the entrance of the
Island of Seine, North; East, on Egypt, and the Deserts of Nubia; and on the
Southside, on Monemugi. It contains in compass 4000 Italian miles. Fertility.
The Region is scarce in Wheat, but plenty in Rice, Barley, Pease, and Beans:
They have abundance of Sugar, Minerals of all sorts, and infinite Herds of Oxen
and Sheep; they have no coin of Gold or Silver, Salt is the most current money.
The Mountains and Woods are full of Bassill, and other odoriferous Plants:
Natures of the People.
The people are much inclined to Barbarism, destitute of learning, not to be
credited, unless they swear by the life of their Prince: they hate a Smith
equally with the Devil; their color is generally Olive-tawny.

Rivers.
Their chief Rivers are Abas, Totcasis, and Nilus.

There are in this Empire 70 tributary Kingdoms, the chief whereof are,

Barnagasso; this Kingdom is situate upon the Red Sea; it stretches from
Suachen almost to the mouth of the Streits; it has no other Port on the Red
Sea but Erocco, neither has the Prester any other Port in all his Dominion but
this; and of late the Turk has taken this, with that of Suachen, and forced
the Governor of this Province to compound for the yearly sum of 1000 ounces of
Gold.

Tigramahon; this Kingdom lies between Nilus, Marabo, Angote, and the Sea. It
has in it Cazunio, supposed to be the Royal Seat of that Queen that visited
Solomon.

Angote is between Tigramahon and Amare; in this Kingdom Iron and Salt is
current money.

The Hill Amarah.
Amara is situate in the midst of the Country; here is a steep Hill dilating
it self in a round form, many days journey in compass. It is situate in a
Plain, extending it self every way without other Hill in the same, for the
space of ^0 leagues; the form is round; the height is such, that it is a days
work to ascend from the bottom to the top; the air above is wholesome and
delectable, and they live there very long without sickness; there are 34
Palaces on the top, spacious, sumptuous, and beautiful, where the Princes of
the Royal blood have their abode, with their Families.

Xoa; this Kingdom has store of Corn and Cattle.

Goyame; this Kingdom has plenty of Gold; here only, and in the Hills of the
Moon, is found the Unicorn, which is seldom seen, only the Horn is found, which
he casts in manner of the Heart.

Fatigar; in Fatigar is a Lake on the top of a high Mountain, 12 miles in
compass, stored with Fish; and thence run many Rivers stored with the same Fish.

Guegere was sometime called Mero; the Inhabitants are confederate with the
Turks and Moors against the Abassines: it is an Island situate in the Rive^
Nilus.

The chief Cities of this Kingdom are Saba and Zambra; besides these two there
is none have above 3000 Houses in them, but these are populous and magnificent,
with Towers, Temples, triumphant Arches, Obelisks, Pyramides, and the like
tokens of Industry, Antiquity, and Majesty.

Saba was founded by the Queen which visited Solomon, and was the Mother-City
of the Empire. It has 5000 Houses, great and sumptuous; the Streets spacious,
with Portals and Pent-houses; it has four choice Gates, all Alablaster and
Jasper, wrought with antique works; the great doors of Cedar, curiously carved;
the ways that lead to these Gates for the space of two leagues, are set with
Palms, Planes, Oranges, Cedars, Cypress, and other Trees, on both sides, for
shade and fruit. Near to this City are Mines of Gold, Gardens, and other places
of pleasure and profit.

Zambra is greater, containing 30000 Houses, and innumerable concourse of
people. It stands in the Kingdom of Caffates, and near the great Lake, called
hereof Zambra, where the Emperor leaving his wonted manner of removing up and
down in Tents, has fixed his Court-Royal; and yet without the City are many
Tents belonging to the Court. The other Cities are Cossonum, Zameta, Aruma,
Eranco, and Suachen; besides the Kings Court, which is as a wandering City; for
with his Tents and Pavilions belonging to him, he covers no less than ten
miles.

Buildings.
Their Houses in Ethiopia are for the most part round; all of Earth;
flat-roofed; covered with Thatch; compassed with Yards. They sleep on Ox-Hides;
they have neither Table nor Table-Clothes, but have their Meat served in on
wooden Platters; some eat Flesh raw; others broyl it.

The Person of this Emperor is very much honored; nay adored by the common
People, to whom he shows himself but thrice a year, (viz.) Christmas, Easter,
and Holy-Rood.

Thus much of the Ethiopian Empire.
Of Ethiopia Exterior.
EThiopia Inferior, called also Exterior, has on the East, the Red Sea; West,
the Ethiopian Ocean; North, Terra Nigrarum; and South, the Southern Ocean.

Division.
The usual division of this Region is into five parts, (viz.) Aian, Benomotapa,
Zanzibar, Cafaria, and Congo.

Aian.
Aian after the Arabian account, contains all that Region that lies between
the mouth of the Red Sea, and Quilimanci, being for the most part on the
Seacoast inhabited by the said Arabians; but in the Inland-part thereof are
People of a black heathenish Nation.

It comprehends two Kingdoms, Adel and Adea; the former of which extends it
self from the mouth of the Red Sea, to the Cape Guardasu, South and West; it
bordereth on the Dominion of Prester John, about the Kingdom of Fatigar.

Fertility.
It abounds with Flesh, Honey, Wax, Corn, Gold, Ivory. The chief City is Arar;
Zeila also and Barbora pertain to this ^ingdom, Cities without the Streit on
the Sea, much frequented by Merchants. It is stored with variety of
Merchandise, and yields some representation of Antiquity in building thereof,
consisting of Lime and Stone.

Adea is situate between Adel, Abassia, and the Sea, to which last it is
tributary. The chief Towns are Brava, Pate, and Gogia; these two last belong to
the Portugal.

Zanzibar.
Zanzibar extends from the River Quilimanci to Benomotape: It is a low,
fenny, woody Country, with many Rivers, which by the extremity of moisture
causes the Air to be intemperate. From the Waste upward they go naked.

Herein are contained the Territories of Melinde, Mombara, Quiloa, Mozambique,
and others.

Melinde is the name of a Kingdom, and of the chief City thereof. The
Inhabitants near the Sea are Moors, and build their Houses after the manner of
Europe.

Quiloa is the name of a City and Island, which is a Kingdom of the Moors, and
extends her Dominion far in the Coast. The People of this Island use when
they have female-Children born, to sew up the private passages of nature,
leaving only a small passage for the Urine; and if they want this sign of their
Virginity when they are married, they are disgracefully sent home to their
Parents, and by them as opprobiously received.

Here are diverse other Kingdoms also, as Mombara, Mozimba, Macuas, Embeve; and
against them the Promontory Prassum.

Mozambique; by this name is signified a Kingdom in the Continent and Island,
also with a safe harbor. Mozambique Island is inhabited by Portugals, which
have there a strong Castle. Here the Portugal Ships winter; they have Trade in
the Continent, in Sena, Macura, Sofala, and Cuama.

Sofala is a rich Kingdom, and abounds in Gold and Ivory; it lies between
Cuama and Magnice, two Rivers. Here the Portugals have on a little Island a
Port and Factory of very rich Trade, the People bringing great quantity of Gold
for their Cloth and other Commodities; it is supposed that it amounts to two
millions yearly. Orfe is of opinion that this Sofala is that which in Solomon's
time was called Ophir.

Besides these Kingdoms beforementioned, here are Gorova, Colta, Norzuge,
Moneulo, Baduis, and Monoemagi, which is rich in Gold.

Benomotopa
Benomotopa is almost environed round with Waters, having on the West and
South, the River called Rio D'Infanto; on the East, the Ocean; and on the
North, the River Quama.

This Country is in compass 450 miles, and abounds with such store of
Elephants, that no less than 5000 are yearly killed for their Teeths sake. Here
are said to be 3000 Mines of Gold; the chief being Manica, Boro, and Quitiani.
The Mines nearest to Sofala are those of Manica, which are in wide Champaignes,
compassed with Mountains, 90 miles in circuit.

The places where the Gold is, appear and are known by the dryness and
barrenness of the Soil.

In the Mines of Boro and Quiticui, and in the Rivers, is found Gold, but not
so pure.

The chief Provinces are Motana, Tocoa, Melchucha, Quinibebe, Berfaca, and
Banagall.

The chief Cities are Benomotopa, Zimbas, and Tongum, the Kings Seat.

Natures of the People.
All the People of this Region are of curled Hair, and are more ingenious than
those which are against Mozambique, Quiloa, and Melinde; among whom are many
that eat Man's Flesh, and let their Kine blood to satisfy their thirst. They
punish nothing more than Witchcraft, Adultery, and Theft.

Cafraria.
Cafraria has on the East, Rio D'Infanto; West and South, the Ocean; and
North, Lune Montes. The People live like Beasts, and are as black as Pitch.
Here are in this Country besides great herds of Oxen and Sheep, abundance of
Deer, Antilopes, Baboons, Foxes, Hares, Ostriches, Cranes, Pelicans, Herons,
Geese, Ducks, Phesants, Partridges. In this Country near the Cape of good
Hope, the People esteem so much of Brass or Iron, and other trifles, that they
would exchange their Cowes and Sheep for a piece of old Iron scarce worth four
pence.

Congo.
Congo has on the East, Aubassia; West, the Ethiopian Ocean; North, the Land
of Negros; and South, the Hills called Lune Montes.

The Provinces of this Kingdom are, 1. Matama: this is a Kingdom great and
mighty; the Air thereof is wholesome; Fertility.
the Earth outwardly furnished with store of Fruits; inwardly with Mines of
Crystal, and other Metals.

Angola was sometime a Province of this Kingdom, but it is now a Kingdom of it
self, and very populous. Here are Mines of Silver, and most excellent Copper.
They have many Kine, but love Dogs better than any other Flesh, and fat them to
the Shambles.

These Countries are very populous, insomuch that they sell to the Portugals
yearly 28000 Slaves. The chief Towns are, 1. Benza, called by the Portugals S.
Savours. 2. S. Pall, lying on the Seashore. It is the principal Haven in these
parts.

Thus much of Ethiopia Exterior.
Egypt.
THis Kingdom is confined on the East, with the Arabian Deserts; those of Bara,
Lybia, and Numidia, West; South, it is divided from Ethiopia by the great
Cataract; and North, with the Egyptian Sea, being part of the Mediterranean. A
Coast dangerous and unhospitable, full of flats, having no Haven but that of
Alexandria, which is by a Desert divided from the rest of the habitable
Country; so that it is neither by Sea nor Land to be invaded, but with much
difficulty. It is said to extend from North to South, 560 miles, and in breadth
from Rosetta to Damietta, 140.

Fertility.
The wonderful fertility of this Soil, is rather to be admired than expressed;
in times past reputed the Granary of the whole World. Amongst other Commodities
which this Earth does yield, and are fetched hence by Foreigners, are Riches.
Sugar, Flax, Rice, all manner of Grain, Linen Cloth, Hides, Salt; Butargio and
Cassia being now the principal.

Nilus.
The fertility of this Country proceeds from the Inundation of Nilus, which
from the 15. of June, overfloweth the Country for the space of 40 days, and
in as many more gathers his waters again; if it flow not the height of 15
Cubits, then is the Earth deficient of her abundance of increase, for want of
moisture; and if above 17, it cannot produce its natural operation: but if the
mean be granted, there is no Country can brag of such abundance; the Corn
being all inned before the first of May: During this Inundation the Cattle lie
on Hills and in the Towns, to which they are driven before hand; as for the
Towns and Villages, they stand all on the tops of Hills; Commerce and
intercourse is not a jot diminished, for Skiffs and like Boats supply the
places of Horses and Camels.

The chief Cities of this Kingdom are, 1. Alexandria, once the Metropolis of
Africa, but now has nothing left her but her ruins, and those ill witnesses
of her perished beauties; only the Walls remain, one within another imbattled,
and garnished with 68 Turrets, rather stately than strong. The buildings as
they are now, are mean and few, erected on the ruins of the former; that part
that lies along the shore inhabited only, the rest desolate; the Walls almost
quadrangular, on each side a Gate; one opens toward Nilus, another regards
Mariotis, a third the Deserts of Bracha, and the fourth the Haven.

Inhabited it is by Moors, Turks, Jews, Christians, Heathens, and Grecians,
more in regard of Merchandise, (for Alexandria is a free Port both for friend
or enemy) than for the convenience of the place, being seated where they have
neither Tillage nor Pasturage. They keep good store of Goats, with ears hanging
to the ground, which feed amongst the ruins. In the Isle of Pharos stands a
Castle, which defends the entrance of the Haven; ten in the hundred is to be
paid for all the Commodities that is there brought a shore, only Moneys pay but
one and a half; whereof they take an exact account, that thereby they may aim
at the value of the returned Commodities, then paying eleven in the hundred
even for such Commodities as are in value unaltered; at so high a rate is this
free Traffic purchased, the Mahumetan paying as much as the Christian; the
Jews pay unto the Bassa for Custom 20000 Maidens a day; but the Traffic of the
Portugal, English, and Dutch hither, is not discontinued, they bringing such
Wares to their several homes by the backside of Africa.

2. Rosetta is another City standing on a branch of the River Nile; the Houses
here are all Brick, flat roofed, as they are generally in those hotter
Countries, for the Moors use much to lie on the tops of their Houses: Raw-hides
are here an excellent Commodity, from hence transported into Italy.

3. Cairo, a City of marvelous strength, seated on the East Side of the River,
at the foot of the Rocky Mountain Muccat; it is in compass about 8 miles: the
Streets narrow, the Houses high, built all of Stone almost to the top; at the
end of each Street is a Gate, making the Streets as defensive as a Castle: The
Houses are more beautified without, than commodious within, being ill
contrived, with cumbersome passages; they are flat, and plastered; above the
wall surmounting the roof commonly of single brick; their Locks and Keys be of
Wood, even to doors that are plated with Iron; their Mosques exceed in
magnificency, of which there are a great number in this City; here are also
diverse goodly Hospitals, both for building, revenue, and attendance; the next
to these in beauty, are the Great Men's Seraglios, by which if a Christian ride,
they pull him from his Ass with indignation and contumely. The Streets are
unpaved, and exceeding dirty after rain, which seldom happens here. In the
heart of the Town stands a spacious Cane, which they call a Besestan, in which
are sold all kind of Wares of the finer sort. Three principal Gates there be in
this City, Beb Anfre, toward the Red Sea; Beb Zueila, leading to Nilus, and the
old Town; and Bebell Futuly, on the North of the City, opening toward the Lake
Esbiky.

This City is inhabited by Moors, Turks, Negroes, Jews, Copties, Greeks, and
Armenians, who are here the poorest, and every where the honestest; most of the
Inhabitants consist of Merchants and Artificers, and though they frequent no
Foreign Marts, yet they have great Commerce with diverse other Nations, for
Silks, Fruits, Wax, and the sovereign Balsamo good for all sorts; besides many
other Commodities of Cotton, Wool, rich Stuffs, of Cloth of Gold and Silver,
and the best Sattins, Damasks, Taffaties, and Grograms, that are in the whole
World: But the main Commodity which comes hither, is brought over-land by
Caravans from Mecha, as precious Stones, Spices, Stuffs of India, Indico, Gums,
Amber, all sorts of Perfumes; our English have but ill utterance for their
Cloths in these hot Countries. Some four miles from this great City stand the
Pyramids surnamed the Worlds Wonder.

The other Cities of note in this Kingdom are, Sues a Haven-Town, standing on
the North end of the Red Sea* Damietta, a Port-Town. There stand also the two
ancient famous Cities of Thebes and Memphis, now known only in their ruins.

On the East Side of Egypt stands the Red Sea, so called of the color of the
Sand. It is fam^ for the passage of the Israelites through it.

Cyrene.
Cyrene, and the Isle Pharos, are reckoned as parts of this Kingdom: Cyrene
has East, Egypt; West, the Kingdom of Tunis; North, the Mediterranean; and
South, the Hill Atlas. In this Country stood the Oracle of Jupiter Ammon,
whither when Alexander traveled he saw for four days space neither Man,
Beast, Bird, Tree, nor River. The chief Cities are Cyrene, Arsinoa, and Baria;
the Soil is barren of water and Fruits; the people are uncivil, and Theftuous.

Isle Pharos.
Pharos is a little Island over against Alexandria, in which for the benefit of
Sailors was built a Watchtower, reckoned one of the seven Wonders of the World.

Revenues.
The Revenue which the Turk receives hence, is three millions yearly, two of
which is distributed to support the charge of his Vicegerent Bashaw, and
presidary Soldiers.

Thus much of Egypt, and the Continent of Africa.
Of America.
AMerica is so called, because Americus Vespusius discovered it. The most usual
name among the Mariners is the Western Indies, because of the West situation;
and India, because by that name they express all wealthy, if remote Regions.

This new World is very plentiful in Spices, Fruits, and such like Creatures
as the old World never knew; burdened with such store of Kine and Bulls, that
the Spaniards have killed thousands of them yearly for their Hides and Tallow;
blessed with such abundance of Gold, that the Spaniards found in their Mines more
Gold than Earth; a Metal which the Americans exchanged for Hammers, Knives,
Axes, and the like tools of Iron.

America is commonly divided by that Isthmus, or neck of narrow passage of Land
at Darien, into two parts: the one called Northern America, or Mexicana; the
other Southern America, or Peruana.

Mexicana.
Provinces.
MExicana contains the Northern Tract, and comprehends the distinct
Provinces of Mexico, Quivira, Nocaragua, Incutan, Florida, Virginia, Norumbega,
Nova Francia, Corterialis, and Estotilandia.

Mexico.
Mexico giving name to half America, is now called Nova Hispania. In this
Country is that excellent Tree called Met, which has forty kinds of Leaves,
which serve for many uses.

Riches.
It abounds with golden-sanded Rivers, and is very much furnished with Gold,
and glories in the Mountain Propochampeche, which is of the same nature as
Aetna and Vesavius.

It has on the East, Incutan; West, Calformio; South, Peruana; the Northern
bounds are unknown. It is divided into four parts:

The first part is Gallicia Nova; the principal Cities whereof are, Xalis,
Guadaliara, New Mexico, Coanum, Compostella, S. Esprit, S. Michael, where is a
Colony of Spaniards; stony it is, and rough, yet yields Mines good plenty.

2. Mechuachan, containing in circuit 80 leagues, is one of the best Countries
in New Spain, abounding in Mulberry-Trees, Silk, Honey, Wax, black Amber. The
Men are tall, strong and active, and some to be of a good wit. The chief Towns
are, Smsoige, Pascuar, Colima, and Valedolit. The chief Havens are St.
Anthonies, and St. James, or St. Jago.

3. Guastachan, which is most poor in the natural Commodity. The chief City is
Tlascalan, the chief City in all these parts next to Mexico. 2. Villeriche, a
Port-Town very wealthy, because all the traffic of old and new Spain do pass
through it. The Spanish have in it two Colonies.

4. Tremistatan, or Mexico; this is the greatest and noblest of all these four:
In it are the Cities of 1. Villarucha. 2. Antithero. 3. Meccioca. 4. Ottopan;
and 5. Mexico, the Seat of an Archbishop, and of the Spanish Viceroy. It is in
compass six miles, and contains 6000 Houses of Spaniards, and 60000 of Indians.
The People are witty and industrious; good hardy craftsmen; and rich Merchants.

Quivira.
Quivira is seated on the most Western part of America, over against Tartary.
It is full of Herbage, and enjoys a temperate Air. The People hereof are
desirous of Glass more than of Gold: the chief Riches of this Country are
their Kine, which to them are both Meat, Drink, and Cloth. Her Provinces are
Cibola, and Nova Albion.

1. Cibola lies on the East Side, and takes its name from the chief City; the
next is Tetontoa.

2. Nova Albion lies on the West toward Tartary. It was discovered by Sr.
Francis Drake, and by him called Nova Albion. The Country is abundant in
fruit; the People are given to hospitality, but withal to Witchcraft, and
adoration of Devils. The chief City is Nova Albion.

Nicaragua.
Nicaragua is South-East from Mexico, with whom it agrees in nature both in
Soil and Inhabitants.

The Country is pleasing to the eye, and abounding in all things necessary: it
is as plentiful in Parrots, as England is of Crows. The chief Cities are, 1.
New Granada. 2. Leo, a Bishops See.

Incutan.
Incutan; this Country of Incutan is 900 miles in circuit, and is a Peninsula:
it is situate over against the Isle Cuba, and is divided into three parts.
Incutan: Cities of greatest worth are, 1. Campechium, Sida Lancum. 2.
Guatimala; whose chief Towns are Guatimala, Cassuca, and Giapa. 3. Acasamill,
vulgarly called Santa Cruza. The chief Town whereof is Santa Cruza.

Florida.
Florida has on the East, Mare del Nort; West, Mexico; North, Nova Francia;
and Sourh, Virginia. This Country abounds in Fruits, and has good quantity
of gold and silver. Emeralds are also found here; and here are Turquoypes and
Pearls. The principal Cities are Arx, Carolina, St. Helens, St. Matthews. Here
are also three strong Ports held by the Spaniard, viz. St. James, St. Phillip,
and St. Austin.

Virginia.
Virginia has on the East, Mar^el Noort; North, Norumbega; South, Floridia;
and West, we know not what limit. It is so fruitful, that two Acres of Land
will return 400 Bushels of Corn. There is said to be rich Veins of Alum,
Pitch, Tar, Rosin, Turpentine, store of Cedar, Grapes, Oil, plenty of sweet
Gums, Dies, Timber Trees, Mines of Iron and Copper, and abundance of Fruit,
Fishes, Beasts, Fowl, and of that Herb or Grain which they call Maize. The
chief Towns are, 1. Requoghton. 2. James-Town. 3. Dalefegilift.

New England.
The Northern part of this Virginia is called New England, full of good Towns
and Forts, and is like to prove the greatest, best, and happiest Plantation of
all this Western Continent.

Norumbega.
Norumbega has on the North, Nova Francia; and South, Virginia; the air is of
a good temper, the soil fruitful, and the people indifferent civil; the chief
Town is called Norumbega, and is possessed by the French.

Nova Francia.
Nova Francia has on the North, Terra Cortelialis; and South, Norumbega; the
earth is barren, the people barbarous: it is inhabited, besides the Natives,
with some few Frenchmen: The chief Towns are Canada, Sangunai, and Hochelagi.

Terra Cortelialis.
Terra Cortelialis, or di Laborodora, has on the North, Estoitland; and South,
the River Canada: the men are barbarous, of color brown, swift of foot; the
chief of their Villages are Breast, Cabo Marzo, and Santa Maria.

Estoitland.
Estoitland has on the South, Terra Cortelialis: the Soil is enriched with
natural endowments; the Inhabitants are endowed with a greater readiness of
wit, and soundness of judgment, than the other Americans. This Province is
called by us English, the New Foundland.

Thus much of Mexicana.
Peruana.
PEruana contains the Southern part of America; it is tied to Mexicana by the
Isthmus or Straight of Darien, being no more than 17 miles broad; others make
it but 12 only: It comprehends Castella Aurea, Guiana, Peru, Brasile, and
Chile.

Castella Aurea.
Castella Aurea, so called for the abundance of Gold, contains the Northern
part of Peruana, and part of the Isthmus: It is admirably stored with Silver,
Spices, Pearls, and Medicinal Herbs; and is divided into four Provinces, (viz.)
Castella del Oro, Nova Andaluzia, Nova Granada, and Cartegana.

Castella del Oro, is situate in the very Isthmus. It is not very populous, by
reason of the unhealthfulness of the air, and the noysomness of the standing
Pools. The chief Cities are, Nombre de Dios, on the East; and Panama, on the
West; through these Towns comes all the Traffic that comes between Spain and
Peru.

Nova Andaluzia has on the North, Castello del Oro; and on the South, Peru.
The best Cities are Toccio, now St. Margarets, and Santa Estritta.

Nova Granada is situate on the South Side of Cartegana. The chief Cities are
Fungia, Tochannum, Popaian, S. Foye, Palma, and Merida. This Country is very
strong, by reason of the situation amongst stony Rocks which environ it. It
yields much Fruit, and has some Mines of Gold and Silver.

Cartegana has a fruitful Soil, in which grows a Tree which if any one
touch, he will hardly escape poisoning. The chief Cities are Cartegana, S.
Martha, and Venzuela, built on a plain Rock, in the waters of a Lake.

Guiana.
Guiana has East and South, the River Maragnon, called also Amazon; and West,
the Mountain of Peru: this Country is the fruitfullest part in all Peruana;
the Inhabitants in Winter dwell in Trees, for fear of Inundations, making on
them many artificial Villages, and ranges of buildings. The like they have in
Brasile, and the Golden Castle. The chief Towns are, Marequito, a safe Harbor;
Winicapora, nigh unto it is reported that there is a Mountain of Crystal;
Manoa, called also Eldorado, the greatest City of America, situate on a Lake of
Salt Water 200 leagues in length; and is by the Spaniards called Eldorado, or
the Gilded City, from the abundance of Gold, both in Coin, I late, Armor, and
other Furniture, which Diego Ordas saw there; the other City of note is S.
Thome.

Peru.
Peru has on the East, the Peruian Mountains; West, Mare Pacificum, or del
Zur; North, Castella Aurea; and South, Chile.

The Soil is luxuriant in all manner of Grain, fortunate in the civility of her
Inhabitants, and salubrity of Air; here is great store of Tobacco. The People
hold opinion, that Men after they are dead and buried, eat, drink, and
wantonnize with Women; and therefore commonly at the death of any, they kill
some of his servants.

This Province above any other in America is abundant in gold and silver; the
Mines whereof in silver; the Mines whereof in diverse places yield more of this
Metal than of Earth: by which abundance, not Spain only, but all Europe, is
stored with more pure and fine Gold, than formerly it was.

The chief Cities of Peru are, 1. St. Michael. 2. Arequipa, seated on the River
Plata, and the Haven-Town to Cusco. 3. Lima, distant about two leagues from the
Sea; the Port that serves it being called Collao. It is an Archbishops See,
and residence of the Peruvian Viceroy. 4. Cusca, the Seat of the ancient Kings
of this Nation. 5. Giacha. 6. Portoneio. 7. Tomobamba, glorying in her fair
Palaces; and 8. Caxemalcha.

Brasile.
Brasile has on the North, Guiana; on the South, Rio de la plate, and Chile;
on the East, the Virginian Ocean; and on the West, the Mountains of Peru,
called the Anadees. These Hills are high, craggy, and very barren; full of
ravenous Beasts, and poisonous Serpents. Here also live a Mountain-People,
being hairy all over, going altogether naked, and live without Houses, or
Bedding.

The Air here is of a healthful temper; the Earth fat, and always
flourishing; great store of Sugars, and wonderful rich Mines, are the sinews
of this Region. Hence comes our red Wood, which we use in dyeing of Clothes,
called Brasile; the Trees of which are of that bigness, that whole Families
live in the Arms of one; every Tree being as populous as many of our Villages:
for which purpose the Cities here are neither many, fair, nor populous, The
chief are S. Anna, Equitum Ascensio, Pernambucco, from whence comes that
Brasile-Wood, which with us is called Fernanbuck-Wood, which they use in dyeing
of red Clothes. The People of this Country have two ill qualities, as being
mindful of injuries, and forgetful of benefits; the Men cruel without
measure, and the Women infinite laseivious.

Chile.
Chile has East, the Virginian Ocean; West, Mare dell Zur; North, Peru; and
South, the Streights of Magellanus. It takes its denomination from the
vehemence of the cold here. The Country toward the mid-land is mountainous,
and unfruitful; toward the shore level, fruitful, and watered with diverse
Rivers. The Spaniards find here good plenty of Gold, abundance of Honey, store
of Cattle, and Wine enough for their own use. The People are very warlike, and
of a Giant-like stature, as being (some of them) 11 foot high. The chief Towns
are Arequipoum, St. James, built by the Spaniard; Cocimbam, Villadives, and the
Imperial.

Thus much of America; and of the Continent of the whole World.
The Islands and Seas.
Having thus discoursed of the Continent, and its particular Kingdoms; I will
say somewhat of the Seas, and the particulars which lie dispersed in them.

First, the Grecian Seas, and Isles in them.

They being dispersed in the Grecian, Cretan, Ionian, Adriatic, Mediterranean,
British, Northern.

And first of such as are about the Coasts of Greece.

Pontus Euxinus.
THis Sea is called also the Black Sea, because of the dark mists thence
arising; or more commonly Mare Maggiore, for its greatness. It is a very
dangerous shore, full of Rocks and Sands; and for this cause there is on the
top of an high Tower, a Lanthorn, in which there is a great Pan full of Pitch,
Rosin, and Tallow, and the like, in dark nights continually burning, to give
warning to Mariners how near they approach the shore of this Sea. The chief
Isles are Thinnus, and Erinthus, little famous. From hence the Sea bending
Southwards, is brought into a narrow bounds, not being fully a mile broad,
called Thracius Bosphorus, site near Thrace, and has no Isle worth naming.

This Straight having continued 26 miles in length, opens it self into the
Propontis, 330 miles in compass, now called Mare di Marmora, from the Island
Marmora, so called for the abundance of Marble there gotten.

The Sea having gathered her waters into a lesser course, is called Hellespont,
or the Sea of the two Castles, the one standing in Europe, and the other in
Asia; Sestos and Ab^dos.
in the same place where once stood Sestos and Abidos, in which the fair Hero
and her beloved Leander dwelt.

Here the Turks search and examine all Ships that pass that way, staying the
Ships three days, to the end if any Slave have run away from his Master, or if
any Thief have stolen any thing, they may in that place be pursued and
apprehended. Here also they receive the Grand Seigniors Customs, and in effect
these two Castles are the principal strength of Constantinople.

Tenedos.
In this Hellespont is the Island Tenedos, an Island not very big, but exceeding
fertile, lying some three miles from the place where Troy stood. It has a City
called Tenedos, having a Castle, and a gallant Haven for all sorts of Vessels.
It produces good store of excellent good Wines.

The much of the Grecian Seas.
The Aegean Sea.
HEllespont of 40 miles compass, expatiateth its waters into the Aegean Sea.
The chief Islands are Samothracia, Lemnos, Lesbos, Chios, Euboea, Soyros,
Salamis, the Sporades, and the Cyclades, or the Isles of the Arches.

Samothracia.
Samothracia; this is a small Isle, and little famous; the chief Town is Samia,
beautified with a goodly Harbor, which now by the Pirates often infesting, is
almost left desolate.

Lemnos.
Lemnos; this Isle contains in circuit 100 miles: Fertility.
The Country is plain and barren, if compared with the adjacent Islands: The
Western part is dry and barren, the Eastern part more fruitful. The chief
Cities of it are Lemnos, or Meryna, yet continuing, though with no great
beauty. It has also 75 Villages, inhabited by the Greeks, except three, which
are fortified by the Turks, who are Lords of this Isle, and call it Stalimene.
This Isle is famous for a kind of Earth dug here, called in Latin Terra
Sigillata.

Chios, or Sio.
Chios, or Sio; this Isle is in compass 100 miles, and famous for the
Medicinable Mastich that grows there on Trees. Fertility.
This Country yields great plenty of Oranges, Lemmons, Apples, Prunes, Pears,
Figgs, Olives, Apricocks, Dates, with Cypres and Mulberry-Trees; and exceeding
good Silk is made here. The chief City is Sio, built by the Genoeses, but now
detained by a strong Garrison of Turks: It contains 100 fire-houses, some
whereof are Greeks, some Genoeses, some Turks, and some Moors; the City it self
is unwalled, yet a populous and spacious place, spread along by the Seaside,
having a goodly Harbor for Ships.

The Women of this City are most beautiful Dames, greatly given to Venery, and
for the most part are exceeding proud and sumptuous in their Apparel; the
Artificers Wives going in their Satin, Taffaty, and some in their Cloth of
Gold and Silver, adorned with precious Stones and Gems; their Husbands are
their Panders, for when they see a Stranger arrive, they will presently ask him
whether he will have a Mistress, and so make Whores of their own Wives.

Lesbos, or Mytelene.
Lesbos, or Mytelene; this Isle is in compass 146 miles; the East parts of it
are level and fruitful, but the West and South parts mountainous and barren;
the chief Cities are Mittilene and Methimnos.

Euboea, or Nigropont.
Euboea, or Nigroponti; this Isle is in circuit 346 miles, and is separated
from the Land of Thessaly by a narrow Channel, over the which in one place
there is a Bridge, that passes between the Isle and the Continent. This Isle
brings forth all things necessary for humane life, and is decored with many
good Villages. The chief Cities of it are Nigropont and Calchos.

Scyros.
Scyros; this Isle is famous for nothing but that it was the Birthplace of
Pyrhus, and the lurking place of Achilles, where in Woman's attire he was
brought up amongst the Kings Daughters, and deemed a Maid, till by getting
Pyrhus on Dedamia, it was proved the contrary.

Salamis.
Salamis; this Isle is near, unto Megaris, famous for the overthrow of Xerxes
Army, by the Athenians, and their Confederates.

Sporades.
Sporades; these Isles called the Sporades are in number twelve; the principal
whereof are Milo, Canaton, Assine; and of these Milo is of most note. It is in
form round, and in circuit 80 miles; the Soil is sufficiently fruitful of
Grain and Oil, deficient only in Wine. Here is good store of Marble curiously
spotted, and store of Millstones: here is also great quantity of Pitch and
Brimstone, and some Sulphury, or hot Springs, good for many diseases.

Cyclades.
The Cyclades, so called because they lie in a circle round about Delos, are in
number 53. They are also called the Isles of the Arches, because they lie in
the Sea called Archipelago. They stand so near together, that in a clear day a
Man may see twenty of them together at one time; for which cause it is a
dangerous place for Sailors in a storm.

The chief of these Cyclades are Delos, Samos, Coos, whose chief Town Coos is
inhabited by Turks, only the Villages by Grecians. Patmos also, where St. John
the Evangelist wrote his Revelation, being confined by Domitian. The Island is
harbourous, but the Country it self is barren.

Gioras is another of the Cyclades: Into this Isle the Romans used to banish
Delinquents.

These Islands lie part in Asia, part in Europe, all in that part of the
Aeigean, which is called the Icarian Sea.

The other Islands lie dispersed about the Greekish, and yield nothing worth
relation.

Thus much of the Grecian Islands.
Creta.
THis Island now known by the name of Candie, has to the North, the Egean Sea;
West, the Ionian Sea; South, the Libique; and East, the Carpathian Sea.

It is of circuit 650 miles. Candia, Canea, Rethimes, and Sittia, are the chief
Cities of it; and in every one of these is a Governor, and two Counselors
sent from Venice every two years. It is divided into four parts, under the
jurisdiction of these four Cities, for the better administration of justice:
and they have a General, who commonly remains in the City of Candie, Note that
since the writing of this Book, Candie is fallen under the Jurisdiction of the
Grand Signior.
which is a large and famous City, situate in a Plain by the Seaside, having a
goodly Haven for Ships, and a fair Arsenall, wherein are 36 Galleys. It is
exceeding strong, and daily guarded with 2000 Soldiers; the Walls in compass
are about three leagues. The Inhabitants are not costly in their apparel; the
Men for the most part wearing but linen Clothes, and use no Shoes, but Boots
of white Leather. The Women imitate the Men, wearing Breeches as they do, and
Boots after the same manner.

The second City is Canea, a City very strong and populous. It has a Castle
containing 97 Palaces, in which the Rector and other Venetian Gentlemen dwell;
there lie in it continually seven Companies of Soldiers, who keep sentinel on
the Walls, and guard the Gates and Marketplaces of the City.

Rethima stands about the midway betwixt Candie and Canea. It is somewhat
ruinous and unwalled; but the Citizens have lately built a strong Fortress, to
keep them from the invasion of Pirates.

Fertility.
The Soil of this Island is very fruitful, especially of Wines, which we call
Muscadels, of which they transport yearly 12000 Butts; together with
Sugar Candy, Gums, Honey, Sugar, Olives, Dates, Apples, Oranges, Lemmons,
Raisins, Mellons, Citrons, Pomegranates; yet it is not a little deficient in
Corn, the most or greatest part of which is brought hither yearly from
Peloponesus. Natures of the People.
The Island in general is very populous, the People being much addicted to envy,
malice, and lying.

The Islands in this Sea of less note are 1. Claudi, mentioned Acts 27. 16. 2.
Dio. 3. Aegilla, of which nothing is famous.

Thus much of the Cretan Islands.
The Ionian Isles.
THe principal Islands of this Sea are Cytherea, the Strophodes, Zacynthus, the
Echinades, Cephalenia, Corcyra, Ithaca, Leucadia.

Cytherea, or Serigo.
Cytherea, or Serigo; this Isle is in compass 60 miles, and about some five
miles distant from Cape malo in Peloponesus. It was formerly called Porphyrus,
from the abundance of Marble, whereof the Mountains yield good plenty: defended
it is by Rocks, in themselves inaccessible. It has but one Castle, which is
kept by a Venetian.

In this Isle is the Village Capsalo, which is a Haven for small Barks.

Strophades
Strophades; these are two Isles, now called Strivalli, lying against Messenia,
famous for nothing but Harpies.

Zant.
Zant; this Island is not above 60 miles in compass, yet is unspeakable
fruitful, producing the best Oil in the World. It has a City of great
strength, bordering along the Seaside, the chief Seat of the Isle: on the top
of a Hill near the Town stands a strong Fortress, wherein the Governor
lives. This City in the Month of October and November is subject to fearful
Earthquakes, which oft-times subverteth the Houses, for which cause they build
them very low. Riches.
It produces good store of Currants, Olives, Pomegranates, Citrons, Oranges,
Lemmons, and Grenadiers.

Natures of the People.
The Islanders are Greeks, a kind of subtle People, and great dissemblers.

The Echinades.
The Echinades are certain little Islands, or rather great Rocks, now called
Curzalari. These Islands are in number five, and are famous for nothing but the
Battle of Lepanto fought nigh them.

Cephalonia.
Cephalonia; this Isle is in circuit 156 miles, and in length 48. It is very
mountainous, yet exceeding fertile, Riches.
yielding Maluasie, Muskadine, Vino Leatico, Raisins, Olives, Figs, Honey, Sweet
Water, Mulberry, Pine, Date, and Cypress-Trees, and all sorts of Fruits in
abundance; the commodity whereof redounds yearly to the Venetian, for they are
Seigniors hereof. The chief Towns of it are Argastuli, Guiscardo, and Nollo.

Corfu; this Isle is in length 52 miles, in breadth 37, and in compass 120. It
is no less strong than beautiful: the Inhabitants are Greeks, and the
Governor a Venetian. The City Corfu is situate at the foot of a Mountain,
whereon are built two Fortresses, and environed with a natural Rock; the one is
called Fortrezza Nova, and the other Fortrezza Vechia. The Governor of these
two Castles are sworn not to communicate, nor to write one to another for the
space of two years, which is the time of their Government; for if these two
Castles were taken, the Trade of the Venetian were of no account. Riches,
This Isle produces good store of Wine, Oil, Wax, Honey, and delicate Fruits.

Ithaca.
Ithaca; this Isle now called Valde Compare, lies North-East of Cephalonia,
being in compass 56 miles, famous for the Birth of Ulysses.

Leucadia.
Leucadia; this Isle (now called St. Maure) is only inhabited by Jews: the
chief City is St. Maure, not long since subject to the Venetian, but of late
lost unto the Turks.

Thus much of the Ionian Isles.
The Adriatic Sea.
THis Sea extends 700 miles in length, and 140 in breadth. The Islands of
this Sea are neither many, great, nor famous. The chief Islands of this Sea are
Lesina, Lissa, and Carzola.

Lesina.
Lesina; this Island of Lesina is the biggest in the Adriatic Sea, and is in
circuit 150 miles. It is exceeding fertile, and yields all things necessary
for the sustenance of Man. The City is unwalled, and of no great quantity; but
they have a strong Fortress, which defends the Town, the Haven, and the
Vessels in the Rhode.

Lissa, or Clissa.
Lissa, or Clissa; this Island is of length 20, and in circuit 60 miles. It is
beautified with two profitable Seaports, and is subject to the Venetian.

Curzola.
Curzola; In this Island the chief Town is Curzola; it has two strong
Fortresses, and is commodious both for the Traffic of Merchandise they have,
and also for the fine Wood that grows there, whereof the Venetians make their
Ships and Galleys; it is in compass 90 miles, being no less pleasant than
profitable, and the most populous of all the rest. The Governor hereof is
changed every 18 months by the States of Venice.

The other Islands in this Sea are Absirtides, Cheros, Wegger, Grissa, and
Arbe, the only Havenless Island of the whole Sea, which defect is recompensed
by its natural pleasantness.

Thus much of the Adriatic Sea,
The Mediterranean Sea.
THis Sea is so called, because it has its course in the middle of the Earth.
The chief Islands of it are Sicilia, Malta, Corsica, Sardinia, and the Baleares.

Sicilia.
THis Island is environed round with the Sea, and has in circuit 700 miles.

Fertility.
The Soil is incredible fruitful, excelling in all sorts of Grain, as Corn,
Wheat, Wine, Sugar, Rice, Oil, Salt, A^um, all kinds of Fruit, and exceeding
good Silk; exquisite Mines of Metal, and the best Coral in the World is found
here. The most of the Towns and Villages within land, are built on the highest
Hills, and greatest heights in the Country, by reason it is a great defense in
the time of Carsary Invasion, and from the salubrity of the air.

There are diverse Grounds (in this Island) and Valleys that abound so in Wheat,
that the Inhabitants recoyle 100 measures for one. In this Country is the Hill
Hibla, famous for Bees and Honey; and the Hill Aetna, which continually sends
forth flames of fire.

Natures of the Inhabitants.
The Inhabitants of this Island are very humane, ingenious, eloquent, and
talkative; pleasant they are, and effeminate, but generally wondrous kind to
Strangers.

The chief Cities of this Island are, 1. Palermo, the Seat of the Viceroy,
situate in the North-West part, over against Sardinia: It is a spacious City,
and well watered with delicate Fountains, having goodly buildings, and large
Streets, whereof Strado reale is principal.

The 2. City is Messina, toward the East; it is impregnable, and graced with a
famous Haven, having three invincible Castles, the chief whereof is St.
Salvator by the Sea side. In this City is held a Fair every year in August,
wherein all sorts of Merchandise are to be sold, especially Raw-Silk in
abundance.

The 3. City is Syracusa, standing in the Southern Coast; a renowned City, and
sometime the Metropolitan Seat.

The 4. City is Trapandy, in the West, over against Biserta in Barbary; it
yields passing fine Salt. The Marine here excels in Ruby and Coral, which
sets half the Town at work, which being refined is dispersed over all
Christendom.

The other Cities of note are Catania, placed at the Marine foot of Mount
Aetna; Nicosia and Emma, two mid-land Towns; Rudazza, Franca Villa, Bronzo, and
Argenti, once Agrigentum, where the Tyrant Phallaris lived.

Malta.
THis Island was formerly called Melita, and is the place where the Viper
leaped on Paul's hand, mentioned Acts 28. 2.

Fertility.
This Isle may properly be termed the Fort of Christendom, yet a barren place,
and of no great bounds, yielding neither Corn nor Wine, which are daily brought
in Barks from Sicilia; yet it yields store of Pomegranates, Citrons, Cottons,
Oranges, Lemmons, Figgs, Mellons, and other excellent Fruits.

This Island is 10 leagues in length, and 3 broad, the Earth whereof being but
3 foot deep, is the cause of its not being so fertile. There are in this Island
60 Villages, and 4 Cities, namely Valletta, the Town and Castle of St. Hermes,
la Insula, and Malta, seated in the midst of the Island upon a Hill, formed
like an Escutcheon; held of no great importance, yet kept by a Garrison. The
Inhabitants are of the African complexion and language, and follow the Romish
Church.

The Soil produces no Grain but Barley; Bread made of it, and Olives, is the
Villagers ordinary Diet; with the Straw they sustain their Cattle; Riches.
Cummin-seed, Annis-seed, and Honey they have in abundance, of which they
Merchandise, and an indifferent quantity of Cotton Wool.

Corsica.
THis Island is situate against Genoa, in the Ligurian Sea: It is in circuit
325 miles. The Soil by reason of the Mountains is less fruitful, producing
Corn in less plenty, but the best Wines; Riches.
it produces also Figs, Raisins, and Honey: it abounds also with Alum,
Box-Trees, and Iron-Mines. The chief Cities are Bastia, seated on the
North-East part of the Country, on a commodious Haven, where the Genoensian
Governor has his residence, and a strong Garrison The other Cities are
Marian, Gallera, and Pila; the principal Havens hereof are St. Florence, in the
Northern part, and St. Boniface, just opposite to it in the South-corner, both
of good safety, and capable of the greatest Vessels that frequent the
Mediterranean.

Sardinia.
Fertility.
THis Island is South from Corsica, and distant from it but 7 miles; it is in
circuit 560 miles, and is abundant in Corn, and well stored with all sorts of
Cattle.

Natures of the People.
The people are small stature, laborious, given to Hunting, indifferent
peaceable among themselves, and in some measure courteous to Strangers. The
principal City is Calliaris, enjoying a goodly Haven, and much frequented by
Merchants, the Seat of the Viceroy, and an Archiepiscopal Sea. The other Towns
are Bossa, S. Raparata, and Aquilastro.

The Baleares.
THese Islands are divided into the greater or lesser, Majorca and Minorca.

Majorca is about 60 miles distant from Spain, and is 300 miles in circuit. The
chief Cities are, 1. Majorca, an University. 2. Palma.

Minorca is distant from Majorca 9 miles, and is 150 miles in circuit; the Soil
is in some places barren, but generally fruitful. The chief Towns are Minorca
and Jana.

Nigh unto these Baleares are two small Islands; the first is called Ebrisa,
distant from the Coast of Spain 50 miles, and is 100 miles in circuit; the
chief City is Yvica; the chief Commodity of it is Salt. Some 10 miles hence is
Olhiusa, 70 miles round.

The lesser Islands that lie dispersed about, are 1. The Vulcanian or Aeolian
Islands, lying on the Coast of Sicilie, and are in number eleven; the chief is
Lipara, 10 miles round, from whence the rest are called the Liparean Islands.
2. Vulcania.

2. The Isles of Naples, which are in number 18. The chief are Ischia, 18 miles
round; the chief Town whereof is Ischia. The second is Caprae; and the third is
Aenaria,

3. The Ligurian Islands; the chief of which are Elba, whose Metropolis is
Cosmopolis. The second Isle of note is Gallinaria.

Thus much of the Mediterranean Isles.
The Isles of the Ocean.
THe chief Islands of it are first those of Zealand and Denmark, which we have
already described; the other undescribed are those in the British and the
Northern Seas.

The British Islands.
They are divided into the Greater, as England, Wales, Scotland, Ireland.
Lesser, as Orcades, Sorlings, Hebrides, Sporades.



Britain.
THis Island of Great Britain is in compass 1836 miles; it is the most famous
Island of the whole World. It is divided into England, Wales, and Scotland,
each differing from other in Language, Manners, and Customs.

England.
ENgland is bounded on the East, with the German Ocean; South, with the British
Ocean; West, with the Irish; and North, with the River Twede, and a line drawn
from it to the Solway Westward.

Division.
It is divided into 39 Shires, wherein are many fair Cities and Towns: the chief
whereof are, 1. London, the Seat of the Britains Empire, and the Chamber of the
Kings of England It is in compass about 8 miles: the little City Westminster,
of old more than a mile distant, is now by fair buildings joined to London, and
is famous for the Church, (wherein the Kings and Nobles have stately
Sepulchers) and for the Courts of Justice at Westminster Hall, where the
Parliaments are extraordinarily held, and ordinarily the Chancery, and
King's Bench; also it has the Kings stately Palace called Whitehall; to which
is joined the Park and House of St. James. The City of London has the
sumptuous Church of St. Paul, beautified with rich Sepulchers; and the Burse,
or Exchange, a stately house built for the meeting of Merchants; a very
sumptuous and wonderful Bridge, built over the Thames; many fair and stately
Palaces, whereof great part lie scattered in unfrequented places.

2. York, the second City in England, and the Seat of an Archbishop.

3. Bristol, a famous City standing on the Sea; it is encompassed with a double
Wall, and has so fair buildings both public and private, as next to London
and York it may be preferred before any City in England.

4. Norwich; this City d^serves to be numbered among the chief of England, for
the riches, populousness, be^uty of the Houses, and the fair buildings of the
Churches.

5. Coventry, a large, fair, and walled City, and at this day is the fairest
City within Land.

There are besides these, diverse fair Cities in this Kingdom, as Canterbury,
the Seat of an Archbishop; Exeter, a Bishops See; Salisbury, a fine City, and
pleasantly seated, and is beautified with a Cathedral Church, and the College
of the Dean and Prebends; also the two Cities of Oxford and Cambridge,
containing in them the two famousest Universities in Christendom.

Riches.
The Riches of this Kingdom consists in the unexhaustible Mines of Tinn, Lead,
Copper, Iron, and Coals; most delicate Cloths are woven here, which are
transported into Germany, Poland, Denmark, Swedeland, Italy, Turkey, and the
Indies, where they are in high request; yea infinite quantity of Beer is
transported hence into Belgium, as also Pelts-Hydes, Tallow, and Sea-coal.

This Island is never without the resort of Portugal, Spanish, French, Flemish,
and Easterling Merchants.

Fertility.
The Soil is very fruitful and plentiful, yielding store of provision for the
Inhabitants, both of Corn, Wild-fowl, Fish, and Flesh. For Wine this Land
affords none, but has it transported hither from Spain, France, and the
Canaries.

Natures of the People.
The people are for the most part tall of stature, fair of complexion, and of
their disposition courteous, much resembling the Italian in habit and
pronunciation.

The Women are most amiable and beautiful, and attired in most comely fashion.

Wales.
Wales is bounded on all sides with the Sea, except on the East, where it is
separated from England by the River Dee, and a line drawn to the River Wie.

Division.
This Country is divided into 13 Shires, wherein are some fair Cities, but
diverse great Towns. The chief Cities are, 1. Caerdiff, where there is a
commodious Haven. 2. Caermaden, where Merlin was born, begot by an Incubus,
whom the common People took to be a most famous Prophet. 3. Caernarvan, a
walled City, and has a fair Castle, built by Edward the First, wherein his Son
Edward the Second was born. Here in the County of Pembroke is Milford-Haven,
than which Europe has not a more noble, or more safe, or more large, with many
Creeks, and safe Roads.

Fertility.
The Soil of this Country, especially that which joyneth toward the Sea, is
most fertile both for Man and Beast; but for the major part it is more barren,
and less fruitful.

Natures of the People.
The Men are of a faithful carriage, one especially toward another in a
strange Country, and to Strangers in their own. They are of a temper much
inclining to Choler, being quickly moved, and soon appeased, being of all
angers the best and noblest.

Scotland.
SCotland is the Northern part of Great Britain, and separated from England by
the River Tweede, and Solway, and the Hills extending from the one to the
other. It is in length 480 miles, but of small breadth, no place being distant
from the Sea above 60 miles.

Division.
This Country is divided into 25 Shires; the Cities and Towns whereof are
neither fair nor many: the chief of those that are, are 1. Edinburgh, once the
Seat of the Kings of Scotland, and the place wherein the Seat and Courts of
Justice were held. It is seated in a fruitful Soil, and wholesome Air, having
many Noblemens Houses lying about it, and abounds with many Springs, and sweet
Waters. The Buildings are of unpolished Stone, but the Galleries of Timber,
built upon the fronts of the Houses, do rather obscure than adorn them. The
City consists especially of one broad and f^ir Street, which is in length from
East to West about a mile, and is the sole ornament thereof; the rest of the
Streets and Allies being of very poor Building, and inhabited with very poor
People. At the end toward the East is the Kings Palace, joining to the
Monastery of the Holy Cross; and at the other end toward the West is a Castle,
which the Scots hold to be inexpugnable.

2. Leith is about a mile distant, and is a most commodious Haven, upon the
narrow Scottish Gulf, vulgarly called Edenburgh-Frith.

3. S. Andrews, seated in Fife, and well known as an University and Seat of an
Archbishop, and Metropolitan of all Scotland.

4. Glascow, the Seat of an Archbishop, and a little University.

5. Striveling also is a little City, where the King has a strong Castle, upon
the brow of a steep Rock.

In general, their Towns and Cities for number, building, or pleasantness, are
not comparable to those in England; neither are their Gentlemen's or Noblemens
Houses so frequent, or so stately built, as the better sort of the English. For
their Villages, they are of Clay, covered with Straw, being much more frequent
than in England, yet not so commodious within. Among the Kings Palaces, that of
Edinburgh and Sterling for building, and Fawlkland for pleasure of hunting, are
chief.

Fertility.
On the West Side of this Country are many Woods, Mountains, and Lakes; on the
East Side toward the Sea it is fruitful in Corn, especially in Barley and
Oats. It abounds in Fish, and has plenty of Cattle, yet not so big as ours;
their Horses are little, but full of spirit, and patient of labor.

Natures of the People.
The People in general are much given to Venery: those that inhabit the South,
are the best, and civillest, and speak the English Language; but those in the
Northern part are savage and uncivil, termed Silvesters.

About Scotland in the Irish Ocean are above 40 Islands, termed Merania and
Hebrides: the biggest of these in length exceeds not 30 miles, and in breadth
not above 12; the chief whereof is Pomonia, well known by the Episcopal Seat,
and yielding both Tin and Lead.

Thus much of Great Britain.
Ireland.
THis famous Island in the Virginian Sea is by the English at this day called
Ireland, and by the Irish Bardes at this day Banno. It stands between the
Greater Britain and Spain; being dis-joyn^d on the East from England by a
tempestuous Sea, termed Hiberniam, not above one days sailing; upon the West
beats the vast Ocean; upon the North it has an Island, disjoined no further
than a Ship may sail in one day; and on the South it beholds Spain, not
distant above three days sailing.

Division.
It contains in length 400, and in breadth 200 miles; and is divided into five
parts, (viz.) Mounster, which is sub-divided into six Counties: Lemster,
divided into ten Counties: Mead, divided into two Counties: Connaght divided
into four Counties: and Vlster, divided into ten Counties.

The chief Cities of this Country are, 1. Dublin, standing within the Province
of Lemster, and in the County Dublin: it is by the English called Divelin. It
is the chief City of this Country, and Seat of justice, fairly built, and
frequently inhabited, and adorned with a strong Castle, 15 Churches, an
Episcopal Seat, and a fair College, and endowed with many Privileges.

The Houses of this City, as also of the City Waterford, are for the most part
of timber, clay and Plaster; yet are the Streets beautiful, and the Houses
commodious within.

2. Armach; it is the Seat of an Archbishop, and the Metropolitan City of the
whole Island.

3. Tredagh; a fair and well inhabited Town.

The fourth City is Cork, consisting almost of one long Street, but well known
and frequented. The Houses of this City, as of Galloway and Limrick, two other
Cities, are of unwrought Freestone, or Flint, or unpolished Stones, built some
two Stories high, and covered with Tiles.

Natures of the People.
The People of this Country are generally strong, and nimble of Body; haughty
of heart; careless of their lives; patient of cold and hunger; implacable in
enmity; constant in love; light of belief; and greedy of glory. In a word, if
they be bad, you shall hardly find worse; and if good, you shall no where find
better.

Fertility.
The Soil in general is sufficiently fruitful, but through the idleness of the
Inhabitants it is made barren. Amongst other rarieties of this Island this is
one, that it breeds no venomous thing; neither will any brought from other
Regions live here.

Thus much of Ireland.
The lesser Islands are, Orcades, Sorlings, Hebrides, Sporades.

The Orcades.
THese Isles are in number 32, and are situate against the most Northern part
of Scotland; Pomonia.
the chief of which is Pomonia, whose prime Town is Kirkwall, honored with a
Bishops Seat, and strengthened with two Castles. This Island is well stored
with Tin and Lead, and is by the Inhabitants at this day called Mamland.

Hethy.
Hethy; the second Island of note is Hethy. The People of this Island are great
drinkers, but no drunkards: they use the Gothish Language, which they derive
from the Norwegians, in whose possession they once were, and of whose qualities
they yet retain some smack.

The Hebrides.
THese Islands are situate on the West Side of Scotland, and are some 44 in
number; Ila.
the chief of which are, 1. Ila, 44 miles long, and 16 broad; plentiful in
Wheat, and Cattle, and herds of red Deer.

Iona.
The second is Iona, famous for the Sepulchers of the Scottish Kings; whose
chief Town is Sodore.

Mula.
The third is Mula, which is 25 miles bigger than the other. The People both in
language and behavior resemble the wild Irish, and are called Red-Shanks.

The Sorlinges.
THese Islands called by the English Silly, are situate over against the
Western Cape of Cornwall, from which they are distant 24 miles. They are in
number 145, of which ten only are of estimation, viz. Armath, Agues, Sampson,
Silly, Bresar, Rusco, S. Helens, S. Martins, Arthur, and S. Mary's, the chief
of all the rest, as being 8 miles in compass, sufficiently fruitful, and
strengthened with a Castle called Stella Maria. These Islands are well stored
with Grass, Grain, and Lead.

The Sporades.
THe chief of these Islands are Man, Anglesey, Jarsie, Gernsey, and Wight.

Man.
Man; this Isle is situate just over against the Southern part of Cumberland,
from which it is distant 25 miles: it is in length 30, and in breadth 15 miles.

The People hate theft and begging: they use a Language mixed of the Norwegian
and Irish Tongues.

The Soil is abundant in Flax, Hemp, Oats, Barley and Wheat, with which they
use to supply the defects of Scotland.

The chief Towns are Balacuri and Russin, or Castle-Town, the Seat of a Bishop.

J^sie.
Jarsie; this Island of Jarsie is in compass 20 miles, and contains 12 Towns or
Villages; the chief being S. Hillary, and S. Malo.

The ground is plentiful in Grain and Sheep, most of them having four Horns,
of whose Wool our true Jarsie Stockings are made.

Anglesey.
Anglesey; this Island is in length 20 miles, and in breadth 17, containing in
former times 360 Towns and Villages; of which the chief are Beumaish Newberg
and Abersraw.

This Island is abundantly fertile in all things necessary to preserve the life
of Man.

Gernsey.
Gernsey is distant 20 miles from Jarsey, to whom it is far inferior in
respect of fertility and largness, but more commodious because of her safe
harbors: it contains ten Parishes; the chief being St. Peter's. The People use
the French Tongue, and in their Ecclesiastical Discipline follow the Church of
Geneva.

Wight.
Wight; this Isle is severed from Hampshire by a little, narrow, and dangerous
Straight of the Sea: it contains 20 miles in length, and 12 in breadth. The
Soil is fruitful; the Sheep bear delicate fine Wool, and the Trees store of
Fruit. Here are two Parks and one Forest; as also 36 Towns and Villages, the
principal being Newport, Yarmouth, and Brading. The Island is very strong,
especially toward France; it is fortified with three Castles, in one of which
is Armor for 5000 Men.

There are diverse other Islands, as Demry, Londay, and Chaldey, in the Severn
Sea; Thanett and Sheppy, near Kent; and Holyfarne and Cockat, on the Confines
of Northumberland.

Thus much of the British Islands.
The Northern Islands.
THe principal Islands dispersed in this Sea are Groaenland, Island, Freezland,
Nova Zemla, and Sr. Hugh Willobyes Island.

Groaenland.
Groaenland; this Island is situate under the Northern cold Zone; the longest
day in Summer being three months and a half: it is in length more than 600
miles: The chief Towns are S. Thome and Alba. In this Island the Londoners have
met with a good trade of Fishing.

Island.
Island is about 400 miles in length, and a damnable cold Country.

The People hereof use dried Fish instead of Bread; their best Commodity is
their Fish, which they exchange with foreign Merchants for other things.

The Island Ling is famous over all Europe: the chief Towns are Hall^ and
Schsh^lten. This Island is the Hill Hecklefort, vomiting flames of fire like
Etna in Sicilie.

Freezland; the only riches of this Island is their Fish, for which Commodity
it is never without the Ships of Flemmings, Danes, Scots, Hansmen, and English,
much frequented by the last. It is almost as big as Ireland, and subject to the
King of Denmark.

Nova Zemla.
Nova Zemla; this Island lies on the North of Muscovy and Lapland, and is
famous for nothing but the Pigmies, which are here supposed to inhabit.

Sr. H. W. Island.
Sr. Hugh Willougbies Island is so called, because he first discovered it, and
because he was thereabouts frozen to death.

Thus much of the Northern, and of the European Islands.
The Oriental Islands.
THe Islands of Asia are either in the Mediterranean Sea, as Rhodes and Cyprus,
or in the Oriental Ocean, as Japan, Zeilan, Moliccoes, Java Major, and Minor,
Summatra, Burneo, and the Philippine.

Japan.
This Island on the East is situate over against China, Natures of the People.
of whose nature and qualities the Inhabitants do some what participate: It is
in length 200 leagues, and in breadth in some places 30 in others not above 10.
It is divided into 66 Shires or petty Kingdoms.

Fertility.
The Soil is not very fruitful subject to much Snow, but the air is very
wholesome, and the Bowels of the Earth enriched with diverse Metals

^n this Island are two high Mountains, one of which casts forth Flames, on
the top whereof the Devil uses to show himself in a bright Cloud, to them that
by long fasting have prepared themselves for the sight. The other called
Figeniaris is by some leagues higher than the Cloud. The chief Cities are Meaco
and Bandum an University*

This Island is said to be frequented by the Jesuits of whom 200 is said to
live here.

Z^ylon.
Zelon; this famous Isle is not far distant from the point of India called Cape
Comrein; It is in form resembling an Egg, Fertility,
and for fertility may be compared to any Country in the whole Universe; It
abounds in Odoriferous Aromatical Spices, with whole Woods of the best Cynamon,
that ^ver the Sun saw, besides fruits, Oranges, Lemmons, surmounting those of
Spane, also here are found the best Smargads, Rubies, and Amber-Greese through
Asia.

Natures of tha^ People
The Inhabitants are egregious Panyms, they hold that on the high Peak (called
by the Europeins) Columbo, Adam was there created, and lived there and hither
do their Pilgrims resort apace, where on the top of a high mount is
conspicuously set the Idea of a horrible Caco Demon, is invelloped with a
Cloud of Arms and sedulously looked unto.

The Moluccoes.
The Moluccoes are usually reckoned 5. but many other Islands are subject to
them, the chief whereof is the King of Ternate, who is said to have had 70
Islands under his subjection, none of these Islands are above 6 leagues in
compass, Riches.
enriched with Cloves, but of other fruits-barren and poor; in Ternante is an
exceeding high Hill which lifts his head above the Airy Regions of the Clouds,
and and seems to conjoyn with the fiery Elements; it casts out continually
bright Flames mixed with a dark smoke.

The Inhabitants.
The Moluccoes are better proportioned than any other Indians, Brown of color
and mean of Stature, and for Valor they have not their like in India,
especially those of Ternante choosing rather to dye than flee.

Amboya is a fertile Island producing Orenges, Citrons, Lemmons, Cloves,
Coquos, Bonanus, Sugercanes, and other fruits being a very fertile Island, the
Inhabitants are simple, live sparingly, and attired like other the Moluccans.

Banta is distant from Amboya some 24 Dutch miles, and comprehend about 5
miles, the chief City is Nera which is chief not only of Banda but of the
Moluccoes: In this Island are more store of Nutmegs than elsewhere in the
Moluccoes, for which cause they resort hither from Java, China, and Mallaca.

Java Major.
Java is an Isle both great and famous, judged to stand in the Gulf of
Bengala; In it are many Kings most of which are tributary to the Emperor,
entitled Mataran, it is oval in form, and in circuit not much inferior to
England, Riches.
abounds with sort of Aromatique Spices of which store, Pepper is the best and
most feasible Merchandise.

I^habitants.
The Inhabitants are for the most part Mahomitans, their color is black, so is
their Actions; they are dismal, strong, impatient, and subtle, strong limmed,
and excellent Swimmers

Their chief Cities are Fortam, Sarrabaia, Tuban, Matura, but Bantam is of most
Traffic frequented by Portugals, Dutch, and English, in which every day are
three several Markets, here Merchants when they come may buy a Woman for their
fleshly and worldly business, which at their departure they sell again.

The King of Turban is the richest King and mightyest in all Java. They have
many Horses of which they make great account, they deck them with furniture of
Gold, Silver and the counterfeits of Dragons and Devils on their Saddles, they
ride and manage them with great skill. North from Java is Madara a fertile
Island of Rice, Arosbay is their chief City, the people are theevish and given
to spoil, they captived some of the Hollanders that went thither on Shore to
buy Commodities. Here in these parts they have Bats as big as Hens which the
people roast and eat. Also near Java is the Isle of Baly, abounding in Bulls,
Buffols, Goats, Swine, with many kind of Fowls, Fruits and Metals. Here the
Women are burned with their dead Husbands.

Burneo.
Burneo; In this Island they are partly Moors, and partly Gentiles: they
worship the Sun and Moon, whom they think to be Man and Wife, and the Stars
their Children: they salute the Sun at his rising, and handle all their public
affairs in the night.

In it they have two Kings, and two Royal Cities situate in Salt Water.

Sumatra.
Sumatra; this Island by some is esteemed the greatest of the Eastern Islands,
stretching almost 700 miles in length, and 200 in breadth. The Air is not very
wholesome, by reason of its situation under the Line.

Riches.
The Inhabitants feed on Rice, Millet, Sagu, and Fruits. Their Riches are
Pepper, Ginger, Cassia, Silk, Benioyn, Gold, Tin, and Iron.

This Island is divided into several Kingdoms; the chief whereof is ^cheen, who
as he precedes the rest in state, riches, and power, so is he foremost in
tyranny.

In the Mountains of Sumatra live Man-Eaters, which use the Skuls of their
eaten enemies instead of money, exchanging the same for their necessaries. The
Attendants of this King are for the most part Women, who are expert at their
weapons, using both Pieces and Swords.

Phillippinas.
Phillipinas; these Islands are many in number, and some of them are very rich
in Rice, Honey, Fruits, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Gold; enriched further with
trade from China. 70 of these Islands are Subjects of friends to the Spaniard.

The Spaniards have here a Bishop and Archdeacon, and besides other religious
Men, as Augustinians and Franciscans, they have seven Colleges of Jesuits.
Inh^bitants.
The People worship the Devil, who oft-times appears to them in conference in
most ugly shape.

There is amongst them an Island of Negroes, inhabited with black People,
almost as big as England. Here are also those black People called Os Paupas,
Man-eaters, and Sorcerers, among whom Devils walk familiarly; and if these
wicked spirits find one alone, they kill him, wherefore they use always to
have company.

Before I leave these Eastern Islands, I will give you a short survey of those
Towns and Castles which the Spaniard has got into his possession, not only in
these Islands, but also on the Continent. And 1. In Cambaia they have the Towns
of Tana, Basa, and Daman; as also the Island of Di^. 2. In Decan or Canora they
have Chaul, and Goa, the Spanish Viceroy's residence. 3. In Mallavar they have
Chalen and Colan, two places of good strength. 4 In Zeilan they have fortified
Columbus, bragging of one of the best Havens in the World 5. In Siam they are
Lords of Mallaca, and the adjoining Castle. And last of all, to secure their
Spice-trade in the Moluccoes, they enjoy Terenante: yet for all these
Fortresses the English and Hollander will not be hindered from traffic with
these Indies.

Thus much of the Oriental Islands.
Cyprus.
THis Island is of length 200, large 60, and in circuit 600 miles.

Fertility.
This Island yields infinite Canes of Sugar, Cotton-Wool, Honey, Oil, Corn,
Turpentine, Alum, Verdegrease, Grogram, store of Metals, and Salt, besides all
sorts of Fruits and Commodities in abundance.

This Isle lies in the Gulf between and Syria; having Egypt to the West; Syria
to the South; Cilicia to the East; and Pamphillia North.

Natures of the People.
The Inhabitants are generally strong; nimble; of great civility; hospitality to
their Neighbors; and exceeding affectionate to Strangers.

The principal Cities of this Isle are, 1. Nicosia, environed with Mountains,
wherein the Beglerbeg remains. It is circular in form, and five miles in
circumference; the Buildings are low, flat-rooft; the entrance little, for the
most part ascending by stairs, for the more difficulty in entering.

2. Famagusta, the chief strength and Seaport in it. It is seated in a Plain
between two Promontories, in form well nigh quadrangular, indifferently strong,
and containing two miles in circumference; it stands almost opposite to
Trippoly.

Selina, Melisso, Paphos, Fontana, and Morosa, are the other four special Towns
in this Island.

The greatest imperfection of this Isle is scarcity of Water, and too much
plenty of scorching heat, and sabulous ground.

Thus much of Cyprus.
Rhodes.
RHodes is situate in the Carpatian Sea over against Caria a Province of lesser
Asia, it is in circuit 120 miles and takes denomination from Rhodes the chief
City, which is situate on the East part of the Isle on the bottom of a Hill and
the brink of Sea, so that it injoyeth a fair and safe Haven for Commodities and
for strength, it has two Walls, 13 high Towers, five Bulwarks, besides diverse
sconces and outworks. It is Inhabited only by Turks and Jews; the Christians
having free Commerce and Traffic in it all the day time, but on pain of death
leaving it at night.

West of Rhodes lies Scarpanto an Island of 70 miles compass.

Thus much of Rhodes and the Islands of Asia.
The Affrican Isles.
These are In the Aethiopick Sea as Madagasker. Zocotora.
In the Atlantic Sea as S. Thomas. The Princes Isles The Gorgades. The
Canaries, Azores and Hesperides



Madagascar.
THis Isle is by the Portugal denominated St. Lawrence. It is one of the
greatest in the Universe, extending in length 1000 English miles; the breadth
in some places being 230 miles. The best known Bay is that of Augustine, where
our Ships ride.

Natures of the People.
The Inhabitants are exceeding black, and have limbs of great strength and
composure. Both Sex go naked, only a linen Cloth about their middles: they use
pinking and cutting their Breasts and Faces: Gold and Silver is of no value
amongst them, but the Beads of Aggats, Bracelets, Glasses, Bells, and such
like, they esteem well of. They have Cattle both great, many, and good, and for
a Bead or two of two pence price, you may buy Sheep and Beeves of good bigness
and taste. The Sheep here have their Tails weighing 16 or 20 pound.

Riches.
The Isle abounds in all good things necessary for Man's use, as Copper, Gold,
Iron and Silver.

Their Towns of note are Roma Augustine, Santo Jacobo, Matatana, Angoda, and
Herendo.

Socotora.
Socotora; this Isle lies just at the entrance of the Red Sea, and in length
60, and in breadth 24 miles. Riches.
It is rich in Aloes, Gums and Spices; yet it wants most things convenient for
vital sustenance.

Inhabitants.
The Inhabitants are tall of stature, and ashy color. ^he Portugals have here
fortified two Towns, Coro, and Benin.

S. Thomas.
S. Thomas; this Isle is in compass 180 miles, and is so fruitful in Sugar,
that forty Ships are laden with it every year. The prime City is Pavoason, an
Episcopal See, inhabited by Portugals and Negroes.

The Princes Island.
The Princes Island; this Island lies nigh unto the Isle of S. Helen, and are
both under the Command of the Spaniard.

The Gorgads.
The Gorgads; these Islands are in number nine, and are called Insulae Capitis
viridis: they all do abound with Goats; the chief of them is St. James, whose
chief Town is Riberia, at this time fortified by the Spaniard.

The Canary Islands.
The Canary Islands; these Islands in former ages called Fortunate, are in
number seven, (viz.) Grand Canaria, La Palma, Teneriffa, Lancaerota, Hierro, La
Gomera, and Forte Ventura; they are now subject to the King of Spain.

Grand Canary precedes the rest in greatness and excellency, for thither all
the other Isles repair for trials, and justice: Teneriffa is thought to equal
it in wealth and circuit. This Island is the highest Land in the World, being
15 miles high. This Isle is distant from the Grand Canary 60 English miles.

Azores.
Azores; these Islands are in number nine, of which Tercera is chief. They are
abounding in no rich Commodity, only they afford much Oad, which has made them
most famous, and best enriched them. The names of the other eight Islands are S
George, S. Michael, S. Mary, Fayall, Pyco, Gratiosa, Flores, and Corno.

Hesperyds.
Hesperyds; these Islands are situate not far from the Gorgades. These Islands
are supposed to be they where the Daughters of Atlas dwelt, where grew the
golden Apples, kept by a Dragon, and taken hence by Hercules: and here was
supposed to be the abode of the blessed Creatures, said to be called the
Elysian Fields, so often memorized by the Poets. These Islands are called Mayo,
Sal, and Bonanista; they are distant from the Continent of Africa some 10000
furlongs.

Thus much of the African Isles.
The American Islands.
THe American Isles are either in the Virginia Sea, as Mare del Nort; or in the
Pacifick Sea, as Mare del Zur.

The Islands in the Pacifick Ocean are, 1. Insulae Solomonis, which are in
number many, the three greatest being Guadalcanal, S. Thome, and S. Isabel. The
Islanders are of a yellowish color, and go naked.

The Islands of the Virginian Ocean.
ARe Margarica Cubagna, the Baccaloes, Boriquen, Jamaica, Cuba, Bermude and
Hispaniola.

Margarica Cubagna.
Margarica Cubagna; these two Islands are situate nigh unto Castella Aurea:
they are deficient in Corn, Grass, Trees, Water, but they abound in precious
Stones, which make some amends for these defects. Nigh unto these is the Island
Trinadado, well stored with Tobacco of the best.

Boluccoes.
Boluccoes; these are certain Islands lying against the Influx of Canada, nigh
unto Corterialis. The People of these Islands in a formal expression of
reverence use to rub their Noses, or stroke their Foreheads.

Boriquen.
Boriquen, or St. John's, is 300 miles long, and 70 broad, traversed with a
rough Mountain, which yields many Rivers. The Spaniards have there some Towns;
the chief whereof are St John's, and Port Rico.

Jamaica.
Jamaica is almost as large as Boriquen: it is extremely troubled with such
terrible gusts of Wind, that nothing can resist them, turning up Trees, and
over-turning Houses, transporting Ships from Sea to Land with a terrible
confusion. The Inhabitants here are of quicker wits than the other Islands.

Ciba.
Ciba; this Island is more Northerly, and extends it self 300 leagues in
length, and 20 in breadth, full of Mountains, Woods, ^ens, Rivers, Lakes both
salt and fresh: the Woods are replenished with Swine and Kine; the Rivers with
golden Sands; and the Soil is replenished with Ginger, Cassia, Mastick, Aloes,
Cynamon, Sugar. The chief Cities are S. Jago, a Bishops See; and Hanana, a safe
road for Ships, and the Staple of Merchandise. Here rides the King of Spain's
Navy, till time of year and convenience of wind serve to waft them homeward.
The other Towns of note are S. Christophero, and S. Trinity. Not far hence are
the Lucacy, above 400 in number.

Hispaniola.
Hispaniola is Eastward from Cuba: it is called by the natives Haiti; it
contains in compass 550 leagues, enjoying a temperate Air, and fertile Soil,
rich in Mines, Amber, and Sugar. This Island has many high and craggy Hills,
over-looking the deep and dark Valleys; but in many places it is most
beautiful and flourishing. It seems to enjoy a perpetual Spring, the Trees
always flourishing, and the Meadows clothed in green. The chief Towns are
Dominigo, S. Jago, S. Thome, S John, and Portoroyo.

Thus much of the American Islands.
And also of all the Islands throughout the whole Universe.
Certain Precepts and Observations for those that do intend to TRAVEL.
Let him that intends to travel, observe these Precepts.
IN the first place let him solicit God daily for his protection, and let all
his actions take beginning in him; let him omit no day wherein he offers not up
his Orisons to God, for his gracious protection in his intended purposes: let
him be sure to observe this well, to keep constant to his God, and he shall
find him to be a special friend in his greatest extremity.

2. Let him have a special care before he go, to leave a careful ^riend at
home, that will keep credit with the Merchant that furnishes him with money
abroad, lest his Friend's ill payments at home drive him to wants abroad: and
for an ordinary expense to one that will live moderately, some 50 or 60 l.
sterling will serve to defray a Travelers Diet, and necessary Apparel.

3. For his outward Necessaries, which are Clothes, Books, and Money, let him
carry no more with him than necessity requires. For his Apparel, let him not
charge himself with overmuch luggage; and let him be sure in what Country
soever he comes, (unless he will make himself ridiculous) that his Clothes be
in fashion. For his Books let them be few or none, especially such as are
prohibited, lest upon suspicion he be searched, (as they are at every Gate in
Italy) be may bring himself into danger: Also for the more caution, let the
Notes of his Observations be taken in Ciphers or Characters; but provided that
he be always ready to give a fained interpretation. And for his money, let him
carry no more with him than will defray his charge unto the next place he is to
have his Bill paid; and let him be wary he show not any quantity at any time
about him, since Thieves have commonly their Spies in all Innes, to enquire
after the conditions of Passengers.

4. Let him also before he go, learn some knowledge in the Art of Cosmography,
for if he be ignorant of that, he will not know where he is, nor which foot to
set forward: And also if he desire to learn the Language of each Kingdom, (that
is in most use in his own Country) let him resort to those places where the
best Language is spoken; those are, Leipzich in Germany, Orleance in France,
and Florence in Italy.

5. For his Observations, when he comes into each Kingdom, let him observe the
fruitfulness of each Country, the Commodity and rarity wherewith each Country
abounds and is adorned: Let him observe the policy of each State, and therein
the Courts of each King or Prince, with the Courtiers, Entertainments, Offices
and Fees: Let him also observe the traffic of Merchandise, and the Commodity
they carry out, and most want, with their Havens, Roads for Ships, and the
value of Coin in each Country, and the several current Pieces.

Likewise in the observation of any City, if the Traveller may without
suspicion, let him climb up one of the highest Steeples, where having taken
the situation of the City, he may at his coming to his Inn, draw the form of
it.

6. Let the Traveller take these Precepts along with him: If he intend a
journey to any place, let him take the seasonablest time of the year, and
fittest time to travel, which is Spring and Autumn; and he shall do well to go
to cold Climes in Summer, and hot Climes in Winter: And if the journey he takes
be long, let him not acquaint, no not his Companions nor Friends in his
journey, the furthest end thereof, but rather from City to City, and profess he
intends to go no further; and instead of a Companion, let him have always such
Books as may fitly accord with his travels, which he may carry without danger.

Let him also when he comes to any City, enquire for the best Inn, especially
in Germany, and also at right in Italy, for he may take a short Dinner at any
Inn in Italy, so he lodge safe at night. In all Innes, especially in suspected
places, let him bolt or lock his Chamber Door; let him take heed of his
Chamberfellow; and let him have always his Sword by his side, or his Bedside;
let him lay his Purse under his Pillow, but always folded with Garters, or
something he first uses in the morning.

7. Before he takes any journey, if it be in the morning, let him eat a small
Breakfast, that ill smells may not offend him; and let him dine sparingly, lest
his after-noons motion hinder his digestion; but let him sup freely. The season
of the year and nature of the Clime is to be respected in Diet; in cold Regions
let him take hot comfortable things; and in Summer and hot Regions, let him
take such things as will cool the Blood; it is dangerous to drink when his Body
is heated, unless he first make water and wash his mouth; and when he is
heated, let him not suddenly expose himself to cold. In the Inn let him have a
care to dry his Feet or his Neck if he be wet^; and it is not amiss if he has
the skill.

7. Likewise I advise a Traveller to be so wary wherever he comes, not to
venture on any new thing, till the example of another give him confidence. Let
him reprove nothing in another Man's House, much less in a Commonwealth; in
which kind it is not amiss to seem dumb, or tonguety'd, so he diligently employ
his Eyes and Ears to observe all profitable things. Let him be courteous to
all, especially to his Host, the Children, and his fellow-so journers in the
House; but in all actions let baseness be shunned, and decency embraced: If he
apply himself to the custom of those amongst whom he lives, he shall gain
their loves. And as he ought to be humble with decency, and without baseness,
so in Germany he shall do well to seem, though not to be proud, where they will
take a Man to be of base condition, if he be too courteous and officious.

8. And as a Traveller ought to have a slow tongue, and his mind locked up, so
let him have a clear and cheerful countenance; let him speak sparingly, and
seldom speak of his own Commonwealth, or private Estate, or good qualities; and
let him take this for a general Rule, that nothing does more preserve a
Traveller out of dangers, or sooner deliver him in danger, than a moderate and
discreet use of his tongue; let him shun a talkative companion, or not seem to
hear their questions; let him not enquire after the secrets of Religion, nor
desire to be present at those Rites. Also I advise a Traveller to avoid all
combats or single Duels, especially in Italy; but if it be so that he must
needs adventure his Body, let him provide means beforehand how to escape after
victory.

9. To conclude, these things are very requisite in a Traveller; the Eye of a
Hawk, (to see afar off) the Ears of an Ass, (to hear the least whispering) the
Face of an Ape, (to be ready to laugh in soothing) the Mouth of a Hog, (to eat
whatever is set before him) the Back of a Camel, (to bear burdens patiently)
the Leg of a Heart, (to fly from all dangers) and a full Purse, to defray all
charges liberally.

FINIS.
Books Printed for William Leak at the Crown in Fleet Street, between the two
Temple-Gates.
BOoks written by the Reverend Father in God, William Lord Bishop of Gloucester.
EKTHESIS PISTEOS; or an Exposition of the Apostles Creed, delivered in several
Sermons, folio; price Bound 16 s. David's Harp strung and tuned; or an Analysis
of the Book of Psalms, cast into such a method, that the sum of every Psalm
may be quickly collected and remembered; with a devout Prayer and Meditation at
the end of every Psalm, folio; price Bound 14 s. An Apology in defense of the
Church of England, in Answer to the Admonitory Letter, quarto; price bound 5 s.
Books in Folio.
The Union of Honor, containing the Arms of the Nobility of England; with the
Arms of the Lincolnshire Gentlemen, By James York; price Bound 12 s. An Exact
Abridgement of the Records in the Tower of London, from the Reign of King
Edward the Second unto King Richard the Third, of all the Parliaments in each
Kings Reign, and the several Acts in each Parliament; together with the Names
of the Peers summoned to the said Parliaments. Collected by Sir Robert Cotton;
Revised and Enlarged by William Prynne of Lincolns-Inne, Esquire price Bound 20 s.
A Commentary or Exposition upon the divine second Epistle general, written by
the blessed Apostle St. Peter. By Thomas Adams; price Bound 30 s.
Books in Quarto.
A Bible of a very large fair Roman Letter. Man become Guilty; or the
corruption of nature by sin: Written originally in French by John Francis
Senault; translated into English by Henry Earl of Monmouth; price Bound 5 s.
The Reading of the famous and learned Gentleman Robert Callis Esquire Sergeant at
Law on the Statute of Sewers, price Bound 4 s. The Result of false Principles;
or Error convicted by its own evidence. By Lawrence Womack D. D. price Bound 3
s. Paris and Vienna, an excellent Romance; price Bound 2 s. Skene de
significatione verborum, a Treatise of Scotch Laws; price Bound 2 s. The Posing
of the Eight Parts of Speech; price Stitcht 1 s Elements of Laws of England By
my Lord Bacon; price Bound 2 s.
Plays.
The Maids Tragedy. Philaster. A King and no King. All three by Francis
Beaumont and John Fletcher; each price 1 s. Othello, the Moor of Venice. The
Merchant of Venice. These two by William Shakespeare; each price 1 s. The
Wedding. The Grateful Servant. These two by James Shirley; each price 1 s. The
Hollander; price 1 s. The strange Discovery; price 1 s.
Octavo's.
Nye's Gunnery and Fireworks, the second Edition; price Bound 2 s. 6 d. Le
Prince de Amor; or the Prince of Love; with a Collection of several choice
Songs and Poems; price Bound 1 s. 6 d. The making use and description of an
Horizontal Dial. Composed by de la Main, Student in the Mathematics; price
Bound 3 s. The Vision of Theodorus Verax. By Bryce Blair; price Bound 1 s. 6 d.
Lazarillo de Tormes; or the History of the witty Spaniard. Translated out of
Spanish, price Bound 1 s 6 d. The Fort-Royal of the holy Scriptures; or a new
Concordance of the chief heads of Scripture commonplaced; the third Edition. By
J. H. price Bound 2 s. 6 d. Corderius Dialogues. Grammatically translated by
John Brinsley; price Bound 2 s Meteors; or a plain description of all kind of
Meteors, as well fiery and aerie, as watery and earthy. By William Fulke D. D.
price Bound 1 s. Mel Helliconium; or Poetical Honey. By Alexander Ross; price
Bound 1 s. 6 d A Tragedy written by Hugo Grotius, called Christus patiens;
Englished by George Sands; price Bound 1 s. 6 d. The Rights of the People
concerning Impositions. Stated in a learned Argument by a late eminent Judge of
this Nation; price Bound 1 s. Trotman's Abridgement of my Lord Cooks Reports;
price Bound 4 s. 6 d.
Books in 12o.
Cato Major; or the Book of old Age, with Annotations. By William Austin Esquire
price Bound 1 s. Flamma sine Fumo; or Poems without Fictions. By Rowland
Watkins; price Bound 1 s. The Mount of Olives; or solitary Devotions; with an
excellent Discourse of the blessed Estate of Man in Glory. By the Reverend
Father Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury; price Bound ^ s. 6 d. A Guide for
Constables, Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, Surveyors of the Highways,
and c. showing the extent of their Offices; the second Edition. Collected by
George Meriton; price Bound 1 s. 6 d.

