THE Wandering Lover. A TRAGY-COMEDIE. BEING Acted several times privately at
sundry places by the Author and his friends with great applause. Written by T.
M. Gent.

Quic quid amor jussit, non est continmere tutum, Regnat and in Superios, I. C.
Ovidius. (...)

LONDON, Printed by T. L. for T. C. and W. Burden, and are to be sold in
Cannon-street near London-stone, 1658.

TO The Ingenuous, Judicious, and the much honored Gentleman, Fran. Wright,
Esquire.
SIR,
My intentions wandering upon the limits of vain cogitations, was at the last
arrived at the prospicious brinks of an Anglicis of performance; where seeing
Diana and Venus in a martial combat, and such rare achievements performed by
so two ininimate Goddesses, did lend to the aspect of their angelical eyes my
self to be the sole spectator of their foregoing valor; where then their
purpose was to choose me their Arbitrator; the which I perceiving, did with a
mild complexion (knowing my self impotent) relent backwards, thinking thereby
to lose less credit, and gain more honor, to set pen to paper, and to relate
some certain and harmless Dialogues that while I was present betwixt them past,
which is this Poem; And having now composed it, did then take care upon whose
shoulder to father this my abortive infant: So then examining the Storehouse
of my friends, after some silent search did find no splendour of friendship to
be more orient in my eyes then yours, unto whose favor I commit this my poor
Elf, it being the first (as yet) I presented to any, though not the first I
writ; for certain it is I writ two Books of the same nature, viz. The Several
Affairs, a Comedy; and The Chaste Virgin, a Romance; but they have been my
pocket companions, and but shown to some private friends: So desisiring your
candid acceptance, which if it not find it will carp the Blossom of my youth;
but if it do, it will encourage me to perform that work I now have in hand,
which may deserve better your acceptance, and accumilate joy upon him; who is

Sir, Yours inseperably, T. M.

To his much deserving friend M. T. M. on his excellent Comedy entitled, The
Wandering Lover.
This pen of mine it should be dipped,
Having my tongue with Muses tipped,
Or my dull fancy in a font,
Made more clear then Hellespont,
Amongst the rest that I might raise,
Setting a monument of thy praise.
More is thy worth then I can frame,
Except beyond my bounds I strain,
Ripping the valley of my wit
In aiming at that I's never hit.
Try I will, weather swim or sink;
O why should I thus vainly think!
No man is able with pen or ink.
R: B:

Dramatus Personae.
HERMON, An old Gentleman. EUPHRATES, His Son. THROPHEUS, A Merchant. MEDEA,
His Daughter. FERCOR, His Factor. POMP, A Student. PERCO, BREMON, LERMO,
Three Courtiers of Thessaly. PUDD, Euphrates man. CRECEA, Medea's Maid. NESTO,
Friend to Thropheus. DROSANUS, Friend to Euphrates, GRECEANA, Euphrates
Mistress. A Boy and Ladies.
The Prologue.
MOst silent audience to you I speak,
The Author bids you welcome, and does you greet
With this his harmless Poem, not full out
Six months old, or penned into a book;
The wandering Lover is the name of this,
You must expect no great tologies,
Nor Nectors Drum, nor no Ambrosian phrase,
He once does show, or out of it does raise,
But Mother-like tongue plainly writ and spoke,
As in pursuit you will find it in his Book;
The Storie's good to pass the gentle ^ime
With Love-conceits that run in easy rhyme,
Of most bold Perco, with his martial browe,
And mild Euphrates wound with Cupid's bow;
How they do differ, and how matchless be
In their affections, neither does agree:
But why should I thus trifle time away?
For it is full season that our Comic Play
Should be now acted in our solemn doom;
Lo here the Player's come, and I will give in room.
THE WANDERING LOVER
ACT. I.
SCAEN. I.
HERMON, EVPHRATES. Her. THE cause of that strange and unexpected Accident,
Euphrates?


Eup. Your Ingenuitie best knows Sir.


Her. No, no, I pray thee relate it to me.


Eup. I am no Orator, muchless no Hudorigrapher;


Her. Why, I Am sure Perco would offer you no abuse; he looks not as if Mars
were seated in his Brows, or Dame Envy in his innocent Breast, or Fury to be
the overswayer of his amoricious will; pray thee, the reason?


Eup. Many words umbrage dissimulation: Father, I beseech your patience. Oh my
dear Grievance! for why, even for thy sake my soul does die.


Her. Fie, fie, Son, extirpate those fond Flames, and illuring Contemplations
out of memory; for it is a thing neither decent, beseeming, nor comely for
such a noble spirit as yours, muchlesse these are not times for Love-Fancies;
why, she is dead, there is no recalling of her; and why should you now wrap
yourself in the Robes of Coffeehouse? Time may put a Period to my years,
where are you then? in a Lake of Misery.


Eup. If she be dead and here me left,
Of life mortal ^he has bereft
Me; and I wish I had run the race,
That I might her sweet Corpse embrace.
But here I swear by Mars Divine,
That ere before the Sun does shine,
Or trace about the Zodiac round,
Stretches his hand.
This hand shall great Perco confound.

Her. Be not so obstinate, there is in the world as beautiful as she.


E^p. But not so virtuous.


Her. Yes, virtuous too.

The tallest Cedar that ever grew, there was some to parallel it both in hight
and straightness.


Eup. I shall desire your pardon at the present Father, for being thus absurd
to leave you, which I am forced by some indispotion of my Body, and return to
my Chamber,

Where with divine and sacred contemplation
Pass the time as in a recreation
Of bright Greciana Idea, until be past
Those careless hours that do run so fast.
Farewell Father.

Exit Euphrates Her. Farewell Son; I wish some good event come often.


Exit Thropheus. ACT. I.
SCAEN. II.
Thropheus, Fercor, Neslo. Thr. FERCOR!


Fer. Sir.


Thr. Where be those Bills of Exchange that came yesterday? let them be drawn.


Fer. They are in your Closet Sir, amongst the rest that came from Spain.


Thr. What! you only stay for a happy Gale; you have all things ready for the
Voyage.


Fer. All, sir.


Enter Neslo. Nesl. Oh happy friend! well met once at home.


Thr. Oh Neslo! once more in the prospect of these mortal eyes of mine: What
News? What News?


Nesl. News that does even terrify me with the most vigorous strength of
sorrow that could have happened.


Thr. What is it?


Nesl. The Lady Greceana this last night stolen away by two insolent fellows,
and by a third, one more wittier, but wickeder; I may term him in knavery
conducted and conveyed to the Thessalian Court, which as we all know, are open
Enemies to us Germans.


Thr. It Is true.


Fer. Know you their Names?


Nesl. Perco, Bremon, and Lermo; oh wretched Villains that dor'st attempt such
an inhumane thing! Hark, the people utter horrid rumors within; let us in and
see.


Fer. We attend you.


Exeunt omnes. ACT. I.
SCAEN. III.
Perco, Bremon, Lermo. Per. WAS it not rarely accomplished*


Ler. I by the Heavens it was; it was always my saying, If once we evinced
that Atlantic brazen Gate, it were as sure as Venus committed Adultery with
Mars.


Brem. I must ingenuouslie confess it was an Herculian task for us, having so
many stratagems, so many Bolts and Locks, and at last being environed with a
most energetical Bulwark, and that fortified with a most strong Moat to
overcome, but by your acute wit Mr. Lermo, the which I must needs commend.


Ler. Sir, my wit is but shallow in comparison of your strength; but it has
been accustomed rathert to choose Ulysses then Poleph^mus, sic parcis componere
magna solebani.


Per. Com^, come friends, it is too tedious; let us not dispute upon that
subject now, but treat upon the facetious spirits of Venus; even now I h^ve an
innumerable Chymaeras entering my turbulent brain, what we shall do with this
Angelical and Goddesse-like Dame; well, I Will go fetch her into the Court; my
eyes have a longing desire to glance upon her delicious Physiogmonie.


Exit Perco. Bre. Go prosperously, and return happily. It was reported (and I
am very confident you very well know) that Euphrates (a man of good fortune and
noble parts) was a great Suitor of this Lady, the flame of which love I fear is
still kindled in her Breast, and not easy to be quenched.


Ler. I do remember it; but time, place, and distance, with some other
intricates, may work another effect, and cause her to bury his former love in
the grave of Oblivion, and not to imbalm it up for a perpetual egrimonie to her
mind; and I hope that old Proverb will prove true, Out of sight, out of mind.


Exeunt. ACT. I.
SCAEN. IV.
Medea, Crecea, Pud. Crece. BE not so coy Madam, Time --


Med. What of Time?


Crece. Nothing but Time.


Med. Speak, prithee speak, what means thou by this hidden talk?


Crece. Hidden talk Madam? you may term it hidden talk, or what you please; but
if you would lived to my years, and had so much experience as I have had in --


Med. Thou art a pretty piece of Mortality indeed; if I Would had so much
experience as thou'st had; in what I pray thee, thou pattern of deformity?


Crece. Madam, I say as I did before, time may alter, witness Sybilla.


Med. What of her?


Crece. Nothing Madam, but she was a fair goddess, but she being coy and
squemish, cast off Phoebus in his glory; and afterward she thinking the May
of her days, and fresh colors would always continue, and time and fortune
could not wear out, not imagining that white and red should once return to
black and yellow; Juniper, the longer it grew, the crookeder it waxt; so she
with age that had no blemish in her face, had wrinckles without number, and all
that knew her shunned her company.


Med. Believe me, a learned speech!


Enter Pud Pud. Madam, I beseech you give me leave to speak a word or two to
your Ladyship.


Med. What insolent audacious Idiot's that? Know him Crecia?


Crece. It is Euphrates man, Madam.


Mad. Euphrates man! what makes he here? ask'im his business, and send him away.


Crece. My Lady desires your business.


Pud. I am come of an Errand from Mr. Fercor, to tell your Lady that he is
going Factor into the Streights for her Father, desiring to take his leave,
because he has some private business with her, and he will wait upon her at
three in the Afternoon.


Exit Pudd. Med. What Is the fellows business?


Crece. He Is come from Mr. Fercor your Fathers Factor, that is going to the
Streights, and he will wait upon you this Afternoon upon business, and then
take his leave.


Med. What business should he have with me my Fathers man? it is true, he was
always a proud fellow, it may be it is for some fancy or other to wear; well,
if he come I Will see him.


Crece. I shall obey your command.


Enter Boy, and goes out again presently. Boy. Madam, my Master desires your
company to Dinner.


Med. Tell my Father I will wait upon him presently. Come Crecea, let us walk
in.


Crece. I am ready to attend your Ladyship.


Exeunt. ACT. I.
SCAEN. V.
Euphrats, e Drosanus, Pudd, Pomp. Eup. SIR, you have much honored me with
your company, and I clearlie discern the power of your affections, where your
welcome cannot be equalled to my desire, much less to your deserts.


Dre. The occasion of my coming was for no other respects but those due unto
your merits, whom I honor and am ready to serve.


Eup. You owe me no service; but I am ready to embrace your friendship, noble
sir, and friend, since it has been my happy fate thus fortunately to light
into your company; as true it is, Necessity hathno Law, so it has no shame;
for contrary to my disposition I must become an importunate suitor to you.


Dro. Sir, name it, no sooner ask't but granted.


Eup. Your kind reply shall imbolden me to declare what I was intended to
have concealed: only this it is, Whether or no those three Vagabonds were the
atrocious Actors in that same dismal Tragedy, in conducting Greceana to the
Thessalian Court?


Dros. Worthy friend, I shall venture as far upon the brinks of liberty as I
can pass without mendation or fabulating unto you; for this I can affirm for a
truth both by prospect, and likewise by a most pensive report, That Percor was
one Malefactor in that same illitable Enterprise, in exhausting the only
Diadem and splendent Luster of Chaste Virgins to that place of deprived
Liberty.


Eup. For answering me this querie in one respect, for uttering the utmost of
your knowledge therein, has linked me to you with the chain of everlasting
Amity; and contrary, has pined me up with the bolt of terrissitie from you,
for hearing of such penetrating and poisonous sentence;

But this I am resolved before,
Those splendent eyes I see no more:
To trace throughout Thessalia round,
And search out that even unknown ground
For invaluable precious Gemme
In all the judgments of vain men,
And fetch her home by day or Night
By frost, or some vile cunning slight.

Dros. If such an Anglicis has took once possession in your undaunted and
well-known Manhood, I shall not be him that withstands it; but this I would
have you take in consideration of your Judicial Policy, the grave Counsel of
that famous Student in all Arts and Sciences, ANTONV S POMP.


Eup. Him dear friend I have sent for.


Dros. In my best apprehension, you in that have done discreetlie.


Eup. It Is three hours since I sent a Letter by my man, which I wonder I hear
no News, it may be he is not at home, and he stays to bring him along with him,
therefore I will wait with patience. But stay, here he comes.


Enter Pudd. Pud. Sir, I have delivered the Letter.


Eup. Delivered the Letter! to whom you Rascal? did I send you in have, and you
have loitered all this time?


Pud. Sir, I stayed to bring him with me, because the contents of your Letter
as I heard said, required speed; therefore he was come half the way, staid to
talk with two Gentlemen, and said he would wait upon you presently.


Eup. In this thou have satisfied me in some respect: But noble friend
Drosamus, I trespass too much upon your patience.


Dros. No sir, I take it for an honor that I am able to serve you in any thing.


Eup. Your love sir is more then I deserve.


Dros. Your desert is more then I am able to require; but stay, who comes here?
it should be Pomp by's gaite; it is him.


Eup. Then his counsel I Will in this matter; and so I go inspight of Fate or
Fortune.


Pud. And so I too in spite of the -- Devil and his -- Monky.


Enter POMP. Pom. Are you one Mr. Euphrates?


Eup. I am the man, sir.


Pom. From you I had a Letter this day by a man, whose tenor I very well
understand, and have pondered on it a seasonable time, and likewise my
Judgment is as follows:

First, Sir, I am compelled by duty to praise your fidelity in the warlike
attempt of Venus; and notwithstanding, your Martial Animoscity in the civil
Combat of Mars; if you be resolved, as I hereby understand, I would advise you
(by the reason they know you) to attire your self in women's Apparel, taking
another Sociate with you, and you may by Arts and Fortune accomplish your
desires.


Eup. I shall do herein my endeavor, and Metamorphise my self with smiling
looks.


Pom. Then go prosperously.


Exit Pomp Pud. And I with him sir, you wish.


Eup. By your many savours and kind replies the mind of your servant is
impleated with so much advantage, as to crave your company in this same dismal
undertaking.


Dros. Sir, I accompany you with helexitie.


Eup. My Father must not know of it; so attend me tomorrow morning betwixt four
and five, at the back Window in the Garden, and you shall find me ready to
take shipping in the Lion.


Dros. Your will shall be fulfilled.


(Exeunt E. D. manet Pudd.) Pud. And what, must I be left behind? marry
godamercie, I believe you will miss your -- before you return; he does not
mind me, nor I will not mind him afterward; and if any one ask me whose man I
am, I can tell thee I am mine own Master now; but I Will be sure first before I
say so, I Will go see him safe.


Exit Pudd. ACT. II.
SCAEN. I.
Lermo, Bremon, Perco, Greceana, Ladies. Ler. WHat, here is no man yet in
prospect; what prodigies have happened by the way? sure something must be the
cause, but what is, uncertain.


Bre. In the Court not long since there were some debates by men of
superiority in warlike Achievements, of which the rumor did pass amongst
the vulgar and commons, as then I did lend an attentive ear, That a Lady of an
unknown birth was to be enjoyed by the encounter of two Knights.


Ler. Not the Lady Greceana!


Bre. Time will divulge it.

But now yonder I perceive the happy sight of long-wish'd for friends; the
Lady's well I hope.


Enter Perco, Greceana, and two Ladies. Per. Very well, she advancing nigh.


Grecea. On unhappie Girl, thus to be rape away by Wolves, Bears, (what shall
I term them?) in man's shape, and by most illitable resolutions!

First begot in vain Conversation, and then brought up by cruelty, the unhappy
Nurse in their infidelious hearts, and conducted here to a pensive Habitation,
which afford^ no pleasure to the eye, but objects of misery; none to the ear,
but self-undoing, outcryes: Oh Euphrates, where art thou? in what cavern of
despair?


Ladies. Madam, why so melancholic?


Greece. Oh that these innocent hands were wreathed about thy ever-flourishing
Breast! then might I sit down and crown my self with contentation; but until
then, what fate and unhappie fortune recommends to a desolate Virgin.


Lad. 2. Sir, will it please you to receive your Enterprise into company?


Per. Madam, remember your self, here behold as great virtue, but far greater
Braverie; and I speak to you without fabulating, and you may believe me, you in
Germany have only mere shrines of love, and wise gods, but we their persons,
and likewise their Virtues; and what can be recorded that has been found out
by Arts and Sciences, but the nobleness of a Courtier has found out by
practice? I should term them most seemless and void of reason that think to
gather more Fruit then Leaves, or see more at the Candle snuff then at the Sun
beams; what may't please you answer, is not all this true?


Ler. Bre. All true, all true.


Greece. Sir, Your speech is good, but not aptly placed in my disposition;
there is one thing yet draws my mind, even as the Lodestone draws to it Iron
away, when you think me most attentive; for why Gentlemen, I must confess it is
far more difficulter for me to glance any pleasing look, or shape a state of
dissembling, than to utter the truth and realitie of the matter.


Ler. Why Madam, was ever that frail cogitation cast into your memory, as once
to imagine that us Courtiers can feign our selves otherwise then we are? my
meaning is, to dissemble.


Bre. Lo Mr. Lermon, this may be recorded, Qui niscit dis^imulare, nes^it
regnare.


Gre. Sir, my meaning will be concealed; for I desire the Place of my
disconsolation, wherein I may take my turbulent repast.


Ladies. Madam, we attend you.


Per. And we also.


Exeunt omnes. ACT. II.
SCAEN. II.
Hermon. Thropheus, Pudd. Through. SIR, your saying is very aptly located, and I
wish it may come to an effect.


Her. Sir, if once the flames of bright Greceana's love not once take place,
nor in his breast there move their ever-flashing Furies, or so cruel betwixt
Diana and Venus, there to keep a duel, our matter may be effected, and with
speed we might perceive brave Greceana dead, and only there virtuous Medea rest
in his most true and ever faithful Breast:

Even at that prospect with my head then bare,
And hand lift up, gave everlasting prayer.
To the immortal Gods, great Mars and Jove,
For his unfeigned and unmatched Love.

Through. Well! but Mr. Hermon, this, I am possessed with much temerousness, that
her love is so radicated in his contemplation, that it is like that famous and
unparaleld Stone A^beston, found in Arabia, of iron color, which being once
made hot, can hardly or never be quenched; but send for him; if he be willing,
my Daughter shall not resist.


Her. I will fulfill your pleasure.

Who attends there? where is your Master?


Enter Pudd. Pud. He Is gone to the Lion, Sir.


Her. What, to drink his Mornings-draught?


Through. The Ship sir, that set out for Thessalia this day, the name of it was
Lion.


Pud. I sir, that is the thing he is gone to.


Her. Oh what, and how much terror has overwhelmed the faculties of my soul!
how my breast pants! how I sweat at the tenor of this Sentence!


Through. Why?


Her. There Is reason enough; but no more at present.


Through. Explain it to me I pray.


Her. At your request I Will do what fond fancy will give leave, and ease my
mind of this heavy burden; by vulgar report the Lady Greceana is gone to
Thessaly, and my fear is, my Son has undertaken that unhappie voyage in
pursuit after her.


Pud. Let fancies flee, I Will bring you more news afterward, that would vex
every vein in your heart if I should get that old man's Daughter;


Exit Pudd. Through. What mine? away fond slave, away. Let Us in, and see more for
certain.


Her. Lead the way.


Exeunt ACT. II.
SCAEN. III.
Medea, Crecea, Fercor. Med. GOod God! did I think a man so void of reason, or
had so little sense? What fond Chymaera's has imbibe'd into his besotted
brain? He told me he loved me; it may be so, am I then forced to love again? No
certainly, there is no such Obligations in Venus Court: But why should I thus
contemplate upon this rash Doteard! fly from me like my dullest breath, for he
is gone whom I did love: Oh Euphrates, Euphrates! why so cruel, when thou art
loved not to love again? But if I should sum up all the sighs that thou have
cost me, I should loath the nomination and thought of such a man; but it is thy
feature I look at, thou knowst' not my grief, though I perceive the vigor of
it; but I must be contented; Crecea where art thou?


Crece. At a call Madam; what is your pleasure?


Med. I have no pleasure in this age; pleasure flies from me, and grief returns
in their place, and does remain.


Crece. Why Madam, what sad news have you received? it is all for a man.


Med. No, not for that.


Crece. I fear it much.


Med. You may persuade your self to contraries; what was it then you think
Fercor came about?


Crece. Believe me I know not; why that's not it made you so sad I hope.


Med. No, nor light neither.


Crece. You are so catching.


Med. But I shall take some time to let thee know it.


Crece. I then attend.


Med. He told me he loved me.


Crece. Ha, ha, ha, what is the man mad? sure he is not right.


Med. He was in earnest, but I returned him presently an answer, and set him
going.


Crece. But would he be said, Madam?


Med. Faith with much ado; but pleased or not, I care, I hope he is gone ere
this, and committed himself to the brackish and merciless waves, where Neptune
is overswayer with his Iron Mace; Enter Fercor.
See the unhappy prospect of my foe! say I am not within.


Exit Medea. Crece. Mr. Fercor, I thought you had been tossed ere this with
turbulent waves.


Fer. Tossed I am, with waves I am not: Where Is your Mistress?


Crece. Is that your business? she is not at home.


Fer. I do not desire your company then.


Crece. Marry come up here; I Am gone sir.


Exit Crecea. Fer. Just Heaven, what will she be so cruel to her servant! I
must aba^e the pride of that fierce humor, and my resentment of it shall make
her see that Lovers must be treated in another fashion; but these scorns I Will
turn into her shame; and Euphrates whom she thinks her own already, shall as
even fail her hopes as she has mine, when a more worthy Object shall change
his mind, and his disdain of her, shall revenge hers of me.


Manes Fercor. ACT. II.
SCAEN. IV.
Thropheus, Fercor, Pudd. Through. TIME and Tide stays for no man; shake off
these panick fears; though it be boystrous at your entrance, yet you may land
with an happy Gale.


Fer. It Is not the waves that works upon my nature, or the fierce rumor of
their horrid noise, nor the tossing of the Ship in the Ocean that can work any
distemper, or search out any desolate vacant Cavern in my illatable body, in
which it may accumulate daunting and disparting fancies; but it is a certain
faculty, more strong and vigorous in its operation, which may aptly be compared
to Dedalus and his waxen Wings, the higher it surmounts, the more it does me
melt.


Pud. But this is nothing to the business concerning my particular, for this is
as fit for love as a Pudding for a Dogs mouth.


Through. You have propounded a mystery to me, Fercor, beyond the Element of my
capacity and climate, in which I walk not; a task too high for me to look; but
if your intention be continued to the promise you formerly made, here is one
who being desolate of a place, would undergo the elaborate Science of
Navigation.


Fer. Sir, my promise is firm, and I intend to fulfill it: is this him that
would learn?


Through. This is the man: I shall leave you to your selves, for time and duty
calls me hence.


Exit Thropheus. Fer. Sir, if you think it convenient to go to sea, and see the
hidden mysteries in the Ocean, I shall fulfill your mind


Pud. I would go if it were but to see my Master, but I would not be drowned,
ones clothes will be so wet when he is taken up; but pray you tell me
seriously, How often have thou been drowned?


Fer. Thou art a fool sure, sees not me yet alive?


Pud. Oh Gentlemen! be they dead that be drowned? I thought they had put on
fishes skins, and walked upon the sands, and kept the fishes company; it were a
thing to be marvelled at, that a little cold, cold water should kill a man of
reason as I am, and not a senseless Gudgin.


Fer. Thou art wise from the crown of the head upwards; if thou goes with me,
I Will make thee understand the Card and the seven Stars.


Pud. How to play at Cards Sir!


Fer. I tell thee, the Sea-Card, and the thirty two Points.


Pud. I can play at one and thirty.

But I have not many points about my Breeches.


Fer. Thou art very dull; but will thou learn?


Pud. I, begin with the Points first, for they are most in fashion,


Fer. North, North and by East, North, North-East, North-East and by North,
North-east, North-east and by East, East, North-East, East and by North, East.


Pud. I Will now say it after you; North-East, North no more by the East, but by
the West side, that is on my right hand, and by North.


Fer. Thou art void of reason, have thou no memory?


Pud. I Will say again, North by North, which should stand in the place of East;
I Am out of it again I dare say.


Fer. And so dare I too; but farewell, I perceive thou art an idiot, and so I
take my leave, for neither time nor tide will permit me any longer to stay.


Pud. Good boy, good boy, I had rather be hanged where I may leap for my life,
then drowned where no body sees me.


Exeunt. ACT. III.
SCAEN: I.
Euphrates in women's Apparel, Drosanus. Eup. EVPHRATES! Oh miserable Euphrates!
how can thou frame thy affections according to thy habit, who was wont to
exercise thy self, and to take only delight in atchieving rare Exploits, riding
a Tilt-Horse, and now confined within the protection of a Petticoat; certainly
Drosanus, I shall never manage it with dexterity, but instead of making a
Coursie I shall make a Leg.


Dros. Though it has been your daily practice to be employed in Martial
Affairs, yet for a certain season you may metamorphose your self as Galathea
and fair Philli^ did in the year of offering sacrifice unto Neptune, who were
compelled by their indulgent Fathers for their safeguard; follow this practice
to enjoy the Trophies of your Victory.


Eup. As power does lie in me, so shall I do my duty: stay, yonder comes Perco
my ordained Enemy, he knows not me, let us stand aside.


Euphrates and Drosanus stand aside, and Perco enters. Perco. Per. How now!
what strange conceit! what new contraries have thou given place to enter into
thy mind! have thou turned the dilicious pastimes of Diana to the lascivious
sports of Venus; thy ever-wished for chastity to wanton looks* thy conquering
arm to captive imaginations of Love? Do thou begin that strange creature
Pyralis, to dye in the air and to live in the fire; to leave the sweet delights
of the Court, to follow the hot desires of Love? (Oh Perco!) these are not
words becoming a man of thy animosity; but for thy affections being a Lover,
can Cupids Brands quench Desta's Fire? or his feeble Shaft, headed with
Feathers, give a wound more emedicable then Viana's Arrows, headed with steel?
Oh Greceana! because thou art fair, must I be fickle? and falsify my Vow
because I see thy virtue? fond man that I am to think of Love! nay, vain
passion that I follow, to disdain Love! But here comes Bremon, Lermo, and the
luster of the day, Greceana; I must vale my Physiognomie with a Vermilion
blush, lest they perceive the Alablaster hew in my face, and laugh.


Eup. Do you perceive? he is in love with her.


Dro. I, very well: But let us know the event of it.


Manet. ACT. III.
SCAEN. II.
Bremon, Lermo, Greceana, Perco, Euphrates, Drosanus. Ler. Sweet Lady, can you
love?


Gre. Withdraw my Lord; can such a thing as Love be once named here, where
every Marble that supports this place in Aemulation does spend tear^ with us;
nay, where the wound of such a mighty Lovers, a Euphrates, has not in my frail
breast bled their last.


Ler. Tush rare Greceana, these sighs and panique fears that seem to Ladies
terrible, are common to every Soldier, when from field returning, all
besmeared in blood, where Dukes and Kings lie slain; yet in their Tents at
midnight it frights not them from courting a sweet Mistress.


Bre. He says the right; and note of this how I can po^^ise?


This his great Father of his Love desired,
When from the slaughter of his foes retired,
He doft his Cushes, and unarmed his head*
To tumble with her on a soft dry Bed.
It did rejoice Briscis to embrace
His bruised Arms, and kiss his bloode-staind face;
Those hands which he so often did imbrew
In blood of warlike Trojans whom he slew,
Were then employed to tickle, touch and feel,
And shake a Lance that had no print of Steel.
Perco. Hear me one word good friends; I rue that ever I did undertake that
matter in conducting that piece of Deformity away; for she is neither wise,
beautiful, nor constant, I Will prove it Bremon; Four Elements meet in the
structure of that Greceana, of which there is not one pure; she is composed
merely of Blood, Bones, and rotten Flesh, which makes her Leprous; where the
Sun exhales, the moist complexion, it does putrify the Region of the Air;
there then is another; sometimes the Sun sits muffled in its Cave, whilst from
the Clouds fly hiddeous showers of Rain, which sweeps the Earth's corruption
into Brooks; Brooks into Rivers; Rivers send their Tribute as they receive it,
to the seething Ocean; Thus Air, Earth and Water, all infected! she then framed
of these, can she be beautiful? No Bremon, no; if she be, she has the help of
Art* by Nature she is ugly: I Will see if I can persuade them to this; for while
two Dogs fights for a bone, the third may get it.


Bre. Are you in this mind, sir?


Per. I, and will continue in it.


Ler. Let Us go for the space of half an hour, and take the fresh air, I Am
mighty full.


Per. So am I.


Bre. Lets go then.


Exeunt Perco, Greceana, Lermo, and Bremon: Eup. Every word of their utterance
carry^s' virtue in them; I Will divide them into particulars: For Perco's, they
are of a mixed composition, neither of Honey nor Gall, much like the fruit called
Mandrake, which is fair in show, but in taste bitter and acid. For Bremons,
it is of a different nature from the former, hollow hearted, only skin, neither
bone nor flesh, but pliable every way, which is plain flattery. Lermo's, the
constructure of it is of both these, head of Perco's, feet of Bremon's, the
middle of Douts, being his own Lot. I pass now to Greceana's, as it were from
turbulent waves to Crystal streams, whose brink is formed of contentment, and
the streams themselves delights: They are --


Dros. By your favor, let me put in one word, which is this* Let Us not dispute
of words, or Castles in the air, but the subject, which is formed of material
substance; we must go about while we do prattle here, the Gole may be won; and
like simple Wood-cocks, think we are most safe when we are in the most danger;
but let not these words take place in your heart for a reservement of hatred,
but for innocentious amosity.


Eup. ^r^sanu^, they (...) sovereign. Balm for a lovesick heart; no time to
come hence forward shall be trifled in vain alluring self*conceits, but labor
to put a Period to coffeehouse, and (...) expect new Trop^ies of felicity.


Exeunt. ACT. III.
SCAEN. III.
Thropheus, Nesto, Hermon. Thr. NESTO, noble Nesto, is there no tidings from
Greceana.


Nest. None as yet; but expected they are.


Through. It is reported Euphrates has pursued her, and it is for certain ere this
he has obtained the happy visit of her, which all as yet he aims at, it being
the rich Object of his desires; if Fortune had stayed his courses in that
Progress, you might have seen which is the greatest confirmitie, Hermon my son,
and Euphrates my son in law; but since it is determined otherwise, I am
submissive to the will of Fates': Stay! yonder comes Mr. Hermon, we will see how
he takes it, and how affected to this Melady.


Enter Hermon. Her. It Is true friends.


Through. What?


Her. That my son has followed her: is this your Friend?


Through. It Is one Mr. Nesto, who usually waited upon Greceana while in this
Nation she was present, but now lives upon his means; he is a Gentleman.


Her. Upon Greceana!


Nest. Yes, servant to her.


Her. She Is now in Thessaly.


Nest. She is so*


Her. And there should stay if it had not been for my son; but generous souls
are prone to valiant acts; I take my leave of you.


Exit Hermon. Through. Nest. Your servant, sir.


Nest. I am forced against my will to leave you.


Exeunt. ACT. III.
SCAEN. IV.
Medea, Crecea, Throph^us. Through. I AM glad you are come Daughter, I have here
stayed in expectation of you these two hours.


Med. Your business, sir?


Through. I have a Letter from Fercor, which is of concernment to you as well as
me; the thing I like well, and do at it rejoice.


Med. The cause of your helexity, Father?


Through. He professes himself your most humble servant.


Med. What Is his meaning by it?


Through. He loves you.


Med. Is any thing more ridiculous? you know I never gave nourishment to that
condition; in you it is the most harsh unpleasing discord; but I hope you will
be instructed better, knowing how much my fancy goes against it; talk not of
that, and welcome.


Crece. Sir, speak to her, or else you will do no good.


Through. You retain!

I see your unkind temper; will no thought soften your heart? disdain agrees
but ill with so much beauty; if you would persuade him not to love you, strive
to be less fair, undo that face, and so become a rebel to Heaven and Nature.


Med. He loves my face then*


Through. As Heavenly Prologue to your mind; he does not dote like Pigmalion on
the colors.


Med. No he cannot; his was a painted Mistress; and besides, you increase my
wonder of his folly, for I have told you that so often --


Through. What?


Med. My mind's so opposite to all his Courtships, that I had rather hear the
tedious Tales of Robbin Hood, then any thing that trenches upon the limits of
Love: If he come fraught with any of Cupids devices, keep 'em for his
Whirligigs, or land the next Edition of his Messenger, or Post with a mad
Packet, I shall but laugh at them, and pity him.


Through. That's pity -- *


Med. Do not mistake me, it shall be a very miserable pity, without love: Were
I a man, and had but half that hansomness, (for though I have not love, I hate
detractation) ere I would put my inventions to the sweet of Complements, to
court my Mistress hand, and call her smiles blessings greater then the suns
beams, entreat to wait upon her, give her Rings with wanton and most lamentable
Poesies, I would turn Thresher.


Through. This is a new Doctrine from women.

I could provoke if truth should be uttered, how he calls it happiness.


Med. Just Heavens! can Fercor be so void of reason to call that happiness
which is a madness? I thank my stars, I never was so vain: But pray you Father
the truth, provoke me if you can?


Through. Fercor it is not.


Med. Not Fercor.


Through. No not Fercor!

Change not your countenance at that word, you will fain persuade me you never did
nor can love.


Med. It Is not for love nor any vain passion from thence proceeding, that does
change the faculties of my body, but to see silly men thus to entrap
themselves. Father, after my duty I take my leave of you.


Exeunt Medea, Crecia, manes Thropheus. ACT. III.
SCAEN. V.
THROPHEVS alone. WOE, woe, Thropheus, what shall one do in this case, being
abused by their children! while they are young easily to be corrected, but
being old, stubborn and perverse, I compare her to tkat subtle fish for her
craftiness, namely, a Barble, that will not meddle with the bait until with her
Tail she has unhooked it from the the hook; no more will she give any audience
until she see the thing reality it self: And to a Crockodile I her conceit, if
they see a man afraid of them, they will eagerly pursue him, but on the
contrary, if they be assaulted, they will shun him; having eaten the body of a
man, they will weep over the head, but in fine, eat the head also: thence came
the Proverb, Crocodile tears: Feigned tears in such manner she does with me;
let me entreat her what I please, still she is quite contrary to it, having made
many protestations against it, and having let many a tear by the reason of it,
at length is contented and receives it; from whence I affirm, Women's tears are
but seigned tears: but hoping to see her better resomed, I Will follow her.


Exi^. ACT. IV.
SCAEN. I.
PERCO, GRECEANA. Per. MAdam, give car.


Gre. Sir, vex me not.

Your words are like Arrows headed with steel, directed only to wound my heart.


Per. Why fairest one? think but what enjoyments thou shall receive at thy
impartial sacred Decree.


Gre. Enjoyments will be turned to curses at that day; if it be with you to
spend the Prime and the first Blossom of my youth, and suffer all to be
exhausted by the hot influence of that most loathsome and consuming lust, to
find those things that therein's hid, and likewise those that are forbid.


Per. Remember for what canse those things to you were given, not to keep
always, or to be smothered with the unhappy Nurse Chastity, but to be employed
upon the like resemblance, and to produce the real substance of material joy.


Gre. Persuade me to it.

But I Will have caution of what I take in hand, to spend those things that be
errevocable, and that with prodigality; no.


Per. Never follow such vain cogitations, but reflect your self into this
climate, wherein I shall lead you, and happily leave you: What profit does
there flow from hidden Treasure, but only to feed the insaciate Misers eye,
when if it were put to some use, it might increase its substance, and enrich
the owner: Such youth and natures bounty, that receive again from the expense;
but were there none but mere Damage, yet the pleasure often, and the delight,
would recompense the loss.


Gre. What e're the pleasure be, or the delight, I am too young, not plumed for
such af^ight.


Per. Too young! I like you better; there is a price due to the early Cherry,
the first Apples deserve most grace; the budding Rose is set by, but stale and
fully blown, is left for Vulgars to rub their sweaty fingers on? Too young! as
well you may affirm the tender Twig too young to grast upon, or you may say the
rising Sun's too young to court the day.


Gre. I see you are obstinate, therefore I mean to answer you no more, but take
my leave.


Exit Greceana. Per. Go happily.

I now perceive words composed of wind are but a flying substance, not able to
carry the efficacy of acting, to preserve vain hope and lose the treasure; but
some other way must be invented, which in short time I Will produce:

No time henceforth there shall be spent,
But make her know I thus ambent,
Those things to do, and them up-stir
Which are as yet unknown to her.

^xit Perco. ACT. IV.
SCAEN. II.
NESTO, PVDD. Nest. COME honest Pudd, I Will undertake to manage that business
thou have in hand.


Pud. I shall be shamed face when I see my poor Crecea, thinking how I shall
stumble at the splendent luster of her orient Cheeks.


Nest. Her eyes you mean.


Pud. Eyes and Cheeks are all one.


Nest. It Is true, to you.


Pud. I, and to you.


Nest. Believe me, it were a kind of profanation to make doubt of the contrary.


Pud. How happy am I then in such acquaintance? a man shall have his due when
your meaner Society has neither judgment to discern, nor credit to commend
it: but may I take your word? will you be true if I should take up the Lance of
Law and wrestle with Crecea.


Nest. Nay, there is no man in the earth more liberal, take it upon my word --


Pud. Your word?


Nest. I have not any thing in the world more dear or precious in my esteem,
which I will not most willingly part with upon the least summons of thee my
friend.


Pud. Well said, my Boy; thy Mistress and my Master are together for a season,
and why may not we be together, and court our Mistresses at our pleasure?


Exit Pudd. Nest. Hasten about thy business, I Will attend thee. I will see now
what lies in my poor judgment here to do, and turn this Fool into an Ass,
which if it take effect, it may produce laughter both unto me, and likewise to
his Master.


Exit. ACT. IV.
SCAEN III.
EVPHRATES, DROSANVS. Eup. UNfortunate Euphrates! therefore unfortunate because
Euphrates! Was it not sufficient to behold the fire and warm thee, but with
(...) thou must kiss the fire and burn thee? Oh Greceana! Greceana! Art must
yield to Nature; Reason to Appetite; Wisdom to Affection: Could Pigmalion
entreat by savor to have his Ivory turned into Flesh, and cannot Euph^^tes
obtain by plaints to have the Picture of his Love changed to life? What
Pigmalion? what Pyrgo^eles? or what Lysippus is he that ever made thy face so
fair, or spread thy same so far as I? But alas! she is the Paramsur to a
Courtier; Perco the great has both her body and affection; for what is it that
Courtiers cannot obtain by prayers, threats, and promises? Will she not think
it better to sit under the cloth of State like a Queen, then in a poor House
like a House-wife? Yes, yes, Euphrates; thou may swim against the Stream
with a Crab, feed against the wind with the Deer, and pick against the steel
with the Cockatrice: Stars are to be looked at, not reached at; Courtiers to be
yielded to, not contented with Greceana to be honored, not obtained; for she
is the only pattern of that Eternity which Jupiter dreamed a sleep, could not
conceive again waking: But the feeding Canker of my ca^e, the never ^ying worm
(...) my heart, is to be killed by counsel, not cries; by applying of remedies,
not by replying of reasons: And since in cases desperate there must be used
Medicines that are extreme, I will hazard that little life that is left to
restore the greater part that is lost: And this shall be my first practice, for
Will must work where Authority is not; as soon as Perco has made his Oration,
and declared what he intends to speak, I will by device pierce his heart by
some strange Weapon, that by that means I may speak with her, and utter my
love, and dye with denial, as conceal it, and live with despair.


Enter Drosanus. Dros. Why so melancholy?


Eup. Faith not well; troubled with some affairs.


Dros. Be patient, time may work a period to them, and you may sit crowned with
Laurel, and relate the story with helexity of those painful hours you have
spent in pursuit after her.


Eup. Those days would be golden ones to me.


Dros. Fear not.

Come let us retire to our Lodgings, to morrow they will be here, at which ^me
we will meet'em.


Exit Drosanus. Eup I Will follow.

Cupid and my Greceana played
Sings. At Cards for Kisses, Cupid paid;
He stakes his Quiver, Bow and Arrows,
His Mothers Dove and Team of Sparrows,
Looses them too, and down he throw^
The Coral of his Lips, the Rose
G^owing on his Cheek, but none knows how,
With these the Crystal of his Brow:
And then the dimple of his Chinne,
All these did my Greceana win.
At last he set her both his Eyes,
She won, and Cupid blind did rise.
Oh how has she done this to thee!
What shall alas become of me!

Exit. ACT. IV.
SCAEN. IV.
Perco, Greceana. Per. PRincely Lady, how unworthy am I to employ my services
in honor of your virtues! how hopeless my desires are to enjoy your rare
opinion, and muchless your love, are only matters of despair, unless you give
large warrant to my boldness, my feeble-wing'd Ambition --


Gre. My Lord, I interrupt you not.


Per. Often have I turned the Lesson of my sorrow to sweeten discord and enrich
your pity, but all in vain; there had my comforts sunk, and near rise again to
hear the story of the dispairing Lover, had not now, even now, your ingenuous
disposition --


Greece. Come, out with it.


Per. After some fit disputes of our condition betwixt your Highness and my
lowness, gave consent, which did imbolden, then encourage my faltering tongue.


Gre. How Is that? how?

I give consent to your fond fancies leading, which is more pernicious then
that under Tongues of Asps, which is most deadly and emidicable?


Per. Though not your hand with your body, Madam, yet your affection, with
disposition, (as I understand) gave License.


Gr^. It shall not need my Lord; you are a servant, pleading by the privilege
of Nature; though I might command, my care shall only conceal what it has not
forced: I can but make one choice, and it is made e're this.


Per. To whom?


Gre. Euphrates..

Ties of Marriage are Tenors not of will, but during life; I want skill to
choose without directions of example in this Land; for which I daily learn, by
how much more you take upon you the roughness of a Courtier, by so much more I
am engaged to fly from you, by the reason of the duty I owe to Euphrates, for
respects of Birth, degrees of Title, and advancement; I nor admire, nor slight
them; all my study shall ever aim at this perfection, only to live and dye so,
that you may see in any course of mine, I still remain in constancy until the
thread of Life be cut by Fates.


Per. Madam, remember your self.


Gre. It is decreed we must yield to Fate, whose angry Justice though it
threaten ruin, contempt, and poverty, is all but trial of a weak woman's
constancy in suffering; here in a strangers and a eminent hand forsaken, and
unfurnished of all hopes, but such as wait on misery, I range to meet
affliction whereso ere I tread my train; and pomp of servants is reduced to
none but rough Jaylors and most sad imprisoners; yet yield I not my Lord to
them.


Manet. ACT. IV.
SCAEN. V.
Euphrates, Drosanus. Per. SEeing no persuasions will prevail, nor once move
thy indurable heart, some other means must be invented, which in short time
I Will produce; in this same Garden here shall be erected the unhappy Gibbet of
thy Fate:

Seeing no persuasions will prevail with thee, there thou shall hang even for
thy constancy.


Greece. The churless brow of War (my Lord) is a sight of horror for Ladies
entertainment; if thou hearst a truth of my sad ending by the hand of some
unnatural subject, thou with all shall hear how I dyed worthy of my right by
falling like a constant Virgin; and in my close, which my last breath shall
sound, Euphrates thou comliest, shall sing a Requiem to my soul, unwilling only
of great glory, cause divided from such a Heaven on Earth, as life with thee.


Eup. I hear she still remembers me; though out of sight, yet not out of mind;
shall I make known my self, and by the force of us two, relieve her from that
Tyrants hand?


Dros No, by no means; I Will devise a plot that with a little patience things
best becoming our minds it may to us produce.


Eup. Let Us hear't.


Dros. While he his Mistress there is courting, I in the same manner will him
counterfeit in courting you; and not able of my self, perceiving to my
entreats, yet you give leave, will to him moan make; but why should I relate it
any further, let me alone, I will it accomplish.


Eup. Then manage it.


Dros. Else I will for my bold attempt suffer what your pleasure is ready to
give sentence.


Per. If you to my love will yield, you shall enjoy the sweetness of liberty
and favor, and sleep securely; and is not this now better then to befit the
Hang-mans clutches, which certainly you shall do if yield you will not, or to buy
the cordage of a tough Halter, which will break your neck? Be no longer
constant, but yield, and hope for pardon.


Eup. Oh* step to him, else he will mischief her.


Dros. Be patient, sir.


Gre. For pardon! hold thy heart strings, whiles contempt of injuries in scorn
may bid defiance to thee and base foul Language: Thou poor Vermin! how dare
thou creep so near me? thou a Lord! nay, thou a slave* why, thou enjoyest as
much of happiness as all the sling of slight ambition flew at; a Dunghill was
thy Cradle; so a Puddle by virtue of the Suns beams, breathes a Vapor to infect
the pure air, which drops again into the muddy Womb that first exhales it;
bread, and a slavish ease, with some assurance from the Beadles Whip, crowned
all thy happiness: But let all the world, as all to whom I am this day a
spectacle, time to deliver by tradition six posterities without another
Chronicle then truth; Lion, constantly my resolutions suffered.


Per. What man is he that would suffer himself to be thus abused? I will no
longer expect Executioner, but play his part my self now in his absence; I,
poor Vermin, dare thou creep so near? no longer then shall mercy hold this
hand, or Love be overswayer of this Weapon; I Will end thy life. He draws his sword


Eup. Oh! step to him, I wish now my Women's clothes were off.


Dros. Sir, no injury to women do; for that case is mine, though to you
unknown; the passages of you two Lovers I have seen, which if it you would minded,
might in like case have perceived mine: Therefore give leave, and yield to
nature; be more miserable, for I shall never endure to see such havoc with
dry eyes: Speak, speak the fair Lady.


Eup. Sir, let us two Virgins taste your bounty, and both your mercies in this,
that at a time of night so late, a place so private as this Garden is, to spare
the lives of both us two, and grant that both your valors shall encounter, and
upon whom that fortune please to smile, shall make his choice of our two Wills,
Bodies, and Affections, and you both covert a liberal grace: Grant to my
entreats a happy reply.


Dros. To you I yield.


Per. In like manner I intend if this same Lady she be pleased


Gre. I am.

Times have their changes, sorrows make men wise;

The Sun it self must set as well as rise.


Dros. To morrow then I Will meet you in the Castle Yard, where I Am resolved
death or life ^here to receive.


Per. There then of youl'le wait in expectation.


Exeunt Perco, Grecean. Eup. Since I this motion here have made, instead of you
will meet him there my self.


Dros. Will you?


Eup. My self I will because I may send his ever boiling blood into the air to
breed strange Vapors.


Dros. You are resolved?


Eup. I am.


Exeunt, Euphrates, Drosanus. ACT. V.
SCAEN. I.
Euphrates, Drosanus. Eup. THE Act is done.


Dros. And no blemish thereby you received?


Eup. None; great thanks to Jove I give for this most dangerous Encounter there
by me performed, and limiting out my life thus far, to be revenged of him that
always desired hate* Go fetch Greceana in, take upon you the victory, and
challenge your demand.


Dros. I shall do any thing wherein I may perform my duty I to you there owe.


Exit Drosanus, and returns again with Greceana. Dros. Ladies, both of you my
Enterprises are, and only by the strength of this poor mortal Arm, which many
Herculian Blows has undergone, which has been for no other cause but this,
That I amongst your servants may be numbered one; but since it has been the
ingenuous disposition of your birth to grant to him, whosoever Fortune gave the
victory should enjoy his choice, therefore whatsoever I make, or service soever
I do, it is to you.


Gre. To me, my Lord?


Dros. I, to you, and no other person, Madam.


Eup. Am I then cast off my Lord? It Is no matter, I shall undergo it with as
much ease as power does able me.


Gre. I am in that case worse then ever I was; before I was most miserable, but
now no misery is to be conceived in comparison of this; seeing my Lord it is my
unhappy, or happy Fortune, (I do not know how to term it as yet) to be yours
by Lot, not by Consent, I shall desire to know of what A^ian and Nation your
valor is descended.


Dros. To name my Predecessors to this day, of whose Attomes the structure of
this body of mine does consist, it were a thing too too superfluous; but my
Father was a Germane, of a Noble Blood, and of which Nation I proceed.


Gre. A Germane, that is my native Soil, and in which endures the Diadems of my
wishes.


Eup. Are you of that Country?


Gre. I.


Eup. Blessed is my soul thus happily to be led amongst my friends, but thinking
to have been foes: Madam, in what part? for travelers are somewhat quisitive.


Gre. From the Court.


Eup. Still happiness does abound.


Dros. We both fair one, from thence does take our course, and not in any place
in which we came as yet did take abode until with wished prosperity we were cast
upon this experiential happy Land, in whose bowels I have you found, which
causes my future trouble to be now present pleasure


Gre. I Am glad of that; but further I Will you examine; There was a person when I
there did live, descended of noble blood, Euphrates by his Name, who was a
subject to his Majesty, and in great favor with him, if you did know.


Eup. We did, Madam.


Gre. Is he alive, or dead?


Eup. His never dying deeds are still alive; for his valiant acts are such as
they will never be in that Nation out of memory extirpated, but does daily show
themselves more glorious in their colors; but for his Body, Person, and his
Virtues, has sung a Requies to Elysium, where all the bodies of good men does
lie.


Dros. I, for certain Madam, he is dead


Gre. Dead!


She falls into a swound. Eup. Oh Heavens, and all your influence* do your
Justice here upon this body of mine, in doing this unnatural act to try a
Woman's constancy: Oh my Dear! he is living, still living to do thee service, and
I am the man; no breath she still receives: Come blow you Eastern Winds, and
all you four Points join here in one to make a prosperous Gale, that by the
virtue of that sweet structure, it may breath some life to my dying Love;
wherein I may relate my folly in doing this unto her: Oh joyful sight! she
breaths; hold her up! give her more air! it is I, it is I Euphrates thy dear
friend, and lo, I strip me from my Woman. Clothes, in which I was disguised
from thee, here did undertake this voyage for no other cause but to relieve
thee from this bondage of tyranizing Monsters; it was I that kill^d Perco thy
deadly Foe, and he that was in thy sight I know most heinous: Speak my Dear,
speak, if not, I dye with thee; therefore from this most hellish torment speak
and relieve me; I know I Am guilty, and 'twas my folly in doing this, therefore
am dutiful to obey the sentence of what Justice you command; here I lie down at
thy feet, thy kind Euphrates in his love, but unkind in doing this.


Gre. Rise, rise, thou happiest of all men in my sight; I have past some silent
time in a slumbring swound, which for the love of thee was no other cause.


Eup. I know it full well, and am ashamed to live, to hear how basely I have
unto thee done.


Gre. No words of it, but let this word be last,
The joy does countervail the sorrow past.

Dros. Then let that pass, I Am guilty as well as you; fear lest we trench upon
vain time too much, and here stand prattling until it has uptript our lingering
heels.


Eup. It Is true; but I shall never be my own man again, thinking how basely I
did deal with her: Come fair Grece^na, let us no longer stay upon this unknown
ground, but haste away to our native Country.


Gre. I am ready to obey, and rejoice to hear the motion.


Exeunt omnes. ACT. V.
SCAEN. II.
Nesto, Pudd, Crecia. Nest. She Is a coming, see you manage it.


Pud. Fear not, let me alone, I Will warrant thee Lad: Oh my pretty little Minks!
art thou come? here I am in expectation of thee.


Crece. Are you the man of valor that would speak with me.


Pud. I am the man of valor, and only valor it self that would speak with
thee.


Nest. Mrs. He is a man of unknown parts, excellent in birth, and of an
undaunted courage.


Crece. Is he so? by his show he should be none of these, for he has a foolish
look.


Pud. Nay, Mrs. I Am the valorous Gentleman that ever Nation bred; for not long
since in streets where I was walking, met with two Constables which charged me
with felony, saying I had killed a man* but to say truth, I was in that
quarrel, where I had my head beaten as soft as a Football, upon which I had
dyed if I had not been valourous; and then my courage rising, I took one of the
Footmen there standing by, a deadly blow, running most nimbly away, and
throwing over two children that there stood; was not this valor?


Crece. I know not what you count valor, sir.


Pud. Why, I count all my deeds valor; nay, and besides at that time I was so
basely cut, that I run under the Table, where perchance (saving your presence)
my Breech stuck out, upon which I had such a blow that I limp ore since; come
Nesto, joul my head and this Post together, and see whether I can endure it or
no with courage.


Nest. I know you are valorous, but I Will try.


Pud. With all my heart -- Harder -- nay harder still -- still -- Oh! oh! so no
more -- nay, no more -- no more -- hold -- Do you see now, pretty Sparrow, how
I can undergo it.


Crece. Excellent, but your Band stands wrong.


Pud. Nay, It is my face stands wrong; but I Will use my self no more to this
foolish fashion.


Nest. Now thou holds thy face crooked.


Pud. That Is because I would have an eye in my --


Crece. Out you beastly, baudy, blockish, and most nasty fellow; you a man of
valor, you a man of Clouts; look how every joint of his frail body quivers.


Pud. It is singing Prick-song.


Crece. I Will prick thy Skin full of oylet Holes.


Exit Crecia. Pud. Nay, is she gone? I Am glad of it; is this your brave
Mistress that should be my Wife, that every word will bite off my Nose, and
every stroke will punch my Skin full of oylet Holes? I was never in such a
dirty case in all days of my life; I am up to the ears in my own dung.


Nest. Avaunt; out you nasty Bare; come along with me.


Pud. To my Aunts! oh! by no means to my Aunts; I would not have her know for a
Cow.


Nest. I say, Avaunt.


Pud. Avaunt, nay then I Will go along with you, if you will be sure to purge me
clean, and whip me soundly that I may so no more do.


Exeunt Pud, Nesto. ACT. V.
SCAEN. III.
Thropheus, Fercor. Through. I Understand it well that you would be in Matrimony
with my poor Girl, Medea.


Fer. It Is true, I have been tossed by Sea and Land to unknown ground, where
never habitants was, still none to me that I can find more pleasing to me then
Medea; she sits like Sol, berayed with Stars most bright, lighting with her
stellation the most tenebrosious place of Fercors heart, and I the only
spectator not daring to presume to be an Actor, does pine with despair.


Through. Take you great courage, not daunt your valorous spirit, though you have
been my servant, of my poor will now Master is, therefore I Will fetch her, and
see what her stout mind will yield unto.


Exit Thropheus, and enters again with Medea. ACT. V.
SCAEN. IV.
Thropheus, Fercor, Medea. Through. YOU must, you must.


Med. Father, forbear, I cannot.


Fer. Madam, may it please your goodness to honor my affections so far, as to
adorn me with the salutation of your hand.


Med. What, sure instead of professing Navigation, you are turned Courtier, a
mere bundle of Complements; I take it for an affront, and my spirit will digest
no rude affronts; though I be a Woman by Nature, yet has a manly courage to
disdain you.


Through. Despise not his affection.


Med. Father, if you did know how I do loath the sight of this man, I am
persuaded then you would no further me urge; I cannot give him one good word,
muchless one pleasing look, or with him dissemble in the Climate of Affection.


Fer. Madam, if your frail mind unto one of these particulars will yield, I
hope you will not shut me so far out of memory, but I to have so much privilege
in your affection, as to beautify my self with the real Badge of your smiles,
and to be reckoned amongst the honored company of your servants.


Med. Certainly the man does rave; let him go to bed and have more sleep, and I
hope he will be more himself.


Through. Nay, take your choice, if you do make him your byword, not yiedling to
his entreats, be sure your self whensoe're your Petition comes to my ear, it
shall not once pierce my mind.


Med. Euphrates is the man whom you very well know that ever since I knew the
force of Loves Weapons, has imbalmed him up to be the only carper of the
Blossoms of my Virginity.


Fer But say Euphrates should be engaged to that only Paramour of Virgins,
Greceana by name, then I hope some other should be the happy Extorser of your
youth prime.


Through. What answer you?


Med. That he should.


Manet. ACT. V.
SCAEN. V.
Euphrates, Greceana, Hermon, Drosanus, Thropheus, Fercor, Medea, Nesto, Puad.
Eup. AFter so many storms as Wind and Seas have threatened to our Weather-beaten
ship, at last sweet fairest we are safely arrived on our dear Mothers earth;
ungrateful only to heaven and us, in yielding not before our happy arrival!
How farest thou my Dearest yet?


Greece. Confirmed in health, by which I may better undergo the roughest face of
change; but I shall learn patience to hope, since silence courts affection for
comforts to this truly noble Gentleman, rare exampled pattern of a friend.


Dros. I wait but as the shadow to the body; for, Madam, without you let me be
nothing*


Eup. Though she has cost me many a redouning blow in fetching her to this her
native Land, yet without license of a Fathers will, I will be --


Her. Question not my liberality, my only son, my only dear and and joy; I
here embrace thee, likewise wishing thee to embrace Greceana for the sake of
me; enjoy her, and take her.


Eup. Father your bounty in granting to your child his desire is not to be
paralleld; therefore when bright Sol descends his fiery Trigion into the more
concavity of the Earth; or pale Cynthia traces about her Orb; then shall you by
real aspect confirm us to be man and wife.


Her. I rejoice to hear it.


Through. Medea, now behold he is gone, whom you thought always had been sure;
therefore be no more thus obstinate, but bend your mind to his affection.


Med. Certainly it was nere decreed by Fate or Fortune for him and me to be
once, made one.


Eup. Come then my dearest, thou and I Will be gone,
I hope thus far in my own opinion;
For now you embrace Virginity,
For to embrace wedlock for perpetuity.

Greece. My duty still stand obedient to your will, not daring to resist, nor can
without breaking a solemn oath: Therefore your pleasure is a command for me to
obey with great gratitude, thinking to me an immense beatitude.


Pud. Wood I's behangd it was a dangerous business I took in hand; for
standing, sitting, lying, and tumbling, I believe nere a Jack-^udding in town
will do it.


Nest. Thy reason Pudd.


Pudd. Ha, ha, ha, I have neither sense nor reason; ha, ha, ha: Stay mess
yonder comes my Master; I will go salute him with a rare sentence only of my own
brains invention; Oh how my tongue now warbles in my mouth to think of 't!
Blew leu leu leu.


Nest. Go, go, thou art not mad; why loyterest thou?


Pudd. Master --


Eup. What then?


Pudd. I am here --


Eup. Art thou alive?


Pudd. Still for you to beat --


Eup. Me to beat?


Pudd. Me into good service.


Eup. Thou shat be my man while man I keep,
Seeing how faithfully I thee have beat.

Pudd. I have been in study ever since you were gone, in Sciences of invaluble
worth, and has profited very little


Greece Name some of those, I desire to hear him talk.


Eup. What are they?


Pud. Nandivigation, Astronimation, Mucinification, Fidlication, and
Lutination; Do you understahd me Master, if please your worship?


Eup: Very well and excellent.


Pudd: I am versed but little yet, hoping to be better:


Through: Give over musing, I will thee interrupt, give me my answer:


Med* Father, what your indulgent clemency thinks most convenient for my youth
and person, I am ready to give ear:


Through: My mind is to have Fercor:


Med. Parents must have their wills, and children must obey; therefore compeld,
Fercor I am thine.


Fer: Gladly recevd thou art:
Come all you Hloy Sisters Muses nine,
Unto our Nuptials and us combine,
With solemns most sure never to be broke,
With hanous crimes, or vanished in a smoke;
For she is the North Pole to which all stars does bend,
And I the Ursa minor does on her attend.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
WIth Tragic sights this Play it does begin,
But afterward with mirth it sought to win,
From thence to joy; and not long after
It did produce us Love, with some small laughter;
Seeing it ended in a loving Q^u,
Even so I hope it is with us and you.

