MEMORIES OF The Life of the Famous MADAM CHARLTON; Commonly Styled the German
Princess. Setting forth the whole Series of her Actions, with all their
Intrigues, and subtle Contrivances from her Cradle to the fatal period of her
Reign at Tiburn.

Being an account of her Penitent behavior, in her absteining from food and
rest; in the Prison of Newgate, from the time of her Condemnation, to her
Execution, January 23. 1672.

Taken from her own Relation, whilst she was Prisoner in the Marshalses, and
other certain information.

With her Nativity Astrologically handled, and an Epitaph on her Tomb.



London, Printed for Phillip Brooksby, next door to the Ball in
West-Smith-field, near the Hospital-Gate. 1673.

THE LIFE OF THE German Princess, etc.
It Is no wonder the World is full of Impositors, since it is self a at full value
is but a Cheat. Nature has her Bristow-stones, as well as Diamonds, and though
these carry no proportion of solid worth with Real Gems, yet they have
something that glitters, and surprises almost as much: A bold Metheor exhald
from Bogs or Dunghills, hurried by a giddy motion to the upper Region, may
out-beard the Sun, and with a Prodigious Blaze, attract more eyes, and wonder,
then all the glorions Lamps of Heaven: some people possessed with a strange
Frenzy of ambition, reguard not what they do or suffer, so they may but make
noise enough. And Diana's Temple (though one of the Worlds wonders) shall be
burned to gain an Herostatus an infamous

Our present C^lebrated yet unhappy subject the Notorious GERMAN PRINCESS was
too much of this gay flanting humor, her towering spirit was too large for her
narrow fortunes, whose short wings she strove to imput with the gaudy plume of
ingenious deceits. and thereby vainly thought to have soared in a higher sphere
of reputation, above the grovelling Level of the vulgar Rabble.

Her aims were great and high, but dazzled with false appearances, she mist the
proper means to attain them; For despairing to arrive at glory, by the
difficult, yet only direct Road of virtue, she fondly pursued it in the crooked
Bypath of subtilty, and Circumventing all that approached her: Whereby
although she brought her self to the Justice of an Ignominious Death, yet in
this her ambition might be a little gratified, that she has afforded matter of
discourse to the whole Nation, and set all the Tongues of Fame on work to tell
stories of her.

To say where she was born is a little difficult, since as many Towns lay claim
to that honor, as there did Cities in the days of Yore fall together by the
ears about the Birth place of Homer: Nor are the Heralds less at variance
concerning her Pedigree and Bearing.

Some allege that she was only Daughter to the great Duke of Oundenia, and
Heiress to vast Teritories of his, in the Mountains of the Mo^n. Others, that
she was born at Cullen in Germany, the Daughter of an advocate, who left her
the proper inheritance of his profession, a large portion of Confidence, and a
voluble charming Tongue. Nor want there some serious Coffee-drinkers who will
depose they knew her Father a Scotch Peddler, who rambling abroad stole a mighty
Jewel, that weighed four pound, and a half out of the grand Seignours Turbant,
and was for that (like Saboths Levi) flead alive, till he dyed at
Constantinople.

But the most credible and current opinion, is that the World was first bliged
with her presence at Canterbury in Kent, being the generous offspring of a
jolly Fiddler; one so excellently skilled in the Melodious Art, that like a
second Orpheus he has often drawn hither all the Brutes and Savages about the
Town to admire and dance after the harmony of his Crowd; for whose better
accommodation, her mother sold a cup of nappy Ale, and lived by these two
excellent Mysteries to the envy of most of their Neighbors.

As for the Age of our Illustrious Heroina any man might guess of late by her
aspect that it was somewhat above Thirty years since her loving Parents made
use of the means to beget her.

But I that am curious to gratify inquisitive Readers in such weighty
circumstances, can be much more exact, having received from a very able Artist
the Scheam or Figure of the Heavens at the moment of her birth, which I could
not but publish to the World for the sake of the Studious Artest, as not
knowing wheth^r in any of the numerous Nativities obtruded on the World, there
be any thing more of truth, or that so remarkably demonstrates the veriety of
celestial influences and Infalibility of the star reading Art.

Born she was the 10th. of April 1639. At which time (as those that are capable
to judge, will find, if they please to erect the Figure) the Princely Sign
ascends, and the Sun Lord of it posited with in the House of Honor ^ This
speaks the Native, Brave, Magnanimous, Majestic, and Ingenious afflicting. The
second argues her perpetual wanton desire, at least of money, occasioned by her
own profuseness, which sly Mercury prompts her to supply by irregular courses,
the ascendent coming by direction to the square of Mars (which happens in Leo,
Leo in the second, and just now began to operate) pronounces her fatal Doom by
the hand of Justice, and Sentance of a Magistrate, as in the 10th. very
oppositely shows.

But to proceed -- Scarce had our famous Native took leave of her standing
stool, and got the use of her prattling Tongue, but she began to promise
something more than ordinary in all her words and gestures.

At Five years Age she read English perfectly, and played with rare dexterity
on the Virginals and Violins; she would always obtrude her self into the
company of the best Children in the City, with whose Relations, her winning
Deportment, and ingenious answers on all occasions, soon did ingratiate her,
insomuch that several persons of good quality frequently took her home as a
Play-mate for their little ones for a week together: Nor were her Infant
fingers (if report speak true) free from Birdlime, and that attractive quality,
which could even then slily convey any pretty thing she liked, without the
least suspicion or discovery: She ever was (like most of her Sex) a great lover
of finery, and would therefore with a very good grace either leg, or by some
other Mercurial stratagem procure clothes above her fathers Purse or Condition;
but had an irreconcilable Aversion to all kind of laborious drudgery, and many
a pitch Battle there happened betwixt her mother and she on that occasion, till
the prudent old Matron perceiving that this busy little Be brought most Honey
to the Hive from abroad (for she never returned home but fraught with a large
carge of Victuals, Clothes, or other more considerable prize) quietly permitted
her to make use of her Tallent, which she so improved, as in short time to grow
very expert in Writing, Dancing, Singing, and all curiosities of the Needle,
all which she attained by her own happy ingenuity, that seemed (like the
Philosophers first matter) capable of all forms, and rendered every thing she
saw done easy for her to imitate.

Thus she continued till she was entered into her fourteenth year, when a young
Lady in her journey to Dover, in Order to Embarque for France, coming to
Canterbury resolved to spend a few days in viewing the Antiquities of that
Eminent Place and especially the Renowned Cathedral, which yet some rude
Sacrilegious hands had then lately Robbed of its chiefest beauties, Confident
Mall (for by that name was our Princess then generally called) understanding
this Lady intended for France, having dressed her self to the best advantage,
goes to her Lodging, and being admitted to her presence, briskly acquaints her,
That she was a Poor Man's Child of that City, and though her Education had not
been costly, she had some small smattering in those common qualities that
Embelish a Woman; For the Refineing and perfecting which, she had a great
desire to serve some person of Quality, and never wished for any thing with more
passion, then that she might have an opportunity to visit France, whither she
heard her Ladyship was then going, and that if her Ladyship would please to
admit her to wait on her thither, she wonld by her future services endeavor to
merit pardon for the boldness, of the present Addresses.

The Lady not a little surprised to hear such a request so handsomely expressed
by a mere Stanger so young, asked her several questions, whereof some perhaps
might be impertinent as any thing in this Narrative, and therefore we shall
omit them here.

But in fine, she took her in, as part of her retinue, and with that Family,
within three weeks after she arrived at Paris. She is now in that Accademy of
Europe.

In France! the staple of new Modes,
Where Garbs and Meens are current Goods,
That serve the under Northern Nations,
With Methods of address and Treat,
Prescribes new Garnitures and fashons,
And how to drink, and how to eat,
No out of fashion Wine or Meat.
To know the Age and Pedigrees,
Of Points, of Flaunders, and Venice:
To affect the purest negligences:
To read the most Authentic of Romances,
And to demonstrate with substantial reason,
What Ribbons all the year are in and out of season.
Here she continued four years, high in her Ladies favor, during which time
she made her self Mistress of that Courtly language, and the French assurance
which our young Gallants travel to acquire, in her was natural.

She was at that age a plump succulent Girl, with a face no way contemptible,
but a fine Wit, a charming Tongue, and a humor so brisk and gay, as if no
other Elements but fire and Air had club'd to her composition.

These attractions, and her petulant deportment drew on a number of Monsiers to
Court her, for that Trifle which men so much covet to enjoy, and women to be
rid of, but she like a discreet market-woman plotting to sell her ware to the
best advantage, received them all equally with promising smiles, and dispensed
the same endaering Caresses to every one. This brought her in a large Harvest
of presents; and the better to draw them in she would for such a Diamond Ring,
rich Bracelet, or Necklace of Pearl, promise some Cully the great kindness, but
be sure aforehand would order one of their other Maids always at the time and
place appointed, to disturb and prevent the assignation.

Amongst the rest a dapper Tailor that worked to her Lady would needs have been
tampering with her forebodies, and though she scorned his louzy addresses, and
had often sharply repulst him, yet he presenting her still with his
importunities, she resolving to be revenged on his sawsiness, pretends to
comply, and for the value of Threescore Crowns to be paid in hand, promises to
let him in at a backdoor about midnight to her embraces. The overjoyed Tailor
pawning some, odd movables he had, raises the same and gave it her, but being
that morning to carry home some Garments of her Ladies to alter, she cunningly
wrapped up therein two or three pieces of her Ladies plate, which he coming home
found with great admiration, but fancying 'twas only a frolique of his
Mistresses kindness to return him part of satisfaction for the threescore
Crowns he had given her, without acquainting any body, lays them up and with
much impatience waits for the blessed hour, That night she (who had the charge
of every thing) stayed up late, left the backdoor and two other doors unlocked,
and subtily taking away the rest of her Ladies Plate, to a great value, hid it
in a place, whence she might at any time secretly remove it: Then to bed she
goes, but keeps her self awake with laughing till she hears her eager Gallant
entered the house, and got groping in the dark in the Chamber next to her, where
the Plate usually stood: then all on a sudden she cries out as loud as she could
bellow, Thives, Thieves. Poor Stitch amazed at the unexpected outcry, had
almost bewrayed himself, and spoiled the room through the excess of his fears,
but she continuing her dreadful exclamations, he found no hopes of safety but
in speedy flight, which he no sooner attempts, but mi-stepping rould down
headlong a whole pair of stairs, to the great camage of his shins and elbows,
and rising with an excellent dexterity at bottom, unhappily run his noddle
against a cruel post, which cut his forehead almost to the skul, and thus
rufully mauld, with much ado made his escape.

In the mean time the Alarm is taken, the Ladies frighted, the people of the
house get up, and finding the doors open, and all the Plate gone: Mistress Mary
protests she is almost frighted out of her wits, and hoarse with crying out,
that she heard the Rogues very plain, that one tumbled down stairs, and she
supposed hurt himself, for she heard him cry, Mon Dieu, Mon Dieu! and was
confident it was no other voice then her Ladies Tailors, who by his familiarity
in the house might have got false keys, etc.

Loath they were to suspect him, but her evidence persuades them however for
satisfaction to get an Officer to search his house next morning, whom they find
in his bed all be-mortified, and three pieces of plate with the Ladies Arms on
it, in his Trunk. The amazed fellow in vain makes protestations of his
innocence: before a Magistrate he is carried, who threatens him with the wrack
to discover the residue of the plate, and his Confederates, but at the good
natured Ladies request that was waved, and he only censured to be branded, and
soundly whipped, which being executed accordingly our merciless Princess to
upbraid the afflicted innocent, very gravely asks whether such a cure of the
Letcherous Itch was not well worth 60 Crown.

At last her Lady taking some notice of her extravagancies, they part, not
without some disadvantage to the Lady: and our Lady Errant returns for England,
and for a small time lives very soberly at Canterbury, where a Shoemaker that
had a very good stock of money falls in love with her, and by his importunities
and her fathers, she is prevailed with to Marry him: But their Nuptial bed was
scarce warm, when her active Genious weary of such a dull life began to plot to
shift the Scene; and thereupon carrying it exceeding fondly to her husband
without suspicion, whilst he is from home she packs up the best of her apparel,
and all the money she had, being about 14 pounds, and slips to Margaret, and
thence to Harwich, where getting a Maid as good as her self, she in the
Packet-boat, crosses to Holland, takes a Noble Lodging at Amsterdam, and
assumes the quality of a great English Lady, by the Title of Duchess of
Rumford, that for some particular reasons desired to remain there a while
Incognito.

Here she sends for an eminent Jeweller, who several times attended her, and at
last she made choice of as many Jewels as she bargained to pay him two thousand
pounds for; but told him she had not money at present, and therefore desired
she might seal them up in that box which he used to bring them in, and that he
would keep them for her three weeks, in which time at farthest her money would
be returned, and not offer to dispose of them till then. Whereas she having
observed the box at his several comings, had in the mean time caused another to
be made exactly like it, and kept it by her ready sealed up, and when he gave
her his to seal by an excellent Legerdemain she put the change upon him, and
soon after removed into England, leaving poor Sweating Hans at the three weeks
end to look for his Chapwoman, and open his sealed box, where be finds nothing
but a sew small Pebbles, and these Lines in English.

Mine Here! I thank you for your Indian Ware,
For since your Nation seeks to rook us there
In gross; This petty retail cheat may pass,
As just Reprisalls, -- So Adieu Van Ass.
From Amsterdam she comes to London, gives out she is a Country Gentlewoman,
and an Heiress to a great fortune in Leicestershire, which drew an old Miserly
Bricklayer to court her, who fancying the Chemistry of her Wit might Extract
some Elixar of Profit out of that withered Picture of Time (as she used to call
him^ receives his Addresses, and at last Marries him, but after a Fortnights
time marched off with near two hundred Pieces of his Idolized Gold, and takes a
Lodging near Smithfield, where she met with a rich Grasiers son of Rumney-Marsh
in Kent: And making him believe she was an Eminent Citizens Daughter, inveigled
him to be a Suitor to her, with whom after several treats in Town, she attended
with her Maid, goes down to Gravesend; There he spends all the Money he had
taken for his Cattle in London, and then she takes him aboard a Ship, makes him
drunk with a Bowl or two of Punch, takes ten Guinnies of the Master for him,
and leaves him fast asleep, bound to seek his Fortunes at Barbado's. But just
as the Tiltboat went off, and she was returning for London, she sends a Letter
to the Mayor of Gravesend, (who by that Office is a Justice of Peace) in her
Cullies Name, entreating his assistance to bring him off, which the Mayor did,
and the Master had his share in the Cheat as well as the Countryman.

Flusht with these late Successes she lays the Plot of a Nobler Comedy, which
conferred on her the gay Title of GERMAN PRINCESS ever after; All the way in
her Passage she spoke either Dutch or Broken English, and pretended she was
just come from beyond the Seas; The Tiltboat arrived about Midnight, and she is
forced to go as far as a Tavern near the Royal Exchange with a Gentleman, whose
civility to a supposed Stranger obliged him to take care for Lodging for her:
There they find people up, and she and her Maid are housed for that Night: Next
day, being dressed very splendidly, she Complements her Landlady, and agrees to
continue her Lodging there: she was brave in her Deportment, and Noble in her
Expenses, which tempted the woman of the house to be Inquisitive what she was,
whilst she on all occasions industriously avoided the declaring of her Quality
or Concerns; till finding the People wrought up to a high expectation, she
writes two Letters, and desires the Woman to get them sent to the Foreign
Post House; who greedy of that opportunity, breaks them open, but finding them
Dutch, is forced to call her Husband (who had formerly been in Holland) to read
them; He finds one directed to a great Prince, by the Name of Brother: an other
to her Steward, ordering great sums of Money, and other Gallantries to be
returned and sent to her, and subscribed Henrietta Maria de Woolway, Princess.

The Letters were sent away no body need care whether, and our witty stranger
soon found the Plot had took, by the additional respects the whole Family paid
to her new Vampt Highness. But the Vintners Wife was big with other thoughts,
considering that if she could Match this Illustrious person to some of her
friends, she and her Husband would be made for ever. At last she pitches on her
Cozen Mr. Charlton, formerly servant to a Scrivcher, but then Usurping the Name
of a Gentleman of the Temple; Him she sends for, and discovers the design; who
is resolved to engage in it, but it is held absolutely necessary, he should
pretend himself at least a Lord, to promote which, his Mother Contributes, and
sets at liberty above a hundred long Imprisoned Angels.

Rich Clothes are taken up, a Coach and Footboy in Livery hired, and a Noble
Dinner bespoke at this Tavern for my Lord, whom the German Lady with many
Entreaties was prevailed with to Honor with her Company. There several
Complements past, in fine (to make short of a well known Story) after several
Treats, and above two Hundred pounds, spent in Courtship, they are Married, and
take Noble Lodgings in the Strand, and Charlton fancies nothing less than to be
made a Duke, or some strange Mammamouchy-Titulado; When all these Magnificent
Dreams are disturbed by a sorry Journeyman-shoomaker; who coming in his Masters
absence to bring her Highness some Shoes, knew her to be Wife to the before
mentioned Shoemaker at Canterbury, with whom he had been Prentice; This he
divulges amongst the Neighbors, and the Buze at last reaches Mr. Charltons
Fathers Ear, who being a wary old Gentleman, spoke with the Fellow, and finding
him persist in his assertion, gets a Warrant, and has her Pageant Highness
before a Justice, where most of her Jewels are found Counterfeit, and she on a
charge of having two Husbands, is committed to the Gate House: There the Old
Bricklayer hears tidings of her, and very kindly came to Inquire for his Wife:
This she understanding dresses up another Woman that somewhat resembled her, to
personate her: which she acted so to the life, that the Old man (though he made
use of his Spectacles for that purpose) took her for the same, and discoursed
with her for two hours accordingly, before the Keeper and several others.

Next Sessions our Princess is tried at the Old Bailey for her Life, for having
three Husbands: the Shoemaker, the Bricklayer, and Mr, Charlton: the last she
owned, the first could not be found, the other was not much regarded, since it
was proved he had charged another woman with it in the Prison, and therefore
'twas thought he Doated, and did not know whom he have for his Wife.

Thus with applause she was Acquitted, and after acted her own part on the
public Theater in the Play made on that Occasion, called; The GERMAN
PRINCESS: but 'twas the General Vogue of the Wits, she acted much better to the
life in the World, than on its Epitome, the better, and therefore she soon left
that, and for some time Employed her self in seizing silver ^ankards in all the
Taverns and Victualing Houses about. Town, taking Lodgings, making the
Servants Drunk, and then Jilting their Masters. At this sport she at last was
Caught; and being Convicted at the Sessions, was Transported into Virginia.
There she kept up her Old Grandeur, lived high for some time, and then boldly
returns for England, in despite of the Sentence.

Then she studies new Pranks, and amongst the rest this pleasant Adventure.

Understanding there was a young Apothecary toward Westminster, newly set up,
with a very good stock, she engages an Old Woman very often to go for odd
things to his Shop; who one day taking her opportunity, asks why he did not
Marry; He replies, with all his heart, if he could meet with a Virtuous Woman,
with any thing of a Fortune; Whereupon she told him she was very Intimate with
a Gentlewoman, Neice to an Eminent Citizen in London, who kept her, and had Two
Thousand pounds of hers, payable at the day of Marriage, in his hands: and
tells him the Name, and where they lived, telling him he might Inquire of the
truth of it; and that if he thought fit, she did not doubt but to bring her
into his Company, and drive the Bargain between them: The young man Civilly
thanked her, and next day made diligent Enquiry amongst some of this Citizens
Neighbors, and finding all things as she had related, he longed to see his
intended Mistress. But Mrs. Wheedle the Matchmaker first gets him to Seal a Bond
of One Hundred Pound Penalty, to pay Fifty Pound on the day of their Marriage,
and then appoints him a day for their meeting, but fails him once or twice, on
purpose to heighten his Appetite, and at last brings him our Princess to act
the Citizens Neice, whom he Treats Nobly, and several Meetings they had: In
fine, she confessed her kind Inclinations to him, which he no sooner heard, but
in an Ecstasy of Joy he urges a Marriage forthwith, which she excuses for want
of Clothes, and alleged it was impossible she should get any from her Uncles
without smoking the Design, whereupon in a gay humor he flings a Hundred
Pieces into her Lap, and bids her provide what she pleased, being resolved
before she returned to her Uncles, to Marry her.

Accordingly next morning Married they were, and having lain with him two
Nights, she told him 'twasnecessary she should go back to her Uncles, but
desired him the next day to come and demand her, and her Portion, which she
knew could not be denied him; He was well satisfied, and the next day went
thither, Inquiring for the Grave Citizen, who demanding his business, he told
him, he came there in a civil way to demand his Wife, who was in his House, and
he hoped he would not keep her from him. The Old Gentleman started at this,
inquires who was his Wife, he replies, your Neice, Sir: and you know there is a
certain sum of Two Thousand Pound that in her right belongs to me, which I
likewise expect.

The Old Man thinking by his confidence that it was too true, in a rage runs up
stairs, and meeting his Neice, Oh you Baggage (quoth he) I thought this you
would come to, there is your goodly Husband below come for you, en get you gone
to him: The Girl that knew nothing of the matter, verily believed her Uncle was
distracted, and began to vow she knew not any thing he meant. Nay, never deny
it (fays he) but be gone to him, and with that drags her by the Arm down
stairs, and pushing her toward the Apothecary; Here take her, he cries, and
leave my House: As for the Portion you speak of, I shall not so easily part
with it, but endeavor to preserve something for her Children, if she have any:
The Apothecary with this being no less surprised, cries: What mean you Sir! I
never saw this Gentlewoman in my life before. This put them all into a greater
maze, but at last the Apothecary telling all the Histories of his Amor, they
concluded he was horribly cheated, and pity, the helpless salve for misery,
was all the comfort they could give him.

But now the Squib is almost run to the end of the Rope, Post Varios Casus,
Post tot discrimina rerum; After these notorious Pranks darly played by our
Extravagant Mock-Princess: Justice Orders her Apprehension, and after a tadious
search, she is taken in the County of Surry, and for some time detained in the
Marshalseys, thence brought to the Sessions in the Old Bailey, the 17th. of
January, 1672. Where Sentance of Death was pronounced against her. Thus (...)
Scelestum
Des^^^it Pana pede claude.


Those Witty Crimes, when varnisht with suecess,
To us seems small, Heaven counts them never the less;
For soon or late must proudest Sinners come,
With Infamy, to their deserved Doom.
Her Epitaph.
UNder this Cannopy of Stone,
Who lies? if you would have it known,
It Is German Princess, no worse Body,
Come now to her last Hole, at Noddy:
She was a Woman Great and Highborn,
But late advanced higher at Tyborn:
Where by the Hangman, and the Carter,
She was Instaul'd Lady o'th Garter:
She came a Lass, as far as Bantam,
And now she sups with Margret Trantam.
FINIS.

