THE MERIT AND HONOR Of the Old English CLERGY. ASSERTED By Laws and Customs
Patriarchal, Mosaical, Evangelical, English, Ecclesiastic, Ethnic.

AND The Demerit of the New CLERGY discovered,

By an Author ANONYMOUS.

(...). London, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, at the Angel in Ivy-Lane, 1662.

THE EPISTLE To the Reader.
Gentle Reader,
WHile the modern Enemies of Aaron and the Priesthood, Number. ^^.2.
like their Progenitors, are often viri nominis, men of high name and renown in
the Congregation, one of the first Quaeres of thy thoughts will be (if my
Prognostics fail not) Why has this Author no other name, but is Anonymus and
Apocryphal? Possibly it may be from this petty piece of Policy and Prudence,
because Authors run the same Fate and Destiny with their Books, and both are
most sought after and admired, when suppressed and called in. Even such veils
cast over any the least intellectual Beauty do not make them the less amiable
or less admirable. But to speak more plainly and probably to the Authors sense
and intendment, he had rather the Work should commend the Author, then the
Author commend (or discommend) the Work; though he really believes neither the
one nor the other very justly commendable

2. Let his Name then, Good Reader, be like the Angels to Manoah, (...) Peli,
Judge. 13:18.
Secret and reserved. His Clergie-Pride, he fears, will be thought by the
censorious Opponents very legible in each Chapter and Line of this Address and
Apology. Is not the Author some sour and supercilious Priest? Is not his mind
as highly exalted above his people, yea the Gentry, all the Week, as his Body
in the Pulpit on the Sunday? Is he not a Pharisee, that enlarges the
Phylacteries of Clergie-Honour and Dignity? Iis he not one that loves the
first seats in Synagogues, and the uppermost rooms at Feasts, and so an
exquisite Pharisee in all? In the simplicity and sincerity of a Christian he
first replieth to thee, that he cordially esteems the whole stock of Learning
no better then Zacchaeus his Sycomore (i. e. ficus fatua) a foolish barren
Fig Tree, fit to be cut down for cumbring the ground, if it keeps men aloft
and in their altitudes, and at greatest distance from their Lord and Master,
the meek and lowly one, Mat. 11.2^.
and from associating and complying with the lowest and meanest member of his
Church. He wishes with equal indifferency each Churchman, and himself
especially, either like the Angel attending on the head (the prime and
principal Christians) or like the Angel waiting at the feet (the least and
lowest member) of his Master; Joh 20.12
or else, like Jacobs Angel, Genesis 28.12.
having equal complacence and self-satisfaction in his ascent to the top, or in
his descent to the lowest step or (...) of Church Order, seeing in both
stations he may have the Angelical Felicity of always beholding the face of his
Father in Heaven. Mat. 18.10.
He calls him the most Reverend and Venerable Priest whose constant Motto is,
Cor Sacerdotis, Cancellus Christi, i. e. Durant. l. 1 sect. 21. Quanta
humilitas debet esse in Praelato and Clero.
the Chancel and the Churchman is Caput Ecclesiae, i. e. most high and
honorable in the estimate of God and the godly-wise, even when both are most
lowly in their respective situations and structures, beneath and below any
other part of Gods Church, in either sense. The Anonymous Author dares once
adventure to say in his own defense, against the common and proverbial reproach
of Clergy-Pride, That he has been so little a Pharisee for love of first seats
and rooms, which Christ upbraideth Matthew. 23.6. and love of preeminence, which
the Apostle reprocheth 3 John 9. that at this present day he enjoys no
Benefice, no Dignity, no Degree, which was ever obtained aut prece aut
obsequio; he never yet opened his lips to any Master of the Feasts, to bid him
sit up higher; Luke 14.10.
Accounting Preferment just as the godly Priests shadow; both of greatest
dimensions commonly in the declination of their age, and both by their presence
or absence scarce adding one Cubit either to his own merit and just value, or
to his own personal content and satisfaction. He has ever taken preferment as
Christ would have him take up his Cross, Mat. 16.24. Yet many primitive Saints
(...), r^n voluntarily after Martyrdom, and more importunatly loved it then an
Episcopal Throne: Theodor. l. 5. c. 38.
not by running after it, but by not running from it, or declining it when
offered and imposed by the supreme Hand of Providence. In short, each honest
and truly venerable Priest would gladly vote a new Edition and Impression (upon
the Table of his Heart) of the old Church-Canons contra Ambitum. (...) says
Saint Basil, Constit. Monast. c. 9. To be ambitious of the Order of Priesthood,
and of Preeminence in that Order, is the Devils disease and distemper, rather
becoming a son of Lucifer, that cried, Ascendam, and ero similis Altissimo,
Isa. 14.14. I will ascend, and be like the highest in the Clerical Order, then
a Disciple of Christ, who should be content to sit in any, though the lowest,
Classis. Again, in the same style of Antiquity, Maxim ambiendus qui minime
ambitiosus: non studet suscipere Sacerdotium, sed mereri, as Sidonius
Apollinaris reports of Simplicius a Catholic Bishop; He did most merit to be
sought after that was least a seeker, and studied rather to merit a Dignity
then to obtain and enjoy it. Even in Offices of eivil and secular concernment,
qui ad civil munus ambitiose pervenisset, puniendus. So the Codex of
Theodosius, l. 1. Defens. Civit. He awardeth penalty rather then dignity to any
self-seeking Officer. In Spiritual and Ecclesiastic preferment, indignus
Sacerdotio and honoribus, qui non invitus illos acciperet: He demeriteth ipso
facto any Ecclesiastical dignity, that receives it not ^^^h some nolleity and
reluctancie. He must be so far from ambition, Cod. de Episc. and Clero, l. 30.
ut quaeratur cogendus, rogatus recedat, sola illi suffragetur non recusandi
necessitas: He must be first a modest Recusant, before he is made Resident in
cathedra, by no other motive but by the necessity of his obedience. Some young
Divines, like Plutarchs young Philosophers, are (...), like those Sparrows that
still fly and mount up to the top of the house; whereas they should rather,
like David's Sparrows, be content with any room or place near Gods Altar and in
his Sanctuary. And what Christian knows not that the Devil was once on the
pinnacle of the Temple, whereas Jeremiah, the high one of God, (as his name is
by interpretation) (...) placed in puteo, in a low place of mire and dirt; and
yet was still (...), like his name, in that very station, or dejection rather?

3. I know again, that this Anonymous Author, or any Advocate of
Clergie-Revenues and Dignity, will be impeached by the common Genius of this
Age, as guilty either of some discontent and dissatisfaction with his own
estate and condition, or else of the Idolatry of Mammon, that is, Covetousness.
Can the Author make any Bar against that common Plea of Clergyadversaries? In
the aforesaid simplicity and sincerity of a Christian Priest he can and will
say, (if his own heart be not his own Jacob, that is, his own Supplanter and
Deceiver, according to that Hebrew Elegancy of Scripture, Jer. 17.9.) and he
does say, W. C. Bishop of ^nton.
in the words of a late godly Prelate, who lost the best Bishopric in all
England, a few days before his death, I thank God, I never knew that night in
which I lost one quarter of an hours rest or sleep for all my own personal
losses and deprivations. Yea, the Author is so far from all paroxysmes of
discontent in either state, that he has imbibed this principle or dogma with
the very milk of his Mother the University, That there is very small or no
difference, excepting the extremity of poverty and cleanness of Teeth, 'twixt
high or low estates of any person, Temporal or Ecclesiastic. His ground is
unmovable, and his reason invincible from Gods own mouth. When God himself was
Lord Almoner to his own people, of both Orders, Lay and Clergy, and gave them a
daily allowance of Manna from his own immediate hand, it is expressly said, He
that gathered much, had nothing over; and he that gathered little, had no lack,
Exodus 16.18. Nothing over, and no lack, are plainly and literally terms
equivalent and equipollent, even Levelling terms, And thus far the Author is a
professed Leveller in his practick judgment, past and present; a very Lazarus,
that gathers little; yet by Some other benediction, of Autarkie and
Self-sufficiency, a very Dives, He has no lack. And if by the rule of Reason,
Perfectum est cui nihil deest, then even a sequestered person has and enjoys
a perfect happiness of estate. This is no more then another Greek Copy (in
another mount, that of Sion, under the Gospel, as well as that of Sinai under
the Law) renders thus, When without purse, and scrip, and shoes, lacked ye any
thing? Luke 22.35. It is the gallant and daring Quaere of our Great Rabbi to
his own Disciples. Though then the Anonymous Author might probably and justly
say, for a double Apprentiship of years, Epist. 7.131,
with Luther, Ego pro annuo stipendio tantum novem antiquas sexagenas habeo:
praeter has ne obolus quidem aut mihi, aut fratribus e civitate accedit, that
is, only sixty pounds for his annual stipend; yet he then was, and he hops
ever shall be, so far from a querulous temper, that when he gathered much, he
had nothing over; and when little, he had no lack of sufficient contentment and
satisfaction. I would now heartily wish and pray for my Brethren, that there
were no one son of Eli the Priest among them, not one that may make the
offerings of the Lord stink, 1 Samuel 1.17.
even under the Gospel, by their foul and sordid humor of Covetousness in any
State. Ephesians. 5.3
Covetousness should not be once named among them, as becomes Saints; much
less should it be acted and practiced amongst them, as becomes Priests
especially. But it is much to be bewailed, that even some Spiritual persons are
so much flesh and blood, and so obnoxious to that foul and mechanic office of
lading themselves with thick clay, Hab. 2.6.
that they also cry out with profane Esau, Da mihi de rufo, rufo illo, Genesis
25.30. Give me that red, that red Clay; whereas even the chief Apostle was
neither ashamed nor discontented to say, Silver and Gold have I none, Act. 3.6.
Both Lay and Clergy-order may and must know, that it is with the Revenues of
Priests as with the Phylacteries of the Pharisees. God himself allowed, yea
enjoined, Exodus 13.16. Deuteronomy. 6.8. (they were jure Divino) the use of these
Phylacteries: yet when there was an enlargement and ampliation of them, though
they were conservatoria pietatis (as their name imports) it was condemned by
the Bishop of Souls in the very Pharisees, Matthew. 23.5. Thus, even just (...)
with Church-Revenues. God does not only allow and approve, but also enjoyneth a
large and liberal income to Churchmen; especially in times of affluence, peace
and plenty in the Christian State: And these Revenues also are conservatoria
pietatis, great conservatories and encouragements of Piety and Religion. But
when there is an enlargement or a dilatation of them to Pride, Covetousness,
Luxury, or Laziness, such Grandees are but Pharisaical Rabbis, and will be
sadly obnoxious to the severe censure and judgment of the great Bishop of
Souls at his last and Ecumenical Visitation. And I, and each true Son of the
Church, do heartily wish, that our Vicarius Dei in suo Regno (as Pope
Eleutherius entitleth the King) and all his Senate or Council would give what
severe Orders or Acts they please against any such Spiritual Dilapidations
which the Luxury, Covetousness, or Laziness of any of that Order may bring upon
the Church of God. For though I shall ever honor the linen Ephod upon any
Gospel-Priest; yet when I see a carking covetous Priest, I cannot but point
with the finger, as the Israelites of old, Weemse on Priests vestments.
and say, Behold the Priest with the rough and rugged Garment, i. e. one of a
rugged and rigid temper, or of a secular and covetous disposition. And yet I
doubt not but the holy and harmless Priest and great Bishop of Souls often
permits and vouchsafes room in his own Zech. 13 4
Society and Church to such or such a Judas, that carries the bag, and yet
betrayeth his Master and his Spouse the Church. That I may conclude this
Subject; I have sometimes smiled at the Romish either Wit or seeming Piety,
that gives this Reason for the Rasura capitis, the shaving of Priests heads in
their Church; That there may be Nil medium inter Coelum and Sacerdotem, Durant.
de ritibus.
not so much as an hair intervenient 'twixt Heaven and their Priests: But I
heartily wish that both our heads and hearts would prove us to be such true
Nazarites to God, as not to grieve to be shaved when we are sequestered and
deprived by the sharpness of a malicious age; and to be so far from lading our
selves with thick Clay, as to lay up little or no treasure upon earth, but a
good foundation against the time to come, 1 Timothy 6.19. ut nihil sit medium
inter Coelum and Sacerdotem.

4. A third Article or impeachment in the Common Pleas of this Age will be, Is
not this Author and Advocate of the Clergy guilty of envy, malice, or malignity
to the Laity? It is answered; As that tender and indulgent Husband once said,
Se cum uxore nunquam in gratiam rediisse, That he was never (for forty or fifty
years) once reconciled to his Wife; because no jarre or domestic quarrel had
been ever betwixt them in the revolution of so many years: even so may this
Author profess, That he was never once reconciled with any one Parishioner, nor
so much as once convented (except before Committees for Plundring Ministers)
nor did ever convent any one single person (except one, who was so exorbitant
and irregular as he never paid King, or Church, or Poor almost, without a
Distringas) before any Tribunal Ecclesiastic or Civil. The Author much
admireth that bond and obligation of the three Britan Kings upon all their
Lay-Subjects, to wit, That all should take the injury of a Priest as an injury
done to all; and, That the best and noble persons should be loco cognatorum and
patroni, such Patrons of the Clergy as if some consanguinity in nature were
betwixt both Orders. Thus Kenneth the I. King of the Scots, Anno 840. the
Learned King Alfred, Anno 905. and King Edgar, Can. 5. How Christian, how
gracious, how gallant would such Lay-Charity be to the Order of the Church! But
the Author applies one Canon, more proper and pertinent to his own Order, even
unto his own heart and soul, and unto the souls of all the Clergy of the
Church, as truly adoring that old English word; Cl^v^shev. Council sub. ^^uth
rio Archiep. apud Spelman p. 25^
Ut praedicator pacis and charitatis nullum invidiae aut odii fomitem adversus
Laicos, ne ad momentum quidem, susciperet: That is, in English Translation, and
practice too, I hope, That no Preacher of peace and charity should entertain
the fuel and fomes of envy and malignity toward any of the Laity, even for
one single moment or minute. Lastly, he endeavors himself, and exhorts all
of Sacred Order to a treble Sacred Ambition or Emulation, even in Apostolical
Language: 1. (...). To be ambitiously emulous of preaching Love and Peace, Romans
15.20. 2. (...) To be Leaders and Captains in giving honor to others, not in
snatching to themselves, Romans 12.10. 3. Lastly, (...), 1 These. 4.11. To be
ambitiously inquisitive of the true Christian and Clerical mode of being quiet
and peaceable, and even industrious Students in that Christian Art of unity and
love. Amen.

5. There is yet behind one Article and Impeachment in the Common Pleas of the
Age against the Clergy, concerning the idleness and laziness of some of the
Church Order. I must assert and confess it to both Orders, that the only
definition of a Churchman, or Man of God, which I find in any page or line of
either Testament, is most probably that of S. Paul, 2 Timothy 3.17. (...), The
Minister is the Man of God well jointed and composed (or exactly articulated)
to every good work: His soul not dislocated, disjoynted, or lame and defective
in the paths of Piety to God, or Charity to his Brother. As for Loyterers in
Gods Harvest, I know not any Animal, that lives, moves, and has a being upon
Gods earth, that is more despicable or detestable then a Spiritual Shepherd
that zelously minds the Fleece or Fat of his Flock, studieth no Book so much
as his Easter-Book, and (in Saint Paul's words) builds with Gold or Silver for
himself, 1 Cor. 3.12.
and affords only Hay or Stubble to his flock. This is not to give attendance
to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine; this is not to give himself wholly to
them, and continue in them, 1 Timothy 4.13, 15, 16. This is not to endure hardness
as a good soldier of Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 2.3. There is indeed a Militia
imaginaria, as the Law in Duarenus calls it, when secular Soldiers do no
duty, lie still in warm quarters and secure Garrisons, and yet receive pay: But
in the Sacred Militia, he that is (...), 2 Timothy 2.3. and yet miles imaginarius
also, has a base and dishonorable Chivalry: Super Magnificat, p. 837.
call him salem infatuatum, says honest Gerson, salt that has lost its
savor, Mat. 5.13.
fit only for the dunghill, and to be trodden under foot by men, and by Angels
also. He that lies still and warm in die Solis, on many, many Christian
Sundays, and does not, ^sal. 19.5.
as the Sun, rejoice as a Giant to run the course of his Function, does not
deserve the blessing of the Priesthood, Jer. 31.14. I will satiate the Soul of
the Priests with Fatness. But that curse rather is his portion, His right eye
shall be utterly darkened, Zech. 11.17. and his Sun shall go down at noonday,
Mich. 3.6. and so he shall be a very Sodomite, groping at the Door both of the
Church Militant and Triumphant also. Genesis 19.11.
The Hebrew Proverb of each Israelite was, Blessed is he that dusteth himself
in the dust of the Temple. And whereas the Minister carries Labor and Dust in
his name (...), Blessed is he that dusteth himself in the Dust of the Pulpit.
And for Honor and Assiduity of that Labor in that Dust ye have the united
Votes and Suffrages of several Councills, Council. Tolet. 2. Can. 4. Tom. 4.
page 800. Constantinop. 2. Can. 19. Tom. 5. page 328. Aurelian. Can. 33. page
713. Trident. Sess. 24. Can. 4. In fine or Conclusion, whereas the Bases of the
Temple had Oxen pourtrayed on them, and Lions, and Cherubim, this Anonymous
Advocate of the Clergy wishes, H. Pintus in Isa. 31.
even with a Popish Author, that each English Churchman were such a Basis of
the Temple, 1 Timothy 3.15:
a pillar and ground of Truth, to his utmost possibility; to wit, somewhat of
the Oxen, for constant labor and industry; of the Lion, for courage against
the most daring Offenders; and of the Cherub, Ob scientiae plenitudinem, for
fullness of illumination and instruction. And such a Churchman as this does
justly merit the complicated, decompounded and superabundant honor which Saint
Paul enjoyneth, 1 Thessalonians. 5.13. and which is the whole intendment and design of
this Anonymous Author: who in an holy and humble imitation of him who wrote
himself, not by the Grace of God, nor by the Providence of God, Durandi
Rationale, in Pr^^m.
but sola Dei patientia Episcopus, does justly write himself,

By the mere Patience of God, His Presbyter, And Your most humble Servant,A. A.

The Merit of the Old, AND Demerit of the New ENGLISH CLERGY demonstrated.
SECTION I. An Introduction concerning the Modern Zamzummims and mischievous
Agitators against the Clergy.
To the English Gentry.
Most generous and courteous Sirs,
THere have been of late some Zamzummims and sons of Anak amongst you, though
not of you. These (as their Name is by interpretation) have been Turpia and
prava cogitantes ac molientes, i. e. Great Inventors and Masters of Mischief.
And the gemination of the word, Deuteronomy. 2.20, 21.
Zamzummim, notes in the Hebrew dialect, High and mighty ones for strength of
Body and Mind to do mischief, or horrid machinations. These have looked upon
the English Churchmen (of the first and best Edition in this Century) as upon
so many inconsiderable and despicable Grasshoppers of the Earth. Number. 13.33.
And while the Sacred Scripture calls them indeed Earthen Vessels, 2 Cor. 4.7.
they have made them all in their new account no better then Terrae filii, i.
e. Sons of the Earth, men of base and vile Allay in respect of their Generous
Order. And yet by the dispensation of Divine Providence, both these sons of
Anak (to complete the Parallel) have been themselves odious and despicable in
the eyes of the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, and that menace and
commination is almost verified, Psa. 73.20
Thou shall make their Image to vanish out of the City. These men have had a
gallant Levelling Project in reference to the Church, while Self-interest has
forbade any such design in relation to the State and Commonwealth.

It Is very true, that the God of Order and Father of Lights has made and
constituted a double Aequinoctial in the compass of the Year, the one Vernal,
the other Autumnal, in which the brightest Day cannot brag of a Minutes length
beyond the soulest and darkest Night. But these sons of Disorder and Confusion
have often and often voted and designed a third and new Ecclesiastic
Aequinoctial in the Church; in which the Lights of the first, second and third
Magnitude must be equallized with the most obscure, ignorant and illiterate
Teachers. Neither would they have any regret or aversion, if all such Lights
had been whelmed sub modio, under a Bushel, or (like Achans accursed thing)
buried under ground, and not one of them set up in a Candlestick, especially if
it be a Golden one, a place of value and eminence.

It seems the sond Fancy of some sons of false Light in old Tertullians days,
by a Platonic Revolution, has lighted upon our modern Age: Tertul. de
Monogamia, c. 12.
Quum extollimur and inflamur adversus Clerum, tunc Unum Omnes sumus, tunc
Omnes Sacerdotes, etc. i.e. When we are extolled and swollen big with a Tympany
of spiritual pride, then we are all One, and all Priests; and that not without
a Sacred Text to justify it (a very Jus divinum for contempt of Ministry)
Sacerdotes nos Deo and Patri fecit, Apo. 5.10.
i. e. We are all Kings, all Priests to God. Jude 11.
Just all Corahs Company (for the gainsaying of Corah is a sin under the
Gospel) All the Congregation are Sancti, every one of them Saints and Holy, as
holy Orders can make them.

These grand Agitators and Pragmaticks in Church Affairs have possibly another
fair (or foul) Precedent from some of their modern Progenitors, even in Queen
Elizabeth's days. Sir Henry Spelm^ns Preface to his Councils.
The Plot was this: That while in our Royal English Arms there is the Cross
and the Lily in a fair conjunction, their Envious eyes would have wholly rased
out the Cross (the Emblem of the Church) that so the Lily (the Emblem and
Cognizance of the State) might singly and solely flourish, exceeding Solomon in
all his Glory.

If these men had gone one step further in their furious Z^al, and una and
eadem litura, by one and the same motion had blotted out and expunged the Cross
from their own Foreheads, had they not made themselves and the whole State very
Gallant and Triumphant Christians? And whereas it was once the pious Vote of a
King of Israel, and one learned in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians, and the
man of Visions and Miracles beyond all others, Number. 11.29.
Would to God all the Lords people were Prophets; that Vote would have been by
these wholly inverted, or perverted, Would to God all the Lords Prophets were
no other then one of the people: and so the Cross it self (the Emblem of the
Church and Churchmen) wholly have been crucified to all intents and purposes.

I am now ashamed and blush (Gentle and Honored Sirs) that I should tell you
such true stories of our own Zamzummims, sons of false Light and Fanatic
Agitators, before whom the whole Body, or Carcass, of our English Church bled
afresh, at the presence of such Monsters of men. God grant there be no Spawn or
Issue left of such Levelling Edomites, that still cry, Down with it, down with
it even to the ground.

The Authors grand Design by these small Papers is, to make our own English
Statute more authentic and unrepealable in all English, generous and Christian
hearts, 8 El^z. cap. ^. in Preamble.
namely that of 8 Elizabeth cap. 1. That the Clergy is a High State, one of the
greatest States of the Realm. And this shall be asserted against all our new
Edomites, 1. Jure Antiqu^-Anglican^, by the old English account; 2. Jure
Naturae and Patriarchali, by the Law of Nature and Patriarchs before the Law;
3. Jure Mosaico and Israelitico, under the Law of Moses; 4. Jure Evangelico, by
the Evangelical account; 5. Jure Ecclesiastico, by Primitive Ecclesiastic
account; 6. Jure Ethnico, even by the account of Heathens themselves.

But before all or any of those, I am constrained from the urgency of the
present Posture of Ecclesiastic Affairs, to give my Reader a double Essay or
Exercitation: One touching the Merit and just Value of the true Old English
Clergy; The other touching the Demerits and depreciating the New English
Clergy, and of all Sectaries, of what division, subdivision, and of what
denomination soever. Though possibly (upon Second thoughts) the grand Defects
and huge and gross Enormities of all such Factious spirits, like the Faces or
Dregs, are most fit and proper for the Bottom and Sediment of this Discourse;
unto which I shall defer them.

SECT. II. Of the grand Merit of the Old English Clergy.
LEt not, I pray (Generous and Courteous Sirs) this one word seem the effect of
Clergy-Pride, if we dare venture to tell you, That there are no less then eight
or nine signal and eminent Honors and Favors which the Great and Catholic
Bishop of Souls has vouchsafed to our Ecclesiastic Order; equal to which the
Divine Benediction has hardly deigned to any Age or any Kingdom besides.

1. Speeds Hist. l. 9. c. 19. page 9 ^7.
The Union of the Houses of York and Lancaster was effected by the Counsels of
Bishop Morton. A rare Accommodation and Expedient for the joint and united
welfare of the Church and State.

2. Idem, c. 20. page 989.
The Union of England and Scotland was wrought by the treaty of Bishop Fox.
That great Wall of Partition was beaten down by a blessed Episcopal Hand.

3. The Conversion of the Kingdom from Paganism was by Saint Augustine
Archbishop of Canterbury.

4. Dr. Tailor, Epistle to Episc. asserted.
The Reformation was begun and promoted by Bishops. These were those Aarons,
whose hands lift up did defeat all the forces of the Amalekites, and gave
Benediction to all true Israelites. So that we may borrow (without just Envy)
the words of K. Alured to Walfigeus the Bishop, Felicia tunc tempora fuerunt
inter omnes Anglia populos, etc. i. e. England was often the Fortunate Island.
His Reason is, Sapientes extiterunt in Anglica gente de Spirituali gradu, etc.
Because those of Spiritual Order were Learned, Wise and Godly.

Let this make a fifth signal Benison even in a modern Age: That as in England
a judicious and authentic Antiquary has fixed this Asterism upon English
Kings, Spolman Council. Praef.
Plures pii Reges in Anglia quam in ulla alia Provincia, quantumcunque
populosa, i. e. More pious Kings have been in little England, then in any other
Province, though never so populous or numerous: so the same Divine Benediction
has bestowed a singularity and specialty of Favor and Honor upon the Body of
this Clergy, That there have been more Learned men in England then are to be
found among all the Ministers of the Religion in France, Flanders, Germany,
Poland, Denmark, Scotland, and all Europe besides. Thus Cambridge and Oxford
answer to the Puritan Petition exhibited to K. James Anno 1603. page 31. And
can it once be imagined by him that has Charity as a grain of Mustard Seed,
that such a numerous company of such Learned, Grave and Judicious Clerks should
prefer a Libel to such a Learned and Judicious Prince as he was?

Add yet a sixth signal Honor, That the late most Odious ( i. e. Dignified)
Clergy, as Bishops, Deans and Prebends, have been (...) (in the singular and
new-coined Greek of the Angel) highly favored and honored above others. For
though their Number exceeds not above 4. or 500. Cambden.
persons, yet they have been more Able and Athletick and Public Champions of
Protestant religion against Popery, then above 9284. Parochial Ministers. In
this I dare appeal to all Learned Gentry or Clergy of what Party or Persuasion
soever. These, like Gedeons 300. Soldiers, have done the Duty and Service of
many thousands, though their Reward has been of late, to be discarded and
disbanded by the men of the new Militia, or Malitia rather.

If all these Six signal Honors add nothing to the Merit and Price of that
English Order, let them give them all an Ostracism for an Honorary, Arist.
and write upon them, Nemo inter vos excellat; an Athenian banishment for ten
years, for being too much Athenian or Learned.

That I may yet add ad cumulum, and make up a very Galeed, i. e. an heap, of
Witnesses, take a seventh signal Honor and Prerogative, which is the greater
because it comes out of the mouth of an Enemy. Even one of the grand Rabbis
and Patriarchs of the Modern Age gives them a fair voluntary Attestation and
ingenuous Confession. His own words are these ensuing. If we had been at Gods
elbow (such his own dialect and language) when he bounded out the Nations, and
appointed out Times and Seasons that men should live in, we should not have
known in what Place or Nation we should have chosen to have lived, in respect
of the enjoyment of the Gospel, rather then in this Kingdom. So Thom as Goodwin
in his Grand Interest of State, Febr. 25. 1645. This Ex ore tuo then was spoken
above 20. years before that date, as himself witnesses; When the Episcopal
Order and English Liturgy were in their very (...) and altitude, their very
Meridian Luster.

Another Rabbi of the same Fraternity gives a fair Concession extorted only by
the virtue and force of Truth, and that with no small Passion and Indignation.
O how does the Carriage of these men in some degree justify the Harshness,
Sourness, Domineering and Cruelty of some of the Prelates? There is occasion
given to think they were not such vile men as heretofore we thought they were.
So Jer. Buroughs, Irenici page 216. Anno 1646. John 11.51.
This, sure, he spoke not of himself, but as being a High Priest (and true
Prophet) for that same year.

If the mouth of two or three Witnesses will not establish this word, hear the
grand and united Authors of the late deformed Reformation. That instead of true
Piety and Power of Godliness, they had opened the very floudgates to all
Impiety and Profaneness; and that after they had removed the Prelatical yoke
from their shoulders (which they had tied on with their own Hands and
Subscriptions, and were now Viri Belial, without yoke) by their Covenanted
endeavors, there was a rueful, deplorable and deformed face of the affairs of
Religion: That instead of Reformation, they might say with Sighs, what their
Enemies said in Scorn, they had a Deformation in Religion, and swarming with
noisome Errors, Heresies and Blasphemies, Schism, Separations, Divisions and
Subdivisions. Thus, thus the Testimony of J. C. subscribed by the Ministers of
the Province of London, page 26, 29, 30, 31.

You may easily judge (Courteous Gentlemen) what kind of Builders they were,
without any Edification; though their fingers do very much itch (if their Wits
were as good as their Wills) to rear up a second Babel. (...).

Let the Reverend Clergy then (yet further) Ride on prosperously, and good luck
have they with their signal Honor in the eighth place, from the indifferent,
impartial Transmarine Testimony. Florentissima Anglia, Ocellus ille
Ecclesiarum, Peculium Christi singular, Spei melioris vexillum, splendida
Domini caulae. -- Horrore toti concutimur ad versam hanc pulcherrimam Ecclesiae
inter vos faciem. -- hactenus in terris and Ecclesiae Theatro eminuere. i. e.
The most Florid and Illustrious Church, the right Eye of the Churches, Christ's
own grand Peculiar, the very Ensign and Banner of all good Hope, the most
splendid Sheepfold of the great Shepherd and Bishop of Souls, the most fair and
eminent Candlestick on the Theater. Thus, even thus, the very Geneva-men and
their Learned Diodate, ad Conventum Ecclesiasticum Londini. Sound Doctrine for
the late Assembly-men.

Again, is it not very Rare and Admirable, that with the Geneva-men, another
Transmarine Author, a French Ambassador (Monsieur Rogne) sings an almost
Antiphonon, Conference at Hampton Court, second day, p. 38.
giving out at Court and at Canterbury, upon the view of our Churchmen and
Church Service, That if the Reformed Churches in France had kept the same
Orders amongst them which we observed, he was assured that there would have
been many Thousands of Protestants more there then now there are.

Now as those eminent Transmarine Persons were at least seeming Fautors and
Fomenters of our old English Church; so others (of a more gallant Equipage then
any Novel Teachers) were no friends to the profane violaters of Sacred Persons
or Revenues of the Church. Luther for Germany calls Bona Papae ( i. e. as they
are miscalled, Lands of Bishops, Deanes and Chapters) the Churches just
Patrimony, Luther on Gal. 6.6.
not to be deprived by the Laiety upon Scruples of Conscience, because Popish,
etc. and (says he) the Devils own highway to destroy Religion is either by
Errors of Heretics, or else by depriving or defrauding Gods Ministers: and
this is the Devils Master-plot.

This is a German Witness serving indifferently for our English Horizon. Calvin
for France does not befriend our English Zamzummims, who complains, That the
Patrimony of Christ and the Patrimony of the Church are not employed to the
Sacred Honor of the Clergy, is my grief; and all good men lament this case
with me. So Calvin de Necessit. Reform.

Lastly, Knox for Scotland gave this deathbed Doctrine against our English
false Teachers: Brethren (says he) we have fought against Heretics, and God
has blessed us: we must now have a strong fight against the Sacrilegious. And
accordingly at St. Andrews Anno 1582. there was a general Fast throughout the
Realm for appeasing Gods wrath for the sin of Sacrilege.

Let our Novel Teachers in England either defy this Quaternion of
Gospel-Souldiers, Diodati for Geneva, Luther for Germany, Calvin for France,
Knox for Scotland; or else down on their knees, and ask Pardon and Blessing
from their old Mother the Church, or their Fathers the Bishops of that Church.

In the ninth and last place, the Honor of the old Clergy might be
demonstrated and made visible and conspicuous from the Antithesis of all Novel
Teachers. Opposita juxta se posita magis elucescunt. Their Disobedience and
Rebellion, their Sacrilege, their Perjury, their Excommunicating of Creed, ten
Commandments, and blessed Sacraments, their Oppression and Robbing of Brethren
(against the Laws of their own Masters) their Apostatizing, Temporizing, and
Symbolizing with Papists (in more then ten or twelve particulars;) these, these
are the Lees and Dregs which (as before was said) shall be reserved for the
very Bottom and Sediment of our whole Discourse; if our good Constantines
Mantle, i. e. our King Charles his Act of Oblivion, do not palliate, even
wholly cover and hide them; or such foul matters will not make my Papers rather
sink then bear them. However, here I give breath to the gentle Reader by a
wilful, and studied, and charitable Paralepsis at the present.

Now, Generous Sirs, weigh all these premised Considerations in the balances of
Reason and Religion; and when ye have weighed their Signal Actions, 1. in
Unions, 2. in Conversions, 3. in Reformations, 4. their numerous Offspring, 5.
their active and vigorous Achievements, 6. their domestic Enemies suffrages,
7. their Transmarine Friends and Fautors, 8. the Defects and Enormities of
their Competitors, etc. Ye may justly pronounce, Euge bone serve, to the Old
Order; and, MEAN, MEAN: TEKEL, i. e. Ye are numbered, weighed in the balance,
and found too light, even to all our English Novellists.

SECT. III. Of Jus Antiquo-Anglicanum, or the old English Account.
IF my Reader be of true English temper and complexion, then (besides the
aforesaid signal Honors and Favors to the Clergy-Order) he may please to
know, That 1. the Authority of the first Christian King of Britain, 2. the Bond
and Obligation by Oath of English Kings, 3. the gracious Concessions of some
English Parliaments, 4. the temper and tenor of our English Laws, 5. the
Devotion of our English Gentry and Soldiery, 6. the sad and bitter Execrations
on Malignants to the Order, 7. the ancient English Usages and Customs; these,
all these, are as so many Cords, i.e. invincible Inducements and Engagements,
to bind them and their hearts and souls both to the Service of Gods Altar, and
to all the Ministers that attend upon it.

For the First; It Is a bold and a blind Error of that grand Popish Clerk,
Bellarm. de Laicis, c. 17.
Adannos CCC. nullus in Ecclesia Christianus Princeps, i.e. There was no
Christian King in the world for the first three Centuries of years: Whiles by
the signal mercy of the King of Kings, Lucius, the first Christian and Baptized
King, did found our English Episcopal Sees and Chairs by his Christian, Royal
and Exemplary Benevolence; and both his Baptism and Royal Charity did bear at
least so early a date as Anno 176. Epist. ad Carolum R.
So Sir H. Spelman, Con^il. Now if the first Christian King was the Patron and
Maecenas, and had the honor to love our Nation, Luke 7.5.
and build us more then a Synagogue, will any Christian English Gentleman run
to the Region of his Antipodes, and count it a great point of honor to be the
Apollyon and Abaddon, the raser and subverter, of such Noble Foundations and
Endowments? This were to verify that ignominious English Proverb, Pater noster
(God, or our King Lucius) built them, and Our Father is become the Apollyon.
Every sober English Gentleman has at least the Loyalty and Charity which the
very Heathen Philistines had to each succession of Kings, and to call his own
Lucius his Abimelech; Pater meus Rex Lucius aedificavit.

2. For the Bond and Obligation by Oath of English Kings; So liberal and
indulgent in point of Honor were our English Ancestors, that that sacred Order
has another peculiarity and specialty of Favor: which is, That all English
Kings, in all successions and generations to this very day, give a treble Bond
and Obligation for defense and protection to them, even a treble Cord by the
Coronation Oath. Which is a favor not vouchsafed or deigned to any other Order
and Profession of men. First, he swears to preserve the Laws, Customs and
Franchises granted to the Clergy by the glorious Saint Edward his Predecessor:
Then, for peace and godly agreement (according to his Power) to God, the holy
Church and Clergy: Lastly, to preserve to us, and the Churches committed to our
charge, all Canonical Privileges, and to be Protector and Defender of the
Bishops, etc. This, all this, is to be found in the Records of the Exchequer,
and His Majesty's Remonstrance May 26. 1641. and in an old Manuscript in the
public Library of Oxford. And if this singularity of favor will seem an
invidious and odious observation in some English eyes, I think there is
somewhat correspondent and equivalent in that Commonwealth in which there was a
pure Theocraty. By act and power of the King of Kings one Rod, Number. 17.8
one Tribe, even that of Levi, had buds and blossoms and ripe Almonds, (a
treble Benison by miraculous mercy) whilst no such fructification, no such
florid blessing, upon any or all the rest of the Tribes in Gods Israel. Now let
any Christian Gentleman judge whether he is not a Traitor to the Kings soul,
(his Unica, or Dearling, as King David calls it Psalm. 22.20.) which shall
persuade him that his treble Oath is but a Gypsies knot, fast and loose with a
breath.

3. The gracious Concessions of some Parliaments, so eminent and exemplary that
they all disclaim, and that upon Scripture-ground, any Authority to dispose
Clergy-estates. Parl. 25. Edw. 1.
Laymen have no authority to dispose of the Goods of the Church; but (as the
holy Scriptures do testify) they are committed only to the Priests to be
disposed of. And another says, That the King by evil Counselors caused the
Temporalties of Bishops to be seized into his hands, 1 Edw. 3. c. 2.
to the great damage of the Bishops: Which from henceforth shall not be done.

4. The temper and tenor of English Law. In the Magna Charta (confirmed 32.
times by our best Parliaments) it is expressly said, We have granted to God, and
by this our Charter have confirmed for us and our heirs for ever, that the
Church of God shall be free, and shall have her whole rights and liberties
inviolable. The great Charter, 2 Part. Instit. proaem.
says Sir Edw. Cook, is no new Law; but it is declaratory of the principal and
fundamental Laws of England. And he says, the Nobles and great Officers were
to be sworn to the observation of it. And by a Parliament it was judged and
taken as the Common Law of England. 25 Edw. 1.
And (which is not unworthy your observation) in our printed Statutes there is
an heavy curse pronounced against those who shall break this grand Charter. 12
Hen. 3. page 23.
Whilst then the Souls of Kings, and Souls of Parliaments, and Souls of
Nobles, and the Soul of the Law lie all at stake, and must be (...) for the
Clergy, he is a Fellow without a Soul (in the Spanish Proverb of a debauched
and dissolute person) and no Christian Gentleman, that studieth and meditateth
the violation and alienation of that Reverence and Maintenance. Deuteronomy. 27.17.
Cursed be he that removes the ancient Landmark. And all the people shall
say, Amen.

5. The Devotion of English Gentry and Soldiery has been such that a very
ancient Bishop, and our own Countryman, says, Jo. Sari^b. Polychron. l. 6.
c. 10.
Jam inolevit consuetudo solennis, i. e. Even in his ancient days it was yet a
more ancient and solemn usage and custom, that Ea ipsa die qua militari cingulo
decoratur, i. e. In that very day in which they were honored with the badge
and girdle of a Military Person, they took their Swords, imposed them on the
Altar of Gods Church, and made a celebrious Protestation of devoting both their
weapons and themselves, as the obsequious Propugners of the Altar and its
Ministers. Neither was this Superstitious practice (as some would call it)
without the fair precedent of all the 12. Number. 2.
Tribes, encompassing and guarding the Tribe of God; as shall be evidenced in
the sequel of our Discourse, touching the Israelitish account.

6. The sad and bitter Execrations and Imprecations against Malignants to the
Order, are solemn denunciations of an utter, total, final and eternal
separation from God and his blessing, Body, Soul, Estate, Posterity, and all.
Ye may read the black lines of such composed by the command of that great King
Edgar, apud Jo. Seldom. in Notis ad Eadmerum, page 155, 156. They are doomed to
the same damned end with lapsed Angels and Devils, Cain, Judas. And even these
Curses are but Copies drawn from the Originals and Authenticks of the meekest
man, Moses, Deuteronomy. 33.11. and Darius his curse, Ezr. 6.12. and Malachi, 3.7, ad
finem. And the Curse was even visible of late days, according to the
Prophetic Prediction of a great Sage and Judge of English Law, On the book of
Statutes, Anno 51. Hen. 3.
That a sacrilegious, or but slovenly, Religion ends commonly (as ours lately
did) in downright Atheism. Sir Edw. Cook in Winchesters Case.

7. For the last, the ancient English Usages and Customs; the Priest had such
eminent honor, that Minori Thano (i. e. villae Domino, atque Militi)
aequiparabatur, in censu capitis pariter aestimatus, pariterque alias
honorandus, i. e. His honor and account was in Equipage to the Lord of the
Manor and Town: Spelman Praef. Council. And again, Seldom Hist. c. 14. sect. 1.
Comes praesidebat foro Comitatus, non solus, sed adjunctus Episcopo; hic ut
Divinum jus, ille ut Humanum diceret, alterque alteri consilio esset and
auxilio. i. e. The Bishop and the Sheriff were Coassessors in the County Court,
etc.

Can we yet further give instance of some singularity and specialty of favor
in our English Constitutions and Canons of Charity? The Bishop (says Sir Edw.
Part 1. fol. 86.
Cook) non facit homagium Regi, dicens, Ego sum homo tuus, does not homage even
to the King, saying, I am your Man; sed fidelitatem, but fealty: quia homo est
solius Dei, because he is the Man only of God. The Parson also, in regard of
his continual attendance upon that sacred Function, is freed from all personal
charges that may hinder him in his Calling. For such an one shall not be chosen
Bailiff, Bedel, Reeve, or other such Officer; nor be compelled to come to the
Sheriffs Turn, to the Leets of the King or other Lords; Finch, Of Law, book 2.
c. 1. p. 88
and all this by the course of Common Law, says Sir H. Finch.

What a strange inversion and perverting of those Orders from some men's Pride
and Petulancy, who while they would seem to sit on the Sunday at the feet of
their Apostles and Teachers, yet expect to have them all the week after (...)
Hominum homines, in base and servile compliances and homages to each man's
humor and fancy.

In short, while we have had, Courteous Sirs, the Bond and Obligation by Oaths
of Kings, Nobles, Parliaments, and constant Customs and Usages as declaratory,
to indemnifie and secure the Clergies Honor and Patrimony, must they not even
yet be inviolable and intemerate? Let the Oath to poor and mean Gibeonites, by
Gods own verdict and sentence, be the end of this Controversy. The Case was
thus; The Gibeonites were a poor, Pagan, Heathenish Nation, once devoted to
destruction: There was yet the interposition of an Oath for their Indemnity;
and there was an addition of a Dedication a part post: They were given to God
(therefore called Nethinims, Ezr. 2.47.
from (...) to give) for the service of the Temple, to be Hewers of wood, Josh.
9.27
and Drawers of water: An office vile and base even to a Proverb, From the
hewer of thy wood unto the drawer of thy water, Deuteronomy. 29.11. Yet about 400.
years after, King Saul, 2 Samuel 21.
in his zele too, to please the humor of the people, seeking to cut asunder
all Bonds and Obligations to that despicable Gibeonite, God sends three years
Famine, and hangs up Saul's seven sons in Gibeah, for their fathers violation
of that Oath. This the Verdict, this the Judgment and Execution. Suppose ye
then, Gentle Sirs, all the English Clergy to be Gods Nethinims, given to his
service; and suppose them as vile and base as Hewers of wood and Drawers of
water: Will the same God that was so tender over poor Pagan Gibeonites, be
wholly neglective of our own Christian, Godly and Learned Priests and
Highpriests, one and all? O rather let that Canon of the Council of Nice
prevail, (...). Let old English Oaths, Customs, Usages, Laws, Concessions,
Execrations prevail.

SECT. IV. Jus Israeliticum and Mosaicum; The Israelitish account under the Law
of Moses.
IF neither the signal and personal Merit of our old English Clergy, nor the
fair practice and precedents of our own Ancestors will oblige, there are yet
many Cords of love (as the Prophet phraseth it) twisted from the joint practice
of the most Generous, Noble and Heroic Israelites, in whom no guile; who lived
also in a pure and mere Theocratie, as Gods peculiar Portion and Appropriation.

Begin we with Moses; Whose own word (as Gods great Legislator) might determine
this Controversy, for our more glorious Ministry under the Gospel. Moses, the
man Moses, (...), was the meekest man in all the earth, Number. 12.3. Moses was of
generous Extraction, (...), a fair and handsome person in the eyes of God, Acts
7.20. Moses was deeply learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, Acts 7.22.
Moses was valiant and courageous, (...) ^ampion forty years in the (...) ness
against all Zamzummims (...) the sons of Anak. Moses also (...) friend; (...)
the appellative of him only and of Abraham in all the Old Testament. This,
even this Moses was the noble and singular friend of Aaron and of the Tribe of
Levi by a specialty of favor and endearment. This meekest person in all the
earth gives a large benediction on them, and a double execration and
imprecation on all Malignants to that despised Tribe, Deuteronomy. 33.11. Bless, Lord,
(not him only, but) his substance, and accept the work of his hands. And then
he shifteth his foot from Mount Gerizzim to Mount Ebal; Smite through the loins
of them that rise against him, and of them that hate him, that they rise not
again. This mirror of Gentility and Lenity, upon Gods own record, first
falls on cursing of such Edomites; next, gives an extensive and entailed
curse upon the loins of their enemies; then the fatal doom of a final and
irrevocable destruction, praying to the God of mercies, that such may never
rise again.

Go on now, ye profane world: ride on prosperously, ye Edomites and Zamzummims.
Can these words be only airy and windy? Are these curses but bruta fulmina?
Sure I am that if it be deeply considered, that the holy Apostle fetches our
Gospel Ministry from Aaron, Hebr. 5.4. No man takes this honor unto himself,
but he that is called of God, as was Aaron; and Gospel-maintenance from Moses
Law, 2 Cor. 9. and Saint Jude makes the gainsaying of Core a sin committed
under the Gospel: and, Jude 11.
Jer. 33.20, 21.
If ye can break my Covenant of the day and my Covenant of the night, and that
there should not be day and night in their season; even such is my Covenant
with the Levites and Priests, my Ministers: and lastly, if the Gospel Ministry
be more glorious then that of the Law, (whereof Saint Paul gives most
elaborate proof and argumentation, 2 Cor. 3. per totum) I say, if all or any of
these are demonstrable, then it is more then a probability, that the influence
of Levi's benediction, or the influence of that imprecation against his
enemies, is not expired or exstinct even under the Meridian of our Gospel-age.
Let any generous and Christian Soul first read the pattern of Moses in the
Mount, and lay it close to his Reins, and flat and plain to his Heart.

2. Next, I dare arraign and convent all the Tribes, not of the Gentility only,
but of the vulgar Laity also, in our own Israel, and give them another
specialty and pattern of honor and favor in the Theocratie, the Government of
Gods choice and administration. Is it not, generous Sirs, highly observable by
you, and by each called Christian, that the Lord of Hosts was so tender and
indulgent to the Militia togata, Number. 2.2. Ainsworth
that by his special order and instruction the twelve Tribes were each and all
of them of the Lifeguard to the Sanctuary and to the Ministers of the
Sanctuary? Judah, Issachar, and Zebulun on the East; Dan, Asher, and Naphtali
on the North; Reuben, Simeon, and Gad on the South; Ephraim, Manasseh, and
Benjamin on the West; and the Sanctuary in the midst of them all, or in
meditullio, and Aaron with the Priests and Levites immediately surrounding and
encompassing the Sanctuary: So that the Sanctuary and the Ministers of it were
encircled and guarded about by the auxiliary Forces of all the twelve Tribes
and of all the men in the Camp. It is now offered to the option and vote of all
ingenuous persons, whether they had rather choose to make a breach and violation
of that order, by carrying weapons not defensive, but offensive, to the
Ministers of the Sanctuary, or else become Angeli castrametantes, Angels, even
guardian Angels, pitching their Tents round about them.

3. The same Divine Wisdom in his own peculiar Commonwealth, to enforce a
happy association and blessed fraternity 'twixt Gentry and Clergy, took and
selected some eminent person of the State, and another eminent person of the
Church, and united and sorted them together: Just as the same Piety and
Prudence under the New Testament consorted the very Apostles, two and two, for
the ferment and perpetuity of love and respect among themselves, and to
consummate a very equipage of honor from each mutually and reciprocally. Exodus
17.12
Thus was Moses consorted with Aaron in the very first field that ever his
people fought; and the Lord caused it to be recorded ad perpetuam rei memoriam,
v. 14. Write this for a memorial in a Book; that the same course might for ever
after be holden in all. The like union and conjugation was of Barak with
Deborah, Judge. 4.9. Isa. 37. 2 Chronicles. 20.14. 2 Kings 13.14.
of Hezekiah the King with Isaiah the Royal Prophet, of Iehoshaphat with
Iabaziel, of Ioash with Elisha. Thus both the Lily and the Cross were very
consistent in Gods Heraldry. And their mutual and reciprocal honor and
respects to each makes them both, as the Church in the Canticles, terribilis
sicut acies ordinata, i. e. terrible to others, and amiable 'twixt themselves,
as an Army with Banners.

Thus, 1. the signal vote and prayer of the King of Israel, Gods great
Legislator, 2. the posture of the twelve Tribes of Israel, 3. the fraternity of
Sacred and Secular Order, make up King Salomons treble cord to bind and unite
their affections reciprocally to each other.

4. It is highly observable by the proud contemners of the Clergy, and singly
and solely is an argument demonstrative and invincible for Priestly honor and
dignity against all gainsayers of Corahs order, That cum in omni natione
certum aliquod nobilitatis argumentum, Joseph. in vita sua.
i. e. Every Nation has some particular way of ennobling, and some particular
evidence and declaration of Nobility and preeminence; as Arms for a great part
is in Spain, Merchandise in some States in Italy, Learning in France, specially
that of Judicature: so Gods own peculiar Jurisdiction and Republic of the Jews
was famous for the Priesthood. A Priest was, even for civil privileges and
enfranchisements, a Gentleman. Therefore has the Apostle not knighted, or
ennobled, but crowned every good Soul with that style, Regale Sacerdotium. 1
Pet. 2.9.
To be Royal without Priesthood seemed not to him Dignity enough. Thus then
the best Jewish Antiquary advances that despised Order and Profession; Joseph.
in ini ^o Vitae.
(...), etc. i. e. As others have other badges and cognizances of Nobility, the
Priesthood is that amongst us Jews: and it was (...), i. e. an evidence of
somewhat splendid and illustrious in that Order in the eyes of God and of good
men, even in Gods peculiar Diocese of Israel.

5. Next, it is as highly remarkable, that in that peculiar Regiment and
Jurisdiction of God, he chose the Tribe of Levi before any other, specially
because akin to Moses the Prince of the Congregation, and King of Jeshurun.
And Moses himself was at once the Son of a Priest and of a Priests Daughter,
(Exodus 2.1. a man of Levi took to Wife a Daughter of Levi) and married the
Daughter of a Priest of Midian, Exodus 2.16. and so had sanguinem duplicatum (in
our Lawyers phrase) with the Sacerdotal Order. O that our English Gentry would
either know or believe this, who think their houses and families disgraced, and
their blood stained and corrupted, if any of their kin become of the Clergy.
These, these Electors (as Antipodes to the Divine and Mosaical Election) had
rather choose (as Jeroboam the Son of Nebat) of the lowest of the people, then
of the highest of their own kindred. But (God be thanked) neither God nor Moses
were once of their opinion. How far distant and dissonant, how diametrically
opposite to God and Moses were they who would not have the Cross (the Emblem of
Church and Churchmen) in any conjunction with the Lily (the emblem of the
State) in the Kingly or Royal Arms! As if it were a huge diminution and
abatement of Honor for Levi to have the least relation to Moses; though Moses
had his Father a Levite, his Mother a daughter of Levi, and his Wife too a
daughter of a Priest in Midian.

6. There is yet another thing not of inferior consideration to the others
precedent. The rule of Jews is, (...) l. 2. c. 6.
Siquis lanio, aut tonsor, aut coriarius, etc. No Butcher, or Slaughterman, no
Barber, or Weaver, or Tanner, etc. shall at any hand become a Priest. Not that
the Arts themselves were unholy or illegitimate; Sed quod eb little sordes
populus in cujusvis successione non acquiesceret: i. e. The holy people of God,
his Saints, would never acquiesce in so sordid a succession. A good pattern in
the Sinai of Moses for the real Saints of God in the mount Sion of the Gospel.

7. The Ministers of Gods own peculiar Diocese have this title and appellation
from Gods own mouth, and in his own Heraldry, (...) either actively,
favorable, benign, gracious; or passively, highly favored, Deuteronomy. 33.12.
highly graced by Jehovah. Let thy Urim and thy Thummim be with thy favorite,
or favored one, Deuteronomy. 33.8. In the Gospel there is (...) and (...) in the very
Function, Ephesians. 3.8. So that both Old and New Testament do sign and seal and
exhibit a near relation, a specialty and singularity of favor from God and all
good men. All the people are sometimes called Gods peculiar; but these, the
peculiar Tribe of a peculiar people. As the Blessed Virgin has a word
new-minted and coined by the Angel, Luke 1.28. (...), a word not found in any
either Ethnic or Ecclesiastic Author; so, as if all the Clergy were in some
measure sons of the Blessed Virgin, they are (...), highly favored by Jehovah,
and the followers of Jehovah.

8. In the last place; the very last Prophet in all Israel is another
Boanerges, (besides them in the New Testament) speaks thunder and lightning
against all Malignants to that Sacred Order in all Ages. Will a man rob God? an
emphatical interrogation. Will an Edomite, Amalekite, Philistine, or any man,
rob God? or, will he rob, or kick, his own God? so the LXX. render it, (...);
Will he supplant, or cast his own God under feet, as it were? The sacrilegious
contempt of Priests ends in downright Atheism; as Sir Edw. Cook before told
us. Next, there is pertinacy and obstinacy in those Malignants: They plead, Not
guilty, to the Worlds end; Wherein have we robbed thee? God assumeth the
propriety; Ye have robbed me in Tithes and Offerings, i.e. in detaining what
should support my Servants and Service: So Deodate of Geneva, and Saint Hierom
of old, in Mal. 3.8. And after all, the contempt is hereditary and ancient,
even from the days of your Fathers, v. 7. After arraignment and endictment God
proceeds to sentence; Ye are cursed with a curse, because ye have thus robbed
me, even this whole nation, v. 9. It seems, though they were Gods peculiar
people, yet many, many such enemies there were to his highly-favoured Levi. Yet
one good expedient there is for that and all Nations after it: v. 10. Bring in
all the Tithes, -- prove me if I will not open the windows of heaven, and pour
you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it.

Thus God in his own Diocese gives good measure of favor and honor to his
Priests, pressed down, shaken together, and running over; whilst our English
Proverb speaks our English sense, It is well when it pincheth on the Parsons
side.

SECT. V. Jus Evangelicum; The Evangelical Account, under the Gospel.
THe great Shepherd and Bishop of Souls, the holy and harmless Priest,
separated from sinners, makes some special, peculiar and eminent reward
belonging to a Prophet, quatenus, and co nomine, as a Prophet: Matthew. 10.41. He
shall receive a Prophets reward, i.e. a signal and honorable recompense.
Otherwise our Saviors speech has no edge, no enforcement in it at all. Thus
Christ's own Angel preaches us his Doctrine; Those that be wise shall shine as
the brightness of the firmament; i.e. all sons of light, Dan. 12.3
all sons of wisdom: But those that turn many unto righteousness, i.e.
Teachers and Instructers, as the Stars for ever and ever; i. e. A greater knot
and union, a happy constellation of light and glory shall be upon them. There
is yet an additional and accumulate glory and eminency from the tongue of
Christ's Angel; Dan. 12.13.
Go thy way, Daniel: for thou shall rest, and stand up in thy Lot at the end of
days. IN SORT TUA, i. e. in sort Prophetarum, that is, the most noble and
gallant portion and station, as Mr. Mede interprets it. Our great Rabbi then
signeth and seals a warrant, Test meipso, Matthew. 10.41. That any Patron,
Fautor or Gaius to a Priest or Prophet shall have a glorious in-come or revenue
for his expenses. For he that receives a Prophet ( i. e. relieveth and
maintains, supporteth and fomenteth a Prophet) shall be partaker of a
Prophets reward. The ground and reason is evident; Because each Fautour and
Fomenter of a Prophet has an interest in and influence upon the work, and
consequently has a kind of title and entail upon the reward that appertains
unto it.

2. The great Bishop of Souls, though he himself were a Priest holy, harmless,
undefiled, and separated from sinners, yet vouchsafes a Benjamins portion of
respect and honor to the Function and Order, even then when it was debased and
almost desecrated by the enormous crimes and personal unworthiness of those
that were invested and inaugurated in the Priesthood. And this singular zeal
should be highly observable, and made exemplary to Zealots of a quite contrary
temper and disposition. His indulgence and condescension to the worst Priests
is very legible Mark 1.44. Vade, and ostende te Sacerdoti, and offerto. Is our
holy Lord and Master a Macenas and Patron even to such Priests? Saint Cyprian
gives the Doctrine upon that Text: Lib. 1. Epist. 65.
Dominus P^ntificibus and Sacerdotibus honorem servavit, quamvis illi nec
timorem Dei nec agnitionem Christi servassent: i. e. That pure, holy and
undefiled Priest has a fair reserve of honor even to those that reserved no
fear of God nor honor of Christ himself. Sure it is strange, that the
pretended zealous Disciples of Christ should in this point or matter become
(...), wholly opposite, both to Christ and such unworthy Priests at once.
Epist. 55.
And the same Father does both heighten and strengthen that observation by St.
Paul's example: Act. 22.5.
Nosciebam quia Pontifex est: scriptum est enim, Principem populi tui non
maledices: That, quamvis impii, sacrilegi, cruenti, though impious,
sacrilegious, bloody Priests, nil praeter inane nomen and umbram, no real,
Sacerdotal honor and authority, yet, Vade, ostende, offerto, Go, show to the
Priest, and offer to him. Neither did our Lord only reserve respect and honor
to the external and Judaical Priests, but (which is far more) even to his own
menial and domestic Apostle: Judas, quamvis malus pecuniam dominicam
dispensavit, non malam nec inutilem been accipientibus fecit, Contra Petilian.
3.
as Saint Augustine voteth it: i. e. Though Judas had the honor of being
Steward or Treasurer of Christ's house, his foul hands did not corrupt or embase
his Masters charity to the poor. Another Father speaks for veneration of the
Order even in the most unworthy persons: Ephr. Syrus, de Sacerdotio, p. 20.
As Gold or a Jewel is still Gold and precious when it falls into the very
Mire or Dirt; fic nec Sacerdotium sordidum redditur, quamvis indignus sit qui
illud recipit; i. e. so the Priesthood is not base, though the Priest be
unworthy. The like Doctrine with that of the great Bishop of Souls and our Lord
and Master, is taught by Isidore of Pelusium, Lib. 2. Epist. 3. and by St.
Bern^rd, Sermon. 3. de Adventu Dom.

3. While Sacrilege, i. e. the violation of Persons, Things, Places sacred, is
esteemed in this last and worst age a venial sin, or no sin at all, I find no
one Sin whatsoever has such an exemplary and miraculous hatred declared from
God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, as that peccadillo in the
eyes of flesh and blood. It is a sin against which Gods vengeance has smoaked
by special and signal judgments and penalties, no less then four or five times
(...), i. e. in the very moment or instant of its commission, even flagrante
crimine, as they say. And let the best Patron of that sin even (...), search
and dig from the superficies or surface of the Scripture to the very bottom of
it, and he shall not find a parallel vengeance upon any species or sort of
sins. Does Uzziah intrude into and violate the sacred Order? 2 Chronicles. 26.20.
Number. 16.
His Leprosy is Godstoken sent him (...). Do Corah and his Accomplices equalize
and level themselves with the sacred Priests Aaron and his Sons? The vengeance
of the God of Heaven opens the earth, and gives a double miracle of wrath,
and those sudden and contemporary with the sin. Does Belshazzar with his
thousand Princes, though heathen only, violate and abuse the sacred cups and
utensils? He is (...) smitten with trembling: which was Gods-token on Cain also
for the same enormity. Thus God the Father is at the expense of more fatal and
mortal miracles against this sin then any other of the first or second
magnitude.

Our Lord and Master, Luke 12.14. Joh. 8.11.
the second Person, waveth giving any sentence or judgment in the case of
Inheritance, and in the case of Adultery; but he passes sentence and judgment
and penalty (...) against the violaters of his House, and abusers and
murderers of his Zechariah and his Successors. His whip of small Cords, In
Mat. 21
as Saint Hierom believes, wrought a greater miracle then any in the whole
Gospel; Quod unu^homo, and illo tempore contemtibilis, etc. potuerit ad unius
flagelli verbera tantam ejicere multitudinem, etc. Such is our great Bishops
fiery zele and indignation, that he himself is both Accuser, Witness, Judge and
Executioner; which is very singular, in that case alone. Mat. 21. and Joh. 2.
And this miracle also is doubled (as Pharaohs Dream) and acted twice over, for
the certainty and confirmation and ratifying of it to all ensuing Ages and
Generations, as Grotius in Joh. 2.14. and Mr. Mede observe. So that Christ made
it both the Alpha and Omega of his Episcopal care and inspection.

Lastly, the Spirit of Christ, the third Person, by the mouth of Saint Peter,
punishes the fraudulent surreption of things Sacred from the h^nds and feet of
the Apostles, Acts 5.
in Ananias's and Saphira's case. While now, Generous and Courteous Sirs, the
blessed Trinity has vouchsafed a double Trinity of Miracles (pardon the
Phrase) as so many Pillars of Salt to season the memories of all posterity,
what Christian can sooth and flatter himself in the innocent nature of such
sins? Though no such miraculous productions of Divine Providence did yesterday
or to day appear from the hands of Father, Son, or Holy Ghost; yet these were
written for our example, 1 Cor. 10.11.
and are for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come.

4. After the great Bishop of Souls, let the great Apostle Saint Paul produce
his strongest zele for the honorable support and sustentation of the sacred
Order to the worlds end. He uses a double Argument: A Minori first, a
Jumentis; The Ox not to be muzzled, 1 Cor. 9.9. Yet higher, from men that
labor in carnal works; If we sow unto you spiritual things, is it (...), a
great matter, if we reap your carnal things? ver. 11. I observe that the same
St. Paul gives out an Injunction, Let him that is taught communicate (...), in
all good things, Gal. 6.6. And if the Compensation be only (...), though
(...), yet in his liberal eye those (...) are but a small recompense for our
Pastoral pains: (...), etc. Is it a great matter if we reap, etc. In Gods own
Law the inferior office and function of a Levite (that was Plebs and vulgus
Cleri) was (...), no small thing: Is it a small thing that God has separated
you (even Levi) from the congregation? Number. 16.9. But in the liberality and
magnificence of the Gospel Spirit, if ye give (...), all your carnal things, it
must not be written down and put into account as (...), a great matter. And yet
the discharge of that little debt is a sore burden to break some men's sleeps,
and backs, and hearts also; though an Apostle instructs them, that for us to
reap their carnal things, is not (...), no great matter. By a just and true and
modest collation of both Texts, Number. 16.9. with Gal. 6.6. it is an evident
conclusion, That the lowest Office of Ministry is (...), great in Gods
account, whilst the greatest honorary by carnal and temporal things is not
(...), any great matter in Gods own eyes. Let not then thine eye be evil,
because Gods is good.

5. The great Saint Paul again, who one while is (...), Ephesians. 3.8.
less then the least of Saints, in his own Heraldry and account, yet elsewhere
uses a word of pregnancy, an Hyperbole and supersoetation of honor and
respects to the sacred Order of Ministers; (...), to esteem them very highly in
love, 1 These. 5.13. a compounded, decompounded and superlative honor. For
(...) notes Abundance, yea Superfluity: So Romans 5.17. Jam. 1.21. (...) makes
some addition and augmentation. But (...) speaks an exceeding, excessive and
superlative degree of honor. As the same Saint Paul by his (...), 1 These.
3.10. praying exceedingly, intimates the excessive and constant and violent
fervency of his Apostolic affection in begging the blessing of God on the same
Thessalonians. Now where the Holy Ghost adds one Iota or tittle in the Book
of God, it is not to be accounted idle, frustraneous or superfluous. For (as
Saint Bernard excellently) Si nec folium de arbore, nec unus e passerculis
cadit, etc. If not a leaf falls from any tree, nor a Sparrow from the
housetop, without the providence of our Heavenly Father, sure not one apex or
Iota falls from the Spirit of Wisdom without a wise and just and provident
election. Saint Paul's choice word does therefore soberly and gravely signify,
according to that Rhetorical (...) or Incrementum (as Casaubon calls it) of
his and our Lord and Master, Luk 6.38.
even good measure of honor and respects, pressed down, shaken together, and
running over, (...). That as in the Office and Function of a Bishop he culleth
out and selecteth a word of most exquisite and accurate signification and
emphasis, Tit. 1.5.
(...), set in order the things that are wanting, etc. (...), singly and
solely, is to make straight or right; (...), is, thoroughly to do it; and (...),
to do it not only exactly, but over and over again. As thus in the discharge
and execution of the Work and Function there should be exactness and
accurateness ex part Episcopi; so in the retribution and remuneration of that
Office there is a (...), and (...), of honor, of love, of respects, ex part
Laici. And as the same Saint Paul says personally of himself, that he does
(...), not only stretch himself to the fullness of his measure, 2 Cor. 10.14.
but, as it were, tentour himself far beyond his scantling, to do service to
the Church of God; so would he have a compounded and super-compounded love and
honor from those he so serves, and the Pupils of that holy tuition. Yet once
more, the very same Apostle in the abundance of affliction, dishonor and
disreputation from an ungrateful world has another high superlative, 2 Cor.
7.4.
, (...), a superabundance of joy even in the midst of those sorrows. An
excellent Lecture, which contains both Doctrine and Use of Joy and Comfort to
that holy Order of men in their most abject and despicable condition for
Christ's sake. Lord, give me and all of us utramvis fortunae paginam, either a
supereffluence of their love and honor, or else a compounded and decompounded
joy and comfort under their dishonor and disgraces. Amen.

6. Let it not seem strange, or a prodigious piece of pride, if the
Ecclesiastic Minister claims, even jure Divine, at least a Gavel-kind of
honor with, or above the civil or secular Magistrate. It is certainly true that
the secular Magistrates even in Scripture-idiome and language are called
Elders, (...) as when we read of the Elders of Israel, the Elders of Judah, the
Elders of the People. By which way the notion of the words 1 Timothy 5.17. may
justly and truly be construed by way of transit us a Thesi ad Hypothesin, as
Rhetoricians call it, thus, Cum omnes Seniores, sive Reip. sive Ecclesiae,
duplici honor dignandi sunt, tamen (...), maxim, Seniores Ecclesiastici, qui
laborant in verbo and doctrina i.e. Whilst all Elders deserve double honor,
specially and signally the Ecclesiastic Elders do, that labor in the Word and
Doctrine. In the beginning of that same Chapter, Elder is used in that larger
and general sense; Rebuke not an Elder, but exhort him as a Father; the elder
Women as Mothers. And why not here so also, for a civil Elder? And both the one
and the other were in place of the Firstborn; and therefore a double honor
was due to each promiscuously and indefinitely; because (...) is not Alms, but
Tribute of honor from the inferior to the superior, and of the same nature
with honor to Princes and Magistrates. If that exposition seems too
supercilious and stately for the honor of Churchmen, yet it seems to be
secundum cor Dei, Psalm. 87.2. The Lord loves the gates of Zion (where the
Temple was sumptuously and magnificently built, and many Schools of the
Prophets erected) more then all the dwellings of Jacob. And upon this account
it was a Psalm or Song for the Sons of Korah, i. e. men of sacred Order; yet
might it be sung by them without any tumor or superciliousnesse of spiritual
pride. According to the genius of the sweet Singer of Israel, secundum cor
Davidis, also, I had rather be a Doorkeeper in the house of God, (i. e. a
Lazar at the Door, or one of the (...) in the ancient Christian Church) then to
dwell in any Tents of ungodliness, i. e. to be a Centurion or Chiliarch in
tents secular and civil. However it fares with the aforesaid expositions of
the three aforesaid Texts, yet it is an indubitate truth that the Quota pars of
Reverence and Maintenance is thus far determinat^ and definite, even jure
Divino, to wit, double Honor. And that exalts and advances as high as the
state and condition of the Firstborn: which sounds too high and lofty for
the tender ears of this Age: for it clearly involveth Lordship, Dominion and
Jurisdiction; and therefore concludes at least a participation of honor (if
not the (...)) with the Civil Magistrate himself.

7. Lastly, If any of you will needs vilify that which our great Master Christ
and his great Apostle do so magnify; let us know then what it is thou do
magnify and make a just account of. Is the whole mystical body of Christ great
in thine eyes? Why, the Ministry is most immediately serviceable for the
consummation of the body of Christ. Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
Is it thine own Soul thou magnifiest? Why, in Scripture Phrase, qui aliquem
erudit, dicitur Animas facere, he that teaches, makes, or gains, Souls.
Thus, Animas quas fecerant in Charran, Genesis 12.5. the souls which they had
gotten in Haran. FECERANT, hoc est, Deo lucrifecerant, Souls which they had
instructed and reduced to God. Lastly, is it Gods grace and Spirit thou can
magnify? Why, while the Physician is but Minister Natura, and the Lawyer and
honorable Counselor is Minister Justitia, the other is Minister Gratia and
Minister of the Spirit. It is a rare and singular observation, which I never
found but in one Author, and he one that lived above a thousond years since,
touching the unluckiness of the Ministry. It is Isidorus Pelusiota, in the
case of Zosimus and Maro and Eustathius, three scandalous and obnoxious
Ministers of his time. There is this difference, says he, betwixt (...) and
(...), Ministers Ecclesiastical, and Ministers and Magistrates secular: If
these offend, the whole world can distinguish betwixt their Persons and their
Functions. No disparagement falls upon any but the offenders. But if
Ecclesiastical persons become obnoxious, then (...), etc. they confound their
Persons and their Functions, and transfer the shame of the faults of some even
upon all, yea upon the whole Order it self. Which is a practice too
dis-ingenuous and unjust for the candor and lenity and gentleness of any of
your generous and Christian Order. These may transcribe a better Copy from that
great Patron of the Clergy and Martyr of the Church: I am, says he, so much a
friend to all Churchmen that have any thing in them beseeming that sacred
Function, that I have hazarded mine own Interests, chiefly upon Conscience and
constancy to maintain their Rights. -- I must confess, I bear with more grief
and impatience the want of my Chaplains then of any other my Servants, and next
(if not beyond in some things) to the being sequestered from my Wife and
Children, since from these indeed more of humane and temporary affections, but
from those more of heavenly and eternal improvements may be expected. Sic
Carolus Magno major in 24. Sect.

SECT. VI. Jus Ecclesiasticum; The Ecclesiastic Primitive Account.
WHen in the Old Testament Shechem, Genesis 34.19.
Hamors son, by Divine Express and Heraldry was more honorable then all the
house of his father, because he received the badge and cognizance of Religion;
and when in the New Testament the men of Beraea were (...), more noble and
generous, of a better kind and stock, then those of Thessalonica, because they
received the Word (...), with all readiness of mind; by a parity of Reason and
Religion those are the most noble and honorable Christians, ancient or modern,
which receive a Prophet in nomine Prophetae, and (...), with all promptness and
propenseness of love and respects.

In the Sp^ritual Heraldry of Holy Writ, we find the very Order is (...), Heb.
5.4.
very Honor; yet more, (...), double honor (a) 1 Timothy 5.17.
; yet further, transcendent and superlative honor (b) 1 These. 5.13.
is their due and debt: And the express title of Lord is given to (c) 1 Kings
18.7, 13.
one; and to others, (...) (d) Acts 15.22. Heb. 13.17, 24.
, (...) (e) 1 Timothy 5.17.
, (...) (f) Romans 12.8. (...), Xenoph. l. 3. (...), Summus belli Capitaneus, Id.
l. 7.
, Leaders, Captains, Dukes, yea Stars (g) Rev. 1.20.
and Angels (h) Rev. 1.20. and ^.1, 8, 12, 18. and 3.1, 7, 14.
; Titles of not inferior Alloy to Lord Bishop. Thus far we have an Indemnity
by the Act and Writ of the great Bishop of Souls. And the guise and mode of
ancient Christendom was, boldly to transcribe the Copy from so fair and
authentic an Original. St. Ignatius to those of S^^yrna, Honora Episcopum, ut
Principem Sacerdotum, imaginem Dei ferentem; that is, Honor the Bishop, as the
Prince of the Priests, and as bearing the image of God. Nothing more customary
and fashionable with pure Antiquity, then to speak of them with honorable
Appellatives: (...), Most honorable Lords; Gods-beloved Lords; Most holy,
Theodoret, lib. 1. c. 4, and 5. and lib. 3. c. 9. and lib. 4. c. 9. and, (...),
Father in God, as Cyril of Alexand. edit. Binii, p. 227. And because
abstractive terms are most significant and emphatical, they were very prodigal
of such Prefaces of honor and respects. Thus the noble Volusianus, Illustris
Dominus (a) Aug. epist. 3.
, bespeaketh the great Bishop of little Hippo (b) Ep. 2.
, Incolumem Venerationem vestram summa Divinitas tueatur, that is, The sacred
Majesty and Divinity protect and defend your venerable person. Yea, even St.
Hierom himself, an ancient Presbyter, writing to St. Augustine (a young Bishop
to him) Beatitudin is vestra literae Epist. 13.
, says he, The Letters of your Blessedness, or Benediction. And again, Epist.
53.
Incolumem Sanctitatem tuam Divinitas tueatur, that is, Let the Majesty of
heaven defend your Holiness. In the Ephesine Council Council. Biaii, tom. 2. p.
237, and 177, and 178.
to Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople they use these honorable Titles; --
(...). -- (...). -- (...). -- thy Holiness, -- thy Sanctity, -- thy Reverence.
And when Charisius, an obsequious Presbyter, makes his address and application
to the whole Convocation Tom. 2.359.
, (...), says he, (...), For this cause I prostrate my self before your
Sanctity. And the ancient and reverend St. Hierom thus takes his leave of St.
Augustine, Epist. 14.
Vale, aetate fili, dignitate parens, that is, Farewell, my Son in age, my
Father in honor and in God. I shall close and conclude this Sorites and
Accumulation of Honor with St. Chrysostoms observation, very proper and
pertinent to our Age, El. Ps. ^3.
Haeretici a diabolo honorum vocabula Episcopis non dare didicerunt, that is,
Heretics (not true Christians) have learned f the Devil, not to give due
Titles of honor to Bishops. An angry word of a Patriarch. In a parallel
observation St. Cyprian observing how tend^r and curious our blessed Savior
was, that he might give honor to the Priests even of the Jews, even then when
their malice was hot, as set on fire by Hell, against him, Docuit enim, says
he, Sacerdotes veros legitime and plene honorari, dum circa falsos Sacerdotes
ipse talis exstitit, that is, He taught how lawful and plentiful honor ought
to be rendered to true Bishops and Ministers, when such honor was given even to
false Priests by the best Bishop of Souls.

In the next place, as their Titles throughout Christendom were glorious and
magnificent, so their Possessions and Patrimony were not penurious and
despicable. The great Bishop of little Hippo, though he was extracted ex nobili
prosapia, of a noble stock or family, In vita Augustini.
as Possidonius writes, yet had such a full and fat Ecclesiastical Patrimony
and Revenue, Epist. 225.
that himself says, Vix vigesima particula res mea paterna existimari potest
in comparatione praediorum Ecclesiae quae nunc, ut Ecclesiae dominus, existimor
possidere; His noble and natural fathers Estate and Patrimony was no better
then the twentieth part of what he enjoyed as Lord Bishop of the Church. Yet in
his greatest eminence and affluence his friends and foes also were his
Compurgators, Ibid.
Nulla nos cupiditate pecuniae in rebus Ecclesiasticis sordidari, that he was
not debased and degenerate by any unhandsom concupiscence toward Mammon. The
most Great and most Christian Constantine, and the first Christian Emperor, had
so gracious and liberal an eye to Church men, that (as our Lucius in England)
Ex statuis Ethnicis pretiosioris materiae pecunias conflavit, and Ecclesiis
contulit, that is, S^z^^^ l. 2. c^^.
He spoiled the Heathen, as Egyptians, and coined the most precious substance
of their Idols into current money, and gave it to the Servants and Serv^ces of
the God of Israel. Yea, Sozom l. 1. c. 8. and l. 5. c 6.
ex publicis tributis per singulas civitates, etc. He made an augmentation from
public Tributes, as Donatives and Honoraries to the present Churchmen, and
made them a firm conveyance and perpetuity by an established Law. Eu^b. l. 2.
de vita constant.
And if any dyed either Intestate or without an Heir, his Estate was given as a
Congiary to the Aerarium Ecclesiasticum. The Church of Antioch had likewise
Plurima vasa, Theod^^et. l. 3. c. 12.
anathemata and pecunias, many precious Utensils, Riches and Offerings, from
the same liberal hand. Nay, his Magnificence was so eminent and exemplary to
persons of the Church Order, that they were no less then Commoners at the
Emperors Table: Eus^b. l. 1. de vit. Con.
(...) insomuch that some envious and disaffected persons verbo Ironico
Pupillum Eccl^siae nominarent, that is, in our modern Phrase, He was
Priest-ridden, and a very Pupil and Ward to such Spiritual Tutors. Of the same
temper and genius was another Emperor, Theodosius; so charitable and observant
of men of Sacred Order, that (...), Secrat. l. 5. c. 4.
etc. He did not only abundantly honor Priests of his own faith and
persuasion, but the very Novatian Bishops also.

One Primitive Bishop, Sozom. l. 7. c. 27.
Acacius Bishop of Beraea, gave this (...), this evidence and indication of
excellent virtue, that (...), all his life long his Episcopal See and House was
an open house for all comers of the City.

I could easily give a Galeed, a very heap, of Witnesses from Primitive
Christians: but I will not further tempt and over-lay the patience of any
generous Reader.

SECT. VII. Jus Natural, from those under the Law of Nature, either
Patriarchal or Ethnical.
THe light and law of Nature, among Patriarchs and refined Ethnicks, made their
Priests or Ministers of a splendid and honorable account and condition. This
Law of Nature, as well as the Law of Moses and of Christ, is expressly styled
the Law of God, Exodus 15.26. and 18.16. when as yet the Law was not given in
Sinai. And so also by Saint Paul's Gospel-Divinity it is said of Heathens, Romans
2.14. that they are a law to themselves, and that the Law is written in their
Hearts, v. 15. Thus it is said of Tithes and First Fruits, the Honoraries of
the Priest, Non tardabis, Exodus 22.29. Thou shall not keep back, materially to
be considered, evidently showing it was a custom of old before the Levitical
Law. So Deuteronomy. 23.21. Non tardabis, that is, Thou shall not be slack to pay,
viz. what was then already due.

It is confessedly true on all hands, that among Patriarchs the firstborn was
the Priest, and so Head and Lord and Prince of the whole Family. On this
account Jacob calls Reuben, primum in donis, i. e. in sacrificiis offerendis,
Genesis 49.3. By right of primogeniture the Sacerdotal Function was Reubens. The
firstborn terminis terminantibus are called (...) Sacerdotes, Exodus 19.22. And
this honor infallibly was vel ab ipso Deo, vel ab Adamo Spiritus S. instinctu,
De Minist. p. 235.
as learned Gerhard says, either by Gods own assignation and designment, or by
Adam from the Spirit of God. Now the Firstborn was, First, higher then his
Brethren, Psalm. 89.27. next in honor to his Parents, Genesis 49.3. Secondly, had
a double portion of his Fathers goods, Deuteronomy. 21.17. besides his inheritance;
Thirdly, succeeded in Government of Family or Kingdom, 2 Chronicles. 21.3. And,
fourthly, in the administration of Priesthood and service of God, Number. 8.14,
-- 17. And these were (...), Exodus 6.25. Heads of the Fathers, Arch-Priests, or
Lords Spiritual.

Under this Meridian of the light of Nature Melchizedek, though he had even
Royal Revenues and Patrimony, yet as an accession of just honor received
Tithes and Gifts from Abraham, Genesis 14.20. Sure then a noble, splendid and
magnificent honor was not judged incompatible by the grand Sages of Nature,
either Melchizedek, or Abram, or Jacob.

2. The last Prophet of the Old Testament carries an Angel or Messenger of God
in his very name, MALACHI. And this Angelical Doctor, to confute the sordid and
sacrilegious Israelites, borrows an Argument or Topic from the very Ethnic
devotion, Chapter 3.8. Will a man rob his God? Will an Heathen, an Amalekite,
Philistine, Ethiopian, or any man rob his God? Any Minister or Messenger of
the New Testament may as justly argue from the same Topic against any Sons or
Patrons that defraud their Priest Evangelical, Will a man rob his own God?

In Sacred Register we find an high and honorable account from Heathen and
Exotic Nations. Even Philistines by the light of Nature would consult and
deliberate with sacred Persons in things Divine. Even when Princes of
Philistines (which is not a little remarkable) had before given their own votes
and voices, 1 Samuel 5.11. they afterward consulted with their Priests and
Southsayers, 1 Samuel 6.2. And those sacred (yet profane) Priests would not have
Gods own Ark go away empty, v. 3. What a shame then and opprobry is it for
Christian Magistrates to assume a Monopoly of Votes and Suffrages to dispose of
Gods Ark as they please, with the exclusion and excommunication of Ministers,
to whose cognizance and jurisdiction such things do most properly and
immediately appertain, and without whose advice it is too often sent home
empty! Again, while the very Kine of Philistines prefer the honor and home of
the Ark of God before their own home and their own Calves, 1 Samuel 6.12. yet
some more brutish then the beasts of the idolatrous Philistines, if they and
their own issue are at ease and plenty, care no more then Gallio, Acts 18.17.
for the honor of the Ark and its Ministers, still lowing after their own, and
not stepping one foot to promote the security, subsistence and honor of Gods
Church. Grot. de Jure belli l. 3. c. 11. sect. 10.
And further, though these Philistines were grand Malignants to the State of
the Jews, yet had they some tender bowels of mercy to the College of Prophets
in Gaba, 1 Samuel 10.5, 10. even as the barbarians had to Saint Paul, Act. 28.2.
Again, the tenderness and indulgence of Pharaoh and the Egyptians toward
their Priests has not a bare record, but an Elogium and Encomium from Sacred
Writ: They sold not their Lands, even in exigency of Famine, Genesis 47.22. and v.
26. except the Land of the Priests only. How guilty then are all rapacious and
rough-handed Esaus, that even in the affluence of peace and plenty have not so
much as an Egyptian kindness for their Priests, yea, to whom no Mummy is so
sweet, so nutritive and restorative as what is made of the Corpse of a bleeding
Church! Even he also that had an Ephod and a Teraphim, had a zeal (though not
according to knowledge) toward his Priest, Esto mihi in sacerdotem and patrem,
Judge. 17.10. Be unto me a Father and a Priest. Though a Father to him in
affection and duty, yet was he really a young man of Bethlehem-Judah, v. 7.
Such reverential respect had Micah toward that young man, as to his Father.
But now, God knows, many true Fathers of the Church are made (as we say)
younger Brothers in the account and esteem of the World by a strange inversion
and commutation of a blinder zeal then that of Micah. Yet once more, the only
Topic by which this Micah proves, concludes and ratifieth a benison to
himself, is this, Now I know that the Lord will do me good, seeing I have a
Levite (the young Father- Levite) to be my Priest, v. 13. His Ethnic Logic
had more reason and religion in it then any Christian that sees no benediction
from a society and cohabitation of Priests. Thus far Heathen Divinity even in
Sacred Writ and Record.

3. The voice of Heathen for the (...) of Saint Paul's charge and command, that
is, Reverence and Maintenance, is so Catholic by instinct of Nature, as if it
had been concluded and enacted by an universal Parliament; and this also by the
grand Swordmen or Grandees of Heathen Militia. (a) X nophon l. 5.
Cyrus having collected a grand sum of money amongst his Captives, caused it to
be divided, and gave a Decimation to the Priests of Apollo and Diana. (b) Plin.
l. 12. c. 24.
Alexander the Great having conquered the Countries of sweet Odours and
Frankincense, sent a whole Ship-lading thereof to the Priests of Greece, (c)
Joseph. Ant. l. 10. c. 13.
Nabuch^^^nosor did the like; Largissimum nimis to the Priests of Belus Temple.
(d) Alex. ab Alex. l. 3. c. 22.
The Locrians, in their benevolence to the Clergy, vowed even the ninth part.
(e) Caesar de B^llo Gal. l. 6.
The custom of the ancient Gauls, our own British Ancestors, was, to give
almost all in effect which they got by War, unto the Gods and their Priests.
(f) Alex ab Alex. l. 3. c. 22.
Lucullus upon this very account abounded in wealth, because he paid God and
his Priests so faithfully and abundantly. From the frequent Inductions of
pregnant instances I am prone to wish that many English Christians would learn
(as Salomons Sluggard is bid to do from the Ant or Pismire, Prove. 6.6.) even
from barbarous Ethnicks and Paynims, what respect and reverence is a due debt
to Christian Priests and Ministers. Those English that account the lowest of
the people fit to be Ministers of God, may learn either from the Heathen
Romulus, (g) C. Rhodig. Antiq. L. l. 12. c. 2.
who elected Priests genere excellentes and virtute praestantes, that is, such
as were eminent for their stock and extraction, and excellent for virtue; or
from the Potitii and Pinarii, (h) Serve. in Aen. 8.
which were two noble Families, and yet were employed in sacrificing morning
and evening to Hercules: yea, even (i) Plut. de ^si^^ and Osir p. 134
Kings themselves were usually elected either from the Military or Sacerdotal
Order; the one, for courage and magnanimity; the other, for piety and wisdom.
Those English that account all secular charges and encumbrances most proper for
the backs and purses of Priests, may learn again of the Heathen Romulus, who
(k) R^sia. Antiq. l. 3.^7.
having constituted sixty public Priests after the founding of Rome, granted
that they should be immunes propter aetatem a militia, and propter privilegium
exemti ab urbanis negotiis, that is, free both from military and civil
services. Those that would have them little better then Alms-men or Mendicants,
may read a contrary Lecture, (l) Cic. 2. de Legib. R^sia. l. 3. c. 27.
Praeter Idaeae Matris famulos nequis stipem cogito; At Rome were allowed no
Mendicant Priests besides those of the Idaean Goddess. Those that make it a
sport and pastime to see a Priest blind or lame, without integrity of his body
or person, may blush to hear Seneca say, (m) Declam. 4.
Sacerdos non integri corporis quasi mali ominis res vocanda. Any defect or
deformity in a Priest made him ominous in their tender eyes. Those that love to
plunder the Ecclesiastic Treasury, and so to spare their own purses, have a
worse Divinity then the Romans, (n) Live. l. 5.
who brought much of their own Jewels and Ornaments to the Priests of Apollo at
Delphos, having regard rather to public piety then private commodity. Those
that are most hungry after sacred morsels, have more foul stomachs and dogged
appetites then the Heathen Romans, (o) Plin. l. 18. c. 2.
who did not taste any new Corn or Wine until they had offered their
First Fruits to the Priests; Just as Gods own peculiar people, Deuteronomy. 26.13.
Those that look on the whole order and society of them as but unprofitable
burdens of the earth, or as troublers of Israel, are worse then those Heathen
Cities that gave them respects and veneration, as (p) Plut. lib. Philosoph. cum
Principib.
beneficial to themselves, to their friends, and to the whole Community.
Lastly, unto all sacrilegious Malignants to Sacred Persons or things (q) De
Legib. l. 10.
the Divine Plato gives this most Christian Doctrine (as if it came from Saint
Peter or Saint Paul) (...), He is guilty of one of these three crimes; either,
first, he absolutely thinks (...), That there is no God at all; or, secondly,
that, if there be a God, he is supine, and (...), is careless of Man and his
actions; or, thirdly, that he is nothing so just and terrible to offenders as
is pretended, or else so corrupt that he may be easily bribed, or in fine, that
he is (...), a tame and facile Deity. And (r) Phaedone, p. 84.
elsewhere he concludes peremptorily, that each sacrilegious man is a dead
man, both incurable and incorrigible; (...). But I hope the vigor and efficacy
of so many Laws, Patriarchal, Israelitical, Evangelical, English,
Ecclesiastical, Ethnic, will give life to him that is dead in that trespass
and sin.

SECT. VIII. Of the grand Demerits and huge Extravagancies of the
Disciplinarians, or new Clergy: with a Parallel of the New Fanatics with the
Old Pharisees.
THe new kind of Clergy, as King James entitleth them in (a) (...).
his Instruction to Prince Henry, have this fair Character from his Royal Pen,
Unruly and fanatic Spirits among the Ministry, as bad as Highland or
Border-thieves for ingratitude, lies, and vile perjuries. Their huge enormities
are fully and clearly characterized by Bishop Andrews, Archbishop Bancroft,
Archbishop Whitgift, Lord Keeper Puckering, Doctor Clerk, Doctor Saunderson,
and others, all fairly and (...) declaring their judgments in (b) D. Tho.
Pierce, Answer to M. Baxter, chapter 5. sect. 6. -- 12, 14, etc.
a modern Author both ingenious and judicious. But are not all their faults (c)
Deuteronomy. 32.5.
the spots of Sons, in Scripture phrase, very small peccadillos? In point of
contempt and disobedience to supreme Authority, they are Sons of Abiathar the
Priest: In point of contempt of ancient Fathers, they are Sons of Cham: In
vilifying of the old Priests, Sons of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat: In point of
disuse of the Creed, Sacraments, and reading the pure Word, Sons of Messalian
Heretics, or Papists: In sacrilege, Sons of old Eli: In temporising, Sons of
Ecebolius, and the Priscillianists, and the like: In covetousness, Sons of
Balaam, and Pharisees In titles and pretenses of sanctity, Sons of Gnostics,
Cathari, Valentinians: In perjury, Sons of Zedekiah, the Righteous one of God,
but a perjured subject. These, all these, are the professed subject or Theater
of other Papers of this Ancmymus: and therefore I will not actum agere in this
place.

My present Province and Task is, to make an exact Parallel 'twixt the old
Pharisees and the new Fanatics, and to make it appear that they are both
gemelli fratres, twin-brothers, in point of opinion and practices, though not
contemporary in their births and productions. In pursuance of which design, it
must be first confessed, that in both of them there is such variety and
contrariety, that it may be said of each Pharisee as the Historian does of C.
Caesar Son of Agrippa, and Nephew of the great Augustus, Tamvarie se gessit, ut
nec laudaturum magna, nec vituperaturum mediocr is materia deficiat: There is a
perfect Cheequer-work of matter for some seeming grand commendation, and for as
grand discommendation also. As there be in the three learned Languages verba
contrariae significationis; as, SACRUM, holy, and accursed, in the Latin;
(...) in the Greek, affability, and scurrility also; and (...) a Saint, and a
Whore, in the holy Language: So in these two sorts of persons, old and modern,
if you compare semblances and pretenses with practices and performances, there
is perfect contrariety, contradictions twisted and accorded together; both are
viri contrariae signification is. Both in their name or titles are Pharisaei,
i. e. Expounders of the Law of God, from (...) expandere, explicare, that is,
Scripture-men, and Scripturewise: or else, (...), i. e. Separatists, by
extraordinary sanctity above others, not as other men, Luke 18.11. Both Masters
of the Rolls and Records of Heaven, and even a Consiliis, Privy Counselors, to
the King of Kings, yet not loyal Subjects, or Friends to the Text, though they
kiss the Book. Both in the light and luster of knowledge are Pekochim, (their
own word) of opened eyes, men of new light; One of them forsooth Or hagnolam,
the light of the first magnitude in his age; Another, Rabbi Hakkodesh, the Holy
Teacher: All, Leaders of the blind, Romans 2.19, 20.
and have (...), a slight and slender and superficial knowledge in things less
substantial and fundamental: Yet even both Lights carried in foul and dark
Lanthorns: and the true Light, that enlightneth every one, discovers their
palpable darkness, with seven or eight Woes, Matthew. 23.

Both so pure and defecate that they will not eat with Publicans and sinners,
Matthew. 9.11. nor suffer a sinner once to touch Christ, Luke 7.39. These cannot
digest even the Lords Supper, nor have Communion with sinners and scandalous
persons, but have fasted seven or ten years upon the same account and score.
Their word is, Touch me not: for I am holier then thou, Isa. 65.5. and Christ's
own word also, Nolite tangere fermentum Pharisaeorum, Luke 12.1. First of all,
beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees. Both their Fasts also were with
sour, leavened, Matthew. 6.
disfigured and exterminated countenances: yet in their very Fasts they had
good stomachs to devour widows, Gods house, and his Prophets. Both have (...),
Acts 16.5.
the most strict and accurate way and walking; all walking (...),
circumspectly, in pretense. They always say, I go, Sir, and go not, as the
smooth and forward Son, the Type of the Pharisee of old, Matthew. 21.30. Lastly,
will the Reader exhaust and swallow down their prime and accumulative
excellencies by wholesale, as they say? How are both affected to Gods day? No
ears of Corn to be picked by the hungry, Matthew. 12.1. nor a blind man to be
cured, on that day, Joh. 9.16. How affected to Gods Cause, or Gods Corban? Why?
Calcab^ patrem: Father and Mother and all natural relations shall be laid
aside, or overlaid by the weight of their affection to the Cause of God or
Corban, Matthew. 5.5. How affected and inclined to Prayer? Praying often, and long,
and openly, Matthew. 6. How in Conference? Ye, being evil, speak good things,
Matthew. 12.34. Such sacred Texts as these, Hos. 2.19. I will espouse thee to my
self in righteousness; Joel 2.28. Your sons and your daughters shall prophecy,
-- your young; men shall see visions; and Mal. 4.3. Ye shall tread down the
wicked, for they shall be ashes under the soles of your feet: These, all these,
they espoused and monopolized to their own sanctified selves. They, the only
Saints to be saved; all others, castawayes: as Mr. Calvin on Mal. 4.3. En and
ecce tunicam Patris vestri, o Fanatici! Behold, the full and perfect livery and
cognisances of the very Fathers of our modern Pharisees and Fanatics! Thus old
and new Pharisees and Fanatics, like spiritual Fiddlers in Religion, do assume
and wear the livery and badge of some Nobleman, that they may not appear to be
what they are known to be by the Statutes of God and the Land. They are like
some Medals in the world, which on the one side have (...), the pourtraicture
of an Angel, or of a Saint, and on the other side the image of an infernal
Fiend or Spirit. The Reader shall presently understand that they both are viri
contrariae significationis.

Is it now possible for such and such qualified persons, in seven or eight
gallant particulars, to be guilty of disobedience and open hostility and
rebellion against their Kings, Gods Lieutenants? Let Josephus, himself a
Pharisee, give in evidence and remonstrance against his own Fraternity: Antiq^
13 c. 18.
(...), that is, in our English Translation and practice also, The Pharisees
were of such prevalence with the people or vulgar, that if they spoke against
either King or Archpriest, they presently obtained the Public faith and
commen credulity. Ibid. c. 23.
Yea, (...), etc. if, being envious and malicious, they spoke never so
malignantly, they could gratify and pleasure their friends, and injure their
foes. Such has been the artifice and imposture of our modern Fanatics, by
ostentations and enchantments of pretended Piety, both in reference to the best
King and best Priests. (...), such potent and prevalent Factors and Agitators
against Kings, that they beat out and exiled Alexander their King out of the
coasts and confines of Moab and Gilead, as Sigonius tells us. Yea, De Republ.
Hebraeor. l. 5. c. 11.
they made so strong infusions of principles of disobedience and rebellion in
their Proselytes, that pueri etiam tormentorum patientia spectateres
obstupefacerent, Ibid.
very Boys were so obstinate Martyrs, even in rebellion and sufferance, that
they did amaze and stupifie the honest Spectators. And such Monsters have been
among modern Fanatics.

2. Is it possible, again, for such and such qualified persons to be guilty of
Violence and Extortion? The word of our great Master is, (...), Luke 11.39.
Very Harpyes for violence, though very Saints in semblance and pretenses. Both
have devoured Widows houses, Gods house, and the Priests, notwithstanding their
long prayers, and their straining at gnats. They kill, and whip, and persecute
Prophets from city to city, Mat. 23.34. While both of them seem by violence to
take the Kingdom of heaven, and they forsooth, the vi^lent ones, (...), to take
it by force; yet both of them are, I fear, Saint Paul's (...), violent
Extortioners, that shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. They are very
fortunate sons of violence, if they have Gods Goodspeed in each sort of
violence, to heaven and earth also.

3. Is it possible for those (...), those accurate and exquisite walkers to the
extremities of Gods commands, (as the word imports) to be guilty of
Covetousness, which is Idolatry? When our Savior spoke of not serving God and
Mammon, Luke 16.13. (...), ver. 14. these accurate walkers snuffed at it, made
mouths and jeers and mimical gestures; and that upon that very account, that
he talked of Charity, Liberality and Alms, ver. 10, 11, 12. Though Piety
seems to fill their sails, when they compass sea and land to gain Proselytes,
yet Profit and Mammon is the perpetual compass by which both steer their
course. Our English Pharisees have thrust their sequestered Brethren out of
house and home, without the assignment of so much allowance as ejected Monks
and Nuns had. Exam. Histor. p. 110, 111.
Sir William Weston Lord Prior of the Order of St. John had a yearly pension of
a thousand pounds; Rawson the Sub-Prior, of a thousand Marks; some of the
Brethren, of two hundred pounds per annum; and thirty pounds per annum, he that
had least. And this may serve for an Use of Instruction, or of Reproof and
Reprehension, of our grand Idolatrous Fanatics, which were more ready (...),
to jeer and mock, their grave, godly and learned Predecessors, then to pay them
a fifth, yea a tenth, or twelfth part.

4. May we not also arraign and endict them as guilty of Pride, high spiritual
Pride? Joh 7.49.
(...), the Rabble and Herd of unsanctified people, that know not the Law, were
accursed by the sour and swelling and leavened Teachers. Populus terrae,
conculcatio pedum Pharisaeorum; The Heads of the people, if not of their own
Godly party, were but competent Foot-stools for the sacred feet of the new
Teachers.

5. Take now a Breviary of their accumulative Impieties and Iniquities. Their
worst, and yet natural, face is seen in one crystal glass, Mat. 23.23. They
omit and neglect, as unnecessary and superfluous duties of Saintship, judgment,
(it is lawful for such Israelites to spoil such Egyptians) and mercy, (Charity
and Good works belong to the Court of Rome, in their own words) and faith, that
is, fidelity and veracity in Promises, Covenants, Oaths. Those of Allegiance
and Supremacy have been like Almanacks out of date for many years together; or
like Queen Elizabeth's dust, swept up and laid together behind the doors of our
Pharisees hypocrites.

6. There is a concurrence and conjunction of them in one point, which is the
highest aggravation of all their Crimes and Demerits: The old Pharisee does
thus dogmatize like a Stoic, Joseph. Ant q^. 18 c. 2. and l. 2. c. 12. Vide
plurae apud D. Pierce, Of Divine Philanthropie, c. 3. sect. 3, 4.
All deputed and linked to Fate and God. Our own Pharisees also say, Reprobates
are compellea with a necessity of sinning, and so compelled that they cannot
choose but sin. Yea, a grand Doctor in our Israel, to mollify the very
Blasphemies of that F^aternity, says, They intended no more then what by
multitude of Scriptures they were led unto, E.R. page 60. and further, Sin by
God is absolutely willed, because ordainable to his glory, E. R. page 101. To
which I return either a better Doctor, Wh^tak. in Cam^ian. p. 115.
Dignus est quem Deus statim fulmine ad imum inferorum barathrum dejiciat; or a
better Author then both, Deus non volens iniquitatem, Psalm. 5.4.

7. Lastly, our Pharisees do love (...) and (...). Whilst Presbytery,
(...)sect. 14.
like a young heir, thinks the Father has lived long enough, and being
impatient not to be in the Bishops chair and authority, all art is used to sink
Episcopacy, and lanch Presbytery in England. And while they garnish the
sepulchers of their Fathers, such as Bishop Cranmer, Ridley, Jewel, etc. they
persecute the survivers from city to city. Add again their swallowing down the
Camel-sins of Disobediency, and Perjury, and Oppression, and Sacrilege, etc.
and yet straining h^rd at the gnats, a Surplice, a Ring, a C^^^, or a May Pole.

S^^, if the Pharisees rightly held a (...), or Transmigration of souls (...)
the Pythagoreans did, then the souls of the Pharisees have had a
Transmigration, and possess the bodies of our English Fanatics.

sect. IX. A Second Parallel, of the New Clergy with the old Primitive
Fanatics.
AS the true Gospel-Christian is described or defined in holy Writ, to be one
sealed with the Spirit of Christ, Ephesians. 1.13. and to have received grace for
grace, John 1.16. that is, Figure for figure, Lineaments for lineaments, and
Impression for impression; and the new man created after God in righteousness
and true holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. So all Pseudo-Christians of this later Age are
sealed with the spirit of Primitive Fanatics. They in the first Age were
(...), paterns and exemplars; and these in our Age and generation are their
exact (...). Both have the same lineaments and figures: Not Ovum ovo similius.
The image in the glass does not more lively express the natural face and
feature, then the reflection of modern Teachers does resemble and represent the
first Ideas and exemplars of primitive Pseudochristians and Fanatics.

1. In point of affectation and ostentation of huge Purity and Sanctity above
their Brethren. Those of the Order of Zelotes in Jerusalem a little before its
destruction by the Romans (a sad omen in our days) called and accounted
themselves (...) the only zealous Brethren of good and godly enterprises and
designs for the power of Godliness. Joseph. de Bello Jud. l. 4. p. 87^.
And others they deemed (...), Id^^, l. 5. in (...).
as a very herd of unsanctified creatures. This is the (...), the first Seal.
In our Age the New Clergy (as King James calls them) have arrogated and
appropriated to themselves a very spiritual Monopoly of Zele, i.e. the only
pure, precious, zealous, Saintlike Teachers, and Godly party. The Disciplinarian
Zelote is only for the Throne of Christ, and the Scepter of Christ, and the
Government of Christ. All others are Barbarians, without and without, (as the
word imports) even without the pale of the Church, without the Scepter and
Throne of Christ. How many also have we of Basilides, Epiph. Haeres. 4. de
Bas^^de.
the old Heretic, his Order and Classis! (...), We, we only, the Men; and all
other, Degs or Swine, for carnal or spiritual impurity, in their eyes. Lastly,
Epiph. ^^r. 70. p. 827.
how many Audians, old Heretics, in our new Age, that had (...), very
admirable and wonderful conversation and deportment in some singularities of
Zele; and (...), they would not use the same Common Prayers with any others of
a different persuasion from themselves! Thus in the first point, of Affectation
and Ostentation of Purity, the old and new Fanatics are (...) and (...), the
last being formed and created ad imaginem and similitudinem of those their
Protoplasts in Doctrine and Purity.

2. The next figure and impression of the former Seal is in Contempt and
Disobedience to Ecclesiastic Parents and Governors. Even a sober and ingenuous
Reader of some passages of the holy Father St. Cyprian would almost believe him
a son and Writer of the present Age; He does seem to give so plain a narrative
and history of the occurrences of the modern Age. Cyprian. Epist. 10. p. 29.
Aliqui de Presbyteris nec Evangelii, nec loci sui memores, Some John
Presbyters, being forgetful of the Gospel, and also of their own place and
station, neque nunc sibi praepositum Episcopum cogitantes, -- cum contumelia
and contemtu praepositi totum sibi vendicant, with contempt and contumely of
the Bishop do assume and arrogate all to their own Presbyterian hands, not at
all reserving Episcopo honorem cathedrae; E^ist. 1^.
whilst in the pure Antiquity, long before St. Cyprian, Idem^epist 27. p. 5^.
Inde per temporum and successionum vices, Episcoporum ordinatio and Ecclesiae
ratio decurrit, ut Ecclesia super Episcopos constituatur, and omnis actus
Ecclesiae per eosdem praepositos gubernetur: In all Ages and series of
successions each Act, Canon or Order of the Church was ruled and managed by the
hands Episcopal. And again, Idem, epist. 69. p. 208.
Inde schismata and haereses obortae sunt and oriuntur, dum Episcopus, qui unus
est, and Ecclesiae praeest, superba quorundam praesumtione contemnitur. It is
already plain English by our practice, Thence Schisms and heresies arise,
whilst such Governors are contemned by the proud presumtion of such
Fanatics. Such a forward and early Fanatic was Aerius, who, missing a
Bishopric himself, made this popular Doctrine, Nulla differentia discerni:
Whose Phantasme was at once convicted by St. Augustine in Africa, Epiphanius in
Asia, and Philastrius in Europe. Such afterward were those fond and foolish
Presbyters, Cour^^ Carthag. 3. can. 42.
Pler^que stolidi adversus Episcopos suos cervices erigunt Presbyteri, vel
conviviis sibi conciliantes plebem, vel certe persuasu maligno and illicito,
etc. Those foolish Smectymnwans did either caress the vulgar by treatments, or
by unlawful and malignant persuasions. Yet worse and more impudent Fanatics
were they that did in some measure acknowledge a Bishop, Ignot. Ep. ^d M^gnes.
(...), did all things, or any thing, without his direction or influence; and
so were (...), very contemtuous and ironical Presbyters. Of the same Paste were
the sour and leavened Donatists, who in a sport or May game Canina corpora
membris Episcopalibus conjunxerunt, Anp^^st. l. 2. contra ^^armen.
and sic saltare fecerunt, conjoined and coupled in a loud Sarcasm the bodies
of dead dogs with the living members of the sacred Angels of the Church, and so
made them dance in a posture, for the recreation of vulgar eyes. The like sad
sport did the Heathen use to George Bishop of Alexandria, (...) l. ^. 2.
(...). they tied him to a Camel, and then drew him off again, and burnt the
beast and the Bishop in the same flames. Our modern Smectymnwan Proselytes were
surely the jocular and merry sons of such or such Fanatics.

3. Another Image and Superscription is in reference to Supreme Parents, the
Abimelechs, as the Heathen Philistines called their Kings. In this point Judas
Galilaeus was one of the first and grand Fanatics. The cause or occasion of
his Sedition is thus represented by the Hebrew Doctors, Cas^ub. Ex^cit. 2. in
Raron. sect. 19.
Non esse decorum aut aequum alium Regem, etc. That it was not comely nor
equitable to impose any other King over men, beside God himself the King of
Kings. And he quoted the Sacred Text to warrant his profane and seditious
Position, Deum tuum timebis, and illi soli servies; whilst the truth is, they
made God to serve by their sins, Isa. 43.24.
as the Prophet says, and his word to serve their pride and ambition. For God
expressly commands their service and obedience even to Pagan and Idolatrous
Governors, Jerem. 27. and 40.9. And Zedekiah was punished for his disobedience
to Nebuchadnezzar, Jer. 24. Sure I am, all English and Ecclesiastic despisers
of Kingly dominion, have more signal and singular Obligations then any other
Nation or Kingdom under the Sun. Spelm. Council. Praesat.
For in England was the first Christian King, Lucius; and the first Christian
Emperor, Constantine; and the first Christian Queen, Helena; and no less then
twelve Christian Kings martyred by the bloody hands of Infidels: And there have
been more pious Kings in England then have been in any other Province, though
never so spacious and populous. Let even a Fanatic be judge, whether any
Antiquary can show Record or Register of the like specialties of the Divine
favor to any other Kingdom under the Sun. No Nation can more justly challenge
the Prophets word, (...) 49.23.
Reges nutritti, Reginae nutrices.

4. Another Parallel and resemblance is in disobedience to catholic there is of
the Church. Such a Fanatic was Abailardus in Saint Bernards days, whose Motto
and Byword was, Omnes Patres sic, Ego non sic: If all the Fathers said, Yea,
Abailardus said, Nay. And none such Saints as the Antipodes to the Fathers. Yet
higher, in Saint Augustines early days, Cum vos veritas urget, Patres dicitis
errasse. -- sed Superbia vos ligavit in cathedra pestilentiae. To old Donatists
(and new Fanatics) all the Fathers were wandering Stars, and erroneous; and
their own pride made them fixed, and firm in the chair of Scorners, or of
Pestilence. How many Echoes of Abailardus and the Donatists have we heard in
this empty, windy and hollow age of Fanatics! Who may justly expect that their
successors and posterity should in reason and religion repay and return their
disobedience lege talionis upon their Fathers heads and humors. This was the
artifice and imposture of Julians mind: S^crat. l. 3. c. 1.
(...) (...) All his Predecessors he scornfully loaded with bitter jeers and
taunts. Nestorius, of the same temper, would not vouchsafe to learn (...),
Socrat. l. 7. c 32.
the Books of the Ancients, because (...), swollen big with conceit of his own
eloquence, (...), he deemed and accounted himself a better man, a better
Father, then any of his Ancients. In the present point either Abailardus, or
the Donatists, or Julian, or Nestorius, were the Types; and our Fanatics, the
Anti-Types.

5. Another seal and impression is in point of disaffection and disobedience to
Natural Parents. Novatus, that had so much affectation of purity in himself,
had bitter disaffection and disreputation of his Parents: ^am^^us, (...) Vita
^ypr^^^i.
Spoliati ab illo pupilli, fraudatae viduae, pecuniae quoque Eccl. denegatae;
pater etiam ejus in vico fame mortuus, and ab eo nec sepultus: He at once
defrauded and oppressed the Widow, plundered the Fatherless, sacrilegiously
robbed the Church; and when his own Father died and perished with Famine in the
street, his zeal could not afford him Christian burial. A barbarism condemned
by a whole Council of Heathen Authors. For the Greeks call Funeral Rites (...),
the Latins, Justa: And he that omitted them (as Novatus did) was (...), an
accursed, devoted fellow, or Anathema. Such an unnatural son was to be served
with a Writ (...) and, if convicted, he was excommunicated all society, both
Sacred and Civil, and to be fined besides. Yet how many Fanatics in case of
Gods Corban, or Gods Cause, have with Pharisees renounced, and with Novatus
abdicated their own natural Parents, of their Country, and Family also, and
almost all natural Relations! And some Fanatic zele of modern Disciplinarians
dares make it a Canon and Constitution, 1 Book of Discipline 9. Head.
That if the Parents gain say marriage upon the common g^ounds, of want of
gudes, or disparity of birth, the Minister may (non obstante parente) admit to
marriage. For the work of the Lord ought not to be hindered by the corrupt
affections of men. So the Disciplinarian Doctors.

6. Those that thus vilify the Natural and Regal Authority and Unction, by a
parity of Reason and Religion also do vilify or nullify the Sacerdotal
Unction or Authority. These delight to see the holy Ark placed upon a Cart, and
Christ upon an Ass and upon a Colt the Fool of an Ass, and Jeremy the high
Prophet in a Dungeon, and the sacred Ministry upon sordid, Lay and Plebeian
heads and hands. Those Fanatics must assume old Ischyras (the grand enemy of
the holy Bishop Athanasius) as the Protoplast of this error and fancy; whose
ignorance and impudence did so far spiritualize him in his own fancy, that,
being a Lay-person, ^or^at. l. 1. c. 10.
(...), he did arrogate the name of Presbyter to himself, as many late
Fanatics have done. Which fancy and impudence the grave Christian Historian
calls expressly (...), a matter demeriting more then a single death. Such
intruding Uzzahs, Korahs, and Saul's do as much demerit death it self under the
Gospel, by the judgment and sentence of the judicious Historian, as those
others did by the express verdict given under the Law. Or if such Fanatics
will not own their Father Ischyras, they may assume another, Zacchaeus, for
their reverend Progenitor: of whom an ancient Father informs us, Epiph. l. 3.
that (...), he out of a bold and impudent attempt did invade the holy
Priesthood; and others with him, (...), by impulse of dreams and inspirations,
did as our Fanatics do, (...), adventure upon the Office of the Bishop.

7. Both primitive and present Fanatics have another fair (or rather foul)
resemblance and correspondence to each other, and that is in their strange,
uncouth and affected postures and gestures in prayer. Such haters of Images of
all sorts, that (as the Pharisees before them both) (...), Mat 6.16.
they deface Gods own Image in their own Faces; as if their leaven of
Hypocrisy (as Christ calls it) must needs sour and disfigure their very
countenances and aspects. Luke 12.1.
Theod de Oracul. l. 10.
Such were those devout Orators, that did all in sacris cum turbatione and
cervicis jactatu, with horrible and pitiful agitations and tossings of eyes and
heads. Such were those which Dio Chrysostomus mentions, Casaub. Ex r^.
Orat. 1. de Regno, that did (...), had strong commotions and a kind of torvity
and affected severity in their looks. Such also were the old Fanatic Epiph.
Haer. 48. (...).
Tascodrugitae or Paxillonasones, which had a strange trick of laying their
Forefinger upon their nose in prayer, and all (...), to show some strange
dejection and discountenance, and as a piece of sad and rigorous will worship.

8. Our new Fanatics have made another exact Parallel, with the old Fanatic
Messalians, by a strange conjunction and commixture of plain contraries. Both
grand Pretenders to the Holy Spirit; (...), They called their very dreams new
Prophesies. Both did fancy the Holy Spirit, and did (...), gave sensible and
visible evidence of his presence in them. Both were enemies to the constituted
Discipline and Fasts of the Church. Yet both those highly Spiritual persons so
far from drinking into one Spirit, (as St. Paul calls it, 1 Cor. 12.13.) in
the blessed Eucharist, that (...), Theod. l. 4. c. 11.
they said the Divine food did neither help nor hurt the sanctity of their
spirits. Our own English Fanatics, by a constant and continued abstinence from
the Divine Sacrament for eight or ten years together in their Congregations,
have unhallowed the Sacrament, vilified the Spirit, unchurched themselves and
their Congregations, and made the wild Messalians-their Fathers in impiety. And
while the Sacred Text says, Joh. 6.56, 58.
He that cateth my flesh, and drinks my blood, shall live for ever; these
Fanatics were even dead while they lived, as that Father and Church-Historian
concludes them.

9. Our Fanatics and the old Donatists are clearly fratres gemelli,
Twin-brethren, in much impiety and iniquity. Both arrogate to themselves Optat.
Milev. l. 2. init. p. 34
specialem sanctitatem de superbia, some singular and special sanctity from
their spiritual pride. Lib. 1. p. 3
Nolunt se dici fratres nostros, says the Catholic Father; They scorned to
call others Brethren, which were not of their Godly party. Lib. 1. p. 27 and l.
3. p. 81.
How stood they affected to Kings? Quid Imperatoribus cum Ecclesia? What have
Kings to do with Church Affairs? was their ordinary mode of speech. How to
Churches and Altars? Lib. 2. p. 53. Altaria frangere, radere, removere.
Tegulis plurimi cruentati, duo occisi: With the very tiles and utensils of the
Church they killed some upon the Altar, and wounded others. How to the blessed
Eucharist? Lib. 4. p. 116.
They cast it to the very dogs; which, non sine signo Divini judicii, turned,
and rent and tore dominos, tanquam ignotos and inimicos, their very masters, as
if strangers and enemies to them. How disposed to the orthodox Bishops?
Deuterium, Lib. 2. p. 72
Parthenium, Getulicum, Dei Episcopos, linguae gladio jugulastis, fundentes
sanguinem, non corporis, sed honoris: Their tongues were sharp swords to wound
them, and to shed the blood, if not of their bodies, yet of their honors. How
called they their prime Leaders and Circumcellions? Lib. 3. p. 106.
Agonisticos Sanctorum duces, the prime Commanders and Captains of Saints,
forsooth; and yet such Boutefeus of public injustice and violence, ut nullus
creditor eo tempore exigendi habuit libertatem: They put such a bar to all
judicial proceedings, that the Creditour could exact nothing for any debts, for
fear of the Sanctorum Duces. Lastly, how malicious in their lies and
accusations? They sent about many Pamphlets and Pasquils, mittentes ubique Lib.
^. p. 23.
litteras livore dictante conscriptas, ut rumoribus falsis cunctorum auribus
mendacia insererent: By false news and rumors they planted and sowed lies in
all ears. They were also in caedibus immanes, Lib. 2. p. 53.
filios pacis ad bella provocantes, most bloody and cruel to all opposits, and
still provoking sons of Peace to Mars his field.

10. Our new Fanatics, of whatever edition, persuasion or denomination, are
twin-brethren with the old Eunomians. Eunomius was (...), Sozom. l. 6. c. 26.
somewhat eloquent in his Schism, very contentious, and a Master of
Logick-disputes and Syllogismes. The Fanatic Proselytes to this Doctor of
Arianisme, (...), they gave little or no commendation or Encomium to Integrity
of life, or Morality, Mercy or Charity, (...), if men entertained not the same
opinion with themselves. But (...). All that they attended to and commended,
was, if one were hugely contentious and litigious for their opinions, and could
conquer by disputes. (...). He was of the Godly party that would and could
mainta n their espoused Opinions and Tenants. Such godly and pious Opiniatouts
were the Gnostics, as Ignatius represents and characterizeth them: (...),
They had no regard of charity, no care of the widow, the orphan, the oppressed,
or imprisoned, but whether rigid, severe and disputing Gnostics. That our
English Fanatics have inherited this virtue of their Fathers, Eunomius and the
Gnostics, I dare attest the personal experience of above thirty years past.
They have ever neglected Integrity, Morality, Charity and Mercy to all
dissenters from them; and their Charity has been very cold to Widows, Orphans,
and imprisoned persons: And the highest virtue of the Godly party has been to
dispute and discourse of their own opinions touching Kings, Bishops,
Common Prayer, Ceremonies, etc. and he that does this, (...), is the Godly man,
and of the Godly party, whether he be Presbyterian, or Independent, or of what
other opinion and persuasion soever.

SECT. X. A third Parallel, of Fanatics with Papists.
IT is a kind of Miracle, and very worthy of observation, That in many things
there is an unhappy coincidence even of extremes, which seem to stand at the
vastest distance and contrariety. In things natural, extreme cold parcheth the
grass, -- Borcae penetrabile frigus adurat, Virg Geor.
as well as extremity of heat. In Mathematics, lines drawn from the opposite
points of the Circumference meet in the Center. In matters Moral, the Prodigal,
that utterly disclaimeth and forsweareth Covetousness, yet pulls upon himself
by his wastefulness a necessity of being covetous and oppressive. Thus, thus in
matters of Religion also, the extreme and opposite Parties to Orthodox Religion
have a coincidence and conjunction of opinions, non obstante their seeming
contrariety and contradiction to each other.

1. It is a cursed position which both concentre in, notwithstanding their
disagreement otherwise, That lawful Sovereigns may be resisted by their
Subjects, and Arms of hostility taken up in the cause of Religion; not the
weapons of the first Christians, Prayers and Tears, but the arms of the Flesh,
Fire and Sword. This point of Popery, never heard of in the first ten
Centuries, is strongly asserted by modern Doctors. For their grand Observator
with all the Disciples of this sanguinary Doctrine do in asserting their
Tenants only translate Bellarmine and the Popish Writers into English. And
this Choleric Doctrine was not kindled and inflamed in the World till Ioh. de
Parisiis, and Iac. Almain, as the learned Bishop of R^sse in his Sacrosancta
Regum Majestas, page 14.

2. Both agree in unchristian partiality, contrary to the solemn charge and
obtestation of St. Paul to Bishop Timothy, 1 Timothy 5.2^.
I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels,
that thou -- do nothing by partiality. Their impaling of the Church to their
own party, and excluding all others from hope of salvation, is infallibly the
grand Partiality. Thus the Pontificii make the Roman and Catholic Church
convertible terms, and make subjection to the Bishop of Rome a necessary
requisite of a Christian Church; making it a formal difference in the very
definition of the Church, Sub regimine unius in terris Vicarii, Romani
Pontificis, that is, which is under the government of the only Vicar of Christ
on earth, the Bishop of Rome. As the old Donatists confined the limits of the
Church, in angulo and particula Africae, in a corner and small part of Africa;
So do our new English ones, either to their Separate, Congregate, or
Presbyterial Classes. These only, the Godly, the Brethren, the Precious, the
Children of God; all other, vile, unsavory salt, Barbarians. This is contrary
to the temper of those ancient and godly souls: Lib. 1. and August. Epist. 203.
Velint, nolint, fratres sunt, says charitable Optatus. Will they, or nill
they, he would style them Brethren. So Greg. Nazianzene, Orat. 33. (...), I
call you Brethren, though ye use unbrotherly dealings with us. Blessed is that
Religion which does religare, bind and tie us in bonds of obedience to the
Head, and in charity to the Members, though unworthy Christians.

3. In the obligation of Oaths and Covenants. The Romanists hold that their
Lateran Jupiter, the Pope, has a power paramount over the consciences of men,
that he can absolve Subjects from their Oaths and Allegiance to their Prince,
that he can rescind, relax, and oblige again, and even contra jus natural
dispensare, dispense with the breach of the Laws of Nature, in this case. As
for our modern Theologues, it is the complaint of the Reverend Prelate, Utinam
nonnulli qui rectissime damnant, non pessime imitarentur: Saunderson, de
Juramento.
What they most justly condemn, they unjustly practice themselves: For illi de
facto exercent quod Papa de jure sibi vendicat, they practice what the Pope
says he may do. It is most certain that all Papal or Presbyterian dispensation
can be but res fori externi: but the obligation of an Oath is intus in foro
conscientiae, has respect to the inward man. Therefore sententia prolata a
Judice in foro non suo, est de jure nulla, i. e. The sentence of a Judge in a
Court not of his jurisdiction is vain and invalid. Let them teach us who can
give a dispensation from that Oath wherein all swear, No power on earth can
absolve them. Thus like Samsons Foxes they are joined in the tails; Isa. 9.15.
And the Prophet that teaches lies, he is the tail, says the Royal Prophet.
And they have their firebrands also, by which they dissolve the bonds of Oaths,
and set every Community, yea the whole world, in combustion.

4. In exalting themselves above all that is called God, i. e. the Supreme
Magistrate. Thus T. C. page 144. sect. 1. Christian Princes must remember to
subject themselves to the Church, to submit their Scepters, to throw down their
Crowns before the Church, yea, to lick the dust of the feet of the Church. So
the Reverend Bishop Bramhall, in his Warning piece, gives us account of the
same Doctrine and conformable practice of the Scottish Presbytery. And is not
this the same Divinity that Alexander preached to Frederick Barbarossa? on
whose neck while he set his feet, he did quote Scripture for his pride, Super
aspidem and basiliscum ambulabis, and conculcabis leonem and draconem. This
pride the Church of England, together with the whole ancient Church, does
detest. Artic. 37. Stat. 12. Hen. 8.
-- The chief government of all Estates, even Ecclesiastical and Civil, does
appertain, etc. and, All sorts of Spiritualty and Temporalty ow next to God a
natural obedience.

5. In that unquiet principle, Dominium fundatur in gratia. For Aquinas,
Cajetane, Bellarmine, and Suarez, etc. hold that any Prince who falls from
the Romish Religion, makes a forfeiture of his Dominions, and may be deprived
of his hereditary rights. The contrivers of the Covenant among us did publish
no different Doctrine from this. For he that swears to defend his Prince with
this limitation, in the defense and preservation of the Protestant Religion,
will suppose himself justly excused, if he do not defend him in case of his
desertion or defection from the same Religion. For it is the rule of Reason,
Exceptio in casibus non exceptis firmat regulam in oppositum. And whilst it is
still pleaded, even to this day, that English Presbytery never dissolved
Monarchy, (as John Corbet;) sure to place the Supreme power, or Coordinate,
(as he still maintains) in Lords and Commons, the power of choosing great
Officers and Ministers of State, the power of the Militia, and government of
all Forts, to share the Kings Revenues, to plunder and kill fellow subjects,
look altogether like some such thing in Presbyters as dissolving of Monarchy.

6. Both guilty of Sacrilege in alienating the Communion, in part, or in whole,
from Lay-hands; and both upon the same reasons and specious pretenses, of high
reverence to the sacred Mysteries. Propter periculum effusionis Sanguinis,
says Liranus, and others, on 1 Cor. 11. for fear of spilling (in the
Ecclesiastic or Natural sense) the blood of Christ. And, Irreverentia and
profanationes Sacramenti vix evitari possent in tanta multitudine, Lib. 4. de
Eucharist. c. 28. n fine.
says Bellarmine; because irreverence and profanations cannot be avoided in
such a multitude. Are not the fears of spilling the Sacrament, and profaning
the body of our Lord, the very same pretenses of debarring so many souls from
the sacred Mysteries?

7. In point of reading the pure Word of God. The pure Popish position is this,
in their own words, Pract. Theolog. tract. 3. c. 27. concl. 2.
Salubriter Laicos a lectione Scripturarum arceri, and sufficere ut ex
praescripto Pastorum and Doctorum Ecclesiae vita cursum moderentur, as I.
Molanus: This Jewel is not to be cast before Swine, but the people are to live
by the dictates or sermonizings of their Pastors and Teachers, and, as little
Infants and Babes, battle only by chewed meat from their Nurses mouths; as
they illustrate their sacrilegious intentions. Our Fanatic Teachers, that in
practice could hardly vouchsafe the people the reading of a Psalm or Chapter,
and were wholly for their own long Prayers and longer Sermons, did practically
at least concentre either with the Papists, or else with the Anabaptists,
Hooker, Ecclesiast. Polity.
that called the written word a dead letter (as I have heard the Word called
without a Sermon) and the Bible, Babel, unless quickened and edified by their
Expositions and Sermons. It is T. C. his position, It is untrue, that simple
Reading is necessary in the Church: A number of Churches have no such order of
simple reading. Thus the grand Patriarch, T. Cartwright.

8. In case of Vows and Covenants. I will not magisterially and dogmatically
conclude and determine, but may piously and compassionately fear, that they are
guilty of the three Popish Vows. When they Covenanted to assist with their
Estates and Fortunes in the Godly Cause, and that without consent of their
Parent (which Vow the Father might cancel by Gods Law, Numb. 30.) is not this
Covenant near akin to the votum Paupertatis? When they covenanted, None shall
suffer himself, directly, or indirectly, by any combination, persuasion or
terror, to be divided, etc. Who, I pray, can totally hinder all arguments from
all impressions? Is not this akin to votum Continentiae, the vow of
Continency, which none can intallibly promise to himself? When, lastly, there
have been multitudes of Protestations, Covenants, Negative Oaths, and
Engagements, were not these very like votum Obedientiae, the vow of Obedience,
to their General also, as the Papists call him in Religious Orders.

9. The Jesuitical Doctrine of Probability is this, Mystery of Jesuitism,
Praes. and page 95, 96.
Quamvis ipse Doctor ejusmodi sententiam speculative falsam esse certo sibi
persuadeat, Though he hold it certainly false, yet from the judgment of one or
two grave Authors he may recommend what is most acceptable to the Questionist,
si haec illi favorabilior and exoptatior sit. In the Divinity of our Fanatics,
a Calvin in Geneva, a Knox or Buchanan in Scotland, etc. shall preponderate the
most probable. Doctrines of the Catholic Church, and all Primitive Christians.
The Doctrine of Direction of intentions, Page 123, 13^.
(as in a Duel, not to the sin of Revenge, but to our profit and advantage, the
saving of Honor, etc.) makes guiltless with the Jesuit: The very Fanatics
grand plea for popular Reformations, Insurrection and Hostility. Let the Reader
peruse The Mystery of Jesuitisme: it is Mysterium Fanaticorum also.

10. The grand controversy of late has been wholly managed by the force of
unwritten Traditions, or blind Fundamentals. Ask the new Teachers, by what Law
of God, or Law of England, may subjects take up Arms against Kings, and against
Saint Paul, Romans 13.2
He that resists, shall receive to himself damnation? Why, it is an unwritten
Tradition, no Law of God or the Land. Where have they liberty reserved to
resume and revoke the Supreme Power into their own hands? It is an unwritten
Tradition. In what case of Law may they take Forts, Navies, Magazines, and all
the Militia? All these are begged only as blind and unwritten Fundamentals: No
authentic Law for their tradition or reception.

11. There are many Characters of Antichrist common to both. De Consummat.
mundi. Anno Christi 220.
Hippolytus, an ancient Writer, near 1400. years since, gives these shrewd
indications; (...), The Houses of God shall be used as Cottages, Liturgy shall
be extinguished, singing of Psalms shall cease, reading of Scriptures shall not
be heard. Not one syllable of this but has been verified of late, as a learned
Minister and eyewitness of the dissolutions of the Welsh Churches does
testify. Dr. Nicolson.
Not three Sermons in all Monmouth-shire, and others, even on the Lords day;
the Sacraments prohibited; Liturgy, Singing, Reading wholly neglected. Sure not
the Bishops foot, but the foot of Antichrist has trodden upon our Fanatic
Teachers heads, and hearts also.

12. Lastly, though both have their (...), 2 Pet. 2.18
speak great swelling words of their own fixedness and immobility in their
respective Religions and Professions, yet have they been Reeds sufficiently
shaken with the winds of Doctrine. Ephesians. 4.14. L'Estrange against Mr. John
Corbet, p. 184.
In Queen Elizabeth's days, of 9400. Parochial Priests there were not above 80.
Rectours of Churches which constantly and invincibly refused the Oath of
Supremacy. And though Mr John Corbet.
a grand Presbyterian tells us in print, they are all fixed and resolute, not
like to be reduced to the practice of former times; and, This interest is not
like a Meteor, which vanishes away, but of a firm and solid consistence, like
a fixed Constellation, page 43. -- never will be extinguished while the state
of England continues Protestant, page 44. Arch-B. S^^swood Hist. p. 479.
Yet, after the Conference at Hampton Court 1603. of 9000 and more Parochial
Ministers only 49. stood out, and were deposed for disconformity: Whilst the
late odious and despicable Clergy, for obedience to their Mother the Church,
and loyalty to their Father, and piety to their Oaths and Obligations, have
this fair (...) and indication of their constancy, Hist. of English and Scottish
Presbyt. p 316
that of 97. Ministers within the walls of London 85. were driven from their
Churches: not to mention many thousands that never bowed their knees to
Baal-berith, from our Dan to our Beer-sheba.

SECT. XI. A Fourth Parallel, of modern Fanatics with the Pagan Mystae or
Doctors.
1. IN the Roman Republic there was a grand Controversy touching the
Tribune-Magistrates and others, the Ediles and Judices Decemviri. The case
clearly this; the Tribunes were sacrosancti and immovable, because they had
legem sacratam, Gro^. de jure B. l. 3. c. ^9. sect. 9.
both Law and Oath, for their establishment and settlement; the Decemviri and
others had only lege^^ simplicem, a Law only, but not any interposition of a
solemn and national Oath. The Tribunes were inviolable, L^v. l. 3.
because Tribunes relig^^ publica populi Romani tu^^atur: the intervention of
an Oath, in which their Religion was concerned, made them immutable and
permanent; The other were revocable and variable by some new Edict and Statute
of the Roman Senate. And Tib. Gracchus was condemned for his wilful abrogation
of Octavius from his Tribuneship. In our English State there has lately been
the very self-same case or public controversy. The Lords possibly, Spiritual
and Temporal, were as the Decemviri and Aediles among the Romans: They had
legem simplicem, no interposition of a sacred and public O^^h; and were upon
that accourt not so wholly immovable and (...) Fanatics and (...) ^^ew that
our Su(...) and Governor had legem sacratam for a sufficient defensative
against injurious hands, a double Oath, of Allegiance and Supremacy; beside a
third, the natural Obedience, which all sorts, of Spiritualty and Temporalty,
did bear to him next to God, according to the words of the Statute 12 H. 8. The
Roman Pagans were far better Christians then any of our Fanatics, of what
denomination or persuasion soever. They kept their Oath though to their own
hindrance (as they might imagine;) Psalm. 15.4.
and our English Fanatics thrust out legem sacratam cum juramento. Cum tota
religio populi Anglicani tucbatur, When the whole Religion of our English
Nation was concerned, the triple cord, of Supremacy, of Allegiance, and of
Nature, was snapped asunder by these violent Samsons.

2. Even among Pagans the effusion of Blood Royal was so horrid and execrable,
that caedes Principis, quantumvis hostis, non impunita, the Blood of a King,
though a professed personal enemy, never found Impunity or an Act of Indemnity
among them. As David, in Sacred Writ, punished the murder of his Royal enemy
(even Saul the son of Cush, Ps. 7. Tit.
an Ethiopian, from the blackness and foulness of his disposition) with the
death of the Executioner, 2 Samuel 1. So the Pagan Augustus was highly
vindicative against the murderers of Caesar; and Severus likewise, against
those of Pertinax; which Act alone (as Herodian writes) procured him
incredibilem gloriam and regnandi securitatem, both incredible honor and much
security. The Pagan Vitellius likewise severely revenged the death of Galba,
his professed enemy. Yea, Pontius Pilate for crucifying the King of the Jews,
our Lord and Master, met with just revenge, and lost his head, by the piety
even of Nero, as Suidas tells us. Yet in the blood-shot eyes of all our
modern Fanatics I fear that neither the Cannon at Edgehill, nor the Ax in
another place, ever yet appeared so horrid and execrable as those other
instruments of villainy did in the eyes of David, or Augustus, or Severus, or
Vitellius, or Nero.

3. The devotion of the Pagans was very eminent and exemplary. They brought
many Donatives and Honoraries to the Temples of their Gods out of the spoils
and plunder of their enemies; Which by the Greeks were called (...), by the
Latins manubiae. Such were those that were sent to Apollo at Delphos, Herod.
l. 8. and those which the Athenians gave to Minerva. Florus says, Tarquinius
Superbus de manubiis captarum urbium templum erexit. Our Fanatic Teachers
cannot vie one such act of zele as these. It shall be more tolerable therefore
for such Pagans at the day of Judgment then for such Christians. Among Gods
people there was a double Exchequer, one Ecclesiastic, the other Civil, Fiscus
regius; as appears Josh. 6.19. 1 Kings 7.51. The Temple of Saturn had a
Treasury (...). A^gustus had his sacred Exchequer, Appian. de Bello civ. l. 5.
In Greece they had a sacred Council for such a Treasury, (...), Strab. l. 9.
But in our worse then Pagan days, what Widow, what Soldier has cast in two
Mites almost for twenty years past?

4. Herodot. and Diodor. Sic. apud Gregor. Tholos. de Repub. l. 26 c. 1. sect.
16.
An Egyptian King was so unmovable in his integrity and devotion, that (like
Pharaoh before him, Genesis 47.22, 26.) he preferred the interest and welfare of
the Priests before his own. For a Thebane God having often molested his sleep
with horrid dreams, and told him that his Empire could not long be prosperous,
felix and di^turnum, unless he would lay violent hands upon his Priests; at
last he sent for them, and having acquainted them with his dreams, told them
plainly, Malle se purum omnique scelere solutum ab Aegypti regno abstinere,
etc. That he had rather part with the Egyptian Crown and Scepter, then be an
actor in so execrable a Tragedy. Our Fanatic Mystae, without being moved and
frighted by dreams and visions, have plundered and sequestered many Priests, and
taken from them (...), all their Livings, as the Physicians did from the poor
wretch in the Gospel. And whereas the Pagan King would rather quit his Crown
then injure the Priests, these have sucked their very life-bloud; and yet,
though they have swallowed the best Livings, they are as lean as Pharaohs
rascal Kine were after they had eaten up the fat ones. Hist. of English and
Scottish Presb. 234
In our grand Metropolis, of 97. Ministers within the walls no fewer then 85.
(as has before been said) were despoiled of their Free-holds by the violence
of Fanatic Presbyterians; and 115. in the Suburbs and Parishes adjoining;
besides those of Paul's and Westminster.

5. The Pagans were ever very firm to and tenacious of their Promises, Oaths
and Engagements. Pacta scripto sancita violare ne abjectissimo quidem homini
decorum esse arbitror: Clapm. l. 5. c. 8
It is unhandsome for the most abject person living to violate his engagements,
Plutarch. Qu. Grac.
says Bellisarius. The Megarenses and Corinthians, when some would forfeit
their Parole, and not return money according to promise for their liberty and
redemption, Fidem fallentes tanquam ingratos and injustos notabant: Their very
friends became their enemies, and set a Mulct upon them as ungrateful and
perfidious. When the Romans were requested by the Campanians to afford them
Auxiliaries against the Samnites their Confederates, they returned them this
resolute answer, Clapm. D^sp. 2. sect. 67.
Arma, Deos prius quam homines violatura, adversus Samnites vobis negamus, Such
Arms as must first fight against the Gods, by fighting against our Faith and
our Associates, we wholly deny you: as Livie. The most gallant Character of a
Soldier in the fury and rage of war is thus made even by a Pagan Poet, --
Optimus ille Sil. Ital.

Militiae, cui primum postremumque tueri
Inter bella fidem.
Our modern Fanatics, though they brag that since the times have been upon
their Tropicks, they have been least Tropical, yet how slippery, perfidious and
temporizing they have been, I leave to a far better Pen and Pencil: Perfidious
to Articles, Th. Pierce against Mr. Barlee, c. 4. sect. 11. p. 12.
to their Ordinaries, and to the supremus Ordinarius totius Angliae. -- Pudet
haec opprobria vobis
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
For modesties sake I forbear any new Century of their scandalous Crimes.

6. Amongst the Pagans, the sacred Mystae, Flamins and Officers in Divine
things were not required or permitted to swear at all, out of their devout and
reverential respects both to Priests and Oaths. The judicious Historian gives
this account of it; Plutarch. Qu. Romans Qu. 28.
Either because an Oath is tormentum liberorum, and therefore incongruous for
so free and ingenuous an Office as the Priesthood; Or else, quia non convenit
de rebus parvis non ei fidem habere cui sacrae and manimae creditae, it was
judged most improper, not to give credence to the Priest in small and civil
occurrences, when Divine and Sacred matters were committed to his charge and
fidelity; Or because execrations, which are still annexed to Oaths, are illegal
and improper for a Priests mouth; Idem, Qu. 44. p. 470.
Or lastly, because publicum periculum, si perjurus sacris operetur; there
might fall public vengeance on all if the Priest were perjured. And it is an
honor to that stout Champion Hercules, that non nisi semel duntaxat juravit,
he never swore but once. Our Fanatic Teachers have not been so nice, tender
and scrupulous as the very Pagan Priests and Flamins. For how many of them have
six or seven times, in the Universities, at Ordinations, Inductions, etc. took
the National Oaths, and yet after all have swallowed Protestations, Covenants,
Negative Oaths, and Engagements? not so abstemious, not so full of fidelity, as
Hercules and the Roman Flamines. Sure they are leves and nauci, i. e. (...),
according to old Varro's derivation, and contrary to St. Paul's (...), 2 Cor.
1.18, 19. Whereas the Romans had one Temple consecrated to the Goddess Fides, I
fear few of our English Fanatic Teachers would make competent Priests and
Officers in that Temple.

7. Philo. Josephus. Plutarchus. Isocrates in Panathenaico.
The Pagans had a most affectionate and constant gratitude to their Kings and
Priests. Our Lord and Master seems to commend them for styling them (...),
Luke 22.25. That honorable Title was given to the Roman Emperors. For the
Pontifices; Cic. in Orat. pro domo su^ ad Pontis.
Omnis Reip. dignitas, omnium civium salus, vita, libertas, arae, foci,
fortunae, domicilia, vestrae sapientiae, fidei potestatique commissa and
credita esse videantur, All the dignity, all the security of all subjects, yea
their lives, houses and goods, were committed to the Priests, as the best
Guardians and Patrons of all. Our Fanatic Teachers were never yet guilty of
that public and universal gratitude to Prince or Priest. King James (as above
said) calls them High-landers and Border-thieves, for lies, perjuries and
ingratitude. For their constant murmuring and ingratitude to our Moses and our
Aarons, they have Judaicum opprobrium, S. Bernard. S^rm. 11. in Cant.
as the Holy Father calls it, the very stigma of the Jewish Nation; who made
no less then ten mutinies and insurrections against the meekest and yet the
stoutest Moses, and against Aaron the Saint of the Lord, thrice for Water,
Exodus 15.24. and 17.2. Numb. 20.2. thrice for Bread, Exodus 16.2. Number. 11.4. and
21.5. twice about the way, Numb. 11.1. and 21.4. and twice against the Priest,
Numb. 16.11. -- 41. The Fanatics in all ages have had more of the Jewish
murmuring against Governors, then of the Pagan gratitude to Benefactors.

8. The prudent Pagans were of such integrity to the public Interest and
concernments of State, Ecclesiastical and Civil, that they abhorred and abjured
all scurrilous and seditious Pamphlets and Pasquils of Innovators. Plato makes
this Canon or Maxim, (...). Lib. 7 De Legib.
It was not permitted or tolerated to private phansies to publish any writing
before it were transmitted to and approved by the Judges and Lawyers. D. L^ert.
in Protagora.
When Protagoras had divulged some impious Tenets and Opinions, (...), The
Athenians burnt his Books in the Marketplace, having by a public Crier
collected all the Copies. And Valerius tells us, V. Max. l. 1. c. 1. sect. 12.
that L. Petilius Prator ex authoritate Senatus igne facto in conspectu populi
cremavit, by the authority of the Senate burnt certain dangerous Books before
the eyes of the people. But our fiery Fanatics have neither the spirit of
moderation, nor of prudence, nor of submissive obedience, as the Heathen Plato,
and others. Disputare malunt omnes quam vivere, Epist. 1.
as Seneca says. The Pamphlets (divulged in spite of the Statute 23 Eliz. c.
3. and others of later date) of Mr. John Corbet, Douglas, etc. are more worthy
ut in ignem mittantur quam ut in lucem emittantur.

I could easily multiply these Parallels, if I did not spare my Reader and my
self. He that vieweth the actions of both impartially, will be ready to think,
that though it be a curse in the Gospel touching some Christians, Math. 18.17.
Sit tibi tanquam Ethnicus, yet it may look like a blessing for some wild
Christians, if they were in many points of Morality even tanquam Ethnici.

The Conclusion.
Gentle Reader,
I Have impartially represented the Genius and Character both of the Old and of
the New sort of our English Clergy: And I cannot easily suspect but that thy
own determination and conclusion will be that in the Gospel touching Old Wine
and New, The Old is better. Luke 5.39.
If thou love Religion and Learning, Loyalty and Charity, Reason and common
Honesty, thou will not be so far imposed upon, as to impose the right hand of
favor and fellowship upon the younger Brother, as once he did, Genesis 48.14. Or
if thou do thus impose thy hands, thou art likely to say as the Bishop
Marcianus did after he had ordained one Sabbatius, (...), Socrat. l. 5. c. 21.
Better to lay hands upon Thorns or Brambles then upon those who of late would
have had the Bramble reign over all the Cedars in State and Church also. And
few or none even of their Classical and Cardinal Leaders but have crimes, and
not only spots of Sons, Deuteronomy. 32.5. Sozom. l. 3. c. 14.
I have read a story of one Pachomius a devout Abbot, who having under him four
and twenty sorts of Monks, according to the number and nature of the Letters of
the Greek Alphabet, placed those that were simple, plain and upright, in the
Letter Iota, which consists una lineola recta, of one straight and small
line; but such as were of a more involved and perplexed genius, and full of
anfractus, he set under Z z Zeta, or X x Xi, by reason of the various winding
and turning of those Letters. I know many, and I heartily wish even all, Old
English Clergy justly placed (as Pachomius his honest Monks) under the Greek
Iota. But I much fear another sort, which have exceeding much of the winding,
turning and involved nature of the Letter x Xi. To all the people of our
English Church I wish the Prophet Malachi's benediction, that God would open
unto them the windows of Heaven, Mal. 3.10.
and pour them out a blessing, that there may not be room enough to receive it.
To all true hearted Ministers I wish the Prophet Jeremiah's benediction, Jer.
31.14.
that God would satiate their souls with fatness. Amen.

Syllabus Sectionum.
I. SEction Introductorie, concerning modern Zamzummims, and mischievous
Agitat^rs against the Clergy. p. 1 II. Of the grand Merit of the Old English
Clergy. p. 8 III. Of the old English Law, and Courtesy to the Clergy. p. 21
IV. Of the Mosaical and Israelitish account. p. 33 V. Of the Evangelical
account, or under the Gospel. p. 46 VI. Of the Ecclesiastic or Primitive
account. p. 66 VII. Of the Natural Account, i. e. Patriarchal, and Ethnic. p.
73 VIII. Of the grand Demerits and Extravagancies of the new Clergy. A Parallel
of our new Fanatics with the old Pharisees. p. 85 IX. A second Parallel, of
our Fanatic Teachers with old Primitive Fanatics, in ten Particulars. p. 99
X. A Third Parallel of our Fanatic Teachers with Papists, in twelve
particulars. p. 119 XI. A Fourth Parallel, of our Fanatic Teachers with the
Pagan Mystae or Doctors. p. 133 The Conclusion. p. 147
FINIS.

