Pecuniae obediunt Omnia.

MONEY Masters all Things: OR, Satirical Poems, SHOWING The Power and Influence
of MONEY over all Men, of what Profession or Trade soever they be.

To which are added, A Lenten Litany, by Mr. C -- d, a Satyr on Mr. Dryden, and
several other Modern Translators; also a Satyr on Women in general: Together
with Mr. Oldham's Character of a certain Ugly Old P --

Though Jews, Turks, Christians, different Tenets hold,
Yet all agree in Idolizing GOLD.
Printed, and Sold by the Booksellers of London and Westminster, School.

TO THE READER.
REader, a Miss I shall present thee here,
Whose Company is grateful everywhere;
In Country, City, Court, and Camp, she can
Great Services perform for any Man.
Both Poor and Rich her Presence do admire,
And her Acquaintance earnestly desire;
Laborers and Husbandmen, with Farmers too,
Tradesmen and Scholars, all her Friendship woo;
Physicians, Lawyers Civil and Common,
And grave Divines too, she is scorned by no Man.
The Chaplain, Curat, Vicar, and the Dean,
Prebends and Bishops wish to entertain
This lovely Miss: The Nuns, with Monks and Friars,
Lord Abbots, Lady Abbesses, Lord Priors;
The Yeoman, Gentleman, Esquire, and Knight,
Baronet, Baron, and Viscount delight
To have her Company, wherever they are;
Earls, Marquesses, and Dukes desire a Share
In her; Princes, Kings, Emperors and Pope,
Her to embrace, their Arms stretch forth, and open.
Though Courted thus, yet she keeps honest still,
No Man can prostitute her at his Will:
She makes her longest Stay, and takes her Rest
With those that hug her close, and love her best;
And though she lodge with you in the same place,
All the Favor you can have's to kiss her Face:
Though she will consent you freely may her use,
Yet have a care you offer no Abuse:
He that presumes to wash her, or to round,
Or clip, file, or impair her Weight, or's found
To counterfeit her Honor, or embrace
Her worth, hazards his Life for such Disgrace:
Reader, if thou inquire after this Miss,
Her Name then know Madam PECUNIA is.
The Charms and Power she has in every thing,
And how effectually about to bring
Her Purposes, where she does interceed,
Hereafter thou may fully see and read,
If thou will take the Pains but to over look,
And thoroughly peruse this pretty Book.
To his Honored Kinsman, on his POEM called Money Masters all Things.
SOme specious Titles fix unto their Books,
To tantalize the Reader, when he looks,
And does peruse the Book, with longing Mind,
Expecting still the Hypothesis to find,
Of Ethics, Physics, Politics, or Laws,
Or such like various Mutters, Things, and Cause,
As by the Title-Pages are set forth:
But in the perusal, finding nothing worth
That answers his Pains, or Time, or Cost;
His Time, and Pains, and Charges are all lost.
But you, Sir, to the Title you have fixed,
Do all along so close keep to your Text,
That he who reads your Book from End to End,
Each Page thereof he surely must commend;
For in each Leaf you have so plainly shown
The Obsequiousness Men unto Money own,
That all with you must needs conclude and say
It Is Money, Money, Money bears the Sway.
R. J.

On the following POEM.
WHO in this Book by chance an Eye does cast,
Will tempted be to look upon the rest;
For here are Wit and Truth together joined,
So neatly intermixed, they please the Mind,
And rouse Attention, whilst they plainly show,
How Money governs all things here below:
At every Turn Truth comes so patly in,
That view the World, and there you see the Thing.
Nor is there more of Money's power expressed,
Than what some one or other will attest,
And from Experience write probatum est.
L. M.

To the Author, on his POEM called Money Masters all Things.
SIR, let me tell you what your Pen has done,
You have accomplished what was often begun,
Or hinted at by others; you have told
At large the All commanding power of Gold.
Some have attempted in a faint Essay,
Others have dropped Remarks thereon; but they,
Content with that, never made a full survey;
But you at last
Have largely shown the wide and sovereign power
Of Money, and how all things bow unto her.
Perhaps some curious Critic will allege,
You have not hit the Humor of this Age:
Your Verse is plain, were it polite and gay,
'Twould better please the nice: To this I say,
The gaudy Ornaments of Poetry
Would not with such a knotty Theme agree;
What Is natural and free becomes it best,
'Twere awkward, were it polished and dressed*
It Is better far some Matters to relate
In lowly Style, and not in Verse of State.
Were you to write of Emperors or Kings,
Of conquered Towns, or great Heroic things,
Then Pegasus should mount, and spread his towering Wings.
But here you show the World as in a Glass
That flatters not, but Face does answer Face.
Poetic Varnish had not beautified
Your Work, but daubed it, had it been applied:
You Have chose a better way to let us see
The Wonders of our primum Mobile,
How't puts the Mass of all Mankind in Motion,
To follow't with laborious Devotion:
Would any Man consider't, let him come
To this your Universal Speculum.
T. H.

THE PROEM.
A Satyr upon MONEY.
I.
IT is not the Silver or Gold of its self,
That makes Men adore it; but it is for its power:
For no Man does dote upon Pelf, because Pelf;
But all court the Lady in hopes of her Dower.
The Wonders that now in our days we behold,
Done by the irresistible Power of Gold,
Our Love, and our Zeal, and Allegiance do mould.
II.
This purchases Kingdoms, Kings, Sceptres, and Crowns;
Wins Battles, and conquers the Conquerors bold;
Takes Bulwarks, and Castles, and Armies, and Towns,
Our prime Laws are written in Letters of Gold:
It Is this that our Parliaments calls, and creates;
Turns Kings into Keepers, and Kingdoms to States,
And Peopledoms this into Highdoms translates.
III.
This Plots does devise, then discovers what the are;
This makes the great Felons the lesser condemn:
Sets those on the Bench that should stand at the Bar;
Who judge such as by right ought to execute them:
Gives the boystr'ous Clown his unsufferable Pride;
Makes Beggars, and Fools, and Usurpers to ride,
While ruined Properties run by their side.
IV.
Stamp either the Arms of the State, or the King,
St. George or the Breeches, C. R. or O. P.
The Cross and the Fiddle, it is all the same thing.
This still is the Queen, who ever the King be.
This lines Men's Religion, builds Doctrines and Truth,
With Zeal, and the Spirit; the factious endu'th,
To club with St. Katharine, or sweet Sister Ruth.
V.
This made that black Senate to sit still so long;
To make themselves rich, by making us poor;
This made that bold Army so daring and strong;
And that made them drive 'em like Geese out of door;
'Twas this made the Covenant makers to make it;
And this made our Levites to make us to take it;
And this made both Makers and Takers forsake it.
VI.
This spawned the dunghill Crew of Committees and 'Strators,
Who lived by picking their Parliament's Gums;
This made, and then prospered Rebels and Traitors,
And made Gentry of those that were the Nations Scums.
This Herald gives Arms, not for Merit but Store;
Gives Coats unto such, as did sell Coats before:
If their Pockets were lined but with Argent and Or.
VII.
It Is this makes the Lawyer give Judgment and plead,
On this side, or that side, on both sides or neither:
This makes Yeomen Clerks, that can scarce write or read,
And spawns arbitrary Orders as various as the Weather:
This makes the blue Lecturer pray, preach and prate,
Without Reason or Truth against K. Church or State,
To show the thin lining of his twice covered Pate.
VIII.
It Is this that makes Earls, Lords, Knights, and Esquires,
Without breeding, descent, wit, learning, or merit;
Makes Ropers and Ale Drapers Sheriffs of Shires,
Whose Trade's not so low, nor so base as their Spirit:
This Justices makes, and wise ones we know;
Furred Aldermen likewise, and Mayors also;
Makes the old Wife trot, and makes the Mare to go.
IX.
This makes the blue Aprons write themselves worshipful,
And for this we stand bare, and before 'em do fall;
They leave their young Heirs well fleeced with wool,
Whom we are to call Squires, and they are to pay all,
Who with beggarly Souls, though their Bodies are gaudy,
Court the pale Chamber Maid, and nick name her a Lady;
And for want of Discourse they do swear and talk baudy.
X.
For Money Men's Lives may be purchased and sold,
It Is Money breaks Laws, and that mends 'em again;
Men venture their Quiet and Safety for Gold,
When they will not stir a foot their Rights to maintain.
This Doctors creates of Dunces, and those
Commanders that use to pollute their Hose;
This buys the spruce Gallant his Verse and his Prose.
XI.
This Marriages makes, it is the Center of Love;
It draws on the Man, and it pricks up the Woman:
Birth, Virtue, and Parts no Affection can move,
While this makes Lords bow to the Brat of a Broom-Man.
Gives Virtue and Beauty to the Lass that you woo,
Makes Women of all Sorts and Ages to do;
It Is the Soul of the World, and the Worldling too.
XII.
This Horses procures you, and Hawks, Hounds, and Hares;
It Is this keeps your Groom, and your Groom keeps your Geldings;
It buys Citizens Wives, as well as their Wares,
And makes your coy Ladies so coming and yielding;
This buys us good Sack, which revives like the Spring;
This gives the Poetical Fancies their Wing;
This makes you as merry as we that do sing.
MONEY Masters all Things.
I. On the Longaevity of Moneys Regency.
Though Madam Money look both Brisk and Gay,
Lovely and fresh as Blooming Flowers in May;
Yet she for several Centuries of Years,
Has Reigned, as it by Sacred Writ appears:
For Ephron Zohar's Son, for Money's sake
Assurance unto Abraham did make
Of Machpelah, and the Cave within that Space,
That he might have it for a Burying place.
Abraham possession took thereof, and made
Room in the Cave, and Sarah therein laid.
Three thousand and five hundred years are past
Since this, and more, yet Money runs as fast,
And vigorously, as if but in her Prime,
And never had appeared before our Time;
Tho she in former Times has born great Sway,
Judas for her, his Master did Betray,
Since which near Seventeen hundred years are Spun,
And yet she strenuously about does Run;
For Madam Money will never be old
So long as Sun and Moon the^e Course do hold.
As she in former Ages did Enchant,
And Men lead as she pleased, she still does Vaunt,
That she is grand Mistress yet of the same Art,
And's not desidious to act her part:
Her Company to gain, Men wait and tend,
And her they will Idolize to the World's end.
II. On the Consequences that attend the Restraint and Prohibition of Moneys
free Currency.
When Regal Power, or States do put Restraint
On Moneys Currency, there is great Complaint,
City nor Country, know not how to Live,
When Money Transmigration cannot have;
When she is prohibited by the Command
Of Supreme power, to pass from Hand to Hand,
Both Rich and Poor, do sadly then complain,
For without her all comfortless remain:
When Money is compelled to disappear
The Griping Usurer must then forbear,
No Debts can then be got, tho long time due,
When she Absconds, it is but in vain to Sue:
Landlords must want their Rents then at Rent day
Money's proscribed, the Tenants cannot pay:
Tradesmen are hopeless, Live 'twixt hope and fear,
With careful Thoughts when Money'll not appear.
Yeomen and Husbandmen do stay at home,
With longing Thoughts, to hear when Money'll come.
Poor Lab'rers then are ready for to Weep,
They know not how their Families to keep;
If Money's Company they cannot have,
They Are in despondency their Lives to save;
It Is she Revives the Gentleman and Clown,
Where she comes not all Hearts are there cast down;
When she is at liberty all Men are glad,
But when Restrained, they are Mestive then and Sad:
For her Restraint does all Men's Minds perplex,
She Is Salus populi, suprema Sex;
For tho Men fret and some, are full of Gall,
If Money interceeds, she quiets all.
III. On the power of Money in general.
Money the Goddess is, which all Adore
She Charms the Universe, with her bright Ore;
All Ages, Sexes and Opinions be
Fondly in Love, with this fair Deity:
Her Votaries she has in every State,
And Princes Court, and other potentate.
In all Cabals and Meetings near so close,
She by her Charms, their Secrets can disclose;
Cunning hatched Plots thought to be surely laid,
Have been by her discovered, and betrayed;
And she by her Infatuating Power,
Has showed the Company, the place and hour.
The greatest Secrets and Clandestin Things
Acted by Popes, or Emperors, or Kings,
For love of Money have been plainly shown,
Which otherwise would never have been known.
In County, Camp and Court, she bears the Sway,
And is so prevalent, she is never said Nay;
Her power can raise to Honor, or throw down
A Noble Man, advance a Silly Clown;
If you desire to have your princes Ear,
Make use of her, and then you need not fear;
For she into the presence Chamber brings
Some that without her, near should speak to Kings.
She introduces some, brings into grace,
Many who Honor merit not, nor place.
Favor she can procure at any time,
And make a Dunce unto preferment climb,
When Parts and Worth, neglected are and sit
Discouraged, and no Employment get.
Where she does not appear to interceed
There Is then small hopes your Business will succeed.
It Is Money, that procures a Man respect,
And want thereof, is slighted with neglect.
IV. On the former prevalency of Money, at Elections for Members of Parliament.
Such as desirous were, and had intent
To be chose Members for the Parliament,
Where choice of such was ordered to be made,
Money they made their Friend, that was the Trade.
He that was free of purse, and treated high,
Neighbors unto the place he could put by;
And Gentlemen of good account that way,
They did out Vote, and so obtained the day.
Money did make the Borough Men all keen
To give their Votes, though they had never seen
His Face, until the Election came in hand,
Yet then their Tongues, and Hearts he did Command.
Money sometimes did silly Men prefer
To places of this Trust, when others far
More worthy for their parts, were set aside,
For Money in this Case, was the main Guide.
And bore the chiefest Rule in every place,
Men to this high preferment brought, and Grace;
Virtue and Worth will now contend with Gold;
This place of Trust must not be Bought or Sold.
But honesty and parts, are now preferred,
Which oft-times Money heretofore debarred.
V. On Persons in high and honourary Employments.
Money is sure a Witch, and does delude
Men in great place, as well as the Multitude.
If she her glittering Spells before Men cast,
They Are Captivated then, and held so fast,
That neither Honor, Wisdom, Honesty,
Nor place of greatest Trust, nor Gravity
Can them secure from this unhappy Fate,
Witness some famous Men but now of late:
Such is the force of Money at all Times,
That she can aggravate, or lessen Crimes;
The Guiltless she can Gu'lty make we see,
And can prevail to set the Guilty free.
VI. On Moneys former Regency in the Universities, and Inns of Court.
If you Reside at the University,
And there a very Dunce or Rake-hell be;
Yet Batchelour, and Master too of Arts,
For Money you will be made, though you want Parts.
And if you would still advance, to be more Famous,
Doctor you may proceed then by Mandamus,
Without your keeping Acts or Exercise;
So whether you are Learned, or otherwise
Does not appear, Money does salve up all,
She can a Fool unto preferment call.
The meanest Lawyer oft-times we may see
By Moneys help, preferred to the Degree
Of Sergeant at Law, although he've never Read,
And in's profession is a dunder Head.
Money has power to raise him higher still,
For she a Judge can make him if she will.
VII. On the Court of Chancery.
If you have a Cause in Chancery does depend,
And you upon a Master must attend
For his Report, then Guinneas must appear,
Else you of great delay may stand in fear;
And when is Report he makes unto the Court,
Perhaps you will have no cause to thank him for it.
Who beat the Cushion best, shall have respect,
Favor in the Cause, the other side neglect:
Miss Money with her Charms can make him kind,
He all Advantages in the Cause shall find,
If she appears not, he is then sadly Blind.
Solicitors and Clerks too, must receive
Encouragement from her, else they will give
Neither Respect unto your Cause nor you,
Will no Attendance give, nor kindness show,
But Lady, Money will your Cause right State
And prove for You a powerful Advocate.
VIII. On the great Predominancy Money has in all Courts.
In every Court Experience shows each day,
That Money bears the Overruling Sway.
If she in the King's Bench does but appear,
Or the Court of Common Pleas, they her Revere,
Or in the Exchequer, or that the Assize,
Or Sessions of the Peace, she does Surprise.
For she in every Office Regent Sits,
And there at all times has her lucky Hits.
She can procure dispatch without delays,
Or make you dance attendance many days.
Money can expedite, or can deterr,
Discover Truth, conceal it if you err;
This Lady can do ought that you would have,
She either can condemn, or she can save.
All Officers to her Obeisance owe,
With Hat in Hand to her the Knee they bow.
IX. On Divines.
Money some grave Divines makes to dispense
With all the Checks of tender Conscience,
Swallow down any Oath, and never stick,
Rather than lose a fair Rich Bishopric,
Good Deanery, Prebend, or Fat Parsonage;
Their Credit they will expose upon the stage
Of Censure and Reproach, rather than fail,
If they in their Pursuit may but prevail:
Such are the Charms of Money, that they will,
By nice Distinctions, and Scholastic Skill,
Prove all things Lawful which they know and find
Assisting are to their aspiring Mind,
And may advance some steps in the Ascent
Of the desired Stage of their Intent,
Of living Great, Supine and Easy Lives,
Make Children rich, and towering high their Wives.
X. On wicked Judges.
Money does partial Judges Eyes so blind,
That they the Truth can neither see nor find,
But are misled into some Error great,
Mistake the Cause, I will not say a Cheat,
But they are so strangely led into Mistake,
That they the greatest Wrong for Right do make,
Mis-represent the Evidence in the Cause,
So th'Jury give a Verdict against the Laws:
Money can make a Cause more clear by far,
Than the profoundest Lawyer at the Bar.
XI. On Lawyers.
Bos in Lingua has been a Proverb long,
For Money surely charms the Lawyer's Tongue;
She stupifies his Sense, and makes him dumb,
He nothing says in's Client's Cause, but Mum:
Book Cases he forgets, and of his Sense
He Is now deprived, has lost his Eloquence,
And jingling Harangues, which Lawyers use
The Cause to puzzle, and Court to amuse;
The wrangling Logic too he used to have,
And urge in Court his Client's Cause to save,
He now has clear forgot, and cannot give
One single Reason, the Cause to retrieve.
XII. On Justices of the Peace.
To Justices of Peace Men rarely bring
Money for Favor, but some other thing,
As Turkies, Geese, Pigs, Capons they present
To them, or to their Ladies with Consent;
Or else the Clerks by the poor Men are see'd,
That the Justice may at Sessions interceed,
And speak for them, to get 'em a Discharge
Of their Recognizance, to go at large:
So though to Money the Justice is not bent,
Yet he will something take equivalent.
XIII. On Clerks of the Crown, and of the Peace.
Clerks of the Crown and Peace, to bring about
Their sitient Designs, often issue out
Illegal Process, thereby Cash to get:
This makes the People at such Practice fret.
If Judge or Justice should hear of the same,
They Will find Excuses to evade the Blame.
So it is in vain to clamor at the Wrong,
You may as well sit still and hold your tongue.
When Bailiffs come, you must pay what they ask,
Or they will distrain; though it is an heavy Task.
Money to pay, where none is due of Right,
But this we find is often o'ersway'd by Might.
Money and Friendship do o'er-master all,
Better sit still than rise and get a Fall.
XIV. On Clerks of Assize.
Clerks of Assize contrive, and beat their Brain,
What way their Place will them afford most Gain;
Sometimes they wheedle, sometimes fret and storm,
And threaten People if they will not inform,
Or swear to some Indictments, what care they,
Whether be true or false, so they get Pay:
It Is Fees, it is Fees they look for, and will have;
Money procures Reprieves, and Life can save.
Though Proofs prevail not, nor what Lawyers plead,
When Money comes, she hits the Nail of the head:
It Is She can free you without Bond or Bayl.
Or can continue you still in the Gaol.
What is it that Money does not at all times,
She frees the guilty, guiltless loads with Crimes.
XV. On Attorneys and Sollicitors.
Attorneys and Sollicitors Money charms,
To throw their Client's Cause into her Arms;
Then Business they neglect, and take no Care,
Council to see, or Witness to prepare.
The Client a Bailiff fees, to cry about
Runs here and there to find's Attorney out,
Who purposely absconds, keeps out of sight,
And never intends to do his Client Right.
The Client, when too late, does understand
His honest Cause was lost, 'cause not well manned,
He blames the Attorney, who for his Excuse,
Begins his honest Client to abuse;
Tells him, when as the Cause in Court was named,
TO appear in such a Cause, he was ashamed:
And says, if he the Truth had understood
At first, that is Client's Cause had not been good,
He Would not have meddled in it; so with a Scoff,
And a mere Sham, he puts his Client off.
Thus Money can nonsuit, Defaults can call
Judgments Arrest, Money is all in all;
She can demurr, o'erthrow or save a Cause
On either side, with or against the Laws.
XVI. On Spiritual Court Men.
If in the Spiritual Court you chance to be
Presented there, by some for Bastardy,
Clandestine Marriage, or such like Offense,
The Court for store of Money will dispense
With any Crime, and for your Money's sake,
Dismissed you shall be, no Penance make
But if this Idol's wanting, and you're poor,
You then are sentenced by the Chancellor,
Some Corporal Penance publicly to make,
That others may by you Example take.
But in the other Case, the Chancellor,
The Advocates, Proctors, and Register,
When all of them have got a good large Fee,
Then they contrive a way to set you free,
If you Whore-monger be, or Whore, or Jilt,
Money prevails to set you free from Guilt.
XVII. On Domestic Chaplains.
If you Domestic Chaplain chance to be
Unto some Person of good Quality,
When-e'er my Lady's Woman fears she will prove
With Kid unto her Master, he does move
The honest Chaplain some Respect to show,
Advises him the Abigail to woo;
Tells him her Lady such great care does take
For her, that she will her a Fortune make;
And I too for my Spouse sake will bestow
First Living that falls in my Gift on you,
That you with Comfort long may Live together
Solacing your selves, in one another;
The hopes of Cash, and Living too does Charm
The Chaplain so, that he in Love grows Warm;
He Courts the Prostitute, who does seem Nice,
His Amors not admitting in a Trice;
Yet after some Addresses she is Won,
And so the Chaplain gets a buttered Bun.
Upon the Enjoyment, he perceives a Cheat
On him is put, the Cushion some have beat
Before he came, and made it fit for use,
He Is grieved in his Mind at this abuse.
But then bethinks himself since it is his Lot
He must be pleased whether he will or not;
And so his hopes do solely rest in this,
That now she is Wed, she will do no more amiss.
And thus, the Idol Money has such Power
A Man for love thereof will Wed a Whore;
He that Weds such, in hopes she honest prove,
May afterward repent his fond hot Love.
XVIII. Non-conformists.
Some Non-conformists, we often see tempted are
To wear a Surplice, keep Set Forms of Prayer,
Kneel at the Sacrament, great Reverence show
To the Altar, at the Name of Jesus bow;
And at the other Rights no scruple make,
And all this for a good Rich Living's sake,
Which store of Money does them yearly bring,
For love of which, they would yield the Mass to Sing;
This Goddess Reforms, and Transforms a Man,
Prevails with some more than the Gospel can.
XIX. On Romish Priests.
If you your Father Confessor do feed
With Cash, you need not fear what Life you lead,
For you may Kill, Rob, Steal, Drink, Whore and Swear
Incest commit, without regard or fear,
Or other Crime, for he can Pardon all,
Your great and crying Sins, as well as small;
And when you die, if unto him you leave
A good round Sum, he then your Soul can save
From Purgatory, to Heaven straight it goes,
Evades all Purgatory, Pains and Woes.
And so though Money cannot perennate your days;
Yet after Death, she has the power to raise
You unto Bliss, if you have steadfast Faith,
And can confide in the Priest, and what he says.
XX. On Quakers.
Tho some that seem Hot Quakers, will not Swear,
Yet when Things of Advantage do appear,
By which great Profit they may get; O then,
They Will Lie, Dissemble, Cheat like other Men:
The Light within them by the Spirit Fed,
For love of Money is Extinguished;
And the Old Man within 'em, now bears Sway,
And so we are not to trust their Yea and Nay,
Although it be the Quakers Zealous Passion,
It is mere Cant, and great Dissimulation.
XXI. On Land Officers in the Field or Garrisons.
If Money to a General does appear,
She charges all, breaks through Front, Flanck and Rear,
This Dalilah en^iceth, till at length,
She does discover his whole Armies Strength,
Wherein it does Consist, and how it lies,
Then with her Lusture dazleth his Eyes;
He Is taken with a Slumber, senceless made,
And no Alarm takes, till all is betrayed;
His Army was so Posted, that none could
Dream of Surprise; but Oh the power of Gold
And Silver Charms, Money's bright shining Twins,
O Money, Money when a War begins,
Thou can prolong it, or can make it cease,
Thy Umpirage determines War, and Peace,
Tho the Cause be near so Just, when Wars begun;
Yet without Money, it cannot go on.
Money procures both Arms and Men to Fight,
She can defend the Wrong, 'oer throw the Right,
Can make the Cannons to Shoot 'oer or short,
To Batter, Beat down, or not hurt a Fort,
Make Fuzees Fire or Die, or Bombs fall down,
And to Destroy, or not Destroy a Town.
Besiegers and Commanders Gold bewitches,
Their Men cut off, within their Mounds and Ditches,
Or wittingly betrayed, 'ithe dead of Night,
And so con^usedly do make their Flight,
Leaving their Guns, and Baggage for a Pray
To the Besieged, when they Run away.
As Money Seige can raise before a Town
So when before 't, an Army does sit down,
And specious Terms unto the Town does tender,
She can entice them quickly to Surrender;
Although the place be Strong, and can hold out,
Money can strangely bring the thing about,
Where Vigorous Assaults can not prevail,
Money can open Gates, and Walls can Scale.
Besiegers and Besieged her obey,
It Is Money that does bear the Bell away.
The Town of greatest Strength, Money has won,
Which by the Force of Arms, could not be done.
Great Lewis knows, this practice is his own,
For this not Force, has gained him many a Town.
For Money Officers false Musters make,
And also for this tempting Idols sake.
Their Soldiers they will Cheat, of Clothes and Pay,
Quarters of the Tick leave, when they March away.
Money's so tempting, when she comes to Hand,
Rather than part, they will hazard a Disband,
She bears the Rule in great, as well as small things,
Money at all times, strangely masters all things.
XXII. On Sea Officers.
Money does Officers at Sea so Charm,
That Enemies may Sail by without Harm.
She Anchors them so fast, they will not get free,
Or else the Fogs are thick they cannot see,
Until the Fleet of Enemies pass by,
And then the Officers do them descry,
O then they follow, and pursue a main,
Discharge Broadsides, but not a Man is Slain;
Or if there be, its some unluckly Shot
The mischief does, which they intended not.
Stores being gone, then they make off from Sea,
Get fr^sh Rec^^its Aboard, expect some pay;
Then they ^o ^^a again return to Cruise,
And spend their Princes Store in like Abuse,
As they had done before; so all this while
Their Prince of pay, and Stores they do beguile.
Money where she attempts, she does prevail
Duty and Loyalty to (...) to Sale;
And Shipwreck makes of a good Conscience,
Makes breach of Trust and Oaths, seem no Offense.
Such Power this Fascinating Goddess has,
She makes Men Abdicate Fear, Shame and Faith.
A Conqueress, we may her truly call,
For Money does over power and master all.
XXIII. On Privateers.
The Privaters do Cruise about the Main
Hazard their Lives and Ships, Prizes to gain.
And then the Masters must compound and pay,
Or else the Men and Ships, they will tow away;
But if it be these Roving Robbers Fate,
To fall 'ith' Road of Men of War, that wait
These Privateers to Fight and Seize upon,
And they are taken, they then are qui^e undone.
For Men of War no composition take,
But these Men and their Ships, free Prizes make,
Pirates expect Money will be their Lot,
But they themselves sometimes do go to th'pot.
Money's so prevalent none can withstand,
Men venture for their Prize by Sea and Land.
XXIV. On Skippers, or Master's of Ships.
Money will make the Skipper Anchor weigh,
And in the soulest Weather go to Sea;
And leave his Friends, and Children, and his Wife,
Hazard his Men, his Ship too, and his Life.
So charming is the glittering of this Ore,
That none can him persuade to stay on Shore.
With or without a Wind, to Sea he will go,
Maugre his Friends whether they will or no;
For Money is so much his Hearts delight
That neither Storms nor Tempests him Affright.
XXV. On Witnesses in a Suit at Law.
Money makes things so evident and clear,
To the time before they are Born some Men will swear,
Others she makes, they cannot well remember
Whether in April 'twas, or in December;
Or in what Year, or how the thing did happen,
They Are now grown Senseless, and has all forgoten.
Money distracts, takes Memory away,
They know not what was done but Yesterday.
She Memory can quicken or decrease,
Can make a Witness Swear, or hold his Peace.
XXVI. On Under Sheriffs, and Associates to Clerks of Assize.
For Money the Subvic keeps you at home,
So that you need not to the Assizes come.
And if you by mistake, or in some Hurry,
Happen to be Returned on the Grand Jury,
If Money but appears before the Eyes
Of the Associate, to the Clerk of Assize,
He Will skip your second call, no Bailiff Swear,
So you're excused from Service and from Fear,
And now may walk about, or take your ease,
Impend your time with whom and where you please.
XXVII. On Seal Keepers to Sheriffs.
The Sheriffs Seal Keepers, and Clerks for Money
Will give you timely notice, when there is any
Process against you brought, that you at home
May save your self and Goods* er' the Bailiffs come
To make a prey of you, and what you have,
So when the Bums do come, then they will rave
And hunt about, and stamp, and foam like mad,
When not so much as Fees are to be had;
They being twice or thrice thus served, you may
Compound, get easy Payments and long day,
And by this means great Charges you may save,
Which Sheriff and the Bailiffs else would have.
XXVIII. On Bailiffs.
Although a Bailiffs chiefest Friend you are;
Yet he for store of Coin perhaps will dare
You to Arrest, or else he will betray
You to his Confreers, and show how they may
Your Person seize, make known the time, and where,
Of which the poor harmless Man stands in no fear.
Cause his supposed Friend sits by Demure,
So the poor Fellow thinks all is Secure;
But at long run, the Catchpoles hurry in,
And then the Judas rouses, does begin
To Fret and Storm, and Quarrel every one,
When he himself in truth's the Cause alone;
And so behind Back, with a Fleering Laughter,
The poor Man like a Sheep is lead to the Slaughter,
By which its plain, a Rascal Bailiff will
His nearest and best Friend for Money Sell.
XXIX. Iaylors.
Jaylors for Money, will great kindness show,
Irons keep off, above and not below
Your Lodged, may Eat and Drink too at their Table,
Have any thing you lack if you are able
To pay for it, but if you're Poor, you're thrown
Into the low Gaol, no favor then is shown*
And though your Case be miserable Sad,
Yet there no Pity, nor Regard is had,
Imperious Jaylors Lord it, if you're Poor,
You must with Patience their Scorns endure.
But Money Friendship gets, does never fail,
Although you're kept and coopt up in a Gaol.
XXX. On Custom Officers.
To Custom Waiters both by Land and Water,
How to get Money, is the only matter,
At which some aim; for where they get a Fee,
Though they be Sworn, yet they can Oversee,
And hazard both their Conscience and their Place,
For Money's sake they will venture a Disgrace;
But when no Money does appear, O then
They Are in their Office very Zealous Men,
Will make strict Search, and Rommage round about
Discovery to make, and find things out;
For which there is Custom, or some Duty due,
Then they are Severe, and will no Kindness show;
But tell you, that they are upon their Oaths,
And so will grope you round upon your Clothes,
That there be no Concealment by you made,
You must excuse them then, for it is their Trade.
Mon^^ the Eyes can close, or open bring,
They can discover, or not see a thing,
Things done in time, or out of time all is one,
Or if not done at all, she can atone;
Money makes things pass curren^ any time,
And can atonement make for every Crime.
XXXI. On Sergeants at Arms, or Pursevants.
If Sergeants at Arms, or Pursevant
Be sent for you; and Money you do want
To palm the Man, then he will Search about,
And make Enquiry, till he ^inds you out.
And then away he will hale you in great have,
He Is other Work in hand, so cannot wast
His time to wait on you; but you must go
Along with him, whether you will or no;
But if you have store of Money for a Fee,
And gratify him well, he will Oversee;
Then back again return, leave you behind,
And make response, that he could not you find.
But when that he unto your House did come,
You Would taken a far Jorney, gone from home,
The time you would return, uncertain was
So he was for'^d to let the Business pass;
Thus Money blinds his Eyes, he can pass by,
And at's return excuse it with a Lie.
XXXII. On Excise Officers.
The Exciseman a Concealment can over look,
For a good Fee not enter't in his Book,
And where he has a kindness he can charge
At easy Rates, others set down at large,
For the Poor Ale wives have in this no Skill,
So the Officers may charge them as they will,
And whatsoever they set them down, they must
At the next sitting pay, for there is no Trust;
The General Riders, and Surveyers too,
This Goddess Money do Adore and Woo,
Think nothink troublesome, nor count it pain,
If they but this bright Goddess can obtain;
And likewise every other Officer
Does Complement, Cringe, and make Legs to her.
XXXIII. On Stewards.
If you would have a Farm at e^sie Rent,
Let my Lords Steward know, what is your intent;
Be free to him, and he will bring't about,
For he does always know, when Farms are out.
So if you store of Money to him bring,
At easy Rent, he will place you on the thing,
Will get you License some fresh Land to plow,
Or cut down Wood, and any kindness show.
Thus Money proves a powerful Advocate,
In Country Business, and Affairs of State.
XXXIV. On Surveyors of Land.
If there be Land that you would have Surveyed,
And you the Surveyor would your Friend have made;
Let Money then accost him as your Friend,
She so effectually will recommend
Your Business unto him, you may command
Such a Return and Survey of the Land,
As you Instructions give and do require,
He Will make it more or less as you desire;
Money so tempting is, that she can have
A Man for love of her, become a Knave,
Rather then suffer Money to pass by,
Men to oblige her, will both Swear and Lie.
XXXV. On Messengers.
If you be in Arrear of Fee Farm Rent
To the King, a Messenger to you is sent;
And when he comes his Fee you must first bring,
And pay him down, before you pay the King.
From the King Exchequer, he tells you there is due
Eight pence a Mile, which he expects from you;
If you want Money he will then Distrain,
So you must hunt about, for its in vain
To think to slur him off, for he will stay
And not stir from your House till he get pay;
Your time for the payment of the King may crave,
But I says he, my Fee will surely have,
And when I come again, you may expect
Each time I Will have my Fee, for your neglect.
Himself and Horse you kindly entertain,
And then betimes 'ith'Morning do complain,
No Money you can get, than he will take
A Silver Tankard, Cup or Bowl, so make
Requital, in this base ungrateful way,
And so take Horse farewell he cannot stay.
And then your Plate along with him must go,
He Is the King's Messenger, who dare say no?
The love of Money does most Men bereave
Of all that is good, no Manners she does leave.
Conscience nor Honesty where Men do set
Their minds on naught but Money how to get.
XXXVI. On Astrologers or Nativity-Casters.
If you unto Astrologers are free
Of Money, they will cast your Nativity
To be auspicious, fortunate, long Life;
And if you be a Man, then a rich Wife
You sure shall have. And if a Woman, she
Shall wed an Husband of great Quality.
Naught but Prosperity does you attend,
Whenas your Stars do no such thing portend.
Money does make Men in their Judgments err;
Just as you pay them, so they shall declare.
If nobly you do pay, good Fortune then;
If meanly, various, it is like other Men.
They likewise is horary Questions give
A good or bad Response, as they receive
More or less Cash from you, out of your Purse,
So shall their Answers be, better or worse.
Thus Money leads a Man which way she will,
Makes him forget his greatest Art and Skill,
And does a very Changeling of him make;
To Right or Wrong he will subscribe for her sake.
XXXVII. On Common Informers.
Common Informers oftimes do pretend
Men guilty are, when they do not offend;
Tell them they have transgrest and broke the Law,
And so they keep poor silly Men in awe.
Extorting Bribes by Fraud and base Deceit,
For which sometimes a Pillory they get.
Then otherwhiles, where they do get a Fee,
They manifest Offenses will o'ersee:
Thus Money right or wrong they will surely have,
For she is the dear Solatrix they do crave.
Money's Memento always in their Ear is,
Faciam ut mei semper memineris;
The Thoughts whereof do run so in their mind,
Their All they set at stake Money to find.
Their Credit, Place, and Conscience sans control;
For Money's sake they will pignorate their Soul.
XXXVIII. On griping Landlords.
Some Landlords minds on Money are so bent,
They never cease to rack and raise their Rent:
If they can Money get, they do not matter
Though the poor Tenants sit with Bread and Water.
To skrew and squeeze the Men they never give over,
Until the Tenant's brought to Beggars Door.
When they the days of Payment cannot keep,
The Landlord's gone with all then at a sweep;
And leaves the poor Man and his Family
Unto the charge and care of the Constablery.
Some Men never care if Money comes but in,
For they believe Oppression is no sin.
XXXIX. On Conservators of Rivers.
The Rivers Conservators, who are made
T'inspect that Fishermen leave off their Trade
In spawning-time, and when Fish kipper be,
If Money does appear, they can o'ersee,
Connive at naughty Fish not fit for use,
When Money pleads in the Fishermen's Excuse.
She can condone unlawful Nets and Spears,
Lines, Leysters, Trolls, Pots, Angles, Leaps, and Wears.
And all illicite Engines in the Water,
If she but wheedles up the Conservator.
Her Blandishments the Man cannot withstand,
If she intrudes her self into his Hand:
Syrenick Miss, with thy bewitching Wiles,
Men of their Honesty thou often beguiles.
XL. On Usurers.
If you to borrow Money stand in need,
If your Security be good, you speed;
But then the Usurer he does expect
Payment of Interest you will not neglect
Every six Months, or else be sure he will call
Both for the Use and for the Principal:
And if you're not provided to pay't in,
To threaten you with Law he does begin.
Then you must treat the old Miser, Presents make
To the Wife, or Son, or Daughter, and them take
For Friends, that you may keep't to further Day,
Till you the same are able to repay:
And thus they are harrasted that Money lack,
Enough to make their very Hea^^ S^^ings crack.
Money is sure the Root of every Evil,
And the love thereof proceeds from the Devil.
XLI. On Young ^asses.
The curious Girl come of good Parentage,
Of comely Body, Beautiful, right Age,
Endowed with Nature's prime and chiefest Arts,
Which one would think could charm Beholders Hearts;
Yet* if she Money lack, she is only gazed
And looked upon, and for a Beauty praised:
But often stays until her Beauty ^ade,
Before she is courted, and a Wi^e is made.
And then the Courtship oftimes proves to be
By those who are below her Quality;
To whose Embraces she must yield consent,
Else single Life to lead must be content.
Whereas the Squint-eyed, Lame, deformed Lass,
If she has Money, does for Beauty pass;
Persons of all Degrees do her admire,
Not for her self, her Money they desire.
Which if she wanted, no Man would endeavor
To gain her Love, but she might stay for ever.
Curse on this Money that does Men ensnare,
To leave the fine, and take the cour^est Ware.
She forces Men Deformities to woo,
All Sizes, Ages, and all Colors too.
XLII. On Clerks to Justices of the Peace.
Clerks to the Justices of Peace do love
Money to get; for her sake they will move,
And vigorously for you will intercede,
If of your Purse to them you freely bleed:
And them profusely Fee, you then command
Their help for you, they Back and Edge will stand.
At Sessions get Discharge upon your Call,
So that you need not there appear at all.
Or any other Service they can do,
Either at Sessions, or at Home, for you.
Money's a Friend in Court, or other Place,
Can any Time procure, she is in such Grace.
If Money comes, the Clerk's your Friend, ^e'er fear it,
If she is withdrawn, nullus Amicus erit.
XLIII. On Horse Races and Foot-Courses.
If you have a mind to keep a running Horse,
A good Estate it craves, and a good Purse:
For when you Match, though you're assured to have
The Match, yet if your Rider prove a Knave,
He Will Money take, perfidiously betray,
And will for lack of Riding lose the Day;
Or throw your Horse, or out of Wind him ride,
Or purposely run on the Stoops wrong side,
And so the Match and Keeping too are lost,
Then home you come, and fret to be so crossed.
In most Foot-Courses too, like Tricks are played,
When Wagers are put down, Cheats then are made;
Such vafrous Wiles in Money are we know,
She makes both Horse and Foot run swift or slow.
This Idol Money the whole World deludes,
Both Private Persons, and whole Multitudes.
XLIV. On Gamesters and Gaming.
Gamesters will cheat at Cards, and with false Dice,
The love of Money tempts them into Vice:
When taken with false play, they will damn and swear,
To get their Prize will stab Men without fear.
The dearest Friends will quarrel to such height,
When they are at Game, they will one another ^ight*
The sordid Humor, and covetous Desire
Men have for Mon^y, instimulate this Ire.
Some she makes merry, and some others sad;
Some full of Passion, and some raving mad:
Such strange Effects she works, as she thinks good,
Her Power's so strong she is not to be withstood.
XLV. On Seamen and Land Soldiers.
Give Seamen Money and you may procure
These Men the greatest Hardships to endure;
Despise all Dangers, ^ight with might and main,
Money does make them fearless to be slain.
It Is she makes Soldiers ^ight by Sea and Land;
Pay them but well, and then you may command,
And greater Numbers have in readiness,
Than you have need for, without Drum or Press.
They Will then not hide themselves, run into Holes,
But briskly throng to you in numerous Shoals.
The force of Money all things does command,
Navies at Sea, and Armies too by Land.
XLVI. On Agents to Regiments.
Debauched Officers that Money want,
Repair to the Agent of the Regiment,
Who always keeps a Bank for such intent,
They Would better take it up at ten per Cent;
For his Exactions are so high, that he
Brings those make use of him to Poverty.
When those are thrifty do receive their Pay,
With the Debauchees Shares he runs away.
For such of them as Drink, and Game, and Whore,
They him enrich, themselves make bare and poor,
Which him delights, his Heart's on Money bent,
He cares not what becomes of the Regiment;
Whether its broke, or stands, does sink or swim,
If he gets Money, its all one to him.
Whilst some Men fondly lavish all on Whores,
Money's the only She that he adores.
XLVII. On O^pressing Mortgagees.
Some Mortgagee will at Advantage lie,
Upon the Rigor of's Security
H^ will insist, on Niceties will stand;
He Will (...)her purchase all, nor part of the Land
He ^^^^gag'd; nor will he let you rest,
But he with Threats and Suits will you molest;
So neither S^ll the Land, nor Let you can,
To the best Advantage unto any Man.
By means whereof he knows that he must seize;
Further he will not account than he receives:
So he will dispose, and Let at easy rate,
And so will worm you out of your Estate;
For he will his Purposes so bring about,
You Will never live to see the Mortgage out:
So by this crafty means he will you compel
For present Maintenance, your Land to sell:
Then his own Terms he will make, for him or's Friend.
Having now gained the Point he did intend,
If he be told his Doings are unjust;
To look for's own, he says, he will and must.
The Law allows what he has done, he will say;
But Summum Ius est Summa Injuria.
And though the thing now troubles not his mind,
Yet afterward he will wish he would been more kind.
When he on's Deathbed lies, he will sigh and groan,
No Mercy can expect that none has shown:
His Conscience then t'accuse him will begin,
Tell him Oppression is a crying Sin.
And then he will cry, would he'ad more Favor shown,
And wish that he the Land had never known.
The Gains he'as got by the poor Debtor's Cross,
He finds will now be his Eternal Loss.
Money nor Lands no Comfort now do bring;
A Conscience good is the sole Sovereign thing.
He now with heavy Groans repents the Evil,
When he is afraid he is going to the Devil.
Who at his Death will Mercy beg and crave,
Must in his Life time Mercy show and have.
But Money is so prevalent with some,
They never think what is afterward to come.
XLVIII. On Chief Constables.
Quarterly Moneys on Constableries charged,
By Master chief sometimes the same's enlarged:
Sixpence, a Groat, or Threepence in a Town,
Above the Sums the Sessions do set down;
Which Overplus he puts into his Purse,
Though it is a Cheat, he likes himself no worse:
And though he knows if it discovered be,
He shall be punished for such Knavery,
Turned out of Place, indicted too, and find,
Yet love of Money runs so in his mind,
He Will hazard both his Credit and good Name,
Exterminate all fear of worldly shame:
Such Power's in Money, and such Feats she works,
That Christians, Heathens, the Jews and Turks,
And all Persuasions, she charms to betray
Credit and Conscience too, her to obey.
XLIX. On Players.
So much of precious Time is spent by Players
That they can scarce get time to say their Prayers.
The Archimimick sets each one his Part,
Which they with care and pains must get by Heart*
The grave and serious Parts suits some the best;
Like Prince or Politician some are dressed;
Soldiers, Tradesmen, Valet de Chamber, Beau,
Like Countrymen, or wheedling Pimps some show*
Ruffians, and merry Drolls, or Lovers keen,
Or in some other shape the Men are seen.
Women great Queens or Ladies some must be;
Some virtuous Wives, Lovers or Jilts you see.
Others mad Jealous Fools, some Bawds, some Whores,
With quaint Discourse they spend their time, and yours.
Music, and Dancing, and Singing you may hear'
Objects to please the Eye, tickle the Ear.
Variety of Actions here you have,
To please the Frolic Humor, and the Grave.
Rich Clothes and Fashions alamode are there,
And change of Scenes with curious Paint appears.
No Artifice is wanting which they think
Will tempt their Auditors to part with Chink.
Money's the tempting thing that brings them there,
If Money fails, no Player will appear.
Money's the lovely Miss that they adore,
Tho some perhaps come there to meet a Whore.
L. On Old Men and old Women.
Money will make a fresh young buxom Lass
Let an old crazy Dotard her embrace;
She Will think him brisk, and fresh as Rose in June:
If wanted Wealth, she would sing another Tune.
And he which now enjoys her Maidenhead,
She would disdain, and fly his hated Bed:
But she her brisk Amors does soon forsake,
And her old Man she does a Cuckold make:
And that is the Fortune of old silly Fools,
That match themselves to such young Airy Tools.
The withered old Woman, if she have store
Of Cash, the young Gallant will her adore,
And swears she is lovely, he dies if he miss her;
Whereas if poor, she would make him spue to kiss her.
The old Creature does believe, is at's Command,
Plights him her Troth, and gives to him her Hand,
Consents to Marriage. He visits her each Day,
And she like a young Girl does toy and play.
At length the Day does come that they are wed,
And he against his Stomach goes to Bed.
He kisses her, and ^ore against his Will,
Her old lascivious Humor does fulfill.
Thus for a while he will please, and slights her not,
Till he her Money, Gold, and Bonds has got;
And then he weary grows, and cannot kiss,
Loathes her Embraces, and must keep a Miss
Under her Nose, for the pleasure of his Life,
With whom he will kiss in spite of his old Wife.
The old Woman sto^ms that she is so much neglected,
And the gay fluttering Miss is so respected.
She sighs and sobs that she alone must lie,
And her brisk Youth abhors her Company,
And naught delights him now but his young Miss;
But such the Fruits of such a Marriage is:
For Youth and Age are very seldom found
In their Embraces constant firm and sound.
The one repents the Folly they have run in,
While to other wallows in their Lust and Sin.
Equality in Age and in Degree,
And Fortunes too, makes the best Sympathy.
LI. On the Necessit^t^s Person and the Miser.
Money, if we do but consider't well,
We find produces good Effects and ill.
Necessitated Persons she relieve^,
And out of Misery she them retrieves;
She consolates them when their Hearts are down,
And them does animate against Fortune's Frown.
But to the Miser she is another thing,
Great Infelicity to him does bring*
The more he gets, the greater is his Curse,
For he thereby becomes still worse and worse;
The more he has, he still does covet more,
H^^l not desist till Death knocks at his Door.
Then all his hoarded Treasures he would give,
To bribe and put off Death, that he might live.
But now he sees the folly of his Gains,
They cannot Li^e prolong, nor ease his Pains.
Money no Comfort now affords the Man,
When he begins to look pale, fain^, and wan,
And sick to Death, O then he does express
Great Grief and Sorrow for his Wickedness:
And if he were but to survive, he would
Abhor the eager griping after Gold.
But Death's inexorable, gives no Days,
No Pleadings he admits of for Delays.
But when he comes poor Mortals to arrest,
They Nature's Debt must pay without contest.
LII. On Friendship and Acquaintance.
If your Acquaintance, which you once have known,
Was rich, and's now grown poor, you will scarce him own;
Especially i^ you foresee and know
He comes an humble Mendicant to you,
You Will not remember then that you before
Have seen him. Walk, Sir, trouble me no more.
Pox on this Money that she should thu make
A Man his old Acquaintance to forsake.
LIII. On Y^ung Wives and Girls.
Many young Wife and Girl, through long pursuit,
With Money tempted is to prostitute
Her curious Body, and pawn her Honor
Unto some young Gallant that is brisk upon her.
Her blooming Youth, and Rosy Colors stain,
With base Adulterous Practices for Gain.
Thus, thus this Idol Money does entice
Many fine Creature to submit to Vice;
And great Debauchery without control,
To the Bodies Ruin, and immortal Soul.
LIVE. On Quarrels and Differences.
Great is the potency in Money's had,
The force thereof produces good and bad:
This wicked Miss does make dear Friends fall out;
Great Foes to be great Friends, she brings about.
Money can make Men one another sue,
And act such things as afterward they rue.
Nay Money makes them one another fight,
And murder out of hand sometimes in spite.
She Quarrels breeds, and also Reconciles;
Which way she will, she leads Men with her Wiles.
Nor Wit, nor Force is able to withstand,
Her Charms are such she all Men does command.
LV. On Churchwardens, Surveyors, etc.
Churchwardens and Surveyors of Highways,
Sesso^s, and Poor's O'er-seers now adays,
And other Officers, although they swear
Their Office truly to perform, they fear
No Oath, nor do they stand at all in awe
Of Che^ks of Conscience, or of the Law;
If they can either Money get or save,
Each of these Officers will be a Knave:
Getting or saving is such a tempting thing,
She Will private Persons cheat as well as the King.
All Men the Goddess Money court and woo;
To compass her they care not what they do.
LVI. On Schoolmasters.
The Pedagogue who rules as petty King
Over his young Subjects, unto those who bring
In their Relief, and make him punctual Pay,
Observing constantly their Quarter*day,
Over such his Rule is gentle, mild, and free,
But over the rest it is perfect Tyranny.
Money does make him kind and pitiful
To Lads who are insipient and dull;
He Will put them right when they are at a loss.
To Boys slack in their Pay he is more cross:
If they have not ad unguem every Word,
Then he to them no Favor will afford,
But up they go forthwith at his Command,
And feel the smart of his correcting Hand.
Dunces with Money Friendship can obtain,
When Wit without her Friendless does remain.
LVII. On Doctors of Physic.
When one is sick, if Money do appear,
She can prevail to have the Doctor there;
And if she freely do attend the Man,
Then he will prescribe the safest Rules he can,
And his Opinion tell of the Disease,
And will prescribe such things as shall give ease.
Each time he comes, if he receives a Fee,
Then frequently you shall the Doctor see;
And so long time as he does Money find,
Comfort he gives to your discons^late mind;
Tells you he hopes the Danger is quite over,
When he is assured that you cannot recover.
There Is hopes of Life as long as he gets Chink;
But when that fails, he knows not what to think.
He then looks slightly, and begins to lay,
All hopes are past, you spend so fast away.
He tells the sick Man's Friends he cannot live,
He speaks the truth when they have no more to give.
And if the Poor be sick, he is then in haste,
Or very busy, has no time to waste.
Money must come her self, or else you must
Want his Advice, for Doctors will not trust.
If he be sure that he shall get no Pay,
The Doctor's Tongue-^y'd, and has naught to say.
And so the Poor alone on God depend,
Whilst th'Rich their Money on the Doctors spend:
Which though the masters all things that have Breath,
She cannot lengthen Life, nor master Death.
LVIII. On Petty Constables.
The Constable, that ancient^ Officer,
The Idol Money sometimes does prefer
Before his Conscience, and for her sake,
The Offenders he can neither see nor take,
But makes Return, that he cannot them find,
Let Us them escape; Money has made him blind.
Tho he be sworn truly to execute
H^s Office, the Cause is clear, needs no dispute:
To be accused of knavery the Man is loath,
Yet Money he prefers before his Oath,
And rather than this charming Miss he lack,
Credit and Conscience too must go to wrack.
LIX. On Fencing Masters.
The Master of Defense for Money will
Appear upon a Stage to show his Skill,
And Art in Fencing, there before Men's Eyes,
And publicly will fight to get a Prize;
Himself adventure to be cut and slasht,
And sometimes maimed perchance, or soundly gasht.
By his Antagonist; sometimes in rage,
Disgracefully in scorn thrown off the Stage.
So sprightly vigorous is Money's Charm,
He will adventure both Disgrace and Harm:
Nay Men about Miss Money make such stir,
That they will resolutely die for her.
LX. On Dancing Mast^rs.
The Dancing master will his ^oopees show;
He steps and winds, if he of Money know:
He Will skip about, and nimbly dance and play,
When Entering penny's come, or Quarter day:
Money does make his Heart and Feet so light,
That he can cut his C^pers bolt upright.
But when he Money wants, (...) sadly dull;
If not his Belly, yet his Heart is full.
He Is out of Order much, (...) to swound,
He scarce can allocate his Feet o^f Ground.
Such Virtue is in Money that she can
Put Life and Spirit into any Man,
When she appears to them; but when she is gone,
Their Hearts are dull and torpid as a Stone.
LXI. On Mount^banks.
The Mountebank he tra^e^seth much Ground,
To find the place where Money does abound;
There up he sets his Stage, where every Day
He shows himself, Andrew the Fool in the Play
For Money does appear, who for a Wit,
Does come behind his Master never a whit:
Thus Money can produce any Disguise,
Can make a Wise Man Fool, and Fool seem Wise.
Then when from every quarter of the Town,
People are crowded in to see the Clown,
And gazed at him some time, and laughed awhile,
The Master then, with graceful Cringe and Smile,
Begins aloud to set forth and proclaim
His own admired Merits, and his Fame,
And tells what mighty Cures both far and near,
He has performed in each Place here and there.
You may, says he, enquire the Certainty;
But you would as good believe as go and see.
After his long Harangue, he is then willing,
To give you a small Packet for a Shilling,
Containing many Medicines, whose worth,
The little printed Paper does set forth.
But when you come to try the things indeed,
You Will find they are all but Cheats in time of need.
If you do wait with Money in your Hand,
O then you may be certain to command
His best Advice in whatsoever you will,
And know the very bottom of his Skill.
A Wen, Hair-lip, or Cancer too he may
A Cure perhaps perform, and take away;
Which any one can do as well as he,
That is but skillful in Chyrurgery.
If you are Blind, or Deaf and cannot hear,
He Will bid you trust in him, and do not fear,
For he will cure, and can recover both:
But in such Case to trust I should be loath;
For we can seldom hear, or ever find,
That they the Deaf make hear, or cure the Blind.
Money's the tempting Bait at which they bite,
Care not if you never hear, nor get your sight.
The only thing's your Cash they hanker after;
If you never mend, they will turn't but to a laughter.
LXII. On Trades, Mysteries and Professions in general.
Rich Merchants, Mercers, Grocers, Drapers too,
Fishmongers, Goldsmi^hs, and the Skinners Crew;
Merchant Tailors, and Habberdashers fine,
Salters, ^^o^mongers, Vintners for Wine;
Cloth-workers, Dyers, Brewers of small and strong,
Leather sellers and Pewterers then throng;
Barber-Surgeons, Armoure^s, White-Bakers,
With Wax and Ta^low-Chandlers, their partakers.
Cutlers, Girdlers, Butchers, and Sadlers neat,
Carpenters, Cordwainers, Painters complete;
Curriers, Masons, Plumbers, Jolly Men;
Inholders, Founders, Embroiderers: Then
Poulterers, Cooks, and Coopers claim next room.
Then Brick-layers, Bowyers, and Fletchers come;
Blacksmiths and Joyners, with Plaisterers right,
Weavers and Fruiterers, Scriveners next in sight.
Bottle makers, Horners, and Stationers;
Then Marblers, Wooll^Packers, and Farriers,
Paviours, Lorimers, B^kers of Brown,
Woodmongers, Uphol^ters* Turners then own
Next place; then Clerks and Watermen,
Apothecaries; and the Glovers then;
Distillers, Clock-makers, and Silk-Throwers pass,
Makers of Soap, and Felts, Sellers of Glass.
Then Workers in Tin-Plate, Makers of Combs,
Basket and Needle-makers after comes:
Makers of Pins, of Hatbands, and of Pipes,
Fishermen, with Victuallers and Shipwrights;
Cheesemongers, Jewellers, Hop-Merchants, Salesmen,
Cole Merchants, Trunk-makers, and Retail-men.
Cane-sellers, Piece-men, Spu^^iers, White-Tawers,
Cole-meeters, Button-men, and Cloth-drawers.
Oil men, Perfumers, Sutlers, Refiners,
Staplers, Confectioners, Looking-glass-grinders;
Dial-makers, Bridlers, Coffee-men, Sm^^k^^s,
Brass-casters, Collar-makers, and Brok^^s*
Makers of Whips, of Paper, and of all
Sorts of Instruments Mathematical.
Gold-bearers, Calendar-men, (...) tak^ns,
Flax-dressers, Silver-smiths, Feather-makers.
Makers of Instruments of every kind
That Music make, either with Strings or Wind.
Silk-Weavers, Copper-smiths, Tent-makers, Naylers,
Makers of Anchors and Cables for Saylors;
With Ropes, and S^il-Clothes, and Pullies ^itting,
Flags, Streamers, Hammocks, all things for Shipping,
Sellers of Perriwigs for every Age,
Ma^e all-a-mode for Beaus, and for the Sage;
(...) Semstresses, that make up Linen,
(...) the we^ring of Men and Women.
Those that in Gloves and Ribbons drive a Trade,
And Venders of Women's Heads that is ready made*
Makers of Wyre-Grates, and sine Bird-Cages,
And Spectacle makers for all Ages.
Corn-Chandlers, Mealmen, Binders of Books,
Makers of Cards and Dice, and Fishing hooks;
Sellers of Potters-Ware, Baskets and Toys;
Makers of Button-moulds for Men and Boys.
Chandlers, Sellers of Signs, Pictures, and Maps,
Of Looking-glasses, Morning-Gowns, and Caps.
Vende^s of Thread and Tape, all sorts of Lace,
Sweet-Powders, Essence-Waters for Hands and Face:
B^^sh makers, Seeds men, sellers of Fringes,
Of ^ine Spring, Locks, Keys, Bolts, Screws, and Hinge^.
Makers of Harness, and all sorts of Bits;
Sellers of Fire-grates, Tongs, Pans, Racks and Spits;
Framers of Iron-work both neat and rare,
Carvers in Wood, Artists beyond compare.
Makers of Women's Pattens, and their Clogs;
Fine Buttons, gilded Buckles, Collars for Dogs.
Of Razors, Lancets, and choicest Scissers,
With Surgeon's Instruments and Twissers;
Sellers of Bells and Lewers, with fine Ha^k-Hoods,
S^arfes, Hair-cloth, and Nets, with such like Goods,
Perspectives, Tellescopes, Glasses for sig^^s*
Great and small Bu^ning Glasses, and Lamp lights;
Makers of Frames for Signs, and Barbers Poles,
Cork-cutters, Tanners, Printers, sellers of Coals:
Truckers for any Goods by Sea or Land,
Sellers of Houshold-goods at second hand;
Scowrers of Clothes, with Bo^chers when they fail,
Translators sitting up old Shoes for sale;
And cunning Dressers of old Hats for view,
Who by their Art can make them look like new.
Makers of Chains, Coach and Ca^^shes too,
Guilders and Varnishers of them for show:
Makers of Coffins, Dresses for the Dead;
Rare Statue makers both of Stone and Lead.
Those that in Leather-cases drive a Trade,
All sorts of Sheaths, Black Boxes ready made
For Deeds and Writings, which concern Men's Lands;
Boxes for Ru^^le^, Perriwigs, and Bands.
The makers of all sorts of Lasts and ^^eels,
Blocks, Winders for Yarn, and spinning Wheels;
Clothworkers, Ca^ders, Spinners, and Pressers,
Tuckers and Fullers, We^ve^s and Cloth dressers;
With Turners and Winders, Shearmen, Teasers,
Weighe^s and Mixers, Sep^^^ters, Pressers:
Makers of Coverlets, Rugs, and Ticking,
Manch^ster-Tape, and what the Men are quick in;
Shinglers and Mill-wrights, Cappers and Knitters,
Wheel-wrights and Higlers, Jobbers and Fitters:
These Traders all in the pursuit of Gains,
Ea^y and late do seek with Care and Pains,
Some Money by their Trades to get or save;
Money's the only Miss for which they rave.
Houses cannot be kept, nor Rents well paid
Unless good store of Money's got by Trade:
It Is she brings Comfort to the Tradesman's mind,
For then he cares not which way blows the Wind.
Money procures them all things that they lack,
And where she is wanting all things go to wrack.
LXIII. On Merchants.
Merchants no venture at the Sea would make,
Were It not for hopes of Gains, and Money's sake;
For if they thought that Money would not come,
Then they would keep their Goods and Ships at home:
It Is Money makes them fearless of all Loss,
Tho sometimes they return with weeping Cross;
Not scared with Losses, they still hope to find
Fortune will prove a^spicious and more kind;
So they will adventure still, and not give over
Their fresh pursuit to gain this gilded Ore,
Till some of them adventure all they have,
And so are brought mere Bankrupts to their Grave;
Whilst others do arrive to great Estate;
So variable is all Human Fate.
This Lady when cajoll'd sometimes will fly,
And of her self at other times draw nigh.
Though she is a Witch, as some have understood,
And does a Man oft-times more harm than good;
Yet so delightful all her Charmings are,
That Poor and Rich in her desire a share;
So that in all things, whether great or small,
It is apparent Money Masters all.
LXIV. On Mercers and Drapers.
If you to the Mercer or a Draper go,
With Cash in hand, good pennyworths he will show
Of Cloth, Stuff, Silks, and Gold and Silver Lace,
Buttons, and other things for Use and Grace:
And if your Taylor's Counsel here you have,
I Am sure by that you will neither gain nor save.
If all at large be not cut off, he will fret,
For then, poor Man, he does less Cabbage get.
When without Cash unto these Men you go,
And they your Reputation well do know,
They Will show Respect, and tell you in a Word,
That as cheap Pennyworths they will afford
As if you ready Money brought; but when
Your Name is entered in their Books, O then
The fair-tongu'd Tradesman will so highly nick,
That you pay Ten per Centum for your Tick:
So if in two Years time your Score is paid,
He Is a sufficient Gainer by his Trade.
LXV. On Grocers.
Although the Grocer does not raise his Price,
Yet he will put off his faulty rotten Spice
Where you do Tick; if ready Money comes,
Then you have Raisins plump and round as Plums,
And if you take a Parcel, he will afford,
The choicest Spice he has, upon his Word;
And he will pick and cull them out so clean,
That not a Stone or Stalk amongst them is seen.
But if you Tick, you must take what they will give,
And have your choice, either to take or leave.
For you cannot expect you may command
Such Ware as those with Money in their Hand.
Money can view their Barrels, Frails, and Tubs,
And have the choicest of their Wares and Goods.
But when she is wanting, and you buy on Trust,
Then any Trash into your hands they will thrust.
Money prevails with Tradesmen, gets Respect,
When Friendship and Acquaintance finds neglect.
LXVI. On Goldsmiths.
The Goldsmith when he shows and sells his Plate,
Cannot with ease impose or put a Cheat
On you, because it is to be understood
It Is by the Standard tried, and marked for good.
But when you come amongst his Rings to gaze,
Diamonds and Rubies, Emeralds, Topaz,
Carbuncles, Hyacinths, and many more,
Which he can show amongst his Radiant Store;
Pendants, Pearl Necklaces, and Jewels too,
All which do make a splendid glorious show;
To value these the Buyer wants skill,
So Goldsmith sets the Price down as he will:
If Money in his Heart bears rule, then he
Will prize then at a very high degree.
Or if he is pleased to take a moderate Gain,
As he will tell you, yet it is very plain,
Let the Price which you do pay be what it will,
If afterward you're forced to pawn or sell,
They Will say they gotten Water, and are soiled,
So that the sparkling Luster of 'em's spoiled;
When as in truth they are not a Penny worse
Than when you bought 'em first. But, O the curse
Of Money, whose Delusions have the power*
To make her Lovers right or wrong pursue her.
The things for which you Twenty Pounds have given,
Perhaps they will have the Face to bid you Seven;
Their Conscience says, where Money does come in,
To swear, dissemble, lie, and cheat's no sin.
LXVII. On Tailors.
If you to take up Goods your Tailor trust,
Then near the half of every thing he must
Take for himself, as he does take for you;
Thus to augment your Score, he helps to skrew:
And though the Devil at his Elbow sit,
He Will venture still to cheat and steal a bit
Of Gold or Silver Fringe, Buttons or Lace,
Rich Silks, fine Cloth, and counts it no disgrace:
Money he knows by such Tricks will come in,
Conscience is cauteriz'd, perceives no sin.
So when the Tailor does bring home your Clothes,
If you never pay his Bill, he cannot lose.
LXVIII. On Habberdashers.
The smooth tongued Habberdasher smiles and prates,
Makes you believe he sells at the lowest Rates,
And says he will not set a Doit down more
Than if you paid in hand, run not of the Score
For Beavers, Casters, Felts, Linings and Bands,
And says he puts choice Ware into your Hands:
Your Payment's good and sure I know and own,
So none but right choice Ware, Sir, I have shown:
So fine and cheap a Hat, Sir, then he will cry,
In all the Town I Am sure you c^nn^t buy.
But all is mere Banter, Tradesmen cannot live,
Without Exacting, where they c^edit give
So if you choice and cheap Ware would command,
Then go with Lady M^ney in your Hand.
LXIX On Vintners.
The Vintner if you are a constant Guest,
And nobly spend, you need not their ^^quest
The choicest Wine, for he will on his Word,
Bring the best his C^llar does afford,
And sit down by you, not go out of sight,
Nor leave your Company by Day nor Night,
So long as you will sit and drink good Wine,
Though it be never so late, he will not repine*
Money comes finely in, and that is the thing
Rubs off all careful Thoughts, and makes Men sing.
When you're defatigate, can drink no more,
Your Gust and Appetite for to restore,
Luke Olives with Anchovies are brought in,
Which when you taste, afresh you do begin:
Place three or four Bottles more in sight,
And them you sipple off, so bid Good Night.
But when the Miser does come in and call
For Gill or Pint of the best Wine, You shall,
The Drawer cries, have that that is very fine,
Canary, Rhenish, White, or Claret Wine.
Let me a Gill of your best Sack then have;
You shall, you shall, he cries; and then the Knave
Good and bad Wine does mix, then up does pass,
And pours some neatly out into the Glass.
How nitty and how rasy't looks, cries he,
This is good Wine, Sir, if you will credit me.
The Miser tastes, and smacks it in his Mouth;
I fear you have cheated me, you cunning Youth.
Upon my Word, Sir, it is the very best;
None such I Would draw, were it not at your request.
Pray taste it then: He sups, and squirts it out;
Why Sir, what ails this Wine? you will not find out
A better Glass in the Town, this I dare say.
The Miser drinks it off, so goes away,
But does suspect there is better Wine in the House,
But not for the Custom that is not worth a Louse.
Those that do freely spend, the best Wine may
Command, when the sparing Niggards are said nay.
They Are the best Company that freely drink,
And fill the Vintner's Purse with shining Chink.
Your Money he admires and loves 'bove you;
For when that fails, no Kindness then he will show.
LXX* On Dyers.
Dyers not pleased with honest lawful Gain,
Will you possess your Stuffs are died in Grain;
And that your Blacks are first made perfect Blue,
And such a Spot they for that purpose show:
Affirm their Colors all are perfect Dye;
But when you come t'experience them, and try,
You Will find them quickly turn, begin to ^ade,
Because the Liquor was not truly made,
With right good Druggs, but any Trash put in
That is but cheap; a Cheat they think's no sin,
But point of Wit, if Money's thereby got;
Money's the only thing for which they plot.
Conscience they will stretch beyond both Shame and Fear;
Money to them more precious is and dear;
Find out an honest Man, and him then try,
He that lives well can never badly Dye.
LXXI. On Brewers.
The common Brewer, where he gets good Pay,
Best Liquor unto such he sends away;
But those that drive him long, and take no care
To pay, he any Swillings sends in there;
For such as answer not his Call with Chink,
They neither get right Measure, nor good Drink.
LXXII. On Pewterers and Brasiers.
The Pewterers and Brasiers seldom give
Credit, but with Respect they will you receive
Into their Shops, will show what Wares you will;
London Pewter, or double Metal sell,
At as low Rates as possibly they can,
For Money must be had, that makes the Man.
Where Money's wanting, each one will despise,
Though you're Discreet, Ingenious, and Wise.
Money procures Respect in every place,
Though your Descent be never so mean and base.
LXXIII. On Barbers.
Your cringing Barber powder will and comb
Your new Bob-Wig, then to you bring it home,
And puts it on your Head, the Curls does set,
It suits you well, says he, does finely fit.
It Is cheap, Sir, of two Guinea's as ever I made
Since first I learnt and understood the Trade.
And yet for thirty Shillings paid in hand
In ready Cash, this Wig you may command.
Then Sir, your fine long Wig he will surely fix,
And place down in his Book at Guinea's six;
When you for five Pounds may, paid down on sight,
The self same Wig, or else a better might
Have put into your hands, finely set out,
With many Thanks, and Conges too to boot*
O ready Money, you are the only Miss,
For most Men seek thee as their only Bliss.
LXXIV. On Surgeons.
The Surgeon where he know he will Money find,
He often Visits there, proves very kind;
Your Wounds with such great safety he will dress,
That he all Fev'rish Symptoms will repress:
And if your Wounds do chance to be inflamed,
Or with some Obtuse Weapon you are maimed
And bruised sore, he then will breathe a Vein,
Remove black, yellow S^ots, and ease your Pain:
But then for Money sake he will retard,
Keep back the Cure that you will think it marred.
Then he will laugh, and tell you that he could
Have cured you sooner if so be he would;
But then he tells you, he must search the Wound
To the very bottom, if you would be ^ound,
And firm indeed, and have no After-Sore,
And so become worse than you were before.
These Men for Money too can also cure
The Flux, Pox, Astmah's, and the Calenture,
Coughs, Rheumatisms, Costiveness and Pain
In the small Guts, or Giddiness in the Brain.
They many Cures can do for Money's sake,
Which if 'twere wanting, they would not undertake.
For when the Poor under their hands do lie,
Friend we can cure you, presently they will cry.
But you must look about, and Money bring,
To pay for and discharge this and that thing;
So as the poor Man does for them provide,
Good or bad News to him it does betide;
For to say truth, o^times for want of Cost,
Many poor Man's undone, and merely lost;
For where there Money lacks, its very sure,
There will be no Attendance, Care, nor Cure.
LXXV. On Sword Cutlers.
The flattering Cutler, when you want a Sword,
And he your Credit knows, and takes your Word,
He Will tell you then, you shall have the choicest Ware,
Pay or pay not, all is one, he does not care:
Trust to my Honesty, good Sir, he will say,
And then he certainly does make a Prey
On you, and sets the Price so high and great,
That his pretended Friendship proves a Cheat;
And you will find then, if Money you would paid down,
In every Pound you might have saved a Crown,
Although a Tradesman is your Friend he will say,
Yet there no Friendship is like ready Pay.
LXXVI. On Butchers.
Butchers often times their Flesh puff up and blow,
That it may plumper and more viewly show,
By means whereof the Buyers they do cheat,
And with their stinking Breath corrupt the Meat.
Then when they have Lamb and Veal that is lean and silly,
Kidneys they will stuff and scure up; then tell ye,
The Meat is fresh and good, plump, fat, and fair;
But when you try't, you will find it nauseous Ware;
They meazl'd Pork, and Flesh dead by mischance,
Or of some bad Disease, will dare to advance,
And lay upon their Stalls, and sell't for good,
Which they know well is base unwholesome Food,
And they may punished be for selling such;
But if they Money get they care not much:
Though they that us't into Diseases fall,
They matter not, Money's their All in All.
And if you to their Shop do send for Meat,
To have it flesh* you will find they will put a Cheat
On you, although they will promise fair, and say,
You shall no more than other Buyers pay;
Yet Threepence or a Groat a Joint they will have
More than the Market-price; which you might save,
If you to the Market sent, and wrangled there:
But you perhaps a Servant cannot spare.
Thus every Trade for greediness of Gain,
Will Cheat and Lie, it is evident and plain.
O Madam Money, what stir for you is made,
Your Company's desired by every Trade.
LXXVII. On Sadlers.
The Sadler a fine Saddle with good Bolsters,
Embroidered House, good Stirrups, and rich Holsters,
Brings to your Lodgings, tells you that it is rich,
Has cost him many Hours and careful Stitch.
I Have laid out all my Moneys, da^e you t^ust,
Say you; Yes Sir, says he, I wi^h you durst
Take so much Ware as I dare credit you;
You should have all in the Shop both old and new.
Well, what is the Price say you, that I must give,
Sir just Five Pounds, whether you take or leave.
O what this want of Money is with Men,
Money in hand would fetched at Three Pound Ten.
LXXVIII. On Carpenters.
The cunning Carpenters a Prey will make
Of you when they a piece of Work do take:
If you in Timber Measure have no skill,
Then they strange Stories unto you will tell,
Make you believe more Timber they must have
By far, than such a piece of Work does crave.
If they perceive you have Knowledge in the thing,
Then their contrived Design about to bring,
They tell you Nails and Pins are in the Task,
So they cannot abate of what they ask:
If you're not willing such a Sum to pay,
They tell you then they will work with you by th'day.
If you agree but either way, O then
They think themselves for that time happy Men:
For many idle Day-works then you will have;
Whether by Day or Task you will nothing save,
For they are resolved good Wages to bring in,
And though unjustly got, they will think it no sin.
Money's the Siren charms their Ears and Hearts,
Her to obtain they will practice all their Arts.
LXXIX. On Shoe makers.
Where the Shooe-maker's assured there is ready Pay,
He Will make choice Ware for such, observe their Day;
And for his Stuff, together with his Pains,
For ready Cash he is pleased with moderate Gains;
But where he knows your Pay's of longer date,
Then patiently you must his leisure wait:
Then rotten Neat, or Calf and Neat together,
With inner Soles put in of base Horse Leather;
And such deceitful Stuff to you he will bring,
Yet have the Face to brazen out the thing;
The Ware is firm and good upon his Word;
Tells you none such to others he will afford;
All which is true, for they must better have,
You grope not out the meaning of the Knave;
And then a Price he sets (for it is his Trade)
Higher than on the choicest Ware is made.
Thus they that Money lack, have th'hardest Fate,
They Are cheated first, then pay excessive Rate.
LXXX On Arms Painters.
If to the Arms Painter you do tell your Name,
He Will quickly find a Coat out for the same,
And he will tell you, for a good round Fee,
That it belongs unto your Family;
Whenas perchance, if you fall into strife,
You have as good a Right to the Herald's Wife:
Yet he for Money will such Kindness show,
He Will give you Coat, and Crest, and Mantling too,
And them in Colors neatly will display,
Deliver't then to you to take away;
Which you may own, and thereby cut a Seal,
And chalenge't for your Coat; he will not reveal;
Your Money stops his Mouth, he would silent be,
Although he knows it is Cheat and Fallacy.
He that has Money may take another Right,
Retain, and use it in the Owner's sight.
Money can make Wrong Right, or Right be Wrong;
She makes a Man to speak, or hold his Tongue;
She Is the enchanting Pharmaceutria,
Whose Incantations leads Men any way.
LXXXI. On Innkeepers.
If to an Inn you come^ and freely call,
O then the Master's Company you shall
Immediately obtain, naught can withstand,
But he is solely, Sir, at your command.
The Hostler is called in to take a Glass;
The Master charge him before he pass,
To take care of your Horse, and rub him clean,
That not a bit of Dirt be felt or seen;
Set him in the close Stall, and fill his Rack,
And let him eat, says he, till's Belly crack;
Then feed and water him in time, if you
Expect the Gentleman shall Kindness show*
Then you and the Host do sit, and bowze about,
And try which of you two does prove more stout;
And when the one of you does drowsy grow,
Its then high time for you to call and know
Your quiet Dormitory, and the Bed
Where you must then decumb your drowsy Head*
In The Morning you rejoice to meet again,
And fall afresh into a merry Vein.
And when you're for your Journey, then comes in,
The Landlords dram of the Bottle, he will begin
Your Health, wish you a happy Journey home;
Seldom such Guests unto his House do come,
That Money freely spend, and fill his Purse;
F^^ when the Niggard comes, that is a Curse:
He for a single Pot will call, and sit
And spend an Hour at least in drinking it;
Then out he walks, to see his Horse in the Stable,
And then comes in, and bids 'em spread the Table,
For he will to Bed, he feels he is somewhat sick,
S^ let him have his Supper very quick:
Such Guests the Host had rather be without;
And when they are gone, he does deride and s^out:
So Money's certainly the only thing
That Men to Favor and Respect does bring;
For he that wants 't, is counted but a Slave,
And the poor Man that cannot pay, a Knave.
LXXXII. On Wine-Coopers.
If the Wine^Merchant's Cooper chance to light
Upon a Piece of Wine that is good and right,
Then that is secured for him that pays the best,
And thither is sent in without Request,
That all the Town throughout he may out-brave,
That such a Piece of Wine none of 'em have.
Those that have Money get every thing that is right,
And those that want are put off with a slight.
LXXXIII. On Linen-Weavers.
The Linen Weaver the good Wives Yarn does take,
And they conclude how many Yards 'twill make;
Then she conceives there is Warp enough and Woof,
But she is deceived when as it comes to the Proof.
The cheating Knave some of the Clues does throw
Into his Hell-hole: and then lets her know
That he her Web cannot work out of the Loom
For lack of Yarn, so she must send or come
With more herself, this News makes her admire
That he should send more Yarn for to require:
He says the Yarn does tender prove, and naught,
Else there had been no need more to have brought,
When as in truth the goo^ Wife he does cheat,
Money to get by this same Knavish Feat.
Money's the Saga which does him enchant,
He Will rather part with his Honesty than want
Her Company, who gets what he does lack
For hungry Belly and for naked Back.
LXXXIV. On Woollen Weavers.
The Woollen-Weaver slight and ^hin will weave,
That he some of the Clues of Yarn may save,
And keep himself, which th'Owner to him brought
To have their Cloth made strong, and firmly wrought;
But whether the Owners keep it for their use,
Or shall expose't to Sale, they will find the Abuse;
For when it comes to be worn 'twill shrink up sore,
And every day 'twill run up more and more,
And in great lumps wear out, great shame to see,
And all this through the Weaver's Knavery;
Who not content with honest Wage does cheat,
For there was Yarn to make the Cloth complete.
But then the Knave less Money would obtain,
If he gets naught but by his lawful Gain;
So he is resolved he Money will ensure,
He cares not by what ways he her procure;
Money's the Sovereign Empress of his Heart,
For her with Truth and Honesty he will part.
LXXXV. On Booksellers.
The Bookseller for ready Cash will sell
For as small Profit as other Traders will;
But then you must take special Care, and look
You no new Title have to an old Book;
For they new Title-Pages often paste
Unto a Book which purposely is placed,
Setting it forth to be the Second Edition.
Or Third, or Fourth, with 'mendments and Addition:
But when you come for to peruse and look,
You will not ^ind one Word in all the Book
Put either in or out, no nor amended,
For that is a thing that never was intended
By the Author; but when a Book begins to fail,
This is their Trick to quicken up the Sale.
And if a new Edition comes indeed,
From all the old Books they have, they then with speed
The Title-Pages often pluck out and tear,
And new ones in their places fixed are:
Then have the Confidence to put to sale
Such Books for new they know are old and stale:
And the Buyer thus if he does not descry,
Will have a Cheat put on him purposely.
And when an Author's Books do bravely sell,
And some deceased Author's Works do well,
These Traders then, to gain a Book a Fame,
Will set it forth under such Author's Name,
Prefixing an Epistle to such Tract,
Declaring to the Reader Matter of Fact,
How and by whom the same was brought to light,
And who has had the View thereof, and Sight;
How worthy the same Book is of the Press,
And Reasons why its published in such Dress;
With bantring Stuff, to make the Copy ^ell,
Which Fallacies they think do wondrous well.
Such Bibliopolists are much to blame,
When a good Author's dead, to abuse his Name;
These Tricks they play, and act without control,
For Money they will oppignorate their Soul:
If you vendible Books cull out, by such
You may suppose you cannot then lose much;
But you're deceived, for if you come to try,
And put them off, you will find them very shie,
And nice: They Will say, though at first coming forth
Such Books sold well, yet now they are little worth.
So Money to disburse they have no mind,
Cause when to get it in they do not ^ind:
But after much ado, you may contrive
For Twenty Pounds laid out to get in Five;
And this they will tell you merely is to show
What Favor and Respect they have for you.
If you will exchange for other Books, say they,
We can afford you then some better Pay;
Ten Pounds in Truck they will pretend is given,
Whenas the Books you get will not yield Seven.
If to be* Bookly given be your Fate,
You Would need to have a plentiful Estate,
For when the Itch of buying Books grows strong,
Then you a Prey to the Bookseller ever long
Become; he will send you Books, and trust so much,
Until he find you fail in keeping touch:
Then for his Money he will call amain;
And if two parts you pay, he gets good Gain,
His Books are so high prized; but All or None,
That is the only String he plays upon.
He Will take no Books again in part, O Curse!
He must have ready Money in his Purse;
And thus by him you shall be kept in awe
By constant Dunning, and Threats of the Law.
And if an Author to the Bookseller bring
A Copy for the Press, although the Thing
He knows will sell, yet he will pretend and say,
Paper is dear, and Trading does decay,
Money is scarce, and Licencing is dear,
So if he buy the Copy, he is in fear
To lose by the Bargain, yet at length he will come,
And condescend to give you some small Sum;
In part of which a Parcel you must have
Of Books at his own Price. And thus you slave
Your self, beating your Brains, and taking Pains,
And this same greedy Leech sucks up the Gains,
He Is so in love with Money, that he would starve
Author and Printer too, if he can serve
But his own Ends, and all the Profit get,
He does not care how meanly they do sit.
Money's the She he courts, the only Miss,
In her does center all his Happiness.
LXXXVI. On Farriers.
If you have a Horse that is sick or lame, wants cure,
Whenever the Farrier comes, he will you assure
That he can cure him, and will undertake
That he will perform great Feats for Money's sake:
He knows how many Joints and Bones, as plain,
And every Sinew, Artery, and Vein,
Are in your Horse, and where and how they lie,
As if he'ad read upon Anatomy;
And yet for all this Skill, we often see,
That he does clear mistake the Malady.
Which being not by him right understood,
He often gives that which does more harm than good.
And so instead of curing of your Horse,
He makes him every Day far worse and worse,
Until at length he turns up's Heels and die,
And yet the Horse-Leech you must satisfy
For his Medicaments, Labor, and Pains,
And so your Loss at length becomes his Gains.
I Have known a noted Farrier so misled,
He'as said a Horse was strained, when gravelled;
And has hot Oils unto the Horse applied
For some few Days, until it was espied
The Horse grew worse and worse, and did break out
Above the Hoof, which put it out of doubt:
He wonders then he should so far mistake,
And says he now must other Measures take;
He cuts the Hoof, finds all within decayed,
The Horse will lose his Hoof I am afraid,
Cries he; then long time tampers with the same,
Till the Horse is killed, or at the best proves lame;
And yet, though through this Fellows Ignorance,
To you befalls this Damage and Mischance,
He Will have the Confidence Money to ask.
Though he thus fondly have performed his Task.
But yet I think if he had his Desert,
To pay for the Horse in such a Case is his part.
For Money's sake Men undertake strange things,
She can prevail to take the Life of Kings.
LXXXVII. On Paviours.
The Paviour when he works by Yard or Great,
Will make his Tools and Hands go till he sweat;
As fast he will pitch the Stones, and nimbly pave,
As the Servers can the same unto him heave:
Great Pains he will take to pave much on a Day,
For then he knows more Money's due for pay:
For greediness of Money thus he will cheat,
And take no pains firmly the Work to beat,
But cover't over with Sand, to make it appear
Firm to the Eye, when within half a year
It all breaks up; then all the Labor's lost,
And the Owner then is put to double Cost;
For if at first the Stones he firmly set,
Covers them well, and has them strongly beat,
Till every Chink is close filled up with Sand,
And no Stone higher than another stand,
But all so firmly beat, and close and plain,
That it will bear a laden Cart or Wain,
And never shrink, that is right Work indeed;
But ah Sir, then he cannot make such speed,
Nor get such Wage as he desires to have;
For store of Cash you have leave to call him Knave.
Money's the false Trivenifica we see,
Enchants Men to betray their Honesty,
Credit, good Name, and all that is most dear,
If she upon the Stage does but appear.
LXXXVIII. On Upholsters.
If the Upholster to your House do come,
To set up Beds for you, or hang a Room,
If you pay down the Price you make him set,
And bring him down as low as you can get.
But if you tick, that is a cursed Disease,
For then he sets whatever Rate he please.
When you with any Tradesman would agree
At easy Price, then Money he must see.
LXXXIX. On Watermen.
The Watermen do wait at Rivers Stairs,
And Lanes near Water-sides, expecting Fares:
When any come they think do want a Boat,
They run, hold up their Hand, set up their Note.
Sculler and Oars they cry, and stop your way,
Till the Sign you give, they will not be said nay.
And when a jolly Company they get,
They Will cast their Coats, and row until they sweat.
And Day by Day this Course they do attend,
For Madam Money's sake, their chiefest Friend:
It Is she on whom they solely do rely,
Them in their great Distresses to supply;
When her they have, of naught they stand in fear,
For nothing they can want when Money's there.
Money's the Idol that each Man adores,
And her Assistance all the World implores.
XC. On Ferry-men.
The Ferry-men that Passage-Boats do keep,
Attend all Day, at Night break off their sleep
To wait on those who that way do resort,
Them and their Goods over Rivers to transport:
This Toil and Pains they take for Money's sake,
Never grudge thereat, nor no Complaints do make;
For these poor Men do think that Money is
The Royal Diploma of all Earthly Bliss.
XCI. On Barge men.
Bargers and Lighter-men do roar and bawl,
By Night and Day their Boats they pull and haul:
Many cold Blast, and bitter Storm they bide,
Be It fair or soul, they will not lose their Tide,
But out they will go, no Weather them can stay,
What is it that poor Men will not do for Pay?
Money's the Crown of all their Hopes, the Prize
At which they aim, precious in all Men's Eyes,
The Apotheca of all Terrestrial Good,
She brings to all both Clothes, and Drink, and Food.
XCII. On Apothecaries.
When the Pharmacopolist does get a Bill
From the Learned Doctor, for such Men as will
Good Payment make, and where his Money's sure,
For such he looks out Druggs both found and pure;
And in his Mortar them will foundly beat,
And run his Pestle round until he sweat.
Then makes the Physic truly up and quick,
And then the Patient visit that lies sick;
At your Bedside he takes hold of your Arm,
And in his canting Terms begins his Charm,
Does feel your Pulse, and says he will set you right,
And talks as if he would cure you upon sight.
He to you then a Bottle small does bring,
And bids you taste, Oh it is a Cordial thing.
Then he pulls out a Pot of his Conserve,
Which you must often take, it will preserve
Your Body Cool, repress excessive Thirst;
But you must take of this same Bottle first,
Says he, then many Pots and Glasses more
He leaves, t'inlarge his Bill, augment your Score,
Which signify no more for you to eat,
Than Chip in Pottage, for it is all a Cheat.
Then he does daily some Slip Slap or other
Bring to your Chamber, and there does them clother;
So those that come to visit you never stop
To say it is like the Apothecary's Shop.
Money does make his Mortar sweetly knell,
And if you have none, it tolls your passing Bell.
Old rotten Drugs on the poorer sort he will try,
Has no regard whether they live or die;
For in such Case where Payment he does fear,
His Shop of rotten Drugs he then will clear.
If Money had the power but Life to give,
The Rich would never die, Poor not long live.
XCIII. On Druggists.
Druggists found Medicines nor Drugs will send,
But where their Money's sure, though you're a Friend;
For Ingenuity and Friendship too,
Although for what is good they court and woo,
If Moneyless, they go with empty Pots,
When other thick-scull'd idle silly Sotts
With Money can prevail, in a great Huff,
To have the best, whilst others take the Stuff
That Is all decayed, worm-eaten, old and rotten,
For without Money Friendship's quite forgotten,
And you must wait their Time, attend their Call,
Perhaps get some, or't may be none at all.
If you get any, its then with a Flout,
And such old Stuff, you would better be without
Than have it in your Shop, all will deny it,
And all your Customers you may lose by it.
It Is very plain there is none can drive a Trade
Without good store of Money, can be made.
Money does master all things, all adore her,
Naught can withstand, she drives on all before her.
XCIV. On Country Glovers.
Glovers with Gloves and Leather ready dressed,
Markets attend, in Money's search and quest:
In Heat and Cold they keep their constant Stand,
When Money comes, to take her in their Hand:
She Is the Amicula of their Affection,
Chears up their Spirits, and yields them Refection.
XCV. On Watch-makers.
Your Watch-maker a neat good Watch will fix,
For Four Pounds in hand, on Credit Six.
A Clock and Weather-Glass you too may have,
Which if with ready Pay you buy, you save
In each Six Pounds a Guinney, if not more,
Such are the fruits of Ticking on the Score.
When Tradesmen sell on Credit, they take care
TO have double Usury paid 'em for their Ware.
XCVI. On traveling Glass-men.
The Glass-man bears about upon his Back,
Glasses and Drinking-Pots both white and black;
He scapes some Dangers, some he cannot pass,
But now and then does break a Pot or Glass,
And yet he travels on, hoping to have
A better Price for those he whole does save.
Money he does pursue from place to place,
All Hazards he breaks through to see her Face;
Whatever Mischances or Misfortunes fall,
If he gets her, she makes amends for all:
No Dangers great, no Pains too much can be,
To compass Madam Money's Company.
XCVII. On Cabinet-makers.
The ingenious Maker of fine Cabinets,
Tables and Drawers, Standards, Glasses, Sets
Of Dressing-Boxes, Brushes, and Japan-
Work of all sorts, in every thing he can
Serve you as well as any Man in Town,
At easy Rates, if Money you pay down.
But when that is wanting, he does then look shie,
And matters not though you should nothing buy.
Money's so fixed in his Thoughts and Heart,
That without her he cannot freely part,
And leave his Goods; for if he is forced to trust,
O then, great and excessive Gains he must
Receive at length, or else he will take home
His Goods, until a better Chapman come.
XCVIII. On Jack of all Trades.
Canes, Pistols, Knives, Guns, or what other Knack.
Or Thing in Jack of all Trades Shop you lack;
If you are his Acquaintance, he will say,
Your Word to him's as good as ready Pay:
But this is Sham, for where you go of the Score,
You Will find you pay him a third Penny more
Than ready Coin; for then you bring him down,
By wrangling, from a Noble to a Crown.
XCIX. On Tobacconists.
Where the Tobacconist good Pay does get,
The choicest Boxes up for those he will set;
But if you're slow in Payment, do not hit
His Time, then any nasty Trash is fit
For you; cut Stalks mixed with decayed stuff,
That Is fit for naught but grinding into Snuff.
If you complain, and give't a bad Report,
He sends you word it is very good of the Sort,
And the best he had made ready up for sale;
But come and clear off Scores, then he will not fail
To pick and choose you out so good a sort,
That when you come to try't, you will thank him for it;
Thus Money, Money runs in his Mind,
Which you must pay if you will true Friendship find.
C. On Alehouse keepers.
The Alehouse-keeper if you will freely pay,
And nobly call, he will sit by you all Day;
All other Company he will neglect,
And you're the only Man shall have Respect.
It Is on the noble-minded Man he tends,
That cares not what comes in, nor what he spends.
Such Company's the solace of his Heart,
He Is then your humble Servant, will not part.
Money's so charming, that she makes him shun
All other Guests, and after you to run.
There Is nothing that his House Sir can afford
But you may it command just at a Word.
My Landlord at none else but you will look,
You hold him fast, Sir, with your Silver-Hook.
But if you for a single Pot but call,
He for such Company cares not at all.
So any Man without Offense may say
That plurimi passim fit Pecunia.
CI. On Milliners.
The Milliner for Ready Money's kind,
For Stockings, Ribbons, Gloves, Hoods, Scarves, you will find
He Will use you well, and though he do pretend
He Would be as kind, because you are his Friend.
If you the Goods upon your Credit take,
But then be sure another Price he would make;
So trust him not, for Money always has
More Kindness found, than where there is greatest Faith.
CII. On Printers.
The Printer will for Money hazard Fate,
Print scurr'lous Pamphlets against the State,
Or any dangerous unlicenc'd thing,
Which may Life and Estate in Danger bring:
Such is the power of Money every where,
That Men regardless are of Shame or Fear.
Nothing's too dear for her to set at Stake,
That all this hurry in the World does make.
CIII. On Salesmen.
Salesmen to those pass by, cry with loud Voice,
Do you want Clothes? walk in, here is good choice
Of Mant'as, Madam, Petty-coats or Gown,
There Is none can show you better in the Town;
Or Coats and Breeches, with good Wastcoats, Sir,
They cry, as you pass by, and make great stir.
If you reply, and say you Money lack,
The Salesman leaves you then, and turns his Back.
If you want Clothes, but can no Money spare,
Then you for all his Store may go Thread bare;
For when this Lady does abscond, O then
He Will show no Clothes to Women or to Men.
But if this Empress of the World appear,
He Will cap and court you then to buy, never fear.
Money brings you in savor with a Man,
When neither Friendship nor Acquaintance can.
(CIV.) On Seamstresses.
The smiling Seamstress, full of wheedling Chats,
For Ruffles, Handkerchiefs, Necks and Creva^s,
Or other sorts, for which you have a Mind,
If she your Credit know, she will be kind,
She Will say: And full of Curtsies, then will tell
With many Smiles and Bows, she will use you well,
Do not distrust, nor make no Words or stir,
You solely may refer the Price to her.
And thus she Wheedles, until the Gypsy
Do get you in her Books, and then she nips ye.
She Will cheat you will find, if she your Name sets down,
In every Angel, at least Half-a-Crown.
Let her Pretense be never so fair in show,
You Will find it is Money that she loves, not you;
And if she Money gets, she does not care
Whether it comes by soul means or by fair.
CIV. On Truckers.
The Trucker is possessed with plodding Head,
Contrives all Day, and Night when in his Bed;
Does nimbly frisk about, for it is his Trade,
Turns every Stone to get a Bargain made.
There Is naught comes wrong, at any Bait he will bite,
He Will serious be, or drink with you all Night;
Suits any Humor, puts on any Shape,
Merry or Grave, Mimicks, or Cunning Ape,
He Is this or that, nay, any thing you will have him,
You must be wondrous quick, if you deceive him.
If you have a Parcel you would have put off,
Though the Goods be very mean, he will not them scoff;
Bid such high Price for them by way of Truck,
That you will rejoice in mind for your good Luck:
Thus he is assured, though double Price he give
For yours, yet he by the Bargain shall receive
Sufficient Gains, if much the less for those
Of yours he gets, or naught, he cannot lose;
For in the Truck he has such Bargain made,
That, sink or swim, he cannot lose by the Trade.
If you have no Goods, then he will desire to know,
If any Men or Women you can show,
Or Lads or Lasles, Strangers, or of your Kin,
He Will truck for them, Gain palliates the Sin:
He Will bargain for your Child, Sister, or Brother,
Rather than stick they will spirit one another.
All Is one to him whether they are pleased or no;
If he gets them a-board, away they go
Unto Barbadues, or Virginia straight,
There he trucks for Tobacco, this his Freight,
Which when come home, his Trade is Trucking still,
For Goods, or he will for Ready Money sell.
There Is naught you can propound that he will refrain,
The Bargain's mean that turns not to his Gain.
What is it the Trucker will not undertake,
And manage too for the Idol Money's ^ake?
Which is the only Goddess he implores,
The very Name of Money he adores:
Over him this Idol has such Influence,
For her he will pawn, or fell his Conscience.
CV. On Scotch Pedlars.
These Circumvoraneans Scotch Cloth cry,
Hollands, Muslins, or Cambricks, will ye buy
Callicoes, Lawns, or any other Ware?
If you will buy naught, then will you sell some Hair?
Thus at the Doors and Windows they do call,
Several Denials quiets not their Bawl,
Into your House with Confidence they will go,
Name all their Wares, and scarcely be said no.
From House to House, from Town to Town they run,
They Will spare no pains if Money can be won,
Either by Chaffer, or else otherwise,
So fair and tempting Money's in their Eyes,
They Will seek and have her, if she may be found,
Traverse the Country, and whole Counties round.
Country and Counties did I say? we find
To range whole Kingdoms will not please their Mind;
What Master Cleaveland heretofore discry'd,
May to these Pedlars sitly be applied,
Had Cain been Scot, God would have changed his doom,
Not made him travel, but confined him home.
CVI. On Butter-Factors.
The Butter-Buyers amongst themselves agree,
How they may gull and cheat the Country.
They know poor Farmers are enforced to sell,
So they set down a Rate just as they will;
Higher or lower Prices they set down,
As they see more or less come to a Town:
When there does come plenty of Firkins in,
Then to the poor Men they Stories do begin;
Tell them at London the Markets are so low,
That how to buy and save they do not know;
Though not a Word of this they know is true,
Yet by this Artifice they wrest and skrew
Great Profit to themselves, and Money get
From the honest Farmers, without much regret.
These Buyers amongst themselves low Prices make,
Which the poor Farmers are enforced to take;
The Men are indigent, else had not come,
So sell they must Money to carry home:
But when these Factors Orders do receive
To buy a Parcel quickly up, they give
Twelve-pence advance perhaps, or sometimes more;
But when they are served, the Price is as before;
And thus the Country is brought to submit,
And take such Prices as these Men think sit.
If you a Pound or less fall short of weight,
Then you must make Abatement for it strait;
But if your Firkin proves a Pound or two
O'er-weight, for that they nothing will allow.
At every Turn Profit they are sure to make,
And all the Country cheat, for Money's sake.
CVII. On Butter-Searchers.
If the Butter-Searcher do some Firkins find
Not perfect Right, yet sometimes he will be kind,
And pass 'em by, if the Owners he do know,
And be assured they will Kindness to him show,
And Presents make unto his Wise, or Self;
For though no Money-Bribes this cunning Elf
Would be supposed from any to receive,
Yet he will take what other things you will give;
If any call these Bribes, he has this shift,
Will tell you no, What is more free than Gift?
If you Corn, Geese, or Turkies will send in,
He Will them receive, not scruple't as a Sin.
CVIII. On Corn-Merchants and Malsters.
Corn-Merchants and the Malster's chiefest Care,
Is Grain to buy cheap in, and sell out dear:
When Farmers and poor Husbandmen would sell,
Wages to pay, or Rents to raise, they smell
There Is Wanting then; so they are very shie,
Are full of Corn, want Money, cannot buy;
But if they can but wrest you to their Pin,
They Will bargain then, your Corn you may bring in;
And thus does run poor Men's unhappy Fate,
They must for Money sell at any rate:
But when the Buyers have got pretty store,
And for some time resolve to buy no more,
Then they bethink themselves, whether last Year
Or this they did their Corn buy in more dear:
If the last Year, great store of Old they have;
If this more dear, They could no old Store save;
So all must go at the best Price they give;
They by this means exuberantly live.
If Money can but any way be had,
She Is welcome, though the Means be never so bad:
Whenas a Steeping fails, and the Malt's not right,
Then that is mixed, laid in some place in sight,
To send abroad, to those whose Custom they,
Do not regard, because they badly pay.
But those that take up much, and take great care
To make good Payment, get the choicest Ware.
So runs the World, Money is never said nay;
But poor Souls are repulsed, that cannot pay.
CIX. On Iobbers of Cattle.
The Jobber buying Cattle does contrive
To some remote far Market them to drive,
Where he is in hopes they will good profit bring,
And that is the only expetible thing
Which he does indagate, and People covet,
For all Mankind of all Degrees do love it:
This Cash each Man desires, to have and keep it,
He that does not, Quae te dementia cepit
May well be said of such, for it comes to pass
Where Money's wanting, every silly Ass
Insults over you, his Tongue is there let loose,
Although he scarce can say Bo to a Goose.
Money procures Respect to every Fool,
He Is capp'd and cring'd, though he look like an Owl.
CX. On Mint-men.
Minters do moil and work early and late,
Run Bullion into Ingots, melt down Plate,
Assay the Pots with Industry and Skill,
Draw Bars to equal thickness in the Mill,
Cut and punch Pieces out, both great and small,
Then carefully size, edge, and blank them all,
Fit for the Skrew and Dies; then they cull out
The greater Pieces, Letter them about,
So tell and bag the Money up, make it fit
For the King, or the Owners that have right to it.
This Pains they take not out of love to Art,
But it is because themselves do get a part
Of what they Coin, else they would have no Will,
Either to Work, or show their Art and Skill.
Money does Coiners and Receivers please,
Quarrels promotes, and Anger can appease,
Sorrow and Grief can ease, and Comfort bring;
Nay powerful Money can do any thing.
CXI. On Tanners.
Tanners unkindly Heats do sometimes use
Unto their Leather, and thereby abuse
Those that do wear the same, for it proves naught,
When after into Boots and Shoes it is wrought.
The Shooemakers are Rogu'd then for the same,
When as in truth the Tanners are to blame,
Who too hot Woozes use, or over-Lime
Leather, and will not give it its due time.
Then other whiles for outer Soles they raise,
Such poor thin Hides by their unlawful ways,
Which they well know, for such use are not fit,
These Crafts they use more Money for to get,
Than lawful ways can compass them, or bring:
And thus we see Money's the only thing
At which all Trades and Mysteries do look,
And are resolved to have't by Hook or Crook.
CXII. On Hawking Pedlars.
Some Hawking Pedlars carry on their Backs,
Others with Iaden Horses, and great Packs
Of Hollands, Cambricks, Lawns, Scotch-Cloth and Hoods,
Callico, Muslins, Lace, and suchlike Goods;
Ribbons and Necklaces, with such like Trade,
Gowns, Scarves, Gloves, Silks, and Mantua's ready made;
With which they hawk in the Country here and there,
At Fairs and Markets too to sell their Ware.
Money's the only Lady they pursue,
If her they can but catch, they never rue,
Nor of their Pains and Labor do Repent,
Money does salve up all, with great Content.
CXIII. On Hard-ware Men.
The Hard-ware Man at Markets seldom fails,
With Knives, and Scissors, Hammers, Locks, and Nails,
And Smoothing-Boxes, Buckles, Steels, and Awls,
And Jersey-Combs, are laid upon their Stalls;
With many other things that People use,
Which he lays all in sight for Folk to choose
Such things as they do lack, and give him pay,
Money's the Miss for whom the Man does stay;
And with great Patience waits until she come,
Then he with Joy does take his journey home,
And when this Lady he does thither bring,
He and his Family Choreuma's sing.
CXIV. On Petty-Booksellers.
The petty Bibliopol has Histories,
And some small Books of several Mysteries,
Primmers, Psalters, and Bibles on his Stall,
Logistoricks, with Books Protreptical;
With Chronologicks for the Peoples Use,
And other sorts on's Stall he does produce,
Which he in order viewly sets to the Eye,
Hoping they will tempt some Lookers on to buy;
He Money wants, naught has such Charms as she,
For her he will part with his whole Library.
CXV. On Traveling Coopers.
Coopers with Hoops and Tools do march about,
To find out Work walk many weary Foot,
When with a Jobb they meet, and Money's got,
They then rejoice at their Auspicious Lot,
When tired with Work, and Traveling all Day,
Money makes them at Night sing Care away.
CXVI. On Bowl-Sellers.
Sellers of Bowls, Churns, Pails, and other Ware,
With them do ride about from Fair to Fair
Chapmen to seek, that Ready Money bring,
Then they will smoke, bouze off their Pots and sing.
When the Market's bad, they are in a sullen Frame,
So dull, that none would think they are the same.
Money's the sprightly Miss, the dainty Dame,
That cheareth up both Young, Old, Blind and Lame.
CXVII. On Millers.
When Corn is dear, the Miller often is
(To get great Gains) tempted to do amiss,
Not pleased with his due, excessive Toll he will take,
And all the Country cheat for Money's sake;
And by this means the Adage does fulfill,
It is as sure as there is a Thief in the Mill.
And the old Saying is, as has been told,
An honest Miller has a Thumb of Gold.
CXVIII. On Coach-makers.
A painted Coach, and Harness fine and gay,
For thirty Pounds you will get in ready Pay;
But if they are brought to you upon the Score,
The Price will then be forty Pounds, or more.
O Money, fie! great are the Cheats thou plays!
To compass thee Men care not by what ways
They do proceed, and value not a Pin,
For Right or Wrong, so Money comes but in.
CXIX. On Horse-Iockeys.
The Mangonist does feed and graith his Horse,
In hopes that he thereby may fill his Purse
With exoptable Cash, which will revive
His drooping Thoughts, when he finds he shall thrive:
Boiled Corn, with Mash, and Balls, and other Things,
He gives his Horse, which he knows quickly brings
And plumps him up, makes him look fat and fair,
And for a Market handsome viewly Ware;
And though he know in this there is much Deceit,
Yet he to get him off does use this Cheat.
Its Money that he wants, and her he will have;
So Tricks will play Money to get or save:
She is the dear Prolubium of his Mind,
Money to get he many ways will find;
He Will cheat his nearest Friend to compass her,
Cog, swear, and lie, great bustle make and stir.
CXX. On Badgers.
From Market unto Market the poor Badger
Does ride and run, and makes himself a Cadger
Of Corn from place to place, and takes great pains,
And all is but to acquire some little Gains;
And if with Profit Money does but come,
He with rejoicing then returns home;
Money revives his Heart, when she will be found,
For Money's sake he seeks the Country round;
Both far and near he does itinerate,
And after Money early does hunt and late;
He cannot live without her, so will pay
His Homage unto her by Night and Day.
CXXI. On Bakers.
Bakers not pleased with just and moderate Gain,
Confederacy amongst themselves maintain,
Huff up their Bread, make it viewly to the sight,
But scarce a Loaf of just Assize and Weight:
But when the Weighers come their Bread to try,
All the light Bread then is presently put by,
And other Bread is brought and set in sight,
Which they well know is of just Weight and right.
Such Bread in store they always ready have,
From the hazard of the Law, themselves to save:
When all is done, and the Weighers gone away,
Then presently this Bread they do convey
Unto the place where it did stand before,
And then comes out again all their light store,
With which they cheat the Ignorant and Poor.
This is their Trade, Money they love so well,
That for her sake they will pawn their Souls to Hell.
CXXII. On Mealmen.
Some fine and course Grain mixed the Mealman will
Grind into Flower, and at the best Price sell;
And if you ask him when you come to buy,
If it is made of the best Corn, he answers, I.
The choicest Grain the Markets do afford
Is in that Flower, believe it on my Word;
The Saying's true, the finest Corn is there,
But of the courser sort's the greater share.
Thus he dissembles, lies, equivocates,
And by such Means these Men do get Estates.
Then they can damp their Flour some other whiles,
Which makes it greater weight, and so beguiles.
To cozen, lie, dissemble's no Offense,
If Money's thereby got, they can dispense
With the severest Checks of Conscience.
Alas, Alas! What Comfort is in this,
Money to gain, and lose eternal Bliss?
CXXIII. On Apprentices.
Poor Prentices the space of Seven Year,
Or longer time, their Masters serve with fear,
Have many Taunts, crabb'd Words, and scornful Looks;
More strictly kept than Scholars to their Books,
And sometimes beat, inhumanely abused,
'Twou'd pity one to have their Dog so used;
Some Lads on silly Errands are sent out,
For petty things, for which some do them flout;
Some clean the Shoes, fetch Coals, and Door-Stones sweep,
Dress Stable out, and Master's Horse do keep;
Many cold Winter stormy bitter Day
Poor Boys behind the Shop-board trembling stay;
Fingers and Hands so swelled and numbed with Cold
They scarcely any thing can take or hold.
When Hands and Feet are Cold, if they desire,
Yet without leave they must not come to the Fire;
Their Fingers blow, behind Backs stand and wait
Whilst the Masters warm themselves, sitting in State.
Some Boys are almost starved for want of Meat,
Or 's slubber'd so, when it comes they cannot eat.
Drudges and perfect Slaves some Lads are made,
Before they can be Masters of their Trade:
These Hardships they endure, with hopes to see
Their Term expire, and then they shall be free,
May set up for themselves, and take their Ease,
Having no angry Master then to please;
But then may sell their Wares and Money take,
Having endured great slavery for her sake.
Then they are in hopes to get a virtuous Wife,
Whose Company's the solace of Man's Life,
Who for the further Comfort of their State,
Will Money bring for her Associate;
Then all their former Slavery's quite forgot,
When as a treble Bliss falls to their Lot;
Freedom, a Virtuous Wife, and Money store,
What can a Man in this Life covet more.
CXXIV. On Fishermen.
Poor Fishermen to wait their Time and Tide,
In sorry Cabbins near the Water side,
On Straw or Rushes poorly lie, and tumble,
At their mean Fare and Hardships never grumble,
But draw their Nets and Lines in Rain and Cold,
And joyful are when they some Fish behold:
And those poor Men who venture out to Sea
When Storms arise, sometimes are cast away,
And so instead of catching Fish for Gain,
Themselves are caught by Death, entombed in the Main;
The hopes Men have they Money shall command,
Makes them adventure both by Sea and Land.
Comfort she brings in time of greatest need,
Men in their greatest Trouble she has freed.
What Toil or Hazard can be thought too much
For Money then, whose Company is such.
O Money, Money, all Men thee adore,
Both those at Sea, and those upon the Shore.
CXXV. On Tapsters.
Tapsters who the Masters Cellars farm by great,
Will froth their Pots and Cans, nick on, and cheat,
Their Drink in Pots, and little Mugs will fill,
Tankard and sorry Cans, for Cheat they will,
Both in the pinching Measure, and their Score,
So long as Money comes they will never give o'e^;
Play all their Tricks, that they may hold her fast,
Till Satan comes, and the Tapster gets at last.
CXXVI. On Hostlers.
An Hostler's looked upon to be a Man
That certainly will cheat you if he can;
For though you see your Horse with corn well fed,
And take great Care before you go to Bed
To have your Horse's Rack well filled with Hay;
As soon as you are gone, he will take it away,
And so your Horse all Night stands without Meat;
Then the next Morn betimes (that he no Cheat
May seem to be) he puts some Hay in the Rack,
Then Master says, your Horse no Meat did lack,
Your self did see the Rack I did so fill,
That there is a great deal does remain in it still;
And thus the Knave his Credit would retrieve,
Hoping that what he says you do believe.
If with your Corn you trust him to your Horse,
Then he it is like will cheat you worse and worse.
If you command him half a Peck to give
Your Horse, perhaps, he will half as much receive,
Or sometimes none at all; you must take care,
Or otherwise your Horse will get ill Fare;
But this is unto such who Strangers are,
Or pinching Slaves, for whom he does not care.
If you're a constant Guest, and nobly pay,
He Will neither cheat you then of Corn nor Hay,
But will as honest be in every Case,
As if your self were by him in the place,
For he is assured you will be very free,
And so he deals with you in honesty.
Immoderate Love of Gains for his Relief,
Does tempt the Man to make himself a Thief.
There Is many have so dearly Money bought,
That they themselves have to the Gallows brought
CXXVII. On Hackney Coachmen.
The Hackney-Coachman when he sees it Rain,
He Is pleased thereat, though others do complain,
For he is in hopes to have then a good Trade,
Whereby good store of Money will be made:
He values not though he be wet to the Skin,
If he can get but store of Money in:
In wet and cold he will drive, though Storms be great,
And in hot Weather moil in Dust and Sweat,
And in his Coach-Box with great Patience sit,
For Money runs betwixt him and his Wit;
His Mind is wholly sixth upon his Gains;
It Is Money that does recompense his Pains.
CXXVIII. On City Carmen and Draymen.
Carmen and Draymen oft-times have great Lists,
And when they drive, are hard put to their shifts*
Oft-times in narrow Lanes there is such a Throng,
They hazard sore their Lives to pass along;
They pull, they lift, they curse, they bawl and flight;
Sometimes to downright Blows they fall, and sight*
All Blood and Dirt, with Hair all torn, they have been,
And hardly can be parted, they are so keen;
And this they undertake; and then this
For the love of Money their admired Miss;
She charms them so, they will any Toil endure,
In Leather Coats and Frocks, to make her sure.
What Pains can be too great her to acquire,
Whom all the World does follow and admire?
In whose Society there is such delight,
That Princes do for her make War and sight*
CXXIX. On Common Colliers.
Poor common Colliers Money to obtain,
In Heat and Cold, fair Weather and in Rain,
Through thick and thin, in Mire as well as Dust,
Early and late their Horses follow must*
Least they against some Gate or Style do run,
Or fall and break their Ware, they are half undone,
And many weary Footstep every Week
They Are forced to undertake Chapmen to seek,
Else Madam Money will not these Men own,
And then they know no Favors to them shown:
But if this Lady they have in their Hand,
They Are sure they then may any thing command,
Corn, Bread or Flower, Eggs, Butter, Flesh or Fish,
Or what else they for Back or Belly wish.
Money's Queen-Regent of the World, all will
On her attend, her Pleasure to fulfill.
CXXX. On Carters, Wain-men, and Waggoners.
The Carters, Wain-men, and Waggoners for Hire,
In Summer's Heat, and Winter's Cold and Mire,
Be the Weather good or bad, they keep their Stage,
Because they know it brings in constant Wage:
Much Toil they have, and many Dangers run,
Money without great Pains will not be won;
For he that Money's Company does crave,
Besides great Ca^e, ^e must himself enslave,
Till he prevails to have her at his Will;
With her Assistance then he may fulfill
What he desires, great Hills may level plain,
Or in low Valleys raise great Hills again;
He any thing may to his Humor bring;
He that has Money can do every thing.
CXXXI. On Country Rope-makers.
The Roper with his Ropes of Hemp and Hair,
Horse-Pannels, Wanties, Cords, and suchlike Ware;
Sick, Webb and Halters, Hair-cloth too he shows,
Cart-Ropes and Hopples for Horses and for Cows;
These things for Money he does ready make,
Has them from place to place Money to take;
For he to meet with her no place will miss,
Money's Solamen in miseriis;
The only Antidote against all Sorrow,
He that has her needs not care for to Morrow.
CXXXII. On Petty Chapmen.
The Petty Chapmen with Tobacco, Spice,
Dutch Bread and Walnuts, Indigo, Blue Bice,
Pepper and Ginger, Sugar White and Brown,
Soap, Starch, and Pins, they go from Town to Town.
Tape, Thread, and Filletting, with other things
Which People want, from House to House they bring.
To Fairs and Markets too; they also rove,
Money to get their Stocks for to improve;
Money's the Lass for whom they so much itch,
Some her obtain, and by their Trade grow Rich,
For where she comes, and does resolve to 'bide,
Such may be said to go with Wind and Tide.
CXXXIII. On Higlers.
Higlers with Poultry, Eggs, and other Trade,
Do nod and ride all Night, are not afraid
Of Weather, or bad Way, or any harm,
Money against all Fear's a powerful Charm:
The Love of her runs in their Minds and Heads,
She breaks their Sleeps, they rest not in their Beds,
But Day and Night they Travel here and there,
Sometimes to sell, sometimes to get more Ware:
And thus continually they ride and rove,
Money to get, the admired Miss they Love,
She pays their Rents, supplies their Needs they see,
And in their greatest Straights does set them free.
CXXXIV. On Traveling Potters.
Potters to Markets with their brittle Ware,
Possessed with fear, do march, and full of care,
Yet Madam Money has them at her Call,
For the Love they bear to her, they will venture all;
The Hopes they have of her to be possessed,
Dispels their Fear, at home they cannot rest,
But out they will go, Money to seek and find,
The supreme Paraclesis of their Mind.
CXXXV. On Brick makers.
The poor Brick-makers in cold Winter Weather,
Their Clay turn over, and do cast together,
In Summertime, from Morn till Night, all day,
With their bare Hands they work and mould their Clay,
In flooting, dressing, drying and making fit,
They take great pains er'th' Bricks in Kill are set;
They pi^e them close, and dawb them round about,
Lest when they are fired it any where break out;
After this Toil, then Money comes to please
Their Acopum Catholi^um of Ease;
Money their Toil requites, gets Clothes and Food,
Transforms sad Spirits into merry Mood.
CXXXVI. On Fish drivers.
Drivers of Fish unto the Markets bring
Cod. Scate and Turbut, Haddocks, Soal, and Ling,
Conger and Whitings, Killing and Mackrel,
With Lobsters, Cockles, and fine Crabs to sell;
Salmons and Scurfs, with Smelts and Salmon-Cocks,
Caught in the Nets, in Kiddels, or Fish-Locks;
Winter and Summer travel Night and Day,
Sometimes in good, sometimes in dirty way;
And in great Storms they are sometimes almost lost,
Thus for a Livelihood poor Men are tossed,
When they to the Market come, and Fish set down,
Away they go, and stay good while in the Town;
Return no more till the latter end of the day,
And then they know those People will not stay
That have far home; and so what Price they set
Upon their Fish, they are in hopes to get;
Because to wrangle Buyers cannot stand,
Rather than stay will pay what they demand.
Thus every Trade does exercise their Wit,
And all their cunning Tricks Money to get,
Her to acquire a Man his Life often ventures,
And for her sake his Wit does set of the Tenters.
CXXXVII. On Sellers of Bread or Cakes, in Markets.
Those which with Bread or Cakes in Markets sit,
Or in the Streets, or those that carry it
Abroad to sell, and Chapmandry to find,
Are not disturbed at Weather, Ways, or Wind;
Whether't be hot or cold, they value not,
If Sovereign Lady Money may be got;
For her they ride, they run, they stand, they wait,
Constant Attendance give, with Minds sedate.
Though Bread's the Staff of Life, yet they will part
With Bread for Money's sake, with all their Heart.
Faith, Hope, and Charity great Graces be,
And Charity the greatest of the Three,
What Name and Place does Money then deserve,
Saves Life, when Charity would let you starve?
Sure she is a Grace, and of all Graces Chief,
That to all sorts of People yields Relief.
CXXXVIII. On Basket makers and Sievers.
Sievers and Basket-makers with made Wares,
As Baskets, Voiders, Sieves, and wanded Chairs,
Fine Rangers, Searchers, Tiffanies, and Boulters,
Course and fine Scuttles, P^nniers for Poulters;
And such like things, with many others more,
Which they have always ready-made in store:
From Fair to Fair they ride, and Markets ply,
Money to get, all Places they do try,
Money's the Lass for whom they work and strive,
Them and their Families to keep alive.
CXXXIX. On Tinkers, and Bowl-Sewers or Crammers.
The Tinkers and Bowl-Sewers ragged are,
So Money seek themselves for to repair;
But when a Jobb of Work falls in their Hand,
Three times as much for it they will demand
As they deserve to have, you must agree
Before the Work's begun, if you would be free
From Noise and Clamor, else the Rogues will swear,
And not give over, till Money does appear;
She charms them into silence, makes 'em still,
She clothes their Backs, and does their Bellies fill.
In stormy Weather, when they trembling lie,
Money their cold chilled Limbs can calefie.
CXL. On Sellers of Herbs and Roots.
Sellers of Roots and Herbs, that Markets tend
With Turnips, Carrots, Cabbages to vend,
Time, Hyssop, Savory, with an hundred more,
Of which their Gardens yield abundant Store;
With these they wait, and with great Patience stay
Till Money comes, and has them all away:
It Is she they come to meet, and those that have
A mind to Herbs or Roots, her Help must crave.
If she comes not, they get no great, nor small,
But if she comes they may command 'em all;
When she appears, her Power they will not withstand,
Wherever she goes all yield to her Command,
Save Death alone, he will not her Charms obey,
Where he appears he will not be said Nay.
CXLI. On Country Salters.
The Common Salters all the Summer long,
To serve the Country with their Salt are throng;
They travel Day and Night, no Time refrain,
Their Horses graze in any Street or Lane.
Their Salt to save from Rain, with Skins they hide,
And nod and sleep as they on Horseback ride:
Oft-times they are weary, and most sadly wet,
And yet well pleased if Money they can get;
Money's so precious Men no Dangers shun,
But will for her through Fire and Water run.
CXLII. On Oatmeal Sellers.
The Venditors of Oatmeal round and small,
Do diligently wait on Money's Call,
And when she does appear, then with great Pleasure,
Their Oatmeal is delivered out by Measure,
As long as any in their Skeps remain,
For she the Sellers can set up again*
If Money they receive, they do not care,
They for her sake will part with all their Ware:
Money's more worth than the best Merchandise,
She Is the dear Paramour in all Men's Eyes.
CXLIII. On Common Carriers.
The drudging Carriers throughout the Year,
Their laden Horses follow in the Rear;
In Winter^time with many Storms they meet,
Early and late they go with cold wet Feet.
In Summertime they are all besmeared with Sweat,
Blinded almost with Dust, their Feet sore beat.
But thus throughout the Year this course they run,
In Winter froze, in Summer tanned with the Sun,
If for this Pains you ask the Reason why,
It is because they Money get thereby:
Money's the Antidote against all Distress,
She Comfort brings unto the Comfortless.
That Man no Toil, no Pains, no Hardship feels,
Where Money surely follows him at the Heels.
CXLIV. On Public Waits.
The Public Waits, who Liveries do own,
And Badges of a City, or some Town;
Who are retained in constant Yearly Pay,
And at their Solemn Public Meetings play,
And up and down the Streets and Town, in cold
Dark Nights, when the Instruments they scarce can hold;
They play about, and tell what Hour it is,
And Weather too, this Course they do not miss,
Most part of Winter in the Nights; and when
Some generous Persons come to Town, these Men,
As soon as they are informed, do then repair
Unto their Lodgings, play them some fine Air,
Or brisk new Tune, such as themselves think fit,
And which they hope with the Gallants Fancies hit;
Then cry God bless you, Sirs, again they play,
Expecting Money 'ere they go away;
For she is the Miss that in their Hearts does reign,
No Waiting's servile thought this Miss to gain;
All Traders, all Professions, and all Arts,
Money to gain do all perform their Parts:
She makes a Jubilee wherever she stays,
Where she absconds they have but anxious Days.
CXLV. On Vestry-keepers and Vergers.
Both Vestry-keepers and the Vergers too,
When Money does appear will Kindness show:
Make room, they will cry, and usher you along,
March on before you through the Crowd and Throng,
Conduct you to some Place where you may be
From the vulgar Press and Concourse safe and free:
But if this Lady take them not by the Hand,
Amongst the common Crowd you then may stand,
Without Respect, or any Kindness shown,
If Money'll not appear, they will make no room.
CXVI. On Apple sellers.
Sellers of Pears and Apples of all kinds,
Their constant Stands do keep with patient Minds,
Endure all sorts of Weather, seldom grieve,
'Cause Money comes sometimes them to relieve,
And now and then does call on them by the way,
And makes her Residence with them and stay,
O that to them's a happy joyful Day;
For when she is all Day frequently in sight,
With merry Hearts they then go home at Night.
CXLVII. On Common Cryers.
The Common Crier walks about with his Bell,
At certain places makes his Stand, to tell
And publish things that he is to make known
To Strangers, and to the People of the Town;
This he performs for mean and sorry Fees,
Some Money's better far than none, he sees;
And of the old Saying he does notice take,
That many Littles do a Mickle make.
For Money Men are willing to take pains,
Rather than idle sit, for little Gains.
CXLVIII. On Sextons or Bell-Ringers.
The Sexton every Morning and each Night,
Winter when dark, and Summer when its light,
Enters the Church, though it be never so cold,
Maugre all Phantasins there, with Courage bold,
And then at the noted Hour does ring the Bell,
That all the Neighbors round about may tell
How the Night does pass away, and Day draws on,
That so the People may then think upon
What Business they have then to go about;
And thus the Sexton the whole Year throughout
Observes his Hours, and at the Quarter Day
Does call upon his Masters for his Pay:
It Is Money that he works for, that is the thing,
That makes him Time observe, and Bell to ring;
For if he had no Money to receive,
He Would ring no Bell, nor no Attendance give.
CXLIX. On Porters.
Porters at Tavern Doors, or some Street end,
With Pokes and Cords do constantly attend,
To wait a Turn, or on an Errand go,
Or Goods and Luggage carry to and fro;
And thus from Day to Day in Heat and Cold,
In weather wet and dry, this Course they hold:
Labor and any Hardship they will endure,
So they thereby can Money but ensure;
Money's the Pharmacotheon indeed,
And cures Men's Grief in greatest time of need.
CL. On the Bell-Man.
The Bell-Man in the dead of Night walks round,
And with a hollow Voice and doleful Sound,
Puts you in mind then of your latter End,
Instructions gives how you your Life should spend;
What time of the Night it is he does declare:
Then to another Place he does repair.
And thus from Night to Night tho never so cold,
In Frost and Snow his constant Course does hold;
And all this Pains the Man does undertake
Without complaint, for tempting Money's sake,
For without her he knows not how to live,
So Night by Night he will Attendance give,
And thinks no Service nor no Pains too much
For Money's sake, his love to her is such.
CLI. On Chimney-Sweepers.
The Chimney-Sweeper thinks it no disgrace
For Money's sake to have his Hands and Face
Besmeared with Soot, and nasty to the sight;
For though He Is all over Black, he cries all White:
His filthy loathsome Clothes, and noisome smell,
And Soot in's Eyes, he can endure full well.
If Money comes but in he then is jolly,
And round about does trudge with his Poles and Holly:
He into any smutty Hole will creep,
And nasty stuff upon himself will sweep.
O Money, Money! for thy charming sake
Men any Drudgery will undertake,
Think no Employ disgraceful or un^it,
If Money may be gained and got by it.
CLII. On Watch men.
Nocturnal Watch men at the appointed Hours,
Walk round the Streets, and thump at all Men's Doors,
Thereby to try if they are made fast and sure,
That Men may rest from Burglaries secure:
This Custom all Year long these Men observe,
And though with Cold they are sometimes fit to starve,
Yet of their constant Walks they do not fail,
In bitter Storms of Rain, Frost, Snow or Hail;
And all is for Money's sake they take this Pains,
They Will venture Health and Life to compass Gains.
Money's an Antidote against Grief and Sorrow,
Who her enjoys no thought takes for to Morrow;
She warms, she clothes, she feeds, affords Content*
All needful things provides, and pays Men Rent.
CLIII. On the Iakes Farmer.
The stinking Gold-finder with his white Rod,
In common or in private Jakes will prod,
And take the Dep^h and Latitude thereof,
Endure the Loathsomness, and every Scoff,
And scornful Flout his stinking Trade affords,
And with Hands bare he will rake in filthy --
Abide the Smell without offense to's Nose,
With Patience look upon his -- Clothes,
In The Tubs and Buckets grope with willing Mind,
And try if he can Gold or Money find.
O who would think Madam Pecunia had
Such power to inveagle Men to be so mad
To rake in nasty -- and make such stir,
Out of fond Love and Dotage unto her.
CLIV. On Kennel Sweepers.
The Kennel-Sweeper with his old scratch Broom,
Backwards and forwards sweeps where he does come,
And in the places where he sweeps, does mind,
If Horse-Shooe Stubs, or Iron he can find,
Or any thing he thinks will Money make,
Which he with joyful Mind does nimbly take,
And into's old Hat Crown the same does sling,
Which for that purpose he about does bring;
And thus from Street to Street he trots about,
To seek his petty Merchandises out,
Which to his Chapmen he does bear away,
Who for the same afford him current Pay.
Then he with Joy to's Trade returns again;
For Money's sake no Drudgery he will refrain,
But sweep, and scratch, and grope with his bare Hands,
In every place where he does make his Stands.
CLV. On Rag-Gatherers.
Those that do seek about for Clo^ts and Rags,
Do in Bie-places rake, that they the Bags
And Pokes they for that purpose bring, may fill,
And get a Stock up for the Paper-Mill,
And Money get to recompense their Care
And Pains in seeking for their ragged Ware,
And which does them whole Clothes get for to wear.
Though Money's got by mean and sorry things,
To those that can get her, she better brings.
CLVI. On London Cries.
We daily Cries about the Streets may hear,
According to the Seasons of the Year:
Some Wellfleet Oysters call, others do cry
Fine Shelsey Cockles, or white Mussels buy;
Great Mackrel five a Groat some cry about;
Dainty fresh Salmon does another shout.
Come buy my dainty Dish of great Eels says one,
Some Soles and Flounders in another Tone.
Have you any old Cloaks, or Coats, or Hats;
Who buys my fresh great Smelts, or dainty Sprats.
Butter and Eggs some cry, some Hampshire Honey,
Others do call for Brass or broken Money:
Box or Horn Combs, Ivory Combs, or Scissers,
Tobacco Boxes, Knives, Razors or Twisters.
Who buys my baked Ox-Cheek here in my Pot,
Plump, fresh, and fat, well stewed, and piping^ hot.
Come buy my Pippins, Pearmains, and small Nutts,
Hot spic'd Ginger-bread, Chestnuts, and Wallnuts.
Buy a Jack-Line or a Hair-Line, cries some;
Another with News Books and Almanacks does come:
Died Linen for Aprons, Vinegar some cries;
Some hot baked Wardens, others Pudding-Pies:
French Beans and Parsley some cry, if ye mind,
And others have you any Knives to grind.
Buy Earthen Ware, says one; others with Bags,
Cry up and down, Take Money for old Rags^
Some Ropes of Onions cry about the Town,
And others Broiling-Irons up and down.
Hot Codlins hot, the best that ever you see,
Who buys these dainty hot Codlins of me.
Turnips and Sandwich Carrots one Man calls:
Green Hastings in my Cart another bawls.
Come buy a Steel or a Tinder-Box, cry some;
Old Boots or Shoes, says one, come buy my Broom.
Maids have ye any Kitchin-Stuff I pray:
Buy long Thread-Laces, does another say.
Some carry painted Clothes on little Poles,
By which its known that such Men do catch Moles:
Others on Clothes some painted Rats have made,
Which notifies Rat-catching is their Trade.
Have you any work for a Cooper here;
Old Brass to mend then tinkles one in the Rear.
Some Nettle-Chee^es cry, some Curds and Milk,
And others Satin, Velvet, or old Silk:
Then Ends of Gold or Silver cries a Lass;
Another Cream or Whey, as she does pass.
With Traps for Rats and Mice do some appear;
Two hundred a Penny Card-Matches here.
Ripe Cherries ripe, come buy my fair Cherries;
Who buys my Currants or ripe Gooseberries.
A Rubbing-Brush, a Bottle Brush, or Grater;
Fine Sparrow-Grass, then cries another Creature:
Here Is dainty Cowcumbers, who buys to pickle:
Another then with Collyflowers does stickle.
Ripe Rasberries about does some one sing;
Fine ripe Strawberries does another bring.
Fresh Nettle-Tops or Elder-Buds come buy;
Then Watercresses and Brooklime they cry.
Have ye any old Iron here, says one;
Another, Maids have you any Marrow-Bone.
Ripe Musk-Melons or Apricots some cry;
Fine Sevil Oranges or Limons buy.
Old Chairs to mend, then cries a ragged Fellow;
Come buy a Door-Mat, does another bellow.
Buy a Cock or a Gelding does one come:
Come buy my dainty singing Birds, say some:
Some dainty ^ine Holly and Ivy says;
Then curious Rosemary and fine Bays:
Some Pens and Ink would sell to all they meet,
And others Small-Cole cry about the Street.
Pity the poor Prisoners, some with Baskets go,
And others cry, Come see my Rara Show.
Anon a poor Wretch crying comes behind,
With Dog and Bell, Pray pity the poor Blind.
Who buys the Figs and Raisins new of mine;
Come buy my Bowl of Wheat; fine Oat-cakes ^ine*
Hot Mutton-Pies cries one along the Street,
Who buys my Mutton Pies, fresh, hot, and sweet.
Buy a Marking-Stone, one cries with smutty Face:
Another says, Come buy my fine Bone Lace.
Buy a Cloth or a Thrum Map, you Maids and Lasses;
Another says, Who buys my (...) Glasses:
A Lattice for a Window who will buy;
Great Faggots five for sixpence do some cry.
Have ye any old Glass for to renew:
Some cry Bellows to mend, or Bowls to ^ew:
Some Silk or Ferret Ribbon for Shooe-strings,
With London Pins and Tape, and other things.
Have y' any Corns upon your Feet or Toes:
Buy a Fox-Tail, or a Whisk, another goes.
Some walk about and old Silk Stockings cry;
Some ask if Socks or Quilted-caps you will buy.
Money for Coney-Skins Maids if you please:
Some cry Brick-Dust, others cry hot Grey-Pease:
Some Fowl and Pullets, and some Rabbets cry,
And some hot Barley-broath to those pass by:
Some Morn's and Night's new Milk cry all the Year,
And others singing Ballads you may hear:
And thus they trot about, and bawl each Day,
For the love they bear Madam Pecunia:
For her they will sit up late, and early rise,
She does appear so glorious in their Eyes,
Think all Pains well bestowed, nothing's too much,
Their zealous Dotage to this Idol's such.
Money's the only She all Men admire,
Both Poor and Rich this Lady do desire:
Who wants her company they are forlorn,
If she is not there they are every Fellow's scorn.
We may conclude when we have said what we can,
It Is Money at all times does make a Man.
CLVII, On News-mongers.
News mongers do themselves insinuate
Into their Favor, who can tell the State
And 'Fair of Things, how they are managed here,
And how transacted and designed elsewhere:
To their Amanuenses they endite,
Who take the Heads, and several Letters write,
Of News at large, then to the Country send 'em,
And to the Imployers there do recommend 'em:
Thus Post by Post they let them understand
The Intrigues a foot as well by Sea as Land;
Money for this they Quarterly receive
From their Imployers, thus they bravely live.
Then to the Imployers Houses Men repair,
And Money spend, to read News-Letters there:
Thus both News-mongers and Imployers gain
Money on this Account, else it is plain
No News at Home, from Foreign States, or France,
We should receive, but rest in Ignorance:
Money does pry into the secret things
Of Privy-Councils, and Cabals of Kings;
She Fairy-like, unseen creeps here and there,
Discovers Plots though whispered in the Ear:
And when the Stroke is ready for to fall,
She shows the Clan, and disappoints them all;
Her Charms are such, that none can them gainsay,
She Will make a Man his Bosom Friend betray.
CLVIII. On Country Farmers.
The Farmer, Husbandman, and Grasier keep
Their Cattle, Horses, Butter, Corn and Sheep,
And several Markets try, both far and near,
Having still Hopes to sell their Goods out dear:
Their Cattle they will comb, and Horns will grease,
That they may viewly look, and Chapmen please.
Their Sacks and Pokes with well-drest Corn they will Face,
When that within's ill dressed, and very base.
A Sample of their finest Corn they will get,
Seldom deliver the rest like unto it,
For that was done to draw the Bargain on,
They care not how the Corn's dressed, when that is done.
Such Tricks as these they have Money to gain,
And many more; for her they beat their Brain
Early and late, and work, and sweat, and moil,
Money's the only thing for which they toil;
And when they Money get she brings relief,
And recompenseth all their Care and Grief;
But when they Money want, they cannot rest,
With Grief and Care they are sadly then possessed.
CLIX. On Laboring Tradesmen.
If you want Workmen, and they are but scant,
Pay well, and give good Wages, you need not want
Carpenters, Masons, Slaters, and Lime-burners,
Brick layers, Tilers, Shinglers, Joyners, Turners,
Smiths, Plummers, Glasiers, Leaders of Sand,
Thatchers and Gardiners you may command,
Or other Workmen; Money is their Bliss,
They think that there no greater comfort is.
When Mowers, Rakers, and Reapers are but few,
Twopence advance in Wage procures enough,
When neither Love nor Favor can procure 'em,
Yet powerful Money sails not to secure 'em;
For where they get best Wage, and surest Pay,
Those Masters they will follow and obey.
CLX. On Gardiners.
If Standards or Wall-Trees you mean to plant,
And with a Gardener treat for those you want,
No sort of Fruit Trees you can easily name,
But he will assure you he has some of the same,
But his are of the choicest Fruit, and best
That can be had, so Price above the rest
Of common Gardners he will have for his Trees;
And thus he wheedles you; at length agrees
To furnish you with some of every kind,
And so he Money gets to please his Mind;
And that is the thing which he has in pursuit,
And you must take your hazard of the Fruit:
So after Patience had for some few Years,
At length Crab sower, and mean Trash-Fruit appears;
At which you're vexed to find the Fellow's Cheat,
You send for him, can scarce forbear to beat
The Man; you call him Rascal, Rogue, and Knave;
He caps and cringes, does your Patience crave,
To hear him speak; he did not understand
Your Soil so well as now; there is too much Sand,
Or Clay, or Mud, or Gravel in your Ground,
There lies the Mischief Sir, I now have found,
And that is the Reason why your Fruit proves naught,
For there is no fault, I Am sure, in the Trees you brought,
I have some Trees right for this Soil will prove,
Else you shall have 'em all, Sir, for your Love.
Thus both your Time and Money you have lost.
And by this Cheat you're put to double Cost,
Before he brings you Trees he knows are right,
Although he could have done it at first sight;
But Money was the thing the Man did covet,
All Sciences and Trades do fondly love it;
They care not what they do for love of Gain,
No Cheats nor Tricks for Money they will refrain.
CLXI. On the Country Housewife.
The frugal Wife great Care has in her Head,
Early she rises, and goes late to Bed;
She is more thrifty in her House than any,
She Will nothing waste she thinks will raise a Penny:
If ought be broke, or out of order set,
She chides her Servants, and is in a fret.
To mind her Churn, Bowls, Dishes, and Milk-Pail
Be scowr'd, and washed, and scalded, she will not fail,
And all her Vessels kept neat, sweet, and clean,
No sluttishness about her Milk is seen;
She minds to keep the same both sweet and good,
And so she does her Bread, and Drink, and Food.
In Brewing, Baking, and in Dressing Meat,
She Is frugal, cleanly, and exceeding neat.
Enough's a Feast, so more she will not have,
Profuseness she is against, resolves to save;
For she is not given to a lavish Folly;
Better have many Meals than few and jolly.
Her Cream into the Churn she sees poured in,
And minds her Maids be clean when they begin
To churn, and that they have no nasty Clout
About them then, nor lick, nor take none out:
She makes 'em take it clean out, when the Butter's got,
Then strein the Milk through Sieve into a Pot:
Thus she saves all to the bigness of a Nut,
And she that does not so's a careless Slut.
Then she does wash it clean with Water fair,
Leaves not a Mote therein, nor the least Hair;
Then weighs it up, and for the Market makes it,
And there all those that know her, quickly take it.
To the making then of Cheese she takes great care,
Minds that her Rennet's sweet, and Cheesemeat's fair,
In clean Clothes put each time they go to the Press,
And there set straight, not slubber'd in by guess:
Her Curds when they are at height, she takes up all,
Lest they unto the Kettle Bottom fall;
Drowsy and sleepy most Maids are she knows,
So she does look to the Milking of her Cows,
Their Paps she will have well drawn, they must not leave,
So long as the Cows a Drop of Milk will give.
Her Hogs and Calves then she will have well served,
If to her Maids she trusts they will be half starved,
For the Meat's so thin sometimes, and cold they get,
That they will not lay their Mouths to it, but take pet;
Then otherwhiles they will make it so hot indeed,
To death they would scald 'em if she did not heed.
Her Turkies, Geese, and Ducks she minds each day,
Makes them convenient Nests when they do lay,
And when their Nests they feather, and would sit,
Such Number of choice Eggs she will for them fit,
As she thinks they can cover well, and brood,
When they come off there is Water set and Food,
But then she minds when from the Nest they are raised,
They stay not too long off, lest the Eggs be daz'd.
The Time of Hatching she knows very well,
And then observes and helps to crack the Shell,
If she perceives the Young ones are but weak,
She helps them then out of the Shell to break,
And careful is to get them brought up fit
For the Market, or for her own Pot or Spit.
Her Hens to count each Night she will not fail,
And with her Finger grope them in the Tail;
And such as are with Egg, she does secure,
No Eggs can then be lost, she is very sure;
Then when her Hens do sit, she careful is,
As for her other Fowl, there is naught amiss.
She at the Winnowing of Corn will be,
To have't well dressed, and no waste made will see.
If the Wind be high, to winnow then she is loath,
Lest any of the Corn blow off the Cloth:
When the Corn is fit to measure, she takes care,
To do it her self, or see it done when she is there.
Into some Garner then the Corn's conveyed,
For their own Use, or for the Market laid.
A good Wife thus takes care of every thing,
Which she conceives or knows will Money bring;
Money's the Solace of her Mind and Heart,
To compass which nought's wanting on her part.
She toils all Day, and in her Bed contrives,
All ways for Money, (few such careful Wives)
Her Mind runs after that will Money bring,
And she will Money make of any thing;
The Saying's old, but much Truth does contain,
Unthrifty Wives waste more than Husbands gain;
For the Husband that would thrive, and Riches have,
Must in such Case his Wife's Permission crave.
CLXII. On Park Keepers.
Keepers of Parks, not pleased with their due Fees
And Liveries, when as their Lord never sees,
No^ knows, they Opportunity then find
To take sometimes a Buck or Do in kind,
And them for Money sell, or else bestow
On Friends, whose faithful Secrecy they know,
Umbles and Skin the Keeper then brings home,
Does tell his Lord there is a Misfortune come;
Taking his Range the Deer for to behold,
He sound a Skin and Umbles then scarce cold;
The Print of two Men's Feet was in the Place,
And he conceives of Dogs they had a Brace.
His Lord does threat Severity to the Crime,
If he can catch the Rogues at any time;
The Keeper at such Chances frets and grieves,
Watches with Care, but never can catch the Thieves,
No, no; the Thief does in his Pocket lurk,
That The Author is of all this knavish Work:
Money, thou art the Thief that steals the Deer,
The Lord his honest Keeper does not fear.
What Mischief is there done, by Sea or Land,
In which bewitching Money has no hand?
CLXIII. On Footmen.
Footmen and Boys behind a Coach do sit
Oft-times, whenas their Masters ride in it;
They otherwhiles run by their Master's side,
When they in Coaches, or on Horse^back ride.
Sometimes they follow 'em, and Cloaks do carry,
Sometimes at Doors Attendance give, and tarry
As well in darkest Nights as in the Day,
Till the Master's Pleasure is to go away;
This Life they lead; they run, they go, they wait,
With Patience take it, because it is their Fate.
From generous Hands they often with Money meet,
Which bitter Toil and Slavery makes sweet:
There Is few but they will wait, and run, and go,
If they be sure they shall get Money so.
CLXIV. On Post-Boys.
Many dark Night, and cruel stormy Day,
In Frost and Snow, and filthy dirty way
Poor Post-Boys ride, sometimes are drowned, o^ starved;
(It Is wonderful how they should be preserved!)
This Hardship they, poor Creatures, do endure,
Great Hazards run, some Money to procure:
Money's the Darling-Solace of their Mind,
And the only chief Asylum of Mankind.
CLXIV. On Shepherds.
If you have such a stock and store of Sheep,
That you a Shepherd are enforced to keep;
Then over him you ought to take some care,
Knavish and Roguish these Men often are.
Not pleased with their Wage, more Gains to get,
A Sheep or Lamb they now and then will take;
Then show their Skins, and by some Dog they will say,
Chased they were, and killed but yesterday,
Or by Misfortune sell into some Ditch,
And so were drowned, Money does them bewitch
To steal the Muttons, their Needs to supply,
Then think t'excuse the Matter with a Lie.
He that gives too much Credit, and believes
His Servants at all times, shall make 'em Thieves;
Money can them seduce, and make unjust,
Forsake their Honesty, betray their Trust.
CLXVI. On Warrenners.
The Nimble Warrenner for Love of Money,
Does now and then his Lord cheat of a Coney;
Nay many Dozen Couples he does take,
Then great Complaints unto his Lord does make,
That Foxes, Fowmarts, and the Birds of Prey,
Destroy the Rabbets, carry them away,
And some they tear, eat part, and leave the rest,
That this is Truth, Sir, here behold the Test,
Then shows some Bits of Skins torn for the nonce,
But he is the Fox indeed, and this the Sconce;
He Is worse than Vermin, and the Birds of Prey,
He carries Flesh, and Skins, and all away.
CLXVII. On Fiddlers.
Fiddlers do commeate from place to place,
To Weddings, Fairs, Cock-fightings and Horse-Race,
And such like Meetings, hoping there to find,
Some frolic Persons to them will be kind,
And Money give 'em, which their Hearts will cheer,
And please as well as Music does the Ear.
No Harmony like Money in one's Purse,
And where she is not, no Sadness can be worse:
Money's the Universal Anodyne,
Of more Delight than Music far, or Wine.
Wherever she comes, and stays, she will Comfort bring,
Allay their Grief, that they with Joy can sing.
CLXVIII. On Day-Labourers.
If you to let a Piece of Work desire,
The Labourer, that duly works for Hire,
Will take it, and then will labor very sore,
Two pence to get or Threepence, sometimes more
Than daily Labor comes to, so the Man
Works late and early, with all strength he can;
And when he gets his Wage it chears his Heart,
With Joy to's Wife and Children he will depart.
CLXIX. On Common Fowlers.
The Common Fowlers, which do make it their Trade,
In many Caw and Plash of Water wade;
In Hail, and Frost, and Snow, they in pursuit
Perambulate, in hopes to find Game out,
And all this Pains they take with willing Mind,
Because thereby Money comes in they find,
Which chears their Hearts and Minds when they her get,
Although their Hands and Feet be cold and wet;
Let Poverty or Riches be one's Fate,
Money's consolabund in every State.
CLXX. On Cow-herds.
The silly Cow-herd trots and runs about,
Both gathers in the Cows and drives them out.
For some small Salary the poor Man waits,
Money, though little, helps him in his Streights.
Money wherever she comes does Kindness show,
Comfort affords, pays all, or part Men owe;
Prevails with those that fierce and cruel are,
Where she appears, they further time will spare.
CLXXI. On Swine-herds.
The common Swine-herds Course is every Morn
To go about the Town, and wind his Horn;
Then People let their Hogs go out at large,
And the Swin-herd takes them all into his charge,
And into the Fields he drives them Day by Day,
And there attends on them the time they stay;
And when some signs of Rain or Storms appear,
Unto some Ditch or Hedge he then draws near,
And under Banks does sculk, till Night does come,
Then Is Army he draws up, and marches home:
And thus poor Man he spends his slavish Life,
Some Money to procure for him and 's Wife,
And Family, and though it be but small
He gets, its better far than none at all.
A little Money brings him some Relief;
But none at all affords him naught but Grief;
And when his Fair's but mean, he never complains,
But shapes his Mind according to his Means.
CLXXII. On Highway-men and Padders.
Some to get Money think no Pains too great,
Others for love of her lie, swear, and cheat;
But Highway-men and Padders for her sake,
Venture their All, and set their Lives at Stake:
And whether they by Horse or Foot do rob,
Perchance those they assault may do their Jobb:
But if they are neither slain, nor sometimes banged,
Yet if they are seized, they will surely then be hanged.
And though beforehand their hard Fate they know,
Yet they for Madam Money's sake do show
Such true Philargery they value not
Her to obtain, if they are killed on the Spot:
And few of them, though long time they have past,
But they are either killed or hanged at last.
Money is sure a Witch, that can entice
Fond Men to run just headlong into Vice,
And desperately to act and perpetrate
A Wickedness attended with such Fate,
Besides the Sin, does recompense their Pains
With hanging, sometimes gibbetted in Chains.
CLXXIII. On Clippers and Coyners.
The love of Money is so prevalent,
Some Men and Women are so fully bent
In quest of it, that they will undertake
To spoil the current Coin for Lucre's sake,
Clip, round, or wash, diminish or impair,
Or falsify, all which Offenses are
Treason by Law, and such as are descried,
And guilty thereof found when they are tried,
Must suffer Death, with scandal and disgrace;
On Sleds the Men are drawn unto the place
Where they their ignominious Exit make,
And Women's Doom is burning at a Stake.
Money such Persons surely does enchant
Whose Minds and Thoughts these Terrors do not daunt:
Her Charms are wonderful, that can require
Men to be hanged, Women to burn in the Fire.
CLXXIV. On Common Strumpets.
The lewd debauched Mercenary Miss,
For Money's sake will any Fellow kiss;
Lying, sitting, standing, what way you will,
She Will yield your lustful Humor to fulfill:
For Money's sake she shames not to be seen
In all the Postures showed by Aritene:
In Private or in Public, what cares she,
If all the Town be standing by and see.
The common Jilt in Cash takes more delight,
Than in the lustful Carnal Appetite:
It Is Money not the Man she does adore,
Money's the cause she turns a common Whore,
And prostitutes her self at any time,
Brute like, and has no sense of any Crime.
CLXXV. On Miners.
Miners that work below within the Ground,
For Coals, Lead, Tin, or Iron, often are found
Crushed by the falling in of Earth to Death,
Or Sulphurous Damps do rise, and stop their Breath.
The love of Money tempts them thus to venture,
For therein does their chiefest Comfort center:
Its their Alexicacon, and no Evil,
They fear, if Money's got, no not the Devil;
Money, poor Souls, they do so highly prize,
To compass her, all Dangers they despise.
Into the Abyss or darkest Pit they will sink,
Midst noisome Vapors down even to Hell's Brink;
Adventure Life and Limbs, and all that is dear,
For Money's sake banish all panick fear.
Men boldly undertake, and fearless are,
In things where Money falls unto their share;
The love whereof in some does so excel,
That for her sake they will headlong run to Hell.
CLXXVI. The Conclusion.
Now Muse farewell, for both to Age and Youth,
In these thy Bluntisms thou have told much truth.
Critics will mock, and scornfully will smile,
Thy Verse appears in such a vulgar Style;
It Is Ballad-Rhime, not Verse thou can profess,
But Truth appears best in a homely Dress.
If to the Ingenious thou had only writ,
In high and lofty Strains thou must have sit
Thy Verse, their quaint nice Fancies to have hit.
To the Mob as well as the Learned thou do declare,
So thou speaks home and plain to every Ear.
Thou do not mince, extenuate, or gloss,
But bare naked Truth thou plainly do disclose;
And though in general Terms thou have set forth
The same, yet there are some of greater worth
And Virtue, that above Temptation are,
Whom neither Gold nor Silver can ensnare
A dirty or unlawful thing to act,
Or their Allegiance suffer to be cracked:
And so no general Rule there is but has
Exception to it, as the old Proverb says:
But thou have fairly thrown each one their Lot,
Some thou perhaps has humored, and some not.
For some will laugh, some fret, and some deride
At that which thou to them have here applied:
But in this Case thou safely may conclude,
That none ever yet could please the Multitude.
CLXXVII. The Epilogue.
My Muse is tired, so has no more to say,
But that Pecuniae obediunt omnia.
FINIS.
A Lenten Litany. Composed for a Confiding Brother, for the Benefit and
Edification of the Faithful Ones.
FRom Villainy dressed in the Doublet of Zeal,
From three Kingdoms baked in one Commonweal,
From a gleek of Lord Keepers of one poor Seal,
Libera nos, etc.
From a Chancery-Writ, and a Whip and a Bell,
From a Justice of Peace that never could spell,
From Colonel P. and the Vicar of Hell,
Libera nos, etc.
From Neat's Feet without Socks, and three-penny Pies,
From a new sprung light that will put out ones Eyes,
From Goldsmiths-Hall, the Devil and Excise,
Libera nos, etc.
From two hou^s Talk without one Word of Sense,
From Liberty still in the Future-Tense,
From a Parliament long-wasted Conscience,
Libera nos, etc.
From a Coppid Crown Tenent pricked up by a Brother,
From damnable Members and Fits of the Mother,
From Ears like Oysters that grin at each other,
Libera nos, etc.
From a Preacher in Buff, and a Quarter-staff Steeple,
From the unlimitted Sovereign Power of the People;
From a Kingdom that crawls on its Knees like a Creeple,
Libera nos, etc.
From a Vinegar Priest on a Crab-Tree Stock,
From a Foddering of Prayer four Hours by the Clock,
From a Holy Sister with a pitiful Smock,
Libera nos, etc.
From a hunger-starved Sequestrator's Maw,
From Revelations and Visions that never Man saw,
From Religion without either Gospel or Law,
Libera nos, etc.
From the Nick and Froth of a Penny-Pot-House,
From the Fiddle and Cross, and a great Scotch Louse,
From Committees that chop up a Man like a Mouse,
Libera nos, etc.
From broken Shins, and the Blood of a Martyr,
From the Titles of Lords, and Knights of the Garter,
From the Teeth of Mad-Dogs, and a Country-man's Quarter,
Libera nos, etc.
From the Public Faith, and an Egg and Butter,
From the Irish Purchases, and all their Clutter,
From Omega's Nose, when he settles to sputter,
Libera nos, etc.
From the Zeal of old Harry locked up with a Whore,
From waiting with Plaints at the Parliament-Door,
From the Death of a King without Why or Wherefore,
Libera nos, etc.
From the French Disease, and the Puritan Fry,
From such as never Swear, but devoutly can Lie,
From cutting of Capers full three Story high,
Libera nos, etc.
From painted Glass and Idolatrous Cringes,
From a Presbyter's Oath that turns upon Hinges,
From Westminster Jews with Levitical Fringes,
Libera nos, etc.
From all that is said, and a thousand times more,
From a Saint and his Charity to the Poor,
From the Plagues that are kept for a Rebel in store,
Libera nos, etc.
The Second Part.
THat if it please thee to assist
Our Agitators and their List,
And Hemp them with a gentle Twist,
Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee to suppose
Our Actions are as good as those
That gull the People through the Nose,
Quaesumus te, etc
That it may please thee here to enter,
And fix the rumbling of our Center,
For we live all at Peradventure,
Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee to unite
The Flesh and Bones unto the Sprite,
Else Faith and Literature good night,
Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee O that we
May each Man know his Pedigree,
And save that Plague of Heraldry,
Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee in each Shire,
Cities of Refuge Lord to rear,
That failing Brethren may know where,
Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee to abhor us;
Or any such dear favor for us,
That thus has wrought thy Peoples Sorrows,
Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee to embrace
Our days of thanks and fasting face,
For robbing of thy Holy place,
Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee to adjourn
The Day of Judgment, lest we burn,
For lo! It is not for our turn,
Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee to admit
A Close Committee there to sit,
No Devil to a human Wit!
Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee to dispense
A little for convenience,
Or let us play upon the sense,
Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee to embalm
The Saints in Robin Wisdom's Psalm,
And make them musical and calm,
Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee since it is doubt
Satan cannot throw Satan out,
Unite us and the High-land rout,
Quaesumus te, etc.
A Satyr on the Modern Translators.
Odi imitatores servum pecus, etc.
By Mr. P -- r.
SInce the united cunning of the Stage,
Has balk'd the hireling Drudges of the Age:
Since Betterton of late so thrifty's grown,
Revives old Plays, or wisely acts his own:
Thumb'd Rider with a Catalogue of Rhimes,
Makes the compleatest Poet of our Times:
Those who with nine Months toil had spoiled a Play,
In hopes of eating at a full Third Day,
Justly despairing longer to sustain
A craving Stomach from an empty Brain,
Have left Stage-practice, changed their old Vocations,
Atoning for bad Plays, with worse Translations;
And like old Sternhold, with laborious spite,
Burlesque what nobler Muses better write:
Thus while they for their causes only seem
To change the Channel, they corrupt the Stream.
So breaking Vintners to increase their Wine,
With nauseous Drugs debauch the generous Vine:
So barren Gypsies for recruit are said,
With Strangers Issue to maintain the Trade;
But lest the fair Bantling should be known,
A daubing Walnut makes him all their own.
In the head of this Gang too John Dryden appears,
But to save the Town Censure and lessen his Fears,
Joined with a Spark whose Title makes me civil,
For Scandalum Magnatum is the Devil:
Such mighty Thoughts from Ovid's Letters flow,
That the Translation is a Work for two;
Who in one Copy joined their Shame have shown,
Since T -- e could spoil so many though alone:
My Lord I thought so generous would prove,
To scorn a Rival in affairs of Love:
But well he knew his teeming Pangs were vain,
Till Midwife Dryden eased his laboring Brain;
And that when part of Hudibras's Horse
Jogged on, the other would not hang an Arse;
So when fleet Iowler hears the joyful hallow,
He drags his sluggish Mate, and Tray must follow.
But how could this learned Brace employ their time?
One construed sure, while the other pumped for Rhyme:
Or it with these, as once at Rome, succeeds,
The Bibulus subscribes to Caesar's Deeds:
This* from his Partner's acts ensures his Name,
Oh sacred thirst of everlasting Fame!
That could defile those well cut Nails with Ink,
And make his Honor condescend to think:
But what Excuse, what Preface can atone,
For Crimes which guilty Bays has singly done?
Bays, whose Rose-Alley Ambuscade enjoined,
To be to Vices which he practiced kind,
And brought the Venom of a spiteful Satyr,
To the safe innocence of a dull Translator.
Bays, who by all the Club was thought most fit
To violate the Mantuan Prophet's Wit,
And more debauch what loose Lucretius writ.
When I behold the Rovings of his Muse,
How soon Assyrian Ointments she would lose
For Diamond Buckles sparkling at their Shoes.
When Virgil's height is lost, when Ovid soars,
And in Heroics Canace deplores
Her Follies louder than her Father roars,
I Would let him take Almanzor for his Theme;
In lofty Verses make Maximin Blaspheme,
Or sing in softer Airs St. Katharine's Dream.
Nay, I could hear him damn last Age's Wit,
And rail at Excellence he never can hit;
His Envy should at powerful Cowley rage,
And banish Sense with Johnson from the Stage:
His Sacrilege should plunder Shakespeare's Urn,
With a dull Prologue make the Ghost return
To bear a second Death, and greater Pain,
While the Fiend's Words the Oracle profane;
But when not satisfied with Spoils at home,
The Pyrate would to foreign Borders roam;
May he still split on some unlucky Coast,
And have his Works or Dictionary lost;
That he may know what Roman Authors mean,
No more than does our blind Translatress Behn.
The Female Wit; who next convicted stands,
Not for abusing Ovid's Verse but Sand's:
She might have learned from the ill-borrow'd Grace,
(Which little helps the ruin of her Face)
That Wit, like Beauty, triumphs over the Heart,
When more of Nature's seen, and less of Art:
Nor strive in Ovid's Letters to have shown,
As much of Skill, as Lewdness in her own:
Then let her from the next inconstant Lover,
Take a new Copy for a second Rover:
Describe the cunning of a jilting Whore,
From the ill Arts her self has used before;
Thus let her write, but paraphrase no more.
R -- er to Crambo privilege does claim,
Not from the Poet's Genius, but his Name;
Which Providence in contradiction meant,
Though he Predestination could prevent,
And with bold dullness translate Heaven's intent.
Rash Man! we paid thee Adoration due,
That ancient Critics were excelled by you:
Each little Wit to your Tribunal came,
To hear their Doom, and to secure their Fame:
But for Respect you servilely sought Praise,
Slighted the Umpire's Palm to court the Poet's Bays;
While wise Reflections, and a grave Discourse,
Declined to Zoons a River for a Horse.
So discontented Pemberton withdrew,
From sleeping Judges to the noisie Crew;
Changed awful Ermin for a servile Gown,
And to an humble Fawning smoothed his Frown:
The Simile will differ here indeed;
You cannot versifie, though he can plead.
To painful Creech my last Advice descends,
That he and Learning would at length be friends;
That he would command his dreadful Forces home,
Not be a second Hannibal to Rome.
But since no Counsel his Resolves can bow;
Nor may thy Fate, O Rome, resist his Vow;
Debarred from Pens as Lunaticks from Swords,
He should be kept from waging War with Words.
Words which at first like Atoms did advance
To the just measure of a tuneful Dance,
And jumpt to form, as did his Worlds, by chance.
This pleased the Genius of the vicious Town,
The Wits confirmed his Labors with renown,
And swear the early Atheist for their own.
Had he stopped here -- but ruined by success,
With a new Spawn he filled the burdened Press,
Till, as his Volumes swelled, his Fame grew less.
So Merchants flattered with increasing Gain,
Still tempt the falsehood of the doubtful Main;
So the first running of the lucky Dice,
Does eager Bully to new Bers entice;
Till Fortune urges him to be undone,
And Ames-Ace loses what kind Sixes won.
Witness this Truth Lucretia's wretched Fate,
Which better have I heard my Nurse relate;
The Matron suffers Violence again,
Not Tarquin's Lust so vile as Creech's Pen;
Witness those Heaps his Midnight Studies raise,
Hoping to rival Ogilby in Praise:
Both writ so much, so ill, a doubt might rise,
Which with most Justice might deserve the Prize;
Had not the first the Town with Cuts appeased,
And where the Poem failed, the Picture pleased.
Wits of a meaner Rank I would rehearse,
But will not plague your Patience nor my Verse:
In long Oblivion may they happy lie,
And with their Writings may their Folly die.
Now why should we poor Ovid yet pursue,
And make his very Book an Exile too,
In Words more barbarous than the place he knew?
If Virgil labored not to be translated,
Why suffers he the only thing he hated?
Had he foreseen some ill officious Tongue,
Would in unequal Strains blaspheme his Song;
Nor Prayers, nor Force, nor Fame should ever prevent
The just Performance of his wise Intent:
Smiling he'ad seen his martyred Work expire,
Nor live to feel more cruel Foes than Fire.
Some Fop in Preface may those Thefts excuse,
That Virgil was the draught of Homer's Muse:
That Horace by Pindar's Lyre was strung,
By the great Image of whose Voice he sung;
They found the Mass, it is true, but in their Mould
They purged the drosly Oar to current Gold:
Mending their Pattern, they escaped the Curse,
Yet had they not writ better, they would writ worse.
But when we bind the Lyric up to Rhyme,
And lose the Sense to make the Poem chime:
When from their Flocks we force Sicilian Swains,
To ravish Milk-maids in our English Plains;
And wandering Authors, ever they touch our Shore,
Must, like our Locust Hugonots, be poor;
I Would bid the importing Club their pains forbear,
And traffic in our own, though homely Ware,
Whilst from themselves the honest Vermin spin,
I Would like the Texture, though the Web be thin;
Nay, take Crown's Plays, because his own, for wit;
And praise what D'urfey, not translating, writ.
On Women.
I. Why Women were made.
WOman in the Beginning (as it is said)
To be an help to Man was chiefly made:
Then ought not Women much to be commended,
Who answer the end for which they were intended?
Women were made to help Men, so they do,
Some unto Sorrow, Grief, Diseases too;
Others do their kind Husbands help to spend
Their whole Estates; thus answer they their End.
Some help Men unto more than they were born
To have, (I mean) Acteon's Head and Horn.
II. Of what Woman was made.
Crooked conditioned Nature made her, when
She formed her of the crookedst Parts in Men:
Nature first framed her of a Man's Rib, she
Then cannot choose but a cross-grained Creature be.
And ever since (it may not be denied)
Poor Man has subject been to a Stitch in the Side.
Yet some there are, who in a grateful Mind,
Would foundly rib their Husbands, could they find
A good tough Cudgel, and make this their Answer,
They but restore what Eve stole from their Grandsire:
And it is a Reason too (as't has been tried)
A bad Wife sits so close t'her Husband's Side.
III. What they committed so soon as they were made.
No sooner made, but she runs into all
Mischief her self, then causes Man to fall:
And now that Judgment on their Sex is doubled,
They Are with a twofold Falling Sickness troubled.
IV. To what they are now likened.
Women in Love and Lust compared be
Unto a Pumice-Stone, for that we see
Is full of Holes; so they when once in Love,
Most hollow-hearted to their Servants prove;
In Love they like it are, 'cause they dissemble,
But when they Lust most, they it most resemble.
Play with a lustful Girl, and you shall see
How like unto the Pumice-Stone she will be,
Which way so ever you do her troul,
You Will find against you still an open Hole.
CHARACTER OF A Certain Ugly Old P --
-- Deformem and tetrum ante omnia Vultum,
Dissimilemque sui, deformem pro cute pellem,
Pendentesque genas, ac tales aspice rugas,
Quales, umbriferos ubi pandit Tabraca saltus,
In vetula scalpit jam matter simia bucca, etc.
Juven. Sat. 10. Assist ye nasty Powers
To describe him thorowout,
I Will dip my Pen in T --
And write upon a shitten Clout.
Tartaret. de modo Cacandi, p. 9.
NO Wonder if I am at a Loss to describe him, whom Nature was as much puzzled to
make. It Is here as in Painting, where the most misshapen Figures are the
greatest Proofs of Skill. To draw a Thersites or Aesop well, requires the
Pencil of Vandike or Titian, more than the best Features and Lineaments. All
the Thoughts I can frame of him are as rude and indigested as himself. The very
Idea and Conception of him are enough to cramp Grammar, to disturb Sense, and
confound Syntax. He Is a Solecism in the great Construction, therefore the best
Description of him is Nonsense, and the fittest Character to write it in, that
Pot-hook-hand the Devil used at Oxford in Queen's-College-Library. He were
Topic enough for convincing an Atheist that the World was made by Chance. The
first Matter had more of Form and Order, the Chaos more of Symmetry and
Proportion. I could call him Nature's By-blow, Miscarriage and Abortive, or
say, he is her Embryo slink'd before Maturity; but that is stale and flat, and
I must fly a higher Pitch to reach his Deformity. He is the ugliest she ever
took Pains to make so, and Age to make worse. All the Monsters of Africa lie
kennell'd in his single Skin. He Is one of the Grotesques of the Universe, whom
the grand Artist drew only (as Painters do uncouth ugly Shapes) to ^ill up the
empty Spaces aad Cantons of this great Frame. He Is Man anagrammatiz'd: A
Mandrake has more of Humane Shape: His Face carries Libel and Lampoon in it:
Nature at its Composition wrote Burlesque, and showed him how far she could
outdo Art in Grimace. I wonder it is not hired by the Play Houses to draw
antic Vizards by. Without doubt he was made to be laughed at, and designed for
the Scaramuchio of Mankind. When I see him, I can no more forbear than at sight
of a Zany or Nokes; but am like to run the Risque of the Philosopher, looking
on an Ass mumbling Thistles. He Is more ill-favored than the Picture of Winter
drawn by a Fellow that dawbs Sign-Posts, more lowering than the last Day of
January. I have seen a handsomer Mortal carved in Monumental Gingerbread, and
woven in Hangings at Mortlock. If you have ever viewed that wooden Gentleman
that peeps out of a Country Barber's Window, you may fancy some Resemblance of
him. His damned squeezing Close-stool-Face can be liken'd to nothing better
than the Buttocks of an old wrinkled Baboon, straining upon an Hillock. The
very Sight of him in a Morning would work with one beyond Ialap and Rhubarb. A
Doctor (I Am told) once prescribed him to one of his Parishioners for a Purge:
He wrought the Effect, and gave the Patient fourteen Stools. It Is pity he is
not drawn at the City Charges, and hung up in some public Fori^a, as a Remedy
against Costiveness.

Indeed by his Hue you might think he had been employed to that use: One would
take him for the Picture of Scoggin or Tarleton on a Privy-house Door, which by
long standing there has contracted the Color of the neighboring Excrements.
Reading lately how Garagantua came into the World at his Mother's Ear, it put
an unlucky Thought into my Head concerning him: I presently fansied that he was
voided, not brought forth; that his Dam was delivered of him on the other side,
beshit him coming out, and he has ever since retained the Stains. His filthy
Countenance looks like an old Chimney-piece in a decayed Inn, fully'd with
Smoke, and the sprinkling of Ale-pots. It Is dirtier than an ancient thumb'd
Record, greasier than a Chandler's Shop-Book. You Would imagine Snails had crawled
the Hay upon it. The Case of it is perfect Vellum, and has often been mistaken
for it: A S^riv^ner was like to cheapen it for making Indentures and Deeds:
Besides it is as wrinkled as a walking Buskin: It has more Furrows than all
Cotswold. You may resemble it to a Gammon of Bacon with the Swerd off. I
believe the Devil travels over it in his Sleep with Hob-Nails in his Shoes. By
the Maggot-eaten Surface, you would swear he had been dug out of his Grave again
with all his Worms about him to bait Eel-Hooks. But enough of it in General, I
think it time to descend to Particulars; I wish I could divide his Face, as he
does his Text; i. e. tear it asunder: It Is fit I begin with the most remarkable
part of it. His Mouth (saving your presence Christian Readers) is like the
Devil's Arse of Peak, and is just as large. By the Scent you would take it for the
Hole of a Privy: He may be winded by a good Nose at twelve-score; I durst have
ventured at first being in Company, that he dieted on Assa-foetida. His very
Discourse stinks in a Literal sense; it is breaking-Wind, and you would think he
talked at the other End. Last New-years-day he tainted a Loin of Veal with
saying Grace: All the Guests were fain to use the Fanatical Posture in their
own Defense, and stand with their Caps over their Eyes like Malefactors going
to be turned off. That too that renders it the more unsupportable is that it
cannot be stopped: The Breach is too big ever to be closed. Were he a Milliner,
he might measure Ribbon by it without the help of his Yard or Counter. It
reaches so far backwards, those that have seen him with his Peruke off, say it
may be discerned behind. When he gapes, 'twould stretch the Duchess of Cl --
to straddle over: I had almost said it is as wide as from Dover to Calice. Could
he shut it, the Wrinkles round about would represent the Form of the Seamens
Compass, and should he bluster, 'twere a pretty Emblem of those swelling
Mouths at the Corners of Maps, puffing out Storms. When he Smoaks, I am always
thinking of Mongibel and its Eruptions. His Head looks exactly like a Devise on
a Kitchen Chimney; his Mouth the Vent, and his Nose the Fane. And now I talk of
his Snout, I dare not mention the Elephant's for fear of speaking too little:
I Would make bold with the old Wit, and compare it to the Gnomon of a Dial; but
that he has not Teeth enough to stand for the twelve Hours. It Is so long that
when he rides a Journey, he makes use of it to open Gates. He Is fain to snite
it with both Hands. It cannot be wiped under as much as the Royal Breech. A Man
of ordinary Bulk might find shelter under it is Eves, were it not for the
Droppings. One protested to me in Raillery, that when he looks against the Sun,
it shadows his whole Body, as some story of the Sciopodes Feet. Another
Hyberbolical Rascal would make me believe, that the Arches of it are as large
as any two of London Bridge, or the great Rialto at Venice. Not long a-go I met
a one-leg'd Tarpawlin that had been begging at his Door, but could get nothing:
The witty Whoreson (I remember) swore that his Bow-sprit was as long as that of
the Royal Sovereign. I confess, stood he in my way, I durst not venture round
by his Foreside, for fear of going half a Mile about. It Is perfectly doubling
the Cape: He has this Privilege for being unmannerly, that it will not suffer
him to put off his Hat: And therefore ('it is said) at home he has a Cord
fastened to it, and draws it off with a Pully, and so receives the Addresses of
those that visit him. This I Am very confident, he has not heard himself sneeze
these seven Years: And that leads me to his Tools of Hearing: His Ears resemble
those of a Country Iustice's Black Jack, and are of the same Matter, Hue, and
Size: He Is as well hung as any Hound in the Country; but by their Bulk and
growing upward, he deserves to be ranked with the graver sort of Beasts: His
single self might have shown with Smeck and all the Club Divines. You may pare
enough from the sides of his Head to have furnished a whole Regiment of
Roundheads: He wears more there than all the Pillories in England ever have
done. Mandevile tells us of a People somewhere, that use their Ears for
Cushions: He has reduced the Legend to Probability. A Servant of his (that
could not conceal the Midas) told me lately in private, that going to Bed he
binds them on his Crown, and they serve him instead of Quilt Night-Caps. The
next observable that falls under my Consideration is his Back: Nor need I go
far out of my way to meet it, for it peeps over his Shoulders: He was built
with a Buttress to support the weight of his Nose, and help balance it. Nature
hung on him a Knapsack, and made him represent both Tinker and Budget too. He
looks like the visible Tie of Aeneas bolstring up his Father, or like a
Beggar-Woman endorst with her whole Litter, and with Child behind. You may take
him for Anti-Christopher with the Devil at his Back. I believe the Atlas in
Wadham Garden at Oxford was carved by him. Certainly he was begot in a
Cupping-Glass: His Mother longed for Pumpions, or went to see some Camel shown
while she was conceiving him. One would think a Mole has crept into his Carease
before it is laid in the Churchyard, and Rooted in it, or that an Earthquake had
disordered the Symmetry of the Microcosm, sunk one Mountain and put up another,
And now I should descend lower, if I durst venture: But I Will not defile my Pen:
My Ink is too cleanly for a farther Description. I must beg my Reader's
Distance, as if I were going to Untruss. Should I mention what is beneath, the
very Iakes would suffer by the Comparison, and 'twere enough to bring a
Boghouse in Disgrace. Indeed he ought to have been drawn, like the good People
on the Parliament House, only from the Shoulders upwards. To me it is a greater
Prodigy than himself, how his Soul has so long endured so nasty a Lodging. Were
there such a thing as a Metempsychosis, how gladly would it exchange its
Carcass for that of the worst and vilest Brute: I Am sufficiently persuaded
against the Whim of Prae-Existence; for any thing that had the Pretense of
Reason would never have entered such a Durance of Choice: Doubtless it must
have been guilty of some unheard of Sin, for which Heaven dooms it Penance in
the present Body, and ordains its first Hell here. And it is disputable which
may prove the worst, for it has suffered half an Eternity already. Men can
hardly tell which of the two will outlive the other. By his Face you would guess
him one of the Patriarchs, and that he lived before the Flood: His Head looks
as if it had worn out three or four Bodies, and were Legacied to him by his
Great-Grand-father. His Age is out of Knowledge, I believe he was born before
Registers were invented. He should have been a Ghost in Queen Mary's Days. I
wonder Hollingshead does not speak of him. Every Limb about him is Chronicle:
Par and John of the Times were short-Livers unto him. They say he can remember
when Paul's was founded, and London Bridge built. I my self have heard him tell
all the Stories of York and Lancaster upon his own Knowledge. His very Cane and
Spectacles are enough to set up an Antiquary. The first was the Walking-staff
of Lanfranc Archbishop of Canterbury, which is to be seen by his Arms upon the
Head of it: The other belonged to the Chaplain of William the Conqueror; was of
Norman make, and traveled over with him. It Is strange the late Author of M.
Fickle forgot to make his Sir Arthur Oldlove swear by them, the Oath had been
of as good Antiquity as St. Austin's Nightcap, or Mahomet's Threshold. I have
often wondered he never set up for a Conjurer: His very Look would bring him in
Vogue, draw Custom, and undo Lilly and Gadbury. You Would take him for the Ghost of
old Haly or Albumazar, or the Spirit Friar in the Fortune Book, his Head for
the enchanted Brazen one of Friar Bacon. 'Twou'd pose a good Physiognomist to
give Names to the Lines in his Face. I Have observed all the Figures and Diagrams
in Agrippa and Ptolomy's Centiloquies there upon strict view. And the other Day a
Linguist of my Acquaintance showed me all the Arabic Alphabet betwixt his Brow
and Chin. Some have admired how he came to be admitted into Orders, since his
very Face is against the Canon: I guess he pleaded the Qualification of the
Prophets of Old, to be withered, toothless, and deformed. He can pretend to be
an Elisha only by his Baldness. The Devils Oracles heretofore were uttered from
such a Mouth. 'Twas then the Candidates for the Tripus were fain to plead
Wrinkles and Gray Hairs; a splay-mouth and a goggle-eye were the cheapest
Simony, and the ugly and crippled were the only Men of Preferment. And this
leads me to consider him a little in the Pulpit. And there it is hard to
distinguish whether that or his Skin be the courser Wainscot. He represents a
cracked Weather-Glass in a Frame. You Would take him by his Looks and Posture for
Muggleton doing Penance, and paulted with rotten Eggs. Had his Hearers the
trick of writing shorthand, I should fancy him an Offender upon a Scaffold,
and them penning his Confession. Not a fluxt Debauch in a sweating Tub makes
worse Faces. He makes Doctrine as Folks do their Water in the Stone or
Strangury. Balaam's Ass was a better Divine, and had a better Delivery. The
Thorn at Glastonbury had more Sense and Religion, and would make more Converts.
He speaks not, but grunts, like one of the Gadarene Hogs after the Devils
entered 'em. When I came first to his Church, and saw him percht on high
against a Pillar, I took him by his gaping for some Iuggler going to swallow
Bibles and Hour-Glasses. But I was soon convinced that other Feats were to be
played, and on a sudden lost all my Senses in Noise. A Drunken Huntsman reeling
in while he was at Prayer, asked if he were giving his Parishioners a Hollow:
He has preached half his Parish deaf: His Din is beyond the Catadupi of Nile.
All his Patron's Pigeons are frighted from their Apartment, and he is generally
believed the Occasion. He may be heard farther than Sir Samuel Moorland's
Flagelet. Nay one damned mad Rogue swore, Should he take a Text concerning the
Resurrection, he might serve for the last Trumpet. And yet in one Respect he is
fitted for the Function; his Countenance, if not Doctrine, can scare Men into
Repentance, like an Apparition. Should he walk after he is dead, he would not be
more dreadful than now while he is alive.

A Maid meeting him in the Dark in a Churchyard, was frighted into
Phanaticism. Another is in Bedlam upon the same Occasion. I dare not approach
him without an Exorcism. In the Name, etc. is the fittest Salutation: Some have
thought the Parsonage-House haunted since he dwelt there. In Yorkshire ('it is
reported) they make use of his Name instead of Raw-head and Bloody-bones, to
fright Children. He is more terrible than those Phantoms Country Folks tell of
by the Fire side, and pretend to have seen, with leathern Wings, cloven Feet,
and sawcer Eyes. If he go to Hell (as it is almost an Article of my Creed he
will) the Devils will quake for all their warm Dwelling, and crowd up into a
Nook for fear of him.

THE TABLE.
Note, That the Figures refer to the Sections, and not to the Number of the
Pages.

A.
AGents to Regiments 46 Alehouse-keepers 100 Apple-Sellers 146 Apothecaries 92
Apprentices 123 Arms Painters 80 Astrologers and Nativity-Casters 36 Attorneys
and Sollicitors 15
B.
Badgers 120 Bakers 121 Barbers 73 Barge-men 91 Basket-makers and Sievers 138
Bailiffs 28 Bell-men 150 Booksellers 85 Petty Booksellers 114 Bowl-sellers 116
Bread-sellers in Markets, etc. 137 Brewers 71 Brick-makers 135 Butchers 76
Butter-Factors 106 Butter-Searchers 107 Bowle-sewers or Crammers 139
C.
Cabinet-makers 97 Cake-sellers 137 Carpenters 78 City Car-men 128 Common
Carryers 143 Carters 130 Petty Chapmen 132 Chief-Constables 48 Chimney sweepers
151 Clerks of the Crown and of the Peace 13 Clerks of Assize 14 Clerks to
Justices of the Peace, 42 Domestic Chaplains 17 Coach-makers 117
Hackney-Coachmen 127 Common Colliers 129 Clippers and Coiners 173 The
Conclusion 176 Conservators of Rivers 39 Constables 58 Church wardens,
Surveyors, etc. 55 Corn merchants and Malsters 108 Traveling Coopers 115
Cowherds 170 Common Cryers 147 Custom-Officers 30 The Court of Chancery 7
D.
Dancing-Masters 60 Divines 9 Doctors of Physic 57 Druggists 93 Dyers 70
E.
Excise-Officers 32
F.
Farriers 86 Fencing-Masters 59 Ferry men 90 Fiddlers 167 Fish-drivers 136
Country-Farmers 158 Fisher men 124 Foot-Courses and Horse-Races 43 Footmen 163
Common-Fowlers 169 Friendship and Acquaintance 52
G.
Gamesters and Gaming 44 Gardiners 160 Traveling Glass men 96 Country Glovers
94 Goldsmiths 66 Grocers 65
H.
Habberdashers 68 Hard ware-men 113 Herb and Root-sellers 140 Highway-men and
Padders 172 Higlers 133 Horse-Iockeys 119 Hostlers 126 Country Housewives 161
I.
Jack of all Trades 98 Iakes Farmer 153 Common Informers 37 Innkeepers 81
Iaylors 29 Iobbers of Cattle 109 Wicked Judges 10 Justices of the Peace 12
K.
Kennel-Rakers or Sweepers 154
L.
Day Laborers 168 Land Officers 21 Lawyers 11 The Longevity of Money's Regency
1 Linen Weavers 83 London Cries 156 Griping Landlords 38 Young Lasses 41
M.
Meal men 122 Old Men 50 Mercers and Drapers 69 Merchants 63 Messengers 35
Milliners 101 Millers 117 Miners 175 Mint-men 110 Money's Power in general, 3
Money's Regency in Universities, etc. 6 Money's predominancy in all Courts, 8
Oppressing Mortgag^es 47 Mountebanks 61 Money's Restraint of Currency 2
N.
Newsmongers 157 Nonconformists 18 Necessitous Persons and Misers 51
O.
Oatmeal-sellers in Markets 142
P.
Park-keepers 162 Parliamentary Elections 4 Paviours 87 Scotch Pedlars 105
Hawking Pedlars, 112 Persons in high and honorary Employments 5 Pewterers and
Brasiers 72 Porters, 149 Post-Boys 164 Traveling Potters 134 Players 49
Printers 102 Privateers 23
Q.
Quakers 20 Quarrels and Differences 54
R.
Rag-gatherers 155 Country Rope-makers 131 Romish Priests 19
S.
Sadlers 77 Salesmen ( 104) Country Salters 141 Sea Officers 22 Seal-keepers to
Sheriffs 27 Seamen and Land-Soldiers 45 Seamstresses 103 Sergeants at Arms,
etc. 31 Schoolmasters 56 Scotch Pedlars 105 Sextons or Bell-ringers 148
Skippers or Masters of Ships 24 Spiritual Court-men 16 Shooemakers 79 Stewards
33 Shepherds 160 Surgeons 74 Surveyers of Land 34 Swineherds 171 Sword-Cutlers
75 Common Strumpets 174
T.
Tanners 111 Tapsters 125 Tailors 67 Tinkers 139 Tobacconists 99 Trades,
Mysteries and Professions 62 Laboring Tradesmen 159 Truckers 104
V.
Vestry-keepers and Vergers 145 Vintners 69 Upholsters 88 Under-Sheriffs
Associates, etc. 26 Usurers 40
W.
Waggoners and Wain men 130 Warreners 166 Watermen 89 Watch makers 95 Public
Waits 144 Watchmen 152 Wine-Coopers 82 Young Wives and Girls 53 Witnesses in
Lawsuits 25 Woollen Weavers 84 Linen Weavers 83
FINIS.

