LOVE and WAR, A TRAGEDY.

Written by Tho. Meriton, Gent.

Demosthen. ex Orat. Bellum gloriosum, pace turpi optabilius est. LONDON,
Printed for Charle^ Webb, at the Bore's Head in St. Paul^ Churchyard, 1658.

Drammatis Personae.
A Berden, King of Bruzantia. Hollarro, the young Prince, his Son. Bellerrio, A
Duke his Nephew. Murgorus, two Courtiers.
Nercius,
Lords, subjects to King Aberden.
Yernomy, Fafrisius, Buzarain, Nevermo,
Quermero, a humorous fellow. Perpurgerus, his Companion. Celerinus, King of
Numenia. Burgargo, a General. two Lords.
Orestes, Sisterus,
two Captains.
Derisius, Gervoron,
Burnomoy, a valiant Soldier. Adrenimia, Queen to Aberden. Lerenica, a Lady of
honor. Histerica, her woman. Bardes to sing the Chorus, Soldiers. Attendants.
the Graces.
Aglaia, Thalia, Euphrosyne,

Scene. Bruzantia. To the truly Noble, Ingenious, Judicious Gent, And my most
esteemed Brother, Mr. George Meriton*
SIR,
YOu cannot favor the Book so much, as wonder at my presumption; nor I could
not have had the boldness, as to present it, but that the symphaticall nature
betwixt us did draw my Genius, as by a North Pole virtue, to make you the
Patron of these my endeavors; I wish the Praises were like Tearus streams, and
relish so in the Appetite, as to invite your serious eye to make pursuit
through it, gaining your favor so far (which is my sole Ambition) to rest
under the wings of your Piety and Learning, which having obtained, it may say I
merrily through the World, fearing neither Rock nor Quick-sand; for they are
like Castor and Pollux, to scour the carping Critics from it in their
censorious manner of guiding and directing: Now my entreaties (mixed with a
little hope) have made their Petition, which if they return with fertility, it
shall ever bind me to your virtues, in the chains of Amity with a Phrygian
knot, which to loose is impossibility in my heart; thus fearing no tempestuous
scorns, nor full mouth Borea's blasts of reprehension, because you are the
Pilot, stearing the Rudder of its weakness from all such dangerous shelves,
and wishing eternal honor to your virtues, is the hearty desire of,

Sir, Your most affectionate Brother, and humble Servant. Tho. Meriton.

The Prologue.
IF once is shown the glimering Star, whereby
Pluto is daunted, and great Jove knows why:
When by its circulation, driven course,
At last by passage, lights upon by force
Some watrish cloud, which by its structure foul,
Is obscured from men's mortal eyes, they houl
To see the radiall beams so quickly gone,
As if all vanish, relics thereof none:
Just in resemblance, so shall I produce
My future breathing, till some me conduce,
To see your sparkling, splendent, orient eyes,
Shining like Luna, Sol, Stars in the skies,
Viewing my Pigmie, if perchance there be
Pleasant looks in the Royal company
Of your bright Train, more Angel-like then she,
Apelles drew by art, yet could not be
So well as nature wrought her; that same look
Would purchase more, then I can with my Book,
For it would raise Ambition, and bereave
My fancy of its reason, to perceive
Nothing but a Chimaera, and thereby
Term my self new again if possibly;
But if in opposition, it appear
Just to the contrary, no looking cheer,
Nor smiling carriage, but then takes their place,
Frowns, discommending, and absurd disgrace,
Then I much like a Prisoner at the Bar,
Shall be dejected, flying hence and far
Do purpose to remain, as long as sense
I have to weep for this my insolence.
If story produce no laughter, nor the Wit
Laugh at my folly in so doing it.
LOVE and WAR, A TRAGEDY.
Act 1. Scen. 1.
Aberden, Yernomy, Fafrisius, Buzaraine, Nevermo, Drum, Trumpet, a Flourish,
Soldiers. Aber. Received with gladness still my Lords you are,
Gladly received, I say; we will suffer all
Our hands to be now numbed with sense, let fall
Our deadly swords; nothing in opposition
Stands, we hear, but the whole Universe
Endures in a paralectick posture; vast
Worlds did Julius C^sar conqu^r, yet never
Was able to withdraw our minds, but forced
To fly our summons; we will range the steepy
Bancks, those which with rudeness hide
Titan his rai^s, seek some terra in^^gnita,
Where men are absent, beasts may fulfill*
Our Warlike, yet not willful, intentions*
Let us find it out, that by the prospect
We Will gain the Victory, and surround the foe,
Drench their hot hearts, as we all else, you know.

Yer. None dare appear: but Numenia land
Is said to have a will, bent to withstand
Your Majesty's (dread Sovereign) Army, for
To know the right of Kingdoms, we abhor*

Faf. The same, great Aberden, I will confirm, that*
They did help with unknown, potent strength,
The last great Camp we raised* showing to them
Benign favors, so they took them for their friends,
No ^oe; which caused detard in winning the
Rich Trophies, that you overcame at length.

Aber. What? sure it cannot be; but if perchance
That they do act a matter so disliking
Me and mine, they shall not further^ trouble
Their dull brains to make a search in pursuit
After it; but I will so employ their
Grasping hands, to set all labor by, but what
Concerns the martial Banner, and bring it
Home to them; War, which treads dame Nature's
Cour^es, trampling under feet, her set
Delivered forms, shall disclose, enclose to
This Realm, strange unheard ^les. Numenia,
With the rest of former Victories, shall
Know my tribute; and I Will quickly see
Wherein they my great force do disobay,
Find them as far as stars does light the way.

Buz. Then let us make a rule, and raise a Camp,
Fall on them undiscreatly, and berdane
Their Forces of a time, in which they
Premeditating, may find Ammunition
To dissolve our Troops, and to disgorge
The obdure faculty of their sense,
Defraud them in the time, and send them all
To the native Earth, the Mother which they call,
And fitly may be termed so, and boiling
Blood into the air, by the meteorious form
Of it, a strange essence make, a full
Similitude betwixt, we foresee they
Purpose for to lead on; but let us go.

Aber. Pray know for what, and why you do so,

Nev. The thing is known, Aberden; yea, it is,
Great Sovereign.

Aber, See that the thing be fit,
And bear, within its self, the full prologue
Whereby it purposes to maintain its self,
For too rash Counsel often breeds within
A subject height, which may be called a sin,
And that in prodigality, then done
Beside its shifts, it can no other shun,
But come to ruin.

Yer. I, it is so, but this is not so bent,
Because, great King, we have Your Counsel in it.

Aber. But for I know, rash counsel does maintain.

Faf. Fear not that thought, for* it will prove most vain,

Aber. If it be so, yet danger may be with

Buz. It cannot be, it is a thing of mirth.

Aber. Your censure so the subject for to be.

Nev. Yea, that we do, that to eternity.

Yer. So, shall we move with freeness, till we come
To that same object, which we in delay,
Do stand most fearful of, hoyst ^ails
To it, search the triangular shapes
Within its Region, where all the Pole does count
Full fifty Degrees it does with height surmount,
Yet comes not near the torrid Zone, whereby
Our skins are scorched, and our flesh does fry;
We Will know the nature of Numenia's Land,
In what longitude, or latitude does stand.

Aber. We Will know my Son his resolution to
This great design, this overtaking of
(I hope it will not be so as I call or prove
In it) our strange unseeming enterprise,
In following that my subjects do devise.

Exeunt. Scen. 2.
Hollarro alone. Hol. Stentorian voices does surround my ear,
Echoing within the concave of the terrestiall
Ball, all doleful sighs does pierce my tender
Sense, of hearing; from those our spoils
Formerly obtained, and deeply groaning*
Bidding farewell to Neighbors and their friends,
With clamorous noyses of loath departing,
And still Bizantia stands, who feeds the blood
Of free born souls, who wishes nothing but
The element they move on; Oh spirits
Generous, who nothing else desire to be
Sepulchers for their falling lumps;
What, is it thought a vapor impure,
Of restless waters, can withdraw the fight
Of quick-sight fury, or the bellowing waves,
Stopped danger courses so, which gravel not
Below, but fly above, the sense perceiving,
And shall we thus decrepit rest at length
Which will accompanied be with phlegmatic
And cholerous humors, for to be drawn
Out by artificial manner, skill, and art,
As verity does us show, whose Turrets
In a Tapers manner gives light to all
Our Hospitality, and yet we are almost
Stupid, lulled with idleness, nothing but
Slumbring dreams does take abode and seize
Upon our faculties: rowse, rowse, your leaden sense,
Display your Arms, cleanse rusty swords amain,
Look out your Helmets, Coats, bring home again
Your lost deceiving follies, search them out,
And let not rust and canker turn their edge from
Shedding blood; let not the hymns of music
Dull your ears, let Drums and Trumpets sound
Still your intentions, until there be found
No vile lascivious fact with wanton ones,
Which brings dull hearts, and lingeringness in bones,
Hollarro's part does differ far from it:
They Will know as much, if they then defraud not
Their much infeebled hands, for th'star where I,
And under which my native time did come,
Did impregnate here in stout acts to be
As valor, rage, choler, blood, temper, free.

Adrenimia with Attendants* Adre. Hollarro Prince, my son and only joy,
The matter still stands in a doubtful way*
To whom it bend^, your judgment Prince, I pray,
Decides the cause, Aberdens fickle will
Runs hazard, yet on tiptoe^, whether the heads
Be mine or no.

Holl. Great Queen, you know,
I nere led my mind in opposition
To the same decree; let not de^oysterous
Humors so vail your discretion^ for
Aberden the King, cannot deny,
I Will undertake with temperance so far,
Without a self-disaster, to bring on
The purpose to a head, if you will detard
Procrastinate the thing which you have heard,
But to the same effect the cause to me's
Unknown.

Adr. Why, it is this, if pardon lead
The will of him, the subjects heads, who captives
Are, by legions of his forces might,
It Is the elixar of my diligence,
May be a sacrifice to me, I^m my hand
May have command of them, disposing with
At pleasures will, none challenge dare the same,
It is no crime, since reason does not blame.
If it does violate the Land, the Laws,
It Is soon amended where is known the cause,
Let nothing interpose the same, but try,
And gain my favor, least it come dearly.

Holl. And were it not sufficient to have all their
Bodies for your servitude, but in a fine
B^^eaving of their troubled lives, and to
Send them to some unknown coast, where all
New found discovered creatures and their souls
Does sleep, while you enjoy only vain
Pattern of a hairy scalp; sure reason
Should discover more then it, to please a
Fancy so with noysom shapes.

Adre. Hold you there,
The King, though private carried in it,
Devines as much, nay more; for surely it
By the discerning Jove was long foretold,
So waver not in will more this or that,
But bring the same.

Holl. Great Queen, your counsel is
A severe guide. I Will go i^ earth and sky.
Were twist together by a prodigy,
And all the foes with branded Lances met,
Making such airy sounds with swords, helmet,
That to the clouds does raise a clamor, so
By wounded souls which is deep (...) most low,
And all the sky with comets range their course,
I would not fail, no not by all their gorse,
But bring a sure certificate.

Exeunt. Scen. 3.
Belerrio, Murgorus, Nercius. Bell. My Uncles Palace is Apelles shop
Of living pictures, which are set in
No forms else but Ladies models.
The Palace is the Judges, Ladies Diamonds;
So it is a store, each Madam is an Angel.

Murg. I, counterfeit

Bell. Unheard of sound, who can dispose it so,
They that do enlighten dull natures eyes

Ner. Why, can it be so termed? Cupid is blind,
And it should follow his strange fashions.

Bell. Yet opposition rise, though fortune deem
The splendor of its rays, therefore to seem
In much less; oh that it could be said
She turned was to moory shape, (...)
It may not forth her worth so bright,
For in her breast carries concealed fire,
Which makes her fumes still by the flame aspire;
All else were rightly colored, but if she
Give elimation, they turn' quickly be
To Auro^a's blushes, none dare take its place,
What decent is, unless she first embrace
Their rosey color, but dejected are,
Her crimson lips does so excel them far.

Mur. Do then explain her, sure she may be known,
No fire there is, but by its smoke is shown.

Bell. Her splendent parts does so transcend clearness,
That by its supernatures work, it dazels all
Bright shining shadows; she is transparent,
No muddy form is placed in her, but she
Is the elixar of Virginity.

Ner. Divulge her then, she sure cannot be leare,
You count her so beyond the crystal clear.

Bell. No quick-sight apprehension can discern
The mould from whence she is took, nor delicacy
By all her pencil art demonstrate her;
Diana still grows shapelesse by comparison,
Yea all the Goddesses are immured by her,
None dare appear, nor in place come nigh her.

Mur. Oh sure she is invisible to be
Named in our presence, that know her may we*

Bell. In her you may discern Loves only face,
All Nymphs their parts, and that with comely grace,
A front dependent, eye much like a sloe,
Her lip a cherry, in her chin a bow;
Her breast like alablaster crimson rose,
Her waste like slender Pine disovered shows,
Her hair the tresses, on her neck like milk,
Display their pastimes like a twisted silk
Or threads of gold.

Mur. Still fomie passage lights in thy design,
Name her* that this discourse may be at fine.

Bell. What, stupid still, possessed with ignorance,
Not know her by these tokens I advance?
I Will spare no passage now to spend my breath,
To name the quintessence of a^^ the earth,
Lerenica she disposes of
My fickle will, and fancy at one both.

Ner. What she? how backward runs the course?
The time has been when opportunities
Has sought occasion in their properties,
By casting favors by her mush-red eye,
Deluding objects to sobriety.
To get the will of him, who intended
The Zenith of love where under it did
^est, should be prolonged further, casting
Aside those indisposed fight and tricks,
As vain, and whom does none regard.

Bell. The Styx, her mists does paraphrase your words,
Wherein grim Cerberus does bathe himself;
Let the same vapor rise, and by its stench,
Infuse an opiate virtue, there to dull*
My vital spirits, to cut the hair
Of danger's purpose, and whereby I shall
Receive a quiet death, for a vexed life.

Ner. Fear not,
A gilded bait shall entrap this Barbell,
We Will find her stratagems, devise a way
The filly blind boy knows not, the which shall
Employ affairs deserving worth a name
Of Chronolgoy, a cheat, or somewhat
May work effect with this same peevish brat.

Bell. Let hope go with that design to the end,
Methinks my top-sayls move with celerity,
I gain acuteness and agility;
Who ever did take arrogance in strength,
Or sound brave Nectars notes with Bacchus juice,
More freely then do I, must be more then
Mother Nature does put forth, sweep away,
Enclose within thy arms; oh Cynthia,
Thy master Titan's Candle, let not him
Praunce on his journey to the top of th'hill;
But curb his fiery trigon, suffer not
No more his fight till we have done our plot.

Mur. Though friendship promise more then strangeness does,
Deride not one, but do receive them both,
I Will bring whole fountains of newfound desires,
Which shall suck up the honey of your fires,
And flames of love: we go.

Exeunt. Scen. 4.
Celerinus, Bugargo, Orestes, Sisterus, Dirisius, Gervoron, Burnamoy. Cel.
Since time, tradition, forces against will
And all the Countries invitations,
Me to withstand Aberdens (...)*
Of choler, which at length consumes all what
It meets with, whose vast supportment would
Not subsist, but be demolisht* and top
Submissive to its feet, know if let rest,
Sloth would enter course, yet Fame not be
Ejected, your valor still would ^^^gne,
And, Bugargo, if you maintain our right;
Supporting all our cause, and not detarding
Shame, but Derisius, Gervoron, both
Take part with him, you shall have recompense,
I stand obliged all due to common sense.

Burg. Courage strikes my resolute contentment
High ( Celerinus) immense vast Trophies,
A Diadem, be purged from my thoughts;
If all the prises then were equal poysed,
And shared the lot, deciding judgment would,
As me possessed, term trouble: for a Peasant
Without delay transported to a Prince
Were a too great Hyperboly, I Will undertake.

Cele. All grateful motions attend then your soul,
You are the head, we members wait there on;
And what composure may be thought upon
By loving deeds, all experientiall skill
May be put forth, or sacrifice thy will.
Stand firm to it, inform us then no more,
Affection lead, thou shall have gold or ore*
I wave my self, though special charge commands,
Either gain Kingdom, or else lose your Lands;
What spoils can blind, or mask our piercing glance?
What keen struck sword, black armor or the lance,
Whose sight corrupts the Element, which pare
Contained in its self the cold moist air,
Put forth betwixt my eye, all my desire
To know the day it is that thou do require.

Deris. What, is it thought that King Aberden will
Hoyst sails to us, dreads he, nor land, nor soil,
Which lends a death, a murror, and a broyl
To their inhabitants, they will nere wait,
Pitching a leagure to overcome the wall
They are bent against, which shares with Nile,
The Alps would fair imprint a backward call,
If once their eyes cast upwards be.
Burgargo, do command my legion, when
Fear smites thy arm, fire Beacons, and let
Drums sound loud.

Ger. Let Bizantia's Monarch pursue the way,
He has at length begun; for Morpheus
Does bear more frequent rule with leaden Mace,
Then Mars with valor carried in his face.
Here Is no determed theme, by whose oppose
May vent hot sparks of manhood from our
Loins; for as quick sight with well wrought temper,
Gives a gloss to affect the matter; so
Often experience by assiduate practice,
Makes that which is uncord then most prompt*
Though love is strong, yet Cupid by might
Combines with Mars a steely shirt though hard,
Yet oftentimes is safer then a linen frock;
My blood does buble, when is brought before
Idle disposed fashions, martial blades;
Seeking, lost nothing, all armor proof, yet
Useless are, which would possess with a
Fear, they stand in danger of each other;
Nor can the same be naught but great,
They raise a Camp postreeme with us, when as
The East and West does seem a distance, not
A foot in length, being fadomed by their might,
Since then so large our enemies be found,
Our glory still grows greater by their sound,
What answer you?

Orest. It Is right, renowned friend
In prime to careful be of our Sovereign
In maintaining right, next to this City
And thy Country good, if truth thou binds in
That same Gordian knot.

Sist. Then bold faced Champions, leviated from the blood
Of well tried Princes, you may discern the
Blast, if by prevention not made sure,
Cause ruin over this Land, if flint and sie:
Being met, expel their fiery beams;
Well may your generous souls inflaming
With valor, betwixt rough danger and
Mild sloth, let fly over sleepy hill, until you
Are conducted to the contrary by grim death.

Bur. Since cause is equal, victory cannot be
Debard from us, and no ways misery
Take here abode.

Cele. Lets then beguile the time no more by talk,
But see your guard and front be sure,
Call over in summons, display your Colors,
Flags, Banners, Pendents, Streamers, see your men
Be right for th'cause, great General Bugardo.
When that is done, I Will cause my sacred Priests
To move the gods, and all their hymns set forth
For your welfare, all what can thought be worth.

Exeunt. Scen. 5.
Quermero, Perpurgerus. Perp. Why so, since time delivers otherwise to be.
Stretch forth thy arm, it is naught but exercise
Brings on the same.

Quer. Oh hold then pray you there;
I Will stretch my hand, if fortune will give leave.
But shall not be to kill, but to maintain
Life by its help.

Per. How strange to common sense!
Draw out thy sword I Will show thy postures;
What if a man should challenge field with thee?

Quer. Then I should dye.

Per. Before the blow did come?

Quer. I quickly sure, the sight's as good as blows
With me; but since your Treaty is to draw,
[He stands in a foolish posture.] I stand hear guardian of my self.

Per. See, see,
If It were possible, he would invite Heraclitus
To laugh: I dare swear Plato might read
A piece of Philosophy in his posture;
Stand up man with a full breast, surely
Mr. Quermero, your breech and feet are
[Quer. nods his head. At difference --

Per. Hold up your hand, and stiddy; how like you
It -- What, no answer, but by conjecture
Postures; he shakes his head, it is well, hold up
I say -- hold in I say this breech, oh
[Quer. makes a face. Pretty face; but if you will make no answer,
It is my means shall force you;
[Per. beats him, and he runs away and lays down his Sword. What none -- what
none -- what none.

Quer. Gently good cousin, my bum is addle,
Have care you break no Eggs; for if you do,
The sent perfumes the room* beside all
Myrrh or Spiknard.

Per. Why answer you not?

Quer. Let pity force compassion* it is
My weak stomach and foolish condition,
The nakedness of sword lends such terror
To my heart, reflects amazement to my
Eyes, that while supported by my hand, no
Word can utter the cause I it dismissed.

Per. Oh senseless pagan, take it up again;
[He takes his sword. What, afraid, here take it, try thy valor,
Shake thy weapon* now I Will draw mine.

Quer. Then I Will
Put up.

Per. Hold, stay thy hand, and let us two enclose.

Quer. I wish Aberden had no greater foes.

[They clatter their swords Per. Hey bravely done, this is all, well manned.

Quer. Hey-day, methinks I am a second George for
England, have at you then.

Per. Stand further off.

Quer. Stand further off.

Per. Have care --

Q. Stand further off.

Per. You Will run in danger, hazard the little life
You have* put up, put up.

Q. Stand further off.

(He cuts him.) Per. What now, draw blood, brave Champion,
My joys still grow the greater, wind whistle
Forth thy fame, like sturdy Oak thou stand^
All other are but shrubs, my blood cries blood
Again, stand Guardian still.

Quer. Stand further off.

(He hollowes.) Per. Your dexterous art works opposition to
My termed design, none can then curb your will,
But what must spring from Bizantia.

Quer. What, kicks thou? stand further off.

Per. The pumel of my sword is lost, thou art like
A Crocodile, pursuing flies, flies pursuing
Your hardy courage, rises more and more,
I hope to see the Land all in a gore;
My spleen now rises, works in the concave,
A desperate motion, nothing shall thee save.

Quer. I fear neither friend nor foe, stand further off.

Per. I purpose now to put in motion some,
Beyond capacity, strange unheard act;
So then thou goes.

(He trips his heels up) Quer. Oh, oh; What, my back broken by a fall,
[Murther, murder. But stir not till he is gone, make much,
Foster what I have got* perchance the fact
Is such, that quickly will not go.

Per, Lie still,
When sense bereaves thee of thy will, conjeal'd
By a known accident, enforced by that
Works invisible, a coard yet stays
His friend, favoring by course what license
Give it is aid, I fetch attendants to wait
On thee.
Exit Perpur.
Quer. Attend thy self, see that thou do;
Is he gone? Sword, where art thou? Hay, hay,
[He rises by degrees. What, as lively as thy Master is, oh
How the flesh corrupts thy edge; stay, is
Perpurgerus gone? I Will lie close still, may
Be he stands perdue, but gone or no, I Will
Up, and see my wound; hay boys, none, none, none.
[He leaps. Oh stay here; what is this? oh deadly thrust,
[He finds a hole in his Stocking. Fetch a Chyrurgion, I cannot go
But must because am forced; Oh, oh, oh, oh.

[He halts from off the Stage* Exit. Scen. 6.
Hollarro. Hol. A Conquest lost for want of obedience;
That superstitious terror, which with
Force con^atenates the will^ of natural
Bears, and hangs its Flag, asign of true
Discretion, as making votes, sole
Recreation in naught but prayer,
And offering sacrifice, still stands in
Behoving power, imploring the aid of
Sublime Gods or Deities; a decree,
Not challenged by a right, then let us la^d
Them according to their deserts, we shall receiv^
Pledges of felicity, and cancel out
Our black transgressions; thus should it, none
In exchange betwixt them and us, for what
^Ascends when we descend, threefold descends
^Again when we asc^nd; this same it will,
By graduation, form a ladder passing
From the celestial quier to the terrestiall ball:
And now nere want pleaded more her
Cause than at this present; my care shall
Be to see it fulfilled, yet my Mother Queen
Stays out her time, my duty shall wait
Leisure of her coming.

Adrenimia, sola. Adr. Well, Prince Hollarro, I see you are not perverse
You wait my leisure; I^^ recompense,
My ears hang at your tongue by a symphaticall
Attention, striving with priority, who to
Super-excede; the ^enor by your voice will give
The Victory, what answers King Aberden?

Hol. Most mighty Queen, my intreates did play
Their course as Fortune thought it fit,
Bent with a resolution not to return with
Fruitless answers, until thought possessed
My tender judgment, they had gained
Anger from King Aberden; yet like a
Valorous Champion stood his ground, not
Flying at the first, but reply over the
Same again; but when the fury ended, mildness
Did deliver, he would conceal.

Adr. What, not the head, the least request could be;
Why, when the swift long-winged faul^on play^^
Her game, her recompense shall be the head;
What so e're her prey be, he would conceal, O
If King would favor me, with majesty
Of his great presence I'uld know the reason why.

Hol. Great Princess, I Will see.
Exit. Hol.
Adr. So go thy way.

Aberden, Hollarro, Yernom^y, Fafrisius, Buzaraine, and Nevermo. Aber.
Adrenimia, you sent for me, I know the cause,
Grief still does poyse the libra of my will,
By a just weight, the beam is leavel, but to
Whom give down (it is yet reserving power)
Is unknown, you plead for it, ten thousand
Pleads against; you are my Queen, all
Other are my subjects; you save my name,
The other save my life: to whom should it
Give down? pray Lords aid you me in it;
She pleads for head of those that captive be,
The request is small, though much denied by me;
Are you content? then I shall notwithstand;
Do you deny? then I will leave the Land.

Hol. Your Majesty Astrea yet much courts,
She with her grasped hand, and severe looks,
With scale and sword makes in your mind her
Sphere, yet will it enter into the hearts
Of your subjects, and deem t'the clemency of a King,
Grant it the Queen, great Sovereign*

Yer. The Prince answers for all.

Abe. Are you so all agreed?

Yer. Faf. Buz. Ne. We are all, brave King.

Hol. The game is up.

Aber. My Queen, the only will of him, who ever (...)
Thy sole refuge, does grant with ^ervency,
The subjects heads that taken are by us;
They are thy ransom, take you them when you please;
My Ships have gained upon the angry Seas,
Dancing levalto, my courage not refuse,
To do the same, thy pleasure wills to choose;
Therefore, brave Princess, this thy self-design
Shall be a virtue, not in least a crime;
So take it freely, take it as a bliss,
[He kisseth the Queen. Before my subjects, confirm it with a kiss.

Omnes, Continuance long we wish.

Adre. My King, my Monarch, what can I term thee less,
In granting thy poor Queen a happy bliss?
I thank thy high and mighty power for it,
Thy subjects too, I Will frame a thing what is fit,
Or best becoming all the tedious sense,
Of your blessed wills for this your kind presence.

Exeunt. Scen. 7.
Chorus, 1. Song
1.
Shout aloud,
Let a cloud
Distill rain
To the plain,
1.
While with mirth
We on earth,
Mercy, Peace,
Each embrace:
Let him want mercy, peace, and voice,
That cannot play when we rejoice.
3.
It combines,
And inclines
Man and beast
To a feast.
2.
And Jove sounds
To their rounds,
Making sport
To their sort.
Let him want mercy, peace, and voice,
That cannot play when we rejoice.
3,
Mars put down
To a room
Lower then
Worst of men.
3.
Forced to be
There is he
With relief
Pini^g grief.
Let him want mercy, peace, and voice,
That cannot play when we rejoice.
4.
It Is a time
Rowls of wine,
Follow game
The self same,
4.
Go about
Till they roue
Fancies of
Those that quaff^;
Let him want mercy, peace, and voice,
That cannot play when we rejoice.
5.
Within this
All Is a bliss,
Not a sin
Is within,
5.
But all joy
Naught dist^oy
The least mite
Of our right;
Let him want mercy, peace, and voice,
That cannot play when we rejoice.
6.
Ceres with
Her green sheaf
In the morn
Brings in Corn,
6.
As the sky
All does die,
Lands and streams
With light beams;
Let him want mercy, peace, and voice,
That cannot play when we rejoice.
Song 2.
1.
The time is all well-nigh spent,
Fury begins to rage,
All to War they a^e fully bent,
Nothing else will assuage.
2.
Now Joves past^mes must give way,
Both man and beast must fear,
Mars must both rule and bear the sway,
It whistles in my ear.
3.
Those that mount even for to pass,
Their time in Taverain,
Must look to keep a Fort at last,
Regard their Sovereign.
4.
Ceres dismissed is with that
She has with labor hew'^,
Turning her with fame in her lap,
Drums sound another tune,
Exeunt* Act 2. Scen. 1.
Lerenica, Histerica. Ler. DIsplay my tresses, see decent places
Become their shapes, withdraw the straggling
Hairs, reduce them to a set form.

Hist. It Is done.
Behold, delicious, sweet face't Hymen's day,
And what your will is with acceptance pleased
To be, my purpose was to have took labor,
In conveying you to some chaste Nunnery,
Where all refreshment of a doleful day
Should be low sighs; but your mind is turned
You in its place receive a Palace bright,
Where Diadems come to a grasping hand,
Such riot by a fury is employed,
That reason would conclude (if sense guide not)
That walls and houses were all eeven ground,
And by it fumes sent by an airy help,
Draws a curtain betwixt friends and foe,
And no other music practiced,
But clamours from both wide and shril-sound throats,
As't were a ransom to a Victory,
The cause whereof Bellerrio counts you fair.

Lere. Had you by favor obtained the good will
Of Duke Bellerrio, and no outraging
Carriage by a mysterious form, metamorphos'd
The design, but expedition wrought with
Nature so, that in the passage of affection,
You by discretion wrought to the object,
Combined with a smile, following by track,
Or by tradition, to the wonted place,
All the Nuptial Rights that are wished for,
To present to the view a happy morn,
As Bridegrooms morrows, Sack-posset, and beside,
A thing not to be named.

Hist. Oh! My blood is young.

Lere. It would have favored time, so as an hour
Rest, when waken all the joys b^ing past,
And what did boil by a lascivious lust,
Would cooled be by a dull appetite,
You may protest when tall Bellerrio,
Did by his own known Counsel hide
Within my soul a treasure not corrupt.
In those consenting silent times he moved,
Was but a gliding beam to Sol his self,
Which by its fulness brings on this malady;
But now renouncing those bad infections,
Receives by means some vital Spirits in,
To bid defiance to those false allurements.

Hist. It were too hard, you speak not like a Siren,
For beauty, shape, with modesty, if tyrants all withstand,
are invitations to Venus Courts,
The efficacy therein by which they bear,
If were abrap'd, the Academy of Love were gone;
Nay if by nature possibly I could
Be turned a Man, if Icie temper seized
Upon my limbs, and put to prospect as
One wanting soul, the like reward, also
Hopeful enterprise, would then regenerate,
As I have hear-said, calor naturalis in my veins;
Nay if Midas his wish, with Iasons golden fleece,
Put to redeem your same beauteous piece,
Yet all would prove too vain; for you are such,
And have like virtues, both in least and much;
I cannot so my self so full express,
As if a man I were I do confess,
For then I should enlarge at every word,
And here for three, three hundred then afford.

Lere. Believe me, Histerica at this time does pierce
My understanding a thought of great belief,
That he prefers you to a place so high,
To be the prologue to his enterprise;
But by his carriage he should be what wise,
(And if he be) he should have took more care,
Than to send such Orations as these.
Learning is not a bait fit for Women's stomachs;
Rather by entreaties, must persuade, and
Fostered Muse, than any Tullian phrase, or
Homers lines, you are too high in your design,
And withal too tedious, away, away,
Be sure your words are not in office, like
Compelling swords, but turn their calling to
Rebounding echoes; they are air, and so
They vanish, and does not enter my soul;
And if by lot he chooses you again,
Tell him from me he is not wise.

Hist. Too hard
Nature to work upon, and by temper,
Was not first decreed to be a woman;
For women are soft, you carry an opposition:
For men to love, you stand against the cause,
But it is no matter; now Bellerrio comes,
[Enter Beller. He Will speak himself.

Scen. 2.
To them Bellerrio. Bell. My only thoughts, thou art my Diamond that
I daily wear, and when my eye is cast
Upon its splendour, its turned a min^ of gold;
When crystal beauty ushers in her train,
And Ruby color fetched from the Indian mine,
Does act their quarrels in a lovely face,
Whose cheeks are Roses, brow a comely mace,
So Paris joy'd, when he fe^ch't Helen home;
So Ulysses joy'd, to see his sweet hearts loom;
So Hippomenes joy'd, when he the Apples got;
So Ae^ea^ joy'd, when saved, it was his lot,
So, and beyond all that, rejoiced he,
(Except your self) obtained by a decree, the fairest of yo^^ex;
Nay, these are naught, in thought but vain deceit^,
Mine is the substance, these are only baits,
Not in the least, derived from a name;
Mine Is pure and perfect, their's is void of shame.
Naught can by artificial art be brought unto,
More decent then pure Lerenica's hieu.
It Is you, it is you, your sex I honor still,
You above rest, in you my only will
Has free beatitude, content and life.
All things what else, that is then void of strife,
I will endure for to maintain the cause
Of your brave sex, and Champion in the Laws,
That concerns you and yours, who perfect is,
Sole happiness, a thing beyond all bliss,
Let me embrace your will.

Lere. Illustrious Duke, it were an injury
Enforced by me, and I should by liberal
Freedom violate the means of your true amity,
Not concluding with a favorite, the
Purpose was my own decree, you did
Display their flames so in their ardency
Of generous contemplations, that
In circumference of its boundless hope,
No room was left for me to express
My self in equal balance poysed your worth,
But with a back-recalling sound of love,
Made a retreat not worthy of the same,
And with cherishing thoughts that pleasure
Might be filled, and no disliking taste rise
From its stench, you for to term me
Most unworthy of such bright enterprises.

Bell. Alas your answer is indisposed now,
Do but resolve me how it would become
A Peasant to deny a Prince, a martial man;
Women fine smiling shows, surely I should
Condemn my self as guilty, one stupifi'd by art,
If that I should think so; come come,
Your words does not diminish, but give aid
To my dull hopes of a brave Victory.

His^. Madam if leave may have so much freedom, hear
This time, to help the case, give me a word,
A Dialogue is good, when there is three persons;
The Duke speaks fair, not sending his words
As if they dealt more cruel by sighs and
Sieges, more tempestuous than storming
Neptune's blast; Or as if he intended
Batteries against your beauties favor.
But with a comely grace, understood of
Sweetness, and smiling passage; withal, a
Brave decorum, it would pierce an Adamant,
Make restless motions, calm, serene and clear,
And in stern looks where fury has before
Took potent place, 'twould quickly extinguish all.

Lere. No want here is of foul conspiracy,
A problem sure, and that invisible too
Contained therein, no new found art can be
By stars or reason, or interpreter,
So quick-sighted in the way of these strange
Politic notes; to lay it open, or
Divulge the same, it must be silence with
Perseverance thereof, who is the spouse
Of long-sought mystery, reveal this same;
How can it be that you should both join in
The same broad channel of deliverance?
As if slit-looks should reason so the case,
To be nunciate betwixt their tongues,
Histerica keep silent in these hours,
Bellerrio I Am not worthy to be yours.

Bell. What still persuaded so, you transform it,
And where you think conspiracy to be,
It is not so, but the Oracles means,
Delivered to our ears, the cause is right,
Come bring no critical point, no posture of
Confusion to my maladies, be more mild,
You deserve all, I single you from the rest,
Because an Angel, and a Virgin blessed.

Exeunt. Scen. 3.
Celerinus, Orestes, Sisterus, Burnomoy Cele. It is decreed, the business
pursues the cause.

Orest. My Liege, the post of quick known news
Did come, not knowing your Majesty's
Privy Chamber, to my hands, he being
Accompanied with many conditions
Of King Aberdens will, and the fuel
That now maintains the quarrel betwixt us
And him, sent to your Highness presence,
Did leave then to your best times consideration*

Celer. Are they now present?

Orest. They are, my Liege.

Cele. Read them, I Will attend.

Orest. Aberdens Conditions of this waging War, sent from Bruzantia to
Celerinus, King of Numenia.

Since all the Regions
Under Nothern Pole,
Stretch forth their
Distance as far as they can,
Does do obedience, (not
One does condole)
Unto the Country and
Bruzantia's man.
Send yearly tribute,
And their daily vows
Unto their Gods to
Prosper our success.
That by the clamor of
Their open mouths,
We have a music that
Beyond all bless.
It is the purpose and
The only care
Of great Aberden to
Have you do so;
And that hereafter
You do not despair
To do the like, and to
His presence owe.
If you refuse, his ships
Are all rig'd for
The Ocean waves, and by
A prosperous gale;
To sally out and come
Unto your shore,
Before you think his
Ships be put to sale;
Therefore consider, take
A serious time,
Regard your cause, to
Whom it should then bend,
Do not then waver, follow
Straight a l^ne.
To have Aberden either
Foe or Friend:

Sist. Put it up, its read, enclose the lines,
A bold design to such a powerful name.

Cele. His usurping grace strives too too high,
Who swells with blood of lost innocent ones,
Which will by vacuation prove a gall,
He cannot carry manhood for a praise
Of Warlike courage as the freeborn souls
For country, good, and health, without more time;
My mind is fixed, no other fancy takes
My genius, but send a daring challenge
To his will.

Bur. It is right, dread Sovereign,
My never tired yet hand shall bring with it
Vermillian hue, when 'se're return, and I,
As long as strength does give its aid,
Withstand their bold attempt.

Orest. My mind by looks did so much answer him,
They were so fixed by fury in my brow.
I slight his threatening lines with spitting fume,
We can set envy up as well as he,
Upon a banner tossed, and make him know
'Twas rash without a Council chose,
Thus answers him, Orestes.

Sist. The Chaos was my Mother, so to Chaos
Will return, e're I be thought base in a
Pedigree, my mind stands to their will.

Celer. So,
Hector by way never gained such fame, as we,
By this dread undertaking; but before.
We force a Camp, I shall engagement bring
Upon your souls, that you a solemn vow,
By this my signature of all Numenia,
To stand your colors, as long as flesh or
Bone, and blood by circulation, keeps dame
Nature in, and fight for him, (my self the
Meaning is) as breath has interal passage,
And then postreme, to kill who is e're you take;
See that you do confirm.

Omnes. Long live Celerinus King.

[They bow and kiss the Signature on his hand. Celer. Well said, brave noble
souls,
But before we for leagure do provide,
We Will know our Generals will and Captains too,
So Burnomoy bring them then into presence,
[Exit Burn. And things right managed with a discreet will,
Brings good well hap, and very seldom ill;
For if the case be plain, and take no heed,
Often ruin comes by that same bad misdeed.

Scen. 4.
To them, Burnomoy, Burgargo, Derisius, Gervoron. Burn. Your command, great
Prince, is here fulfilled.

Burg. Your business, stout Liege.

Celer. It runs by Cypreans fields, Br^zantia's plain,
By a spectatious sight, and information,
A Paradise to show whose in, beyond,
The ^agus fragments go, by Poets famed to be
Paved with a Pearl, her grace surrendering to
The Queen of beauties pride Chlo^is with her
Decency, strikes admiration to the insatiate
Soyls, to see themselves by Autum's clusters
So pressed down, and cooling Rivers which with
Melodious tunes sing by the woody banks,
While they with as well pleasing noyce,
Whistle like Orpheus reed, Ti^an in
Aestivious time^, when torrid heat has power,
Dismisseth night, and gives day the full hour,
Of number twenty four; then Burgargo,
This Region (which I named) by situation,
Transcends the metropolis of every Nation,
I stand defiance with a barbarous call,
I purpose to choose you my General.

Burg. When sense does rave beyond its bounds, why then
There is no reason that we should be men;
Let sense and reason scorn my only state,
When I deny to govern this by fate,
Which has been separated from the rest,
By Jove his hand, and he to be the guest
That it should entertain; this I Will that which
Gives livelihood, and makes the inhabitants rich,
My hope is fixed upon, and firmly too,
That sacred Gods will aid and fortune show,
Because we stand in our defense, not lust
To have a War; but this our cause is just,
We stand for right, not what is got by pelf
For lives, for wives, who are our second self;
It Is pity that this Nation should go down,
And save your Majesty, none ought to wear the Crown,
Except your self, who wisely with your hand,
With voice gives leave, with that their force with-stand,
Let them display their colors, black visage, so
unseemly sight, with plaited hair you know,
Much like a Horses main, which gives a light,
They are savage creatures, special in the night,
When skies become their favor; let them come,
I Will be your General till day of doom.

Cel. Your answer's good, they are both rash and rude
In judgment, doing actions, and before
Their nature be by valor curbed so,
They Will never rest silent, but stratagems
Inventing still, though with grief and amazing
Flashes bring a float of destruction
With whole waves of sorrow to their pedigree,
My breast does breathe not with a fair clear passage,
Because corruption grows from nomination of
Such hellish heathens; the Numenia's Land
They strive to make their prey, and spoil of it;
It Is not the fear of their great potent arm,
It Is not Aberden with his hellish charm,
It Is not their Chariots with their Iron wheels,
It Is not their Ships with their well pitched keels,
It Is not the fierceness of their nature soul,
It Is not the savagenesse of their grim soul,
It Is not the words of their well threatened (...),
It Is not the strokes with which they make their noise,
It Is not the armor that they daily wear,
It Is not the colors wrought with silver clea^,
It Is not the conditions that they all sent,
It Is not the words that they pleased to put in it,
It Is neither this, nor that, shall work so fast,
But I will fight their fury to the last.

Deris. Your answer's like your self, noble, and that
Most generous; I like a branch, you are
The root, if you perish I must not stand.

Gervo. Let fame want Trumpets for to blaze her self,
Let my poor soul want blood to raise her self,
When I deny to be as firm as you.

Cele. Then my Lord Orestes, see a Legate
Be prepared to send to King Aberden.
You know the drift of the cause, we will maintain
The War he promises to our Land, and
Burgargo with these two Captains, which are
Derisius and Gervoran, and that valiant
Soldier Burnomoy, draw down your forces
To the port-Towns, cast trenches, ditches, that
If they gain the Land, they know not where to
Lead a squadern up, but stand amazed
at their rash stricking shore.

Omnes. Heavens bless Numenia's King.

Cel. After you return, (as undoubtedly victorious)
Trophies shall be prepared of pure Gold,
Elixars essence, what does Nature hold,
Be presents to your reward.

Exeunt. Scen. 5.
Adrenimia, Hollarro, with Attendants. Adre. My soul runs wandering from its way,
Not knows its guide, till fortune by favors
Whip, lash the occasion forward, that they
May join their Forces by Sea or Land;
My hands want blood, that (by its natural heat)
R^ceive a quickening sense, my ^ury plays
Upon the strings of the ^^^^cordium,
Which causes a palfie in my hand, th^^
Hold I cannot till some blood I have,
I could with ease digest the wrong that is done,
If I should cause one of Aberdens friends
To use my Altar, his head upon my spear,
In the air to be an attom of delight,
It is a thing disgorge with me most sure,
I feel a weakening cause rise in my bones
Which can be deemed naught else, but want of blood,
Prithee Hollarro what, must still vacation,
A rust corrupt your souls and weapon too,
Resolve my quere, sure you are not bent
To raise perplexity to a Queen her will,
Blood, blood, still I will call.

Holl. Great Adrenimia, the conditions which your King
Was pleased to make a War, expected answers
Are, when Post brings news, the tidings which you
Wait leisure on, unto my Fathers Court,
No sooner arrival shall take its abode,
But with a fiery look and watery eyes,
Bring to your Highness those same prodigies
Which lurk betwixt affection and defraud,
Your pleasure wills to crave that harsh design,
Like Ebian wood, whose color cannot be
Changed to a whitish hue, no more can your
Entreaty turn its black melanchollious
Humor to a white waterish phlegmatic
Cause; my spirits raise ambition in my
Veins, that such who works against natures will,
Receives no free permission there to lay
Its store for that same matter which you crave;
But if a War go on with immatchlesse forces,
My father's such a man (your Husband, Aberden)
Stands to a word, though mentioned long before,
To let those captive subjects, which by lot
Caught in the gins of our freeborn like souls
Of Amazons, never yield field to any,
Either foe or friend, to less or many.

Adr. What, is it so? what, is it so? still Hollarro stand against
That same cannary bird, what is e're it be,
Sings such a note with pains repining forth,
Such unagreeing discord, and unhandsome
Quavers, shall quickly have a Pip upon
His tongue, a slit or ga^^ about his neck,
Make him sing sweeter changes then those same;
Hollarro take care, look not to untwist
Those arms of great Aberden and his Queen.
He granted me, you stand in opposition;
Talk more with silent counsel, then to the face
Of a Queens power, condemn it a disgrace
That she takes pleasure in, it is blood that I
Crave of my King, until the day I dye,
If none can have from foreign Countries then,
Constrained I must take then our innocent men,
Your part shall not escape free, if you do not
Go to the Wars, the next will be your lot,
Therefore blow up those fires that almost dye
In your stout Soldier, that perpetually
They may bring home great spoils unto the Queen,
As captives, bracelets, all what my youth has seen:
See, see, you do, do so, dispatch the cause,
Or else in this Land I will bring new Laws.

Hol. Your will's a Law, great Madam, to my force,
I shall not be him that withstands your loss;
The frigid Zone never new the Icie way,
Or tract her course more plainer then does I,
In your bright Horizon, the sphere of hope
Wherein my restless will does make her Orb.
While Titan drives four prauncing Horses,
That needs neither whip nor bridle; so move I
To please the tender affection of your
Princely grace; take not in least in heart
My bad attempt, which flies by the swift wings
of ignorance, guided by staff of folly,
Ranging within the bowers of restless will,
Seeking the corners of vain bad defigns,
Still let them fly for refuge to your grace,
Let them there take their most reserving place.

Adre. You are most hollow-hearted, while you see
No good there is in gaining, what your will
Has mind to work its force, you then detard
Most fatigated in that, what your purpose was,
Desist your talk, I leave your presence.

Holl. I,
Stand submissive as becomes your Son,
And wait your royal Person.

Exeunt. Scen. 6.
Aberden, Yernomoy, Fafrisius, Buzaraine, Nev^rmo. Aber. The Legate is dismissed
from them, it is well
Their answer rises so high against our will,
Which has bid stern Mars stand off, and the Brute
Of troy-novant his race, has stood with his
Shoulders pending to the ground, by its
Massy and assured w^ight, blessed in the
Perifery of a swallowing main, burst
Great Numenia's wall, make skies to echo
As you do at Rome, when Pope stand elevated,
Quell you their voice by your secret harmony,
That will make Hercules for to wonder,
And Leo rejoice to hear such single notes,
And Tigers repeat it as a loving Song,
That when the Inhabitants hear, struck with the
Amazement of a terrors will, terming it
Thunder; let Auster, Boreas, and the other two,
Of Cardinal points, your fame blow aloud,
In represention of (wrongs new redrest)
Not to be veiled by curtain of a foe,
Or frightment, but fully resolved to be
Revenged of the quarrel, and his Majesty.

Yer. Our glorious purpose, like the sparkling star,
Gives light in dark, when leaden Saturn stands
Nigh on his side, whose pale-faced tanyed state
Makes splendour rise of the ^^ar above the rest,
When all the mists and watrish vapors of
The middle Region cannot withstand him;
But like a Diamond among ^ebble stones,
Cast bighter blaze above the rest, then them;
So we proceed, excel the others hope.

Faf. Liberty stands bound, when with the crafty
Whistle, or second sound of their advanced
Pinnions, dives to the buroughs of a
Childish fear, we will afford upon their
Terrestiall plains, such unheard language,
That shall not by graduation, but at first
Seize on their clownish brains, and endue
Our native Land unto posterity,
With victorious praise.

Buza. Right, Fafrisius,
The caelestiall Quiers runs counter for to
Gain us trophies by their help; for the Globe
Which was the Antipodes Land, is now ours
By fortunes only guiding, by women's
Innocent looks, strives with her force and will
To have all good for us, and nothing ill.

Nev. Your speeches are fully poys'd, no venture done,
No good is had, we will strike an oblick cross
Unto their Land, if 't be for no cause else,
But for our Countries good, as for our King;
That all the Penates with divine sound,
Bless all the Cities, Towns, and Castles of our Land,
With most tranquillous times, Linraides
Spreads Fields with Flora's Vesprey, and that Sol
May have perpetual motion in the Ram,
Though hot and chollerick, yet a handsome
Spring, which shall bestow on this the Title
Of a fruitful soil.

Abe. Your souls are generous
To the last --

Yer. And does hope for to endure.

Aber. As long as blood does warm the heart.

Faf. We will
not flinch our ground.

Aber. Your valor's stout,
Much like a Trojan blade.

Buz. Or Irish Moor,
Who never stepped from him that gained
Ground.

Aber. Then you will fight?

Nev. We will my Liege.

Aber. Then let valor range her course, go see what
Ships are rig'd, and Galleys fit for sail,
That in two hours space or less, we may
Bestride the Sea, with the whole Navy of
Our Army, ten thousand Ships well prepared,
To bear within concaves of their vast
Great bellies, both men and Ammunition,
Shot, under the conduct of Hollarro Prince,
Twelve thousand horse, and forty thousand foot,
Bearing the colors of a golden Ball
Set in a large black field, with chevern of
Three Mullits ore; next him, you Yernomoy,
Bring up a wing of thirty thousand foot,
Furnished with pike and sword, musket and bandalere
And all displayed, with Griffins rampant on
Their shield; so you Fafrisius follow next
With nine thousand horse, well saddled, bearing
A Rose upon their Arms, beset in Arg.
Buzaraine, with your Captains and the rest,
As Nevermo, stand you a distance from the rest,
With nine thousand both of foot and horse,
To aid these Lords, if that need require.
What subject you take, bring home unto my Queen,
These are all your precepts.

Omnes. Heavens bless Aberden King, and prosper
his success.

Exeunt. Scen. 7.
Chorus, Song 1.
1.
Acteon was not wise,
Diana him espies,
And caused him to be by Dogs tor^,
Because he did her see
Naked with modesty,
And graced him with two horns before.
2.
Hellen she was most fair,
Paris thought none compare
Unto her well shaped soul and face*
She did at length destr^y
That famous City Troy,
And caused both famine and disgrace,
3.
Demonica that Queen,
VV^o for lucre and gain
Pe^raid Ephesus with a wile
Unto Brennus that man,
Which afterward became
His sole destruction and exile.
4.
And Atalanta, she
Did chaste Peleus see,
Would not give way unto her will,
She falsely did accuse,
And basely did abuse
Him, to Acasius of ill.
Song 2.
You see by these four examples,
how women they do fail,
In any matter that mantles,
the good in ill prevail:
They seek with sweet sugard words,
And all things that pleasure affords,
for to destroy
their only joy,
b^ they ^ar Knights or Lords:
Then fie upon this world, that such a thing should be.
Then let us leave those silly brats,
that do perdition bring,
And discourse of more serious that is
belonging Aberden:
He draws his stout Capt^ins ^n,
And his potent Army long,
against his foe,
which he does know
to be of the same throng:
Then fie upon this world, that such a thing should be.
Act 3. Scen. 1.
Celerinus, Burgargo, Orestes, Sisterus, Derisius, Gervoron, Burnomoy,
Soldiers, Ensign, Drums, Flagge. Cel. THeir first arrival on Numenia's Land,
They purchased it by a Legion of
Their sacrificed lives. Aberdens men
Were new beginners in those stratagems,
Their Armor was no friend, but played a foe,
To their well nigh and half sweltred bodies:
Our trenches work by wisdom, not by force,
While we like Trojans stood and mazed their folly.
Come brave souls, lets meet them in the front.

Bur. Let them strike anchor in our barren forts,
While there no controversy rises on ground,
For their determed wills to make a choice,
Whether Sea or Land afford their execution;
Though AE^lus confirm with Neptunes
Blustering noise on the azure gliding Seas,
Which hoysteth to the memory a panick fear;
Yet those shall stand in no similitude
To our own Land contrivings: cheer then up,
Your Numenia bloods, we will put them to it
Great King Celerinus, will you please to lead,
Lets ralley them before they gather head.

[They march and go out. Aberden, Hollarro, Yernomoy, Fafrisius, Buzarain,
Nevermo, Quermero, Perpurgerus. Ensigns, Drums, a march, Soldiers. Aber.
March, march, let swift and sure set feet strike off
Sloth her entreatie^, the metamorphious forms
Of their strange Land, shall lend to none of our
Determi'd thoughts such a prodigious sense,
As make a quick flown fury rise, as
Choler in the veins created by burnt
Adust blood, but with a milder grace,
Send comfort to our hope with new supplies.
The soaring Eagle never prided more
To play with air, or stand upon her wing,
In the defiance of the lesser birds,
Then I do in my potent Soldiers strength.
Let them strike lance with dexterous art,
My care shall ever be employed to gain
The field, her triumphs, by Bruzantia's hands;
Lets detard time no longer.

Hol. My Liege, your will,
Though putrid bodies by corrupted stench,
Breeds impure Atoms, infects pure air;
Yet those most innocent souls must not go
To the Elysium of eternal rest,
Without reve^ge do follow.

[They march and go out. A great shouting and hollowing, and the Battle within,
Aberden, et c^^t. Aber. What, still multiplies surround their courses?
They rise like Ants from muddy mole hills,
Surely want never showed her face within the bounds
Of this new prodigal lle: men like the
Putrefaction of a loathsome form, breed
Like the Atoms, the Sun his rays, and
Never diminish, though voice with bloody notes
Send thousands to their far-sought homes,
They lie with arms spread open to receive
Their unnatural mothers, like Vipers to their dams;
Yet Terror strikes no sense to their benumbed wills,
But a carriage of presumptuous Law,
Of free dom, license, of their free born right,
They like a Fury more than modest Grace,
Spend wind and limbs a sacrifice to us:
We fear nor courage, nor their valor; no,
Their sights are not the weapons of our lust
We have to fight; come, come, march on.

Holl. We will,
For never shall that strange sound take place
Within receptacles of a hearing,
That Bruzantia's men lost ground; come march
With me, my Lords.

Yer. We follow your command.

Exeunt. Celeriuns, and.c. Cele. The service was hot, yet fear not you,
Though ground does thirst with her insatiate
Will, to drink up more conjeal'd coagulated blood
Of our lost souls and Soldiers, receiving
A surfeit by its strange and faulty virtue,
We have enough to stand a field, and face.

Burg. Lets draw the scattered forces to a head,
Bring ranks in order, and each his Ensign place,
Not lose the day with folly in our hand.

Burn. My stomach never did faint with killing till
This day, my arm bids not desist, though
Reason would plead for it, my sword cries
Vengeance still, each blow it gave, brings rosey
Blood, its hue, from those strange hags, Bruzantia's
Men, sending their woeful cries to the skies,
To frame a thunder.

Cele. Valor runs with thy great will, from hence
Lead thou the blew male-frocks to the field,
Thy manhood shows thy grace, thy fame this day
Won first its root, the next the branches they
^hou wilt obtain, on which the Trophies hang
Of those lost men, of which they made a mang;
Let us see them once more, come follow me.

Exeunt. Scen. 2.
Quermero enters with two Swords, and all in Armor. Que. They force me to it;
well surely, I shall be
Prepared for the cause, this sword shall curb
These will, and this maintain its right,
A Caesar, nay a Caesar never was
So valiant as my two swords are, one cuts
The flesh, the other hews the bone, my helmet
Shows a force to kill a Guy, or Hercules,
My Armor binds my body to the same;
I wish a fortune would give more advice
To him that falls in hand, then run his life;
Suppose this Pillar were great Bevis stout,
And I a Hector, as I am, stand to
[He cuts the Pillar. Oppose the feind, my first progress it should
Strike him under th'^ar, the n^xt take him here:
Oh, oh, have at the man, have at thee;
Nay this is naught, when Drums and Trumpets sound
A fame unto my valor, I should be
More like a General then a common man.
I am sure as fancy pleases, now I could
Put ten to flight, if all were Trojans stout,
I should redress my self with Tygars strength,
And make them fear my swords.

Burgargo enters, and Quermero throws away his swords, and runs into a corner.
Bur. The pillage of the soil is left for him,
Who bears the victory of these two land broyls,
At present does an opportunity show forth,
The way to steer thy course; forbear, I Will not
As long as heat infuse my livelihood,
To cast a backward look to those before
Lie gasping on the ground, I will exchange
My broken sword for two, which are like clifts
For them to gaze at; and keep them under
The thraledom of a fear; but I Will pursue
The chase to find my prey.

[Exit Burgar, and Querm. runs and gets up the broken sword^ Quer. What, art
thou gone? it is well
Thou scapedst so, he knew I was here,
Or if he had not, I would have made him fear
To take my swords, and leave a stump for me;
Oh I wish he were now present, for now
My chollar rises, I would show him such
A twisting combat, as know a friend from foe.
I am a Lion now, he is but a Lamb,
I Will tear him, tear him, tear him; what, a
Broken piece, he left unto my lot:
Come, come, again, and let me flesh my
Appetite, and kill thee for a name.

Perpurgerus with a bloody sword. Quer. Come, come, Perpurgerus.

Per. What, stand you still? rouse leaden spirits from
Thy earthly soul.

Que. This broken sword has caused the absence of
The bravest Hector: this sword and hand cau^'d it;
I made him run, I, run.

Per. Some childish boy*

Que. He was a Man, whose shoulders were like
Mountains; a foot, a Pasty peel would
Equal with its birth, his eyes strike dead the
Heartiest man that goes, all armor furnished,
Yet forced to run.

Per. How did he bear the blows?

Qu. How did I bear the blows? like V^lcans anvill;
For as he struck, my rebounding sense
Answered him again; he stood like
Nicodemus, or a fool, while I stood
Breaking my sword upon his nose,
He snuft, and said naught else, but run.

Per. You are stout.

Quer. I never knew my heart until this day,
Now I perceive the rigor of its will.

^Hollarro enters with his sword drawn and bloody. Hol. The stygian lakes
recoyl, Hero and Leander
Makes cold, their loves are froken to an Ice,
Proserpina does rule with fiery look,
Pan now does make a sword, a shepherds crook;
Diana chaste, begins to fly for fear,
Cynthia does mask her face till the next year;
Endymion waken is by these loud cries,
Nymphs they do court their Garlands miseries;
Ceres does lavish forth her full ripe ears,
Venus complains her self with watrish fears;
Juno is lumpish, and her love is gone,
Pallas turned foolish, and she wit has none;
Mars rules full out with his most severe look,
Themis stands potent with her justice book,
Nemesis is troubled from the funded deep,
Morpheus is waken from his creeping sleep;
Apoll^ stands smiling at their folly so,
Jove bids me fight, and know my friend from foe.

Per. More aid shall come, I Will fetch them out my self.
Exit Per.
Qu. Great Prince, my valor risse beyond its bounds,
All for your Fathers right.

Holl. Now let Burgargo come, my weapon's fixed
To play its part, pierce tender bowel with
Its three formed point, and make his blood
Still wait upon his shoes.

Scen. 3.
Burgargo following the flight. Bur. Stand still your ground, the day breaks
from the
Skies, for to discern the foe, my hands are
over loaded by the spoils of this days labor,
While some lie gasping, others crying loud,
Here legs, there arms, all bodies mortified,
My spirit thirsts to see the Prince Hollarro,
And to change Gloves with him, try valor at
The point of naked nimble swords.
Oh Goddess blind, thou fortune has enforced,
To show my progress of my lingering days
In this brave soul, so stand prepare to fight.

Hol. Your worthy carriage shows as much, nay more
After the encounter of our steelly blades,
Let after victory either rise or fall;
And let Astrea poyse the truest cause
By this the combat of our martial will,
So General come on; stand, see your self.

Bur. Your valor's to be praised he that dare
Twist his hand with me, must have a grace
More then such young years can put forth;
I praise thy courage, but not thy discretion,
Because thou runs upon thy death.

[They fight, and he wounds Hollarro. Hol. Desist your purpose, till I close my
wound,
The blood speaks on my cause, a fury leads
^y temper now, stand still and pause, and then
^ will renew the second blow.

Bur. Vain purpose of your will, to strive with him
Who always returned with victory in his hands,
You cherish folly in a strange conceit,
strive with a weaker hand for to oppose
A decreed sense which is much stronger;
Yet shall it not be uttered with a voice
I killed thee unawares, but take thy time.

Holl. Rest upon your blade, ground its point,
The time runs in swift motion to one
Of our ends, the Elysium field does open
Large her panting soul, for to disgorge
The vicious humor of our Fabric,
Within that space, the which we shall possess,
Rewards stand ushering in our power,
To have the Crown allotted by those Saints;
Come lend your force again, I now prepare
For to receive my death by your unnatural Hand.

Bur. Fortune support then both our hands,
Valor with-drawes unskilful helps,
And shows a fair prospect to a foul design.

[They fight, and he gives Burgargo a deadly wound. Burg. Hold, hold, I dye,
take you the day,
And Crown your self with Trophies of my blood,
Your riper years sprung in a blossom stout,
Shall be Encomium to Bruzantia;
My spirit it does vanish, as my blood
Flows from the veins, sending by legate cause
All praise to your most severe stoutest arm.
sighs.
Oh, my breath is proved an airy substance now,
I wish it were confined a longer space
To run its course, that I my King may show,
The man gave me this wound, him to exalt
Above the rest by Title, degree and honor.
sighs.
Oh, now the fading hourglass consumes its sand,
Each corn a drop of blood, and the three fates
Come with their hungry appetite to cut
My fatal end, and blood does b^bble by
The hottest combat that us two did fight:
sighs.
Oh, I must I must, the bones begin to be
Afraid of flesh, the sinews stand at difference,
All my body cold, save only heart, does
Leap by its extremity of pains, and
Hot with sorrow; staggers.
I come, I come, make room
Amongst you, ghosts, see there be place for
Me, * I dye.

[Falls dow^, and dies. Hol. Thou dies then like a man, whose breath did bear
The whole Numenia's Land in a subjection,
The only pillar of thy Countries good,
Death has surprised the conquest of thy soul,
And this thy trickling blood that is here displayed,
Does show thy progeny to take its flight
From rutus, or other greater Monarch,
My spirit's sorry for such a thrice noble friend.

Derisius enters. Holl. Return, return, thou runs upon thy death.

Deris. Draw in that sulphurous breath: I live! and
Here my General he lies slain; no, no,

[Fight, Deris. falls and dies. Hol. Die slave, as thou have been ordained.
[Exit Hol.
Quer. turns the bodies over and over, to see whether they be dead or no. Quer.
R^bi^ dead, dead? Jack, dead, dead? are you
Or no? -- faith if you be not I Will make you,
[He draws his Sword. I Will panch you, Rogue^, and make you know
What I am, -- what not
[Deris. shakes his leg, and Quer. runs away, but after draws nigh again.
Dead still, but stir you, hang
You, hang you I Will have one of you sure
Enough; come away, come away come -- come --

He trayles Deris. off the Stag^, by his hea^. Scen. 4.
Yernom^y. Yer. Fight, fight, the day's our own,
Squeeze forth thy spleen with a censorious frown,
And turn my serious blows into a wrack of gall,
Delivered to my sight, ten thousand men
Were slain, and like an Abyssus did the earth,
Enclose all in a lump, converting so
Their oakey chaists into a putrid form,
And these my Robes, a badge receives from those,
Of honor, pomp, and glory to the day.
I follow them my self, so the compunction
Of their boiling blood did then rebate
My f^rm^r st^^mes into most pleasant cal^s.
Stand, stand, thou slave.

[B^rnomoy enters. Bur. I fear no Rebel, such an one as thee,
[They fight, he kills Yerno. Consume thy self to ashes, and there lie:
My General Burgargo, what, thou killed;
What mortal motion propagated it?
This cannot be withstood, but hymns must sound,
And El^gies complain thy doleful fall;
The Firmament crack with a thunder, and
The stars want light at this thy funeral;
A marble shall enclose thy sacred soul,
But cause its nature weeps, and may be termed for thee.

Exit Bur. and carries out Burg. Aberd^n, Hollarro, Fafrisius, Buzarai,
Nevermo, Orestes, Sisterus, taken captives and bound, Perpurgerus, Quermero,
Soldiers, Fla^, Ensigns, Drums, aretreat. Aber. We contemn liberty, and honor
with the same,
By a most sottish will, and by idleness,
Their ranks dispersed, does inflame fear with it;
The blew pavillions in which comfort lived,
Are routed by the heavens stormy blasts;
His Forts demolished, and his Army broke
Into a hundred squadrons, not able
To do a damage to our potent strength,
His Subjects hear our captives and his chiefs
Of all the Soldiers slain, shot, powder, by
Them vanished, all Bulworks they consumed*
The best politic way that must come here,
Is to destroy both branch and root of them;
And that Hollarro be the Captain of
This new Dominion, so shall dame Peace
Still flourish with her train.

Holl. Your purpose is confirmed by me, and that
United to your only self. My wound
Does fester, and begins to ^ave beyond
A fury of its hot inclining, visiting me,
Thus with torn tossed discord.

Faf. The Heavens shows a face to prosper our
Success, the Sea is calm with gliding streams;
The wind does shut a savor with its blasts,
And the sky looks clear with serene splendent hieu,
All by invasion strive to do us good,
Then suffer all our Navy to the coast,
And spring Bruzantia's Land, carry the
Captives to the Queen of love, Ad. inemia.

Buza. A conspiration works with harmless will.
The air displayes her friendship to the cause,
The Element of water joins her force,
To suffer all a shipwreck, if not now
We take this opportunity the Turrets
Of our hope consume with fear after invasion
Of an obstinate and a perverse sense;
So let us go to that our native soil,
The Captains stand and tremble at that word.

Nev. Nature her Empire will at last give way,
The limits are unclos'd in which she moves,
A fainted courage can never withdraw
Such a design, if knowledge be against:
So most great Sovereign of your sacred will,
Draw down the Forces to the River side,
Because the day is vanished, and their force:

Aber. Then, stout Hollarro, draw your whole Army down,
Clear all the Camps, and set the bondmen free,
Fear lest the Pleyades with its constellation
Drop stormy weather, and a season foul;
For now the Equinoctial line does poyze
The day and night both into equal parts
And no dy^^sterous soil does work such fate,
As make a wisdom rise aginst our hate*

Hol. Father, you King of great Brrzantia,
Conquered Celerinus of Numenia.
I needs must visit you with good for ill,
If such a thing were forced against my will.
The noise of fame, and nimble swift-flown hope
Gives freedom pardon for to use her scope;
You need not bid, but command him that stands
Submissive in the way of your commands.
I will conduct the Army, hoyst the sayls
To where you please, in him it never fails.

Aber. Confirm thy resolution.

Quer. Hunger, hunger, preythee Perpurgerus^
Give me some victuals, my teeth begin to gnash.

Per. Here, take all.

[He gives him some scraps. Quer. Oh reward thee, its ready cut to my hand.

(Exeunt. Scen. 5.
Celerinus, Gervoron, Burnomoy. Cel. Burgargo's gone, and all my Lords taken
Captives; when Titan, obscured within his Orb,
The verdant fields receives a Gown of dew,
But when my General lies in Elysium,
Then floods of sorrow spends their store,
And do prolong it by a cunduit art,
And stew the whole soil in salt, brackish tears.
The wind does show its force as by a fury,
So does the ebbing Sea abound with gall;
One strikes alarm with a thundering voice
In the air; the other like a Lion,
Roars forth her spleen under the Globe,
All to the celebration of the soul
Of great Burgargo, my only General,
Without a transformation of a sudden change.
They Will rage their bounds too far beyond their power,
And if no clam strike overthwart their Laws,
Such a strange tossed tempest brings a ruin
To the terrestiall Ball, and so with their
Raging motion strike a fire, as Cyclops
Throws his Thunderbolts, bring a consumption
To the substance often* all for Burgargo.

Ge. The two-wing Pegasus does stand ready
To show the fame about the world; her motion
Is swift, but he is swift as she,
Cutting the air, and parting grosser forms
To view the lacrimy of such a friend,
Soaring the Climates, prauncing by the stars,
Viewing the lower, middle, higher of
The three Rgions, before he comes to the Moon;
So passing all till he comes to that light
Of Jupiter and Falcifer at one sight;
All for the praise of him who strived with hope
To gain the Land from damage, loss and foyl:
The holy Saints does clamor with a sound,
Welcome Burgargo to our possessed ground,
Take the Trophies of Martius Campus field,
Who never did turn to Enemies or yield,
Sit with a Coronet of a golden twist
Upon thy head, to be the Prince of all the rest,
All make submissive forms, a solemn bow;
All stand afraid, and make to him a vow,
To be their King, for they did never enjoy
Such an Heroic soul as that same boy;
Yet more's our loss, and pity for the same,
Parting both with his body, and his name,
Because, of his blood no posterity follows.

Burg. The valorous of all souls return with joy,
The Cassiopeia and Ursa major crave,
A fame of that same honor to the grave;
They run by Tropicks of the frigid Zones,
Leaving the carcass as the firmer bones;
All stars lament by constellation,
His down-thrown fame by a rebellion;
They tear their Robes, casting about their sloufs,
Nothing is left but print of their foul hoofs;
The pale reflects of Cynthia's crystal front,
Springing in the vaulty heaven there a font,
To glide with restless streams a hilding bless
Of gravities, and parts, from the work and mess
Of best proportioned honor, pulling to
The gifts of praise to whom they all do owe;
They all presage unto a dreamy Throne
Of their best wisdom, what he does intomb,
As honor, valor, and sobriety,
Meekness and patience, with celerity,
They found an Empire of all thoughts in him;
They found the sweet of joys filled to the brim,
Within the structure of that sacred soul,
In show no shadow, but in self the moul
Of only valor, brave manhood, with the same
On which they will fix an everlasting name.

Cel. You have no envy in a rational way,
Lets make a happy Burial to the deep,
It greets the cause, prolong no future speed,
Since he dyed valorous, (...) a va^o^ous
Grave receive his soul^

Bur. Confirm the same with
A Page of consort to the Muses, and
Make a following pomp, express his worth.

Exeunt. Scen. 6.
Adrinemia, Murgorus, and Nercills. Adr. Resolve no resolution, for the cause
Thou understands prevents no remedy
In my sole knowledge, thou gives there no aid,
To a prevention of a future danger*
Wisdom cries help, to call a resolution
In the hand of Labell, of a real deed,
With a commission of an issue true,
Of shreud and pensive to a quick return.
Charybdis or great Sylla threaten death
To their swift navy, or the mount Aetn^
Has burnt their top sayls, or cast down their masts,
Turning their rudder to another coast,
While time affords an ornament to d^^k
My sensual mind with shapes of horror, fear,
And love, does now dismember the defense
I had, whereby I conduct my proved skill,
They captives are, no captives they received,
For else my King would have blazed his troops home
He promised the company whom he took,
No company here is sent, Murgoru^,
Tell the cause, the Court is black for want of
Sparkling Lords, to give a Iustre to its
Marble walls.

Mur. Most high Princess,
Things by the counsel of vain sorrow's will,
Does sojourn with the cause, the whirlwinds
Apt to make a tempest rise, bellowing the
Waves till their whole mountains soar aloft,
^
Strikes with a desperate blow to swift wind ships,
^ay cause detard, and make sloth to ascend
^er private and her withdrawing chamber,
Of your censuring soul, and cause the twinkling of an eye,
A minute more or less, to show in length
A number of long years, but suffer not
Such Rivalls to exhale such innatural
Fumes, bring (...) to the vital
Spirits, and perplexlty to the Brain*

Nerc. The informer of the daylight, struck a knell,
The twelve a clock, against his sounding bell;
When then by co^^se the ships did promise fight,
They arrive our coast before the next night;
But now by fortune bond to favor good,
That hour is gone, and they still in the stood,
And Sol like nimble passenger surrounds
The hills again, discending to the downs,
And yet no Herald does blaze forth no ^ame,
None strikes Love's ^^sets, or her word^ proclaim,
It must be some strange temp^^t that drive^ back
Their ships from shore, when they all things did lack

Adr. Why it is a ransom, for a Kings disdain,
For his own Queen, not to her send a line,
If storms did bind the ships within the harbors,
Yet quick flown message might come to my ear,
But never since the voy^ge took (...) game
Upon the restless Seas; I heard by Post
They stay their living, or confined their dead.

Mur. I feel a pain, like Cerberus fasting jaws,
And Tantalus his gaping with desire
To gain the Apples, are not to compare
To these the torments that does drench my soul,
All bring an ocean of a foul despair,
Because they stay beyond the bounds of time,
And cause a lingering motion to answer
For their detard.

Exeunt. Scen. 7.
Celerinus, Gervoron, Burnomoy: the Funeral of Burgargo passes over the
Stage, with his Scutcheon, Armor, Heralds, with Flags, Torches, and Mourners.
Cel. Let earth kiss the corpse with sorrow, and rest you!
Could potent strength, or magna^^^ous deeds,
Bidding defiance to envy* spi^^, and force;
Solemn confirmed to Jove in haughty sky,
Or virtues Offspring, or the Nymphs of th'maine,
Save this same mortal man from being slain;
Then fortune had conquered death, and thy soul
Still lived with us: but we may curse the fates
With more hatred vows, and not lament thy
Rape so to despair, because Mars honored so
Thy Royal valor, dying like a Champion:
The scraggy fleshless bone man, durst not bring,
Or put to sight, a sheet to wind thee in,
Had not first glory, a rich Garland hold,
To crown thy merits, framed of brandish gold,
The Country laments thy fall, and thy King too,
My subjects to thy Hearse does make a bow,
Giving the praise and honor of the day,
Lauding thy name, and crowning thee with bay;
But now the Cypress must take place for it.
Elegies song.
Hector was famous for War,
Achilles did excel him far;
Scipio was valiant stout,
Hanibal put him to rout;
Ulysses knew to handle Lance,
Ajax did above advance;
Turnus fought well at a field,
Aeneas him forced to yield;
Priamus had kingly power,
Agamemnon him brought lower;
Hercules did valiant acts,
Alexander did great facts;
Paris was a valiant soul,
Burgargo does these control;
Hector was no man to him,
Achilles knew nothing in;
Then fall in pieces thou earth,
Weep thy self into a dearth;
Scipio he was not stout,
Hannibal knew nothing to it;
Then let us all mourn a^une,
To this soul that is here slewn;
Ulysses held not a sword,
Ajax he knew not a word;
Then lament this down-throw fall,
That is hapn'd to us all;
Turnus may be termed foul,
Aeneas knew not his soul;
Then break forth into a maine,
Shower tears as if 'twere rain;
Priamus had no hand in war,
Agamemnon knew no jar;
Then send rumor to the sky,
And make thick clouds with our cry,
Hercules was child in show,
Alexander ^e're like knew;
Then we will mourn our selves to death
'Cause he is bereaved of breath;
Paris he was not a man,
Burgargo did all withstand;
Then we will make both hills and dales
Know the loss of all us males.

Cel. The faculty of penetrating grief,
Surrounds the brave Idea of all joy;
The sable dressings of her mournful days.
Draws a curtain betwixt our eye and mirth,
The body of Burgargo must be interred,
And valiant deeds dies with that soul;
For Julius Caesar when he conquered Troy,
Never knew such deeds as he does here employ,
All are not worth a nomination to
His rare achievements.

Bur. Let all their barbarous words bring hail with them
Inviting Aeolus, to make a tempest roar;
Yet those we would whistle by as a jear,
For all that, Burgargo's gone.

Cel. Thy soul does crush all pomp in infamy,
Let not rage spend the courage of your hearts,
You are, my Lords, my only Lords I have,
The Scythian Wolves never war'd amongst the flocks,
As your two valors did amongst your foes.
My other Lords are took for sacrifice,
To that hellish Queen Adrinemia;
Yet we will grapple for the reason often,
When Laws are settled, and the havoc quelled,
Prolong your journey to the silent grave,
For triumph of the Corpse and Funeral;
And let all Poets use their brains and pens
In praise of him and pomp of burial.

Bur. My Liege, your will's fulfilled.

Exeunt. Scen. 8.
Bellerro, Lerinica, Histerica. Bell. Are you not yet persuaded to combine?

Ler. No, nor never.

Bell. How Vulters in a cogitatious shape,
Know my inflamed heart, masqing dismal
Prodigies, let echo answer contrary,
Sound a retreat, cherish the trope of hope,
Strike dum that sense, that is protractor
Of those airy notions that again-sayes all,
Answer once more, let passion move the favor,
Dispatch the case, and mercy take a place,
Shall birth rebound, I will and can: speak* speak.

Ler. No no, great Duke, I cannot.

Bell. That sound strikes dumb my soul,
The Lilly, Rose, stands in battalia form,
Acting their decent hieus against your frowardness,
The Dazie carries lance to show the savagenesse;
Vesper and Hesper does by aspect show
Their influence to fling still against you;
Mounts and Dales make skirmish against other,
Because you suffer such a Rose to smoother,
Confounding nature, and deceiving earth,
Killing both matter, and both air and breath.

Ler. None of these strange To^ds may make such need,
And frame a darling of a vain despair,
I will not wrong both nature and the soil
With foggy mists of vicious quality
As not to marry, but that vapoured slime
Shall turn the voluptuous humor to
A ^iccid substance, and not rolling forth
That radical moisture to be soon exhald;
I Will marry, but not yet.

Bell. The winding comets, by confession bring^
An antidote, to acute ^eavours sharp;
But you my Comet, and my blazing star,
Turns me a Pagan, and speaks death thereto.
The cask wherein the camp of graces lay,
Is turned a den of groaning mischief loud;
I cannot live, if the oadstone of your will
Change a virtue stupid to the Iron.
Cupid may bend his shaf^, his arrows loose,
But never hit so fair a mark as this,
Venture a whole quiver to the Sea and Land,
But rebound venom to such lips as thine;
Marry, marry, for the present time
Excells both past and future though divine.

Hist. Sir, she is the masterpiece of all Arts,
A whirly-gigg of glittering stones,
The Sun is clouded, and the stars want light,
When she by her airy motion enters.
See, speak again, she is like a purple die,
Neither loose color, nor her face thereby.

Bell. The flowery shade devoutly kneeling to
Brave Titans rays, with a compendium
Of servitude, that by obedience,
Both Woods and Fens receive a party shade,
And Groves stand shivering with the drops of cold,
Because offensive to his glorious head;
But I stand like a Willow, more then Oak,
Unto the shrine of your beatitude,
Expecting (...) I may (...)
To violate the wi^d with a (...)
Of your bright palm, (...)
Of favor from your look^.

Ler. The question of a danger, (...)
Meeting with death or life (...);
Therefore I Will enter with a (...) none,
I hate no look from a Hermaphrodite,
A man in show, but woman in the speech,
Therefore desist; no favor from my hand^*
No, none.

Bell. The enraged foe, both pride and avarice,
Aims at the Capitol of poverty;
And Phrygian plains, who, bound with Chariotteers,
Is formed a channel useless, out of date.
Voluntary hearts often ransackt bodies
Of a livelihood, and royal freedom
Grant such a small request.

Ler. The night derides the day, sure otherwise^
Such instances should not offer to rise,
But more or less, none from me.

Hist. Alas poor man.

Bell. Oh object of despair!
But most sweet Madam, please to let me wait,
The shadow comforts me when it wants the bait.

Ler. The fester'd thoughts of your vain restless will,
Mocks but your habit, and with fancy fill.

Bell. The servile tribute that I owe to you,
Binds my glory for to wait you know.

Ler. The Apple mollifies the heart that sees
Its lusture, but not my soul i^'t please.

Bell. It Is, it is your goddess-like soul that sweeps away
The gloomy night, and brings with it bright day;
Come then we will go.

Hist. I Will wait your purposed will.

Exeun^. Scen. 9.
Chorus. Song 1.
1.
Weep forth Phrygian Swan*
Phrygian Swans weep forth
To see so fair (but cruel)
A creature on the earth.
Who is beyond all nature,
Or pencill art can make;
Weep forth, weep forth,
So fair, but obstina^e.
2.
Heavens send a smile
Prospering the success,
To gain so fair a substance
Within her self a bless;
Who is beloved of all souls.
Yet makes their bodies quake;
Weep forth, weep forth,
So fair, but obstinate,
3.
She Is a morning star,
Lighting men's hearts;
But when they see that object,
She wounds them with loves darts*
Yet they are so entangled,
That they will die for her sake:
Weep forth, weep forth,
So fair, but obstinate.
Song 2.
1.
Let quick-foot nimble Do
Surround the valleys all,
And make a pleasant consort,
As they each other call,
For peace does bind them to it;
Aberden got the day,
Both Bucks and Does may play their fills,
There Is none will again-say.
2.
He rides in great tri^mph,
With subjects waiting on,
And with his most cursed Queen*
Without Rebellion.
^elerinus forced to turn
His Majesty to yield
And glad that he escaped so
To give Aberden field.
3.
Their valors play their part,
Aeneas and Turnus great,
Did neither of them manage
Their Army so complete:
But when the foul smoaky clouds,
That they with Gunshot made,
Was vanished, and was turned serene,
Aberden he best played:
Act 4. Scen. 1.
Aberden, Hollarro, Fafrisius, Buzarain, Nevermo, Orestes, Sisterus. Aber.
WElcome once more unto Bruzantia's Land,
My Lords, we lost not one but Yernom^y,
Without discredit of the sword, or pelts,
The flashes of their thunder-roaring Canons,
Bred but a night not overcame the fight.
They fainted as their sword aimd at our heads;
Saying dame nature forgot the Deities;
Fortune was turned a fool, they cared not ^or't,
When their raged Army was torn by discord,
No Empire took their will, time chid their folly,
Because they did dismember counsel skill;
Experience hang a Flag to show the woe
That would pursue the evicted Army.
Amazed all stood at distance, intending
To give a shout and fly; but grief mounting
Upon the soaring wings of uttered speech;
Did stop and cease both anger and the cry,
Conspiring then again to win the I Will,
Which was turned frustrate to the purpose, and
We took the Lord, the which my Queen shall have
In grateful sense.

Holl. Your Princely grace, and sacred Majesty,
May dazzle the luster of a glorious fire
Foundation of mildness strives against the stream,
If it seek a revenge within the gates,
Or flowery bank of your resigned will;
Mercy the sister of a peaceful time,
Saved millions from the sparks and darts of death,
Which by the worthy motions of your will
Was carried on, or otherwise sharp and
Keen swords had made no standard there,
But sent pale death as Captain of the Fort.

Faf. The Darts strove in the air, even then to choose
Whether to fall or fly; their feebleness
Did so surprise their force; yet valiant you;
My sacred Liege, stuck to the glittering Arms,
Holding both sword and shaft to work a sign
Of manhood, courage, degree and title;
And passing fenced foords, to captivate
These Lords we have, they trembl' within
The Ring of fear, knowing no side
Where passage makes escape; the Swan did
Sing not half so many notes, as hollowing cries
And bloody screeks did make a harmony;
Well, it is fortune, not the fates did work this
Bold attempt.

Aber. You speak still like you selves, which Lords
And Princes are: what say you captives?

Orest. Our soul and bodies are desolate of peace,
Yet let your Queen and men be filld with wrath,
We Will choose no spoiled gain, but truth to Celerinus.

Sist. Yea, King, its so; though we be captives now,
Time changes, and in them our manner do;
Though furies tear my body, yet my soul
Shall stand for Celerinus, King of all
Numenia; and your Queen's wrath are Pearls
To us, because we dye not guilty.

Aber. My lov's no worse to you, since truth rebounds
With hope, you shall have hence my favor.

Orest. No favor we crave.

Sist. We desire no favor.

Ner. The ancient freedom that we did possess,
Strikes a perpetual fame unto your name,
A full ripe plumed bird should be the guide
And messenger to over-fly the world,
And mount up to the skies, to let them know;
Your excellency.

Faf. It Is, it is most true.

Aber. The day grows on, my Queen expects me now,
The harmless will of her known genius,
Flames in a lake of longing sighs for me,
Proceed and be the buckets to quench it;
But since the day consumes, I Will send for her,
My Lord Nevermo, conduct the Queen to presence.

N^v. My Liege, I go.
Exit Nevermo.
Aber. Come Captives, here must be your doom,
She Will have your lives if you were twenty more,
But yet my favor goes with you.

Orest. I thank your Majesty.

Sist. Great King, all glory wait on you;
But I am conduced by willingness to dye.

Orest. So I am, since I am an exile.

Aber. You are, stay, here is the Queen.

Scen. 2.
Adrenimia, Nevermo, Attendants. Adr. Aberden, welcome to your Kingdom, and
your Queen;
Lo, I see Celerinus subjects bound,
And for my use, which gives a resolution
To my sense, if your own Queen by tractive
Operation, work effect, to dismiss
From contemplation of your soul, all
Opportunities that does bring despair,
You shall find no stratagem that to be
Irrevocable, and the objects of
Foul melancholy, shall not afford the
Idols of vain puffing fears.
For those are they that does commit, and does
Drop unto eternity great contrarieties
Unto your majesty, and place of Prince,
The service of a sadfull humor,
Works undiscreetly, and changing certain things,
It Is always proved; the Chaos testifies
You a great Warrior, both in Waves and Land,
Whose pectorall force (expected) did prevail:
No loss of War or Arms, if nature stood
To oppose the slaughter of so many lost;
But I Will sacrifice my wishes to your self,
Gladly received my King.

Aber. Your patient favor receives a great applause;
And I your King expect no future joy;
My Queen, your receivance is most grateful,
And bids adieu all sadness, but not contemplation,
Which shows a firm judge of a prime design;
Safety pleads leisure, and show fair shape
To commonalty, not a vain flasse-glass,
Of best contriving virtues,
To effect the Guardian (not a bad excuse)
Of their firm liberty, the Gems of all
The Indians strikes no luster to your
Fame; you are not fair, but virtue follows it:
My Queen, the Captives stand at your command.

Adr. My Liege, your favor.

Holl. Duty does force obedience to my knees,
[Kneels. Great Queen, your sacred will if 't please to grant
A blessing to Hollarro, a wounded subject
To serve the Queen; your will?

Adr. Rise, valiant Prince, my bless go to thy years,
To find Aberdens blood in thy young youth.

Holl. You may term void of sense unto my state,
But hope survives the spirits, 'cause I bring
A pardon firm and just, it is my duty.

Aber. Hollarro, rise, your duty binds no further;
But what I know.

Holl. Your will, great Queen.

Faf It were a sacrilege, and that rashly
Committed against your Princess goodness,
Not to offer my self a Soldier to your will.

Buz. Mine follows by a triple form, great Queen;
Your subject salutes you with a happy
Bliss.

Nev. I stand a safeguard to your goodness.

Adr. Faithfully done, here wants brave Yernomoy.

Aber. Forgive the fact that is done, not robbed your will;
He Is slain, to pay devotion to your looks;
Rude was his fancy, but senseless was his guide,
Allowing no recovery to his kindled fame:
He died a Hector, a Prince; nay more, he slew
Millions of Forces to ransom then his death;
He left the world by Burnomoy's stout arm,
But Burgargo, Hollarro, sleep did charm,
For to describe true valor in fancy fair,
In real substance to deserve the chair:
The Goddess of all hope favored his deeds,
The Goddess of all might helped him in needs;
The Goddess of all right stood true to him,
The Goddess of all happ did valor bring:
The Gods and Goddesses struck union to
His well fast blade, his stiff framed bow of Yew.
So brave Hollarro shall be only name
Through all Numenia, there to carry fame.

Adr. Hollarro still thy achievements soar above
The mean capacity of a Queens recompense:
These are the captives, I like them well, their
Heads are large to be a pinnacle of fame;
They Are mine, great King.

Aber. They are for recompense
Of your deserts.

Adr. You render pure substance of a divine will,
By outward show, no excuse they expect,
But dye a sacrifice, for to restore
The jewel of my fainting liberty:
The Harchet's well prepared to execute
The case, the block perceives its finished, not
In gaud, but martial way, to make the Harmony,
My attendants expecting the prosperous
Sight of that same day, by forming new
Altitudes, erecting large Houses for the
Same: I Will make no great dispute, but finish it.

Holl. Great Queen, the subjects I avouch by true
Affect and powerful law, descend of noble
Blood.

Adr. Well, they are no worse, but better for my use.

Cap. Ah las, we must then dye.

Adr. I, I; see who attends us there.

Scen. 4.
Quermero. Quer. I am here, I am here.

Aberd. Well, what art thou?

Que. A Gentleman of quality, as good as your self.

Aber. Why, I am a King.

Quer. Well, so am I, sause-box.

Aber. My Lords, conduct the knave to prison, and
Prepare a lash to execute its office.

Quer. Oh las, you will; I Will try your force:
[They carry Quer. out, and he struggles mightily with them How, how -- how --
let go your hold.

Aber. The slaves and bondmen, which have wrought a
Council, to digg the works of War, as the
Pioneers do raggifie the walls:
And they who use to toil in labyrinth,
And founders of their folly, are prisoners
To your pick-axe; Hospitalls does crave my
Aid, and Euncuchs make a market for
My home return; so force pleading my will,
I leave you with my Serpents and my foes,
As emblems to my valor and my state,
Use discretion as time does interview,
And appoint a season to your sport;
For I must dismiss your rank.
Ex. Aberd.
Adr. My King, a happy repose unto your soul;
Who attends there?

Bellerrio, Lerenica, Histerica, and attendants. Adr. The passage of a drowsy
pomp withdrew
A door of breathing betwixt the ark of store,
Of hidden vows, showing the pride of fortune
In a chance, ravishing the beauty of a
Monsters hide, and stuck a stage of desire,
To harbor the fancy of a dreadful sign,
To spill the blood of captives; Lerenica,
You Will screek and vanish with the dame of fear;
But I Will repulse that guide that titles it,
So bring the captives to the slaugher-house,
I Will shift such Robes fit for such enterprise.
Exit Adre.
Holl. Madam, I Will improve my reverend service,
To see the same fulfilled.

Ler. The sovereign balm for fear, must be a heart
Void of a sensual cause; but I Will attend
To see the genius of all mortal souls,
Wear the sad Cypress of a gloomy day.

Bell. Lerenica, your servant, will wait your time.

Orest. Spare us, and let us speak before we dye.

Holl. Give them time to breathe their last farewell.

Orest. The stroke's a Basilick, the sight does kill,
Confirms a death by venom of its raze;
Perfidious creature, more degenerate Fate.
Steeping his aspects in foul Leth^'s streams:
So Adrenimia by her cursed hand.
But fury bids defiance to those guiles,
My time does show by prospect now full old,
Tossing my senses by grim horror's wav^s;
So noble Prince confirm to future time,
And to posterity I dye a Man,
A prop of th'Country, the Numenia:
So by a swifter motion life surviews
The dregs of mortals to the prime of things:
My appetite is fresht by gizard of a cause,
To view the spirits of transcendent Kings,
Great Jove, who weighs the ponder of this ball,
Make creatures Angels in Numenia's Land,
To stand the stratagems of forrai^ foes;
Brazen their souls to yield to no deceits;
(Oh, death makes my senses fly)
And dare Aberden rule great Ce^erinus?
Suffer the primum mobile to rest,
Which rules the sphere according to their Orbs,
Consume the highest Region, and drive down
The splendent lights, but at length I must die;
Desist thy talk, thy Candle waxes dim,
And only such is left to see death grim.

Sist. The smoaky mists bids light adieu, with her
Obscure cloak; then suffer a doleful sound
To echo my spirits with an Ebian cry:
These chains says, Mirth depart. So decent are
These new found novelties unto my soul!
So hymns of Elegies please a parting close,
Rack I must suffer for my King and Land.
Well, it is my duty, my breath's bound thereto,
Only a faculty's left to close a hymn, to
Spend all its bounds to eternize your fame,
Inform, some Goddess, where I shall begin
To make a prayer according to the time:
Brave valiant soul, Burgargo, I Will relate,
Because thy death, my pain does propagate,
Thy sacred shrine directed, journey sweet
In leaving us, bids mine go to and sleep;
The griefs does punish, consume the fountain
Of my weak vital spirits, and the main,
A frustrous case bids anger play her part,
And aim at nothing but my wounded heart;
My life is trouble, but my death gives ease,
So Jaylemen, Keepers, take us when you please.

Attend. We are ready in our office.

H^ll. Procure them to the Queen her grace,
I Will stay a season, but I Will follow straight.

[Exeunt omnnes praeter, Hollarro, Bellerrio, and Lerenio^, and Histerica; and
while Beller, and Lerenica discourse, Hollarro walks on one side of the Stage
viewing Lerenica. Scen. 4.
Bellerrio, Lerenica, Histerica, Hollarro. Bell. Madam,
It is a vain trifle of a small despair,
I bring to presence, and not tediousness,
The business concerns much your safeguard,
Grant it, and then I will relate.

Ler. 'Twere colors of a melanchollious sight,
For to convert the gesture to the sense;
And meaning of the close, your generous thoughts
Must speak to Ladies, not covert with a smile.

Bell. The night spends forth her dews, beguils her hour*
With strange adventures of a darksome truth,
So I diluted in the practice of,
In courting Ladies to their own content,
Shall crave a place of watchman to your self,
In the foul progress of a dangerous time.

Ler. Contempt, despise, and only disdain grows
In my own breast against a cowards soul,
If that report does bring a news unto
My audience, not valor flows from veins
Of your Microcosm; I should deride
The case unto your face, so plead not that,
I Will shift for one, take you no care for me.

Bell. Oh obstinate!

Holl. Heavens bless the wisdom of my genius now.
Aside. What State or General drew that velvet screene
Of painting troubles 'twixt my eye and heart?
Lerenica, what is that name Lerenica?
Sure it is no Taper of a fiery blaze:
She pierces the rights, and joyneth union.
Could my stiff arm withstand Numenia,
And not the glances of a woman's eye?
The Realm produces no such knots of fear:
I see her basis, and her vertex too,
Surround the Camp of her delicious soul,
Yet stand a loof, not undertake the cause,
Because discr^erest deeds bid me forbear.
The various forms that heart and spirit moves,
Were cause enough to make one lunatic:
She enters souls, not cares for mortal shows,
And makes my tongue tremble 'cause I report it;
Well, it is thy garb and gesture wins the soul
Of Prince Hollarro to a nuptial song;
My breath must have no passage, if dis-joyn'd
From the bright rays of such a mo^-^un's light;
Bellerrio shall know, 'twas (...) laid
The same design (I love Lerenica)
I long to see the wells and springs of fire
Still kindled more; so I Will go to my sire,
And make his Majesty acquainted with it.
Exit Hollarro.
Hist. A heap of vermin dispatch a famine
To a commonwealth, and ill-disposed manners,
So you despair unto a Ladies will.

Bell. Hold your tongue, you are troubled with Histerical fits,
Time which reaches forwards by its means,
Falls under question of a sole denial:
Muse no more, but let discretion answer
Unto the cause; the bud is sprung, and fruit
Must have its time to come unto maturity;
But too long kept, grows putrid in it self:
Trenches and shelves are horrid stratagems,
Unto the ships tossed on the ruder waves,
But time dilate them to their confusion,
Making no Caves but solid earth of them.
Mark then that Gentleman, which is rough before,
But bald behind, and there no hold to get.

Lere. The revenue of a Maiden^ life,
Is the whole Wardrope of all mirth and joy;
But when combined unto a fouler Mass,
Provision of all strife and vain discord,
Venturing the plundering of such nature gifts,
Were sacrilege beyond the end of hope;
Therefore desist a truder to bereive
The same which never nature does restore,
Mine Is kept for better spirits than your self.

Bell. Those words are like a Parthian, flying kills,
And raise a mutiny of f^ries in my brain;
Forbear that contemplating case, Homer
Had never blast^d fair ^^elen's fame so far,
But knew the disposition of that shrine,
Would equalize her ^^ibuted parts:
Prefer no more those sparing words, but quench
The concealed fire of affection;
Shall limbrace, gran^* help my mind?

Lere. Great D^k^, you take a spangled action of
No man, to cou^^ he meeting of two
Opposites, secrecy requir^^ advantage of a sight,
But you err grosl^, losing honor by it,
Because you fo^c^, rather then persuade.

Bell. Madam, it is my desire must br^ng excuse,
Because it is parts are invisibl^ to the eye,
Then a short return shall not impoverish
My honor: I must, because in love.

Lere. Vouchsafe no further to prolong your talk,
For it is tedious, and the time requires
Our absence now; Histerica, make a
Fire in my Bedchamber.

Hist. It Is done, Madam.

Bell. Since yet dejected, still I Will beg the place,
To be your servant for an hours space.

Exeunt. Scen. 5.
Aberden, Hollarro. Aber. Dismiss that faculty.

Holl. Forbear, I cannot My Liege.

Aber. Oh strange, that pale Eos should feed the Tweed,
Shouting such murdering cries unto the Altar,
(Steeping its sound in poison of a rage)
Of all victorious souls, your own fame
Strives at a higher glory, then one fair,
It is a painted hieu that Ladies use,
To put fine art before true plain Nature,
Though you feel a pain, it is only love,
A foggy wrath ascends, when bright Sol mounts
Swift Pyrosus; play no more upon fair,
Let worth surmount the Towers of its foul mask,
That influence cannot strike such unheard blows,
As make your soul fly to despair for help.

Holl. Oh Lerenica, Lerenica, thou, thou.

[beats his breast. Aber. Of future joy the Monarchs of the world
Will sprinkle the notes of such a vain design;
Phoebus will make the heavenly Diamonds
Strike rays to show the folly of your will;
She is not worth a glimmering spark of stone,
Much less your Princely Bed; Hollarro, choose
One that is deserving, and my will shall
Not be against.

Holl. The Tartarian Prince is gone to foreign soyls
With other strange Hecatombs of all men;
The Captain of my soul must follow them,
If your Princely grace deny my full request;
Could I sound sweeter then the Deltan Dames,
When the tall Cedars by my force did fall,
Having more fame then the Ephesian Towers:
At that same instant, by the stately steps
Oh manhood, valor; and not this request;
It Is true, she is fair, her virtues second it,
Which is the pinnacle of ambition I aim at,
For means are dregs of the earth, her person shows
Her parts, Princes must have their liking;
Not combind to objects of honor.

Aber. The Audacious pines do not stand without fear,
Nor does your valor without trying it,
Therefore that blind and senseless Boy must take
His bow, leave you his Arrows to supply his place,
The madding waves of love, strives against stream
Of reason, bringing contempt and disgrace
To noble spirits, their smiles are smoothly
Carried to delude the Olive Branch of hope;
Therefore take one that is of noble blood,
And follow discretion as your will does guide
Your disposition.

Holl. The sayls of hope is turned to leaden plumbs,
Because you plead still for a worthier one,
Though it might be said, it is my fortune so,
To mix with flashes of both fear and hope:
Yet when my restelsse Navy comes to shore,
That same coaste must give my sentence then,
So as I sail by rudder of sweet love;
I hope the Magistrate of your affection
Will give a glad mittimus to my soul;
For if contrariety plead at the bar,
Having its trial to win overthrow.
That deadly sentence must close up my breath,
And make me fear neither Heaven, Sea, nor wind,
Therefore deny and kill; Oh, oh --

Sighs. Aber. Strange to a common sense: reason then with
Your self, she is a woman naught but flesh
And bone, and a mere gall of bitterness;
You know your Mother well, her savagenesse,
To brew her hands in teppid blood of foes,
And you thus stand in a disposition
Contrary to her heart; I wounder at
That unnatural sympathy, but e're
You despair, make choice and venture there,
Where sense does guide your fancy, but for
All, she is too low your birth.

Enter Quermero in chains, naked from the shoulders upwards, and Ialors after
him. Quer. Oh my back, oh my belly, oh my sides.

Iayl. 1. Oh your breech, firra, come away.

Quer. Oh prithee spare me, give me time to breathe.
That I may have wind to cry withal, oh, oh, oh.

Iayl. 2. Ha, ha, ha, what, do you feel it then,
You must not be so bold.

Qu. What, as to cry; I will cry, if the King were here.

Iayl. 3. But you shall not cry long.

Quer. Oh bless thee, bless thee, shall I not cry long?
Nay then I Will bid the gentle whip, come, come.

Exe. Quer. and Iayl. Holl. The civil pleasures that a dewy shower
Does gratify the earth withal, cannot
Be expressed; so your reply trebles my joy.

Aber. Flort no more with Deities of fear,
But take the Empire of all hope and force;
Grief leads no more vain anger as a sign
Of wrath, and ill-disposed manners; haste
To the Rock of mirth, make splinters fly
To be attendants on your Majesty.
Thou have been valiant, no report shall go,
Thou art dismayed by a woman foe;
Pursue your course, as you have then begun.

Holl. I will my Liege, long live your Majesty.

Exeunt. Scen. 6.
Adrenimia, Fafrisius, Buzarain, each of them bearing a man's head, and Nevermo,
following with a Hat^het. Adre. The fiege of Thebes, and Ulysses Acts,
Never betrayed fancy with so sweet a fight;
The Heads does gape, but cherishes no amber breath;
Oh las it is a pity that no sooner had
Hold them up, let us see the glory of the same,
The night will betray my mirth, before my eyes
Be satisfied, the Banquet and Music
That I took therein, brought recreation
To my vital sense, besides no equals,
Or raptures promised by a future joy,
Could bring reward to what I here have seen;
The Artillery of all hope was waggon'd up,
Betwixt their heads and shoulders, that is their necks,
My soul cannot by public, or secrecy,
Be sufficient Actor to King Aberden,
In duty, or in praise, for this same fact.
Unbolt the Prison Gates, set them open,
And let the numerous slaves be glad to see
Such great Triumphs, and their selves set full free,
And mysteries explained, by Gods of Temples all,
Because such prosperous jubilee fell out,
I recruit my self to see those signs.

Faf. The progeny of humanity challenge title in it,
Because you show like the B^thinians,
The copulating troops does entertain,
Of fame and valor, your most bright Queens health,
The heads does show your praise, and does prepare
A sacrifice unto your sacred shrine,
With amorous gesture of a lowly look,
Not like Amazons, but a Persians smile,
The natural rights within a Jewels hieu,
Does show the perfect virtues of its self;
So all your sex may with a comely brow,
Seeing your deservements by wisdoms deeds,
Turn thanks as bodies of a further fame.

Buz. Discover Engines to subdue the hill*
Of all renowning praise, that when obtained,
May be a ransom to your Empress;
The ancient Romans had never reflection
Of so great happiness, by any Pope,
As we obtain by your Sovereignty,
To keep all Laws and customs in their forms,
Not suffering them to be wrong violated,
Making decent pavillions of sobriety,
To be the Magistrates and Rocks of right,
The streets rebound (as Alexander came)
With redoubling voices of your worth and fame,

Adr. When Sols bright rays shines through the curtain
Of an Eastern fogge, then Animals rejoice;
So do I by your conjuring words,
As if I had obtained the Phoenix nest,
Which is a fountain of all sweet incense.
Records and Chronicles to posterity,
Let them challenge memory of the same,
The ^rook wherein the Nymphs correct their ga^bs,
Let show the splendour of this brave design,
As orient matter of a mineral,
Strikes beauties pride through the dark of night,
The deed's Siren, cause it wins the hearts
Of all my subjects unto Elysium.

Ner. I am executor bearing the Axe.
That brought content and pleasure to a Queen;
The Mayors and Senates of Bruzantia,
Stood Officers to the act and instruments
Thereto; we live like Elephants, disturbed
By none, bearing the Castle of liberty
On our shouldiers, and Wars thrown down,
Living by Counsel of tranquillious time,
While our foes heads do obeisance to the Queen,
Making a dance in a triangle,
Avoiding the tortures of a moments fear,
I Will bear the Axe of hope.

Adr. Lets muse no more, seeing the deeds of worth,
The streets themselves its praise will warble forth.

Faf. The tempters of all justice, lastly throws
At greatest strength, when others potent shows.

Buz. Love's guard bids yield; when honesty does play
Her questions and occasions for the day.

Nev. Join are to arms, as honor bids us do,
And make their heads and bodies lowly bow.

Adr. And for this prize, let go the prisons then,
Draw up Purcullises and set free men.

Nev. It Is done, great Queen, as your generous soul,
Is pleased to have, for it does all control,

Faf. Then Querme^ m^st go among the rest,
Which of all others he will think him blessed.

Adr. See all do go, my joy does countervail
All former faults, be they e'ne or or frail.

Buz. Clap hands for joy, because the Queen such things
Does propagate, and delightful tidings.

Omnes, Long live the Queen in health.

Adr. Wheel off the plain, and purchase more fame
Then Ixion does by turning wheel in flame,
Fetch captives more, till th'Land it self does yield
No martial soul to bear, or sword or shield
Bring all Numenia's brood unto my hand;
I know your strength none of them can withstand,
So I you leave to see the tombs of those
That dead do lie, and prisoners to unloose.

Exeunt. Scen. 7
Hollarro. Leren^ca. Holl. Love speaks as bold, as any Druids preach;
Because its darts strike at the hope of fates,
The champion of all eyes checks bashful thoughts,
Fearing to enter the barred Gates of love,
The standards of a lofty foundation,
Gives freedom to the lesser pinnacles;
So I by examples, get benefit
To make a fair progress in affections,
And as an interposition of th'Moon
Betwixt our eyes and Sun, causes eclipse;
So fainting doubts with-draws a screen mantle
Betwixt despair and hope: But, fair Madam,
If you will yield to be a Princess, I am
The man will make you.

Lere. Most noble Prince,
The place is too honorable for my birth,
And your bright grace flows by dame virtues spring
Of valor; you might command, not woo a
Humble soul, the Zodiac wherein your
La^p of goodness keeps its motion round,
Like Cy^thia's silver streams, is too radiant
F^r on me to gaze; your honor deserves
A Princess rightly born, for manners, tongue,
N^^ poor Peasant from a broken I Will;
A (...) should make answer for my part,
I am inf^^^our.

Holl. The spirits of a double breast leads Van*
In love's Empire, no gulf does back them to it.
So unknown beauty of a judged look,
Often force affection to keep triumph there.
Your beauty shows beyond a Prince his favor,
Discretion guids the manners of your soul:
You plead too poor, then moves the honor that,
You shall sit crowned with canopy of fame,
To be a Prince his spouse: I venture soul
More free then Scipio, Marius, or Sylla did,
To maintain the troop of your crystal beams,
My lance shall drop at your foot which monsters tame,
And be a servant at your wills command,
Yield and have the same.

Lere. Great Prince, your will
Has vigor to withdraw the proudest soul;
You Will knock at Pluto's Gate sore Pegasus,
Yet fear no death by incense of their breath;
Your brave Heroic mind dare face great Brute,
Make Gian^^ toys, and not know where their's scope;
And when you dance upon uneven waves,
The Eolian blades, stand trembling with your fear,
And Tritons sound your fame, to please the sense;
Why, it is strange that you does these repose,
And not a woman's shows of mean descent;
I wish my blood were higher for to join
In equal manner with your Princes right:
But read some Poet, and you will then agree I am too low.

Holl. Oh, Poets are m^n composed of species four,
[Enter Beller, and walks about on one side. They Will praise both virtue and vice
all in an hour:
'Twas not Medeas words, but Ovids quill,
That Hippolytus most chaste of will;
For if that acute Ovid likewise would,
Medea had been as chaste as e're he could;
And 'twas brave Virgil made Aeneas fame,
Soar above action of brave Turnus name;
But if that famous V^rgil pleased to be,
Turnus had been as great, nay more then he;
So 'twas not Helens looks, but Homers mind,
That made Paris his soul to her combind:
For he as well could ^urn her nature so,
That where she is fair, she should be black as crow;
Dispute no more of Poets, but give leave
My hands for to embrace, else you deceive
Me of my life.

Lere. Your words imbrew the altar of my will,
And you may force where you have used your skill,
The Phoebus of your mind has grace full bright,
My irksome caves, and my more irksome night,
The influence that is shown by its bright rays.
Turns days to nights, and nights into clear days:
Therefore my duty is, to not oppose
Your Princely grace, but make choice where it shew^,
But still I am too low.

Holl. Most nobly received,
We Will make a happy Nuptial to the day,
And The King and Queen shall grace bright Hymen's play.

Lere. I am submissive.

Holl. Come my joyful Bride.
It is not long till I lie by thy side.

[Exeunt Hollar. and Lere. Bell. Thou blazen Taper that surmountst my skill*
Taken my Mistress mace of all my joy,
Shall not live happy by the victor got,
I Will work thy ruin by some budding plot;
I Will go to Celerinus, make my plea,
And join him once by love to cross the Sea.
That he may eross my foe, Hollarro stout,
Put King Aberden and the Queen to rout;
And thee Hollarro, which by that design,
He vanquished one, at last thou will be mine:
Fair Lerenica, but cruel to show
Thy love to me, and to Hollarro owe
The right and title of it; but that fact
Shall ruined be, before he once does act.
I Will be a Traitor once to King and Land,
And Prince and Queen, because my love withstand,
Fetch him over the restless seas, the stars
Will prosper my success, because the Wars
Began first in our Land. Why tarry I
To lose the day? both King Queen, Prince, shall fly,

Scen. 8.
Chorus. Song I.
1.
Let sweet face'd Hymen's nuptial songs
Fill all, both hearts and years,
With grace to quell the mournful day
That brings in jealous fears.
2.
And no compendium of state
Drop envy to the hour,
That Bride and Bridegroom spend their time,
(...) a pleasant bower.
3.
Strange factious doing in the Land,
Brings not a slavery
Unto the Magistrates of it,
By foul conspiracy.
4.
Isis flowery banks shows not fair
To that joyful couple,
Nor Mulmutius half so stout
When his Sons did grapple.
5.
Then let the leader of all hope
Hollow triumphant fame,
And let bright Sol beraze the day
Of such a nuptial train.
Song 2.
I.
Still am I forced to fly,
And be a traitor to my King,
Because her obstinacy
Does force a horrid combating,
Lerenica
Does bear the sway
Of all this troubled distract,
Causes ruin
And undoing, oh most unseeming act.
2.
Celerinus shall enclose,
And know vermillion from white,
With his Bruzantia's foes,
And frame a field, them for to fight,
Make a battle
Which will rattle.
Sending thousands by the fact
Unto their home,
And their dark tomb, oh most unseeming act,
Wayliday, wayliday, wayliday, wayliday.
Act 5. Scen. 1.
Aberden, Arenimia. Aber. THe north and south both Poles do not contain
The very thoughts of this our great Lands joys,
A Conqueror by popular grace;
I reign with reverent voice among my flock,
Revenge will not spring up by angers dew,
Or show its muddy face by foul conspiracy;
Fortune is prosperous, spurning gods of Love
To dress our Land with crown of Trophies, Gold,
Repulsing Legions of Furies that spend
Their breathing hours naught but to wrack and ruin:
All Lands implore my aid, drooping their head,
Till hope does blow the fire of better days,
Sharp empty titles they make fame of them,
While we with hostile voice crack Thunderbolts;
And 'twas Hollarro's valor stated it,
Which is a captive to fond Cupids bolt,
Planting female Cannons charged with love,
Whose shot is fear, and powder jealousy,
Turning this Land to the Antipodes.
Lerenica has a stronger arm then he,
And by her sweet-fac'd plots, which Tyrants turn,
Has the pledges of his Princely brow;
But at the length he loves her so entire,
That he has promised union to her shrine,
And marry her.

Adr. It Is pride, not fortune sure, that nature leads,
His years are too young to hide such vows;
That glorious rays will vanish with the Sun,
Striking a seeming passage of despair,
And waken the papavered sense of his brain,
Which by an opiate virtue is made dull,
And will revive desire of ecstasy;
But if that balm, that sovereign balm of love,
Has so impregnated by a silent look,
The bed of all his joy, and heart of fire,
Them to unjoyn, shall not be my desire;
Let Myriads of prayers, and countries love sound all
Large Hymns of mirth unto their nuptial;
And let all acute Poets seek their store,
To give the Bride a gift beyond all over;
Let mirth and triumph then so join together,
That there is no difference 'twixt fair or foul weather.

Aber. The trembling silence of your dreadful vote,
Has turned his title to another sense,
The extreme load which virtuous valor bear
By loves punnyard, is an abyss of pain;
But your reply gives a supporter to
That heavy heart, which is by th'load oppressed,
Out of the stage where honor plays her Scenes.
I know he will call reward unto your name;
His duty binds such sonly grace to me,
That Reason says he will not forget thee.

Adr. The Syrian flames quench the damp of spirits,
So honored terms brings conclusion to good will;
I know the dainty Soldiers of such troops,
Fear not the fight of ashes of men's Tombs,
The constellation of his nature good,
Does bring a recompense beyond that form:
There is no royal looks, or face of fame,
Be more in gratitude then his own self,
I wish the presence of his Princely plumes,
Would over-fly the Court into this place,
That peace might show my pity to consent,
To the bright day triumph of his Bride,
I give my free consent.

Aber. His presence is
Expected, heavens starry light does show
By their true rays, the substance not far off;
For time does sacrifice unto the dame
Of patience, the flower of its first prime,
Because our mind stays leisure of his will,
Until it please be present in our sight,
The dismal looks of th'progress that he goes,
Debars the splendency of his bright beam,
Or otherwise he would have seen the Queen
(Your self) my joy, with his blessed spouse;
But stay, he comes with her.

Hollarro, Lerenica. Adr. Is this her?

Aber. Yes, this is she; welcome Hollarro.

Adr. The civil war of all the world, b^nds knee
Unto your judgment and excellency,
And so I hope this Lady gives the Bays
Unto your Crown, I wish long happy days.

Hol. Great Queen, the weakness of my youth did bend
My fancy to a sensual careless end,
Because no knowledge seemed to admit its trust
Unto your sacred wisdom which is just;
But let a fickle fancy with weak mind,
Crave pardon for my folly there inclined.

Ler. And I, most Princely Queen, which Mother be
To my poor soul, I thank on bended knee,
Because you grant the same.

Adr. Rise hopeful child,
Then King Aberden give the day its fill
Of merriment unto a Princess will.

Aber. I will, blessed Queen, Hollarro take the Bride,
And to the Church be thou a swift sure guide.
Where all the Gods of th'Land stand in a form
Of servitude, as they were all forlorn;
But haste to th'Bishop that combines the knot,
I Will stay at Palace for a future plot.

Exeunt. Scen. 2.
Bellerrio, Celerinus. Cel. It Is strange news you bring.

Bell. But it is far truer.

Cel. How can a hazard of such war, employ
Any intention of undertaking?
We pay a tribute to them of pure gold,
And sacrifice our lives for recompense,
And the highest force of all my potent souls,
Is a common Soldier; Burgargo gone!
And it is a small Nation of its strength, to stand
In revenge of the looks of Bruzantia,
I will not for a world be their combatant.

Bell. Oh how can you upon Haemus of fear,
Rest so securely with subjection;
Let Zephyrus gales move quicker in the ear,
Inform the sense how Ty^a^ny does rule:
I Will undertake with damage of my life,
To bring your Army in by port Braveron,
Amongst Bruzantiae's Lords, and King and Queen,
Before you tread a furlong on that ground;
[kneels. Let hopes survive the spirits of a King,
I beg it on my knees; you may persuade
Your self, that I am here no Harpalus,
But a true Athenian to your Majesty;
Shall my request return with joy?

Cele. A Monarch's will is not designed of,
Without the counsel of his subjects votes;
Therefore no sayls of joy must carry on
Your wandering Pinnace, till the sight of them:
The Olive branch does cluster with her fruit,
In the plain soil of our inhabitance:
Therefore to reflex on a gloomy shade
Of fear and anger were discretion.

Bell. Pity such angry days that invent it,
As not to admit of a private end,
No foreign aid can help them, for their Land
Is grown infectious by the f^tnesse often;
Therefore surround their Camp, your victory
Is sure enough, which fertility will make
Your Land as prosperous as the Aegean I Will,
Which is named Delos, where then there was born
Apollo and Diana, God and Goddess;
Then let not peace, like an innocent lamb,
Rule in the Theme, but a rampant Lion,
Rousing from den of f^ry and ruin,
Shall I you engage great, King?

Cele^. Not my self,
Unless my subjects by degrees would grow
In love with Diamonds and a Pearl her grace;
The massy weight of gold shall never draw
By North Pole virtue my mind to that Land,
But here is my Lords, Lets hear their votes.

Gervoron, Burnomoy. Cel. The man of generous brood Bruzantia,
Affords unto the province Numenia,
Is here imploring by a wooing cheek,
As the Moon does the Earth in the Antipodes,
That we may ceize a Lares, or Silvaines great,
On their fatigated limbs in plenty:
Yea, he will undertake to lead from coast,
Our squadrons to the Court Bruzantia.

Bur. No happier sky does show a light by blaze,
Of pla^etary influence or rays,
Then those same lines, if vigor be with them;
I Will follow th'motion to carp twig from th'stem.

Ger. The same I Will follow, and as a darling,
Cherish; attired in such scarlet Robes;
Will you maintain the deed?

Bell. I will, Captain,
Blaze your Troops unto the river side,
Let no delay strike in with tarriance;
For now their Land is Garden of the West,
Filled to the bounds with aromatic fruit,
An Ocean lake of dainties there is in hid;
Therefore the time runs by d^me fortunes will;
Put off no longer, but hoyse ^ales to it.

Cele. No more, no more, my Lord; c^n Pigmies stand
Against Bellonia's threats? lets slide the main,
And all our Galleys la^ch into the Ocean,
And make those azoar parallels upon
Its gliding surface, give a happy voyage.

B^r. Nereus, and all the gods do pardon not
Our wrong that is done, be pleased to view the bounds
Of thousands well joined ships ready for sail,
Ten thousand men at my command, all proof,
Burning with desire of War, dappled Nags
For to supply those Alexander souls.

Ger. No more let frozen thoughts take place within
Our natural forms, as to be lovesick with
An idle disposition: I know bright Sol
Will favor us, by being in Cancer, a
Waterish sign, proceed as preparation
Does give leave.

Bell. Oh blessed Numenia's souls,
Make no dispute, time does grow further on.

Cele. Gervoron lead up the blew mayle frocks,
And you Burnomoy be my General,
Aberden shall see what force guides our hand,
Once more commend our selves unto the seas,
Make no delay.

Bur. None great King, they are ready,
All utensells for the voyage so we go.

[Bell. with hope, with hope. Exeunt Scen. 3.
Aberden, Adrenimia, Hollarro, Lerenica, Fafris^^, Buz^ram, Nevermo. Aber. Now
all Bruzantia's rights connfirms the day
And Lacedemonan customs of the boy
Hyacinthus bids meriment to the same:
Let shepherds write this nuptial wedding day
In red Capital Letters for a Holiday,
Joy to Hollarro, and the Bride his spouse.

Adr. Hymen's fits crowned with Garlands of all joy,
To welcome train of marriage, Ladies beds,
Sprinkled in form of solace, and of mirth,
And the Pyrene mounts drop offerings to
Such sacred meetings as this day affords,
Long live you both is health and happily.

Holl. Great King, the duty of a weak desire
Comes short in limits of a recompense;
Let humble will, with intention, her aid,
Strike thanks so worthy as you do deserve,
Most virtuous Queen, the law does guide my sense,
If that I taste once of ingratitude,
(A stranger plant then ever Glaucus eat)
To turn my self into a main of fear,
And counted their a God not for to live,
But by a fained will, so thanks to you
For gracing Nuptials of my wedlock hour.

Lere. The mind that treads in natures paths, must say
With the guest of most free deliverance,
All thanks to King and Queen.

Aber. Then Prince Hollarro, now the knot is done,
It shall not be said by Bruzantians,
I like Amyens, caused your banishment;
But all their tribute's quitted by this day,
And thou shall be the King of fruitful place,
And issue of my hope of all the Land;
Acknowledge Prince of the Cecilian souls;
And like great Butes, have a Champion race;
How like you it, my Lords?

Faf. You are a ^ire of all firm judgment,
Brutus divides not the least Atome from't,
Where the way your credit takes its course,
I^ argument enough for me to yield.

Buz. The succor of the Gods descends from Jove,
So all our lives and Pedigree of us.
Has conduits of all plenty, good and great,
From the protection of your mighty hand;
Therefore if I deny, no pardon's the^e,
But grim unjustice must devide the spoil,
Give me the worst, and shame thereunto boot;
So let both Nature, Nation, and all friends,
Give vote as free, as my soul does unclose,
Or wish to have the same Hollarro King.

Nev. Great King, your will is good, I like the same.
Hoping he will prove a Lap^thenian soul,
A second Phlegias; your motion's good,
And liked of all, here is the Bardes presents
The Groom and Bride a song.

Enter three Brades, and sings to the Music. 1.
Great Sol was di^^
By a pearly dew,
But now does fling
Off that muddy hieu,
By the sweet motions of such smiles,
The Bride and Bridegroom time beguiles;
Then let both heaven, earth, and sea,
Four Elements, what is e're they be,
Give happy joy, and mirth for ay,
To those brave gu^sts of this same day,
For ever, for ever, let all sing
Hymns to the Queen, and her brave King.
2.
A joyful day,
But more joyful night,
Lead on the way
To that same delight;
And when its past a happy morn,
To the Groom that is by his Bride born,
And so we wish to after rest
To the Bride, that is by B^idegroom pressed:
So let all joy wait leisure on,
To pleasure them in splendent morn;
For ever, for ever, etc.
Aber. The Diadem Hollarro is stayed,
Of all Bruzantia on your noble head:
Numenia's Land is struck with fear and quakes,
Under the ^^ow of such a martial soul.
After the drowsy pomp of nuptial terms,
You shall begin your Reign.

Holl. The massy weight of such a grave design
Would act its part far better with your self,
But since a freedom breathes such spicie notes
Of father's love, my duty must give way.
For Cel^us, the father of immortal Gods,
Never did indue his Sons with greater joy:
Caeus he was not in least politic,
To lose his Trophies by a Hercules:
Strength shall not subdue wit, if it has play,
I Will rule the Land, and I will you obey.

Aber. Thou shall, brave Prince: the Temple's clad with joy,
To receive your sacred presence, and also
Honors most stately camp does obeisance
To your heroic shrine: be thou the King.

Omnes. Heavens bless his Majesty.

Lere. My breast's an altar to the sacrifice
Of loves due rights, unto my loyal King.

Holl. Thou art a Queen, and my only spouse,
Both King and Queen, Lord bless your Majesty's.

Scen. 4.
A great noise within of landing! and afterward, they cry, (Kill all, kill
all, etc.) and by and by, enters Celerinus, Bellerrio, Gervoron, Burnomoy,
Sould^ers, Ensigns, and Drums, Flourish. Aber. What is the news within? Heaven^
bles^ me!
What is it?

Adr. I wish all things were right, then see,
My Lords.

Nev. A foul invasion, we are betrayed,
Celerinus comes.

Cele. I, and die you shall;
[Fight. Fall on brave souls, let us ruin root and branch,
Like the Hybernian blades, sound a loud,
Lead up the fronts; strike, strike.

Faf. Oh Traitor, traitor.

Bell. Die, die, thou slave.

Celer. Wound not the Queen: let her pains rest, to be
A future punishment.

Aber. Oh I die, I die, thou vain destroyer
Of men's lives.

[Here all Aberdens s^d^, with himself, is killed, save only Adrenimia, who is
cha^'d, and carried out; and Hollarro, who defends himself, and escapes, and
takes Lerenica with him. Cel. Conduct the Queen to prison,
The day's our own, with the Supreams of the Land.

Bur. We will, great Liege, let us follow out the chaise.

Exeunt, march. Quermero with a dish full of furmity. Quer. Oh me, stay, what is
here to do? what, a sleep? or tumbling;
Pox take it, you will break your brains with it, and I
My belly with plum pottage; rise for shame:
What, is here the slave that imprisoned me;
A bard, a burd, or a turd, tell; what, art thou
Dead, alive, or drunk; rise, and stand,
[Takes the Kings Cloak, and puts it on wrong side outward. Thou haste a
velvet Cloak I Will see how it fits me,
Hey, it becomes my Princely person right.
I look like some grave Minister or Divine,
A black blew velvet, and scarlet gippo;
See, my foot stands like some reverend Bishop,
And my backside like a Prince behind;
These pottage, pottage, trouble, when I King;
But stay, they will do me courtesy at time,
I Will put them up; hold up velvet Jacket;
[Puts the Pottage in his pocket. Oh these are warm still from the heart to the
breast;
But for all my jesting, what do you mean
To go to dinner or no? I Will promise
Here Is good furmity for the same, Come go?
What, you are mad sure: but if you be,
I Will right your senses straight to its same form:
[He kicks them. Oh how their guts cry Pease and Bacon hot:
[Nevermo pisseth. I Will break the Pitcher and let the juice out,
As hot as my pottage; stay, where are they?
Ho, in my pocket, in my pocket,

Scen. 5.
Enter Burnomoy. Bur. What art thou? and for whom?

Quer. A turn-coat, and for my self.

Bur. Dye then thou slave.

[Falls as if he were dead, and while he lies, eats up his pottage. Que. I with
all my heart.

Bur. Once righteous cause, shows face against its foe,
And Northern scourge brings yoke of Scipio's fear;
My hands imbrew'd in warlike Champions,
All save Hollarro the B^zantian soul;
A Brennus, or Nenius of fame
[Quer. I sleep (...) all th^re swallow's Custara, and pelts of (...) Whose
shallowed concaves, compels in valor
All mushrums of fear (save only he)
Trampled by beast of forest, and of plains,
I shall be Lord or King by the conquest.

[Enter (...). Holl. Nay, that thou shall not, stand then like a man,
[Fights. Bur. falls, and dies, An equal bond is now shared by my blade:
The Cyprian Queen like chaste Diana,
Of all my hope, waits leisure of a time;
I Will not stay from her, but requite my self.
[Exit H^llar.
Que. Oh, oh, I have got the wind chollick by
Lying on my belly, the pease and Broth
Does run such Barly-breaks within my maw,
That if the backdoor hold not, I shall leak;
Hold Punniard and Sword. I dare not stir,
Fear lest I send my broth then parboyl'd out:
Ill ventured, my breeches is clean; up, up,
[He rises. I go as if I had a Frenchman in my Boots;
But now I Am forced to turn, I shall be killed,
Or else foully bestride.

[lies down again. Celer^nus, Gervoron, Bellerro, Soldiers, Drum, Ensign. Cel.
The wrath of Nero is not yet appeased,
We are like Nevervian souls, stout to a spoil,
Though Law and Nature be our enemies,
Yet we will rain the Hype^borean pole,
And make our Land like shepherd Hyraeus host,
A place for to receive none but the Gods:
But after Gradivus has then clattered thus,
Let Us make a burial to the Elysium field,
So Soldier take up the bodies of the dead,
Carry them as Trayo^s to their long sought home.

[Quer. Then they will let me alone, for I am not dead. Ger. See you perform your
office, the King commands.

Soul. We will, great King, and noble General.

Ger. Lo here is slain brave Burnomoy, the blade
Who deserves pomp, as much as Burgargo had.

Cel. That time and this is not now poys'd alike,
The War conveys a change of Sea and Land,
Therefore he must be buried among the rest,
So then confirm your place.

[Exeunt omnes praeter Soldiers* Sold. 1* Come, lets make a hole, and put
them all in.

Quer. Oh, what must I do then? faith I Will dye with them,
For I shall be killed if I stir.

Sold. 2. Let Us take the plunder of the field first;
Oh here is a good suit, I Will have this, none else.

Sold. 3. What, here is one fellow warm, I believe he
Is alive still;
[He kicks Quer. to see whether he be alive or no, and Quer. answerth nothing,
but makes a face. But if he be quick, he shall be put in the grave first.

[Exeunt, and carry (...) the dead bodies. Scen. 5.
Hollarro, Lerenica. Holl. The time runs round by hidden motion,
I was a King, but now more desperate;
And you my Queen, but fortune frowned thereon.
I wish that Halia could have then oppressed
To drown their ships in Cynthia's merciless realm,
Her Father Nere^s with a glad design,
Before they footed this Bruzantia:
Fair Lerenica, I must fly for fear,
To adore the sorrows of an exiles place;
I Will leave my Princely Robes, and dress my bones
According to the custom of a Pilgrims form;
And beat the banks which Neptunes waves have tossed
To hunt my death, because I loathe the same;
And at my last farewell, I Will use no art,
Let sighs, tears, kisses, bid loath to depart.

Lere. Those drops of blood does stain my maiden face,
Because my sole Artemon must fly hence,
Sure Jove will strive to make the Ganymedes,
For the Hesperidon Dragon cannot stand
The force of such a Hercules: let hope,
Where Is e're you tread your Princely guard, then guide
Your hood-winck actions in unknown places.
I willing am to stay, to make a prayer,
When you depart you will kill my life, that thing.
The Swan's near death, when she begins to sing.

Holl. Oh Damsel of my breath, let not such debt
Lie on the fabric of Hollarro,
Though I have ^iomedes fame, I Am loath
To prove Domitianus to thy soul;
Heaven and Earth will not forgive the fact,
No sacrifice nor kneeling pay the act;
The st^rry bowers would send a loathsome smell
To strangle death in the prime of my days;
Besides the edge of furious war would bring
A State to beg relief for thy great woe;
What, I be D^mophoon to Phillis?
To cause untimely death? far from Hollarro,
Aid requires no help; I Will carry you
Along with me, to make the Indian foes
Grow stiff with fear, because they see the Sun
Eclipsed by your bright brow; then go with me.

Ler. Display your self no more in i^ward love,
My heart and tongue cannot express my mind;
I Will dwell within the Land, Bruzantia's walls,
As long as breath sees still the inner rooms;
Go noble Prince, as power does give thee aid,
For thy own sake, I'^^ live and die a maid.

Holl. Sweet Lerenica loath, but I must go,
My soul bids fly, my heart cries out the same,
Then fair Lerenica, please to take the air,
Of other Princes from Numenia:
So I must go, my tongue fails, naught but this
I can express; fair, give me adieu kiss,
Constant Lerenica, constant Lerenica.
[Exit Holl.
Ler. Go noble Prince, stay, take another kiss;
What, art thou gone? woe, woe, Lerenica,
Cannot my warbling voice crave Niobe,
To be with her turned into a dull stone,
That those stretching motions may then faint
At my more flinty nature, then my breast
Can expel from it, as such stormy blows,
Or with Iphianassa and Lysippe,
Changed to strange furies, that no woe may pierce,
My vital spirits; pish, now I feel
A stronger temper then those Goddesses,
No Daelalus his Labyrinth can hide,
My woe from running its due ordered course;
Then let me frame a twist as Iphis did,
For to make sorrow have abortive birth,
Or turned to man, to have a stronger heart
In the defiance of my wandering woe:
But stay, I wrong poor natures time,
For to detard the blow that rids my pains,
So pangs strikes larums to my parting close;
Then do appear thou ender of my life,
[Drawes her knife. Bring license from Elizian souls to me;
Come, come, thou quick Physician, welcome now,
Thy medicines to my poor panting soul,
No tears shall hinder virtue of thy will,
Nor Ivory breast turn point of steely form;
So then I come Hollarro, dear Hollarro,
[stabs. To which place thou'l follow me, woe, woe, woe.
Now I will frame an ocean for my soul
Of pure blood, to hoyst a Gallie in.
And its same say I shall aim at no port else,
But the Hollarro, Hollarro of my joy,
So spend you drops and make a quick conv^y,
Drench all my soul to make that great deluge;
But if your wandering channels run to him,
Inform his ear my heart was the messenger,
And for his own dear soul I bleed my last,
I wrong my soul to stay the time so long:
[stabs aga^n. Now then you happy Nymphs, make passage free,
Let no foul ghost turn back my bloody hand,
Though grim Prometheus vulture's tear my breast,
Yet still my journey tempers all those pains.
Then Jove that loves Diana's Nymph that is fair,
Ruling the whole universe in form,
Send down a smiling look, take pity of
Her, who does welter in her own hot blood,
As in the great red Sea, whose water boyls,
The time begins to challenge privilege:
Oh, oh, I fail; oh, oh, I fail, and come,
Now, now, methinks, whole Kingdoms ^ome to me:
Oh sweet sweet Music, and a melody,
Hollarro, so I go, Hollarro --

[Falls and dies, and lies on the Stage. S^en. 6.
Celerinus, Gervoron, and Bellerrio. Cel. Mars, Armocares, is still our friend,
The mounting Eagle soars upon the wind,
And makes pale Moon a Diadem to her Crow^,
And so all language smiles ^i^h hollowing cries,
To show our force like the Athenian,
Great Agatho, strange man of might, but weak
Unto our souls, who are Hyperions Son,
They stood like Pigmies, while we A^bions
And Bergions stood to oppose the wrath;
Their Towns are ours, we will make a happy sky,
Present a prosperous morn unto our souls;
And when crystal Aurora gives the foy!
To Cynthia's wandering Chariot, then I Will give,
And all divide the Land according to the place
Of every Soldier, the whole Kingdom shall
Be in fragments.

Ger. Great King, the appointment of your sunbright
Judgment, gives peace and plenty to our minds,
Whole Regions of a violentiall form is turned
To peace, her wishes in a splendent case;
And as the aggregate of future loss,
Is over-vail'd by joy of present time;
Even, so your sacred will stops envies teeth,
To give this Kingdom in a recompense.

Cel. Though Maulinus, they were noble in their deeds,
To use the chain of liberty with friends,
The Phoenix of that age, which robbed the time
With his best deeds, are trifles to my vote;
I hope my time will not prove like Cavinus,
But live to see my men in silver forests,
Urania's ^ ure shall not content the mind,
Nor (...) Lu^e so well as gift will do,
Tomorrow morning it shall be confirmed.

Bell. Your royal Majesty has shaped my lot;
If Achilles were here, and Pargamus,
Their same could be no greater then ours won;
Neptune and Nereus conspired with all one vote,
And Titans rays for to redeem your Land,
And, noble Liege, you have fulfilled your part.

Ger. The storm is over of great rage and War,
Rhenus her waves never flowed with Nilus tides,
To make a fertile soil, may be compared
To this your most King-like decree of fame.

Cel. Here I Ulysses, they Alcanders stand,
While the Troys blades strike dead those Sarpedons,
The Agonius god is at command:
I Will do what pleases fancy of my care,
Though Alexanders fame runs much in world,
Yet bounty takes the place of all his acts,
Alecto, and the other two, cannot
Withdraw the purpose that I have decreed;
So we will begone, to morrow is the day.

(Exeunt Cel. Ger^, manet Bellerrio. Bell. Where Is now Lerenica? sure^ speed
will drive
Her feet, to make a ranscat for her bold
Attempt, I shall be King or Prince, the King
Fore-tells, by service I did perform;
The brazen Gates of Hell dare not withstand
The bilbow blades of my great thundering arm:
[Finds Lerenica. But stay, what is this? the spoils of some strange story,
It Is not Lerenica sure, her face is black,
A contrary climate to her element;
I Will cl^nse thy face to see with sorrows eyes,
Sure't cannot be fair L^renica;
Let Us see thy chin, thy finger and thy ring;
Oh las, it is the signature I gave
To her dear soul. oh cursed Bel^errio,
I have done wrong for to defame my King,
And lose my Dame, a mock-star of the Sun;
Oh slavery of Heirs, to fight and die
By that great War I overcame by blows;
Let one Urn conclude both of our ashes,
A servile man unto my sorrow: no,
This arm shall send a weapon to my heart,
No policy shall work by quick design,
To turn the mind that hangs on that same string:
She Is dead, she is dead, and stabbed her self for grief,
By homebred strife, and a full stretched arm;
What, shall I live to see those days of woe,
With this my body, and want the life of the soul?
No, sure I may with Carthaginians,
Be buried quick as Philenius were,
Make Celerinus prove to me a Cyrene
Oh that would be a joyful day to see,
Such a mutation in my barbarous plot;
Or like Orpheus wife Euridice,
Be stung with the Aristaean Adder,
And so cause end to this my gloomy light:
But these afford no aid unto my dying soul,
Then let me be with Babylonian dame,
To Dirces fish converted, in moment,
That all Pallanian dames may hiss my woe,
To see my foul and unreserving thought;
Let flocking furies strangle breath within
Such a presumptious soul, to venture it;
I caused her death, then death must recompense
That virgins act; I must, I must then dye,
The battle's ended, but in arms with me,
Such objects fright my inner vitalls sense,
[Draws his sword. So thou must be my friend when all forsake;
A happy key to open death the Gate.
Cut, cut, the veins, that has wrought such a foe,
To fair Lerenica in her resting sleep:
Then here I come with a most sweet content,
[stabs With Cancus bird, to pine away with mirth, oh-oh-
The pangs begin to work, I leave this place
To be surnamed ( Bellerrio's comfort
With Lerenica) --

[Falls and dies, so they are both conveyed off the Stage. Scen. 7.
Hollarro in a d^stressed condition. Holl. This dismal life gives tongue unto
my mind,
What Arcadian mountain, or Pholot wood,
Receive my soul, and charge it as a prey,
A Panetolium forest would befit
My sense with decent alarums of fear;
Rouse then authority of hellish cries,
Be thou a foe when substance wants its force,
Bring in a full carreer of desperate shouts,
And tax the muster-role of all my sense,
Though the Athenian Cynegirus
Holded the ship, while hands and stumps did last:
So I in fathers Kingdom equaled him,
In that Halcyion's nest of all my joy,
No choler moved me to it, but duty did imprint
To lend that aid of my full strongest arm,
By whose great blows the air it did inflame;
I forced all those Symbarians by a rule,
To make the earth a pillow for their souls.
That which was matter and spirit, is now turned
To matter only in a putrid form:
The Spirit's gone like an airy breath,
And a sweet music only by its sound.
When I have done all, this, must now return
Into a hopeless humor of my life,
Losing my Kingdom, cast as reprobate:
No sure, I shall never undergo't with hope,
To boil in lak^ of famine and despair,
Vengeance oryes loud unto my fearful soul,
But impotency warns me to desist,
A desolate forest yields no comfort to
A Princely humor, lest be by combat
Of savage creatures in their form and shape,
But let a hope survive my vital sense,
Often good fortune haps to a foreign Prince:
But stay, methinks I wander without brains,
Where Is Le^enica my only Queen and joy;
Oh that is the deed, no hope can recompense;
Now, now, these thoughts bequeath my life to death,
Let Orcus streams that flow from Stygian lake,
Make her full course in channel of my throat;
Or like Oenomatus, an El^an King,
Treacherously slain, not knowing friends from foe
Or else like Daphn^, turn to tri-form,
Wearing a Laurel Crown of Prince's power;
But all these days are gone, a quicker charm
Shall do the deed, come thou my steely man:
[He draws his sword, and sets it to his breast, but cannot make it enter. Oh
strange, oh strange; what, is my soul an Adamant?
The point is turned, sure gods has against said,
I Will try once more, perchance it was my fear;
[He tries again, and his sword breaks. Heavens bless me, what is the matter?
what, is
My sword confounded, and my breast yet firm?
Well, I Will go range for a fury to kill
Me, or else die with despair.
Exit Hollarro.
Celerinus. Gervoron, Soldiers. Cel. After the Queen is punished by courage,
Of lash, of fury, with a martial hand,
The storms grown calm of all our foreign foes,
All poetic Centaures leave the game,
Not one assayl on credit of our fame;
Then Gervoron be you the Lord of
The woody Province of Bruzantia;
As for Bellerrio he has sung a doleful close
Of ecchoing quavers to Elysium:
And all my Souldlers have a ^itting bound,
According to the valor they have won.

Ger. Most noble Liege,
Time does surrender office to your Crown,
Giving the Theater of all Kingly power,
Making all Rebels venture for safeguard,
Suffering no bulwork of discretion;
Therefore grave judgment is in balance now,
And your great Majesty has poys'd the same,
By prosperous spoils; all ponderous rage is gone
Fled with the viper to the cave of fear:
All foggy shaddows turn a crystal rays,
To make the misty humor ascend up;
Tears wiped from us, a joyful day now coms,
No stars are now, but turned to glittering suns.

Cel. Let Tagus spangled shore void up all Gems,
And Nilus gliding streams recruit all stems,
The quintessence of all four Elements,
And all the earth as they each one frequent,
Join all in one to make Elixar true,
Yet all are vain to what is born to you,
The mass of all the round terrestiall globe,
Is unto that you have, but a poor node;
You in abyss of joy is plunged full out,
And in a Wardrobe which none can recrout;
Go blessed souls, take spoils or fields, what you
Do most approve of, or best in your show.

Sold. Noble Heroic Liege, all grace wait on
Your Kingly honor, and royal person.
Exit Sold.
Ger. Honor of honors, and the field of fame,
Give Victors, Trophies, to your divine name;
Let them all sound, to make the rocky stones
Know whose's their subject, who helps their great moans,
And let the wheel of valor still at hand,
Stand present at the sign of your command.

Cel. The rector of all the spread dapled skies,
Who holds the Poles, and all that on them lies*
Bids gloomy Luna take possession free,
Of golden Titan and his splendency.
So we will depart, Aberden must give way
To Celerinus, who still rules the day.

Exeunt. Scen. 8.
Chorus, Song 1.
1.
Let s^ble mourning fling away
Her dusty Robes, here comes the day,
Which makes bright Ceres smile to see
Such Bacchalian tranquillity,
All Gods and Goddesses both far and never,
Must sing and praise this day with grateful che^r
2.
The Stygian lakes must cease ^be,
And Cerberus greedy of his fee,
Peace does make Bellonia frown,
Mars yields up, and gives Peace the Crown;
Then let us all clap hands for joy of thi^,
That naught can recompense below a bliss.
Song 2.
See how the flocks possess the ground,
While men do wait thereon,
And all things in a blessed form,
And joyful union;
All Cities quiet, singing hymns,
While children plays thereby,
Skies send to them a happy morn,
All by mil^e jubily;
Therefore since peace does make these things,
Let us spend all our days
To frame such peace while peace does last
In all our wandering ways:
How bravely Nymphs and Satyrs play,
And skip in valleys low;
And how great Jove does like the same
In such a pleasant show;
Then sound, clap hands, and make a noise,
Till skies they do rebound,
To see such friend^hip and such love,
'Twixt their Land and this ground.
Exeunt. The Graces, with the Ri^g of Amity. Agl. Aberden caused Celerinus to
fly.

Tha. Celerinus made Aberden know why.

Eup. Neither of those Kings knew which first should die.

At. Here Is Aberdens ashes laid in tomb,
And Soldiers lie so thick, there is no room
For future damage, the clear stars wax dim,
A Serpent now is viceroy of all sin,
His Subject made their answer and design,
Still viewing Countries, till with him made fine:
The wide mouth of all swallowing angers throat,
Gapes like Eagle or Lion from his vote,
No Empire bounded, but this Nymph will see
The bounds and freedom of its liberty;
She Is born of crooked nature, 'cause her will
Is often employed to manage what is ill;
But let grim Anger wait, as long as days,
Or years, or months, or Sol has any rays,
She still shall be debarred from us three,
Who live in ring (naked) of amity.

Tha. The hellish Queen, great Adrenimia's paid
To her deserts, in prison chained, and laid
For future trouble of a dreadful day;
Greedy her hands were to spill blood always;
But now expect revenge from that same King,
Where she employed such a Lethalian thing.

Eup. The Prince Hollarro still must wander time,
In smiling Dales and Woods then full of crime;
The hoysting sayls of all his hope must be,
After foul cross to have community,
Until the spangled skies does give such rays,
I wish bright Sol may turn all nights to days;
But if my wish be too severe in sight,
I wish all native Princes had their right.

Exeunt. Tibul.
-- credula vitam
Spes fovet --
FINIS.

