A Yorkshire DIALOGUE, In its pure Natural DIALECT: As it is now commonly
Spoken in the North parts of Yorkshire.

Being a Miscellaneous discourse, or Hotchpotch of several Country Affairs,
begun by a Daughter and her Mother, and continued by the Father, Son, Uncle,
Neese, and Landlord.

Note that D. stands for Daughter, M. for Mother, F. for Father, S. for Son, V.
for Uncle, N. for Neese, and L. for Landlord.

Reader here is folly, come and Laugh thy fill, He near did good, that never did
noe Ill.

YORK, Printed by John White, and are to be sold by Richard Lambert, at the
Crown at the Minster-gates. 1683.

A Yorkshire Dialogue in its pure Natural Dialect, as it now commonly spoken
in the North parts of Yorkshire, being a Miscellaneous discourse, or
Hotchpotch of several Country affairs, begun by a Daughter and her Mother, and
continued by the Father, Son, Uncle, Neese, and Landlord;
D. MOther our Croky's Cawven sine't grew dark,
And Ise flaid to come nar, she macks sike wark;

M. Seaun, seaun Barn, bring my Skeel and late my tee
Mack have, and hye Thee ore to the Laer to me:
Weese git a Battin and a Burden Reap,
Though it be mirke, weese late it out by grape;
Than we will to*th Field and give the Cow some Hay,
And see her Clean, before we come away;
For flaid she git some water before she Cleen,
And mar her Milk, Ise greet out beath my Neen:

D. Whaugh Mother how she Rowts, Ise varra Arfe
She Will put, and rive my good Prunella Scarf,

M. Ise dinge thy harnes out, thou base mucky Sewe,
Thou macks sike Anters, Thou'l mistetch my Cow;
What need thou be seay flaid. She will nut mell,
Nor Hipe, if there war neane here but thy sell;

D. Wally, wally, here is a deft Tinye Cawfe,
It Is better than a Keausteril behawfe,

M. It Is newly gitten Feaut, tack haud on it Tibb,
We Will suckl't weel, and put it into 'th Cribb,
And Bed it Strangly, with good clean Streay,
And see it lye'th sell down before we geay,
Now let us hame, and late for Bowls and Sile,
Thy Father'l meause whore we are all this while.

F. Ise nut far, is it Cow Cawv'd that is a gooddin,
Now Tibb weese git some Beestling puddin,
Let Us Spang our gates for it is varra Snithe,
And Ise flaid wife, it will be frost belive,
Leake yonder is it Lad coming, to late for you,
He Would be in Bed, to Morn, we gang to plewe,

M. Wya, wya, did 'th pot play when you com.
Wheay keauks the Supper now when Ise fra hame
What Hob is it Beef aneugh, is it Groats put in
Till all war deaun, I knawe thou wad not lin,

S. Ey Mother the Groats are in, Ive taken of'th pot,
And 'th Cael I seaure are cawd eneugh to Sup;

M. Come tack up'th Beef Tibb, is it Dubler ready,
Thy Father and Hobb mun gang to the Smiddy,
And fetch the Specks, Sock, and Coulter hither,
Seedtimes now come, they mun Saw Haver;
Stride Tibb, and clawt some Cassons out 'oth Hurne,
Then geay Thy ways and fetch a Skeel of Burn,
And hing the pan ore'th Fire, ith Rekin-crewke,
And Ise wesh 'th Sile, and dishes up 'ith Newke,
And than we will all to Bed; here is a cawd Neet
But Husband Ise cling close, and weese blend Feet,

F. Pray thee deau Pegg, than Ise git up 'ith Morn,
And late some pokes, and put up our Seed Corn:
Than thou may sarra'th Goats and Gilts with draffe,
And Ise give Yawds some Hinderends and Caffe,
Than for our Breakfasts, Thou may haet some Cael,
Till I lie by my Shackfork and my Flail:
And Hobbs mack ready my Harrows and my Plewgh,
And he and I Pegg, sall deau weel aneugh;
Ive hard it tauk'd, and now the Truth Ive fund,
Amell tweay Steauls, the Tail may fall to the grund.
I lited on Hobb, he Lited on me,
And the Deel a thing is ready at I see,
Neither Traces, Hames, nor Baurghwans to find,
Swingle Trees, nor Helters, all is made an ill end
But tweay days sine, Ise seaure they war all here,
Flung on an Heap 'ith midst of our Laer Fleaure,

S. Fatther they are ligging all on our Faugh Lands
I trail'd them there my sell with my own hands;

F. Thou's a good Lad my Hobb that teauke sike Care
Is It Yoaks and Bows and Pad and Yoaksticks there

S. Ey ey and'th Plewgh Staff teau Hopper and Teems
We lack nowght but a Bay Stagg of me Neems
That wee're to Yoake'ith plewgh before our Yawds,
And than Ise seaur weese rive up all Adawds.

F. Near rack near rack, weese tack neay thought for that,
Ise seaur that it will bide us billing at.
Our Land is tewh, and full of strange whickens,
Catt whins, and Seavy Furrs and monny Breckins,

S. Lythe ye, Lythe ye, how fondly you tawke,
You think, weese mack monny ilfavart Bawke.

F. Gray Geause has laid, geuy carry in her Egg,
Tibb dare not come to fetched, for flaid'oth Stegg. Grise,
Then goame, steeke'th Hemble deaur and bar up'th
For they have been in a mischief twice or thrice.
The Libber comes to Morn, weese Libb'th awd Piggs
For they have mead filthy wark, 'oth Corn Land Riggs.

S. Fatther our Bull Seggs pussom'd, he is degbownd,
And our awd Mere is slidden into'th Pownd,

F. Wellaneerin, wellaneerin, run fast run,
Hye thee Hobb, and bid thy Mawgh Herry come,
And bring his horn, and give our Segg a drinck,
Mack hyast or else Ise lam thee till thou stinck.

V. How now Hobb, thou reeks sayr what macks ta run
What uncuths hes thou brought come tell me seaun,

S. Our Yawd's laid arse-ward, Bull Segg is like to dec,
And seay Ise com for you to gang with me.

V. Marry Ise varra weay, for that's ill warke,
Ise flaid, weese not get there before't be dark*

F. That's weel your come, the Segg is at Stand Hecl,
What ails it is deaur I cannot find out'th Sneck.

V. Is this him that liggs here, he is tengd he will dee
Lett's stick him, there is neay whopes of him I see,
He Is pratty meetery Flesh here s a good skin,
He l mack good Ca^l and put fat Backon in;
Lett's gang and see your Sheep, what ails yon Teaupe
I think he is gitten some stob in his Feaut,
Thur Yowes are Clowclagg'd, they skitter sayr,
They Will be full of Mawks if you tack nut care,
I think they have gitten some fresh whewt of girse,
That macks them seay beclarted about 'th Arse.

F. Ise like to Clem lets hame Maugh to our Pegg,
She Will trigg our Kites with good Kirne Milk and Whigg

V. Sister have you owght that will slocken weel,
You Have Whigg 'ith Stand, and good Kirn-milk 'ith Skeel
Fill me'th Bend Kit, Ise set it to my paet
I Will venture a strange pull, though I be haet.
Here Is sine Backon Sister its glore fatt,
But it is a little knarl'd with our Carl Catt.

F. Its small warse Pegg where is our Haver Riddle;
Last time I sawt, it was laid ive our Stable.
Wheay hes remmond 'th Side Lanyells some ill Foal,
I laid um here under the Aumry soal.
Can neathing lig, that leeter than a stane
We sall heve nowt left seaun, all will be gane
All things run wrang wife, neathing Cottens weel
Thy spindle is all ravield, nea Garn oath Reel.
Thy sammaron webb thou sent tuth Bleacher well
Is stown, gray Geause Gezlins all dazd ith shell
Our Bayking I put up 'ith Harden Seck,
The Mi^ners let it fall into the Beck,

M. Ways is me Husband our awd Breads all gane,
We mun mack Bannocks till 'th Bakin come haum.

F. Its comes ith Earnder Wife or else be Neaun,
Come bring my Siippers Tibb and deet my Sheaun.
To Morn ith Ownder we mun dod our Sheep,
The Weathers hate and Mawks begin to creep:

M. Sum's feald our backstane Tibb or else its gean,
Ise varra flaid sum es gitten't for'th lang lane,

D. Whilk ways our Hobb gaen Mother, here is base wark
Yonder Is Gawt ith Garth and riven all his sarke.

M. What Is warse than ill luck, late me our Fruggin,
Ise stop 'th Yatt, tell thou mack Perry lugg him.

F. Herest Dubler brocken, and nowther Soul nor Breau*
And Ise seay Howl I knawe nut what to deau.
Here Is mad wark Hobb, Speer'th Heck and flay back'th Catt.
Therest Backon in her mouth hitt her a batt
Weel dean Hobb hest a gittint leauke is it there,
Its little warse its traild 'ith Mucky Fleaur,
Here'st Gully liggin, call thy Mother seaun,
Ise scrape it clean, Ise seaure its now past Neaun,
Fie fie if we would nut come just when we did,
We Would been mislicken'd of our dinners Pegg.

M. How seay I whemmil'd Dubler ore the Meat,
To keep it safe and warm for you to Eat.

F. But'th Catt had eaten't all if weed nut been
Dubler's brocken, thou may trust thy nawn Even,
I Wad feign see a fine Sun shiny day,
Here Is wancle weather for gittinge of our Hay.
What ails our Tibb, that she urles seay ith Newke,
She Is nut Reet. she leauks an Awd farrand Leauke.

D. Fatther, Ive gitten cawd, I can scarce tawke,
And my Snurles are seay sayr stopped, I can nut snawke,

N. How duz my Cozen Tibb Naunt I mun nut stay,
I hard she gat a Cawd the other day,

M. Ey wallaneerin, wilta gang and see, Stee.
She Is aboun 'ith Chawmber, Thou may Clim upth
She Is on a dovening now gang deftly Nan,
And mack as little din as ee'r Thou can.

N. Your mains flaid, there is an awd saying you knawe
That Is there is no Carrion will kill a Crawe:
If she be nut as dead as a deaur Nail,
I Will mack her flyer and semper like Flesh Cael,
What Tibb I see, Thou is nut yet quite dead,
Leauke at me woman, and haud up thy head.

D. Ah Nan steeke'th winderboard, and mack it dark,
My Neen are varra sayr, they stoun and warke.
They are seay Gummy and Furred up sometime.
I can nut leauke at 'th Leet, nor see a stime.

N. Come come, I can mack Thee Leetsome and blythe,
Here will be thy awd Sweetheart here Belive.
He tell'd me seay I say him but last Neet
O Tibb he is as fine as onny Kneet.

D. Nay Nan Thou dus but jest there is neay sike thing,
He woes another Less and gave her a Ring.

N. Away away great feaul tack thou neay Care,
He swears that he will love thee for evermare.
And says as ever he whopes his Saul to seave,
He Will either wed to Thee, or tull his greave.

D. Thou macks me laugh Nan, if all be true thou says,
I whope that than Ise see some joyful days:
He Is made me have monny a sad heart,
I thought he would left me, and wad nut tack my part.
But than sometimes I thowght it is a black Creake,
That never to her sell can gitt a Meake:

N. The Reason why he duz nut come and gang,
He says love me leetly and love me lang.
There Is luck in Leizur, he would have your Loves tack haud
He says he is heard that haet Love is seaun cawd:
He can Leov the House weel that has Tibb in,
And nut be always Riding 'oth Riggin.
Next time he comes he will tell thee all his mind,
Seay be nut Stanfra, but Loving and kind,
And let him kiss and grape teau if he will,
Thou's near warse woman for there is nean can tell.

D. He Is had neay want of that which macks me think,
The Proverb's true, that proffered things duz stink:
The things that we have dean Ise arfe to tell,
But I suppose Thou's deaun the same with Will:

N. Pray thee tell me Tibb, tell me woman seaun,
And I Will tell thee what Will and I heve deaun

D. If I sud tell the Reeks that we have had,
Thou'l kittle seay, it'l mack thee just stark mad:

N. Thou setts me Agog until I hear,
Thou need nut blush come whisper me 'ith Ear

D. What need I whisper, Thou knawes young Women will
To get a Lively Lad, use all their skill:
He kissed me first did grape my breests and than,
Went lawer down, Thou knaws what teau dear Nan:

N. Tell me I pray Thee what did he Tibby,
Did he, beat a Larum on thy Stiddy:

D. Wheesht wheesht my Mothers comeing up I hear,
And she is heard all our Tawke, Nanny I fear

N. Wad she war hanged that cud nut stay belawe,
I Would as leeve be felled as nut the truth all knawe:
Ise heare't all out when I have time to stay
My Naunt's just here now, farewell I Will away
I mun be ganging now Ise seaure its time
Ive nowther been at Kye, nor farra'd 'th Swine:

M. What ista ganging Nan will thou nut stay,
How comes thy clathes seay flurr'd Barn this cawme day
Thous never Tite, there is always something wrang,
Wad ta saw thy sell thou great Gammerstang,
For sham Woman Reet um down as ta geayes
Ise seaur thou hes neay Mence near in thy Clathes,
Beseaur hereafter thou tack better Care.
For Meat is mickle, but Mence is Maer.
Yonder Is our Owse, is Loppen ore the Yate,
Nan slap him back as Thou gangs up 'th Town gate

N. Naunt I Will nut mell, outless he war our own,
What is it weaud Owse, that Hiped at our Brawne.

M. Neay neay great Staggs, what a fond wark Thou macks
It Is him, that brach down'th Railes, tuth Haver stacks.
When thou duz gang upp'th Town, Thoul know him seaun,
He Is a find Flae Head, and a pure brown Greaun.

N. Here Is your Hobb coming let him gang his Sell,
I tell you plain I Will nowther mack nor mell.
I heve nea time now up the Town to Rame,
There is odd Charrs for me to deau at hame;

F. Is Hobb gane Husband to fetch back weaud Owse,
A we bit sine, out o'th Fawd Garth brack lowse.

M. If he can but dree, I saw him yeaud upth Town,
And seay I think he is gean to fetch him down:
Wife what is become of my Spatterdashers,
Pray Thee Stride upp'th Greese and fetch'th Gammashaes
For I mun gang to the field and cut some Hay,
And give Ilkin 'oth drapes some while I stay,
There is a Rencky Cow, that beats all'th rest.
And till I Fother'd them, I never wist.
The Other has book, and Bane, and are as tall,
And yet she macks um run on Snocksnarles all.
Bring me our Hay Spade Hobb, Hushta good Lad
Can thou not hawd thy Feet, what ista Madd:
Some Rogue has stown our Cawse house deaur away,
Mind Hobb if thou Speer it out to day.
Outapont how that Hen gobbles up all'th Groats,
Thur Birds are all Cumber, I Will cut their Throats.

M. Stand by Caingell let me Crum um some Bread,
Ise Arfe to put them out because 'oth Glead.

F. What a whanks there if thou fike wast do mack,
I mun late 'th Needle whore it never stack.
I care nut, an they war all Drowned 'ith dike
There not worth an Atchison, nor Twenty fike.

M. Your a cheap Man, trouble not your Jobber Nowle
I Will give um some Trouts, reach me hither Bowl.

F. Thou's naught but Babbles, thou duz things to the Hawves
Thou Would mayer need gang, and mack some Cale for'th Cawves
They Are starved for want of Meat, hark how they Bleere
When'th Steed stown, Thou may steeke the Stable deaur.
Mack have good Pegg, sweep'th house and don the seaun
Our Landlord woman will be here by Neaun.
I had an Inklin on it at'th Arvall Feast,
Methinks he macks deevlish stickle but have.

M. Its time for me about the House to Tripp,
He Is be as welcome as watter into a Shipp.
It Is nut aboon Three weeks gane sine'th Rent day,
Husband what have you gitten upp to pay.

F. Ive five Nobles Pegg and some odd money,
Thou seld some Cheefes hes thou onny.

M. Seven groats and a penny is all my Stock
Thou knows whore it liggs, lve nowther Key nor Lock

F. Pray thee tell truly, hes thou neay mayer,
Did thou nut sell some Garne at our last Fair:

M. What if I did, heve I nut mayer to pay,
Then I can mack of Trouts, Kirne Milk, and Whey
Wadta have me keaune, or deau that is warse,
Turn Whore, and Addle money with my Narse;
I Will have mayer under my hands to gang about,
Thou's nut think, that I Will be thy Underlout

F. Thou Snoutbands me sayer may I nut jest,
I seaur I meant neay harm to thee 'ith least;
Come hither Hobb, what little stock hes Thou,
I knawe Thou's Addle some, with driving Plewe;

S. The small stock I Have gitten up together.
Is Twelve Bodles a Groate and fix pence Fatther,

F. I mun borrowed Hobb, what ista willing,
When I git money Thou's have a Shilling.

S. Ise gang and fetch it hard fest in a Cloote:
You may seaun lows't your sell, and tack it out.

F. Here Is Three and Three pence in odd Money Pegg
That macks Forty Shillings, Reet as my Leg;
Pashions a Life, heerst Landlord just at deaur,
Stand you by, I Will speak to him do nut fear,

L. Ise come to see Thee, how dusta Billy,
What macks Thee hustle, thou's mayr fawse than silly
Thou Glincks and Glimes seay I Would misken'd thy face,
If Thou had wont at onny other place:
Is It God Moarn or God Deen, what saysta Will?
I think you heve nut dyn'd here is a good smell,

F. Leet pray you Landlord, and you than will knawe,
I think my wife hes Pyes ith Ewn to draw:

L. How now Peggy, methinks thou's varra fine,
Have you some Guests to come to day, to dyne,

M. Wellaneering we would need have every Neaun,
Something that is good, to keep our Hearts aboon;

L. But courser Fair I think, might you content,
You tack neay thought, how to pay me my Rent,

F. Weese pay you as me mack't, and ast comes in,
And you can have neay mayer 'oth Catt but'th Shin,
Here Is Forty Shillings we heve neay mayer,
Weese have a Cow to sell at our Neest Fair:

L. What can I deau with this it will nut clear,
And pay seay Mickle, as streights your awd Arreare,

F. Here Is bad times pray you Landlord be content
Forbear us but and you's heve all your Rent:

L. But it will be a lang time first-Ise feared,
And whiles'th girse grows, 'ch Horse Starves as Ive heard
Next time I come you mun clear off, I leauke,
Thur Driblets mack me scrat, where duz nut yeauke*

F. But you mun Let us Rive up some fresh grund
Or else we will turn your Farm into your hand:

L. Wad yee'd gane titter, I had been neay warse.
For your not worth the warst Fart of mine A --
You may gang when you will, Ise never Care,
Ise get another Tenant I near fear;

F. Wee'r sattl'd here: And sea to stir wee'r laith,
But weel I wait weese gether here nea Graith,

L. You Ill my Farm for you have said to some,
Your quite undone and beggared sine you com.

F. Some Pikethanks for ill will hes teld you that,
An uncouth Dog hes monny Barkers at;
Ise Sackless on it Sir. by this fire that Reeks,
I Will Swear't upon all Beauks, that opens and steeks,

L. Away away, if I sud let you Si^t,
Rent free; I see you cud nut Live on it;
Your Corn's as Rank as ever it can stand.
There Is sike a wreck, it liggs all down 'oth Land:
And yet you say your Farm is stark att'th Rent
And you for Tennants give me nea Content;
You can nut pay nor I can nut forbear,
Provide seay for your selves another Year:

F. Wee'r nut seay Browden on it, as you suppose,
I thinck langer we stay, the mayer weese lose,
Wad we would near kend your Farm, nor had come here,
But bowght wittt's best, if it cost nut ore dear,
There Is neay Feaul, like to the awd Feaul, I may say;
They that are bund. I see they mun obey;
The time that we com here, wee've cause to curse
A tumbling stane, I see near gathers Moss;
We war 'ore weel before and did not wait
And now we may the time rue when'ts ore late;

L. Come come for all your goodly Cracks and Braggs
Ill Husbands and Sluggards mun gang in Rags;
If you owed money when you com tuth Farm,
Your Creditors not it have deaun you harm:
If all your stock be gaen, lean to your Kin,
Near is my Sarke, but nearer is my Skin,
Charity begins at hame Ise nut bund
To let you Live Rent free, upon my grund,
There Is neay Sell like to the own Sell; you have Farms anew
Offered you say, God speed you, Ise never Rue;
A weaud Horse I Have heard it often Reported
And a Rotten Harrowe, are seaun parted,
Fareweele, Ise weay to find'th awd saying true,
It Is an ill made Bargain whore beath Parties Rue.

F. I Have set our Landlord forwards Wife he is gane,
Our Hobb's nut weel he is a base stinking Yane.
He Is troubled with Worms, he can nut sleep nor Lig
Give him Worme-seed and Treacle, pray the Pegg.
Weayworth this Trash, Ise flaid my Ladd's undeaun,
He Is varra seek it works at his Heart Speaun;
To Moarne I Will gang to the Market and hire Tibb,
And Peggy thou thy Sell sall spin out'th Webb:

M. Wya Husband you may deau what you will,
If I be we will. Ise git it deaun my sell;

N. How deayee all, what Naunt as I hear say,
Tibby hes taine a Godspenny to day;
I Am come to knawe before I gang to Bed,
I thowght this Martinmas she wad be Wedd:

M. Wayse is me she is ore young for a good Man,
There Is meay fowks wed, than keeps good Houses Nan*

N. Ore young seay you, I seaure she is gane Eighteen,
And few but at that Age they are Man keen;
Pray you what Age war you, when you war Wed,
At sixteen Naunt you lost your Maidenhead;

M. But they that Wed before their wise its said
Will dee before they Thrive, and seay Ise flaid
Will thou and she, and all sike Flirtigiggs,
That Is fit for nowght but serving Brewster Piggs;
I marvel thy Mother gitts nut thee a Dame,
Its fitter for Thee than to stay at Hame:
To slaver and Spin, and run an odd Charr,
A good Service war better for Thee far:

N. What sike an a Service, as Tibb's to have,
I had as leeve be carrid to my Grave;

M. How seay, what ails her Service can thou tell
Thou nowther let her Thrive nor Thrive thy Sell.

N. I hear Tibb is to gang to Mistress Nice,
She Will rue, I Will warrant mayer than yance or twice.
She Will deal her Neaves about her, I hear tell,
She Is timorous to please and varre fell;
First thing that comes to hand She Will let it flee,
Neans yable to abide her Cruelty:
I Will lay a Wager Tibb never stays
A new Meaun, and an Awd, nay nut ten days.

M. Birlady but my Barn shall never be
A Battingstock for her, Thou's plainly see;
Her Godspeny sall be sent back to Moarn,
Tibb's stay at hame with me, Nan I Will besworne,
My Less sall nowther Dame nor Mistress have
Rather then gang to be a perfect Slave;

N. My Neem's coming, fareweel Naunt, I Will to Bed,
I Have sitten till my feet as cawd as Lead.

F. Yon Town a dree way off Pegg, Ise sayer tire'd,
Tibb is all Jarbil'd, and I Will basely Mire'd;
Here Is good Tobacco Wife it cost a Pringle,
How mun I leet my Pipe? Whaugh here is neay Ingle

M. What need you Rame seay, you see'th Fire's gane,
Poul out your Touchwood, Box Steel, and Flint stane.
Than strike a Fire, and leet a Seave I reed,
And Smeauke your Pipe, before we gang to Bed;

F. Unfest my Collar point Wife than let us kiss,
And pray for Love amell them where nean is.
My Papers at an End, I Will take my Ease
Here Is too mnch pains bestowed unless it please.

FINIS.

