FORMS OF PRAYER FOR EVERY Day in the Week, MORNING and EVENING. Composed for
the use of PRIVATE FAMILIES.

By John Meriton D. D. Rector of St. Michael Cornhill London, and Lecturer at
St. Martins in the Fields.

LONDON, Printed by H. H. for Robert Boulter, at the Turks Head in Cornhill,
1682.

THE PREFACE.
THat all Men are obliged to worship God by praising and praying to him, is so
evident by the light of natural Reason, as well as the Revelation of Scripture,
that none can question it, but they whose Immoralities and improved
Debaucheries, have laid such a foundation of Atheism as makes them inclinable
to deny the Being of God, and loath to acknowledge their dependence upon him,
lest this should involve them in the dreadful consequence of their being
accountable to him. And that men ought daily to pay this Homage and Tribute of
Praise and Prayer unto God, as they stand linked in the relations of Families,
though all readily grant, that are sensible of the Sins there committed that
need his Pardon, of the many Temporal and Spiritual blessings either wanted and
to be sought at his Hands, or enjoyed, and to be thankfully acknowledged, yet
the too common neglect of Family Prayer is (it is to be feared, and he must have
a very easy and credulous charity that can be otherwise minded) not only one
of the many instances of the decay of Piety and Religion, but one of the
provoking Sins that cry aloud, to Heaven for vengeance. It is no doubt by many
totally omitted from an insensible stupidity, and an irreligious, profane
disregard of God and their Duty; but by others not a few (as was well and
charitably suggested by the Good Man that earnestly pressed me to this
undertaking) only from a consciousness of their inabibility decently to perform
it. Now that this might be neither a feigned pretense nor a real hinderance:
But that they that like Joshua are willing and resolved to serve God with their
Families, might have Materials of Devotion ready at hand; As the Water near the
Road, offered it self to the Eunuch willing to be Baptized, I have for the help
of such as can read, complied with my Friends desire, and composed a Form of
Weekly Prayers, Morning and Evening. And though their length will not, I hope,
be complained of by any whose leisure may allow, and whose Affections can
vigorously attend one quarter of an hours solemn and religious Address to God:
Yet in consideration of others multiplicity of Business, and that flatting and
depression of Spirits that may follow from it; all the Prayers are printed in
many distinct Paragraphs, that some of the Confessions or Petitions or both may
easily, and without disturbing their Devotion, be passed over and the Prayer
thereby so contracted as to suit their convenience: And I desire they would
rather do so than wholly omit the Duty, for better a short Prayer than none at
all.

Lord's Day Morning.
ALmighty, most high and holy, Lord God, who art the glorious Creator,
Preserver, and Governor of all things in Heaven and in Earth, and most worthy
to be praised, and honored by all Creatures; And with infinite kindness and
compassion have redeemed lost, and undone Sinners, by thine only beloved Romans
4. ult.
Son, whom thou have delivered to death for their offenses, and raised again
for their justification, and so thou art for ever to be loved, and delighted
in, obeyed, and worshipped, praised and honored by thy redeemed ones. We thy
poor Creatures and Children are here before thee this Morning, humbly sensible
of this our great and bounden duty, and of our own inability, without the
assistance of thy Grace to perform it. And in a deep sense both of our duty and
insufficiency, we desire to offer up our sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving
to thy Divine Majesty, our mighty Creator, and most merciful Redeemer, and
humbly desire that thou would sanctify and prepare both our Souls and
Bodies by the Grace of thy Holy Spirit, that we may present unto thee
acceptable thank-offerings.

We acknowledge, O Lord, that besides the sins of our Callings and common
Employments, and even those of the Week last past, whereby we have greatly
offended thee, the sins of our holy duties, and our profanation of this thy
holy day, have given thee a just provocation to withdraw the grace of thy good
Spirit from us, and leave us to the ignorance and vanity of our own minds, the
wanderings and distractions of our thoughts, the earthliness and sensuality of
our affections, the hardness, impenitency and unbelief of our hearts: And then
by all the duties of thy Worship and Service we should dishonor thee, and by
offering the Sacrifices of Fools, increase our own guilt before thee.

But we humbly beseech thee, most merciful Father, forgive us all our past
offenses, that they may not stand as a partition Wall between thy Majesty and
us to hinder either thy Grace from coming down upon us as Rain upon the tender
Herb, or our Prayers from coming up before thee as Incense.

Fill every one of our hearts with awful thoughts of thee, as a God that
searchest hearts, and art thoroughly acquainted with our most secret
imaginations, dispositions and purposes; and because thou art a God of purer
Eyes than to behold iniquity, Let us worship thee with an holy worship; so as
to fear thy Goodness, and love thy Justice, to delight in thy Mercy, trust and
rely upon thy Power and Faithfulness, to admire, praise and imitate thy
Holiness.

In the public Duties and Services of this thy Day, help us so to join with
the Assembly of thy Servants, that our hearts may be inflamed with a love of
thee, and delight in thee, and in the vigor and fervency of devout affections,
we may together glorify thy holy and great Name, set forward our own
edification, and comfort, and advance in those ways of holiness that lead to
everlasting happiness: And seeing in great mercy and compassion to our Souls
thou art pleased to continue to us thy Sabbaths, and the use of thine
ordinances, which by our many and great sins we have long since forfeited, Let
us not, like Children sitting in Mat. 11. 16.
the Marketplace, trifle away the precious opportunities and means of Grace
and Salvation.

Help us seriously to consider, when we are in thine House, the Habitation of
thine Holiness, Psalm. 26. 8.
and the place where thine Honor dwells, the glorious Majesty, and spotless
perfect purity of that God with whom we have to do, and let us behave our
selves in thy sacred and dreadful presence, with that reverence, and holy fear,
that humility, and lowliness of mind, that simplicity, and godly sincerity,
that heavenly mindedness, and purity of affection, that firm constancy of
resolution to devote our selves to thee, by our hearty obedience to thy Laws,
as it becomes dust and ashes, vile Creatures that dwell in houses of Clay, when
they worship and do homage to that Sovereign Majesty, the Throne of whose Glory
is in the highest heavens.

Let us hear thy holy Word, that shall be read and preached to us, as the
Oracles of God, and those Divine Messages which thou have sent us from Heaven
to guide us in the ways that lead thither. Let us hearken to it with diligent
attention, embrace it with holy and heavenly affections, rejoicing in the
Promises, dreading the threatenings, loving and practicing the commands of it,
let us receive it with meekness and mix it with Jam. 1. 21.
Faith, that it may be an ingrafted Heb. 4. 2.
word to the salvation of our Souls. And as the Rain Isa. 55. 10, 11.
comes down, and the Snow from Heaven, and returns not thither, but waters
the Earth, and makes it bring forth Fruit, and bud, that it may give seed to
the Sower, and bread to the eater; So let not thy Word, that goes forth out of
thy mouth, return to thee void, but accomplish that which thou please, and
prosper in the thing whereto thou have sent it.

Help us to pray in faith and fervency, let all our petitions be addressed to
the Throne of thy Grace, in the prevailing name of thy dear Son, and by the
efficacy of thy holy Spirit, the Spirit of Supplication: And that the Prayers
that we shall this day send up to Heaven may find a gracious acceptance with
thee, Let the holy Ghost make intercession Romans 8. 26.
in our hearts, by exciting holy, humble, earnest and hearty desires, and let
our blessed Redeemer make intercession in Heaven, and sweeten all the
displeasing unsavoriness of our Flesh, with the Perfume Rev. 8. 3.
of his Incense.

Let us give thanks unto thee with our whole hearts, and let all that is within
us magnify and praise thy Name, as for all thy mercies to our Souls and
Bodies, for this Life and a better, so especially for our Redemption, by the
precious death and Sufferings of thy Son, and finishing that glorious work, by
the raising him from the Dead. Raise up our Souls, O Lord, to the highest pitch
of hearty thankfulness in the remembrance and sense of those inestimable
benefits, that redound to us and thy whole Church from this great and
alsufficient Redeemer. And help us so to sing praises to thee and to the Lamb
that sits with thee upon thy Throne, that by praising thee on Earth, we may
tune and prepare our hearts for those glorious and triumphant Praises, that in
Heaven will be the business and happiness of thy Saints, to all Eternity.

Let us so carry our selves this whole day, as remembering thou have separated
and sanctified it to thine own service, and made Religion, which is the great
Work of every day, the more proper and peculiar employment of this.

Let us therefore make a difference betwixt the thoughts, the words, the
practices of other days, and this which thou have set apart to different
purposes, and so sanctify this day of holy Rest, and make it our delight, that
we may be sanctified and fitted for that perpetual Rest that remains for thy
People, and satisfied with those Rivers of Psa. 16. ult.
Pleasures, that are at thy Right Hand for evermore.

Bless, we beseech thee, thy whole Church, and that part of it especially which
thou have planted in these Kingdoms. Pardon our many Sins, and remove far away
from us whatever may provoke thy displeasure, unsettle our foundations or
disturb our peace. Let thy Servant, our Sovereign Lord the King, find favor in
thine Eyes, So bless Him in His Person, in His Counsels and Enterprises, that
upon his Head His Crown may long flourish, and His Government be a public
Blessing to these Kingdoms. Govern those that govern under Him in Church and
State, and let all His Subjects in their several Orders and Stations, do what
lies in them, to the healing of our wide Breaches, the restoring of Christian
Love and Charity, the establishment of Truth and Ephesians. 4. 3.
Righteousness, and keeping the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace.

Let all afflicted ones in what kind soever, find thy gracious hand ready for
their relief and succor, and by the more immediate working of thy holy Spirit,
supply the want of thy public ordinances to all that desire them, and are by
Imprisonment, Banishment, Sickness or any other hinderance deprived of them,
and let us that by thy special favor, are blessed with the rich and in
estimable privilege enjoying them, carefully improve them to a growth in
Grace, and the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to an increase
of Faith and all godliness, till we come to the full and perfect happiness of
an immediate enjoying thee without them in thy heavenly and everlasting
Kingdom, by thy dear Son Jesus Christ our ever blessed Redeemer, through whose
Merit and Mediation, and in whose Form of Words, we are bold to call thee
Father, saying,

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread.
And forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that Trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from Evil: For thine is the
Kingdom, and the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. Amen.

Lord's Day Evening.
EVer blessed, and gracious Lord God, and in Jesus Christ our loving and
merciful Father, and most liberal and open-handed Benefactor, from whose
favor, and kindness, we have all the good things that we receive in this Life,
and the hopes of a better to make us everlastingly happy in the next. We thy
poor Servants acknowledging our manifold unworthiness of the least of thy
mercies, and the guilt of those sins, whereby we have made frequent forfeitures
of them, are here before thee, to offer up to thee our Evening Sacrifice of
hearty praise and thansgivings for all those blessings that with a most free
and unwearied bounty thou have been pleased to confer upon us, and continue to
us.

Thy hand has formed us in the Womb, given us Life, and Breath, and Being, and
having brought us into the World, bestowed on us many conveniences of Life,
that have made our Being in the World easy and delightful to us: Thine, O
Lord, is our health and strength, our ease and liberty; thine the Air we breath
in, and the Earth we tread upon, thine our Food and our Raiment, the Sun that
shines to give us Light, and the Rain that falls to give us plenty, thine the
use of our Limbs, and thine the exercise of our Understanding and Reason. And
we bless thy Name for all those outward and temporal blessings, the multitude
whereof, (such is thy goodness) makes us unable to recount them, and whose
daily repetition, that should heighten our esteem of them, and thankfulness for
them, makes us (such is our folly and weakness) too apt to undervalue them.

But above all we adore, and with our highest and heartiest praises, desire to
magnify thy rich and free Grace for spiritual blessings in heavenly things in
Christ Jesus our Lord, that tend to the renewing us after thy likeness in this
life, and the satisfying of us with it in the life to come.

We bless thee for that inestimable gift, the Foundation of all others, the Son
of thy dearest love, and everlasting delight, whom in a tender compassion to
our Souls, thou have sent into the world to be our Redeemer and Savior, that
when we had by our sins ruined and undone our selves, and were so liable to thy
severe displeasure and insupportable vengeance, that no creature in Heaven or
Earth could deliver us from it, it pleased thee in thine infinite goodness, to
find out, and in thy mercy to afford us in him an admirable and unthought of
way of recovery. Now, O Lord, we know thou love us, and have a favor and
good will toward us, seeing thou have not withheld thy Son, thine only Son
from us.

Ever blessed be thy Name, that thy Son, who is God over all, blessed for ever,
took upon him our humane Flesh; that while he lived here upon Earth, he
instructed us, both by his heavenly doctrine and exemplary life, that he gave
himself to Death as the price of our Redemption, that he completed that great
work, in his powerful and glorious Resurrection, wherein he conquered and
triumphed over all the powers of darkness, and has begotten us again to a
lively hope of an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4.
that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for us. We praise thee, that, when he
had wrought a perfect Righteousness for us upon Earth, he ascended up to
Heaven, and sits at thy right hand to represent and plead it on our behalf, by
his prevailing intercession; that when he ascended up on high, he led captive
those spiritual enemies that held us in captivity, and for the Ephesians. 4. 11.
edification of his Church gave gifts unto Men, Apostles and Prophets,
Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers. That thou have Psalm. 119. 10
given thy holy Word to be a Lamp to our Feet, and a Light to our Paths, and
when many Nations sit in Darkness and the Regions of the Shadow of Luke 1. 78,
79.
Death, the day spring from on high has visited us, to guide our Feet into the
way of Peace. We give thee our humble and hearty thanks, that thou still
keep open the doors of thy Sanctuary, that for our unfruitfulness thou
might have shut and barred against us, and notwithstanding our vile
unworthiness, thou graciously admittest us to Communion with thy Self in thy
public Ordinances, the Reading and Preaching of thy Word; Prayers to and
Praises of thy Name, and the participation of thy holy Sacraments, wherein thou
do lively represent the Death of thy Son, and to all worthy Receivers do
firmly assure and convey the precious benefits of it, and bind them to walk
answerably to them.

And we further thank thee with enlarged hearts, O our heavenly Father, for all
the promises of thy Covenant, which thou have sealed with the Blood of thy Son;
and given unto us that we might by them be the more encouraged in an holy 2
Cor. 7. 1.
obedience, cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit, and
perfecting holiness 2 Pet. 1. 4.
in thy fear, be made partakers of the Divine Nature.

We can never enough magnify thy mercy and goodness that thou have made our
duty to be a part of our happiness, and that it is not only necessary but best
for us to love and fear, trust and serve, obey and honor thee, and that we are
not only bound to be sober and temperate, meek and patient, just and
charitable, but much better by being so.

And what thanks can we render to thee, who in consideration of our weakness
and slugglishness to the performance of our duty, have not only set before us
the lively and encouraging examples of thy Saints and Martyrs, but assisted and
enabled us by the grace of thy holy Spirit, that our sufficiency 2 Cor. 3. 5.
has been of thee, who of our selves have not been sufficient to think a good
thought, and for the Reward of those Graces and Duties that are the Fruits of
thy Spirit working in us, have promised such a glory and happiness in the world
to come, as surpasses not our desires only, but our thoughts and conceptions?

We further glorify thy great Name, O Lord, that thy rich and free Grace has
been the only motive to the bestowing all thy Mercies upon us, guilty and
wretched sinners, that our unworthiness has not hindered the streaming forth of
thy goodness, but thy goodness has born away before it all consideration of
our unworthiness; And O how admirable in themselves, and how obliging to us are
all those favors and kindnesses, which not only without our merits, but
notwithstanding our deserts of wrath and vengeance, thou have conferred upon
us, bold and provoking Rebels!

We are, O Lord, as thy Creatures, infinitely below thee, but as Sinners we
have foolishly opposed and set our selves against thee; we have broken thy holy
Laws, abused thine abundant Mercies, slighted the tenders of thy Grace,
dishonored and crucified afresh our great and merciful Redeemer, resisted and
grieved thy holy Spirit, profaned and polluted thy Sabbaths and Ordinances,
that are both the Pledges and means of thy Grace and Favor. And were there no
other Sin upon our account, but of these thy days and the holy duties of them,
they might for ever fill our Faces with shame, and lay us under thy wrathful
displeasure.

We have come unprepared to thy solemn worship, and with unhallowed hearts
entered the Sanctuary and approached the presence of the most holy God, we have
been heedless and unattentive hearers of thy holy Word, remembering little of
what we have heard, and practing less of what we have remembered; we have been
flat, and unaffected in offering up thy praise, and our hearts have been
earthly, dull and distracted in our Prayers, how often have we turned our Backs
upon thy holy Table judging, our selves unworthy of the precious benefits that
are there tendered; or if we have not altogether neglected the sacred
Ordinance, we have not, as we might have done, grown in the graces and the
comforts of thy holy Spirit by it.

How seldom have we been seriously exercised in Meditation, and either so
recollected thy Mercies, as to become sensible of our obligation by them, or so
thought on our ways, as Psalm. 119. 59 ^
to turn our feet unto thy Testimonies.

Forgive us, O Lord, we pray thee all our past offenses, and as the best
assurance of our forgiveness, let us not so offend any more. Graciously guide
us into the ways of truth and holiness, and that we may always fear thee, let
us set our selves continually in thy presence, and so observe and stand in aw
of thine all-seeing Eye, that all our evil thoughts, words and actions may be
scattered by it.

Let us dye with Christ in the crucifying of our Flesh, with its affections and
lusts, and rise with him to a life of holy and new obedience; that as Christ
being raised from the dead Romans 6. 9.
dies no more, so being risen with him, we may wilfully sin no more, but run
the race of thy Commandments, till at length we receive the prize of a glorious
and incorruptible inheritance.

Extend thy mercy and goodness to all the Sons of Men, and let the Kingdoms of
the World, that are ignorant of thee and thy Salvation, behold the light of thy
glorious Gospel, and become obedient to the Scepter of thy Son.

Bless thy whole Church, scatter the Mists of Ignorance and Error, heal the
breaches of Schism and Division, quench the Wildfire of Strife and Contention;
cleanse the Spots of Profaneness, and Superstition that defile and deform it;
and make thy Sion the Beauty and the joy of the whole Earth.

Be gracious to these sinful Nations, forgive those many and great sins, that
have pulled down thy heavy Judgments upon us, and still provoke thee more and
more to punish us, and particularly pardon, we pray thee, our wicked and
scandalous profanation of this thy day, our unthankfulness for the light of thy
blessed Gospel, and walking unsuitably to the principles of that holy Religion
that has been of a long time publicly taught and professed among us. Wash us
thoroughly Psalm. 51. 2.
from our Iniquities, and cleanse us from our Sins, and grant that by unity,
and charity, and holiness of life, we may glorify thy great Name, evidence the
truth of our Christianity, and adorn the Gospel of God our Savior. Continue
thy Gospel among us, defeat and overthrow the evil designs of bloody and
deceitful Men that would pervert the truth of it, by mixtures of Superstition
and Idolatry; and let all that Psalm. 40. 16.
love thy Salvation, say continually, let the Lord be magnified.

Guide and guard, bless and protect thine Anointed Servant our Sovereign Lord,
King Charles; let his days be many, his Counsels wise and religious, his
enterprises successful, his Reign happy to himself and all his Subjects: Cloth
his Enemies with shame, and upon his head Psalm. 132. 18.
let his Crown flourish, let the Bishops and Pastors of thy Church further the
edification of it, by soundness of Doctrine, and holiness of Life; and
Magistrates cherish, and defend it by the encouragement of all virtue and
goodness, and the punishment and suppression of all vice and ungodliness; and
let all men follow after peace and holiness, without which Heb. 12. 14.
none shall see the Lord.

Refresh and support the Sons and Daughters of Sorrow, and in the multitude of
their Psalm. 94. 19.
thoughts within them, let thy comforts delight their Souls.

Be gracious and favorable to us that are here before thee, forgive us all our
Sins and remember not against us those iniquities that have this day polluted
our holy offerings; defend and protect us this night, from all those dangers
and mischiefs that might overtake us, and let us find safety under the shadow
of thy wings; refresh our frail Bodies with a quiet and moderate rest, and help
us in the renewed strength of it, vigorously to serve thee in a faithful
discharge of the duties of the next day; and all our days let us live to thee,
that in the end of them we may live with thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord,
who has taught and commanded us when we Pray, to say;

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread.
And forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that Trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from Evil: For thine is the
Kingdom, and the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. Amen.

Monday Morning.
O Most mighty, Lord God, and merciful Father, the Author of our Being, both
Bodies and Souls, and the Giver of every good Gift, that may tend to the
benefit and happiness of both our Souls and Bodies, we thy poor and most,
unworthy Servants are here before thee this Morning, thankfully to acknowledge
thy great goodness, in all the blessings we enjoy, for this Life and a better,
humbly to implore thy mercy in the free pardon of all our Sins, and earnestly
to beg the grace of thy holy Spirit, that we may faithfully discharge the
duties of pardoned Sinners, and answer the Obligations thou have laid upon us
by thy manifold blessings.

We bless thy holy and great Name, as for all Spiritual and Temporal blessings
bestowed on us through thy Son, so particularly for all the ordinances of the
Gospel and the privileges of thy House yesterday enjoyed, and for the safety
and quiet rest, and refreshment of the last Lam. 3. 22.
night; acknowledging it to be of thy mercies that we are not consumed, and
because thy compassions fail not, for had thou rewarded us after our
Iniquities, we had long since been incapable of any the least blessing, and had
been punished with utmost and everlasting misery.

We confess, O Lord, there has on thy part been nothing wanting that might
work in us a Conformity to thy Will, but there has wanted on ours, a care to
please thee and a fear to offend thee, a love and delight in thee, and a
steadfast purpose to give up our selves to the obedience of thy heavenly Laws:
And which has made us more remiss and negligent, we have not firmly believed
the excellent and glorious things thou have promised upon a compliance with thy
Will, nor the fearful and insupportable punishments, which thou have threatened
to our disobedience. We have with great folly over desired, over loved, over
trusted to, and over delighted in the things of this World, which cannot profit
us, nor in the least promote our spiritual interest, or eternal happiness,
whilst we have been Mat. 6. 33.
careless and negligent in seeking thy Kingdom and righteousness, though for
our encouragement to do that in the first place, thou have graciously promised
that all the conveniences of life shall be added unto us. How have vain
transitory profits and pleasures drawn off our hearts from the love of thee,
who alone can make us happy, and from a delight in thy Laws, in the keeping
of which there Psalm. 19. 11.
is great reward? We have with too great care pampered our vile bodies and made
provision Romans 13. 14.
for our flesh, to fulfill the lusts of it, and with too little provided for our
Souls, and secured their happiness in the future state.

We have misimployed the Talents entrusted with us, in the service of Sin, and
abused to thy dishonor, our time, and opportunity of doing good; our health
and strength, our ease, and liberty, our credit and plenty, the members of our
Bodies, the faculties of our Souls, which being received from thy bounty,
should all have been improved to thy glory; nor have we remembered the great day
of reckoning, wherein we must give an account of our Stewardship, and Luke 16.
2.
be no longer Stewards.

We acknowledge, O Lord, that we are guilty Sinners, unable to help our selves,
and unworthy that thou should help us; our own consciences condemn us, and
thou might 1 John. 3. 20
much more condemn us, for thou know more by us than we do by our selves,
and art greater than our consciences.

But, O God, be merciful to us, and spare us, in the multitude of thy tender
compassions: Thou that have promised pardon and forgiveness to all repenting
Sinners, work in us, we beseech thee, a serious and unfeigned repentance, and
let us thereby obtain remission of Sins: And by a true and lively faith in our
Lord Romans 3. 24, 25.
Jesus Christ, whom thou have set sorth to be a propitiation, through faith in
his blood, justify us freely by thy Grace, and let not any of our sins be
charged upon us to our condemnation. But let us by his Merits and Righteousness
be so delivered from the guilt of them, that we may serve thee in righteousness
Luke 1. 75.
and holiness before thee, all the days of our life: And grant that as Christ
dyed for us, that were dead in sin, and under a sentence of death for it, we
may not henceforth live unto our selves, but unto him which 2 Cor. 5. 15.
dyed for us and rose again.

Guide our Feet into those ways of righteousness and peace, temperance and
sobriety, mercy, meekness and charity, that are well-pleasing to thee, and
guard us against the temptations of the World, the Devil and our own naughty
Hearts, that we never depart from them. Let a continued sense of thine
Omnipresence and all-seeing Eye, make us upright and sincere, in the discharge
of every duty; careful and vigilant for the avoiding of every sin, firm and
constant in the resisting every temptation; let us so set thee always before us,
that thou being at our right hand, Psalm. 16. 8.
we may not be moved.

Heb. 13. 9.
Keep us steadfast in thy truth, and when many are carried about with diverse and
strange Col. 2. 7.
doctrines; let us be more and more rooted and stablished in the faith, by
bringing forth the fruits of righteousness. And 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7.
add to our faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge; and to knowledge,
temperance; and to temperance, patience; and to patience, godliness; and to
godliness, brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness, charity; v. 8.
that these things being in us, we may not be barren, and unfruitful in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, but an entrance may be
ministered v. 11.
unto us abundantly into his everlasting Kingdom.

Let the whole race of mankind find favor in thine eyes, and let the glorious
light of the Luke 1. 79.
Gospel of Salvation shine upon them that sit in darkness, and the regions of
the shadow of death. Let the people praise Psalm. 67. 3.
thee, O God; let all the people praise thee; call home the Jews, thine ancient
people, accomplish the promised fullness of the Gentiles, that the whole Church
may be in Christ, as one Sheepfold under one Shepherd.

O be gracious and favorable unto Sion, and build up the decayed and ruinous
Walls of thy Jerusalem. Free thy Church from all Heresy, Profaneness, Schism,
Superstition and Idolatry, and whatever is displeasing in thy sight, and a
blemish of the blessed Gospel of God, her Savior. Keep the Vineyard which thy
right hand has planted, from all its enemies that would pull up the Hedges
thereof, and lay it waste; water Isa. 27. 3.
it every moment, lest any hurt it, keep it night and day.

Bless these Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland, forgive those many and
crying Sins that might make us desolate without Inhabitants, and let every one
of us that have added to the great weight of wickedness, and made it heavy
enough to sink us into utter ruin, turn from the evil of our ways, and by an
hearty repentance, and real reformation stand in the gap, and stop those
Judgments that are gone forth against us, and entering in at our wide breaches
to destroy us: Amend us by thy just severities and merciful salvations, and let
both thy punishments and preservations of us, lead us into the ways of
righteousness.

Bless with thy richest blessings our Sovereign Lord the King, preserve him, as
thou have done wonderfully heretofore, from the malice and subtlety, the
mischievous Plots and Combinations of his Enemies, and let him so remember the
deep distress out of which thou have drawn him, and the high authority wherein
thou have placed him, that in all his actions and designs, he may promote thy
honor and glory, and all 1 Timothy 2. 2.
that are under him may lead quiet and peaceable lives, in all godliness and
honesty.

Let the Bishops and Pastors of thy Church, further truth and holiness by their
life and Doctrine; and civil Magistrates discountenance and suppress all
wickedness; and encourage virtue and goodness, and not bear the Sword in vain.
And let all from the highest to the lowest, so carry themselves, as that thou
may be glorified, true Religion advanced, the Gospel of Christ honored, and
Truth and Peace may be established among us.

Let all that are Sick, pained, or impoverished, distressed either in Body or
Mind, find thy gracious hand to sweeten and sanctify their Afflictions, and in
thy good time to deliver from them.

Bless us, O our God, that are here before thee, direct, assist and prosper us
in all that we this day set our hand unto; and let us not undertake any
business, but what thou have warranted by the rules of Righteousness, and upon
which we may desire and expect thy blessing: Guide us by thy Counsel, till
Psalm. 73. 24.
thou bring us to thy Glory, by Christ Jesus our only Lord and Savior, who in
compassion to our Infirmities has taught us thus to pray;

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread.
And forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that Trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from Evil: For thine is the
Kingdom, and the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. Amen.

Monday Evening.
BLessed and holy Lord, God, who made all things by thy Power, and rulest all
things by thy Providence, and fillest all places by thy presence, art about our
Bed, and about Psalm. 139. 3.
our Path, and spyest out all our Ways; we thy poor Creatures most heartily
beseech thee that thou would fill every one of our hearts with an awful
sense of thee, and an humble sincerity in our approaches to thee, that laying
aside all guile and hypocrisy, we may draw near thee Heb. 10. 22.
with a true heart and worship thee, that desire truth in the in Joh. 4. 24.
ward part, in Spirit and in Truth.

We thankfully acknowledge our dependence upon thee, and that our lives, and
all the comforts of our lives are the effects of thy bounty and goodness thy
hands have both made and fashioned us in the Womb, and brought us into the
World, and ever since we saw the Light, thou have all along opened thine hands,
and filled us with variety of good things; though for our many and great sins
thou might have left us naked and miserable, and brought upon us all the
punishments, that the threatenings of thy holy and righteous Law have made
justly due to the Transgressors of it; and had thy ways been as the ways of a
Man are, or thy thoughts toward us like unto our thoughts, we had long since
been past the Thank-offering of Praise, the benefit of Prayer and the hope of
Pardon; for our trangressions have been multiplied against thee; and our
Iniquities have gone over Psalm. 38. 4.
our Heads, as a burden too heavy for us.

The corruption of our nature is opposite to thy holy Law, that requires no
less holy principles than holy practices, and by the transgressions of our
lives, we have broken it in thought, word and deed.

We confess, O Lord, with sorrow and shame, our ignorance of thy will, and in
many things our acting contrary to the knowledge we have had of it, our pride,
earthliness and hypocrisy; our injustice, uncharitableness and sensuality; our
inordinate self-love, eagerness in the pursuit of worldly things, and
indifferency in matters of Religion; our impenitency and unbelief, the hardness
of our hearts, notwithstanding all the ways and methods thou have taken to
soften them; our unthankfulness for all thy mercies, our incorrigibleness under
all thy chastisements, our unfruitfulness under the means of Grace, our
unfaithfulness under all our vows and promises, and resolutions of service and
obedience. We have sinned against a clear revelation of thy Will, and against
the greatest obligations to compliance with it, against the expressions of a
tender kindness in thy multiplied mercies, and the evidence of a righteous
severity in thy justly deserved chastisements; we have sinned against thine
inviting promises and dreadful threatenings, against the frequent warnings of
thy Word, the renewed motions and powerful convictions of thy Spirit, and the
precious blood of thy dear Son; we have sinned against the light of our
understandings, against our promises and purposes of obedience, against the
checks of our own consciences; we cannot recount the number of our sins, they
are so exceeding many, nor set in order the aggravating circumstances, whereby
they are become exceeding sinful.

But, O Lord, have mercy upon Psalm. 51. 1.
us, according to thy loving kindness: according to the multitude of thy tender
mercies blot out our transgressions; Help us to forsake our sinful Isa. 55. 7.
thoughts and crooked ways, and by unfeigned repentance to return unto thee,
that thou may have mercy on us and abundantly pardon us.

Speak peace to us, most merciful Father, through the death and sufferings of
thy dear Son, who gave up himself in Sacrifice to expiate the guilt of our
sins, and by that precious ransom to buy off the punishment that was due to our
transgressions; O sprinkle our consciences with that blood of sprinkling that
speaks better things Heb. 12. 24.
than the blood of Abel; work in us a true and lively faith, that we may be
justified and have Romans 5. 1.
peace with thee, through our Lord Jesus Christ: For though we have no
righteousness of our own that we dare plead to the strictness of thy Law, and
the severity of thy Justice, thou have treasured up an alsufficient
righteousness in thy Son; that believing in him we may be pardoned, and through
his stripes be healed.

And let thy pardoning mercy be accompanied with thy purifying grace, that we
may be both delivered from the guilt and punishment of our sins, and cleansed
from the filth, and impurity of them. And as our Lord Christ dyed unto sin to
condemn it in the flesh, let us dye unto sin to crucific it in ours, that it
may never reign in our mortal bodies, that we Romans 6. 10, 11, 12.
should obey it in the lusts thereof.

Help us, heavenly Father, to put off the old man, which is corrupt according
to deceitful Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24.
lusts, and to put on that new man which is created after thine own image, in
righteousness and true holiness, and as by the natural birth, we have in sin
and corruption born the image of the first Adam, that was made a living Soul,
so let us by the spiritual birth, in sanctification and holiness, bear the
image of the second Adam, that was made a quickening Spirit. Give us a new Ezekiel.
36. 26, 27.
heart, and put within us a new Spirit; take away the stony heart out of our
flesh, and give us an heart of flesh; put thy Spirit within us, and cause us to
walk in thy Statutes, that we may keep thy Judgments and do them.

Wean our hearts from an excessive and inordinate love of all the things of
this World, and let us never place our happiness in the pomps and pleasures,
the profits and honors, or any transitory enjoyments of this Life, where we
are told not only in thy Word, but by our own experience, it is not to be
found; but let us weep, as though we wept not, and 1 Cor. 7. 30, 31.
rejoice as though we rejoiced not, and buy as though we possessed not, and use
this World as not abusing it, because the fashion of this World passes aaway.

Let us never adventure upon sin with the foolish and deceitful hopes of
getting any thing by it, but let our minds be influenced with the great and
certain truth of what our Savior has taught us, that the gaining of the whole
World, can be (...) 16. 26.
no recompense for the loss of our Souls. Let the great and strict account,
that we must ere long make be often in our serious thoughts, and the course of
our Lives be thereby so ordered that we may think of it with a joyful
expectation, and never allow our selves to do, to speak or think any thing,
that may make the thoughts of the day of Judgment a terror to us. Let us so
obey the Laws of our great Lord and Savior, and follow the steps of his
example, that when Christ, who is our life, shall appear, we may lift up our
heads with joy, and appear with Col. 3. 4.
him in glory.

Show forth the favor and loving kindness of a Father, to all the Children of
Men, and as thou have made them capable of eternal life and happiness, make
known unto them the way of thy Salvation that leads unto it. Let the Sun of
Righteousness arise with healing in his Mal. 4. 2.
Wings, and dispel the darkness of Heathenish and Mohammedan Superstition and
Idolatry, that the Kingdoms of the Earth may become the Kingdom of thy Son.

Bless thy whole Church, and let the company of the Faithful that thou have
incorporated and knit together as one Body in thy Son, by thy Grace be
desended, and preserved, enlightened and instructed, ordered and governed,
purged and sanctified, and let the Ordinances of Christ be so administered, and
his Laws observed, as may become the Spouse and Body of thy Son.

Be merciful, O Lord, to the sinsul Nation wherein we live, and let neither our
abuse of thy mercies, nor our hardening our selves under thy Judgments, bring
upon us that ruin that they have justly deserved. Lord thou have been
favorable to the Land, in that thou have often rescued us from the destruction
that was due to our Sins, and have blessed us with the long continuance of thy
Gospel, that was no way due to our walking so unworthy of it. Oh let that
infinite mercy that has hitherto spared us, and interposed betwixt us and thy
desolating vengeance, forgive our iniquity and turn away the fierceness of
thine anger.

Heal our backslidings and heal our breaches, take away Hos. 14. 2.
all our iniquity, receive us graciously and love us freely, to us belongs
confusion of Face, Dan. 9. 8. 9.
but to the Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses, though we have
rebelled against thee. Continue thy mercies, our peace and our plenty, and
above all the truth of thy Gospel and purity of Religion, Cause us to fear thee
and thy goodness, and let thine infinite wisdom find out a way to bring us out
of those woeful confusions, from which to be delivered is above the contrivances
of our wisdom.

Bless with the blessings of the right and left hand, of this life, and a
better, thine Anointed Servant, and our Sovereign Lord King Charles; let his
Reign be religious, peaceable, long and prosperous; so rule his heart in thy
faith, fear and love, that he may ever seek thy honor and glory. And let all
that are Governors under him, in Church or State, exercise their power for the
punishment of 1 Pet. 2. 14.
evil doers, and the praise of them that do well.

Be merciful to all afflicted ones, to our Friends and Relations, to all that
have wronged us; forgive our Enemies, O Lord, and help us to forgive them, as
we expect to be forgiven both of them and thee.

We humbly commit our selves to thy merciful protection this night, defend from
all danger, our persons, our dwellings, our possessions, refresh us with a
quiet and healthful sleep, and with the health and strength of our Bodies, and
the vigor of our minds, let us serve thee all our days, till at the end of
them we receive the end of our Faith, the salvation of our Souls, through thy
dear Son, our alone Savior, Jesus Christ, in the merit of whose righteousness,
and intercession we further pray:

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread.
And forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that Trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from Evil: For thine is the
Kingdom, and the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. Amen.

Tuesday Morning.
GReat and glorious Lord God, who art infinite and incomprehensible in all
perfections, art clothed with Glory and Majesty, and dwell in that light
that no mortal creature can approach and live, we thine unworthy servants,
humbly sensible of our infinite distance as creatures, and our abominable
vileness as Sinners, are here before thee this morning to offer up our prayers
and praises in the Name and Mediation of thy Son. In our selves we have no
confidence to appear before thee, for we are as dry stubble, and thou a
consuming fire, but in thy beloved Son, our ever blessed Redeemer and
Intercessor we have access with confidence, who has opened Heb. 10, 19, 20.
an entrance into the Holiest by his Blood, and consecrated a new and living
way to the Throne of thy Grace, through the Veil of his Flesh, that we coming
to thee, in his precious and prevailing Name, Heb. 4. ult.
may obtain mercy and find grace to help in our time of need.

We are guilty Sinners and want pardon, we are defiled Sinners and want
cleansing, we are weak Sinners and want strengthening, we are foolish Sinners
and want to be instructed in the ways of thy Word, and wandering Sinners that
want to be brought back into them, but though our case be all necessity, thy
glorious attribute is Al-sufficiency, and thy grace and mercy, thy wisdom and
power, is ready to supply all our wants Phil. 4. 19.
according to thy riches in glory by Christ Jesus.

We admire with all thankfulness, thy great patience and long-suffering toward
us, that thou have hitherto spared us, and not speedily brought upon us that
punishment and misery that our sins have righteously deserved, of which we can
give no account, but that thou art merciful, because mercy pleases thee, and
show compassion, because thou delightest in compassion: but such is thy
goodness, thou have not only spared but bountifully supplied us, and given us
all things richly to enjoy, that belong to life and godliness: thou feedest and
cloathest us, preservest and defendest us, have safely brought us through the
darkness and the dangers of the last night to the light of another day; for
these and all the blessings of this life, we praise thee, but we much more
magnify and adore thine inconceiveable goodness and love in giving us thy Son
to redeem us from wrath and condemnation, and thy holy Gospel to conduct us in
the way to eternal life. And we cannot without confusion of face, reflect upon
the shameful and disingenuous returns we have made of thine abundant and
undeserved kindnesses, that when thou have nourished and brought up children,
we have rebelled against Isa. 1. 2.
thee.

Thy holy Laws we have broken in sinful thoughts, words and actions, though
thou have therein commanded us nothing but what is in it self just, and
reasonable, and what is suitable to our dependence upon thy holy Majesty, we
have not carried our selves as it becomes us, to thee, in holiness and
godliness; to our neighbors in righteousness and charity; to our selves in
temperance and sobriety; but have followed after, and fulfilled the sensual
appetites and inclinations of our own hearts, and instead of serving thee, our
God, have served diverse lusts and pleasures.

We have known that our vile bodies must ere long lie down in the house of dust
and rottenness, and yet we have pampered them to fulfill the lusts of our flesh;
and that our immortal Souls must last an Eternity of Happiness or Misery, and
yet we have neglected laying up in store for them, an Happiness in the future
State* Joh. 6. 27.
And while we have labored for the meat that perishes, we have neglected that
which endure^ unto everlasting Life. We have little considered the great en^ of
our coming into this world* and as little laid to heart wha^ will become of us
when w^ shall go hence and be no more and as though we were to dy^ as the
Beasts dye, we have liv^ too much as the Beasts live.

In our selves, O Lord, w^ have no hope, but in the mu^titude of thy tender
mercies w^ cannot despair, and thoug^ we have deserved wrath and vengeance, and
have nothing of our own to plead, why we should escape it, we are greatly
encouraged to sue to thine offended Majesty for pardon and forgiveness, by that
Proclamation which thou have made Exodus 34. 6, 7.
of thy glorious Name, the Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious,
long-suffering and abundant in goodness, and truth, keeping mercy for
thousands, and forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and sin, and because thou
have said thou will not clear the guilty, take away our guilt by a sincere
hearty repentance, and a true and lively faith in the merits, and righteousness
of thy Son.

Let all our sins be more bitter and burthensom in the review of them, than
they have ever been pleasant and delightful in the commission of them, and
grant, gracious Lord, that ^e may be so sorrowful for (...) sins, as to loath
them, so (...) them, as to take up firm Resolutions against them, and so
resolve, as that by the powerful assistance of thy holy Spirit, we may never
renew the practice of them, and having done iniquity, Job 34. 32.
we may do so and offend no more.

Wash and cleanse our sinful Souls, from their guilt and filthiness in that
fountain of thy dear Sons most precious blood, Zech. 13. 1.
which thou have set open for sin, and uncleanness, and by the grace of thy
holy Spirit, subduing and mortifying our sins in us, convince and satisfy us
that thou have pardoned them: create in us clean hearts, O God, Psalm. 51. 10.
and renew right spirits within us.

And as we call thy Son, Jesus Christ, our Savior, and hope to be for ever
happy in the light and enjoyment of him in Heaven, let us make him our example,
and purify our selves even as he is pure. 1 John 3. 3.
Make us as he was, holy and humble, meek and merciful, patient and charitable,
heavenly minded and self-denying: let us be zealous for thy glory, contented
with our present condition, satisfied with all the wise allotments of thy
providence, and make it our meat and drink to do the will of our heavenly
Father; and in all things wherein he was a most lively and admirable pattern
for our imitation, seeing we profess our selves Christians, and say we abide 1 John 2. 6.
in him, let us walk as he also walked.

Settle and root in our hearts a stronger and more firm belief of thy holy
Gospel, and so fix our thoughts and affections upon that unseen happiness, that
our Savior in our name and place is possessed of; that nothing here below may
either allure or affright us from our duty or make us remiss, cold and
negligent in it, but we may be zealous of good works, and with fervency of
spirit always serve that gracious Lord, from whom we expect the reward of a
glorious and immortal inheritance.

Fill every one of our hearts with a quick and a constant sense, an humble and
awful dread, an ardent and entire love of thee, together with an active and
vigorous delight in thee, and a vigilant and circumspect care universally, and
in the whole course of our lives, to please and approve our selves to thee. Let
us never adventure to commit any sin, as a little one, because it will offend
and dishonor thee, the great and infinite Majesty of Heaven, and deserve the
eternal punishment and misery of an immortal Soul.

Keep us by thy grace from every evil way; and those sins especially to the
which we may be most inclined, and easily prevailed upon by custom or example;
the naughtiness and general corruption of the age we live in, our Callings, our
company or our constitution, so that laying aside every weight, Heb. 12. 2.
and the sins that easily beset us, and running with patience and perseverance
the race that thou have set before us, we may at length obtain that prize of
our High Calling, which thou have prepared and promised in Christ Jesus our
Lord.

And in his Name we humbly recommend to thy compassion and goodness, all the
Sons of Men that dwell upon the Face of the Earth, beseeching thee that thou
would make known thy Will to them, and help them to practice according to
what they know, and whatever affliction or calamity may lie upon them in mind,
body or estate, let them by thy mercy and clemency, be supported under them,
and in thy due time be delivered from them.

Show favorable regards of care and kindness toward thy Church, engrave her
upon the Palms of thine Hands, and let Isa. 49. 16.
her Walls be continually before thee.

Appoint Salvation for the Walls and Bulwarks of the Nation wherein we live,
pardon our many crying sins, avert thy deserved, feared Judgments, heal our
backslidings, and heal our breaches, continue thy Gospel, and grant that we
may walk worthy of that inestimable favor.

Bless our dread Sovereign with the blessings of thy right and left hand, let
his Government be happy and peaceable, long and prosperous, and a public
blessing to all that are under it, and grant that all subordinate Governors in
Church, in State, may faithfully use their power to the discouragement of Vice
and ungodliness, and the promoting and supporting peace and good order, truth,
righteousness and holiness: and let all men by a serious repentance and a
through reformation of their ways, strive to save the Land from those
confusions and miseries, into which they have plunged it by their manifold
offenses. Comfort all that mourn, give them beauty for ashes, and the garments
of praise for the spirit of heaviness, and let all that groan under thy heavy
hand triumph in thy salvation.

Be with us thy servants, this day, and let that good providence that has this
night preserved and refreshed us, direct, assist and bless us in all our ways,
and keep us from the dangers and mischiefs, the sins and offenses, the snares
and temptations that we might otherwise fall into. Let us be in thy fear all
the day long, and so order our lives, as if it were the last day we had to live
in this world, that as in the evening we shall be one day nearer our death, we
may be nearer eternal life and happiness; grant us all these our requests, most
gracious Father, and whatever else thou know to be needful for us, for the
sake of thy dear Son, in whose Name and Words, by his own direction we further
implore thy merciful goodness;

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread.
And forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that Trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from Evil: For thine is the
Kingdom, and the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. Amen.

Tuesday Evening.
ALmighty and most merciful God and Father, the Maker and Governor of all
Creatures in Heaven and Earth, and exalted in thy glorious perfections, above
the thoughts and services, the praises and acknowledgments of the highest and
best of them, thine understanding is infinite, and thou see the hearts and
ways of all the sons of men, thy holiness is infinite, and thou hate all the
sin and iniquity thou espiest in them, thy power infinite, and thou can
easily punish them for the sins that provoke and displease thee, and (...) yet
thine infinite mercies thou pardonest the sins of all that by sincere
repentance, and a through amendment of their ways return to thee.

We thy poor Servants in a deep sense of our guilt and wretchedness, and the
strong encouragements of thy declared mercy and goodness, humble our Souls at
thy Footstool, beseeching thee to have mercy upon us, and through the
righteousness of thy dear Son, whom thou have given to be a propitiation, and
price of redemptition for us, to pardon our many and great transgressions,
whereof we are guilty before thy Majesty, in thought, and word, and deed, and
whereby we have deserved to be punished with overlasting destruction, from thy
presence, by thy glorious power.

Had thou, O Lord, taken advantages against us, or been forward to pour out
that wrath and vengeance that we have been forward to provoke, we had not now
been begging thy mercy, or cherished with the hopes of it, but had in vain
lamented the bloody and severe effects of thine incensed Justice.

We are not only by Nature the Children of Wrath, but have in the course of our
Lives actuated the sinful, corrupt principles of our Nature, and gone astray
from thy holy, just and good Laws, that thou have given to be the rule and
measure of our actions: and though both as thy Creatures, thy Servants, and thy
Children, thou have laid upon us the greatest obligations to obedience, and a
dutyful compliance with thy Will, yet have we in the eager and violent pursuit
of our lusts Psalm. 2. 3.
broken thy bonds asunder, and cast away thy cords from us.

We have professed the pure and holy Religion of thy Son, but have shamefully
dishonored him and his Religion, by impure and unholy practices, and 2 Timothy 2.
19.
naming the Name of Christ, we have not departed from iniquity: we have given
up our Names to him in Baptism, and solemnly vowed obedience to the Laws of his
holy Gospel, but we have started aside, like broken Bows, and walked in the
imaginations of our own hearts, and fulfilled our vile and foolish lusts, as if
there were no God to be served, no Soul to be saved, no Hell to be feared, no
Heaven to be expected, and as if the Name of Christians would have carried us
to Heaven, we have done those things that many Heathens would have blushed at
and been ashamed to have practiced; so that this might be our condemnation,
which of all other is the most grievous and insupportable, that Light is come
into the World, and we have loved Darkness rather than Light, Joh. 3. 19.
because our deeds have been evil.

So many, and undeserved, have been thy mercies toward us, so kind and
unwearied the expressions of thy bounty, that all our disobedience is by a
shameful and odious ingratitude become exceeding sinful, and we cannot without
sorrow of heart and confusion of Face, reflect upon our wearying thee with our
sins, when thou have loaded us with thy benefits.

But we beseech thee, O most merciful Father, in the tenderest compassions of
thy sounding bowels, look down upon us, and for thy Names sake (the most
powerful argument and such as uses to prevail) O Lord hear, O Lord spare, O
Lord forgive: by a serious and hearty repentance, and a true and lively Faith
in thy Son, make us fit partakers of thy pardoning mercy.

Though our deserts are thine indignation and vengeance, the merit of his
righteousness is remission and forgiveness, though we have affronted thy
Justice, he has satisfied it, though we have incensed thy wrath, he has
appeased it; the chastisement of Isa. 53. 5.
our peace was upon him; O let the merit of his righteousness be upon us.

And because the holy Jesus, together with the guilt and punishment of sin,
always delivers from the power of it, and they that are Christ's, crucify the
Gal. 5. 24.
flesh with its affections and lusts, by the subduing and mortification of our
sins, convince and comfortably satisfy us that thou have pardoned them, and by
thy sanctifying grace, help us to cleanse our selves from 2 Cor. 7. 1.
all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and to perfect holiness in thy fear:
sanctify us wholly, 1 These. 5. 23.
and let our whole spirit, and soul, and body be preserved blameless, unto the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Quicken us, holy Father by the spirit of life and holiness, to run the ways of
thy Commandments, and as thou have given our blessed Savior to be Head of thy
Church, and anointed him with an unmeasured fullness of thy Spirit, that he
might communicate and impart it to the Members of his Body, let some drops of
that holy Oil fall down upon us, that was so plentifully poured upon the Head
of our High Priest, and out of his fullness, let us receive Joh. 1. 16.
Grace for Grace; and so renew the Image of his Holiness in our Souls, that as
his true Children we may show forth all the Features and Lineaments of our
heavenly Father.

And because we are not sufficient of our selves, to avoid any evil, or perform
any good, be graciously present with us to preserve us from the one, and assist
us in the other. Make us perfect in every good work, to do thy will, working in
us that which is well pleasing in Heb. 13. 21.
thy sight through Jesus Christ.

Make us wise to Salvation, and seeing our days are very few and uncertain, and
repentance both necessary and out of our own power, let us not put it off till
to morrow, not knowing what a day may bring forth, nor deceive our selves with
vain purposes of parting with our Sins hereafter, when this very night our
Souls may be Luke 12. 20.
taken from us; But seeing the Heavens and the Earth at 2. Pet. 3. 15.
length, and our selves ere long, must be dissolved, let us be diligent, that
we may be found of thee in peace, without spot, and blameless.

Bless thy whole Church scattered far and near over the Face of the Earth; pour
out upon it the Spirit of Truth and Holiness, and grant that all that confess
thy holy Name, may agree in the truth of thy holy Word, and live in unity and
godly love; be thou that art the Lord and Lawgiver of thy Church and People,
their Protector and Savior from all their Enemies, thou art our Psalm. 44. 4.
King, O God, command deliverances for Jacob.

Be gracious and favorable to these Nations, many and heinous are the sins
whereby we have provoked thy Majesty, great and heavy the Judgments that hang
over us for those Sins; pardon we most humbly beseech thee our Sins, and avert
those Judgments, thou that sit between the Cherubims shine forth; before
England, Scotland and Ireland, stir up thy Psalm. 80. 1, 2.
strength, and come and save us.

And though we of this Nation have deserved to be overthrown with an utter
destruction; and for ever cast out of thy sight, as a loathsome and abominable
thing; for thy goodness, O Lord, pardon and spare, reform and amend, compose
and settle, heal and establish us, in the multitude of thy tender mercies.

Give us not up to the mischiefs and desolations that we have deserved, and
thine and our Enemies have designed, nor suffer those that hate us proudly to
insult and triumph over us.

Bless with all blessings of this life and the next, thine anointed Servant our
Sovereign Lord the King; direct him in such ways as are pleasing to thee, and
protect him from all dangers that may at any time threaten him. Let all
subordinate Ministers Ecclesiastical and Civil, be so assisted by thy Grace and
holy Spirit, that Religion and Godliness, Peace and Order, Love and Unity,
Truth and Righteousness may be established and encouraged 1 Pet. 2. 1.
among us, and let all sorts of men, laying aside all malice, and all guile,
and hypocrisies, and envies, and all evil speakings, keep the unity Ephesians. 4. 3.
of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace.

Comfort the afflicted and distressed in Mind, Body or Estate, recompense the
kindnesses of our Friends seven fold into their Bosoms, forgive our Enemies,
and help us so to forgive them, that we may comfortably hope for our own
forgiveness.

Keep us, O Lord, from the evils and dangers, that, without thy protection
might this night befall us, refresh and strengthen our frail Bodies with a
moderate, quiet and peaceable rest, and let the strength of this nights
healthful repose, be returned to thee in the next days faithful service, that
as every day we are nearer our death; we may be nearer an immortal Crown of
Life and Glory, which thou have prepared and promised to them that Love and
Fear thee, through Jesus Christ, who, by his Righteousness and Intercession,
has given us the liberty and confidence to say.

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread.
And forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that Trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from Evil: For thine is the
Kingdom, and the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. Amen.

Wednesday Morning.
HOly and heavenly Father, thou art infinite in Power and Wisdom, in Holiness,
Truth and Goodness, abundant in Mercy to all that call upon thee in truth, all
thy Works in Heaven and Earth show forth thy praise; the glorious Angels, and
the glorified Spirits of just Men, being themselves honored in the honoring
of thee, everlastingly triumph in the celebration of thy divine and
incomprehensible perfections; to praise and magnify thy great and holy Name,
is both the duty and privilege of the Sons of Men, to whom thou have given
understandings in some measure to conceive thy glorious excellencies, and
tongues to declare them.

We thy poor and unworthy Servants, humbly offer up to thy divine Majesty, the
tribute of our hearty praises, and adorations of thine infinite Power and
Justice, Wisdom and Holiness, Truth and Faithfulness, and bless thee with our
whole Souls, for all those blessings for our Souls and Bodies, our present and
future happiness, which are the effects of thy bounty and goodness.

We thank thee, O Lord, for our health and strength, our liberty and peace, the
Bread we eat and the Raiment we put on, that thou have delivered us from Pains
and Sicknesses, and those grievous pressures and calamities, wherewith others,
better than our selves, are sorely afflicted, that thou have the last night
preserved us from dangers and refreshed us with sleep, and bestowest upon us
all the supports and conveniences of Life, and above all, that thou have
redeemed us from Hell and Damnation, by the precious Blood of thy dear Son,
that by his Gospel thou have brought to light life and immortality, and
encouraged our hopes of them, by thy precious and faithful promises.

Lord what is Man that thou art so mindful of him? What are Sinners that thou
show such favor unto them? Thy mercies conferred upon us are admirable, as
we are thy Creatures that can no way oblige our Almighty and Independent
Creator, and much more so as we are Sinners, that have offended and provoked
our most righteous Sovereign Lord and Lawgiver.

Ever since we came into the World, we have been overspread with a contagious
Leprosy and loathsome Disease, and have added the iniquities of practice to our
natural pollution, and more defiled our selves by choosing our own crooked ways,
and fulfilling the imaginations of our naughty hearts.

We have many times given scandal to others, by our open and observed
miscarriages, and cast a blemish and reproach upon that holy Religion whereof
we have made profession; so as to have made it worse thought on by its Enemies,
and with great folly we have sometimes adventured to commit those Sins in our
private retirements, which we would have been ashamed that men should have
taken notice of, though we have well known that the Psalm. 139. 12
light and darkness are both alike to thee, and that no secrecy can hide from
thine all-seeing Eye.

We have been too careless of avoiding temptations to Sin, and have run into
those snares, that by taking heed to our feet, we might have avoided; we have
neglected the means of mortifying our Lusts, watchfulness, Prayer and Fasting,
which through thy blessing might have been effectual to that blessed purpose,
and instead of strongly and resolutely opposing we have cowardly and
treacherously complied with, furnished and animated thine and our Enemies,
making provision for Romans 13. 14.
our Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof: and though we have been well assured
that our lives and all our present earthly enjoyments that support and sweeten
them, are but of a short and momentany continuance, we have labored and been
sollicitous Joh. 6. 27.
for the meat that perishes and neglected that which endures to everlasting
Life.

How often have we deafned our Ear to the calls of thy Gospel? And made light
of both the invitations of thy gracious promises, and the terrors of thy
dreadful threatenings? How often have we hardened our hearts against the motions
of thy holy Spirit? How often to satisfy our lustful appetites, have we broken
through the convictions of our own consciences? And to violate thy holy and
good Laws, have offered violence to the dictates of our own minds?

We judge our selves, O Lord, and acknowledge we have justly deserved all that
wrath that might make us everlastingly miserable, and made our selves liable to
those threatened punishments, which we can neither escape nor endure; but O our
merciful Father, do not thou condemn us, we are ashamed and confounded in the
sense and remembrance of our transgressions, comfort us, O Lord, we beseech
thee, with a sense of thy pardoning mercy, in our blessed and all-sufficient
Redeemer.

Help us by a sincere and hearty repentance, to return to thee, from whom in
our own crooked and perverse ways we have gone astray; Let the time past of our
lives suffice us to have 1 Pet. 4. 3.
wrought the wills of the flesh, and seeing we have already by the frequent
commissions of sin too much offended thee, and endangered our Souls, let us not
by the repeated and continued practice of it, heighten the offense and add to
our guiltiness.

Let the Blood of thy dear 1 John 1. 7.
Son Jesus Christ cleanse us from all sin, and through his precious Sacrifice
and meritorious sufferings, that was pure and perfectly innocent, discharge and
acquit us that have been foul offenders.

Let thy holy Spirit sanctify and renew us after thine own Image, in
righteousness and true holiness, and as we hope to be pardoned, by the precious
death of Christ, grant that crucifying our Lusts upon his Cross; we may follow
the example of his holy Life, and in all holiness and humility, meekness and
charity, zeal for thy Glory and submission to thy Will, patience, heavenly
mindedness and self-denial, contentment and the contempt of this World, we may
walk as Christ walked, and be filled with all Phil. 1. 11.
the fruits of righteousness, which are through him unto thy praise and glory.

Help us to live by faith in thy promises, in all varieties of thy providence,
let this be our great support and comfort, that thou have said thou will never
Heb. 13. 5.
leave us nor forsake us, and in all difficulties and temptations, let this be
our great care, that we do not leave nor forsake thee, But sanctify the Lord
God 1 Pet. 3. 15.
in our hearts, and with a zealous faithfulness endeavor to please and approve
our selves to thee in all our ways; and seeing we call on the Father, who,
without respect of persons judges according to every man's work, let us pass the
time of our sojourning here in fear: 1 Pet. 1. 17.
And give diligence to make our calling and election sure, that 2 Pet. 1. 10,
11.
we may never fall either into scandalous sins or insupportable miseries, but
an entrance may be ministered to us abundantly, into the everlasting Kingdom of
our Lord and Savior, Col. 3. 4.
and when Christ who is our life shall appear, we may also appear with him in
glory.

Show thy favor and goodness to all mankind, and grant, O Lord, we beseech
thee, that the course of this world may be so peaceably ordered by thy
governance, that thy Church may joysully serve thee in all godly quietness, and
being delivered from the Plots and Combinations, the Oppositions and
Persecutions of its Enemies, may always walk before thee in truth and holiness,
and all that profess the Gospel of our Lord Jesus, may hold fast his pure and
heavenly Doctrines, and express the power of them in their lives.

Bless this sinful and provoking Nation, wherein we live, pardon our many great
and crying sins, heal our wide breaches, unite our divisions, compose our
distractions, and remove from us whatever may provoke the Eyes of thy Jealousy
and Glory, and deprive us of thy long continued temporal and spiritual
blessings, and lay us open to thy dreadful and desolating Judgments.

Send thy blessed Spirit into our hearts, a spirit of wisdom and knowledge, and
of the fear of the Lord, a spirit of truth and holiness, of peace and unity, of
righteousness, moderation, meekness and charity, and instead of loading one
another with slanders and scandals, foul reproaches and bitter censures, help
us to bear one another Gal. 6. 2.
burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.

Bless our Sovereign Lord King Charles with the choicest of thy blessings, fill
his heart with wisdom and piety, with a mighty sense of the great Trust thou
have committed to him, and the great obligations thou have laid upon him, with
courage and resolution to support and promote Righteousness and true Religion.

And grant that all in places of Power and Authority may exert, and use it for
the punishment of evil doers, and the praise of them that do well, as it
becomes them that have received their Power from thee, and are accountable for
it unto thee. Order all public Affairs to thy glory, and the comfort and
encouragement of all that fear thee. Support and comfort all those whom thou
have fed with the Bread of Tears and mingled their drink with weeping.

And we humbly beseech thee for a blessing upon our selves, as thou have
preserved us this night, direct, assist, and prosper us in all the affairs and
enterprises of this day, and let us all the day long be in thy fear, remembering
thou observest, and thou will judge us: and let a sense of this preserve us
from all sin, and quicken us to the doing of whatever may be pleasing in thy
sight, through our blessed Redeemer, who, when we pray, has taught and
commanded us to say;

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread.
And forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that Trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from Evil: For thine is the
Kingdom, and the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. Amen.

Wednesday Evening.
BLessed Lord God, the high and lofty One, that inhabitest Isai. 57. 15.
eternity, whose Name is Holy, who dwell in the high and holy place, with
him also that is of a contrite and humble Spirit. We wretched and miserable
sinners, most humbly beseech thee to look down upon us from the habitation of
thy Holiness, and glory in the multitude of thy tender mercies; and work in us
that humble and contrite Spirit, that is so pleasing and acceptable in thy
sight, that our hearts, hardened by the deceitfulness of Sin, may be softened by
the effectual working of thy Grace.

By commanding us to call upon thee, thou have made Prayer our Duty, and by
promising to hear us when we Pray, thou have made it no less our privilege: in
obedience to thy command, and in the encouragement of thy Promise, we are here
before thee, to offer up our Evening Sacrifice of Prayer, desiring thee both to
prepare our Hearts to Pray, and bow down thine ear to hear.

We are not of our selves sufficient to perform any duty, to bear any burden,
to resist any temptation, to mortify any lust, 2. Cor. 3. 5.
To think one good thought, but all our sufficiency is of thee: thou, O Lord,
can pardon our Sins, supply our wants, heal our distempers, enlighten our
blindness, soften our hardness, strengthen our weakness, we have no whither to
go but unto thee, nor can we come to thee but in thine own Power: into such a
wretched condition have our Sins, brought us, that we are both unable to help
our selves, and unworthy that thou should help us; but our comfort is, that
thy Grace does not use to find Sinners worthy, but make them so, nor do thou
show favor and kindness to them, because they please thee, but because thou
art pleased with thine own Mercy and Goodness.

Our Iniquities, we acknowledge, have been many and great, a sinful nature, as
a corrupt Fountain, has sent forth polluted streams in the thoughts, words and
actions of our Lives, and we have often offended against thy holy Laws, and
expressed the enmity of our carnal minds. Though all thy Laws are in themselves
most equal, just and good, and thou have both encouraged our obedience by the
gracious promises of thy favorable acceptance, and an eternal recompense; and
affrighted from sin by threatening it with everlasting punishment, yet lightly
esteeming thy Promises and contemning thy threatenings, we have trodd^n thy holy
Laws under our Feet, and broken through the restraints, wherewith ^ou have
hedged us in from finding our own ways.

Our pride and earthliness, our unbelief and unthankfulness, our hypocrisy,
sensuality and hardness of heart, witness against us to our faces, and give us
great cause to blush and be confounded, to mourn and grieve in the sense of
them.

Who of us has had that due sense of thy holiness, power and goodness, thine
omnipresence and all-seeing Eye, as to be thereby driven from our Sins, or
quickened to the exercise of Virtue and Godliness? Who of us has been so
affected with that Grace that has appeared bringing Salvation, as to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and make it our study and business to please and
approve our selves to thee? Who of us has so felt the burden, and tasted the
bitterness of our sins, as to loath and leave them with dislike and abhorrency?
Who of us has been so delighted in thy love, as to return thee our hearty love
in a sincere and uniform obedience? Who of us has so firmly believed the
rewards and punishments of the future state, as to press toward the mark for
the obtaining the prize, and make have to escape and flee from the bottomless
Pit and burning Lake?

The zeal and earnestness that we should have shown in matters of Religion, we
have expressed in following our worldly interests, and that coldness and
indifferency that would have been well bestowed upon the little and short lived
benefits of the present Life, has attended the performance of our holy duties.

We have in some measure known our Masters Will, and yet have done our own, and
to please our corrupt and fleshly Appetites, have done what we have well
understood to be displeasing in thy sight. Though thou have often commanded us
to repent, and turn from our evil ways, and we have been convinced that to hear
thy Voice to day, is both our duty and our wisdom, we have demurred by lingering
delays, and not cast off our Sins by a speedy repentance.

We are ashamed, O Lord, of this our folly, and beseech thee so to awaken and
assist us by thy Grace, that we may not receive it in vain, nor longer delude
our own Souls with the deceitful purposes of a future repentance, but let us
make haste to hearken to thy loud and earnest 2 Cor. 6. 2.
Calls, now while it is the accepted time, and the day of Salvation.

And let thy pardoning mercy freely forgive all our Sins, thy Grace having by
true repentance made us meet partakers of that inestimable benefit: So set them
before our face, as that we may mark and consider them, mourn for and confess,
loath and forsake them; and so cast them behind thy back, as not to observe
them with a wrathful countenance, or punish them with a justly deserved
vengeance.

By the precious blood of thy dear Son, that immaculate Lamb, that was offered
to take away the Sins of the World, Psalm. 51. 2.
Wash us thoroughly from our Iniquities, and cleanse us from our Sins, and
through his perfect righteousness let the free gift come upon us unto
justification Romans 5. 18.
of Life.

Deliver us, we pray thee, as from the guilt and damnation of Sin by his
precious Sacrifice so from its power and dominion by his sanctifying Spirit,
and though like a Leprofie in the Walls of an infected house, Sin will remain
in us while we are in the world, let it not reign Romans 6. 12.
in our mortal Body, that we should obey it in the lusts thereof. But as the
Flesh in us lusts against the Spirit, let thy Gal. 3. 17.
Spirit in us resist and subdue the lusts of the Flesh.

Let not an inordinate love of the allurements, and intangling vanities of this
World quench or weaken in our Souls that entire and most hearty love that is
due to thee and heavenly things, nor distracting cares for the conveniences of
the Body, eat out and destroy the care of our Souls, nor hinder a timely
provision for their future and eternal happiness. But for as much as our stay
here below is very short, and the time of our departure hence into an
everlasting state very uncertain, let us with fear and trembling, earnestness
and diligence, work out our own Salvation, and carry our selves with upright
and inoffensive Consciences toward thee and all men whilst we are in the World,
as we shall wish to have done when we come to leave it.

Help us to run the race of holy obedience, meekness and patience, charity,
contentment, constancy and perseverance, to fight a good fight, finish our
course, and keep the faith, that we may receive a Crown of righteousness, which
the righteous Judge shall at the last day 2 Timothy 4. 7. 8.
give unto all them that love his appearing: And let the contemplation of that
glory and happiness, and the well-grounded hope of our attaining it, make us
diligent and faithful in the discharge of our duty, watchful against all
fleshly defilements, patient and cheerful under all crosses and troubles, cold
and indifferent to all the profits and pleasures of this Life, and let our
whole conversation on Earth be such as may become the Heirs of an heavenly,
glorious and eternal inheritance: that when our earthly 2 Cor. 5. 1.
house of this tabernacle shall be dissolved, we may have a building of God, an
house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens, and be found meet to be Col.
1. 12.
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in Light.

Look in mercy upon all the Sons of Men, and cause the light of thy Gospel to
guide their feet into the way of peace, that are wandering in the darkness of
sensuality, profaneness, superstition and idolatry, and show them thy Salvation.

Bless thy whole Church throughout the World; preserve it from the offenses and
reproachful scandals of its professed Friends, and from the oppressions and
persecutions of its open and declared Enemies: Let thy continual care keep and
cleanse thy Vineyard, that it may abound in the Fruits of Righteousness.

Be merciful to this Nation where we live, pardon the Sins that cry aloud for
vengeance, heal the breaches that threaten its ruin, and avert those dreadful
Judgments that hang over our heads; and as thou have all along often saved us
from the destructions and miseries that our daring wickednesses might have
pulled down upon our heads, give us cause more and more to magnify thy mercy,
and triumph in thy Salvation.

Bless our Lord the King with Wisdom and Courage, a zeal for thy glory, and a
continual care of promoting Righteousness and true Religion; and let all under
him in places of Civil and Ecclesiastical Government, make it their business to
further Righteousness and Peace, and the good of Souls: and let all sorts of
men follow after peace, without which they cannot see happiness on Earth, and
holiness, without which they shall not see thy Face in Heaven.

Be thou a present help for the relief and succor of all that are in a
suffering condition, and let that good providence that has defended, directed
and assisted us in the dangers, the occurrences and businesses of the day, so
protect and refresh us with sleep this night, that in the morning we may be
more fit to serve thee, and live to thy praise in Christ Jesus our Lord,
through whom, we beseech thee to accept our persons, pardon our sins and hear
our Prayers, when we say,

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread.
And forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that Trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from Evil: For thine is the
Kingdom, and the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. Amen.

Thursday Morning.
MOst gracious God, and merciful Father in Jesus Christ, the Author of our
Being, and the Fountain of all those good things that may make us happy in this
World and that which is to come, we thy poor Creatures, vile and provoking
Sinners, in the sense of our own guilt fly to thy mercy to pardon us; in the
sense of our weakness fly to thy might to strengthen us; in the sense of our
own ignorance and folly, fly to thy wisdom to instruct and counsel us; in the
sense of our manifold wants and necessities, fly to thy fullness and
all sufficiency to supply us.

We acknowledge, O Lord, that our nature is not only corrupt and sinful,
overspread with a Leprosy and loathsome Disease, that might make us for ever
abominable in thy pure Eyes; but our practices have been contrary to thy holy
and righteous Laws, both in the doing what thou have forbidden us, and the
leaving undone what thou have commanded us; we have followed after and
fulfilled our own Lusts, and yielded to them a vile and slavish subjection, as
to our Lords and Lawgivers, whilst we have refused and been weary of thy
Service, as a slavery, which is perfect freedom.

We have forgotten thee, our God, and turning aside to lying vanities, have
sinned against thee in every state and condition of our lives; in our health we
have seldom thought how soon we might be cast upon a sick Bed, and in our
sickness have been unprepared for death, that might have been the issue of it;
in our prosperity we have been secure and sensual, wanton, proud and
unthankful, and in our adversity we have repined and murmured with impatience
and coffeehouse, and when our folly has perverted our ways, our hearts Pro.
19. 3.
have fretted against the Lord.

We have suffered our selves to be prevailed upon by the pleasures and profits
of this Life, those deceitful baits of the Flesh, that having for a while
gratified our sensual inclination, have left the sharp and wounding hook of
fear and disquiet in our consciences: And though thou have graciously
forewarned us, that our most pleasant Lusts will be bitterness in the latter
end, and the wages of Sin Romans 6. 23.
is nothing less then death, and eternal misery, yet by our unbelief and carnal
affections, and the present seeming advantages of Sin, we have been drawn into
Sin; and not frighted from it by its future mischiefs and punishments.

Thou have sent thy Son into the World to redeem and save us from our Sins, to
make known thy Will, and publish to us his holy and good Laws, that we should
govern our thoughts, our words and actions by them; but we have by our
disobedience, vilely cast away his Scepter, and disowned the authority of his
Laws; notwithstanding our professions to Tit. 1. 16.
know and believe him, we have by wicked works denied him, and naming the Name
of Christ, 2 Timothy 2. 19.
we have not departed from Iniquity.

We have so resisted and grieved thy holy Spirit, who has earnestly pleaded
with us to cast off our Sins, and return to our Duty, that he might in
displeasure withdraw from us, and forbearing his blessed motions, and leaving
us destitute of his gracious assistance, might give us up to the blindness of
our own minds, the unbelief and impenitent hardness of our hearts, and suffer
us to go on in our own ways, till our condition were wholly hopeless, and
without possibility of recovery, we had sinned our selves into eternal misery.

Awaken, O Lord, we pray thee, our sleepy Consciences, and so thoroughly
convince us of the great evil of Sin, and those fearful punishments that follow
it, that we may in good earnest and without the least delay, flee from it, by a
most serious and hearty repentance; and return unto the Lord our God, from Hos.
14. 1.
whom we have fallen, and gone astray by our Iniquities.

Through the sufferings and precious death of thy Son, be reconciled and speak
peace to us, though our offenses are very foul and heinous, and our best
righteousness cannot encourage us to look up with confidence to thine offended
Majesty, yet in the righteousness of our blessed Mediator, we both pray and
hope to be forgiven, being by thy self assured, that thou have given him a
great and all-sufficient Redeemer for the Atonement of great Transgressors, and
exalted him Acts 5. 31.
to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance and remission of Sins. For
our sakes, and in our stead, he endured the punishments that himself had not
deserved, he Isa. 53. 5.
was wounded for our Transgressions, and the chastisement of our peace was upon
him, O let us through his Stripes be healed.

Help us, being delivered from wrath and condemnation, Matt. 22. 37, 39.
to love thee the Lord our God, with all our heart, and our Neighbor as our
selves, and let us evidence our love to thee by keeping thy Commandments, 1 John
5. 3.
and our love to our Neighbor by forbearing and forgiving reproving and
admonishing, counselling, comforting and relieving him, and performing all acts
of charity and kindness to him.

Let us herein exercise our Acts 24. 16.
selves to have always a conscience void of offense toward thee, and toward
men: enlighten our understandings with the knowledge of thy Will, inflame our
affections with a delightful love of it, and so conform our wills unto thine,
that we may readily do what thou would have us do, and cheerfully suffer what
thou would have us suffer. Give us that Jam. 3. 17.
wisdom which is from above, that is first pure, to fit us for the happiness of
another life, and then peaceable, to give a relish to the enjoyments of this:
and let us so employ our selves in the affairs and businesses of this World, as
to make Religion our great business, and present Romans 12. 1.
our Bodies and Souls a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto thee, which is
our reasonable Service.

Help us to subdue our inordinate desires, and all sinful passions, and when at
any time we are tempted to the breach of thy Laws, with courage to resist the
temptation, not daring to sin against thee our gracious Father and righteous
Judge; and whatever Talents thou intrustest to our management, health, strength
or credit, our time, Estates, the seasons of Grace, and opportunities of doing
good, let us husband and improve them with that wisdom and faithfulness that
become them, that must ere long give an account of their Stewardship.

And because through the weakness of our mortal nature, we can do no good thing
without thee, grant us the help of thy Grace, that in keeping thy Commandments,
we may please thee both in will and deed, and in our several Callings, whether
they be public or private; our several Conditions, whether of prosperity or
adversity; our several Relations, whether of Husbands or Wives, Parents or
Children, Masters or Servants, Neighbors and Friends, we may perform the
Duties that those Callings, Conditions and Relations require of us: And Mat. 5.
16
let our light so shine before Men, that they seeing our good Works, may
glorify thee, our Father which art in Heaven.

Whilst we are in the way let us quickly agree with our Mat. 5. 25.
Adversary, and give diligence that by a sincere repentance, and an upright
universal obedience we may be found of thee in peace, and prepared to appear
before the Judgment Seat of Christ, when he shall sit upon the Throne of his
Glory, and weighing our thoughts, words and actions, in impartial Balances,
shall render to us according to our works: and let the consideration of that
account leave such awful impressions in our hearts, as both to hinder the doing
of whatever may make the thoughts of it terrible to us, and cause us to wait
for our Lord with our Loins Luke 12. 35.
girt, and our Lamps burning, that at his return we may enter with him into
everlasting habitations.

Let thy merciful hands be opened toward all the Sons of Men, whom thy hands
have made; and with a more especial kindness be gracious and favorable to
Sion; keep thy Church and Household, continually in thy true Religion, and
leaning upon the hope of thy heavenly Grace, let them evermore be defended by
thy mighty Power.

Bless this sinful and unworthy Nation; pardon all our Sins that cry aloud in
thine Ears for vengeance, purely purge away Isa. 1. 25.
our dross, and take away all our Tin; deliver us from the destructions we have
deserved, and perpetuate thy Gospel and true Religion among us, from generation
to generation.

Let the Life and Health, the peace, honor and safety of our Sovereign Lord,
be precious in thy sight, and let all that govern under Him in Church and
State, maintain and encourage Truth and Peace, Religion, Righteousness and all
goodness: and grant that all under their Authority may lead quiet and ^ Tim. 2.
2.
peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty.

Succor and relieve all in any suffering condition, recompense the kindnesses
of our Friends and Benefactors sevenfold into their Bosom; forgive and help us
heartily to forgive all that may have offered injury and unkindness to us.

Look down upon us in mercy that are here lifting up our hands and hearts to
thee; we bless thee for the peace, safety and refreshment of the last night,
beseeching thee, so to guard us through the hazards, and guide us through the
affairs of this day, that we may glorify thee, grow in Grace, and go forward
in the way that leads to everlasting Life and happiness, through our Lord Jesus
Christ, according to whose direction^ and command we further pray;

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread.
And forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that Trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from Evil: For thine is the
Kingdom, and the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. Amen.

Thursday Evening.
ALmighty and everlasting God, the wise and righteous Governor of all things
in Heaven and Earth, who do whatsoever thou please, and whatever thou do
is well and wisely done, because thou do it: we thine unworthy Servants, whom
thy hands have made, and ever since supported and supplied, beseech thee in
mercy to look down upon us, that in a sense of our own vileness are here
humbling our selves at thy Footstool acknowledging it thy mercy and
longsuffering, that we are entrusted with one opportunity more, to implore thy
pardon and forgiveness.

Thou might have destroyed us, the polluted Offspring of disobedient
Parents, as soon as ever we came into the world, and ever since we were capable
of breaking thy Laws, we have added sin unto sin, and heapt transgression upon
transgression.

We have trifled away that time, that thou have allotted us to make provision
for an happy Eternity, in the pursuit of pleasure and profit, transient and
momentany vanities, and have waged and maintained War against thee in those
seasons of Grace, thou have afforded us for the making our peace: thy patience
and long-suffering that should have led us to repentance, we have perverted to
fleshly purposes, and a more presumptuous and impenitent progress in Sin.

We have over-cared for, over-loved, over-desired and over-delighted in the
good things of this World, and inordinately placed our affections upon earthly
and temporary enjoyments, which thou have fitted to such things as have in them
an heavenly, spiritual and everlasting excellency: How grievously and how
justly might thou plague us with the desires of our own hearts, and punish
us by giving us our portion in this Life?

As thou have multiplied thy Blessings we have multiplied our Inquities, and
transgressed those holy and good Laws which thou have given us as the rule of
our carriage toward thee, our selves and others, and wherein thou have
commanded us nothing but what tends to the perfection of our nature, and the
promoting of our happiness.

We have little regarded thy design in sending us into this World, which was
that we should serve and please, obey and honor thee, our great Creator and
gracious Benefactor, and as little laid to heart the strict account that we
must shortly render of all our ways and works, before thy exact and impartial
Tribunal, when we shall go hence and be here no more.

We have turned a deaf ear to thy counsels, quenched the motions of thy Spirit,
misimproved thy mercies to make them the materials of pride, and a wanton
sensuality, rejected the tenders of thy Grace, and hardened our hearts under the
correction of thy Rod; And if thou, Lord, should mark our Iniquities, who of
us, Psalm. 130. 3.
O Lord, could stand?

How justly might thou deprive us of all the blessings that we have
forfeited? And make us feel the smart and severity of that vengeance that thou
have threatened? Thou might inflict pains and diseases in our Bodies, and
pursue us with terrors, and the fearful foretasts of wrath in our consciences;
thou might remove thy Gospel, which we have abused, and withdraw thy Spirit
whom we have grieved; thou might give us up to the lusts of our (...) 81. 12.
own hearts, that we should walk in our own counsels, till we had filled up the
measure of our Sins, and ripened our selves to be cut down for everlasting
punishment.

But with thee there is mercy Psalm. 130. 4.
and forgiveness that thou may be feared, and we may be pardoned: work in us
we beseech thee, that deep contrition and through repentance, which wher^ever
it is wrought, is followed by forgiveness, and through faith in the blood of
thy dear Son, who has made peace by the blood of his Cross; let us be
justified and reconciled, and rejoice in thee, having Romans 5. 11.
received the Atonement.

Sanctify us in Soul, Spirit and Body to thy Service, enlighten our minds with
the knowledge of thy Will, incline our wills to the obedience of it, purify
our affections to a love and delight in it, purge our consciences from dead
Heb. 9. 14.
works to serve thee the living God, and as we have yielded our Members
Servants of unrighteousness unto Iniquity, let us yield them the Servants of
Romans 6. 19.
Righteousness unto Holiness.

And because we are in this World beset with many Snares and Temptations; let
us be sober 1 Pet. 5. 8.
and vigilant, and walk circumspectly, Ephesians. 5. 15.
not as Fools but as Wise, shunning all appearance of evil, and avoiding
whatever may be an occasion to the Flesh, suffer us not at any time so to be
led into temptation, as that the solicitations of Satan, the Allurements of
this vain World, or the suggestions of our own carnal and treacherous hearts,
should draw us into those sinful ways that are displeasing to thee, and
destructive to our Souls, but being always sensible of how great importance and
necessity it is, to work out our Phil. 2. 12.
Salvation with fear and trembling, how short a time is allotted to us: How
many and powerful Enemies are combined to hinder us: How glorious the Reward is
that is promised: And how dreadful and insupportable the punishment that is
threatened, Let us make have to escape the wrath to come, and with all our might
endeavor to lay hold of eternal Life, pressing toward the mark for Phil. 3. 14.
the prize of the high Calling of God in Christ Jesus.

1 Pet. 1. 17.
And seeing we call on the Father, who without respect of persons, judges
according to every man's work, let us pass the time of our sojourning here in
fear, and never allow our selves the commissions of any known Sin, nor the
omission or neglect of any known Duty.

Enable us by thy holy Spirit to subdue and govern our unruly passions, to
resist and crush the first motions of Sin in our earthly members, faithfully to
trade the several Talents thou putst into our hands, regularly to fill up all
the relations wherein thou have placed us, patiently to bear all our burdens,
cheerfully to enjoy all our blessings, and thankfully to return them to thee in
thy service and praise, and so wisely to improve all thy providence, both of
bounty and severity, that in our lowest adversity we be not dejected with
anxiety and unbelief, and in our highest prosperity, our hearts be not lifted
up with pride to forget thee the Lord our God, but in all things the glory of
thy great Name may be advanced, and the spiritual profit of our Souls, and
their growth in grace may be promoted and furthered.

Cherish and increase in us all sincere, though feeble motions toward a more
perfect and uniform obedience to thy Will, and having begun a good work in any
of us, complete and finish Phil. 1. 6.
it until the day of Jesus Christ: help us to love thee more entirely, to serve
thee more diligently, to trust in thee more fully, to live to thee more
exactly, to please thee more abundantly than we have hitherto done, that in a
dying hour our Sins and Follies may not strike us with horror and perplexity,
but our Souls may be filled with sweet and comfortable reflections upon those
ways that have been pleasing to thee, that our God, and our Consciences may
smile upon us, and speak kindly to us, when all the things of this World are
forsaking us, and we are passing into an eternal state. Use us, O Lord, whilst
we live, as Instruments of thy Glory in all holiness, and as Vessels of Glory,
fill us when we dye, with everlasting happiness.

Let all the Sons of Men whom thou have made capable of thy grace and favor be
made partakers of it: Relieve them that are any way distressed, and enlighten
them with the knowledge of thy Gospel that sit in darkness.

Beautify Mount Sion the joy of the whole Earth, with thy Salvation, deliver
thy Church from ignorance and error, pride and hypocrisy, strife and
contention, schism, profaneness, tyranny, superstition and idolatry, and let
there be none to offend or oppress in thy Holy Mountain.

Be gracious and merciful to this sinful and divided Nation, though our Sins be
as scarlet, let them be white as Snow, though Isai. 1. 18.
they be red like crimson, let them be as Wool: Establish thy Religion in the
truth and purity of it, and let it be made beautiful by the religious lives and
practices of them that profess it.

Let the King joy in thy Psalm. 21. 1.
strength, O Lord, and exceedingly rejoice in thy Salvation, bless him with
length of days and safety from dangers, direct him by wise Counsels to just,
honorable and successful Enterprises; let all subordinate Authority be
exercised to the beating down of Vice, and the exaltation of Religion and
Righteousness, and dispose all that are under Authority to a pious obedience
unto thee, a peaceable subjection to them that thou have set over them, not
only for wrath, but for conscience Romans 13. 5.
sake, and to mutual kindness and a brotherly love of one another.

We come unto thee, holy Father, for a blessing upon our selves, beseeching
thee to take our Bodies and Souls, our Habitation and Possessions, into the
safe custody of thy watchful Providence, that no evil befall Psalm. 91. 10.
us, nor any plague come nigh our dwelling, repair the decays of our frail
Bodies by a quiet and refreshing rest, and let us lay out our strength and
vigor in thy service, to thy praise and honor, and the giving up our account
with joy, at the appearing of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in whom, as
the High Priest of our Profession, we offer up all our Prayers and Praises, and
through whom alone we hope to be heard and accepted, when praying, we say;

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread.
And forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that Trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from Evil: For thine is the
Kingdom, and the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. Amen.

Friday Morning.
O Lord, the great and holy Dan. 9. 4.
God, that keep Covenant and Mercy, to them that Psalm. 145. 18.
love thee, and art nigh to all that call upon thee in truth and sincerity,
though thou have thousands of holy and blessed Spirits, and ten thousand times
ten thousands daily Ministering about thy Throne, and art not at all bettered by
their pure and spotless Services, yet thou have gracious and compassionate
regards to the Prayers of weak and sinful Creatures, that dwell in Houses of
Clay, thou openest thine Eyes to take knowledge of their condition, bowest
thine Ear to hearken to their Cries, movest thy Bowels to pity their
infirmities, and stretchest forth thine hand to relieve their wants.

We poor Creatures and guilty Sinners are here fallen down at thy Footstool,
adoring thine infinite perfections of holiness and wisdom, power, truth and
goodness, and beseeching thee mercifully to look upon our follies and
frailties, to supply our bodily and spiritual necessities, to lift up the light
of thy countenance upon us, and turn away thy Face from our deserts of
vengeance, to answer (...) which purposes, we have none in Heaven Psalm. 73. 25.
but thee, none in Earth that our Souls can desire in comparison of thee.

We dare not, we confess, look up to Heaven with any confidence of being
accepted for our own worthiness, as being conscious that we have grievously
offended that holy, just, and Almighty Majesty that is there seated on the
Throne of his Glory; nor are we worthy to tread upon the Earth, or enjoy the
fruits and benefits of it, where we have acted our wickednesses in the sight of
Heaven.

We were not only conceived in Sin, and brought forth in Iniquity, but we have
conceived Sin, and brought forth Iniquity, Number. 32. 14
and are risen up in our Fathers stead a generation of sinful men; to kindle
and in crease the anger of the Lord against us.

We have followed after our own imaginations, and fulfilled the motions of our
own Wills which have been opposite and contrary to the declarations of thine,
though there has been the greatest reason we should receive Law from thy Mouth
as our Almighty Creator, Sovereign Lord, and merciful Redeemer.

How barren and unfruitful have we been in thy Vineyard, though thou have
caused the Clouds to drop down their moisture upon us, and watered us with the
plentiful showers of thy Word, and the fructifying dew of thy holy Spirit, that
should have made us fruitful in all good works? How have we neglected the
Seasons of Grace? And when thou have called us to a speedy and present
repentance, the answer of our hearts has been, we will repent to morrow, as if
we could live as long as we listed, and had power in our selves to turn to thee
when we listed.

We bewail, before thee, the blindness of our understandings, the stubbornness
of our wills, the vanity of our thoughts, the earthliness of our affections, we
have hated what thou love, and loved what thou hate, and the good things
which thou have allowed us to love moderately, and in subordination to thee, we
have followed with eager and unbounded appetites, and embraced with our highest
and best love: we have not carried our selves as it becomes those that are
Strangers and Pilgrims upon the Earth, and profess to seek a better heavenly
Country, but lived as if we were at home, and expected nothing better than
what is to be here enjoyed, as if the happiness of this Life would never end,
and that of the next would never begin.

O Lord, be merciful to us, and in the multitude of thy tender mercies be
reconciled to us through thy Son, and blot out all our Iniquities: give us
heartily to repent of all our forepast Sins and Follies, and so to receive
Christ Jesus the Lord, as Col. 2. 6.
to walk in him: And whatever thou denyest us, grant us a full pardon through
our dear and all-sufficient Redeemer, whom thou have set forth to be a
Propitiation Romans 3. 25.
through Faith in his Blood.

And let the time past of our 1 Pet. 4. 3.
Lives suffice to have wrought the wills of the flesh, judging that Christ dyed
for us, that we 2 Cor. 5. 15.
should not henceforth live unto our selves, but unto him which dyed for us,
and rose again: Col. 1. 10.
help us to walk worthy of thee unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good
work, and increasing in the knowledge of God; give us we pray thee a Psalm. 111.
10
good understanding, not only to know, but to do thy Commandments, and by
growing 2 Pet. 3. 18.
in Grace, let us increase the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Phil. 4. 8.
Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things
are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report, if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise,
let us think on, and follow these things, and never be slothful in the weighty
matters of thine honor, and the everlasting interest and happiness of our
Souls, but diligently follow those that have been followers of thee, and have
Heb. 6. 12.
through faith and patience inherited the promises.

And because we are weak in our selves, and insufficient to perform our duty,
to subdue our lusts, to improve our blessings, or bear our burdens, to resist
and conquer our spiritual enemies, to stand our ground in the fight, or recover
our selves from our falls, let thy grace and holy spirit strengthen Ephesians. 3. 16.
us with might in our inward man, and make us more than Romans 8. 37.
conquerors through him that has loved us.

Cause us in the first place to Mat. 6. 33.
seek thy Kingdom and righteousness, and as those that are Col. 3. 1.
risen with Christ, to seek the things that are above, not looking at the
things that are seen, 2 Cor. 4. 18.
for they are temporal; but at the things which are not seen, for they are
eternal: Let our Mat. 6. 20.
treasure be laid up in Heaven, where Moth and Rust corrupt not, and where
Thieves break not through, nor Steal, and let our hearts be where our treasure
is.

Guide us continually in all the ways of wisdom and righteousness, and defend
us against all temptations that might withdraw us from them; help us to go on
our way rejoicing, and working righteousness, and perform our several duties to
thee and all men, with such cheerfulness and constancy, as not to be weary of
well-doing, but by a religious abstinence, and moderate use of bodily
refreshments, let our flesh be so subdued to the Spirit, that we may ever obey
thy godly motions, and in a course of righteousness and true holiness run to
the end of the race which thou have set before us, and be made partakers of
that glorious prize which thou have promised to all them that by a patient
continuance in well-doing seek for Romans 2. 7.
glory and honor, and immortality.

And let the prospect and blessed hope of thy heavenly Kingdom, make us upright
and faithful, active and diligent, contented and cheerful in every condition of
life, humble and patient, steadfast and resolved, selfdenying, and heavenly
minded, till thou bring us to the possession of those inconceiveable joys,
and make us to drink of the Rivers of Pleasure, that are at thy right hand
for evermore.

Do good with us, we pray thee, to the whole world, and let all that bear the
image of thy power and wisdom be made partakers of thy favor and kindness, let
the Nations that know thee not, be delivered from the power of darkness, Col.
1. 13.
and translated into the Kingdom of thy dear Son.

Be gracious in an especial manner to all whom thou have called to the
knowledge and obedience of his Gospel, forgive, gracious Father, and shower down
thy blessings upon the inhabitants of this sinful Land; let us prepare to meet
thee by an hearty and universal repentance, and so prevent those judgments that
seem to be arrayed, and marching forward to our destruction.

Give Salvation to our King, Psai. 144. 10
and preserve thy Servant from hidden Treacheries and the hurtful Sword; direct
all public Counsels to thine honor, the promoting of true Religion, the
establishment of Righteousness and Peace, and the comfort of all them that
heartily love and fear thee, and let all that love thy Salvation, say Psalm. 40.
16.
continually, the Lord be magnified.

Comfort all that in any kind suffer adversity, let thy holy Spirit refresh
them as with new Wine, whom thou have given Tears to drink in great measure,
and let that good providence that has been our protection and repose this
night, defend us from all the dangers and temptations, direct and prosper us in
all the designs and enterprises of this day, and by a faithful discharge of our
duty, bring us nearer to the glorious reward of Eternal Life, which thou have
promised in Christ Jesus our Lord, in whose Name and Words, we further commend
our selves and others to thy grace and mercy, saying.

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread.
And forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that Trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from Evil: For thine is the
Kingdom, and the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. Amen.

Friday Evening.
MOst blessed Lord God, the Father of Mercies, our hope and present help, our
strength and our Salvation, the overflowing and inexhaustible Fountain of all
Good, we thy poor Servants, in an humble and thankful sense of thy great
goodness, and emboldned by the invitation of thy gracious promises, present our
selves before the Throne of thy Grace, to offer up our supplications, and
thanksgivings through the Mediation of thy dear Son, in whom thou have given us
access Ephesians. 3. 12.
with confidence, through the Faith of him.

We are most unworthy in our selves to receive blessings, or offer praises, but
worthy art thou, O Lord, to receive honor and glory, and blessing, and
thanksgiving, as for thy divine perfections which we cannot comprehend, so for
thine abundant kindnesses toward us, which we can neither deserve nor number.

Thou did frame and fashion us in the Womb, by thy wisdom and power, and have
maintained and provided for us by thy goodness and bounty, ever since thou have
brought us into life and being; giving us richly all things to enjoy, not only
the necessaries, but conveniences of Life, whereby it has been made easy and
pleasant to us.

But above all from the bottom of our hearts we praise, a door and magnify thy
transcendent wisdom and superlative love in that inestimable benefit of our
Redemption, by the bitter sufferings and bloody Death of thy dear Son, that
when we had lost and undone our selves, were liable to wrath and eternal
misery, when we lay weltring in our own blood, and there was no Eye to pity, no
Hand to relieve us, thou redeemedst us in such a way as no creature had wisdom
to contrive, worthiness to undertake, or power to effect.

We praise thee O Lord, that thou have in thy Gospel manifested this great and
admirable Salvation, made thy goodness to pass before us, and fully and plainly
instructed us in our duty; that in performing the one we might be made
partakers of the other; that thou have afforded us the means of Grace, thy Word
and Sacraments, opportunities of thy public Worship, the motions and
assistances of thy holy Spirit, that thou have quickened our obedience by the
hopes of a glorious recompense.

Give us, we pray thee, a due sense of all thy mercies, and withdraw not thy
loving kindness from us; if our worthiness had been to procure these mercies,
they had never been put into our hands and if any thing but thy goodness were
to continue them, we could never hold them; our own wickedness might correct
us, and our Jer. 2. 19.
backslidings reprove us, for we have sinned and done very foolishly.

We have perverted and polluted our ways, and professing Tit. 1. 16.
to know thee, have in our works denied thee, we have called thee our Father,
but have not loved and honored thee, as Children, our Master, but have not
feared and obeyed thee as Servants, our Friend and Benefactor, but have
expressed our enmity against thee in wicked works; we have 2 Timothy 2. 19.
named the Name of Christ, but not departed from Iniquity, vowed allegiance to
thee in our Baptism, but have broken thy Bonds asunder, and cast away thy Cords
from us, and as if the temptations of the World and the Devil would not have
enough prevailed to defile and destroy us, we have tempted our selves, and been
drawn away of our own lust and enticed. Jam. 1. 14.


We have not had that sense of thy Love, as to love thee with all our hearts;
that sense of thy Mercies, as with those Cords of kindness to be drawn to thy
Service; that sense of thy displeasure, as to fear offending thee; that sense
of Sins filthiness and deformity, as to hate and flee from it with our whole
Souls; nor have we had that belief of Heavens Glory and Happiness, as by a
fruitfulness in good works to press toward it with all our might; that active
and vigorous diligence that should have been used to promote the spiritual good
of our Souls, and secure their immortal interest, we have with great folly
misimployed in pursuing the pleasures and profits of this World, and in
assuring those fickle and slippery vanities, that are not capable of a long, or
certain continuance.

O Lord have mercy upon us, miserable offenders, and help us so to repent of
all the Sins we have committed, as never more to commit the Sins of which we
have repented, and work in us a true and a lively faith in thy dear Son, our
blessed Redeemer, who is both God and Man, that God and Man may be reconciled,
and through the blood of his Cross, grant us repentance and remission of Sins,
and by that precious Blood, sprinkled upon our Consciences, Heb. 9. 14.
purge them from dead Works, to serve thee the living God.

Wash our hearts from wickedness Jer. 4. 14.
that we may be saved, and let not vain thoughts lodge within us, help us so to
govern our Tongue, that unruly Member, that no corrupt communication may at any
time proceed out of our Mouth, but that Ephesians. 4. 29.
which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace unto the
hearers: and let all our actions be directed by thy Word, and designed to thy
Glory.

That delight and satisfaction that we might vainly, and to no purpose seek, in
sensual pleasures, and the impure gratifications of the Flesh, let us seek and
find in the ways of holiness, and a dutiful compliance with thy Will, that in
loving and keeping Psalm. 119. 165.
thy Law, we may have great peace, and nothing may offend us: and in the midst
of all the troubles and confusions of the World, we may rejoice in our
reconciliation with thee, and in the harmony and peaceful reports of our own
consciences.

Bless us in our Callings and Employments, that we may neither Pro. 30. 8. 9.
abound in Riches, lest we be full and deny thee, nor be pinched with extreme
want, lest we be tempted to the evils that attend an impoverished State, but in
thy wise and good providence, carve out to us such a convenient share of
worldly good things, health and strength, riches and reputation, that we may
faithfully serve thee, and be cheerfully helpful to our brethren. Let thy love
and holy fear so intermix with and sweeten all our earthly enjoyments, that we
may eat our Eccl. 9. 7.
Bread with joy, and drink our Wine with a merry heart, because thou acceptest
our works.

In every condition of Life be thou our Guide, and our Support, help us to love
and rejoice in thee above our highest and best comforts, and under our crosses,
with patience and cheerfulness to resign up our selves to thy wise and
righteous providence, and with a steadfast faith to rely upon thy gracious and
faithful promises. Let our conversation be without Heb. 13. 5.
covetousness, and make us content with such things as we have, because thou
have said, thou will never leave us, nor forsake us: by all the changes we meet
with in this World, prepare us, O Lord, for our last and great change, when we
shall leave it; that death our last Enemy may be to us neither dangerous nor
dreadful, but a sweet and desirable passage to a blessed, and glorious
immortality.

And in these our Prayers we commend (allied by a common Brotherhood) all
Mankind to thy Grace and Favor, heal the Sick, ease the pained, relieve the
Oppressed, supply the Impoverished, feed the Hungry, cloth the Naked, comfort
the Disconsolate, cause them that are disquieted in Conscience to Rejoice,
spread forth the knowledge of thy Son into all the dark corners of the World,
that Isai. 49. 6.
he may be thy Light and thy Salvation unto the end of the Earth.

Let thy continual pity cleanse and defend thy Church, and because it cannot
continue in safety without thy succor, preserve it evermore by thy help, and
goodness.

O be gracious and favorable to the Land of our Nativity, forgive all our
crying Sins, avert thy threatened and approaching Judgments, cleanse our
defilements, heal our divisions, stablish us in truth, righteousness and peace,
perpetuate thy Gospel and Ordinances, the pledges of thy love and kindness, and
grant that we may always walk worthy of those inestimable benefits.

Bless, preserve, direct and prosper our Sovereign Lord the King, in all his
thoughts, words and works, let him ever seek thy honor and glory, and study to
preserve thy People committed to his charge, in wealth, peace and godliness.
Let the Bishops and Pastors of thy Church by their heavenly Doctrine and
exemplary Lives, their diligent labors, vigilant care, and prudent carriage,
adorn the Gospel, silence gainsayers, and win many to righteousness: and let
Magistrates by an equal and indifferent administration of Justice, uphold
Religion and Virtue, and suppress Vice and Ungodliness; and grant that all
under Authority may follow after Peace and Holiness, obeying those that are
over them for conscience sake, loving and forbearing one another, leading quiet
and peaceable Lives in all godliness and honesty.

Follow us with thy mercy and loving kindness this night, and let thy good
providence, that neither slumbers nor sleeps, defend and protect us, that no
danger or disturbance in the intermission of our own thoughts, care and reason,
harm or annoy us: And so repair our decaying spirits by a quiet and peaceful
rest, that we may serve thee with healthful bodies and cheerful minds, the next
day, and all our days, till thou bring us to that blessed state where
eating, and drinking, and sleeping shall be no more, but we shall be eternally
happy in praising and enjoying thee through thy dear Son, our ever blessed
Redeemer, through whose Merits alone we hope to be heard, and in whose words we
further pray;

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread.
And forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that Trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from Evil: For thine is the
Kingdom, and the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. Amen.

Saturday Morning.
O Eternal Lord God, the great Creator and Preserver of Heaven and of Earth,
and our most merciful Father in Christ Jesus, Look down, we beseech thee, from
Heaven, upon us vile Dust and Ashes, and grant that when we call upon thee with
our Lips, our Hearts may not be far from thee.

We do humbly acknowledge the great sinfulness and corruption of our Natures;
the blindness of our Minds, the perverseness of our Wills, the disorder and
depravedness of our affections, and the vanity of our thoughts. We acknowledge
that we are by nature the Children of Wrath, and that there is no sound or
clean part in us.

We do farther confess, that we have by many actual sins made our selves more
the Children of Wrath than we were by Nature. We confess our sins of omission
as well as commission, our sins against Thee, our Brother and our own Souls. We
have many ways offended thee in thought, word and deed: And if thou should
mark Iniquities, we were not able to stand before thee.

We have sinned against light and knowledge, after the greatest of thy Mercies,
under sufficient means of Grace, after many and solemn Vows of better
obedience. We have not been awakened out of our sinful and careless Life by the
greatest of thy Judgments; but have sinned after the convictions of our own
Consciences, and the experience of the evil of departing from thee, after many
confessions and many repetitions. We have grieved thy Spirit, defaced thy
Image, misspent our precious time, trifled in the great concernments of
Eternity, and in great measure received the grace of thee our God in vain. We
humble our selves before thee, O God, and desire to be vile in our own Eyes, as
we have made our selves so in thine. Enter not into Judgment with thy Servants,
O Lord, for no Flesh shall be justified in thy sight.

Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us for Jesus Christ's sake, who is
the Propitiation for our Sins, and ever lives to make intercession for those
who come unto God by him.

Grant that he may not be an empty Name and Title to us, but that he may bless
us in turning us from our Iniquities, and may give us Repentance as well as
forgiveness of Sins.

And we most humbly beseech thee to give us thy holy Spirit; purisie and
cleanse our Hearts, and help us that we may fear, love and desire thee above
all things. Make us like unto thee, and help us that we may cheerfully do and
suffer thy whole Will. Supply all our wants, sanctify all thy dealings to us,
direct us in our difficulties and enable us against our Sins.

Deliver us, O Lord, from every evil thing, from hardness of Heart, and
contempt of thy Word: keep us from being tempted above what we are able, and
enable us by thy Grace against the assaults of the Devil, the Temptations of
the World and the Flesh, and make us at the last partakers of Everlasting Life.

Be merciful, we pray thee, to the whole World: enlarge the Kingdom of Christ,
and let the whole World be filled with the knowledge of thee, and of thy Son,
as the Waters cover the Sea.

Bless thy whole Church: reform whatever is amiss in the belief or lives of
Christians: Grant that all who name the Name of Christ may depart from all
Iniquity.

Be gracious to these Kingdoms. Pardon our Sins, pity our Distractions, heal
our Breaches, unite us to one another, reconcile us all to thy Divine Majesty,
and defend us against our Enemies.

Especially we pray thee to bless the King: endue his Heart with all the Graces
of thy holy Spirit, defend Him against all His Enemies; bless Him in His Royal
Relations, and teach His Senators wisdom.

Bless all the Governors and Instructors of thy Church, and grant they may all
in their several places answer the end of their Institution and Appointment.

Pity all that are afflicted. Comfort them that mourn, visit the Sick and Weak,
have compassion on them who lie a dying, and take them not out of this Life
before they are fitted for a better Life than this.

Bless all our Friends with all the Blessings of this and of a better Life.
Forgive our Enemies, convert and turn their hearts.

We bless thee for all thy Mercies to us, both of this and a better Life: above
all we bless thee for Jesus Christ, humbly beseeching thee, so to affect our
hearts with the sense of thy Mercies, that thy goodness may lead us to
Repentance: And all we beg for Christ his sake, who has taught us, when we
pray, to say;

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread.
And forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that Trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from Evil: For thine is the
Kingdom, and the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. Amen.

Saturday Evening.
MOst gracious and ever blessed Lord God, and our most merciful Father in
Christ Jesus, we that are less than the least of thy mercies, desire in all
humility to come into thy presence, and beseech thee for Christ's sake, to have
a regard unto us.

We do acknowledge before thee, our lost and undone condition without thy great
mercy toward us: we have grievously offended thee in thought, word and deed:
been unthankful for thy Mercies, incorrigible under thy Judgments, and very
unprofitable under the means of Grace. We humble our selves before thee for the
Sins of our whole Life; and particularly for the Sins of this day, with all the
circumstances of aggravation, with which they have been attended.

Pardon us, O Lord, we humbly pray thee, for the sake of Jesus Christ who came
into the World, to seek and to save that which was lost. Give us a true faith
in him, and work in us a sincere and hearty repentance never to be repented of.
And, we pray thee, assist us by thy Grace, that we may for the time to come,
walk before thee in newness of Life.

Enlighten our Minds, rectify our Wills, sanctify our Affections and purify
all the thoughts and intentions of our Hearts. Make us fit Temples for thy holy
Spirit to dwell in, and grant that he who is in us may be greater than he who
is in the World.

Be with us under all our Trials and Temptations, and prepare us for all events
of things. Sanctify all thy dispensations to us, and give us Wisdom and a
saving Knowledge of thee and of thy Son. Make us humble and lowly, heavenly
minded and pure in heart, patient under every trouble, contented in every
condition, and resigned to thy holy and heavenly Will.

And because the way of Man is not in himself, we humbly pray thee to direct
and guide us in the way that we should go. Take care of our Affairs, prosper
all our Undertakings which are agreeable to thy heavenly Will; help us that we
may live Righteously, So berly and Godly in this present World.

Cast out of our mind every thing that is displeasing to thee: discharge our
Hearts of all Pride, Ambition, Covetousness, Malice, Vain Conceit of our
Selves. And grant that we may not be overcome by the Temptations of the Devil,
the World and the Flesh: And that we may not go out of this World with false
hopes and expectations about us.

Prepare us, we pray thee, for our latter end. When our Heart and Flesh shall
fail us, be thou the strength of our Heart and our Portion for ever: And suffer
us not at our last hour for any Pains or Agonies of Death to fall away from
thee: make us willing and ready to leave this World, whenever it shall please
thee to call us hence.

Be merciful to the whole race of Mankind: Advance the Kingdom of Christ in the
World; Let the People praise thee, O God, let all the People praise thee.
Especially be merciful to thy whole Church; Bless these Kingdoms, and settle us
upon the Foundations of Righteousness, of Truth and Peace.

Bless with the choicest of thy Blessings, our Sovereign Lord the King. Protect
His Royal Person, bless His Government, let His days be many and His Reign
prosperous. And bless His Royal Relations, and succeed His Counselors, and all
in Authority under Him, and grant that under Him we may live quiet and
peaceable Lives, in all godliness and honesty.

Bless all that minister in holy things, and grant they may gain many unto
Righteousness.

Have compassion upon the Afflicted, upon the Oppressed and the Poor, upon
Widows and Fatherless, upon all that are persecuted for Righteousness sake,
upon the Sick and the Weak, upon all that are troubled in mind, and at the
point of Death: Be merciful to them all according to their several necessities.

We beseech thee to be merciful to our Friends and to forgive all our Enemies.

We bless thy holy Name for all thy mercies to us and to all the World; for thy
preservation of us this day, for the means of Grace and the hope of Glory. We
bless thee above all for Jesus Christ, we praise thee for the clear revelation
of thy Will the Promise of thy Spirit, the time and space of Repentance which
thou art pleased to continue to us; for any measure of Health and Strength, the
many Mercies which we enjoy, and which others want, and which we have been
unthankful for. Write a Law of thankfulness upon our Hearts, we humbly pray
thee, and grant that we may be bettered by all thy Mercies. Take us, we pray
thee, into thy protection this night, sanctify and prepare our Hearts for all
the solemn Duties and Services of the next Day, and grant all our Requests for
Christ's sake, in whose words we further call upon thee.

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread.
And forgive us our Trespasses, As we forgive them that Trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from Evil: For thine is the
Kingdom, and the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

