Let this Book be Printed.

Oct. 20. 1693. G. Treby.

A GUIDE TO SURVEYORS OF THE Highways, SHOWING The Office and Duty of such
Surveyors, with several Cases and Resolutions in Law relating to the same.

Collected and gathered Out of public Acts of Parliament now in force; and out
of the Year-Books, and other Books of the Municipal Laws of this Kingdom.

With an Abridgment Of the Statute of 22 H. 8. Chap. 5. for the repairing of
Bridges, with Cases relating thereunto.

And likewise a Summary Of the Statutes made for Paving, Cleansing, etc.
Streets, Lanes, etc. in London, and other Towns and Places.

And an Abstract Of Statutes made for the Repairs of Highways and Bridges in
particular Places.

Methodiz'd into short CHAPTERS for the ready finding out any Matter contained
in the BOOK.

By G. Meriton, Gent.

Non nobis solum nati sumus, sed partem Parents, partem Amici, partem Patria
vindicant.

LONDON, Printed by W. Rawlins and S. Roycroft, Assigns of Rich. and Edw.
Atkins Esquires; For A. and J. Churchill in Paternoster Row, and Fr. Hillyard
Bookseller in York. 1694.

The Dedication.
To the much Honored Sir Marmaduke Wyvil, Sir William Strick* ^and, Sir Brian
Stapleton, Sir William Franck* ^and, Sir Henry Marwood, Sir William Caley, Sir
Mark Milbanck, Sir Christopher Wandes^ord, Sir Thomas Pennyman, Sir William
Chaytor, Sir Edward Blacket, Sir Charles Ho^ham and Sir William Robinson,
Baronets.
And to the Honored Sir Barrington Bourcher, Sir William Hustler, Sir Henry
Bellasis, Sir Rich. Osbaldaston, Sir William Bows, Sir Jonathan Jennings, and
Sir Abstrupus Danby.
And to the Worshipful Will. Palms, Tho. York, Will. Thompson, ^eon Smelt,
John Wastal, Rich. Pierce, Tho. ^ascelles, Charles Tankred, Tho. Worsley, ^dw.
Thompson, John Lowther, Tho. Lang^ey, Tho. Hesletine, John Hill Jun. John
Gib^on, Rich. Stains, Roger Talbot, John Bealby, ^ohn Smelt, John Hutton, Tho.
Pullein, Rob. Waters, * Henry Metcalfe, * Tho. Gower, ^ich. Darley, * James
Mountain, Constable ^radshaw, * Tho. Wakefield, Tho. Strange^ayes, * Luke
Robinson, Francis Wyvil, An^hony Wharton, Will. Pennyman, John Hop^on and *
Tho. Saunders Esquires, Their Maje^^ies Honored and Worthy Justices of the
Peace (...) the North Riding of the County of York.
Honored and Worthy Sirs,
THE drowsy Heads of the slumbring Sta^utes made for the repairing and
amendment of Highways being now rowsed up, which Laws for some time bypast,
have seemed to be as it were seized on with a Lethargy; and the Highways (for
lack of putting the Laws in Execution) were grown so foundrous (as the Law
terms it) and so extremely bad, that the Owners and Occupiers of Lands in most
Places have been necessitated to suffer their Fences to lie down, and to permit
People to travel over their enclosed Grounds, to the private Damage of such
particular Persons, and the public Loss and Damage of the whole Country, in
the decay of Commerce and Trade, by reason of the impassableness of the
Highways. But since the evigilating and exuscitating of the former Statutes,
backed with the new Laws of their Majesty's KING William and QVEEN Mary; the
Country People in most Places have set themselves to labor more effectually in
the repairing and amending of their Highways than they have usually done
formerly. But notwithstanding their Activeness more than heretofore, yet they
are very defective in the Measures taken about their Repairs in most Places,
which is principally occasioned through the ignorance of Surveyors of the
Highways, in the Duty and Authority of their Office; for although your
Worships have given these Officers printed Directions, and do also acquaint
them by Parol Instructions, yet many of them are so stupid and dull of
Apprehension, that unless a thing be reiterated over and over, and over again,
they either cannot or will not apprehend it: Therefore I conceived that some
little methodical Pocketbook of the Laws now in force about Highways, might
be (especially at this juncture of time) serviceable to the Country: So having
set some vacant Hours apart for that purpose, and bestowed some little Pains
therein, I have methodized the product of my Barren Genius into the Unpolished
Form it now appears in, and do (pardon my Presumption) humbly dedicate it to
your Worships, not at all conceiving or imagining that it can in the least
better the Knowledge of any of your Worships in the Matters handled therein:
But considering that a Prophet is not without Reward but in his own Country,
and suspecting that this rude and indigested Pamphlet and its Auchor, may not
only fall under the hard Censure of some, but also meet with the Scoffs and
Slights of others I do therefore the better t^ secure and defend my Sel^ and it
against such Contumelies and opprobrious Receptions, take Asylum under the
Protection of your Worships* and do not only hope, but humbly crave you will
no^deny Tutelage to him who is*

Gentlemen, Your Worships very Humble Servant G. Meriton*

TO THE READER.
CAndid and Ingenuous Reader (for so I wish thee to be) their Majesty's
Justices of the Peace appearing now more vigorous and active than usual, in
putting the Laws in Execution for the amending and repairing the Highways; and
many that are called to the Exercise of the Office of Surveyors of the same,
being ignorant in the extent of their Office and the Power and Authority
thereof; and the Inhabitants in most Places (taking advantage of their Officers
Deficiencies in the Knowledge of the Power of their Authority) are so remiss in
the discharge and performance of their Duties, about the amending and repairing
their Highways, that the Work is performed very negligently, and the Intention
of the Laws made for that purpose are (though not wholly) yet in a great measure
frustrated: To the end therefore that the Surveyors may be the better
instructed in the Power and Authority of their Office, and the People may learn
and know their Duties, I have collected this small Abstract of the Laws now in
force relating to Highways, and divided the Book in twenty short Chapters
under proper Heads, for the more easy and ready finding out of any thing
comprised therein; and being but a small Pocketbook, any one may have it ready
at hand to resolve their Doubts and Quaeries: And to the end, that it may be of
general Use, and serviceable in all Places, and upon all Occasions, as well for
the Repairs of Bridges other Repairs, as for the Highways, I have therefore
added an Abridgment of the Statute of 22 H. 8. chapter 5. made for the amending and
repairing decayed Bridges, and of the Statutes made for Paving, Repairing and
Cleansing of the Streets, Lanes and Allies in the Cities of London and
Westminster, and the Liberties thereof, and for several other Towns and Places,
with diverse other Matters relating to the said Places; and likewise the
Statutes for repairing the Northern Post-Road in the County of Hertford, and
taking Toll at Wades Mill in the said County, lately revived by an Act of
Parliament made in the 4 and 5 Years of their Majesty's Reigns: And lastly, An
Abstract of such Statutes as have been made for the repairing and amending of
some particular Ways and Bridges in some certain Counties in England and
Wales: If the Book proves serviceable I have my desire, and to such as carp and
find fault, my request is, that they will amend the Errors, and supply the
Defects, and consider that est voluisse satis: And though my Pains do not merit
their good Opinion, (...) I hope they will have (...) occasion to be Angry but
whether they be (...) no, it shall not discourag^ or deter me to be to the
utmost of my Power se^viceable to my Countr^ whilst I am

G. Meriton*

A SUMMARY OF THE CONTENTS Of the several CHAPTER'S Contained in this TREATISE.
CHAP. I. OF Highways in general; how many kinds of Ways, and how
distinguished, and of some Privileges belonging to the Highways. Page I CHAP.
II. Who are to be Surveyors of the Highways, and how and by whom to be chosen,
and when; and what Forfeiture for refusing to take the (...) upon them, and how
to be levied (...) disposed of. (...) CHAP. III. What things are first to be
done (...) the Surveyors of Highways, (...) they have taken the Office (...)
them, and within what time, (...) under what penalty, and how to levied and
disposed of. (...) CHAP. IV. Who and what Persons are to appe^^ and labor upon
the public or common Days appointed by the Su^veyors for the amendment and
(...) pair of Highways, and where th^^ are to appear, and after what manner,
and how long they are to wor^^ and under what Penalties, an^ how to be levied
and disposed (...) with some Cases and Resolutions r^lating to these Matters.
2^ CHAP. V. How Trees, Hedges and Bushes growing in or adjoining to Highway
are to be ordered, and to whom the Freehold of Highways belongs, and who shall
have the Trees growing therein, when they are cut down, and about scowring
Dikes and Gutters, and making of Trenches, and what Forfeitures for defaults
and neglects, and how to be levied and disposed of, and what breadth Highways
and Causeys in them are to be. 42 CHAP. VI. What Stones and Rubbish the
Supervisors may take for the amendment of the Highways, and in what places, and
how they may dig for Sand, Gravel, etc. And when they are necessitated to buy
such Materials at their Charges, how they are to be reimbursed. 52 CHAP. VII.
How, when, where, and before whom, Presentiments upon the Statutes for Highways
are to be made, and to whom, and within what time, and before whom account is
to be made by Officers for Moneys received by virtue of any of the said
Statutes 57 CHAP. VIII. H^w Lands given for the maintenance of Cawseys,
Highways, Pavements and Bridges are to be let and how Assessments are to be
made and gathered for the repairing of Highways; and of such as make
resistance and oppose such persons (...) are employed in the Execution of the
Statutes made for amendment of Highways, and concerning Suits that shall be
brought about the same. 64 CHAP. IX. The Surveyors Duty about traveling
Wagons, Wains, Carts or Carriages, with an account when and by whom, and where
the Prices for Goods carried by Waggoners, and other Carriers are to be
assessed and rated, and the Penalties for taking above such Rates. 69 CHAP. X.
Of Nusances in public and private Ways, how removeable and punishable, and
where an Action upon the Case lies for a Nuisance, and where not. 73 CHAP. XI.
An Abridgement of the Statute of 22 H. 8. chap. 5. about the Repair of Bridges,
with some Expositions and Cases in Law relating thereunto. 2 CHAP. XII. An
Abridgment of such Statutes as have been made for the paving and cleansing the
Streets and Lanes in the Cities of London and Westminster, and Suburbs and
Liberties thereof, and Out-Parishes in the County of Middlesex, and the Borough
of Southwark. 93 CHAP. XIII. An Abridgment of so much of the Statutes of 15
Car. 2. chap. 1. e and 16 and 17 Car. 2. chap. 10. as concerns the repairing
the ancientd Highway, and Post-Road fro^^d. London to York, and so into (...)
land, as lies in the several Parish Towns, Vills and Hamlets in the County of
Hertford; and now revived by the Statute of the fourth and fifth Years of their
present Majesty's Reigns. 121 CHAP. XIV. How new Ways may be set out in the
Welds of Kent and Sussex, and how, and by whom Kings Ferry in the Isle of
Sheppy, and the Ways belonging ^o the same, with the Sea Banks and Sea Works on
the Coasts of Norfolk are to be repaired; and what the Owners and Occupiers of
Iron Works are to perform (...) pay toward the repairs of the Highways in
Sussex, Surrey* and Kent. 136 CHAP. XV. The Heads of the Statutes made for
paving, repairing and maintaining the Streets and Lanes in Cambridge, Ipswich
and Chichester. 145 CHAP. XVI. An Abstract of the Statutes made for repairing
Huntington-Lane near the City of Chester, the common Highway called the Cawsey
lying in the Counties of Dorset and Somerset, between the Towns of Shaftsbury
and Sherborne, and for amending the Highways within five Miles of the City of
Oxford. 151 CHAP. XVII. The Heads of the two Statutes made in the 18 and 27
Qears of Queen Elizabeth for the maintenance and reparation of Rochester-Bridge
in the County of Kent. 156 CHAP. XVIII. An Account of the Statutes of the 39
and 43 Eliz. made for repairing and maintaining the Bridge at Wilton upon Wye,
in the County of Hereford, and Edon and Prestberk Bridges in Cumberland. 160
CHAP. XIX. How Chepstow-Bridge standing between the Counties of Gloucester an^
Monmouth, is to be repaired a^ maintained. 1^ CHAP. XX. Cardiff, Newport and
Carlion-Bridg^ in Wales, how to be repaired a^^ maintained. 1^
A GUIDE FOR SURVEYORS OF THE Highways.
CHAP. I. Of Highways in general; how many kinds of Ways* and how
distinguished, and of some Privileges belonging to the Highways.
AN Highway in our Law-Language Co. Lit. f. 56. 2. Terms of the Law, and
Blounts Law Dictionary, verb Chimin and Chiminage, Crom. Jurisd. f. 189.
is called Chimin, being a French word for Way, whereof comes Chiminage or
Chimmage, Chiminagium or Chimmagium, which signifies a Toll due by Custom, for
having a Way or Passage through a Forest, to the disquiet of the Wild Beasts of
the Forest. And no Forester, but such as hold in 9 H. 3. Charta Forest^ cap.
1.4. Forest 14. Rest.
Fee-Farm of the King are to take any Statutes at large printed 1587. f. 5.
Wingates Forests, Chases, etc.. 14. Keb. Stat. printed 1684. f. 7. Raft. Forest
14.
Chiminage or Chimmage; and such who do hold in Fee-Farm, are to take it only
in such places where it has been accustomed to be paid, viz. Two pence half
yearly for a Cart, and for an Horse that bears Loads every half year an half
penny, and this must be but of such that come as Merchants by license to buy
Bushes, Timber, Bark or Coal, and sell the same again at pleasure; but for no
other Carriage by Cart shall Chimmage be taken; no^ of those that bear upon
their Backs Brushment, Bark or Coal to sell though they get their Livings by it
except they take it in the Kings Demes^ Woods.

An Highway in Latin is called via Co. Lit. 56. Dalt. J. P. printed 1677.
chap. 50. f. 98. vid. Fleta lib. 4. cap. 1. Bract. lib. 4. f. 232. and Kitchen
Court Leet, etc. printed 1585. p. 49. b.
a vehendo, from carrying, in respect o^ the Carriages passing to and fro
therein, and is defined to be transitus a loc^ ad locum, the passage from one
plac^ to another. And although it be said in the Terms of the Law, and by Mr.
Blount, that there are but two kinds of Ways, yet my Lord Cook and others tell
us that there are three kinds of Ways; As first a Foot-way, calle^ Iter, Quod
est jus eundi, vel ambuland hominis, where a Man has right to go and come, and
was the first or prime Way; The second kind is both a Foot-way and a Horse-way,
which is called Actus ab agendo, and vulgarly is called Pack and Prime-way,
because it is both a Foot-way which was the first or prime-way, and a Pack or
Driftway also, sometimes called a Bridleway; and then the third kind is Via or
Aditus, which contains both the other two, and also a Cart-way or Carriage-way,
for this is jus eundi, vehendi, and vehiculum and jumentum ducendi; A public
way for Cart and Carriage, and driving Cattle, etc. and this Way is twofold,
viz. Regia Via, the Kings Highway free for all Men, and Communis Strata,
belonging to a City or Town, or between Neighbors and Neighbors.

And Minshaw also out of Vlpian Dalt. J. P. printed 1677. chap. 50. f. 98.
makes three kinds of Ways, Publicam, Privatam, and Vicinalem, a Publick-way, a
Private-way and a way of Vicinage or Neighborhood, via publica, quam Latini
Regiam appellant, a Publick-way is that called the Kings Highway, via
vicinalis, quae in vicis est, vel quae in vicos ducit, these Ways of Vicinage,
are Ways between Street and Street, Neighbor and Neighbor, House and House in
Cities and Towns, via privata est quam agrariam dicunt; A private way is
reckoned to be a Field-way, and these ways are of two sorts, vel ea quae ad
agros ducit, per quam omnibus commeare licet, either that way which leads into
the Fields lawful for all Men to pass and repass, go and come in, vel ea quae
est in Agris, cui imposita est servitus, it a ut ad Agrum alterius ducat, or
such a Way as is set out in the Fields to lead to another Man's ground.

And these private ways also which Terms of the Law, and Blounts ^aw Dictionary
(...) Chimin.
one or more Men have, either by Prescription or Charter, through another Man's
Grounds, are likewise divided into a way in gross and a way appendant. Chimin
in gross is that way which a Man holds principally and solely in ^^^self; as if
a Man hires a Close or Pasture, and has a Covenant for ingre^^ and regress to
and from the said Clo^^ through the Ground of some other Man, through which
otherwise (...) might not pass; this is a way in gross* Or a way in gross may
be that which the Civilians call personal; as when one Covenants for a way
through the Ground of another Man for him and his Heirs. And Chimin appendant,
(...) way appendant, is that way which a Man has adjoined to some other things
as appertaining and belonging thereunto, and may be that way which the
Civilians call Real; as where a Man purchases a way through the Ground of
another Man for such as do or shall dwell in this or that House, or that are
the Owners of such a Manor for ever, etc. And this is a way appendant to the
said House or Manor.

And it was said by Fairfax (a Justice 5 H. 7. f 7. b pl. 15. Kitchen Court
Leet, etc. printed 1585. p. 50. b. Bro. Chimin. 14.
of the Kings Bench) that if a Man have Chimin appendant, a way appendant to
his Manor or House, that this way cannot be made in gross by Grant, because
none can have the benefit of such way, but he that has the Manor or House to
which the way is appendant; but via Regia the Kings Highway may be made in
gross, because the Country may have the benefit of it, notwithstanding that
they have Tr. 10 Car. 1. ^. R. per Curiam upon a Trial at Bar upon an
Information against Sir Edward Duncombe, Cro. Car. f. 366. pl. 3. Rolls Cases 1
part, f. 390.
not the Land.

If there be a Common Highway for all the Kings Subjects, which lies in an
open Field uninclosed, and it has been used time out of Memory, that when the
said way has been foundrous A. 10. 15. Dalt. J. P. printed 167^ chapter 50. f. 98.
Bon^ Guide for J. P p. 110.
and bad, that then the People have used to go by Outlets upon the Lands
adjoining: in this Case these Outlets are parcel of the way, for the Kings
Subjects ought to have a good Passage, and the good Passage is the Way, and not
only the beaten Track; for if the Lands adjoining were sown with Corn, the
Kings Subjects (the way being foundrous) may go over the Corn.

Where a Common Highway has Cro. Car. ubi supra Rolls Cases, 1 par. 8. 390.
B. 30. 35. 40. 45. Dalt. J. P. ubi supra. Complete Justice printed 1681. p. 160.
time without memory been used to be repaired by the Country. If afterward J.
S. who has Land not enclosed next adjoining to the said Highway on both sides
thereof, and he for his own advantage does enclose his Land on both sides of
the way, with an Hedge and Ditch, he by this has taken upon him to repair the
said way for the future, and has freed the Country from the Reparation
thereof; so that at all times afterward when need requires he must repair it,
and it is not sufficient for him to make it as good as it was at the time of
the Enclosure, but he ought to make it a perfect good way, without having any
respect to the way, as it was at the time of the Enclosure; for when the way
laid in the open Fields not enclosed, the Kings Subjects used when the way was
bad and foundrous, to go for their better passage upon the Fields adjoining to
the way, out of the common Track of the way, which liberty is taken away by the
Enclosure.

And in Sir Nicholas Staughtons Tr. 22 Car. 2. B. R. Siderf. Rep. 1 p. f. 464.
pl. 8.
Case, it was said by the Chief Justice, and not denied, That if one enclose
Land but on one side of the Highway which was anciently enclosed on the other
side, he which makes such new Enclosure, must repair the whole way; but if
there were no ancient Enclosure on the other side, he shall repair but half of
the Highway. And by the same reason there, if there be a common Highway
enclosed, and one Man has the Land adjoining on one side of the way, and
another Man has the Land adjoining on the other side of the way, and each of
them incloseth his own Land adjoining to the said way, then in such Case they
are to repair the way between them.

There were three parcels of Land, M. 1658. B. 8. in Parker and Welsteads Case,
Sider^ins Rep. 2 p. f. 39. and 111, 112. vide Tr. 5 Jac. 1. B. R. Clark and
Cogg^ Case, Cro. ^ac. f 170. pl. 10.
and the necessary private way was out of the first parcel to the second, and
out of the first and second parcels to the third parcel, and J. S. purchases
all the three parcels, and afterward Aliens the two first parcels to J. N. And
whether this unity of possession in J. S. did not extinguish the way, came in
question; and it was said that if it were a way of necessity, and no other way
to the third parcel, which J. S. still kept, that then the way does still
remain, for it is not only a private Inconvenience to J. S. but also a
prejudice to the Common Wealth, for Land to lie fresh and unoccupied: And so it
was adjudged by the Court.

If T. have an ancient way over the Horn and Tailors Case, Noys Rep. ^. 128.
Sheppards Actions upon the Case, chapter 5. sect. 4. cap. 8.
Close of H. and H. sowes the Close and Way, and leaves a Way in another part
of the Close, yet T. may justify to go where the ancient Way is, and is not
bound to go in the unplow'd Way.

And so an ancient common Highway, Vide Mi^h. 8. Car. 1. B. R. The King against
Ward and Lyme, Cro. Car. f. 266, 267. pl. 16.
which has been time out of memory, cannot be enclosed or stopped, and another
way laid out without a Writ of Ad quod dampnum first sued out, to enquire
whether or no it be to the damage of the Kings Liege Subjects, and to whom,
etc. and an Inquisition returned that it is not to the damage of any of the
Kings Liege Subjects, for without this or the Kings License, though the new way
be as beneficial and commodious for the People as the old way, yet the Party
may be presented and indicted that turns such an old way, and any that is Jones
Rep. f. 222.
so minded may abate the Nuisance and break it down, and go the old way; And in
this Case without a Writ of Ad quod dampnum the Party may stop the new way
again at his pleasure, and by this laying out a new way, the Subjects have not
such Interest therein so as they may justify their going there, nor is it any
such way that the Inhabitants are bound to watch there, nor are they liable to
repair and maintain it.

The Owner of Land who is not the Hill. 2. Car. 1. B. R. Rolls 1 pars. ca. f.
390. B. 50.
Occupier is not chargeable to the Repairs of Common Highways, but only the
Occupier, so that the charge is to be upon the Tenant and not upon the
Landlord, unless it be covenanted between them to the contrary. And this was
so agreed by the Court of Kings Bench upon a motion to have a Prohibition to
the Marches of Wales upon an Information there preferred in such a Case against
the Owner.

It is provided by the Statute of Marlbridge Marlbr. chap. 15. F. N. B. 90. A.
Reg. f. 97. b. 183. b. Co. 2 Inst 131. Stat. at large printed 1684. f. 14. Ke^.
that no distress shall be taken in the Kings Highway, nor in the Common
Street; but by the Common Law Statutes printed 1684. f. 17.
one might have taken a Distress in the Except the King and his Officers having
special authority, Wingates Distresses sect. 11. 17 E. 3. 43. Rolls ca 1. pars
f. 671.
Kings Highway, till it was prohibited by this Statute, and this is intended
only of Distresses for Rents and Services, and not for those things whereof no
Distress can be, but in the Highway, Vide Mich 41 El. B. R. in Smith and
Shepherds Case, Cro. El. f. 710. pl. 34. 17 E. 3. 1. 43 E. 3. 40.
as for Toll, etc. And in Case (...) Distress be taken for Rents and Services
in the Highway, yet the Party distrained cannot plead it in Bar, bu^ Co. Rep.
8. lib. f. 60. b. 11 R 2. Avowry 87. Co. 2. Inst. f. 131.
must bring his Action upon the Statute.

And if the Lord comes to distrain* Co. Rep. 9. lib. f. 22 a. 44 E. 3. 20. b. 6
R. 2. Res^ous, 11 H. 7. f. 4. a. pl. 11. 21 H. 7. f. 40. a. pl. 59. Terms of
the Law verb. Distress, Co. Lit. f. 161. a. Co. 2. Inst. f. 131. 2. R. 2.
Avowry 182.
and sees the Cattle upon his Tenancy* and the Tenant or any other on purpose
to prevent the Distress, drives the Cattle out of the Ground into other Lands
not holden of the Lord, or into the Highway, in this Case he may freshly
follow and distrain them there and is not punishable by this Statute* but in
both these Cases the Lord when he comes to distrain must have the view of the
Cattle within his Fee, for i^ they be driven out before he have the view of
them, or that the Cattle afte^ the view go out of themselves, or a^^ chased and
driven out for some other cause and not to prevent the Distress then the Lord
may not distrain them i^ another Man's Land, or in the Highway for Rents and
Services.

The Country by the Statute of 13 E. 1. Stat. 2. chapter 2. 28 E. 3. chapter 11. 27 El.
chapter 13. Co. Rep. 7. f. lib. f. 7. a. Wingate Abridg. Stat. ^it. Robberies sect.
5. Statat large printed 1684. f. 52.
^inchester are to take care so to secure their Highways, that people may
Travel with safety; for if one be rob^ed, the Hundred where he is robbed, ^s to
make satisfaction, and if it be done in the Division of two Hundreds both
Hundreds shall be answerable, but Dalt. J. P. printed 1677. chapter 84. f. 215
Bonds Guide for J. P. p 199. Wing-Robberies sect. 17. Statutes at large printed
1587. f. 710. Keb. Stat. printed 1684. f. 885. sect. 11.
^hen the Party robbed as soon as he can is to give notice of the said Robbery,
to some of the Inhabitants of ^ome Town, Village or Hamlet next adjoining to
the place where the Robbery was committed, and must also within twenty days
before he bring his A Justice of the Peace in any of the three Ridings in
Yorkshire, is within the meaning of this Stature, which names only a Justice
of the County, and so it was resolved, Hill. 1657. B. S. in Halls Case, ^iderf.
Rep. 1 p. last printed f. 44, 45.
Action make Oath before some Justice of the Peace of the County where the
Robbery was committed, living in or near the same Hundred, whether he knew the
Party that robbed him, or any of them, and if he do, then before he commence
his Action he must enter into sufficient Bond by Recognizance before the said
Justice, effectually to prosecute the same Person or Persons so known, by
Indictment, or otherwise according to Law; and the Party robbed Hill. 14 Jae.
1. Norris Case, Hob. Rep. f. 139, 140. Keb. f. 885. sect. 9.
is to commence his Action within a year after the Robbery committed or else
the Hundred shall not be charged therewith, nor shall they be charged, Mich. 12
Car. 2. B R* in Baskervils Case, Siderf. Rep. 1 pars f. 11.
if the Robbers or any of them b^ taken, but then such taking and apprehending
of the Robbers or any of them must be before the Verdict or Judgment against
the Hundred.

Robbery by some is said to be from Co. Lit. fol. 288. Terms of the Law and
Blounts Law Dictionary verb. Robbery. 22 Als. pl. 55. Kitchen Court Leet, etc.
printed 1585. p. 36. b. Crom. 33. b. n^. 1 Lamberts Eirenarcha chapter 7. lib. 2.
Stam. 17. Bond ubi supra, ^. 198.
Roberia or Robaria, from the French Rob, id est, vestis a Robe; and i^ when
there is a felonious taking away of a Man's Goods from his person o^ presence
against his will* putting him in fear, and of purpose to steal the same: and it
is called Robbery because the Goods are taken as it were de la Robe, from the
Robe, that is, from the Person; and although the thing taken be but to the
value of a Penny, yet it is Felony, for which the Offender shall suffer death.
Tr. 27 El. C. B. in Sendhills Case, Co. Rep. 7. lib. f. 6. a. Co. 2 Inst. f.
169. Cro El. f. 753. pl. 13. Mo. Rep. f. 62. pl. 848. Cro. Jac. f. 467. Tr. 29
El. C. B. in Milburns Case, Co. Rep. 7. lib. f. 6. b. Savils Rep. f. 83. pl.
163. Tr. 28 Eliz. C. B. Ashpoles Case, Co. Rep. 7. lib. f. 6. b. Mith. 13 Jac.
B. R. M^yes Case, Cro. Jac. f. 106. pl. 45.


Note, If a Man be robbed in an House, the Country is not chargeable nor liable
to answer such Robbery, for it ought to be committed openly that the Country
may take notice of it; nor is the Country liable to answer for a Robbery
committed in the Night, but though the Robbery be before Sunrise or after
Sunset, yet if it be daylight the Hundred shall be charged.

And where a Robbery is begun in Goldsb. Rep. p. 8^. pl. 11.
one Hundred and committed in another, yet it is a Robbery in the first Hundred
where it was begun; as if a Carriers Horse and Pack be taken by Robbers in one
Hundred, and led into another Hundred and there his Pack is ^obb'd, this is a
Robbery in the first Hundred where the Horse was taken; but if the Carrier lead
the Horse himself, then it is a Robbery in the second Hundred, because the
Carrier was always in possession till then; and if Tr. 17 Car. 2 B R. so held,
Siderfin^ Rep. 1 p. f. 263.
Robbers take a Man in one Hundred and carry him into another Hundred and there
rob him, this has been held to be no Robbery in the first Hundred, but in the
second, because the Party is always in possession till then. And if Robbers
drive or force a Waggoner to drive his Wagon out of the way Tr. 31 Eliz. C. B.
Greens Case, Cro. Eliz. f. 142. pl. 8. Goldsb. Rep. p. 24. pl. 3. Latch. Rep.
f. 127. Tr. 2 Car. 1. C. B. Reymonds Case, Cro. Car. f. 37. pl. 2. Sidersins
Rep. 1 p. but last printed f. 45. if the Servant or Carrier will not swear, the
Master or Owner is without remedy, Dalt. J. P. f. 215*
in the daytime, but rob him not till night, yet this is a Robbery in the day,
for the first seizure is the Robbery.

If a Servant be robbed of his Masters Money, or a Carrier be robbed of another
Man's Goods, he that is robbed must make Oath, and not the Master or Owner; and
the Action may be brought either in the Master or Servants Name, and so either
in the Owner of the Goods or Carri^^ Name.

If a Servant be robbed of his M^sters Vide Mich. 1649. B. S. Wrights Case
Styles Rep. f. 156. ca. 3. and Hill 1651. B. S. Crosthwa^tes Case, Styles Rep.
f. 318. ca. 3. Vide Lamberts Ei^enarcha, lib. 2* cap. 7.
Goods in the presence or sight his Master, this shall be taken for robbing of
the Master; and so if Man be riding Post, and the Post-bo^^ has his Portmantle
behind him, whi^^ is robbed, and the Posters Money take out of it in his
presence, this shall b^ taken for a robbing of the Party the rides Post, and
not of the Post-bo^^ for these Robberies being committe^ in the Owners presence
are said to b^ done to their Persons; and if one (...) away his Purse or Goods
to save the^ from a Robbery, and the Robber tak^ them up and carry them away,
the is a Robbery done to the Owners Person.

If two Highway Men meet tw^ Hill. 26 Eliz. B. R. Pudseys Case, Andersons Rep.
1 p. f. 116. pl. 161. vid. Lamberts Ei^enarcha, lib. 2. chapter 7. Bonds Guide for
J. P. p. 199. and Complete J. printed 1681. p. 350.
Persons traveling in the Highway, an^ they endeavor to rob the Travello^^
and draw their Swords and offer t^ wound them, upon which the Travellors ride
one of them one way and the other another way, and one of the Robbers follows
one of them, and his Companion the other, and in this pursuit one of the
Travellors is robbed by one of the Highway Men, out of (...) sight and hearing
of his Compa^ion, yet in this Case they are both of ^^em principal Robbers, he
that neither heard nor saw the Robbery, as well as he that committed it. And so
it ^as adjudged in the Case of one Pud^ey, who was arraigned in the Kings ^ench
as a Principal, and was found ^uilty and hanged, though the Rob^ery was done by
his Companion out of his sight and hearing.

Formerly if a Man were traveling Mich. 16 Jac. 1. B R. Waits Case, Godbolts
Rep. P. 280. ^l. 397. Cro. Jac. f. 466. pl. 2.
upon a Sunday, and were robbed though it were in time of Divine Ser^ice, upon
the Sunday in the Fore^oon, yet the Country were liable, and were bound to
answer for the Robbery, (...) it was adjudged in one Waits Case; ^ut now by the
Statute of the 29th of St. 29 Car. 2. ^h. 7* Keb. Stat. f. 1485. sect. 5. But
the Country upon notice of a Robbety committed upon a Sunday are to make Hue
and Cry, as if it had been done on another day, or else to forfeit as much to
the King as might have been recovered by the Party robbed.
King Char. II. they shall not make sa^isfaction for any Robbery committed upon
Persons traveling upon Sunday, ^ut it is at the peril and loss of the Parties
traveling, if they be robbed upon a Sunday.

Now having opened the Ways, and ^leared the Passage, I shall proceed to
^ntroduce the Officers.

CHAP. II. Who are to be Surveyors of the Highways, and how and by whom to b^
chosen, and when; and what Forfeiture for refusing to take the Offic^ upon
them, and how to be levied an^ disposed of.
I Find no mention made in our Law^ Rosinus Romans An. tiq. lib. 7. p. 300. Dalt.
J. P. chapter 50. f. 97.
of the Surveyors of Highways (...) about one hundred thirty eight year^ ago,
Anno 2 and 3 P. and M. Bu^ Rosinus tells us, that the Senate (...) Rome, in
ancient time, took great ca^^ in making and amending of the^^ Ways, as well
within as without the City: Maxima (says he) pris^^ temporibus Senatus
diligentia fuit f^ciend^ sarciendisque viis tam infr^quam extra Urbem. And the
ca^^ of these Ways was first committed (...) the two Censors, who were called
(...) Fenest. de Magistr. Romans cap. 17. Godwins Romans Antiq. lib. 3. sect. 2.
chapter 5.
a Censendo, because they assessed an^ valued every Man's Estate, and too^
notice how every Man lived and carried himself, and were reputed of the best
Rank of Magistrates in Rome But these Magistrates being too much busied with
their other Employment they chose others whom they called quatuor viros viarum
curandarum; the four Overseers of the Highways; but the number of their ways
increasing, particular Ways had particular Surveyors appointed, who were called
curatores viarum, which Caesar Augustus made an Ordinary Office; to which
Office our Surveyors of the Highways now answer, so that this Office has been
of great Antiquity.

By the Statute of the 2 and 3 of 2 and 3 P. and Much. ^ St at large printed
1587. f. 289. Poulton Abr. Penal St. Highways 1. Keb. St. printed 1684. f.
740. sect. 2. Wingate sect. 5. Highways.
King Philip and Queen Mary, it is ^enacted, That the Constables and
Churchwardens of every Parish with^n this Realm, shall yearly upon the Tuesday
or Wednesday in Easter Week, call together a number of the Parishi^^ners, and
then elect and choose two honest Persons of the Parish, to be Surveyors and
Orderers for one Year of the Works for amendment of ^he Highways in their
Parish leading ^o any Market Town, the which Persons shall have authority by
virtue of ^he said Office, to order and direct the Persons and Carriages that
shall be appointed for those Works by their dis^etions; and the said Persons so
named shall take upon them the execution of their said Offices, upon pain every
of them making default to forfeit twenty But now by the St of the 3 and 4 of
K. Will. and Q. Mar. the penalty is 5 ^.
shillings.

But the Statute of the 22d. of King Charles the Second appoints, that the 22
Car. 2. chapter 12. Keb. ibid. f. 1396. sect. 12. Wingate sect. 39. High-w^ys
Surveyors and Orderers of the Work for the amendment of the Highways within
their respective Parishes, shall be yearly chosen and nominated by such Persons
as by the Act made in the 2 and 3 years of King Philip and Queen Mary is
appointed; (that is, (...) the Constable and Churchwardens (...) every Parish,
calling together a number of the Parishioners) upon some day in the same week
that the Feast (...) the Birth of our Lord, commonly called Christmas shall be,
which Person so nominated and appointed, shall tak^ upon them the said Office,
upon pai^ of incurring the Forfeiture mentione^ in the other Act of Parliament;
(...) that this Statute of 22 Car. 2. see^^ to repeal that Clause of 2 and
(...) P. and M. Quoad tempus, sed n^^ quoad modum, as to the time of the
Election of these Officers, but n^^ to the manner and form of the^^ choice.

And now by the Statute of the thi^ ^ and 4 K. Will. and ^. Mar. chapter 12.
and fourth years of their present M^jesties Reigns King William and Quee^ Mary
(which is the Law now to be observed) it is enacted, That the Constables, The
time and form of choosing Surveyors according to the Laws now in force.
Headboroughs, Tythingmen, Churchwardens, Surveyor or Surveyors of the
Highways, and Inhabitants in every Parish shall assemble together upon The
Constables, Surveyors, etc. of every Town, Liberty and Precinct within the
Parish are to assemble, and make a List and return it, or every of them
neglecting forfeit 20 s. as appears by another Clause in this Act. See p. 18.
the six and twentieth day of December every Year, unless that day shall be
Sunday, and then on the seven and twentieth, and the Major-part of them as are
so assembled, shall make a List of the Names of a competent number of the
Inhabitants in their Parish, who have an Estate of ten pounds by the Year in
Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments Who are to be Surveyors, and how qualified.
either in their own Right or their Wives, or are worth an hundred pounds in
personal Estate, or farm thirty pounds by the Year in Houses, Lands, Tenements
or Hereditaments, if there be any such, or if there be no such Persons in the
Parish, then they are to make a List of the most sufficient Inhabitants of the
said Parish.

This List thus made* must be returned A List to be returned to the J ^ at
private Sessions and when to be held.
unto two or more Justices of the Peace in or near the Division of the County
in which their Parish lies at a Special Sessions to be held by the said
Justices for that purpose within the said Division, on the third day of January
next following, unless it shall happen on a Sunday, and then to be the fourth
of the same Month, or within fifteen days after; of the time Notice to be given
before the holding of the special Sessions of the time when, and place where,
and the Justices forfeit 5 ^. If they neglect to keep such a Sessions, or to
put this Act in execution.
and place of holding of which said Special Sessions, the Justices must give
ten days notice, at the least, before the holding thereof to the Constables,
Headboroughs, Tythingmen, Churchwardens and Surveyors of the Highways of every
Parish within the said Division, and then and there the said Justices by
Warrant under their Hands Justices of Peace to nominate the Surveyors.
and Seals, shall nominate and appoin^^ out of the said Lists one, two or mo^^
at their discretions of such Persons as they think fit, being of like
sufficiency as aforesaid, to be Surveyor o^ Surveyors of the Highways of every
Parish within the Division, or for an^ Hamlet, Precinct, Liberty, Tything or
Town therein for the Year ensuing And the Person or Persons so nominated
Persons named to have notice.
and appointed within six days afte^ are to be served with the said Warran^^ or
Warrants, or the same, or a tru^ Copy thereof must be left at his (...) their
Houses, or usual places of Abod^^ by the Constables, Headboroughs Tythingmen,
Churchwardens or Surveyors of the Highways, for the tim^ being, or some of
them, and from thenceforth the Person or Persons so nominated and appointed
shall be Surveyor or Surveyors of the Highways for the Year following, for the
place for which he is so nominated, chosen and appointed, and shall take the
Office upon him or them, and duly execute the same according to the Laws made
for the enlarging, amending and repairing of Highways.

And if the Persons so nominated Forfeiture for refusing the Office, or
neglecting the same.
and served with the said Warrant do refuse or neglect the Office, he or they
so refusing and neglecting shall forfeit five pounds, to be levied on his or
their Goods and Chattels by distress and sale of them, by Warrant under the
Hand and Seal of two or more Justices of the Peace of the same Division, or in
default thereof of any Neighboring Justices of the Peace for the same County,
which Warrant the said Justices Quare who shall serve the Warrant, and make
distress and sale, for no Officer is named.
are empowered and required to make, upon information of any one credible
Witness upon Oath, one moiety to go to the Informer, and the other moiety to
the Repairs of the Highways of the same Parish, rendering the overplus, if any
be, to the Owners, Charges of the Distress and Sale being first deducted: And
in case Upon refusal of the Office, J. to appoint others.
of such neglect or refusal as aforesaid, the said Justices are to nominate and
appoint some other fit Person or Persons to perform the said Office, who upon
notice given as aforesaid, are to take the Office upon him or them, and upon
neglect or refusal thereof to forfeit five pounds to be levied and disposed of
as aforesaid; and if the Constables, Forfelture for not returning a List of
Names.
Headboroughs, Tythingmen, Churchwardens, and Surveyor or Surveyors of the
Highways of any Parish, Town, Liberty or Precinct, or some of them do not
return such List of Names as aforesaid, every of them so neglecting shall
forseit twenty shillings, to be levied in the manner, and employed to the uses
aforesaid: And if any Surveyor of Penalty for neglect, after the acceptance of
the Office.
the Highways after his acceptance of the Office, neglect his Duty in any
thing required of him by the Statute of the third and fourth Years of their
Majesty's Reigns, King William and Queen Mary, Chap. 12. He shall for every
such Offense forfeit forty shillings to be levied and disposed of as is
aforesaid; but all Persons for any Offense Offenses to be prosecuted within six
months, and those punished by this Act, to be punished by no other Law.
against this Statute, are to be prosecuted within six months after the Offense
committed, and such Persons who are punished for any Offense by this Act, shall
be punished by no other Law for the same Offense.

Surveyors during the time of their Surveyors not putting the Acts of
Parliament in execution to be fined by the Justices, 3 and 4 K. Will. and Q.
Mar.
continuance in their Office are to cause the several Acts of Parliament in
force, made for repairing and amending of Highways to be put in execution,
within the Limits of their respective Parishes and Places, and the penalties
thereby imposed, to be levied and disposed of as by the said several Acts is
directed, and upon refusal or neglect thereof, upon complaint made to any
Justice of the Peace of the Place or Division where such neglect shall be
proved to be done, and conviction of the Parties by the Oath of any one
credible Witness before the said Justice, or upon the view of the Justice
himself, they shall incur such penalty as the Justice shall think fit to
impose, not exceeding forty shillings for one Offense, the same Fine to be
levied by Fines by whom to be levied, and how to be disposed of.
the High-Constable of such Place or Division, or any other Officer by Warrant
under the Hand and Seal of such Justice of the Peace upon the Goods and
Chattels of the person so offending (rendering the overplus to the Owner
thereof, all necessary Charge in the levying the same being first deducted) to
be employed for the amending the Highways of the Parish or Place where such
neglect shall be found, as the said Justice or Justices shall appoint for the
doing thereof.

CHAP. III. What things are first to be done by the Surveyors of Highways,
after they have taken the Office upon them, and within what time, an^ under
what penalty, and how to be levied and disposed of.
THE Constables and Churchwardens 2 and 3 P. and M. chapter 8. Wing. Bridges sect.
5.
of every Parish, with such of the Parishioners as did in Easter Week make
choice of their Surveyor^ for their Highways, were at the same time to appoint
four days for amending Then by the Stat. of 5. Eliz. chapter 131. six days were to
be appointed in manner aforesaid, Wing. Highways, sect. 14.
their Highways betwixt that time and Midsummer-day next following and public
notice of the said four days was to be given in the Church the Sunday next
after Easter; but by the Statute 22 Car. 2. this Clause is altered in all
particulars: 1. As to the Parties that are to appoint the days 2. As to the
time and place of giving notice. 3. As to the number of the days: And 4. As to
the time of the year.

The Surveyors of the Highways How many days Surveyors are to appoint, 22 Car.
2. chapter 12.
having taken the Office upon them, are to appoint six days for the providing
Wingate sect. 39. Highways.
of Stones, Gravel, and other Materials for the amendment of, and for working
in the Highways, having respect to the Season of the Year, and the Weather,
and giving notice publicly some convenient time before the several days; at
which days all persons liable to the said Work shall attend and work
accordingly: And in such places Within what time the public or common days
works are to be performed, 22 Car. 2. chapter 12. Keb. St. f. 1394. sect 3. Wingate
sect. 33. Highways.
where the Highways cannot be sufficiently amended before the Feast of the
Nativity of St. John Baptist yearly, the same may and must be sufficiently
amended before the Feast of St. Luke yearly, without incurring any penalty for
the not doing thereof before the said Feast of the Nativity of St. John
Baptist, according to the former Act: And this is the Rule that is now to be
observed.

And every Surveyor of the Highways, Within what time Surveyors are to view
all their Ways, etc. 3 and 4 W. and M. chapter 12.
is within fourteen days after his first acceptance of the said Office, and so
from time to time every four months during his being Surveyor, to take a view
of all the Roads, Common Highways, Watercourse, Bridges Cawseys and
Pavements within the Parish, Town, Village, Hamlet, Precinct or Tything, for
which he is appointed Surveyor, that are to be repaired by the said Parish,
Town, Village, Hamlet, Precinct or Tything and must make a Presentment upon
Presentment to be made upon Oath, and to whom, and under what penalty.
Oath in what state and condition h^ finds the same in, to some Justice (...)
the Peace of the same Division, if the^ resident there* otherwise to some
neighboring Justice of the Peace (...) the same County, and in default ther^
of to incur the same penalties as if h^ had refused, or neglected to acce^^ and
execute the said Office (which penalty is five pounds, to be levied o^ his
Goods and Chattels by Distress an^ Sale, by Warrant under the Hand an^ Seal of
two or more Justices of the Peace of the same Division, or in d^fault thereof
any neighboring Justic^ of the Peace for the same County unless he show some
reasonable excu^^ (to be allowed by the Justices aforesaid for omitting the
same.

And what defaults or annoyances the Notice to be given in the Church of
defaults and annoyances, and if not removed Surveyors to remove them, and how
to dispose of them.
^urveyors shall find in any of the said Highways, Cawseys, Bridges, Ditches,
^edges, Trees, Watercourse, Drains (...) Gutters next adjoining to the same,
^hey are from time to time the next Sunday after Sermon ended to give ^ublick
notice thereof in the Parish Church, and if the same be not removed, repaired
and amended within ^hirty days after such notice, then the ^urveyor or
Surveyors are within thirty days to remove, repair and amend the ^ame; and
dispose of the same Annoy^nces for the repair of the said Highways; and what
Charges the Sur^eyor Surveyors to have their Charges repaid for removing of
Annoyances, repairing, etc.,
and Surveyors are at, they are to ^e reimbursed by the Parties who should have
done the same; and if the parties refuse or neglect to pay the Surveyors their
Charges upon demand, ^hen the Surveyors making Oath hereof before any Justice
of the Peace within the Division of the County wherein such Way is, or in
default ^hereof to any neighboring Justice for ^he said County, they shall be
repaid all such their Charges as shall be allowed to be reasonable by the said
Justice, to be levied in manner aforesaid; that is, by distress and sale of
Offenders Goods and Chattels by Warran^ as is showed before, but still here
(...) no Officer named that shall execu^^ the Warrant and make the distress an^
sale.

CHAP. IV. Who and what Persons are to appea^ and labor upon the public or
common Days appointed by the Su^veyors for the amendment and repair of
Highways, and where th^^ are to appear, and after what manner, and how long
they are to worl^ and under what Penalties, an^ how to be levied and disposed
o^ with some Cases and Resolutions r^lating to these Matters.
EVERY Person for every Plo^ 2 and 3 P. and M. chapter 8. Stat. at large f. 289.
Poulton Highways 2. Dalt. J. P. chapter 50. f. 99. Lamb. Eirenarcha printed 1588.
p. 474. Keb. 81. f. 740* sect. 2. Bonds Compl. Guide for J. P. p. 110. Wing
Highways sect. 6.
Land in Tillage or Pasture the he or she shall occupy in the sam^ Parish, and
every other Person keepin^ there a Plow or Draught, shall fin^ and send at
every day appointed for the amending of their Highways (...) the place to be
appointed, one Wa^ or Cart furnished after the Custom (...) the Country, with
Oxen, Horses, Where they keep all Horse Teems, there they may send a Cart
furnished, and where they keep Draughts and Oxen there they must send a Wain
and not a Cart, for if the Party keep both a Wain and a Cart, yet he must send
that which will do best service, and that is a Wain. Dalt. ibid. f. 100. Poult.
Highways 4. Bond ibid. p. 111. Keb. ubi supra, Wing. ubi supra.
^ther Cattle, and all other Necessaries ^eet to carry things convenient for
^at purpose, and also two able Men ^ith the same, upon pain of every ^raught
making default ten shillings; and every Householder, and also every ^ottager and
Labourer of the Parish, ^ble to labor, and being no hired ^ervant by the Year,
shall by them^^lves, or one sufficient Labourer for ^very of them, upon every
of the said ^ays, work and travel in the amendment of the said Highways, upon
^ain of every person making default (...) lose for every day twelve pence; and
if the said Carriages of the Parish, Two able Men to be sent for every Carriage
spared, Dalt. ibid. f. 100. Poult. ibid. Highways 3. Wingate Highways sact. 7.
(...) any of them shall not be thought ^eedful by the Surveyors to be occupied
upon any of the said days, that then every such person that should have ^ent
any such Carriage shall send to the said Work for every Carriage so spared, ^wo
able Men there to labor for that Note, that neither Women nor Children are to
be sent to the common days Works. But by the Stat. of 22 Car. 2. chapter 112. the
forfeiture is made 1 s. 6 d. and so it is for every day Laborers making
default*
^ay, upon pain to lose for every Man ^ot so sent to the said Work twelve
^ence; and every Person and Carriage ^bovesaid, are to bring with them ^hovels,
Spades, Picks, Mattocks, and other Tools and Instruments necessary ^or the said
Work; and all the said Persons and Carriages are to do their Work as they shall
be appointed (...) the Surveyors or one of them, eig^^ hours of every of the
said days, unl^^ they shall be otherwise licenced by (...) said Surveyors, or
one of them.

Stewards in Court-Leets have pow^^ Stewards in Leets, and in their default J.
P. at Sessions to enquire of defaults upon this Statute.
to enquire after the Offenses aforesa^^ committed within the Precincts of the
Leets, and set reasonable Fines a^^ Amerciaments upon Offenders, and (...) St.
at large f. 289. Keb. ibid. f. 740. sect. 2. Wing. ibid. sect. 8.
within six weeks after Michaelmas (...) deliver inde^^ed ^^treats of such F^^^
under their (...) and Seals, (...) o^ part thereof in the Baili^^ or Hig^
Constable o^ the Hundred, Rape, Lat^^^ or Wapen^^ke and the other to t^^
Constables and Churchwardens of (...) Parish where the defaults were made and
in default of Presentiments in t^^ Leet, then the Justices of the Peace (...)
the County at every general Quarte^ Sessions may enquire thereof, and (...)
such Fines as they or any two of the^ (whereof one of them to be of t^^ Quorum)
shall think fit, of whi^^ the Clerk of the Peace is to make i^ dented Estreats
under his Hand an^ Seal in like manner as the Stewards (...) B^iliff or
High-Constable to levy and make account Dalt. J. P. f. 103. Poult. Highways
10, 11. Wingate Highways sect 11
Leets are to do; and these Estrea^^ shall be a sufficient warrant to the
Bailiff or High-Constable to levy the ^id Fines by way of distress, and if ^o
distress can be found, or the party ^bstinately refuses, and does not pay ^he
Fine within twenty days after demand, he or they shall then forfeit ^ouble so
much, and the Bailiff or High-Constable shall every Year be^wixt the first of
March and last of April render to the Churchwardens of ^he Parish where the
Offense is committed (and who have the other part ^f the Estreats) an account
of the Money received by him on pain of ^orty shillings; and the Churchwardens
Pain for not accounting, Poult. Highways 10, 11. Compl. J. 166, 167 Wing. ubi
supra.
have power to call the Bailiff or High-Constable to account before two or more
Justices of the Peace (whereof one of them to be of the Quorum) who have power
to commit the Bailiff or High-Constable till he have paid ^ll the Moneys
received by him, save ^ight pence in the pound for himself, and twelve pence in
the pound for the Steward or Clerk of the Peace that made out the Estreats, for
their Fees, which Moneys are to be bestowed on Moneys how to be bestowed, Wing.
ibid. sect. 10
^he Repair of the Highways of the Parish where the Offenses were committed;
and the succeeding Churchwardens have the same power of cal^ing their
predecessors to account as they had against the Bailiffs; but the Surveyors are
now to present the d^faults upon this Statute, and upon 5 Eliz. 13. and 22 Car.
2. 12. within one month after any default, and^. And by the Statute 3 and 4
King Wi^liam and Queen Mary, chap. 12. the^ are to be presented every four
months so see afterward, chap. 7. about Pr^sentments.

After the making of the Statute o^ 18 Eliz. chapter 10.
2 and 3 P. and M. some Scruples b^ing raised about such Persons as h^^ a
Plow-land lying in several Parish^^ part in one Parish, and part in another
where he should send his Draught, an^ about those who had several Plowlands,
how they should be charged and some other Quaeres, for resolving of which
Doubts, and explaining (...) the said Act of Parliament, it is enacted St. at
large f. 609. Keb. f. 859. sect 2. Poult. 12. Lamb. 474. Dalt. 100. Wing High
vvays sect. 18.
by the Statute 18 Eliz. That eve^^ Person (except such as dwell in the City of
London) assessed at five pound^ in Goods to the Subsidy, or wort^ forty
shillings or above in Lands, being none of the Parties chargeable for the
amendment of Highways by an^ former Law; but as a Cottager is to find two able
Men yearly at the public or common day-works to labor in the Highways as by
the Statute is Keb. ubi supra, sect. 3. and 4. Poult. 13, 14. Dalt. 99. Bond
110, 111. Compl. Just. p. 161. Wing. ibid. sect. 19.
appointed. And every person or persons occupying a Plow-land in Tillage or
Pasture, which lies in several Parishes is chargeable only in the Parish where
he lives, in the same manner as any person is, having a Plow-land all in one
Parish; and he which keeps in his He which keeps a Plovv-land in several Towns
to send a Draught to every Town, Wing. ubi supra.
hands or possession several or diverse Plow-lands, as aforesaid, in several or
diverse Towns, shall be chargeable to ^ind in each Town or Parish (where the
Plow-lands being in his occupation do lie) one Cart, Wain, Tum^rel, Dung-pot or
Court, Sleads, Cars ^r Drags furnished for the amendment and repair of the
Highways within the several Parishes where the said Plow-lands do lie, as if
he or they were a Parishioner dwelling there.

And in such places where there is no Keb. Stat. f. 1359. sect. 8. 22 Car. 2.
chapter 12. Dalt. f. 100. Bond 111. Wing, Highways, sect. 37
use of Cart and Teams for the amendment of Highways, but the usage ^s to
carry materials for such amendment upon backs of Horses, or by any other kind
of Carriages; the In^abitants there shall send in such their ^orses as are
accustomed to that kind of Labor, and such their other Car^ages, with able
persons to work with the same, in like manner and under the like penalties as
is appointed for Carts and Teams.

If any fail to make their respective 22 Car. 2. chapter 12. Keb. ubi supra sect.
9. Dalt. f. 102. Bond 111. Wing Highways sect. 38
day labors every year for and toward the repairing the Highways, or neglect
to send their respective Carriages* Horses and Carts as by Law they are
respectively required, the Surveyo^^ are to make complaint thereof to the next
Justices of the Peace, who upon Oath thereof made by one Witness may levy by
distress and sale of even person sailing or neglecting as aforesaid, (and not
having a reasonable excuse to be allowed by the said Justice,) that is to say,
of the Goods an^ Chattels of every day-labourer one sh^^ling and six pence, and
after that ra^ for every Labourer that is to be se^^ in, and for every Man and
Horse th^^ shillings, and for every Cart wi^^ two Men ten shillings, for every
r^spective day they shall make defau^^ (rendering the overplus to the Owne^
reasonable Charges being first deduc^ed) which respective penalties so lev^^
Wing. ubi supra
shall be employed for and toward t^^ repairing the Highways, in every
respective Place and Parish.

Having showed how those that o^cupy and keep a Plow-land are charg^ab^^ to the
repair of Highways, I shall now proceed to show some Opinions what a Plow-land
is, and set down some Cases and Resolutions about this matter.

A Plow-land, Hide, or Carve of Co. Lit* f. 69. 3. Co. Rep. 4. lib. f. 37. b.
and 9 lib. f. 124. a* Dalt. f. 104, 105.
Land, being all one as some hold, is not of any certain content, but so much
as one Plow by course of Husbandry may Plow in one year, Tanta fundi portio
quanta unico per annum coli poterat Aratro; and so in some Countries it is
more, and in some less, according to the heaviness or lightness of the Soil,
and herewith agrees Mr. Lambart verb. Hide. And Sir John In the Reign of King
H. 6.
Prisot Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, says, That a Plow may till
more Land in a year in one Country than another, and therefore it stands with
reason, that a Plow-Land should be less in one Country than another, Vide in
Hill and Granges Case, Plo. Com 168. and 6 E. 3. 42. 39 H 6. 8*
vide 35 H. 6. f^l. 29. And a Plow-land may contain a Message, Wood, Meadow
and Pasture, because that by them, the Plowmen and the Cattle belonging to the
Plow are maintained; And venerable Bede calls a Plow-land familiam, because it
contains necessary Things for the maintenance of a Family: And Crompton in
his Jurisd. fol. 222. says, A Hide of Land (being the same with a Plowland)
contains one hundred Acres, and that eight Hides make a Knights Fee; but Sir
Edward Cook holds, That a Knights Fee, a Hide or Plow-land a Yard-land, or
Oxgange of Land do not contain any certain number ^^ Acres. In ancient time a
Plow-land was of the yearly value of five pound^ and this was the Living of a
Plowm^^ or Yeoman.

Some differences arising upon seven D^lt. J. P. chapter 50. ^. 104.
Presentiments, what should be the Content of a Plow-land, an Order of
Explanation was made, 1 October. 16. Jac. That an hundred Acres should be
esteemed; but afterward in Ki^^ Charles I's. Time, eight Acres was ^^ be
accounted a Plow-land, and ^^ proportionably to be charged for mening Highways.

A Man that goes with two Draugh^^ ^^ that keep two or more Draughts ^^r his
own use, should s^nd as many to the am^ndment of the High way, D^lt. J. P. chapter
50 ^. 105. Compl Just. p. 164
usually, or more, for the dispatch (...) his own Husbandry, and keeps pe^haps
above an hundred Acres of T^^ lage Land, does usually send but o^ Wain or Cart
furnished to the comm^^ day works for the amendment of the Highways; and he
that keeps but o^ D^aught and has but a small quantity of Tillage, perhaps of
what the other has, yet he is chargeable to send his Wain or Cart furnished to
the same Work, which by some has been thought very hard; therefore it has
been thought reasonable, and warranted by the Statute, that he that for his own
private business shall usually make and set up two Draughts or Carts, shall
also for the King and Countries Services be chargeable with two Draughts or
Carts, though he occupy all his Land but with one Plow, and the more Draughts
he uses, the greater damage he does to the Highways, though a greater
advantage accreweth to himself; And Qui sentit commodum, sentire debet and onus:

He that does Profit get,
At the Burden should not fret.
This matter in a like Case came in Dalt. and Compl. J. ubi supra.
debate in the Kings Bench in Michaelmas-Term, 27 Car. 2. upon an Order made by
the Justices of the Peace in Middlesex, for charging several Brewers and
Bricklayers living there, and using several Draughts to send so many as they
kept, for the repairing of the Highways; and the Order being removed into the
Kings Bench, a Procedendo was awarded by the Lord Chief Justice Hales; and the
whole Court were all strongly of Opinion that so many Draughts as they kept, so
many they ought to send, for so the service they will do, will answer the wrong
and damage by them occasioned in the Highways.

If a Man occupies a Plow-land in Dalt. J. P. f. 105, 106.
Pasture for feeding of Cattle, but keeps neither Cart nor Plow, yet the
Words of the Statute seem to charge him to find a Cart ready furnished, and two
able Men; and so he that keeps a Draught for Carriage, or a Plow, though he
occupies little or no Land or Pasture in his own hands, yet he is chargeable
to find a Cart for the amending the Highways, although he keeps his Plow and
Cart only to carry and plow for other Men; but quaere (says Mr. Dalton)
whether he is chargeable to send two able Men with his Cart, except he has in
his occupation a Plow-land; for the^ Statute seems not (says he) to charge
such a Man to send two able Men with his Cart, and perhaps he keeps not a Man,
and then it were hard; but if the Rule in Law hold, absoluta sententia
expositore non indiget, then such a Person must send two able Men with his
Cart; for the words of the Statute 2 and 3 P. and M. chap. 8. are, Every person
for every Plow-land in Tillage or Pasture that he or she shall occupy in the
same Parish, and every other person keeping there a Plow or Draught, shall find
and send, etc. which is plain and backed with another Rule in Law, Generale
dictum generaliter est accipiendum; and then there is no excuse but he must
send two able Men. And if this be an hard Case, it is as hard that a poor
laboring Man who is scarce able to get Bread for his Family, should be (as by
the Statute he is) compellable to go himself, or send an able Labourer in his
room to the common day works appointed for amending the Highways, when another
Man in the same Town that keeps neither Plow-land nor Draught nor Cart, and so
comes under the denomination of a Cottager, and perhaps is worth five or six
hundred pounds, is but to send two able Men.

He that keeps a Cart for hire, and Da^t. J P^ch. 50. f. 105.
goes with one or two Horses, must send his Cart to the amendment of the
Highways, with so many Horses as he goes withal for hire, to carry such Loads
as they are able to draw.

It has been as a Quaere by some, Whether Ministers are to s^nd their Draughts
to the common days works.
whether Ministers that keep a Plow, Cart or Wain, and a Draught to load their
Tithes, and till their Glebe, be chargeable to send a Cart or Wain, and two
able Men to the amendment of the Highways, and it has been the general
Opinion that they are no^ Co. 2 Inst. f. 3.
bound to send any; for my Lord Cook says, That true it is, that
Ecclesiastical persons have more and greate^ Liberties than other of the Kings
Subjects, wherein to set down all would take up (says he) a whole Volume (...)
it self; so he only does instance and show some few particulars, viz. The^ Co.
2 Inst f. 4. Marlb^. chapter 10. Briton p. 19. b. ^h 12. n. 40. Fl^ta lib. 2 chapter 52
sect. 7. But if they are chargable to pay toward the repairing of decayed
Bridges by the words of the St. 22 H. 8. chap 5. which makes every Inhabitants
I^able, Co. 2 Inst. f. 704.
ought not in person to serve in Wa^ nor are they to appear at Sheriff^ Tourns
or Views of Frankpledge, and they ought to be quit and discharged of Tolls and
Customs, Average, Pontage, Pannage, Paviage, and the like and if they be
molested or distraine^ for any of these, they may have Writ out of the Chancery
for their discharge, as appears by the Registe^^ Regist. f. 260. a. F. N B. f.
227. F. Degs Parsons, Co. 4 Edition printed 1685 p. 122, 123*
and Fitzherbert; Rex Ballivis sui^ de B. salutem, cum personae Ecclesiastica
secundum consuetudinem hacte^s in Regno nostro usitatam and ap^obatam, ad
Toloniam, Pannagium, Muragium, etc. de bonis suis Eccle^asticis alicubi in
eodem Regno prae^and. nullatenus teneantur, vobis prae^pimus quod L. S.
personam Ecclesiae (...) W. ad Toloneum, etc. And when any Charge is intended
to be put upon them or their Spiritual Promoti^ns, they are set down in express
Terms, and particularly named; and the general Custom has been to ex^use them,
and it is a Rule in Law, ^ptimus Interpres Legum consuetudo, Custom is the Laws
best Interpreter: And where the penning of a Statute Vaugh. Rep. f. 169
(...) dubious, long usage is a just Me^ium to expound it, for jus and no^^a
lequendi is governed by usage, and the meaning of things spoken or written,
must be as it has constantly been ^eceived to be by common acceptance, by all
which it appears that Ministers But they are ^^able to pay their proportion of
Assessments made for the repairing of Highways.
should be excused from the common or public days works ap^ointed for the
amendment of Highways, in respect of their Church Livings only; for if they
hire or ^arm any Lands, and keep a Draught to manage those Lands, I presume
they are chargeable to send to the (...) pairing and amending the High-w^^ for
those Lands they so farm.

CHAP. V. How Trees, Hedges and Bushes (...) in or adjoining to High-w^^ are to
be ordered, and to whom (...) Freehold of Highways belongs, (...) who shall
have the Trees (...) therein, when they are cut (...) and about scowring Dikes
and (...), and making of Trenches, (...) what Forfeitures for defaults (...)
neglects, and how to be levied (...) disposed of, and what brea^ Highways and
Causeys in them (...) to be.
IT is provided by the Statute 13 F. 1. St. 2. Winchest. chapter 5. Wing. Robberies
sect. 7. St. at large f. 49. Poult. Highways 18. Dalt. J. P chapter 50. f. 98.
Keb. St. f. 53.
Winchester, That Highways (...) from one Market Town to (...) other, shall be
enlarged two (...) Feet on either side of the High-w^^ so that there be neither
Dike, (...) nor Bush (other than Ashes and (...) Trees) whereby a Man may lurk
to (...) hurt; and if any Robbery be comm^ted for want of cutting down (...)
(...), Underwood and Bushes, then (...) Lord that ought to cut them down to
answer for the Felony, and if any (...) be done he is to make Fine (...) the
King; and if the Lord be not (...) to cut down the Underwoods, (...) Country
shall assist him; and in (...) Kings Demesne Lands and Woods (...) his Forest
and without, the ^ays shall be enlarged as aforesaid: (...) where a Park is
taken from the ^^gh-way, it ought to be two (...) Foot from the Highways, or
(...) with such a Wall, Dike or Hedge (...) Offenders may not lurk and have
(...) and freedom to pass and repass (...) do Evil.

This Statute has never been fully The Stat. of Winchester for cutting down
Woods etc. and clearing the Highways 200 Foot on each side, not put in
Execution.
specially within the time of our (...)) put in Execution; for those (...) are
acquainted with traveling the ^igh-ways and Roads, may see in every ^ounty in
several places thereof, great ^nderwoods adjoining close to the ^igh-ways,
where Rogues may and (...) lurked, and when Robberies have (...) committed, the
Country and not (...) Lords have answered for the (...): and Parks in many
places are (...) close to the Highways not so (...) as the Statute requires.

The Lord of the Leet or (...) 27 H. 6. f. 8. a. per Cur. 17 E. 3. f. 43. 6 E.
3. Chimin 2. 2 E. 4. f. 9. a. pl. 21. 8 E 4. f. 9. a. pl. 7. 8 H. 7. f. 5. b.
pl. 7. Kitch. Court L^et printed 1585. p. 48. b. 49. b. 50. b. Rolls Cases 1
part f. 392. B. 5. 10.
who has the Land on both sides an Highway, shall have the (...) growing in
the said Way; and where the Highway is over the (...) Waste, for the King has
but the (...) passage for him and his people, (...) the Freehold and all the
Profits are (...) the Lord of the Soil, as Trees, (...) etc. and he may have an
Action (...) the Trees taken away, or eating (...) Grass, or digging the Soil,
etc. (...) I have known an Action of (...) brought for eating the Grass (...)
in an Highway; and although it (...) accustomable for Salters and Colliers
(...) their Horses and eat the (...) growing in the Highways, yet (...) are
Trespassers in so doing.

And generally the Owner of (...) 2 E. 4. f. 9. a. pl. 21. per Littl. 8 H. 7.
f. 5. b. pl. 2. 18 El. B. R. per Curiam Rolls Cases 1 p. f. 392. B. 10 Kitch.
Court Leer, etc. printed 1985. p. 48. b.
Soil on both sides of the (...) shall have the Trees growing in (...)
Highway; but he who has the (...) but adjoining on one side of (...)
Highway, shall not have the (...) growing upon that moiety of the Highway.

The Lord of a Rape within which Pas. 11 J^c. 1. B. R. Inter Sir Thomas Pelham
quer. and Wiat and Pack defen. Rolls Cases 1 p. f. 392. B. 15. 20
there are ten Hundreds, may (...) to have all the Trees growing in (...)
Highway within that Rape, althoug^ the Manor or Soil adjoining be another
(...); for usage of taking the Trees is (...) good Badge of Ownership.

The Statute of 5 Eliz. provides, 5 El. chapter 13. Stat. at large f 443 Poult.
Highways 7, 8. Keb. f. 802. sect. 7, 8. Lamb. p. 475. Dalt. J. P. f. 100. Bond
p. 111.
that all Heyes, Fences, Dikes and (...) next adjoining on either side (...)
any high or common fairing way, (...) from time to time be diked, (...),
repaired and kept low, and (...) Trees and Bushes growing in the ^igh-ways, cut
down by the Owner (...) Owners of the Ground or S^il which shall be enclosed
with the said (...), Fences, Dikes or Hedges afore^^id, whereby the said Ways
may be (...), and the people have more ready Wing. High-vvays sect. 15.
(...) easy passage in the same; here is (...) penalty set down, but the
Super^isors within one month after Default (...) Offense made, done or
committed (...) any person or persons contrary to his present Act, shall
present it to the ^ext Justice of the Peace on pain of (...) shillings, and the
Justice on pain ^f five pounds (Mr. Keble says a The Book of the Statutes at
large printed 1587. f. 444. says 5 ^. Wing. ubi supr^ says also 5 ^.
^undred pounds, but I suppose its a (...)) is to certify the said (...) at
the next general Sessions, and (...) Justices at the Quarter Sessions, ^r any
two of them (whereof one to (...) of the Quorum) are to assess Fines for such
Defaults. But here being mention made how the (...) forty shillings Fine shall
be levied (...) paid, few Presentiments were in (...) Cases made, and so the
Statute wa^ little effect as to these particulars.

To supply the defects of this (...), 18 El. chapter 10 Stat. at large f. 609, 610.
Keb. Stat. f. ^59. sect. 5.
another Act of Parliament made in the eighteenth year of (...) Elizabeth, and
there is it (...) That all and every person and (...) that shall not repair,
ditch or (...) any Heyes, Fences, Ditches or (...) adjoining to any Highway or
(...) By 5 Eliz. chapter 13. they are to cut down the Trees and Bushes, but by
this Act, if they be but kept lovv, it seems is sufficient.
Fairing-way, or shall not (...) down or keep low all Trees and (...) growing
in or next adjoining to (...) of the said Ways, according to (...) true intent
of 5 Eliz. chap. 13. (...) Wing. High-vvays sect. 20, 22.
every Offense therein committed, (...) forfeit and lose for every (...) ten
shillings, to be levied in (...) Parish by the Surveyors of the (...) ways
within that Parish for the (...) being; by distress, and sale of (...) in
manner and form as Fines (...) Amerciaments in Leets have been (...) and the
Money to be employed (...) the Highway where the Offense (...) committed; and
in default of (...) Surveyors not levying and (...) same within one year after
the (...) committed, then to be levied (...) aforesaid by the Constables or
^^urchwardens of the Town or Parish (...) the work ought to be done, the
Highway as aforesaid; and (...) he or they so levying any of the (...)
Penalties or Forfeitures shall make (...) yield such account as is appointed
the Statutes of 5 Eliz. chap. 13. 2 and 3 Ph. and M. or either of (...).

It is enacted by the Statute of 3 and 4 W. and M. chapter 12.
and 4 of their present Majesty's (...), King William and Queen (...), That no
Tree, Bush or Shrub (...) be permitted to stand or grow in (...) Highway not
full twenty Foot Qu. if the Highvvay be not above 20 Foot broad, whether the
Trees, etc. need be cut down or no by the words of this.
(...), but the same shall be cut down, (...) up and carried away by the ^wner
or Owners of the Land or (...) where the same grows, within (...) days after
notice given to him or (...) by the Surveyors of the High^ays, Quare how the
distr^ss shall be taken and penalty levied, for here is power given to
Justices to make a Warrant, but no Officer named to execute it, as is usually
done in such Cases in other Statutes.
or any of them, on pain of (...) shillings for every neglect, to be (...) on
his or their Goods and (...) by distress and sale of the (...) by Warrant under
the Hand and (...) of two or more Justices of the (...) of the same Division,
or in default thereof, any neighboring (...) stices of the Peace for the said
(...) which Warrant the said Justices are make upon information upon Oath any
one credible Witness, one (...) to the Informer, and the other (...) toward
the Repairs of the (...) of the said Parish, rendering the (...) plus, if any
be, to the parties (...), the Charges of distress and sale (...) first deducted.

And the Possessors of Land (...) 3 and 4 W. and M. chap. 12. If the way be
above 20 Foot broad.
adjoining to the Highways (...) they are not twenty Foot broad, (...) from
time to time, and at all (...) Qu. if the Hedges must be plasht, etc. for the
Intention of the Parliament is, That People and Carriages in such narrovv vvays
might have free passage, and the Sun shine into them to dry them; but if they
be above 20 Foot broad it seems by these words as if there were no need of
such plashing and pruning.
keep their Hedges plasht, cut or (...), so as no Tree, Bush or Shrub (...)
grow or stand in any such (...) nor any Bough or Branch (...) the same or any
part thereof, but (...) Hedges must be kept cut and (...) right up from the
Roots, so that (...) may not spread and hang into (...) Highway, so that there
may be clear and free passage for all sorts Travelers and Carriages, and that
(...) Sun may freely shine into the said (...) to dry and amend the same; for
(...) some narrow Ways the Trees (...) Hedges over-hang them so much, (...)
neither Sun nor Wind can come (...) them, and so they are always bad, (...)
besides, People who are Strangers (...) travel there after it is dark, are
(...) danger of being knocked off their horses, or of scratching their Faces, or
tearing their Clothes, or some other mischief.

Every Supervisor or Supervisors 5 El. chapter 13 Stat. at large f. 443, 444,
Poult. Highways 86. Keb. St. f. 802. sect. 6. Dalt. J. P. f. 103. Bond. p.
112. Wing. Highways sect. 21 and 12.
within the Parish or Limits where they (...) Supervisors, have power and
authority by virtue of the Statute 5 El. (...) turn any Watercourse or Spring
of Water, being in the Highways, (...) any Ditch or Ditches of the several
(...) or Soil of any person or (...) whatsoever, next adjoining to (...) said
Ways, in such manner and (...) as they think fit and convenient. (...) all such
as occupy any Lands (...) 18 El. chapter 10. St. at large f. 609, 610. Poult. ibid.
15. Keb. ibid. f. 859. sect. 6. Wing. ibid. sect. 2^.
to the Ground that joins (...) the Highway, in which any (...) or scouring
should or ought to (...) are as often as need requires to (...) and scower the
said Ground, so (...) the Water conveyed from the (...) over the Ground next
(...), may have passage over the (...) Ground so next adjoining to it, (...)
pain to forfeit for every Rod (...) pence for every time the same not ditched
and scowred, to be levied by the Surveyors, or in the default by the Constables
or Chu^^ wardens, and to be disposed of is showed before in this Chap^^^ And no
person or persons have 18 El. chapter 10. St. at large ubi supra. Poult. Highways
16. Keb. ubi supra sect. 7. Lamb p. 475 Wing. High ways sect. 21.
any Ground by Lease or otherwise ^^joyning to any Highway or comm^^
Fairing-way leading to any Ma^^ Town, shall cast and scour (...) Ditch, and
throw or lay the (...) thereof in the Highway, and suffe^ to lie there by the
space of six mo^^ to the annoyance of the said H^^^^way or common Fairing-way,
(...) That is, by the Surveyors, or in their default the Constables
Churchwardens, see before in this Chapter.
pain to forfeit for every Load two pence, to be levied and disposed o^ (...)
the same manner as aforesaid. (...) where any Soil has been cast into Highway
heretofore, that there (...) Bank between the said Way and (...) Ditch, the
Surveyors are to (...) Sluices or other Devices by their ^^^cretions, to convey
the Water out (...) the said Way into the Ditch. (...) 3 and 4 W. and M. chapter 12.
where the Ditches and Drains alre^^^ made are not sufficient to carry off
Water that lies upon the Highway Before the making of this Stat. 3 and 4 W.
and M. they had no such power of making Drains in Men's Grounds.
the Surveyors may make new Ditch^^ and Drains in and through the La^^ next
adjoining to the said High-wa^ and keep them scoured, cleansed (...) open, and
come upon any of the ^^d Lands which their Workmen for doing.

It is enacted by the Statute 3 and 4 3 and 4 W. and M* chapter 12.
(...) their present Majesty's Reigns, King ^illiam and Queen Mary, That the
^^rveyors of the Highways shall and ^^e required by the said Act to make ^^ry
Cart-way leading to any Market^own, eight Foot wide at the least, ^^d as near
as may be, even and level; ^^e is no penalty set down in case of ^ler in the
Surveyors, but I suppose ^^t will come within the words of other Clause in this
Act, where it said, That if any Surveyor of the ^^gh-ways after his acceptance
of his ^^fice, shall neglect his Duty in any ^^ing required of him by this Act,
(...) shall forfeit for every such Offense ^^ly shillings, to be levied and
dis^sed of as the Act directs, and how ^at is see before in this Chapter. ^t
quaere how the Surveyors shall (...) ^uch a Way eight Foot wide, if (...)
Owners or Possessors of Lands ad^ning to the narrow Ways will not ^^fer it, for
here is no provision made (...) such a Case, and the Surveyors can^^t ^nlarge
the Highway by laying any part of another Man's Land to without his consent.

By the Statute of 3 and 4 of t^^ 3 and 4 W. and M. (...). 12.
present Majesty's Reigns, King W^^liam and Queen Mary, it is also (...) acted,
That no Horse Cawsey, Cawsey for Horses traveling upon, (...) in any public
Highway, be less under three Foot in breadth. (...) if defaults herein are to
be prese^^ at the Justices special Sessions, where else, and how defaults he^
are to be punished, for here is (...) penalty set down by the Act of ^^^liament.

CHAP. VI. What Stones and Rubbish the S^^visors may take for the am^^^ment of
the Highways, and in (...) places and how they may dig^^ Sand, Gravel, etc. And
when they (...) necessitated to provide such M^^rials at their Charge, how they
to be reinbursed.
THE Supervisors of the H^^^ways 5 El. chapter 13. St. at large f. 443, 444. Poult.
Highways 5.
may without leave of Owner or Owners take and (...) away so much of the
Rubbish and Keb. St. f. 802* sect. 3, 4. Dalt. J. P. f. 102. Wing. Highvvays,
sect. 12.
^mallest broken Stones of any Quarry ^r Quarries already dug, and lying
^ithin the Parish or Limits where ^hey are Supervisors, as they shall ^hink
necessary for the amendment of their Highways; but they are not ^^ dig for any
without leave of the ^wners: And if there be no such Quarry or Quarries, or
Rubbish to be ^und in any such Quarry or Quarries ^ithin their said Parish or
Limits; ^^en they may dig or cause to be dig^ed in any Man's several Ground
with^^ their Parish and Limits, and nigh If there be a River not far from a
Highway where there is Gravel, etc. to be had, and it cannot be gotten
without going through a Man's Close adjoining to the High-vvay, though the
Surveyors may dig in that Ground, not being Meadovv, etc. yet qu. whether they
may justify to go over the same to the River to fetch Gravel without the
Owners License; it seems by the words of the Statute as if the^ could not.
^^joyning to the Highway, for Gra^^l Land or Cinders, where they are (...) be
found, and take and carry away (...) much as by their Discretions they (...)
all think meet and convenient to be ^^ployed in the said Highways; but ^^ey
are not to dig in any House, ^arden, Orchard nor Meadow of any ^an, nor to dig
any more Pits but ^^e, and the same Pit or Hole shall ^^t be in breadth or
length above ten ^^rds over at the most, which Pit ^^ey are to cause to be
filled up with^^ a month after with Earth, at the ^^osts and Charges of the
Parishioners, ^^on pain to forfeit five marks to be recovered by Action of
Debt, as other like Cases of Debt has been customed. The Supervisors may ^
Supervisors may gather Stones lying upon any Man's Lands.
gather or cause to be gathered Sto^^ lying upon any Man's Lands or Grou^^
within the Parish, and meet to used for such service and purpose, ^ carry away
so much as they think ^^cessary to be employed in the am^^^ment of the
Highways.

There is no Exception of La^ No exception of Lands as to gathering of Stones.
mentioned in the Act, as to the ^^thering of Stones, so that I presu^ the
Supervisors may gather Stones a Man's Meadow-ground, but the they ought in
Conscience to do it such a time of the Year, as Meadow may not be spoiled
thereb^ and when the Supervisors dig for ^^vel, etc. it must be done in Gro^^
nigh adjoining to the Highway: ^ quaere how far this shall extend, ^^ whether
they may dig in a Ma^^ Ground lying two or three Clo^ from the Highway without
his lea^ and making him satisfaction for ^ damage; but I conceive if a ^^ have
a Close that adjoyns upon ^^ Highway, which has fourscore or hundred Acres in
it, that all this Cl^^ shall be said nigh adjoining to ^ ^igh-way, and that the
Surveyors ^ay dig for Gravel, etc. in any part the Close where its likely to be
^^und, without being Trespassers to ^^e Owner or Occupier of the said ^lose.

When Surveyors of the Highways 3 and 4 W. and M. chapter 12.
^ave been forced to lay out their own ^onies for buying Gravel, Sand, Stones,
^id other Materials for the amend^ent of their Highways, in such ^arishes and
Townships where they had ^^one within themselves, and no pro^ision by Law, how
they should be re^^bursed their Moneys they have so ^^id out; It is now enacted
by the ^tatute 3 and 4 of their Majesty's ^eigns King William and Queen Mary,
that upon notice given by such Sur^eyors How Surveyors are to be re-imbursed
the Moneys they lay out.
to the Justices of the Peace at their special Sessions, and Oath made ^f what
Sum or Sums of Money are ^xpended and laid out upon amend^ng and repairing the
said Highways, ^he Justices or any two of them at Rate by whom and how to be
made.
their special Sessions by Warrant un^er their Hands and Seals may cause ^n
equal Rate to be made for the re^mbursing the said Surveyor or Surveyors, the
Moneys by him or them said out as aforesaid, upon all the Inhabitants of such
Parish or Townships where such Moneys are so expended* according to the Rules
and Methods prescribed in the Act for the relief of the Poor, made in the three
and fortieth Year of Queen Elizabeth, (which ^^ Bliz. chapter 2.
Act directs the Taxation to be upon every Inhabitant, Parson, Vicar and other,
and of every Occupier of Lands, Houses, Tithes impropriate, propriations of
Tithes, Colomnies, or saleable Underwoods in the said Parish) which Rate being
allowed by the said Justices in their special Sessions, shall be collected and
gathered by the said Surveyor or Surveyors of the Highways: and if any person
or Persons refuse to Surveyors to distrain for the rate and sell the distress.
pay the Moneys so assessed on him or them, that then the same shall be levied
by the said Surveyors by distress and sale of the Goods and Chattels of the
persons so refusing, rendering to the party the overplus, reasonable Charges for
making the said distress first to be deducted.

CHAP. VII. How, when, where, and before whom, Presentiments upon the Statutes
for Highways are to be made, and to whom, and within what time, and before
whom account is to be made by Officers for Moneys received by virtue of any of
the said Statutes.
Presentiments for Defaults in not 2 and 3 P. and M. chapter 8. Stat. at large f.
289, 290. Poult. Highways 9, 10, Keb. St. f 741. sect. 2, 4. Lamb p. 475.
Dalt. J. P. f. 103. Bond Guide for Just. J. p. 112. Wing. Highways, sect. 8, 9.
coming to the public or common days-works for amendment of the Highways, by
the Statute 2 and 3 P. and M. may be in the Leet or at the Sessions; and the
Steward of the Leet or any two Justices at the Quarter Sessions (whereof one to
be of the Quorum) may set Fines at discretion; if it be in the Leet, then the
Steward within six Weeks after Michaelmas is to deliver indented Estreats of
the Fines under his Hand and Seal, one to the Bailiff or High-Constable of the
Hundred, Rape, etc. And the other to the Constables and Churchwardens of the
Parish where the default is made; and if it be in the Sessions, the Clerk of
the Peace is to do the like, and the Bailiff or High-Constable are to levy Wing
Highways sect. 10.
by distress the Fines mentioned in the Estreats, and where no distress is to
be found, or denial of payment for twenty days after demand, then the parties
are to forfeit double so much, and the Bailiff or High-Constable are Wing. ibid
sect. 11
yearly betwixt the first of March and last of April to give account to the
Churchwardens of the Parish where Offenses shall be committed, on pain of forty
shillings, and if they refuse to give account and pay all the Moneys b^ them
received, save eight pence in the pound for their own Fee, and twelve pence in
the pound for the Steward o^ Clerk of the Peace Fees that make the Estreats,
then the Churchwardens may call them before two or more Justices of the Peace
(one to be of the Quor.) who have power to commit them till payment, and the
Money is to be bestowed on the repair of the Highways of the Parish where the
Offense was committed, and the succeeding Churchwardens may in like manner call
their 5 El. chapter 13. and 22 Car. 2. chapter 12. directs the same to be done at the
same time, Keb. St. f. 1396. sect. 12. Crom. 131. Dalt.. J. P. f. 99. Poult. J.
P. 69 Bond. P. 110. Comp. J. P. 161. Lambert P. 305. Wing. Highways sect. 15,
16, 17.
Predecessors to account.

Surveyors of the Highways by the Statute 5 Eliz. are to present Default and
Offenses to the next Justice of the Peace within a month after they are
committed, on pain of forty shillings, and the Justices on pain of five pounds
is to certify the same Presentment at their next general Sessions; and by the
same Statute every Justice of the Peace may of his own knowledge in open
Sessions make presentment of any Highway not sufficiently repaired, or of any
other Default or Offense committed in the said County within the Limits of his
Commission contrary to this Act, or the 2 and 3 P. and M. which presentment
shall be of the same force as if it had been presented and found by the Oath of
twelve Men: And the Justices or any two of them (one to be of the Quorum) may
at their general Sessions assess such Fines upon presentiments as they think
fit, saving to the persons so presented, their lawful Traverse to the same, as
they might have upon an Indictment of Trespass or Forceable Entry; and the
Fines upon such Presentiments, to be estreated by the Clerk of the Peace, and
levied and disposed of in manner and form aforesaid.

The Fines imposed and set on the When Fines set on a Parish for not repairing
their Highways are levied on some particular Inhabitants, how they shall be
reimbursed.
presentment of a Justice of the Peace; and other Fines and Issues for not
repairing of Highways, being oftentimes returned into the Court of Exchequer,
or other Courts, and levied upon some particular Inhabitants, an^ no provision
being made for making a Rate to reimburse them; it is enacted therefore by the
Statute 3 and 4 3 and 4 W. and M. chapter 12.
of their Majesty's Reigns, King William and Queen Mary, That no Fine, Issue,
Penalty or Forfeiture shall for the future be returned into any of the Qu. how
it shall be levied, and by whom, if by the chief Constable or Bailiff of the
Hundred upon an Estreat made by the Clerk of the Peace as is directed by the
Statute 2 and 3 P. and M. and 5 El. or how else, for here is no mention made by
this Stat.
said Courts, but shall be levied and paid into the Hands of the Surveyors of
such Parish or Place to be applied toward the repair of such Highway; and if
any Fine, Penalty or Forfeiture imposed on any Parish or Place for not
repairing the Highways, be hereafter levied on any one or more of the
Inhabitants there, then such Inhabitant or Inhabitants may make their complaint
to the Justices of the Peace at their special Sessions, and they or any two of
them by Warrant under their Hands and Seals may cause a Rate to be made
according to the form and manner (as is set down in the last Section of the
sixth Chapter for the reimbursing Surveyors) for reimbursing such Inhabitant or
Inhabitants the Moneys levied on him or them, which Rate so made and confirmed
by two Justices as aforesaid, shall be collected and levied by the Surveyor or
Surveyors of the Highways of such Parish or Place so presented or indicted;
and the Surveyor or Surveyors within a month next after the making and
confirming the Rate, must pay unto the Inhabitant or Inhabitants, such Money so
levied on him or them as aforesaid.

Justices of Assize and Oyer and 18 El. chapter 10. St. at large f. 610. Pult. J.
P. 69. Keb. St. f. 860. sect. 9. Wing. Highways sect. 23*
Terminer and Justices of the Peace in the Sessions and Stewards of Leets and
Law-days, may hear and determine Offenses against the Statute 18 Eliz. and the
Surveyors who are to levy the Forfeitures on that Statute, and the Constables
or Churchwardens (who in default of the Surveyors are to levy the same) are to
yield such account appointed in 2 and 3 P. and M. chap. 8. and 5 El. chap. 13.

All defects of Repairs of Cawseys, 22 Car. 2. chapter 12. Keb. St. f. 1394. sect.
4. Wing. ibid. sect. 33.
Pavements, Highways or Bridges shall be presented in the County only where
such Cawseys, Pavements, Highways or Bridges do lie, and not elsewhere, and
that no such Presentment or Indictment shall be removed by Certiorari, or
otherwise, out of the said County, till such Indictment or Presentment be
traversed, and Judgment thereupon given.

And no Presentment, Indictmen^ 3 and 4 W. and M. chapter 12.
or Order made by virtue of the Statu^^ 3 and 4 of their Majesty's Reigns, King
William and Queen Mary, is to b^ removed by Certiorari out of the County into
any other Court for any Matters concerning Highways, Cawseys, Pavements and
Bridges mentioned in the said Act, but are to be determined in the County where
the same do li^, and not elsewhere.

And now by the Statute also of the 3 and 4 W. and M. chapter 12.
said 3 and 4 Years of their said Majesty's Reigns, King William and Queen
Mary, it is enacted, That the Justices of the Peace of every County i^ their
respective Divisions shall hold ^ special Sessions once every four months,
Special Sessions to be held every four months.
and summon all the Surveyors of the Highways within that Division to come
before them, and then shall give them charge to do their Duty, and declare to
them what they are obliged to do by virtue of that Statute, o^ any former Act,
and then the Surveyors The Surveyors to present upon Oath.
are to make a presentment to the Justices upon Oath of the state and condition
of the Highways within their respective Parishes, Towns, Villages, Hamlets,
Precincts or Tythings, for which they are Surveyors, and what Offenses or
Neglects any are guilty of contrary to the meaning of the Statutes made
concerning Highways; and before they go out of their Surveyors to account upon
Oath.
Office, they must at some special Sessions of the said Justices give an
account upon Oath of all Money come to their Hands which ought to be employed in
amending of the Highways, and how the same is disposed of, and if any Money be
remaining in any Surveyors Hands, he shall deliver the same to those that shall
succeed him for the Year ensuing in the same Office for that Place, and in case
of failure to forfeit double the value of what shall be judged to be in his
Hands by the said Justices, to be levied and disposed of in the same manner as
the Statute directs in case where one refuses to be Surveyor after he is
served with a Warrant of Notice, or neglects the Office, for which see before,
Chap. 2. And now generally all Presentiments about Highways, and Offenses
concerning the same, are to be made upon Oath by the Surveyors before the
Justices of Peace at their special Sessions held for that purpose.

CHAP. VIII. How Lands given for the maintenan^^ of Cawseys, Highways,
Pav^ments and Bridges are to he le^ and how Assessments are to be made and
gathered for repairing Highways, and of such as make resistance and oppose
such persons a are employed in the Execution of the Statutes made for amendment
of Highways, and also concerning Suits that shall be brought about the same.
TRustees of Lands given for maintenance 22 Car. 2. chapter 12. Keb. Stat. at large
printed 1684. f. 1394. sect. 2. Wingate Highways, sect. 31.
of Cawseys, Pavements, Highways and Bridges, shall let them to farm at the
most improved yearly Rent without Fine; and the Justices of Peace in their open
Sessions, may order the Improvement and Employment thereof (other than of such
Lands as have been given to the uses aforesaid to any College or Hall in
either of the Universities that have Visitors of their own) according to the
Will of the Donor, if they find that the Persons entrusted have been negligent,
or faulty in the performance of their Trust.

Where the Justices of the Peace of 3 and 4 W. and M* chapter 12.
any County, City, Borough or other Place, or the major-part of them at their
general or quarter Sessions, shall be fully satisfied that the common
Highways, Cawseys, Bridges, Streets ^^ Pavements within their respective
Jurisdictions within any Parish, Township, Hamlet or other place there, cannot
without the help of the Statute of 3 and 4 of their Majesty's Reigns, King
William and Queen Mary, be sufficiently amended, repaired, paved, ^leansed and
supported, then in all Assessments when and how to be made.
such Cases one or more Assessment or Assessments upon all and every the
^nhabitants, Owners and Occupiers of ^ands, Houses, Tenements and
Here^^taments* or any personal Estate usu^lly ratable to the Poor, within any
^^ch Parish, Township, Hamlet or ^ther place, may be made, levied, col^^cted
and allowed by such person and ^ersons, and in such manner as the ^^id Justices
by their Order at such ^essions shall direct and appoint in ^^at behalf, and
the Money thereby ^^ised shall be employed and accounted ^^ according to the
Orders and Dictions of the said Justices, for and ^^wards the amending and
repairing, paving, cleansing and supporting (...) Highways. Cawseys, Streets,
(...) and Bridges, from time to time Quare who must make the distress, for the
Statute names no Officer, but this Clause I conceive has reference to the
preceding Clause and it must be done by such person or persons as ^oe Justic^s
shall order at their general quarter Sessions.
as need shall require, and the said (...) shall be levied by distress (...)
sale of the Goods of every Person (...) assessed (not paving the same within
(...) days after demand) rendering the (...) plus to the Owner or Owners ((...)
Charges of making and selling (...) distress, being first deducted) and (...)
Assessment in any one Year is not (...) exceed six pence in the pound of (...)
yearly value of Lands, Houses, (...) and Hereditaments, nor abo^^ six pence for
every twenty pounds (...) personal Estate; and such Order (...) the greater
number of the Justices (...) Peace shall make at their general qu^^ter Sessions
concerning Persons (...) shall be conclusive and bind (...) said Parties.

If any person or persons shall (...) 22 Car 2. chapter 12. Keb Stat. f. 1394.
sect. 2 Wingate Highway, sect. 32
or make forceable opposition (...) any person or persons employed in (...) due
Execution of the Acts of (...) 2 and 3 P. and M. chapter 8. 5 El. chapter 13. 18 El.
chapter 10.
of 2 and 3 P. and M. and (...) and 18 Eliz. or 22 Car. 2. made (...) the
amendment of Highways, (...) shall make any rescue of any (...) or Goods
distrained by virtue (...) of, every person being convicted thereof by the Oath
of one credible Witness before any Justice of the Peace of the place or
division, or by the view of the Justice himself, shall for every such Offense
forfeit forty shillings, and for non-payment within seven days after notice of
Conviction, any Justice of the Peace residing near the place where such
opposition or rescue shall be made, may commit the Offender to the Common Gaol
of the County where such Offense was committed, there to remain till payment of
the Forfeiture be made to the Surveyors of the Highways for the Parish where
the Offense was committed, to be employed for the amendment of the Highways of
the same Parish.

Actions brought against any Person 22 Car. 2. chapter 12. Keb Stat. at large
printed 1684. f. 1394. sect. 3. Wingate High-vvays, sect. 33.
or persons for any thing done by means of the Act of 22 Car. 2. for repairing
of the Highways, shall be said in the proper County where the Fact was done
and not elsewhere, and the Defendants may plead the general Issue, and give the
special Mat^er in Evidence; and if there be a Verdict for the Defendant, or the
Plaintiff be nonsuited, or discontinue ^is Action, the Defendant shall recover
his treble Costs sustained by reason of such Action or Suit.

And if any Action or Suit shall b^ 3 and 4 W. and M. chap. 12.
commenced or prosecuted against an^ person or persons, authorized to (...) the
Act (of 3 and 4 of their M^jesties Reigns, King William an^ Queen Mary, made
for repairing Highways) in Execution, the Defendan^ may plead the general
Issue, and (...) the special Matter in Evidence, and (...) the Plaintiff be
nonsuited, or for bear farther prosecution, or discontinue his Action, or a
Verdict (...) against him or her, the Defenda^^ or Defendants shall recover
doubl^ Costs for which he and they sh^^ have the like Remedy, as in Case where
Costs by Law are given to Defendants.

CHAP. IX. The Surveyors Duty about traveling Wagons, Wains, Carts or
Carriages, with an account when and by whom, and where the Prices for Goods
carried by Waggoners, and other Carriers are to be assessed and rated, and the
Penalty for taking above such Rates.
NO traveling Wagon, Wain, 22 Car. 2. chapter 12. Keb. Stat. at large printed
1684. f. 1395. sect. 6, 7. Dalt. J P. f. 106. Wing. Highways, sect. 35.
Cart or Carriage wherein any Burdens, Goods or Wares are or shall be carried
(other than such Carts and Carriages as are employed about Husbandry, and
manuring of Lands, and in the carrying of Hay, Straw, Corn unthresht, Coal,
Chalk, Timber for Shipping, Materials for Building, Stones of all sorts, or
such Ammunition or Artillery which shall be for their Majesty's Service) shall
at any one time travel, or be drawn, or go in any common or public Highway or
Road, with above five Horse-Beasts at length, and if any shall draw with a
greater number of Horses or Oxen, they shall all draw in Pairs, that is to say,
two a Breast for such numbers as they shall use, except one Horse; and every
Owner of any Wagon, Cart, Pen^lty for offending, Wing. Highways, sect. 36.
Carriage, Horse, Beasts or Oxen offending therein, shall for every Offense
forfeit forty shillings, one third part to the Surveyors of the Highways of
the Town, Village or Hamlet where the Offenses shall be committed, one other
Penalty how to be disposed.
third part to the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish where the Offenses shall
be committed, for the use of the Poor of the said Parish, and the other third
part to him that shall discover the same, to be imposed on such Offender by any
Justice of the Peace of the Place or Division where such Offense is committed,
upon the Conviction of the Offender, by the Oath of one credible Witness, or
upon the Justices own view, and to be (...) Penalty ^y whom to be levied.
by the High-Constable or other Officer of such Place or Division by Warrant
under the Hand and Seal of such Justice of the Peace, upon the Goods and
Chattels of such person so offending (rendering the overplus to the Owner
thereof,) all necessary Charge in levying the same being first deducted.

And every Surveyor of the Highways 22 Car. 2. chapter 12. Keb Stat. at large
printed 1684. f. 1394. sect. 1. Wingate Highways, sect. 30.
wilfully suffering any Wagon ^r Carts to pass through his respective ^imits,
with any more Horses, or ^ther Cattle, or in other manner than ^foresaid, upon
complaint thereof made ^o any Justice of the Peace of the ^lace or Division
where such neglect (...), and conviction of the Party, by the Oath of one
credible Witness, or upon ^he view of the Justice himself, shall ^ncur such
Fine as the same Justice shall think fit to impose, not exceeding forty
shillings, to be levied by the High-Constable or other Officers, as aforesaid;
and to be employed for the amending the Highways of the Parish or Place, where
such neglect shall be found, as the said Justice or Justices shall appoint for
the doing thereof.

To prevent the Abuse (occasioned 3 and 4 W. and M. chapter 12.
by the Combination of Waggoners and other Carriers) in raising the Prices of
Carriage of Goods in many Places; it is enacted by the Statute of 3 and 4 of
their Majesty's Reigns, King William and Queen Mary, That the Justices Prices
of Land-Carriage for Goods to be set by the Justices of Peace.
of the Peace of every County, and other Place, within the Realm of England, or
Dominon of Wales, at their respective Quarter or General-Sessions after
Easter Day yearly, a^^ to assess and rate the Prices of a^ Land-Carriage
whatsoever of Good^ to be brought into any place o^ places within their
respective Limit^ and Jurisdictions, by any common Waggoner or Carrier; and to
certif^^ the said Rates to the several Mayo^^ and other chief Officers of each
respective Market Town within their said Limits and Jurisdictions to be hung up
in some public place in every such Market Town, that People may resort to it
for their Information; and no common Waggoner or Carrier is to take above such
Prices so set, upon pain to forfeit for every Offense five pounds, to be levied
by distress and Qu. who shall levy by distress, for no Officer is named.
sale of his and their Goods by Warrant of any two Justices of the Peace, where
such Waggoner or Carrier shall reside, rendering the overplus of the value of
the Goods so distrained to the Owner or Owners thereof (the necessary Charges
of making and selling such distress, being first deducted) and the Forfeiture
to the use of the Party grieved.

CHAP. X. Of Nusances in public and private Highways, how removeable and
punishable, and where an Action upon the Case lies for a Nuisance, and where not.
Nuisance comes from the French Blounts Law Diction^y verb. Nuisance.
word Nuire (id est) Nocere to hurt or annoy.

By the Statute of 3 and 4 of King 3 and 4 W. and M. chapter 12.
William and Queen Mary, it is enacted, That no person or persons whatever Qu.
if the Highway be above 20 Foot broad, whether the laying such things in the
way be punishable by this Statute.
shall lay in any Highway, not being twenty Foot broad, any Stone, Timber,
Straw, Dung, or other Matter, whereby the same shall be any ways obstructed or
annoyed, on pain to forfeit for every such Offense the Sum of five shillings,
to be levied on Qu. who shall levy for no Officer is named by the Act
his or their Goods and Chattels by distress and sale of them, by Warrant under
the Hand and Seal of two or more Justices of the Peace of the same Division, or
in default thereof any neighboring Justices of the Peace for the said County,
upon information of any one credible Witness, upon Oath, the one moiety of
which said Forfeiture shall be to the Informer and the other moiety for and
toward the Repairs of the Highways of the same Parish, rendering the overplus
if any be, to the party or parties distrained If the Offender lives in one
Parish and the Offense is committed in another, qu. which Parish shall have the
moiety for repairs.
upon; the Charges of the distress and sale being first deducted* And if any
Timber, Stone, Ha^* Straw, Stubble, or other Matter for making of Dung, or on
any other pretense whatsoever, shall be laid in such Highway* as aforesaid,
whereby the same shall Not being 20 foot broad.
be any ways obstructed or annoyed the Owners or Possessors of the Land next
adjoining to the same, shall cle^^ the said Way, by removing such things, and
take and dispose of the If the Highway be 20 foot broad, qu. whether the
Owners or Possessors of the Lands may then remove and dispose of such
Annoyances, for it seems by the words of the Statute as if they could not.
same to his and their own use, and i^ such Owner or Occupier neglect to remove
such Nusances, or to cleanse (...) scour their Ditches, Gutters and Drains
adjoining to the said Highways, (...) to cause the Earth taken out thereon to
be carried away, and lay sufficient Trunks, Tunnels or Bridges where Earth
taken out of Ditches, Gutters and Drains to be carried away.
any Cart-ways are into the sai^ Grounds, for the space of ten day^ after
notice given to him, her or them by the Surveyors, for every such Offense they
shall forfeit five shillings to be levied and disposed of in manne^ aforesaid.

For a common Nuisance in a com^on 2 E. 4. f. 9. a. pl. 21. 5 E. 4. f. 2 b. pl.
24. 27 H. 8. f. 27. a. pl. 10. Tr. 41 El. B. R. Fineux and Hovedens Case, Cro.
El. f. 664. pl. 15. Co. Rep. 5. lib. f. 73. a. and 9 lib. f. 113. a. Co. Lit.
f. 56. a. Rolls Cases 1 p. f. 88. Kitch. Court Leet printed 1581 p. 49. a. 50.
a.
Highway, as where a Ditch is ^ade, or Pale erected cross a Way, or its are
dug therein, so that a Man cannot pass, or dead Horses, Beasts, ^wine, Dogs,
or other Carrion or ^nnoyances are laid and thrown in the ^igh-way, to the
great disturbance of ^^e People passing that way, yet for ^hese common
Nusances, a Man shall ^ot have an Action upon the Case, and this the Law has
provided, for ^voiding the multiplicity of Suits; ^or if one Man might have an
Action ^ll might have the like, and then one Co. Rep. 4 lib. 43. a.
might be punished an hundred times for one Offense; And nemo debet bis ^uniri
pro uno delicto. So the Law for these common Nusances (which ^s commune
Nocumentum, and equal to all their Majesty's Liege People) has provided an apt
Remedy, and that is by presentment in the Leet, Tourn or Sessions, etc. But in
these Vaugh. Rep. f. 335, 341.
Cases if any Man have a particular damage by them, as if he and his Horse fall
into the Ditch or Pits, or his Horse startle at the Carrion, or other Annoyance
thrown into the Street, and throws him, whereby he receives damage or harm, for
this particular damage which is not common to other he shall have an Action
upon the Case.

But if a Man have a particular d^mage Vaugh. Rep. f. 340 The Common Law
epitomized, printed 1679. p. 53.
by a foundrous Way, he is generally without remedy, and the reason is because
a foundrous Way or decayed Way, or the like is commonl^ to be repaired by some
Parish, Township, Vill, Hamlet or County who ar^ not Corporate, and therefore
no Action lies against them, for a particul^^ damage, but their neglects are to
b^ presented, and they punished by Fin^ to the King; but if any particula^
Person, or Body Politic be chargeable with the Repairs, in such Case ^^ may
have an Action against such Person or Body Politic (who ought to repair) for
his damages, because h^ can bring his Action against them but where there is no
person certain against whom to bring his Action, i^ is as if a Man be damaged
by one th^^ cannot be found.

If a private Way be stopped ^^ F. N. B. f. 184. and 407* Kitch. printed 1581.
p. 49. a. 50. a* b. 1 R. 3. f. 1. a. Mich. 8 El. C. B. Leon. Rep. 3 p. f. ^3.
ca. 31.
straightned or other injuries done there to the disturbance of him or them
that have right to pass there, and has a Freehold in the Estate for which he
claims such right, he may in such case have an Assize of Nuisance, Quare ^njuste
obstruxit, vel arctavit, vel ^bstupavit quandam viam, etc. for ^indring or
straightning his way, etc. And if he be no Freeholder that is disturbed thus of
his way, then he may have an Action upon the Case; But Justice Pollard said
there is a di^ersity, 2 H. 4. 11. 22 H. 6. f. 15. a. 14 H. 8. f. 31. b. pl. 8.
Pas. 8 El. Dyer f. 250. b. pl. 88. The Common Law epitomized p. 52.
where the Way is wholly stopped, so that one cannot pass, for there ^n Assize
of Nuisance lies, and where the Way is stopped but in part, so that one may pass
narrowly, for there an Action of the Case lies; so there is a diversity when
the Way is straightned in part, and when wholly stopped, which all the Justices
agreed; but notwithstanding this diversity later Pas. 38 Eliz. B. R* Alston and
Pamphyns Case, Cro. El. f. 466. pl. 22. 21 H. 7. f. 30. a. pl. 5. and Tr. 43
El. in Came. Scaccar. in Cantrel and Church Case, Cro. El. f. 845 pl. 3^. Tr. 11
Jac. 1 B. R. Co^^cote and Tucker, Rolls Cases 1 p. f. 104. L. 30, 35. Mich. 8
Jac. 1. Pollard and Casy, Bol^^r. Rep. 1 part f. 47.
Judgments have over ruled this Opinion, for it has been resolved and ^djudged
upon consideration had of the Books, that the Party may either bring an Assize,
or an Action upon the Case at his Election, whether the Way be wholly stopped,
or but in part; and so an Assize is now very rarely brought, but Actions upon
the Case altogether.

And the reason why an Action lies 1 R. 3. f. 1. ^. Tr. 41 El. B. R. Cro. El.
f. 664. pl. 14. Co. Lit. f. 56* a. Sheppards Actions of the Case, chap. 5.
sect. 5. p. 252.
for a Nuisance in a private Way, and not for a Nuisance in a public Way, is
because that a private Nusan^^ is not inquirable in the Leet or Tour^ and it
was said in the Case betwee^ Westbury and Powel, that it had bee^ adjudged,
That where the Inhabitan^^ of Southwark had by Custom a Watring-place for their
Cattle, which (...) stopped up by Powel, that in (...) Case any of the
Inhabitants of Southwark might have an Action, (...) otherwise they should be
without remedy, because such a Nuisance is (...) presentable in the Leet or
Tourn, (...) note the diversity.

If an Highway be not repaired, (...) 5 E. 4. f. 2. b. pl. 24. Br. Action sur
le Case 93. and Nuisance 29. Kitchen Court Leet, etc. printed 1581. p. 49. a. b.
that I am damaged by myring (...) Horse, I shall not have an Actio^ on the
Case against him that (...) to repair it, for this is an Action popular, and in
this Case no single Person shall have an Action, but it shall be presented in
the Leet or Tourn, etc. and there punished*

If a Man lay Clogs of Wood (...) Adjudged M. 15 Juc. 1. B. R. in Fowier and
Sanders Case, Cro. Jac. f. 446. pl. 25. Rolls Cases 1 p. f. 88. n. 15, 20.
and there in the Highway, and suffe^ them to lie there by the space of two
months or such other time, although a Man with great care, and in the daytime
may pass safely, yet if (...) be riding in the Evening in the Way^ not
perceiving the Clogs, and hi^ Horse stumbles upon them, by which he falls and
throws his Rider, whereby he is wounded or bruised, or otherwise damnified,
here an Action upon the Case lies against him that laid the Clogs in the way,
although it be before a Man's Door in a Town, Gate or Street, and that the
People time out of mind have used to lay Clogs before their Doors in the Town
or Street for their Fuel or Firing, for this is a common Nuisance, and none can
prescribe to a Nuisance.

But if A. being seized of a Waste Pas. ^ Jac. 1. B. R. inter Blyth and Topham
adjudged, Cro. Jac. f. 158. pl. 11. Rolls Cases 1 p. f. 88. n. 30.
adjoining to an Highway, dig a Pit in the Waste, within thirty Foot of the
said Way, and the Mare of B. escapes into the said Waste, and falls into the
Pit and dies, here B. shall not have an Action against A. because the making of
the Pit in the Waste and not in the Highway, was no wrong to B. for it was his
own fault that his Mare escaped into the Waste; but Hill. 12 Jac. 1 B. R. in
Everard and Hopkins Case per Cur. Rolls Cases 1 p. f. 88. n. 35.
it is otherwise if a Pit or Ditch be dug in the Highway, for there an
Action lies if one falls in, or if a Man's Servant falls into such a Ditch and
is lamed so that his Master for a long time does lose his Service, in such Case
the Master may have an Action upon the Case for the loss (...) his Service
against him that dug (...) Ditch.

If a Gate be set and hung cross (...) Pas. 6 Car. 1. B. R. Cro. Car. f. 185,
185. pl. 3. James and Haywards Case, Jones Rep. f. 221, 222, 223. pl. 1.
Highway, where none has been (...) ancient time, though it be fixed and
(...) that it may be opened and shut (...) pleasure, so that their Majesty's
Subjects may pass and repass, yet this (...) a Nus^nce, for it is not so free
(...) easy a passage as if no such Gate had been, for Women and old Men (...)
more troubled with opening of Gat^ than they should be, if there were none; and
though the usual course (...) 33 H. 6. f. 26. Finch Law, Lib. 3. chapter 2.
to redress a Nuisance by Indictment yet every person may remove the Nuisance and
pull it down, and so it was held by Hide, Jones and Whitlock^ Justices, 6 Car.
1. but Judge Cro^^ was of a contrary Opinion, and said* If it were a Nuisance,
there should be no Gates, for there cannot be a Prescription to a Nuisance, and
the multitude of Gates in several Ways, prove that it never was accounted to be
a Nuisance: But to this Jones said, That for ancient Gates in Highways, it
shall be intended they were by License from the King, and upon an Ad quod
dampnum fued out of Chancery, but Crook conceived that could not be for ^
stopping, etc. but notwithstanding is Opinion it was agreed to be a Nu^ance,
and that a Man might justify (...) pull down such a Gate.

If the Owner of the Land stop my Tr. 13 Jac. 1. B. R. Bolds Case, Sheppards
Actions upon the Case, chapter 5. sect. 1. The Common Law Epitom. p. 52.
Way, and lease it to another, who ^oth not open it, but continues the ^usance,
I may in this Case have an ^ction upon the Case against the ^essee: and so if a
Nuisance be erect^d Cro. Jac. f. 201. pl. 10. Sheppards Actions upon the Case,
chapter 5. sect. 1
in my time, and I devise the Land, and it be still continued, then the ^evisee
may have an Action upon the ^ase, for the Continuance is a new ^usance.

If one have a Way over another Mich. 28, 29. Eliz. B R. in Dike and Dunstans
Case, Godbolts Rep 52^ 53. ca. 65.
(...) Ground, and by rooting of Cart^heels, the Way is so dug and ^^owned
that they cannot so well use (...) as formerly; in this Case the party (...)
the Way, cannot justify to fill (...) the Cart-roots, and dig a Trench (...)
let out the Water as it was held in (...) and Dunstans Case; and it being
^emanded what remedy he should have, ^^stice Shute made Answer and said, (...)
he went that Way before in his (...), let him now pluck on his Boots.

CHAP. XI. An Abridgement of the Statute (...) 22 H. 8. chap. 5. about the
(...) of Bridges, with some Exposition and Cases in Law relating ther^ unto.
FOUR Justices of the Peace (b^ 22 H. 8. chapter 5. Keb. St. at large printed 1684.
f. 384, 385. sect. 1, 2, 3, 9. Poult. Abst. of the P^nal St^t. Tit. Just. of
Peace, sect. 70. Lamb. p. 474. Dalt. J P. f 44, 45. Compl. J. p. 45, 46. Bond
p. 54, 55. Wingate Bridges sect. 3.
not under that number) where one to be of the Quorum, in eve^ Shire,
Franchise, City or Boroug^ have power in the general Sessions (...) the Peace*
to enquire, hear and d^termine of all manner of Annoyanc^ of Bridges broken in
the Highways and of the Highways next adjoy^ing to either end of the said
Bridg^ by the space of three Hundred (...) and shall make Process and Pains
upon every Presentment before them for t^^ Reformation of the same, against
su^^ as own to be charged with the R^pairs thereof, as they think (...) for the
speedy amendment thereof. (...) when it cannot be known what Hundred, Co. 2
Inst. f. 70^. Poult. Bridges 1. Wingate Bridges s^ct. 4.
Riding, Wapentake, City, Tow^ or Parish, nor what Person, or (...) Politic
ought to repair a Bridge (...) Way at the end of it, then if the (...) (...)
without a City or Town Corpo^^te, it must be repaired by the Shire (...) Riding
within which it is situate, (...) if it happen to be part in one ^hire, Riding,
City or Town Cor^orate, and part in another, then the ^nhabitants of the
several places shall re^air their several parts that lie within ^^eir Precincts.

And in every Case where it cannot 22 H. 8. chapter 5. Co. ibid. f. 703. Keb. ibid.
sect. 4, 5, 8. Poult. ubi sup^a Bridges 2.
(...) known and proved, what Persons, (...), Tenements or Bodies Politic
(...) or make and repair the same, Wingate Bidges, sect. 5.
(...) four Justices of the Peace (one to (...) of the Quorum) within the
Limits (...) their several Commissions and Au^^orities have power to call
before ^^em the Constables, or two able Men (...) every Town and Parish within
the (...), Riding, City or Town Corpo^^te, and with the assent of the said So
that by th^^ Act the Justices cannot make the Tax without the Constable or two
Inhabitants, no^ they without the Justices, Co. Inst. 2 p. f 704.
^onstables or Inhabitants may make Tax of such a reasonable Sum of (...) upon
every Inhabitant in any (...) City, Town or Parish within the (...) of their
Commissions as they all think fit, and the Names and Every Inhabitant is to be
taxed by himself, and not a gross Sum upon a Constable, etc. Co. ubi supra,
Poult, Bridges 3, 4.
(...) of every particular Person so by (...) taxed, being written in a Roll
(...), the Justices shall appoint two ^^llectors for every Hundred, who
receiving one part of the Roll so (...) dented under the Hands and Seals the
said Justices, by virtue thereof (...) are to collect and receive the (...)
therein mentioned, and to (...) upon such as refuse, and to sell (...)
Distress, and retain and keep all (...) Money taxed, and the residue (if (...)
Distress be better) to deliver to (...) Owner thereof; and the Collectors (...)
to pay the Moneys into the Hands (...) the Surveyors appointed by the (...)
Justices for that purpose, who are (...) see such decayed Bridges repaired
(...) amended, which Collectors and S^^veyors and their Executors and
Ad^^nistrators are to render an Account the said Justices, upon pain of
I^prisonment, Wingate Bridges se^^ 8.
without Bail, till (...) make a true Account, upon which (...) the Justices
are to allow (...) such reasonable Costs and Charges they think convenient; and
the (...) upon presentment of (...) against such Persons as own to chargeable
to the making and (...) of such Bridges, may make (...) Process into every
Shire within (...) Poult. Bridges 5. Wingate Bridges sect. 6.
Realm against such Persons; and Sheriffs and Bailiffs of Liberties (...)
Franchises are to obey the same, (...) pain make such Fine as the said (...)
think fit.

This Act shall not extend to the 22 H. 8. chapter 5 K^b. St. at large printed
1684. f. 385. sect. 6, 7. Poult. Bridges 6. Wing. Bridges, sect. 7.
^iberties of the five Ports or Members ^^ the same, save only that the (...),
Mayors and Bailiffs elected, and (...) of the same Ports and every ^^ them,
have such Power and Au^^ority to enquire, hear and determine (...) manner of
common Annoyances (...) Bridges within the same Ports and ^embers as the
Justices do in their ^hires and Liberties out of the same ^orts by virtue of
this Act.

A Bridge in Latin is called Pons, a Co. 2 Inst. f. 701. in M^rgin, and 700 in
Margin.
(...), Quia tanquam in Aere pendet, (...) my Lord Cook, Because it hangs as
(...) were in the Air; but some derive it (...) Pono, to place or set, Quia ad
(...) ponitur, Because it is set for (...) over: And the said Lord Cook ^aith,
That Pons significat omne quod ^uper Aquas transimus, Every thing ^^at we may
passover the Water upon; and Pontage is derived from Pons, Terms of the Law,
and Blounts Law Dictionary verb. Pontage, Co. Rep. 8. lib. f. 47. ^. 3 E. 3.
Ass. 445. F. N. B. D. 227.
(...) signifies sometimes the Contri^ution that is given for the main^^nance
or re-edifying of Bridges, and ^ometimes the Toll paid for that pur^ose by
those that pass over Bridges: and so it is mentioned in 39 Eliz. chap. 24. And
before the making (...) 27 Ass. pl. 28. 43 Ass. pl. 37. Co. 2* Inst. f. 701.
this Statute 22 H. 8. Presentiments for repair of Bridges might be by (...)
Common Law, before the Justices (...) the Kings Bench, or before Justices (...)
Air, or Commissioners of Oyer an^ Terminer, and in the Tourn or Leet*

Of common Right all the Coun^^^ 10 E. 3. 28. Co. 13 Rep. f. 33. and Co. 2
Inst. f. 700, 701. Pasch. 1^ Jac. 1. Poph. Rep. f. 192 Tr. 2 Car. 1. B. R. Tr.
10 Car. 1. in an Information against the Inhabitants of Middlesex for Longford
Bridge, agreed by the Court Rolls Case 1 p. f. 368. C^om. 186. b. 187.
shall be chargeable to the Reparatio^ of a Bridge (where no other is bou^^ by
the Law to repair it) because it (...) a common Easement for the who^^ County;
And so as to that Point (...) Statute 22 H. 8. chap. 5. was but (...)
affirmance of the Common Law; (...) those who have Lands on the one si^^ of a
Bridge, or on the other, or (...) both sides, are not bound of (...) Right to
repair the same.

But he who has the Toll of (...) 14 E. 3 B^rr 276. ^^. R^p. 13. lib. ^. 33.
Men or Cattle which pass over (...) Bridge or Cawsey ought to repair (...)
same, for he has the Toll to (...) purpose; Et qui sentit (...) s^ntire debet
and onus, Also a (...) may be bound to repair a Bridge, R^tione tenurae
Terrarum sive Teneme^torum, etc. By reason of the (...) ^e^ist. f. 268. ^* N.
B* (...) b. Co. 2 Inst. f. 700.
of his Lands: And if such a Person alien part of these Lands to one Man and
part of them to another, (...) twenty Acres to one, and ten Acres (...)
another, and afterward one of these (...) is presented only, and found liable
(...) the Repairs of a Bridge, and is (...) for the same; in this Case (...)
may have a special Writ de onerando (...) rata portione, to be discharged for
(...) Rate according to his proportion; (...) a particular Man cannot be bound
For the Act of the Ancestor cannot charge the Heir without Profit, 21 E. 4. f.
38. b. Co. 2 Inst f. 700 and 13 Rep. f. 33. 27 Ass pl. 8. Crom* 187 49 E. 3. f.
5. b. ^ ^ E. 4. ^. 38. b. Dalt. J. P. f. 45.
^y Usage and Prescription, viz. That (...) and all his Ancestors have rep^ired
^he Bridge, if it be not in respect of ^he Tenure of his Land, taking of Toll,
or other Profits as aforesaid. But (...) Body Politic or Corporate, Spiritual
or Temporal, who are local, and have a perpetual succession, may be charged by
Usage and Prescription, for they may bind the Successors: And if a Bishop,
Prior, Abbot, etc. And 10 E. 3. f. 28, 29. 27 Ass. pl. 8. Co. ^ Inst. f. 700.
Co. 1^ lib. Rep. f. 33.
their Predecessors, time out of mind, have repaired a Bridge out of Alms or
Charity, or Good Will, this shall bind them to repair it; but if it has been
but for once or twice within Memory, it binds not, and yet it is Evidence
against them till they prove the contrary.

If a Man make a Bridge for the 8 H. 7. f. 5. b. Co. 2 Inst. f. 701.
good of all their Majesty's Subjects, he is not bound to repair it by the
Common Law; but either Ratio^^ Tenurae or Praescriptionis; and no^^ can be
compelled to make new Bridge where never any were before, but (...) Act of
Parliament. But if a Man (...) ^olls Ca. 1 p. 368.
a Mill for his own singular Profit, an^ make a new Cut for the Water (...)
come to it, and make a new Bridg^ over it, and the People use to go over (...)
as over a common Bridge; this Bridg^ ought to be repaired by him whi^^ has the
Mill, and not the County because he built it for his own Benefit 8 E. 3. B. R.
Adjudged for (...) Bridge and Channel-Bridge against (...) Prior of Stratford,
and it is now repaired by the City of London whi^^ has the Mill.

This Act of 22 H. 8. extends (...) 22 H. 8. chapter 5 Co. 2 Inst. f. 701.
to common Bridges in the Kings Highways, which are broken to the damag^ of
their Majesty's Liege People, and (...) to private Bridges to Mills, or the
like and therefore the Indictment upon (...) Statute says, Quod pons publicus
(...) communis situs in alta Regia Via super flumen seu cursum Aquae, etc.
(...) common public Bridge set in (...) Kings Highway over a River or Water
sewer, etc. And for the better Warrant Co. ibid. f. 703.
of the Justices when it cannot b^ proved who own to repair such Bridges, (...)
has been gravely advised (says my Lord Cook) That the Justices make inquiry
by the Grand Inquest of the Body of the County, at the General
Quarter Sessions, who ought to repair the Bridges, and if that cannot appear
upon any proof made, then to find that the Bridge is in decay, etc. And to
conclude their Presentment, How the (...) Jury are to conclude their
Presentiments for decayed Bridges, Co. ibid. f. 703.
Et ulterius Juratores praedicti praesentant quod prorsus nescitur quae
personae quae Terrae sive Tenementa, aut Corpora Politica eundem pontem, aut
aliquam inde parcellam ex Jure aut antiqua consuetudine rerare debent, seu
consueverunt, And the said Jurors do farther present, that it cannot be known
what Persons, Lands or Tenements, or Body Politic of Right, or by ancient
Custom ought to repair the said Bridge, or any part of it, or have been
accustomed to do it; and this will be a safe way for the four Justices, or
more, to proceed herein. And in a Franchise, City or Borough, where there are
not four Justices of the Peace, and one of them of the Quorum, and where they
keep not General Sessions, the Justices of the Peace for the County in such
case are to inquire upon this Statute* But if the Franchise, City or Boroug^ be
a County of itself, then the Justices of the Peace of the County ha^^ nothing
to do with it, but such decay of Bridges there must be remedi^^ according to
Common Law, as they were before the making of this Act o^ Parliament.

If a Man dwell in an House out o^ Who shall be accounted ^n Inhabitant and
liable to contribute to the charge of the Repairs of decayed Bridges.
the County, Riding, City or Tow^ Corporate where a decayed Bridge is yet if he
have Lands or Tenements ^^ his own possession and manurance is that County,
Riding, City or Tow^ Corporate where the Bridge is; he ^^ an Inhabitant in both
places within this Statute, for habitatio dicitur a^^ habendo, quia qui
propriis manibus, and sumptibus possidet and habet, ibi habitare dicitur; So
that a Man is said t^ So resolved in Jeffries Case, Mic. 31 and 32 El. B R. Co.
Rep. 5. lib. f. 66, 57.
inhabit where he keeps Lands in his own Manurance and Possession, a^
aforesaid; And so if a Man dwell i^ a Foregin Shire, Riding, City o^ Town
Corporate, and keeps House and Servants in another Shire, Riding City or Town
Corporate, he is a^ Inhabitant in each of them also within this Statute; but
though Servant^ are properly Inhabitants where the^ Live, yet they are not such
Inhabitants as this Statute extends to them, but to such as be Householders; and
to every Corporation and Body Politic residing in any County, Riding, City or
Town Corporate, or having Lands or Tenements in any Shire, Riding, City or Town
Corporate, quae proprits manibus and sumptibus possident and habent, are said
to be Inhabitants within the purview of this Statute; and an Infant likewise
that has House and Lands by descent or purchase is liable to this public
Charge, and so is the Husband of a Feme-Covert; and by this word (every
Inhabitant) all Privileges of Exemptions, or Discharges whatsoever from
Contribution, for the Reparation of decayed Bridges (if any were) are taken
away, although the Exemption were by Act of Parliament; so that it seems
Ecclesiastical Persons who by former Laws are freed from Pontage are by this
Statute made liable to contribute to the Charges of decayed Bridges.

Although by this Statute of 22 H. 8 How and after what manner (...) Taxes are
usually laid on for the repairs of decayed Bridges.
neither the Justices without the assistance of the Constable, or two able Men
of every Town or Parish, nor the Constables or Inhabitants without the Justices
can make a Taxation, no^ when the same Tax is made, can the same be set by the
Justices in a gross Sum upon every Hundred, Parish and Town, but that every
Inhabitant ought to be taxed singly by himself, Co. 2 Inst. f. 702, 703.
and each one bear his own Burden; and that indented Rolls in Parchment of
every several Hundred, and of the Names and Sums of every particular Person so
by them taxed, and sealed by the said Justices, ought to be given to the
Collectors appointed for the Bridges for their Warrant to gather the said Tax
by; yet notwithstanding (to free the Constables and Inhabitants from the
trouble and charge of Attendance) the common course is to charge every Hundred
and Constablery with a Sum in gross, and to give it in charge to the Chief
Constables of every Hundred, who send their Warrants to the Petty-Constables to
gather the same, by virtue of which Warrant the Inhabitants lay on their
Assessment, and pay the Money to the Petty-Constables, who pay the same to the
Chief-Constables, and they pay the Moneys for their whole Hundred at the
Sessions. And this course, though not warranted by the Statute, is submitted
to, and never disputed, for Communis Error facit Philips Principles of Law, p.
13.
Jus.

CHAP. XII. An Abridgment of such Statutes as have been made for the paving and
cleansing the Streets and Lanes in the Cities of London and Westminster, and
Suburbs and Liberties thereof, and Out-Parishes in the County of Middlesex, and
the Borough of Southwark.
BY the Statute of 24 H. 8. The 24 H. 8. chapter 11. R^stal paving 1. Stat. at
large printed 1587. f. 624, 625. Keb. Stat. printed 1684. f. 410.
Street-way between Charing Cross and Strand-Cross, was to be sufficiently
paved at the Charges of the Owners of the Lands or Tenements seized thereof in
Fee-simple, Fee-tail, or for Term of Life, along from his or their Lands or
Tenements adjoining to the said Ways unto the midst of the same, and the same
to be maintained by such Owners, their Heirs and Successors, with several
Clauses for Pains and Forfeitures upon defaults and neglects, as appears in the
Statut^ at large, which are now altered, and the Rules in the Statute of the
second Year of their Majesty's Reigns, King William and Queen Mary (mentioned
afterward in this Chapter) is now to be observed.

By the Statute of 25 H. 8. it is enacted, 25 H. 8. chapter 8. Paving 2. Rastal,
St. at large printed 1587. f. 638. Keb. St. printed 1684. 415.
That Holburn from the Bridge to the Bars shall be paved on both sides with
paving Stone, at the Charges of the Tenants in Fee-simple, Feetail, or for
Life, of the Lands thereunto adjoining, their Heirs and Successors, and they
from time to time to maintain the same paved, and if the Lessees do it, they
may defaulk so much out of their Rent, if not otherwise agreed; with several
Clauses in the Statute at large for Pains and Forfeitures for defaults, etc.
But now by the Statute of 22 and 23 Car. 2. 22 and 23 Car. 2. chapter 17.
All power of cleansing the Streets Lanes and Passages within the City of
London and Liberties, and pitching and paving with the order and manner thereof
is in the Mayor, Communalty and Citizens of the said City, to be managed,
executed and done by such Commissioners, or any seven of them as they appoint
under their Common Seal, as is showed afterward in this Chapter.

By the Statute of 32 H. 8. From 32 H. 8. chapter 17. Pa^ Rast. ^t. at large
printed 1* 5 87* ^* 816, 817. Keb. St. printed 168^. f. 512.
Algate to White-chappel and from Holburn-Bars to St. Giles, and Chan^^ry-Lane,
Grays-Inn-Lane, Fetter-Lane and Shoo-Lane were to be paved by Tenants in
Fee-simple, Fee-tail, and for Life, on both sides so far as their Lands and
Tenements extend in length, to the middle of the Street, and they, their Heirs,
Assigns and Successors to maintain the same, with several Clauses for
Presentiments, Forfeitures, etc. but now the sole Power is in the Lord Mayor,
Communalty and Citizens, etc.

By the Statute of 34 and 35 H. 8. 34, 35 H. 8. chapter 12 Paving Rast. 4. St. at
large printed 1587. f. 947, 948, 949. and Keb. Stat. printed 1684. f* 569.
White-Cross-Street, Cheswel-Street, Golding-Lane, Grub-Street, Goswel-Street,
Long-Lane, St. Johns-Street, Smithfield-Bars, Water-Lane, from Temple Bar by
Clements-Inn, and New-Inn to Drury-Lane-end, Petty-France, Shore-Ditch and
Foscue-Lane, were to be paved by Tenants in Feesimple, Fee-tail, for Life, or
Years on both sides, and maintained in the same manner as is showed above for
Al^ate, etc. And several Clauses also in ^his Act, about Presentiments,
Forfeitures, etc. But now all Power in the Lord Mayor, Communalty, Citizens,
etc.

By the Statute of 13 Eliz. The 13 El. chapter 23. Paving 6. Rast. Stat. at large
printed 1587. ^. 551, 552. Keb. Stat. printed 1684. f. 844.
Way without Aldgate in the Subur^ of London, and a Way leading from the
Old-Cage to the North-end o^ Nightingale-Lane, and another Wa^ between the said
Old-Cage and Cros^-Mill in the Parish of St. Mary Ma^fellon at White-Chappel,
were to b^ paved with Stone, and continued (...) by Persons seized as
aforesaid, in such manner as aforeshewed, and several Clauses about
Presentiments and Forfeitures also, and about carrying the Waters from Algate to
the Commonshore at the East End of Hog-Lane, etc. but now all Power is in the
Lord Mayor, etc. Then an Addition w^^ made to this Stat. in 23 Eliz. touching
23 El. chapter 12. Paving 6. Rast. Stat. at large printed 1587. f. 663, 664. Keb.
Stat. printed 1684. f. 872.
the paving a Street without Algate, leading to the Queens Storehouse at the
Minories toward the Tower of London, and other places near thereunto, with
provision about Scouring and Cleansing the Ditch at Hog-Lane, and several
Clauses about Pains and Forfeitures, but the Lord Mayor, etc. as i^ showed
before has now all the Power in such things.

By the Statute of 19 Car. Such 19 Car. 2. chapter 3* sect. 20. Keb. Stat* printed
1684. ^* 1333.
Persons, or any seven, or more of them, as shall be authorized and appointed
from time to time by the Mayor of London, Aldermen and Commonalty of the said
City in Common Council ^ssembled, or the more part of them under their Common
Seal, with the Surveyors or some or one of them within his or their Precinct
respective^y at their Meeting have power to Making new Vaults, Drains and
Sewers, etc.
order the making of any new Vaults, Drains and Sewers, or to cut into any
^lready made, and for the altering, in^^rging and amending, cleansing and
^^owring of any old Vaults, Sinks or Common Sewers, for the better effect^ng
whereof the said Persons, or any seven or more of them, at their Meet^ng, may
impose any reasonable Tax Tax how to be imposed and laid on.
upon all Houses within the said City and Liberties thereof, in proportion ^o
the benefit they shall receive there^y, for and toward the new making,
^ltering, etc. and in default of payment, by Order and Warrant under their, or
any seven of their Hands and Seals to levy the said Sun^s so assessed, Qu. what
Offi^^^ must take the distress, for here is none named.
^y distress and sale of the Goods of ^he Party chargeable therewith, and
re^using or neglecting to pay the same, rendering the overplus (if any be,) and
that all other Commissioners whatsoever be altogether suspended to inte^ middle
in the Premises within the sai^ City and Liberties thereof, for the space of
seven years; but by the St^^ of 22 and 23 Car. 2. chapter 17. this Clau^^ is made
perpetual, Keb. Stat. print^^ 1684. f. 1433. sect. 1, 2, 3.

The sole power of cleansing the To whom the sole power for cleansing the
Streets, Lanes, etc. and pitching and paving is given.
Streets, Lanes and Passages within the City of London and Liberties, an^
pitching and paving, with the orde^ and manner thereof, and for makin^ and
cleansing Drains and Sewers by the Statute of 22 and 23 Car. 2. is declared 22
and 23 Car. 2. chapter 17. Keb. Stat. printed 1684. f. ^434. sect. 4, 5, 6.
to be in the Major, Common^^ty and Citizens of the said City, (...) be
managed, executed and done (...) such persons as by the said Mayor, A^dermen
and Commons in Comm^^ Council assembled, shall be thereup^^ authorized and
appointed, or by a^^ seven or more of them (being (...) Members of the said
Court) and (...) other persons whatsoever; And a^ Paviers and Scavengers, etc.
to observe the Commissioners Orders.
Paviers, Scavengers, Carters, Laboure^ and Lighter-men that shall be imploy^^
about any of the said Works, are (...) observe and obey such Orders from time
to time as the said Commissione^ or any seven or more of them shall appoint;
and the persons therein offending may be proceeded against, and thereof
convicted by Indictment at the next Sessions of the Peace held for the said
City and Liberties according to their Offense, unless they submit to the
censure of such seven Commissioners or more, and pay such Mult or Penal^y as
they shall impose for such Offense, into the Chamber of the City of London, to
be employed toward the Works mentioned in the said Act.

And for the better enabling the Power given to Commisioners to raise a Tax or
Assessment, Keb. St. ibid. sect. 7.
Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens to defray the Charge in effecting and
performing the Works mentioned in the Act, the Commissioners or any seven or
more of them at their public Meeting, have power to impose any reasonable Tax
or Assessment upon the several Wards and Precincts within the said City and
Liberties, and to direct their Warrants to the several Deputies and Common
Coun^il-Men of such Wards, to rate and ^ssess the said Taxes and Assessments
(...) manner following, and also to di^ect like Warrants to such, and so many
of the Scavengers within the said Wards, as they shall think fit, thereby
requiring them to collect and levy the Moneys so assessed, upon receipt whereof
the said Deputies and Common Council-Men are to make an Assessment and
Distribution of the proportion charged upon their Wards, as well upon the
Tenants and Occupiers of Houses, Shops, or other Tenements or Hereditaments, as
upon Owners or other interested of or in such Houses, Tofts of Ground unbuilt,
and other Hereditaments, whereof there shall be no Person Occupier and a
reasonable proportion to be assessed on the Parish whose Churchyard shall be
fronting and adjoining to an^ of the Streets, Lanes or Passages (...) be paid
by the Churchwardens there of in behalf of the Parish; and the Duplicates of
the Assessments and Scavengers Names to be returned, Keb. St. ibid. sect. ^*
Deputies and Common Council-Me^ within twenty days after the receip^ of their
Warrant, are to return D^plicates in Writing of the Assessmen^^ with the Names
of the Scavengers appointed to collect the same; and i^ default of assessing or
returning D^plicates, the said Commissione^s (...) any seven of them may assess
the sai^ Wards (where such default shall be in manner as aforesaid, all which
(...) to be rated and assessed in pursuance of the Act, are to be collected and
levied by the Scavengers appointed to collect the same; and for default of
payment by the space of six days after demand, they are to levy the same by
distress and sale of Goods of the Parties refusing or neglecting to pay,
rendering the overplus (if any be) besides reasonable Charges to the Parties so
distrained; and the Scavengers are Scavengers to pay the Assessments when
collected into the Chamber of London, Keb. Stat. ibid. sect. 9.
to pay all the Moneys so to be collected into the Chamber of the City of
London, and the Chamberlain is to keep Books of the receipt thereof, and no
Money to be paid out from thence, but by Order or Warrant under the Hands of the
said Commissiooners, or any seven of them, for the Uses in and by the Act
appointed.

Where any Citizen is agrieved, or Grievances through defect of paving how to
be redressed, Keb. St. ibid. sect. 10, 11, 13, 14.
any Inhabitant, through the defect or decay of Pavements in any of the
Streets, Lanes or Passages within the the said City or Liberties thereof, for
want of due cleansing, and being made known to the said Commissioners, or any
seven or more of them at their public Meeting, upon due proof made that such
Grievance is unreformed, the persons complaining shall receive their Order for
the redressing thereof, and a Warrant under their Hands and Seals to the
Chamberlain to issue out Moneys for defraying the Charge thereof, and a Sum of
Money not exceeding ten shillings for encouragement of his or their D^ligence,
and upon receipt of the Warrant the same is to be paid accordingly, and the
Mayor, Aldermen and Commons Laystalls for laying Dirt and Rubbish, etc. in, to
be purchased.
in Common Council assembled, may set out and purchase for the public Use of
the City, in places convenient; parcels of Ground for Laystalls to lay Dirt,
Rubbith, etc. in, and places for public Stores of Materials and Commodities,
the said pieces of Ground for the Uses aforefaid, to be purchased with the
Moneys raised out of the imposition upon Coals; and persons agrieved by reason
of any Tax, Assessment or other Charge, within five days after demand thereof,
to appeal to the Mayor and Court Appeals to whom to be made in case of
grievance.
of Aldermen, whose Order in that behalf shall be final; and none that are
liable to be taxed, rated or assessed by this Act, for or in respect of any
Houses, Tofts, or other Hereditaments toward the public Charge of altering,
enlarging, amending or cleansing of the said Vaults or Sewers, etc. shall be
otherwise charged for or in respect of any Houses, Tofts, etc. shall 2 W. and
M. chapter
be otherwise charged therewith; and if any Persons be sued or prosecuted for
any thing done in pursuance of this Act in any Court whatsoever, they may plead
the general Issue, and give the special Matter in Evidence, and if the
Plaintiff or Prosecutor shall be Nonsuited, or suffer Discontinuance, or a
Verdict pass against him or her, the Defendant and Defendants shall recover
their treble Costs, for which they shall have like Remedy as in any Case where
Costs by Law are given to the Defendants.

For the better cleansing and keeping The Lord Mayor or any Alderman may
present where Ashes, Soil, Dust or Rubbish is thrown or laid in the Streets,
etc.
the Streets, Lanes and Passages within the City of London and Liberties
thereof; it is enacted by the Statute of the second Year of their Majesty's
Reigns, King William and Queen Mary, That the same shall be ordered and
managed, and Rates and Impositions laid and levied, and all other ways and
means therefore used and observed, according to the ancient Usage and Custom of
the said City, and that the Lord Mayor for the time being, or any Alderman of
the said City for the time being, upon his own proper Knowledge or View in the
open General Sessions may make presentment of the throwing our, (...) laying or
suffering any Ashes. Soil Dust or Rubbish, or other Nuisance (...) Obstruction
in any the Streets, Lanes or Passages of the said City or Liberties thereof,
which Presentment shall be good and effectual, and the Lord Mayor and Justices
of the same City are immediately at the same General Sessions to assess Fines
for such Offenses, not exceeding twenty shillings for any one Offense, which
said Fines shall be levied and paid unto the Chamberlain of the City of London
for the time being, for the use of the same City, to be employed in the public
Payments of the same City.

All Persons inhabiting in the Out-Parishes Inhabitants in Out-Parishes in
Middlesex, Liberties of Westminster and Southwark, to sweep before their
Houses, etc. twice in the Week.
in Middlesex, Westminster, and the Liberties thereof, and the Borough of
Southwark, or in any the Streets, Lanes or Allies comprised within the Weekly
Bills of Mortality, and the Town of Kensington, by the Statute of the second
Year of their Majesty's Reign King William and Queen Mary, must twice in the
Week, viz., Wednesdays and Saturdays at the least, weekly sweep the Dirt and
Soil away before their Houses, Buildings and Walls, and Walls of Churches and
other public Places, that it may be ready for the Scavenger to carry away, on
pain of three shillings and four pence for every Offense or Neglect; and None
to throw any Ashes, Dust, Dirt, etc. before their own Houses or the Houses of
any others, etc.
none are to throw, cast or lay any Sea-Coal-Ashes, Dust, Dirt, Rubbish, Dung,
or other Filth or Annoyance in any open Street, Lane or Alley within the said
City or Places aforesaid, before their own Dwelling-houses, Stables, Buildings
or Walls, or the Buildings or Walls of Churches or Churchyards, or other
public Places, or suffer it to be done on the penalty of five shillings; and
none shall lay any Ashes, Dirt or Soil before the Houses or Buildings of any
Persons Inhabitants of the Places aforesaid, or before any Church or
Churchyard, or any of their Majesty's Buildings, Palaces or Places whatso^ver,
or cast, lay or throw any such No Annoyances to be cast into public or private
Sinks, etc.
Annoyances into any public or pri^ate Sink, or into any Watercourse, (...)
Common-Sewer, within the Places ^foresaid, but shall keep the same in their
Houses, Yards or Backsides, or ^he Yards or Backsides of Churches, and other
public Buildings, till the Scavengers or Officers come, and the^ to carry, or
cause the same to be carried to them, or put into their Car^ Barrow or other
Thing, on pain (...) forfeit twenty shillings for every O^fence; and the
respective Churchwardens, Churchwardens, House keepers, etc. punishable for
suffering Annoyances before Churches, their Majesty's Buildings, etc.
and the Housekeepers and other Keepers of White Hall, Somerset House, St.
James-House, and St. James Park, and the Guard-House and Stables near it, and
other the^^ Majesty's Houses; and the Ushers, Peter's and Keepers of Courts of
J^stice, and all other Public or other Houses and Places respectively, shall
be liable to, and suffer the like Penaltie^ for every the beforementioned
O^fences or Neglects done, committe^ or suffered to be done before (...) Church
or Churchyard, or before (...) of their Majesty's Houses, Buildings (...)
Walls, or before any Houses, Building^ or Walls, or before any public
Buil^ings, Houses or Places whatsoever and the Rakers, Scavengers and oth^^
Scavengers every day to bring their Carts, etc.
Officers thereunto appointed, sha^^ every day in the Week (except S^^days and
other Holy Days) bring the Carts and other Carriages into the several Charges
and Divisions wh^^ they can pass, and give notice at their approach by a Bell,
etc. and so in every Court, Alley, etc. ^here their Carts cannot pass, and ^ay
there a convenient time, so that ^ll Persons concerned may bring forth ^^eir
Dust, Dirt, Ashes, Filth and ^oil, to the Carts and Carriages so ^aying, and
the Scavengers, etc. are ^ayly to carry away the same on pain (...) forfeit
forty shillings for every Of^ence or Neglect.

None shall hoop, wash or cleanse None to hoop, wash or cleanse Pipes or
Barrels in the Streets.
any Pipes, Barrels or other Casks or ^essels in any the Streets, Lanes or ^pen
Passages aforesaid, nor shall set (...) any Dung, Soil, Rubbish or empty
^oaches to make or mend, or rough ^imber or Stones to be swan, or ^rought in
the Streets, on penalty of ^wenty shillings for every Offense; and all open
Streets, Lanes and Allies Streets already paved by whom to be maintained, and
under what penalty.
^ithin the Parishes or Places aforesaid, ^ow ready paved, are from time to
^^me to be repaired, amended and ^aved at the Charges of the House^olders,
Inhabitants there, and where ^ouses are empty at the Charges of ^he Owners or
Proprietors thereof, before their Houses, Stables or Out^ouses, so far as their
Housing, Walls a Buildings extend, unto the Denterstone or Channel, or middle
of (...) said Street, Lane or Alley, on pain (...) forfeit for every default
twenty shilling for every Perch or Rod, and aft^^ that Rate for a greater or
lesser qu^^tity, and twenty shillings a Week (...) every Week after, until the
same sha^ be sufficiently paved; and any one (...) more Justices of the Peace
of the Place or Division where any ne^ New Streets how, and by what Order to be
paved and repaired, and under what Penalty.
Streets are or shall be made, may fre^ time to time view the same; and (...)
upon such view they think them (...) to be paved, or otherwise amended then to
certify the same under the^^ Hands to the Justices of the Peace (...) the next
respective General Quart^^ Sessions of the Peace for the (...) where such
Streets are, or shall be made, who are to take such Orde^ therein for paving or
amending as the think fit, and all the Persons conce^^ed, by the time limited
by the Orde^ of such Justices at the Sessions, are (...) pave with Stone or
Gravel, or otherwise amend all the Ground that do^ or shall lie in front before
every Dw^ling-House, or other Buildings in (...) Streets and Ways extending to
(...) middle of the Way that does or (...) lie before the same; and every
Pers^^ offending or neglecting shall forfeit ^^rty shillings for every such
Offense or ^efault, for every Perch, and after ^^at rate for a greater or
lesser quan^^ty, and the like Sum for every Week ^ll the same be paved or
amended, and ^^paired, and when paved and amend^d, the Sum as those aforeshewed
that ^^all not pave and repair open Streets, ^anes and Allies now paved; and
Ancient Streets, Lanes and Allies to be repaired as formerly.
^^ch ancient Streets, Lanes and Allies within any of the places aforesaid, as
by Custom and Use have been repaired and paved by any other order, or in any
other manner shall be hereafter re^aired, paved and maintained in such ^^rt and
manner, and by such Persons (...) have been used to do the same, un^er the
Penalties aforesaid.

On Monday or Tuesday in Easter-Week, Scavengers how and when to be chosen, and
what penalty for refusing the Office.
yearly, the Constable* Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, and Surveyors of
the Highways of the places aforesaid, or the greater number of them calling
together such an^ient Inhabitants as are usually present ^t the Election of
Parish Officers, the greater number of them then pre^ent, shall make choice of,
and nomi^ate and appoint two or more able Tradesmen of their Parish to be
Scavengers for their Parish for the Yea^ following, and till others be chosen
an^ settled in their Places, which Persons being approved of and confirmed under
the Hands of two Justices of the Pea^^ within their respective Limits, an^
within seven days after notice of s^^ Election and Confirmation, to ta^^ the
Office upon them upon pain (...) ten pounds forfeiture for every Refuse
respectively; and in case of refus^ then other two are to be chosen an^
confirmed in manner aforesaid, within seven days after such refusal, in the
place of him or them so refusing and having notice shall undergo the like pain
of ten pounds, in case of refusal and not taking the Office upon him or them,
within seven days after notice as aforesaid, the said Penalties to be paid to
the Surveyors of the Highways of the place, to be employed toward the
amending the Highways and Streets of the sa^^ Parish, Ward or Division, and to
be How and by whom the Penalties are to be levied*
levied by distress and sale of the Goods and Chattels of the Offenders, by
Warrant under the Hand and Seal ^^ any one Justice of the Peace of any the
places aforesaid, to be directed t^ the Constables or other Officers of the
said Parish, or any two or more of them, rendering the overplus to the Parties
(reasonable charges for the distress only to be deducted,) and for want of
distress or non-payment within six days or demand, or notice left ^^ writing at
the House or Dwellingplace of the Offender, by the said Constables or Officers,
the said Offender to be committed to the Common Gaol of the County, City or
Place respectively, by the Warrant of any such Justice of the Peace, under his
Hand and Seal, there to remain without Bail or Mainprise till payment be made
as aforesaid; and so in like man^er for every Person or Persons neg^ecting or
refusing the same, and with^n Within what time Rates are to be made, and by
whom.
twenty days after the election and confirmation of the said Scavengers ^s
aforesaid, the Constables and such other Officers and Parishioners as
aforesaid, or the greater number of them ^hen present, shall make a Rate or
Assessment according to pound Rate, upon the Inhabitants of their Parish, which
being allowed and confirmed ^y two Justices of the Peace of the ^laces
aforesaid, shall be quarterly paid ^y every Inhabitant upon demand ^ade by the
Scavengers or Officers appointed to gather the same, and i^ case of refusal or
neglect, shall b^ Warrant under the Hands and Se^^ of two such Justices of the
Peace ^^ aforesaid, be levied by distress and sa^^ of the Offenders Goods, and
for wa^^ of distress by imprisonment (being no Peer of the Realm) until payment
as aforesaid.

And such Sums of Money as sh^^^ The Scavengers to account for the moneys
received by them.
be yearly assessed and collected, shall be yearly accounted for by the
Scavengers for the time being, which collected the same, to two or mo^^ of the
Justices of Peace of the plac^ residing in or near to the respectiv^ places,
for which such Scavengers were appointed within eight and twenty days after the
electing of new Scavengers for the ensuing Year, and ^^ pay to the new
Scavengers what remains in their Hands; and any such two Justices of the Peace
as aforesaid upon refusal to account, may comit^^ the Refuser to prison, there
to remai^ without Bail or Mainprise till he a^count and pay what remains upon
Account; and the Scavengers man Scavengers to lodge their Dirt in such public
places as the Justices of Peace shall approve of.
lodge their Dirt, Dust, Ashes, etc. i^ such vacant and public places near the
Street or Highways, as two or mo^^ of the Justices of the Peace in their ^etty
Sessions shall approve of, they ^iving satisfaction to the Owners and Occupiers
thereof, and in case of un^easonable demands, such Justices of the Peace in
their Petty Sessions may moderate and determine it; and such persons as are
agrieved with any As^essment or Determination of the Ju^tices of Peace in their
Petty Sessions, may appeal to the Justices of the Peace ^t their General
Quarter Sessions of the Peace for that place, whose Order and Determination
upon hearing the Complaints, shall be final without farther appeal to any other
Court; and where there are any Highways Assessments wh^^ and how to be made.
within the said Parishes, which cannot be amended without help of an
Assessment, then one or more Assessments shall be made from time to time upon
all the Inhabitants, Owners and Occupiers of Lands, Houses and Tenements, or
any personal Estate there, usually ratable to the Poor, to be allowed, levied
and collected by such person and persons as the said Justices of the Peace at
such their General Quarter Sessions shall direct and appoint; and the Money
raised to be employed and accounted for toward the repairing such Highways
from time to time as the said Justices shall order, to be levied by distress
and sale of the Goods of the perions so assessed, (n^^ paying the same within
fourteen days after demand) rendering the overplus to the Owner, necessary
Charges of making and selling the distress, being first deducted, which
Assessments in any one year are not to exceed four pence in the pound of the
yearly value of Lands, etc. nor eight pence for every twenty pounds personal
Estate.

All Sinks, Sewers and Vaults made Sinks, Sewers and Vaults to be within the
Commi^^ion of Sewers.
since the twelfth Year of King Charles the Second, within the City and
Liberties of Westminster, and Parishes aforesaid, are to be subject to the
Commission of Sewers; and the Commissioners of Sewers within the Liberties of
their respective Commissions, may after amend, cleanse and scour any new
Sewers, Sinks and Vaults, and direct the making of new ones, or may cut into
any already made, and alter and take away any Nusances in the same, and alter
or take away any cross Gutter or Channels in all or any of the Streets and
Lanes in the Parishes Houshold^^^ to h^ng out Candle^ at Night.
aforesaid; and all Householders in the Counties of Middlesex and Surry, and
City and Liberty of Westminster comprised within the Weekly Bills of Mortality,
whose Houses adjoyn unto or are near the Street, shall on the outside of their
Houses next the Street every Night from Michaelmas to Ladyday, yearly, set or
hang out Candles or Lights in Lanthorns, from time to time, as it shall grow
dark, until twelve of the Clock in the Night, on pain to forfeit two shillings
for every default (except such as shall agree to make use of Lamps to be placed
at such distances in the Streets as two or more Justices of the Peace shall
approve of; ^ and every Truss of old How much Truss^s of Hay are to weigh.
Hay (by this Statute) brought or offered to be sold within the Cities of
London and Westminster, and all other places within the Weekly Bills of
Mortality, between the last day of August and first day of June, shall weigh
six and fifty pounds at the least; and between the first day of June and last
day of August, being new Hay of that Years growth, shall weigh sixty pounds,
and if it be old Hay of any former Years growth, then to weigh six and fifty
pounds as aforesaid; How long Wagons, Carts and Cars are to stand with Hay or
Straw.
and none are to sulfer their Wagons, Carts or Cars to stand or be in any of
the places aforesaid laden with Hay or Straw to sell the same, after two of
the Clock in the Afternoon from Michaelmas to Lady Day, nor after three from
Lady Day to Michaelmas, on pain to forfeit five shillings for every Offense or
Neglect; and every Justice of the Peace within the Counties of Middlesex and
Surry, and City and Liberties of Westminster, and Places aforesaid within their
respective Liberties upon their own Knowledge or View, Confession of the Party
or Proof of one credible Witness before him, may convict any Persons of the
Offenses aforesaid, so that they may incur the Penalties aforesaid; one moiety
to the relief of the Poor of the Parish where the Offense is committed, to be
paid to the Overseers of the Poor of the same Parish for the use of the Poor
thereof, and the other half to the Discoverer and Prosecutor, in case the
Conviction be so; but if it be by the View or Knowledge of the Justice of
Peace, then one half to the relief of the Poor as aforesaid, and the other half
if for default of payment, to be paid to the Scavengers of the place to be
employed for the repair or paving and cleansing the said Streets or Places, or
otherwise to the relief of the Poor aforesaid; all the said Penalties to be
levied by Penalties how to be levied.
distress and sale of the Goods and Chattels of the Offenders, by Warrant under
the Hand and Seal of any one Justice of the Peace of the place directed to the
Constables or Headboroughs of the same Parish where the Offense was done,
rendering the surplusage to the party, and in default of distress or not payment
within six days after demand (where it is not by this Act otherwise provided)
or notice in Writing left at the Offenders House or Dewlling Place by the
Constable or Headborough, then the Offender (not being a Peer of the Realm) to
be committed to the Common Gaol of the Counties or City respectively, by
Warrant as aforesaid, there to remain without Bail or Mainprise until payment.

By this Statute the Wheels of every The breadth of Cart Wheels and Dray
Wheels, etc.
Cart, Car or Dray, to be used for the Carriage of any thing whatsoever, from
any place within the said Cities and Places, to any place within the same,
where the Streets are paved, are to be made to contain in full breadth six
Inches in the Felly, and must not be wrought about with Iron-work, nor drawn
with above two Horses after they are up the Hills from the Waterside, and the
Owners and Proprieto^s ^ssending herein, are to forfeit forty shillings for
every time such Cart or Dray shall be used to the contrary, to be levied as
aforesaid; but this is not to extend to any Country-Cart or Wagon that shall
bring Goods to the City or Places aforesaid, or shall carry any Goods half a
Mile beyond the paved Streets of the said Cities and Places. But now by the
Statute of the second 3 and 4 W. and M. chapter 12.
and third Years of their Majesty's Reigns, chap. 12. this Clause is altered,
for any Inhabitant of any of the Parishes within the Weekly Bills of Mortality,
who dwells off and from the Pavement, or uses his Cart as well off as upon the
Pavement, and any Brewer or Scavenger, or other Person employed in carrying
away the Dirt and Soil of the Streets, Lanes and Allies, may make use of any
Cart or Dray with Wheels shod with Iron, and narrowe^ than six Inches in the
Fellies, and drawn with more than two Horses, notwithstanding this former Act
of Parliament, or any Law or Usage to the contrary.

No person or persons whatsoever by None to breed, seed or keep Swine.
his Statute of the second Year of their Majesty's Reigns, shall breed, seed or
^eep any sort or manner of Swine in any part of the Houses or Backsides of ^he
paved Streets of the said Cities, Borough or Parishes, where the Houses (...)
contiguous, upon pain to forfeit ^he same to the Churchwardens and Overseers
of the Poor of the Parish where such Swine shall be kept, bred ^or Fed to the
use of the Poor thereof, and all or any of the Churchwardens, Overseers of the
Poor, Chappel-wardens, Constables, Beadles, Headboroughs or Tythingmen of any
of the Parishes of the said Cities or Places at all times in the daytime, by
Warrant under the Hand and Seal of the Lord Mayor, or any other Justices of the
Peace of the place may search in all such places in their respective Parishes
for the finding all such Swine, and to seize, drive, take and carry away all
that shall be so found, and to sell the same for the best price, that can be
had, and to deliver the Money to the Churchwardens or Overseers of the Poor of
the Parish where such Swine shall be seized, to be distributed to the Poor
there, in such manner as the Churchwardens and Oversee^^ shall think fit, and
if any shall be sued Persons sued may plead general Issue, and give special
Matter in Evidence.
in any Court for any thing done i^ pursuance of, or execution of this Act*
they may plead the General Issue, a^^ give the Special Matter in Evidence, and
if a Verdict pass for the Defendants, or the Plaintiff be Nonsuited, or suffer
Discontinuance, then the Defendants shall recover treble Costs, for which they
shall have the like remedy, as in any Case where Costs by the Law are given to
the Defendants.

This Act being of such universal and beneficial Concern for the Places
mentioned therein, I have therefore taken all the Heads of it quite through,
though some of the Paragraphs thereof have no relation to the repairing the
Highways, or paving or cleansing the Streets, Lanes and Allies there.

CHAP. XIII. An Abridgment of so much of the Statutes of 15 Car. 2. chap. 1.
and 16 and 17 Car. 2. chap. 10. as concerns the repairing the ancient Highway,
and Post-Road from London to York, and so into Scotland, as lies in the several
Parishes, Towns, Vills and Hamlets in the County of Hertford; and now revived
by the Statute of the fourth and fifth Years of their present Majesty's Reigns.
BY the Statute of 15 Car. 2. chap. 1. Justices of Peace at the S^ssion^ to
choose nine Sur^^yor^, K^b. St^^. f. 1256 sect. 1.
It is (amongst other things) enacted, That the Justices of Peace for the
County of Hertford, every Year at the S^ssions to be holden after Easter, shall
from time to time nominate and appoint nine sufficient and able Persons
residing and inhabiting within the said County, to be Surveyors for ^o much of
the said Highway, as lies Upon notice ^^v^n them in writing, they are to t^ke
the Offic^ upon them, Keb. St. printed 168^. f. ibid. sect. ibid.
in the several Towns and Parishes of the said County, and the said Justices of
Peace are to cause notice in Writing to be given to the said Surveyors so
chosen, who (having ^^ lawful impediment to be allowed by the Justices by whom
they were chosen) are to take the Office upon them, and perform their Duty in
the speedy execution of the said Act, and upon refusal or neglect, the said
Justices What forfeiture for refusing or neglecting the Office, Keb. stat. f.
1258. sect. 8.
at their Quarter Sessions, may impose such Fine upon such Person so refusing
or neglecting as they think sit, not exceeding ten pounds, and may cause the
same to be levi^d by distress and sale of his or their Goods, rendering to the
party so distrained the overplus, if The Surveyors to meet at a convenient
place to consider of Repairs and providing Materials, Keb. St. printed 1684. f.
1256. sect. 1.
any shall be; and such as take the Office upon them, are within a Week after
notice given them as aforesaid, to meet and assemble themselves together in
some convenient place within the County to be appointed by the Justices of the
County at their Quarter Sessions, to the intent that they may view the said
Highways, and to consider what Reparations will be needful; and to provide
Stones, Gravel and other Materials and Necessaries to be used in the repair and
amending the said Highway at the places aforesaid; and three or more of them
The Surveyors to appoint a Collector of Toll, Keb. Stat. ibid. sect. 1.
being so assembled after notice given as aforesaid, are* to appoint a Receiver
Collector of Toll, and such Officers they find necessary for carrying on ^e
said Work (with moderate Al^^wances as shall be thought fit) to be ^^proved of
by any two or more Ju^^ices of the Peace of the County living ^ear to the said
Highway or Place foresaid, or otherwise to be removed, and other fit persons
to be chosen in their places by the said Justices of the Peace; and such fit
person or persons The Collector to take Toll, and for what things, and how
much, Keb. St. ibid. f. 1259. sect. 11.
^ppointed by the Surveyors with such ^onsent and approbation as aforesaid,
shall receive and collect the Toll at Wades Mill in the said County, and ^o
receive and take in the Name of Toll or Custom, for every Horse one penny, for
every Coach six pence, for every Wagon one shilling, for every Carr eight
pence, for every score of Sheep or Lambs an half penny, and so proportionably
for greater numbers, for every score of Oxen or Neat Cattle five pence, for
every score of Hogs two pence, and so proportionably for every greater or
lesser number, not being under five, and upon refual or neglect to pay upon
demand made by the Collector or Receiver appointed to receive the same, in such
case he may distrain and detain such Horse, Cart, Coach, Wagon, Oxen Cattle
aforementioned, or any of the till payment thereof, with such D^mages as the
party so distraining she sustain by keeping such distress; b^ Toll not to be
paid twice on one day for the same things, Keb. Stat. printed 1684. f. 1259.
sect. 11.
if any return the same day with (...) same Horse, Coach, Wagon, or (...)
Carriage, or with Cattle, they (...) not to pay a second time for the (...)
things that same day, and every person What Persons, and from what places, and
for what things to pay no Toll, Keb. Stat. ibid. sect. 14.
or persons coming immediate^^ and primarily to and from the seve^ Parishes of
Standen, Thundridge, (...) and Benges, adjacent to Wades (...) may carry any
quantities of Stone^ Sand, Lime or Gravel, Dung, (...) or Compost of what
nature or kin^ soever, Brick, Chalk or Wood, an^ that they and all Carts with
Hay (...) Corn in Straw at Hay-time or Harvest Plows, Harrows, and other
Implements of Husbandry, and all other things whatsoever, employed in the
husbanding, stocking and manu^ing of their Lands, shall pass to and (...)
through the said place without paying any Toll for their so passing through the
same; and Soldiers upon their Soldiers on their March, and Posters to pay no
Toll, Keb. St. ib. sect. 17.
March, and persons riding Post, ar^ to pay no Toll; the Collector (...)
Receiver of the Toll is to give (...) account of such Moneys as he receives,
Receiver of the Toll to give an account to the Collectors, Keb. Stat. ibid. f.
1257. sect. 4, 5.
often as the Surveyors or any three them shall appoint, and pay the (...) to
them, or unto such (...) as they shall appoint, to be paid But this Clause is
altered by Stat. 16 and 17 Car. 2. ch 10
^t and expended in the Repairs of (...) Places aforesaid, and not elsewhere;
(...) the Surveyors every Year at the Surveyors to account to the Justices at
Easter Quarter Sessions, Keb. Stat. printed 1684. f. 1257. sect. sect. 5.
^^arter-Sessions to be held for the ^ounty next after Easter, shall give ^
account in Writing under their ^ands to the Justices of Peace there (...) be
assembled, of the Money which (...) or any of them have received (...) the
Collector or Receiver of (...) Toll, and of their Disbursments ^^out the
Repairs aforesaid, or by (...) of their Offices, and to pay (...) overplus (if
any be in their Hands) (...) the Surveyors to be chosen for the (...) ensuing,
or to the Treasurer or ^eceiver by them to be appointed, and the Justices are
to make such al^^wance to the Surveyors out of the ^enefit of the Toll or their
Care and ^ains taken in the Office as they think ^t; and in case of non-payment
by ^he Collector or Receiver of the Toll, upon request made as aforesaid, or
that the Surveyors or any of them, shall not make such account or payment as
aforesaid, the Justices at the Quarter Sessions of the Peace to b^ held for the
County, may make enquiry as well by Confession of the Parties, as by Testimony
of two (...) more Witnesses upon Oath, and i^ case of default in any of those
Office^ to be adjudged by the said Justice^ the party or parties so convict,
are (...) be committed to the Common Ga^^ of the County, there to remain
without Bail or Mainprize till account b^ made, and payment as aforesaid.

The Surveyors or any three or mo^^ Surveyors to charge Teams and Laborers,
Keb. Stat. ibid. f. 1256. sect. 2.
of them from time to time, as the^ shall see cause, may appoint and r^quire
all Persons inhabiting in the County within three miles of the places
aforesaid, who by any Law (...) Statute in force, is or are chargeabl^ to
labor at the Highways, or t^ find any Wain or Cart for the amending thereof,
upon reasonable notice t^ send his or their Wain or Cart (...) Team, or to come
to labor in the said Highway, at any of the place aforesaid, so furnished as
the Law direct for amending other Highways, when and as often as the said
Surveyors (...) any three or more of them shall ^hi^^ needful and appoint, for
which the^ shall pay them according to the rate ^f the Country, upon pain to
forfeit ^n shillings for every Team every day making default, and every
Labourer ^ighteen pence; but none are to send their Team, Cart or Wagon for
^mending the said Way, or to go and ^abour therein, above three miles from
^^eir Dwelling-houses, nor above three ^^ys in one Week, nor in Seed-time, ^ay
or Corn-Harvest; and any two ^r more Justices of the Peace of the County are to
determine all Differences ^out the Hire of such Persons and seams, Carts and
Wagons, and the ^^stices determination in such cases to In what places the
^urveyors, may dig for Gravel, etc. Keb. Stat. ibid. f. 1257. sect. 3*
^e conclusive; and where there is not ^ufficient Gravel, Chalk, Sand or ^tones
within any Parish, Town or ^illage, or Hamlet wherein the said ^igh-way lies,
then three or more of ^he Surveyors or such Persons as they ^ppoint, may dig,
take and carry ^way such quantities of such Materials ^ut of the Waste or
Common of any ^eighbouring Parish, Town, Village (...) Hamlet as they think
necessary for ^he repairing of the said Way, without paying any thing for the
same; ^^d when there is not sufficient in such ^^ces, then they may dig in the
several Grounds of any Persons where such Materials are to be found, not being
an^ House, Garden, Orchard, Yard or Part stored with Deer within any Parish
chargable toward the Repairs of the sai^ Highway, and carry away from tim^ to
time such quantities as aforesaid without paying any thing for the same save
only reasonable Satisfaction to the Owners or Occupiers of the Grounds for the
damage they shall thereby sustain, to be assessed (in case of any difference)
by the Justices of the County at their next, or any other Quarter Sessions held
for the County, and the Pits or Places so dug to be filled up with all
convenient speed (to be adjudged by the said Just^ces) and levelled with Earth,
or other Materials, or else railed about so as the same may not be deemed
dangerous to Man or Beast.

The Surveyors (with the consen^ Surveyor* may engage the Toll for present Money
Keb. Stat. f. 1258. sect. 6.
of the Justices of the Peace at an^ Quarter Sessions of the Peace to be held
for the County) by Indenture under the Hands and Seals of the said Surveyors
for the time being, may transfer and grant the Profits of the Toll for any time
or term not exceeding nine Years, to any Person or Persons that shall and will
upon that Security advance any present Sum or Sums of Money toward the present
^^paration of the said Highways, for the repaying the same with Interest; When
and how the Justices may make a Rate, Keb. ibid.
and in case Money cannot be borrowed on that Security, then the Justices at
their Quarter Sessions, when they see cause, may make a Rate for the repair of
the said Highway, of such Sum or Sums of Money as they think fit for the speedy
effecting the Repairs thereof, to be raised upon the Parishes that lie in or
near the said Road, and to be paid to the Surveyors, or to their Receiver or
Collector, and in ^ase of refusal by any Person to pay, then the said Surveyors
or their Receiver or Collector may distrain for such Sum or Sums of Money, and
sell the Distress, rendering the overplus to the Owners; and the Money so
advanced Repayment out of the Toll to the Towns charged with a Rate. Keb. St.
f. 1258. sect* 7. Such as were formerly chargeable toward Repairs to be so
still, Keb. ibid. f. 1259. sect* 11.
by the said Towns, is to be repaid by the Surveyors as it does arise out of
the Toll; and such Persons who by ^aw are chargeable toward the repairing of
the said Highway and Places, shall still remain so chargeable notwithstanding
this Act of Parliament.

All Fines and Forfeitures incurred Fines and Forfeitures to be levied by the
Surveyors, Keb. Stat. 1258. sect. 9.
by this Act, shall be paid to the Surveyors or any three of them, or their
Treasurer toward the repairing the said Highways and Places; and in In Case
of refusal or death, new Surveyors to be chosen, Keb. ibid.
case of refusal, or of Persons accepting and dying in the Office, or discharge
for any lawful Impediment, then two or more Justices in the County living in or
near the said Highways and Places aforesaid, are to appoint some other fit
person or persons within the County, in the place of him or them so refusing,
dying or discharged; and such persons as are so chosen, having notice thereof
given under the Hands and Seals of such Justices so choosing them, are to take
upon them the Office, and execute the same in such manner, and under such
Penalties, as if he or they had been chosen by the Justices at their Sessions
of the Peace in manner aforesaid; and all Suits upon Actions upon this Statute
to be laid in the same County; general Issue pleaded, and give special Matter
in Evidence, Keb. ib. sect. 10.
this Act to be laid in the same County, and the Desendant may plead the
General Issue, and give the Special Matter in Evidence; and if at the Trial it
appear the Matter was done in pursuance, and by authority of this Act, and that
such Action shall be brought in any other County, then the Jury to find for the
Defendant; and upon such Verdict, or that the Plaintiff shall be nonsuited or
discontinue this Action after the Defendants appearance* or if upon Demurrer
Judgment shall be given against the Plaintiff, the Defendant shall have double
Costs, and have like remedy for the same, as any Defendant has in other Case
by Law. And this Act was to continue for eleven years, which ended Anno Dom.
1674.

Then by the Statute of the 16 and 16 and 17 Car. 2. chapter 10. Toll at Wades Mill
continued for 21 years, Keb. Stat. f. 1307. sect. 3.
17 Years of Car. 2. chap. 10. The Toll taken at Wades Mill, was continued for
one and twenty years, to commence from the time mentioned in the former Act;
and the Money arising therefrom, to be employed for the repaying the Debt with
Interest borrowed by the Hertfordshire Gentlemen, for the repairing the said
Highway; and that the Persons empowered by the Way between Puckeridge and
Barley to be amended with part of the Toll, Keb. ubi supra, sect. 4.
former Act for the repair of the said Highway within the County of Hertford,
to have the same power to repair the Ways leading from Puckeridge to Barley in
the same County, as they have to repair the Highway in the said County,
leading from London to York; and that they shall and may apply such part of the
Toll thereunto (having an equal care on both Highways) as they shall find
needful, and the Collector of the Toll upon Oath Collectors of the Toll to
account weekly upon oath, Keb. ubi supra, sect. 8.
before the next Justice of the Peace is to account weekly to the Receiver
General for the whole Money received, which account so made, shall be returned
into the next General Sessions to be held for the said County by the said
Justice of Peace before whom such Oath was taken; and all Persons chargeable by
Law toward the All persons chargable to the repairs to pay yearly six pence
per pound, Keb. St f. 1308. sect. 7, 12.
repair of the said Highways, to remain still chargeable, and pay yearly six
pence in the pound, according to the true value of their Estate, toward the
repairing of the said Highway, during the time of the continuance of this Act,
to be paid to the Treasurer appointed to receive the Toll, and for default of
payment, by the space of six days after demand, then the Surveyors of the
Highways for the time being to levy the same by distress and sale of the Goods
of the Party refusing to pay, returning the overplus, if any be, to the Owner.
Upon adjudication of the Ways being amended, and Moneys advanced rep^id, then
the Toll to cease, Keb. Stat. f. sect. 9, 10.


And if before the expiration of the said Term of one and twenty Years the
Highways be adjudged at the public Quarter Sessions for the County of
Hertford to be sufficiently amended, and that such Sums of Money already
borrowed and laid out, or shall be borrowed and laid out for the use aforesaid,
be repaid with Interest for the same, then from and after such adjudication
made, and repayment of such Money so borrowed and laid out as aforesaid, the
aforesaid Toll in the said County to cease and determine; and if the Highways
shall be sufficiently amended, and the Justices of Peace at their
Quarter Sessions make no adjudication, in such case the Justices of Assize for
the County of Hertford may make such adjudication, which being entered with the
Clerk of Assize for the said County shall be a good adjudication of the
amendment of the said Highways, and from thenceforth the said Debt being fully
satisfied to such as shall have advanced any Money thereupon, the said Toll
shall cease and determine.

These two Statutes being expired, Toll at Wades Mill, and all former Powers
given by virtue of the two former Statutes revived for fifteen years, as to the
County of Hertford, 4 and 5 W. and M. chapter 9.
and the Parliament taking notice that this great Post-Road and the other Way
cannot be amended and repaired by the ordinary course of the Laws and Statutes
of this Realm now in force, ^s to such part thereof as lies within the County
of Hertford, it is therefore enacted by the Statute of 4 and 5 of their
Majesty's Reigns, King William and Queen Mary, That the Toll to be taken at
Wades Mill for the County of Herford, formerly by force of the beforementioned
Acts of Parliament, be revived, set up and taken again in the same manner by
the said Acts mentioned to continue for the space of fifteen Years from the
passing of this Act, and that the Moneys thereby arising, be employed for the
repair of the said Highways within the said County of Hertford, with a
Proviso, That if the said Highways Upon adjudication of ^mendment of the
Highways, the Toll to cease.
before the expiration of the said Term of fifteen Years be in good and
sufficient repair, and an adjudication thereof to be made at the Assizes, or
the General Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the said County (as is
provided by the said Statute of 16 and 17 Car. 2.) the Tol^ shall from
thenceforth cease and determine as in the said Act is directed and appointed;
and it is farther provided by this Statute of 4 and 5 of their present
Majesty's Reigns, That the several Officers and Persons empowered in and by the
said Acts, to the purposes therein, mentioned, so far as may any ways concern
or relate to the said County of Hertford shall have (...) like Powers and
Authorities by virtue of this Act, as they and every of them had by virtue of
the said former Acts; and that all Clauses, Provisions, Penalties, Forfeitures
and Exceptions whatsoever, therein mentioned concerning the collecting, pay^ng,
engaging or accounting for the ^^id Toll at Wades Mill be by virtue ^f the said
Act renewed and put in execution again during the continu^nce of this said Act,
as if they were particularly expressed and repeated in (...) same.

CHAP. XIV. How new Ways may be set out in the Welds of Kent and Sussex, and
how, and by whom Kings Ferry in the Isle of Sheppy, and the Ways belonging to
the same, with the Sea Banks and Sea Works on the Coasts of Norfolk are to be
repaired; and what the Owners and Occupiers of Iron Works are to perform or pay
toward the repair of the High*ways in Sussex, Sur^ey and Kent.
ANY Person within the Welds 15 H. 8 chapter 6. and 26 H. 8. chapter 7. Statutes at
large printed 1587. f. 537, 538. and f. 638, 639. Highway, Rast. 1. Keb. Stat.
printed 1684. f. 366. sect. 3* 4* 5. and f. 448. sect 3. Lamb. (...), lib. 3.
chapter 1. D^^ J. P. printed 1677. f. 108.
of Kent and Sussex (with the assent of two Justices of the Peace of the
County, and twelve discreet M^n of the same Hundred, or other Hundreds
adjoining) may assign and lay out a new Way in and over the Lands adjoining to
an old Way for the more commodious passage of the People, the said Person or
others to his use being seized in Fee in Estate of Inheritance of the Lands
over which the said new Way shall be laid out, and having no respect of profit
to accrue thereby; and such so setting out a new Way, shall have the Soil of
the old Way in severalty to him and his Heirs in recompense of the said new
Way; and within three months after the setting out of any such new Way, the
said two Justices and twelve Men are to certify into the Chancery under their
Seals, the length and breadth of the said new Way or Street, and of other
things adjoining and concerning the same; but such assignment of a new Way, and
seizing the Soil of the old Way in severalty, shall not debar any Person or
Persons, or Body Politic of their Church Way, or Way to their Lands as
formerly they had, at such convenient places through the old Way or Street as
shall be assigned by the said two Justices of Peace and other twelve Men, and
by them certified into the Chancery in form as aforesaid.

Kings Ferry in the Isle of Sheppy 18 El. chapter 10. Stat at large printed 1587.
f. 610, 611. Highways 12.
in the County of Kent, and the Ways leading to the same, to be maintained Rast
Keb. Stat. f. 860. sect. 10, 11.
by an Assessment and Tax to be laid on every Year by the Jury impannelled and
sworn at the Court or Lawday to be held at Kingsborow within the said Isle, the
Monday next after the Feast of Pentecost upon themselves, and all other the
Inhabitants and Land Occupiers of the said Isle, an Acre of Fresh-marsh and
Upland not to be taxed above one penny in the year, and ten Acres of Salt-marsh
one penny; and all other Profits given for the maintenance of the said Ferry,
are to be levied, recovered and received by the Ferry-Warden, and the
Assessments to be distrained for and levied upon the Estreats of the Steward of
the Court as other Amerciaments are used to be, and to be bestowed by the
Ferry-Warden upon the repairing and amending the said Ferry and Ways, and he to
give account to the Ferry-Warden to give account of Monles received, etc.
Steward and Homage the next Lawday following, and to pay in the Arrears in his
Hands to the next Ferry-Warden on pain to forfeit double of such Arrears to be
levied as other pains in the Court be, and employed to the maintenance of the
said Ferry; and three Justices of the Peace (one to be of the Quorum) next
inhabiting to the Town of Middleton in the County of Kent may assess all Land
Occupiers dwelling out of the Isle of Sheppy, and within four miles distant
from the Ferry, not exceeding in one year the Rates above mentioned for fresh
and salt Marsh, and to appoint (...) Collector or Collectors for the same, who
are to employ the same upon the Highways leading from Middleton to the said
Ferry, and to give account thereof yearly to the said Justices.

Then by the Statute of 27 Eliz. 27 El. ch 26. Stat. at large printed 1587. f.
723, 724. Highways 7. Rast. Keb. Stat. f. 890.
Six, five, four or three Justices of the Peace inhabiting within eight miles
of Middleton in the County of Kent, may lay a Tax upon the Grounds lying
without the Isle of Sheppy, and within four miles distant from Kings Ferry
there, and raise such Assessments toward the Highway leading from Middleton
to Kings Ferry, as to them shall seem reasonable, though the Owners or
Occupiers of the said Grounds be dwelling without the compass of four miles, so
as every Year one Acre of Fresh-marsh be not charged above one penny, nor ten
Acres of Salt-marsh not above one penny, notwithstanding the other Statute.

The Justices of Peace within the 27 El. chapter 24. Stat. at large printed 1587 f.
722. Highways 4. Rast. Keb. St. f. 890 sect. 2, 3.
County of Norfolk may yearly at any General Sessions held for the said County,
appoint so many of the public Day-works as are set out for amending the
Highways as they think are superfluous for that Work, and employ them for and
toward the making and amending the Sea Banks or Sea Works there, which shall
needfully require any such amendment; and every Person so appointed (and
chargeable to the amendment of the Highways within three miles of the said Sea
Banks or Sea Works) shall yearly upon reasonable warning given during so many
days as shall be appointed in the Sessions in respect of his or their Labor
and Carriages stand and be charged toward the amendment of the said Banks or
Works, as by the Statutes of 2 and 3 P. and M. chap. 8. 5 Eliz. chap. 13. and
18 Eliz. chap. 10. they stand charged for the amendment of any Highways, under
the like pains and forfeitures contained in those Statutes for their not
performance; and the Justices to appoint Surveyors.
said Justices at their said Sessions to appoint the High-Constables of every
Hundred chargable toward the amending the said Banks or Works to be Surveyors
thereof, who are to take the Office upon them under the like Penalties
contained in the said Acts against Surveyors of the Highways refusing to take
the Office upon them; and the Persons employed toward amending of the Sea
Banks or Sea Works aforesaid, to (...) discharged for so many days toward the
amending of the Highways as they are employed in the other Work; (...) all
Penalties and Forfeitures to be (...) in manner and form as in the Statutes
aforesaid are limited and appointed.

Occupiers of Iron-Works as Owners 39 El. chapter 19. Dalt. J. P. printed 1667. f.
107, 108. Keb. St. printed 1674. f. 630. sect. 3, 4, 5. Lamb. Eirenarcha P. 305
and 475.
(...) Farmers for Life, Years or at Will, (...) any Coals, Mine or Iron to
(...) for any their Iron-Works in any Year between the twelfth day of October
and first day of May, for every (...) Wain or Cart Loads of Coal (...) Mine,
and every Tun of Iron (...) within the said time by the space of one mile in
any Highways within (...) Wields of Sussex, Surry, Kent, or (...) of them,
shall pay three shillings to (...) next Justice of Peace dwelling near (...)
places in the said County where the Highways shall be most annoyed, or (...)
his Assigns, and upon default of payment Distress to be made for defaults
to be levied by the said Justice or his Assigns, by distress of the parties
goods within the County that should have (...) same; and for every thirty Loads
(...) Coal and Mine, or either of them, and every ten Tuns of Iron to b^
carried by such Persons between the first day of May and twelfth day o^ October
in any Year, one Load o^ Cinder, Gravel, Stone or (...) to be by them laid in
such pla^^ where the Highways within the Limits aforesaid shall be most
annoyed as any Justice of the Peace of any o^ Justice of Peace to assign places
where Cinders, etc* are to be laid.
the said Counties dwelling near the same, shall appoint, or else to pay ^^ the
said Justice or his Assign thre^ shillings within eight days after demand made
at such Iron-Work, t^ or from which any Carriage shall b^ for and in allowance
of every Ca^ Load so to have been carried and lai^ as aforesaid, to be levied
by (...) after default of payment upon demand; and if such Justice of the Pea^^
do not within forty days yearly afte^ the first day of May appoint (...) the
said Cinder, Gravel, etc. shall b^ laid, or where the Money due or pai^ for the
same shall be bestowed, th^^ the same shall be laid where the Su^veyors of the
Highways within (...) Surveyors in default of the Justice of Peace to assign
Places.
Parish so annoyed shall appoint, or (...) default thereof pay to them thr^^
shillings for every such Load due an^ uncarried in manner and form (...), on
pain of ten shillings for every Load of Cinder, etc. not carried and (...) in
the Highways, or the three (...) unpaid as aforesaid, to be paid by such
Person as ought to have (...) and laid the same, or to have (...) as aforesaid,
after Conviction and Presentment thereof had before the (...) of Oyer and
Terminer or Justices of the Peace in any of their open (...), to be levied by
distress by any Distresses by whom to be taken.
Constable, Tythingman, Headborough (...) other Officer thereunto assigned
(...) Warrant made in open Sessions by (...) Clerk of the Peace of the County
(...) the Offense is committed, or (...) any two Justices of the Peace (one
(...) be of the Quorum) which were (...) at the Sessions upon the (...), and to
be bestowed upon the (...) of the Highways at and by (...) discretion of any
such Justices of (...) Peace living next the places most (...) by the said
Carriages; and no distress can be found, or the (...) be not paid by the
Offender (...) twenty days after demand (...) by the said Officer appointed,
(...) then upon such denial and (...) within twenty days as (...), to forfeit
double the Sum he should have paid, to be levied by such ways as any two
Justices of the Peace of the same County where the Offense shall be committed
(one to be of the Quorum) shall be thought most Penalties how to be bestowed.
meet, the same to be likewise employed upon the amendment of the Highways;
and upon default of the Justices assigning where the Cinders, etc. are to be
laid, or the forfeiture of Moneys to be bestowed, then the Surveyors of the
Highways within those Parishes where the greatest Annoyance shall be within
twenty days after such default shall assign the place on pain of forty
shillings for every default, and they are also upon like pain to make demand of
the Forfeitures to be paid in default of Carriages, according to the Limitation
of the Act, and to make presentment of every such default of carriage or
payment at the next General Quarter Sessions to be holden for the said County
where such defaults shall be, upon pain also of fort^ shillings, one moiety to
their Majesty's and the other to the Informer that wi^^ sue for the same in any
their Majestie^ Courts of Record.

CHAP. XV. The Heads of the Statutes made for paving, repairing and maintaining
the Streets and Lanes in Cambridge, Ipswich and Chichester.
BY the Statute of 35 H. 8. Bridge-Street, 35 H. 8. chap. 15 Cambridge R^st. 2
St. at large printed 1587. f. 998, 999, 1000. Keb. St f. 601.
Highward-Street, the Marketplace, and all other common Streets and Lanes in
Cambridge, that then were or had been paved, were to be sufficiently paved
before Lammas following, by Persons holding any Houses, Lands, Tenements,
Gardens, Yards, Orchards, Barns, Stables, Cottages, Curtilages or other Grounds
or Soils there, in Fee-simple, Fee-tail, Frankalmoign, by Divine-Service, Term
of Life or Years, etc. in length as far as their Premises reach to the midst of
the Street, on pain of twelve pence for every Yard square not paved within
Which was Lammas 1545.
the time, and six pence every Yard not kept in repair; and Jesus-Lane,
Blacksriers-Lane, with the Ways leading to Barnwell, and so through the Town to
Sturbridge, Harlestone-Lane, St. Giles-Lane, and the Lane leading from St.
John's to the Waterside, and all other common Back-Lanes not then paved, nor had
been paved, to be repaired and amended with Gravel and other things by such
Owners and Possessors as aforesaid, before the said time, on pain of two
shillings for every Pole not repaired, and twelve pence for every Pole not kept
in repair afterward; The Chancellor, Enquiry of Defaults to be made twice in
the year.
Vice Chancellor or Deputy, and Mayor and Bailiffs or Deputy, with such four
Assistants as they think fit, two of the University and two of the Town, twice
in the Year, at Easter and Michaelmas, or within a month after to make enquiry
by the Oaths of twelve Men, as well of Scholars Servants as Inhabitants of the
Town, of all Defaults, and to set Fines at discretion, those set on the Fines
set and imposed, how to be (...) and disposed of.
Scholars, or Scholars Servants, to be gathered by the Bedel for the use of the
University, and those set on other Persons to be levied and gathered by the
Chamberlain of the Town, or such Officer as the Mayor shall appoint to be
employed to the use of the Town; and the Chancellor, Vice Chancellor and Mayor,
and other Officers aforesaid, neglecting their Duty therein, or delaying or for
bearing for Favor or Reward by the space of six Weeks after any one of the
said Feasts to forfeit five pounds, half to the King, and half to the Informer,
that will sue for it in any of the Kings Courts; and Paviers not to take above
one penny farthing for every Yard square paving, or six pence a day and find
himself, on pain to incur the Penalties comprised in the Statute of Winchester
made for Artificers and Laborers; Lessees that lay out Moneys for paving or
repairing as aforesaid, to defalk so much out of their Rents, unless it be
otherwise agreed.

The Streets of Ipswich in the 13 Eliz. chap. 24. Ipswich 1. Rast. St. at large
printed 1587. f. 552, 553. Keb. Stat. f. 844.
County of Suffolk, and Suburbs thereof (by the Statute of 13 Eliz.) were to be
paved with good paving Stone; and for ever repaired by the Owners, Landlords
or Ter-Tenants of Houses, Lands or Tenements within the same Town in
Fee-simple, Fee-tail, or for Life or Years, along, from and against their
Houses, Lands and Tenements adjoining to the Street, viz. So much of the said
Street in length as his House, Lands and Tenements so adjoining extends unto,
and in breadth during all the said length to the Channel, or to such place as
the Channel there shall be appointed by the Bailiffs upon pain to forfeit for
every Yard square, not sufficiently repaired and amended, eight pence, to go to
the use Forfeitures how to be disposed.
of the Town, toward the amendment of the Haven there, and Streets adjoining
to any Church or Churchyard to be paved and repaired at the Charges of the
Parishioners, to be indifferently rated by the twelve Headboroughs or the
major-part of them; and the Bailiffs once every quarter of a year to enquire of
Defaults by the the Oaths of twelve Headboroughs, and upon presentment to levy
or cause to be levied by distress or lawful means the said Forfeitures and Sum
of Money so assessed, and may make such Avowry, Cognizance or Justification as
by the Common Laws may be made for Arrearages of Rentcharge, and shall have
like Judgment, Costs, Damages and Return.

All and singular Person and Persons* 18 El. chapter 19. Paving Rast. 7. Stat. at
large printed 1587. f. 618, 619. Keb. St. 1. 863.
their Heirs and Successors which shall be immediate Owners, Landlords or
Ter-Tenants of any Houses, Lands or Tenements within the City of Chichester, in
Fee-simple, Fee-tail, or for Life or Years, shall from time to time by the
assignment of the Mayor for the time being, pave or cause to be paved with good
paving Stones, along, from and against his or their House and Houses, Lands and
Tenements adjoining to the Street, so much of the said Street in length to the
Channel, or to such place as the Channel there shall be by the Mayor appointed,
Pain for not paving.
upon pain to forfeit for every Yard square not sufficiently paved within two
months after warning thereof given by the major-part, upon the Presentment
thereof made before him, by the Oaths of twelve honest Men of the said City
chosen for that purpose, the Sum of three shillings and four pence; and the
Owners, Landlords and Ter-Tenants of any House, Houses, Lands or Tenements in
Feesimple, etc. within the said City adjoining to any of the greater Streets
there called the East, West, North and South-Streets, their Heirs and
Successors shall from time to time maintain and repair the said Street and
Streets so adjoining, with like Stone against their Houses, etc. in such like
manner as above declared, in pain of twenty Pain for no^ keeping Streets in
repair, and w^ll paved.
pence for every Yard square not sufficiently repaired and amended, and being
presented in manner and form aforesaid, which Forfeitures shall be to the use
of the Mayor and Citizens toward the maintenance and repairs of the City
Walls; and the Mayor for Mayor to make inquiry every quarter of a year, and to
levy Penalties by distress
the time being shall have power every quarter of a Year to enquire of the
Defaults, by the Oaths of twelve Men, and to levy or cause to be levied the
said Forfeitures by distress or other lawful means, and make such Avowry,
Cognizance or Justification as by the Common Laws may be made for Arrearages of
Rent, and have like Judgment for Costs, Damages and Return: The Lessee for
Years or at Lessees to defalk out of their Rents.
Will may defalk and abate so much out of their Landlords Rents, as they shall
expend in such paving, i^ there be no Covenant to the contrary.

CHAP. XVI. An Abstract of the Statutes made for repairing Huntington-Lane near
the City of Chester, the common Highway called the Cawsey lying in the
Counties of Dorset and Somerset, between the Towns of Shaftsbury and Sherborne,
and for amending the Highways within five Miles of the City of Oxford.
BY the Statute of 37 H. 8. Huntington-Lane 37 H. 8 chapter 3. Highways Rast. 2.
Stat. at large printed 1587. f. 1011. Keb. St. f. 606.
near the City of Chester, being in length two miles, and an half, or
thereabouts, is to be repaired from time to time by one that shall dwell in the
said Lane, who shall have Grass, Pasture or Feeding for five Kine, or five
other kind of Beasts or Head of Cattle, in and upon the said Highway, and upon
the sides of the same, from Bothil to Butterback-Bridge, Sir William Stanley
and Sir Hugh Calverly and their Heirs Males being of full Age (and in default
of them) the Mayor and Aldermen of Chester shall appoint the said Party, and
remove him if he be negligent in repairing any part of the said Way.

By the Statute of the first of Queen 1 M. Sess. 3. chapter 5. St. a^ large printed
1587. f. 230, 231. Shirbone Rast. 1. Keb. St. f. 716.
Mary, The common Highway called the Cawsey, paved with Stone in the Counties
of Dorset and Somerset between the Towns of Shaftsbury and Sherborne, being
about twelve miles in length, shall be repaired and amended Who chargable to
the repairs.
by the Owners, Tenants, Farmers and Inhabitants of the Manors, Lands,
Tenements and Parishes lying nigh to the said Cawsey on either side thereof,
and by the Inhabitants of the Towns of Shaftsbury and Sherborne, and by the
Owners, Tenants and Farmers of Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and
by the Inhabitants of, and within the Forest of Gillingham, and Liberties of
Gillingham and Alcetter, and the Hundreds of Redlane and Sherborne in the
County of Dorset, and of the Hundred of Horthorne in the County of Somerset,
and Justices of Peace ^o make Orders and set Fines.
the Justices of Peace of the said Counties at their Quarter Sessions, or
otherwise, may call before them, or four of them at the least (two to be of the
Quorum) so many of the Persons bound to repair and amend the said Cawsey as
they think fit, and to make Orders and Assessments from time to time toward
the repair thereof, and may set Fines on Defaulters, and make Orders for
levying by distress the said Assessments and Fines, and for a yearly Account to
be made of the same to whom they appoint; and the said Orders to be entered and
enrolled of Record by the Clerks of the Peace of the said two Counties in the
Rolls of the Sessions; and all Pains and Pains and Penalties how to be bestowed.
Penalties to go toward the amendment of the said Cawsey; and if the Justices
refuse to put this Act in execution, then upon request of the Lord Chancellor
of England, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal shall make a Commission to certain
discreet Persons to put this Act in execution, who shall have the same Power
and Authority as is given to the Justices of Peace by this Act.

It is enacted by the Statute of 18 El. 18 Eliz* chap. 20. Bridges Rast. 4. St.
at large printed 1587. f. 619, 620* Keb. St. f. 863, 864
That every Person and Persons resident, dwelling or inhabiting within five
miles of the City of Oxford, and having in his Occupation, to the use of
himself or any other, a Yard-Land or more* in Tillage, Pasture or other Ground,
or using a Draught, Plow or Wain at their own proper Costs and Charges, for
every such Yard-Land is to send one Wain, Draught or Cart furnished after the
Custom of the Country, with Necessaries convenient, and two able Men for
amending, repairing and upbuilding of decayed Bridges, Ways and Passages within
a mile of the said City, and every other Householder, Cottager or Labourer
within the said Circuit (being no hired Servant) must go themselves, or send a
sufficient Labourer to the repairing the same, and all to be at the command of
certain Supervisors to be appointed by the Vice Chancellor and Mayor, with
other Justices of the University and City, and do their Carriages and Labors
by the space of six days, between the Feast of St. John Baptist and the Feast
of All Saints, upon twelve days warning given or sent in writing to the
Vice Chancellor and Mayor, or either of them, to the Constable or other Officer
of the Place that ought to serve, and every Person making default, does for
every days default, or any part thereof forfeit five shillings, to be levied
and employed for the amendment of the said Bridges and Cawseys, and the Persons
making default, and making no reasonable composition for the same, then the
Vice Chancellor and the Mayor, or other their Officers to distrain, and keep
and detain the distress till the Forfeitures and Charges of keeping the
distress be paid: But by the Statute of 35 El. chapter 7. Keb St. f. 913. sect. ^^.
35 Eliz. this last Article was altered, and it is provided that no Person or
Householder living within five miles of Oxford, and not having in possession a
Yard-Land, shall be chargeable with any thing toward the amending the said
Bridges and Highways; and that Every Yard-Land to pay four pence, and none
else chargeable.
such as have a Yard-Land or more in possession, lying within the said compass,
shall pay yearly the Sum of four pence for every Yard-Land before the Feast of
Pentecost, to the Vice Chancellor and Mayor, or their Deputy or Deputies
toward the amending of the said Bridges and Highways, and no other Penalty,
with like Remedy by distress for the same, being due and not paid, as is
limited and appointed by the other Statute of 18 Eliz. chap. 20.

Note, That Virgata Terrae, or a Co. Lit. f. 5. a. 69. a. Terms of the Law and
Blounts Law Dict. verb. Yard-Land, and Lamb. Exposition of Words.
Yard-Land, called by the Saxons Girdland, and now the G. is turned to Y. is in
some Countries ten Acres, in some fifteen, in some twenty, in some twenty four,
in some thirty, and in others forty Acres, and so does not contain any certain
quantity of Land, but is various according to the Custom of the place where it
lies.

CHAP. XVII. The Heads of the two Statutes made in the 18 and 27 Qears of Queen
Elizabeth for the maintenance and repair of Rochester-Bridge in the County of
Kent.
THE morrow after the General 18 El. chapter 17. Stat. at large printed 1587. f.
616, 617. Keb. St. f. 863.
Quarter Sessions of the Peace holden next after Easter in Kent, the Wardens
and Commonalty of the Lands Contributory to Rochester-Bridge, or so many of
them as can conveniently attend, shall for ever assemble at the Castle of
Rochester near the Bridge, and there elect by the most Voices, two Persons of
the same Commonalty, such as are Housekeepers, and commonly resident within
the County of Kent, and are healthful and can attend the Office, to be Wardens
of the said Bridge, and twelve Persons of the said Commonalty to be Assistants
to the Wardens for one whole year after the Feast of Pentecost then next
following, at which said Elections Absence of House holders at the Election of
the Wardens forfeit 10 s. a piece, 27 El. chapter 25. Stat. at large f. 723. Keb.
f. 890.
of Wardens and Assistants, two Householders at the least out of every Parish
within seven miles of the said Bridge wherein any Contributory Lands lie, shall
be present to give their Voices at the said Elections; and the two Wardens thus
chosen shall do their endeavor for that Year to benefit the said Bridge, and
shall receive the Fines, Rents and Revenues of the Lands belonging to the
Bridge, and of all Contribution Money payable to the use of the same Bridge, and
shall answer and pay out of the same as cause shall require; and the new
Wardens so New Wardens bound to the former Wardens to make account and elected
Wardens being absent to have notice sent in writing.
chosen, if then present, shall be bound to the former Wardens to make account
of all Receipts, and payment of Arrearages found upon the same; and if any who
is chosen Warden, shall be absent at the time of Election then notice shall be
given by Letter sent by one or both of the former Wardens, and delivered at the
Dwelling House of such absent Person elected, on pain of five pounds; and every
such absent Person so elected before the Feast of Pentecost then next
following, before the Custos Rotulorum of that County* or two Justices of the
Peace of the same County (one to be of the Quorum) shall become bound to render
Account and pay of Arrearages as Forfeiture of Warden refusine to be bound, and
how choice is to be made of another in such case.
aforesaid; and every Warden elected as aforesaid, refusing to become bound, to
forfeit ten pounds, to be recovered by the former Wardens in an Action of Debt
for the use of the Bridge; and if any refuse to stand, notwithstanding the
Fine, or being elected and bound, dies before the end of the Year, then at the
Quarter Sessions of the County to be held in convenient time next after such
death or refusal, and before the said presixed day of Election, a new one of
the Commonalty qualified, as aforesaid, shall be chosen by the said Justices at
the Sessions, and by the other Warden and twelve Assistants, or majorpart of
them present at the Sessions, to serve to the end of that Year, who at a
convenient time to be then prefixed, shall become bound as aforesaid, under the
pain above limited; and at the Election of new Wardens and Assistants, all
other Officers concerning the said Bridge and their Stipends, shall be
appointed by the said two elected Wardens; and the old Wardens Old Wardens
every year to account upon Oath in the presence of the new Wardens.
shall every Year account, upon Oath, on Thursday in Whitsun-Week, in the
presence of the new Wardens, or of one of them, and such four of the Assistants
as are assigned to be Auditors in the House called Crown-Inn in Rochester, or
at some other place appointed, and none of the Assistants or Auditors so
assigned, to be absent at the Account, on pain of ten pounds; the Wardens and
Assistants, Wardens and Assistants to consent to and subscribe Leases of the
Bridges Lands, and for what Term.
or major-part of them, are to consent to, and subscribe to all Leases made of
the Bridges Land, which Leases shall be made but of such effect as Tenant in
Tail may do, by the Statute of 32 H. 8. chap. 8. save Leases of Houses not
having three Acres of Land belonging to them, which may be made for fifty
Years; and every seven Years shall be made a Terrer of the Lands leased; and
When Owners or Tenants of contributary Lands may be Taxed. 18 El. chapter 17.
Stat. at large printed 1587. f. 617. Keb. Stat. f. 863.
Owners Tenants of Lands contributary to the maintenance of the said Bridge,
shall not be assessed to pay toward the maintenance thereof, but only when
the Rents and Profits of the Lands belonging to the same be not sufficient; and
then in such 27 El. chapter 15. Stat. at large f. 722. Keb* Stat. f. 890.
case the two Wardens and more part of the twelve Assistants shall Tax all the
contributary Lands, Rating every Parish where those Lands be, proportionably at
such Sums of Money to be paid as by the said Wardens, etc. shall be appointed,
in writing under their Hands and Seals, for which Money any persons by them
appointed may distrain, and sell the Distress, rendering the overplus, if any
be, to the Owners of such Distress.

CHAP. XVIII. An Account of the Statutes of the 39 and 43 Eliz. made for
repairing and maintaining the Bridges at Wilton upon Wye, in the County of
Hereford, and Edon and Prestberk Bridges in Cumberland.
BY the Statute of the 39 Eliz. 39 El. chap. 24. Keb. Stat. f. 933. Bridges
Rast. 8.
the Inhabitants of the County of Hereford were to build a Bridge at Wilton
upon Wye, near the Town of Ross; and every laden Cart, Carr, or Wayn driven
over the said Bridge What Pontage or Toll to bae paid.
shall pay two pence, and every Horse laden with a Pack one penny, and every
ten Sheep, and under twenty, two pence; and every twenty Sheep three pence, and
every five Beasts or above, and under twenty, two pence, and every twenty
Beasts six pence, and so proportionably according to that Rate, to be taken as
Pontage; and two Burgesses of the Town of Four Collectors to be appointed.
Ross, and two Freeholders of the County of Hereford to be yearly chosen
Collectors of the said Pontage, to whom, or to their Deputies it shall be
lawful to distrain and impound any persons Sheep, Beasts, etc. refusing to pay
the said Pontage: And the Collectors Ten pounds per Annum to be p^id to Charles
Bridges and his Heirs.
shall yearly pay to Charles Bridges, his Heirs or Assigns (upon whose Lands
the Bridge was ordered to be built) ten pounds, at the Feast of St. Michael;
and the said Collectors Collectors to Account yearly
shall yearly make account of the Profits of the said Pontage; and a provision
in the Act to discharge them and their Heirs that do yearly pay Corn to the
Keepers of the passing there for their Pontage.

The County of Cumberland shall 43 El. chap. 16. Bridges Rast. 9. Keb. Stat. f.
957.
stand chargable for erecting, maintaining, repairing and new making of Edon
Bridge, and Prestberk Bridge, standing over the River of Edon, and as often as
need shall require, and for the assessment, raising, collecting and employing
of such Works and Sums of Money, from time to Assessment according to 22 H. ^.
chap. 5.
time as shall be needful for the Building and Repairing of these Bridges, and
such form and order shall be observed in all things, by and through the said
County, as is appointed by the Statute 22 H. 8. cap. 5. ordained for the repair
of Bridges: but the Inhabitants of the Lordship of Milham Inhabitants of Milham
not chargeable.
shall not be chargeable with any Contribution thereunto.

CHAP. XIX. How Chepstow Bridge standing between the Counties of Gloucester and
Monmouth is to be repaired and maintained.
THE Counties of Gloucester and 3 Jac. 1. chap. 23. Keb. Stat. f. 1119. Bridges
Rast. 10.
Monmouth shall for ever maintain and repair Chepstow Bridge over the River
Wye, viz. the County o^ Gloucester from the midst of the said Bridge for that
part or moiety tha^ lies on that side unto the Lordship of Tyddenham and the
County of Monmouth, from the midst thereof for that part or moiety that lies
on that side unto the Lordship of Justices to Tax Inhabitants, appoint
Collectors and Surveyors. Keb. ibid f. 102^* sect. 4.
Chepstow, any four of the Justices of Peace (one to be of the Quorum)
respectively, in either of the said Counties, to Tax all the Inhabitants of the
said Counties, as well within Liberties as without, at such Sum as they think
reasonable and fit, and to cause the Names and Sums of every particular person
to be writ severally in Rolls indented; and to appoint Collectors of every
Hundred of either of the said Counties, severally within the limits of their
Authorities; which Collectors receiving several parts of the said Rolls under
the Hands and Seals of the said Justices, are by virtue thereof to collect and
receive all Collectors to distrain for nonpayment, and pay money to Surveyors,
Keb. ubi supra.
the particular Sums of Money therein contained, and to distrain upon such as
refuse, and to sell the Distress and retain and receive all the Money Taxed,
rendering the overplus, if any be, to the Owner; and the said Justices are to
appoint four Surveyors for the said Bridge, two for each County to whom the
Collectors shall pay the Moneys by them levied and Collected to be employed for
the repairing of the said Bridge, and shall make indented Rolls to be
Subscribed interchangably between them and the Surveyors, mentioning the time
and payment, and to make account when required, to the said Justices Collectors
and Surveyors to account to the Justices. Keb. ubi supra.
respectively, in either of the said Counties, wherein they are appointed
Collectors or Surveyors, how the Money is expended: And upon refusal to account
or to pay without delay (for the uses aforesaid) such part thereof as shall be
found in their Hands, to such person or persons as the said Justices
respectively, in either of the said Counties at their Quarter Sessions shall
nominate and appoint; then the said Justices may make process Process to be
made out against Surveyors and Collectors for not accounting or not paying.
Keb. ibid. f. 1021. sect 4.
against them and their Executors and Administrators, by Attachment or Capias
under their Seals, retornable at their General Sessions of the Peace, and if
they appear, to compel them to account and pay, and upon refusal to commit them
to Prison, there to remain without Bail till they perform; and the said
Justices of the said Counties respectively are to take care that one part of
all the several Rolls, containing all Taxations be kept amongst the Records of
the Sessions, that it may always appear how much money is Taxed, etc. and the
Justices (after request made Justices penalty for neglect. Keb. ubi supra,
sect. 5.
(...) any two Inhabitants of the County where they are Justices) shall forfeit
^orty shillings a piece for every month^y negligence or default by them
committed, in not taking order as the Act directs for reparation of the Bridge
from time to time: All Forfeitures Forfeitures, ^o^ to be recovered* Keb. ibid.
f. 1022. sect. 8.
to be recovered in any of the Kings Courts of Record, by Action of Debt, Bill,
Plaint or Information, and after recovery to be divided into four parts, one
part to the use of the party that shall sue, and the other three parts toward
the repair of the Bridge.

CHAP. XX. Cardiff, Newport, and Carlion Bridg^ in Wales, how to be repaired.
THE County of Glamorgan i^ 23 Eliz. chap. 11. Bridges Rast. 5. Statutesat
large, Printed 1587. ^. ^^1. 162, 163. Keb. Stat. f. 852.
South- Wales, and the Tow^ of Cardiff therein, standing near unto the River of
Toff* shall jointl^ proceed together to the Re-edifying the Bridge there, viz.
the Count^ shall always bestow five parts of the Charges, and the Town of
Cardiff one part* and so for every five pounds payable by the County, the Town
of Cardiff and Liberties shall be charged with twenty shillings; and from time
to time, for the maintaining the said Bridge, shall defray all such Charges as
shall be necessary in like proportion: and two Justices of the Justices of
Peace to Assess and appoint persons to Collect and Levy. Keb. ubi supra.
Peace (one of the Quorum) shall Assess the Places and Inhabitants within their
several Jurisdictions, and appoint persons to gather the same, who may distrain
for the same, and sell the Distress, according to the Statute 22 H. 8. chap. 5.
and upon refusal or opposition, imprisonment till they ^onform to abide the
Order of the ^ustices.

The Inhabitants of the County of 39 Eliz. chap. 23. Bridges, Ra^^. 7. Keb.
ibid. f. 933.
Monmouth shall stand chargeable for the making and repairing of New^rt and
Carlion Bridges over the River of Uske, as need shall require; and such Order
shall be observed for the assessment, gathering, and employing of the Money
thereupon to be spent, as is appointed by the Statute of 22 H. 8. chap. 5. But
no Town Corporate shall be chargeable to be contributary thereunto, which is
bound by any Law to make or repair any Bridge over any main River.

FINIS.

