The Praise of Yorkshire Ale

Wherein is enumerated several Sorts of Drinks, with a Description of the
Humors of most sorts of Drunckards.

To Which is added, a Yorkshire Dialogue, in its pure natural Dialect, as it
is now commonly spokenin the North parts of Yorkshire.

BEING A Miscellanious Discourse or Hotch-potch of Several Country Affairs,
begun by a Daughter and her Mother, and continued by the Father, Son, Uncle,
Niece, and Landlord: after which follows a Scold between Nell and Bess, two
Yorkshire women.

Corrected and Amended, with large Additions in many places throughout the
whole Book, by the Author, And after all, a Clavis explaining the meaning of
all the Yorkshire words in the Dialogue.

By G. M. Gent.

^ORK, Printed by J. White, for Francis Hil^^ard, at the Sign of the Bible in
Stonegate, 1685.

To the READER.
Reader, here is sportive mirth, and harmless Droll,
Come buy and read, and laugh thy Belly full.
When thou have done, if thou condemn me for it,
Then I have made my self, and not thee sport;
That man is too morose, and much to blame,
That does condemn all mirth to be profane:
All Ages have of lawful mirth allowed.
If too much time in it were not bestowed;
Here thou have mirth, with small expense of time,
I Have taken pains, the pleasure will be thine.
Vale, G. M.

Ad Momum,
Carpere vel noli, nostra vel Ede tua.
Or Carpe not at these Lines of mine,
Or cause for to be published thine.
The praise of Yorkshire-Ale, wherein is Enumerated several Sorts of Drinks,
with a Description of the Humors of most Sorts of Drunkards.
BAcchus having called a Parliament of late,
For to consult about some Things of State,
Nearly concerning the honor of his Court,
To The Sun, behind'th Exchange, they did resort:
Where being met, and many things that time
Concerning the Adulterating Wine,
And other Liquors; Selling of Ale in Muggs,
Silver Tankerds, Black-Pots, and little Juggs:
Strong Beer in Rabits, and cheating penny Cans,
Three Pipes for two pence; and such like Trepans:
Vintners small Bottles, Silver mouthed black Jacks,
Papers of Sugar, with such like cheating knacks:
Biskets, Luke Olives, Anchoves, Caveare,
Neats Tongues, West-Phalia-Hambs, and such like Ch^
Crabs, Lobsters, Collar Beef, Cold Pullets, Oyste^
And such like Stuff, which make young men tur^ Royste*
And many other things were then debated,
And Bills past, upon the Cases stated;
And all things ready for Adjournment, then
Stood up one of the Northern Country men,
A Boon good fellow, and Lover of Strong Ale,
Whose Tongue well steeped in Sack begun this Ta^
My Bully Rocks, Ive been experienced long
In most of Liquors, which are counted Strong:
Of Claret, White Wind and Canary Sack,
Rhenish and Malago, I Have had no lack;
Sider, perry, Metheglin, and Sherbet.
Coffee and Mead, with Punch and Chocolet:
Rum and Tea, Azora wine, Mederry,
Vin-de-Paree, Brag, wine with Rosemdry:
Stepony, Vsquebath, besides all these,
^qua Caelestis Cinnamon, Hearts-ease:
^rave Rosa Solis, and other Liquors fine,
^asberry Wine, Pur-royal, and Shampine
Malmsey, and Viper-wine, all these I pass:
^rontineack; with excellent Ipocras:
Laced Coffee, Twist, Old Pharoh, and Old Hoc
Juniper, Brandy and Wine de Langue-Dock.
Mum, Cherry-wine Langoon, and ^emonad,
Sherry, and Port a Port, both white and red.
Pomgranate, Myrtle, and Isope-wine I know,
Ipres and Orleance, Coos, and eke Anjow,
Burgundian-wine, Coecubum, Sage and Must,
Fennel and Wormwood-wine have past my Gust,
Hydromel, Mulsom, wine boiled with Southernwood
Opimium, Smirna, and Bi^on good:
Temetum, Lora and brave Muskadel,
Rumney and Nectar too that does excel:
Sicilian, Naples and Lorain Wine,
Moravia, Malta and Corsica fine:
Tent, Muskatine, Brandy, and Alicant,
Of all these Liquors I Have had no scant,
And several others; but none do I find,
Like Humming Northern ALE to please my mind*
It Is pleasant to the Taste, strong and mellow,
He that affects it not is no boon Fellow.
He that in this drink does let his Senses swim,
There Is neither wind nor storms will pierce on him*
It warms in Winter, in Summer opes the Pores,
'Twil make a Sovereign Salve against cuts and fores*
It ripens Wit, exhillerates the Mind,
Makes friends of foes, and foes of friends full kind*
It Is Physical for old Men, warms their Blood,
Its Spirits makes the Coward's courage good:
The Tattered Beggar being warmed with Ale,
Nor Rain, Hail, Frost, nor Snow can him Assai^*
He Is a good man with him can then compare,
^t makes a Prentise great as the Lord Mayor:
The Laboring Man, that toiles all day full sore,
A pot of Ale at Night, does him Restore,
And makes him all his Toil and pains forget,
And for another day-work, he is then fit:
There Is more in drinking Ale, sure then we wot,
For most Ingenious Artists, love a Pot:
Nay amorous Ladies it will pleasure too,
Make frozen Maids, and Nuns, and Virgins do
The thing you know; Soldiers and Gown-men,
Rich and poor, old and young, lame and sound men
May such advantage reap by drinking Ale,
As should I tell, you would think 'twere but a Tale;
Mistake me not, Custom, I mean not tho,
Of excessive Drinking, as great Ranters do,
For that would turn a great Wit to a Sot,
^ mean the merry Quibling over a Pot,
Which makes dull Melancholy spirits be,
For Critics and great Wits, good Company.
Oh the rare Virtues of this Barley Broth;
To rich and poor it is Meat and Drink and Clot^
The Court here stopped him, and the Prince did sa^
Where may we find this Nectar, I thee pray,
The boon good Fellow answered, I can tell,
North-Allerton, in Yorkshire does excel
All England, nay all Europe for strong Ale,
If thither we adjourn, we shall not fail
To taste such humming Stuff, as, I dare say,
Your Highness never tasted to this day.
They hearing this, the House Agreed upon
All for Adjournmenr to North-Allerton:
Madam Bradley's, was the chief house then nam'^
There they must taste this noble Ale so famed,
And noised abroad in each place far and near.
Nay, take it Bradley for strong Ale and Beer,
Thou have it loose, there is none can do so well
^^ brewing Ale thou do all else excel.
Adjournment day being come there did appear
A brave fullhouse, Bachus himself was there.
This Nectar was brought in, each had his Cup,
But at the first they did but sipple up
This rare Ambrosia, but finding that
'Twas grateful to the Taste, and made them chat
And laugh and talk, O then when all was out,
They called for more, and drank full Cans about;
But in short space, such strange Effects it wrought
Amongst the Courtiers, as Bachus never thought
Or dreamed upon: his wise men it made Fools,
And made his Counselors to look like Owls.
The simple sort of Fellows it made prate,
And talk of Court Affairs, and things of State:
And those that were dull Fellows when they came
Were now turned nimble Orators of Fame.
And such of them were thought to be no Wits,
Were Metamorphis'd into excellent Poets:
Those that were lame, and came there with a staff,
Threw't quite away, which made the Prince to laugh,
The Cripples which did Crutches thither bring,
Without them now did hop about and sing:
Some over the Stools and Forms did skip and leap,
Some knac't their fingers, no plain word could speak
Some shak'd their legs and arms with great delight,
Some cursed and swore, and others they did fight;
Some antic tricks did play like a Baboon,
Some knit their brows did shake their heads and frown*
Some Maudlin drunken were, and wept full sore,
Others fell fast asleep, begun to snore:
Thousands of Lies and Stories some did tell,
Their tongues went like the Clapper of a Bell,
Others were tongue-ti'd, could not speak one word
And some did cast their reckoning up at Board.
Some sung aloud, and did deaf their fellows
Making a Noise, worse than Vulcan's Bellows:
Some were for baudy Talk, and some did shout;
Some mist the Cup, and poured the Liquor out?
At every word, some did their Neighbor jump,
And some did often give the Board a thump.
Some were all Kindness did their Fellows kiss,
Some all bedaub'd their clothes, and mouths did miss:
For Arguments some were and learned discourses,
Some talked of greyhounds, some of running horses,
Some talked of hounds, and some of Cocks o'th game
Some naught but hawks, and setting dogs did name:
Some talked of Battles, Sieges and great Wars,
And what great Wounds and Cutts they had, and Scarrs
Some very Zealous were, full of Devotion,
But being Sober then had no such Notion,
Some there Were all for drinking healths about
Others did rub the Table with their Snout:
Some pissed in the fire, others threw out their snuffs,
And some were mad to be at handy Cuffs.
Some swore that they would have a Serenade,
Others did call their Hostess Whore and Jade:
And round about did throw the Cups and glasses.
The drink did fly into their Neighbors Faces:
Some were for Bargains, some for Wagers ^aying:
Others for Cards and Tables cried for playing:
Some broke the Pipes, and round about them threw,
Some smoked Tobacco till their nose was blew.
Some in the fire fell and singed their Clothes,
And some fell from their Seat and broke their nose
Some could not stir a Foot, did sit and glore,
Some sought the house all over for a whore,
Some called for Mussck, others were for a dance,
And some lay staring, as if in a Trance.
Some calld'd for Victuals others for a Crust,
Some opened their Buttons and were like to Burst.
Some challenged all the people that were there,
And some with strange invented Oaths did Swear
Some told how many Women they had used,
Others at such discourse were sore Amused:
Some shirk'd their drink, did put away the Cup,
And some took all that came left not one Sup:
Some whilst they Sober were would nothing pay,
But being drunk, would all the Shot defray;
Others whilst sober, were as free as any,
But when once drunk, refuse to pay one penny?
Some were for News, and how the State of things
Did stand amongst great Potentates and Kings:
Some all their Friends and Neighbors did backbite,
And some in Jearing others, took delight;
Some of their Birth and Riches made great boast.
And none but they were fit to Rule the Roast:
Some filled the Room with noise yet could not speak
One word of English, Latin, French or Greek:
Or any other Language which one might
Put into sense, and understand aright:
Some Laughed, until their Eyes did run on water,
And neither they, nor others knew the matter:
Some so mischievous were they without Fear,
Would give their chiefest Friend a Box on'th Ear:
Some were so holy, that they would not hear,
Words either that Profane or Smutty were:
Some in a Melancholy posture laid,
Others did cry what is the Reckoning paid:
Some burnt their Hatts, others the Windows broke
Some cried more Liquor we are like to Choke
Some pissed their Breetches, Sirreverence your Nose,
Some not only pissed but all be -- their Hose:
Lame Gouty Men, did dance about so sprightly,
A Boy of fifteen scarce could skip so lightly:
Old crampy Capts that scarce a Sword could draw,
Swore now they would keep the King of France in, Awe.
And new Commissions get to Raise more Men,
For now they swore they were grown young again:
Off went their Perriwigs, Coats and Rapers,
Out went the Candles, Noses for Tapers
Served to give light, whilst they did dance around
Drinking full Healthes with Caps upon the ground:
And still as they did dance their round-delayes,
They all did cry this drink deserves the Bays,
Above all Liquors we have ever tasted:
It Is pity that a drop of it were wasted:
A Stranger coming by, did hear the Noise,
He stepped into the house to see the Boys:
Such sights he saw, as he never see before,
Which made him Laugh until his sides were sore,
His Horse did follow, and saw their Quaffing,
He Neigh''d aloud, and broke his Girts with laughing
These Antic Sights made Bacchus to admire,
And then he did begin for to Enquire:
What Privileges were bestowed upon
This famous Ale Town of North-Allerton,
The Answer was, that it was only known,
To have four Fairs in the year, a Bourrough-Town,
One Market every week and that was all,
This moved Bacchus presently to call
For a great Jug which held about five Quartss
And filling't to the Brim; come here my Hearts
Said he, we will drink about this merry Health,
To the Honor of the Town, their State and Wealth
For by the Essence of this Drink I swear,
This Town is Famous fot strong Ale and Beer;
And for the sake of this good Nappy Ale,
Of my great favor it shall never fail,
For to promote the quick Return and Trade,
For all strong Ale and Beer, that here is made
So to it they* went, and drunk full Healths about,
Till they drunk Money, Wit, and Senses out:
For whilst one drop of Ale was to be had,
They Quaft, and drunk it round about like mad.
When all was off, then out they pulled the Tapps,
And stuck the Spiddocks finely in their Hats,
And so Triumphantly away they went,
But they did all Agree with one Consent
To Easingwold they then away would pass,
With Nanny Driffield there to drink a Glass:
For Bacchus having heard of her strong Ale,
He swore by Jupiter, he would not fail
To have a merry about if he did find
Her Nappy Ale to please his Princely Mind:
When they came there a Flaggon was brought in,
Hold Gentlemen, before we do begin,
Cries one Boon Blade, let me declare to you,
Some things which I of this same Ale do know:
So bowing to the Prince, he thus began,
May't please your Highness, and you Gentlemen:
I Have Traveled through the most parts of France,
As Picardy, Bress, Bretaigne and Provence:
Normandy, Bevois* Poictu and Champaigne
With Aquitain Bu gundy, and Lorrain:
Geneva, Savoy. Languedock; also
Within the Kingdom of Spain Oniedo:
Lean, Navarr, Corduba, and so on
Through Biscay, Toledo, and Catelone:
Castile, Valentia, Venice, Florence,
Mantua, Millain, Vrbin, St. Lawrence:
Portugal, Naples, Italy, Holland,
Germany, Denmark, Sweedland, Poland.
Hungary, Muscovia, Cephalonia,
Turkey, Transylvania, and Sclavonia:
Media, Persia, and Mesopotamia,
Palestine, Armenia, and Arabia;
Parthia, Syria, Caldea, and Tartary,
East and West Indies, China, and Barbary:
Numidia, Lybia, and Mexicana;
^thiopia, Egypt, and Messena;
^eru, the Grecian Isles, Sicillia,
^anary Isles, Corsica, and Sardinia.
^hese Country Wines, and other Liquors rare,
With Englands humming Ale can not compare:
^or in my thoughts it does most drinks excel,
and this same Nappy Ale does bear the Bell:
^bove most Ale: for herein is such Art,
^ome when you will it is neithe Sweet nor Tart,
^ Summer, Winter Weather, Rain, or Fair,
Thunder, Sunshine* Misty or serene Air:
Frost or Snow, Morning, Noon, or Night,
^^ whem you please this Ale is always Right:
neither thicker, nor thinner, nor paler,
^or higher Colored, Newer, nor staler:
^onger, nor smaller, it has no Fellow,
^eeter nor sowrer, but always Mellow:
And fit to drink what time so^'er you come,
This is the pure strong British Islands Rum;
Hold, cried the Prince, for thou now more have said,
Of this same Ale, then is Truth, I am afraid:
Ye Gods, the Prince then Cried, if this be true,
I Will leave my Government of Wine to you;
And list my self, among Ale Boys that are famous,
For now, Paulo majora Canamus:
So let us* now fall on, fill up my Can,
Let each one take his Cup, observe his man,
And let us drink, until we all be Tipsie,
Ego tuquoque, ille and ipse,
Vive Le Roy, great Bacchus then begins,
God bless him cried the Courtiers and his Friends;
This Health and several others went about,
Then growing warm, they all set up a shout;
Most famous Ale, if we thy worth had known,
Then we had hasted soone^ to the Town,
Oh Ladds said Bachus I never thought to have found
^ch pleasant Nectar, here on English ground
^ wonder any will himself Confine
^om bousing Ale to swill himself in Wine:
^he Juice of Grapes shall be no more o'th Quorum,
^t Nappy Ale, Hordia Far a Forum.
Wine's but an Ass, when Ale does come in play,
^ it be like the Ale we drink this day:
^all in my Land-Lady let her Appear,
^amous she is for brewing Ale, I swear;
and I a badge of Honor will bestow
upon her without fail, before I go;
^d so a Clerk was called to Exemplify,
^he Letters Pattents following, daintily:
^chus Prince of good Fellows; To all to whom
^hese our brave Letters Pattents shall now come,
^hereas wee've bin Informed now of late,
^et Nanny Driffield our great Court and State,
For many years last past has much advanced,
By her strong humming Ale and as it chan^
We having ample Proof thereof, so now
We of our Princely grace, would have you kno^
This Land-Lady unto the Noble State
And Honor of a Countess, we Create:
And by our merry Fudling Subjects, She
Countess of Stingo henceforth called shall be.
To The Pattent then was fixed a Black Pot,
In a fine Silk Lace, twisted on a knot:
Upon the Countess it was then bestowed,
The Noble Courtiers all stood up and Bow^
Long may your Honor Live to Brew such A^
And of your Art we wish you never fail;
Bachus then took a great full Flagon up,
And drunk the Countess health left not one S^
To an old Blade, the Prince said, thou shall follo^
Then, Tu-eris mihi magnus Apollo.
Each of the Courtiers did then pledge the same,
And now in earnest did begin the game:
The new made Countess to gratify them all,
For an Hogshead of her choicest Ale, did call:
Upon the Hogshead Bachus got astride,
Now Ladds said he, this Ale is Deified.
A Countess, a Countess, they then proclaimed,
You all the Country over, will now be Famed:
Drink Prince she said, and all ye Noble Crew;
Drink till such time, ye wade your Noses blue:
Here Is Ale said they, so pure, so clear, so fine,
It is more grateful to the taste then Wine:
Nay this same Ale will make the World admire us
Efficit Ingenios nobilis Ala Viros:
This famous Liquor, we know does far outgoe
The Poets Nectar and Ambrosia too:
The Gods Nepenthe with it cannot compare,
This is the Sovereign Antidote against Care.
Some Townsmen hearing this, Listened a while,
Then into'th House they went, begun to smile;
You Are welcome Gentlemen, sit down said the Prince
And do as we do: if it be no Offense
The townsmen said, we will join our selves with you,
And try this day, to whom Honor is due
Whether to Wine or Ale; it shall be Tried,
Agreed Agreed, they with one voice all Cried
The Townsmen did perceive the Courtiers warm,
Six in a hand says one will do no harm:
You Grape Boys now shall know before we part,
Wines not the only Nourisher of Art:
When Recubans sub Teguine Fagi
We drink strong Ale: it makes us of the Magi.
Well said, cried Bacchus, about then let it go,
As long as any here can shake a Toe:
For as Scribendo disces Scribere,
Just so Bibendo disces Bibere:
O brave Colonus see it go about,
And let us now all Join set foot to foot,
And drink all off, I Will not contend for praise,
From henceforth this same Ale shall have the Bays
Wine shall not once be named, where this comes in,
He that names Wine that day commits a Sin,
We Will all be merry, I Will hear no Clamor,
Let Us drink and sing, O^inia vincit Amor.
Health upon Health did post about with speed,
Till all the Courtiers were sore flusht indeed:
Qui Color albus erat, with a Faldo,
I plainly see Nunc est contrarius Albo,
One Townsman said: let us our hold now keep:
And we shall quickly lay them all to sleep,
Bumpers and double Tankerds did go round,
Bachus from's hogshead Throne, fell to the ground,
Some forwards fell, backwards, and sidewayes some,
Till on to the Floor, they all did tumble down:
Let Us throw them on an heap, a Townsman said,
And Sing a Catch about them; I have made,
Agreed they cried the Wine Boys this shall know,
That they to good Ale Topers, now must bow:
Lett's throw the God above, He Will spoil his Cloth;
Marry says one, I think he is broke his Nose,
He has all bedaub'd his Suit of Tabby,
But Sort tua contentus Abi,
Said they; The Catch begun then by the Blades,
The Tune is, Hail unto the Myrtle Shades.
The Song.
1.
COlonus and Bacchus did meet,
Each one to commend his own Liquor;
The Juice of the Grape was sweet,
But Barley Oil ran down the quicker:
Colonus did challenge the Gods,
To sight in defense of his Barley,
But Bacchus perceiving the odds,
Desired a Friendly Parley.
2.
They drunk full Bumpers about,
And Bacchus an health did begin,
The Bacchanalians gave a great shout,
The Colonians then thronged fast in:
They drunk double Tankards around,
Till the Grape Boys begun for to Glore
The Rusticks near flinched their ground,
Till Bacchus fell down on the Floor:
3.
Colonus did heartily Laugh,
And about the God they did dance,
Full Pots about they did quaff:
Whilst Bacchus lay still in a Trance.
The Grape Boys were beat out of play,
And at length poor Bacchus did Rise:
To Colonus he yielded the day,
So the Rusticks obtained the Prize.
Just as the Catch did end, they rubbed their Eyes,
They Yawn'd and gaped, and did begin to rise:
Oh Gentlemen, the Townsmen said you now,
We hope the force and power of Ale do know:
Faith Bacchus said wee'r forced to yield the day,
For you have beat us quite, Pinch out of Play:
O Wine I formerly did thee adore,
But thou said he shall have my heart no more:
Boy lead our Horses out when we get up,
We Will have with you, a merry Stirrup Cupp:
Then we to Famous York will have away,
For thither we will adjourn the Court this day:
The Horses were lead out, they mounted all,
And each of them did for a Flagon call:
Well Sirs said they, we yield the day's your own,
We Will try again next time we come to Town,
Agreed the Townsmen said, come when you will,
You Will find us true blue Fudling Bulies still:
They drunk about, the Townsmen pledged the same
So took their leaves till they should meet again
At parting they did kiss, and Bachus swore,
He never met with such boon Blades before:
Well noble Boys said He, before't be long
I hope our Lot will be to sing a Song;
Great Bacchus when you come the Townsmen said
Come well prepared, for we are not afraid:
Farewell good Lads said he, and so away,
They took their journey unto York that day:
When they to York were come, they roved about
From House to House to find such Nectar out
As they had tasted last at length they heard
At Parkers Coffee-house in the Minster Yard:
They several sorts of strong Ale there would find
Some of which Ale would surely please their mind
Unto this place they went, and Crowded in,
Come Wench said they, with strong Ale we will begin
Sirs said the Girl, wee've Ale that is strong and old,
Both from North-Allerton, and Easingwold.
From Sutton, Thirke, likewise from Rascal Town,
Wee've Ale also that's called Knocker-down:
Well bring a Tankerd of each in, you Maid,
We Will taste them every one the Courtiers said;
The Ale came in each man a Tankard had,
They tasted all; And swore they were full glad
Such Stingoe, Nappy, pure Ale they had found:
Lett's loose no time said they but drink a round:
And cheer our Spirits up with this good Creature,
For Miser est, qui Nummos Admiratur.
About and about it went full merrily,
Till some could neither go, stand, sit, nor see,
Vir sapit qui pa^ca loquitur; if true
The wisest in the Company is you,
Said one, to's Opposite beyond the Table,
Who was so drunk, to speak he was not able:
They called and drank till they were all high-flown,
And could not find their way into the Town,
They staggar'd too and fro, had such lite heads,
That they were guided all unto their Beds:
And in the Morning when they did awake,
They cursed and swore that all their heads did ache;
O Yorke-shire Yorke-shire: thy Ale it is so strong;
That it will kill us all, if we stay long:
So they agreed a Journey for to make
Into the South, some Respite there to take,
But in short space again they said they would come,
And Taste some more of this same Yorkshire Hum:
Nay Bacchus swore to come he would not fail,
And glut himself with Yorkshire Nappy Ale:
It is so pleasant, mellow too, and fine,
That Bachus swore he would never more drink Wine.
The Conclusion.
Now I have done, and will hold a piece on it:
That, Nil hic Nisi Carmina desunt.
Some men will say perhaps, here is no wit,
Let such then know, Ex Nihilo Nihil fit.
FINIS.
A Yorkshire DIALOGUE In its pure Natural DIALECT As it is now commonly spoken
in the North parts of Yorkshire.

Being a Miscellaneous Discourse or Hotch-Potch of several Country Affairs,
begun by a Daughter, and her Mother, and continued by the Father, Son, Uncle,
Neese, and Landlord, after which follows a Scould between Bess and Nell two
Yorkshire Women.

Note that D. stands for Daughter, M. for Mother, F. for Father, S. for Son, V.
for Uncle, N. for Neese, and L. for Landlord.

Reader here is Folly come and Laugh thy fill, He near did good, that never did
no ill.

YORK Printed by J. White, for Francis Hildyard at the Bible in Stonegate. 1684.

A Yorkshire Dialogue in its pure natural Dialect, etc.
D. MOther our Crockey's Cawven sine't grew dark,
And Ise flaid to come nar, she macks sike warke,

M. Seaun, seaun, Barn, bring my Skeel and late my Tee:
Mack have and hye thee ore to the Laer to me:
Weese git a Battin and a Burden Rape,
Though it be mirke, weese late it out by grape:
Then we will to the Field and give the Cow some Hay
And see her Cleen before she come away:
For flaid she git some watter before she Cleen.
And mar her Milk, Ise greet out bath my Neen:
D. Whaugh Mother how she rowts, Ise varra Arfe,
She Will put and rive my good Prunella Scarf:
Ise ding thy Harnes out, thou base mucky Sew,
Thou macks sike Anters, thou'l mistetch my Cow:
What need thou be seay flaid, she will nut mell,
Nor hipe, if there war nean here but thy sell:

D. Wally, wally, here is a deft Tinye, Cawfe,
It Is better than a Keausteril behawfe,

M. But pratty macks nea Porridge Tibb, ift wa^
A Keausteril, it wad yield mare money far:
It Is newly gitten Feaut, tack haud on it Tibb,
We Will Suck'lt weel, and put it into'th Cribb,
And Bed it strangly with good clean Streay,
And see it lye'th sell down, before we geay;
It liggs bravely, for it hardly can be seen,
It'l git neay Cawd, it is bedded up to the Even:
Good Beddin Tibb, will mack if Battin we will,
Now I will milk some Beestlings into'th Skeel;
Our Why is better Tidded than this Cow,
Her Ewr's but swampe, Sh^e's nut for Milk I trow^
You wait nut yet of Croky what to say,
Preaufe of a Puddin's in the eating always:
She Is daft yet on her Cawf, in a day or tweay
You Will see, wheather she be for Milk or neay;
Now let us hame and late for Bowls and Sile,
Thy Fatther'l meause whore wear all this while.

F. Ise nut far, is it Cow Cawv'd that is a Goodin,
Now Tibb weese git some Beestling Pudding:
Letts spang our geates for it is varra Snithe,
And Ise flaid Wife it will be Frost Belive;
Leauk yonder is it Lad coming to late for you,
He Would be in Bed to Morn we gang to Plewe:

M. Wya, wya, did'th Pot play when you com,
wheay keauks the Supper now when Ise fra Hame
What Hobb is it Beef aneugh, is it Groats put in,
Till all war deaun, I know thou wad nut lin:

S. Ey Mother, Groats are in Iv'e taken of'th Pot,
And 'th Cael I seaure are caud anough to sup:
M. Come tack up'th Beef Tibb, is it Dubler ready,
Thy Father and Hobb, mun gang to the Smiddy,
And fetch the Specks, Sock and Cowlter hither
Seed time's now come they mun saw Haver:

F. Come Tibb for sham bring out the bread and sawt
Thou's lang a coming, thou braids of Haver Maut
Thur Cael taste strange of Reeke, they are nut for me,
God sends meat and'th Deevil sends Ceauks I see:

M. Marry geaupe stink, you're varra dench'd I trow
Your Belly sarraes an ill Master now:
They'ro're good for them that finnds faut I seaure,
But as the Sew does fill the Draffe does sour:

F. Thou wad feign persuade us they are gooddins,
Hungry Dogs are fain of durty Puddins:
Come thou and taste them, and sit down in the chair^
Meay the merryer, but fewer better Fair.

M. But you will nut let me be merry lang
I seaur, for there is always something wrang
They that have sike as you, can have neay will
To deau ought, A good Jack macks a good Gill,

F. I pray thee Pegg let us be Friends again,
Thou knaws fair words duz mack Feauls fain,
It is weel spoken, that is weel taken I Have heard,
Thou is seay Crabb'd, to speak Ise always feared:

M. You set yan on unscape, and than you rewe,
Great matters of an angry word I trow;
Stride Tibb, and clawt some Cassons out o'th Hurne,
Than geay thy ways and fetch a Skeel of Burn,
And hing the Pan ore'th fire ith Rekin-Creauk,
And Ise wesh Sile, and Dishes up 'ith Neauke:
And then we will all to Bed; here is a cawd Neet:
But Husband Ise cling close, and weese blend feet

F. Pray thee deau Pegg, than Ise git up 'ith Morn
And Late some Pokes, and put up our seed Corn:
Than thou may sarra Gawts and Gilts with Draffe,
And Ise give'th Yawds some Hinderends and Caffe,
Than for our Breakfasts thou may haet some Cael^
Till I lie by my Shackfork, and my Flail;
And Hobbs mack ready my Harrows, and my Plewgh
And he and I Pegg fall deau weel aneugh;
I Have heard it tawk'd and now the Truth I Have fund
A mell tweay Steauls, the Tail may fall to the grund
I lited on Hobb, and he lited on me,
And the Dee'l a thing is ready that I see;
Neither Traces, Hames, nor Baurghwans to finnd,
Swingle-Trees nor Helters, all is made an ill end:
But tweay days sine, Ise seaure they war all here
Flung on an heap ith midst of our Laer Fleaure.

S. Fatther they are liggin all on our Faugh Lands.
I trail'd them there my sell with my awn hands,

F. Thous a good Lad my Hobb that teauk sike care
Is It Yoakes and Bows and Gad and Yoaksticks there:

S. Ey, ey, and 'th Pleugh Staff teau, Hopper and Teems
We lack naught but a Bay Stagg of my Neems,
That wee're to Yoke 'ith Plewgh before our Yawds
And than Ise seaur weese rive up all Adawds,

F. Near rack, near rack, weese tack neay thought for that
Ise seaur that it will bide us billing at.
Our Land is t^wgh, and full of strange whickens.
Cat whins, and Seavy Furs, and monny Breckins:
It Is naught but Gorr, it ploshes under Feaut,
Weese find Trouble aneugh when we come teaut:

S. Lythe ye, lythe ye, how fondly you tawke,
You think weese mack monny ilfavart Bawke;
When we do Plew, we mun tack teaume I Reed.
I Have heard Fowks often say mare heast warse speed:
The Feck on'ts Gripp'd, and 'th watter runs away,
I was at field my sell, and saw't to day:
It will bring as good Blendings I dare say,
As ever grew a Reaut in onny Clay;

F. Our Eard is nut for blending Hobb I dout,
We mun saw it with Bigg I trow, or naught:
Gray Geause hes laid, geay carry in her Egg,
Tibb dar nut come to fetched, for flaid o'th Stegg,
Than goame steek'th Hemble deaur, and bar up Grise
For they have been in a mischief twice or thrice;
Let Us nut loase an Hogg for a hawpworth of Tarr,
But mind to Noint'h Gawt Ear it will all mar,
Our Perry garr'd him run, and lugg'd him sayer,
I thowght that he had riven off his Ear:
The Libber coms to Moarn, weese libb'th awd Piggs
For they have made filthy warke ot'h Corn Land Rigs

S. Fatther our Bull Segg's puslom'd, he is degrees bownd
And our awd Mere is slidden into'th Pownd,

F. Wellaneerin, wellaneerin, run fast run,
Run fast Hobb, and bid my Maugh Herry come:
And bring his Horn, and give our Segg a drink,
Mack have or else Ise whang thee till thou stink:

V. How now Hob thou reeks fair, what macks ta run
What uncuths hes ta brought come tell me seaun,
Our Yawd's laid backwards, Bull Seg is like to dee
And seay Ise come for you to gang with me:
V. Marry Ise vara weay, for that is ill warke,
Ise flaid weese nut git there, before't be dark,

F. That Is weel your come, the Segg is at Stand Heck
What ails this deaur, I cannut finnd out'th Sneck:
That comes in an hour, sometimes they say,
That comes nut in Twenty, He was weel to day,
And preaz'd to git ore'th Hedge into our Fogg,
And I did Slate him back than with our Dog;

V. Is this him that liggs here, He Is Teng'd he will dee
Lets stick him, there is neay whopes of him I see
He Is pratty meeterly Flesh, here is a good Skin,
He Will mack good Cael, and put fat Backon in,
Lets gang and see your Sheep, what ails yon Teaup,
I think something hes stamped upon his Feaut:
Thur Yowes are Clowelagg'd, they skitter saire,
They Will be full of Mawks if you tack nut Care;
I think they have gitten some fresh whewts of Girs^
That macks them seay beclarted about'th Arse
Ise like to clem let us Hame Maugh to our Pegg,
She Will kedge our kites with good Kirne-milk, and whig^

V. Sister heve you ought that will slocken weel*
You Have Whigg 'ith Stand, and good Kirn-milk 'ith Skee^
Fill me 'th bend Kit Ise set it to my pact,
I Will venture a strange pull though I be haet,
Here Is fine Backon Sister its glore Fat,
But it is a little knarl'd with your Carl Cat,

F. It Is small warse Pegg whores our Haver Riddle,
Last time I saw't it was laid ive our Stable:
Ise like to tawme this day's seay varry warm
Your Bees macks a great noise, you will have a Swarm
Wheay has remmond 'th side Lanyels some ill Foal
I laid um here, under the Awmry soal,
Can neathing ligg that is leeter than a Stane
We sall heve naught left seaun, all will be gane
All things run wrang Wife, neathing Cottens weel
The Spindle is a Ravel'd, neay Garn o'th Reel,
Thy Rock is burnt, thy Sneauskin is quite gean,
I Have lated sayer, and can nut finnd it Dame;
Our great whean Cat hes eaten'th Pudding poke,
You goam neathing, I never saw sike Fowke:
Our Kitling meyw'd, I meaus'd what she did aile,
I trail'd her out 'oth Ream Kit, by the Tail;
Our Sew hes been 'ith Spence, thrawn down Whigg Stand
I set it up again, with my awn hand:
Perry hes been ith Beef Tubb teau just now,
And maed as bad, or warse warke, than our Sew:
The Ewn for lack of Dittin, hes slake'd all'th heet.
Puddings and Pyes are daugh nut fit to Eat,
Thy Sammaron web thou sent to the Bleacher well,
^s stown, gray Geause Geslings all daz'd 'ith shell:
Our Bakin I put up 'ith Harden Seek,
The Milners let it fall into the Beck.
Ways is me Husband, our awd Bread's all gane
We mun mack bannocks till'th Bakin come hame

F. It comes ith Earnder Wife or else by Neaun,
Come bring my Slippers Tibb, and deet my Sheaun
To Morn 'ith Ownder we mun dod our Sheep*
The Weathers haet and Mawkes begin to Creepe^

M. Some's feal'd our Backston Tibb, or else it is gan^
Ise varra flaid some's gitten't for'th lang lane:
If I cud tell wheay's cut our Band fra'th Sneck,
Next time they come, Ise mack them Jet the Heck,
Thou geayes Tibb like a Feaul, come leauke about,
And see if thou can late our Backstane out:

D. There is seay monny Holes and Hurles to seek
That Ise near finnd it, if I late this Week:
Some Tantril hes been here and Stown't away,
For it was liggin here, but the other day:
Whilk ways our Hobb gane Mother, here is base wark^
Yonder Is Gawt ith Garth, hes riven all his Sarke
What Is warse than ill Luck, late me our Fruggin
Ise stopp'th Yat, till thou mack Perry lugg him:

F. Here'st Dubler broken, and nowther sowl nor breau
And Ise seay howl, I know nut what to deau:
The Fatt's all storken'd here, a sham to see,
I wad this grisely Cat war hanged for me,
Hame's hamely, if it be near seay poor they say,
And wee're but like to have poor Fair to day:
Here Is mad warke Hobb, speer'th deaur and flay back 'th Cat
There'st Backon in her Mouth, hit her a bat:
Weel deaun Hobb, hesta gitten't leauke it is there,
It Is little warse, it is traild' ith mucky Fleaur,
Here'st Gully liggin, call thy Mother seaun,
Ise scrape it cleen, Ise seaure it is now past Neaun,
Fie, Fie, If we would nut come just when we did,
We Would been misliken'd of our Dinners Pegg:

M. How seay I whemmeld Dubler owr'th Meat,
To keep it seaf and warm for you to Eat,

F. But'th Cat had eaten't all if we would nut been,
Dubler's broken, thou may trust thy nawn Even;
This Backon macks me Sweat it is varra sawt,
And its all reasty teau, that's a warse fawt:

M. They that eat til they sweat, and work till they't Cawd,
Sike Fowkes are fitter to hang than hawd:
Yan knaws nut how to please you you are seay fickle
Sike Feauls as you, are in Dockin out Nettle:
All things are reet abroad, but naught at Hame,
You Will finnd a faut I seaur whore there is nane:

F. I wad fain see a Fine Sun shiny day,
Here Is wancle Weather for gitting of our Hay,
What ails our Tibb, that she urles seay ith Neauke
She Is nut reet she leauks an awd farrand Leauke:

D. Fatther Ive gitten Cawd, I can scarce Tawk
And my Snurles are seay sayer stopped, I can nut Snawke
Nor snite my Nose, my Teeth Datther in my head
Ise grown seay Healdy, I mun gang to Bed:
I may thank my sell for sitting barehead,
^ut wilful Fowkes, Duz never want weay its said.
How duz my Cosen Tibb Naunt I mun nut stay,
(...) hard she gat a Cawd the other day,

M. Ey wellaneerin will ta gang and see,
^he's aboonith Chawmber, thou may clim upth Stee
^hees on a Dovening now gang Deftly Nan,
And mack as little din as ee'r thou can:

^. Your mains flaid, there is an awd saying you know
That there is neay Carrion can kill a Craw:
^ she be nut as dead as a deaur Nail,
^e mack her flyer, and semper like flesh Cael;
Thou Covers Tibb, I see thou's nut yet dead,
Leauk at me Woman, and hawd up thy Head;

^. Ah Nan steek'th winderboard, and mack it dark,
My Neen are varra fair, they stoun and wark,
Tey are seay Gunny and Furred up some time,
^ can nut leauke at Leet nor see a Stime,

N. Come, come, I can mack thee Leetsome and Blithe,
Here will be thy awd Sweetheart here Belive.
He teld me seay I saw him but last Neet,
O Tibb he is as fine as onny Kneet:

D. Nay Nan thou duz but Jybe, there is neay sike thing,
He wooes another Lass, and gave her a Ring:
For Change of Pastures macks fat Cawves it is said,
But Change of Women macks lean Knaves Ise flaid
I thought he loved me weel, he made sike show,
But all is nut Gowd that glisters, I see now,
Over micle of yea thing, I Have often heard say,
Is good for neathing: and seay I finnd this day,
He was over keen to hawd as he began,
He was seay fond in Love as near was Man,
But I may lie me down now, Seigh and Sob,
He cares neay mare for me now than a Dog:

N. Away, away great Feaul tack thou neay Care
He swears that he will love thee for evermare;
And says as ever he whopes his Saul to save,
He Will either wed to thee, or tull his Grave;
Ways me he never meawted thou was ill,
But all is weel that ends weel I can tell:
He had come titter Tibb, if he had knawn,
Thou war seay Ill, what woman he is thy nawn;
He says he would leather tack thee in thy Smock,
Then some with Fifty Pund, means is but Muck:

D. Thou macks me laugh Nan, if all be true thou says
I whope that than Ise see some Joyful days,
He Is made me heve monny a sad Heart,
I thowght he would left me and wad nut tack my part:
But then sometimes I thought it is a black Crake,
That never to her sell can get a Make:

N. The reason why he duz nut cume and gang,
He says Love me leetly, and Love me lang
There Is luck in leizure, he would heve your loves tack hawd
He says he is heard that haet love is seaun cawd:
He can love the House weel that hes Tibb in,
And nut be always Rideing o'th Riggin
Next time he comes he will tell thee all his Mind:
Seay be nut Stanfra but loving and kind:
And let him kiss and grape teau if he will,
Thou's near warse woman, for there is nean can tell.

D. He Is had neay want of that, w ch macks me think
The Proverbs true that proffered things duz stink:
The things that we heve deaun Ise arfe to tell,
But I suppose thou's deaun the same with Will:

N. Pray thee tell me Tibb, tell me woman seaun
And I Will tell thee what Will and I heve deaun,

D. If I sud tell the Reeks that we heve had*
Thou'l kittle seay, it'l mack thee just stark mad:

N. Thou sets me now Agog until I hear,
Thou need nut blush come whisper me 'ith Ear:

D. What need I whisper, thou knaws young women will,
To git a Lively Lad, use all their skill,
He kissed me first, did grape my Breests and than,
Went lawer down, thou knaws what teau dear Nan

N. Tell me I pray thee what did he Tibby,
Did he beat a Larum on thy Stiddy:
I know that thou wad let him deau it gratis,
If yance he gat but to thy Nunquam satis:
Then thou wad cleave like Ivy to a Tree,
Come thou may tell here is neayn but thee and me,

D, I dare nut tell for flaid now of my Motther,
Pray thee be quiet Nan thou's sike another,
I will nut tell unless thou will declare
What Will and thou did when you went to the Fair

N. When Will did git to mine within an Inch,
O Tibb, how I did kittle than and winch:
I blush to tell what followed after that,
Young Men will heve a bit Tibb for their Cat:

D. Wheesht, wheesht, my Mother's coming up I hear
And she is heard all our Tawke Nanny I fear:
I dare nut speak a word now less or mare,
For if she hear she will whang me varra sayer,

N. Wad she war hanged, that cud nut stay belawe,
I had as leeve be fel'd, as nut all know:
Ise hear all out, when I have time to stay,
My Naunts just here now, farewell I Will away
I mun be ganging now, Ise seaure its time,
I Have nowther been at Kye, nor sarra'd 'th Swine.

M. What ista ganging Nan will thou nut stay,
How comes thy Clathes seay flurr'd Barn this Lownd day.
Thou's never Tite there is always something wrang,
Wad ta saw thy sell thou great Gammerstang:
For sham Woman Reet um down as ta geayes
Ise seaur thou hes neay mence near in thy Clayes
Beseaur hereafter, Thou tack better Care,
For Meat is Mickle but Mence is mare:
Yonder Is our Owse is loppen over the Yate,
Nan Slate him back, as thou gangs up'th Town gate;
N. Naunt I Will nut mell, Outless he war our awn,
What is it weaud Owse, that hiped at our Brawn,

M. Nea nea great Stags what a durdam thou macks,
It Is him that brack down'th railes, to the haver stacks
When thou gangs up the Town, thou'l know him seaun
He Is a fine Flan Head, and a pure brown Greaun,

N. Here Is your Hob coming let him gang his sell
I tell you plain, I Will nowther mack nor mell:
I heve neay time now up the Town to Rame
There is odd Charrs for me to deau at hame:

M. Husband is Hob gane to fetch back'th weaud Owse
A we bit sine out o'th Fawd garth brack lowse

F. If he can but dree, I saw him yeaud up'th Town,
And seay I think he is gane to slate him down;
Our Hay was seay ill gitten this wet year,
It hes nea Feausan in it at all, I swear,
My Maugh did say, this Hay'l be naught you will see,
I finnd an awd Ape now, hes an awd Ee:
Wife what is become of my Spatterdashers,
Pray thee yeaud up'th Greese and fetch'th Gamashaes
For I mun gang to the Field, and fetch some Hay
And give Ilkin o'th Drapes some while I stay,
There is a Rencky Cow that beats all'th rest,
And till I Fothet'd them I never wist,
The Other hes Book and Bane, and are as tall
And yet she macks um run on Snocksnarles all*
Bring me our Hay Spade Hob, hushta good Lad
Tack teaum, and gome thy feet what ista mad*
Some Roguehes Stown our Cawfhouse deaur away
Mind Hobb if thou can Speer it out to day,
Outapont how that Hen gobbles up all'th Groate
Thur Birds are all Cumber Ise cut their Throat^

M. You Have setten'th Hen a Flowter, and she did fettle
To git her Birds all under the Lang Settle:
She gat a Gliffe o'th Dog, hit him a Nawpe,
Or else Ise tack up'th Tengs and break his Scau^
F. What a durdams here, thou macks great warke
Theyl heve their gutts stamped out when it grows dark

M. Stand by Caingell, let me crum um some Bread
Ise arfe to put them out, because o'th Glead,

F. What a whanck's there, if thou sike wast do mack
I mun late'th Needle whore it never stack;

M. They Will yield some money, though it be little,
And ^monny* a little duz mack a Mickle:

F. I care nut an they war all drowned in the Dike,
They Are nut worth an Atchison, nor twenty sike,

M. Your a cheap man trouble nut your Jobber Nowl
I Will give um some Trouts, reach me hither'th Bowl:

F. Thou's naught but babbles thou duz things tot'h hawves,
Thou Would mare need gang and mack some Cael for'th Cawves
They Are starved for want of meat hark how they Bleare,
When steed's stown thou maysteek'th Stable deaur

M. You're full of Care, and near had onny yet,
A pund of care'l nut pay an ounce of debt:
Braggsa good Dog. I Have heard my Granny tell,
But he was hanged for Biting that was Ill:
If I Would nut taken mare care then you, Ise seaur,
Before this day we would all been turned to the deaur,

F. I Will yield thy humor thou mun heve I see,
Or else I seaur, Thou'l neither Height nor Ree:
It Is a good Horse that duz never stumble,
And a good Wife that duz never grumble:

M. Come come for all this Clutter you do keep,
You Would better have a Shrew, than heve a Sheep;

F. Come bring my Jerkin Tibb: I Will to the Arvil,
You man's dead seay seaun, it macks me marvil:
I thought he leauk'd weel Yesterday at Neaun,
I little dreamed he wad be dead seay seaun:
Come Wife mack ready will nut thou gang teau,
Let Tibb deau'th warke, if there be ought to deau:

M. Nay nay you know I cannut gang full weel,
For'th Cooper is to bring Hame'th Kirn and Skeel.
Wya fare ye weel than, for I Will away,
They Are boon to the Kirk, and seay I mun nut stay.
I Have gitten sike a Whelke, as I com Hame
^ust now it made my Gutts all kelke agane;
Mack have good Peg sweepth house and don thee seaun
Our Landlord Woman will be here by Neaun,
(...) had an Incklin out at'th Arvil Feast,
Methinks he macks deevlish stickle but have.

M. Its time for me about the house to Trip,
^le's be as welcome as watter into a Ship:

F. Sweep'th Arrans down, till all be clean near lin,
^s he will leauk all Agye when he comes in:
^ wad nut heve him here for onny thing,
^lthough a Cat may leauke Pegg at a King:
^hou leauks a Dozand leauke, rub over thy Face
With dishclout, and put on thy Coife with Lace:

M. I Will into'th Loft, and don my Clathes, now Will
^ind you to git some Eldin seaun your sell,
And mack Tibb mend up'th Fire, its ommost ot^
And let her rub down'th Table with a Clout:
Ise ready now let him come when he will,
But nowther'th Why nor Filly we will sell,
Let Us nut cast down our Hearts though he be man
As lang lives a merry Heart as a sad:
Its nut aboon Three weeks gane sine'th Rent da^
Husband what heve you gitten up to pay:

F. Ive Five Nobles Pegg, and some odd mone^
Thou seld some Cheeses hes thou onny:

M. Seven groats and a penny is all my Stock,
Thou knaws whore't ligs, Ive nowther Key nor lo^^

F. Pray thee tell truly, hes thou neay mare,
Did Thou nut sell some Garn at our last Fair;

M. What if I did, heve I nut mare to pay,
Than I can mack of Trouts, Kirn-Milk and W^^
Wadta have me keaun, or deau that is warse,
Turn Whore and Addle money with my Na^
^e have mare under my hands to gang about,
Thou's nut think that I Will be thy Underlout:

^. Thou snoutbands me sayr, may I nut Jest,
^ seaur I meant neay harm to thee 'ith least;
Come hither Hobb, what little Stock hes thou,
^ know thou's Addled some with driveing Plew

^. The small Stock, I Have gitten up together,

^ Twelve Bodles, a Groat and Six pence Fatther,

^. I mun borrow't Hobb, what ista willing,
When I gitt money thou's have a Shilling:

^. Ise gang and fetched, it is hard fest in a Clout,
You may seaun lowse't your sell, and tack it out:

^. Here Is three and three pence in odd money Peg,
That macks Forty Shillings, reet as my Leg.
Pashions a Life, here'st Landlord just at deaur,
^tand you by, Ise speak to him do nut fear:

L. Ise cum to see you, how dusta Billy
What macks Thee hustle, thou's mare fawse then silly
Thou Glincks and glimes seay, I Would misken'd thy Face
If thou had wont at onny other place:
Is It God Morn, or God Deen, what sesta Will,
I think you heve nut dined, here is a good smell.

F. Leet pray you Landlord, and you seaun will know
I think my wife hes Pyes in the Ewn to draw:
Thou casts a Leet a Lantom Pegg, thou's mains fine,
Have you some Guests to come to day to Dine,

M. Wellaneering, we would need have every Neaun,
Something that's good to keep our Hearts aboon:

L. But courser Fair, I think might you content
You tack neay thought how to pay me my Rent*

M. Good Landlord spare us we are but pour and bare^
Whore'th Hedge is law, it is eath gitting 'ore there:
When yans down down with um, it duz appear
We heve had monny Losles this same year:
Our Sheep are dead ith Rot, and you do know
The price of Butter now is varra law,
Weese pay you as we mack't and as't coms in,
And you can have neay mare ot'h Cat but'th skin:

^. Here Is Forty shillings, we heve neay mare,
Weese have a Cow to sell at our neest Fair:
L. What can I deau with this it will nut clear,
And pay seay mickle, as streights your awd Arrear,

^. Here Is bad times, prey ya Landlord be content,
Forbear us but and you's heve all your Rent.

^. But it will be a lang time first Ise feared,
And whiles'th Girse grows Horse starves as Ive heard
Next time I come, you mun clear off I leauk,
Thur driblets mack me scrat, whor't duz nut yeauk

^. But you mun let us rive up some fresh grund,
Or else we will turn your Farm into your hand:

^. Wad ye'd gane titter, I had been neay warse,
^or your nut worth the warst Fart of my A --
^ou may gang when you will Ise never care,
^ git another Tennant I near fear:
Wee'r Sattle'd here, and seay to stir weer laith
But weel I wait, weese gether here nea Grath,

L. You ill my Farm for you have said to some,
Your quite undeaun and beggared sine you c^m

F. Some Pikethanks for ill will hes teld you that,
An unquoth Dog hes monny barkers at,
Ise Sackless on it Sir, by this fire that Reeks,
I Will swear't upon all Beauks that opens and steeks;
If we sud swelt our hearts it will nut deau,
T'afford Sour Milk, and Bread and Rent up teau;
Yet of your Farm, I near said an ill word,
To onny Body I will besworn Landlord:
I was teld, Is It git Gowd Grapes here by some Fowke,
But now I see I Have bought a Pig in a Poke,

L. Away away if I sud let you sit,
Rent free I see you cud nut live on it,
Your Corn's as Rank as ever it can stand,
There Is sike a wreck, it ligs all down o'th Land,
And yet you say your Farm is stark 'oth Rent,
And you for Tenants give me neay content,
You cannut pay nor I cannut forbear,
Provide seay for you selves another year;

F. Wee'r nut sea Browden on it as you suppose,
I think langer we stay the mare weese lose:
Wadwe'd never kend your Farm, nor had cum here
But bought wit's best if it cost nut 'ore dear,
There Is neay Feaul like to the awd Feaul, I may say
They that are bund I see they mun obey,
The time that we com here, we have cause to Curse,
A tumbling Stane I see near gathers Moss:
We war over weel before and did nut wait,
And now we may the time rue, when'ts ore late.

L. Com, com, for all your goodly Cracks and Brags,
^ll Husbands and Sluggards, mun gang in Rags:
^f you awed Money when you com to the Farm,
Your Creditors not it heve deaun you harm:
If all your Stock be gane lean to your Kin,
Near is my Sarke, but nearer is my Skin;
Charity begins at Hame Ise nut bund
To let you live Rent free upon my grund:
There Is neay sell like to the own sell; yeu've Farms ane^
Offered you say, God speed you, Ise never Ru^
A weaud Horse I Have heard it often Reported
And a Rotten Harrow are seaun parted:
Fare weel, Ise weay to finnd'th awd saying tru^
It Is an ill made Bargain, whore beath Parties Ru^

F. I Have set our Landlord forward, wife he is gan^
Our Hob's nut weel, he is a base stinking yane
He Is troubled with worms, he can nut Sleep nor Li^
Give him Wormseed and Treacle pray thee Pe^
Weay worth this trash, Ise flaid my Lad's undeau^
He Is varra Seek, it works at his Heart Speaun:
To Morn I Will gang to the Market, and hire Tibb^
And Peggy Thou thy Sell, sall Spin out'th Web^
Why a Husband, you may deau what you will,
If I be weel. Ise git it deaun my sell;

N. How deaye all, what Naunt as I hear say,
Tibby hes taken a Godspenny to day:
Ise come to know before I gang to Bed,
I thought this Martinmas she wad be wed

M. Ways is me she is ore Young for a good Man,
There Is mare Fowks wed than keeps good Houses Nan
She Is Book and Bane aneugh I know that is true
But ill weed waxes fast and seay duz Thou:

N. Ore young say you, I seaure she is gane eighteen
And few but at that age, they are Man keen:
Pray you what Age war you when you did wed,
At sixteen Naunt you lost your Maidenhead:

M. But they that wed before they are wise, it is said
Will dee before they thrive, and seay Ise flaid
Will Thou and She, and all sike Flirtigiggs,
That Is fit for naught but serving Brewster Piggs
I marvel thy Mother gits nut thee a Dame,
It Is fitter for thee then to stay at Hame,
To slaver and Spin, and run an odd Char
A good Service war better for thee far:

N, What sike an a Service as Tibbs to have,
I had as leeve be carrid to my Grave;

M. How sea what ails her Service can thou tell
Thou'l nowther let her thrive, nor thrive thy sell:

N. I hear Tibb is to gang to Mistress Nice,
She Will Rue, I Will warrant more than yance or twice,
She Will deal her Neaves about her, I hear tell,
She Is timorous to please, and varra Fell,
First thing that comes to hand she will let it flee,
Neans yable to abide her Cruelty;
She Will Nawpe and Nevel them without a Cause,
She Will make them late their teeth Naunt in their Hawse
She Is kittle of her hands, and of her tongue seay rife,
That Tibb Ise seaure will have but an ill Life;
I Will lay a Wager that Tibb never stays
A New Meaun, and an awd, nay nut ten days:

M. Thou's had a good Layer Fatther Nan I guess,
Or else I seaur, thou never cud tell this;
Birlady but my Barn shall never be
A Battingstock for her, Thou's plainly see:
Her Godspenny, sall be sent back to Moarn,
Tibbs stay at Hame with me Nan I Will besworne;
I know here'l be a Sain'd for her to come,
But Ise never care, although her Mistress Gloom,
My Lass sall nowther Dame nor Mistress have,
Leather then gang to be a perfect Slave;

N. My Neem's now coming farewell I Will to Bed,
I Have sitten till my Feet's as caw'd as Lead;

M. Nay prithee stay Nan but a wirly Bit,
I heve some Garne to send with thee to Lit,
I stale a Keslup Nan, fra thy Fatther,
Which made me a deel of dainty preaser:
But Ill gitten, Ill gane, is true I finnd,
For it is all scattered, and's made an ill end:
Sea pray thee lend me a little Earning
For we mun mack some Cheese in the Morning:

N. Let Tibb come 'ore as seaun as she gits up,
And I sall send you back by her a soape:

M. What hast's thou in stay and tack a drink Nan
There Is Beer o'th Table, 'ith little Can,

N. This Drink's all dowl'd, how lang is it sine't was drawn
It is nut hawfe sea fresh Naunt as our awn:

F. Yon Town's a dree way off Pegg, Ise sare tire'd
Tibb is all Jarbil'd, and Ise basely Mire'd:
As we went 'ore a Steel out starts a Hare,
Our Tibb, gave sike a Glent, it flaid her sare:
We went into an House, I lost my Staff,
I finnd its true, Still Sew eats all the Draffe,
All Fowk's denied, but yan beyond the Board,
And he had stown't, and never said a word,
How dusta Wife, thou is nut weel I think,
Thou grains varra sare, wilta have a drink,
A grunting Horse, and graining Wise, never will
Their Rider fail, as I have heard Fowks tell,

M. Wya wya, I can bide your Scoffs and scorns
But God be thanked a Cursed Cow gits short Horns
You Would leather see me hanging weel I wait,
Than see me ganging up and down'th Town gate,

F. You meause wife as ye use, Ise neay sike man,
I can nut please I see deau what I can,

M. You are unsawncy, I think by my life,
With tawkin to you I heve broken my Knife:

F. It Is eath to mack'th Barn greet whore'th lip does hing
You Gloom seay Wife, I thought you would have a Fling
At me, or some else in the House, ee'r Neet,
Something is always wrang, all is never reet,

M. Gloom Co yea, it macks me as seek as a Horse,
Never to have a penny in my Purse:

F. Better's a coming pray thee do not wreak,
What Woman but for hope the Heart wad break:
God never sent Mouths, but he sent Meat always,
After fowl Weather follows a fair day:
That Man falls law that never again duz Rise,
Hope weell and have weell, is said by the wise
I never fear, but Fortune again will smile,
If we can have but patience for a while:
We sall heve Luck Golore tack thou neay Care,
Though we at present be but varra Bare:
Some Rise and some do fall strangely we see,
Give a man Luck and thraw him into'th Sea.
Here Is good Tobacco Wife it cost a prindle,
How mun I leet my Pipe, Whaugh here is nea Ingle:

M. What need you Rame seay, you see'th fire's gane
Poul out your Touchwood, box, Steel, and flint stane,
Then strike a Fire, and leet a Seave I Reed,
And smeauke your Pipe before we gang to Bed:

F. Unfest my Collar point Wife, Than let us Kiss,
And pray for Love, mell them whore there nean is.
What din is yon, lets gang to the deaur good wife,
And Lithe, yonder is some Flight, I lay my Life:

M. Marry Husband you have a special guess,
Hark you what warke, yonder is 'tween Nell and Bess

A Cruel Flight begins, Amel tweay former Friends.
N. Thou Ugly Whore what wark made thou last Neet,
Thou deserves douking ift hou had thy Reet;
That wad ceaul thy sawt A -- thou fulsome Bitch,
O Rotten Jade thou gave young Nobbs the Itch:
Last time he clapperclaw'd thy Reeking A --
He may be glad and fain it was neay warse:

B. Thou lucken-brow'd Trull, there is nean warse than thy sell
Thou went to ceaul thy Tail thou knaws at'th well
When every grisely Scab it was seay big,
And sare that thou cud neither sit nor lig:
I near Besh -- my sell, as thou did Bitch,
When 'th Fellow wrought seay sare he gat a stitch
Thou cud not git him off thy Belly Jade,
Till thou was forced to cry our for Aid,
And than'th whors bird thy Daughter Jan com in
And pould him of, and drust and made thee clean:

N. I scorn thy words thou filthy Refie Jade,
Thou's gitten an 'ore heat Bitch with thy Trade,
Geay shack thy Scabs off Whore, and wesh thy skin:
Thou stands mare need than I of macking clean:

B. Hang thee whore, hang thee, I never was laid yet
Between two Feather Beds, to get a Sweat:
My hair did never come off thon dirty Drab,
As thine did when thy Nose was in a Scab;
I never was laid down drunken on a Bed,
With all my Clathes poul'd up whore to my head,
And sea left fast asleep with a great Candle
^urning between thy Houghs, that all meet handle,
And then deau what they wad thou drunken Sew,
Thy Tallow face is like to mack me Spew:
^. How lang is it fine the Lads did shout and hollow
And after thee with Rotten Eggs did follow:
Thou mawky whore, thou hes forgitten seaur,
^ine'th Cramer gat the up again a deaur,
^^th midst of all'th Towngate, and'th Lads com by;
And saw you at it, than they set up a Cry:
And than beath thou and he away did sneake,
^f thou can say ought for thy sell, Whore speak,

N. Thou lees, thou lees, thou grisely Braslen Face,
^ never was Pybald yet, ith Saddle place:
Nor had a Surgeon to Syring me,
As thou had Whore, when thou cud hardly see
Thy Head and Face, they war seay swell and sare,
That thou had scarcely left thee onny Hair:

B. As weel hair'd as thy sell, Thou nasty Quea^
Hang thee, thou fulsome Trull, thou's never clea^^
Base Tantrill I never use to tack Neet Ramble
And heve my Clathes ram'd up 'ith Butchers Shamble^
There Is filthy stinking Flesh when thine liggs there,
O'th day time seaur there is nean can like sike war^

N. As good Ware as thy sell Whore every whit^
I never was laid down on a Midden yet,
With a Drunken Tinkler fund at warke
Between my Legs Whore; it was nut seay dark,
But they cud plainly see that did gang by,
How sweetly thou and thy Tinckler did lie,

B, Away, away Whore, thou tells up and down,
How monny Men hes laid with thee in the Town,
Thou's a bold Whore, thy like was seldom seen,
I marvel neay good Wife Clawts out thy Neen;

N. Clawt out my neen Whore, but I Will dill thy din,
I Will coul thy Haggas Bitch, if I begin,
Nay run nut Whore, Thou's nut seay leet of feaut,
^e git thee an the Devil git the nut;
Nay Whore I Have gitten haud, I Will coul thee down,
and show thy Neighbors thy bald Scabby Crown
^ Murder, Murder, good Neighbors help me seaun*
^he Bites and Scrats, Ise flaid Ise be undeaun:
Weay worth this Whore, she is riven all my pinner
My Coife, and Hankercher' as Ise a Sinner:
^e mack thee pay for this Whore I Will besworn,
^e have a Warrant for the Jade to Moarn:
^. What prates ta still, wad ta have mare yet Trull
before I gang thou's have thy Belly full:

^. What runs ta Whore, hesta gitten'th deaur Sporne
^e have another Bout with thee to Morn:
^hou peeps yet whore, cum out again thou Bitch,
and I sall Scrub off all thy Scabs, and Itch,
^hink I Have wheested thee Whore, for this Neet,
^hou sal be seaur of mare next time we meet:

B. Wad, ta kissed my A-thou Jarble tail'd Trull the
Thou's just like a Cow that's keen 'oth Bull no^
Thou pins and decks thy, sell to get a Ride
And nean that knaws thee will sike Ket bestrid^

N. Oh Whore had I but thee here out again,
I Would mack thy Ribs to Reeke, and Guts to grai^
If ever I git thee in my Clutches,
I Will mack the fit Jade to gang on Crutches.

The Authors Conclusion.
My Papers at an end I Will take my Ease,
Here Is too much pains bestowed unless it plea^^
FINIS.
An Alphabetical CLAVIS, Uunfolding the Meaning of all the Yorkshire Words
made use of in the aforegoing DIALOGVE.
A.
ISe Arfe; that is I am afraid. Auters; signifies strange work, or strange
things. Amell; is Between. Own; Signifies own. To Rive all dawds; is to tear
all in pieces. Ackwards; is when a beast lies backwards and cannot rise. What
ailes this deaur; is what is the matter with this door. An Aumry; is a Cupboard
to put bread or meat in. Awd; is Old. Awdfarrand; is grave and sober. Aboon; is
above, To set one Agog; is to make one long or desire, Asta; Signifies as thou,
An Atchison; is a Scot'ch Coin worth four Bodles, An Arvill; is a Funeral. To
look Agye is to look aside.
B.
A Barn; is a Child, A Battin; is the Straw of two Sheaves foulded together.
Behawfe; is behalf. To Batt'n; signifies to feed or like well. Beestlings; is
the first milk after Calving. Belive; is in the Evening, Burn, is water. To
blend, is to mix or put together. Baurghwans, are horse Collars, To bide
billinge at, is to abide working at. Breckins, signifies Fearn. A Bauke, is a
Balke. Blendings, are Beans and Pease mixed together. Bigg, is of the nature of
Barley, and makes good Malt. A Bull segg, is a gelded Bull, Backon, is Bacon.
Beclarted, is Besmeared or Bedaubed. A bend Kitt, is a kind of a great Can with
a Cover. A Bleacher, is a whitester of Cloth. A Bakin, is Corn put up to send
to the Mill for bread. A Beck, is a River. Bannocks, are Cakes baked before the
fire. A Back-stone, is a stone or iron to bak^ Cakes on. Blithe, is glad.
Breests, are breasts. A Brawne, is a Boar. Book and bane, signifies lusty an^
strong. To bleare, is to roar and cry. Twolve Bodles, signifies two pence, To
be browden on a thing, is to be fon^ on a thing. Birlady, is by our Lady. A
batting stock, is a beating stock, Beath, is both. Breau, is supping Meat, or
Gravy and fat for brewis, etc.
C.
CRockie, is a little Scotch Cow. Cawven, is Calved. A Cow cleening, is the
bag that hangs at the Cows Box after she has new Calved. A Cawfe, is a Calfe.
Cawd, is cold. Caell, are Potage. To Ceauke, is to Cook. To Clawt; is to tear
or pull. Cassons, are dried Cow turds, Caffe, is Chafe. Like to clem, is very
dry ready to choke. A Carle Cat, is a dog-Cat, or He Cat. Naught Cottens
weell, is Nothing goes right. Cud, is could. Chaumber, is a Chamber. A Crawe,
or a Crake, is a Crow. To Cover, is to recover. Clathes, are Clothes. Cumber,
is trouble. A Caingel, is a toothy crabbed fellow. To keep a clutter, is to
make a grea^stir. Coyea, is quoth you. To Ceaul, is to cool. To Clapperclawe,
is to work earnestly or beat or Fight earnestly. A Crammer, is a Bowl sewer.
To Cool ones Haggas, is to beat on^ soundly.
D.
ISe dinge, that is I shall beat. Deft, is pretty. Daft, is fond or foolish.
Deaun, is done. A Dubler, is a Dish to lay Meat on. Dench'd, is finely Mouthed
or Curious. Draffe, is Grains. Deau, is do. A Deaur, is a door. Degg-bound, is
mightily swelled in the Belly. Dittin, is Mortar to stop up the Oven withal.
Dayugh, is Dough. To Deet, is to wipe and make clean. To Dodd Sheep, is to cut
the wool away about their Tails. To Datther, is to Tremble with cold. Duz,
signifies does. Deftly, is softly or leasurely. A Dovening, is a slumber. Din,
is noise. A Durdam, is a great noise or stir. To dree, is to hold out, or be
able to go. A dree way of, is a long way off, A drape, is a Cow to be fatted
that gives no milk. A Dike, is a little Pond or watery place. To Don, is to put
ones Clothes on, A dozand leauke, is an old withered look. Dusta, is does thou.
Driblets, are small inconsiderable things. Dowl'd, is dead or flatt, and not
brisk. Drust, signifies dressed. To deck one self, is to make them trim and fine.
E.
Even, are Eyes. Ewes, is an Vdder, Ey, ey; is Yes, Yes. Eard, is Earth. Ewn, is
an Oven, Earnder, is the forenoon, Eldin, is Wood and sticks for the fire,
Eath, is easy. Earning, is Rennet to make Cheese withal.
F.
FLaid, is afraid. Feaut, is a foot. Fra, is from Finnd, is find. Fawt, is
fault. Feign, is glad. Feawls, is Fools. Fund, is found. Flung, is thrown.
Fleaure, is floor. Faugh, is Fallow. Fondly, is foolishly. Fowkes, is Folk.
Feck, is the most or greatest part. Fogg, is fresh Grass that comes after
Mowing. Feald, is hid. Fruggin, is a Pole to stir in the Oven when it is heated
to stir the ashes up. Flyer, is to laugh. Feared, is afraid. To be feld, is to
be knocked down. Flur'd, is all Ruffled. A Flan head, is a broad large head.
Feausan, is Taste or moisture. Flowter, is when one is angry or afraid. To
Fettle, is to make ready, or prepare. A Filly, is a Mare Foale, or young Mare,
To Fest, is to tie. A Flirtigiggs, is a wanton fond Lass. Fell, is fierce and
keen. A Flight, is a Scoulding-match.
G.
BY Grape, is by grope. To Greet, is to weep. Geay, is go. Town-gate, is the
Town Street. Gang, is go. Groats, are Oatmeal. Gawts and Gilts, are Hog-pigs,
and Sow-pigs. Gor, is miery or dirty. Gripped, is delv'd to drain away water.
Geause, is a Goose. To Goame, is to mind. Grise, is Swine. Girse, is Grass.
Glorr fatt, is very fat. God Morn, is a good Morning to you. Goddeen, is a good
Evening. Garne, is yarne. To Gawve, is to stare. Grisely, is ugly. A Gully, is
a house Knife, to cut bread, etc. Gunny and furred, is sore running eyes.
Gammerstang, is a great foolish wanton Girl. Greaun, is a Month. Greese,
signifies Stairs into a Chamber. Gammashaes, are course Cloth Stockings that
butten upon other Stockins to keep one warm. To Gobble, is to eat greedily. A
Glisse, is a sudden sight of a thing by chance. A Glead, is a Kite. Granny, is
a Grandmother. Glincks and Glimes, signifies to look cunningly. Grath, is
Riches. Godspenny, is an Earnest-penny, To Gloom, is to frown and be sullen.
Grane, is to groan To Glent, is to start aside. Golore, is great plenty, or
abundance,
H.
TO Hye, is to make have. Harnes, signifies Brains, To Hipe, is to push with
the Head, Haud, is hold. Hame, is Home, Hobb, is Robert. Haver, is Oats An
Hurn, is a hoal behind the Chimney. Hinderends, are the Off all of Corn when it
is winnowed. Haet, is hot. Hames, are the crooked pieces of wood that are put
upon Horse Collars. An Hopper, is a Seed-lip, or Basket the Husbandmen put
their Seed-Corn in, when they sow their Land. An Hemble, is an Hovel or house
to put Cattle under, or Wayns or Carts into. An Haver Riddle, is a Sive they
use in Winnowing of Oats. Harden, is Hempen. Hing, signifies hang. Helters, is
Halters. Holes and hurles, are odd dark blind holes in a house. Hes, is has.
Howl, is hungry. Hesta, is has thou. Heauldy, is one that is tender and cannot
endure much cold. Hushta, signifies to hold fast or mind ones feet. Hawves, is
halves. Height nor Ree, signifies a wilful person that will not be persuaded to
any thing, but what they list. Hustle, is to shrug ones Shoulders.
Heart-speaun, is the hole betwixt the Breast and Belly. Hause, is the Throat.
Houghs, are the Legs and Thighs.
I.
ILfavart, is unhansome. To Jet the Heck, is to put one to the door. Jybe, is
to mock or Jeer, Ista, signifies art thou, Ilkin, is each one. Jobber Nowle,
signifies a Logger-head. Jerkin, is a kind of a jacket or upper Dublet with
four Skirts or laps. An Inckline, signifies to have knowledge or hear of a
thing. Ise, signifies sometimes I shall, and sometimes I am. Is It, signifies is
it. Jarbl'd, is dagled or dirty. Ingle, signifies fire.
K.
A Keaustril, is a great bon'd course Creature. A Keauke, is a Cook. Knawe, is
Know. To Kedge, is to fill one very full. A Kite, signifies the belly. Kirne
Milk, is butter Milk, Knarl'd, is eaten and torn with the Teeth. A Kneet, is a
Knight. Keen, signifies Fierce or earnest. Knawn, is known, To Kittle, is to
Tickle. Kye, are Cowes. A Kirne, is a Chirne. A Kirk, is a Church. Kelk
signifies to Groan.
L.
TO Late, is to seek. A Laer, is a Barn. Lig, is to lie. Leauke, is to look or
behold. Never Lin, signifies not to tire or give over. Lang, is long. To Lite,
is to Rely on, or trust to. Liggin, is lying or resting. Lyth ye, Lyth ye, is
as much as to say hark ye, hark ye. To Lug, is to tug, pull or bite. A Libber,
is a Gelder. Leeter, is Lighter. For'th lang Lane, is when a thing is borrowed
with an intention never to be paid again. Leetsome, signifies to be pretty
Cheerful. Leather, is rather. Lawer, is lower. Lownd, is calm and mild. Loppon,
is Leaped. A Langsettle, is a long Wainscot Bench to sit on. A Loft, is a
Chamber. To Leet, is to alight. A Lantom, is a pretty distance, or way off.
Laith, is loath. A Layer-father, is an Instructor, Teacher, or prompter. To
Lit, is to dye. Lucken Brow'd, is hanging knit Brows. Thou lees, is thou lies.
M.
TO mack, is to make. Mirk, is dark. To mar, is to spoil. Mistetch, signifies
to get an ill use o^ Custom. Mell, is Between. Mare, is more. To Meause, is
wonder or admire. Mun, is must. Maut, is Malt. Meay, is more. A Mere, is a Mare.
Maugh, is a brother-in-Law. Meeterly, is indifferent. Mawks, are Maddocks.
Mislicken'd, is disappointed. Mains flaid, is much afraid. Mickle is much.
Meauted, is thought, dreamed, or feared. A Make, is a fellow, or companion.
Mence, is handsomness, or Credit. To marvil, is to admire or wonder. Misken, is
not to know. Mains fain, is very glad. Mains fine, is very fine. Meaun, is the
Moon. Meause as you use, that is when one judges another according to their
own doings. Mawkie, is full of Maddocks. To Morn, is to morrow.
N.
NAr, is near. Neen, signifies Eyes. Nut, is not. Nean or Neayn, is none. Neay,
is no. A Newke or Neawke, is a Corner. Neet, is night. Neem, is Uncle. Near
Rack, is never matter; or take no care. Neawn, is Noon. Nawn, is own. Nowther,
is neither. Neest, is next. Naupe and Nevill, is to beat and strike.
O.
Ought, is any thing. Onny, is any. Ownder, is the afternoon. Owse, is an Ox.
Odd Charrs, signifies triffling business, or small Errands. Ommost, is almost.
P.
TO putt, is to push with the head. Pratty; is handsome, or pretty. Preauf, is
proof. To plew, is to plow. To mack the Pot play, is to make the Pot boil.
Pokes, are Sacks. Pudding-pock, is the Pudding bag. A Pleugh, is a Plough. It
ploshes, signifies to be all wet under foot. Perry, is a little Cur Dog.
Pusom'd, is poisoned. A Pownd, is a Pond of water. To preaze, is to press
toward a plac^ or endeavor to go that way. The Paete, is the head. Preasure,
is Rennet to make Chees^ withal. A Pringle, is a little silver Scotc^ Coin
about the bigness of a penny with two xx. on it. Pybald, is to be of two
Colors. To prate, is to talk saucily.
R.
A Rape, is a Rope. To Rout, is to roar. Rive, is to tear. Reek, is smoke. A
Reckincrewke, is the pot hanger. I Reed, is I advise. Reant, is root. Remmon'd,
is removed. A Reel, is an instrument Women wind their linen or hempen yarne
on. A Rock, is a Distaffe. Ream Kit, is the Cream pot. Reasty, is when Bacon is
yellow and taste rank. Reet, is right: To Reet a thing down, ir to make it
smooth. Riggin, is the Ridge of an house. Reeks, is it smokes. Rame, is to
Rove, Rake, scrape, or pull. Rencky, is great and large. Rank, is thick or
throng. To rue, is to repent. Rife of Tongue, is quick and nimble of Tongue.
Reefie, is Scabby or Itchy,
S.
SIne, is since. Sike, is such. Seaun, is quickly. A Skeell, is a Milk Pale, or
Water Pale. Sell, signifies self. To Suckle, is to let a Calf suck the Dam or
Mother. Streay, is Straw. Strangly, is strongly. Swamp, is empty or small. A
Sile, is a strainer for Milk. To Spang ones gates, is to make have. Snithe, is
very cold and piercing. Seaure, is sure. Smiddy, is a Black-Smiths Shop.
Specks, are long thin pieces of Iron which Husbandmen nail upon their Ploughs,
to save them from wearing. A Sock, is the Plough share to put on the Nose of
the Plough. Sawt, is salt. A Stag, is a young Colt. Sarraes, signifies serves.
A Shack-fork, is a stick with two grains which Thrashers use to shake up the
Straw with all, that all the Corn may fall out from amongst it. Steauls, are
Stools to sit on. Swingle-trees, are crooked piecs of wood to which the Horse
Traces are made fast behind the Horses. Strange, is strong. Seavy, is full of
Rushes. A Seave, is a Rush that is drawn through in grease, which in ordinary
poor houses, they light up and burn instead of a Candle. To Saw Corn, is to sow
Corn. A Steg, is a Gander. To steek or steck, is to shut. A stand Heck, is a
Cratch that stands on feet in a Fold-Yard, for Cattle to eat their Fodder out
on. A Sneck, is a latch of a door or Gate, To slate a Beast, is to hound a Dog
at him. To stick, is to Butcher and kill a thing. To stramp, is to tread upon.
Skitter, is when Cattle Scour, or shite thin. Slocken, is to quench the
thirst. Side Lanyells, are hopples for Horses. A Stane, is a stone. A
Sneauskin, is a leather which Women have fast at their Distaff, and lay upon
their thigh to twirle their Spindle upon. A Spence, is a little place made with
Wainscot, or a Lattice to set Milk or drink in. To Slake heat, is to scale or
loose heat. Sammaron, is a Cloth betvveen Linen and Hempen, not altogether so
course as the one, nor fine as the other. A Seck, is a Sack. Sheaun, are
Shoes. Slovvn, is stolen. A Sark, is a shirt. Soul, is all kind of moist or
supping Victuals. To Storken, is to cool, or wax stiff or hard. Seay, is so. To
speer out a thing, is to enquire after a thing. To speer the Deaur, is to shut
the door. To whemmele a Bowlover a thing, is to cover it with a Bowl. Snawke,
is to smell. Snurles, are the Nostrils. To Snite, is to blow the Nose. A Stee,
is a Stye or Ladder. To semper, is to smile. To stown, is when a thing smarts.
Not to see a stime, is to be blind, and see nothing at all. A Saul, is a soul.
Sad, is sorrowful or Melancholy. Stanfra, is backward, or unwilling. Sud, is
should. A Stiddy, is an Anvill. Spatterdashers, are things to put above ones
Stockings to keep them clean from mire and dirt. To run on snack-snarles, is to
run on heaps headlong together. Where it never stack, is where it never stuck.
Sporn, is shut or closed. Sesta, is say thou. Stickle but have, is very
great have, or speed. To snoutband one, is to be very angry and hasty with one.
Stark at the Rent, is very dear at the Rent. To scrat, is to scratch. Sattl'd,
is settled. Sackless, is guiltless, or innocent. To Swelt, is to dye. A Saind,
is a Messenger or message. A Soape, is a little quantity or sup.
T.
A Tee, is the string the Cow Legs are made fast withal whilst she is milked.
Tinye, is little. Well tidded, is when a Cow has a good Vdder, and promises
fair for store of milk. Tweay, is two. Thur, is these. Taken, is taken. Tawke,
is talk. Tewh, is tough. Teaut, is to it. Teaume, is time. Teng'd, is stung or
sting'd. A Teaup, is a Ram. Like to tawme, is like to swound. Traild, is pulled
and dragged up and down. Teau, is to. A Tantril, is an idle tatling Woman.
Titter, is quicker or sooner. A Drull, is a mucky fowl Queen. Tack, is to take.
Tengs, are Tongues. Twonty, is twenty. Trouts, are Curds. Trash, is green fruit,
as Apples, etc. Timorous to please, is ill to please. Touch-wood, is rotten
Wood laid by to dry, that it may take fire at any spark given by a flint and
steel.
V.
VArra, is very. Vnscape, is to put one in mind of a thing that is not
Convenient. Vncuths, signifies News. To Vrle, is to draw ones self up on a
heap. An Vnderlout, is a kind of a slave, or Drudge. An Vneuth Dog, is a
strange Dog. Vnsawncy, is unluckie, or not fortunate. To unfest, is to untye or
unloose.
W.
WArk, is work. Weese, is we shall. Whaugh, is a word of Admiration, as God
bless us, etc. Wally, Wally, is Good lack, good lack or Oh me, Oh me. War, is
were. Wad, is would. A Why, is an Heifer. To wait, is to know. Whore, is
Where. Wya, is well. Wheay, is Who. Whickens, are roots of Weeds. Whins, are
Furz. Wellaneerin. is Lackady, or Alas, alas. To Whaug one, is to beat one.
Wrang, is wrong. A whanck, is a great piece. A Whelk, is a great fall. Wont, is
dwelt or lived. A wreck, is abundance. Whewts of Girfe, are young fresh Piles
or blades of Grass. Whig, is Clarified Whey, put up with Herbs to drink. A
Whean Cat, is a she Cat. Warse, is worse. Ways is me, is woes me. Whilk, is
which. Weell, is well. Wancle, is uncertain or changeable Weather. Weay, is
sorrowful. Wilta, is will thou. To winch, is to Kick. Whesht, Whesht, is peace,
peace. Wadta, is would thou. Weand, is Mad. A We bitt, or Wirly bitt. To
Wreak, is to fret and be angry.
Y.
YAn, is one. Yauds, are Horses. Yowes, are Yewes. A Yat, is a Gate. Yance, is
once. To Yeaud, is to go. To Yeauke, is to Itch. The Yane, is the breath.
FINIS.
A Catalague of some Books, Sold by Francis Hildyard, Bookseller at the Sign
of the Bible, in Stonegate; in York.
GRotij Opera 4 vol. fol.

Eusebij etc. Historia Eccles cum notis valesij Gr. and Lar. 3. vol. fol.

Sylvij Opera Medica fol.

Heisechij Lexicon 4 to.

Monasticon Anglicanum 3 vol. fol.

Matthaej Pa^i^ Historia newly printed with a large Gloss etc.

Hortus Indicus Malabaricus, continens Regni Malabarici apud Indos celeberrimi
omnis generis Plantas rariore, Latinis, Malabaricis, Arabicis, and Bramanum
Character ibus nominibusque express as, Una cum Floribus, Fructibus and
Seminibus, naturali magnitudine a peritissimis pictoribus delineatas, and ad
vivui^t exhibitas, 2 vol. fol.

Originis contra Cessum 4 to.

-- contra Marcion. 4 to.

Dr. Hammond's Works now completed in 4 vol. fol.

Dr. Jsaac Barrow's Works 2 vol. fol.

Dr. Willis Works Complete, fol. English.

Dr. Brady's Introduction to the old English History.

Josephus Works, newly reprinted, fol.

Mr. Pole's Annotations on the Bible, fol. 1. vol.

Bakers Chronicle fol. newly reprinted.

Dr. Combers Companion to the Temple in one vol. fol.

The Works of the Author of The whole duty of Man, fol.

Dr. Grews Anatomy of Plants, upon Royal Paper, fol.

Dr. Salmons Iatrica se^ Praxis Medendi, 4 to.

-- Dispensatory 8 vo.

-- Doron Medicum. 8 vo.

-- Synoptis Medicinae. 2 vol. 8 vo.

-- Horae Mathmaticae 8 vo.

Sr. Jonas Moors System of the Mathmaticks, 4 to. 2 vol.

Itineareum totius sacrae Scripturae, or the Travels of the holy Patriarchs,
Prophets, Judges, Kings, our Savior Christ and his Apostles, as they are
related in the Old and New Testaments, etc. 4 to.

History of the Bucaniers in America, 4 to.

L'Estranges Observators, 1. vol. fol.

-- Tracts, in two vol. 4 to.

The Works of the famous Mathematician, Mr. Edmund Gunter. 4 to.

A short Dictionary English and French, with another French and English
according to the present use, and Modern Orthography, by Guy M^ege Gentleman

Contemplations Moral and Divine, by Sr. Matthew Hale Knight, late Chief
Justice of the Kings Bench, 8 vo.

Dr. Gibsons Anatomy of Humane Bodies Epitomized.

Dr. Patricks Paraphrase on the Psalms. 2 vol. 8 vo.

-- Paraphrase on Job. 8 vo.

-- Paraphrase on Proverbs. 8 vo.

-- Devout Christian 12 mo.

-- Christian Sacrifice, 12 mo.

A Friendly Debate between a Conformist and a Nonconformist Short Discourses
upon the whole Commonprayer, designed to inform the Judgment, and excite the
Devotion of such as daily use the same, by Th. Comber, D. D.

Plutarchs Lives done into English by several hands, the three first vol. being
all that are yet extant.

Plutarchs Morals, done in English by several hands, they two first vol. being
all that are yet extant.

Mr. Creech's Translation of Lucretius, 8 vo.

-- Horace, 8 vo.

-- Theocritus, 8 vo.

LAW BOOKS.
The Statutes at large by Ios. Keeble Esquire. fol.

An Assistance to Justices of Peace by the same Authors. fol.

Plowdens' Commentaries, fol. newly reprinted.

Roles Grand Abridgement in two vol. fol.

-- Reports, 2 vol. fol.

Cooks ^1. Reports in English, fol.

-- 12. and 13. Reports Eng. fol.

-- Institutes in 4 vol. fol.

Croke's Reports in English, fol. 3 vol. reprinted with the addition of many
thousand of References never before printed.

Leonard's Reports Com^t. in one vol. fol.

Sheppard's Common Assurances. fol.

-- Grand Abridgment* 2 vol. 4 to.

A New Book of Entries by Sr. Tho. Robinson. fol.

Dalton's Justice of Peace fol.

-- Office of a Sheriff, fol.

Brown's Entries fol. Complete.

Anderson's Reports, fol. Complete.

Moors Report, fol.

Hobarts Reports, fol.

Modern Reports, fol.

Sidderfin's Reports, 1 and 2 parts, fol.

Styles Reports, fol.

Yelvertons Reports, fol.

Vaughan's Reports, fol.

Huttons Reports, fol.

Owen's Reports fol.

Littletons Reports, fol.

Saviles Reports, fol.

Dyers Reports, fol.

Pultons De pace Regis and Regni fol.

Cawleys Laws against Recusant^, fol.

Manlys Interpreter fol.

Officina Brevium, fol.

Sr. Orlando Bridgmans Presidents, fol.

Vidians Entries, fol.

Blounts Law Dictionary, fol.

Complete Clerk, 4 to.

Wests Presidents 4 to.

Godolphins Abridgement of Ecclesiastical Laws, 4 to.

Brownlows and Goldsbroughs Reports 4 to.

Swinbourn of Wills, 4 to.

Swinbourn of Wills, 4 to.

Winggtes Abridgement of all the Statutes in force, and use until this present
year 1684. 8 vo.

Terms of the Law. 8 vo.

Clarks Guide all four parts. 8 vo.

The Parsons Councellor, by Sir Simon Degg, 8 vo.

The Parsons Law.

The Laws of Jamaica, 8 vo.

Abridgement of Crokes Reports by W. Hughs. 8 vo.

Kitchen of Courts. 8 vo.

Hales Pleas of the Crown, 8 vo.

And all sorts of School Books, as also Pictures ingraved, Etch'd, and in
Missintinto, Maps of several sorts, both plain and Colloured.

FINIS.

