RECREATION FOR Ingenious Head-peeces.

OR, A Pleasant Grove FOR THEIR WITS TO WALK IN.

Of Epigrams, 700. Of Epitaphs, 200. Of Fancies, a number. Of Fantasticks,
abundance.
With their Addition, Multiplication, and Division.

Mar. Non cuique datur habere nasum.

LONDON, Printed by M: Simmons, in Aldersgate Street. 1654.

WITT'S RECREATIONS refined Augmented, with Ingenious CONCEITS for the witty,
And Merry Medicines for the Melancholy.

See the next Page.

Printed by M.S. sold by Edw: Archer in Little Britain. 1654.

Ad Lectorem.
THis little Book is like a furnishe Feast;
And has a dish, I hope, to please each guest.
Here thou may find some good and solid fare;
If thou love pleasant junket^, here they are;
Perhaps sh^rp sawces take thee most; if so,
I have Cook for thee some sharp sawces too;
But if thy squemish stomach can like none,
No body hinders thee, thou may be gone.
The Stationer to the Reader.
IF new, or old wit, please the Reader best,
I Have hope, each man of wit, will be our Guest
The new, was framed to humor some men's taste*
Which if they like not, they may carve the last*
Each dish has sauce belongs to it; and you will
By your dislike, censure the Authors skill;
Yet if you cannot speak well of it, spare
To utter your dislike, that the like snare
May entrap others; so the Book may be
Sold, though not liked* by a neat fallacy:
That Is all I ask, yet 'twill your goodness raise,
If as I gain your coin, he may your praise.
EPIGRAMS.
1. To the Reader.
EXcuse me Reader, though I now and than,
In some light lines, do show my self a man;
Nor be so sour, some wanton words to blame,
They are the language of an Epigramme.
2. On Battus.
Battus does brag he has a world of Books,
His Studies maw holds more then well it may,
But seld' or never, he upon them looks,
And yet he looks upon them every day.
He looks upon their outside, but within
He never looks, nor never will begin.
3. On Prue.
Prues nose hangs down so low, one would suppose
When ere she gapes, that Prue would eat her nose.
4. To Gripe.
Gripe keeps his coin well, and his heaps are great,
For which he seems wise in his own conceit;
Be not deceived Gripe, for ought I can see,
Thy bags in this sense are as wise as thee.
5. On Man and Woman.
When man and Woman dies, as Poets sung,
His heart's the last that stirs, of hers the tongue.
6. On Woman's will.
How dearly does the honest husband buy
His wives defect of will when she does die?
Better in death by will to let her give,
Then let her have her will while she does live.
7. Spangle the spruce Gal:
Spruce Spangle's like to a Cynamon Tree;
His outside is of much more worth then he.
8. Chaerilus.
Eat Toste and Oil, eat supple herbs and loos,
For thou look wondrous costive Chaerilus.
9. In Paulum.
By lawful Mart, and by unlawful stealth,
P^ulus from The Ocean has derived much wealth:
But on the Land, a little gulf there is,
Wherein he drowneth all that wealth of his.
10. Vestitus peritus.
Clitus goes often time clad in Suits of Scarlet,
That else no color had to play the Varlet.
11. Of Poetus.
Poetus with fine Sonnets painted forth
This and that foul Ladies beauties worth:
He shows small wit therein, and for his pains,
By my consent, he never shall reap gain^;
Why, what needs Poets paint them, O sweet Elves!
When Ladies paint their beauties best themselves.
12. Of Shift the Sharker.
Shift swears he keeps none but good company,
For, though they are such as he did never see,
Worse then himself he is sure they cannot be.
13. On an Vpstart.
Pray wrong not ( late coined) give the man his right,
He Is made a Gentleman although no Knight,
For now it is clothes the Gentleman does make,
Men from gay clothes their pedegrees do take;
But wot you what is the arms to such men's house?
Why this -- hands chancing of a Rampant Louse.
14. Volens Nolens.
Will with provisio wills you testify,
Has made his will, but has no will to die.
15. Ad Clodium.
Wit, once thou said was worth thy weight in gold,
Though now't be common for a trifle sold;
It dearer seems to thee that get'st not any,
(When thou should use it) for thy love or money.
16. In Getam.
Geta from wool and weaving first began,
Swelling and swelling to a Gentleman;
When he was Gentleman and bravely dight,
He left not swelling till he was a Knight:
At last (forgetting what he was at first)
He sweld to be a Lord, and then he burst.
17. To Emson.
Emson thou once in Dutch would court a wench,
But to thy cost she answered thee in French.
18. In Fimum.
Fimus is Coach'd, and for his farther grace
Does a^k his friends how he becomes the place;
Troth I should tell him, the poor coach has wrong
And that a Cart would serve to carry dung.
19. In Flaccum.
The false knave Flaccus once a bribe I gave;
The more fool I, to bribe so false a knave:
But he gave back my bribe, the more fool he,
That for my folly did not cosen me.
20. Of Women's naked breasts.
In open shop^ flies often blow that flesh,
Which in close safe^ might be kept longer fresh.
They but invite flesh-flyes, whose full spread pap^
Like road ways lie between their lips and laps.
21. On Morcho.
Morcho for haste was married in the night,
What needed day? his fair young wife is light.
22. On a Bragadocio.
Don Lollus brags, he comes from Noble blood,
Drawn down from Brutus line; it is very good,
If this praiseworthy be, each Flea may then,
Boast of his blood more then some Gentlemen.
23. Edens vomens.
Cacus that sups so duly at the Rose,
Casts up the reckning truly ere he goes.
24. On a Pumpe stopped with stones.
M. I Will cut it down, I swear by this same hand,
If 'twill not run, it shall no longer stand.
R. Pray Sir be patient, let your Pump alone,
How can it water make when it has the stone?
Yet did he wisely when he did it fell.
For in so doing he did make it well.
25. Of Prittle-prattle.
Though th'danger be not great, of all tame cattle,
Yet the most troublesome is Prittle-prattle.
26. In Aulum.
Thou still art muttring Aulus in mine ear,
Love me and love my Dog: I will I swear,
Thou ask'st but right; and Aulus, truth to tell,
I think thy Dog deserves my love as well.
27. Ad Tilenum.
Tilens' cause thou art old, fly not the field,
Where youthful Cupid does his b^nner wield;
For why? this god, old men his Soldiers styled;
None loves but he who has been twice a Child.
28. To Vellius.
Thou swearst I bowl as well as most men do,
The most are bunglers, therein thou say true.
29. Three Genders.
A wife although most wise and chaste,
is of the Doubtful Gender;
A Queen oth' Common: Feminines,
are Women small and tender.
30. Of Brawle.
Brawle loves brabling, as he loves his life,
Leave him for dead, when he leaves stirring strife.
31. In Paulum.
Paul, what my cloak does hide thou fain would know,
Were to be seen I would not cover'^ so.
32. Of sleep and death.
That death is but a sleep I not deny,
Yet when I next would sleep, I would not dye.
33. Upon Methusus.
Methusus asked me why I called him sot,
I answer made, because he loved the pot,
For while Methusus busy is with it,
The fool I Am sure's as busy with his wit.
34. On Thraso.
Thraso goes lame with blows he did receive
In a late duel, if you will him believe.
35. News.
When News does come, if any would discuss
The Letter of the word, resolve it thus:
News is conveyed by letter, word, or mouth,
And comes to us from North, East, West, and South.
36. Of Rufus.
Rufus had robbed his Host, and being put to it,
Said, I am an arrant rogue if I did do it.
37. Of Marcus.
When Marcus failed, a borrowed sum to pay,
Unto his friend at the appointed day;
Twere superstition for a man, he says,
To be a strict observer of set days.
38. Of a Thief.
A thief arrested, and in custody
Under strong guards of armed company,
Asked why they held him so; Sir, quoth the chief,
We hold you for none other then a thief.
39. Of Motion.
Motion brings heat, and thus we see it proved,
Most men are hot and angry when they are moved.
40. Formal the Fashionist.
Formal all form and fashion is, for matter,
Who says he sees it in him, does but flatter;
Open and search him, you shall quickly find
With what course Canvas his soft silks are lined.
41. Ad Scriptorem quend.
Half of your Book is to an Index grown,
You give your Book Contents, your Reader non^
42. Riches.
Gold's the only God, Rich men bear rule,
Money makes Majesty:
Rich Pluto, not plain Plato now,
Speaks with applause most high.
43. On Sextus.
Sextus does wish his wife in Heaven were,
Where can she have more happiness then there?
45. Secreta nobis.
Tassus from Temple-stairs by water goes,
To Westminster, and back to Temple rows,
Belike he loves not trot too much the street
Or surbait on the stones his tender feet:
Tut! come, there is something in it must not be known
But Sir beleev't, The debt is not his own.
45. Of Text-corruptors.
Bad Commentators spoil the best of Books,
So God gives meat, (they say) the Devil sends Cook^*
46. On a Drawer drunk.
Drawer with thee now even is thy Wine,
For thou have pierced his Hogs-head, and he thine.
47. Upon the weights of a Clock.
I wonder time's so swift, when as I see,
Upon her heels, such lumps of lead to be.
48. On Cynna.
Because I am not of a Giants stature,
Despise me no^, nor praise thy liberal nature,
For thy huge limbs; that you are great, it is true,
And that I Am little in respect of you:
The reason of our growths is easily had,
You, many had perchance; I but one Dad.
49 On Alastrus.
Alastrus has nor coin, nor spirit, nor wit.
I think he is only then for Bedlam ^it.
50. Of Mendacio.
Mendacio pretends to tell men News:
And that it may be such, himself does use
To make it: but that will no longer need,
Let him tell truth, it will be News indeed.
51. On Landanno.
Landanno in his gallant bravery,
Ruffled his Silks, looked big, and thrust me by:
And still as often as he meets me so,
My homespun cloth must to the channel go.
Advise thee well Landanno, children note,
And fools admire thee for thy velvet coat:
I keep ( Landanno) in repute with such,
As think they cannot scorn poor thee too much.
But thou can squire fine Madams, thou can vail
Thy Cap and Feather, cringe, and wag thy tail
Most decently: Now by you stars that shi^e,
So thou transcend'st me: Take the wall, it is thine.
52. On Shanks.
Shanks swears he fasts; and always cries for Beef:
O how he fasts! that is how fast eats the Thief!
53. Cito been.
Sir John at Mattins prays he might dispatch,
Who by true promise is to bowl a match.
54. Of Pertinax.
It will, it must, it shall be so,
Says Pertinax; but what is the reason trow?
Nay, that I cannot tell, nor does he know.
55. To valiant Dammee.
Dammee thy brain is valiant, it is confessed;
Thou more, that with it every day dare jest
Thy self into fresh braules; but called upon,
With swearing Damme, answer'st every one.
Keep thy self there, and think thy valor right,
He that dares Damn himself, dares more then fight.
56. On Cornuto.
Cornuto is not jealous of his wife,
Nor e're mistrusts her too lascivious life,
Ask him the reason why he does forbear,
He Will answer straight, it comes with a fear.
57. On a Shrew.
A froward Shrew being blamed because she showed
Not so much reverence as by right she owed
Unto her Husband, she replied he might
Forbear complaint of me, I do him right;
His will is mine, he would bear rule, and I
Desire the like, only in sympathy.
58. Of Lawless.
Lawless the worst times likes best, why is it?
Because then Lawless may do what he list.
59. A rich Curre.
Dru dares good men deprave because he is rich,
Whether more fool or Knave, I know not which.
60. On a Youth married to an Old Woman.
A smooth-faced youth, what wedded to an old
Decrepit Shrew! (such is the power of Gold)
Thy fortune I dare tell; perchance thou wilt have
At Supper dainties, but in B^d a grave.
61. On a Fly in a glass.
A Fly out of his glass a guest did take,
E're with the liquor he his thirst would slake;
When he had drunk his fill, again the Fly
Into the glass he put, and said, though I
Love not Flies in my drink, yet others may,
Whose humor I nor like, nor will gainsay.
62. On Collimus.
If that Collimus any thing do lend,
Or Dog, or Horse, or Hawk unto his friend,
He to endear the borrowers love the more,
Says he never ^ent it any one before,
Nor would to any but to him: His wife
Having observed these speeches all her life,
Behind him forks her fingers, and does cry,
To none but you, I Would do this courtesy.
63. To Loquax.
Loquax, to hold thy tongue would do thee wrong,
For thou would be no man but for thy tongue.
64. Good wits jump.
Against a post a scholar chanced to strike
At unawares his head; like will to like:
Good wits will jump (quoth he:) if that be true,
The title of a block-head is his due.
65. On Women's Masks.
It seems that Masks do women much disgrace,
Since when they wear them they do hide their face.
66. Of Saucy the Intruder.
Saucy, though uninvited, is so rude,
As into every comp'ny to intrude;
But he is no fit companion for any,
Who all ways makes the number one too many.
67. Upon a pair of Tongs.
The burnt child dreads the fire; if this be true,
Who first invented Tongs its fury knew.
68. Lawyers and Soldiers.
If Lawyers had for Term, a term of war,
Soldiers would be as rich as Lawyers are;
But here is the difference 'tween Guns and Gowns,
These take good Angels, the other take cracked crowns.
69. On Momus.
Momus can call another fool, but he
Can never make his brain and wit agree.
70. Woman.
A Woman is a Book, and often found
To prove far better in the sheets then bound:
No marvail then, why men take such delight
Above all things to study in the night.
71. Clytus cunning.
Clytus the Barbar does Occasion fly,
Because it is bald, and he gains naught thereby.
72. Rich promises.
Lords promise soon, but to perform are long,
Then would their purse-st^ing^ were tied to their tongue.
73. On Comptulus.
I wondered Comptulus, how thy long hair,
In comely curles could show so debonair,
And every hair in order be, when as
Thou could not trim it by a looking glass,
Nor any Barber did thy tresses pleat;
It Is strange; but Monsieur I conceive the ^eat
When you your hair do kemb, you off it take,
And order't as you please for fashion sake.
74. On Gellius.
In building of his house, Gellius has spent
All his revenues and his ancient rent,
Ask not a reason, why Gellius is poor,
His greater house has turned him out of door.
75. To Ponticus.
At Supper time will Pon^u^ visit me,
I Would rather have his room then company;
But if him, from me I can no ways fright,
I Would have him visit me each fasting night.
76. Balbus.
Balbus a Verse on Venus Boy does scan,
But ere 'twas finished Cupid's grown a man.
77. On a Pot-Poet.
What lofty verses Coelus writes? it is
But when his head with wine oppressed is:
So when great drops of rain fall from the skies
In standing pools, huge bubbles will arise.
78. On Onellus.
Thou never supp'st abroad, Onellus, true,
For at my home I Am sure to meet with you.
79. Of professed Atheists.
If even Devils themselves believe and tremble,
Atheists professed methinks should but dissemble.
80. To Termagant.
My Termagant, as I have ought to save,
I neither called thee fool, nor knave:
That which I called thee is a thing well known,
A trifle not worth thinking on:
What I suppose thy self wilt easily grant,
I called thee Cuckold, Termagant.
81. On a Virtuous Talker.
If virtue's always in thy mouth, how can
It e're have time to reach thy heart, fond man?
82. To Severus.
Believe Severus, that in these my Rimes
I tax no person but the common Crimes.
83. Upon Pigs devouring a bed of Penny-royall, commonly called Organs.
A good wife once a bed of Organs set,
The Pigs came in and eat up every whit,
The good man said, wife you your Garden may
Hogs Norton call, here Pigs on Organs play.
84. On Gubs.
Gubs calls his children Kitlins: and would bound
(Some say) for joy to see those Kitlins dround.
85. On a Fortune Tellers.
The influence of th'Stars are known to thee,
By whom thou can each future fortune see:
Yet since thy wife does thee a Cuckold make,
It Is strange they do not that to thee partake.
86. To sweet sir Ou^side.
The Expense in Odours, is a foolish sin,
Except thou could sweeten thy Corpse within.
87. On a Gallant.
A glittering Gallant, from a prancing Steed,
Alighting down desired a boy with speed
To hold his horse a while, he made reply,
Can one man hold him fast? 'twas answered, I:
If then one man can hold him Sir, you may
Do it your self, quoth he, and slunk away.
88. To Eras-mus.
That thou'art a man each of thy learned works shows,
But yet thy name tells us thou wast a Mouse.
89. On Bunce.
Money thou ow'st me; prithee fix a day
For payment promised, though thou never pay:
Let it be Doomsday; nay, take longer ^^ope;
Nay when thou art honest, let me have some hope.
90. On an empty House.
Lollus by night awaked heard Thieves about
His house, and searching narrowly throughout
To find some pillage there, he said, you may
By night, but I can find naught here by day.
91. A trim Barber.
Neat Barber trim, I must commend thy care,
Which do all things exactly to a hair.
92. On a bragging Coward.
Corsus in Camp, when as his Mates betook
Themselves to dine, encouraged them and spoke,
Have a good stomach Lads, this night we shall
In heaven at Supper keep a festival.
But battle joined he fled away in have,
And said, I had forgot, this night I fast.
93. On a great Nose.
Thy Nose no man can wipe, Proclus, unless
He have a hand as big as Hercules:
When thou do sneeze the sound thou do not hear
Thy Nose is so far distant from thine ear.
94. On an unequal pair.
Fair Phillis is to churlish Priscus wed,
As stronger wine with waters mingled;
Priscus his love to Phillis more does glow
With fervency then fire; hers cold as snow:
It Is well, for if their flames alike did burn,
One house would be too hot to serve their turn.
95. In Quintum.
Quintus is burnt, and may thereof be glad,
For being poor he has a good pretense
At every Church to crave benevolence,
For one that had by fire lost all he had.
96. On a changeable Raiment.
Know you why Lollus changes every day,
His Perriwig, his face, and his array?
It Is not because his comings in are much,
Or 'cause he will swill it with the roaring Dutch;
But 'cause the Sergeants (who a writ have had
Long since against him) should not know the Lad.
97. On Guess.
Guess cuts his shoes, and limping goes about
To have men think he is troubled with the Gou^,
But it is no Gout (believe it) but hard Beer,
Whose acrimonious humor bites him here.
98. On Stale-Batch.
For all night-sins with other Wives unknown
Batch now does daily penance in his own.
99. To sir Guilty.
Guilty, be wise; and though thou know the crime^
Be thine I tax; yet do not own my Rimes;
'Twere madness in thee to betray thy fame,
And person to the world, ere I thy name.
100. Veritas subverta.
Luke that a man on hor^-back met but late,
Would simply seem thus to equivocate,
And strong maintain against them, contend who dare,
'Twas merely but a Tailor and a Mare.
101. On Hugh.
Hugh should have gone to Oxford the other day,
But turned at Tiburn, and so lost his way.
102. On a Painted Madam.
Men say you are fair; and fair ye are, it is true,
But (Hark!) we praise the Painter now, not you.
103. On Barossa.
Barossa boasts his pedigree, although
He knows no letter of the Christ-Crosse row,
His house is ancient, and his gentry great,
For what more ancient e're was heard of yet
Then is the family of fools? how than
Dare you not call Barossa Gentleman?
104. Experto credendum.
How durst Capritius call his wedlock whore,
But that he speaks it plusquam per narratum.
Nam ipse test: what require you more,
Unless you would have it magis approbatum?
105. On Jack Cutpurse.
Jack Cutpurse is, and has been patient long,
For he is content to pocket up much wrong.
106. On Afer.
Afer has sold his land and bought a Horse,
Whereon he pranceth to the royal Burse,
To be on hors-back he delights; wilt know?
'Cause then his Company he would higher show:
But happy chance tall Afer in his pride,
Mounts a Gunnelly and on foot does ride.
107. On Charismus.
Thou have composed a Book, which neither age,
Nor future time shall hurt through all their rage;
For how can future times or age invade,
That work which perished as soon as made?
108. Facilis descensus averni.
The way to hell is easy, the other day,
A blind man thither quickly found the way.
109. Age and Youth.
Admire not youth, despise not age, although
Some young are grave, most old men children grow.
110. On Orus.
Orus sold wine, and then tobacco, now
He aqua-vitae does his friends allow.
What e're he had was sold to save his life,
And now turned Pander, he does sell his wife.
111. On Sneape.
Sneape has a face so brittle, that it breaks
Forth into blushes, whensoere he speaks.
112. On Acerra.
Tobacco hurts the brain Physicians say,
Does dull the wit, and memory decay,
Yet fear not thou Acerra, for 'twill never
Hurt thee so much by use, as by thy fear.
113. Empta nostra.
Madam La Foy wears not those locks for naught,
Ask at the Shop else, where the same she bought.
114. On Briso.
Who private lives, lives well, no wonder then,
You do absent you from the sight of men,
For out of doors you never by day appear,
What, is a Sergeant such a huge Bugbear?
115. A Foolish Querie.
How rich a man is, all desire to know;
But none inquires if good he be or no.
116. On the King of Swedens Picture.
Who but the half of this neat Picture drew,
That it could never be fully done, well knew.
117. B. I. answer to a Thief bidding him stand.
Fly Villain hence, or by thy coat of steel,
I Will make thy heart, my brazen bullet feel,
And send that thrice as theevish soul of thine,
To Hell, to wear the Devils Valentine.
118. Thiefs reply.
Art thou great Ben? or the revived ghost
Of famous Shakespeare? or some drunken host?
Who being tipsie with thy muddy Beer,
Do think thy Rimes shall daunt my soul with fear?
Nay know base Slave, that I am one of those*
Can take a purse as well in verse as prose;
And when thou art dead write this upon thy Hearse,
Here lies a Poet that was robbed in Verse.
119. Nothing New.
Nothing is new: we walk were others went;
Th^re's no vice now but has his president.
120. On Cupid.
Cupid has by his sly and subtle Art,
A certain Arrow shot, and pierced my heart;
What shall I do to be revenged on love?
There is but one way, and that one I Will prove;
I Will steal his Arrows, and will head them new
With Women's hearts, and then they will never fly true.
121 A Tobacconist.
All dainty meats I do defy*
Which feed men fat as Swine,
He is a frugall man indeed,
That on a leaf can dine.
He needs no Napkin for his hands,
His fingers ends to wipe,
That keeps his Kitchen in a Box,
And Roast-meat in a Pipe.
122. Feeble standing.
Mat being drunken, much his anger wreaks
On's wife; but stands to nothing that he speak^.
123. Long and Lazy.
That was the Proverb. Let my Mistress be
Lazy to others; but belong to me.
124. On the Tobaconist.
If man's flesh be like Swines, as it is said,
The Metamorphosis is sooner made:
Then full faced Gnatho no Tobacco take,
Smoking your Corpse, lest Bacon you do make.
125. Another.
Tom I commend thee above all I know,
That sold'st thy cushion for a pipe of To --
For now it is like if e're thou study more,
Thou'^t sit to it harder then thou did before.
126. On Button the Grave-maker.
Ye powers above and heavenly poles,
Are graves become but Button-holes?
127. On long hair.
Lucas long hair down to his shoulders wears,
And why? he dares not cut it for his ears.
128. To a stale Lady.
Thy wrinkles are no more, nor less,
Then beauty turned to sowernesse.
129. A Crab is restorative.
The Crab of the wood
Is sauce very good,
For the Crab of the foaming Sea;
But the wood of a Crab
Is sauce for a drab
That will not her husband obey.
130. Alius altior.
Would you with Cajus offer now confer
In such familiar sort as heretofore?
And not observe he is grown an Officer,
That looks for adoration ten times more?
Tut! what of pedigree, or turpe domo,
It Is not so now ye see, nam ecce homo.
131. Sor^e tua contentas.
If adverse fortune bring to pass,
And will that thou an Ass must be;
Then be an ass, and live an ass,
For out of question wise is he
That undergoes with humble mind,
The state that chance has him assigned.
132. On a pretender to Prophecy.
Ninety two years the world as yet shall stand,
If it do stand or fall at your command;
But say, why placed you not the worlds end ny^r
L^st ere you died you might be proved a liar?
133. Mart. lib. 8. Epigr. 69.
Old Poets only thou do praise,
And none but dead ones magnify,
Pardon Vocerta, thee to please,
I am not yet in mind to die.
134. On a Gamester.
For hundred-thousands Matho plays;
Olus what is that to thee?
Not thou by means thereof, I trow,
But Matho poor shall be.
135. Parcus profusus.
Old doting Claudus that rich miser known,
Made drunk one night, and jumping but with Joan,
Was forced not only to discharge the shot,
But keep the Bastard which the gull never got.
136. On Fr. Drake.
Sir Drake, whom well the worlds end knew,
Which thou did compass round,
And whom both Poles of Heaven once saw,
Which North and South do bound.
The Stars above would make thee known,
If men here silent were;
The Sun himself cannot forget,
His fellow Traveller.
137. B. I. approbation of a copy of Verses.
One of the witty sort of Gentlemen,
That held society with learned Ben --
Showed him some Verses of a tragic sense;
Which did his ear much curious violence;
But after Ben had been a kind partaker
Of the sad lines, he needs must know the maker;
What unjust man he was, that spent his time,
And banished reason to advance his rhyme:
Nay gentle Ben, replies the Gentleman,
I see I must support the Poet than;
Although those humble strains are not so fit
For to please you, he is held a pretty wit;
Is he held so? (says Ben) so may a Goos,
Had I the holding, I would let him loos.
138. Vt pluma persona.
Why wears Laurentius such a lofty feather?
Because he is proud and foolish both together.
139. Gain and Gettings.
When others gain much by the present cast,
The Cobblers getting time, is at the last.
140. Domina praedominatis.
Ill may Radulphus boast of rule or riches,
That lets his wife rule him, and wear the breeches.
141. On Doll.
Doll she so soon began the wanton trade,
She never remembers that she was a maid.
142. To a Nose and Teeth very long.
Gape against the Sun, and by thy Teeth and Nose
It Is easy to perceive how the day goes.
143. On a Welshman and an Englishman.
There was a time a difference began,
Between a Welshman and an Englishman,
And thus it was; the Englishman would stand
Against all Argument, that this our land
Was freest of her fruits: there is a place,
Quoth he, whose ground so fruitful is of grass,
But throw a staff in it but this night, you shall
Not see it the morrow, 'twould be covered all.
The Welshman cried, it is true it might lie under
The o'r-grown grass, which is with us no wonder:
For turn your Horse into our fruitful ground,
And before morning come, he shall not be found.
144. On Pride.
Why Pride to others does her self prefer,
The reason's clear, she is heir to Lucifer.
145. On Skrew.
Skrew lives by shifts, yet swears by no small oaths,
For all his shifts, he cannot shift his clothes.
146. O Mores.
Now vertu's hid with follies juggling mist,
And he is no man that is no humorist.
147. To Teltale.
Thy glowing ears, to hot contention bent,
Are not unlike red Herrings broyl'd (...).
148. Sperando pariens.
Hodg hired him such a house, at such a rent,
As might against marriage, much his state augment;
But lingering fates did so his hopes prevent,
As Hodg perforce must fly, for all was spent.
149. On a Soldier.
The Soldier fights well, and with good regard,
But when he is lame, he lies at an ill ward.
150. Vivens mortuis.
What makes young Brutus bear so high his head,
And on the sudden gallant it so brave?
Pray understand Sir; 's Father's newly dead,
Who has so long been wished for laid in's grave.
151. A secret necessity.
What makes F. G. wear still one pair of hose?
Ask Banks the Broker; he the business knows.
152. On Garret and Chambers.
Garret and his friend Chambers having done
Their City business, walked to Paddington,
And coming near the fatal place, where men,
I mean offender^, never return again,
Looking on Tyburn in a merriment:
Says Chambers, here is a pretty Tenement
Had it a Garret? Garret hearing that,
Replies, friend Chambers I do wonder at
Your simple censure, and could mock you for it,
There must be Chambers e're there be a Garret.
153. Dubium indubitatum.
Say Parnels children prove not one like the other;
The best is yet, she is sure they would both one Mother.
154. On Linnit.
Linnit plays rarely on the Lu^e, we know;
And sweetly sings, but yet his breath says no.
155. On Usuring Gripe.
Gripe feels no lameness of his knotty Gout,
His moneys travel for him in and out.
And though the soundest legs go every day,
He toyls to be at Hell as soon as they.
156. A phrase in Poetry.
Fairer then that word fair, why so she must,
Or be as black as Timothies toasted crust.
157. A Witt-all.
Ieppa thy wit will never endure a touch,
Thou know so little, and do speak so much
158. Ad Lectorem.
Is It possible that thou my Book have bought,
That said 'twas nothing worth? why was it naught?
Read it again, perhaps thy wit was dull,
Thou may find something at the second pull:
Indeed at first thou naught did understand;
For shame get something at the second hand.
159. On Skinns.
Skinns he dined well to day; how do you think?
His nails they were his meat, his reume the drink?
160. Suum cuique pulchrum.
Posthumus not the last of many more,
Asks why I write in such an idle vain,
Seeing there are of Epigrams such store;
O give me leave to tell thee once again,
That Epigrams are fitted to the season,
Of such as best know how to make rhyme reason.
161. Certa dissimulans.
Monsieur Piero's wise trades all in French,
And coyly simpring cries, Pardona moy:
As who should think, she is sure no common wench
But a most true dissembler, par may foy.
162. In magnis voluisse sat est.
In matters great to will it does suffice:
I blush to hear how loud this Proverb lies,
For they that owe great sums by bond or bill,
Can never cancel them with mere good will.
163. As proud as witless Dracus.
Dracus his head is highly by him born.
And so by straws are empty heads of corn.
164. Saltem videretur.
A Welshman and an Englishman disputed,
Which of their lands maintained the greatest state;
The Englishman the Welshman quite confuted,
Yet would the Welshman naught his brags abate,
Ten cooks, quoth he, in Wales one wedding fees,
Truth, quoth the other, each man tosts his cheese.
165. Knowing and not knowing.
Cosmus by custom taunts each man,
And yet can naught of reason scan,
How can that be, when who knows least,
Knows he should wise be, that would jest:
Then thus no further I allow,
That Cosmus know^, but knows not how.
166. Stupid Binus.
Since time flies fast away, his safest flight,
Binus prevents with dreaming day and night.
167. Postrema pessima.
Cacus in's cunning never so proved o'r-reacht
As now at last, who must be halter-stretcht*
168. On his Mistress.
My Love and I for kisses played,
She would keep stakes, I was content,
And when I won she would be paid;
This made me ask her what she meant,
Says she, since you are in this wrangling vain,
Take you your kisses, and give me mine again.
169. On a proud Maid.
She that will eat her breakfast in her bed,
And spend the morn in dressing of her head,
And sit at dinner like a Maiden-bride,
And talk of nothing all d^^ but of pride;
God in mercy may do much to save her,
But what a case is he in that shall have her?
170. Tempus edax rerum.
Time eats all things, could the Po^ts say,
The times are changed, our times drink all away.
171. Facies ignota.
Why should not Rubin rich apparel wear,
That Is left more money then an Ass can bear?
Can any guess him by his outward guise,
But that he may be generous and wise?
172. On a coy Woman.
She seems not won, yet won she is at length;
In loves war, women use but half their strength.
173. On Bed-keeping.
Bradus the Smith has often sworn and sed,
That no disease should make him keep his bed,
His reason was, I often have heard him tell it,
He wanted money, therefore he would sell it.
174. On a man stealing a Candle from a Lanthorn.
One walking in the street a winter night,
Climbed to a Lanthorn, thought t'^ave stole the light,
But taken in the manner and descri'd
By one o'th'servants, who looked and cried,
Whose there: what do you? who does our lanthorn handle?
Nothing, said he, but only snuff the Candle.
175. On Fraternus.
Fraternus' opinions show his reason weak,
He held the nose was made for man to speak.
176. Little and Loud.
Little you are; for women's sake be proud;
For my sake next, (though little) be not loud.
177. On a French Fencer, that challenged Church an English Fencer.
The fencing Gauls in pride and gallant vaunt,
Challenged the English at the Fencing skill,
The Fencer Church, or the Church Militant,
His errors still reproved and knocked him still;
But since our Church him disciplined so sore,
He (rank Recusant) comes to Church no more.
178. On Gella.
Gella is light, and like a Candle wastes,
Even to the snuff, that stinketh more it lasts.
179. On I. Lipsius who bequeathed his Gown to the V. Mary.
A dying Latinist of great renown,
Unto the Virgin Mary gave his Gown;
And was not this false Latin so to join
With female gender, the case masculine?
180. On two striving together.
Two falling out, into a ditch they fell,
Their falling out, was ill; but in was well.
181. A Lawyers Will.
A Lawyer being sick and extreme ill,
Was moved by his friends to make his will,
Which soon he did, gave all the wealth he had
To frantic persons, lunatic, and mad;
And to his friends this reason did reveal;
(That they might see, with equity he would deal)
From mad men's hands I did my wealth receive,
Therefore that wealth to mad men's hands I leave.
182. Youth and Age.
Age is deformed, Youth unkind,
We scorn their bodies, they our mind.
183. Somnus decipiens.
Dod sweetly dreamt this other night had found
In gold and silver never an hundred pound,
But waking felt he was with Fleas sore bitten,
And further smelt he had his shirt be --
184. To a Shoemaker.
What boots it thee, to follow such a trade,
That Is always under foot and underlaid?
185. Death.
The lives of men seem in two seas to swim,
Death comes to young folks, and old go to him.
186. Quos ergo, etc.
Rufus in rage the Pots flings down the stairs,
And threats to pull the Drawer by the ears,
For giving such attendance: Slave (says he)
Where Is thine observance? Ha! must such as we
Be no more waited on? Go; bring to pay,
And keep my Rapier till I come this way.
187. A disparity.
Children fondly blab truth,
and fools their brothers;
Women have learned more wisdom
of their Mothers.
188. To Maledict.
Thou speak ill, not to give men their dues,
But speak ill, because thou can not choose.
189. On Newter Ned.
Newter convict of public wrongs to men,
Takes private beatings, and begins again;
Two kinds of valor he does show at once,
Active in's brains, and passive in his bones.
190. Interpone tuis, etc.
Not mirth, nor care alone, but inter-wreath'd;
Care gets mirths stomach, mirth makes care long breathed.
191. Ignotus sibi.
Fastidius finds it Nimis ultra posse,
How to distinguish of Teipsum nosce:
I do not marvel much it should be so,
For why the Coxcomb, will himself not know.
192. On Craw.
Craw cracks in Sirrop; and does stinking say,
Who can hold that (my friends) that will away.
193. Pot Poet.
Poet and pot differ but in a letter,
Which makes the Poet love the pot the better.
194. Content.
Content is all we aim at with our store?
If that be had with little, what needs more?
195. Fast and Loose.
Paphus was married all in have,
And now to rack does run;
So knitting of himself too fast,
He has himself undone.
196. Tortus.
Tortus accused to lie, to fawn, to flatter;
Said he but set a good face on the matter;
Then sure he borrowed it, for it is well known,
Tortus never wore a good face of his own.
197. On Raspe.
Raspe plays at Nine-holes, and it is known he get^
Many a Teaster by his game, and bet^;
But of his gettings there is but little sign,
When one hole wastes more then he gets by nine.
198. Impar impares odit.
Sotus hates wise men, for himself is none,
And fools he hates, because himself is one.
199. Similis doctrina libello.
Croesus of all things loves not to buy
So many Books of such diversity:
Your Almanac (says he) yields all the sense
Of time's past, profit, and experience.
200. On Tullus.
Tullus who was a Tailor by profession,
Is late turned Lawyer, and of large possession.
So who before did cut but Country freeze,
Now cuts the Country in excessive fees.
201. Vt parta perdita.
Marcellus proves a man of double means,
First raised by drunkards, then undone by queans.
202. On Jack and Iill.
Since Jack and Iill both wicked be;
It seems a wonder unto me,
That they no better do agree.
203. On Women.
Woman's the center, and the lines be men,
The circles, love; how do they differ then?
Circles draw many lines into the center,
But love gives leave to only one to enter.
204. On Woman's love.
A woman's love is like a Syrian flower,
That buds, and spreads, and withers in an hour.
205. On Cook a Cuckold.
A young Cook married upon Sunday last,
And he grew old ever Tuesday night was past.
206. Nomine, non re.
Grace I confess it, has a comely face,
Good hand and foot as answerable to it:
But what is all this except she had more grace?
Oh you will say, it is want that makes her do it.
True, want of grace indeed, the more her shame:
Graceless by Nature, only Grace by Name.
207. A Mounsieur Naso, vero le.
Naso let none drink in his glass but he,
Think you it is pride? it is courtesy.
208. A Butcher marrying a Tanners daughter.
A fitter match then this could not have bin,
For now the flesh is married to the skin.
209. A Widow.
He which for's wife a widow does obtain,
Does like to those that buy clothes in Long-lane,
One Coat's not fit, another's too too old,
Their faults I know not, but they are manifold.
110. On a Farmer Knighted.
In my conceit Sir John, you were to blame,
To make a quiet good-wife, a mad-dame.
211. On Pallas and Bacchus Birth.
Pallas the offspring of Jove's brain,
Bacchus out of his thigh was taken:
He breaks his brain that learning wins,
When he that is drunk breaks but his shin^.
212. On an old man doting upon a young Wench.
A rich old man loving a fair young Less,
Out of his breeches his spectacles drew,
Wherewith he writ a note how rich he was;
All which (quoth he) sweet heart I Will give to you.
Excuse me Sir (quoth she) for all your riches,
I Will marry none that wears his eyes in's breeches.
213. On a Welshman.
The way to make a Welshman think on bliss,
And daily say his prayers on his knees,
Is to persuade him, that most certain it is,
The Moon is made of nothing but green Cheese;
Then he will desire of Jove no greater boon,
Then to be placed in Heaven to eat the Moon.
214. On Lungs.
Lungs (as some say) never sets him down to eat,
But that his breath does fly-blow all his meat.
215. Ad Quintum.
Thy lawful wife, fair Lelia needs must be,
For she was forced by law to marry thee.
216. As many days in the year, so many Veins in man.
That every thing we do, might vain appear,
We have a vein for each day in the year.
217. To a friend, on the loss of his Mistress.
I^ thou the best of women did forgo,
Weigh if thou found'st her, or did make her so:
If she was found, know there is more then one;
If made, the workman lives though she be gone*
218. On a Whore.
Rosa is fair, but not a proper woman;
Can any woman proper be that is common?
219. Aequalis consensus.
Caecus and's choice, for change no time defers,
Both separate, yet consenting each together,
He maids for his turn takes, she men for hers,
And so they jump, though seldom join together*
220. On a Welshman
A Welshman late coming into an Inn,
Asked the Maid what meat there was within;
Cow-heels she answered, and a breast of Mutton;
But quoth the Welshman, since I am no glutton;
Either of both shall serve; to night the breast,
The heels in the morning, then light meat is best;
At night he took the breast, and did not pay,
In The morning took his heels, and run away.
221. On Men and Women.
Ill thrives that hapless family that shows
A Cock that is silent, and a Hen that crows:
I know not which lives more unnatural lives,
Obeying Husbands, or commanding Wives.
222. On Linus.
Linus told me of Verses that he made,
Riding to London on a trotting Jade;
I should have known, had he concealed the case,
Even by his Verses of his Horses pace.
223. Sauce for sorrows.
Although our sufferings meet with no relief,
An equal mind is the best sauce for grief.
224. On a little dimunitive Band.
What is the reason of God-dam-me's band,
Inch-deep, and that his fashion does not alter?
God-dam-me saves a labor, understand,
In pulling't off when he puts on the halter.
225. On fine apparel.
Some that their wives may neat and cleanly go,
Do all their substance upon them bestow:
But who a Gold-finch, fain would make his wife,
Makes her perhaps a Wag-tail all her life.
226. Upon Conscience.
Many men this present age dispraise,
And think men have small conscience now adays;
But sure, I Will lay no such fault to their charge,
I rather think their conscience is too large.
227. Dicta praedicta.
Battus breaks jests on any thing that is spoken,
Provided always, they before are broken.
228. On Vmber.
Vmber was painting of a Lion fierce,
And working it, by chance from Vmbers Erse
Flew out a crack, so mighty, that the fart,
(As Vmber swears) did make his Lion start.
229. In Cornutum.
Cornutus called his wife both whore and slut,
Quoth she, you will never your brawling but --
But what quoth he? quoth she, the post or door,
For you have horns to butt, if I Am a whore.
230. A witty passage.
An old man sitting at a Christmasse feast,
By eating Brawn occasioned a jest;
For whilst his tongue and gums chased about,
For want of pales the chased Bore broke out;
And light perchance upon a handsome less,
That near him at the Table placed was;
Which when she spied, she plucked out of her sleeve
A pin, and did it to the old man give;
Saying, since your Brawn out of your mouth does slip,
Sir take this pin, and therewith close your lip;
And bursting into laughter, strained so much,
As with that strain her back-part spoke low dutch
Which the old man hearing, did the pin restore;
And bad her therewith close her postern door.
231. On Cob.
Cob clouts his shoes, and as the story tells,
His thumb-nayles pared afford him sparables.
232. Omnia pariter.
Ralph reads a line or two, and then cries mew;
Deeming all else according to those few;
Thou might have thought and proved a wiser Lad;
(As Joan her fooding bought) some good some bad.
233. A new married Bride.
The first of all our sex came from the side of Man,
I thither am returned from whence I came.
234. On a Pudding.
The end of all, and in the end,
the praise of all depends.
A Pudding merits double praise,
because it has two ends.
235. Answer.
A pudding has two ends; you lie my brother
For it begins at one, and ends at the other.
236. Si nihil attuloris, ibis, etc.
Planus, an honest Swain, but moneylesse,
Besought a Lawyer to be good unto him,
Who either (gratis) must his cause redress,
Or promise what he never meant to do him.
Being asked why he careless lingered it?
Made this reply, Ex nihilo nihil sit.
237. On Maids.
Most Maids resemble Eve now in their lives,
Who are no sooner women, then they are wives;
As Eve knew no man, ever fruit wrought her woe;
So these have fruit often ever their husbands know.
238. Vt cecidit surgit.
Now Martha married is, she will brave it out,
Though never so needy known to all about;
And reason good, she rise once in her life,
That fell so often before she was a wife.
239. On a man whose choice was to be hanged or married.
M. Lo here is the Bride, and there is the Tree,
Take which of these best likes thee.
R. The choice is bad on either part,
The woman's worst, drive on the Cart.
240. Women.
Were women as little as they are good;
A Pescod would make them a gown and a hood.
241. On a Louse.
A Louse no reason has to deal so ill,
With them of whom she has so much her will;
She has no tongue to speak ought in their praise,
But to backbite them finds a tongue always.
242. A Courtier and a Scholar meeting.
A Courtier proud walking along the street,
Happened by chance a Scholar for to meet:
The Courtier said (minding naught more then place,
Unto the Scholar (meeting face to face)
To take the wall, base men I Will not permit;
The Scholar said, I will; and gave him it.
243. Cede majoribus.
I took the wall, one rudely thrust me by,
And told me the Highway did openly,
I thanked him that he would me so much grace,
To take the worse and leave the better place;
For if by owners we esteem of things,
The wall's the Subject^, but the way the Kings.
244. On Betty.
Sound teeth has Betty, pure as pearl and small,
With mellow lips, and luscious therewithal.
245. A rule for Courtiers.
He that will thrive in Court, must often become,
Against his will, both blind, and deaf, and dumb^
246. Why women wear a fall.
A question it is, why women wear a fall;
The truth it is, to pride they are given all,
And pride, the Proverb says, will have a fall.
247. For as expertus.
Priscus has been a traveller, for why?
He will so strangely swagger, swear and ly.
248. To a painted Whore.
Whosoever says thou sellest all, does jest,
Thou buy'st thy beauty, that sells all the rest.
249. Detur quod meritum.
A Courtier kind in speech, cursed in condition,
Finding his faults could be no longer hidden,
Came to his friend to clear his bad suspicion,
And fearing least he should be more then chidden*
Fell to flattering and most base submission,
Vowing to kiss his foot if he were bidden.
My foot said he? nay that were too submisse;
You three foot higher, well deserve to kiss.
250. Non lubens loquitur.
Gluto, at meals is never heard to talk,
For which the more his chaps and chin do walk,
When every one that sits about the board,
Makes sport to ask, what Gluto, never a word?
He forced to answer being very loath,
I^ almost choked, speaking and eating both.
251. On Philos.
If Philos, none but those are dead, do praise,
I would I might displease him all his days.
252. The promise-breaker.
Ventus does promise much, but still does break,
So all his promises are great and weak:
Like bubbles in the water (round and light)
Swelling so great, that they are broke outright,
253. Change.
What now we like, anon we disapprove;
The new successor drives away old love.
254. On a passing Bell.
This doleful music of impartial death,
Who danceth after, danceth out of breath.
255. Nummos and demona jungit*
Bat bids you swell with envy till you burst,
So he be rich, and may his coffers fill,
Bringing the example of the Fox that is cursed
And threatening folks who have least power to kill^
For why it is known, his trade can never fall,
That has already got the Devil and all.
256. Nil gratum ratione carens.
Paulus a Pamphlet does in prose present
Unto his Lord (the fruits of idle time)
Who far more careless, then therewith content,
Wishes it were converted into rhyme:
Which done, and brought him at another season,
Said: now it is rhyme, before nor rhyme nor reason.
257. Non cessat perdere lusor.
Ask Ficus how his luck at dicing goes:
Like to the tide (quoth he) it ebbes and flows,
Then I suppose his chance cannot be good,
For all men know it is longer ebb than flood.
258. Women's policy.
To weep often, still to flatter, sometime spin,
Are properties women excel men in.
259. Volucrem sic decipit auceps.
Hidrus the Horse-courser (that cunning mate)
Does with the buyers thus equivocate;
Claps on his hand, and prays he may not thrive,
If that his gelding be not under five.
260. Perdat qui caveat emptor.
Nor less meant Promus when that vow he made
Then to give o'r his cousening Tapsters trade,
Who checked for short and frothy measure, swore
He never would from henceforth fill pot more.
261. On Death.
How base has sin made man, to fear a thing
Which men call Mors? which yet has lost all sting,
And is but a privation as we know,
Nay is no word if we exempt the O:
Then let good men the fear of it defy,
All is but O, when they shall come to dye.
262. To Mr. Ben Johnson, demanding the reason why he called his plays works.
Pray tell me Ben. where does the mystery lurk,
What others call a play, you call a work.
263. Thus answered by a friend in Ben Iohnsons defense.
The Authors friend thus for the Author says,
Bens plays are works, when others works are plays.
264. On Crambo a lousy shifter.
By want of shift, since Lice at first are bred,
And after by the same increast and fed;
Crambo I muse how you have Lice so many,
Since all men know, you shift as much as any.
265. Ad Aristarchum.
Be not agriev'd, my humorous line^ afford
Of looser language here and there a word:
Who undertakes to sweep a common sink,
I cannot blame him, though his broom do stink.
266. In Aulum.
Aulus gives naught, men say, though much he crave
Yet I can tell to whom the Pox he gave.
267. On covetous persons.
Patrons are Latrons, then by this
They Are worst of greedy people,
Whose cognizance a Wolfs head is,
And in his mouth a steeple.
268. On a Dyer.
Who has time has life, that he denies,
This man has both, yet still he dies.
269. Non verbera, sed verba.
Two Scholars late appointed for the field;
Must, which was weakest to the other yield;
The quarrel first began about a word,
Which now should be decided by the sword:
But ever they drew, there fell that alteration,
As they grew friends again by disputation.
270. Love and Liberty.
love he that will; it b^st likes me
^o have my neck from loves yoke free.
271 To a neat reader.
^hou say my verses are rude, ragged, ruff,
^ot like some others rimes, smooth dainty stuffe^
^pigrams are like Satyrs, rough without,
^ike Chestnuts sweet, take thou the kernel out.
272. Of Letting.
^n bed a young man with his old wife lay*
O wife, quoth he, I Have let a thing to day,
By which I fear, I am a loser much:
His wife replies, youths bargains still are such;
So turning from him angry at her heart,
She unawares let out a thundering --
O wife, quoth he, no loser am I now,
A marv'lous saver I am made by you;
Young men that old wives have may never sell;
Because old wives, quoth he, let things so well,
273. Sublata causa etc.
Why studies Silvester no more the laws,
It Is thought Duck-lane has taken away the cause.
274. Sapiat qui dives, oportet.
It Is known how well I live, says Romeo,
And whom I list, I Will love, or will despise:
Indeed it is reason good it should be so:
For they that wealthy are, must needs be wise:
But this were ill, if so it come to pass,
That for your wealth you must be begged an (...)
275. In Dossum.
Dosse riding forth, the wind was very big,
And strained court'^ie with his Perriwig,
Leaving his sconce behind so void of hair,
As Esops Crow might break her Oyster there;
Fool he to think his hair could tarry fast,
When Boreas tears forests with a blast.
276. Post dulcia, finis amarus.
Ienkin a Welshman that had suits in Law,
Journying to London, chanced to steal a Cow;
For which (pox on her luck as never mon saw)
Was burnt within the fist and know not how:
Being asked if well the Laws with him did stand*
Hur have hur now (quoth Ienkin) in hur hand.
277. Feminae Iudificantur viros.
Kind Katharine to her Husband kis^ these words,
Mine own sweet Will, how dearly do I love thee*
If true (quoth Will) the world no such affords.
And that it is true, I durst his warrant be;
For never heard I of woman good or ill,
But always loved best, her own sweet will.
278. Ad Tusserum.
Tusser, They tell me when thou were alive,
Thou teaching thrift, thy self could never thrive;
So like the wh^^stone many men are wont
To sharpen others when themselves are blunt.
229. Praestat videri quam esse.
Clitus with clients is well customed,
That has the Laws but little studied;
No matter Clitus, so they bring their fees,
How ill the case and thy advice agrees.
280. Tunc ^ua res agitur.
A jealous Merchant that a Sailor me^,
Asked him the reason why he meant to marry,
Knowing what ill their absence might beget,
That still at Sea, constrained are to tarry?
Sir (quoth the saylor) think you that so strange?
It Is done the time whiles you but walk the exchange.
281. On Skoles.
Skoles stinks so deadly, that his breeches loath
His dampish but tocks furthermore to cloth:
Cloyd they are up with Arse; but hope, and blast
Will whirle about, and blow them thence at last.
282. A Conference.
A Dane, a Spaniard, a Polonian,
My self a Swisse, with an Hungarian,
At supper met, discoursed each with other,
Drank, laughed, yet none that understood another.
283. In Marcum.
Marcus is not an hypocrite, and why?
He flies all good, to fly hypocrisy.
284. Quod non verba suadeant?
Sextus half saved his credit with a jest,
That at a reckoning this devise had got,
When he should come to draw amongst the rest,
And saw each man had coin, himself had not;
His empty pocket feels, and 'gins to say,
In sadness Sirs, here is not a cross to pay.
285. Stupid Binus.
Since time flies fast away, his safest flight
Binus prevents with dreaming day and night.
286. In divites.
Rich men their wealth as Children Rattles keep,
When played a while with it then they fall asleep.
287. In Fannium.
What fury's this? his foe whilst Fannius flies,
He kills himself, for fear of death he dies.
288. On a vaunting Poetaster.
Cecilius boasts his Verses worthy be
To be engraven on a Cypress tree;
A Cypress wreath befits them well, it is true;
For they are near their death and crave but due.
289. In divites iracundo^.
Rich friends against poor to anger still are prone:
It is not well but profitably done.
290. Durum telum necessitas.
Coquus with hunger pennilesse constrained
To call for meat and wine three shillings cost,
Had suddenly this project entertained,
In stead of what is to pay, to call mine host;
Who being come entreats him discuss,
What price the Law alots for shedding blood:
Whereto mine Host directly answers thus;
'Twas always forty pence he understood:
So then, quoth Coquus, to requite your pains,
Pray break my head, and give me what remains*
291. To an upstart.
Thy old friends thou forgotst having got wealth*
No marvel, for thou have forgot thy self.
292. Ambition.
In ways to greatness, think on this,
That slippery all Ambition is.
293. Suum cuiq^e.
A strange contention being lately had,
Which kind of Music was the sweet'st and best,
Some praise the sprightly sound, and some the sad
Some liked the Viols; and among the rest,
Some in the Bag-pipes commendation spoke,
Quoth one stood by, give me a pipe of smoke.
294. In Prodigum.
Each age of men new fashions does invent;
Things which are old, young men do not esteem*
What pleased our Fathers, does not us content:
What flourished then, we out of fashion deem:
And that is the cause as I do understand,
Why Prodigus did sell his Fathers Land.
295. In Medicum.
When Mingo cries, how do you sir? it is thought
He Patients wants; and his practice's naught:
Wherefore of late, now every one he meets,
With [I am glad to see you well] he greeteth:
But who will believe him now, when all can tell,
The world goes ill with him, when all are well?
296. On Zelot.
Is Zelot pure? he is: ye see he wears
The sign of Circumcision in his ears.
297. Crispati crines plumae dant calcar amori.
Why is young Annas thus with feathers dight?
And on his shoulder wears a dangling lock?
The one foretells he will sooner fly then fight,
The other shows he is wrapped in's mothers smock.
But wherefore wears he such a jingling spur?
O know, he deals with Jades that will not stir.
298. On Boung-Bob.
Bob, thou, nor soldier, thief, nor fencer art,
Yet by thy weapon liv'st, thou have one good part,
299. On Glaucus.
Glaucus a man, a woman's hair does wear,
But yet he wears the same combed out behind:
So men the wallet of their faults do bear,
For if before him, he that fault should find:
I think foul shame would his fair face invade,
To see a man so like a woman made.
300. On Crab.
Crab faces gowns with sundry Furs; it is know^*
He keeps the Fox-furre for to face his own.
301. Dolo intimus.
Nor Hauk, nor Hound, nor Horse, those letters hhh*
But ach it self, it is Brutus bones attaches.
302. Of Batardus.
Batardus needs would know his Horoscope,
To see if he were born to escape the rope:
The Magus said, ere thou mine answer have,
I must the name of both thy parents crave:
That said, Batardus could not speak but spit;
For on his fathers name he could not hit:
And out of doors at last he stepped with shame,
To ask his mother for his fathers name.
303. Consuetudo lex.
Two wooers for a wench were each at strife,
Which should enjoy her to his wedded wife,
Quoth the one, she is mine, because I first her saw;
She Is mine, quoth the other, by Pye-corner law^
Where sticking once a prick on what you buy,
It Is then your own, which no man must deny.
304. On Women's denial.
Women, although they never so goodly make it,
Their fashion is but to say no, and take it.
305. In Battum.
Battus affirmed no Poet ever writ,
Before that love inspired his dull-head wit:
And that himself in love had wit no more,
Then one stark mad, though somewhat wise before.
306. On Marriage.
Wedding and hanging the Destinies dispatch,
But hanging seems to some the better match.
307. Vidua aurata.
Gallus has got a widow wondrous old,
The reason is he wooed her for her gold:
Knowing her Maids are young and serve for hire,
Which is as much as Gallus does desire.
308. In Dol praegnantem.
Dol learning Propria quae maribus without Book,
Like Nomen crescent is genitivo does look.
309. Timidos fortuna repellit.
When Miles the Serving-man my Lady kissed,
She knew him not (though scarcely could resist)
For this (quoth he) my Master bid me say; --
How Is that (quoth she) and frowning flings away:
Vexed to the heart, she took her mark amiss,
And that she should a serving creature kiss.
Why thus it is when fools must make it known,
They come on others business, not their own.
310. Against a certain --
For madmen Bedlam, Bridewell for a Knave,
Choose whether of those two thou had rather have.
311. Loves progress.
Loves first approach, delights sweet song does sing:
But in departure, she woes sting does bring.
312. On old Scylla.
Scylla is toothlesse, yet, when she was young,
She had both teeth enough, and too much tongue.
What shall I then of toothlesse Scylla say,
But that her tongue has worn her teeth away?
313. On Gallants cloaks.
Without, plain cloaks; within, plush't: but I doubt
The wearer's worst within, and best without.
314. On Banks the Vserer.
Banks feels no lamenesse on his knotty Gout,
His money travels for him in and out:
and though the soundest legs go every day,
^e toils to be a^ Hell as soon as they.
315. Pecunia praevalens.
^ell Tom of Plato's worth or Aristotle's;
^ang't, give him wealth enough; let wit stop bottles.
316. On the same.
^om vowed to beat his boy against the wall,
and as he struck he forthwith caught a fall:
^he boy deriding, said, I do aver,
^'have done a thing, you cannot stand to sir.
317. On Debt.
To be indebted is a shame men say,
Then it is confessing of a shame to pay.
318. A forsworn Maid.
^osa being false and perjured, once a friend
^id me contented be, and mark her end:
But yet I care not, let my friend go fiddle;
^et him mark her end, I Will mark her middle.
319. Adversity.
love is maintained by wealth, when all is spent,
Adversity then breeds the discontent.
320. On Soranzo.
Soranzo's broad-brim hat I often compare
To the vast compass of the heavenly sphere:
His head, the Earth's glo^^, fixed under it;
Whose center is, his wondrous little wit.
321. To a great Guest.
With other Friends I bid you to my Feast,
Though coming late, yet are you not the least.
322. In Cottam.
Cotta when he has dined says, God be praisd,
Yet never praises God for meat or drink:
Since Cotta speaks, and not practices,
He speaks surely what he does not think.
323. De Cord and Lingua.
The tongue was once a Servant to the heart,
And what it gave she freely did impart:
But now hypocrisy is grown so strong,
She makes the heart a servant to the tongue.
324. On Rumpe.
Rump is a Turn-spit, yet he seldom can
Steal a swollen sop out of the dripping-pan.
325. On Poverty.
If thou be poor, thou shall be ever so,
None now do wealth, but on the rich bestow.
326. In Ebriosum.
Fie man (says she) but I tell Mistrisse Anne,
Her drunken Husband is no drunken man.
For those wits which are overcome with drink,
Are void of reason, and are Beasts I think.
327. Wills error.
Will says his wife's so fat, she scarce can go,
But she as nimbly answers, Faith Si^ no:
Alas good Will, thou art mistaken quite,
For all men know, that she is wondrous light.
328. On Rome.
Hate and debate, Rome through the world has spread,
Yet Roma, amor is, if backward read:
Then is it not strange, Rome hate should foster? no,
For out of backward love all hate does grow.
329. On Tuck.
At Post and Pair, or Slam, Tom Tuck would play
This Christmasse, but his want therewith, says nay.
330. Some thing no savor.
All things have savor, though some but small;
Nay, a box on the ear, has no smell at all.
331. Art, Fortune, and Ignorance.
When Fortune fell asleep, and hate did blind her,
Art, Fortune lost; and Ignorance did find her:
Since when, dull Ignorance with Fortunes store,
Has been enriched, and Art has still been poor.
332. On Bibens.
Bibens to show his liberality,
Made Lusus drunk; (a noble quality,
And much esteemed) which Bibens fallen would pro^^
To be the sign of his familiar love:
Lusus beware, thou wilt find him in the end,
Familiar Devil, no familiar friend.
333. On Tobacco.
Things which are common, common men do us^
The better shrt do common things refuse:
Yet Countries-cloth-breech, and Court-velvet-hose
Puff both alike Tobacco through the nose.
334. On Cupid.
Cupid no wonder was not clothed of old,
For love though naked, seldom ever is cold.
335. On Ebrio.
See where Don Ebrio, like a Dutchman goes,
Yet drunk with English Ale, one would suppose
That he would shoulder down each door and wall,
But they must stand, or he, poor fool must fall.
336. On Love.
Love has two diverse wings, as lovers say:
Thou following him, with one he flies away;
With the other, if thou fly he follows thee:
Therefore the Last, Love, only use for me.
337. On the same.
Love, as it is said, does work with such strange tools,
That he can make fools wisemen, wisemen fools,
Then happy I, for being nor fool, nor wise,
Love with his toys and tools I shall despise.
338. On a Woman.
Some the word Woman fetch, though with small skill,
From those that want one to effect their will
If so, I think that wantons there are none,
For till the world want men, can they want none.
339. Ingluviem sequitur fames.
Curio would feed upon the daintiest fare,
That with the Court or Country might compare:
For what lets Curio that he need to care,
To frolic freely with the proud'st that dare:
But this excess was such in all things rare,
As he proved bankrupt ever he was aware.
340. On Maulsters.
Such Maulsters as ill measure sell for gain,
Are not mere knaves, but also knaves in grain.
341. In Corbum.
Corbus will not, persuade him all I can,
The world should take him for a Gentleman:
His reason's this, because men should not deem,
That he is such as he does never seem.
342. On Priscus Mistress.
Priscus commends his Mistress for a Girl,
Whose lips be rubies, and whose teeth are pearl*
They Had need prove so, or else it will be found,
He pays too door; they cost him many a pound*
343. On Women.
Women think woe -- men far more constant be,
Than we -- men, and the letter O we see,
In woe -- men, not in we -- men, as they say,
Figures earths constant Orb; we -- men say nay
It means the Moon, which proves (none think i^ strang^
Women are constant, and most true in change.
344. On Soldiers.
Nor faith, nor conscience common soldiers carry*
Best pay, is right; their hands are mercenary.
345. Drusius and Furio.
Furio would fight with Drusius in the field,
Because the straw, stout Drusius would not yield,
On which their Mistress trod; they both did meet;
Drusius in field fell dead at Furio's feet;
One had the straw, but with it this Greek letter p
The other lost it, pray who had the better?
346. On Cupid.
Love is a Boy, and subject to the rod
Some say, but Lovers say he is a God:
I think that love is neither god nor boy,
But a mad brains imaginary toy.
347. On Candidus.
When I am sick, not else, thou come to see me,
Would fortune from both torments still would free me.
348. On a Puritan.
From impure mouths, now many bear the name
Of Puritan, yet merit not the same.
This one shall only be my Puritan
That is a knave, yet seems an honest man.
349. Ostendit hedera vinum.
A scoffing mate, that past along Cheap Side,
Incontinent a gallant less espide;
Whose tempting Breasts (as to the sale laid out)
Incites this youngster thus to 'gin to flout.
Lady (quoth he) is this flesh to be sold?
No Lord (quoth she) for silver nor for gold,
But wherefore ask you? (and there made a stop)
To buy (quoth he) if not shut up your shop.
350. Quantum mutatus ab illo!
Pedes grown proud makes men admire thereat,
Whose baser breeding, should they think not bear it,
Nay, he on cock-horse rides, how like you that?
Tut! Pedes proverb is, Win gold and wear it.
But Pedes you have seen them rise in have,
That through their pride have broke their neck at last.
351. Upon Lavina.
Lavina brought to bed, her husband looks
To know's child's fortune throughout his books,
His neighbors think he had need search backward rather,
And learn for certain who had been the father.
352. Report and Error.
Error by Error, Tales by Tales, great grow;
As Snow-balls do, by rolling to and fro.
353. In Superbum.
Rustic Suerbus fine new cloths has got,
Of Taffata and velvet, fair in sight;
The show of which has so bewitched the sot,
That he thinks Gentlemen to be his right:
But he is deceived; for true that is of old,
An Ape's an Ape, though he wear cloth of gold.
354. No truth in Wine.
Truth is in wine, but none can find it there,
For in your Taverns, men will lie and swear.
355. On Infidus.
Infidus was so free of Oaths last day,
That he would swear, what ever he thought to say:
But now such is his chance, whereat he is grieved
The more he swears, the less he is believed.
356. On Celsus.
Celsus does love himself, Celsus is wise,
For now no Rival ever can claim his prize.
357. On Christmasse Ivy.
At Christmasse men do always Ivy get,
And in each corner of the house it set:
But why do they, then, use that Bacchus weed?
Because they mean, then Bacchus-like to feed.
358. Adversity.
Adversity hurts none, but only such
Whom whitest fortune dandled has too much.
359. On Bacchus.
Pot-lifting Bacchus to the earth did bend
His knee to drink a health unto his friend:
And there he did so long in liquour pour,
That he lay quite sick-drunk upon the floor.
Judge, was there not a drunkards kindness shown,
To drink his friend a health, and loose his own?
360. Of a fat man.
He Is rich, that has great in-comes by the year:
Then that great bellied man is rich, I Will swear:
For sure his belly never so big had bin,
Had he not daily had great commings in.
361. A wished Cramp.
Some have the Cramp in legs, and hands, it is told,
I wished in my wifes tongue, when she does scold.
362. Vindicta vim sequitur.
Nick being kicked and spurred, pursues the Law,
That doomed the damage at twice forty pence.
Which, when the party which had wronged him, saw;
Thought 'twas too great a fine for such offense.
Why then, quoth Nick, if I too much request,
Thou may at any time kick out the rest.
363. On Flaccus.
Flaccus being young, they said he was a Gull;
Of his simplicity each mouth was full:
And pitying him, they would say, the foolish Lad
Would surely be deceived, of all he had.
His youth is past, now may they turn him loose;
For why? the gull is grown to be a Goose.
364. Per plumas anser.
See how young Rusus walks in green each day,
As if he never was youthful until now:
Ere Christmas next, his green Goose will be gray,
And those high burnished plumes in's cap will bow:
But you do wrong him, since his purse is full,
To call him Goose, that is so young a Gull.
365. Of Ienkin.
Ienkin is a rude Clown, go tell him so;
What need I tell, what he himself does know?
Perhaps he does not, then he is a sot;
For tell me, what knows he that knows it not?
365. On Trigg.
Trigg having turned his suit he struts in state,
And tells the world he is now regenerate.
366. To Fortune.
Poets say Fortune's blind, and cannot see,
And therefore to be born withal, if she
Sometimes drops gifts on undeserving wights:
But sure they are deceived; she has her sight;
Else could it not at all times so fall out,
That fools should have, and wise men go without.
367. On Briscus.
I pray you give Sir Briscus leave to speak,
The Gander loves to hear himself to creak.
368. On an English Ape.
Would you believe, when you this Monsieur see,
That his whole body should speak French, not he?
That he untravell'd should be French so much,
As French men in his company should seem Dutch?
Or hung some Monsieurs picture on the wall;
By which his damn conceived him, clothes and all?
No, it is the new French Tailors motion, made
Daily to walk The Exchange, and help the trade.
369. Possessions.
Those possessions short lived are
Into the which we come by war.
370. Nulla dies sine linea.
By ever learning, Solon waxed old,
For time he knew, was better far then gold:
Fortune would give him gold which would decay
But Fortune cannot give him yesterday.
371. In Cornutum.
One told his wife, a Harts-head he had bought,
To hang his hat upon, and home it brought:
To whom his frugall wife, what need^ that care?
I hope, sweetheart, your head your hat can bear.
372. On More-dew.
More-dew the Mercer; with a kind salute,
Would needs entreat my custom for a suite:
Here Sir, quoth he, for Sattins, Velvets call,
What ever you please, I Will take your word for all.
I thanked, took, gave my word; say than,
Am I at all indebted to this man?
373. Pari jugo dulcis tractus.
When Caecus had bin wedded now three days,
And all his neighbors bad God give him joy,
This strange conclusion with his wife assayes,
Why til her marriage-day she proved so coy:
Before God (says he) 'twas well thou did not yield
For doubtless then my purpose was to leave thee.
Oh Sir (quoth she) I once was so beguild,
And thought the next man should not so deceive me.
Now fie upon it (quo^h he) thou breedst my woe.
Why man (quoth she) I speak but quid pro quo.
374. On Sims marriage.
Six months, quoth Sim, a Suitor, and not sped?
I in a sev'n-night did both woo and wed
Who green fruit loves, must take long pains to shake;
Thine was some downfall, I dare undertake.
375. Upon Sis.
Si^ brags sh'hath beauty, and will prove the same:
As how? as thus Sir; it is her Puppies name.
376. On Clym.
Clym calls his wife, and reckoning all his neighbors,
Just half of them are Cuckolds, he avers.
Nay sie, quoth she, I would they heard you speak;
You of your self, it seems, no reckoning make.
377. On Gut.
Science puffs up, says Gut, when either Pease
Make him thus swell, or windy Cabbages.
378. On Women's faults.
We men in many faults abound,
But two in women can be found:
The worst that from their Sex proceeds,
Is naught in words, and naught in deeds.
379. To a Muck-worm.
Content great riches is, to make which true,
Your Heir would be content to bury you.
380. On Law.
Our Civil Law does seem a Royal thing,
It has more titles then the Spanish King:
But yet the Common Law quite puts it down,
In getting, like the Pope, so many a Crown.
381. In Coam.
A nor will Coa espy,
Til she ascend up to the cornered p
382. Maids Nay's.
Mayds Nayes are nothing, they are shy
But to desire what they deny.
383. De Ore.
Os of O, a Mouth, Scaliger does make;
And from this letter, Mouth his name does take:
And I had been of Scaligers belief,
But that I looked in O, and saw no Teeth.
384. In Hugonem.
Though praise, and please, does Hugo never none,
Yet praise, and please, does Hugo ever one;
For praise, and please, does Hugo himself alone.
385. On Severus.
Severus is extreme in eloquence,
For he creates rare phrase, but rarer sense:
Unto his Serving-man, alias his Boy,
He utters speech exceeding quaint and coy;
Diminutive, and my defective slave,
My pleasures pleasure is, that I must have
My Corpse Coverture, and immediately,
T'insconce my person from frigility.
His Man believ's all is Welsh his Master spoke,
Til he rails English, Rogue go fetch my Cloak.
386. On Iulias weeping.
She by the River sat, and sitting there,
She wept, and made it deeper by a tear.
387. On a Gallant.
What Gallant's that, whose Oaths fly through mine ears?
How like a Lord of Pluto's Court he swears!
How Dutchman-like he swallows down his drink!
How sweet he takes Tobacco til he stink!
How lofty sprighted he disdains a Boor!
How faithful hearted he is to a --!
How Cock-tail proud he does himself advance!
How rare his spurs do ring the Morrice-dance!
Now I protest by Mistress Susans Fan,
He and his boy will make a proper man.
388. On Virtue, Milla's Maid.
Says Aristotle, Virtue ought to be
Communicative of her self and free;
And has not Virtue, Milla's maid, been so?
Who Is grown hereby, as big as she can go.
389. On Corydon.
An homespun Peasant with his Urine-glasse,
The Doctor asked what Countryman he was.
Quoth Corydon, with making legs full low,
Your worship, that, shall by my water know.
390. On a Spanish Soldier.
A Spanish Soldier, sick unto the death,
His Pistol to's Physician did bequeath.
Who did demand, what should the reason be,
'Bove other things to give him that; (quoth he)
This with your practice joined, you may kill,
Sir, all alive, and have the world at will.
391. Upon the Ass.
The Ass a Courtier on a time would be,
And traveled foreign Nations for to see;
But home returned, fashion he could none,
His main and tail were only larger grown.
392. On Hypocrisy.
As Venison in a poor man's Kitchin's rare;
So Hypocrites and Usurers in Heaven are.
393. Daemonum certamen.
A Broker and an Usurer contended,
Which in's profession was the most befriended;
And for experience more to have it tried,
A Scrivener must the difference decide,
To whom (quoth he) you like the Fox and Cub,
One shall be Mammon, the other Beelzebub.
394. On Love.
Love's of it self too sweet; the b^st of all
Is; when Loves honey has a dash of gall.
395. On Man and Woman.
When Man and Woman dies, as Poets sung;
His Heart's the last that stirs, of hers the Tongue.
396. On Fabullus.
I asked Fabullus, why he had no wife?
(Quoth he) because I Would live a quiet life.
397. On Fornus.
Fornus takes pains, he need not without doubt,
O yes, he labors much. How? with the Gout.
398. Quid non ebrietas.
Rubin reports, his Mistress is a Punk:
Which being told her, was no whit dismayed,
For sure as death (quoth she) the Villains drunk*
And in that taking, knows not what he said.
'Twas well excused, but often it comes to pass,
That true we find, In vino veritas.
399. No Pains, no Gains.
If little labor, little are our gains,
Man's fortunes are according to his pains.
400. Infirmis animosus.
Pontus by no means from his coin departs,
Z'foot, will you have of men more then their hearts?
401. A culina ad curiam.
Lixa, that long a Serving-groom has been,
Will now no more the man be known or seen:
And reason good, he has the place resigned;
Witness his cloak, throughout with Velvet lined,
Which by a Paradox comes thus to pass;
The greasy Gull is turned a gallant ass.
402. Frustra vocaveris heri.
Dick had but two words to maintain him ever,
And that was Stand, and after stand Deliver.
But Dick's in Newgate, and he fears shall never
Be blessed again with that sweet word, Deliver.
403. Magnis non est morandum.
See how Silenus walks accomplished,
With due performance of his fathers page:
Looks back of purpose to be honored,
And on each slight occasion 'gins to rage;
You, villain, dog, where has your stay bin such?
Quoth he, the Broker would not lend so much.
404. Puduit sua damna refer.
Such ill success had Dick at Dice last night,
As he was forced, next day, play least in sight:
But if you love him, make thereof no speeches,
He lost his Rapier, Cloak, and Velvet Breeches.
405. Ad Lectorem.
Reader, thou see how pale these papers look,
While they fear thy hard censure on my Book.
406. Nimis docuit consuetudo.
Old Fucus board is often replenished,
But naught thereof must be diminished,
Unless some worthless upper-dish or twain;
The rest for service still again remain.
His man that used to bring them in for show,
Leaving a dish upon the bench below,
Was by his Master (much offended) blamed,
Which he, as brief, with answer quickly framed;
T'hath been so often brought before this day,
As now ch'ad thoft it self had known the way.
407. Poculo junguntur amici.
A health, says Lucas, to his Loves bright ey;
Which not to pledge, were much indignity;
You cannot do him greater courtesy,
Then to be drunk, and damned for company.
408. Nullum stimulum ignaris.
Caecus awake, was tol'd the Sun appeared,
Which had the darkness of the morning cleared:
But Caecus sluggish, thereto makes reply,
The Sun has further far to go then I.
409. In Richardum.
At three goe-downs Dick doffs me off a pot,
The English Gutter's Latin for his throat.
410. Non penna, sed usus.
Cajus accounts himself accursed of men,
Only because his Lady loves him not:
Who, till he taught her, could not hold her pen,
And yet has since, another Tutor got.
Cajus it seems, Thy skill she did but cheapen,
And means to try him at another weapon.
411. An absolute Gallant.
If you will see true valor here displayed,
Hear Poly-phemus, and be not afraid.
Do You see me wronged, and will ye thus restrain me?
Sir let me go, for by these hilts I Will brain ye.
Shall a base patch with appearance wrong me?
I Will kill the villain, pray do not prolong me.
Call my Tobacco putrified stuff?
Tell me it stinks? say it is dross I snuff!
Sirrah! what are you? why Sir, what would you?
I am a Prentice, and will knock you too:
O are you so? I cry you mercy then,
I am to fight with none but Gentlemen.
412. To Momus.
Momus thou say my Verses are but toys:
It Is true, yet truth is often spoke by boys.
413. In Dolentem.
Dolens does show his purse, and tell you this,
It is more horrid then a Pesthouse is;
For in a Pesthouse many mortals enter,
But in his purse one Angel dares not venture.
414. Abditio perditio.
From Mall but merry, men but mirth derive,
For trix it is makes her prove demonstrative.
415. On a Gallant.
Sirrah, come hither, boy, take view of me,
My Lady I am purposed to go see;
What does my Feather flourish with a grace?
And this my curled hair become my face?
How decent does my Doublet's form appear?
I would I had my Suit in Long-lane here.
Do not my spurs pronounce a silver sound?
Is not my hose-circumference profound?
Sir these be well, but there is one thing ill,
Your Tailor with a sheet of Paper-bill,
Vows he will be paid, and Sergeants he has fee'd,
Which wait your coming forth to do the deed.
Boy God-a-mercy, let my Lady stay,
I Will see no Counter for her sake to day.
416. In Sextum.
Sextus six pockets wears, two for his uses,
The other four to pocket up abuses.
417. A Stammerer.
Balbus with other men would angry be,
Because they could not speak as well as he;
For others speak but with their mouth he knows,
But Balbus speaks both through the mouth and nose.
418. On himself.
I dislikt but even now;
Now I love I know not how.
Was I idle, and that while
Was I fired with a smile?
I Will to work, or pray, and then
I shall quite dislike again.
419. Tom's fortune.
Tom tel's he is robbed, and counting all his losses,
Concludes, all is gone, the world is full of crosses:
If all be gone, Tom take this comfort then,
Thou Art certain never to have cross again.
420. Opus and Vsus.
Opus for need consumed his wealth apace,
And never would cease until he was undone;
His brother Vsus lived in better case
Than Opus did, although the eldest son.
It Is strange it should be so, yet here was it,
Opus had all the Land, Vsus the Wit.
421. A good Wife.
A Bachelor would have a Wife were wise,
Fair, rich, and young, a maiden for his bed --
Nor proud, nor churlish, but of faultlesse size;
A Country houswife in the City bred.
But he is a fool, and long in vain has staid;
He should bespeak her, there is none ready made.
422. Anger.
Wrong^ if neglected, vanish in short time;
But heard with anger, we confess the crime.
423. Upon Gellia.
When Gellia went to school, and was a Girl;
Her teeth for whitenes might compare with pearl
But after she the taste of sweet meats knew,
They turned all Opals, to a perfect blew;
Now Gellia takes Tobacco, what should let,
But last they should converted be to jet?
424. On an unconstant Mistress.
I dare not much say when I thee commend,
Lest thou be changed ever my praises end.
425. In Lesbiam.
Why should I love thee Lesbia? I no reason see:
Then out of reason, Lesbia, I love thee.
426. In Paulinum.
Paul by day wrongs me, yet he daily swears,
He wishes me as well as to his soul:
I know his drift to damn that he naught cares,
To please his body, therefore good friend Paul,
If thy kind nature will afford me grace,
Hereafter love me in thy body's place.
427. On Zeno.
Zeno would fain the old widow Egle have;
Trust me he is wise, for she is rich and brave:
But Zeno, Zeno, she will none of you;
In my mind she is the wiser of the two.
428. Of a Drunkard.
Cinna one time most wonderfully swore,
That whilst he breathed he would drink no more*
But since I know his meaning, for I think
He meant he would not breath whilst he did drink.
429. To Cotta.
Be not wroth Cotta, that I not salute thee,
I used it whilst I worthy did repute thee;
Now thou art made a painted Saint, and I,
Cotta, will not commit Idolatry.
430. To Women.
Ye that have beauty, and withal no pity,
Are like a prick-song lesson without ditty
431. On Creta.
Creta does love her husband wondrous well,
It needs no proof, for every one can tell:
So strong's her love, that if I not mistake,
It does extend to others for his sake.
432. On Priscus.
Why still does Priscus strive to have the wall?
Because he is often drunk and fears to fall.
433. On Rufus.
At all, quoth Rufus, lay you what you dare,
I Will throw at all, and 'twere a peck of gold;
No life lies on it, then coin I Will never spare;
Why Rufus, that is the cause of all that is sold?
For with frank Gamesters it does often befall,
They throw at all, till thrown quite out of all.
434. On Tobacco.
Tobacco is a weed of so great power,
That it (like earth) does all it feeds, devour.
435. Upon Nasuto.
When at the Table once I did aver,
Well-taken discord, best did please the ear,
And would be judged by any Q^irister,
Were in the Chapel, Paul's, or Westminster;
Nasuto sitting at the nether end,
(First having drunk and cough'd) quoth he my friend,
If that were true, my wife and I, I fear,
Should soon be sent to some Cathedral Q^ire.
436. Nec vultus indicat virum.
Dick in a raging deep discourtesy,
Calls an Atturny mere Necessity:
The more knave he; admit he had no Law,
Must he be flouted at by every Daw?
437. On Furius.
Furius a lover was, and had loving fits,
He loved so madly that he lost his wits;
Yet he lost naught, yet grant I, he was mad,
How could he lose that which he never had?
438. Fools Fortune.
Fools have great fortune, but yet not all,
For some are great fools, whose fortune's small.
439. Tace sed age.
Little or nothing said, soon mended is,
But they that nothing do, do most amiss.
440. On Count-surly.
Count-surly will no Scholar entertain:
Or any wiser then himself; how so?
The reason is, when fools are in his train,
His wit amongst them, makes a goodly show.
441. On Women.
When man lay dead-like, woman took her life,
From a crook't emblem of her nuptial strife;
And hence (a^ bones would be at rest) her ease
She loves so well, and is so hard to please.
442. Verses.
Who will not honor noble Numbers, when
Verses outlive the bravest deeds of men?
443. Poor Irus.
Irus using to lie upon the ground,
One morning under him a feather found,
Have I all night here lien so hard (quoth he)
Having but one poor feather under me:
I wonder much then how they take their ease,
That night by night, lie on a bed of these.
444. Merry Doll.
I blame not lusty Doll, that strives so much,
To keep her light heart free from sorrows touch;
She Will dance and sing a hem boys, hey all six,
She Is steel to th'back, all mirth, all meretrix.
445. Heaven and Hell.
I^ Heaven's called the place where Angels dwell,
My purse wants Angels, pray call that Hell.
446. Like qu^stion like answer.
A young beginner walking through Cheap Side,
A house shut up he presently espied
And read the Bill, which o'r the door was set,
Which said, the house and shop was to be let;
That known, he asked a young man presently,
Which at the next door stood demurely.
May not this shop be let alone? qoth he,
Yes, you may let't alone for ought I see.
447. On deaf Joan.
She prates to others, yet can nothing hear,
Just like a sounding Jugge that wants an ear.
448. Of an ill wife.
Priscus was weeping when his wife did dye,
Yet he was then in better case then I:
I should be merry, and should think to thrive,
Had I but his dead wife for mine alive.
449. Meum and Tuum.
Megge lets her husband boast of rule and riches,
But she rules all the roast, and wears the breeches.
450. Deaths trade.
Death is a Fisherman, the world we see
His Fish Pond is, and we the Fishes be.
He sometimes, Angler-like, does with us play,
And slily takes us one by one away;
Diseases are the murthering-books, which he
Does catch us with, the bait mortality,
Which we poor silly fish devour, til struck,
At last too late we feel the bitter hook.
At other times he brings his net, and then
At once sweeps up whole Cities full of men,
Drawing up thousands at a draught, and saves
Only some few, to make the others graves:
His Net some raging pestilence; now he
Is not so kind as other Fishers be;
For if they take one of the smaller ^rye,
They throw him in again, he shall not dye:
But death is sure to kill all he can get,
And all is Fish with him that comes to Net.
451. O^ Bice.
Bice laughs when no man speak^, and does protest
It is his own breech there that break^ the jest.
452. Valiant in drink.
Who only in his Cups will ^ight, is like
A clock that must be oil'd well ere it strike.
453. Master and Scholar.
A Pedant asked a Puny ripe and bold,
In an hard frost, the Latin word for cold:
I Will tell you out of hand, (quoth he) for lo,
I have it at my fingers ends, you know.
454. Gasters great belly.
Gaster did seem to me to want his eyes,
For he could neither see his legs nor thighs;
But yet it was not so; he had his sight,
Only his belly hanged in his light.
455. Drunken Dick.
When Dick for want of drunken mates grows sick,
Then with himself to work goes faithful Dick.
The buttery door t'himself he shuts close
That done, then goes the pot straight ways to's nose:
A health (quoth noble Dick) each hogs-head than
Must seeming pledge this honest faithful man:
But straight from kindness Dick to humors grows,
And then to th'barrels he his valor shows,
Throwing about the cups, the pots, the glasses,
And rails at the tuns, calling them drunken asses:
Never ceasing this same faithful coyl to keep,
Till under th'hogshead Dick falls fast asleep.
456. In Sextinum.
A pretty block Sextinus names his Hat,
So much the fitter for his head by that.
457. Sine sanguine.
Ralph challenged Robin, time and place appointed,
Their Parents heard on it, O how they lamented!
But good luck was, they soon were freed of fear,
The one never meant, the other came not there.
458. On humane Bodies.
Our bodies are like shoes, which off we cast,
Physic their Cobbler is, and death the Last.
459. On Trencherman.
Tom shifts the Trenchers, yet he never can,
Endure that lukewarm name of Servingman;
Serve or not serve, let Tom do what he can,
He is a serving, who is a Trencher-man.
460. A Toothlesse-pratler.
Nature the teeth does as an hedge ordain,
The nimble frisking tongue for to contain:
No marvel then since that the hedge is out,
If Fuscus tongue walks so fast about.
461. A musical Lady.
A Lady fairer far then fortunate,
(In dancing) thus o'r-shot her self of late,
The Music not in tune, pleased not her mind,
For which he with the Fiddlers fault did find;
Fiddlers (quoth she) your Fiddles tune for shame*
But as she was a speaking of the same,
To mend the consort, let she did a (F.)
Whereas the fidling knaves thus did her greet,
Madam your pipe's in tune, it plays most sweet;
Strike up, quoth. they, (but then the knaves did smile)
And as you p^p^, we will dance another while.
At which, away the blushing Lady flings,
But as she goes, her former notes she sings.
462. In Laurettam.
Lauretta is laid o'r, how I Will not say,
And yet I think two manner of ways I may,
Doubly laid o'r, videlicet, her face,
Laid o'r with colors, and her coat with lace.
463. On Macer.
You call my verses toy's, they are so, it is true,
Yet they are better then ought comes from you.
464. Briskap the Gallant.
Though thou have little judgment in thy head,
More than to dress thee, drink and go to bed;
Yet may thou take the wall, and the way shall lead,
Since Logic wills that simple things precede.
465. Necessity has no Law.
Florus did beat his Cook, and 'gan to sweaee,
Because his meat was rotten roasted there.
Peace good Sir (quoth the Cook) Need has no Law,
It Is rotten roasted, 'cause 'twas rotten raw.
466. In Carientium.
Garentius might have wedded where he wooed,
But he was poor, his means was nothing good,
'Twas but for lack of living that he lost her;
For why? no penny now, no Pater noster.
467. On Harpax.
Harpax gave to the poor all by his will,
Because his heir should not faign'd tears distill.
468. To a Barber.
Tonsorius only lives by cutting hair,
And yet he brags that Kings to him sit bare:
Me thinks he should not brag and boast of it,
For he must stand to beggars while they sit.
469. Upon Grand^orto.
The morrow after just Saint Georges day,
Grand^orto piteous drunk, sat in a ditch,
His hands by's side, his gelding strayed away,
His scarlet hose, and doublet very rich;
With mud and mire all beastly raid, and by
His feather with his close-stool-hat did ly.
We asked the reason of his sitting there,
Zounds 'cause I am King Solomon (quoth he)
And in my Throne; then for the Love we bear,
(Replied my self) unto your Majesty,
We Will pull you out, and henceforth wish your grace
Would speak your Proverbs in a warmer place.
470. The Fencer and Physic Doctor.
Lie thus (the Fencer cries) thus must you guard,
Thus must you slip, thus point, thus pass, thus ward
And if you kill him Sir, this trick learn then
With this same trick you may kill many men.
A Doctor standing by, cries, Fencing fool,
Both you and he to me may come to school,
Thou do but prate: my deeds shall show my skill
Where thou hurt'st one, an hundred I do kill.
471. In Lusiam.
Lusia who scorns all others imitations,
Cannot abide to be out-gone in fashions:
She says she cannot have a hat or ruff,
A gown, a peticoat, a band, or cuffe.
But that these Citizens (whom she does hate)
Will get into it, at never so dear a rate:
But Lusia now does such a fashion wear,
Whose hair is curled, and costs her some what dear:
That there is no Citizen, what ever she be,
Can be transformed so like an Owl as she.
472. Kisses.
Give the food that satisfies a Guest:
Kisses are but dry banquets to a feast
473. A Civilian.
A lusty old grown-grave gray headed Sire,
Stole to a wench, to quench his lusts desire;
She asked him what profession he might be?
I am a Civil Lawyer, Girl, (quoth he)
A Civil Lawyer Sir! you make me muse,
Your talk's too broad for Civil men to use;
If Civil Lawyers are such bawdy men,
Oh what (quoth she) are other Lawyers then?
474. Rainaldo, and Rainer.
Rainaldo meeting Reiner in the street,
Deep in his debt, he does thus Reiner greet,
You know some money is betwixt us two,
That well-nigh now these ten years has bin due;
Quoth Reiner (looking down unto his feet)
I'^aith and we will part it, if I see it:
But as I live Rainaldo I find none,
As fain as you, I would you had your own.
475. Spinus his choice.
Spinus would wed, but he would have a wench
That has all tongues, Italian, Spanish, French,
But I dissuade him; for if she has any,
She has enough; if two, she has too too many.
476. Backbiters.
When Codrus catches fleas, what ever he ailes,
He kills them with his teeth, not his nails;
Saying, that man by man may blameless go,
If every one would use Backbiters so.
477. In Salonus.
Often in the night Salonus is inclined,
To rise and piss; and does as often break wind*
If's Urinall be glass, as it is no doubt,
I wonder it so many cracks holds out.
478. In Leonatum.
The filthiest, the fowlest, deformedst less,
That is, will be, I think or ever was,
Leonatus loves; wherewith should she him draw,
Except as she is like jet, he be like straw?
479. Nosce teipsum.
Walking and meeting one not long ago,
I ask't who 'twas, he said he did not know:
I said, I know thee; so said he, I you,
But he that knows himself I never knew.
480. An Old Silvium.
Silvius by Simony a living got,
And he lived well upon it; pray why not?
For he the poor did pill, the rich did lurch,
And so became a pillar of the Church.
481. On Perfumes.
They that smell least, smell best: which intimates,
They smell like Beasts that smell like Civet Cats.
482. Arcades ambo.
Jack and Dick both with one woman dealt
So long till she the pains of woman felt:
Now Dick he thinks to put a trick on Jack
And Jack again to hang it on Dicks back:
Which got the Child, it seems a double case,
I^ has so like (they say) Iacks nose, Dicks face.
But by both marks my judgment should be quick,
Et vitulo tu dignus Jack and Dick.
483. On Punchin.
Give me a reason why men call
Punchin a dry plant-Animall.
Because as plants by water grow,
Punchin by Beer and Ale spreads so.
484. Ne fide colori.
When Bassa walks abroad she paints her face,
And then she would be seen in every place,
For then your Gallants who so ever they are,
Under a color will account her fair.
485. In Flavium.
When Flavius once would needs praise Tin,
His brain could b^ing no reason in;
But what his belly did bethink,
Platters for meat, and Pots for drink.
486. Ad Quintum.
Thy lawful wife, fair Lelia needs must be,
For she was forced by Law to marry thee.
487. In Virtutem.
Virtue we praise, but practice not her good,
(Athenian-like) we act not what we know*
So many men do talk of Robin-Hood,
Who never yet shot arrow in his bow.
488. A good wits diet.
That which upholds our tottering walls of flesh,
Is food: and that which does our wits refresh,
Is wholesome study: for like longer fare,
Be solid Arts, but sweet meats Poems are.
489. On Women's tongue.
Things that be bitter, bitterer than gall,
Physicians say, are always Physical.
Then women's tongues, if into powder beaten,
And in a Potion, or a pill be eaten,
Nothing more bitter is, I therefore muse,
That women's tongues in Physic they never use:
There Is many men who live unquiet lives,
Would spare that bitter member of their wives.
Then prove them Doctor, use them in a pill;
Things often help sick men, that do sound men kill.
490. A proper comparison.
As there are three blue beans in a blue bladder,
As there are thrice three rounds in a long ladder,
As there are three nooks in a cornered cap,
And three corners and one in a Map,
Even so like all these,
There are three Universities.
491. Of Death.
He that fears death, or mourns it in the just,
Shows of the resurrection little trust.
492. Woman.
Woman was once a rib, (as truth has said)
Else since her tongue runs wide from every point,
I should have dreamed her substance had bin made
Of Adams whirle-bone, when 'twas out of joint.
493. Pepertit, etc.
Nels Husband said, she brought him naught but toys,
But yet (without his help) she brings him boys.
494. Insipiens.
Two friends discoursing that together stood,
The one enquiring if the other could
Tell whether such a man were wise?
He answered no, but he is otherwise.
495. Romes wifelesse Clergy.
Long did I wonder, and I wondered much,
Rome should her Clergy that contentment grudge
As to debar them of their proper due;
What, does she all with continence indue?
O no; they find a woman's lips so dainty,
They Will tie themselves from one, 'cause they will have twenty.
496. On Eves Apples.
Eve for thy fruit thou gav'st too dear a price,
What? for an Apple give a Paradise?
If now adays of fruit such gains were made,
A Coster-monger were a Devilish trade.
497.
Will the Perfumer met me in the street,
I stood amazed, he asked me what I meant;
In faith, said I, your Gloves are very sweet,
And yet your breath does cast a stronger sent:
498. Beauty.
Beauty's no other but a lovely grace,
Of lively colors, flowing from the face.
499. On Poetical Blinks.
He nine ways looks, and needs must learned be,
That all the Muses at one view can see.
500. A Conceit.
As Sextus once was opening of a Nut,
With a sharp knife his finger deeply cut,
What sign is this, quoth he, can any tell?
It Is sign, quoth one, you have cut your finger well.
Not so, says he, for now my finger's sore,
And I am sure that it was well before.
501. Women.
Howsoe'r they be, thus do they seem to me,
They be and seem not, seem what least they be:
502. Mutuans Dissimulans.
Dick crafty borrows to no other end,
But that he will not ought to others lend,
That else might ask him: It Is some wisdom Dick
How ere, accounted but a knavish trick.
503. Writing.
When words we want, love teaches to indite;
And what we blush to speak, she bids us write.
504. A cure for Impatience.
Who would be patient, wait he at the Pool,
For Bull-heads, or for Block-heads in the School.
505. Satisfaction.
For all our works, a recompense is sure:
It Is sweet to think on what was hard to endure.
506. To Mistress mutable.
Love runs within your veins, as it were mixed
With Quicksilver, but would be wisely fixed:
For though you may for beauty bear the Bell,
Yet ever to ring Changes sounds not well.
507. On a Madman.
One asked a man-man, if a wife he had?
A wife! quoth he, I never was so mad.
508. To Scilla.
If it be true that promise be a debt,
Then Scilla will her freedom hardly get;
For if she has vowed her service to so many,
She Will neither pay them all, nor part from any.
Yet she to satisfy her debts, desires
To yield her body, as the Law requires.
509. Nescis, quid serus vesper vehat.
Lyn^us devises as he lies in bed,
What new apparel he were best to make him:
So many fashions flow within his head,
As much he fears the Tailor will mistake him:
But he mistook him not, that by the way
Did for his old suit lay him up that day.
510. To Ficus.
Ficus has lost his nose, but knows not how,
And that seems strange to every one that knows it:
Me thinks I see it written in his brow,
How, wherefore, and the cause that he did loose it.
To tell you true, Ficus, I thus suppose,
'Twas some French Caniball bit off your nose.
511. On a painted Curtezan.
Whosoever says thou sellest all, does jest,
Thou buy'st thy beauty, that sels all the rest
512. Of Arnaldo.
Arnaldo free from fault, demands his wife,
Why he is burdened with her wicked life?
Quoth she, good husband do not now repent,
I far more burdens bear, yet am content.
513. Labor improbus omnia vincit.
Glogo will needs be knighted for his lands,
Got by the labor of his fathers hands,
And hopes to prove a Gentleman of note,
For he has bought himself a painted coat.
514. Quis nisi mentis inops --
Ware proffered stinks; yet stay good Proverb, stay,
Thou art deceived, as Clients best can say;
Who proferring trebble fees, for single care,
It Is well accepted, gold it is such ware.
515. On a friend indeed.
A real friend a Cannon cannot batter;
With nom'nall friends, a Squib's a perilous matter,
516. On an Italian Proverb.
Three women met upon the Market day,
Do make a Market, (they do use to say
In Italy) and why? their tongues do walk
As loud, as if an hundred men did talk.
One hearing this, swore had his wife been there
And made a fourth, there might have been a Fair.
517. Man's ingresse and egresse.
Nature, which headlong into life did throng us,
With our feet forwards to our grave does bring us
What is less ours, then this our borrowed breath?
We stumble into life, we go to death.
518. On bad Debtors.
Bad debtors are good liars; for they say,
I Will pay you without fail, on such a day;
Come is the day, to come the debt is still,
So still they lie, though stand in debt they will.
But Fulcus has so often ly'd in this wise,
That now he lies in Ludgate for his lies.
519. On a Iustasse.
A Justice walking o'r the frozen Thames,
The Ice about him round, began to crack;
He said to's man, here is some danger, James,
I pray thee help me over on thy back.
520. Genitoris nesciens.
Tom asks no fathers blessing, if you note him,
And wiser he, unless he knew who got him.
521. To a sleeping Talker.
In sleep thou talk un-forethought mysteries,
And utter'st un-foreseen things, with close eyes.
How well would thou discourse if thou were dead
Since sleep, deaths image, such fine talk has bred?
522. Omne simile non est idem.
Together as we walked, a friend of mine
Mistook a painted Madam for a Sign,
That in a window stood; but I acquainted,
Told him it was no wooden sign was painted,
But Madam Meretrix: yea, true, said he,
Yet it is a little sign of modesty.
523. Tandem manifestum.
Katharine that hid those Candles out of sight,
May well conceive they will come at length to light.
524. Qui ebrius laudat temperantiam.
Severus likes not these unseason'd lines
Of rude absurdities, times foul abuse,
To all posterities, and their assigns,
That might have been (says he) to better use.
What senseless gull, but reason may convince,
Or jade so dull, but being kicked will wince?
525. Quantum mutatus ab illo.
Would any deem Manasses now the man,
That whilome was not worth a wooden kan.
Doubtless the Dunce in something does surpass,
Yet his red nose is still the same it was.
526. On wisdom and virtue.
Wisemen are wiser than good-men, what then?
It Is better to be wiser than wise men.
527. On Ducus.
Ducus keeps house, and it with reason stands,
That he keep house, has sold away his lands.
528. Mysus and Mopsa.
Mysus and Mopsa hardly could agree,
Striving about superiority:
The Text which says that man and wife are one,
Was the chief Argument they stood upon.
She held, they both one woman should become:
He held, they should be man, and both but one.
So they contended daily, but the strife
Could not be ended, till both were one wife.
529. On Photinus.
I met Photinus at the B -- Court,
Cited (as he said) by a Knave relator:
I asked him, wherefore? he in laughing sort,
Told me it was but for a Childish matter.
How e're he laughed it out, he lied not;
Indeed 'twas childish, for the child he got.
530. On Castriotes.
See, see, what love is now betwixt each fist,
Since Castriotes had a scabby wrist:
How kindly they, by clawing one another,
As if the left hand were the right hands brother!
531. New Rhetorique.
Good Arguments without coin, will not stick;
To pay, and not to say, 's best Rhetoric.
532. To some kind Readers.
This Book of mine I liken to a glass,
Wherein the fool may look and laugh his fill:
He having done with it Readers, as ye pass,
Here take and use it, as long as you will.
533. Est mihi Divi parens.
Owinus wondreth, since he came from Wales,
What the description of this Isle might be;
That never had seen but mountains, hills, and dales,
Yet would he stand and boast on's pedigree.
From Rice ap Richard, sprung from Dick a Cow,
Be cot, was right good gentleman, law ye now?
434. Principia sordida.
Bassus has Lands good store, and leases Farms,
Whose Mother, Milk-pails bore, ever he bore arms.
535. On Thirsites.
Although Thirsites have a filthy face,
And staring eyes, and little outward grace:
Yet this he has, to make amends for all,
Nature her self, is not more natural.
536. On Zoilus.
If Soldiers may obtain four Terms of war,
Muskets should be the pleaders, Pikes the bar;
For black bags, Bandeliers, Jackets for gowns,
Angels for fees, we'll take no more cracked crowns.
537. On a long beard.
Thy beard is long, better it would thee fit,
To have a shorter beard, and longer wit.
538. On my self.
Who seeks to please all men each way,
And not himself offend;
He may begin to work to day,
But God knows when he will end.
539. Nimium ne creed colori.
Battas believed for a simple truth,
That yonder gilt-spur spruce and Velvet youth,
Was some great personage, or worthy weight,
Until one told him he was but a Knight.
A Knaight (quoth Battas) vaith I chud a zworne,
A hod not bin lass then zome Gen-man borne.
540. Silens simplex.
Will would seem wise, and many words let pass,
Speaking but little 'cause he is such an --
541. To the mis-interpreter.
Cease gaul'd back guilt, these inscious lines to mince,
The world will know you are rubbed if once ye wince;
They hem within their seeming Critique wall,
Particularly none; generally all:
Amongst which if you have chanced to catch a prick
Cry we-hy if you will, but do not kick.
542. To Mary Meare.
Meare, since unmixt, unmary'd, and a maid;
Then you to be a Mearmaid may be said:
A Mearmaid's flesh above, and fish below,
And so may you be too, for ought I know.
543. Ad Rinaldum amic.
See, see, Rinaldus! Prithee who is that,
That wears you great green feather in his Hat,
Like to some Tilter? sure it is some Knight,
Whose wits being green, his head must needs be light.
544. On himself.
Mirth pleases some, to others it is offense,
Some commend plain conceit, some profound sense;
Some wish a witty jest, some dislike that,
And most would have themselves, they know not what.
Then he that would please all, and himself too,
Takes more in hand then he is like to do.
545. Fingers end.
Philomathes once studying to indite,
Nibled his fingers, and his nails did bite:
By this I know not what he did intend,
Unless his wit lay at his fingers end.
546. Sapia qui vendit oportet.
Ianus does jesting, use Equivocation,
Which he alludes as doubtful words of Art,
To hide the color of his Occupation,
But to the Devil he bears an honest heart.
547. Clamans Asinus.
Who says Tom Tipstaffe is no man of calling?
Can any Crier at Sessions be more bawling?
548. Upon Dunmo.
I Dunmo asked as we at Supper sat,
How long he had lived in the married state,
Sir, just (quoth Dunmo) with my wife I met
In the great Plague time, I remember yet,
And sighing, as he would have burst in twain,
Said, now almost the thirtieth of her reign.
549. Upon Tom Tolthams Nose.
The radiant color of Tom Toltham's nose,
Puts down the Lilly, and obscures the Rose;
Had I a Jewel of such precious hew,
I would present it to some Monarch's view,
No subject should possess such Jems as those,
Ergo, the King must have Tom Toltham's nose.
550. Domina praedominans.
Ill may Rodolphos boast of rule or riches,
That lets his wife rule him, and wear the breeches:
551. Titus the Gallant.
Brave Titus three years in the Town has been,
Yet not the Lions, nor the Tombs has seen;
I cannot tell the cause without a smile,
He has bin in the Counter all this while.
552. In Lalum.
Lalus which loves to hear himself discourse,
Talks to himself as if he frantic were,
And though himself might no where hear a wors^,
Yet he no other but himself will hear;
Stop not his mouth if he be troublesome,
But stop his ears, and then the man is dumb.
553. To Criticus.
Criticus about to kiss a Maiden throng,
He happened first on one whose nose was long;
He flouting, said, I fain would kiss you Sweet,
But that I fear our lips will never meet,
Your nose stands out so far; the Maiden died
Her cheeks with Crimson, but soon thus replied,
Pray sir, then kiss me in that place where I
To hinder you, have neither nose nor eye.
554. Profundo Scientia.
Sal can by silence, deep profundity,
Force you cry, fough! Ieronimo go by.
555. On two by Sea.
Two Youngsters going by Sea, the one
That never before had been the Sea upon.
Casts up; and as he heaves, he Bo does cry;
O said the other, Sir, you are sick, ye'll die.
No (says the Sea-sick) though my stomack's loose,
You see, I can cry Bo unto a Goose.
556. Vt pluma parsona.
Why wears Laurentius such a lofty feather?
Because he is proud, and foolish both together.
557. Aurum volat ocius Euro.
Monsieur Flemingo fraught with Angels store,
Would see fair London, never seen before:
Where lodging with his Mistress but one night,
Had (ere he parted) put them all to flight.
558. To Pontilianus.
Dogs on their Masters fawn and leap,
And wag their tails apace;
So, though the Flatt'rer want a tail,
His tongue supplies the place.
559. Instabilis stans.
Mat being drunken, much his anger wreaks
On's wife; but stands to nothing that he speaks.
560. On some Lawyers.
Law serves to keep disordered men in aw,
But Aw preserves orders, and keeps the Law,
Were Aw away L[aw]yers would liars be
For Lucre; which they have and hold in fee.
561. Health.
Even from my heart, much Health I wish,
No Health I Will wash with drink,
Health wished, not washed, in words, not wine,
To be the best I think.
562. Case is altered.
Tom Case (some do report) was lately haltered;
If this be true, why then the case is altered.
563. Quae placuit Domino nupta est Ancilla sodali.
Madam Rugosa knows not were to find
One Chambermaid of ten to please her mind.
But yet my Lord so likes their comely carriage,
As he prefers them to his men in marriage.
564. Plagis mitior.
Katharine that grew so cursed, and fit for no man,
With beating soon became a gentlewoman.
565. Priscus.
When Priscus raisd from low to high estate,
Rode through the street in pompous jollity;
Cajus his poor familiar friend of late,
Bespake him thus, Sir now you know not me;
It Is likely friend (quoth Priscus) to be so,
For at this time my self I do not know.
566. Anger soon appeased.
When John Cornutus does his wife reprove,
For being false and faithless in her love,
His wife to smooth those wrinkles in his brow,
Does stop his mouth with, John come kiss me now.
567. A fool for Company.
Fatuus will drink with no such Ass,
That lets his jests (unapprehended) pass:
Or if he jest with such of shallow brain,
He laughs himself to make his jests more plain.
Thus Fatuus does jest and play ^he sany,
To laugh at's self, he is fool if there be any.
568. In Cineam.
When Cineas comes amongst his friends in mourning,
He slily notes, who first his cap does move;
Him he salutes, the rest so grimly scorning,
As if for ever he had lost his love;
I knowing how the humor it did fit
Of the fond Gull to be saluted first,
Catch at my Cap, but move it not a whit,
Which he perceiving, seems with spite to burst.
But Cineas, why expect you more of me*
Then I of you? I am as good a man,
And better too by many a quality:
For vault, and dance, and fence, and rhyme I can:
You keep a whore at your own charge, men tell me,
Indeed friend Cineas, therein you excel we.
569. On Captain Sharke.
One asked a friend where Captain Shark did lie,
Why sir (quoth he) at ADIV2ate, at the Pie;
Away, quoth the other, he lies not there I know it,
No, says the other, then he lies in's throat.
570. A witty answer.
A lean, yet ^at Recusant being confined
Unto a Justice house, whose wife was great,
(Not great with child, but hugely great with meat)
At supper thus began to grope his mind,
To hoc est corpus what say you? she sed;
Marry (quoth he) I say it is well feed.
571. Gossips discourse.
When Gillian and her Gossips all are met,
And in the match of Gossiping down set,
And plain Mass-Parson cutting bread for th'table
To tell how fast they talk, my tongue's not able
One tells strange news, the other Godsworbet cries,
The third shakes her head, alack replies,
She on her Hens, this on her Ducks do talk,
On thousand things at once their tongues do walk.
So long as Cocks can tread, and Hens will lay,
Gill, and Gills Gossips will have words to say.
572. Capa^ incapabilis.
Produs in's Office seem^ a simple Scribe,
Yet has he cunning learnt to take a Bribe.
573. A Parson and a Thief.
A lusty Parson riding on the way,
Was by a Thief commanded for to stay;
The Parson drew his sword, for well he durst,
And quickly put his foe unto the worst.
Sir (quoth the Thief) I by your habit see
You are a Churchman, and debate should flee,
You know it is written in the sacred word,
Jesus to Peter said, Put up thy Sword:
True (quoth the Parson) but withal then hear,
Saint Peter first had cut off Malchus ear.
574. Similes habent labra lactucas.
Dick swash (or swaggering Dick) through Fleetstreet re^les,
With Si^ and Brettice waiting at his heels:
To one that would have taken the wall, he swore,
Zounds, do not see my Punck and Paramour?
575. A Soldiers jest.
One told told a Soldier sitting at the board,
(And silent) that he had an edgelesse sword;
Who straigh^ replied, Sir, I will do my best,
To break your pate, though I never break a jest.
576. Good Advice.
One to a Serving-man this Counsel sent,
To get a Master that is intelligent;
Then if of him no wages he could get,
Yet he would understand he is in his debt.
577. Thieves.
Two Thieves by night began a lock to pick,
One in the house awake, thus answered quick,
Why, how now? what a s^ir you there do keep?
Go, come again, we are not yet asleep.
578. Ass.
He that loves glass without a G.
Leave out L. and what is he?
579. Enecat amplexu nimio, sic simia foetum.
Call Davus knave, he straightway draws his sword,
And makes you prove as much, or eat your word.
But if you call him honest Rogue, or Jew,
He huggs you then for giving him his due.
580. To Festus.
Festus thou art old, and yet would mary'd be:
Ere thou do so, this counsel take of me;
Look into Lillies Grammar, there thou wilt find,
Cornu a Horn, a word still Vndeclin'd.
581. A Gentleman and his Physician.
A Gentleman not richest in discretion,
Was always sending for his own Physician.
And on a time, he needs would of him know,
What was the cause his pulse did go so slow?
Why (quoth the Doctor) thus it comes to pass,
T'must needs go slow, which goes upon an Ass.
582. On Saint George.
To save a maid Saint George a Dragon slew,
Which was a noble act, if all be true;
Some say there are no Dragons; and it is said
There Is no Saint George; pray Jove there be a maid.
583. Similis cum simili.
Tom went to the Market, where Tom met with Tom,
Tom asked Tom, what Tom? ^ow far'st thou Tom?
Who Tom, I Tom? Is Tom (quoth Tom) you Tom;
Well God a mercy Tom; how do you Tom?
Faith ne'^ so well (quoth Tom) since Tom was Tom:
And thus was the greeting past 'twixt Tom and Tom.
584. Ebrius oblitus.
Fucus was fox'd last night, but it is concealed,
And would not for his Office 'twere revealed.
585. Dulce quod utile.
An honest Vicar riding by the way,
Not knowing better how to spend the day,
Did sing unto himself some certain Psalms;
A blind man hearing him, strait begged his alms;
To whom (quoth he) with coin I cannot part,
But God thee bless, good man with all my heart.
O, said the blind man, greater is my loss,
When such as you do bless without a cross.
586. In Dacum.
Dacus with some good color and pretense,
Terms his wifes beau^y silent eloquence;
For she does lay more colors on her face,
Then ever Tully used his speech to grace.
587. In Sillam.
Though I were blind, or though I never saw him,
Yet if I should Silla but talking hear;
For a right roaring Gallant I should know him,
For of a whore he talks, and still does swear.
588. Varietas iniquit^s.
Mat will not marry: true, 'cause tied to none,
He may have wenches new, when the old are gone.
589. Good sauce.
I went to sup with Cinna the other night,
And to say true (for give the Devil his right)
Though scant of meat we could a morsel get,
Yet there with store of passing sauce we met.
You ask what sauce, where pittance was so small?
This, is not hunger the best sauce of all?
590. Plagis mitior.
Katharine that grew so cursed and fit for no man,
With beating soon became a Gentlewoman.
591. To a Lawyer.
To go to Law, I have no maw,
Although my suite be sure,
For I shall lack suits to my back,
Ere I my suit procure.
592. Semel insanivimus.
Bedlam fate bless thee, thou wantst naught but wit,
And having gotten that, we are freed from it;
Bridewell, I cannot any way dispraise thee,
For thou do feed the poor, and jerk the lazy.
Newgate, of thee I cannot much complain;
For once a month, thou freest men out of pain;
But from the Counters, goodness it self defend us?
To Bedlam, Bridewell, or to Newgate send us,
For there in time, wit, work, or law sets free;
But here wit, work, nor law gets liberty.
593. Of himself.
Some men there be, which say of me,
That I am not a Poet;
They say well, why? I do not lie,
I write the truth; I know it.
594. Upon Annes marriage with a Lawyer.
Anne is an Angel, what if so she be?
What is an Angel, but a Lawyers fee?
595. Aenigma.
The Devil, men say, in Devonshire died of late,
But Devonshire lately lived in rich estate,
Till Rich his toys did Devonshire so bewitch,
As Devonshire died, and left the Devil Rich.
596. On Cupid.
Why feign they Cupid robbed of his sight?
Can he whose seat is in the eye, want light?
597. An Answer.
Experience show, and reason does decree
That he who sits in's own light cannot see.
598. Lucus journey.
Lucus has traveled with an hundred pound,
Was robbed and left well beaten, and fast bound:
But when to share their prize, they had begun,
No miracle was wrought, yet he undon.
599. Of Nature.
Nature did well in giving poor men wit,
That fools well monifi'd may pay for it.
600. Vilescit dives avarus.
Rufus is wondrous rich, but what of that?
He lives obscurely, like a Water-Rat.
601. Visum ignotum.
That Crambo's wife's with child, her belly shows it:
But who was it got it? pray ask those that know it.
602. Upon Marriage.
Marriage as old men note, has lik'ned bin
Unto a public fast, or common rout,
Where those that are without would fain get in,
And those that are within would fain get out.
603. On Annas a News-monger.
Annas has long ears for all news to pass:
His ears must needs be long, for he is an Ass.
604. Sir John.
Now good Sir John (the beggar cries) I pray
Bestow your Worship's alms on me to day,
Relieve my wants (quoth he) I am your brother,
We born are, one to help and aid another;
My brother (quoth. Sir John) poor wretch^d wight,
Why, thou mistakest me, I am a Knight;
I know it, quoth he, but hark you kind Sir John,
There Is many a Knight kin to the beggar men.
605. Conjectus.
Conjectus says he will plainly prove,
Another Child he ought to love,
More than his Parents; which is strange,
And yet it is true; for I protest,
He ought to love his wife the best.
606. Aulus.
Some (speaking in their own renown)
Say that this Book was not exactly done;
I care not much, like banquets let my Books,
Rather be pleasing to the Guests than Cooks,
607. On envy.
Why say some, wealth brings envy, since it is known
Poor men have backbiters fifteen for one?
608. Errantes errare licet.
Pandorus spends the day by telling news,
Of such his travels as will make you muse:
Nay sir believe it, he will discourse at large,
How should he else be fed at others charge?
609. To a Drunkard.
Much prattling causes greatest thirstinesse:
Thy wife talks more then thou, why drinks she less.
610. On Pru.
Pru give me leave to laugh, why should thou buy
Ceruse, and Stibium, and Mercury,
And sleiking Oils, the best that may be got,
When thy whole face Prue is not worth a groat?
611. To Momus.
Leave for shame, Momus, leave to bark and cry,
My actions give thy slandrous tongue the lie.
612. To Roba.
Thou Art fair, it is true; and pretty too, I know it;
And well bred (Roba) for thy manners show it;
But whilst thou make self-praise thy only care,
Thou Art neither pretty, nor well bred, nor fair.
613. On Gallo.
Gallo's a pretty man, has pretty hair,
A pretty hat, and cloak as one need wear;
Gallo's a Gallant, and as Gallant^ use,
Can court his Mistress, with a sprightly Muse:
Gallo's a dunce, for I supply his wit,
Which he makes nonsense by his reading it,
And it is no wonder, as all wisemen know,
For pretty Gallants to be dunces now.
614. Pudor est sua damna refer.
Peter has lost his purse, but will conceal it,
Least she that stole it, to his shame reveal it.
615. Wheele-greace.
Men th'Axletree do Greaze, that they not screak,
But Lawyers must be Greaz'd to make them speak.
616. Who best friend.
A Louse I say, for when a man's distressed,
And others fall off, she sticks the surest.
617. O times and manners!
Why thus do men, manners and times accuse,
When men themselves, Manners and times abuse?
We Are bad in them, they worse by us do grow,
Yet we complain that help to make them so.
618. Carpe.
Of all our Modern Writers, Carpe likes none,
He loves the old Poets that are dead and gone:
Pardon me honest Carpe, I would not be
Laid in my grave a while yet, to please thee.
619. Non nunquam jactat egenus*
Jack is a Gentleman I must confess,
For there is no woman's Tailor can be less.
620. On Terpin.
Terpin sips wine, and gluts down meat; I think,
My Terpin drinks his meat, and eats his drink.
621. To Phaulo.
As often (Phaulo) as thou do amiss,
Thou have no more excuse for it, but this,
It was against thy will; why, be it so,
Against thy will thou shall be punished to.
622. Little, nothing, too much, enough.
The Poor have little, Beggars none,
The Rich too much, enough not one.
623. On Spurco of Oxford.
Spurco from Chandler, started Aldermen,
And trust me now most Elder-like he can
Behave himself: he never appears in Town,
But in his beaver, and his great fur'd gown:
His Ruff is set, his head set in his Ruff;
His reverend trunks become him well enough;
He wears a hoop ring on his Thumb; he has
Of Gravidud a dose full in his face:
And tricked and trimmed, thus bravely he supposes
Himself another man; but men have noses;
And they that have so, maugre Spurco's skill,
Through all his robes may smell the Chandler still.
624. On the same.
Spurco made candles once, it is true enough,
Yet when I told him so, he tookt in snuff.
625. To Damon.
What cause, what confidence draws thee to town?
Oxford can yield thee nothing, get thee down;
Thou can not turn rogue for thy private ends,
Thou can not play the baud to please thy friends.
Thou hat'st to sell thy breath at any price,
Or flatter great ones to their prejudice.
Whence will thou live? (unhappy wretch!) I am
A trusty friend, thou say, an honest man.
That Is nothing, Damon, set thy wits to school,
Not to be knave here, is to be a fool.
626. Compotatio.
Tasso, Torquato, Trew-wit, Manlius,
Brave merry Greeks all, and ingenious:
Let us be mad a while: come here thou Squire
Of Pints and Pottles, pile us up a fire:
Then bring some sack up, quick you Canniball,
Some cleanly sack to wash our brains withal:
There is I am sure, no other Thespian spring,
No other Helicon to bathe us in.
Troul then your sack about boys, never fail,
Commending dull men to their stands of Ale.
Tinkers wind off whole pottles in a breath,
I hate such puddle Coxcombs worse than death;
But we true bra^^ of Bacchus, as our use is,
With lusty Wines will sacrifice to th'Muses.
627. Conscientia testis.
What makes Antonia deem himself undone,
Being questioned since his Office first begun:
But that a Conscience tells him quae sumuntur
Tam male parta, male dilabuntur?
628. On Terpin.
Listen who list, my Terpins nose I sing,
And much I labor to express the thing:
For when he snorts, it is his trumpet shrill;
It is his conduit, for it is running still;
It is his drag, his E^le-spear in the brook;
His spade, his mattock, and his pruning hook*
It Is a convenient staple for a wall,
A handsome wedge to cleave his wood withal:
'Twill make a good ship-anchor when he lacks,
It is his gimlet, and his twibill axe.
Regard not then, what m^n thy nose abuses;
Thy nose is proper Terpin for most uses.
629. On Ned.
Have not I friends (quoth Ned) I dare to say,
I have not supt at home this twelve months day:
And very true it is, for sherking Ned,
At home (poor man) goes supperlesse to bed.
630. Pecunia prevalens.
Hand off, si^ sauce-box! think you Mistress Phips
Allows such lobs as you to touch her lips?
But then it is questioned further; if you bring her
Some legem pone, that is another thing Sir.
631. On Love.
Where love begins, there dead they first desire:
A spark neglected, makes a mighty fire.
632. A Herculean task.
To curb the courage and Wives tongue keep under.
May well be called Hercules thirteenth wonder.
633. On Coritia.
Coritia, when all her Table's set
With Manchet, Sauches, and good wholesome meat,
She still gives brown bread to her Son and heir,
And tells the little boy 'twill make him fair.
If so (my Love) if it be true you say,
You never ate brown bread Coritia.
634. On Drammato.
Drammato makes new plays great store; and yet
It Is plain, Drammato has not too much wit:
He strives too, to be pleasant, and brings in
Mimicks, and fools, to make the people grin,
I know not what the rest think, but I say,
Drammato's the best fool in every play.
635. Taming of a Shrew.
Would tame thy wife: first tame her tongue,
Who thus his wife comes o'r shall overcome.
636. Liberty.
If he be well which has what he can wish,
Why then do men for stinging Serpents fish?
True liberty amongst virtues bears the bell;
He may live as he will, which may live well.
637. Drammato.
Of all Drammato's plays that ere I see,
Nothing could ever make me laugh but he.
638. On Galba.
Galba she says, she never tasted Man;
Galba will lie, believe it, now and than.
639. To the Reader.
Such tenor I have kept here all along,
As none (I hope) can challenge me with wrong.
I injure not the least, I give no blow
To any person; he that knows not how
To scourge man's vice, unless he tax his name,
Makes a base Libel of an Epigram.
640. On Formidando.
Stout Formidando walks imperiously,
With tragic Bilbo girt upon his thigh;
His roping locks, his buffe becomes him well,
And to say sooth, he looks right terrible;
He swayes the Town before him, and will slay
Whatever man he be that dares gainsay:
But Formidando pawned his coat last night,
And Formidando's out of money quite;
Nor oaths will pass, nor credit from henceforth,
For one poor penny, or a pennyworth:
Starved Creditors begin to gape; and how
To quit himself he scarcely knows; that now
Stout Formidando who was wont to daunt
Whole thousands, trembles at a Pursivant.
641. The German-Dutch.
Death's not to be: so Seneca does think:
But Dutchmen say it is death to cease to drink.
642. Death.
What Death is, do thou ask of me?
Till dead I do not know;
Come to me when thou hear'st I Am dead,
Then what it is I shall show.
643. On Carp and Manilla.
Manilla would with Carp be married,
Manilla's wise I trow:
But Carp by no means will Manilla wed;
Carp's the wiser of the two.
644. On Carp.
These are my verses which Carp reads; it is known;
But when Carp makes them nonsense, they are his own.
645. To Phaulos.
Thou art offended ( Phaulos) as I hear,
Because I sometimes call thee whoremaster;
My nature's blunt, and so will ever be;
I call a spade a spade, pray pardon me.
646. To Coracine.
What Crispulus is that in a new gown,
All trimmed with loops and buttons up and down?
That leans there on his arm in private chat
With thy young wife, what Crispulus is that?
He Is Proctor of a Court, thou say, and does
Some business of my wives: thou brainlesse goose!
He does no business of thy wives, not he,
He does thy business ( Coracine) for thee.
647. On Pru.
Pru praises her complexion, nay swears
She dares compare with any of her years;
And very true it is, that Prudence says,
I saw not better sold these many days.
648. The Parret.
If lawful't be, of things t'invent the name;
With prattling Parret, prater is the same.
649. To Maronilla.
My Maronilla, I could easily spare
Thy hands and arms, thy shoulders and fraught hair,
I could well spare thy feet, thy legs and thighs,
Thy tongue and teeth, thy lips, cheeks, forehead, eyes:
And not to reckon each part several,
My Maronilla I could spare thee all.
650. Study.
Some men grow mad by studying much to know;
But who grows mad by studying good to grow?
651. To Lionell.
Lionell shows his honorable scars,
And labors to invite me to the wars:
But I will not by no means Lionell;
I do not love to live ill, and drink well.
652. On Pumilio a Dwarf.
Pumilio lying in despair
Of further life, said, take no care
To make a Tomb for me, good folks,
I will be buried in a Box.
653. Sharp sauce.
Kisses and savours are sweet things,
But those have thorns, and these have stings.
654. On Drad-nought.
Drad-nought was for his many riots laid
Ith'Counter lately, now he is wondrous staid.
655. On Phaulos and Gellia.
Phaulos he visits, Gellia she is sick:
I am no Wizard, yet I know their trick.
656. To his Friend.
I will not be a Foe to any,
Nor be familiar with too many;
And twice I will not love my friend,
But whom I love, I Will love to the end.
657. Married Folk.
Man love thy wife; thy Husband, wife obey:
Wives are our Heart, we should be Head always.
658. On Pru and Galla.
Why are Pru's teeth so white, and Galla's black?
The reason is soon known:
Pru buys new teeth as often as she lacks,
But Galla wears her own.
659. On Bombo.
When Bombo preaches (and that is thrice a year)
Nothing but wit sounds wisely in his ear.
His ^ustian phrases make a noise; each strain
And swelling rapture fills his mouth again:
He Is parcell-States-man, parcell-Priest, and so
If you observe, he is parcel Poet to.
Bombo thy fetches* and thy fangles may
Become a stage perhaps, but used this way,
They Are base, and impious: let me prevail,
Talk till thy strong lines choke thee; if they fail,
Commence at Tyburn in a cart, sweet Poet,
And there a strong line will for cert^in do it.
660. On Lulls.
Lulls swears he is all heart, but you will suppose
By his Probassis, that he is all nose.
661. On Paeto.
Implore the Muses, and their two top'd hill,
Still to supply fresh matter to thy quill:
Crave Phoebus aid, call Homer with the throng
Of all the Bardes, Learned Manes, to thy song.
I dare not ( Paeto) be so bold, as do it,
Nor seem so like what I am not; a Poet.
My page invokes no deities: here love,
And indignation the best Muses prove.
662. On the same.
My Paeto thinks he sings melodious,
And like a Swan: alas he is but a Goose.
663. On Plutus.
Plutus, rich Plutus would have me b^stow
Some New Years gift, as other neighbors do.
Why I will send thee what thou want my friend;
Nothing thou want, and nothing I will send.
664. To Phocion.
Thou buy'st up all that thou can light upon,
This is the way to sell all Phocion.
665. To Lividus.
Do not rail basely, do not swell with spite,
Do not scoff (Lividus) at what I write:
For ridden, trust me, I can hardly pace,
Nor bear thee gently like a patient Ass;
But trot amain, and if thou chance to kick,
I shall wince too, and gall thee to the quick.
Flinging full fast till I have thrown thee off,
Till I have shook thy snaffle from thy mouth;
And then in triumph ( Lividus) look to it,
I spurn thy pride and follies under foot.
666. On his Verses.
He Is blind with love that likes them every one,
And he is blind with envy, that likes none.
667. Truth.
Truth is best found out by the time and eyes;
Falsehood wins credit by uncertainties.
668. Time.
Time all consumes, both us and every thing,
We time consume; thus, both one song do sing.
669. To Bombo.
Most men condemn thee Bombo, when they hear
Thy high and mighty Sermons, but I swear
Thou preachest movingly; and well I may;
Thou preachest all thy Auditors away.
670. On Plutus.
Rich Plutus needs would buy a fool, and paid
Fifty good pounds: but after trial made,
Perceiving him an understanding man,
Plutus would have his money back again.
671. To Linus.
Thou wast my debtor when I lent the coin,
Pay me mine own, and then I will be thine.
672. Leven.
Love is a Leven, and a loving kiss
The leven of a loving sweetheart is
673. To Phaulos.
Thou ask'st me whom I think best man to be,
He Is the best (Phaulos) that is least like thee.
674. To Claudius and Linus.
Ungodly Claudius, to be good,
Wants nothing but a will:
Lewd Linus, also, wants naught
But power to be ill.
675. Hot-waters.
Our trickling Tears express our private Love,
Love causes tears; strange! fire should water prove.
676. On Grotto.
Talk but of death, Grotto begins to rage,
And sweat, and swear, and yet he is blind with age.
Fie on thee Grotto, what a coil you keep?
Thy windows they are shut, it is time to sleep.
677. On Boreman.
Boreman takes tole, cheats, flatters, lies, yet Boreman
For all the Devil helps, will be a poor man.
678. On Crab.
Crab being caught, and in the Sergeants power,
For shame and anger looked both red and sower.
679. On Fargo.
Fargo by his wit and pleasing tongue,
Has won a wench that is wondrous fair and young;
The match (he says) is half concluded, he
Indeed is wondrous willing; but not she.
680. On Richard.
Dick being drunk, in bed thought on his sin,
And that lewd course of life he lived in,
Yet long hereof for thirst, Dick could not think,
But, Drawer, cries, now for thy smallest drink.
681. To Spruce.
Spruce wears a Comb about him, always he
To prune and smooth his pollisht hair:
The Cock's never too without his Comb you see,
Spruce it is a Coxcomb then you wear.
682. On This Wise age.
The Wise men were but seven: now we scarce know
So many fools, the world so wise does grow.
683. On Profuso.
Unstayd Profuso has run thorough all,
Almost the story of the Prodigal,
Yet swears, he never with the Hoggs did dine,
That Is true, for none durst trust him with their swine.
684. On a fire in Town.
One night through all the streets the men did cry,
Fire, fire! at which I wak't and wondered by;
Not that dry wood should burn, but because all
Did cry fire, when for water they should call.
685. To either University.
InduDIV2ent Mother, and kind Aunt, no where
Throughout all Europe find I such a pair;
From whose fair breasts those milky rivers run,
That thousands feed, else thousands were undone.
Oh were it not that some are weaned too young,
And some do suck (like^ Esse^ Calves) too long.
686. On Mounsieur Congee.
A proper handsome courtly man indeed,
And well set out with clothes, can for a need
Discourse with legs, and quarter congees, and
Talk half an hour with help of foot and hand;
But when I viewed this Mounsier clean throughout,
I found that he was only Man without.
687. To my Reader.
My person is another as I list,
I now but act the Epigrammatist.
688. On Physicians.
Physicians are most miserable men,
that cannot be denied:
For they are never truly well, but when
mo^^ men are ill beside.
689. On Puff.
Puff quarrels in his cups, and then will fight,
Is beaten sober; troth he is served right.
690. To Flash.
Flash when you are drunk, then in thy own conceit
You Are valiant, wise, great, honest, rich, discreet.
Troth Flash be always drunk! for well I know
When you are sober you are nothing so.
691. Wi^tily wicked.
Good wine (they say) makes Vinegar most ta^t,
Thou, the more witty, the more wicked art.
692. A Doctor and his Patient.
A Doctor told his patient Omphida;
The grief she felt was a Sciatica:
Which she not perfect how to nominate,
Mistaking cries, O my Certificate!
693. On Mounsier Powder-wig.
Oh do but mark you crisped Sir you meet!
How like a Pageant he does stalk the street?
See how his perfumed head is powderd ore:
Twu'd stink else, for it wanted Salt before.
694. To Rash.
Rash swear not! think not 'cause you swear that I
Believe you, no: he that will swear will lie.
695. Drunk-bounty.
I Will tell you why the drunk so lavish are,
They have too much, nay more then they can bear.
696. To Gut.
Gut eats and drinks, does nothing else but swill,
His teeth do grind, his mouth's the water-mill.
697. To Simple.
Simple, you know I gave you good advice;
Little to say, that men might think you wise;
If you will proclaim your self a fool you may:
I only tell you now what others say.
698. On Quaff.
To quench his sorrows Quaff drinks very free,
Sorrow is dry, he says, and so is he.
699. To Tom Coriat.
Of all the Toms that ever yet were named,
Was never Tom like as Tom Coriat famed.
Tom Thumb is dumb, until the pudding creep,
In which he was entombed, then out does peep.
Tom Fool may go to School, but never be taught
Speak Greek, with which our Tom his tongue is ^raught.
Tom Ass may pass, but for all his long ears,
No such rich Jewels as our Tom he wears.
Tom Tell-troth is but forth, but truth to tell,
Of all Toms, this Tom, bears away the bell.
700. To a fat Usurer.
Fat folks we say by nature are most free:
You and your purse are fat, and yet I see
Your hand and that still shut, the reasons this;
In costive flesh thy lean soul buried is.
701. On Brisk.
Brisk bragged of's ready wit; I tempting him
But for one Distick, did propound this theme
Nothing: I^ cannot be, he wondering said
That out of nothing ought should ere be made.
Dull Brisk thou never could tune Apollo's Lyre;
A pure steeld-wit, will strike Mercuriall fire
Out of the flintiest subject: but thy head
Is all composed of softer mettle, lead.
702. Semel insanivimus omnes.
Thus have I waded through a worthless task,
Whereto I trust there is no exception ta'n,
For meant to none, I answer such as ask,
It Is like apparel made in Birchen-lane;
If any please to suit themselves and wear it,
The blame's not mine, but theirs that needs will bear it.
703. On Sullen.
Sullen will eat no meat, but peevishly
Replies, I care not, nor I will not, I:
Troth I commend his abstinence, it is great,
When having such a stomach he will not eat.
704. To Banks.
When Spendall asks to borrow, you reply,
You know not when he will pay you; troth nor I.
705. To Boldface.
Boldface, I wonder at thy impudence,
That da^'st affi^m things so against all sense:
For shame ben't impudent and foolish too!
And think all men are fools 'cause you are so.
706. Of his Book.
Part of the work remains; one part is past:
And here my Ship rides, having Anchor cast.
707. On Bearill.
Bearill because his wife is somewhat ill,
Uncertain in her health, indifferent still;
He turns her out of doors without reply:
Wondering at which, I asked the reason why?
In sickness and in health, says he, I Am bound
Only to keep her, either weak or sound;
But now she is neither, he replies; you will see,
She Will quickly now or mend or end, says he.
708. On Bib.
Wisdom does teach us silence, now Bib is
With drink made speechless, is he not then wise
709. On Silly.
Silly by chance did loose his Diary
Of wit, which he had got in company:
No marvel he now so mute and pensive sits,
How can he choose, since he has lost his wits.
710. Ad sesquipidales poetastros.
Hence Brauron's God to Tauriminion,
And you Levaltoring Corybant^ be gone;
Fly thundering Bronsterops to Hippocrene,
And Mauros to Nymph-nursing Mytelene;
Grisly Megaera's ne^romantique spell
Depart to black nights Acherontick cell:
Avaunt transformed Epidaurian,
Unto th'Antipod Isles of Trabroban,
Away Cyllenius plumy-pinnion'd God,
With thy peace making wand, snakecharming rod,
And all the rest not daring look upon
Vranus blood-born brood, and fell Typhon;
Chimera's victor great Bellerophon,
Thou vanquisher of Spanish Geryon.
Stout Asdruball Sicilian Lord of yore,
Thou that destroy'dst the Caledonian bore,
Courageous conqueror of Cretes Minotaure,
Thou pride of Mermeno's cloudy Semitaure.
Perseus whose marble stone transforming shield,
Enforced the Whale, Andromeda to yield,
You Argonautes that scoured Syndromades,
And passd the quicksands of Symplegades,
Help Demogorgon, King of heaven and earth,
Chaos, Lucina, at Litigiums birth,
The world with child looks for delivery
Of Canibals, or Poetophagy.
A devilish brood from Ericthonius,
From Iphidemia, Nox, and Erebus,
Chide Pegasus for opening Helicon,
And Poets damn Pyry-Phlegeton;
Or make this monstrous birth abortive be,
Or else I will shake hands with Poetry. -- Nihil sic nisi Carmina desunt.


Marmora Maeonii vincunt menumenta libelli;
Vivitur ingenio, caetera mortis erunt.
The Muses works stone-Monumen^^ outlast;
It Is wit keeps life, all else Death will down cast.

EPITAPHS.
1. On a Liar.
GOod passenger! here lies one here,
That living did lie every where.
2. On a Dyer.
He lives with God none can deny,
That while he lived to the world did die.
3. On a Iugler.
Death came to see thy tricks, and cut in twain
Thy thread, why did not make it whole again?
4. On Mr. Fish.
Worm's bait for Fish, but here is a great change,
Fish bait for worms, is not that very strange?
5. On a Child.
A child and dead? alas! how could it come?
Surely thy thread of life was but a thrumme.
6. On Mr. Do.
Do is my name, and here I lie,
My Grammar tells me, Do fit Di.
7. On Tailor a Sergeant, killed by a Horse.
A Taylour is a Thief, a Sergeant is worse,
Who here lies dead, god-a-massy Horse.
8. On Mr. Thomas Best.
With happy stars he sure is blessed,
Where ^'ere he goes, that still is Best.
9. On Robin.
Round Robin's gone, and this grave does enclose
The pudding of his doublet and his hose.
10. On Bell the Tinker.
Bell though thou dy'dst decrep^t, lame, forlorn,
Thou was it a man of Mettle, I Will be sworn.
11. On proud Tygeras.
Proud and foolish, so it comes to pass,
He lived a Tiger, and he died an Ass.
12. On John Cofferer.
Here lies John Cofferer, and takes his rest,
Now he has changed a Coffer for a Chest.
13. On blind and deaf Dick Freeman.
Here lies Dick Freeman,
That could not hear nor see man.
14. On a Miller.
Death without warning was as bold as brief,
When he killed two in one, Miller and Thief.
15. On a Lady.
Here lies one dead under this marble stone,
Who when she lived, lay under more than one.
16. On a Wrestler.
Death to the Wrestler gave a pretty fall,
Tript up his heels, and took no hold at all.
17. On John Death.
Here Is Death interred, that lived by bread,
Then all should live, now Death is dead.
18. On an Infant.
The reeling world turned Poet, made a Play;
I came to see's, disliked it, went my way.
19. On a little but very ingenuous youth.
Grim Death perceiving, He had far out ran
The elder youth^; mistook him for a man.
20. On a Lady dying quickly after her Husband.
He first deceased, she a little tried
To live without him, liked it not, and died.
21. On Mr. Stone.
Jerusalems curse is not fulfilled in me,
For here a stone upon a stone you see.
22. On Mr. Strange.
Here lies one Strange, no Pagan, Turk, nor Jew,
It Is strange, but not so strange as it is true.
23. A Forts Epitaph.
Reader, it was born, and cried,
Cracked so, smelt so, and so died.
24. On Mr. Anguish a scholar.
Some do for anguish weep, for anger I,
That ignorance should live, and art should dye.
25. On a lovely young youth.
From thy quick death, conclude we must,
The fairest flowers are gathered first.
26. On Mr. Thomas A^len.
No Epitaphs need make the just man famed,
The good are praised when they are only named.
27. On a Lady.
Finis and Bonum are converted, so,
That every good thing to an end must go.
28. On a pious Benefactor.
The Poor, the World, the Heavens, and the Grave,
His Alms, his Praise, his Soul, and Body have.
29. On a Poet in Prison.
Though I in prison here do lie,
My Muse shall live although I dye.
30. On a poor Poet.
Here lies the Poet buried in the night,
Whose purse, men know it, was exceeding light.
31. A man and his wife.
Viator siste, ecce miraculum!
Vir and uxor hic non ligitunt.
32. On a Pauls-walker.
Defessus sum ambulando.
33. On a Scrivener.
May all men by these presents testify,
A lurching Scrivener here fast bound does lie.
34. On one that cheated his Father.
Here lies a man, who in a span
Of life, beyond his Father ran.
35. On a Cutpurse.
Death has that Cutpurse seized on at Alhallows,
Who by good hap has so escaped the Gallows.
36. On a young great wit.
Great wits are dangerous, for then,
It seems, they seldom come to men.
37. On an Usurer.
That all those goods and riches scraped together,
Should with himself depart, and knows not whither.
38. On a Captain.
Who late in wars did dread no foes in field,
Now free of scars his life in peace does yield.
39. On a Potter.
He that on clay his chiefest trust reposed,
Is now in clay, in stead of dust reposed.
40. On a Merchant.
Who from accounts and reckning^ never could rest,
At length has summed up his Quietus est.
41. On a young man newly married, dyed.
The world and thou art quickly gone about,
That but now en^ring in, art entered out.
42. On John Friend.
How ere he failed in's life, it is like Jack Friend
Was no man's foe but's own, and there is an end.
43. On Christopher Fowler.
Let all say what they can, '^is known Kit Fowle^
Was held an honest man, though no good Bowler
44. On Dorothy Rich.
Here rests young Doll Rich, that dainty drab,
Who troubled long with itch, died of the scab.
45. On Ralph.
Ralph bids adue to pleasures good or ill,
But tells you true, it is much against his will.
46. On Walter Moon.
Here lies Wat Moon, that great Tobacconist,
Who died too soon for lack of had I wist.
47. On John Cooling a Player-foole.
Death has too soon removed from us Io. Cooling,
That was so well beloved, and lived by fooling.
48. On a Welshman.
Who living least* espied his life should leese,
By mere Metheglin died; and tosted Cheese.
49. On Io. Long.
Here sleep I. Long, who lived till New-year^-tide,
Full fourscore strong, but then fell sick and died.
50. On Stephen Spooner.
Death has time borrowed of our neighbor Spooner.
Whose wife much sorrow'd that he di'd no sooner.
51. On a Lawyer.
God works wonders now and than,
Here lies a Lawyer died an honest man.
52. On a Waterman.
Here sleep^ Will Slater, why? by death^ command,
Has left the water to possess the land.
53. On Sir Francis Drake.
England his heart, his Corpse the waters have,
And that which raisd his fame, became his grave.
54. On a Gallant.
Who cloth of Tissue wore, here flat does lie,
Having no issue, more than that in's thigh.
55. On John Garret.
Gone is John Garret, who to all men's thinking,
For love to Claret, killed himself with drinking.
56. On notable Ned.
Cause of the good naught must be said but good,
It Is well for Ned that naught he understood.
57. On a Taylour who dyed of the stitch.
Here lies a Taylour in this ditch,
Who lived and dyed by the stitch.
58. On a traveling Beggar.
Here lies a Vagrant person whom our laws
(Of late grown strict) denied passage, 'cause
He wandering thus, therefore return he must,
From whence at first he hither came; to dust.
59. On a Mason.
So long the Mason wrought on others walls,
That his own house of clay to ruin falls:
No wonder, spiteful death wrought his annoy,
He used to build, and death seeks to destroy.
60. On a Schoolmaster.
The Grammar School, a long time taught I have,
Yet all my skill could not Decline the grave,
But yet I hope it one day will be shown
In no Case save the Ablative alone.
61. On Prince Henry.
I have no vein in Verse, but if I could
Distill on every word a Pearl, I would.
Our sorrows pearls drop, not from pens, but eyes,
Whilst other Muses write, mine only cries.
62. On the death of Mr. Newcomin of Clarehall in Cambridge.
Weep ye Clarenses, weep all about,
For New-com-in is new gone out;
Weep not Clarenses, weep not a^ all,
He Is gone but from Clare to Trinity-Hal.
63. On Hobson the Carrier.
Hobson (what is out of sight, is out of mind)
Is gone and left his Letters here behind,
He that with so much paper used to meet
Is now, alas! content to take one sheet.
64. Another.
He that such carriage store, was wont to have,
Is carried now himself unto his grave:
O strange! he that in life never made but one,
Six Carriers makes, now he is dead and gone.
65. Another.
Here Hobson lies, pressed with a heavy load,
Who now is gone the old and common road;
The wagon he so loved, so loved to ride,
That he was drawing on whilst that he died.
66. Another.
Hobson's not dead, but Charles the Northern Swain
Has sent for him to draw his lightsome wain.
67. On a Footman.
This nimble Footman ran away from death,
And here he rested being out of breath;
Here death him over-took, made him his slave,
And sent him on an arrand to the grave.
68. Iustus Lipsius.
Some have high mountains of Parian stone,
And some in brass carve their inscription,
Some have their Tombs of costly marbles reared;
But in our tears only are they interred.
69. On a Child.
Like Birds of prey,
Death snatche away,
This harmless Dove,
Whose soul so pure
Is now secure
In heaven above.
70. On a rich Gentleman.
Of woods and plains, and hills and vales,
Of fields, of meads, of parks, and pales;
Of all I had, this I possess;
I need no more, I have no less.
71. On a Child.
That flesh is grass
Its grace a flower,
Read ere you pass
Whom worms devour.
72. On a Lock-smith.
A zealous Lock-smith died of late,
Who by this time's at heaven gate.
The reason why he will not knock,
Is 'cause he means to pick the lock.
73. On a Collier.
Here lies the Collier Ienkin Dashes,
By whom death nothing gained he swore,
For living he was dust and ashes,
And being dead he is no more.
74. On Dick Pinner.
Here lies Dick Pinner, O ungentle death!
Why did thou rob Dick Pinner of his breath?
For living, he by scraping of a pin,
Made better dust than thou have made of him.
75. On a Sack-sucker.
Good Reader bless thee, be assured,
The spirit of Sack lies here immured:
Who havock't all he could come by
For Sack, and here quite sacked does ly.
76. On a Child.
Into this world as stranger to an Inn,
This Child came Guest-wise, where when it had bin
A while, and found naught worthy of his stay,
He only broke his fast, and went away.
77. On a Candle.
Here lies the Chandlers chiefest joy,
Here lies the Scholars pale-faced boy;
Having naught else but skin and bone
Died of a deep Consumption.
78. On T. H. the Pannier-man of the Temple.
Here lies Tom Hacket this Marble under,
Who often made the Cloisters thunder;
He had a horn, and when he blew i^,
Called many a Cuckold that never knew it.
79. On a young Infant.
The life of Man
Is but a span,
The common saying is;
But death did pinch
His to an inch,
Ere he could say, what is this?
Yet he has gained, not lost, thereby
Changing time for eternity.
80. On Mr. Calfes death.
Heaven of his soul take charge, for he,
Of all his days lived but the half;
Who might have grown to be an Ox,
But dyed (as you see) a Calfe.
81. On Bolus.
If gentleness could tame the Fates, or wit
Delude them, Bolus had not dyed yet;
But one that death o'r-rules in judgment sits,
And says our sins are stronger then our wits.
82. On a Clown.
Softly tread this earth upon,
For here lies our Corydon:
Who through care to save his sheep
Watched too much, Oh let him sleep!
83. On a Child.
As careful Nurses on their beds do lay,
Their babes which would too long the wantons play,
So to prevent my youths ensuing crimes,
Nature my Nurse laid me to bed betime^.
85. On a Musician.
Be not offended at our sad complaint,
You Quire of Angels, that have gained a Saint;
Where all perfection met in skill and voice,
We mourn our loss, but yet commend your choice.
85. On a Gardener.
Could he forget his death that every hour
Was emblem'd to it, by the fading flower?
Should he not mind his end? yes, sure he must,
That still was conversant amongst beds of dust.
86. On a Drunkard.
Bibax the Drunkard, while he lived would say,
The more I drink, the more methinks I may;
But see how death has proved his saying just,
For he has drunk himself as dry as dust.
87. On a Child.
Tread softly passenger, for here does lie,
A dainty Jewel of sweet Infancy:
A harmless babe, that only came and cried
In baptism to be washed from sin, and died.
88. Another.
In this marble Casket lies
A matchless Jewel of rich pri^e,
Whom nature in the worlds disdain
But showed, and put it up again.
89. On Mr. Sands.
Who would live in others breath?
Fame deceives the dead man's trust,
When our names do change by death,
Sands I was, and now am dust.
90. On Mr. Goad.
Go add this Verse, to Goad's hearse,
For Goad is gone, but whither?
Goad himself is gone to God,
'Twas deaths Goad drove him thither.
91. On Monday.
Hallowed be the Sabbath
And farewell all worldly pelf;
The week begins on Tuesday,
For Monday has hanged himself.
92. On a Child.
Here a pretty Baby lies
Sung asleep with Lullabies:
Pray be silent, and not stir
Th'easie earth that covers her
93. On a Matron.
Here lies a wife was chaste, a mother blessed;
A modest Matron, all these in one chest:
Sarah unto her Mate, Mary to God,
Martha to men, whilst here she had abode.
94. In Latin thus.
Vxor casta, Parens felix, Matrona pudica,
Sara viro, mundo Martha, Maria Deo.
95. On a Soldier.
When I was young, in Wars I shed my blood,
Both for my King, and for my Countries good:
In elder years, my care was chief to be
Soldier to him that shed his blood for me.
96. On Mr. Dumbelow, that dyed of the wind Collicke.
Dead is Dick Dumbelow
Would you the reason know?
Could his tail have but spoken,
His stout heart had not broken.
97. On Mr. Kitchins death.
Kitchen lies here (for so his name I found)
I see Death keeps his Kitchen under ground.
And the poor worms (that flesh of late did eat)
Devour their Kitchen now for want of meat.
98. On Isabella a Curtezan.
He who would write an Epitaph,
Whereby to make fair Is'bell laugh,
Must get upon her, and write well,
Here underneath lies Isabell.
99. On a virtuous wife.
In brief, to speak thy praise, let this suffice,
Thou were a wife most loving, modest, wise,
Of children careful, to thy neighbors kind,
A worthy Mistress, and of liberal mind.
100. On Mr. Christopher Lawson.
Death did not kill unjustly this good man,
But death, in death, by death did show his power,
His pious deeds and thoughts to heaven fore-ran,
There to prepare his soul a blessed bower.
101. On a Welshman.
Here lies puryed under these stones,
Shon ap Williams, ap Shinkyn, ap Shones,
Her was porn in Whales, her was killed in France,
Her went to Cot by a very mis-shance.
La ye now.
102. On Mr. Carter, burnt by the great powder-mischance in Finsbury.
Here lies an honest Carter (yet no clown)
Unladen of his cares, his end the Crown,
Vanished from hence, even in a cloud of smoke,
A blown-up Citizen, and yet not broke.
103. On a Lady dying in Childbed.
Born at the first to bring another forth,
She leav^ the world, to leave the world her worth:
Thus Phoenix-like, as she was born to bleed,
Dying her self, renews it in her seed.
104. On a Faulconer.
Death with her talon^ having seized this prey,
After a tedious flight, trus^'d him away:
We marked him, here he fell, whence he shall rise
At call, till then unretriv'd here he lies.
105. On Joan Truman who had an issue in her leg.
Here lies crafty Joan, deny it who can,
Who lived a false maid, and died a Truman,
And this trick she had, to make up her cunning,
Whilst one leg stood still, the other was running.
106. On a youth.
Now thou have heaven for merit, but it is strange,
Morality should envy at thy change:
God thought us unfit for such as thee,
And made thee consort of eternity.
We grieve not then that thou to heaven art taken*
But that thou have thy friends so soon forsaken.
107. On Prince Henry.
Did he dye young? O no, it could not be,
For I know few that lived so long as he,
Till God and all men loved him; then behold,
The man that lives so long, must needs be old.
108. On -- borne before his time.
Greiv'd at the world and times, this early Bloom
Looked round, and sighed, and stole into his Tomb,
His fall was like his Birth, too quick; this Rose
Made have to spread, and the same have to close:
Here lies his dust, but his best Tomb's fled hence,
For Marble cannot last like Innocence.
109. On a very fat man.
Under this pebble stone,
Here fast sleeps one,
And that is not two;
Yet was without doubt
Far bigger about,
Then both I, and you;
His kidneys encreast
So much, that his wast
Was hooped all round:
But his girdle death cuts,
And down fell his guts,
'Bouts heels to the ground.
110. On John Newter.
Reader, John Newter who erst played
The Jack on both sides, here is laid
Who like the herb John indifferent
Was not for King, or Parliament,
Yet fast and loose he could not play
With death, he took him at a Bay;
What side his soul has taken now
God or Devil? we hardly know:
But this is certain, since he died
He has been mist of neither side.
111. On Hocas Pocas.
Here Hocas lies with his tricks and his knocks,
Whom death has made sure as his Juglers box:
Who many has cozened by his leiger-demain,
I^ presto conveyed and here underlain:
Thus Hocas he is here, and here he is not,
While death played the Hocas, and brought him to th'pot.
112. On a Child of two years old, being born and dying in July.
Here is laid a July flower
With surviving tears bedewed,
Not despairing of that hour
When her spring shall be renewed;
Ere she had her summer seen,
She was gathered fresh and green.
113. On a Cobbler.
Death at a Cobblers door often made a stand,
And always found him on the mending hand;
At last came death in very foul weather,
And ripped the sole from the upper leather:
Death put a trick upon him, and what was it?
The Cobbler called for's Awle, death brought his last.
114. On a young Gentlewoman.
Nature in this small volume was about
To perfect what in woman was left out:
Yet careful least a piece so well begun,
Should want preservatives when she had done:
Ere she could finish what she undertook,
Threw dust upon it, and shut up the Book.
115. On a Scholar.
Forbear Friend t'unclaspe this book,
Only in the forefront look,
For in it have errors bin,
Which made the Author call it in:
Yet know this, 't shall have more worth,
At the second coming forth.
116. On a young Woman.
The body which within this earth is laid,
Twice six weeks knew a wife, a Saint, a maid;
Fair maid, chaste wife, pure Saint, yet it is not strange
She was a woman, therefore pleased to change:
And now she is dead, some woman does remain,
For still she hopes once to be changed again.
117. On Brawne.
Here Brawne the quondam beggar lies,
Who counted by his tale,
Full sixscore winters in his life;
Such virtue is in Ale.
Ale was his meat, Ale was his drink,
Ale did him long reprive,
And could he still have drunk his Ale,
He had been still alive.
118. On a Candle.
Here lies (I wot) a little star
That did belong to Jupiter,
Which from him Prometheus stole,
And with it a fire-coale.
Or this is that I mean to handle,
Here does lie a farthing Candle,
That was loved well, having its light,
But loosing that, now bids good night.
119. On M. R.
Who soonest dies, lives long enough,
Our life is but a blast or puff.
I did resist and strive with death,
But soon he put me out of breath;
He of my life thought to bereave me,
But I did yield only to breath me.
O'r him I shall in triumph sing,
Thy conquest Grave, where is thy sting?
120. On a Child.
Here she lies a prtty bud,
Lately made of flesh and blood:
Who, as soon, fell fast asleep,
As her little eyes did peep;
Give her strewings; but not stir
The earth that lightly covers her.
121. On an Inne-keeper.
It is not I that dye, I do but leave an Inn,
Where harboun'd was with me, all filthy kind of sin;
It is not I that dye* I do but now begin
Into etenall ^oy by faith to enter in.
Why weep you then my friends, my parents, and my kin?
Lament ye when I loose, but weep not when I win.
122. On a Cobbler.
Come hither, read my gentle friend,
And here behold a Cobblers end.
Longer in length his life had gone,
But that he had no Last so long;
O mighty Death, whose dart can kill
The man that made him souls at will
123. On M. Air.
Under this stone of Marble fair,
Lies th'body 'ntomb'd of Gervase Air.
He died not of an ^gue-fit,
Nor surfeited of too much wit,
Me thinks this was a wondrous death,
That Air should dye for want of breath
124. On Mr. Rice. M.
Who can doubt (Rice) to what eternal place
Thy soul is fled, that did but know thy face?
Whose body was so light it might have gone
To heaven without a resurrection;
Indeed thou were all type, thy limbs were signs,
Thy Arteries but Mathematick lines;
As if two souls had made the compound good,
Which both should live by faith, and none by blood.
125. On Thomas Jones.
Here for the nonce
Came Thomas Ionce
In St. Iileses Church to lie,
None welsh before,
None Welshman more
Till Shon Clerk dye.
I Will tole the bell,
I Will ring his knell,
He dyed well,
He Is saved from Hell:
And so farewell
Tom Ionce.
126. On a young man.
Surpised by grief and sickness here I lie,
Stopped in my middle age, and soon made dead,
Yet do not grudge at God, if soon thou dye,
But know he trebles favors on thy head.
Who for thy morning work equals thy pay,
With those that have endured the heat oth'day.
127. On the two Littletons that were drowned at Oxford, 1636.
Here lie we (Reader, can thou not admire?)
Who both at once by water died and fire,
For whilst our bodies perished in the deep,
Our souls in love burnt, so we fell asleep:
Let this be then our Epitaph: Here lies
Two, yet but one, one for the other dies.
128. On a Butler.
That death should thus from hence our Butler catch,
Into my mind it cannot quickly sink;
Sure death came thirsty to the buttry-hatch,
When he (that busi'd was) denied him drink.
Tut! 'twas not so, it is like he gave him liquor,
And death made drunk, him made away the quicker;
Yet let not others grive too much in mind
(the Butler's gone) the keys are left behind.
129. On M. Cook.
To God, his Country, and the poor, he had
A zealous soul, free heart, and lib'rall mind.
His wife, his Children, and his kindred sad,
Lack of his love, his care and kindness find:
Yet are their sorrows asswag'd with the thought
He has attained the happiness he sought.
130. On a Porter.
At length by works of wondrous fate,
Here lies the Porter of Winchester-gate:
If gone to heaven, as much I fear:
He can be but a Porter there:
He feared not hell so much ^or's sin,
As for th'great rapping, and often coming in.
131. Upon one who dyed in Prison.
Reader, I lived, enquire no more,
Left a spy enter in at door,
Such are the times, a dead man dare
Not trust nor credit common air,
But dye and lie Entombed here,
By me, I Will whisper in thine ear
Such things as only dust to dust
(And without witness) may entrust.
132. On Waddam College Butler.
Man's life is like a new-tunn'd Cask they say,
The foremost draught, is often times cast away,
Such are our younger years, the following still
Are more and more inclining unto ill;
Such is our manhood, until age at length,
Does sour its sweetness, and does stop its strength:
Then death prescribing to each thing its bounds,
Takes what is lef^, and turns it all to grounds.
133. On a Horse.
Here lies a Horse, who dyed but
To make his Master go on foot.
A miracle should it be so:
The dead to make the lame to go;
Yet Fate would have it, that the same
Should make him go, that made him lame.
134. On an old Man a Residenciary.
Tread, Sirs, as lightly as you can
Upon the grave of this old man.
Twice forty (bating but one year,
And thrice three weeks) he lived here.
Whom gentle fate translated hence
To a more happy Residence.
Yet, Reader let me tell thee this,
(Which from his Ghost a promise is)
If here ye will some few tears shed,
He Will never haunt ye now he is dead.
135. On a Maid.
Here she lies (in Bed spice)
Fair as Eve in Paradise.
For her beauty it was such
Poets co'd not praise too much.
Virgins come, and in a Ring
Her supreamest Requium sing;
Then depart, but see ye tread
Lightly, lightly ore the dead.
136. On Husband and Wife.
To these, whom Death again did wed,
This Grave's the second Marriage Bed.
For though the hand of Fate could force,
Twixt soul and body a Divorce;
It could not sever Man and wife,
Because they both lived but one life;
Peace, good Reader, do not weep,
Peace the Lovers are asleep:
They (sweet Turtles) folded lie,
In the last knot that love could tie.
Let them sleep, let them sleep on,
Till this stormy night be gone.
And the eternal morrow dawne,
Then the Curtains will be drawn,
And they waken with that light,
Whose day shall never sleep in night.
137. On Aretyne.
Here biting Aretyne lies buried*
With gall more bitter, never man was fed.
The living nor the dead to carp he spared,
Nor yet for any King or Caesar cared:
Only on God to rail he had forgot,
His answer was, indeed I know him not.
138. On William Coal an Alehouse-keeper, at Coaton near Cambridge.
Does William Coal lie here? henceforth be stale,
Be strong and laugh on us, thou Coaten Ale:
Living indeed, he with his violent hand
Never left grasping thee, while he could stand.
But death at last, has with his fiery flashes
Burnt up the Coal, and turned it into ashes.
139. On one Andrew Leigh, who was vexed with a shrewd wife.
Here lies Leigh, who vexed with a shrewd wife,
To gain his quiet, parted with his life;
But see the spite! she that had always crossed
Him living, dies, and means to hunt his Ghost.
But she may fail, for Andrew out of doubt
Will cause his brother Peter shut her out.
140. In quendam.
Stay mortal, stay, remove not from this Tomb,
Before thou have considered well thy doom;
My bow stands ready bent, and could i^ see,
Mine arrow's drawn to the head, and aims at thee:
Prepare yet wandering Ghost, take home this line;
The grave that next is opened may be thine.
141. On a virtuous youth.
Reader, let a stone thee tell
That in this body there did dwell
A'soule, as heavenly, rich, and good,
As ever could live in flesh and blood:
And therefore heaven that held it dear,
Did let it stay the less while here,
Whose Corpse here sacred ashes makes;
Thus heaven and earth have parted stakes.
142. On a Cock-master.
Farewell stout Hot-spur, now the battel's done,
In which thou art foiled, and death has overcome,
Having o'r-match'd thy strength that made thee stoop
She quickly forced thee on the pit to droop:
From whence thou ar^ not able rise or stir;
For death is now become the vanquisher.
143. On a Mathematician.
Lo^, in small closure of this earthly bed,
Rests he, that heavens vast motions measured,
Who having known both of the Land and sky,
More than famed Archimede, or Ptolomy,
Would further press, and like a Palmer went,
With Jacobs staff, beyond the Firmament.
144. On a Taylour.
Jack Snip the Taylor's dead, it is now too late
To brawl or wrangle with the cruel fate,
Yet sure 'twas hardly done to clip his thread,
Before he gave them leave, in his own bed.
He died at forty just; poor shred of base
Mortality! who pities not his case?
Of a whole ell of cloth, he would not take
Above a nail at most, for conscience sake:
But of his span of life, I dare to say,
Death stole not much less than one half away;
And Coward-like, just when he was not well,
With his own bodkin (pitiful to tell)
He board a hole through him, that all his men
And Prentices could not stitch up again.
143. On his Mistress Death.
Unjustly we complain of Fate,
For shortning our unhappy days,
When death does nothing but translate,
And print us in a better phrase.
Yet who can choose but weep? Not I:
That beauty of such excellence,
And more virtue than could dye,
By deaths rude hand is vanished hence.
Sleep blessed creature in thine urn,
My sighs, my tears, shall not awake thee.
I but stay until my turn;
And then, O then! I Will overtake thee.
146. On Hobson the Carrier.
If Constellations which in heaven are fixed,
Give life by influence to bodies mixed,
And every sign peculiar right does claim
Of that to which it propagates a name;
Then I conjure, Charles the great Northern star
Whistled up Hobson for to drive his Car.
He is not dead, but left his mansion here,
Has left the Bull, and flitted to the Bear.
Me thinks I see how Charons fingers itches,
But he is deceived he cannot have his riches.
147. Another on Hobson.
Whom seek ye firs? Old Hobson? ^ie upon
Your tardinesse, the Carrier is gone,
Why stare you so? nay, you deserve to fail,
Alas, here is naught, but his old rotten maile.
He went a good-while since, no question store
Are glad, who vexed he would not go before:
And some are grieved he is gone so soon away,
The Lord knows why he did no longer stay.
How could he please you all? I Am sure of this,
He lingered soundly, howsoe'r you miss;
But gone he is, nor was he surely well
At his departure, as mischance befell:
For he is gone in such unwonted kind,
As never before, his goods all left behind.
148. Old Hobsons Epitaph.
Here Hobson lies among his many betters,
A man unlearned, yet a man of Letters;
His carriage was well known, often has he gone
In Embassy 'twixt father and the son:
There Is few in Cambridge, to his praise be it spoken,
But may remember him by some good Token.
From whence he rid to London day by day,
Till death benighting him, he lost his way:
His Team was of the best, nor would he have
Been mir'd in any way, but in the grave.
Nor is it a wonder, that he thus is gone,
Since all men know, he long was drawing on.
Thus rest in peace thou everlasting Swain,
And supreme Waggoner, next Charles his wain.
149. Upon John Crop, who dyed by taking a vomit.
Man's life's a game at Tables, and he may
Mend his bad fortune by his wiser play;
Death plays against us, each disease and sore
Are blots, if hit, the danger is the more
To lose the game; but an old stander by
Binds up the blots, and cures the malady,
And so prolongs the game; John Crop was he
Death in a rage did challenge for to see
His play, the dice are thrown, when first he drinks,
Casts, makes a blot, death hits him with a Sinqu^^
He casts again, but all in vain, for death
By th'after game did win the prize, his breath.
What though his skill was good, his luck was bad,
For never mortal man worse casting had.
But did not death play false to win from such
As he? no doubt, he bare a man too much.
150. An honest Epitaph.
Here lies an honest man, Reader if thou seek more,
Thou art not so thy self; for honesty is store
Of Commendations; and it is more praise,
To dye an honest man, then full of days.
151. On a Cobbler.
Here lies an honest Cobbler, whom cursed Fate,
Perceiving near worn out, would needs translate;
'Twas a good thrifty soul, and time has bin,
He would well liquor'd wade through thick and thin:
But now he is gone, it is all that can be said,
Honest John Cobbler is here under-laid.
152. On a proud man.
Good Reader know, that come nigh,
Here lies he low, that looked so high.
Both poor and naked, that was gay-cloath'd:
Of all forsak'd, who others loathed.
He once thought all envied his worth:
Nor great, nor small, now grudge his turf:
The heavenly Cope was his ambition:
Three Cubits scope is his fruition.
He was above all; God above him:
He did not love all; nor God love him:
He that him taught first to aspire,
Now has him caught, and pays his hire.
153. On an irefull and angry man.
Here lies a Fury, hight Sir Ire,
That bred, and earned immortal fire.
He 'gan to wrangle from the womb;
And was a wrangler to his Tomb.
A peevish, and a foolish elfe,
Foe to his God, his Saints, his self.
He hated men, men did not love him:
No evil but his own might move him.
He was, and was earths load and care:
He is, and is hells brand, and share.
154. On John Dawson Butler.
Dawson the Butler's dead, although I think
Poets were nere insusd with single drink,
I Will spend a farthing Muse, a watery Verse
Will serve the turn to cast upon his Hearse.
If any cannot weep among us here,
Take off his cup, and so squeze out a tear.
Weep O ye barrels, let your drippings fall
In trickling streams, make wast more prodigal,
Then when our beer was good, that John may float
To Stix in beer, and lift up Charrons boat,
With wholesome waves: and as the Conduits ran
With Claret, at the Coronation,
So let your channels flow with single Tiff,
For John I hope is crowned: take off your whiff,
Ye men of Rosemary, and drink up all,
Remembering it is a Butlers Funeral:
Had he been Master of good duble beer,
My life for his, John Dawson had been here.
155. On Turn-Coat.
Passenger, Stay, Read, Walk. Here Lies, ANDREW TURNCOAT, WHO WAS NEITHER
SLAVE, NOR SOLDIER, NOR PHYSICIAN, NOR FENCER, NOR COBBLER, NOR FILCHER, NOR
LAWYER, NOR USURER, BUT ALL WHO LIVED NEITHER IN CITY, NOR COUNTRY, NOR AT
HOME, NOR ABROAD, NOR AT SEA, NOR AT LAND, NOR HERE, NOR ELSEWHERE, BUT EVERY
WHERE. WHO DIED, NEITHER OF HUNGER, NOR POISON, NOR HATCHET, NOR HALTER, NOR
DOG, NOR DISEASE, BUT OF ALL TOGETHER. 1.1. H. BEING NEITHER HIS DEBTOR, NOR
HEIR, NOR KINSMAN, NOR FRIEND, NOR NEIGHBOR, BUT ALL, IN HIS MEMORY HAVE
ERECTED, THIS NEITHER MONUMENT, NOR TOMB, NOR SEPULCHER, BUT ALL WISHING
NEITHER EVIL, NOR WELL, NEITHER TO THEE, NOR TO ME, NOR HIM, BUT ALL UNTO ALL.


156. On a Dyer.
Though death the Dyer colour-lesse has made,
Yet he dies pale, and will not leave his trade;
But being dead, the means yet does not lack,
To dye his friends cloth into mourning black.
Some sure foresaw his death, for they of late
Usd to exclaim upon his dying Fate.
And weak, and faint, he seemed often times to have been,
For to change colors often he was seen;
Yet there no matter was so foul, but he
Would set a color on it handsomely:
Death him no unexpected stroke could give,
That learnt to dye, since he began to live.
He shall yet prove, what he before had tried,
And shall once more live after he has died.
157. On a disagreeing Couple.
Hic jacet ille, qui centies and mill
Did scold with his Wife:
Cum illo jacet illa, quae communis in villa
Did qui^tance his life:
His name was Nick, the which was sick,
And that very male,
Her name was Nan, who loved well a man,
So Gentlemen, vale.
158. On a Footboy that dyed with overmuch running.
Base Tyrant death, thus to assail one tired,
Who scarce his latest breath being left expired;
And being too too cruel thus to stay
So swift a course, at length ran quite away.
But pretty boy, be sure it was not death
That left behind thy body out of breath:
Thy soul and body running in a race,
Thy soul held out, thy body tired apace,
Thy soul gained, and left that lump of clay
To rest it self until the latter day.
159. On a Scrivener.
Here to a period is the Scrivener come,
This is the last sheet, his full point this Tomb.
Of all aspersions^ excuse him not,
It Is known he lived not, without many a blot;
Yet he no ill example showed to any,
But rather gave good Copies unto many.
^e in good Letters has always been bred,
And has writ more then many men have read.
He rulers had at his command by Law,
And though he could not hang, yet he could draw
He far more bondmen had, and made, then any;
A dash alone of his pen ruined many;
That not without good reason, we might call
His Letters great, or little, Capital.
Yet is the Scriveners fate as sure as just,
When he has all done then he falls to dust.
160. On Mr. P. Gray.
Reader stay,
And if I had no more to say,
But here does lie till the last day,
All that is left of Philip Gray;
It might thy patience richly pay:
For, if such men as he could dye,
What surety of life have thou and I?
161. On a Chandler.
How might his days end that made weeks? or he
That could make light, here laid in darkness be?
Yet since his weeks were spent, how could he choose
But be deprived of light, and his trade lose?
Yet dead the Chandler is, and sleeps in peace,
No wonder, long since melted was his grease:
It seems that he did evil, for daylight
He hated, and did rather wish the night:
Yet came his works to light, and were like gold
Proved in the fire, but could not trial hold;
His candle had an end, and deaths black night
Is an extinguisher of all his light.
162. On a Smith.
Farewell stout Iron-side, not all thine Art
Could make a shield against deaths envious Dart.
Without a fault, no man his life does pass,
For to his Vice the Smith addicted was.
He often (as Choler is increast by fire)
Was in a fume, and much inclined to ire.
He had so long been usd to forge, that he
Was with a black-coal marked for forgery:
But he for witness needed not to care,
Who but a Blacksmith was, though never so fair;
And opportunities he needed not.
That knew to strike then when their'n was hot;
As the door-Nailes he made, he is now as dead;
He them, and death him, has knocked on the head.
163. On a man drowned in the Snow.
Within a fleece of silent waters drowned,
Before my death was known, a grave I found;
The which exiled my life from her sweet home,
For grief straight froze it self into a tomb.
One element my angry Fate thought meet
To be my death, grave, tomb, and winding sheet:
Phoebus himself, an Epitaph had writ,
But blotting many ere he thought one fit;
He wrote until my grave, and tomb were gone,
And 'twas an Epitaph that I had none;
For every one that passed by that way,
Without a sculture read that there I lay.
Here now the second time untomb'd I lie,
And thus much have the best of Destiny:
Corruption, from which only one was free,
Devoured my grave, but did not feed on me:
My first grave took me from the race of men,
My last shall give me back to life again.
164. On Doctor Hackets wif^.
Drop mournful eyes your pearly trickling tears,
Flow streams of sadness down the spangled spears,
Fall like the tumbling Cataracts of Nile,
Make deaf the world with cries; let not a smile
Appear, let not an eye be seen to sleep
Nor slumber, only let them serve to weep
Her dear lamented death, who in her life
Was a religious, loyal, loving wife,
Of Children tender, to an husband kind,
Th'undoubted symtomes of a virtuous mind:
Which makes her glorious, 'bove the highest pole,
Where Angels sing sweet Requiums to her soul,
She lived a nonesuch, did a nonesuch dye,
Never nonesuch here her Corpse interred lie,
165. On a beautiful Virgin.
In this Marble buried lies,
Beauty, may enrich the Skies,
And add light to Phoebus eyes.
Sweeter then Aurora's air,
When she paints the Lilies fair,
And gilds Cowslips with her hair.
Chafter then the Virgin spring,
Ere her blossoms she does bring,
Or cause Philomel to sing.
If such goodness live amongst men,
Bring me it; I know then
She is come from heaven again.
But if not, ye standers by
Cherish me, and say that I
Am the next designed to die.
166. An ancient Epitaph on Martin Mar-Prelate.
The Welshman is hanged,
Who at our Kirk flanged,
And at her state banged,
And breaded are his Bukes:
And though he be hanged,
Yet he is not wranged,
The Devil has him fanged
In his kruked klukes.
167. Upon Hodge Pue's Father.
Oh cruel death that stop^ the view
Of Thoms Parishioner good man Pue,
Who lived always in good order,
Until that death stopped his Recorder,
Which was betwixt Easter and Pentecost,
In the year of the great frost:
At New Market then was the King,
When as the Bells did merrily ring;
The Minister preached the day before
Unto his Highness, and no more,
Returning home, said prayers, and
Buried the man as I understand.
168. On our prime English Poet Geffery Chaucer, an ancient Epitaph.
My Master Chaucer, with his fresh Comedies
Is dead, alas! chief Poet of Britain,
That whilome made full piteous Tragedies:
The fault also of Princes did complain,
As he that was of making Sovereign;
Whom all this Land should of right prefer,
Since of our Language he was the Load-sterre.
169. On Mr. Ed^: Spencer, the famous Poet.
At Delphos shrine, one did a doubt propound,
Which by the Oracle must be released,
Whether of Poets were the best renowned,
Those that survive, or they that are deceased?
The Gods made answer by divine suggestion,
While Spencer is alive, it is no question.
170. On John Owen.
Well had these words been added to thy hearse,
What ever thou spak'st (like Ovid) was a verse.
171. On Michael Drayton buried in Westminster.
Do pious Marble, let thy Readers know,
What they, and what their Children ow
To Draytons sacred name, whose dust
We recommend unto thy trust.
Protect his memory, preserve his story,
And a lasting Monument of his glory,
And when thy ruins shall disclaim
To be the Treasury of his name:
His name which cannot fade, shall be
An everlasting Monument to thee.
172. On Mr. Beaumont.
He that has such acuteness, and such wit,
As well may ask six lives to manage it;
He that has writ so well, that no man dare
Deny it for the best; let him beware:
Beaumont is dead, by whose sole death appears,
Wit's a disease consumes men in few years.
173. On William Shakespeare.
Renowned Spencer lie a thought more nigh
To learned Chaucer, and rare Beaumont lie
A little nearer Spencer, to make room
For Shakespeare in your threefold, fourfold tomb,
To lodge all four in one bed make a shift
Until Doomsday, for hardly will a fifth
Betwixt this day and that, by Fates be slain,
For whom your curtains may be drawn again.
If your precedence in death do bar
A fourth place in your sacred Sepulcher;
Under this sacred Marble of thine own,
Sleep rare Tragoedian Shakespeare! sleep ^lone.
Thy unmolested peace in an unshared cave,
Possess as Lord, not Tenant of thy grave,
That knto us, and others it may be,
Honor hereafter to be laid by thee.
174. On Ben: Johnson.
Here lies Johnson with the rest
Of the Poets; but the best.
Reader, wo'dst thou more have known?
Ask his story, not this stone;
That will speak what this cannot tell
Of his glory. So farewell.
175. Another on Ben: I.
The Muses fairest light, in no dark time;
The wonder of a learned Age; the line
That none can pass; the most proportioned wit
To Nature: the best Judge of what was fit:
The deepest, plainest, highest, clearest pen:
The voice most Echoed by consenting men:
The soul which answered best to all well said
By others: and which most requital made:
Tuned to the highest key of ancient Rome,
Returning all her music with her own.
In whom with nature, study claimed a part,
And yet who to himself owed all his Art;
Here lies Ben: Johnson, every age will look
With sorrow here, with wonder on his Book.
176. On Mr. Francis Quarles.
To them that understand themselves so well,
As what, not who lies here, to ask, I Will tell,
What I conceive, envy dare not deny,
Far both from falsehood, and from flattery.
Here drawn to land by death, does lie
A Vessel fitter for the sky,
Then Iasons Argo, though to Greece,
They say, it brought the Golden Fleece.
The skillfull Pilot steered it so,
Hither and thither, to and fro,
Through all the Seas of Poetry,
Whether they far or near do lie,
And fraught it so with all the wealth,
Of wit and learning, not by stealth,
Or Piracy, but purchase got,
That this whole lower world could not
Richer Commodities, or more
Afford to add unto his store.
To heaven then with an intent
Of new discoveries, he went,
And left his Vessel here to rest
Till his return shall make it blessed.
The bill of Lading he that looks
To know, may find it in his Books.
177. On Doctor Donnes death.
He that would write an Epitaph for thee,
And do it well, must first begin to be
Such as thou were; for none can truly know
Thy worth, thy life, but he that has lived so.
He must have wit to spare, and to hurl down:
Enough to keep the Gallants of the Town.
He must have learning plenty; both the Laws,
Civil, and Common, to judge any Cause;
Divinity great store, above the rest;
None of the worst edition, but the best;
He must have language, travall, all the Arts;
Judgment to use; or else he wants thy parts.
He must have friends the highest, able to do;
Such as Maecenas and Augustus too;
He must have such a sickness, such a death,
Or else his vain descriptions come beneath.
Who then shall write an Epitaph for thee,
He must be dead first; let alone for me.
176. On Doctor Whaly.
What? is the young Apollo grown of late
Conscious his tender years are nothing fit
To rule the now large Heliconian S^ate,
Without a sage Competitor in it?
And therefore sen^ death, who might Whaly bring
To be a Guardian to this stripling King?
Sure so it is, but if we thought it might
Be worse then this: namely, that th'Gods for spite
To earth, had ta'n him hence; we would weep amain,
We Would weep a Phlegethon, an Ocean;
Which might without the help of Charous Oars,
Ferry his soul to the Elysian shoares.
179. On Doctor Bambrigg.
Were but this Marble vocal, there
Such an Elogium would appear
As might, though truth did dictate, move
Distrust in either faith or love;
As ample knowledge as could rest
Inshrined in a Mortals breast,
Which ne'rethelesse did open lie,
Uncovered by humility.
A heart which piety had chose,
To be her Altar, whence arose
Such smoking Sacrifices, that
We here can only wonder at;
A honey tongue that could dispense,
Torrents of sacred Eloquence;
That it is no wonder if this stone
Because it cannot speak, does groan;
For could Mortality assent,
These ashes would prove eloquent.
180. On Sir Walter Rawleigh at his Execution.
Great heart, who taught thee so to dye?
Death yielding thee the victory?
Where took'st thou leave of life? if there,
How could thou be so freed from fear?
But sure thou dyest, and qui^'st the state
Of flesh and blood before the Fate.
Else what a miracle were wrought,
To triumph both in flesh and thought?
I saw in every stander by,
Pale death, life only in thine eye:
The Example that thou left'st was then,
We look for when thou dy'st again.
Farewell, truth shall thy story say,
We died, thou only liv'dst that day.
181. On Sir Horatio Palavozeene.
Here lies Sir Horatio Palavozeene,
Who robbed the Pope to pay the Queen,
And was a thief. A thief? thou lie:
For why? he robbed but Antichrist.
Him death with his beesome swept from Babram,
Into the bosom of old Abraham:
But then came Hercules with his Club,
And struck him down to Beelzebub.
182. On Sir Francis Drake drowned.
Where Drake first found, there last he lost his fame:
And for Tomb left nothing but his name.
His body's buried under some great wave,
The Sea that was his glory, is his grave:
Of him no man true Epitaph can make,
For who can say, Here lies Sir Francis Drake.
183. Sir Ph. Sidney on himself.
It is not I that dye, I do but leave an Inn,
Where harbored was with me, all filthy sin;
It is not I that dye, I do but now begin
Into etenall joy by faith to enter in.
Why mourn you then my Parents, Friends, and Kin?
Lament you when I lose, not when I win.
184. On Sir Wal^er Rawleigh.
If spite be pleased, when as her object's dead,
Or malice pleased, when it has bruisd the head,
Or envy pleased, when it has what it would,
Then all are pleased, for Rawleighs blood is cold,
Which were it warm and active, would o'rcome,
And strike the two first blind, the other dumb.
185. On Sir Philip Sidney.
Reader: within this ground Sir Philip Sidney lies,
Nor is it sir, that more
I should acquaint;
Left superstition rise,
And men adore
A Lover, Scholar, Soldier, and a Saint.
186. On a Learned Nobleman.
He that can read a sigh, and spell a tear,
Pronounce amazement, or accent will fear,
Or get all grief by heart, he, only he,
Is fit to write, or read thy Elegy.
Unvalued Lord! that were so hard a text,
Read in one age, and understood i'th'next.
187. On the Tombs in Westminster.
Mortality, behold, and fear,
What a change of flesh is here!
Think how many Royal bones,
Sleep within these heaps of Stones;
Here they lie, had Realms, and Lands;
Who now want strength to stir their hands.
Where from their Pulpits sealed with dust,
They preach, in greatness is no trust.
Here Is an acre sown indeed,
With the richest, royal'st seed,
That the earth did ever suck in,
Since the first man died for sin:
Here the bones of birth have cried,
Though Gods they were, as men they died:
Here are Sands, ignoble things,
Dropped from the ruined sides of Kings,
Here Is a world of Pomp and State
Buried in dust, once dead by fate.
188. On Queen Elizabeth.
Kings, Queens, Men's, Virgins eyes
See where the mirror lies.
In whom her friends have seen,
A Kings state in a Queen:
In whom her foes survai'd,
A Man's heart in a Maid.
Whom lest Men for her Piety,
Should grow to think some Deity;
Heaven hence by death did summon
Her, to show that she was Woman.
189. On Queen Anne, who dyed in March, was kept all April, and buried in May.
March with his winds has struck a Cedar tall,
And weeping April mourns the Cedars fall:
And May intends her month no flowers shall bring,
Since she must lose the flower of all the Spring.
Thy March his winds, have caused April showers,
And yet sad May must lose his flower of flowers.
190 On Prince Henry.
Reader; wonder think it none,
Though I speak, and am a stone,
Here is shri^'d Coelestialll dust,
And I keep it but in trust:
Should I not my treasure tell,
Wonder then you might as well,
How this Stone could choose but break,
If it had not learned to speak:
Hence amazed and ask not me
Whose these sacred ashes be,
Purposely it is concealed,
For alas! were that revealed,
All that read would by and by
Melt themselves to tears and die.
191. On King James his death.
We justly, when a meaner subject dies,
Begin his Epitaph with, Here he lies,
But when a King, whose memory remains
Triumphant over death; with, here he reigns:
Now he is dead, to whom the world imputes
Deservedly, eternal Attributes.
For shall we think his glory can decease,
That Is honored with the style, The King of Peace:
Whose happy union of Great Britanny?
Calls him the blessed King of Unity.
And in whose Royal Title it ensu'th,
Defender of the Faith, and King of Truth,
These girt thy brows with an immortal Crown,
(Great James) and turn thy Tomb into a Throne.
192. On the King of Sweden.
The world expects Swede's monumentall stone
Should equal the Philosophers; each groan
Should breath a golden vein, and every verse
Sold draw Elixar from his fatal Hearse.
No fitter subject where strong lines should meet,
Than such a noble Center: could the feet
Of able Verse but trace his Victories,
Where all is transcendent, who out paralleled
Pluiarchs selected Heroes, and is held
The tenth of Worthies: who has over-acted
Great Caesar's German-Comment, and contracted
H^ expeditions by preventing aw,
He often overcame before he saw:
And (what of his great Son, Jove used to say)
He always either found or made his way.
Such was his personal and single fight,
As if that death it self had ra'n her flight
Into brave Swedens ^cabbard, when he drew,
Death with that steel inevitably flew.
His Camp a Church, wherein the Gen'ralls life
Was the best Sermon, and the only strife
Amongst his, was to repeat it; bended knee
Was his prime posture, and his enemy
Found this most prevalent; his discipline
Impartial and exact, it did outshine
Those Antique Martial Grecian, Roman lamps,
From which most of the worlds succeeding Camps
Have had their borrowed light; this, this was he,
All this and more; yet even all this can dye.
Death surely ventured on the Swede to try,
If heaven were subject to mortality;
And shot his soul to Heaven, as if that she
Could (if not kill) unthrone a Deity.
Both Death's deceived, it is in another sense*
That Heaven is said to suffer violence.
No ir'n Chain-shot, but it is the golden chain
Of Virtue, and the Graces are the maine,
That do unhinge the everlasting Gates,
All which like yoked undivided ma^es,
Were lined in Sweden; where then were ^nchain'd
Like Orthodoxall, Volumes nothing feigned:
Though fairly bound, his story is not dipped
In oil, but in his own true Manuscript.
It is enough to name him, surely we
Have got that Romans doting Lethargy:
And may our names forget, if so we can
Forget the name of Sweden; renowned man?
Thou had no sooner made the Worthies ten,
But Heaven did claim the tenth; jealous that men
Would Idolize thee, but their Instrument.
Thus thy Meridian proved thy Occident:
Had longer days been granted by the Fates,
Rome had heard this Hanniball at her gates.
Farewell thou Austrian scourge,
Thou modern wonder,
Strange rain has followed
Thy last clap of thunder,
A shower of tears:
And yet for ought we know,
The Horn that is left,
May blow down Jericho.
163. To Death.
Death, art thou mad? or having lost thine eyes,
Now throw'st thy dart at wild uncertainties?
Which hits those men, who had thou eyes or sense
Would challenge from thee mild obedience.
Their prudent looks gilt with Divinity,
Thy trembling hand would cast thy dart away,
And grant the wearied Bells a holy day;
And thou grieved for thy former cruelty,
Would to the world proclaim a Jubilee.
But thou art blind and deaf: yet one or two
At most, me thinks, had been enough
To satisfy thy bloody Tyranny.
But thou would fain rob poor mortality
Of all true worth, that men might be as base
As thou art, and the Devils of thy race.
Art thou Coward grown? why did not dart
Thy spite at lusty youth? whose valiant heart
Would scorn thy fond Alarums, and would sl^ght
Thy mighty malice, and thy puny might.
This had bin fair enough; but thou go further:
That had been but manslaughter, this is murder;
To kill those rich-soul'd men, who sweetly do
Whisper unto their willing souls to go.
But knowledge of thy weakness makes thee wise,
Thou seek'st not triumphs now, but sacrifice.
Thy malice fools thee too, thou hop'st they would griev
Because they should be forced behind to leave
Their honored worth; but (fond fool) they be
Now crowned and clothed with immortality.
Nor shall thou kill their fames; here we will raise
A Monument to them, shall out-last days;
Nor shall decay, until the Trumpets call
The world to see thy long-wish'd Funeral:
Till then sleep blessed souls, freed from hopes and fears.
Whilst we do write your Epitaphs in tears.
FANCIES AND Fantasticks.
maze Time that all things does inheritt
Renders each desert his meritt,
Youth with youth is best combined,
Each one with his like is twined,
Bewty should have bewteous meaning,
Ever that hope eases playning,
Do so and to love be turning
El's each it will be burning
Learn to love and leave denying,
Endless knotts let fates be tying,
Such a face so fine a feature,
Kindest, fairest, sweetest creature,
Never yet was found but loving,
O then let my plaints be moving,
I love not with vows contesting,
Faith is faith without protesting,


Aenigma.
AS often as I please it changes form,
It is no Coward, though it do no harm;
It Is never hurt, nor ever does it seed;
It Is nothing worth, yet nothing does it need.
Swiftly it runs, yet never makes sound,
And once being lost, again it is never found.
It Is a fit Servant for a Gentleman,
And a true pattern for a Serving-man.
It Is born a Giant, lives a Dwarf, and nigh
Unto its death, a Giant does it dye.
Another on the six Cases.
No. Nanta was nominated for a W.
Genesis For she that had been Genitive before:
Da. Notice hereof was to the Justice given,
Acc. Who her accu'sd, that she had loosly liven.
Voc. But she cried mercy, and her fault up ripped,
Abl. And so was ta'n away and soundly whipped.
Her Case was ill; yet will the question be,
Being thus declined, in what a Case was she
If V 2 I, as I 2 V am true,
VI must lie, and I in V
Thoughts -- c
Searching c
Valued may B
Love -- may B
Truth never ties
Too A fool yy
If have part
And V bb
You Have 1.2. many then I. C.
And R not worth
Write QQ
I Will -- not yours VV
A Riddle.
A beggar once exceeding poor,
A penny prayed me give him,
And deeply vowed never to ask more
And I never more to give him,
Next day he begged again, I gave,
Yet both of us our Oaths did save.
Another.
There was a man bespake a thing,
Which when the owner home did bring,
He that made it, did refuse it,
He that bought it, would not use it;
He that has it does not know
Whether he has it, yea or no.
Another.
One evening, as cold, as cold might be,
With Frost and Snow, and pinching weather,
Companions about three times three,
Lay close all in a bed together;
Yet one after other they took heat,
And died that night all in a sweat.
maze THIS is love and worth commending,
Still beginning never ending,
Like a wily net insnaring
In a round shuts up all squaring.
In and out, whose every angle
More and more does still entangle.
Keeps a measure still in moving,
And is never light but lovinge
Twyning arms exchanging kisses,
Each partaking others blisses.
Laughing weepinge still together
Bliss in one is mirth in either.
Never breaking ever bending,
This is love and worth commending.


A doubtful meaning.
The Faeminine kind is counted ill:
And is I swear: The contrary;
No man can find: That hurt they will;
But every where: Do show pity;
To no kind heart: They will be cursed;
To all true friends: They will be trusty;
In no part: They work the worst;
With tongue and mind: But honesty;
They do detest: Inconstancy;
They do embrace: Honest intent;
They like least: Lewd fantasy;
In every case: Are penitent;
At no season: Doing amiss;
To it truly: Contrary;
To all reason: Subject and meek;
To no body: Malicious;
To friend or foe: Or gentle sort;
They be never: Doing amiss;
In weal and woe: Of like report;
They be ever: Be sure of this;
The Faeminine kind: Shall have my heart;
Nothing at all: False they will be;
In word and mind: To suffer smart;
And ever shall: Believe you me.
2 A go
That does
That Is ruled by 1. whose says no:
I Will try ere trust ward left my
Find slight regard.
The a whilst
I 2 Lovers
That gazed me.
There was nor
nor loathsome
That might disturb or break delight,
Nor nor
in that same road,
And yet to me they seemed affright.
Then favor them I told,
True love cannot be bold.
These may be read two or three ways.
Your face Your tongue your wit so fair so smooth so sharp first drew then
moved then knit mine eye mine ear my heart Mine eye Mine ear My heart thus
drawn thus moved thus knit ^ffects hangs on yields to Your face Your tongue
your wit

These may be read backward or forward.
Joy, Mirth, Triumphs, I do defy,
Destroy me Death; fain would I dye:
Forlorn am I, love is exiled,
Scorn smiles thereat; hope is beguild:
Men banished bliss, in woe must dwell,
Then Joy, Mirth, Triumphs all farewell.
maze TRUE love is a precious pleasure,
Rich delight unvalu'd treasure,
Two firm Hearts in one meeting,
Grasping hand in hand never fleeting,
Wreathlike like a maze entwineing
Two fair minds in one combineing;
Foe to faithless vows perfidious
True love is a knott religious,
Dead to the sins yt flameing rise
Through beauties soul seduceing eyes,
Deaf to gold enchaunting witches,
Love for virtue not for riches;
Such is true loves boundles measure.
True love is a precious pleasure.


Est aliis servire tenetur
Iure qui
sum servire necesse est
Iure tibi me
Te nulli cunctos
aut are videris
Qui cunctos hos laud
aut fero cunctis.
Thus Englished.

-ling is bound to serve his Mris. hands
An-
you and bound to do your high commands
I Am
None's you
you all are then
I Will praise you
other men.
A New years Gift.
That our loves may never alter,
Tie it fast with this strong Halter.
The Answer.
The Rope is old, the Jest is new,
I Will take the Jest, the Rope take you.
A Gentleman to his Love.
Tell her I love; and if she ask how well;
Tell her my tongue told thee no tongue can tell.
Her Answer.
Say not you love, unless you do,
For lying will not honor you.
His Reply.
Madam, I love, and love to do,
And will not lie, unless with you.
To his Mistress.
A constant heart within a woman's breast,
Is Ophir gold within an Ivory Chest.
Her answer.
Of such a Treasure then thou art possessed,
For thou have such a heart in such a Ghest.
On Chloris walking in the Snow.
I saw fair Chloris walk alone,
When feathered rain came softly down,
Then Jove descended from his Tower,
To court her in a silver shower:
The wanton Snow flew to her breast,
Like little birds into their nest;
But overcome with whitenes there
For grief it thawed into a tear;
Then falling down her garment hem,
To deck her, froze into a gem.
Upon Clarinda, begging a lock of her Lovers hair.
Fairest Clarinda, she whom truth calls fair,
Begged my heart of me, and a lock of hair;
Should I give both, said I, how should I live?
The lock I would, the heart I would not give:
For that, left theeving love should steal away,
Discretion had locked up, and kept the key;
As for the lock of hair which lovers use,
My head laid on her knee, I prayed her choose,
Taking her Sizars by a cunning art,
First picked the lock, and then she stole my heart.
maze A begins love's criss cross row.
Love's not wthout a cross or two.
A duble begins this knot
Love wthout crosses meritts not,
This knot and love are both alike.
Seeing first and last are both to seek
Reaching, spreading, round about,
All ways turning in and out
Still increasing still renewing
Crossing meeting still continuing
Winding this way that way bending
Wthout beginning without ending
True love's stirring still in action
Allways tending to perfection
No cross can stop true loves intent
But it goes on to what it meant
And though it meet with many a one,
True love makes a seem non
To those yt never love but one
Love of manys true loves bane
And such shall be crossed and crossed again
who lives to love must learn to know
A begins loves criss cross-row.


A Loving Bargain.
Give me a kiss, I Will make that odd one even,
Then treble that which you have given;
Be sure I Will answer you, and if I miss,
Then take a thousand forfeits for a kiss,
And a thousand be too few, than take more:
Kiss me with your kisses, make me poor:
When I am beggered some hope will remain,
You will for pity give me some again.
A Question.
Between two Suitors sat a Lady fair,
Upon her head a Garland she did wear:
And of the enamoured two, the first alone,
A Garland wore like hers, the second none;
From her own head she took the wreath she wore,
And on him placed it that had none before.
And then mark this, their brows were both about
Beset with Garlands, and she sat without:
Beholding now these Rivalls on each side
Of her thus placed and decked with equal pride:
She from the first man's head the wreath he had
Took off, and therewith her own brow she clad.
And then (not this) she and the second were
With Garlands decked; and the first man sat bare.
Now which did she love best? of him to whom
She gave the wreath? or him she took it from?
The Answer.
In my conceit, she would him soonest have,
From whom she took, not him to whom she gave.
For to bestow, many respects may move:
But to receive, none can persuade but love.
She graced him much on whom the wreath she placed;
But him whose wreath she wore, she much more graced.
For where she gives, she there a servant makes,
But makes her self a servant where she takes.
Then where she takes, she honors most: and where
She does most honor, she most love does bear.
An incomparable kiss.
Give me a Kiss from those sweet lips of thine,
And make it double by enjoining mine,
Another yet, nay yet another,
And let the first Kiss be the seconds brother.
Give me a thousand kisses, and yet more;
And then repeat those that have gone before;
Let us begin while daylight springs in heaven
And kiss till night descends into the Even,
And when that modest Secretary, Night,
Discolours all but thy heav'n-beaming bright,
We will begin Revels of hidden love,
In that sweet Orb where silent pleasures move.
In high, new strains, unspeakable delight,
We'll vent the dull hours of the silent night.
Were the brigh^ day no more to visit us,
O then for ever would I hold thee thus;
Naked, inchain'd, empty of idle fear,
As the first Lovers in the Garden were.
I Will dye betwixt thy breasts that are so whi^^,
For, to dye there, would do a man delight.
Embrace me still, for time runs on before,
And being dead we shall embrace no more.
Let us kiss faster then the hours do fly,
Long live each kiss, and never know to dye.
Yet if that fade, and fly away too fast,
Impresse another, and renew the last;
Let us vie kisses, till our eyelids cover,
And if I sleep, count me an idle Lover,
Admit I sleep, I Will still pursue the Theme,
And eagerly I Will kiss thee in a dream.
O give me way; grant love to me thy friend,
Did hundred thousand sui^ers all contend
For thy Virginity, there is none shall woe
With heart so firm as mine; none better do
Then I with your sweet sweetness; if you doubt,
Pier^^ with your eyes my heart, or pluck it out.
To his Mistress.
Dearest, thy twined hairs are not threads of gold,
Nor thine eyes Diamonds; nor do I hold
Thy lips for Rubies, nor thy cheeks to be
Fresh Roses; nor thy Dugs of Ivory;
The skin that does thy dainty body sheath,
Not ^lablaster is; nor do thou breath
Arabian odours; these the earth brings forth,
Compared with thine, they would impair thy worth;
Such then are other mistresses; but mine*
Has nothing earth, but all divine.
The Answer.
If earth does never change, nor move,
There Is naught of earth sure in thy love;
Since heavenly bodies with each one,
Concur in generation;
And wanting gravity are light,
Or in a borrowed luster bright;
If meteors and each falling star,
Of heavenly matter framed are,
Earth has thy Mistress, but sure thine
All heavenly is, though not divine.
To his Mistress.
I love, because it comes to me by kind;
And much, because it much delights my mind:
And thee, because thou art within my heart:
And thee alone, because of thy desert.
I love, and much, and thee, and thee alone,
By kind, mind, heart, and every one.
Her answer.
Thou love not, because thou art unkind,
Nor much, cause it delights not thy mind:
Nor me, because I am not in thy heart:
Nor me alone, because I want desert:
Thou love nor much, nor me, nor me alone,
By kind, mind, heart, desert, nor any one.
Clownish Courtship.
Excellent Mistress, brighter than the Moon,
Then scoured Pewter, or the Silver-spoon,
Fairer then Phoebus, or the morning star;
Dainty fair Mistress, by my troth you are
As far excelling Dian and her Nymphs,
As lobsters crawfish, and as crawfish shrimps:
Thine eyes like Diamonds, do shine most clearly,
As I Am an honest Man, I love thee dearly.
A Comparison.
Like to the selfe-inhabiting snaile,
Or like a Squirrell pent-hous'd under his tail,
Even such is my Mistress face in a veil:
Or like to a Carp that is lost in mudding,
Nay, more like to a black-pudding:
For as the pudding, the skin lies within,
So does my Mistress beauty in a taffity gin.
A Question.
Tell me (Sweetheart) how spell'st thou Ione,
Tell me but that, it is all I crave;
I shall not need to be alone,
If such a lovely mate I have;
That thou art one, who can deny?
And all will grant that I am I,
If I be I, and thou art one,
Tell me (Sweetheart) how spell'st thou Ione.
The Answer.
I tell you Sir, and tell you true,
That I am I, and I am one,
So can I spell Ione without you,
And spelling so, can lie alone:
My eye to one is consonant,
But as for yours it is not so;
If that your eye agreement want,
I to your eye must answer no;
Therefore leave off your loving plea,
And let your I be I per se.
Loves prime.
Dear Love, do not your fair beauty wrong
With thinking still you are too young,
The Rose and Lilly in your cheek
Do flourish, and no ripening seek:
Those flaming beams shot from your eye,
Do show Loves Midsumer is nigh.
Your cherry-lip, red, soft and sweet,
Proclaim such fruit for taste is meet:
Then lose no time, for love has wings,
And flies away from aged things.
Another to his Mistress.
When first I saw thee, thou did sweetly play
The gentle thief, and stol'st my heart away;
Render me mine again, or leave thy own,
Two are too much for thee, since I have none:
But if thou will not, I will swear thou art
A sweet-fac'd creature with a double heart.
Another.
Sweetest fair be not too cruel,
Blot not beauty with disdain,
Let not those bright eyes add fuel
To a burning heart in vain;
Lest men justly when I dye,
Deem you the Candle, me the Fly.
Another.
I cannot pray you in a studied style,
Nor speak words distant from my heart a mile;
I cannot visit Hide-Park every day,
And with a Hackney court my time away;
I cannot spaniolize it week by week,
Or wait a month to kiss your hand or cheek;
If when you are loved, you cannot love again,
Why, do but say so, I am out of pain.
Excuse for absence.
You Will ask perhaps wherefore I stay,
(Loving so much,) so long away?
I do not think 'twas I did part,
It was my body, not my heart:
For like a Compass in your love,
One foot was fixed, and cannot move;
The Other may follow the blind guide
Of giddy fortune, but cannot slide
Beyond your service; nor will venture
To wander far from you the Center.
To a fair, but unkind Mistress.
I prithee turn that face away,
Whose splendour bu^ benight^ my day;
Sad eyes like mine, and wounded hearts,
Shun the bright rays that beauty darts;
Unwelcome is the Sun tha^ prie^
Into those shades where sorrow lies.
Go shine on happy things, to me
The blessing is a misery;
For your bright Sun, not warms, but burns;
Like that the Indian sooty turns.
I Will serve the night, and there confined,
Wish thee less fair; or else more kind.
To himself.
Retreat sad heart, breed not thy further pain;
Admire, but fonder thoughts seek to refrain.
To some Ladies.
Ladies, you that seem so nice,
And in show as cold as ice,
And perhaps have held out thrice,
Do not think, but in a trice,
One or other may entice;
And at last by some device,
Set your honor at a price.
You whose smooth and dainty skin,
Rosy lips, or cheeks, or chin,
All that gaze upon you win,
Yet insult not, sparks within
Slowly burn ever flames begin,
And presumption still has bin
Held a most notorious sin.
A Heart lost.
Good folk, for love or hire,
But help me to a Crier,
For my poor heart is gone astray
After two eyes that went that way.
O yes! if there be any man
In Town or Country, can
Bring me my heart again,
I Will pay him for his pain.
And by these marks I will you show,
That only I this heart do ow:
It is a wounded heart,
Wherein yet flick^ the dart,
Every part sore hurt throughout:
Faith and troth writ round about.
It is a tame heart and a dear,
That never used to roame,
But having got a haunt, I fear
Will never stay at home,
For love-sake walking by this way,
If you this heart do see;
Either impound it for a stray,
Or send it home to me.
The sad Lover.
Why should I wrong my judgment so,
As for to love where I do know
There is no hold for to be taken?
For what her wish thirsts after most,
If once of it her heart can boast,
Straight by her folly it is forsaken.
Thus whilst I still pursue in vain,
Me thinks I turn a child again,
And of my shadow am a chasing.
For all her favors are to me
Like appari^ions which I see,
But never can come near th'^bracing.
Often had I wished that there had been
Some Almanac whereby to have seen
When love with her had been in season.
But I perceive there is no art
Can find the Epact of the heart,
That loves by chance, and not by reason.
Yet will I not for this despair,
For time her humor may prepare
To grace him who is now neglected.
And what unto my constancy
She now denies: one day may be
From her instancy expected.
A Watch sent to a Gentlewoman.
Go and count her happy hours,
They more happy are than ours:
That day that gets her any bliss,
Make it twice as long as it is:
The hour she smiles in, let it be
By thine art increased to thee:
But if she frown on thee or me,
Know night is made, by her, not thee:
Be swif^ in such an hour, and soon
Make it night, though it be noon:
Obey her time, who is the free,
Fair Sun that governs thee and me.
On a Fairing.
Let them whose hear^ distrusts a Mistress faith,
Bribe it with gifts: mine no suspicion has:
It were a sin of as much stain in me,
To think you false, as so my self to be.
If to reward that thou have expressed,
Thou do expect a present: it is confessed
'Twere justice from another, but I am
So poor; I have not left my self a name
In substance; not made thine by gift before:
He that bestows his heart, can give no more
If thou would have a fairing from me, then
Give me my self back, I Will give it thee again.
Posies for Rings.
We are agreed
In time to speed.
I trust in time
Thou will be mine.
In thy breast
My heart does rest.
This and the giver
Are thine for ever.
It Is love alone
Makes two but one.
Loves knot once tide
Who can divide?
Where hearts agree
No strife can be.
God above
Increase our love.
Though time do slide,
Yet in true love abide.
Naught so sweet,
As when we greet.
Thy affection,
My perfection.
With a to Julia.
Iulia, I bring
To thee this Ring,
Made for thy finger fit;
To show by this,
That our love is
Or should be, like to it.
Close though it be,
Thy joint is free:
So when lov's yoke is on
It must not gall,
Or fret at all
With hard oppression.
But it must play
Still either way;
And be, too, such a yoke,
As not too wide,
To over-slide;
Or be so strait to choke.
So we, who bear,
This beam, must rear
Our selves to such a height:
As that the stay
Of either may
Create the burden light.
And as this round
Is no where found
To flaw or else to sever:
So let our love
As endless prove;
And pure as Gold for ever.
True beauty.
May I find a woman fair,
And her mind as clear as air;
If her beauty gone alone,
It Is to me, as if 'twere none.
May I find a woman rich,
And not of too high a pitch:
If that pride should cause disdain,
Tell me, Lover, where is thy gain?
May I find a woman wise,
And her falsehood not disguise;
Has she wit, as she has will?
Double armed she is to ill.
May I find a woman kind,
And not wavering like the wind*
How should I call that love mine,
When it is his, and his, and thine?
May I find a woman true,
There is beauties fairest hue;
There is beauty, love and wit,
Happy he can compass it.
Choice of a Mistress.
Not that I wish my Mistress
More or less than what she is,
Write I these lines, for it is too late
Rules to prescribe unto my fate.
But yet a^ tender stomach^ call
For some choice mea^, that bears not all*
A queazie lover may impart,
What Mistress it is that please his heart.
First I would have her richly spread,
With natures blossoms white and red;
For flaming hearts will quickly dye,
That have not fuel from the eye.
(...) this alone will never win,
Except some treasure lies within;
For where the spoile's not worth the stay,
Men raise their siege and go away.
I Would have her wise enough to know
When, and to whom a grace to show:
For she that does at random choose,
She will, as soon her choice refuse.
And yet methinks I Would have her mind
To flowing courtesy inclined:
And tender hearted as a maid,
Yet pity only when I prayed.
And I would wish her true to be,
(Mistake me not) I mean to me;
She that loves me, and loves one more,
Will love the Kingdom o'r and o'r.
And I could wish her full of wit,
Knew she how to huswife it:
But she whose wisdom makes her dare
To try her wit, will sell more ware.
Some other things, delight will bring,
As if she dances, play, and sing.
So they be safe, what though her parts
Catch ten thousand forain hearts.
But let me see, should she be proud;
A little pride should be allowed.
Each amorous boy will sport and prate
Too freely, where he finds not state.
I care not much though she let down
Sometime a chiding, or a frown.
But if she wholly quench desire,
It Is hard to kindle a new fire.
To smile, to toy, is not amiss,
Sometimes to interpose a kiss;
But not to cloy; sweet things are good,
Pleasant for sauce, but not for food.
Wishes to his supposed Mistress.
Who ever she be,
That is the only she,
That shall command my heart and me.
Might you hear my wishes
Bespeak her to my blisses,
And be called my absent kisses.
I wish her beauty,
That owes not all his duty
To gaudy tire, or some such folly.
A face that is best
By its own beauty dressed;
And can alone command the rest.
Smiles, that can warm
The blood, yet teach a charm
That chastity shall take no harm.
Joys that confess
Virtue her Mistress,
And have no other head to dress.
Days, that in spite
Of darkness, by the light
Of a clear mind, are day all Night.
Life that dares send
A challenge to his end,
And when it is come, say, Welcome friend.
Soft silken Hours,
Open Suns; shady Bowers,
Bove all; Nothing within that lowers.
I wish her store
Of wealth may leave her poor
Of wishes; and I wish no more.
Now if time knows,
That her whose radiant brows,
Weave them a Garlant of my vows.
Her that dare be,
What these lines wish to see,
I seek no further, it is she.
Such worth as this is,
Shall fix my flying wishes
And determine them to kisses.
Let her full glory,
(My fancies) fly before ye,
Be ye my fiction, but her my story.
To a Lady.
Madam,
Should I not smother this ambitious fire,
Which actuates my verse: it would aspire
To blear your virtues, in a glimmering line;
And your perfections in its measures twine.
But I have checked my fancy Muse, nor dare^
Dull Poetry attempt to scan the spheres;
Or in a cloudy rhyme invaile the light,
Or court the trembling Watchmen of the night;
Some vulgar virtue, or a single blaze,
Might stand in Verse; and would endure a gaze:
But when both Art, and Nature, shall agree
To sum them all in one Epitome:
When the perfections of both sexes, are
Locked in one female storehouse; who shall dare
In an audacious rapture, to untwine
Into loose numbers, what Heaven does enshrine,
In one rich breast? Dazzled invention say,
Can thou embowell either India,
In one poor rhyme? Or can thy torch-light fire,
Show us the Sun; or any Star that is higher?
If thou will needs spend thy officious flame,
Do it in admiration: but disclaim
Thy power to praise: thy senders wishes, bear,
And be the Herald of the newborn year:
Wish that each rising Sun, may see her more
Happy, then when he rose the morn before;
And may, when ever he gilds the envious West,
Leave her more blessed, then when he graced the feast;
Wish higher yet, that her felicity
May equalize her virtues: Poetry
Thou art too low; can thou not swell a strain
May reach my thoughts: good Madam since it is vain,
(And yet my verse to kiss your hand presumed)
Let it to be your sacrifice be doomed:
And what it wants in true Poetique fire,
Let the flame add, till so my Muse expire.
An Echo.
Come Echo I thee summon,
Tell me truly what is Woman?
If worn, she is a feather,
If wooed she is frosty weather;
If worn, the wind not slighter:
If weighed, the Moons not lighter:
If lain withal, she is apish:
If not lain with, she is snappish.
Come Echo I thee summon,
Tell me once more what is woman?
If fair, she is coy in courting,
If witty, loose in sporting,
If ready, she is but clothing,
If naked, she is just nothing,
If not beloved, she horns thee;
If loved too well, she scorns thee.
The Echo still replied,
But still me thought she lied.
Then for my Mistress sake,
I again reply did make.
If worn, she is a Jewel,
If wooed, she is not cruel,
If won, no Rock is surer,
If weighed, no gold is purer,
If lain withal, delicious;
If not, yet no way vicious.
False Echo go, you lie,
See your errors I descry.
And for the second summon I
This for woman do reply.
If fair, she is heavenly treasure,
If witty, she is all pleasure,
If ready, she is quaintest,
If not ready, she is daintiest,
If loved, her heart she spares not,
If not beloved, she cares not.
False Echo, go you lie,
See, your errors I descry.
Icar. Oh you do my hearing wrong,
I have turned my eyes thus long
To be captived by your tongue.

Phil. Then my hours are happy spent,
If my tongue give such content,
It shall be thy Instrument.

Icar. But be sure you use it then,
Thus unto no other men,
Lest that I grow deaf again.

Fidelius and his silent Mris. Flora.
Fid. My dearest Flora can you love me?


Flo. Prithee prove me.


Fid. Shall I have your hand to kiss?


Flo. Yes, yes.


Fid. On this whiteness let me swear,


Flo. No, pray forbear.


Fid. I love you dearer then mine eyes.


Flo. Be wise.


Fid. I prize no happiness like you.


Flo. Will you be true?


Fid. As i^ the Turtle to her Mate.


Flo. I hate.


Fid. Who my divinest Flora, me?


Flo. No flattery.


Fid. He that flatters, may he dye.


Flo. Perpetually.


Fid. And his black urne be the cell,

Flo. Where Furies dwell.


Fid. May his name be blasphemous,

Flo. To us.


Fid. His memory for ever rot;

Flo. And be forgot.


Fid. Lest it keep our age and youth,

Flo. From love and truth.


Fid. Thus upon your Virgin hand,

Flo. Your vows shall stand.


Fid. This kiss confirms my act and deed.


Flo. You may exceed.


Fid. Your hand, your lip, I Will vow on both;

Flo. A dangerous Oath.


Fid. My resolution never shall start;

Flo. You have my heart.


Fears and Resolves of two Lovers.
A. What would thou wish? tell me dear lover,


I. How I might but thy thoughts discover.


A. If my firm love I were denying,
Tell me, with sighs would thou be dying?

I. Those words in jest to hear thee speaking,
For very grief, this heart is breaking.

A. Yet would thou change? I prithee tell me,
In seeing one that does excel me?

I. O no, for how can I aspire,
To more then to my own desire?
This my mishap does chiefly grieve me;
Though I do swear'^, you will not believe me.

A. Imagine that thou do not love me;
But some beauty that is above me.

I. To such a thing Sweet do not will me;
The naming of the same will kill me.

A. Forgive me fair one, Love has fears:


I. I do forgive, witness these tears.


A Sonnet.
Who can define, this all things, nothing love,
Which has so much of every thing in it?
Which watery, with the Planets often does move,
And with the Zoane it has a fiery fit;
Often seizes men, like massy stupid earth,
And with the Air, it fills every place;
Which had no Midwife, nor I think no birth,
No shrine, no arrows, but a woman's face.
A God he is not, for he is unjust;
A Boy he is not, for he has more power;
A Faction it is not, all will yield I trust;
What is it then, that is so sweetly sower?
No law so wise, that can his absence prove?
But (ah) I know there is a thing called Love.
A Love-sick-sonnet.
Love is a Sickness full of woes,
All remedies refusing:
A plant that with most cutting grows,
Most barren with best using.
Why so?
More we enjoy it, more it dies,
If not enjoyed, it sighing cries
Hey ho!
Love is a torment of the mind,
A tempest everlasting;
And Jove has made it of a kind,
Not well, nor full nor fasting.
Why so?
More we enjoy it, more it dies,
If not enjoyed, it sighing cries
Hey ho!
A Question.
Fain would I learn of men the reason why
They swear they dye for love, yet lowly ly?
Or why they fondly dote on, and admire
A painted face, or a fantastic tire.
For while such Idols they fall down before,
They prove more fools then those they thus adore.
Answer.
The reason why men loving lowly ly;
Is hope to gain their purposes thereby.
And that they fondly dote on paint and tires;
It Is just in love, to show men's fond desires.
And for the rest, this have I heard from Schools
That love, makes foolish wise, and wise men fools.
Sighs.
All night I muse, all day I cry,
ay me.
Yet still I wish, tho still deny.
ay me.
I sigh, I mourn, and say that still,
I only live my joys to kill.
ay me.
I feed the pain that on me feeds,
ay me.
My wound I stop not, though it bleeds;
ay me.
Heart be content, it must be so,
For springs were made to overflow.
ay me.
Then sigh and weep, and mourn thy fill,
ay me.
Seek no redress, but languish still.
ay me.
Their griefs more willing they endure,
That know when they are past recure.
ay me.
To Celia weeping.
Fairest, when thine eyes did pour
A crystal shower;
I was persuaded, that some stone
Had liquid grown;
And thus amazed; sure thought I
When stones are moist, some rain is nigh.
Why weep'st thou? cause thou cannot be
More hard to me?
So Lionesses pity, so
Do Tygres too:
So does that Bird, which when she is fed
On all the man, pines over the Head.
Yet I Will make better omens till
Event beguile;
Those pearly drops, in time shall be
A precious Sea;
And thou shall like thy Coral prove,
Soft under water, hard above.
An Hymn to Love.
I will confess
With cheerfullnesse,
Love is a thing so likes me,
That let her lay
On me all day,
I Will kiss the hand that strikes me.
I will not, I,
Now blubb'ring cry,
It (ah!) too late repents me,
That I did fall
To love at all,
Since love so much contents me.
No, no, I Will be
In fetters free;
While others they sit wringing
Their hands for pain;
I Will entertain
The wounds of love with singing.
With flowers and wine
And Cakes divine,
To strike me I will tempt thee:
Which done; no more
I Will come before
Thee and thine Altars empty.
Loves Discoverys.
With much of pain, and all the Art I knew,
Have I endeavored hitherto
To hide my love; and yet all will not do.
The world perceives it, and it may be, she;
Though so discreet and good she be,
By hiding it, to teach that skill to me.
Men without love have often so cunning grown,
That something like it they have shown,
But none that had it ever seemed to have none.
Love's of a strangely open, simple kind,
Can no arts or disguises find,
But thinks none sees it cause it self is blind.
The very eye betrays our inward smart;
Love of himself left there a part,
When through it he past into the heart.
Or if by chance the face betray not it,
But keep the secret wisely, yet,
Like drunkenness into the tongue 'twill get.
Heartbreaking.
It gave a piteous groan, and so it broke;
In vain it something would have spoke:
The love within too strong for it was
Like poison put into a Venice Glass.
I thought that this some Remedy might prove,
But, oh, the mighty Serpent Love,
Cut by this chance in pieces small,
In all still lived, and still it slung in all.
And now (alas) each little broken part
Feels the whole pain of all my heart:
And every smallest corner still
Lives with that torment which the whole did kill.
Even so rude Armies when the field they quit,
And into several Quarters get;
Each Troop does spoil and ruin more
Then all joined in one body did before.
How many loves reign in my bosom now?
How many loves, yet all of you?
Thus have I changed with evil fate
My Monarch Love into a Tyrant State.
A Tear sent his Mistress.
Glide gentle streams, and bear
Along with you my tear
To that coy Girl;
Who smiles, yet slayes
Me with delays;
And strings my tears as Pearl.
See! see she is yonder set,
Making a Carkanet
Of mayden-flowers!
There, there present
This Orient,
And pendant Pearl of ours.
Then say, I Have sent one more
Jem, to enrich her store;
And that is all
Which I can send,
Or vainly spend,
For tears no more will fall.
Nor will I seek supply
Of them, the springs once dry;
But I Will devise,
(Among the rest)
A way that is best
How I may save mine eyes.
Yet say, should she condemn
Me to surrender them;
Then say; my part
Must be to weep
Out them; to keep
A poor, yet loving heart.
Say too, she would have this;
She shall: Then my hope is,
That when I Am poor,
And nothing have
To send, or save;
I Am sure she will ask no more.
A Song.
To thy lover
Deer, discover
That sweet blush of thine tha^ shameth
(When those Roses
It discloses)
All the flowers that Nature names
In free Air,
Flow thy Hair;
That no more Summers best dresses,
Be beholden
For their Golden
Locks to Phoebus flaming Tresses.
O deliver
Love his Quiver,
From thy Eyes he shoots his Arrows,
Where Apollo
Cannot follow:
Feathered with his Mothers Sparrows.
O envy not
(That we dye not)
Those deer lips whose door encloses
All the Graces
In their place^,
Brother Pearls, and sister Roses.
From these treasures
Of ripe pleasures
One bright smile to clear the weather.
Earth and Heaven
Thus made even,
Both will be good friends together.
The air does woo thee,
Winds cling to thee,
Might a word once fly from out thee;
Storm and thunder
Would fit under,
And keep silence round about thee.
But if natures
Common Creatures,
So deer glories dare not borrow;
Yet thy beauty
Owes a duty,
To my loving lingering sorrow.
When my dying
Life is flying;
Those sweet Aires that often slew me;
Shall revive me,
Or reprive me,
And to many deaths renew me.
The Cruel Maid.
And cruel maid, because I see
You scornful of my love, and me:
I Will trouble you no more; but go
My way, where you shall never know
What is become of me: there I
Will find me out a path to dye;
Or learn some way how to forget
You, and your name, for ever: yet
Ere I go hence, know this from me,
What will, in time, your fortune be:
This to your coyness I will tell;
And having spoke it once, Farewell.
The Lilly will not long endure;
Nor the Snow continue pure:
The Rose, the Violet, one day
See, both these Lady-flowers decay:
And you must fade, as well as they.
And it may chance that love may turn,
And (like to mine) make your heart burn.
And weep to see it; yet this thing do,
That my last vow commends to you:
When you shall see that I am dead,
For pity let a tear be shed;
And (with your Mantle over me cast)
Give my cold lips a kiss at last:
If twice you kiss, you need not fear,
That I shall stir, or live more here.
Next hollow out a Tomb to cover
Me; me, the most despised Lover;
And write thereon, This, Reader, know,
Love killed this man. No more but so.
Silence.
No; to what purpose should I speak?
No, wretched Heart, swell till you break!
She cannot love me if she would;
And to say truth, 'twere pity that she should.
No, to the Grave thy sorrows bear,
As silent as they will be there:
Since that loved hand this mortal wound does give,
So handsomely the thing contrive,
That she may guiltless of it live.
So perish, that her killing thee
May a chance Medley, and no murder be.
It Is nobler much for me, that I
By 'her beauty, not her Anger dye;
This will look justly, and become
An Execution, that a Martyrdom.
The censuring world will never refrain
From judging men by thunder slain.
She must be angry sure, if I should be
So bold to ask her to make me
By being hers, happier then she;
I will not; it is a milder fate
To fall by her not loving, then her hate.
And yet this death of mine, I fear,
Will ominous to her appear*
When, sound in every other part,
Her sacrifice is found without an Heart;
For the last tempest of my death
Shall sigh out that too, with my breath.
His Misery.
Water, water I aspie:
Come, and cool ye; all who fry
In your loves; but none as I.
Though a thousand showers be
Still a falling, ye^ I see
Not one drop to light on me.
Happy you, who can have seas
For to quench ye, or some ease
From your kinder Mistresses.
I have one, and she alone
Of a thousand thousand known,
Dead to all compassion.
Such an one, as will repeat
Both the cause, and make the heat
More by provocation great.
Gentle friends, though I despair
Of my cure, do you beware
Of those Girls, which cruel are.
The Call.
Marina, stay,
And run not thus like a young Roe away,
No Enemy
Pursues thee (foolish Girl) it is only I,
I Will keep off harms,
If thou'l be pleased to garrison mine arms;
What do thou fear
I Will turn a Traitor? may these Roses here
To palenesse shred,
And Lillies stand disguised in new red,
If that I lay
A snare, wherein thou would not gladly stay;
See, see the Sun
Does slowly to his azure lodging run;
Come sit but here,
And presently he will quit our Hemisphere;
So still among
Lovers, time is too short or else too long;
Here will we spin
Legends for them, that have love Martyrs been;
Here on this plain
We Will talk Narcissus to a flower again;
Come here and chose
On which of these proud plate thou would
Here may thou shame
The rusty Violets, with the Crimson flame,
Of either cheek;
And Primroses white as thy fingers seek;
Nay, thou may prove
That man's most noble passion, is to love.
A Check to her delay.
Come come away,
Or let me go;
Must I here stay,
Because you are slow;
And will continue so?
Troth Lady, no.
I scorn to be
A slave to state:
And since I Am free
I will not wait,
Henceforth at such a rate,
For needy fate.
If you desire
My spark should glow,
The peeping fire
You must blow;
Or I shall quickly grow
To frost or snow.
The L^re.
Farewell, nay prithee turn again,
Rather then loose thee, I Will arraign
My self before thee; thou (most fair) shall be
Thy self the Judge;
I Will never grudge
A law, ordained by thee.
Pray do but see, how every Rose
A sanguine visage does disclose,
O see, what Aromatic gusts they breath;
Come here we will sit,
And learn to knit,
Them up into a wreath.
With that wreath, crowned shall thou be;
Not graced by it, but it thee;
Then shall the fawning Zephir^ wait to hear
What thou shall say,
And softly play,
While News to me they bear.
Come prithee come, we will now assay
To piece the scantnesse of the day;
We Will pluck the wheel^ from th'charry of the Sun*
That he, may give
Us time to live;
Till that our Scene be done.
We Will suffer viperous thoughts, and cares,
To follow after silver hairs;
Let Us not anticipate them long before;
When they begin,
To enter in,
Each minute they will grow more.
No, no, Marina, see this brook
How't would its posting course revoke,
Ere it shall in the Ocean mingled lie,
And what I pray,
May cause this stay;
But to attest our joy?
Far be it from lust; such wild fire, never
Shall dare to lurk or kindle here;
Diviner flames shall in our fancies roll,
Which not depresse
To earthlinesse,
But elevate the soul.
Then shall a grandiz'd love, confess,
That souls can mingle substances;
That hearts can easily counter-changed be,
Or at the least,
Can alter breasts,
When breasts themselves agree.
To Iulia.
It Is Evening my sweet,
And dark; let us meet;
Long time we have here been a toying:
And never as yet,
That season co'd get,
Wherein to have had an enjoying.
For pity or shame,
Then let not loves flame,
Be ever and ever a spending;
Since now to the Port
The path is but short;
And yet our way has no ending.
Time flies away fast;
Our hours do wast;
The while we never remember,
How soon our life, here,
Grows old with the year,
That dies with the next December.
Of Beauty.
What do I hate, what is Beauty? less
How does it pass?
As flowers, as soon as smelled at
Evaporate,
Even so this shadow, ere our eyes
Can view it, flies.
What Is color? alas the sullen Night
Can it affright;
A Rose can more Vermilion speak,
Then any cheek;
A richer white on Lillies stands,
Then any hands.
Then what is the worth, when any flower
Is worth far more?
How constant's that which needs must dye
When day does fly?
Glowworms, can lend some petty light,
To gloomy night.
And what is proportion? we discry
That in a fly;
And what is a lip? it is in the test
Red clay at best.
And what is an Eye? an Eglets are
More strong by far.
Who can that specious nothing heed,
Which flies exceed?
Who would his frequent kisses lay
On painted clay?
Wh'would not if eyes affection move
Young Egle^s love?
Is beauty thus? then who would lie
Lovesick and dye?
And's wretched self annihilate
For knows not what?
And with such sweat and care invade
A very shade?
Even he that knows not to possess
True happiness,
But has some strong desires to try
What Is misery,
And longs for tears, oh he will prove
One fit for love.
Farewell to Love.
Well-shadow'd Landship, fare-ye-well:
How I have loved you, none can tell,
At least so well
As he, that now hates more
Then e're he loved before.
But my dear nothings, take your leave,
No longer must you me deceive,
Since I perceive
All the deceit, and know
Whence the mistake did grow.
As he whose quicker eye does trace
A false star shot to a Market place,
Does run apace,
And thinking it to catch,
A Gelly up does snatch.
So our dull souls tasting delight
Far off, by sense, and appetite,
Think that is right
And real good; when yet
It Is but the counterfeit.
Oh! how I glory now; that I
Have made this new discovery?
Each wanton eye
Enflamed before: no more
Will I increase that score.
If I gaze, now, it is but to see
What manner of deaths-head 'twill be,
When it is free
From that fresh upper-skin,
The gazers joy and sin.
A quick Coarse methinks I spy
In every woman* and mine eye,
At passing by,
Check, and is troubled, just
As if it rose from Dust.
They mortify, not heighen me:
These of my sins the Glasses be:
And here I see,
How I have loved before,
And so I love no more.
To a proud Lady.
Is it birth puffs up thy mind?
Women best born are best inclined.
Is it thy breeding? No, I ly'de;
Women well bred are foes to pride.
Is it thy beauty, foolish thing?
Lay by thy cloths, there is no such thing?
Is it thy virtue? that is denied,
Virtue's an opposite to pride.
Nay, then walk on, I Will say no more,
Who made thee proud, can make thee poor.
The Devil only has the skill
To draw fair fools to this foul ill.
On Women.
Find me an end out in a Ring,
Turn a stream backwards to its spring,
Recover minutes past and gone,
Undo what is already done,
Make Heaven stand still, make mountains fly,
And teach a woman constancy.
An Apologetique Song.
Men, if you love us, play no more
The fools, or Tyrants, with your friends,
To make us still sing over and over,
Our own false praises, for your ends.
We have both wits and fancies too,
And if we must, let us sing of you.
Nor do we doubt, but that we can,
If we would search with care and pain,
Find some one good, in some one man;
So going thorough all your strain,
We shall at last of parcells make
One good enough for a Song sake.
And as a cunning Painter taken
In any curious piece you see,
More pleasure while the thing he makes,
Then when it is made; why, so will we.
And having pleased our art, we will try
To make a new, and hang that by
Canto.
Like to a Ring without a Finger,
Or a Bell without a Ringer;
Like a Horse was never ridden,
Or a Feast and no Guest bidden,
Like a Well without a Bucket,
Or a Rose if no man pluck it:
Just such as these may she be said,
That lives, not loves, but dies a maid.
The Ring if worn, the Finger decks,
The Bell pulled by the Ringer speaks,
The Horse does ease, if he be ridden,
The Feast does please, if Guest be bidden,
The Bucket draws the water^forth,
The Rose when plucked, is still most worth:
Such is the Virgin in my eyes,
That lives, loves, marries, ere she dies.
Like a Stock not graffed on,
Or like a Lute not played upon,
Like a Jack without a weight,
Or a Bark without a freight,
Like a Lock without a Key,
Or a Candle in the day:
Just such as these may she be said,
That lives, not loves, but dies a maid.
The graffed Stock does bear best fruit,
There Is Music in the fingered Lute,
The weight does make the Jack go ready,
The freight does make the Bark go steady,
The Key the Lock does open right,
A Candle's useful in the night:
Such is the Virgin in my eyes,
That lives, loves, marries, ere she dies.
Like a Call without a Non-sir,
Or a Question without an Answer,
Like a Ship was never rigged,
Or a Mine was never dug;
Like a Cage without a Bird,
Or a thing not long preferred.
Just such as these may she be said,
That lives, not loves, but dies a maid.
The Non-sir does obey the Call,
The Question Answered pleases all,
Who rigs a Ship sails with the wind,
Who digs a Mine does treasure find,
The Wound by wholesome Tent has ease,
The Box perfumed the senses please:
Such is the Virgin in my eyes,
That lives, loves, marries ere she dies.
Like Marrow-bone was never broken,
Or Commendation and no Token,
Like a Fort and none to win it,
Or like the Moon, and no man in it;
Like a School without a Teacher,
Or like a Pulpit and no Preacher.
Just such as these may she be said,
That lives, never loves, but dies a maid.
The broken Marrow-bone is sweet,
The Token does adorn the greet,
There Is triumph in the Fort being won,
The Man rides glorious in the Moon;
The School is by the Teacher stilled,
The Pulpit by the Preacher filled.
Such is the Virgin in mine eyes,
That lives, loves, marries, ere she dies.
Like a Cage without a Bird,
Or a thing too long deferred:
Like the Gold was never tried,
Or the ground unoccupi'd;
Like a house that is not possessed
Or the Book was never pressed.
Just such as these may she be said,
That lives, never loves, but dies a maid.
The Bird in Cage does sweetly sing,
Due season prefers every thing,
The Gold that is tried from dross is pur'd,
There Is profit in the Ground manured,
The House is by possession graced;
The Book when pressed, is then embraced.
Such is the Virgin in mine eyes,
That lives, loves, marries, ere she dies.
A Disswasive from Women.
Come away, do not pursue
A shadow that will follow you.
Women lighter then a feather,
Got and lost and altogethar:
Such a creature may be thought,
Void of reason, a thing of naught.
2.
Come away, let not thine eyes
Gaze upon their fopperies,
Nor thy better Genius dwell
Upon a subject known so well:
For whose folly at the first
Man and beast became accursed.
3.
Come away, thou can not find,
One of all that is fair and kind,
Brighter be she then the day,
Sweeter then a morn in May;
Yet her heart and tongue agrees
As we and the Antipodes.
4.
Come away, or if thou must
Stay a while: yet do not trust,
Nor her sighs, nor what she swears.
Say she weep, suspect her tears.
Though she seem to melt with passion,
It Is old deceit, but in new fashion.
5.
Come away, admit there be
A natural necessity;
Do not make thy self a slave
For that which she desires to have.
What she will, or do, or say,
Is meant the clean contrary way.
6.
Come away, or if to part
Soon from her, affects thy heart,
Follow on thy sports a while,
Laugh and kiss, and play a while:
Yet as thou love me, trust her not,
Left thou becom'st a -- I know not wh^^.
An Answer to it.
Stay, O stay, and still pursue,
Bid not such happiness adue,
Know thou what a woman is?
An Image of Celestial bliss.
Such a one is thought to be
The nearest to Divinity.
2.
Stay, O stay, how can thine eye
Feed on more felicity?
Or thy better Genius dwell
On subjects that do this excel?
Had it not been for her at first;
Man and beast had lived accursed.
3.
Stay, O stay, has not there been
O^ Beauty, and of Love a Queen?
Does not sweetness term a she
Worthy its only shrine to thee?
And where will virtue choose to ly,
If not in such a Treasury?
4.
Stay, O stay, would thou live free?
Then seek a Nuptial destiny:
It Is not natures bliss alone,
(She gives) but Heavens, and that in one;
What she shall, or do, or say,
Never from truth shall go astray.
5.
Stay, O stay, let not thine heart
Afflicted be, unless to part
Soon from her. Sport, kiss and play
Whilst no hours enrich the day:
And if thou do a Cuckold prove,
Impute it to thy want of love.
The Postscript.
Good Women are like Stars in darkest night,
Their virtuous actions shining as a light
To guide their ignorant sex, which often times ^all*
And falling often, turns Diabolical.
Good Women sure are Angels on the earth,
Of these good Angels we have had a dearth:
And therefore all you men that have good wives,
Respect their Virtues equal with your lives.
The Description of Women.
Whose head befringed with b^-scattered ^resse^*
Shew^ like Apoll^es, when the morn he dresse^:
Or like Aurora when with Pearl she sets,
Her long discheveld Rose-crown'd Trammelets:
Her forehead smooth, full, polished, bright and high,
Bears in it self a graceful Majesty;
Under the which, two crawling eyebrows twine
Like to the tendrills of a flattering Vine:
Under whose shade, two starry sparkling eyes
Are beautified with fair fringed Canopies.
Her comely nose with uniformall grace,
Like purest white, stands in the middle place,
Parting the pair, as we may well suppose,
Each cheek resembling still a damask Rose;
Which like a Garden manifestly shown,
How Roses, Lillies, and Carnations grown;
Which sweetly mixed both with white and red,
Like Rose-leaves, white and red, seem mingled.
Then nature for a sweet allurement sets
Two smelling, swelling, bashful Cherry-lets;
The which with Ruby-rednesse being tip'd,
Do speak a Virgin merry, Cherry^lip'd.
Over the which a (...) sweet skin is drawn,
Which makes them show like Roses under Lawne.
These be the Ruby-portalls and divine,
Which open themselves, to show an holy shrine,
Whose breach is rich perfume, that to the sense
Smells like the burned Sabean Frankincense;
In which the tongue, though (...) member sm^ll
Stand guarded with a Rosie-hilly-wall.
And her white teeth, which in the gums are set,
Like Pearl and Gold, make one rich Cabinet:
Next does her chin, with dimpled beauty (...)
For his white, plump, and smoth prerogative.
At whose fair top, to please the sight the^e grow^
The fairest image of a blushing rose;
Moved by the chin, whose motion causes this,
That both her lips do part, do meet, do (...)
Her ears, which like two Labyrinths are pla^^d
On either side, with which rare Jewels graced:
Moving a qu^st^on whether that by them
The Jem is graced, or they graced by the Jem.
But the foundation of the Architect,
Is the Swan-staining, fair, rare stately ^eck,
Which with ambitious humbleness stands under,
Bearing aloft this rich round world of wonder.
Her breast a place for beauties throne most fit,
Bears up two Globes, where love and pleasure sit;
Which headed with two rich round Rubies, show
Like wanton Rose-buds growing out of Snow,
And in the milky valley that is between,
Sits Cupid kissing of his mother Queen.
Then comes the belly, seated next below,
Like a fair mountain in Riphean snow:
Where Nature in a whiteness without spot,
Has in the middle tide a Gordian knot.
Now love invites me to survey her thighs,
Swelling in likeness like two Crystal (...);
Which to the knees by nature fastened on,
Derive their ever well 'greed motion.
Her legs with two clear Calves, like silver tried,
Kindly swell up with little pretty pride;
Leaving a distance for the comely small
To beautify the leg and foot withal.
Then lowly, yet most lovely stand the feet,
Round, short and clear, like pounded Spices sweet;
And whatsoever thing they tread upon,
They make it sent like bruised Cynamon.
The lovely shoulders now allure the eye,
To see two Tablets of pure Ivory:
From which two arms like branches seem to spread
With tender vein'd, and silver colored,
With little hands, and fingers long and small,
To grace a Lute, a Vial, Virginal.
In length each finger does his next excel,
Each richly headed with a pearly shell.
Thus every part in contrariety
Meet in the whole, and make an harmony:
As diverse strings do singly disagree,
But formed by number make sweet melody.
Her supposed servant, described.
I would have him if I could,
Noble; or of greater Blood:
Titles, I confess, do take me;
And a woman God did make me,
French to boo^, at least in fashion,
And his manners of that Nation.
Young I Would have him to, and fair,
Yet a man; with crisped hair
Cast in a thousand snares, and rings
For loves fingers, and his wings:
Chestnut color, or more slack
Gold, upon a ground of black.
Venus, and Minerva's eyes,
For he must look wanton-wise.
Eyebrows bent like Cupids bow,
Front, an ample field of snow;
Even nose, and cheek (withal)
Smooth as is the Biliard Ball;
Chin, as wholly as the Peach;
And his lip should kissing teach,
Till he cherished too much beard,
And make love or me afeard.
He should have a hand as soft
As the Down, and show it often;
Skin as smooth as any rush,
And so thin to see a blush
Rising through it e're it came;
All his blood should be a flame
Quickly fired as in beginners
In Loves School, and yet no sinners.
'Twere too long to speak of all
What we harmony do call
In a body should be there.
Well he should his clothes to wear;
Yet no Tailor help to make him
Dressed, you still for man should take him;
And not think he had eat a stake,
Or were set up in a brake.
Valiant he should be as fire,
Showing danger more then ire.
Bounteous as the clouds to earth;
And as honest as his birth.
All his actions to be such
As to do nothing too much.
Nor o're-praise, nor yet condemn;
Nor out-valew, nor contemn;
Nor do wrongs, nor wrongs receive;
Nor tie knots, nor knots unweave;
And from baseness to be free,
As he durst love truth and me.
Such a man with every part,
I could give my very heart;
But of one, if short he came,
I can rest me where I am.
Another Ladies exception.
For his mind, I do not care,
That Is a toy that I could spare;
Let his Title be but great,
His clothes rich, and band sit neat,
Himself young, and face be good,
All I wish it is understood.
What you please, you parts may call,
It Is one good part I Would lie withal.
Abroad with the Maids.
Come sit we under yonder Tree,
Where merry as the Maids we will be,
And as on Primroses we sit,
We Will venture (if we can) ^t wit:
If not, at Draw-gloves we will play;
So spend some Minutes of the day;
Or else spin out the thread of sands,
Playing at Questions and Commands:
Or tell what strange tricks love can do,
By quickly making one of two.
Thus we will sit and talk; but tell
No cruel truths of Philomell,
Or Phillis, whom hard Fate forced on,
To kill her self for Demophon.
But Fables we will relate; how Jove
Put on all shapes to get a Love;
As now a Satyr, then a Swan;
A Bull but then; and now a Man.
Next we will act how young men woe;
And sigh, and kiss, as Lovers do,
And talk of Brides; and who shall make
That wedding smock, this Bridal-Cake;
That dress, this sprig, that leaf, this vine;
That smooth and silken Columbine.
This done, we will draw lots, who shall buy
And guild the Bays, and Rosemary:
What Posies, for our wedding Rings;
What Gloves we will give and Ribonings:
And smiling at our selves, decree,
Who then the joining Priest shall be.
What short sweet Prayers shall be said;
And how the Posset shall be made
With Cream of Lillies (not of Kine)
And Maidens-blush, for spiced wine.
Thus having talked, we will next commend
A kiss to each; and so we will end.
The Shepherds Holy Day.
Mopso and Marina. Mop. Come Marina let us away,
For both Bride, and Bridegroom stay:
Fie for shame, are Swains so long
Pinning of their Head-gear on?
Prithee see,
None but we
Amongst the Swains are left unready:
Fie, make haft,
Bride is past,
Follow me, and I will lead thee.

Mar. On, my loving Mopsus, on,
I am ready, all is done
From my head unto my foot,
I am fitted each way to it;
Buskins gay,
Gown of gray,
Best that all our Flocks do render;
Hat of Straw,
Platted through,
Cherry lip, and middle slender.

Mop. And I think you will not find
Mopsus any whit behind,
For he loves as well to go,
As most part of Shepherds do.
Cap of brown.
Bottle-crowne,
With the leg I won at dancing,
And a pumpe,
Fit to jumpe,
When we Shepherds fall a prancing.
And I know there is a sort*
Will be well provided for
For I hear, there will be there,
Liveliest Swains within the shier^:
Jetting Gill,
Jumping Will;
O'r the floor will have their measure:
Kit and Kate
There will wait*
Tib and Tom will take their pleasure.

Mar. But I fear;

Mop. What do thou fear?


Mar. Crowd the Fiddler is not there:
And my mind delighted i^
With no stroke so much as hi^.

Mop. If not he;
There will be
Drone the Piper that will troun^e it.

Mar. But i^ Crowd
Struck alowd;
Lord methinks how I could bounce it.

Mop. Bounce it Mall I hope thou will,
For I know that thou have skill*
And I am sure, thou there shall find
Measures store to please thy mind.
Roundelayes.
Irish hayes,
Cog^ and Rongs, and Peggie Ramsy,
Spaniletto,
The Venetto,
John come kiss me, Wilsons fancy.

Mar. But of all there is none so sprightly
To my ear, as Touch me lightly;
For it is this we Shepherds love,
Being that which most does move;
There, there, there,
To a hair;
O Tim Crowd, me thinks I hear thee,
Young nor old,
Never could hold,
But must leak if they come near thee.

Mop. Blush Marina, fie for shame,
Blemish not a Shepherds name;

Mar. Mopsus, why, is it such a matter,
Maid^ to show their yielding nature?
O what then,
Be ye men,
That will hear your selves so forward,
When you find
Us inclined
To your bed and board so toward?

Mop. True indeed, the fault is ours,
Though we term it often time yours.

Mar. What would Shepherds have us do,
But to yield when they do woe?
And we yield
Them the field,
And endow them with their riches.

Mop. Yet we know
Often times too,
You Will not stick to wear the Breeches.

Mar. Fools they will deem them, that do hear them,
Say their wives are wont to wear them;
For I know, there is none has wit,
Can endure or suffer it;
But if they
Have no stay,
Nor discretion (as it is common)
Then they may^^
Give the sway*
As is fitting, to the Woman.

Mop. All too long (dear Love) I ween,
Have we stood upon this T^eam:
Let each Less, a^ once it was,
Love her Swain, and (...) his Less:
So shall we
Honored be,
In our mating, in our meeting,
While we stand
Hand in hand,
Honest Swainling, with his Sweeting.

Alvar and Anthea.
Come Anthea let us two
Go to Feast, as others do.
Tarts and Custards, Cream and Cakes,
Are the junkets still at Wakes:
Unto which the Tribes resort,
Where the business is the sport:
Morris-dancers thou shall see,
Marian too in Pagentrie:
And a Mimick to devise
Many grinning properties
Players there will be, and those
Base in action as in clothes*
Yet with strutting they will please
The incurious Villages.
Near the dying of the day
There will be a Cudgel-play,
Where a Coxcomb will be broke,
Ere a good word can be spoken*
But the anger ends all here*
Drencht in Ale, or drowned in Beer
Happy Rusticks, best content
With the cheapest Merriment:
And possess no other fear,
Then to want the Wake next year.
The Wake.
I, and whither shall we go^?
To the Wake I trow:
It Is the Village Lord Majors show,
Oh! to meet I will not fa^le;
For my palate is in have,
Till I sip again and taste
Of the Nut-browne Less and Ale.
Feel how my Temples ache
For the Lady of the Wake;
Her lips are as soft as a Medler
With her posies and her points,
And the Ribbons on her joints,
The device of the fields and the Peddler.
Enter Maurice-Dancer.

With a noise and a Din,
Comes the Maurice-Dancer in:
With a fine linen shirt, but a Buckram skin.
Oh! he treads out such a Peale
From his pair of legs of Veale,
The Quarters are Idols to him.
Nor do those Knaves inviron
Their Toes with so much iron,
'Twill ruin a Smith to shoe him.
I, and then he flings about,
His sweat and his clout,
The wiser think it two Else:
While the Yeomen find it meet,
That he jangle at his feet,
The Fore-horses right Ear Jewels.
Enter Fiddler.

But before all be done,
With a Christopher strong,
Comes Music none, though Fiddler one,
While the Owl and his Granchild,
With a face like a Manchild,
Amazed in their Nest,
Awake from the Rest,
And seek out an Oak to laugh in.
Such a dismal chance,
Makes the Churchyard dance,
When the Screech Owl guts string a Coffin.
When a Fiddlers coarse,
Catches cold and grows hoarse,
Oh ye never heard a sadder,
When a Rattle-headed Cutter,
Makes his will before Supper,
To the Tune of the Nooze and the Ladder.
Enter the Taberer.

I, but all will not do,
Without a pass or two,
From him that pipes and Tabers the Tattoo.
He Is a man that can tell 'em,
Such a Jigge from his vellam;
With his Whistle and his Club,
And his brac't half Tub,
That I think there never came before ye,
Though the Mothes lodged in it,
Or in Manuscript or print,
Such a pitiful parchment story.
He that hammers like a Tinker
Kettle Music is a stinker,
Our Taberer bids him hark it;
Though he thrash till he sweats,
And out the bottom beats
Of his two Dosser Drums to the Market
Enter the Bag-piper.

Bag-piper good luck on you,
Thou Art a Man for my money;
Him the Bears love better then honey.
How he tickles up his skill,
With his bladder and his quill;
How he swells till he blister.
While he gives his mouth a Glister,
Nor yet does his Physic grieve him;
His chops they would not tarry,
For a tried Apothecary,
But the Harper comes in to relie^e him.
Whose Music took its fountain,
From the Bogge or the Mountain,
For better was never afforded.
Strings hop and rebound,
Oh the very same sound
May be struck from a ^ru^kle-bed coarded.
Cock-throwing.
Cock-a-doodle-doe, it is the bravest game,
Take a Cock from his Dame,
And bind him to a st^k^*
How he strutt^ how he throws,
How he swaggers, how he crows,
As if the day newly brake.
How his Mistress Cackles,
Thus to find him in shackles,
And tied to a Pack-threed Garter;
Oh the Bears and the Bulls,
Are but Corpulent Gulls
To the valiant Shrove-tide Martyr.
Canto.
Let no Poet Critic in his Ale,
Now tax me for a heedlesse Tale,
For ere I have done, my honest Ned,
I Will (...) my matter to a head.
The Brazen Head speak^ through the Nose,
More Logic then the College knows:
Quicksilver Heads run over all,
But Dunces Heads keep Leaden-ball.
A Quirristers Head is made of air,
A Head of wax becomes a Player,
So pliant it is to any shape,
A King, a Clown, but still an Ape.
A melancholy head it was,
That thought it self a Venice glass;
But when I see a drunken sot,
Methinks his Head's a Chamberpot.
A Poets Head is made of Match,
Burnt Sack is apt to make it catch;
Well may he gri^^ his household bread,
That has a Windmill in his Head.
There is the tongue of ignorance,
That hates the time it cannot dance;
Show him dear wit in Verse or Prose,
It reeks like Brimstone in his nose;
But when his Granhams will is read,
O dear! (quoth he) and shakes his head.
French heads taught ours the graceful shake,
They learned it in the last Earthquake.
The gentle head makes mouths in state,
At the Mechanic beaver pate.
The empty head of mere Esquire,
Scorns wit; as born a title higher.
In Capite he holds his lands,
His wisdom in Fee-simple stands.
Which he may call for, and be sped,
Out of the Footmans running head.
The Saracens, not Gorgons head,
Can look old ten in th'hundred dead
But deaths head on his fingers ends,
Afflicts him more then twenty fiends
An Oxford Cook that is well read,
Knows how to dress a Critics head.
Take out the brains, and (...) the noats,
O rare Calves-head for (...) throats.
Prometheus would be puzzled,
To make a new Projectors head:
He has such subtle turns and nooks,
Such turn-pegs, mazes, tenter-hooks:
A trap-door here, and there a vault,
Should you go in, you would sure be caught;
This head, if ever the heads-man stick,
He Will spoil the subtle politic.
Six heads there are will never be seen,
The first a Maid past twice sixteen:
The next is of an Unicorne,
Which when I see, I Will trust his horn;
A Beggars in a beaver; and
A Giant in a Pigmies (...)*
A Coward in a Ladies lap,
A good man in a Friars cap.
The plural head of multitude,
Will make good hodg-podge when it is stude;
Now I have done my honest Ned,
And brought my matter to a Head.
Interrogativ^ Camilena.
If all the world were Paper,
And all the Sea were Ink;
If all the Trees were bread and cheese,
How should we do for drink?
If all the World were sand'o,
Oh then what should we lack'o;
If as they say there were no clay,
How should we take Tobacco?
If all our vessels ran'a,
If none but had a crack'a;
If Spanish Apes eat all the Grapes,
How should we do for Sack'a?
If Friars had no bald pate^*
Nor Nuns had no dark Cloisters,
If all the Seas were (...) and Pease,
How should we do for Oysters?
If there had been no projects,
Nor none that did great wrongs;
If Fiddlers shall turn Players all,
How should we do for songs?
If all things were eternal,
And nothing their end bringing;
If this should be, then how should we,
Here make an end of singing?
The seven Planets.

SATURN diseased with age, and left for dead;
Changed all his gold, to be in involved in Lead.
JOVE, Juno leaves, and loves to take his range;
From whom, man learns to love, and loves to change*
JUNO checks Jove, that he to earth should come
Having her self to sport withal at home.
MARS is disarmed, and is to Venus gone,
Where Vulcans Anvill must be struck upon.
(...) sees, yet 'cause he may not be allowed,
^o say he sees, he hides him in a cloud.
VENUS tells Vulcan, Mars shall shoe her Steed,
For he it is that hits the nail o'th head.
The Aery-nuntius sly MERCURIUS,
^s stolen from Heaven to Galobelgicus.
LVNA is deemed chaste, yet she'^ a sinner,
Witness the man that she receives within her:
But that she is horned it cannot well be sed,
Since I never heard that she was married.
The 12 Signs of the Zodiac.

Venus to Mars, and Mars to Venus came,
Venus contrived, and Mars confirmed the same:
(...) the place, the game what best did please,
(...) Vulcan* found the Sun in ARIES.

TAURUS, as it has been alleged by some,
^s fled from Neck and Throat to roar at Rome.
(...) now the Bull is grown to such a rate,
The price has brought the Bull quite out of date.

CANCER the backward Crab is figured here.
O'r stomach, breast, and ribs to domineere.
Eve on a rib was made, whence we may know,
Women from Eve were Crab'd and backward too*

VIRGO the Phoenix sign (as all can tell ye)
Has regiment o'r bowels, and o'r belly.
But now since Virgo could not her belly tame,
Belly has forced Virgo to lose her name.

SCORPIO Serpent-like, most slily tenders,
What much seduceth man, his privy members:
Which moved our Grandam Eve give ear unto
That secret-member-patron Scorpio.

The goatish CAPRICORN that used to press
Amongst naked Mermaidens, now is fallen on ^s (...)
Where crest-faln too (poor Snake) he lies as low
As those on whom he did his horns bestow.

With arm in arm our GEMINI enwreath,
Their individuate parts in life and death:
The arms and shoulders sway, O may I have
But two such friends to have me to my grave.

LEO a Port-like Prelate now become,
Emperiously retires to the Sea of Rome:
A Sea, and yet no Levant-sea, for than
He were no Leo, but Leviathan.

LIBRA the reins, which we may ^ustly call
A sign which Tradesmen hate the worst of all:
For she implies even weights, but do not look
To find this sign in every Grocers-book.

If thou would please the less that thou do marry,
The sign must ever be in SAGITTARY:
Which rules the thighs, an influence more common
Among Marmosites and Monkies, then some women.

AQUARIUS (as I informed am)
Kept Puddle-wharfe, and was a Waterman,
But being one too honest for that kind,
He rowed to Heaven, and left those knaves behind.

PISCIS the fish is said to rule the feet,
And socks with all that keep the feet from sweat*
One that purveyes provision enough,
Of Ling, Poore-Iohn, and other Lenten stuff.
A Hymn to Bacchus.
I sing thy praise Bacchus,
Who with thy Thyrse do thwack us:
And yet thou so do black us
With boldness that we fear
No Brutus entering here;
Nor Cato the severe.
What though the Lictors threat us,
We know they dare not beat us;
So long as thou do heat us.
When we thy Orgies sing,
Each Cobbler is a King;
Nor dreads he any thing.
And though he does not rave,
Yet he will the courage have
To call my Lord Major knave;
Besides too, in a brave.
Although he has no riches,
But walks with dangling breeches,
And skirts that want their stitches;
And shows his naked flitches;
Yet he will be thought or seen;
So good as George-a-Green;
And calls his Blouze, his Queen,
And speaks in a Language keen.
O Bacchus! let us be
From cares and troubles free;
And thou shall hear how we
Will Chant new Hymns to thee.
The Welshmans praise of Wales.
I's not come here to tauke of Prut,
From whence the Welse do^ take hur root;
Nor tell long Pedigree of Prince Camber,
Whose lineage would fill full a Chamber,
Nor sing the deeds of old Saint Davie,
The Ursip of which would fill a Navy.
But hark you me now, for a liddell tales
Sall make a gread deal to the creddit of Wales.
For her will tudge your ^ares,
With the praise of hur thirteen Seers;
And make you as clad and merry,
As fouteen pot of Perry.
It Is true, was wear him Sherkin freize,
But what is that? we have store of seize;
And Got is plenty of Coats milk
That sell him well will buy him silk
Enough, to make him fine to quarrel
At Herford Sizes in new apparel;
And get him as much green Melmet perhap,
Sall give it a face to his Momouth Cap.
But then the ore of Lemster;
Py Cot is uver a Sempster;
That when he is spun, or did
Yet match him with her third.
Aull this the backs now, let us tell ye,
Of some provisions for the belly:
As Cid and Goat, and great Goats Mother,
And Runt, and Cow, and good Cows uther.
And once but taste on the Welse Mutton;
Your Englis Seeps not worth a button.
And then for your Fisse, shall shoose it your disse,
Look but about, and there is a Trout.
A Salmon, Cor, or Chevin,
Will feed you six or seven,
As taul^ man as ever swagger
With Welse Club, and long Dagger.
But all this while, was never think
A word in praise of our Welse drink:
Yet for aull that, is a Cup of Bragat,
Aull England Seer may cast his Cap at.
And what you say to Ale of Webley,
Toudge him as well, you will praise him trebly,
As well as Metheglin, or Syder, or Mead,
S'all sake it your dagger quite out of the seath.
And Oat-Cake of Guarthenion,
With a goodly Leek or Onion,
To give as sweet a rellis
As ever did Harper Ellis.
And yet is nothing now all this,
(...) of our Musicks we do miss;
Both Harps, and Pipes too, and the Crowd,
Must aull come in, and tauk aloud,
As loud as Bang^^, Davies Bell,
Of which is no doubt you have here tell:
As well as our louder Wrexam Organ,
And rumbling Rocks in the Seer of Glamorgan,
Where look but in the ground there,
And you sall see a sound there;
That put her all to gedder,
Is sweet as measure pedder.
Hur in Love.
A modest Shentle when hur see
The great laugh hur made on me,
And fine wink that hur send
To hur come to see hur friend:
Her could not strose py Got apove,
Put was entangle in hur love.
A hundred a time hur was about
To speak to hur, and lave hur out,
Put hur being a Welshman porne,
And therefore was think, hur would hur scorn:
Was fear hur think, nothing petter,
Then cram hur love into a Letter;
Hoping he will no ceptions take
Unto her love, for Country sake:
For say hur be Welshman, whad ten?
Py Got they all be Shentlemen.
Was decend from Shoves nown line,
Par humane, and par divine;
And from Venus, that fair Goddess,
And twenty other Shentle poddy^:
Hector stout, and comely Parris,
Arthur, Prute, and King of Fayris,
Was hur nown Cosins all a kin
We have the Powells issue in:
And for ought that hur con see,
As goot men, as other men pee:
But whot of that? Love is a knave,
Was make hur do whot he would have;
Was compel hur write the Rhyme,
That never was writ before the time
And if he will nod pity hur pain,
As Got shudge hur soul, sall never write again:
For love is like an Ague-fit,
Was brin poor Welseman out on hur wit:
Till by hur onswer, hur do know
Whother hur do love hur, ai or no.
Hur has not bin in England lung,
And conna speak the Englis tongue:
Put hur is hur friend, and so hur will prove,
Pray a send hur word, if hur con love.
Of Melancholy.
When I go musing all alone,
Thinking of diverse things fore-knowne,
When I build Castles in the air,
Vold of sorrow and void of fear,
Pleasing my self with phantasmes sweet,
Me thinks the time runs very fleet.
All my joys to this are folly,
Naught so sweet as melancholy.
When I lie waking all alone,
Recounting what I have ill done,
My thoughts on me then tyrannise,
Fear and sorrow me surprise,
Whether I tarry still or go,
Me thinks the time moves very sloe.
All my griefs to this are jolly,
Naught so sad as melancholy.
When to my self I act and smile,
With pleasing thoughts the time beguile,
By a brook side or wood so green,
Unheard, unsought for, or unseen,
A thousand pleasures do me bless,
And crown my soul with happiness.
All my joys besides are folly,
None so sweet as melancholy.
When I lie, sit, or walk alone,
I sigh, I grieve, making great moan,
In a dark grove, or irksome den,
With discontents and Furies then,
A thousand miseries at once,
Mine heavy heart and soul ensconce.
All my griefs to this are jolly,
None so sour as melancholy.
Me thinks I hear, me thinks I see,
Sweet Music, wondrous melody,
Towns, places and Cities fine,
Here now, then there, the world is mine,
Rare Beauties, gallant Ladies shine,
What e're is lovely or divine,
All other joys to this are folly,
None so sweet as melancholy.
Me thinks I hear, me thinks I see
Ghosts, goblins, feinds, my fantasy
Presents a thousand ugly shapes,
Headless bears, black-men and apes,
Doleful outcries, and fearful sights,
My sad and dismal soul affrights.
All my griefs to this are jolly,
None so damned as melancholy.
Me thinks I court, me thinks I kiss,
Me thinks I now embrace my Mistrisse.
O blessed days, O sweet content,
In Paradise my time is spent,
Such thoughts may still my fancy move,
So may I ever be in love.
All my joys to this are folly,
Naught so sweet as Melancholy.
When I recount loves many frights,
My sighs and tears, my waking nights,
My jealous fits; O mine hard fate,
I now repent, but it is too late.
No torment is so bad as love,
So bitter to my soul can prove.
All my griefs to this are jolly,
Naught so harsh as Melancholy.
Friends and Companions get you gone,
It Is my desire to be alone,
Never well but when my thoughts and I,
Do domineer in privacy.
No Jem no treasure like to this,
It Is my delight, my Crown, my bliss.
All my joys to this are folly,
Naught so sweet as Melancholy.
It Is my sole plague to be alone,
I am a beast, a monster grown,
I will no light nor company,
I find it now my misery.
The scene is turned, my joys are gone,
Fear, discontent, and sorrows come.
All my griefs to this are jolly,
Naught so fierce as Melancholy.
I Will not change life with any King,
I ravished am: can the world bring
More joy, then still to laugh and smile,
In pleasant toys time to beguile?
Do not, O do not trouble me,
So sweet content I feel and see.
All my joys to this are folly,
None so divine as Melancholy.
I Will change my state with any wretch,
Thou can from jail or dunghill fetch:
My pain's past cure, another Hell,
I may not in this torment dwell.
Now desperate I hate my life,
Lend me an halter or a knife.
All my griefs to this are jolly,
Naught so damned as Melancholy.
On the Letter O.
Run round my lines, whilst I as roundly show
The birth, the worth, the extent of my round O
That O which in the indigested Mass
Did frame it self, when nothing framed was.
But when the worlds great mass it self did show,
(...) largeness, fairness, roundnesse a great O.
The Heavens, the Element, a box of O's,
Where still the greater does the less enclose.
The imaginary center in O's made,
That speck which in the world does stand or fade.
The Zodiac, Colors, and Equator line,
In Tropique and Meridian O did shine,
The lines of breadth, and lines of longitude,
Climate from Climate, does by O seclude.
And in the starry spangled sky the O
Makes us the day from night distinctly know.
And by his motion, round as in a ring,
Light to himself, light to each O does bring;
In each days journey, in his circle round,
The framing of an O by sense is found.
The Moon has to the O's frame most affection:
But the Suns envy grudgeth such perfection.
Yet Dian has each month, and every year,
Learned an O's frame in her front to bear.
And to requite Sols envy with the like,
With often Eclipses at his O does strike
In our inferior bodies there does grow
Matter enough to show the worth of O.
Our brains and heart, either in O does lie,
So that the nest of O's the sparkling eye.
The ribs in meeting, fashion an O's frame,
The mouth and ear, the nostrills bear the same.
The Latins honoring the chiefest parts,
Gloryed to make our O the heart of hearts;
Fronting it with three words of deepest sense,
Order, Opinion, and Obedience.
Often have I seen a reverend dimmed eye,
By the help of O to read most legibly.
Each drop of rain that falls, each flower that grows
Each coin that is current does resemble O's.
Into the water, if a stone we throw,
Mark how each circle joins to make an O.
Cut but an Orange, you shall easily find,
Yellow with white and watery O's combined.
O does preserve a trembling Conjurer,
Who from his Circle O does never stir.
O from a full throat Crier, if it come,
Strikes the tumultuous roaring people dumb.
The thundering Cannon from this dreadful O,
Ruin to walls, and death to men does throw.
O utters woes, O does express our joys,
O wonders shows, O riches, or O toys.
And O ye women which do fashions fall,
O ^^tre, O gorget, and O farthingall,
And O ye spangles, O ye golden O's
That art upon the rich embroydered throws
Think not we mock, though our displeasing pen
Sometime does write, you bring an O to men,
It Is no disparagement to you ye know,
Since Ops the Gods great Grandame bears an O;
Your sexes glory (Fortune) though she reele,
Is ever constant to her O, her wheel,
And you Carroches through the street that glide,
By art of four great O's do help you ride.
When tables full, and cups do overflow,
Is not each cup, each salt, each dish an O?
What is it that dreadful makes a Princes frown,
But that his head bears golden O the Crown?
Unhappy then th'Arithmatician, and
He that makes O a barren Cipher stand.
Let him know this, that we know in his place,
An O adds number, with a figures grace;
And that O which for Cipher he does take,
One dash may easily a thousand make.
But O enough, I have done my reader wrong,
Mine O was round, and I have made it long.
Pure Nonsense.
When Neptune's blasts, and Boreas blazing storms,
When Tritons pitchfork cut off Vulcans horns,
When Eolus boyst'rous Sunbeams grew so dark,
That Mars in Moonshine could not hit the mark:
Then did I see the gloomy day of Troy,
When poor Aeneas leglesse ran away,
Who took the torrid Ocean in his hand,
And sailed to them all the way by land:
An horrid sight to see Achilles fall,
He brake his neck, yet had no hurt at all.
But being dead, and almost in a trance,
He threatened forty thousand with his lance.
Indeed 'twas like such strange ^ights then were seen
An ugly, rough, black Monster all in green.
That all about the white, blew, round, square, sky;
The fixed Stars hung by Geometry.
Juno amazed, and Jove surpised with wonder,
Caused Heaven to shake, and made the mountains thunder.
Which caused Aeneas once again retire,
Drowned Aetna's hill, and burnt the Sea with fire.
Nilus for fear to see the Ocean burn,
Went still on forward in a quick return.
Then was that broyle of Agamemnon's done,
When trembling Ajax to the battle come.
He struck stark dead (they now are living still)
Five hundred mushrooms with his martial bill.
Nor had himself escaped, as some men say,
If he being dead, he had not run away.
O monstrous, hideous Troops of Dromidaries,
How Bears and Bulls from Monks and Goblins varies!
Nay would not Charon yield to Cerberus,
But caught the Dog, and cut his head off thus:
Pluto raged, and Juno pleased with ire,
Sought all about, but could not find the fire:
But being found, well pleased, and in a spite
They slept at Acharon, and wak^ all night:
Where I let pass to tell their mad bravadoes,
Their meat was tosted cheese and carbonadoes.
Thousands of Monsters more besides there be
Which I fast hoodwinked, at that time did see;
And in a word to shut up this discourse,
A Rudg-gowns ribs are good to spur a horse.
A mess of Nonsense.
Like to the tone of unspoke speeches,
Or like a Lobster clad in logic breeches,
Or like the gray freeze of a crimson cat,
Or like a Moon-calfe in a slipshooe-hat,
Or like a shadow when the Sun is gone,
Or like a thought that never was thought upon:
Even such is man, who never was begotten,
Until his children were both dead and rotten.
Like to the fiery touchstone of a Cabbage,
Or like a Crablouse with his bag and baggage,
Or like th'abortive issue of a Fizle,
Or the bag-pudding of a Plow-mans whistle,
Or like the foursquare circle of a ring,
Or like the singing of Hey down a ding;
Even such is man, who breathles, without doubt,
Spoke to small purpose when his tongue was out.
Like to the green fresh fading Rose,
Or like to Rhyme or Verse that runs in prose,
Or like the Humbles of a Tinder-box,
Or like a man that is sound, yet has the Pox,
Or like a Hob-naile coined in single pence,
Or like the present preterperfect tense:
Even such is man who died, and then did laugh
To see such strong lines writ on's Epitaph.
An Encomium.
I sing the praises of a Fart;
That I may do it by rules of Art,
I will invoke no Deity
But buttered Pease and Furmity,
And think their help sufficient
To fit and furnish my intent.
For sure I must not use high strains,
For fear it bluster out in grains:
When Virgils Gnat, and Ovids Flea,
And Homers Frogs strive for the day
There is no reason in my mind,
That a brave Fart should come behind;
Since that you may it parallel
With any thing that does excel:
Music is but a Fart that is sent
From the guts of an Instrument:
The Scholar but farts, when he gains
Learning with cracking of his brains.
And when he has spent much pain and oil,
Thomas and Dun to reconcile;
And to learn the abstracting Art,
What does he get by'^? not a fart.
The Soldier makes his foes to run
With but the farting of a Gun;
That Is if he make the bullet whistle,
Else it is no better then a Fizle:
And if withal the wind do stir up
Rain, it is but a Fart in Syrrup.
They are but Farts, the words we say,
Words are but wind, and so are they.
Applause is but a Fart, the crude
Blast of the fickle multitude.
Five boats that lie the Thames about,
Be but farts several Docks let out.
Some of our projects were, I think,
But politic farts, foh how they stink!
As soon as born, they by and by,
Fart-like but only breath, and die.
Farts are as good as Land, for both
We hold in tail, and let them both:
Only the difference here is, that
Farts are let at a lower rate.
I Will no say more, for this is right,
That for my Guts I cannot write,
Though I should study all my days,
Rimes that are worth the thing I praise.
What I have said, take in good part,
If not, I do not care a fart.
The Drunken Humors.

One here is bent to quarrel, and he will
(If not prevented) this his fellow kill:
He fume^, and frets, and rages; in whose face
Nothing but death and horror takes place.
But being parted, 'tother odd jugg, or two,
Makes them all friends again with small ado^.
Another he makes deaf your ears to hear
The vain tautologies he does declare;
That, had you as many ear^ as Argus eyes;
He Would make them weary all with tales, and lies:
And at the period of each idle fable,
He gives the onset to out-laugh the Table.
One he fits drinking health to such a friend,
Then to his Mistress he a health does send:
This public Captain^ health he next does mean,
And then in private to some nasty Que^n;
Nothing but health^ of love is his pretense,
Till he himself has lost both health and sense.
To make the number up amongst the crew,
Another being o're-fil'd, begins to spue
Worse then the brutish beast; (O fie upon it!)
It is a qualme forsooth does cause him vomit.
So that his stomach being over-prest,
He must disgorge it, over he can have rest.
Here sits one straining of his drunken throat
Beyond all reason, yet far short of note:
Singing is his delight, then hoops and hallows,
Making a Garboyle worse then Vulcans bellows.
Now for a Coun^er-tenor he takes place,
But straining that too high, fall^ to a base.
Then screws his mouth an inch beyond his form,
To treble it, just like a Gelders-horne:
He Is all for singing, and he hates to chide,
Till blithfull Bacchus cause his tongue be tide.
One like an Ape shows many tricks and toys,
To leap, and dance, and sing with ru^full noise;
Over the foorme skips, then crosse-legd sits
Upon the Table, in his apish fits.
From house to house he rambles in such sort,
That no Baboon could make you better sport:
He pincheth one, another with his wand
He thrusts, or strikes, or else with his hand:
P^ss^s the room, and as he sleeping lies,
Waters his Couch (not with repenting eyes.)
A seventh, he sits mute, as if his tongue
Had never learned no other word but mum;
And with his mouth he makes mops and mews,
Just like an Ape his face in form he screws:
Then nods with hum, and hah; but not one word
His tongue-tide foolish silence can afford.
To note his gesture, and his snorting after,
'Twould make a Horse break all his girts with laughter
But questionless he would speak more were he able,
Which you shall hear, having well slept at table.
Sir reverence, your stomachs do prepare
Against some word, or deed, ill-sent does bear.
So this most sorded beast being drunk, does miss
The Chamber Pot, and in his hose does piss.
Nay, smell but near him, you perhaps may find,
Not only pissed before, but -- behind;
Each company loathes him, holding of their nose,
Scorning, and pointing at his filthy hose:
As no condition of a Drunkard's good,
So this smells worst of all the loathsome brood.
The Post of the Sign.
Though it may seem rude
For me to intrude,
With these my Bears by chance-a;
'Twere sport for a King,
If they could sing
As well as they can dance-a.
Then to put you out
Of fear or doubt,
He came from St. Katharine-a.
These dancing three,
By the help of me,
Who am the post of the Signe-a.
We sell good ware,
And we need not care,
Though Court and Country knew it;
Our Ale's o'th best:
And each good guest
Prays for their souls that brew it.
For any Alehouse,
We care not a Louse,
Nor Tavern in all the Town-a;
Nor the Vintry Cranes,
Nor St. Clement Dones,
Nor the Devil can put us down-a.
Who has once there been,
Comes hither again,
The liquor is so mighty.
Beer strong and stale,
And so is our Ale;
And it burns like Aqu^-vitae.
To a stranger there,
If any appear,
Where never before he has bin;
We show th'Iron gate,
The wheel of St. Kate,
And the place where they first fell in.
The wives of Wapping,
They trudge to our tapping,
And still our Ale desire;
And there sit and drink,
Till they spue and stink,
And often piss out the fire.
From morning to night,
And about to daylight,
They sit and never grudge it;
Till the Fish-wives join
Their single coin,
And the Tinker pawns his budget.
If their brains be not well,
Or bladders do swell,
To ease them of their burden;
My Lady will come
With a bowl and a broom,
And their handmaid with a Jourden.
From Court we invite,
Lord, Lady, and Knight,
Squire, Gentleman, Yeoman, and Groom,
And all our stiff drinkers,
Smiths, Porters, and Tinkers,
And the Beggars shall give ye room.
If you give not credit,
Then take you the verdict,
Or a guest that came from St. H^llow^;
And you then will swear,
The Man has been there,
By his story now that follows.
A Ballade.
A Discourse between two Contrymen.
I Tell thee Dick where I have been,
Where I the rarest things have seen;
Oh things beyond compare!
Such sights again cannot be found
In any place on English ground,
Be it at Wake or Fair.
At Charing-Crosse, hard by the way
Where we (thou know) do sell our H^y,
There is a House with stair^;
And there did I see coming down
Such volk as are not in our Town,
Vortie at l^ast in pairs.
Amongst the rest, on p^st'lent fine,
(His beard no bigger though then thine)
Walked on before the rest:
Our Landlord looks like nothing to him:
The King (God bless him) 'twould undo him
Should he go still to dressed.
At Course-a-Park, without all doubt,
He should have first been taken out
By all the maid^ (...) Town:
Though Iusty Roger there had been,
Or little George upon the Green,
Or Vincent of the Crown.
But wot you what? the youth was going
To make an end of all his wooing;
The Parson for him stand:
Yet by his leave (for all his ha^t)
He did not so much wish all past
(Perchance) as did the Maid.
The Maid (and thereby hangs a tale)
For such a Maid no Widson-Ale
Could ever yet produce:
No grape that is kindly ripe, could be
So round, so plump, so soft as she,
Nor half so full of juice.
Her finger was so small, the Ring
Would not stay on which he did bring,
It was too wide a peck:
And to say truth (for out it must)
It looked like the great Collar (just)
About our young Colts neck.
Her feet beneath her peticoat,
Like little mice stole in and out,
As if they feared the light:
But Dick she dances such a way I
No Sun upon an Easter day
Is half so fine a sight.
He would have kissed her once or twice,
But she would not, she was so nice
She would not do'^ ^n sight,
And then she looked as who would say
I will do what I list to day;
And you shall do it at night.
Her cheeks so rare a white was on,
No D^zy make comparison
(Who sees them is undone)
For streaks of red were mingled there,
Such as are on a Katherine Pear,
The side that is next the Sun.)
Her lips were red, and one was thin
Compared to Heat was next her chin;
(Some Be had stung it newly)
But ( Dick) her eyes so guard her face,
I durst no more upon them gaze,
Then on the Sun in July.
Her mouth so small when she does speak,
Thou Would swear her teeth her words did break,
That they might passage get,
But she so handled still the matter,
They came as good as ours, or better,
And are not spent (...) whit.
If wishing should be any sin
The Parson himself had guilty bin,
(She looked that day so purely)
And did the youth so often the feat
At night, as some did in conceit,
It would have spoiled him surely.
Passion oh me! how I run on!
There Is that that would be thought upon,
(I trow) besides the Bride.
The business of the Kitchin's great,
For it is fit that men should eat;
Nor was it there denied.
Just in the nick the Cook knocked thrice,
And all the Waiters in a trice
His summons did obey,
Each Serving-man with dish in hand,
Marched boldly up like our Trained band,
Presented and away.
When all the mea^ was on the Table,
What man of knife, or teeth, was able
To stay to be entreated?
And this the very reason was
Before the Parson could say Grace,
The company was seated.
Now hats fly off, and youths carrouse;
Healths first go round, and then the house,
The Brides came thick and thick;
And when 'twas named another health,
Perhaps he made it here by stealth;
(And who could help it Dick?)
O'th sudain up they rise and dance;
Then sit again, and sigh, and glance:
Then dance again and kiss:
Thus several ways the time did pass,
Whilst every woman wished her place,
And every man wished his.
By this time all were stolen aside,
To council and undresse the Bride;
But that he must not know:
But 'twas thought he ghest her mind,
And did not mean to stay behind
Above an hour or so.
When in he came ( Dick) there she lay
Like new-faln snow melting away,
('It Was time I trow to part)
Kisses were now the only stay,
Which soon she gave, as who would say,
God B'w'y'! with all my heart.
But just as Heavens would have to cross it,
In came the Bride-maids with the Posset:
The Bridegroom eat in spite;
For had he le^^ the women to it
It would have cost two hours to do it,
Which were too much that night.
At length the Candle's out, and now,
All that they had not done, they do:
What that i^, who can tell?
But I believe it was no more
Then thou and I have done before
With Bridget, and with Nell.
The Good Fellow.
When shall we meet again to have a taste
Of that transcendent Ale we drank of last?
What wild ingredient did the woman chose
To make her drink withal? it made me lose
My wit, before I quenched my thirst; there came
Such whimsies in my brain, and such a flame
Of fiery drunkenness had singed my nose,
My beard shrunk in for fear; there were of those
That took me for a Comet, some afar
Distant remote, thought me a blazing star;
The earth me thought, just as it was, it went
Round in a wheeling course of merriment.
My head was ever drooping, and my nose
Offering to be a suitor to my toes.
My pock-hole face, they say, appeared to some,
Just like a dry and burning Honeycomb:
My tongue did swim in Ale, and joy'd to boast
It self a greater Seaman then the toast.
My mouth was grown awry, as if it were
Laboring to reach the whisper in mine ear.
My guts were mines of sulphur, and my se^
Of parched teeth, struck fire as they met.
Nay, when I pist, my Urine was so hot,
It burnt a hole quite through the Chamber Pot:
Each Brewer that I met, I kissed, and made
Suit to be bound appren^i^e to the Trade:
One did approve the motion, when he saw,
That my own legs could my Indentures draw.
Well Sir, I grew stark mad, as you may see
By this adventure upon Poetry.
You easily may guess, I am not quite
Grown sober yet, by these weak lines I write:
Only I do it for this, to let you see,
Whos'ere paid for the Ale, I Am sur't paid me.
Canto, In the praise of Sack.
Listen all I pray,
To the words I have to say,
In memory sure insert um:
Rich Wines do us raise
To the honor of Bays,
Quem non fecere disertum?
Of all the juice,
Which the Gods produce,
Sack shall be preferred before them;
It Is Sack that shall
Create us all,
Mars, Bacchus, Apollo, virorum.
We abandon all Ale,
And Beer that is stale,
Rosa-solis, and damnable hum:
But we will rack
In the praise of Sack,
Against Omne quod exit in um.
This is the wine,
Which in former time,
Each wise one of the Magi
Was wont to carouse
In a frolic blouse.
Recubans sub tegmine fagi.
Let the hop be their bane,
And a rope be their shame
Let the gout and colic pin (...)
That offer to shrink,
In taking their drink,
Seu Graecum, sive Latinum.
Let the glass go round,
Let the quart-pot sound,
Let each one do as he is done do:
Avaunt ye that hug
The abominable Jugge,
Amongst us Heteroclita sunto.
There Is no such disease,
As he that does please
His palate with Beer for to shame us:
It Is Sack makes us sing,
Hey down a down ding,
Musa paulo majora canamus.
He is either mute,
Or does poorly dispute,
That drinks ought else but wine O,
The more wine a man drinks,
Like a subtle Sphinx
Tantum valet ille loquendo.
It Is true, our souls,
By the lousy bowls
Of Beer that does naught but swill us,
Do go into swine,
( Pythagoras it is thine)
Nam vos mutastis and illos.
When I Have Sack in my brain,
I Am in a merry vain,
And this to me a bliss is:
Him that is wise,
I can justly despise:
Mecum confertur Ulysses?
How it chears the brains,
How it warms the vains,
How against all crosses it arms us!
How it makes him that is poor,
Courageously roar,
Et mutatas dicere formas.
Give me the boy,
My delight and my joy,
To my tantum that drinks his tale:
By Sack he that waxes
In our Syntaxes.
Est verbum personale.
Art thou weak or lame,
Or thy wits to blame?
Call for Sack, and thou shall have it,
'Twill make thee rise,
And be very wise,
Cui vim natura negavit.
We have frolic rounds,
We have merry go downs,
Yet nothing (...) done at random,
For when we are to pay,
We club and away,
Id est commune notandum.
The blades that want cash,
Have credit for crash,
They Will have Sack whatever it cost um,
They do not pay,
Till another day,
Manet alta mente repostum.
Who never fails to drink,
All clear from the brink,
With a smooth and even swallow,
I Will offer at his shrine,
And call it divine
Et erit mihi magnus Apollo.
He that drinks still,
And never has his fill,
Has a passage like a Conduit,
The Sack does inspire,
In rapture and fire,
Sic ether aethera fundit.
When you merrily quaffe,
If any do off,
And then from you needs will pass the,
Give their nose a twitch,
And kick them in the britch,
Non componuntur ab ass.
I have told you plain,
And tell you again,
Be he furious as Orlando,
He is an ass,
That from hence does pass,
Nisi bibit ad ostia stando.
The virtue of Sack.
Fetch me Ben Iohnsons scull, and fill't with Sack,
Rich as the same he drank, when the whole pack
Of jolly sisters pledged, and did agree,
It was no sin to be as drunk as he:
If there be any weakness in the wine,
There Is virtue in the Cup to mak't divine;
This muddy drench of Ale does taste too much
Of earth, the Malt retains a scurvy touch
Of the dull hand that sows it; and I fear
There Is heresy in hops; give Block-heads beer,
And silly Ignoramu^, such as think
There Is Powder Treason in all Spanish drink,
Call Sack an Idol; we will kiss the Cup,
For fear the Conventickle be blown up
With superstition; away with Brew House alm^,
Whose best mirth is six shillings Beer, and qualms.
Let me rejoice in sprightly Sack, that can
Create a brain even in an empty pan.
Canary! it is thou that do inspire
And actuate the soul with heavenly fire.
Thou that sublim'st the Genius-making wit,
Scorn earth, and such as love, or live by it.
Thou make us Lords of Regions large and fair,
Whilst our conceits build Castles in the air:
Since fire, earth, air, thus thy inferiour^ be,
Henceforth I Will know no element but thee:
Thou precious Elixar of all Grapes,
Welcome by thee our Muse begins her scapes,
Such is the worth of Sack; I am (me thinks)
In the Exchequer now, hark how it chinks,
And do esteem my venerable self
As brave a fellow, as if all the pelf
Were sure mine own; and I have thought a way
Already how to spend it; I would pay
No debts, but fairly empty every trunk;
And change the gold for Sack to keep me drunk;
And so by consequence till rich Spaines wine
Being in my crown, the Indie^ too were mine:
And when my brains are once afoot (heaven bless us!)
I think my self a better man then Croesus.
And now I do conceit my self a Judge*
And coughing laugh to see my Clients trudge
After my Lordships Coach unto the Hall
For Justice, and am full of Law withal,
And do become the Bench as well as he
That fled long since for want of honesty:
But I Will be judge no longer, though in jest,
For fear I should be talked with like the rest,
When I am sober; who can choose but think
Me wise, that am so wary in my drink?
Oh admirable Sack! here is dainty sport,
I am come back from Westminster to Court;
And am grown young again; my Ptisick now
Has left me, and my Judge^ graver brow
Is smoothed; and I turned amorous as May,
When she invites young lovers forth to play
Upon her flowery bosom: I could win
A Vestall now, or tempt a Queen to sin.
Oh for a score of Queens! you would laugh to see,
How they would strive which first should ravish me:
Three Goddesses were nothing: Sack has ^ipt
My tongue with charms like those which Paris sipt
From Venus, when she taught him how to kiss
Fair Helen, and invite a fairer bliss:
Mine is Canary-Rhetorick, that alone
Would turn Diana to a burning stone,
Stone with amazement, burning with loves fire;
Hard to the touch, but short in her desire.
Inestimable Sack! thou make us rich,
Wise, amorous, any thing; I have an itch
To the other cup, and that perchance will make
Me valiant too, and quarrel for thy sake.
If I be once inflamed against thy foe^
That would preach down thy worth in smal-beer prose,
I shall do miracles as bad, or worse,
As he that gave the King an hundred Horse:
The Other odd Cup, and I shall be prepared
To snatch at Stars, and pluck down a reward
With mine own hands from Jove upon their backs
That are, or Charles his enemies, or Sacks:
Let it be full, if I do chance to spill
Over my Standish by the way, I will
Dipping in this diviner Ink, my pen,
Write my self sober, and fall to it again.
The Answer of Ale to the Challenge of Sack.
COme, all you brave wights,
That are dubbed Ale-knights
Now set out your selves in sight:
And let them that crack
In the praises of Sack,
Know Malt is of mickle might.
Though Sack they define
To holy divine,
Yet it is but natural liquor:
Ale has for its part
An addition of art,
To make it drink thinner or thicker.
Sacks fiery sum
Does wast and consume
Men's humidum radicale;
It scaldeth their livers,
It breeds burning fevers,
Proves vinum venenum reale.
But History gathers,
From aged forefathers,
That Ale's the true liquor of life:
Men lived long in health,
And preserved their wealth,
Whilst Barley-broth only was rife.
Sack quickly ascends,
And suddenly ends
What company came for at first:
And that which yet worse is,
It empties men's purses
Before it half quenches their thirst.
Ale is not so costly,
Although that the most lie
Too long by the Oil of Barley,
Yet may they part late
At a reasonable rate,
Though they came in the morning early.
Sack makes men from words
Fall to drawing of swords,
And quarrelling ends their quaffing;
Whilst dagger-ale barrels
Bear off many quarrels,
And often turn chiding to laughing.
Sack's drink for our Masters:
A^l may be Ale-tasters*
Good things the more common the better.
Sack's but single broth:
Ale's meat, drink, and cloth,
Say they that know never a letter.
But not to entangle
Old friends till they wrangle,
And quarrel for other men's pleasure;
Let Ale keep his place,
And let Sack have his grace,
So that neither exceed the due measure.
The Triumph of Tobacco over Sack and Ale.
NAy, soft, by your leaves,
Tobacco bereaves
You both of the Garland: forbear it:
You are two to one,
Yet Tobacco alone
Is like both to win it, and wear it.
Though many men crack,
Some of Ale, some of Sack,
And think they have reason to do it;
Tobacco has more,
That will never give over
The honor they do unto it.
Tobacco engages
Both sexes, all ages,
The poor as well as the wealthy,
From the Court to the Cottage,
From childhood to dotage,
Both those that are sick and the healthy.
It plainly appears
That in a few years
Tobacco more custom has gained,
Then Sack, or then Ale,
Though the double the tale
Of the times, wherein they have reigned.
And worthily too,
For what they undo
Tobacco does help to regaine,
On ^airer conditions,
Then many Physicians,
Puts an end to much grief and pain.
It helps digestion,
Of that there is no question,
The gout, and the toothach, it eases:
Be it early, or late,
It Is never out of date,
He may safely take it that pleases.
Tobacco prevents
Infection by sents,
That hurt the brain, and are heady,
An Antidote is,
Before you're amiss,
As well as an after remedy.
The cold it does heat,
Cools them that do sweat,
And them that are fat makes lean:
The hungry does feed,
And, if there be need,
Spent spirits restores again.
Tobacco infused
May safely be used
For purging, and killing of lice:
Not so much as the ashes
But heals cuts and slashes,
And that out of hand, in a trice.
The Poets of old,
Many fables have told,
Of the Gods and their Symposia:
But Tobacco alone,
Had they known it, had gone
For their Nectar and Ambrosia.
It is not the smack
Of Ale, or of Sack,
That can with Tobacco compare:
For taste, and for smell,
It bears away the bell
From them both where ever they are.
For all their bravado,
It is Trinidado
That both their noses will wipe
Of the praises they desire,
Unless they conspire
To sing to the tune of his pipe.
Turpe est difficiles habere nug^s.
A Farewell to Sack.
FArewell thou thing, time past so true and dear
To me, as blood to life, and spirit, and near,
Nay thou more near then kindred, friend, or wife,
Male to the female, soul to the body, life
To quick action, or the warm soft side
Of the yet chaste, and undefiled Bride.
These and a thousand more could never be
More near, more dear, then thou were once to me.
It Is thou above, that with thy mystic fallen
Work'st more then Wisdom, Art, or Nature can;
To raise the holy madness, and awake
The frost bound-blood and spirits, and to make
Them frantic with thy raptures, stretching through
The soul^ like lightning, and as active too.
But why, why do I longer gaze upon
Thee, with the eye of admiration,
When I must leave thee, and enforced must say,
To all thy witching beauties, Go away?
And if thy whimpring looks do ask me, why?
Know then, it is Nature bids thee hence, not I;
It Is her erroneous self has formed my brain,
Incapable of such a Soverain,
As is thy powerful self; I prithee draw in
Thy gazing fires, lest at their sight the sin
Of fierce Idolatry shoot into me, and
I turn Apostate to the strict command
Of Nature; bid me now farewell, or smile
More ugly, lest thy tempting looks beguile
My vows pronounced in zeal, (...) thus much shows thee,
That I have sworn, but by thy looks to know thee
Let others drink thee boldly, and desire
Thee, and their lips espoused, while I admire
And love, but yet not taste thee: let my Muse
Fail of thy former helps, and only use
Her inadulterate strength, what is done by me,
Shall smell hereafter of the Lamp, not thee.
A fit of Rhyme against Rhyme.
Rhyme the rack of finest wits,
That expresses but by fit^
True conceit.
Spoiling senses of their treasure,
Cousening judgment with a measure,
But false weight.
Wresting words from their true calling,
Propping Verse for fear of falling
To the ground.
Joynting syllables, drowning letters,
F^st^ing vowels, as with fetter^
They were bound.
Soon as lazy thou were known,
All good Poetry hence was flown,
And art banished.
For a thousand years together,
All Parnassus green did wither.
And wit vanished.
Pegasus did fly away,
At the wells no Muse did stay,
But bewayl'd.
So to see the fountain dry,
And Apollo's Music dye;
All light failed!
S^arveling Rimes did fill the stage,
Not a Poet in an age
Worth crowning.
Not a work deserving Bays,
Nor a l^ne deserving praise;
Pallas frowning.
Greek was free from Rimes infection,
Happy Greek by this protection
Was not spoiled.
Whilst the Latin, Queen of Tongues,
Is not free from Rimes wrongs;
But (...) soiled.
Scarce the hill again does flourish,
Scarce the world a wit does nourish,
To restore,
Phoebus to his Crown again;
And the Muses to their brain,
As before.
Vulgar languages that want
Words, and sweetness, and be scant
Of true measure,
Tyran Rhyme has so abused,
That they long since have refused
Other ceasure.
He that first invented thee,
May his joints tormented be,
Cramped for ever.
Still may syllables join with time,
Still may reason war with rhyme,
Resting never.
May his sense when it would meet,
The cold ^umor in his feet,
Grow unsounder.
And his title be long fool,
That in rearing such a School,
Was the Founder.
A Letany.
From a proud Woodcock, and a peevish wife,
A pointlesse Needle, and a broken Knife,
From lying in a Ladies lap,
Like a great fool that longs for pap,
And from the fruit of the three cornered tree,
Virtue and goodness still deliver me.
From a conspiracy of wicked knaves,
A knot of villains, and a crew of slaves,
From laying plots for to abuse a friend,
From working humors to a wicked end,
And from the wood where Wolves and Foxes be,
Virtue and goodness still deliver me.
From resty Bacon, and ill roasted E^les,
And from a madding wit that runs on wheels,
A vap'ring humor, and a beetle head,
A smoky chimney, and a lousy bed,
A blow upon the elbow and the knee,
From each of these, goodness deliver me.
From setting virtue at too low a price,
From losing too much coin at Cards and Dice.
From surety-ship, and from an empty purse,
Or any thing that may be (...) worse;
From all such ill, wherein no good can be,
Virtue and goodness still deliver me.
From a fool, and serious toys,
From a Lawyer three parts noise;
From impertinence like a Drum
Beat at dinner in his room,
From a tongue without a file,
Heaps of Phrases and no (...),
From a Fiddler out of tune,
As the Cuckoo is in June.
From a Lady that does breath
Worse above, then underneath.
From the bristles of a Hog,
Or the ring-worm in a Dog:
From the courtship of a bryer,
Or St. Anthonies old fire.
From the mercy of some Jaylors,
From the long bills of all Tailors,
From Parasites that will stroke us,
From morsells that will choke us,
From all such as purses cut,
From a filthy durty slut,
From Canters and great eaters,
From Patentees and Cheaters,
From men with reason tainted,
From women which are painted,
From all far-fetched new fangles,
From him that ever wrangles,
From rotten Cheese, and addle Eggs,
From broken shine, and gowty Legs,
From a Pudding has no end,
From bad men that never mend,
From the Counter or the Fleet,
From doing penance in a sheet,
From Jesuits, Monk^, and Friars,
From hypocrites, knaves, and liars,
From Romes Pardons, Bulls, and Masses,
From Bug-bears, and broken Glasses,
From Spanish Pensions and their spies,
From weeping Cheese with Argus eyes,
From forain foes invasions,
From Papisticall persuasions,
From private gain, by public loss,
From coming home by weeping cross,
From all these I say again,
Heaven deliver me, Amen.
The Gypsies. The Captain sings.
FRom the famous Peake of Darby,
And the Devills-arse there hard-by,
Where we yearly keep our Musters,
Thus the Egyptians throng in clusters.
Be not frighted with our fashion,
Though we seem a tattered Nation;
We account our rags, our riches,
So our Tricks exceed our stitches.
Give us Bacon, rinds of Wallnuts,
Shells of C^ckels, and of small Nuts;
Ribands, b^ll^, and saffrand linen,
All the world is ours to win in.
Knacks we have that will delight you,
Slight of hand that will invite you.
To endure ou^ tawny faces
Quit your places, and not cause you cut your laces.
All your fortunes we can tell ye,
Be they for the back or belly;
In the Moods too and the Tences,
That may fit your fine five senses.
Draw but then your gloves we pray you,
And ^it still, we will not fray you;
For though we be here at Burley,
We Would be loath to make a hurley.
Another sings.
STay my sweet Singer,
^he touch of thy finger,
A (...) and linger;
For me that am bringer
Of bound to the border,
The rule and Recorder,
And mouth of the order,
As Pri^t of the Game,
And Prelate of the same.
There Is a Gentry Cove here,
Is the top of the shiere,
Of the Bever Ken,
A man among men;
You need not to fear,
I have an eye, and an ear
That turns here and there,
To look to our gear.
Some say that there be,
One or two, if not three,
That are greater then he.
And for the Rome-Mor^s,
I know by their Ports
And their jolly resorts
They are of the sorts
That love the true sports
Of King Ptolomeus,
Or great Coriphaeus,
And Queen Cleopatra,
The Gypsies grand Matra.
Then if we shall shark it,
Here Fair is, and Market.
Leave Pig Py and Goose,
And play fast and loose,
A short cut and long,
Some inch of a Song,
Pythagoras lot,
Drawn out of a pot;
With what says Alkindus
And Pharaotes Indus,
John de Indagine
With all their Pagine,
Of faces and Palmestrie,
And this is All mystery.
Lay by your Wimbles,
Your boring for Thimbles,
Or using your nimbles,
In diving the Pockets,
And sounding the sock^ts
Of Simper the Cocke^s;
Or angling the purses,
Of such as will curse us;
But in the strict duel
Be merry, and cruel,
Strike fair at some Jewel
That mine may accrue well
For that is the fuel,
To make the Town brew well,
And the Pot wring well,
And the brain sing well,
Which we may bring well
About by a string well,
And do the thing well.
It is but a strain
Of true legerdemaine,
Once twice and again.
Or what will you say now?
If with our fine play now,
Our knack and our dances,
We work on the Fancies
Of some of your Nancies.
These trinckets, and tripsies*
And make 'em turn Gypsies.
Here Is no Justice Lippus
Will seek for to nip us,
In Cramp-ring or Cippus,
And then for to strip us,
And after to whip us.
His justice to vary,
While here we do tarry
But be wise, and wary
And we may both carry
The Kate and the Mary,
And all the bright ae'ry.
Away to the Q^arry.
Or durst I go further
In method and order,
There Is a Purse and a Seal,
I have a great mind to steal.
That when our tricks are done,
We might seal our own pardon;
All this we may do,
And a great deal more too,
If our brave Ptolomee,
Will but say follow me.
To those that would be Gypsies too.
FRiends not to refell ye,
Or any way quell ye,
To buy or to ^ell ye,
I only must tell ye,
Ye aim at a Mystery
Worthy a History;
There Is much to be done,
Ere you can be a Son,
Or brother of the Moon.
It Is not so soon
Acquired as de^ir'd.
You must be Ben-bousie,
And sleepy and drowsy,
And lasie, and lousy,
Before ye can rouse ye,
In shape that arowse ye.
And then you may stalk
The Gypsies walk;
To the Coops and the Pens.
And bring in the Hens,
Though the Cock be sullen
For loss of the Pullen:
Take Turkey, or Capon,
And Gammons of Bacon,
Let naught be forsaken;
We Will let you go loose
Like a Fox to a Goose,
And show you the stye
Where the little Pigs lie;
Whence if you can take
One or two, and not wake
The Sow in her dreams,
But by the Moon beam^;
So warily hie,
As neither do cry.
You shall the next day
Have license to play
At the hedge a flirt
For a sheet or a shirt;
If your hand be light,
I Will show you the slight
Of our Ptolomies knot,
It is, and it is not.
To change your complexion
With the noble confection
Of Wallnuts and Hog's Grease,
Better then Dogs-grease:
And to milk the kine,
Ere the milkmaid fine
Has opened her ^^ne.
Or if you desire
To spit, or fart fire,
I Will teach you the knacks,
Of eating of flax;
And out of their noses,
Draw ribbands and posies.
And if you incline
To a cup of good wine,
When you sup or dine;
If you chance it to lack,
Be it Claret or Sack;
I Will make this snout,
To deal it about,
Or this to run out,
As it were from a spout.
A Farewell to Folly.
FArewell, ye gilded follies, pleasing troubles;
Farewell, ye honored rag^, ye crystal bubles;
Fame's but a hollow Echo; Gold, poor clay;
Honor, the darling, but of one short day;
Beauties chief Idol, but a damask skin;
State, but a golden Prison to live in,
And torture freeborn minds; imbroydred trains,
But goodly Pageant^? proudly swelling vains,
And blood alal'd to greatness, is but loan,
Inherited, not purchased, not our own.
Fame, Riches, Honor, Beauty, State, Trains, Birth*
Are but the fading blessings of the Earth,
I would be rich, but see man too unkind;
Digs in the bowels of the richest Mine.
I would be great, but yet the Sun does still
Level his beams against the rising hill.
I would be fair, but see the Champion proud,
The worlds fair eye, often setting in a cloud.
I would be wise, but that the Fox I see
Suspected guilty, when the Fox is free.
I would be poor, but see the humble grass
Trampled upon, by each unworthy ass.
Rich, hated; wise, suspected; scorned if poor;
Great, feared; fair, tempted; high, still envide more.
Would the world then, adopt me for her heir;
Would beauties Queen, entitle me the fair;
Fame, speak me honors Minion; and could I
With Indian-Angels, and a speaking eye,
Command bare heads, bowed knees, strike Justice dumb,
As well as blind and lame, and give a tongue
To stones by Epitaphs; be called great Master;
In the loose lines of every Poetaster;
Could I be more, then any man that lives;
Great, Wise, Rich, Fair, all in superlatives:
Yet I these favors, would more free resign,
Then ever fortune would have had them mine.
I count one minute of my holy leisure,
Beyond the mirth of all this earthly pleasure.
Welcome pure thoughts, welcome ye carelee groves;
These are my guests; this is the Court age loves.
The winged people of the skies shall sing
Me Anthems, by my sellers gentle spring.
Divinity shall be my Looking-glass,
Wherein I will adore sweet virtues face.
Here dwells no heartlesse loves, no pale-fac't fears,
No short joys purchased with eternal tears.
Here will I sit and sigh my hot youths folly;
And learn to affect an holy Melancholy:
And if contentment be a stranger, then
I Will never look for it but in heaven again.
An Invitation to the Reader.
HAving now fed thy youthful frencies, with these Juvenilian Fancies; let me
invite thee (with my self) to sing Altiora peto. And then to meet with this
thy noble resolution; I would commend to thy sharpest view and serious
consideration; The Sweet Caelestiall sacred Poems by Mr. Henry Vaughan,
entitled Silex Scintillans.

There plumes from Angels wings, he will lend thee,
Which every day to heaven will send thee.
(Hear him thus invite thee home.)
If thou would thither, linger not,
Catch at the place,
Tell youth, and beauty, they must rot,
They Are but a Case:
Loose, parcell'd hearts will freeze; the Sun
With scattered locks
Scarce warm^, but by contraction
Can heat Rocks;
Call in thy powers; run, and reach
Home with the light;
Be there, before the shadows stretch,
And span up nighs;
Follow the Cry no more: there is
An ancient way
All strewed with flowers and happiness,
And fresh as May;
There turn, and turn no more; let wits,
Smile at fair eyes,
Or lips; but who there weeping sits,
Has got the prize.
FINIS. 1654.

