The Merchants Daughter of Bristow.
The Tune is, The Maidens joy.
BEhold the touchstone of true love,
Maudlin the Merchants daughter of Bristow town
Whose firm affection nothing could move,
This favor bears the lovely brown,
A gallant youth was dwelling by,
Which many years had born this Maiden great good will,
She loved him so faithfully,
But all her friends withstood it still.
The young man now perceiving well
he could not get nor win ye favor of her friends,
The force of sorrow to expel,
To view strange Countries he intends.
And now to take his last farewell,
Of his true love, his fair and constant Maudlin,
With Music sweet that did excel
He played under her window then:
Farewell, quoth he, mine own true love,
Farwell my dear and chiefest treasure of my heart,
Through Fortunes spite that false did prove,
I am enforced from thee to part.
Into the Land of Italy,
There will I wail and weary out my life in woe
Seeing my true love is kept from me,
I hold my life a mortal foe:
Fair Bristow Town therefore adieu,
For Padua shall be my habitation now,
Although my love does rest in thee,
To whom alone my heart I vow.
With trickling tears thus did he sing,
With sighs and sobs descending from his heart full sore,
He said when he his hands did wring,
Farewell sweet love for evermore.
Fair Maudlin from a window high,
Beholding her true love with music where he stood
But not a word she did reply,
Fearing her parents angry mood.
In tears she spent that woeful night,
Wishing her self, though naked, with her faithful friend
She blames her friends and fortunes spite,
That wrought her love such luckless end:
And in her heart she made a vow,
Clean to forsake her Country and her kindred all
And for to follow her true love,
To bide all chance that might befall.
The night is gone and the day is come,
And in the morning early did she rise,
She gets her down into a lower room,
Where sundry Seamen she espys.
A gallant Master among them all.
The Master of a great and goodly Ship was he,
Who there was waiting in the Hall,
To speak with her father if it might be.
She kindly takes him by the hand,
Good sir, said she, and would you speak with any here
Quoth he, fair Maid, and therefore I do stand,
Then gentle Sir, I pray draw near:
Into a pleasant Parlor by,
With hand in hand she brings the Seaman all alone
Sighing to her self most piteously,
She thus to him did make her moan.
She falls upon her bended knee,
Good sir, said she, now pity you a woman's woe,
And prove a faithful friend to me,
That I to you my grief may show.
Since you repose your trust he said,
In me, who am unknown, and eke a stranger here,
Be you assured most proper Maid,
Most faithful still I will appear.
I have a Brother, then quoth she,
Whom as my life I love and favor tenderly,
In Padua alas is he,
Full sick God wot and like to dye.
Full fain I would my brother see,
But that my father will not yield to let me go,
Therefore good Sir, be good to me,
And unto me this favor show;
Some Ship-boys garment bring to me,
That I disguised may go unknown,
And unto Sea I Will go with thee,
If so much favor might be shown,
Fair Maid, quoth he, take here my hand,
I will fulfill each thing that you desire,
And set you safe in that same Land,
And in the place that you require,
She gave him then a tender kiss,
And says to him, your servant Master will I be,
And prove your faithful friend for this,
Sweet Master then forget not me.
This done as they had both agreed,
Soon after that before the break of day,
He brings her garments then with speed,
Therein her self she did array.
And e're her father did arise,
She meets her Master as he walked in the hall,
She did attend on him likewise,
Until her father did him call.
But e're the Merchant made an end,
Of all his weighty matters he had then to say,
His Wife came weeping in with speed,
Saying our daughters gone away:
The Merchant then amazed in mind,
Yonder vile wretch enticed away my child, quoth. she
But I well wot I shall him find,
At Padua in Italy:
With that bespake the Master brave,
Worshipful Merchant, thither goes this pre^ty youth
And any thing that you would crave:
He will perform and write the truth:
Sweet youth (quoth. he) if it be so,
Bear me a letter to the English Merchant there
And gold on thee I will bestow,
My Daughters welfare I do fear:
Her Mother took her by the hand,
fair youth (quoth. she) if ever thou do my daughter see
Let me soon thereof understand,
And there is twenty Crowns for thee.
Thus through the daughters strange disguise,
The Mother knew not when she spoke unto her child
And after her Master straight she ^ies,
Taking her leave with countenance mild.
Thus to the Seas fair Maudlin is gone,
with her gentle Master God lend them a merry wind
Where we a while must let them alone
Till you the second part do find.
WElcome sweet Maudlin from the Seas,
Where bitter storms and tempests do arise,
The pleasant banks of Italy,
You may behold with mortal eyes;
Thanks gentle Master then said she,
A faithful friend in sorrow thou have been,
If fortune once do smile on me.
My gentle heart shall soon be seen.
Blessed be the Land that feeds my love,
Blessed be the place whereas his person does abide
No trial will I stick to prove,
Whereby my true love may be tried:
Now will I walk with joyful heart,
To view the town whereas my darling does remain
And seek him out in every part,
Until his sight I do obtain:
And I (quoth he) will not forsake,
Sweet Maudlin in her sorrows up and down,
In wealth or woe thy parti'le take,
And bring thee safe to Padua Town:
And after many weary steps,
In Padua they safe arrived at the last,
For very joy her heart it leaps;
She thinks not on her sorrows past.
Condemned he was to dye alas,
Except he would from his Religion turn,
But rather then he would to Mass,
In fiery flames he vowed to burn.
Now does sweet Maudlin weep and wail
Her joy is turned to weeping sorrow grief and care
For nothing could her plaints prevail.
For death alone must be his share.
She walks under the Prison walls
Where her true love did lie and languish in distress
When woefully for food he calls,
When hunger did his heart oppress.
He sighs and sobs and makes great moan,
Farewell sweet love for evermore;
And all my friends that have me known
In Bristow town with wealth and store:
But most of all farewell (quoth he)
My own sweet Maudlin whom I left behind;
For never more thou shall me see,
Woe to thy father most unkind;
How well I were if thou were here
With thy fair hands to close these my Wretched eyes
My torments easy would appear,
My soul with joy would scale the Skies.
When Maudlin heard her lovers moan,
Her eyes with tears her heart with sorrow filled was
To speak with him no means was known,
Such grieveus doom on him did pass.
Then she put off her Lads attire,
Her Maidens weed upon her back she seemly set
To the judges house she did enquire,
And there she did a service get:
She did her duty there so well,
And eke so prudently she did her self behave,
With her in love her Master fell,
His servants favor he did crave
Maudlin (quoth he) my hearts delight.
To whom my heart in affection is tied,
Breed not my death through thy dispight,
A faithful friend thou shall me find.
O grant me thy love fair Maid (quoth he)
And at my hands desire what thou can devise,
And I will grant it unto thee,
Whereby thy credit may arise.
I have a Brother, Sir, said she,
For his Religion is now condemned to dye,
In loathsome Prison he is cast,
Oppressed with grief and misery:
Grant me my Brothers life (she said)
And now to you my love and liking I will give
That may not be (quoth he) fair Maid,
Except he turn he cannot live:
An English Friar there is (she said)
Of learning great and passing pure of life,
Let him to my brother be sent,
And he will finish soon the strife:
Her Master granted her request,
The Mariner in Friars weeds she did array,
And to her love that lay distressed,
She did a Letter soon convey.
When he had read these gentle lines,
His heart was ravished with pleasant joy;
Where now she is full well he knew,
The Friar likewise was not coy;
But did declare to him at large,
the enterprise his love for him had taken in hand
The young man did the Friar charge,
His love should straight depart the Land.
Here is no place for her (he said)
But woeful death and danger of her life,
Professing truth I was betrayed
And fearful flames must end the strife.
For e're I will my faith deny,
And swear my self to follow damned Antichrist
I Will yield my body for to dye,
To live in Heaven with the highest.
O Sir the gentle Friar said,
Consent thereto and end the strife,
A woeful match (quoth he) is made,
Where Christ is left to win a wife.
When she had used all means she might,
To save his life, and yet all would not be;
Then of the judge she claimed her right,
To dye the death as well as he.
When no persuasions could prevail,
Nor change her mind in any thing yt she had said
She was with him condemned to dye,
And for them both one fire was made.
Yea arm in arm most joyfully,
These Lovers twain unto the fire did go,
The Mariner most faithfully,
Was likewise Partner of their woe.
But when the judges understood,
The faithful friendship did in them remain:
They saved their lives and afterward
To England sent them back again.
Now was their sorrow turned to joy,
And faithful Lovers have their hearts desire,
Their pains so well they did employ,
God granted that they did desire,
And when they did to England come,
And in merry Bristow arrived at the last;
Great joy there was to all and some
That heard the dangers they had past.
Her father he was dead God wot,
And eke her Mother was joyful at her sight
Their wishes she denied not,
But wedded them to hearts delight:
Her gentle Master she desired,
To be her father, and at Church to give her then:
It was fulfilled as she required,
Unto the joys of all good men.
Printed for F.Coals, T. Vere, and J. Wright.


