RELIGIO MILITIS.

A SERMON Preached to the Artillery-Company, October 24, 1672. At St. Michaels
in Cornhil.

By JOHN MERITON, D. D.

LONDON Printed for Ralph Smith at the Sign of the Bible under the Piazzo of
the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, 1672.

To the Right Worshipful, and my much Honored Friends, Sir Richard Ford,
Knight, Sir James Edwards Knight, Dannet Forth Esquire, Sir Robert Clayton
Knight, Aldermen; Lieutenant Col. Nicholas Osborne, Major John Grant, Major
Thomas Beckford, Major Thomas Cowden, Late Stewards of the ArtilleryCompany.
Worthy Sirs,
I Was much surprised with your desire, that this plain Sermon might be
Printed: Nor can I yet in cooler thoughts conjecture (though its shortness, the
best commendation of bad Music, had possibly gainedit a Favorable Acceptance
from the Pulpit) what might incline you to desire its further Publication;
unless (for I more value your Judgments, than fondly to imagine you could think
it worthy) you had a mind to try, whether, in an Age, when many talk of what
they know not how to practice, I could show either Courage or Obedience, that
had discoursed of them: Of both which I have here given some Proof. Of Courage,
that having, for one Passage, full of Truth and Innocence, passed the Pikes, I
have adventured once more to run the Gantlope; and of Obedience, that like the
Centurions Servant, when you said Do this, I have done it; to approve my self,

GENTLEMEN, Your Ready and Faithful Servant JOHN MERITON.

Josh. 1. 7. Only be thou strong, and very Courageous, that thou may observe
to do according to all the Law, which Moses my Servant commanded thee.
THese words are part of Joshua's Commission, that God gave him, when in the
room of his servant Moses lately Deceased, he appointed him his Captain
General, for the conduct of Israel into the promised Canaan. They had all
along, in their March through the Wilderness, met with great opposition from
the neighboring Countrey's, the Amalekites, the Edomites, the Moabites, taking
the Alarm, Mustered up their Forces, and did all they could, both by Ambush and
Skirmish to obstruct their passage, and make it troublesome and hazardous: And
looking forward into Canaan, they had reason to look for more and more
formidable Enemies; the Amorites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Hivites,
the Jebusites, the Canaanites, being all of them in ancient possession of the
Country, and withal strangers to God, were not like so far to acknowledge his
right, as easily, and without blows to quit their own to these new Occupiers.
So that in these circumstances, God saw it needful to animate his servant
Joshua, and put life and metal into him, for carrying on the difficult
enterprise; and this he does, by telling him, he will be with him, Verse 5.
As I was with Moses, I will be with thee, I will not fail thee, nor for sake
thee. Somewhat like Caesar's Venite to his Soldiers, (though infinitely more
encouraging, for it was the mouth of the Lord of Hosts that spoke it) Come on,
and I Will go along with thee. And he must be strangely faint-hearted and
cowardly, that could let his spirit sink, his face grow pale, or his arm shake,
with such a second at his right hand.

Which presence of God with Joshua, (though a mighty support) was by no means
to be interpreted as a discharge from his own diligence and duty, as though all
the work were now taken off his hands, and there were nothing left for him to
do, No such matter! It was rather to excite in him a Masculine and Heroic
bravery of spirit, as Paulus Emilius prayed to Hercules for Victory with a
Spear in his hand, (...). Plutarch in vit.
God engaged himself not to forsake his servant Joshua, and thereby obliged him
to look to it, that he was neither forsaken of his courage, nor his conscience,
Only be thou strong, and very courageous, that thou may observe to do
according to all the Law, which Moses my servant commanded thee.

In which words, as an Epitome, and short abridgment of his Military
Discipline, God charges upon Joshua two things, that would in all things render
him a gallant and complete Soldier.

1. Valor and Courage, Only be thou strong and very Courageous.

2. Obedience, and a compliance with the Divine Law, That thou may observe
to do, etc.

1. First, Valor and Courage: The phrase is doubled, (...) and so is the
command too, in this and the foregoing verse, that may denote, as the greater
strictness of the charge, so that double courage and fortitude that is
necessary it make an accomplished warrior,

The one Natural, as a Soldier.
The other Spiritual, as a Saint.
1. Natural courage, which is a strength and stoutness of spirit, fearlesly to
encounter hazards and hardships, which as it was necessary for Joshua in his
circumstances, being to conduct a mutinous quarrelsome people, and combat
warlike and combined enemies; So is it greatly requisite in every Soldier,
whether in, or under command, his Art and Profession being to converse with
Sword and Pike, Blows and Bullets, Wounds, and Death in a thousand shapes, and
all its grim and dismal appearances, he had need wear better armor within his
breast, than that which he puts upon it. Neither the Sword, nor the Sword-man
is right metal, whose soft edge is soon blunted, and rebated, with a few hard
strokes, and that pusillanimous tenderness for life and limbs, that in another
man is easily overlook't, and passed by as a pardonable infirmity, in the
Soldier amounts to an heinous crime, as having in it the baseness of
treachery, and being false to his trust and undertaking. When death, and
dangers appear in their most frightful, ghastly complexion, and threaten high,
the true Soldier, with an unappaled courage, makes as brisk a reply as Brutus
did once to his Malus Genius, Plut. in vit.
(...). Thou shall see me at Philippi, A match, I Will meet thee. What a brave
speech was that of Joab to his brother Abishai, when encompassed with an huge
and formidable Army of 2 Samuel 10. 12.
Syrians, Be of good courage, and let us play the men, for our people, and for
the Cities of our God. And upon the like occasion Gentlemen, the Honor of your
King, the safety of your Country, the happiness and flourishing prosperity of
this City at stake, I doubt not in you such a generous and masculine spirit;
But God grant there never be greater cause to try your Courage, than there is
to question it.

2. Secondly, A Spiritual Courage is required that is suitable unto Saints; to
this the Apostle presses the Ephesians, Be Chap. 6. 10.
strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, and there are three things
wherein this strength and magnanimity is especially to be exercised,

1. Enduring Afflictions. 2. Resisting Temptations. 3. Subduing and mortifying
corrupt Affections.
In all which points, there is so much the more courage to be used, because the
enemies to be conquered, the World, the Devil, and the Flesh, are most
pernicious and deadly, and the Crown prepared for, and promised to the
conquest, is most rich and glorious. So that what God has (in the Text) said
to Joshua, is particularly to be applied to every Christian, as if he were
mentioned by name; and so much the rather, because the Apostle has already
done it to his hand, He has said, Heb. 13. 5.
I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee: And he has said, Be thou strong
and very courageous.

1. First, Be strong and very courageous to endure Afflictions. Every good man
especially is in this world exposed to crosses, and troubles, and it well
becomes him, with a mighty and magnanimous patience and submission to Gods
will, to bear all his burdens, and take them, as the Camel does his load from
his Master, upon his knees, strengthened with all might, unto Col. 1. 11.
all patience, and long-suffering with joyfulness. The patience and
long-suffering of God, is founded in his Allmighty Numb. 14. 17, 18.
power, Let the power of my Lord be great, (says Moses in the behalf of
Israel) according as thou have spoken, saying, the Lord is long suffering. And
when God is pleased to send crosses, and calamities, all our might, and power
is to be exercised, in Patience and Long-suffering. 2 Timothy 3. 3.
(...), it is Saint Paul's word to Timothy, endure hardness; And it is urged with
this Argument, as he would approve himself a good Soldier of Jesus Christ,
Tert^ll.
Quid facis in Christi Militia delicate Miles? What makes the nice, and the
delicate Soldier Marching under Christ's Banners? How low, and hard, and full
of crosses soever thy condition may be in this world, Courage man! to give
ground by a froward impatience, and pettish despondency, is a certain sign of
an impotent cowardice and feeble-mindedness, for if thou faint in the day of
adversity, thy Prove. 14. 18.
strength is small.

2. Secondly, Be strong and very courageous to resist temptations. Which so
long as we are in this world, the Devils walk and Principality; and so long as
that bloodthirsty Abaddon has malice, and subtilty, We must never look to be
freed from, for as a roaring Lion he walks 1 Pet. 5. 8.
about, seeking whom he may devour. He tempts to Atheism and infidelity, pride
and malice, hypocrisy, covetousness and sensuality, And there is no safety in
truce, parley, or compliance, but in a stout and resolute resistance, and that
Victory that certainly follows upon it; for, resist Jum. 4. 7.
the Devil, and he will slay from you; yet, as erranda Coward as he is, he had
the bold and daring hardiness to assault our Lord Christ, in that famous Duel
and Encounter, Matthew. 4. but its observable, how the Captain of our Salvation,
to set us the pattern of a valiant and vigorous resistance, picked up his fiery
darts, and threw them in his face, It is written (says the Devil) he shall
give his Angels charge over thee; and it is written (says Christ) thou shall
not tempt the Lord thy God. The Devil will never be worsted by a Meaky cowardly
Milksop, and you must either overcome, or fall into his Clutches, the Apostle
bids rouse up your courage, and stand to your Arms, Put on the whole Ephesians. 6.
11, ^^.
armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil,
for we wrestle not against Flesh and Blood, but against Principalities, against
Powers, against the Rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual
wickedness, in high places. And though a man had strength and courage enough to
rout whole troops and squadrons of other enemies in the field, he were like to
bear away sad and mournful trophies, if he, whose name is legion, makes him
Prisoner, and leads him captiveat his will.

3. Thirdly, Be strong and very courageous in the subduing, and mortifying of
corrupt affections. Such as are Pride, and Passion, malice, earthly-mindedness,
ambition, hypocrisy, wrath, and revenge, the worst enemies we have; and were
it not for these, the Devil would more easily be vanquished. Samson slew the
Phili^^ins, heaps upon heaps, and they could never have wronged him, had not
Delilah, that lay in his bosom, betrayed him. Against these therefore we must
stir up our whole strength and courage, to smite them under the fifth rib.
These remaining lusts in good men, not wholly to be rooted out in this life,
are like that remnant of Canaanites, that God left to prove Israel, to teach
them War, and train them up in the Art-Military; and with whom he commanded
them never to make Peace, or a League of Friendship. And verily the crucifying
of a darling lust, is an act of no less courage, then it was in Abraham, at
Gods command to put a sacrificing-knife to the throat of his beloved Isaac.
David got more true renown, by conquering a passionate revenge, in the case of
Saul and Shimei, than in cutting off the head of Goliab. And Solomon has laid
it down for a rule (nor though a man of Peace, has he at all undervalued Prove.
16. 32.
Martial exploits and achievements) He that rules his spirit ( i. e. keeps
his soul from being invaded by exorbitant lusts and passions) is a better man (
i. e. shows more Manhood and gallantry of mind) than he that tak^s a City.
God has set up his Royal Standard, and on purpose Proclaimed open hostility
against those insolent rebels which we harbor in our bosom; that we should
draw our swords, and that not only to brandish them, with a flourish, or play a
Prize, and strike with a false edge, but be at sharps, run them through, slash
and mangle them from head to foot, that we should give fire, and spend our
Powder and Bullet at home. In a word, that without any quarter given, we should
serve them as that wise woman did Sheba, at Abel of Bethmaacah, throw 2 Samuel ^0
21.
the Traitors heads over the wall. And thus much for the first part of the
charge, Be strong and very courageous.

2. The Second follows, that of obedience, and a compliance with the Divine
Law, That thou may observe to do according to all the Law, which Moses my
servant commanded thee. Men of a Military Profession, are concerned seriously
to mind matters of Religion; A faithful punctual observance of the divine Law,
is both necessary for a Soldier: And that which adds to him the greatest
luster and ornament. Joshua was a great Commander, and yet not so absolute, but
that he must acknowledge a Superior Lord, and take Law from God, and Moses in
his name. The Law of Moses was then the only Manisestation of Gods will,
superadded to the originally imprinted Law of Nature: And although God has to
us amplified it in the Gospel, and reprinted it in a fairer Edition, yet that
was to be the rule and measure of his actings, and he was thence to learn all
his postures, not varying from it, by excess or defect, or as the Text has it,
in a Military phrase, not turning (or wheeling about) to the right or to the
left. There Is no such complete armor for a Soldier, as that which Saint Paul
recommends out of Gods Magazine, the Ephesians. 6.
Girdle of truth, the breast plate of righteousness, the shield of Faith, the
helmet of Salvation, the Sword of the Spirit. And there is a walking orderly
(...) beyond that of marching rank and file. Did God of old take such order,
that the Priest (whose office and employment was the killing of Beasts) should
be a man of holiness, and can we think he will allow the Soldier in his
Profession of killing men, to be a stranger to it? There is indeed a
Licentious, fanciful, and Fanatical Generation of men, that say the Profession
of a Soldier is now inconsistent with Religion, and the state of Christianity.
All things are under the Gospel to be acted with tenderness and indulgence,
love and lenity: And if they could with these fine smooth sayings, persuade
others to lay down their Arms, they themselves were like to be the first, that
without scruple would run to take them up. The Foxes, in the Fable, with such a
plausible and insinuating artifice, would have drawn the sheep into a fair and
kind correspondence, only there was a sort of rugged, and scandalous creatures,
with sharp teeth, called Shepherds Dogs, that stood in the way, and obstructed
the Peace, let them all be but first knocked on the head, and matters should
then be menaged kindly and lovingly, to their own hearts content. They bring
Arguments indeed, pitiful slender ones (God knows) to prove, that Religion
forbids the use of the Sword, such as it would hardly be worth while for me to
answer; Swordmen themselves may better do it, by a Religious deportment and
conversation, the best and most effectual confutation of their feeble cavils,
being like that Philosophers walking up and down the room silently to refell
his Arguments, that with mighty noise and bustle, would needs prove there was
no such thing as motion. One of the great excellencies of Religion is, that as
it conduces to men's eternal interest, and makes them happy in another world. So
it is the accomplishment and perfection of every state and condition in this.
This makes the Good Prince and the Good Subject, the good Husband, the good
Wife, the good Master, the good Servant, the good Merchant, Mariner,
Husbandman, Lawyer, Physician, yea and good Soldier too; unto whom (that I may
speak more particularly) it adds this sixfold excellency and advantage.

1. Skill. 2. Courage. 3. Safety. 4. Honor. 5. Success. 6. A Public and
beneficial usefulness.
1. First, Religion adds to the Soldier the advantage of Skill. How expert was
David when a youth: who when Goliath, his proud Enemy, despised the poor
stripling, as a raw and undisciplined novice, slung a stone into his forehead,
and laid that mountain of flesh flat at his foot; would you know how he became
so dextrous, and with such art did the exploit, he himself tells you, that God,
to the observance and pleasing of whom, he applied himself with a studious
care, and utmost diligence, had trained him up in his Artillery-Ground. The
Lord my strength Psalm. 144. 1.
teaches my hands to War, and my fingers to fight. And at another time, when
he over-reacht, and outwitted Achitophel, countermin'd, and defeated the
cunning stratagem of that profound shrewd pated Politician; it was not so much
his own Mother-wit, as a Religious care to please God, that made him his Arts
Psalm. 119. 98.
Master. Thou (says he) through thy Commandments, have made me wiser than mine
enemies, for they are ever with me. He that has the highest and principal
wisdom, to go beyond the Devil in his plots, and baffle that bloody enemy of
souls in his mischievous designs (and the Job 28. ult.
fear of the Lord that is wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding) is
the likeliest person, by the guidance, and direction of the only wise God, to
blow up and scatter the petty projects of fleshly opposites, that compared with
that spiritual adversary, are the acutest of them, thick-scull'd and
heavy-headed enemies. Atheism, profaness, and irreligion, blast the best laid
designs, and lead the subtle Artists and contrivers of them, into traps, Job 5.
12.
and unseen precipices. God disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that
their hands cannot perform their enterprise, they are short and defective, both
in the Theory and the Practice, their fine spun Policies come to nothing, and
break like the Spiders web. And when any exploit is to be done, they are
fumble-fisted, and their hand hangs in their Glove; the stouthearted Psalm. 76.
7.
are asleep (says the Psalmist) and the men of might have not found their
hands: But what the Prophet says of the Husbandman, holds true of the upright,
obedient, and conscientious Soldier, his God does instruct him to discretion,
Isa. 28. 26.
and does teach him.

2. Secondly, Religion gives the Soldier the advantage of Courage and
boldness. Nothing does so fix and consolidate the mind, to a fearless and
undaunted resolution in dangers, as its being possessed and principled with
Gods holy fear, for in the fear of the Lord there is Prove. 14. 26.
strong confidence. Clavus clavum trudit, Nieremberg.
omnes timor Dei pellit timores. David in the 112. Psalm, deseribes a man of a
brave and bold spirit, that he shall not be Ver. 6, 7.
moved, nor afraid of evil tidings; and who this man of courage and confidence
is, he tells us, one that the world would little dream of, the divine Coward,
one Ver. ^.
that fears the Lord, and greatly delights in his Commandments. And when
the People in Samuel's days, were by a thunder in Wheat-Harvest, smitten with
a pannick-fear, and scared almost out of their wits, it was excellent and
proper counsel that he gave them (though to some it may look like a
contradiction) fear 1 Samuel 12. 20, and 24.
not, only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth, with all your heart. This we
have suggested in the Text, Be strong and very Courageous; How so? Observe to
do according to all the Law which Moses my servant commanded thee.

Vile men, of Atheistical, debauched principles and practices, Dammers and
Sinkers, may rant and swagger, and when furnished with Pipe and Pot-Ammunition,
pretend high to seats of Prowess and Chivalry, and might bear away great renown
for Martial exploits, if (as when of old the Giants sought it by fighting
against the Gods) sending defiances to heaven, and storming it with full
mouthed Oaths, and Blasphemies, would carry it, but however they may rufile,
and look big, they can never be truly courageous, who carry that deadly enemy
in their bosom, a guilty accusing Conscience, a dismal Volume; which when it
opens, more appales and dispirits them, than the writing upon the wall did
Belshazzar, in his carowsing and drunken frolic; Conscience, I say, that at
the approach of death, uses to awake and beat a frightful alarm, as old sores
ache and throb most at night to bedward, and there is nothing more like to make a
whiteliver'd Soldier, than that black-mouthed accuser, nor will any man sneak
basely, and cowardly run his head in a hole, or be backward to venture his life
in so good a cause as the saving of his Country, like him that is madly bold
and forward to venture his Soul, in so bad a one, as the Prove. 28. 1.
satisfying of his lusts. The wicked flee (says Solomon when no manpursueth,
he is haunted with so many walking Ghosts in a guilty Conscience, that he runs
for his life, when there is nothing behind him but his own shadow; he is Al a
mort with the shaking of the tops of a few reeds or thistles, as if they were
the Pikes of an armed enemy, arrayed in Battalia; his heart sinks to his heel,
at the rusling of the wind among the leaves, as if it brought the more certain
News of his death, than the report of Musket or Canon. What a doughty combatant
was Cain like to prove, when having armed and enraged his own Conscience
against him, by imbrewing his hands in the blood of an innocent brother, he
stood whining and puling with finger Genesis 4. 14.
in eye, Every body that meets me will kill me? But the righteous is bold as a
Lion. That saying of David was no flashy vapouring huff, but the issue of an
unshaken gallantry of Spirit, Though an Host should Psalm. 27. 3.
encamp against me, my heart shall not fear, though War should rise against me,
in this will I be confident.

3. Thirdly, Religion gives the Soldier safety, and secures him against
danger. It were the less advantageous to a man at arms, if it only put into him
spirit and metal to attempt and encounter dangers, and there left him of the
forlorn, without hope of a safe and honorable retreat, or a strong hold for
his defense and protection, but the way of the Lord is strength to Prove. 1^* 29.
the upright. And let Swords clash, and bullets fly thick, that man is out of
harms way, and needs not flinch or fear colors, whose path is encompassed with
a brazen wall. Holy David fighting upon great odds, against an whole Host, was
not more confident than secure; For in the time of Psalm. 27. 5.
trouble, he shall hide me in his Pavilion, in the secret of his Tabernacle
shall be hide me, be shall set me up upon a rock. That is, a well fortisied and
impregnable Garrison, into which the Prophet Isaiah puts the righteous person,
and he seems particularly to describe the righteousness of a Isai. 33. 15. 16.
Soldier, One that despises the gain of oppression, and stops his ears
from hearing of blood: He shall dwell on high, his place of defense shall be
the munition of rocks, bread shall be given him, his waters shall be sure: If
enemies beleaguer him, and bring ropes and scaling ladders, they are all too
short, He dwells on high. If they bring Petards, and plant great Guns for
Battery, all instruments of violence are (alas) too weak, to make a breach,
and force an entrance, for his place of defense is the Munition of Rocks. And
if perhaps despairing to storm, they shall design to starve him out of his
strong hold, that plot is like to fail, and come off as poorly as the other,
for the man is as well stored with Victual as Ammunition, Bread shall be given
him, his Waters shall be sure. Gideon, a brave Soldier, when in obedience to
God, he threw down Baals Altar, was sorely threatened, by a rude rabble of
enraged Idolaters, (And there is no madness like that of men's being mad for
Religion) but God himself was of his guard, and gave him safe conduct, so that
all their high bluster of words proved mere Squibs and Crackers. And if it
shall be said, Religion is not always the Soldiers defense; It was the hard hap
of godly Josiah, and since that of many a good man, to be wounded and slain in
the day of Battle. I answer, God, when he sees it best, delivers them either
from, or out of dangers; or if neither of these, however at the long run he
will infinitely reward them, so that, be the hazards and mischiefs what they
may, that they wade through, they are sure, when all accounts are made up, not
to come off losers. Put the case, a General were able, (as we are sure God is)
to make his Soldiers shotfree, to cure the wounded, and quicken the dead, and
at the head of his Army should say before a Fight, Come on my stout hearts,
fear nothing, He engage my honor, that not a man of you shall be a loser by
this Battle. And yet when they fall on, and are at it Pell-mell: Some indeed
are untouched, but others lose, either a leg or an arm, or are killed outright.
Well! the Fight over, and the General surveying his Army, the first, that lost
never a drop of blood, he rewards well for fighting, them that lost their
limbs, he makes fishwhole, and gives them what is better than a leg or an arm;
the slain he raises to life after a most glorious manner, makes them all
Captains and Colonels, and bestows upon them places of honor and command. Now
which of all these lost any thing by fighting! they sure lost least that were
quite knocked o'th head, and for a time lost all in appearance.

4. Fourthly, Religion adds to the Soldier honor and renown; And this many a
one of that Profession prefers to his safety, and so that be preserved
untoucht, matters not how he exposes life and limbs to danger. Now there is
nothing like Religion advances to honor and dignity, it makes a man's face to
shine, and incircles his head with a glory. All the Orations and triumphs of
Roman Consuls and Di^^^tors, gave but a mean and trivial luster (like the
glittering of a gloworm, or the shining of a piece of rotten wood in the dark)
compared with the real and substantial brightness of them that have the 1 Pet.
4. 14.
Spirit of glory, and of God resting upon them. And of these two, that holds
true that the Apostle says of the Law and the Gospel, That which was made
glorious, had 2 Cor. 3. 10.
no glory in this respect, by reason of a glory that excels. The righteous
(says Solomon) Prove. 12. 25.
is more excellent than his neighbor. And representing Religion under the name
of wisdom, as a magnificent Queen, distributing various and ample rewards to
all her train, he reckons honor, with Prove. 3. 15.
riches to boot, as a left hand boon and largess. Nay God himself puts in
caution and security (that never yet broke his parole) to advance their
reputation and renown, that are careful to lift up his Praise, by holy
practices, and (as it were) dub them his Knight-Bannerets in the 1 Samuel 2. 30.
field, them that honor me, I will honor, and they that despise me, shall be
lightly H^^ 2. ult.
esteemed. I will take thee O Zerubbabel my servant, the Son of Shealtiel,
says the Lord; and will make thee as a Signet, for I have chosen thee. God
takes notice of his noble birth, the son of Shealtiel, not a Signet made of a
shoe-buckle, but his highest honor was, Zerubbabel my servant, I will make
thee as a Signet, for I have chosen thee. There is in virtue and goodness, that
intrinsic beauty, and amiable commanding Majesty, that it conquers and
captivates, sets up its trophies in the minds of observers, and conciliates
respect and reverence from those persons that will not themselves be at the
trouble to practice it.

5. Fifthly, Religion gives success and an happy prosperous issue of affairs:
Nothing does so entangle and perplex an enterprise, and make it miscarry in
men's hands, as their sinning against God, they that walk in their own ways,
Sow the wind, and all the crop they are like to reap thence, is the whirlwind,
to blast and scatter all they take in hand. The Israelites sin made their
Carcasses to fall thick and threefold in the Wilderness, so that of above six
hundred thousand that came Exodus 12. 37.
out of Egypt, two only, Caleb and Joshua, set foot into the promised Land:
Nay, Moses himself, for his infidelity and disobedience, striking the rock,
when God bade him but speak to it, was shut out of Canaan, and had his
Leading-staff taken from him. And when God put it into Joshua's hands, it was
done with the charge in the Text, and a reason annexed, that affairs might
thrive better under his conduct and menagery, that thou may prosper
whithersoever thou go. And again, ver. 8. then shall thou make thy way
prosperous, and then shall thou have good success. Not but that holy and good
men have been worsted, and lost the day. It is no new thing, for Gods Israel to
flee before accursed Amalekites, or be led captive by Babilonish conquerors,
but it was sin, that accursed thing that foiled and routed them, and casting
Gods Law behind their back, made them to turn their back before their enemies.
And there is no way lies so fair and smooth to success and victory, as for the
Menagers of Martial affairs, by a Religious and faithful obedience, to engage
him that is the Lord of Hosts, in their cause and quarrel.

6. Sixthly and Lastly, Religion adds to the Soldier a public and beneficial
usefulness, such as answers those just ends, for which God has put the Sword
into his hands; without which, the world perhaps would have no more cause to
joy in the bare success of arms, then the poor Polander at this day in the
Great Turks prosperity. Neither the Civil nor the Military Sword is to be born
in vain, God has appointed the one and the other to set and keep the world to
rights, so as that where the Sword of the Magistrate cannot enter, nor Justice
and reason take place, by reason of men's brutish lusts, and ungovernable
passions, the Soldiers Sword is to cut a way for them. The state of things
would, its true, be very much bettered in the world, if reason and equity,
righteousness and honesty could obtain such an uncontrolled, and universal
Empire, as might make the Soldier useless, and beat Swords into Plow-shares,
and Spears into Pruning Hooks; but this neither being, nor to be expected, in
our corrupt degenerate state, where the most men, like bruits, blindly and
eagerly pursue a mere sensual interest; God has made the Military Sword a whip
for the Horse, a bridle for the Ass, and a rod for the Fools back.

Now without the sway and influence of Religion, and a sense of duty to God,
this severe, boisterous, and bloody instrument can hardly be menaged to the
ends of Justice and righteousness; men would use it to promote their own lusts
and passions, humors and interests, and cut and slash, only to carve the fat
and large portions for themselves; and so greater injury and mischief would be
done by the Sword than redressed; were St. John Luke 3. 14.
Baptists Military Lecture no part of the discipline, the world would have no
disease more fatal and deadly than this last remedy. When Cain took up arms
without any restraints of Religion, what woeful havoc did he make, destroying
one quarter of the world at a blow? And among our selves, not long since, when
they had the sword in their hands, that were Saints, without Religion, and
applauded themselves in a godliness without righteousness and honesty, how were
honors and estates, lives and liberties, the crown it self, and the head that
wore it, sacrificed to pride and revenge, boundless ambition, and insatiate
avarice? I should not on such a day as this, bring sorrows to remembrance, but
that there is joy in thinking we are past them. And that they are not now the
objects of sense, but memory, olim meminisse. But on the other side the
unbyassed holiness and Religious integrity of a Sword-man, makes him a public
benefit: And as a second to the Prudent, faithful and conscientious Magistrate,
the world is beholden to him for that little peace, justice, honesty, and good
order that are yet remaining in it.

FINIS.

