A WELCOME IN A POEM To His Excellency John Lord Roberts Baron of Truro, Lord
Lieutenant General, and General Governor of Ireland; my most Noble Patron,
etc. At his Royal Entry into the Castle of Dublin.

BY Lieut. Coll. VV. M.

Seria mixta jocis. DUBLIN, Printed by Josiah Windsor, for Robert Howes,
Bookseller in Castle-street, 1669.

In place of the FRONTISPIECE.
Upon this page I thought to place
His Excellence Effigies,
Of Liniaments so right and r^^e,
That all should say the life lay there.
The piece that made the sparrows pick,
Was not accounted near so quick,
As I believed that this should be,
Or of such excellent degree.
But then as soon as e're I saw
The workman would his hand withdraw,
And that things so were understood,
I thought his draughts would do no good,
So put (supplying of the place)
Sonnets for his Effigies,
Perceiving that the Pencils art,
His Pourtraicture could not impart,
His mind's a Magazin of grace,
And that is apparent in his face.
If so? then who has hands or wit,
Or learning to illustrate i^?
The endless Emblem of a Ring
Illustrates only such a thing,
Rings have no end you will allow,
His virtues all are endless too.
Read then this reason, and go on,
Better a bad excuse than none.
And let me leave this empty place,
For Zeuxes to attempt the face.
I See no workman willing for to fall,
To work upon this Hero's face at all*
But though the pencil cannot paint a span,
My pen shall paint it as well as I can.
Figures can not such numbers lay, so long
Men may mistake, but words will not go wrong.
Considering such, and in so strict a case,
Reverence thering which should surround the face.
Ring.

How can the compass of a Ring
Contain the Image of a king?
Whose Image, of Divine Contents,
His Makers Image represents.
It can not (no man must say so)
More then an end is in this O.
But see his shadows admit you might,
^is substance is far finer sight,
Which in some sort is sung by me,
Within this welcome, come and see.
Put then some pages here apart,
And read his welcome with your heart.
I labored long enough to fill
This blank, believe me if you will,
And wished the workman to take care,
To do his duty to a hair,
In handling his Effigies,
He said he understood the case,
So still he stamped a stately thing,
That to the life looked like the King,
And then when I would tell him that,
He asked me, what I would be at?
Assuring me it must so be,
The Image of His Majesty,
What first he wrought, he would defate,
And then begin again to get
The graven Image, said, in reason,
King Charles could not call it treason.
But finding him affected so,
I took my book, and bade him go,
And left the blank ev'nas before
Forboth of us could do no more.
Then we his mind would modellize,
Which vexed us worse by ten degrees*
So prayed Apelles with his wit,
To try his skill, contriving it,
But mind nor body could he bring
within the compass of a Ring.
Then we three threw the things away
Wherewith we wrought, but I did say,
I shall afford for my offense,
A welcome for his Excellence.
Within this Welcome will appear
Mistakes, and twenty faults I fear.
But I Will excuse no crime into 't,
Let scribimus indocti do 't.
Verbum Sapienti, OR, MERCERS Muse making Melody, in a WELCOME To His
Excellency John Lord Roberts Baron of Truro, Lord Lieutenant General, and
General Governor of Ireland, my most Noble Patron, etc.

Ovid. Principlis obsla, sero medicina paratur,
Cum mala per longas invaluere moras.
Englished thus,

Kill Cocatrices early in the egg,
If sickness seize, then Galen may go beg.
Or thus,

With timely care, kill Cankerworms, that eat,
Your enterprises, and destroy the State.
By a Lover of the Muses Lieut. Coll. William Mercer.

DUBLIN, Printed by Josiah (...) for Robert Hewes, Bookseller (...) 1669.

Epistle Dedicatory.
May it please your Excellency,
NO Indian Ore, of precious stones, or gold,
Have I to give, or if I had? you would
Not value such, my gift gives greater price,
First welcoms you, then gives you good advice,
Within few words, and lo my lines do bring
Vnfeign'd affection, that is a sacred thing.
I also offer by some things I add,
A fair forewarning to debar the bad,
But how the bad shall from the better be
Discerned, that secret lies asleep with me.
If things ensue, which here I seem to smother?
Say that a fool said so when you came hither.
I honor you, and wish your welfare too,
And (if commanded) I know what to do.
But for the present pray (Great Sir) proceed,
Vievving your vvelcome, venture then to read,
What more I say, and so I shall bring on
The vvelcome with this Dedication.
But left it be abused by base objection,
I publish it upon my Lords protection*
For unto whom should I such duty do,
Were I an Ovid only unto you,
Whose valor weighs with Cesars, and I say,
Exceeds by so much as is seen to day.
That prosperous Pompeius too in power,
You parallel in pomp this present hour.
Nations and cities in's days he did subdue,
And so the same sure shall be said of you.
He gained Armenia, Medeia, and Celicia,
Mesopotamia, Raphlagonia, Cappadocia,
But all by force, your Excellence not so,
You gain by fairness wheresoever you go,
Nor are your fortunes, nor your actions either,
One jot inferior to Pompeius neither.
Great treasures did his Victories transport
To Rome: so could you also, Sir, in short
Do (of your own to Dublin) and transcend
The pomp for which they Pompeius commend;
For he but conquered Kingdoms, purchased fame,
And you compare with Pompeius in them.
But then to put more pomp upon your plenty,
Weigh with your Welcome Verbum sapienti.
ANAGRAMS Upon the Noble Name of JOHN ROBERTS.
Sob'r not hjer.
John Lord Roberts.
Trj on bold'r Hero's.
I Will ord'r hon'r best.
Is bornet' hon'r.
Rest noblj'r hon'rd.
Sob'r not hjer, though in honor high,
Heroique signs of true Nobility.
Now signed and sealed this promise is expressed,
As Lord Lieutenant I Will ord'r hon'r best.
Trjon bold'r Heroes, do nothing now remove at,
In all attempts, Audaces fortuna juvat.
Is borne to hon'r in his Monarchs eye,
And truly honored by his Majesty.
Rest noblj'r hon'rd, of himself said Caesar,
So may my Lord say as much now as these are.
These Anagrams and Name so well agree,
Nor place, nor Name, nor letters, nothing free.
ACROSTICK.
I know not one (when I read all the Roll)
O fall the wise Philosophers, the whole
Have not so near a sympathy in things*
Neither by Nature, nor what Fortune brings
Like you (my Lord) Lo no man must deny us
O fall your Lordship's likest to Pompeius*
Read of his rare endowments, and I dare
Directly say, your Excellence by far
Rise to a higher magnitude of mind,
Of wisdom, valor, fortune; yet I find*
Better success. In Pompeius appeared
Even then in all Philosophers, but heard
Renowned ROBERTS, he disposed so
Things in such sort, Pompeius Magnus, no,
So flourished in Africa for his fame,
For all that they so Pompeius proclaim,
As does your Noble Excellence, but now
I Am tied to Letters, knows not what to do*
R. W.

To the Curious READER.
A Caveat.
REader, remember what you have to do,
And in whose presence you are pressing to,
To whom you talk, nor do not you presume
With hands profane, these sayings to assume,
Dare not to take this Noble Name in vain,
Nor do this welcome wilfully disdain.
Although my weak invention, and my phrase
Fall short by thousands to impart his praise,
Yet blame me not* bewitched with this day,
To write his Welcome as well as I may.
For write who will, and write till they have won it.
Yet I must spend my spark of fire upon it*
What pen so proper punctually to pen
The virtues of the worthiest of men,
Whose word so well may be believed to be,
Witness as one who with his eyes did see
His Excellence so many months and years,
To prove most prudent among Englands Peers,
His proof has power his praises to proclaim,
That viewed his worth, and well discerned the same*
Let me then labor, though my lines are lame,
The praise of our Pompeius to proclaim.
Next bout shall be a bout, a Twelve months time
To tell three Nations Nequams in a rhyme.
Till then I say, take timely notice now,
Censure me slowly. Reader, that is for you.
My meaning to Momus.
THe dullest drone, whose wit will hardly weig^
Adram of dust, which on the balance lie,
That fool I say, before he fully looks,
Can tell the Ploughman that the furrow crooks.
But I could wish your wits to work were driven,
To hold the plough, and place the furrow even.
For you that read behind my back, must be
Busy abusing both my Book and me.
But I shall say, as did Diogenes do,
Behind my back (be doing) beat me too.
But better spare me (though you do reject
My rithmes) and praise me for my Lords respect.
If I want wit, yet Critics must confess
Beauty's Idea needs no newfangled dress.
Learning I lack, and I left all my skill
With Mars half-murther'd one day on a hill.
Wherefore (as Coyduck) I would draw you in
With your more lofty Elogium to begin,
Because a quill sn^pt from some Fagles wing,
Sho^^ pen his praise approved so by a King.
Yet knows my Lord, allows no signs of show,
Where such great value it within, O! no,
Whence, sin^^^ worth down-weigs what I can do,
(If I had Homer (...) to help me too)
I must leave off, my Lord allows me not
To put a pla^^ where there is no spot.
The Prologue.
LEt passengers (for all their speed) espy
Upon this page, Summa* Negotii.
HEre is a perilous present offered up,
A pill of poison in a precious cup,
Many fair phrases, fair pretenses too,
And such things done, as all do overdo
Thousands (in substance) brave embracements bring,
But oh! the shadow far exceeds the thing,
First writes a Welcome, Nemine contradicente,
Then casts a caveat, Verbum sapienti,
Where (in the first place) plainly you have here
The pleasure, then the poison does appear.
Two things indeed, which though I draw them dark,
A blind man's bolt can scarcely miss the mark:
Secrets set open, AEdipus nor other
Are useful here, one ridle reads another*
It is the same, or as much as to say,
A snare may snap the Phoenix for a prey.
The WAY to the WELCOME.
When we were crossed, then fried away our fat,
Now we are blessed, what will become of that?
No Aedipus shall need to answer either.
My Muse alone resolves the ridle rather.
We were confounded formerly with cares,
Now enters one can cure our fatal fears,
For Pompeius Magnus proved not so victorious,
Or great at Rome, as ROBERTS now is glorious,
Whence you our comfort easily may scan,
Comes from enjoying of so just a man,
Then (overcharged by chance) how can I choose,
But ask assistance for my murdered Muse?
To write a Welcome for a man so rare,
Who, fitly, with Pompeius I compare.
I must invoke the sacred Nine, but may
Fall short by far, of what I think to say,
Yet shall unto our Caesar seal my thought,
Write down his welcome, so my work is wrought.
Then let the Nymphs, and all the Nine too, meet,
And spend their spirits on this paper sheet.
Let Helicon convey within my Quill
Celestial drops down from Parnassus Hill,
That (sacred Power inspiring of my Pen)
I may write vvelcome to the best of men.
These then surrounding (circle-like) the center
Of my vveak sense, I am resolved to venture
With such assistance, so that now you shall
See trembling hands take strength, and to it fall.
I read of some, that went by water round
The world, and I sailed far besouth the sound
My self, but savv not such brave things; I say,
As Dublin is demonstrating to day,
Whose splendent pomp, since none can fashion fit
Let me pen an Epitome of it,
And since not said so well as it should be,
Amend it then, mean time attend to me.
Behold yet Phoebus reaches out his rays,
Affording time for such triumphs as these,
Heaven also smiles, the Elements, and air,
All creatures do contentedness declare.
Prayers bring advantage when the prayers appear
To have had audience in the Almighties ear.
When fame took vvings, and first with force the fly
Throughout this Nation, none will now deny
With what affections most men were inflamed
Hearing't affirmed, your Excellence once aimed
Your Monarchs only, and immediate aid
In Ireland, and see Banners once displaid
By your appointment, to promote the peace
With piety, in this distracted place,
In hope whereof all elevated are,
Both hearts and hands convening from asar
To bid you vvelcome, and will venture too
Their treasures, though they should themselves undo,
To do their duty; nor dare I refuse
To play my part in manner as my Muse
Can compass things, contentment cannot come
From my vveak pen, yet I will point at some
Who now are met, sincerely in the sense
Of joy, enjoying of your Excellence.
I must be active for to set things forth,
So long a witness of your Lordships worth,
Only my Feather from an Eagles fan
Should be plucked out to write of such a man.
But O! I Am hurried, heaps are on my hand,
So many thousands both by sea and land
Are looking on, and scarcely will allow it,
Or let me write, and yet they put me to it.
Great Sir, then see, for you can hardly hear
(The sight goes farther than the sense of ear)
But first perceive the season of the year,
Smiling to show how welcome you are here,
And you may see, Sir, conduits, on that score,
Wasting the wine, where water went before,
And all that are fill pitchers too, with plenty,
The Spanish grape gets not the name of dainty,
They drink and dance, delighting so that they
Think it no sin to celebrate the day,
To welcome you, and were this day a year,
They would not tire in tippling too, I fear.
But they must act the Act they are to do,
Before they be intoxicated too,
For empty vessels make the shrillest sound,
They Are full, but of affections most profound.
Wherefore they would, and will now as they may,
Sing welcome, that is the work, Sir, of the day*
Whence you shall see, all Nations now appear,
With twenty tongues, to entertain you here:
First, then, the English, have their force set sorth
By furious lions, to defend your worth,
This they would do, should you not buy it dear,
Leave half at home, the other half have here.
The Natives are by Nature so much moved,
They think you never can be enough beloved.
The Caledonians dote on you, and they
An ancient Emblem of their power display,
A Thistle, such as (if in pride men press it?)
Says, serving you, Nemo nos impune lacessit;
Proclaims by casting Blue-caps up and down,
Lord Roberts, our Lord Lieutenant's in the Town.
Likewise the French affirm with par ma foy,
Monsieur we must make merry now for joy,
Officiously, not falsify our fence,
But fight most stoutly for his Excellence.
The Irish also tune their harps anew,
And tire the strings with welcoming of you,
And with the rest resolves to see the day,
When they shall dance, whoever please to play.
The Dutch men drink a health to every one,
Your vvelcome vovvs invite you to come on.
Will vvave advantage, and a voyage will make,
And fraught a ship with vvelcomes for your sake.
The Danes drink also deep as they can do,
And kindly cries, you're vvelcome to them too.
So many vvelcomes from such several lands,
And all their Patrons come to kiss your hands,
St. George, St. Andrew and St. David do
Dance with St. Dennis, and St. Patrick too.
Two Nations more, the Duchess and the Duke
So fain would foot it, they cannot refrain,
And all for nothing, kindly, but to call,
(Bowing their knees) you're vvelcome unto all,
So that I think lay Caesar in the scale,
With you, his vvelcoms vvouldnot countervail;
He conquered all by force where he did go,
Men yield to you* Sir, whether you will or no;
English, Scotch, French, Welsh, Dutch, Danes, Irish, all,
To crown your welcome, come on knees, and fall
Before your Honor, entering on the Throne,
With acclamations; hark how they go on*
In Wales, St. David, to his Harp, indeed,
Dances, twice sixty Sovereigns to succeed.
Brutus the first, Corineus who renowned,
Whence, now, the name of Cornwall does redound.
Brutus I say, from whose brave enterprises,
Cadwallader, Corineus, Roberts, now arises;
Three, so succeeding Brutus at his best,
As does the Phoenix from the Phoenix nest,
Brutus is that Arabian bird, from whence
Roberts arises, but in Excellence,
The name unites too, England, Scotland, Wales,
Britain from Brutus, else the Fable fails,
THE WELCOME.
ANd are ye come King Charles his Champion,
To sway the Scepter on your Soverains throne?
God give you joy, but see, Sir, to and fro,
With what great glory they receive you so,
A^l are rejoyeing, and triumph in state,
Unanimous, no murmr nor debate,
Both far and near, all are convened to call,
And clap their hands, concurring one and all.
Not only Subjects, but each living thing,
This day adore the image of their King
In doing homage, heaven and earth concur,
All things in such extremity do stir
In stately manner, as much as they may,
Or mortals can, and this is that they say,
Welcome Great Heroes, Caesar seldom saw
Such troops of Captives, conquered with his awe,
As are to day, on tops of mountains met,
Building of bon fires, thousands now are set
With free consent, see how the flags do fly,
Exceeding Cesars signs of victory.
Mars now runs mad, makes men march out in milions,
Transporting tents, and they prepare pavilions,
Wherein they may make merry and carouse,
And pay unto your Excellence their vows.
Mark our commanders how they come in clusters
The Pikes and Muskets meet at general Musters,
Ships hoise up fail, and through sweeps the Main,
Swims to and fro, fly out and in again.
The very fishes float above, and bite
At every thing they see so much delight,
But Neptune roars in madness out of measure,
To part with such a precious piece of treasure*
O! but behold, See thousands on the shore,
Throwing away their treasures and their store,
That all those things exceed the joys by water,
So much that men admire to see the matter.
Buildings are empty, streets are standing bare,
Windows are open, with the Cages there
Where Parrots prattle, and keep such a spruttle,
The pretty sparrows tattle too and truttle.
The shops are slighted, much now in a maze,
All men admiring what is meant by these,
And which is more, the Masters make it play,
The boys give blessings to this holy day.
But I have done with things concern the City
Shall tell you stories twenty times more pretty,
And all for nothing, but to let you know
That all sing welcome to my Lord; for lo
The towering hills on tiptoes stand, and stare
To see above us what brave things are there*
The stony rocks stand as they could not stir,
The herds and flocks too murmr, and demur,
The very Bees about the holes are humming,
All things rejoice your Excellence is coming.
Nor do they care who buys the bargain dearest,
But stiives and struggles who may-now be nearest
Will you resolve through Ireland for to ride,
Your Excellence is sure to see a guide.
The country Clowns to welcome you will venture
With Docha Dorros, where you cannot enter*
The wildest stags stand instantly enticed,
And for your sake they will be sacrificed.
The feathered fowls fall down and do not fly,
But for to feast you, are content to die.
Fairies in flocks, upon the spangled hills,
Hearing your welcome, dance and feast their fills.
Yet not content with all I here have told,
You shall see more, Sir, by a thousand fold.
But that the atoms are so in the air,
The day draws dark you cannot see things there.
The pride of prancing horses with their heels,
Raise such a dust, that all the riders reels.
The rattling of the Coaches keep a noise,
The laquies laughing, and the little boys
About the Hackneys, they keep such a crying,
The haughty horses naturally are neighing
For joy, that just unless you are so near,
You shall not see, though doubtless you may
The trumpets sound, the echoes answer them
The bells ring out; so do the drums proclaim
Their pleasures, and the Castle Cannons roar,
The City shakes, as dancing does a door
This day* even so the Ensigns fan and fly,
As flourishing before a Deity.
I know not how to compass nor contract
So many welcoms, such a st^r they make,
They come not on in order, but they run
To weave the web, before the weft be spun.
The men go mad, as vanished from their wit
With overjoy, and just now in the fit
All things rejoice, and joyfully proclaim
Your welcome, but believe not half of them.
The women also, willingly convene
To welcome you, such things are seldom seen.
Lo, how the Ladies in a train attend,
Scattering the confects round about Ringsend,
Whence, where the floods before* did overflow,
Now over man led, all with green does grow,
Where men may walk from bank to bank, even both
From Bullock bravely to the Hill of Hoth,
About which mountain Neptune now is a sense,
And flows for favor of your Excellence,
And with his proud approaches does proclaim
The ancient custom of the Diadem.
This day is done, our duties we declare,
The Lords and Ladies loyally repair,
Where famous feastings furnished are found,
Ceres and Bacchus, both of them abound*
Applauded pleasures, nor did Paradise
Afford such fruits of plenty, or of price,
As Hoth in heaps, can cast upon the Hills,
Till ships were fraughted, when we fed our fills,
And after all Solemnities were there,
And many thousands satiate with a share.
Lo then from thence unto the Castle-gate,
Ladies lay lillies, my Lord may step in state,
Likewise the Leefy looked as it were paved
With precious pearls as the waters waved.
But then, behold, about the heaps and hills
The sea flowed farther then we see it fills;
For as my Lord does peace and peace appear
It drowns the dust to make the passage clear.
Then do the Callaughs make the Pipers play,
And dance in dozens to delight the day.
The country children meet in millions too,
And at your welcome make as much ado,
And tatling, tells, when they to knowledge come
They will be witness of this welcome home.
Even so the Shepherds now forsake the sheep,
With oaten Piffers plays them all asleep.
The silly lambs lie sacrificed too,
To make you welcome, so you see they do.
And if in Ireland were there such things here
Inspired with poison, should there such appear,
(But that St. Patrick put them all away)
To bid you welcome, they would dance to day.
But then of all these diverse kinds of calls,
I most admire the meanest animals
That make a noise to welcome you, and lo,
Your Lordships coming cause the cripples go.
The sick and lame have left the Hospitalls,
Beggars and Cripples play busy with the balls.
Hippocrates, and Paracelsus sure,
Nor Galen neither gave so great a cure,
As all of these by getting you, do grant
They get, and think, hence, they shall hardly want.
Thus men and women, beasts, birds, all are bent,
Your Excellence convene a Parliament,
And so proclaim by carrying a Crown,
This Days triumph with Trophies of renown,
To eternize to after times, the story
Of such a welcome, and illustrious glory.
But best of all, our Pastors preach and pray
Mornings and Ev'nings, almost all the day,
And all the people nigh to the Pulpit press,
Where with their prayers divinely they address
Themselves with thanks, and that is sure the best
Beseeming welcome, even of all the rest.
The Organs also make a sacred sound,
Even so the Anthems solemnly redound
Devoutly too, so that I think I see
And hear the Saints assist our melody.
Thus all are willing with a fair pretense,
To bow before your Honors Excellence,
And bid you welcome, you, whose virtues won
Englands Great Monarch mounted on the throne,
There, to assign the ordering of all
This Islads glorious Grandieur, great and small,
You, whose great wit could weigh the scale, and cast
A loyal Lot, now thirty season past.
And now your native Nation no more moved
With barbarous broils, behold how it behooved
To condescend, and see you sent away
The Sovereign sword in Ireland for to sway.
Transporting whom, may I not truly tell,
How Neptunes pride by piece and piece did swell,
To see himself so trusted, to receive
Your Excellence upon his watery wave,
Loath to deliver such a Loyal Lord
To Irelands evils being once aboard.
Though for its bliss he was content to bring
A Lord Lieutenant to so great a King*
But since I see the main design is but
To bid you welcome, therefore I shall shut
My thoughts, even so with saying welcome too,
But would the world sav welcome, that will do
Nothing indeed (in substance nor in sense)
Worthy to welcome your most Excellence.
The only welcome therefore I Will allow
Is speech in constant prayers to welcome you.
Wherefore I offer sacrifice of praise,
My Lord is landed, and shall shortly raise
My praise unto a Diapasons pitch,
Tickling men's ears, when they the stringe shall twitch,
The sound whereof sure shall ascend on high,
In thankful prayers for your Excellency.
But to break off, here must my Muse remain,
Illustrious Heroes, welcome once again,
Millions of mortals singing Sonets, say
Caesar triumphs, and we have won they day.
Verbum Sapienti.
THis welcome, sure, of sweet things is made up,
But yet some knavery may be in the cup*
And though with these I make so much ado,
Pills gilded may be packt with poison too.
Fish had far better be without that bait,
A golden hook may choke them with a cheat.
My meaning is, when friendship was professed,
A juggling Judas did betray the best.
NOw seven Epistles, such as they are, I enter,
Wherewith (in weakness) wise advice I venture.
Or are they fables, which fill up the paper?
If so? the buyer buys my Book the cheaper,
To light his Pipes, has paper here, in plenty,
He saves enough by Verbum sapienti.
Provided that, as he the pipe pursues,
He also Verbum sapienti use.
1. Epistle.
MArk my discourse, but construe right the case,
Some Ghostly Father flattering in your face
Will, with a kiss come, striving to destroy
Your enterprises, if you such employ?
But you (in prudence) will be pleased to see
Precepts expressed from such a tool as me,
Whereby the baseness which be practiced here,
May partly to your Excellence appear.
Fools may by fortune, let such phrases fly,
As wise men may mark something by the by.
But these (distracted with distress) I do
Humbly here offer to your Lordship now.
For if each Judas should enjoy a cord,
In loyalty I love to serve my Lord,
And these send forth before some things suppressed
For present, I, in time may tell the rest.
2. Epistle.
THe thing called Verbum sapienti, sleeps,
Within a place that is private, but it peeps,
For to perceive your Excellence apart,
To speak of Verbum sapienti s art,
And in the hour the hurly burly's over,
That you can try conversion, tricks and trover,
I mean not things my self concerning so,
But grieved to see such subtle gamesters go
With great designs; yet were my Lord at leisure,
Then I shall pay the tithe our of my treasure,
Presuming too* ten thousand tens to twenty,
My Lord says, Thank you Verbum sapienti.
3. Epistle.
As fish at flies, things I on sudden snap,
Nex^ time my hook may hit and hurt perhap,
My feathers forced to strike, as steel at flint,
And I am pl^as'd to prove a fool in print,
To tell the errors of the time, and try,
Whether the fault lies in a knave, and cry
Whore first, and so in season serve my Lord,
(This Earnest penny shall the sum afford)
Though no man writes, but some offense may fall
Yet I presume my fin shall seem but small,
Unmasking merely things that lurk below,
By laying open, that my Lord may know
He has one here, so well does know the case,
That dare dissect the fore before their face,
And e're the Leeffy lies by Letterkenny,
Shall make them scratch their crowns, I Will pawns penny,
Or e're Dundalk to Dublin Castle comes,
Shall beat alarm louder than by drums*
But lest they think such things shall never be,
I shall come quickly, take this much of me.
For what are they, think I should such adore?
Or be the subject of their scorn, Wherefore?
Because misfortunes have laid me below,
And they have got what I had long ago,
No, they shall see I something have in store,
And to their much, it may be give them more.
Qua mihi prestiferis memini, semperque ten (...). 4. Epistle.
A Ridle resolved.
Wit and Ingenuity,
Honesty and Fair dealing,
Money and Merchandise.
These three may beg their bread in Ireland.

1.
Were Cato, Plato, or Pythagoras,
Here with their wits, each one would prove (...)
2.
Were Job here too, with his integrity,
He might go thread bare by his honesty.
3.
Bring also Dives, which if you could do
Here, they would cheat him for his moneys too*
Whence, since all such are made but fools at fairs
Lothen, poor I, must prosper by my prayers,
Or at the least from Dublin must depart,
Where almost all live by that ugly art, feigned desert.
5. Epistle.
I Doubt not but your Excellence shall see;
More learned lines, then you receive from me.
And yet I think, few such shall come in season,
Though better rithm, shall not be better reason.
When Caesar saw a soldier do his duty,
He valued not the bigness of the booty,
So I presume your Excellence will never
Despise a soldiers poems; howsoever
Let these take place for present, I avow,
E're long I shall bring better things to you;
I call them better, though they be but bad,
To tell them now, my Lord might think me mad.
My mind is vexed with a world of woes,
Lawsuits, and things fomented by my foes.
But I presume your Excellence will be,
Henceforth a gracious safeguard unto me,
For in such peril where should I appear?
But to my Patron, being present here,
Or shall I rest, as Horace with his rithme,
On my Mecenas? this distracted time.
Yes, Noble Lord, so shall it then be said,
The Poet for his prophecy is paid.
6. Epistle.
LIke as a wife Commander sends a Scont,
In day of danger to disclose a doubt.
Even so I send this little Book to be
My messenger a small thing swims the sea,
And marks the way before the mighty whale,
The greater fish find favor from the small;
But if so be the smaller should be slain,
Or swallowed up within the mighty Main
By bigger beasts* Leviath an then lies
Exposed to peril in the depth, and dies.
But as the mean makes way unto the most,
The great takes care lest that the less be lost*
And so I cease with what I said before,
Verbum sapienti, I shall say no more.
7. Epistle.
Let many more then Momus
Receive this Reckoning from us, etc.
WHen Redbreasts in your Chamber window chats,
The chirping bird bad news prognosticates;
Even so my Redbreast flutters in your floor,
And gives you warning of a winter shower.
This bird too, boasts, great multitudes of men,
To bring bad tidings about sixty ten.
Then let my Redbreast pick upon your table,
Till that time comes, you find it not a Fable.
Twelve Similitudes.
The Constitutions in a true Catalogue,
Of all, between the Postscript and the Prologue.
1.
First, then, to Court comes early, one by one,
As proud as was Caligula alone.
2.
Then you shall see some falling at your foot,
Drunk as Tiberius, they dare daily do it.
3.
Nero could never such cruelty contrive,
As here do thousands, though they therewith thrive,
4.
A vile and vicious Heliogabalus here,
Shall every hour before your face appear.
5.
Envious men, exceeding Alexander,
Inenvy, sure, this can be called no slander.
6.
Avaricious Cyrus, slily, Sir, he lies,
Catching at Court your profits to surprise.
7.
Ulysses likewise no man must deny,
Could ever act such plots of policy.
8.
Midas men say was covetous, but hold,
Here thousands far more covetous of gold.
9.
The craft of crafty Hanniball we see,
But here are koaves far craftier than he.
10
But then of all this is my only fear,
A Zoperus dissembling in your ear.
11.
Adding withal, by joining ill to ill,
A false and flattering Aristippus still.
12.
Now one of these shall come, and kiss, and bow,
But justas ludas shall betray you too.
Thus I have told you, then your self to save,
From Court exclude them, that is all I crave.
But you will say, you know them not, what then*
I know them mingled among ten thousand men.
And when I Am urged to usher ou my mind,
I think I shall leave very few behind.
His Excellence, thus welcomed first, as fit,
Now, three Estates, ensue to second it.
THe Illustrious Glory of three crowns, consist
Of three Supreams, and make a Monarch blessed
I may express them (on a fair pretense)
As they are Gods, and that is Gospel-sense.
1. A Lord Lieutenant is a Sovereign thing,
Set in the Throne of Majesty, as King.
The spiritual powers, Peers of divine degree,
Infer perfection, that is the Prelacie.
2. Pious Lord Primate, full of zealous fire,
Learned Lord Chancellor may challenge St. Peter's chair,
Lords Temporal too, enlarge this loyal link
Of state to strength, these are the Three I think.
3. Only I add that Rule among the Romans,
Things are concluded by consent of Commons.
So numbering no more than I now enroll,
These Three, I say, set fully forth the whole.
But having thus in general justly wrote,
Behold what further falls unto their Lot.
My Lord Lieutenant long before he came,
Anag. Was born to hon'r, faith his Anagram.
And will you weigh things rightly with the rest,
His Excellence can Order hon'r best. Anag.
Anag. Am Sions Gamester, though the game goes od,
Against Romes mas, to play a game for God.
And look ye now but merely on the name,
James Margets* son, says certainly the same.
Anag. Cholie Lamb I, Holy cymbal, too.
Of Michael Boil, both Anagrams I do.
Anag. With Holy cymbal, David, (night, and day)
That Holy Lamb did praise the Lord and pray.
But if you think these Anagrams go high,
The names gives out these Anagrams, not I.
Determine rather Grace, and Nature too,
In each of them these did divinely do.
Such threefold cord secures the crown on caesar,
What hand can hurt such sacred things as these are?
Distinct three parties, parted all asunder,
In one they make a Monarch, that is no wonder.
Whom God unites, let no man brag to break,
King, church, and State, a perfect Monarch make.
Thus to the purpose playing hereupon,
Now one wotd more, and so I shall be gone.
APelles paints Apollo pretty nigh,
But finding it imperfect, put it by*
Nor ever one the venture yet would run
To finish what Apelles had begun.
So I a Welcome write here as I can,
Hoping a Horace, or more learned man
Might mend my work, for write who will^ he (...)
My Lord will be M^cenas, I dare say.
My Lord's alone, for which my pen repeats,
Such Worthies with him, as make three Estates,
And with this welcome, or hereafter, soon,
Or long before the Man that is in the Moon
Gets twelvefull faces, I shall fetch afar,
And boldly bring three Nations to the Bar,
And there arraign them; but for present peace,
My Muse resolves, with what is said, to cease.
Let all (but such, as are concerned here)
Read with regard, give no offense for fear.
FINIS.
(...) ^aith, a thought once past by speech
(...) mine, but has outrun my reach.
(...), how many men's cursed crime,
(...), before a Twelve months time.
(...) resolved, in telling truth, not tire,
(...) (says the Psalmist) every one's a liar.
Doubtless with Dublin I have much to do,
And must say much of most men therein too.
But whether that be good or bad, behold
When that time comes, what stories I have told,
The tithe whereof, I at this instant owe,
Commending of some Clergymen I know.
Our righteous Judges, I must draw their due,
My long experience proves it to be true.
Both learned and loyal. Then the Advocates
That plead with prudence, some like Parots prates.
But this in general, when that day does dawn,
I Will mark them then, not flatter, ly, nor fawn.
For here are hundreds, who men's wits bewitch,
Intangling Clients by becomingrich.
But rich and righteous render that no lie,
Then comes the Camel through the needles eye,
Yet what I mean, or whom my aim is at,
Till that time comes, let none prejudicate.
Only to this I am resolved to stand,
Before this vvitness set my seal and hand.
Witness H. C. VV. M.



