PAPISMUS LUCIFUGUS, OR A faithful Copy of the Papers exchanged betwixt Mr.
JOHN MENZEIS, Professor of DIVINITY in the Marischal-Colledge of ABERDENE, and
Mr. Francis Dempster Jesuit, otherwise Surnamed Rin or Logan,

WHEREIN The Jesuit declines to have the truth of Religion examined, either by
Scripture or Antiquity, though frequently appealed thereunto.

AS ALSO, Sundry of the chief Points of the Popish Religion are demonstrated to
be repugnant both to Scripture and Antiquity, yea, to the Ancient Romish-Church.

TO ALL WHICH Is premised in the Dedication, a true Narration of a verbal
Conference with the same Jesuit.

Tit. 1.10.11. There are many unruly and vain Talkers and Deceivers, -- Whose
mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole houses, teaching things which they
ought not, for filthy Lucres sake.

Aug. lib. 2. de Bapt. con. Don. cap. 6. Non afferamus stateras delosas, ubi
appendamus quod volumus and quomodo volumus pro arbitri^ nostro, dicentes, hoc
grave, hoc leve est: Sed afferamus divina^^ stateram de Scripturis sanctis
tanquam de the sauris Dominicis and in illa quid sit gravius appendamus: Immo
^on appendamus sed a Domino appensa recognoscamus.

ABERDENE, Printed by JOHN FORBES Younger, Printer to the TOWN, Anno Dom.
M.DC.LXVIII.

Aberdeen coat of arms BON ACCORD Insignia Vrbis abredoniae


Unto the Right Honorable MR. ROBERT PATRIE of PORTLETHEN Lord Provest.
Bailies. ALEXANDR. ALEXANDER JOHN SCOT JOHN DUNCAN JOHN SMITH

ANDREW SKENE Dean of Gild, GILBERT BLACK Treasurer, And to the rest of the
honorable COUNCIL of ABERDENE.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
It was not any supposed Worth in these Papers, which moved me to consent to
the publishing of them. But because our Romish Adversaries had the confidence,
openly to triumph in City and Country, (though I hope without ground,) as if
their Champion Master Dempster, had left, not me only, (which had been no great
matter,) but also the Religion of PROTESTANTS, at a great loss and
disadvantage. Who, Who am I, the meanest of the thousands of ISRAEL, that any
infirmities of mine, whether supposed or real, should be charged on so
GLORIOUS a CAUSE, which is the invincible Truth of the Most High GOD, and may
bid a defyance to all the Goliahs and Hoasts of Romish Philistines? Has not the
Reformed Religion, stood as an impregnable Rock against all the assaults both
of Speculative and Pragmatick heads and bloody hands, which have been kept at
work these many years, in opposition thereto by the Sea of Rome? Who then,
that is but one remove from madness, can imagine that the insignificant scufle
of this Jesuit should endanger it? I freely confess, what I have said, or can
say, is infinitely below the dignity of the CAUSE which I mantaine, yea, and
exceedingly short, of what eminent Lights in the Reformed Churches have said,
and can further say in behalf of our Religion. Must it not argue either height
of prejudice, or pitiful shallowness, to impute whatsoever deficiencies of
such an one as Me, to Religion it self? Wherefore Reverend, Learned, Pious and
Judicious Persons, (with whom I did communicate all these Papers when they
were exchanged,) have judged it sit, that all should be faithfully published,
that the World might have a new demonstration, on how small grounds (to say no
worse,) our clamorous Romanists can triumph, as if they were more then
conquerours. Well may that saying of Austin, in Psalm. 32. Be accommodated to
them, Non remanet iis nisi sola infirmitas animositatis, quae tanto est
languidior, quanto se majores vires habere aestimat. There only support is, the
infirmity of an high or overweening stomach, which is so much the more feeble,
as it overvalueth its own strength.

It has been the usual artifice of Heretics, when they could not conquer
Truth by their captious argueings, to load the assertors thereof with
reproaches. Austin complained of such dealing, both from Pascentius, a champion
of the Arrians, tom. 2. Epist. 174. As also from the Donatists, tom. 7. in
Epist. ad Donatist. post collat. What wonder then, though Romanists who are so
Heretical in their Doctrines, be Acted by the same Calumniating Genius?
Learned Doctor Prideaux, lect. 9. de visib. Eccles.. 11. Has been at the
pains to present his Reader with a multitude of instances of most impudent
Calumnies, wherewith Romanists have aspersed faithful witnesses of truth. I
will not rake in that dung-hil. Only let me remember you, that Romish practices
of this nature were long ago so known to the World, that learned Doctor
Featly, before that he and Doctor Francis White, engaged in their disput with
Fisher and Sweet, two Jesuits, could easily presage and foretell to the pitcher
of the field, that whatever were the issue of that combat, and at whatever
disadvantage the Jesuits should be left, yet he and his Colegue Doctor White,
should be conquered in effigy, and led in triumph in many a Pageant at Doway,
Bruxels, Rhemes, and Rome, as afterward fell out. Yea so impudent were the
Romanists, that Doctor Weston told at Saint Omers, to a Protestant Lord, who
had been present at the disput, viz. to the Earl of Warwick, that the two
Jesuits had acquitted themselves so admirably well, and with so much advantage
to the Romish interest, that two Earls, and an hundredth Auditors were gained
to the Church of Rome, and of these Earls this noble Lord to whom the Doctor
spoke, was affirmed to be one; who could not but smyle as these ludibrious
Legends. For the Earl well knew, there were not near an hunder persons present
at the Conference, nor one PROTESTANT staggered thereby. Yea, the person for
whose satisfaction that conference was principally intended, though before he
had his own doubts, yet after the debate, professed that he was fully resolved
as to the Reformed Religion. All this is testified by judicious Doctor Featly,
in the Relation of that Conference. Should it then seem strange to any, that
the tristing debate wherein I have been lately engaged with this Jesuit, has
been so grossly misrepresented by men of these principles? Who could have
expected any thing else? Do men gather grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles?
Yet as to my own particular interest, I could have borne all their reproaches,
remembering that of the Ancient, Quisquis volens detrahit famae meae, nolens
addit mercedi meae. But judicious Lovers of Truth finding Religion it self to
be thrust at through my sides, laid bonds upon me to give the World a faithful
account of that whole transaction; though otherwise, I could willingly have
destined these poor Papers, so far as they concerned me, to perpetual
silence.

Since therefore, Very Honorable, this scufle with Mr. Dempster fell out under
the intuition of your Authority, I judged it incumbent to me, to present you
with this brief ensuing account thereof. As you in your Civil Capacity, and we
your Ministers in our Ecclesiastic Line, traveled to suppress Error and
Ungodliness in this CITY, We had frequent opportunity to deal with Persons of
a Popish persuasion. When we did demonstrate to them that the present Romish
Religion was False, Impious, Idolatrous yea, and (notwithstanding all its high
pretenses to Catholicism,) grossly Schismatical. These poor straying Souls,
being nuzled up in ignorance by their Romish Guides, under a pretense of the
Implicit Colliar Faith, could make little other Reply, then that, though they
could not answer us, yet there Priests and Learned Men could argue the matter
to the full. We often in compassion to these misled Persons told them, that not
the Priest only but the People also should be ready to render a reason of the
hope which is in them with meekness and fear. 1. Pet. 3.15. That though the
seduceing Priest shall receive a larger measure of Damnation, yet misled Souls
who wilfully persist in their Error, when truth is convincingly proposed, will
also Dye in their sins. Ezech. 3.18. Matt. 15.14. And therefore, that it highly
concerned them to examine the proposalls of their Priests. We did add
likewise, and I hope without vanity, that had we opportunity of speaking with
these Learned Men, of whom they talked so bigly, we should be ready to give a
rational account of the Truth which we profess, and of the Falsehood of
Popery. Hereupon (as we have since been credibly informed,) after many
Consultations betwixt the chief persons of the Romish profession in this Place,
and traffiquing Missionaries, Mr. Dempster was chosen as the Champion who
should encounter the Ministers of ABERDENE, whom they concluded to assault by a
supprizall.

When the Popish Party are about this secret contrivance, it fell out, that as
I was preaching upon the Doctrine of Repentance, from Acts 17.30.31. I gave
this transient advertisement to my hearers, That the Popish Doctors had not
only corrupted the dogmaticalls of Christianity, (as we had frequently
demonstrated,) but many of the Practicalls also. I did instance from the
Subject matter which I was handling, that many of their great Doctors do
teach, That when a man has sinned haynously, he is not bound to repent
presently, in so much, that their great Cardinal de Lugo, tract. de paenit.
disp. 7. sect. 11. 1. number 169. speaking of this Doctrine, says, that it is
Sententia verior and communis jam omnibus Theologis uno vel altero recentiore
excepto. That this Doctrine is now received by all their Divines, except one or
two Neoterieks. Nay, great Doctors among them, as their famous Vasquez, tom. 4.
in 3. part. quaest. 86. dub. 6. Mantaine, That the precept of Repentance binds
only, per se, in articulo mortis, In the article of Death. I shall not here
mention other of their absurd Positions in that matter, whereof I have given
some account in my Reply to the Jesuits eight Paper, page 158. 159. etc. The
discovery of this their Doctrine concerning Repentance, which has so direct a
tendencie to Ungodlynesse, seemed to have such a reflection on their Popish
Religion, that a Gentleman of that Profession (whom I do very greatly honor,
and whose Conversion I sincerely wish,) judged himself concerned to send a
challenge to Me by a friend: Showing That he wondered why I should thus wrong
their Doctors; yea, he was so confident of my mistake, that the Messenger said,
that he promised to turn. PROTESTANT if I would make good what I had asserted.
I told the Messenger that I was sure of a Convert, if the Gentleman would
stand to his word, and if he would be pleased to come to my Study, his own eyes
should be judges, whether I had wronged their Authors.

Within a few days hereafter, when the Secret contrivance (as seems,) was
ryp, and Master Dempster with much study had put his Syllogism into its goodly
frame, and committed it to writing, (only the misery was, that he forgot to
study the Confirmation of either of the Propositions thereof,) the Gentleman
of whom I was lately speaking, accompanied by another of that Profession, was
pleased on the 18. of Aprile 1666: to make Me a visit, my Reverend and Learned
Colegue, Mr. GEORGE MELDRUM being then with Me. He did bespeake us both to this
purpose. You may remember, (said he,) that you have said in conference with
persons of our Profession, that you would not shun to argue the Controversies
of Religion with any of our Learned Men, and now you may have opportunity of a
free communing with a Catholic Scholar (so the Jesuit was designed,) at my
Lodging, if you be pleased to go along with Me. We answered, that we were not
unmindful of what we said, and should be as ready through the help of GOD to
perform, whenever occasion did offer. But I behoved first to answer another
challenge sent by him to Me; some days before, as if I had wronged Popish
Authors concerning the Doctrine of Repentance. And therefore, I offered
presently to make good what I had affirmed as to that thing, by produceing
their own Authors. But he would not so much as speak to that particular: Only
he insisted upon the other Proposition. Whereupon we told that we should never
decline a communing, either upon that particular, or any other Question of
Religion with any person whatsoever. But because such Conferences might be
exceedingly misrepresented, it were ^^ed^ul that Circumstances were cautiously
ordered. It was therefore agreed upon by mutual consent, that there should be
none present but six of either side, and all to be silent except the
Disputants. Yea, the six which should be of the Popish side, were by name
expressed. The day being now far spent, and the advertiseing of our Friends
requiring a time; it was also condescended, that our meeting should be to
morrow in the afternoon, at this Gentle-Mans Lodging. When we had given notice
to some discreet Persons of Our Religion, concerning this challenge, they
looked upon the place as unfit, upon many accounts. Wherefore I wrote a letter,
desiring the meeting might be at some other place, especially, where books
might be at hand, if any testimony which we cited should be denied. But when we
were so far from obtaining this, that our desire was interpreted, as if we were
declyning the Conference, and distrusting our CAUSE. We resolved to go to the
Gentle-Mans house upon whatsoever disadvantage, taking along with us no more
then the definit number of Persons eondescended upon. When we came into the
Lodging, we found (contrary to promise,) a great multitude of both Sexes.

The Champion (whom we afterward understood to be Mr. Dempster Jesuit,) being
set in a great Chair at the head of the Table, and a Popish Youth, who had been
educated at the Scots College in Paris at his elbow; as a Scrivener, (who was
none of the Persons communed upon,) we complained of violation of promise, in
bringing us to such a public Convention, which in the end proved tumultuary,
The clamours of the Excommunicated Women being louder then the Jesuits
Arguments. The Jesuit answered, that was but a circumstance. But it was replied
to him, that PROTESTANTS had too many dear bought experiences of the Perfidy of
Papists. If they were not faithful in Circumstances, we had cause to jealous
them much more in Substances.

This passing. I publicly declared before all present, that I had received
from such a Gentleman two Challenges, One, as if I had charged upon Popish
Doctors eoncerning Repentance that which they do not mantaine. The Other, to
debate the Controversies of Religion with this person, who appeared as Champion
for the Romish interest; Which my Reverend Colegue and I were ready to do, not
against him only, but against the whole Conclave of Rome, if there present. As
to the first, I repeated to the Jesuit, what I had charged upon many of the
chief Doctors of the Present Romish Church, concerning the Doctrine of
Repentance, viz that they mantaine, That when a man has sinned haynously he is
not bound to repent presently. And required him, as one whom I presumed to be
acquaint with their writings, to declare, whether it was so or not? And if he
would deny it, I offered instantly to prove it against him. The Jesuit answered
he came not either to answer Questions, or Objections against the Romish
Religion; but only to impugn the PROTESTANT Religion. It was Replied to him,
we were not affrayed of his Impugnations, but matters behoved to be managed
orderly. The Religion which we profess, being not only the Truth of GOD, but
also established by the Law of the Land; We could not betray our Trust, by
suffering it only, or in the first place to be impugned. But he should have
all, which in Reason or Justice could be desired. Let him answer us either two
or six Arguments against Popery, we should answer as many propounded by him
against the Religion of PROTESTANTS. And this previous question concerning
Repentance, being of a matter of fact, might soon be at an end. So as not to
impede the General discuss of the Truth of Religion. But the Jesuit peremptorly
insisted upon his Declinatur, That he would answer nothing, neither Question
nor Argument, but only impugn

Here it pleased a Grave and Judicious Person, who lately before had born
Principal Charge in the Magistracy of this Town, G. G. P. (whom we found in
the Lodging with others at our coming,) to interpose himself thus. I am a
PROTESTANT (said he,) nor have I any scruple concerning my Religion, yet I
could willingly hear the controversies of Religion fairly debated. But I cannot
be witness to have the PROTESTANT Religion only called in question, or in the
first place. But it seems a most just and reasonable proposal which is made,
that so many objections be first moved against the Popish Religion, and then as
many against the Religion of PROTESTANTS. This the Jesuit pertinaciously
declyned, still affirming that he would only impugn. Whereupon our PROTESTANT
Friends thought it was fittest for us to be gone. And indeed we were once at
the door removing, until these of his own Party being ashamed of his
tergiversing, persuaded him at length by their importunity first to be
Respondent.

We returning, (and the Jesuit shunning to debate with my Reverend and Learned
Colegue Master GEORGE MELDRUM who had offered to impugn him,) the Jesuit was
again desired, First to Answer to the Question of fact, concerning the
Doctrine of Repentance, and then Arguments of more general concernment should
be propounded. But he refuseing to answer to that question, unless it were
framed into an Argument against their Religion, I told that for gaining of
time. I would frame it into an Argument against their Religion, though it would
oblige Me to a more general accusation of their Church, as to that particular,
then I had delivered in the Pulpit. Yet to extort an Answer from him I would
do it, hoping afterward to have liberty granted, to propound other Arguments
against their Impious, and Idolatrous Religion. The Thesis which I undertook
to prove, was, That the Popish Religion is Impious. My first Argument was
framed after this manner: The Religion which teaches, that when a man has
sinned haynously, he is not bound to repent presently, is Impious.

But the Popish Religion teaches, that when a man has sinned haynously, he is
not bound to repent presently.

Ergo, the Popish Religion is Impious.



After that this Argument was several times repeated to the Jesuit, he denied
the Major. Whereupon I took Witness of all that were present, but especially
of the Gentleman who had sent the challenge to Me, that the Jesuit had
admitted the Minor, viz. That the Popish Religion teaches, that when a man
has sinned haynously, he is not bound to repent presently (Which was the only
thing which I intended to have cleared by this Argument, and was more then I
had affirmed in Pulpit, of that particular,) And that he only denied the Major,
that it is an Impiety to teach so. Then I would have been at the propounding of
a new Argument. Had not he and that Party, as seems to drive of time, and to
keep Me from propounding other Arguments against their Religion, by their
clamorous outcrying, constrained me to insist on that which I never intended,
namely, The confirmation of the Major, which of it self, might seem evident
enough to any who had any sense of Godliness. It would be too tedious in this
Epistolar discourse, to rehearse to your HONORS all that was said in
Confirmation of that Major. Only I shall briefly relate to you the Result of
it. The Jesuit in end was reduced to say, That when a man's Soul, or Body, or
his Neighbors Soul are in extreme danger, he is not bound presently to take
care of any of them. Which whether it savor of Atheism, intelligent Christians
may judge? Yea some of the Hearers, who were not called by us (speaking of that
business,) could make no better Apology for the Romish interest, then to say,
That the Jesuit behaved himself like one who resolved to betray the Romish
Cause.

Then I propounded another Argument, which indeed was the first that I designed
against their Religion, (the former being only occasionally put into a
Syllogistick frame to extort an answer from him, in reference to the Matter of
Fact, whereof I had been challenged,) after this manner.

The Religion which destroys all certainty of Faith, is Impious.

But the Popish Religion destroys all certainty of Faith.

Ergo, the Popish Religion is Impious.

Though the Jesuit would make no Answer at all to this Argument, yet I
proposed a Confirmation of the Assumption, (which was the only proposition,
which he could deny,) from the Tridentin and Florentin Canons, which make the
efficacy of all Sacraments to depend upon the intention of the Priests who
officiat. From which it follows, that seeing they cannot have Certainty of
Faith concerning the Priests intention, all certainty of Faith must be
overturned in their Religion. They cannot certainly know who is Pope, Bishop,
or Priest, ( Ordination with them being a Sacrament,) or who is Baptized; and
consequently, they cannot know who is capable to be a Constituent member of a
Council, or to celebrat the Eucharist, and so they cannot have certainty of
Faith, that their Hosty is transubstantiated, even according to their own
Principles, of that they have either Pope, or Council, on whose Authority to
build their Faith. To this Argument, the Jesuit refused absolutely to answer,
desiring that he might have liberty to impugn. But it was replied to him, that
my Argument was already tabled, to which if he would answer, I should answer
him other two according to my first proposal. And this was so much the more
reasonable, because my first Argument, as I ever declared, was only to extort a
declaration from him, concerning a matter of fact. Sundry also of our
PROTESTANT Friends, (without whose advice, I resolved not to move in a matter
of such public concernment,) advised that I should admit of no Arguments from
him, unless he would answer this Argument which I had last proposed. But still
he persisted in his Refusal to answer my Argument. Whereupon it was told him,
neither would I admit of any from him, until that which I had propounded were
answered. Yet had he been very zealous to impugn, might he not at lest have
vocally propounded his Argument? Did I not propound a second Argument against
him, and hint also at the confirmation of the Proposition, which might have
been questioned, though he refused to answer thereto? Could I stop his mouth,
more then he could mine? All he did was to hold a Paper in his hand, (wherein
it seems, he had his poor naked Syllogism,) and to call upon the Scrivener to
writ. But he never told what should be written. It is generally supposed, and I
believe truly, that the Paper which the Jesuit had in his hand, was the First
Paper which he transmitted to me the next night, and is in my Reply thereunto,
I hope sufficiently examined. It resembled every way his first Paper, which I
have by me, and it is more then probable that his first assault would be with
that long studied Achilles, especially, seeing in all his following Papers he
could never frame one Syllogism more.

Matters being at this point, the Jesuit said he would send a written Paper to
me, which I told him, by the help of GOD, should be answered. Hereupon these
ensuing Papers betwixt him and me were exchanged, which I shall submit to the
candid censure of the unprejudiced Reader. Only the tenth and last Paper was
not transmitted to him, the occasion whereof was this. Shortly after the Jesuit
sent to me his tenth Paper, dated May 14 1667. He got out of the Nation. A
Reply to it was lying drawn by me in June 1667. And when I was intending to
transmit it to him, several Persons did advertise me that he was gone over
Sea; yet, as afterward I perceived, they made the rumor to go, that he was
gone, sometime before he was really gone, to make me (as seems,) lay aside
thoughts of returning an answer to his Tenth Paper. I thereupon desired to be
advysed by judicious Friends, what was fit to be done in such an exigent; whose
judgments did all harmoniously concur in this, that all the Papers should be
Printed, together with a Reply to his tenth Paper, that the World might have a
full account of this whole Encounter, which had been so much noysed abroad.
Though I had a great aversation from appearing in Print, especially, with such
trifling Papers, yet in end the Importunity and Authority of Friends prevailed.
And the rather because the Papists made afterward rumors sometime to go that
Mr. Dempster was dead, sometime that he was alive, so that I could not certainly
know what was become of him. But whether he were liveing or dead, the
Misrepresentations of this matter were still animated by the calumniating
Genius of living Papists, for confutation whereof, their clamours laid a
necessity upon me, to publish faithfully the Papers exchanged betwixt us.

There be some two or three things in these Papers which perhaps may seem to
require an Apology. As first, It may be offensive to some that there should be
so much writing on so little purpose. This can be no more irksome to a Reader,
then it was tedious to me in writing. But the nauseating repetitions of the
Adversary constrained me either to resume the same things, or to disdain to
give him any Answer. Yet whether I have not given to him a large enough field,
had he had courage to adventure out of his trenches, others may cognosce. This
I confess was one of my tentations to chastise him somewhat sharply. least
peradventure I might afterward be judged Socius Criminis.

It may Secondly be enquired, why I was not as speedy at all times in my
Answers to him, as he was to me. I believe the frequent incumbency's of duty
which your HONORS know dee weekly return on me, in School and Pulpit, might
sufficiently apologiz for me in this matter. But I have this further to add.
At the first, upon expectation of some significancy from the Adversary, I
concerned my self to use some diligence in returning my Papers, I believe not
inferior to him, though I had more to do. But afterward when I found nothing
but frothy emptiness in his scriblings, it became a Problem with me, whether
to answer him at all. Hereupon I would purposly throw by his Papers for a
time. But lest my utter silence should make him overvalue what he had said, I
would at a spare hour, mould him an answer. When I thought of the dispatch he
sometimes used, (though yet sundry of his Papers be antedated a considerable
time before they were delivered to me,) it brought to my mind the story of the
conceited Painter, who bringing a Picture to Apelles, to raise the esteem of
his Artifice, told that he had done it in so short a time. I guessed said
Apelles at your great haste by your foul work. Festinans Canis caecos parit
catulos. Is it not an easy matter to dispatch quick Replies, when what is most
material is answered with silent Preteritions? Others may consider, whether the
Jesuit have not demeaned himself as it is reported of the Dogs of Egypt, that
for feate of being bitten with a Crocodyle, they dare not take a full draught
of the Rryer Nilus, but satisfy themselves with transient lappings. Indeed his
Papers and Quaker discourses, as some where I have told him, required no great
study. He would do well the next time to mind that advyce of Socrates (...).

There is a Third exception, which may be taken at the acrimony which I have
used in some of these Papers. I sincerely profess, I take no pleasure therein.
I love rather hard Arguments then hard Words. I acknowledge the Truth of that
saying of the Comic Poet, Bacchae Bacchanti etc. But there be two things,
which I hope will in great measure plead my Apology in this also. The First
is, that these smart expressions had their first rise from the Jesuit and not
from me. In evidence whereof, let a Momus peruse my First Reply, if any uncivil
expression be found in it: Yet what scurrilous and dung-hil eloquence the
Jesuit uses in his next Paper, without any provocatio^ is obvious to any
Reader, But next, I appeal to all rational Persons, who shall peruse these
Papers, whether he gives not just cause for smart Language, by his nauseating
Repetitions, shameful Preteritions; and impudent Calumnies, (for what I
know,) without a parrallel. In so much, that sometimes he would inscribe his
Papers with a splendid Calumny, affirming, that I had disovvned all which I
had said before. So he did in his sixth Paper. When these his Papers were
disseminated among the Popish Proselyts, (without my Answers) who took all
the Jesuits bold Assertions for Oracles, and were ready thereupon to clamor
through the Country, would not such dealing have moved the Choler of a Person
of ordinary Meekness? It was the saying of a great Iurist, Non irasci ob eas
causas, I ob quas irasci oporteat, stultoru^^ est. Yea Aristotle affirms it to
be an Act of meekness, (...). And Plutarch was not afraid to say, (...). Yet
if either Master Dempster or any for him will hereafter prosecut this Debate in
a Rational and Civil way, they may be assured of as Courteous and Civil
Entertainment as they shall give. But leaving these things.

I have made bold to superscribe your HONORS NAMES to these Papers. Your known
Affection to the True Reformed RELIGION, and your zeal for promoting the
welfare of this Famo^^ CITY, the Happiness whereof is more wrapped up in the
Interest of Religion, then in any Earthly concern, suffer me not once to doubt
of your Willingness, to undertake the Patrociny of the Truths herein asserted.
The Obligations are so many and so great, which ly upon me from this CITY, and
from the MAGISTRATES and COUNCIL'L thereof, especially these twenty and one
years last bygone, wherein I have been, through Mercy, officiating, though
weakly, in the public Ministry of the Gospel among you; beside the Personal
respects which I owe to your selves, who at present do possess the Chair, that
you may justly challenge a Propriety in all my performances. It is therefore
become a Problem with me, whether this poor Present which I humbly tender to
you, ought not more properly to be termed the Payment of a just Debt, then a
SYMBOL of GRATITUD? But under whatsoever notion you shall be pleased to accept
of it, I shall surely be the more deeply addebted to you. I add no more, only
the GOD of all Grace and Truth rebuke a Spirit of Error, Profaneness and
Idolatry, which has Alas! fermented too too many in this Place That this City
may become a City of Righteousness, a Faithful City, wherein Mercy and Truth may
meet together, Righteousness and Peace may kiss each other, and the Cognizance
thereof may be, JEHOVAH SH AMM AH, The LORD is there. I conclude with that
Apostolical supplication, in behalf of you our Governors. The very GOD of
Peace sanctify you wholly, I pray GOD, your whole Spirit, Soul and Bo^^^e
preserved blameless unto the coming of our LORD JESUS CHRIST. So prays he,
who is

YOUR HONORS In all humble observance, John Menzeis.

To the Impartial READER.
BEside the historical account of this affair, given in the Dedication, I have
yet some few things whereof to advertise thee.

Know therefore, that necessity and not choice, did put ^e upon this whole
undertaking. I was provoked by solemn, challenges, first to a vocal debate,
then to exchange of Papers, and lastly, by insolent clamours to the publishing
of all. I believe no discreet Person will ascribe this appearance in Print to
vanity: For I acknowledge the debate is inglorious, the Papers which I had to
examine, being so very insignificant. I may indeed be blamed for wasting Oil
and Pains to confute such tristes. But Mr. Dempster, and what dropped from his
mouth or pen, how frivolous so ever, were so admired, (I had almost said,
adored,) by our Romish Apostats, that, had I not answered him, and published
both his Papers and mine, I should have been judged by many as wanting in duty
to the PROTESTANT Interest. Who in such an exigence, would not rather submit to
have his labor censured as unnecessary, then to be deemed unfaithful to the
Truth?

T's true, on whose work had been only to state Controversies, and to argue
pro and con, might have said more in a very few sheets for the satisfaction of
an ingenuous lover of truth, then is said in all these Papers. But I have been
constrained to follow the anomalous motion of a tautologizing Jesuits, Who
could never be induced to speak to any particular Controversy. Sundry times I
stated Controversies, and hinted at impugnations of Romish Doctrines, but could
prosecute nothing, unless I would fight with my own shadow; for the Adversary
had not the confidence to speak to any particular. And besides, these Papers
were not at first designed for the press, but as private missives to give a
check to a petulant Caviller. Many things may pass in private missives, which
are hardly tolerable in tractats, designed, at the first contrivance, for
public use. So true is that saying, Aliud est uni scribere, aliud omnibus.
More of my work stood in discovering the prevarications of the Jesuit then in
canvasing his Arguments. This readily will not have so savoury a relish with
thee, yet I hope it will be judged excusable in me, when the circumstantiated
case, wherein I stood is considered. However, to compense this loss, I
intended by way of an Appendix to have added some Arguments against the Popish
Religion. As First, from its direct Contrariety to clear Scriptures in many
weighty points. 2. From its Novelty and Dissonancy from the faith of the
Ancient Church, notwithstanding the vain and deceitful pretenses of Romanists
to Antiquity. 3. From the manifold and gross Idolatry established thereby. 4.
From its Contrariety to Catholic Unity, and the Schismatical constitution of
the present Romish Church, though Romanists have the confidence to glory, as if
they were the only Catholics. 5. From the Impious reproaches, which Romanists
and the Present Romish Religion do throw upon the Holy Scriptures. 6. Because
the Popish Religion is greatly injurious to the Satisfaction and Merits of our
Blessed REDEEMER the LORD JESUS CHRIST. 7. Because Popery overturnes all
certainty of divine faith, or rather (to use the expression of learned Mr. Pool
who has given a blow at the root of the Romish Church,) because of the
Nullitie of divine faith in the Romish Religion. 8. Because many of the
Principles of Popery have a manifest tendency to practical ungodlynesse, and
particularly Jesuits (who are as it were the soul of the present Court and
Church of Rome, and the chief Emissaries for promoting the Romish Interest,)
do mantain principles opposite to sound Christianity and Mordlity. Yea, there
is scarce one Command in the Decalogue, whereof gross and impious ^olations
are not justified by these Men, I whereof a considerable account is given to
the World by many learned Authors both PROTESTANT and Popish. 9. Because of
the sinful means whereby the Popish interest is supported and propagated. 10.
Not to mention more at present, because Popish principles, at lest as improven
by the Iesuited party, are highly injurious to the Sovereign authority of
Princes. I purposed with-all, to have examined some of the most Popular
Sophlsms wherewith Romish Missionaries assault unstedsast people. But finding
that these Papers had swelled to such a bigness, I thought fit to wave the
foresaid particulars at the time, and the rather, all these being judiciously
handled by Persons of eminent Learning and Piety. Yet if I be providentially
drawn to a further prosecution of this debate, I may then perhaps resume some
thoughts of this nature.

I could willingly have deleted some smart expressions, which the unhandsome
dealing of the Jesuit extorted from me. If I know my own genius, I take no
pleasure in Altercations. I would rather contend with an Adversary in
civilities. It has often been My desire, if at any time I should be engaged in
a Polemick debate, that it might be My lot, to deal with an Ingenuous person,
who laying aside personal Criminations, cowardly preteritions, and Childish
tautologies, would fairly and yet vigorously prosecut the debate, which would
be both recreative to Dis^^tants, and satisfying to the Reader. But when I
discerned My present Antagonist to be of a contrary disposition, as to all
these, it did not a little perplex me. For should I have disdained to answer
him. Our Romanists would have cried out, that his papers had been unanswerable.
If I did bestow an Answer upon him, it was easy to presage, that I should
wast more time and paper in chaslising him for his prevarications, then in
examining his Arguments. This Dise^^^a troubled me more then all the Jesuits
Argueings. But now, had any thing been expunged in these papers, the clamorous
Papists would exclaim that I had not published the papers which were exchanged
betwixt us, but had substituted new papers in their place, and so I had lost my
chief design, which was to give a real acount of what had passed. Wherefore
these unpolished lines, must suffer the fate of going abroad in their Homely
and Native dress, as they first dropped from me, currente calamo, without
Alteration, Addition, or Diminution, so far as could be attained by ordinary
moral diligence. I must add this caution, lest a Litigious Adversary should
object to me any petty escape, either of the press, or Amanuensis. For other
alteration they have suffered none.

I studied such faithfulness in transcribing my papers, that I have not so
much as englished one sentence which was not englished in the original papers
transmitted to the Jesuit. Albeit the englishing of sundry testimonies, would
have rendered the papers more grateful and more useful to many Reader. The like
Justice I have done to the Jesuits papers. For what ever be the Tenet of
Romanists, De fide non servanda Haereticis, yet we PROTESTANTS hold it a crime
to deal unjustly with an Enemy, with an Heretic, yea, with a Jesuit. There is
no Alteration wittingly made upon either word or sentence of any of his papers,
safe only that the PRINTER has been at the pains to correct many of the
grosser trespasses in their Orthography. He craves pardon for some few errors
which have escaped him, such as page 80. line 14 GGD for GOD, and page 179.
line 6. moir for mor. But for these two unwilling escapes, (and if there be any
more of that kind,) he has corrected many more then forty times two gross
errors, which one would wonder how they had dropped from the pen of a
professed Scholar. The PRINTER judged not himself obliged to correct all. So
that sundry absurd errors do yet remain by which thou may guess, what
papers thou should have had, if no correction had been used. I may sincerly say
by this Edition, I have neither bettered my own papers, nor wronged the
Jesuits. Nay the Jesuits have received a considerable advantage by the
correction of many Orthographick trespasses.

I am sensible of one disadvantage I stand at, in regard, the Jesuit could
never be induced to sign any of his papers, though ofter then once he was
required to do it. I might justly have disdained to notice his papers, as not
carrying the Name of the Author. And the rather, seeing Their Councal of Trent
sess. 4. decret. 2. had prohibited the publishing or disseminating any papers
on a Religious subject, quosvis libros de rebus sacris sine nomine Authoris,
without the name of the Author, and that Sub paena Anathematts. But such noise
was made here of the papers of this Jesuit, as if some new Goliath had appeared,
or a new monstrous Sphinx, for the unravelling of whose Riddles, hardly the
World could afford an OEdipus. So that I was constrained to take some notice of
them, under whatsoever Irregularity they did appear. Yet now, when the
nakedness of their Idol is discovered to the World, perhaps Our Romanists may
affirm that these are not the Jesuits papers, or that they are interpolated or
vitiated, and so much the rather, because they know that I have them not
subscribed with the Jesuits hand. This inconvenient I smelled how soon I
received his First paper, and signified so much to him in the close of My
Answers to his first, second, and third papers; but by no means could he be
drawn to subscribe any of them: yea positively he declined it toward the end
of his second and third papers. But now, should Our Romanists betake themselves
to this subterfuge, they will but discover more of their disingenuity. For I
sincerely profess, I have given in the faithful Copies of the Jesuits papers
to the Press. And in verification hereof, I can produce the Authentic copies
transmitted to me by the Jesuit, to which these here exhibited in Print are
conform. Though the papers sent to me be unsubscribed, yet they were seen at
the time of their transmission, by Eminent Persons of Our Religion, who can
attest these to be the papers which I received. I believe also, they were
comunicated by him to many Papists, who if they will deal ingenuously, cannot
but acknowledge that these are the Faithful Copies of the Jesuits papers which
are here set forth.

I am not so vain, as to desire that any Romanist should insist in this debate.
I take no Complacency in Eristique debates, further then the Interest of Truth
and necessity on that account do constrain me. I wish there were no
Controversies about Religion in Christendom. I would reckon it a greater Mercy
to be helped of GOD to contribut my poor mite, for the healing of breaches,
(were it possible,) then to write as vast voleums of Controversies, as
Bellarmine, Stapleton, Gretser, etc. -- Pax una triumphis Innumeris potior.

May I therefore earnestly obtest the more Moderat Romanists, (for I have no
hope of prevailing with the Iesuited faction, whose design, as appears, is to
keep up a stated Schisine in Christendom, and to ruin by Fraud or Force all who
cannot comply with their mischievous Projects,) seriously to consider, whether
there be not many things in the present Popish Religion, greatly obstructive to
the Peace and Unity of the Catholic Church. I shall but hint at a few things.
As first, the pretended Infallibility of the Romish Church, whether Pope, or
Council, or both. Will the Church of Rome admit of Reformation so long as she
affirms her self to be beyond possibility of erring? Secondly, The Universal
Supremacy acclaimed by the Pope over the Catholic Church. Does not this oblige
Romanists to keep up a Schism from all these Churches, which cannot enslave
themselves to this Usurped power? Thirdly, The manifold Idolatry of the Romish
Religion, Masse-Worship, Image Worship, Sainct-Worship, Angel-Worship,
Crosse-Worship, Relict-Worship. Know not judicious Romanists, that their
Idolatry is not only offensive to many Christian Churches, but also impeditive
of the conversion of Jews and Infidels? Fourthly, The Injuriousnesse of the
Romish Religion to Our LORD JESUS CHRIST, the only MEDIATOR betwixt GOD and
Man, by setting up a daily propitiatory facrifice, for the sins of the Living
and Dead in the Mass; by asserting that men must satisfy for a lesser kind
of sins, which they call venial, either in this Life, or in Purgatory, yea,
and for the temporal punishment due to mortal sins; by affirming that men do
merit Heaven ex condigno, and that we must be justified by inherent
Righteousness Do not Romanists in persuance of these and such like tenets,
Anathematiz many christian Churches, who cannot concur with them in such like
Blasphemies, against our Blessed SAVIOR? Fifthly, The going about public
worship in the Latin tongue, which is not now the Vulgar language of any
Nation of the World. Does not the Apostle condemn the performing of public
worship in an unknown tongue without an interpreter. 1. Cor. 14. so clearly,
that your great Cardinal Cajetan, commenting on the place, says, Ex hac Pauli
doctrina habetur, quod melius ad aedificationem Ecclesiae est orationes
publicas, quae audiente populo dicuntur, dici lingua communi clericis and
populo, quam dici latin. Sixthly, Are not the reproaches horrid, which
Romanists throw upon the Holy Scriptures of GOD, in their debates, concerning
the Authority, Perspicuity, Perfection, Necessity, and Interpretation of the
Scriptures? Nay, is not this one of the first Query's wherewith Missionary
Jesuits do assault our people, how do you know the Scriptures to be the Word
of GOD? As if they would rather have people turn Scepticks, or Atheists, then
remain PROTESTANTS. Have not many Romanists had many convictions in their
consciences, that there are corruptions in the Church of Rome, calling aloud
for Reformation? in so-much that there have been many meetings at Rome of their
Cardinals, and Bishops in order to this? But well did Luther, as Sleidan
reports lib. 12. ad Annum 1537. compare these Assemblyes, to a company of
Foxes, comeing to sweep a room full of dust with their tails. And in stead of
sweeping out the dust, they sweept it all about the house, and made a great
smoke for a while, but when they were gone, the dust fell down again. How long
shall Romanists through Pride, prejudice, faction and interest, stifle these
convictions?

Yet if any Romanist will needs prosecute this debate, I cannot be so base,
being honored to stand for so GLORIOUS a CAUSE, as to fear what any Mortal can
say. I know there are Learned Romanists, who can say much more for their ill
cause, then Mr. Dempster has done. They want neither Learning nor Policy to
support their Mystery of iniquity. So that (as Sir Edwin Sands has judiciously
observed, in his Speculum Europae, page 24.) were it not for the Natural
weakness of untruth and Dishonesty, which being rotten at the heart, does
abate the force of what ever is founded thereon, there outward means were
sufficient to subdue a whole World. But it concerns Romanists to notice the
smart admonition which Austine gave to a Learned Heathen, Ornari a te quaerit
Diabolus. How will these men render an account of their Talents one day, who
improve them to promot the Devils interest? I should be a very great stranger
to my self, if I were not conscious to my own weakness. Yet Truth has such
advantage over Error, that it does not need Advocats of the greatest Learning
or profoundest Judgment. Let me only therefore leave these Advertisements to
him who will be at the pains to make a Reply, whether Mr. Dempster, who, as I
hear, is alive again, or any other: First, that he has not only the tenth
and last paper to answer, but also to supply the paralipomena or emissions of
all his former papers, and so in truth he has the whole Ten to examine. 2. It
will not be very handsome to catch at broken shreds here or there. But if he
would do his work thoroughly, he must discuss all, and chiefly that which is
most material. Is there any thing of moment in Mr. Dempsters papers, which I
have not revised? 3. I desire that he would not object to me the ordinary
cavils of Romanists, unless he will be at the pains to examine what is
Replied thereto by our Divines. Else he will constrain me, either to neglect
what he says, or to remit him to the Authors who have canvased these
Objections before, or at most to transcribe old Answers given to these old
objections, which cannot but be allowable in me who am the Defendant. This I
the rather have mentioned, because it is observed, that late Romish Pamphleters
do often resume old Objections without mentioning the Answers made thereto by
our Divines, as if they were New Arguments, and hitherto unheard of. Thus they
abuse many of the Vulgar who are not versed in great volumes, especially, in
the Latin tongue, where all these Sophisms are solidly confuted. 4. He may be
pleased to own what he writes, by putting his Name thereto. I cannot be
obliged to fight any longer cum Larvis, with Specters, who have not the
confidence to own what they write. 5. And lastly, I hope it would not be
amiss that Personal criminations were laid aside. Mr. Dempster extorted more
Recriminations from me then I had pleasure in, but if I meet with a Civil
Adversary, I hope he shall have no cause to complain of Vncivility from me.
But if he will needs thrust more at me then at the CAUSE, I can rejoice with
Hierom to be railed upon by Heretics, and with Job, chap. 31. verse 36. Take
these invectives on my shoulder and bind them to me as a Crown. It was an
Heroic word of Luther, Indies magis mihi placeo, superbus fio, quod video
nomen pessimu^ mihi crescere. He gloryed in it that he was evil spoken of for a
good cause. If these rational proposals be neglected, I will not contend, in
that Case, for the last word, Patience and Silence will, I hope, sufficiently
then apologize for me.

One Objection must needs be removed. It may be asked how I do charge the
Jesuit, as declyning to have the truth of Religion either examined by Scripture
or Antiquity, seeing he profers at lest to have one Controversy examined by
Scripture, Viz. concerning the number of Sacraments? But let any rational
person though a Romanist, if he can but dispossess his own mind of prejudice,
cognosce whether my Charge be just. How disingenuous the Jesuit was in that
seeming profer concerning the number of Sacraments, is sufficiently discovered
in my Reply to his tenth paper, from page 236. to page 241. Now only let these
few particulars be considered. And 1. When did the Jesuit make this profer?
Only in his tenth or last paper, ime^diatly before his getting out of the
nation. Why did he it not sooner, especially, seeing we had been exchanging
papers above a year before, and he had been frequently appealed to a discuss
of particular Controversies? Did he not in former papers, positively decline to
have the truth of Religion examined either by Scripture or Antiquity? By
Scripture, because as he affirms, paper 4. page 37. The letter of Scripture is
capable of diverse, yea contrary senses, and there is no Religion so false but
pretends that the tenets of it are conform to the letter of Scripture. By
Antiquity also, because (says the Jesuit, paper 5. page 61) This with as
great reason may be assumed by any Christian false Religion. Yea, does he not
charge me as hatching a new Religion of my own, because I appealed to the
Fathers of the three first Centuries, in his 9. paper page 178. Now what
ingenuity or courage is manifested by such a seeming profer, at such a time,
after so many declinaturs, ingenuous Romanists may judge. But secondly, Had
there not been weighty Controversies tabled before, viz. Concerning the
Infallibility of Popes and Councils, the Perspicuity and Perfection of the
Scriptures, Transubstantiation, Adoration of Images, Communion under one kind,
Papal indulgences, Apocrypha books, the Popes Supremacy over the whole
Catholic Church, and his Jurisdiction over Princes? Yea had it not been
showed, as the breviry of missives would permit, that the Church of Rome does
grossly err in all these? Yet never did he offer to Reply to any of these. Let
Romanists therefore again judge, whether he who passes over in silence all
Arguments, both from Scripture and Antiquity, to prove the present Romish
Religion erroneous in all the foresaid particulars, and only starts a new
Question about the number of Sacraments, does show a through willingness to
have the Truth of Religion tried either by Scripture or Antiquity. Thirdly, If
there he any Controversy tossed betwixt Rom mists and us, where a cavilling
Sophister may wrap himself up under Logomachies, is not this it which the
Jesuit has pitched upon concerning the number of Sacraments? Must it not be
acknowledged on all hands, that as the word Sacrament is taken in a larger or
stricter sense, a man may affirm that there be more or fewer Sacraments? But of
this you may see more at length, in the A^swere to the Jesuits tenth paper,
page 238. and 239. Let it be then considered, how willing the Jesuit was of a
Scriptural trial, who dates not adventure on the examination of other
Controversies, and only betaks himself to this, wherein the Adversary may shut
himself up in a thicker of Logomachies? But fourthly, Does the Jesuit really
profer to have that on Controversy concerning the number of Sacraments,
betwixt Papists and us decyded by Scripture? Or does he bring Arguments from
Scripture to prove a precise Septenary of proper Sacraments, neither more nor
fewer, which is the Doctrine of the Present Romish Church? Nor at all. What
then? Only that he might seem to say something, he desires me to prove from
Scripture that there be only two Sacraments, or that there be no more then two,
which is, in very deed, to require me to prove the Negative, while he himself
declynes to prove the Affirmative, viz. That there is not only more then two,
but completely seven. Though the Jesuits demand be irrational, I hope I have
satisfied it, in its own proper place. But what though I had succumbed in
proving that there were no more but two proper Sacraments? Yet the question
betwixt Romanists and us, concerning the number of Sacraments were not decyded,
except it be proven that there be precisely seven, neither more nor fewer. If
there be not a precise septenary, one Article of the Romish faith falls to the
ground. Consequently, the Jesuit never submits the Question concerning the
number of Sacraments to a Scriptural trial, until he offer to prove by
Scripture a precise sepetenary of proper Sacraments, which as yet he has not
done, nor I believe will adventure to do. He will find need of the supplement
of his unwriten traditions here: But neither I suppose will these serve his
turn. But Fifthly, what are all these ensuing papers, but a demonstration of
the Jesuits tergiversing humor? In his first paper, he proposed four postulata
like so many Oracles. I discovered an egregious fallacy in one of them. But to
this day he never once endeavored to vindicat himself. He proposed in that
paper an informal Syllogism, (but could never thereafter adventure on a
second,) which was retorted in better form against the Popish Religion more
ways then one: but these Retortions to this hour remain unexamined. I denied
the Assumption of that long studied Syllogism, but he could never be induced
to undertake the probation thereof. In that Assumption the Jesuit had said,
that the PROTESTANT Religion had no grounds to prove its conformity with the
letter of Scripture. To repel that bold allegiance, I appealed him to produce
any solid ground of conformity with Scripture, which either the True Christian
Religion has, or that the Popish Religion can pretend to, which the Religion
of PROTESTANTS wants. But he could never be moved to produce any. Sometimes he
hinted at the Infallibility of the Propounders of the Articles of Faith, but he
durst neither adventure to tell whom he meant by these Infallible Propounders,
or to prove the Infallibility of Romish Propounders, or to answer Arguments
against their Infallibility. At length, being outwearied with his tergiversing,
I produced positive Grounds, for proving the conformity of our Religion to the
Scriptures, and the disconformity of theirs, viz. The Perspicuity of the
Scriptures in all things necessary, and Conformity with the faith of the
Ancient Church in the first three Centuries. Hereupon he positively declyned
both Scriptures and Fathers in these first three Centuries, as a test to find
out the Truth of Religion. Therefore finding that still he shunned to come to
particulars, I pirched upon that much controverted Scripture, which Romanists
pretend to be as favorable to them as any, viz, Hoc est Corpus meum, This is
my Body, and proved the sense which PROTESTANTS give thereof to be True and
Genuine, and the sense which Romanists impose to be false and absurd. And
offered to do the like concerning other controverted Scriptures, such as Luke
22.32. I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not. Matthew 16.18. Upon this
Rock I will build my Church. 1. Tim. 3.15. The pillar and ground of Truth,
etc. This I did in the Answer to his seventh paper, from page 126. to page
130. But all these he waves as tedious Digressions in his eight paper, page
148. I resolved also to try his behavior more particularly, in reference to
Antiquity, and therefore in the Answer to the Jesuits eight paper, from page
169. to page 173. I produced seven articles of the present Romish Religion,
which I briefly show to be repugnant to the faith of the Ancient Romish Church,
viz. Their Adoration of Images, Their Transubstantiation, Their Communion under
one kind, The Popes Supremacy, Their mantaining the Apocryphal books to be
Canonical Scriptures, the Papes usurped Jurisdiction over Princes, and their
Indulgences for easing Souls under the pains of Purgatory. But this is all
the Answer which the tergiversing Jesuit makes to these particulars, in his
paper 9. page 176. What makes it to our purpose, your digressions about Images,
about Transubstantiation, about Communion under one kind, about the Popes
supremacy, about Apocryphal books, about Indulgences, Purgatory, etc. I gave
likewise some account of their corrupting, the Morals and Practicals of
Christianity by their impious doctrine of Probables, in the answer to his
eight paper, page 162. 163. etc. But to this he answered Ne (...) quidem,
nothing at all. The rest of his rergiversing Preteritions, I must leave the
Reader to collect by his own observation. Did ever, I pray an ill cause fall
into the hands of a more unhappie Advocat? Whether now my charge against the
Jesuit, as on that declynes to have the truth of Religion tried either by
Scripture or Antiquity be just, let him who who ponders these particulars, and
peruseth all the Papers, judge. Had I tergiversed as the Jesuit has done, had
I been left at such disadvantages as he, would they not have made the World
ring with it? What ever answer shall be returned to me, Our Popish Apostats
will be ready to entertain it with Plaudire's, as if the field were wone. But I
hope they who are judicious will hereafter less regard their clamours, having
such experience of their triumphing, when their Champion had behaved himself in
such a piteous fashion.

Our Romanists are pleased to boast that how soon these papers come abroad they
shall have an Answer tripping upon their heels. Indeed I have eased them of
much labor by publishing all these papers. Have they not had a good
opportunity these six or seven months, wherein they knew their papers were at
the Press, to prepare supplies for Mr. Dempsters omissions? Have they not many
hands and heads to furnish them materials, and little work to divert them from
scribbling? Yet they would take heed lest through preposterous h^ste they fall
into Mr. Dempsters error, to leave the chief of their work behind them. My
design ever was, rather to contend with them in solidity of reason, then in
Celerity of dispatch. Diu apparandumest bellum ut vincas celerius. If Romanists
be as speedy in their Reply as they talk, will it not discover that they
apprehend some danger to their ill Cause from these papers? If their speed be
not answerable to their boasting, will it not be an evidence that they are
large as good at boasting as at argueing? All the courtesy I crave from the
ingenuous Reader is to allow me an equal hearing with the Adversary. So as when
he is to pass judgment betwixt us, he consider an equal number of his papers
and mine. Here there be ten of either side presented. If now Sentence should be
past, neither of us could complain that we had not ben heard. But if Romanists
add their eleventh paper, then ought not any further sentence be suspended
until my Reply be heard? The Jesuit having the first word, does not the last,
de jure appertain to me? Yet if the eleventh paper run in the same trifling
and tautologizing strain with the former I plead no Suspension.

My heart bleeds for our straying Apostats, some falling to rank Popish
Idolatry, others to the delusions of Quakerism, which, if learned and
judicious persons be not mistaken, is but Popery under a disguise. However, O
that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, to weep day and
night over these deluded Souls, under whatsoever Denomination they go. O that
their eyes were opened to see the Sin, the Scandal and Danger of their way! It
might be of some use to speak of the Causes of so great a Defection, had not
these Papers already swelled to such a bigness. I shall therefore only
transiently hint at a few. And First, There is, alace! an innate Principle of
Levity and Instability in peoples h^ar^s, so that they are ready to be Tossed
to and frolike Children with every wind of Doctrine. Ephesians. 4.14. If the heart be
not established by grace. The (...) si^eration of this should humble all, and
make us jealous our own hearts, and watch unto Prayer, lest we fall into
temptation. Secondly, Seducers have usually a wonderful insinuating faculty.
Rom 16.18. By good words and fair speeches they deceive the hearts of the
simple. By smooth words accommodated to the complexion of these with whom they
deal, they steal away their hearts, as is said of Absolon. Yet, they in a
manner fascinat and bewi^ch them, as is the Apostles expression, Gal. 3.1. And
now these decenfull workers (as they are termed, 2 Cor. 11.13.) have taken an
unusual boldness upon them to intrude into all companies where they have any
hope of prevailing. These therefore who would eschew their Contagion, would shun
their fellowship as they would shun Persons smitten with the Plague, for the
Words of Seducers do eat as a Gangren, 2. Tim. 2.17. The Apostle John would
not breath in the same air with the Heretic Cerinthus, but sprang out of the
Bath (...) says Eusebius, lib. 3. hist. Eccles. cap. 25. How soon he perceived
the Heretic to be there. Thirdly, As Heretics are high and specious in their
pretenses, so also bold and peremptory in their Asseverations. The Romish
Emissaries talk bigly of the Church, as if none had an interest in the
Catholic Church but these of their way. The Quakers take us great a latitude
to boast of the Light and Spirit. God forbid that we should derogat from the
necessity or efficacy of the Spirits working, or from the due esteem to the
Catholic Church, nay I hope our hearers know we speak more to the just
advantage of both then either Jesuit or Quaker. But besides these vain and
specious pretenses, these men are very confident in their Asseverations. Though
they cannot solidely prove any of their Erroneous Positions, yet they will
affirm the truth of them boldly, and be ready to Anathematize all who dissent
from them. Now it can hardly be told, what influence bold Assertions from
persons of reputed gravity, especially joined with high pretenses, and some
plausible Sophisms will have upon credulous, apprehensive or melancholy
persons, yea upon most of people who are not well grounded in Religion, and
some way studied in the Controversies. But fourthly, Both Romish Seducers, and
Quakers join issue in this, that the persons they intend to prey upon, may
have nothing to guard them, against their Seduction, they reflect heavily upon
the holy Scriptures, and Faithful Ministers The Scripture (say they,) is but a
dead letter, Ambiguous, Obscure, capable of diverse, yea, contrary
interpretations, and insufficient to terminat controversies in Religion. They
reproach Ministers as Hyrelings, they load them with calumnies, and the
trespasses of some few they charge upon the whole function, by which means
they so abuse poor people that they despair of good by consulting either with
the Scriptures or Ministers. These Seducers deal with poor people, as the
Wolves (in Demosthenes his Apologue to the Senate of Athens,) who offered to
make peace with the Sheep, if they would put away their Dogs, but the Wolves
intended to prey upon the poor Sheep when once their Guardians were gone. They
therefore who would not betray their own Souls to these Imposters would bring
every thing to the Scriptures as to a test, Isaiah, 8.20. and would consult
with their Spiritual guides, I mean the Ministers of GODS Word, Mal. 2.7. The
serious consideration of these few overly hints may be useful through the LORDS
blessing against the growing defection of these times. Let it with-all be
thought upon what heavy Characters the Scripture sets upon Apostasy and
Seducers. I commend to this end the reading of these Scriptures. Heb. 10.38. 2.
Pet. 2.1.2.3.2. These. 2.9.10.11.12. 1. Ioh. 2.19. Matthew. 24.24.25. 2. Cor.
11.13.14.15. And in particular, there be most dreadful threatenings against
Complyers with Romish Babylon which may make the ears of all that hear to
tingle, I mention but one at the time, Revel. 14.9.10.11. If any man worship
the beast and his Image, and receive his mark in his forehead or in his hand,
the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out with
out mixtur into the cup of his indignation, and he shall be termented with fire
and brimstone, -- and the smoke of their terment ascends up for ever and
ever. Shall not then these who are ensnared by Romish Impostors hearken to the
call, Revel. 18.4. Come out of Babylon my people that ye be not partakers of
her fins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. I know Romanists turn these
things off as not concerning them. But if a common Whore can as Solomon says,
Pro. 30.20. Wip her mouth as if she had done no wickedness, is it any wonder,
that the Mother of harlots and abominations of the earth, Revel. 17.5.
endeavor to palliat her Villainies with floorishes of words, and
School-distinctions, especially having so many thousand Jesuits, and other
Ianisary's under pay for that effect. Will Antichrist when so ever he appears
proclaim himself to be the Antichrist? Will he not dissemble the matter? Why
else is his work termed a Mystery of iniquity, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7? Why is it said
that the Beast Revel. 13.11. Has two hornslike a Lamb? why has the great
Where upon her forehead written Mystery? And if great Authors do not
misinforme us, the same is written upon the Popes Mitre. Have not Learned
PROTESTANTS in their debates on this subject, made it more then Probable, that
the Papal faction is that Antichristian state spoken of in Scripture. I shall
only now remember you of the Reply which Sir Francis Bacon gave to King James,
when he asked at him whether the Pope were the Antichrist, If, said Sir
Francts, a hus and cry were made after the Antichrist, and I should apprehend
the Pope, I would make him clear himself of the marks of the Antichrist before
I would let him go.

Perhaps this warning shall not have much influence upon them who have already
devoted, or rather mancipated themselves to the Popish or Quaker interest. For
Heresy is a pertinacious disease. Sin is never so dangerous as when it is
covered with the mantle of Truth or Duty. It was the ingenuous confession of a
good man, Error meus erat Deus meus. That once his Errors were his Idols, and
then it seemed as hard for him to forsake them as to renounce his GOD. O how
piteous is the case of deluded Souls who esteem their Apostasy from Truth,
their Blaspemyes and Id^latry, acceptable service to GOD? Yet though Israel
play the Harlet, let not Judah offend, Hos. 4 15. Let me therefore obrest
these, who through Mercy are preserved from the contagion of Popery and
Quakerisme, as they regard the Eternal Salvarion of their Souls, that they
would hearken to the peremptory Scripture-caveats against Apostasy. 2. Pet,
3.17. Beware lest ye also being led away with the error of the wicked, fall
from your steadfastness. Revel. 3.11. Behold I come quickly, hold fast that
which thou have, that no man take thy Crown 1. Cor. 10.12. Wherefore let him
that thinks he slandeth, take heed lest he fall. Now unto him that is able to
keep you from falling, Jud. 24.25. And to present you faultlesse before the
presence of his glory with exceeding joy, to the only wise God our Savior be
glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, both now and ever

AMEN.
Cicero. Tantam semper potenti^ns veritas habuit, ut nullis machinis aut
cu^usquam hominis ingenio aut art subverti potuerit: and licet^ in (...)
nullun Patronum aut defensorem obtineat, tamen per sc^ipsa defenditur.
A faithful Copy of the Papers exchanged betwixt Master JOHN MENZEIS
Professor of Divinty in the Mareshall College of ABERDENE: and Master Francis
Dempster Jesuit, otherwise Sir-named Rinne, or, Logan.
The Jesuits first Paper. For Master JOHN MENZEIS, whose Answer is civilly
required, according to his promise.
1. GOD Almighty, who is supreme Lord, has decreed for man eternal
happiness after this life, and howbeit, he might have decreed to give it him
absolutely without any condition; yet, de facto, he has tied the obtaining of
it to certain conditions to be fulfilled upon our part, whereby Christ's blood
and passion is applied to us, and amongst these conditions, one is, that we be
of one true faith, and one true religion.

2. Since that by Gods decree, eternal happiness and salvation, is tied to one
true religion, this true religion must be sufficiently furnished with grounds
and principles, whereby it may prove it self to be a true religion, which
grounds and principles are so determinat to truth, that they cannot serve to
prove a false religion to be a true religion.

3. It is to be supposed that all parties agrees in this conditional
proposition, that they would submit their judgments and belief with all
firmnes to any thing, if they knew certainly that God had spoken it, or that
the sense that is given to such a text of scripture, were the true sense. or
the sense intended by the holy Ghost, when he dyted such words. Since then that
all must agree in this conditional proposition, all the controversy must be
reduced to this, what party purifies this conditional, that is to say, what
part has more solid and stronger reasons: that they have the assistance of
the holy Ghost to give the true sense of the letter of the word of God.

4. As it is impossible for one to prove himself an honest man, except he can
show some distinction betwixt him and a knave, and that there can be verified
of him, something which is not applicable nor can agree to a knave: so it is as
impossible for a religion to prove it self to be a true religion, except it can
assign some distinction betwixt it and a false religion, and that there can be
verified something of it, which cannot be verified nor applied to a false
religion.

Out of these premises is deduced this one Syllogism.

That Religion cannot be a true religion, which has no peculiar principle or
ground to prove that it is a true religion, and conform to the true sense of
the letter of the word of God. But the Protestant religion has no peculiar
ground or principle, to prove that it is a true religion and conform to the
true sense of the letter of the word of God. Ergo, it cannot be a true
religion.


May it please the answerer of this syllogism to remember that the ground or
principle which he shall produce to prove the truth of his religion, or that it
is conform to the true sense of the letter of the word of God, must have this
propriety, that it cannot serve, nor cannot be assumed to prove a false
religion to be a true religion, or to be conform to the true sense of the
letter of the word of God: as the ground and principle that one produces to
prove that he is an honest man, must have this propriety that it cannot serve
nor be assumed to prove a knave to be an honest man, or if he allege that the
ground or principle, whereof he serves himself is only misapplyed by a false
religion, then he is obliedged to assign some good reason, whereby he shows
that it is well applied by him and misapplyed by the other.

Likewise he is entreated to answer shortly to the point, and lay aside all
long homilies and excursions, least by multiplying many words, he incur
suspicion that he seeks only to obscure the matter, that the weaker sort, may
not penetrat nor see through his weakness.

20 Apryll, 1666.
Mr. JOHN MENZEIS his Reply to the Jesuits first paper.
An answer to a paper, from an anonymous person of the Popish profession,
commonly supposed to be Master Francis Dempster, alias, Logan.
IT had been sufficient for me, upon the first reading of your paper,
instantly to have returned this or ely answer, NIGO MINORIM, I deny your
minor. For I found but a poor naked Syllogism, the assumption whereof is
splendidlie false, and ye have not so much as added the shadow of a proof to
confirm it. Neither can ye be exempted from being tied to prove it, because it
is a Negative, as shall afterward appear. Yet for the clearing of truth, and
also, (if it may please GOD) for your conviction, I have added these following
animadversions.

1. And first, Ye lay down four previous Propositions, as so many oracles,
which might extort an assent from any Reader. But you must give me leave to
tell you, how specious soever they seem to you, they want not their own
flawes. Take one instance from your third proposition, wherein there is an
egregious fallacy committed in your explication of that conditional, wherein
ye suppose all parties to agree. For it is one thing to know that the sense
given to such a text of Scripture, is, the true sense intended by the holy
Ghost when he dyted such words; which is the condition at first mentioned by
you, and it is a quite other thing, to know that he who gives the sense, has
the assistance of the holy Ghost to give that true sense, which ye hold out as
the explication of the former. This latter savors rankly of that erroneous
Popish tenet, concerning the necessity of an infallible visible judge of
controversies. Now, is it handsome, under pretense of explayning a proposition
wherein all agree, to foyst in one of the maine points of difference, as if
that also were agreed upon? could there be a greater cheat put upon a simple
Reader?

2. But secondly, It had been of more use then all these your propositions, to
have laid down the Thesis which ye were to oppugn; and to have explained the
terms thereof. Since therefore ye have omitted it, it will be necessary for me
to do something to it, least we seem to fight Andabatarum more, as Persons
blindfolded. The Thesis then which we defend and you oppugn, is this.

The Protestants Religion is the True Religion.
Take these few hints of explication of the terms. By True Religion, We
understand the true doctrine of salvation concerning God, and the right way of
serving and worshipping him. By the Religion of Protestants, we mean, the
Christian Religion contained in the holy Scripturs. By Protestants, these
Christians who protest against, and do reject Popish-Errors and additions to
Scripture truths. So that Christianity is our Religion, and our Protestancie
is not our Religion, but our rejection of your Popish corruptions. If then ye
consider the importance of the Thesis which ye impugn, ye will find that ye
undertake a hard work, nay, an Infidells cause. Namely, that the
Christian-Religion revealed in the holy Scriptures, and held by these who are
called PROTESTANTS, because of their rejection of Popish-Errors, is not the
true Religion.

3. Thirdly, Because ye so often make mention of some peculiar Grounds and
Principles, which the true Religion must have to prove it self to be the true
Religion, and which cannot be verified of a false Religion, which ye illustrat
by the similitude of an Honest-man and a Knave. I desire, that these two things
may be noted in reference to this; which may perhaps give some light to the
whole matter. And first, these Grounds and Principles must be understood, ex
part objecti, on the part of the object, not of the subject. That is to say,
that the true Religion has sufficient Grounds in it self, to manifest it self
to be the true Religion, if it meet with a well disposed intellect. For, (to
use your own similitude,) an Honest-man may have Ground enough to show a
distinction betwixt him and a Knave, albeit a fool cannot discern it. So the
true Religion may have Ground enough to prove it self true, (which the false
religion has not,) though an Infidel, or Heritick, whose foolish mind is
darkened. Romans 1.21. cannot take it up. Secondly, The prime peculiar difference
of the true Religion from a false, stands in its conformity to the will of GOD
revealed in the Scriptures; and this conformity, has a sufficient intrinseck
objective evidence in it self, to any who have a well disposed understanding,
to collate and compare these two together, to observe the exact correspondence
betwixt the one and the other. This likewise may be illustrated by your own
example of Honesty and Knaverie. An Honest-man being one whose actions are
squared according to the Law, what ever a Knave may pretend, yet when both are
compared to the Law, the honest-Mans conversation is found to be that which the
Law enjoineth; not so the Knaves. So that this honesty which is the
conformity of his actions to the Law, has an intrinseck objective evidence,
to demonstrat it self to any discerning Person, who can compare the man's
actions with the Law. So it is in the present case. Yet, besides this
intrinseck objective evidence, which is in true Religion, I do not deny, but
there are many external and accessorie Grounds which strongly persuade its
credibilitie.

Having thus paved my way, I come to examine your Syllogism, which runes thus.
That Religion cannot be a true Religion, which has no peculiar ground or
principle to prove that it is a true Religion, and conform to the true sense
of the letter of the word of GOD. But the PROTESTANT Religion, has no peculiar
ground or principle to prove that it is a true Religion, and conform to the
true sense of the letter of the word of GOD. Ergo it cannot be a true Religion.


Answer. 1. I might here first friendly advise you to take better heed
hereafter to the form of your Syllogismes. For both your Premises are
Negative, and ye know the Logic rule says, ex ntraque premissa negativa
nihil sequitur. But I shall endeavor to help this by improving your medium, in
a better form, and I hope also to better purpose, against your self and your
Romanists, thus.

The true Religion has a peculiar ground and principle to prove that it is a
true Religion, and conform to the true sense of the letter of the word of GOD.
But the Popish religion, has no peculiar ground and principle to prove that it
is a true religion, and conform to the true sense of the letter of the word of
GOD. Ergo, the Popish Religion is not the true Religion.


Hade ye intended to satisfy the conscience of any Person, you would have
held forth these peculiar grounds and characters of a true Religion, which is
conform to the true sense of the letter of the word of God; and ye would, at
least, have endeavored to demonstrate that these did exactly quadrat with your
Romish Religion, and not at all with the Religion of PROTESTANTS. But as to
this, there is nothing but deep silence in your paper. Before you make good
your retreat from this Argument, as thus inverted against your self, ye may
perhaps find, that ye are taken in the ginne which ye designed for others.

Ans. 2 But Secondly, I would try you with another Retersion, thus. If the true
Religion have grounds and principles to prove its conformity to the true sense
of the letter of the Word, then no article of Faith and Religion can be founded
upon an unwritten Tradition. But the first is true Ergo etc. The Minor is clear
from the Major of your Syllogism. The consequence of my Major is no less
clear. For it is impossible that an article founded merely upon an unwritten
Tradition, should prove its conformity with the letter of the written word of
God, else it should be written and not written. Nor can ye handsomely resile,
by saying you did thus only argue, ad hominem, against PROTESTANTS. For this
your Syllogism, you deduce from your four premised propositions, which, ye
suppose, ought to be agreed to, by all Parties. Now what thanks you are to
expect for this manner of arguing, from your late Pamphleters, who do so
highly magnify your unwritten Traditions, ye your self may judge.

Ans. 3. But Thirdly, leaving Retorsions, I Answer directly denying the
Assumption, viz. that the PROTESTANT Religion has no peculiar ground or
principle to prove that it is a true Religion, and conform to the true sense
of the letter of the word of GOD. Nay surely, it has that intrinseck objective
evidence, in its conformity with the Scripturs, to demonstrate it to be the
true Religion, of which I was speaking a little before; which neither Popery,
nor any other false Religion either has, or can have. But now, it lies on you
as the Opponent to prove your Assumption. It seemed strange to me, that this
Proposition whereon the whole stresse of the Controversy didly, was so
nakedlie proposed by you without any proof. Only it would appear, because it
is a Negative, you would lay over upon me to prove the contrary. Are ye so
soon weary of the Opponents office, who were so eager to have it? Find you the
burden of impugning the Religion of Protestants so heavy, that so soon ye
shrink under it? Are there no Negative Propositions proved in the Schools? Does
not Philosophy teach us more Moods and Forms of Negative Syllogismes then of
affirmatives? Shall there be no way to oppugn an affirmative position but by
turning the Respondent to an Opponent? Yea, let me put you in mind, that
though your assumption and conclusion be expressed Negativly, yet, upon the
matter, we do rather mantaine the Negative, and you the affirmative. Which I
thus make out. If any consider our Religion and yours; it will be found that in
most of our Positives, ye and we are agreed. As that there is a GOD, three
Persons, that Christ is both GOD and man, etc. But the difference is mostly in
our Negatives. As for instance, Ye affirm the necessity of a visible
infallible judge of controversies, we deny. Ye affirm the necessity of
subjection to the Pope of Rome as head of the Catholick-Church, we deny: Ye
affirm that there is a propper propitiatory sacrifice in the Mass, we deny:
Ye affirm that the Apocrypha books are Canonick Scriptures, we deny: Ye
affirm that Saints are to be invocated; that Crosses, Images, and your
Sacramental Hosty are to be adored; we deny: Ye affirm a Purgatory, we deny,
etc. In all these and such as these we mantaine the Negative, and ye the
Affirmative, yea, and these are your Superadditions unto Scripture truths. And
consequently, when it is demanded, whether that which we, or ye mantaine in
these particulars, be agreeable to the sense of the Scriptures? The meaning is,
whether does the Scripture hold these things out, or not? Ye affirm, and we
deny. Therefore, according to the saying, that, Affirmanti incumbit probatio;
It lies upon you to find out the exact measures of the true Religion, and the
peculiar Grounds, which do evidence its conformity to the true sense of the
letter of the word of GOD, and also, to demonstrate that these Grounds cannot
agree to the Religion of PROTESTANTS. Bellarmin, Gretser, Valentia, and others
of their fellows who have traveled long in this work, have been able to
effectuat nothing, by all their vast Volumes. And have ye the confidence to do
the bussinesse by this one naked Syllogism?

But that I may shut up these lines, remember, ye cannot now call upon me to
show a peculiar ground or evidence, which the Religion of PROTESTANTS has, to
prove it self to be the True Religion, and that it is conform to the True
sense of the Scriptures. For Religion is not one individual truth, but a
complex of many truths, which cannot all be proven at once, or with one breath,
though there be none of them, but through the mercy of GOD, we are able to
demonstrate against any Adversary. But now it lies upon you, as the Opponent,
to prove your Assumption.

Instance therefore, if ye can, one Ground Necessarlie requisite for evidenceing
and proving the True Religion, and its conformity to the True sense of the
Scriptures, which is wanting in the Religion of PROTESTANTS; which, I hope, I
may confidently say, neither you, nor any of your fraternity, shall ever be
able to do.

April, 24. 1666. John Menzeis.
POSTCRIPT.
August. lib. De unitate Ecclesia, contra Epist. Petiliani cap. 3. Sunt certe
libri Dominici, quorum authoritati utriqueue consentimus, utrique credimus,
utrique servimus. Ibi quxramus Eccesiam, ibi discutiamus cansam nostram. Idem
Patrlo infra Ergoin Scripturis sanctis Canonitis Ecclesiam requiramus.

It is desired, that any Answer which shall be returned, be subscrived, as the
Author would have it taken notice of.

Apryll 28, 1666. The Jesuits second paper.
A Reply to an Answer made be Mr. JOHN MENZIES, to a discourse of a
Romane-Catholick, showing that the PROTESTANT Religion, cannot be a true
Religion, or a Religion wherein men can save their Souls.
I Have perused your paper, and find that in writting ^^ are like to your self
in conference by mouth, because in both much, that you may seem to the simple
sort to say something. The controversies that we have in hands about the means
to know a True Religion, and to distinguish it from a false Religion is not of
small concernment, neither has it so narrow dimensions, as within the compass
of them it (...) not able to detain for a little while, all the pith or force
of (...), or be leaping out be the sides, to mix it with other digressions
about traditions, visible judge of controversies, untimely retortions of
Arguments, etc. Which makes nothing to the present difficulty; which may be
fully ^nded without mentioning any such things. Laying them closs aside, and
purposely ^^ske nuing all your excursions as out of the line, and swelling only
of tergiversations and diffidence, to answer directly, I lay again to your
door this point, viz. It is impossible that the Protestant Religion can be
proven to be a True Religion, or the Religion to which GOD has tied the
promise of eternal life, and consequently, that whosoever aims at eternal
happiness after this life, or intends to save his Soul, is oblidged to quite
it, and to make search to find out the True Religion, Prescinding for now,
where this True Religion is to be found, since the present difficulty is only
to show that Protestant Religion cannot be it.

This point I proved by this one Syllogism.

That Religion cannot be a True Religion, which has no peculiar ground or
principle to prove that it is a True Religion, and conform to the True sense
of the letter of the Word of GOD. But the Protestant Religion, has no peculias
ground or principle to prove that it is a True Religion or conform to the True
sense of the letter of the Word of GOD. Ergo, it cannot be a True Religion.


To this Argument you answer first carping it that is not in form, as having
two Premises Negatives, but in this you are far mistaken; for the Negation in
one of the Premises is not taken Neganter but Infinitanter, and does not
affect or light upon the Copula, but is a part of the subject of the
Proposition. Next you answer, as you say, directly admitting the Major and
denying the Subsumption, to wit, that the Protestant Religion has no special
ground or principle to prove that it is conform to the True sense of the
letter of the Word of GOD, and so denying that it has no special ground or
principle, you consequently must affirm that it has some special ground or
principle, whereby it can prove it self to be destinguished from a false
Religion, and to be conform to the True sense of the letter of the word of
GOD. Now lay all these things together, first, that under your own hand writ,
ye have undertaken to mantain the Protestant Religion to be a True Religion.
Next that you grant a Religion cannot be True, except it have some peculiar
ground or principle whereby it can prove it self to be Ture, or conform to the
True sense of the letter of the word of God. Thirdly, that you deny that the
Protestant Religion has not their special grounds and principles whereby she
may prove herself to be True and conform to the True sense of the letter of
the word of GOD. Now let any be judge whether to weind your self out of this
labyrinth, and without manifestly deserting of your cause, ye be not oblidged
to produce these peculiar grounds or principles whereby you say that Protestant
Religion is furnished to prove it self to be True, and conform to the True
sense of the letter of the word of GOD. Which likewise may be extorted by this
Dilemma. Either the Protestant Religion is furnished with sufficient grounds or
principles to prove it self to be True and conform to the True sense of the
letter of the word of GOD, or it has no such principles: if it have no
sufficient principles, then confess ingenuously it is a groundles Religion; if
it have them, then let them be produced and examined, And why do you reserve
and keep them up, since the producing of them is necessary to mantaine and
defend the truth of the Protestant Religion? are they perhaps invisible, or are
you ashamed to bring them to light? only remember that the grounds or
principles that you produce to this effect, to prove your Religion to be True,
must be special and have this propriety, that they so prove the Protestant
Religion to be True, or conform to the True sense of the letter of the word of
God, that they cannot be affirmed to prove a false Religion (and which you your
self holds for a false Religion) to be a True Religion, or conform to the
True sense of the letter of the word of GOD. As the ground or principle which
is produced to prove Honesty, or one to be an honest man, must have this
propriety that it cannot serve to prove a knave to be an honest-man.

Lastly, in your paper you insinuat two superficial and fleeing shifts and
evasions which does nothing help you. The first is, that the Protestant
Religion has, ex part objecti, intrinseck grounds and principles whereby it
is constitute a True Religion, though it has not, ex part subjecti. But this
only is to bring new obscure terms, which put in good SCOTS, signify only
the same, which has been said hitherto; to wit, that Protestant Religion has
intrinsecall and objective truths and conformity with the true sense of the
letter of the word of GO'D, but is destitute of all special grounds or
principles whereby it can prove it self to have such intrinsecall and objective
truth and conformity. But I pray you, what false Religion is there, that may
not with as good reason apply the same terms to themselves, and say that their
Religion is true, ex part objecti, and has intrinsecall and objective
evidence, truth and conformity with Scripture, though they cannot show this, ex
part subjecti. Likewise they have as great Reason as you to say that their
Religion, and the truth of it may be made evident, if it encounter with an
understanding well disposed, though it cannot be made evident to fools. So, you
are pleased civilly to call all those who have their understanding of such
temper that they cannot see the truth of your Religion.

The other shife and evasion is, that Religion is not one individual truth but
a complex of many truths, which cannot be proven at once, or in one breath. But
what makes this to your purpose? since that before you can prove any one of
those particular truths, to be conform to the true sense of the text of such a
Scripture; you must first produce some special ground or principle to prove
that your Clergymen in Actu primo has such assistance or hability as is
prerequired in men that should give out to People the true sense of particular
texts of Scriptures: or else how can men be induced to believe that the sense
which you give is the true sense? since every false Religion might pretend with
as great reason as you do, that they give the true sense, though plain
contrane to the sense that you give.

In the end of your paper you desire me to subscrive, and to put my name to the
answer that I make, as you have put to your name to yours, but this your
demand does not seem rational, since your condition and mine are not alike,
for you are at home, and as a Cock on your own midden, and there must lurk
some other thing under this demand, since it can make nothing to your cause,
who proponeth the reasons against, if they be pertinent and to the purpose.

Mr. JOHN MENZEIS his Reply to the Jesuits second paper. May 2. 1666.
An Answer to a second paper from the traffiquing Romanist, who commonly
passes under the name of Mr. Francis Dempster, alias, Logan.
YOur consident undertaking to impugn the Religion of PROTESTANTS, made me
once to expect great things. But for what I can yet discern, Parturiunt montes
etc.

I did truly nauseat, to read this your raw and indigested paper, in which you
wholly pass by the most material points in my Answer, and are pleased to
reflect on them, as unnecessarie excursions, that so your Omissions might seem
less criminal. A very easy subterfuge, by which any faint disputant may
decline to meddle with these difficulties, which he sees would nettle him.

But that I may keep you closse to your work, I must crave leave to reminde you
of some of these omissions, and yet to desire that, first, ye would clear your
self of that fallacy, wherewith I charged the third proposition of your first
paper. Whether it were an impertinent excursion, to discover an egregious
fallacy in one of these propositions, which ye laid down as a foundation of
all your ensuing superfl^^cture, the indifferent Reader, may judge. Secondly, I
desire you to answer directly to the retorsions, whereby I inverted your
Syllogism against your self and your Romanists. Is there any thing more
ordinary in School debates then retorsion of Arguments? or when the grand
debate betwixt you and me is, whether the PROTESTANT RELIGION or Popery be the
True Religion; was it untimely or impropper for me to show, that the weapons
which ye bring against the Religion of PROTESTANTS, do strick at the very
foundations of Popery? And thirdly, I desire you to prove the assumption of
your Syllogism denied by me; or else to refell the Arguments, whereby I show,
that, though it be a Negative, yet this is no sufficient ground to turn over
the opponents office upon me. If you do not perform these things, to all
which ye are tied by the rules of disputing, I believe ye shall hardly escape
from being censured by judicious Readers, as an Ignoramus.

I shall not insist upon the evasion, which ye have devised, to cloak the
informalitie of your Syllogism, ex omnibus negativis; pretending that in one
of the propositions you take the Negative, Infinitanter, not neganter. Although
you have not been pleased to tell in which of the propositions it is so taken;
and though there be no indifferent Reader, but would look upon all the
Propositions, as simple Negatives; neither could you in our Language express
them, more Negatively, if you intended to affect the Copula with the Negation.
Yet I shall pass this, seeing I have only used this transient insinuation, to
admonish you to look better to the form of your Syllogismes, and withal did
show you a clear way, how to have corrected your error, without ^unning to
these Termini infinitantes. Only you must remember that if your N^gatio
infinitans fall in the Minor, then it becomes an Affirmative, and so your
pretense of liberating your self from being tied to prove it, does wholly
evanish.

There be diverse other things in your paper, deserving severe castigation, but
they are truly so Iudibrious, that it is irksome to me once to mention them.
Nay hardly shall any thing material be found in the whole paper, beside the
repetitions of what ye had said in your first. Yet lest the wrapping up of all
these in general, should give you occasion to say, that my complaint were
groundles, I shall therefore branch forth two or three of the particulars.

And first, Ye seem to strengthen your Syllogism, with a Dilemma, which yet
upon the matter is nothing but Recocta crambe, the same thing in a new dress.
And thereupon you insult, not without petulancy, as if you hade nothing to
do, but to triumph, saying, Has the Religion of PROTESTANTS no principles
whereby to prove it self? Are they invisible? or, are you ashamed to produce
them? Soft, I beseech you. Is the Sun invisible, because the blind Mole does
not see it? Did I not tell you, that the Religion of PROTESTANTS, hade peculiar
grounds and principles to prove it self to be a True Religion? Did I not
likewise declare, wherein this chief Ground and Principle consisted? Namely, in
its conformity to the Will of God, revealed in the holy Scriptures. Which
neither Popery nor any false Religion has or can have. Were you so dull as not
to take up this? or, if you did, why did you not either acknowledge it, or at
least, go about to disprove it? I find you indeed a little after, objecting
thus. What false Religion is there that may not say with as good reasone, that
they have the like conformity with the Scriptures? But did I not pre-occupie
this cavil in my first paper, and by your own example of Honesty and Knavery,
illustrate the whole matter? know therefore again, that it is not pretended,
but real conformity with the Scriptures, which demonstrats a True Religion. A
Knave may pretend (but not with good reason,) conformity with the Law, which he
has not. And the only way to discover him, is to compare his actions with the
Law; whereby the dissonancie thereof will appear. A man may be so absurd,
(though contrary to reason,) as to affirm a crooked line to be straight: But
when his line comes to be applied to the rule, the obliquity thereof is clearly
discovered. Just so, Popery and other false Religions, may prerend, (albeit
with as little good reason,) a conformity to the word of GOD. But learned
Divines, by applying the rules of Scriptures to them, have demonstrated their
obliquity and dissonancy, as with a Sun beam. Has not this been the way, how
our Lord Christ, his Apostles, the aneient Fathers, and the faithful witnesses
of Truth, confuted Heresies and false Religions in all ages?

But secondly, In your next section you prevaticat, yet more grossly. For
whereas, I had said that the True Religion has sufficient grounds, ex part
objecti, to prove it self, to be a True Religion. Ye offer thus, to make Scors
of my words. That the PROTESTANT Religion, has intrinsecall and objective
truths, and conformity to the sense of the letter of the word of GOD, but that
it is destitute of all special grounds, to prove it self to have such
objective truths and conformity to the Scriptures. I believe, rarely has such
contradictory Nonsense been heard. You might as well, if I had asserted Snow to
be white, have concluded, that I mantained it to be black. Did I not make
plain Scots of my assertion in my own paper, explaining it thus. That is to
say, That the True Religion has sufficient grounds in it self, to manifest it
self to be the True Religion, if it meet with a well disposed intellect. Or if
ye would have it yet clearer, take it thus. The True Religion has such grounds
to manifest its truth, That if it be not taken up and assented to, it is not
through any defect in the Religion, but through the defect and indisposition of
the subject, which it meets with. You do acknowledge, that I affirm the
PROTESTANT Religion to have Objective evidence. If it have objective evidence,
how can it want grounds to manifest it self to be the True Religion? what else,
I pray you, can be meant by Objective evidence, but grounds, Exparte objecti,
to manifest it self? Let this be a Caution to you, that you do not henceforth
substitute your Nonsense, as an explication of my assertions.

Thirdly. In your penult section, ye involve your self in a palpable
contradiction, saying That before any particular truth of Religion be proven to
be conform to the true sinse of Scripture. it must first be proved that the
Clergy has such habilities and assistance, in actu primo, as is requisite for
giving out the truesense of Scripture. If you mean, infallible assistance, ye
not only take for granted, what ye know, all PROTESTANTS do deny; but also, ye
declare that no sense of Scripture can be taken off your hand, or such
Traffiquers as you. Seeing, according to your Romish principles, none below the
Pope, or general Council, are the subjects of this pretended infallibility.
Yes, not only are your own men divided in this, whether this infallible
assistance, be entailed to the Pope or Council, but also, some of your
greatest Rabbis, have concluded, that both Pope and Council may err. And if
so, who then according to your Arguing, should give the true sense of
Scripture. But leaving this, to let you see how your own words entangle you, I
shall desire you to consider this Enthymeme. Before any particular truth of
Religion, be proven to be conform to the true sense of the Scriptures, this
must first be proven, that the Clergy has such requisite habilities, and
assistance In Actuprimo, for giving the true sense, Ergo, this truth,
concerning the Clergies habilities and assistance must be proven before it be
proven, which implies a manifest contradiction. The Antecedent is your
assertion. The Sequel is clear. Because, that the Clergy should have such
assistance, (according to you) is one truth of Religion. If therefore it must
be proven before every truth, it must be proven before it self. Is not this,
not only to contradict the truth, but your own self. Who would not pity a
Person smitten with such a Vertigo?

Conveniet nulli qui secum dissidet ipse. Go not henceforth to cavil, that it
is either through diffidence or tergiversation, that I decline to prove the
contradictorie of your Assumption. The Grounds on which I have done it, are
these. First, because, that I resolve to keep with you exactly, the rules of
disputing. And therefore, seeing you have taken upon you, the office of an
Opponent; you must eit^^er do his work, or else acknowledge that the
PROTESTANTS Religion, is such a^ you cannot impugn. Secondly, because, to
prove the PROTESTANTS Religion, to be a True Religion, is to prove the several
Articles of our Religion, to be conform to the Scriptures, which as I said,
cannot be done with one breath. But if you desiderat to see it done, I shall
remit you to Chamieri Panstratia Catholica; not to mention the works of other
Champions for the Truth. In the mean while, remember, I have appealed you (and
yet again do,) to instance any One Ground necessarly requisite to prove the
True Religion, which is wanting in the Religion of PROTESTANTS.

In the close of all, you offend, that I should have desired you to sign your
papers. And your language concerning this, savours of a Dunghill. But I shall
ingenuously tell you, why I did desire it, That I might know, with whom I
deal. For this has been observed, as one of your Romanists practices, when ye
have been worsted in debates, then to allege, it was no Scholar, that
sustained such a debate, but some obscure Person. Again therefore, it is
required of you, that you would sign your papers, as you would have them
regarded.

I once intended with this paper, by way of retaliation, to have sent you some
demonstrations that Popery cannot be the True Religion. But as yet I have
spared, because, I confess, it is l^kesome to me, to grapple further with you,
until ye discover some more stuff.

John Menzeis.
POSTSCRIPT.
Augustinus, de doctrine Christiana, lib. 2. cap. 9. In iis, Qua aperte posita
in Scriptura sunt, inveniuntur illa omnia qua continent fidem moresqueue
vivends. After the writing of this, a new Edition of this your second paper was
transmitted to me, correcting somewhat the dress of it, but nothing the
matter, which therefore I judged not worthy of any further recognition.



Reader know, That the Corrections in the second Edition of the Jesuits second
paper, were only of some trespasses of Orthography, which are now much better
corrected by the PRINTER.

The Jesuits third paper.
An Answer to a Reply of Mr. JOHN MENZEIS, wherein he labors to justify,
that the grounds which he produced to prove the truth of the PROTESTANT
Religion, were not mere shifts and evasions.
May 5. 1666.
YOUR reply is stuffed with words, wherewith ye undervalue all things that are
brought against you; calling them none-sense, raw and indigested, that you have
a faint disputant, that the matter is Recocta crambe, etc. But do you not know
that such tenor of words are called Sagittae parvulorum. Since every one who
has a tongue and pen, may say or writ what he pleases, or why may not all
their things be reponed with as good reason to your self, calling you a faint
disputant, and that your discourses are raw and indigested, and so, a matter of
so great importance, as to discern a True Religion from a false, shall be
resolved in a flyting, whereof you have this advantage, to have the first word.

Laying then purposely aside all things that are out of the way, I propone to
you again this point, that the Protestant Religion cannot be a True Religion,
nor the Religion to the which God has annexed the promise of eternal life,
and consequently, whosoever aims at eternal happiness, after this life, or
intends to save his soul, is obliged in conscience to quite it, and to search
for the True Religion, prescinding or abstracting for now, where this True
Religion is to be found, and insisting for the present in this only point; that
the PROTESTANT Religion cannot be it: and assure your self that this point will
be a Crambe cocta et recocta, and alwise set before you, till by sufficient
heat you digest, and make good substance of it. This point we proved by this
one Syllogism, which again is repeated to you.

That Religion cannot be a True Religion, which has no peculiar ground nor
principle to prove that it is a True Religion, or conform to the true sense of
the letter of the word of GOD. But the Protestant Religion has no peculiar
ground or principle, to prove it self to be a True Religion, or a Religion
conform to the true sense of the letter of the word of GOD. Therefore, the
Protestant Religion cannot be a True Religion.


Here you deny the Subsumption, that is you deny that the Protestant Religion
has no peculiar ground or principle to prove it self conform to the true
sense of the letter of the word of GOD, and consequently, you affirmed that it
has peculiar grounds or principles, whereby it can prove it self to be a
Religion, grounded upon the true sense of the letter of the word of GOD, and
being pressed to produce your grounds, to prove the truth of your Religion, in
stead of solid grounds, you produce these two sleeing shifts and evasions.

The first is, That the Protestant Religion has intrinsecall grounds Ex part
objecti, though it have not alwise Ex part subjecti, that is, if they do not
alwise prove, the defect is not in the Religion, or in the grounds considered
in themselves, but in the indisposition of the subject to the which they are
applied. But it was told you that it was a mere shift, and that your obscure
terms being resolved in good Scots, signifies only, that your Religion has
objective and intrinsecall truth, or conformity with the true sense of the
letter of the word of GOD, but so, that it is destuute of all special ground
or principle, whereby it can prove it self to be grounded upon the true sense
of the letter of the word of GOD. And that your answer can have no other sense
but this, is proven, because all their four propositions are Synonima, to wit,
A Religion, to be a True Religion, A Religion to be conform to the will of GOD
revealed in Scripture, A Religion to have objective and intrinsecall truth and
evidence, A Religion that is able to convince, if it meet with a well disposed
intellect or capacity. These four propositions being all Synonims, and
signifying the same thing, and so all equally in controversy, you cannot prove
one by another, but you must prove them be some extrinsecall and distinct
Medium, otherwise you must grant that your answer is a mere shift, and which
in good Scots signifyes only this. That your Religion is true in it self, but
has no peculiar ground whereby it can be proven to be true, and so we must
believe it to be true, only because you say that it is. And with this, I set
again before you this Recocted Dilemma. Either the Protestant Religion has
special grounds to prove that it is a True Religion, that it is a Religion
conform to the will of GOD revealed in Scripture, that it is a Religion that
has objective or intrinsecall truth and evidence, that it is a Religion able
to convince any intellect that is well disposed, or else it has no special
ground or principles, whereby all their can be verified of it. If it have
special grounds, let them be produced and examined: if it have none, let an
ingenuous confession have place, that it is groundless and destitute of all
principles, whereby it can prove these four Synonime propositions to agree to
it. Which is confirmed: because any Religion even that which is acknowledged be
themselves to be false, may affirm with as good reason, and pretend that all
these four forenamed Synonime propositions, may be verified of their
Religion. To wit, that their Religion is a True Religion, that their Religion
is conform to the will of GOD revealed in Scripture, that their Religion is
true, Ex part objecti, and has objective and intrinsecall grounds, that their
Religion is evident and true, if it meet with an intellect well disposed. All
the answer and disparity you give, is, that they are fools and ye wise men,
that they are blind, and so no wonder that they cannot see the clear beams of
the truth of your Religion But may not they apply all this to you, with as good
reasons as you do to them?

The other shift that in stead of a solid ground you brought was this, that
you were not obliged to give a particular ground or principle, to prove in
general your Religion to be true, because Religion say you is not an
individual truth, but a complex of many truths whereof one must be proven
after another. But this answer is a mere shift, whereby you would decline the
only and maine difficulty, by bringing in a whole body of controversies:
which likewise can no ways help you. Because before you can prove any one of
these particular truths, to be conform to the true sense of such a text of
Scripture, you must first by some special ground or principle prove that your
Clergy. Men has In Actu Primo, such assistance and ability, as is
prerequired in men who should give the true sense of particular texts of
Scripture. since every false Religion may pretend that they give the true
sense though contrary to the sense that you give.

To this you reply, that it is a contradiction to say: that before other
particular proofs be proved to be conform to the true sense of the letter of
the word of God, it must first be proven, that their Clergy has such ability
and assistance in actu primo, as is requisite to give the true sense of
Scripture. Because say you, this same that the Clergy should have in actu
primo, such assistance is one particular truth, and so, if it should be proved
before every particular truth, it should be proved before it self. And it
seems, you have great compleasance and are fallen in love with this answer, as
with a prime and unswearable subtilitie, backing it both with prose and meeter,
and likewise, advertiseing me to consider it. But I likewise advertise you to
consider, how that in this you fight only with your own shadow. For first, may
not a proposition be in it self one and particular, and yet have an object
universal, in the which, though it be contained, yet the thing affirmed of
that object, do not agree to it: otherwise ye would by this, prove that David
contradicted himself, when he pronounced this proposition, All men are liars;
for if all men be liars, and David be a man, then he was a liar, in saying all
men are liars. Next, what makes it to the purpose, whether the necessity of
particular assistance in actu primo, in Clergy men, to give the true sense in
other particular truths; what imports I say, that this is so of an general
object, that it is in it self one particular truth distinct from the rest, it
being sufficient, that it be such a particular truh of whom other truths
depends, and of the which, the people must first be convinced, before they can
be persuaded, that other particular points proponed to them, are revealed in
such texts of Scripture. Wherefore take this Recocted dilemma again, either
the Protestant Religion has special grounds or principles, whereby men's
understanding can be convinced, that their Clergy is qualified In actu primo,
with such assistance and ability as is requisite to persuade the people, that
they give the true serse of the letter of Scripture, or they have no such
grounds or principles. If they have, then let them be produced, and examined.
If they have no such grounds and principles, they cannot exact of people to
believe their gloss, as the word of GOD since without this particular and
interior assistance, they can only guess at the true sense of the text of
Scripture.

As to that you desire again, that I sign my answer with my name, and that
you require this, because you would know with whom you deal, and because it
has been observed, to be one of the Romanists practices, when they have the
worst in debates, to allege, it was no Scholar that sustained such debate,
but some obscure person. But good Sir, in what Register did you find such a
practique, or whether they may not with greater reason be turned over upon your
selves? and who will not smile, to hear you compare your self, and your
Divines, with Catholic Authors? Since it is known, that the most part of the
doctrine that you vent, either in Pulpits or Schools, is copied out of them.
The thing then desired of you, is, that you answer to the reasons proponed,
not careing by whom they be proponed.

Mr. JOHN MENZEIS his Answer to the Jesuits third Paper.
An Answer to a third Paper from a traffiquing Papist, commonly supposed to be
Mr. Francis Dempster, alias Rinne or Logan.
IS it not Ominous, that this your third Paper, begins with a notorious
falsehood, in its very Inscription? as if I in my second Paper, had undertaken,
to prove the truth of the Religion of PROTESTANTS. Whereas, it is manifest,
that in both my former papers, I only sustained the part of a Defendant. And
this I did of purpose, that it might be seen, how you would discharge the
Office of an Opponent, under which you now appear, clearly succumbing, by your
nauseating repetitions.

If the acrimonie of my Style, in my last offend you, ye may blame, partly your
own tedious repetitions, and trifling in a matter of such importance, and
partly some scurrilous expressions, which yoused, and opprobrious accusations,
of tergiversation and diffidence, where with ye loaded me in your second paper.
Because, forsooth, I would not gratify you so far, as to take the Opponents
work off your hand. So that, what of this kind has been, owes its rise to you.

I admire nothing in you but your confidence. That ye are not ashamed, to offer
to me a Paper, bearing the inscription of a Reply; when ye seem as affrayed to
touch the chief points in my Paper, as you would be to handle a Serpent. Did I
not charge you with grievous Omissions in my last? Why do you not clear your
self of that Fallacy, in the third proposition of your first Paper? Why do
you not answer, to the Retorsions of your argument, against your self? Why do
you not either prove your Assumption, or else refell the arguments, by which I
show that ye were tied to prove it? Did I not demonstrate the pertinencie of
all these particulars, and withal, conjured you to speak to them, as you
would not incur the heaviest characters of Ignominy? What construction after
all this, can your deep silence bear, but that you are not able to acquit your
self in these points? Has there been one article of controversy in any of
your Papers, which I have not examined? whether therefore you, or I, be guilty
of tergiversation, or diffidence, the unbyassed Reader may judge.

I am so wearied with your Tautologies, that I should not have deignied this
paper with an answer; but that I know, the clamorous impudence of many of your
Party, to be such, that if no answer had been returned, (how insignificant
soever your paper be,) they would have insulted, and sung Victoria. But let me
ask you seriously, does the frequent repetition of this poor naked Syllogism,
either help the form, or strengthen the matter thereof of, both of which have
been justly questioned? Are battologies so savourie, and delicious to your
Popish palate? will the ingemination of your (...), extort an assent, from these
who have the use of their reason? How often will ye constrain me to tell you,
that I deny your Assumption, and consequently, the second branch of your ragged
Dilemma, which is wholly coincident therewith, and that I have long desiderated
the probation of both? But seeing ye have some fancy for Dilemma's, I will
repone this one to you. Either you can prove the Assumption of your Syllogism,
or not. If you can, give I pray you a specimen of your Acumen, and tergiverse
no longer. If ye cannot, then profess ingenuously, (as the truth is,) that ye
have undertaken a work which ye cannot perform. And it is no wonder that here
you be at a Nonplus. For, if the Christian Religion revealed in Scripture,
has grounds to prove it self to be the True Religion, (which none but a down
right Infidel can deny,) then surely, the Religion of PROTESTANTS, wants not
grounds to prove it self. For the Religion of PROTESTANTS, is the Christian
Religion, revealed in the holy Scriptures, as I told you in the explication of
the terms in my first Paper. And consequently, what ever solid grounds were
brought either by these Ancient Apologists, Justin Martyr, Tertullian,
Athenagoras, Arnobius, etc. Or are held out in the modern tractats of Morney,
Grotius, Amyrald, yea in your own Vives, to prove the truth of the Christian
Religion, these also prove the truth of the Religion of PROTESTANTS. Nay, do
not you Romanists acknowledge the most of all our Positives? So that the great
question which remains, is, Whether you Papists have any evidence for your
superadditions. And is it not your concernment to show this? But when I think
upon your Tautologizing way, it calls to my mind the custom of children, who,
when their memory fails them, in saying their lesson, least they should seem
to say nothing, they will needs ingeminate the last word. Away then for shame
with these childish, unmanly, and insipid repetitions.

You blot much paper needlessly, with four Synonima propositions. But I might
advertise you, first, that your discourse concerning them, is wide from the
purpose. For it supposes, that I am now proving the Religion of PROTESTANTS to
be the True Religion, which is not at present my work. But seeing ye have
undertaken to impugn it, my bussines is, to cleat it from your cavills.
Secondly, I doubt if ye can reconcile, what ye have said of the Equipollencie,
of these four Propositions, with your Tridentine Faith. For if it be the same
thing, for a Religion to be a True Religion, and to be conform to the
Scriptures, then it cannot be true, which your Council of Trent has defined,
that Unwritten Traditions, are to be received Pari pietatis affectu, with
equal devotion, as the written Word of GOD. For, if this Tridentin Canon be
true, the truth of Religion, cannot stand adequatly in its conformity to the
Scriptures, but partly in its conformity with the Scriptures, and partly, in
its conformity with unwritten traditions, and consequently, your forementioned
propositions, cannot be adequatly Synomma's. You may bethink your self, whether
ye, or the Council be in the Error? But thirdly, granting these propositions
to be Synonima's, that is, to have an Objective identitie: I pray, by what
Logic will ye prove, that one of them, cannot be brought to prove the other?
Is it not lawful to argue, a Definitione, ad Definitum, betwixt which, there
is an objective identity? Do not Logicians acknowledge an identity, betwixt
objective Premises, and the Conclusion? And therefore, though a True Religion
be a Religion conform to the Scripturs, yet, there is no absurdity in proving
the truth of Religion by its co^formity to the Scripturs. Even as, to use your
old example, from which ye are fallen off, (as seems) because, it made so much
against you. An action to be honest, and conform to the Law are Synonima's,
and yet, the best way of proving it to be honest, is, to prove its conformity
to the Law. By all this it appears that your plain Scots, (which ye are not
ashamed again to repeat) is plain Nonsense, as I demonstrated in my last.
For the truth of Religion consisting in its conformity with the Scripture, may
be demonstrated by holding out its conformity with the Scripture. An objective
evidence of a Religion being nothing else, but a ground whereby the truth of
Religion may be demonstrated, it is unconceivable, how a Religion can have
objective evidence, and yet want a ground, whereby to manifest it self to be a
True Religion. If here you but understood your own self, I hope there would be
no more controversy, as to this, betwixt us. So that the matter is not
obscured by my terms, (as you say,) but by your contradictory Nonsense. As to
your frivolous often repeated cavil, that a false Religion may pretend the like
conformity and objective evidence, it was confuted so fully in my last, that I
shall remit you to what was then said. Though Anaxagoras and Hypochondriack,
Persons may mantaine Snow to be black, Shall that make others who have their
eyes in their head, and the use of their Reason turn Skeptics, and question,
whether it be white or black.

Toward the close, ye pass by many things, (as your coustome is,) which I
hade said concerning the assistance of your Clergy men, In actu primo, to give
the true sense of Scripture. And ye only labor to extricat your self from that
Contradiction, wherein I show you to be involved, but all in vain. Nay ye
involve your self the more, by affirming, That a proposition, may have an
universal object, whereof it self is a part, and yet, that something may be
affirmed of that universal object, which cannot be affirmed of that part of
the object. A rare notion forsooth! implying a manifest repugnancie. But I am
loath to digress, to a Philosophic debate with you. Can any thing (I pray
you,) be affirmed of every man, which cannot be affirmed of you and me? As for
that proposition of David's, All men are liars, which you bring to illustrate
your paradoxall notion. How could you make use of it in your argueing with me,
until first you proved your infallibility? For, (if you may be believed,) I
can take no sense of it from you, until you first prove your self infallible;
which, (I suppose,) you pretend not to. But, it is your ill luck, to be still
involved in contradictions. Yet, to speak more particularly of this example,
and not to take up time in enumerating the several acceptions, of this
Syncategorematick particle, All, it may be evident that David did not take it
Universally, of all men, in reference to all their sayings, else he had not
only convicted himself of a lie; but also, charged all the pen men of holy
Scriptures, as liars, in all that they said. Which, I believe, no rational
Person will affirm. It must therefore be restricted to one of two. Either, to
these who had said that DAVID should be King; and if thus, it was indeed an
overreaching, and false assertion in DAVID. For among these the Prophet Samuel
was one. And no wonder that DAVID did overreach in this, for he acknowledges,
he spoke it, in Festinatione, in his haste. Or secondly, (to which I rather
incline,) it must be understood thus, every mere man, of his own nature, is
prone to lying, and fallible, as your Esthius and A Lapide, upon Romans 3.4. And
many others do expound it. And so it holds universally, and can be affirmed of
every one, who is a mere man; and yet David not be guilty of actual lying, in
speaking so. Nay this sentence of David's, reaches a deep stroke, at the
pretended infallibility of your Clergy; except, ye can prove, that they have a
special gift, of infallible assistance, which I believe you will do when you
prove your assumption: Namly, Ad Graecas Calendas, that is to say, Never. You
are then so far, from having any subsidy, from this saying of DAVID, that
while you go about to expede your self, you do involve your self the faster.
But I leave you in this thicket, until I consider your other evasion. For, Mus
miser est uno, qui tantum clauditur antro.

You therefore except this truth, Concerning the assistance of the Clergy,
from being in the condition of other particular truths: As if the knowledge of
this, were to be presupposed, before we can know the conformity of any other
particular truth to the Scriptures. But this shift yields you no more succor
then the former. Nay, it leaves you likewise in a Contradiction, which I thus
demonstrat. A Religion, and the several points thereof to be true, and to be
conform to the true sense of Scripture, are Synonima's, according to you.
Therefore, no point of Religion can be known to be true, until it be known, to
be conform to the true sense of Scripture. But, that the Clergy should have
such assistance, In actu primo, to give the true sense of Scripture, is one
point of Religion, as you affirm. Therefore, it cannot be known to be true,
until its conformity with the true sense of Scripture be known. And yet upon
the other hand, you say, that, before the true sense of any Scripture be known,
we must first know, that the Clergy has such assistance to give the true
sense of it, Ergo, that the Clergy has such assistance, must be known, before
the true sense can be known. And consequently, the assistance of the Clergy,
In actu primo, must be known before the sense of Scripture, and not before the
sense of Scripture. Now, what need have you of Ariadnes clue, to wind your self
out of this labyrinth?

By this, it is easy to consider, what we are to think of your last Dilemma.
Either (say you,) The PROTESTANT Religion has special grounds, to prove that
the Clergy has this assistance, In actu primo, to give the true sense of the
letter of Scripture, or it has not, if it has, let them be produced, and
examined: if it has not, then the People have no ground to believe their
Teachers. Who sees not, how easily this may be retorted upon your selves? For,
either the Romish-Religion, has special grounds, to prove that their Clergy
has this assistance, In actu primo, to give the true sense of the letter of
Scripture; or, it has not. If it has, let these grounds be produced, and I
doubt not, but upon examination, they shall be found light. If it have none,
then the poor deluded People, have no ground to believe their Romish Doctos.
Nay, it were easy, (if I did not fear too great prolixitie,) to demonstrate,
that this falls much more heavylie on the Romish-Religion, then it can do on
us. For, how (I pray you,) can your Romists know, that they have any Clergy at
all? Seeing, the being of their Clergy depends upon a condition, whereof they
can have no infallible certainty. Namely, the intention of the Ordainer, as is
defined both in the Council of Florence, and Trent. And if they cannot know
who are their Clergy Men, far less can they know that they have this
assistance, so much talked of. Again, If the knowledge of their Clergies
assistance, be such a prerequisit, then, it ought to be defined, to which of
the Clergy this assistance is entayled. Whether to all, or only to some, and
who these some are, whether the Pope, or General Council? But as to this ye
are not agreed among your selves. Nay, as I hinted in my last, some of your
chief Doctors mantaine, both Pope and Council may ert. Define then (if you
can,) who these are, that are to give the sense of Scripture, with this
pretended assistance.

Therefore, to answer directly to your Dilemma: If you speak of infallible
assistance, I absolutely deny, that the knowledge of such infallibity, In actu
primo, in the Clergy, is a necessary prerequisit, before the true sense of
Scripture may be known. And now again, the probation of this will ly upon you.
Which (I believe,) ye shall find as difficult, as the probation of your
Assumption. Can I not give an assent, to a Jurist explaining some of the
Institutes of Justinian, or receive from him satisfactory resolution of a
Law-case, unless first I know him infallible? Can I not assent to him who
explains or demonstrats a proposition of Euclyd, unless first I be satisfied
as to his infallibility In actu primo? I wish your Proselytes would deal with
you according to your principle, and believe nothing you say, till you prove
your infallibility. But to remove the (...) of this your mistake. Know that our
Peoples faith is not built on our Authority. We arrogat nor Dominion over their
faith, we are but helpers of their joy. 2. Cor. 1.24. But seeing you have
pitched upon the knowledge of the infallible assistance of the Clergy, In actu
primo, for giving the true tense of Scripture, as a necessary prerequisit,
before the true sense of Scripture can be known; which the PROTESTANTS deny. I
therefore appeal you, to prove this to be a necessary prerequisit, if you can.

Ye are not a little commoved, that our Divines should be compared to yours. It
is long indeed, since the pride of the Romish Clergy, made an eminent Person
say, Odi festum istius Ecclesiae, but I may say without vainity, to the praise
of GOD, there have been eminent Lights in the Reformed Churches; such as
Calvin, Beza, Juel, Whitaker, Morton, Usher, etc. Who lake only some years to
make them be enrolled among the Fathers. Neither indeed do I desire them to be
otherwise compared with your men, then as one would compare Austine, Jerome, or
Athanasius, with the Heretics of their time. Yet, would I not put all the
Doctors of your Church in one class. Some we know, have been of a more
moderate principle, then the Grandees of your faction, for which cause many of
their writtings have suffered by your Judex Expurgatorius.

How are you not ashamed, to say, that the most we teach in Schools or Pulpits,
is copied out of your Authors? Do we (I pray you,) reach Popery either in
Schools or Pulpit? Do we cite your Authors, but to confute them? Or, do we
make further use of them, except in common truths, wherein we and ye agree? as
we make use of Heathen Authors; and as Virgil made use of Ennius, to extract
Aurum ex stercore Ennii; or, as the skilled Surgeon can make use of Vipers
flesh, to compound a sovereign Triacle. I am sorry, that as your Paper began
with a falsehood, in matter of fact, (you must excuse my plainness,) so it
should be shut up with another: Sic respondent Ultima Primis.

You may not expect, that I will trifle away more time, in answering your
frivolous unsubscrived Tautologies. Either therefore, leave your repetitions,
and do the work of an Opponent seriously, or else, you will constrain me, to
give a public account to the World, of your trifling, and tergiversation.

Turpe est difficiles habere nugas. Aberdene, May 9. 1666. John Menzeis.

The Jesuits fourth Paper. Answer to a third Paper of Mr. JOHN MENZEIS,
whereby he labors of new, to persuade that the Grounds which he produces, for
the truth of the Protestant Religion, were not mere shifts and evasions. 28.
of May, 1666.
This Paper was not delivered to Mr. JOHN MENZEIS till June 2.
YOUR third Paper, bearing the date of the ninth of May, Did not come to my
hands before the twenty seventh of May. Neither know I, wherefore it has been
so long keept up. Since, as I am informed, you did first dyt it to your
Scholars, who out of zeal to the reputation of their Master, did use all
diligence to disperse many copies of it: and although it be not authentic, and
subscrived with your hand, with the solemuities used in your former paper, yet,
for the ordinary strain of digressions, not making to the purpose, I do
acknowledge it for yours. And it is pleasant, that you say that you marvel,
that I pass over in silence, and does not answer. But how can you marvel at
this, since I have always protested to you, and protest to you again, that I
would closse misken, and take no notice of any thing that is out of the way,
and which does not concern the decision of the present controversy, to wit;
Whether the Protestant Religion can be shown to be a True Religion, by any
ground or principle, which may not serve with as great Reason, to prove any
false Religion to be a True Religion. And so soon as you (who has bragingly
undertaken, to prove the truth of your Religion,) shall produce any such
ground, whereby it may appear, that you put your self at least in the way,
either to give some satisfactory answer, or at least, to confess ingenuously,
that you have no such ground for your Religion; I oblige my self, and shall
find you Surtie, that I shall answer at length to all your Digressions, to
all your Retorsions, and likewise, shall disput with you at great leisure,
about the rules of Logic, and show how groslie you are mistaken, in
confounding Objective negations, with formal negations, as if a formal
affirmation, might not fall upon objective negations united be an objective
affirming Copula. As for your injurious and undervaluing words, both in Greek,
and Latin, wherewith your paper is stuffed, calling all things brought against
you, Tantologies, Battologies, Insipid and Childish things, and Nonsense, etc.
I told you before, that any man that has a tongue, may heap up and utter
injurious words, even against GOD himself. And this way of proceeding, would be
thought by the judicious, to be a clear testimony of a deserted cause, and
that, since by sufficient reason you cannot propt the tottering truth of your
Religion, at least by Digressions, Injurious words, and other practices, you
will shoulder and hold up your reputation before simple people, who adjudges
the Victory to him who rails most. As if the means to try a True Religion from
a false, were not of such high concernment it self alone, as did deserve to
confine both your thoughts and pen within the gyre of it. So that without
wrouging the weightines of the matter, ye cannot decline to squable about other
things, before it be fully ended.

Laying then aside as before, all other things as out of the rod; this is laid
again before you, that the Protestant Religion, cannot be the true Religion,
nor the Religion to which GOD has tied the promise of eternal life, and
consequently, whosoever arms at eternal happiness after this life, or
intends to save his Soul, is obliged in conscience to quit it, and betake
himself to a diligent search for the True Religion, prescinding for now, where
it is to be found, and insisting for the present is this, that the Protestant
Religion cannot be it. This point is proven at before by this Syllogism.

That Religion cannot be a true Religion, which has no special Ground or
Principle whereby it can prove it self to be a true Religion, or conform to
the true sense of the Letter of the Word of God. But the Protestant Religion,
has no special Ground or Principle, whereby it can prove it self to be a true
Religion, or to be a Religion, conform to the true sense of the Letter of the
Word of God. Ergo, the Protestant Religion, cannot be a true Religion.


Though you leave off to call this Syllogism a Crambe recocta, being conscious
to your self, not to be able to produce sufficient heat to dissolve and digest
it, yet you call it a poor and naked Syllogism, which if it be as you say, it
beggs this favor of you, that you will cloth and cover the nakedness of it,
with some fitting answer. Only be pleased to remember, that since you deny the
subsumption, and so puts your self in obligation, to produce grounds for the
proof of your Religion, that the grounds you produce, must have this
property, that they cannot serve with as great reason to prove a false
Religion, to be a True Religion, As the grounds which serves to prove one to be
an honest man, must have this property, that they cannot serve to prove a
knave, to be an honest man. Neither do you satisfy in saying, that Honesty
consists in a conformity of actions with the Law, as Knaverie in a deformity of
actions to the Law: this I say does not help you, because this is only to
explicat the terms, and to draw the lineaments not filling up the fields and
vacuities. For the present controversy is not wherein consists objective
Honesty, or objective Knaverie; nor wherein consists objective truth of
Religion, or objective falsehood of Religion: but suppoining the one to consist
in a conformity, or difformity of actions to the Law, and the other to consist
in a conformity, or difformity with the true sense of the letter of the word of
GOD: it remains to show by some special ground, wherefore of one man is
verified this objective Honesty, and not of the other? and wherefore of one
Religion is affirmed this obiective truth, and not of the other? To this you
answer, that this is easily known, be applying and comparing only the actions
of both with the Law, and the tenets of both, with the word of GOD, as the
obliquity and crookedness of a rule, is presently known by applying it to a
straight and even rule, and with this popular discourse, you think to have
cleared, and exhausted all the difficulty. But good Sir, give me leave to
discover the shallowness, and superficialnesse of this answer. You say
objective Honesty is proven to agree to such a man, because his actions are
conform to the Law. But I ask you, what if the letter of the Law, with the
which you compare the actions, be capable of diverse, yea, contrary senses, and
the knave pretend that the actions of his Knaverie, are conform to the Law,
taking the letter of the Law in the sense that he give it? In this case can one
be proven to be an Honest man, unless there be produced some special ground,
to show that his actions are conform to the true sense of the letter of the
Law, and which cannot favor the Knave, nor his actions? Likewise, since the
letter of Scripture is capable of diverse, yea, contrary senses, and there is
no Religion so false, but pretends that the tenets of it, are conform to the
letter of Scripture, taken up in the sense that they give it: there rests no
remedy to prove a Religion to be true, or to be distinct from a false, but by
producing some special ground, which is not applicable to a false Religion.
And hereby the way appears how easily simple people are gulled, and at how
easy a rate their favor and suffrages are obtained, be a discourse, smoothly,
and plausibly proponed, and attempered to their capacity, though in the mean
time it be dest-tute-of all truth and soliditie.

Out of this you may see, that since you have undertaken to prove the truth of
your Religion, and grants that the truth of a Religion, cannot subsist without
some special ground, denying the subsumption, that affirms the want of all
grounds, there results out of all these, a necessity and obligation upon your
part, to produce some special grounds for the truth of your Religion, whereby
you may make appear, that the objective truth, or the objective grounds of a
true Religion, does agree to your Religion, and which cannot serve, to prove
that the objective truth, or objective grounds of a true Religion, agrees to a
false Religion. Neither does it exempt you from satisfying this obligation, the
pretext that you are the Defender, and I the Impugner, because, to me, as the
Impugner, belongs only to press you, either to grant that you have no
grounds, or to produce them to be impugned.

Now let us come to the shifts and evasions which ye have produced in place of
solid grounds. The first was, that your Religion has objective truths, or
objective grounds of evidence, though they be not alwise convincent, by reason
of the indisposition of the subject to whom they are proponed. But, it has
been told you, that all their are Synonims, A Religion to be a true Religion, A
Religion to have objective grounds of truth and evidence, A Religion to be
conform to the true sense of the letter of the word of GOD, A Religion that is
convincent if it encounter with an intellect well disposed. And so their being
all Synonims, and all equally in controversy, one cannot be ground to prove
one another, but they must all be proven by some other thing. And this was told
you, and is now repeated again. Neither does it help you, the answer that you
insinuat in this paper, that, although they be all Synonims, yet one of them
may serve to prove another, as it is lawful to argue A Definitione ad
Definitum, though there be an objective identitie betwixt them, as likewise,
betwixt objective premises and the conclusion. But in this, as before, you
discover your shallowness, in touching only the screofe, not going deeper.
Because this way of arguing does not hold, when both the Definition and
Definitum are in controversy, whether they do agree in such a thing, for then
they must be proven by some other ground. Moreover, may not all this with as
great reason be assumed of a false Religion, and which you your self
acknowledge for a false Religion and why may they not say that their Religion
has objective grounds of truth and evidence, and prove this be this other
Synonime, that their Religion is conform to the true sense of the letter of
the word of GOD? Now all the answer that you always give, is, that those that
sees not the truth of your Religion, have an intellect ill disposed and
tempered are Fools, Blinded, and now you add that they are to be esteemed for
Hypochondriack persons. But all this is as easily turned over upon your self,
since men that denies and professes that they can see no truth in your
Religion, are in all other things as discursive and as sharp sighted as your
self.

The other shift that you bring, when you are pressed to produce some special
ground, whereby may be made manifest the truth of your Religion, is, That
Relgion is not an individual truth, but a complex of many truths, which cannot
be proven altogether, but successively, one after another. But, who sees not
this to be a mere shift, in place of a difficulty, to substitute a whole body
of particular controversies, which though they may now be begun, yet requires
years to bring them to an end? And does not Aristotle teah us, that we should
alwise begin Ab universalioribus, before we descend to particulars, least doing
otherwise, we be forced to repeat often the same things? Likewise remember,
that the same shift with as great reason, may be alleged by any false
Religion, to decline the necessity, that they have to give grounds to prove the
truth of their Religion.

As for that, in which you enlarge your self to show an Contradiction in my
discourse, whereby I told you, that before you can induce the people to
believe, that you propone the true sense of particular texts of Scripture, you
must first produce solid grounds, that you are qualified with such assistance,
and such directions, In actu primo, to give out this true sense. In this I told
you before, that you are fighting with your own shadow: and putting up a
feigned adversary to your self that afterward you may have a feigned pleasure
in putting of him down. For what contradiction can it be, to say, that the
actual operation, or, Actus secundus, does necessarly suppone, Actum primum,
and if, In actu secundo, you give the true sense of the letter of Scripture,
then necessarly you must be furnished In actu primo, with sufficient ability to
give this true sense? Or how can any exerce operations of Seeing, Hearing,
Speakeing, In actu secundo, except he be supported to have In actu primo,
sufficient ability to do their operations? And you must have great dominion
over your intellect, if you can persuade your self, that this discourse
involves a contradiction. Now I request you to cloth this ragged Dilemma, as
you call it. Either you can produce some special grounds, whereby can be made
manifest, that your Clergy men are qualified In actu primo, with sufficient
ability and assistance, to give the true sense of particular texts of
Scripture, and let their grounds be produced, and shown, that they cannot be
assumed with as great reason, to prove that the Clergy of a false Religion,
has this ability In actu primo, or else, you are destitute of special
grounds, and then it is impossible that your Clergy can give the true sense of
Scripture, because, it is impossible to do any thing In actu secundo, without
a special ability In actu primo, to do it. So that all the ability that your
Clergy is furnished with, In actu primo, is only, to guess at the true sense
of Scripture, and wherefore, should people pay you Stipend for guessing, since
they are endued with sufficient ability themselves, and without you, to guess
at the true sense of Scripture.

In this your last Paper, you add a third shift, to wit, that all the grounds,
whereby Tertullian and other Fathers, proved the truth of Christian Religion
against Paganes, proves likewise the truth of your PROTESTANT Religion. But who
will not laugh at this answer, as if there were no Christian Religion but your
PROTESTANT Religion? And what Christian Religion is so false, which may not
with as great reasone assume this shift of yours? As to that, whereby you
remitt me to the grounds, which Morney, Grotins, and others of your own Authors
brings, I pray you, since they are your own, take all the help you can of them,
and either be distilling or squeezing all their writs. Express me one solid
ground to prove the truth of your Religion, which may not with as great reason,
be applied to prove a false Religion to be a true Religion.

Mr. JOHN MENZEIS his Answer to the Jesuits fourth Paper.
An Answer to a fourth Paper from a traffiquing Papist, commonly supposed to
be Mr. Francis Dempster, alias Rinne, or Logan.
TO apologize for your long silence, you allege, that my third Paper, dated
May ninth, came not to your hands until May twentyseventh, and that it was
unsubscrived, and hade been first dictated to my Scholars. To which it is
answered, that on the ninth of May, I sent an authentic copy of that paper,
to the Gentleman of your profession, by whom the rest, both of yours, and
mine, were addressed. If he has neglected to deliver it to you until the
twentyseventh of May, you may call him to an account, and put him to Penance
at your next shriveing, for being so negligent of the concernments, of his
Ghostly father. Whereas, you say, it was unsubscrived, I can hardly believe
you; yet, if it be so, it has been a lapse of memory. But you are not In bona
fide, to object that omission to me, who never had the confidence to sign any
of your papers. However, Quod scripsi, scripsis what I have written, I have
written. And to give evidence, that I am ready to mantaine, what ever is in
that Paper, against all the fry of Jesuits; transmit to me with a confident
hand, the copy which I sent, and it shall be returned with my subscription
manual. As to the alleagance, that it was dy^ed to some Students, before I
sent it to be conveyed to you, it is a gross untruth. For it was not
communicated to them, or to any else, until the week thereafter; which I was
the more easily inclined to do, hearing how busy your Romish proselyts were,
to disseminat your Papers, and that with the addition of impudent calumnies.
But believe me, I should not have accused you for your delay, if at length, you
had supplied the omissions of your former Papers, and done the work of an
Opponent neatly, and thoroughly, as ye were required. Sat cuo, si sat been. But,
you must give me leave, to give you a free Character of this Paper. I find it
to be nothing but a Rapsodie of Railings, Repetitions, Tergiversations, yea,
and shameful flinching from your own principles. So that, if I mistake not, it
had been more for your credit, utterly to have kept silence. For, Stultus est
labor Ineptiarum.

By this time it appears, that it is lost labor, to press you any further, to
make a Reply to the principal points of my former Papers. For now, you protest
you will not do it, and you cloak your shameful tergiversation, with this
pellucid excuse, that these things in my Papers were out of the way. That is,
(if you may be believed,) impertinent. But who, beside you, will say, that it
was impertinent for me, to discover a fallacious Sophistication, in the ground
of all your discourse? What ingenuous person, would not have judged himself
concerned, to clear himself of such an imputation? Yet, though this has been
now four times charged on you, ye think it not pertinent to vindicat your
self. Who, besides you, but will acknowledge, that it was pertinent for me to
demonstrate, that by your own discourse, you had ensnared your self in
Contradictions, and had cut the sinews of your Romish and Tridentine faith?
What a poor Advocat then are you for the Romish cause, and an unworthy
Stipendiarie to your Master the Pope, who have no more to say, but, that it is
not pertinent for you now to speak to these things? But what need I wonder at
this? Seeing you judge it impertinent to prove the Assumption of your own
syllogism, which I had not only requited you to do, but also, condescended
to demonstrate by many Mediums, that you were tied to do it. And yet, it seems
not pertinent to you, either to prove it; or to refell these my arguments.
Shall only impertinencie be pertinent with you? I doubt, if that cowardly
boast shall raise up your falling reputation, that if I should answer
according to the method which you prescribe, that is, if I would liberat you of
the burden, of proving your Assumption, then you would answer, not only to
all these my Digressions (as for the salving of your credit, you are pleased to
term them,) but also, dispute at leisure with me, about Logical Rules, and I
know not what, notionall whimsies concerning Formal and objective negations.

Quid dignum tante feret hic promissor hiatu? When I compare your bigg, but
conditional braging, with your lean performances at present, I remember of him
in Plutarch who was termed (...), Semper dicebat (...), and nunquam dabat. He
was liberal in promises, but nothing at all in performances. If you be so able
to expede your self in these particulars, what mean you by all these shifts and
dilatours? Quinon est hodie, cras minus aptus erit. If you were once become so
ingenuous, as to acknowledge that you cannot prove your Assumption, I would so
far commiserat you, as to grant you an exemption. But till then how can you
expect courtesy at my hands? Might not a man of your years, have learned so
much discretion, as not to prescribe methods of answereing, to his Adversary?
Vain debates for victory and not for truth, do not become grave persons.
Yet, I purpose never to decline to exchange a Paper with you, or any Romanist,
either upon a Philosophical, or Theological subject, when I see it for
edification, or the Churches advantage. This trifling encounter with you, has
made the esteem of your Romish breeding to fall exceedingly with me. For
though you have been of such fame among these of your Cabal, that I promised to
my self learned and accurat discourses from you, yet I must profess, that the
most of the lines which I have received from you, have been like the ludibrious
pratlings of a Quaker.

You take it ill, that I accuse you, of your Tautologies, and Battologies. Is
it a crime to call Scapham Scapham, or to call black, black? Had I not just
cause so to do, when now the fourth time you have repeated one Paralogisme,
yea, and glory in your recocted colworts, as if they were delicious food?
Would it not tempt the patience of another, to have to do with one, who will
needs still repeat the same note? Apage coccysmum. You call upon me, To cloth
your naked, and informall Syllogism, with an Answer. If you look back on the
Papers, which ye have received from me, you will find, that I have returned
three Answers unto it in my first Paper, though, as then I told you, it was
unworthy of any further reply, then, NEGO MINOREM, That I denied the Minor. Is
it not rather your concernment, To cloth your Syllogism, with a probation of
the denied Assumption? All that was incumbent to me, was to publish the
Nakedness of it, which I hope in some measure I have done. You say, that they
who have a tongue, or pen, may throw the like reproaches upon me. I have
indeed sufficient experience of your revilings. For it is ordinary with you, to
upbraid me with shallowness, and superficialnesse, etc. Yet these shallow
discourses have so (as seems,) affrighted you, that ye have not adventured to
plumbe them. But, I rather never put pen to paper, before you, or any other,
had just ground to accuse me, of such Childish repetitions. If you hold on in
this way, the like fate may befall you, which did that Rudolphus, who for his
trifling, was to his reproach, surnamed, Nugax. Whether I have deserted the
cause, which I have undertaken, as you are pleased to reproach me, let your
self, or any of my most prejudicat adversaries, after they have perused all
these Papers, judge?

You have studied now at length an evasion, but a miserable one, to elude the
example whereby I did illustrate in my foregoing Papers, that the truth of
Religion may be proven, by holding out its conformity with the Scriptures, even
as the honesty of a man's actions, may be demonstrated by holding forth the
conformity thereof with the Law. But what (say you,) if the letter of the Law,
be capable of diverse, yea, and contrary senses, and then making application to
Religion, you affirm, That the letter of the Scripture, is capable of diverse,
yea, contrary senses, and thereupon, you would infer, that the truth of
Religion cannot be known by its conformity with the Scripture. But you are so
unhappie in all your arguings, that they are both false on the matter, and
return with more violence on your own head, then upon your adversary. And
first, may it not with more reason be retorted on you, that the Canons of your
Councills, the Bulls, Breves, and Decretalls of your Popes, and what else of
that nature you would make use of, to verify the truth of your Religion, are
capable of diverse and opposite senses? Need I put you in mind of the eager
debates of the Jesuits, and Dominicans, about the sense of, Posse dissentire si
velit; in the Fourth canon of the sixth session of the Council of Trent? Or,
shall I remit you to see further digladiations of your Doctors, about the sense
of other Canons of the said Council in Vasquez, in primam secundae disput:
203. and cap. 9? When you loose this knot, in behalf of your Romish principles,
you will ease your Adversary of the pains, of discovering the vanity of your
arguing. But I shall not wait for your help, and therefore, I plainly Answer
by this distinction. If you mean that the Law, which is the measure of honest
actions, is capable of diverse, and contrary genuine senses, it is a manifest
falsehood. For the Law cannot at once command two contraries, more then a man
can at once, blow hot and cold breath out of his mouth; else, two contrary
propositions should at once be true, which Logicians tells you, cannot be. But
if you mean, that the Law may have diverse, yea, and contrary imposed senses,
Sive ex inscitia, sive ex nequitia, whether through the ignorance, or
perverseness of cavilling imposers, or, one genuine sense, and others imposed.
It is granted, that this may be. But, these misprisions of cavillers, will not
impede the clearing of the real honesty of a good action, by its conformity
with the genuine sense of the Law. No more then the cavilling of a Sophister,
pretending a crooked line to be straight, will impede the discerning of a
straight line, from a crooked, by the application of both to the rule. Which
was another example formerly made use of by me, of which also, in this your
last paper you make mention, but the evidence thereof, seems so to have dazzled
your eyes, that you have not been able to find out a Sophisme, to elude it.
This same distincton serves for the other branch of your discourse, concerning
the Scriptures, For, if you mean, that the Scriptures have diverse or disparat,
yea, and contrary genuine senses, intended by the holy Ghost: you speak both
falsely, and impiously, as if the Spirit of GOD did equivocat in Scriptures, and
Scriptures were like to Apollo's dubious Oracles. But, if you mean only, that
diverse and disparat, yea, and contrary senses, may be imposed on Scripture,
through the ignorance or cavilling humor of men; it is granted. But this
hinders not, but that, the truth of Christian Religion, may be demonstrated by
its conformity with the one genuine sense of Scripture. Especially, seeing,
though there be depths in the Scriptures of GOD, yet they are clear in all
things necessary to salvation. As our Divins have demonstrated in the
controversy, De Perspicuitate Scripturae. Know you not that of Chrysostom.
Homil. 3. in 2. Epist: ad These. In divinis Scripturis quacunquod necessaria
sunt, manifesta sunt. Or that of August: in Psalm: 88. Et si quadam sunt tecta
mysteriis, quadam tamen si^ manifesta sunt, ut ex ipsis facillime ap^riantur
obscura. Or what think you, of the boldness of Irenaeus, lib: 2. Contra
Hereses cap. 46. Vniversae Scripturae Propheticae and Evangelicae in aperto and
sine ambiguitate and similiter ab omnibus audir^ possunt. Yea, this truth is so
luculent, that it has extorted testimonies from your own writters. Hence
Aquinas part: 1. quest: 1. art: 10. Nihil sub Spirituali sensu continetur fidet
necessarium quod Scriptura per literalem sensum alicubt manifest non tradat;
and Sixtus Senensis lib: 6. Bibliotheca Annot. 152. Affirms that part of
Scripture, apertam esse and dilucidam quae complectitur summa rerum
credendarum, principia and pracipua been vivendi praecepta and exempla. So
that, were I not resolved to keep you at your work, as an Opponent, it were
easy thus to redargue, all which you have said.

If the Scriptures be clear in all that is necessary to Salvation, then the
Religion of PROTESTANTS, has a clear ground to prove it self to be a true
Religion.

But the first is true, Ergo.

The Sequel of the Major is so clear, that your Romanists have no other
evasion, but to accuse the Scriptures, sometimes of obscurity, sometimes of
ambiguity, as being capable of diverse, yea, of contrary senses. And in this,
you imitate the old Heretics, as appears, by that luculent testimony of
Irenaus, lib: 3. cap: 2. Cum ex Scripturis arguuntur in accusationem
convertuntur ipsarum Scripturarum, quasi vary sint dicta, and non possit ex
bis inveniri veritas, ab iis qui nesciunt traditionem. The assumption is proved
at length by PROTESTANTS, in the controversies De Perfectione and Perspicuitate
Scriptura. When you have tried all the art of Iesuitical Sophistry, to
disprove these popular discourses (as in the height of your Spirit, you are
pleased to term them,) I hope you shall find them both solid and impregnable.

This may silence your clamor, that I should produce a ground, by which the
truth of the PROTESTANT Religion may be proved, for you suppose, that you are
tied to no more, but to press me to produce the grounds of the PROTESTANT
Religion, that you may impugn them. But, to silence this your vociferation,
you may remember, first, that I have demonstrated that you are tied to do
more. Had you indeed undertaken, to prove the Hypothesis of the Atheist, that
there is no true Religion at all, in this case, you might have demanded of me,
a ground to prove a True Religion. But when you affirm, that, there is a True
Religion, which has peculiar grounds, which can be verified of none else, you
were tied, to have produced these grounds, and to have demonstrated, that they
could not agree to the Religion of PROTESTANTS. Especially, I having solemnlie
appealed you to instance one ground, requisite to prove the true Christian
Religion, whith is wanting in the Religion of PROTESTANTS. Secondly, You had
not only in the general affirmed, that the True Religion had grounds to prove
it self, but you had particularly condescended upon one, namely, the knowledge
of the assistance (as seems infallible,) of the Clergy, In actu primo, to give
the true sense of Scripture, before the true sense thereof can be known.
Whereupon in my last, I told you, this was expressly denied by us PROTESTANTS,
and therefore, appealed you, if you could, to prove it. But you have been so
far from doing it, that you have shamefully flinched from it, as shall a
little after appear. But thirdly, I have Ex superabundanti, though not tied
thereto, by rules of disputing, given you a Ground of the truth of the Religion
of PROTESTANTS, namely, The Perspicuity of the Scriptures, (but not excluding
the use of means,) in all things necessary to Salvation, which you might have
collected, from that Intrinseck objective evidence, of which I spoke from the
beginning. Only remember, that you call not upon me to prove this, though it
were easy to do it, and has been done, times without number, by PROTESTANTS,
in their debates against your Romanists. But now, we are to keep the rules of
disputing, and you have acknowledged, that it is your concernment, As the
Impugner, when a ground is produced, to impugn it. And therefore, you must
either do your work, or else become so ingenuous, as to confess, that you
are not able to impugn the truth of God. In the mean time, trouble me not with
the cavils of your fellows, which have been often already refured by our
Divines, else, I will remit you to the Authors, who have examined these
Sophisms before. But, if you have any new thing, worthy of consideration, you
may propose it. I wish you were moved by such principles, as he who said, 2.
Cor. 13.8. We can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth. Yet do you
as you will, Fortis est veritas and praevalebit.

I had showed you in my last, that your whole discourse, concerning your four
Synonime propositions, was both (...), wide from the purpose, and likewise
inconsistent with your Tridentine faith. Yet, so rare a disputant are you, that
you make no return to these things, what can I conclude, but, Qui tacet
consentire videtur. The reasons which I brought, have so far prevailed with
you, as to make you explicitly grant, that of two propositions, Objectivly
Synonims, the one may be brought to prove the other, except when both are
equally in controversy. But this can be of no use for you, in the present
case, until you disprove the Perspicuity of the Scriptures, in these things
which are necessary to Salvation, which, I believe, you will find beyond your
reach. This Hypothesis also, takes off the cavil of Heretics, pretending a
conformity with Scripture, for these Heretical vapors, cannot stand before
the radiant beams of Scripture Light.

You discover both your Humor, and Ignorance, in alleging, that it was a
Shift in me, to say, That Religion being a complex of many truths, it could not
be proven at once. Suppose a man had an hundred pieces to be tried, whether
they be upright Gold or not. Can (I beseech you,) this be done, but by bringing
every one of them to the Touchstone? Suppose there were an hundred lines to be
examined, whether they be straight or crooked. Can this be done, but by
applying each of them to the Rule? Even so, there being a multitude of points
of Religion to be tried, whether they be agreeable to Scripture or not. How can
this be done, but by comparing each of them with the Scripture?

I have admired nothing more, since my encounter with you, then your flinching
toward the end of your Fourth Paper, from your own Principle. Viz. That the
knowledge, of the assistaence of the Clergy In actu primo, is a necessary
prerequisite, before the true sense of any Scripture can be known, from which I
had concluded you, to be involved in an Inextricable contradiction. I had
besides reflected upon a Paradoxall, yea, and implicatorie notion of yours,
That something might be affirmed, of an universal object, distributively
taken, which cannot be affirmed of every particular, under that universal. I
likewise discovered your Childish, and inconsistent discourse, concerning that
word of David, All men are liars. I show further that your last Dilemma,
concerning the Clergies assistance, did fall so heavily on your own head, that
your Romists could have no infallible certainty, that they had any Clergy at
all; let be, that they had this pretended assistance. Yet to these things, and
many more, which here were tedious to me to repeat, you make no more particular
Reply, then if they had never been objected to you. It your silence, the
strongest confutation of your Adversary? All I find you saying is, What
contradiction can it be to say, that the actual operation, or Actus secundus,
does necessarly suppone Actum primu^. But, Quid hoe ad Rhombum? Was this the
question betwixt you and me, whether the Actus secundus did presuppose Actum
primum? From which, no more can be concluded, but, that they who give the true
sense of scripture, when they give it, have assistance, In actu primo, to give
it: which no Protestant, or rational man ever denied. Yet, if you understand
your Jesuits principles, the Actus secundus, or actual operation, does not
necessarlie presuppose such an infallible assistance, In actu primo, as here
you seem to plead for. For according to them, Omnia quae tenent se, ex part
actus primi, in free agents, may consist, Cum actu, vel, actu contrario, vel
actus negatione. But to leave this, the question betwixt you and me, was, as
appears by your former Papers, Whether the knowledge of the Clergies
assistance, in actu primo, be a necessary prerequisite, before we can know the
sense of Scripture, given by them, to be true? Which is vastlie different from
what you now assert. Who sees not the difference betwixt this proposition, He
that gives the true sense of Scripture, when he gives it, has assistance in
actu primo, to give it? And that other, Before I can know the sense, given by
such an one to be true, I must antecedently know, that he has assistance in
actu primo, to give it? It is true, one cannot exercise the operations of
Seeing, and Hearing, (which are your own examples,) unless he have a
sufficient ability, In actu primo, to exercise these operations. But he may
exercise them, although he does not know, and actually reflect upon the
faculty which he has, In actu primo. A beast both Sees, and Hears. so does
an Infant, who yet, cannot reflect upon the Actus primus, of these operations,
I can hardly say, whether in this prevarication, you have discovered more
crafty falsehood, (you must excuse this plainness,) folly, or impudency.
Only henceforth, I commend to you, that rule of Ruffin, Lib. 1. historiae
Ecclesiasticae cap. 11. Dolis apud ignorantes locus est, scientibus vero dolum
intendere, non aliud est quam risum movere.

Afterward, you bring your old Dilemma upon the Stage again, but in a more
ludibrious dress then before. Either say you, we can produce some special
grounds, whereby may be made manifest, that our Clergy men are qualified, in
actu primo, with sufficient ability, to give the true sense of particular texts
of Scripture, and then let them be produced, or we are destitute of them, and
then it is impossible, that our Clergy men can give the true sense of
Scripture, Because, it is impossible to do any thing, in actu secunde, without
a special hability, in actu primo, to do it. And so they can only guess at
it. Who does not see, how this judicious Dilemma, such as it is, does recoyl
upon your own head, Mutatis mutandis? But I did canvase it so fully in my last,
both by retortion, and direct answer, which you have not as yet adventured to
take under your consideration; that I must remit you back, to what was then
said. Only now, I take notice of your ludibrious confirmation, of the latter
branch of your Dilemma, viz. that, if we cannot prove antecedently, that the
Clergy has assistance, In actu primo, to give the true sense of Scripture,
then it is impossible, that our Clergy can give the true sense: Because, it is
impossible to do any thing, In actu secunde, without a special ability, In
actu primo. It is a wonder to me, how ever such a Childish consequence, could
drop from the pen of one, who would be reputed a Scholar. Is the Sequel good, A
negatione probationis, ad negationem (...) esse? Because you, or I, cannot
prove that such a thing is, does it therefore follow, that it is not? Because I
cannot infallibly prove, you to be Mr. Dempster, the Jesuit, Does it therefore
follow, that you are not he? who but a child would conclude, that, because I
cannot prove Antecedenter, and a priori, that such a Doctor of the Church, has
an assistance In actu primo, to give the true sense of Scripture, therefore, he
has it not? The Spirit breaths on whom, and where he pleases. The assisting
influence of the Spirit, may be given, when I cannot demonstrat A prtori, that
such a one has it, Hic and nunc. But surest arguings in such cases, are, A
posteriori, from the effect. Such an one has given the true sense of
Scripture, Ergo, he had the assistance of the Spirit to give it. Had you but
consulted with your Romanists Principles, you would have found, that you were
under a necessity to acknowledge the truth of this. For you pretend not to
conclude peremptorily, and antecedently of any Doctors of your Church, that
they have this assistance, In actu primo, for giving the true sense of
Scripture, except of your Pope in Cathedra, and general Councills, yea some of
your Authors dare not conclude so much of them. Will you the refore say, that
none beside the Pope, and the general Councills, can give the true sense of
Scripture? You cannot prove antecedently, by any Medium, that Tostatus,
Toletus, Pererius, Esthius, A Lapide, etc. had assistance, In actu primo, to
give the true sense of Scripture, For none of these were Popes. Nay, nor can it
be proven, A priori, that A^stine, Jerome, or Chrysostom, had this assistance,
In actu primo. Will you therefore conclude, that none of these, ever gave a
true sense of Scripture, but only guessed at it? But the root of your mistake,
is, that you apprehend, the objective ground, on which our belief to such a
truth is built, must be the Persuasion, We have, that such a Doctor, is guided
by such an infallible assistance, which is a manifest untruth. For whereupon I
pray you, is that persuasion grounded? That must surely have another
foundation. But because you had so often insinuated this, therefore I did
appeal you, and again do appeal you, to produce Grounds for this pretended
Infallibility of your Clergy; or else, I will take your silence, for an
evident desertion of your cause.

Your last brawl is, because I had said, that what ever solid Grounds were
brought by Tertullian, and the rest of the ancient Apologists, to prove the
truth of the Christian Religion, or are to be found, in the late Tractats of
Morney, Grotius, Amyrald, and Vives, De veritate Religionis Christianae, These
also prove the truth of the Religion of PROTESTANTS. Who (say you,) will not
laugh at this answer, as if there were no Christian Religion, but your Prot
estant Religion? And then your choier is stirred, that you should be remitted
to our Authors, Morney, and Grotius. I confess, smyling and silence, are your
best Topics. But, laugh you, fret you, you must hear truth. Are there, I
beseech you, more true Christian Religions then one, that you say, As if there
were no Christian Religion, but your Protestant Religion? Says not the
Apostle, Ephesians. 4.5. Una fides, unum baptisma, One faith, one Baptism? We
shall not therefore declyne this Jest. Prove, if you can, our Religion, not to
be the Religion of the purest, ancient, primitive Church, in the first three
Centuries, or that there is an essential difference, betwixt their Religion and
ours, and I shall yield to you the Buckler, and grant, that our Religion is not
the true Religion. But you may sooner pull the Sun out of his Orb, then
perform this. Nay, if I were not resolved to keep you, at the probation of
your Assumption, I might argue thus.

That Religion which in all its essentials, agrees with the Religion, of the
purest and most primitive Antiquity, in the first three Centuries, must be the
true Religion. But the Religion of PROTESTANTS, in all the essentials thereof,
agrees with the Religion of the purest, and most primitive Antiquity, in the
first three Centuries. Ergo, the Religion of PROTESTANTS is the true Religion.


The Major, you must admit, or else, condemn the primitive Church yea, and
Christianity it self. The Assumption is evident, by comparing our Religion,
with the apologies of Tertullian, Justin Martyr, Athenagoras, Arnobius, etc. I
appeal you, out of all the authentic writings of the Fathers, of these three
Ages, to produce one essential difference, betwixt their Religion and ours. But
on the contrary, it were easy from this same Principle, to demonstrat that
your Romish Religion, is not the true Religion, Thus, If the Romish Religion,
differs in its essentials, from the Ancient Christian Religion, in the first
three Centuries, then the Romish Religion, is not the true Religion. But the
Romish Religion, differs in its essentials from the Ancient Christian Religion,
in the first three Centuries. Ergo, the Romish Religion, is not the true
Religion.


^ The Major is clear, the true Christian Religion being but one. For proof of
the Assumption, I remit you to that Formula fidei, or Romish Creed, contrived
by Pope Pius the fourth, which is set down by Onuphrius in the life of the said
Pope, to which all the Bishops of your Church must solemnly swear. In which,
after the Constantinopolitan Creed, there be added many articles, which never
were, either in the Apostolic Creed, or in the Nicen. Or in the Athanasian, or
in the Constantinopolitan, or in any other Christian Creed, much above the
space of three hundred years, after Christ. Nay, in it, all the articles
defyned in the Council of Trent, are declared to be, Fides vera Catholica,
extra quam neme salvus esse potest; the true Catholic faith, without which
there can be no Salvation. Now I appeal you, to produce any evidence from the
indubitat writings, of the first three Centuries that this was the faith of the
Catholic Church in these three Ages. Which if you do, here under my hand I
engage, to become a Papist. If you cannot, (as I am persuaded you are not
able.) then confess that your Religion is not the true Christian Religion.
Nay, learned Divines amongst the rest Crakanthorp, in his Defens. Ecclesiae
Anglicanae, contra Spalat. cap. 15. number. 4. And long before him, Bishop Iuell,
in a Sermon preached at London, Anno One thousand five hundredth and sixty,
appealed the Doctors of your Church, to produce, either Church, Councills, or
Fathers, for the space of six hundredth years after Christ, who mantained all
these Articles, which now are concluded, by the forementioned Formula fidei, of
Pope Pius the fourth, to be necessary to Salvation. And yet, to this day, none
of your men have been able to perform this. Was it (I pray you,) a point of
faith, necessary to Salvation, in the first three Centuries, (I might go much
lower;) to acknowledge the Church of Rome, the Mother and Mistress of all
Churches? Or the headship of the Bishop of Rome, over the whole Catholic
Church? What meaned then the opposition, made to Pope Victor, by Polycrates,
and the Asiaticks? or by Cyprian, and the Africans, to Pope Stephanus, not to
mention others? Or was it a part of the Christian faith, necessary to
Salvation, in the first three hundredth years, that Images were to be adored?
that there is a Purgatory after this life? That Bread and Wine, are
transubstantiated into the Body of Christ? That the Communion ought to be
given, under one kind, abstracting the Cup from the people? As to this last, I
shall present to you, the testimony of your own Cassander, (by which you may
judge of the rest,) In Consult. Art. 22. Satis compertum est vniversalem
Christi ecclesiam, in hunc usquod diem, occidentalem vere, seu Romanam, mill
amplius a Christ annis in solenn and ordinaria hujus Sacramenti dispensatione,
utramquod Panis and Vin^ speciem omnibus ecclesiia Chrsti membris exhibuisse,
id quod ex innumeris veterum Scriptorum tam Graecorum, quam Latinorum
testimoniis manifestum est.

You needed not to have offended, that I remitted you to Morney, and Grotius,
especially, I having joined with them your own Vives, and these Tractats, not
having been written in opposition to you Papists, But against Jews, Heathens,
and Mahumetans. And it was but shallowness in you, to desire me to squeeze
them, for one ground, to prove the truth of the PROTESTANT Religion, seeing, I
did appeal to all the solid grounds that ever were made use of, either by
Ancients, or Moderns, either by these of the Eastern, or Western Church, either
by PROTESTANTS, or Papists, to prove the Christian Religion against Heathens;
that it might be examined, whether these did not likewise prove the PROTESTANT
Religion to be true. Squeeze you them all; and if you find it not to be so,
Herbam dabo. Only I must add, that these last named Authors, were Persons of
such eminent learning, that neither you, nor I, need to be ashamed to learn a
lesson from them.

This much further I have written, then once I intended to have done, so long
as you hold on in your trifling strain. But until you answer to all the
particulars of this Paper, and to these you have omitted in my former Papers,
know, that I will look upon any thing that comes from you, as unworthie of a
Reply.

I shall close with that saying of Cyprian, Epist. 40. Qui mandatum Dei
rejictunt, et traditionem suam st atuere conantur, Fortiter a vobis (and
nobis,) et firmiter respuantur.

Aberdene June 9. 1666. John Menzeis.

The Jesuits fifth Paper.
An Answer to a fourth Paper of Mr. JOHN MENZEIS, wherein he continues, to
persuade; that the grounds which he produced, for the truth of the Protestant
Religion, were not mere shifts and evasions. June 13. 1666.
THIS your fourth Paper, carrying the date of the ninth of June, came to my
hands the twelth of June, and in it you make a more ample muster of your
ordinar digressions, contumelies, and misapplyed Eruditions, though you know,
that the better sort esteems this weak-mens weapons, and clear testimonies of a
deserted cause, but it seems all one to you, if by this means you can uphold
your reputation with the Vulgar sort, who seeing you blot so much Paper,
remains in conceit, that you retain still your post. If I had the qualities,
to render me worthy of your friendship, I would in a homely, and friendly
manner, suggest to you a compendious way to spare Paper; observing only their
three omissions. First, that you omit all exeursions out of the way, that is to
say, that you omit all these things, without naming of the which, the present
controversy may be fully deeyded. Secondly, that you omit all contumelies, and
undervalueing words, as more besetting a scolding Wife then a Scholar. Thirdly,
that you omit all these things which cannot favor your Religion, but with this
inconvenient, that in the same degree, in the which it favors you, it must
favor and shelter a false Religion, and which is holden by your selves for a
false Religion. And I hope, that you will grant their things, to be very
rationallie demanded of you: since it is known, that there is a great
difference to be put, betwixt the handling of a controversy in a Pulpit, where
one railes at random, having none to contradict him, and the handling of it in
a School way, where you must foot your bowl, and hold you within the score;
under the pain to be exploded. Now if you will be pleased to observe their
three things. which are so rationally demanded, I oblige my self to make it
good, that you will not be able to put ten lines in Paper, which shall be
judged to make to the purpose in the present controversy. And for proof
hereof. you may be pleased to take all your four Papers, misaplyed as they
are, squeeze them, and see if you express out of them their ten lines, taking
first away, their three things, to wit, Digressions about other matters.
Contumelies, and base flyting words, and things that cannot favor your cause
without favoring in the like degree a false Religion. And since it is to be
presumed, that none can express more substance out of your own Papers, nor
your self, it is expected of you that after you have taken the pains, to blow
away all this chafe; you will show, that there remains greater quantity of
solid corn upon the floor, then can be contained in ten lines of Paper.

That it may appear, how far you wander out of the way, you must be content
to have patience, that the maine point be laid always again and again before
you, which is, the Protestant Religion cannot be the True Religion, or the
Religion to the which, GOD has tied the promise of eternal life, and
consequently, whosoever aime^ at eternal happiness after this life, or
intends to save his soul, is obliged to quit it and to betake himself to a
diligent search for the true Religion, prescinding for now, where it is to be
found, and insisting only for the present, that the Protestant Religion is it
not. This is both a substantial point, and proponed in so clear terms, that
none can but understand it. And it is proven by this one Syllogism.

That Religion cannot be a True Religion, which has no special grounds or
principles, to prove it self to be a True Religion, or a Religion conform to
the true sense of the letter of the word of GOD. But the Protestant Religion,
has no special grounds or principles, whereby it can prove it self to be a
True Religion, or to be a Religion conform to the true sense of the letter of
the word of GOD. Ergo, the Protestant Religion cannot be a True Religion.


To this Syllogism you answered first, cavilling the form of it, as componed
of two premises negatives, and so concluding nothing. But in this you discover
gross ignorance, confounding and calling negative propositions, affirmative
premises of objective negations. Next you come to deny the subsumption, that
is, you deny that the Protestant Religion has no special grounds to prove it
self to be a True Religion, or to be a Religion, conform to the true sense of
the letter of the word of GOD. And you add, that since the subsumption is
denied by you; it is my part who is the Opponent, to prove it. Let it be so.
But has it not been sufficiently proven, first, Because, if it have any good
grounds, they are produceable, but they are not produceable, or else produce
them. Next, has it not been often inculcat, and is now of new inculcat, that
the Protestant Religion has no special grounds or principles, to prove it
self to be conform to the true sense of the letter of Scripture, but such that
with as great reason may serve to prove a false Religion, to be conform to the
true sense of the letter of Scripture. Ergo, it has no true principles or
grounds, because a true principle is not of an indifferent nature, but is so
determinat to truth, that it cannot protect nor shelter any error. Now, that it
may appear, that all the principles, or grounds, which you bring to prove the
truth of your Religion, are indifferent, and consequently, cannot be true
principles, we shall run them over and lay them open to the view of all.

The first ground you produced is, that your Religion has objective truth, and
objective ground, or evidence, and can sufficiently show, and prove it self to
have this truth, upon condition that it encounter with a well disposed
intellect. But all this may be assumed, and is assumed by a false Religion; or
assign some reason, wherefore you have right to assume it, and they not.

The second is, that your Religion is easily known to be a true Religion, by
applying and confronting the tenets of it with the Word of God, as a man is
easily known to be an honest man, be confronting his actions with the Law; as
likewise, a line is easily known to be straight, and not crooked, by the
conformity it is seen to have with a right rule. But what false Religion is
there, that does not apply all this to themselves, with as great reason as you
do. And though the letter of Scripture, is of it self, capable only of one
genuine sense, to wit, which was intended by the holy Ghost, which is all the
shift which you add now in this last Paper. But what makes this for you, since
you bring no reason, whereby may appear, that the sense which you give to the
letter of Scripture, is that one genuine sense intended be the holy Ghost, or
that the sense which you give, is that right rule, by the which all
crookedness is to be known? You think it is enough to say their things, without
any proof, as if a Religion, which you your selves gives out for a false
Religion, did not with as great reasone pretend all this for themselves.

The third is, that Religion is not an individual truth, but a complex of many
truths, which cannot be proven altogether but one after another. As a man who
has a hundred pices of Gold, and would prove whether they be upright Gold or
not, this proof cannot be done, but by bringing every one of them to the
Touchstone. But this likewise may be assumed, with as great reasone by a false
Religion, or assign wherefore they may not use this shift as well as you, when
they are required, to give some ground for the truth of their Religion.

The fourth is, that the grounds which Tertullian, and the holy Fathers brings
to prove the truth of Christian Religion against Pag^nes, proves likewise the
truth of your Protestant Religion. But this with as great reason may be assumed
by any Christian false Religion, or show wherefore not.

The fifth that you add in this Paper now is this, that the perspicuity of
Scripture in all things necessary to Salvation, is a ground to prove the truth
of the Protestant Religion. But though this were true, what makes it more for
the truth of your Religion, nor for the truth of a false Religion, since they
with as great reason as you, may and does pretend, that the tenets which they
hold as necessar to Salvation, are clearly contained in Scripture.

Likewise, you have been often pressed to produce grounds, whereby might be
showen, that your Clergy has In actu primo, some peculiar assistance to give
In actu secundo, the true sense of texts of Scripture, which does not prove
the like assistance, to the Clergy of a false Religion. So that in handling of
Scripture, you are all one with them, having no more assistance to handle it
rightly then they have. As to that which you add now in this Paper, that this
sense, which is given by a Doctor to a text of Scripture, may be the true
sense, though neither he, nor others reflect or know any thing of the ability
that he has In actu primo, to give this true seuse, for, Spiritus ubi vult
spirat. But though this answer were to the purpose, may it not be assumed with
as gryt reasone in favor of a false Religion. Next, you force me to discover
the shallowness of the discourse that you make here, because it seems, you
only intend to induce a plausable and glittering scroofe upon things, to dazzle
the eyes of simple people, not earing what stuffely under. For the question, is
not, whether a thing may be truly such in it self, though I do not know it
to be such, nor knows any thing of the causes whereof the truth of it depends,
since things are such and such in themselves, whether they be known or not
known by us. Neither is the question about matters of Science, where objective
evidence convicts the understanding to assent, and that independently of all
authority of the Proponer. But the question is, about matters of Faith, where
all the motive to induce one to believe a thing, is reduced to the authority of
the Speaker, and according to the diverse degrees, that are found in the
authority of these that speaks a thing, so are the correspondent degrees of
firmnes in the assents whereby the hearer believes such things, and because,
the authority of GOD is a supreme authority, and above all other authorities,
therefore the assent that is due to such authority, when it speaks or reveals
any thing, must have a firmnes, above the firmnes which other assents have, and
which we give to matters proponed only by inferior authorities. Now I ask,
how can people be induced to exerce one Act of faith, or to believe with that
firmnes which is due only when GOD speaks or reveals a thing, if they be not
first assured that GOD speaks by the mouth of such a man, and consequently,
that such a man has sufficient assistance and direction In actu primo; that he
cannot deceive nor speak one thing for another. Now, you are required to
produce some special ground, whereby the people may be assured, that their
Clergy who should instruct them in matters of faith, has this assistance In
actu primo, and which is necessar if they would beget superuaturall faith in
their hearers, that is to say, Such a belief whereby the hearers do adhere
above all, to the things that are proponed to them, as revealed by GOD in such
texts of Scripture, otherwise it will follow that the assistance which you have
does not exceed the assistance which the Clergy of a false Religion have; and
consequently, that preach what you will, and though you rune over the whole
Bible, you will never be able by your preaching, to produce so much, as an sol
Act of supernatural faith in your hearers.

Out of all this appears, at what poor posture you have reduced the truth of
your Religion, notwithstanding, that in the beginning, you did so bragingly
undertake to mantaine the truth thereof, before whomsoever, against whomsoever,
and in whatsomever place. And likewise to this effect, have spent and blotted
so much Paper, since all ends in this, that your Religion is indeed true, but
so, that it cannot be shown wherein it differs from a false Religion, as if one
had taken in hand, the defense of the honesty of a man, and after long
pleading at the bar, and brought the matter to this pass, that he were
declared to be indeed an honest man, but such an honest man, that there were no
seemable difference betwixt him and a knave.

Mr. JOHN MENZEIS, his Answer to the Jesuits fifth Paper, Which was not
delivered to Mr. John Menzeis till June 15. 1666.
Some Animadversions on the Jesuits fifth Paper.
HOW forcible are right words, but what does your arguing reprove. Job 6.25.
You are pleased to censure the Prolixity of my Papers, but you might have known
that of Seueca, Epist. 48. Longiore mora opus est ut solvas quaestionem quam ut
proponas.

You take the boldness also, to asperse these lines with Impertinencie. But
were not you afraid whom I had so often convicted of manifold Impertinencies, to
have it reponed to you, Calvus calve calvitium ne objiciat? Is not the true
crime whereof these poor lines are guilty, because they have touched you in
the quick, so, as you are not able to answer, and therefore, they must be
endyted of Impertinencie, though you could not particularize one impertinent
line? But I shall be surety for them, that they shall not decline, to have
their Pertinencie examined by your Romish Inquisitors, though your Pope, like
another Rhadamanthus, presided in the Court. Only your Fathers would remember,
that we PROTESTANTS, are not besotted with an Implicit faith, as if there
charres were made of Irish timber, which cannot bear a Spider. Wherefore, they
had need to be more cautious then you have been, and not to deliver there naked
affirmations for Oracles. In the mean time, you are required, to verify this
your ignominious accusation, with particular instances; (for, Dolus est in
generalibus,) as you would not convict your self to be a (...), and to have
drunk in that Machiavillian principle, Calumniare audacter, aliquid adhaerebit.

You fret at the plainness of my Admonitions, but could I have chosen a more
proper medicine, to purge you of your tautologizing, and tergiversing humor.
Yet, for what I can discern, your disease is likero prove so pertinacious, and
malignant, that well it may be reckoned, Inter Medicorum opprobria.
Nevertheless, if you can pitch upon one of my expostulations, for which you
have not given too much ground, you may hold it for a contumely.

You fill up the Paper, wherein you should have examined my Reply, with an
excentrick discourse, concerning Rules of brevitie. But in this, as in all the
rest, you are so unhappy, as to be an impudent transgressor of your own Canons.
For had you waved Impertinencies, you had not transmitted any of these lines to
me, since your first Paralogisme, And for contumelies, you think me too narrow
a mark to shoot at, unless you reproach the whole Ministric as Railers at
random. But there was a more compendious Rule for brevity, then all these which
you have named, which I wonder, you did not recommend from your own practice,
viz, to pass in silence, what ever seems to be of moment, in the Paper of the
Adversary, and to hold that for a learned confutation. This is all the Laconick
concisenes which I have discovered in your discourses; which how justifiable it
is, or satiafying to the judicious Reader, when you come to your self, you may
judge.

Does not the shamlesse repetition, no less then five times, and still in
Folio, of that one insignificant, and often confuted Syllogism, without any
proof, bewray both a disperat cause, and an empty brain? If you produce it
the sixth time, you may for me, go on till you come to the perfect number of
the Be^st, Six hundred and sixty six. Are not your Recocted colworts, of hard
digestion with your own self, which do regurgitat so often with you?

If both the premises, of your famous Syllogism, be Affirmatives, (as herey
you allege, to cover the informality thereof,) how then is the Conclusion a
Negative? Or what pretext had you hithertoo, for shunning the probation of you
Assumption, but becase it was a Negative? Or might you not have showed, as you
were required, how in our Language, you would have expressed these propositions
more Negativelie, if you had intended to make them Formal Negatives? But
perhaps, this may be one of your M^steries of Jesui isme, so to express your
selves, that men shall not understand, when you Affirm, or when you D^^y.

Your frequent repeating, and glorying in this ludicrous Syllogism, tempts me,
to discover more of its vitiosirie, then once I intended. Though I for brevity,
did only deny the Assumption, and did require no more from you, but the
probation thereof, yet I might have denied both Major, and Minor, yea, and the
Conclusion also. I say, first, I might have denied the Major. For the True
Religion, and the true sense of Scripture is the same. What is the True
Religion, but the true Doctrine of Salvation? And is not the true sense of
Scripture the true Doctrine of Salvation? Now must the true sense of Scripture,
have a ground to prove that it is conform to it own self? So, that your Major,
which I did let pass, might justly have been questioned. Next I denied the
Assumption, because, Religion or the Doctrine of Salvation, may be considered
under a double notion, either as revealed in Scripture, or as professed by men.
Under the former notion, it is the very true sense of Scripture, and so to
prove it to be conform to the sense of Scripture, were to prove it to be
conform to it own self, and that Sub eadem formaliratione. But under the
latter consideration, namly, as professed by us, the truth of Religion may
admit of such a probation, as when the truth of an Apograph, is proven by its
conformity to the Autegraph, or the truth of a Transumpt, by its conformity to
the Original. Nay, lastly I added, that I might have denied the Conclusion;
because of the informalitie of the whole structure, which you have been
endeavoring to palliat, by your formal and objective negations, yet have you
not been able to salve. May you not by all this discern, that your gloriation
has been De re nibili, yea in your own shame?

You subjoine a piece of notable Pageantrie. For though hitherto you have been
declying to prove the assumption of your Syllogism, yet now with a brazen
forehead, you affirm you have proven it, and that oftener then once. But how I
pray you? Because forsooth, you have here twice magisterially affirmed, that
there can be no grounds of the truth of the Religion of PROTESTANTS produced,
which cannot be verified of a false Religion, and these your two affirmations,
you hold for two learned probations. But are not your affirmations, Synonyma's,
upon the matter with the denied assumption, and equally in controversy with
it? Think you us so simple, as to believe your assumption, because you do once
and again, affirm it to be true? Then indeed, you might conclud us, as well
as your self to be, Boeotum in patria crassoque sub aere natos.

At least, you could not be ignorant, that I would desider at a probation of
your Affirmations, as well as of the denied Assuption. And it has been often
told you, that by rules of disputing, you could not ty me to produce Grounds of
the truth of our Religion; you being the Opponent, and having affirmed, that
there is a true Religion, which has peculiar Grounds, competible to no false
Religion. Therefore, had you either manifested that candor, which might have
been expected, or endeavored the satisfaction of consciences, you would have
produced the Reciprocal Grounds, of the True Religion, and have essayed, to
show that they could not compet to the Religion of PROTESTANTS, especially, I
having often appealed you Sub periculo cause, to produce one ground of the true
Religion, which is wanting in the Religion of PROTESTANTS, but Hic haret aqu^.
Consider therefore this Dilemma. Either you acknowledge that there is a true
Religion, having peculiar and reciprocal Grounds, which can be verified of no
false Religion or not. If not, then it is not only the Religion of
PROTESTANTS, which you impugn, but all Religion, and it is Atheism which you
go about to establish. If therefore you grant, that there is a True Religion,
which has these peculiar and reciprocal Grounds, let them be produced, and
let it be examined, whether they do agree to the Religion of PROTESTANTS or
Romanists. Hic Rhodus, hic Saltus. Had you not distrusted your cause, you could
not being the Opponent, have shifted this so long.

But to put a more speedy period to this controversy, I had condescended, to
mention to you Grounds of the truth of the Religion of PROTESTANTS, which are
not really competible to any false Religion, however they may be pretended too.
It is hard to me to tell, whether in your enumeration of them, or in your
ludicrous way of confutation, you manifest more Childish weakness and folly.

And first, in the enumeration of the grounds of Religion, you number up five,
more indeed, then ever I gave you. For the first two, namly, the Intrinsic
objective evidence of Religion, and The conformity thereof to the word of GOD,
were never mentioned by me as two distinct grounds; yea, your self in your
third Paper, reckoned these as Synonima's, and therefore, you but play the
child in reckoning them as distinct. Neither is the fifth ground which you
mention, concerning The perspicuity of the Scriptures, to be adequatly
distinguished from these. But your chief prevarication is, in that which you
mention, as the Third ground of the truth of our Religion, namly, that Religion
being a complex of many divine truth, cannot be all proven at once, but by
compating each of these truths with the word of GOD. I could not have expected,
that a man who was not in a perfect Delirinm, could have bewrayed such
stupidity, for this was never laid down by me, as a Ground of our Religion. Nay
a Child might have discerned by the very terms, that this was only brought as
a reason, why in such a short Paper, I could not be tied to give you the
grounds of our Religion. For it were to tie me, as matters are now stated, to
writ a whole body of controversies. What an impudent cheat then is this, you
would put upon your Reader, to substitute that, as a Ground of the truth of our
Religion, assigned by me, which in very deed was brought by me as a reason, why
I was not tied at this time, to give you any grounds? Henceforth therefore,
when you go to impugn any thing in my Papers, propose it in my own terms,
else I must say to you in the words of the Poet.

Quem recitas meus est, O Fidentine, libellus, Sed male dum recitas, incipit
esse tuus. You discover no less weakness, in your trifling confutation, of
these grounds of Religion, for all ye say to every one of them, which five
times you do repeat, is that a false Religion may allege all these grounds.
But herein, you play the silly Sophister, Ab ignoratione elenchi, for the
question is not, whether the PROTESTANT or true Religion has grounds, which a
false Religion may not allege or pretend, but whether the PROTESTANT Religion
has grounds, which cannot be verified of a false Religion? I freely grant,
that a false Religion, may lay claim to the grounds of the true Religion, as
the mad man of Athens, laid claim to all the Ships that came into the Harbout
as his own, though none of them were his. But the Grounds of the true Religion,
can never be verified of a false Religion. It was not enough then for you, to
say, that a false Religion, may lay claim to those Grounds, nay, nor was it to
the purpose, unless you could also have showed, that the Ground of the
PROTESTANT Religion, namely, Conformity with the Scripture, might be verified
of a false Religion. This you ought to have showen, if you had intended a real
confutation of my grounds. But this you will find as impossible for you, as to
remove the Earth from its Axis.

If you look again, to my last Paper, you will find, that in stead of these
Five grounds, of your mustering, I gave only these Two grounds, from which
indeed, the truth of the Religion of PROTESTANTS, and the falsehood of the
present Romish Religion, may be discovered. The first was, The perspicuity of
the Scripture, in all things necessary to Salvation, which I did confirm by
luculent Authorities, which you have not once dared to examine. The other was,
From our Agreement in essentials, with the faith of the purest, and most
Ancient primitive Church, in the first three Centuries. And with all, from this
I deduced, a demonstration of the falsehood, of your now Romish Church, and
Religion, from the discrepancy thereof in essentials, from the faith of the
Catholic Church, in the first three Centuries; which I confirmed from your
Formula Fidei, or Popish Creed, contrived by Pope Pius the fourth, which
differs in its essentials, from the faith of the Church, in the first three
Centuries. Had you been willing, that imparriall search should be made, whether
the truth stood on your side, or on ours, Had you not here matter enough to
work upon, both from Scripture and Antiquity?

But dissembling all my arguments from these principles, you only give this
snifling Answer, that they who have a false Religion, may also pretend, that
their Religion is also contained in Scripture, and is conform to the Religion
of the primitive Church. To which I Reply first, that these forementioned
grounds, do not cease to be grounds, for proving the True Religion, because
Heretics pretend an interest in them. Nay on the contrary, Heretics laying
claim to them, is a strong persumption, that they are the induitable grounds
of the true Religion, as a Rogues pretending conformity with the Law, is so
far from proving, that the Law is no discriminating Test, betwixt Honesty and
Roguery, that it is rather, a vehement presumption of the con-ratie. Secondly,
Had you resolved to go to the borrome of the business, you should have proved,
that either these grounds assigned by me, are not proper grounds, for the
discerning the True Religion, from a false; or that these grounds does really
agree to a false Religion, that is, That a false Religion is perspicuously
contained in Scripture, and does agree in its essentials, with the Religion of
the primitive Church, in the first three Centuries, or that these grounds, do
not agree to the Religion of PROTESTANTS. But none of these do you once
attempt to perform. Nay over again, you are put to prove any of these, which
if you do, Tu Phillida solus habeto. But thirdly, I demonstrate on the
contratie, that these are sure grounds, by which the truth of Religion may be
discerned, Thus, if Scripture be not a sufficient ground, and Test, to
distinguish a true Religion from a false, then it must be, either because, it
does not contain All things, necessary to Salvation, or because, it does not
hold out Perspicuously all these things, for there is no other impediment
imaginable, unless with the Infidel, you should question the Authority of
Scriptures. But when we say, that the Scripture is the indubitable Test, for
discerning the True Religion, from a false, it is to be understood among
Christians, who acknowledge the divine Authority of Scriptures. Consequently,
if the Scriptures be Perspicuous in all things necessary to Savlation, (as our
Divines have often demonstrated, and I cleared in my last, by irrefragable
testimonies, both of Ancients, and of your own Doctors,) then it must be a
sufficient ground, and Test, to discern a True Religion from a false. Your
cavil concerning the ambiguity of Scriptures, is frivolous. For, if Scripture
had not sufficient objective grounds, (means of interpretation being duly
used,) to clear its own genuine sense, in all things necessary to Salvation,
then were it not Perspicuous which is against the Hyphothesis laid down,
against which you have not adventured to move one Objection. So that still it
holds, that if Scripture be perspicuous in all things necessary to Salvation,
it must be a sufficient ground, and test, to discern a True Reilgion from a
false. What therefore remains, but that either you show the Scriptures not to
be clear, in all things necessary to Salvation, or else, that both the Religion
of PROTESTANTS, and Papists, be brought to this Test, and examined, which of
them are really conform thereunto. But next, as to the other ground, I argue
thus. Either the faith of the Catholic Church, in the first Three Centuries,
was the True Christian Religion, or not. If not, then there was no true
Christian Religion at all, Absit blasphemia. If it was, then what accords with
it in its essentials, must be the True Christian Religion; and on the contrary,
what differs from it in essentials, cannot be the true Christian Religion, and
therefore here again I appeal you, either to show an essential difference,
betwixt the ancient True Christian Religion in these ages, and ours, or, that
there is an agreement in essentials, betwixt the ancient Religion in these
ages, and your Romish Religion, as it is expressed in that Formula fidei of
Pope Pius the fourth, or else to acknowledge, that the Religion of PROTESTANTS,
is the True Religion, and that your Romish Religion is but a Farrago of
falsehoods, and Innovations, (...).

In your penult section, you whisle like a child, concerning the Clergies
assistance In actu primo, to give the true sense of Scripture, and you call
upon me, to prove that our Clergy has such an assistance. As if it were a
point of our faith, that the knowledge of the Clergies infallible assistance,
(for of that only you must be understood,) were a necessary prerequisite,
before the true sense of Scripture can be known. But have I not often told you,
that this is denied by us, and also often appealed you, if you could to prove
it, else I would hold it for confessed that you could not do it. But to call
you to your duty, is, Surdo canere. Yea, from this your assertion, concerning
the knowledge of the Clergies assistance, I have showed you to be encircled in
an inextricable Contradiction, from which, you have never attempted to expede
your self. Only in your last Paper, you flinched from your own principle, as
if you had only affirmed, that the Actus secundus, presupposes Actum primum,
which none denies. Know therefore again, that a Doctor may give the true sense
of Scripture and we may have ground enough To believe, that it is the true
sense which he gives, though neither he, nor we, have an anteceden knowledge,
of his Infallible assistance in actu primo, as a civil Judge may give the true
sense of a municipall Law, and I may have sufficient ground to believe, that he
has sensed it aright, though nei^^er he, nor I have antecedent knowledge, that
he has Infallible assistance in act primo.

Though in all these things, you have bewrayed shameful weakness, and as a
Thersires, declyned to examine what was reponed to you in all my Papers, yet
now, like a vaiue glorious Thras^, in the conclusion, you sing a Triumph, but
without a Victory.

Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici. What means this insulting, that you
cry out of the poor posture out Religion is brought too? Have you said ary
thing, that would have reduced the weakest Tyro, in our Schools, to a strait?
Have I slipped one Punctillo, in any of your Papers, which I have not confuted?
Has not all you have written been sitted Ad furfures? Can you say the like of
my Papers? Yet you are bold, to compare the Religion of PROTESTANTS, to a
Kn^ve, pretending Honesty, and not able to prove it; but, Mutato nomine
narratur fabula de i^. He that would compare your Romish superstition, with the
Religion of PROTESTANTS, might as well compare Catiline with Cato, the Rogue
Ziba, with Honest Mephibosheth, or the strumper Thais, with chaste Lucretia. But
I shall propose a true Emblem, of the stare of our Religion, and yours, from
the state of the present debate, betwixt you and me, leaving the application to
your own self. Suppose that Titius and Sempronius stood at the bar, and that
Titius acclaimed the monopoly of Honesty to himself. And withal, accused his
Neighbor Sempronius as a very Knave; because, (as Titius alleged,) he could
produce no grounds to prove his Harestie. On the other hand, Sempronius
modestly show how easy it were to recriminat, and retote all these accusations
upon Titius. Yet though he might have desired Titius, as the Accuser, to prove
his indytment, or else, to suffer Secundum Legem talionis, and to be esteemed
as an arrand Knave; yet, he would condescend so far, as to give Grounds by
which his Honesty might be proven. But with this Proviso, that both he, and his
Accuser Titius, might be brought to the Test, that the World might see, who was
the Rogue, and who the Honest-Man. The first Ground to which Sempronius
appeals, is the Law, protesting that both he and his Accuser Titius, may be
judged by that Rule. The other Test, to which Sempronius referres himself, for
trial, Is the practice and example of men of untainted Honesty, such as
Aristides, Fabricius, Cato, etc. Protesting likewise, that he be stigmatized as
the Rogue, whose conversation shall be found discrepant from theirs. Titius,
though at first a bold Accuser, yet not able to endure so accurate a trial,
studies all the subterfuges his poor wit could invent. And first, he declines
the Law, alleging it could not be the Ground of trial: because it is
ambiguous, and admits of diverse and contrary senses; nor can any give the
sense of the Law, except he be Iufallible. Which gift of Infallibility, Titius
would have all men to believe, though he cannot prove it, to be peculiar to
himself alone, so as no sense of the Law may be admitted, but that which he
homologates. And for the example of Aristides, Fabricius, and Cato, etc. They
are too strict Paterns for Titius; yet not dareing openly to condemn them, he
makes this evasion. What Knave, says he, is there, that may not pretend
conformity both with these, and also with the Law? But Sempronius gravely
answers, that however Knaves might pretend conformity both to the Law, and
Practices of Good-Men, yet they had it not. And again, he solemnly protests
that the matter might be put to exact trial, whether the Accusers or his
conversation were agreeable to the Law, and these untainted Paterns of Honesty,
and withal added, that it was an intolerable reproach, thrown both upon the
Law, and the Lawgivers, that a Law was given to people to walk by, which no man
except Titius, with his pretended infallibility, could understand. Is it not
strange (said Sempronius,) that my Accuser Titius, can speak his accusation so
intelligibly, that a Child can understand the sense thereof; and yet that our
Lawgivers had not so much wit, as to express the Laws, which they would have
to be the Rule of our lives, in intelligible language? What prudent Senators,
would suffer themselves, and Lawgivers, thou to be reflected upon by Titius,
and would not, for his pleading after this manner, condemn him as a petulant
Rogue? The application af this Emblem is left to you, and to the judicious
Reader.

I have made so many experiments upon you, that if there had been any Mercury
in you, in all probability, before this time it had been extracted; but the
longer I deal with you, the greater Dounce do you appear. I am both wearied,
and ashamed, to graple further with one, who multiplies such Childish
impertinencies, and notorious falsehoods. Least therefore I should seem, Cum
Cretensi Cretizare, I discharge any further exchange of Papers with you, except
you change your strain.

Yet because I know the Genius of many of your Party to be such that if you
transmitted to me a Rapsody of perfect Nonsense, to which no answer were
returned, you would glory, as if you had approven your self, as a Doctor
Irrefragabilis. Therefore, to put a check to this insolency, and withal, to
satisfy the judicious, I add two things. And first, you are required, though
an Adversary, to do me so much Justice, as when you communicate to others any
of your Papers, that you do likewise communicate my Answer; and then I shall
decline no rational Person, either of your, or of our profession, who is not
either Ignorant, or Blinded with prejudice, tosi^ as Umpyre, or Arbiter betwixt
you and me. If you do otherwise, after so solemn admonition, it will be an
evidence, that you are conscious, that your Papers are naught, and not able to
abide the Test. But next, if you find an abler Person then your self, that can
manage this debate, to better purpose then you have done, he shall not
GOD-willing lake an answer, so far as the interest of truth does require it.
In the mean time, I say to you, as Cyprian did to Demetrian. Oblatrantem te and
are Sacrilego and verbis impiis obstrepent^^ frequenter Demetriane
contempseram, melius existimans errantis imperitiam silentio spernere, quam
loquende dementis insaniam provecare. Nec hoc sine ^agisterii divini and
Numinis authoritate faciebam, quum scriptum sit, noli respondere imprudenti ad
imprudentiam ejus, ne similis flas illi. Cyp. lib. ad Demet.

Aberdene, 28. of June, 1666. John Menzeis.

POSTSCRIPT.
This Paper was written on June 18. but I being called to the Country, on June
19. and not returning until June 26, it could not be transcribed until this
28. of June, 1666.

The Jesuits sixth Paper.
Answer to a fifth Paper of Mr. JOHN MENZEIS, wherein he brings a new Shift
and Evasion, for a Ground of the truth of the PROTESTANT Religion, disowneing
all things for to be grounds, which he has brought hitherto. July, 6. 1666.
YOU was disired to give a proof of your ability, to put only ten lines in
Paper, which could be judged to make to the purpose, in the present
controversy, observing three things, first, to ^^it all ex^^sions out of the
way, that is to say, to omit all things, without naming of the which, the
present controversy may be fully decyded. Secondly, to omit all hase
undervalucing words, as more besetting an flyting Wife, then an Scholar.
Thirdly, to omit all things, which cannot serve to prove the truth of your
Religion, but with this inconvenient, that it equally serves to prove an false
Religion to be true. But in this Paper, deboarding mor then ever, you give
cleir testimony, that all your strength consists in their things. So that the
confyning of you within their limits, were to disarme you altogether, and to bind
up all the fecundity, which you have to blot Paper, and multiply words, for
hyding your weakness. Laying asid then all things of whatsoewer sort that are
out of the line, I lay before you again the maine point, to wit, the Protestant
Religion, cannot be the true religion, nor the Religion to the which GOD has
tied the promise of eternal life, and consequently, whoseever aims at eternal
happiness after this life, or intends to save his soul, is oblidged in
conscience to quit it, and to betake himself to a diligent search for the
truth, prescinding for now, whair it is to be found, insisting for the present
in this only, that the Protestant Religion cannot be it. This cannot be called
a nonsense, since its both an most substantial point, and likewise proponed to
you in such cleir terms. It is proven by this one Sylogisme, That Religion
cannot be a true Religion, which has no special grounds, whereby it can prove
it self to be a true Religion, or to be a Religion conform to the true sense
of the letter of the word of GOD. But the Protestant Religion has no special
grounds, whereby it can prove it self to be the true Religion, or to be a
Religion conform to the true sense of the letter of the word of GOD. Ergo, the
Protestant Religion, cannot be the true Religion.


To this Syllogism, you answered first, carping the form of it, as if it were
of tuo premises negatives and though it was showen you yowr gross ignorance in
this, calling affirmative propositions, negations, because they are of objective
negations, yet now you add with alse gryt ignorance, that the conclusion is
negative. Is it possible that an Rabbi in Israel is so ignorant, that there
most be made to him a lesson of Summules to make him capable to discern
betwixt affirmative and negative propositions? Here indeed would come in
season, a way for sham, and such hissing and histrionicall expressions as you
use now and then in yowr Papers. Next you say, that though hithertoo, you have
only denied the subsumption, yet you have acquired, by the benefit of so long
a time, a new light which discovers a defect also in the Major. But this argues
that the Sylogisme is not of so obvious a nakedness, as you stylled it, since a
man of yowr capacity has need of so long time to acquire light for the
discoverte of the defects of it. But giving and not granting, that there were
defects in the Major, yet since you have engaged yowr self, in denying the
subsumption long ago, and so incurred an obligation, to produce grounds for
the truth of yowr Religion, you must first end this, before you begin the
other, either confessing that you have no grounds, or else producing them; that
they may be examined whether they subsist or not. And here I cannot but commend
yowr ingenuity in that you confess cleirly, that all the things that you have
spoken hithertoo, in so long lybells, are not true grounds, but only reasons to
show, that you were not obliged, to produce grounds, for the truth of yowr
Religion; and so you Disowne, and recant them all as taken under this
formalitie. But let them be called as you please, either grounds or shifts, to
disoblige you from producing of grounds, yet the m^ine point remains always,
that they may be with as great reason, assumed be an false Religion, as be you,
and so all this time, you have been pleading ^swell for an false Religion, as
for yowr own.

After you have Disclaimed and recalled under the formalitie of grounds all
things that you so copionstie have spkoken of hithertoo, Now you prodoce your
Achilles, in which you profess that you will own as a ground of the truth of
yowr Religion, to wit, Scripture taken as containing perspicuously all things
necessary to Salvation. So that Scripture taken under this formalitie, is the
only ground distinctive of your Religion, from all false Religion But let us
go on here sofilie, that it may appear better the juglings that lurbs under
this answer, and the labyrinth and obscurity that you have involved yowr self
in. For first, by Scripture of which you affirm, that it is a distinctive of
yowr Religion, from all false Religion, must be understood the letter of
Scripture taken in the true and genuine sense intended by the holy Ghost. So
that to contain all things necessary to Salvation, with perspicuitie is
affirmed of the letter of Scripture, taken with this true sense, as
contradistinguished from all false sense. Ergo it cannot serve for a
distinctive ground, of yowr Religion, from all false Religions, except first
you prove, that the sense, which you give to the letter of Scripture, is that
true and genuine sense intended by the holy Ghost, and that all other senses,
which do not coincide with yours are false and erroneous. Because according to
your self, Scripture is not a ground to distinguish your Religion from a false
Religion, but in so far as it is suppoued to contain, (and that with
perspicuitie,) all things necessary to Salvation, and again it does not
contain this, but so far as it suppons, and is taken for the letter of
Scripture, with the true and genuine sense. Now I ask, how can you assume the
letter of Scripture, taken with the true sense; for a ground to prove your
Religion to be true, and to be distinguished by this from a false Religion,
Except first, you show with pregnant and convincing reasons, that this sense,
which you give to the letter of Scripture, is that true genuine sense intended
by the holy Ghost? Neither does it avail you, that which you now here
infinuate, that the sense which you give, must be the true sense, For the
conformity it has with the sense holden by the Church in the first three
Centuries. Because this claim to Amiquity is common to all Sexts. And so you
cannot make use of it, except first, you bring some solid reason, to prove your
claim to be more just then theirs. Secondly, I ask you, how can you affirm so
boldly, that all things necessary to Salvation ar contained and that
perspicuously in Scripture, except first, you draw up A list or a catalogue of
all things that are necessary to Salvation, as contradistinguished from all
other things not necessary, and whereof a great pairt ar likewise eleirly
contained in Scripture, and Scripture it self makes no mentione to distinguish
the one from the other? For according to the rules, you gave your self, it
cannot be but blindlings affirmed, That all the pieces of Gold that one has in
his purse, ar upright Gold, except they be all produced to be tried: Thirdly
you say, that all things necessary to Salvation, are perspicuously in
Scripture, but with this limitation, and supposition, That the means for the
interpretation be duly used, so that Scripture is not of it self alone so
perspicuous in all things necessar to Salvation, except there interveene the
due use of certain mids to attain to the true sense of Scripture. But heir
again you plunge your self in a new labyrinth of obscurity, for I ask, what
ar their means, and what you mean by the due use of them? And whether the people
without your preaching, can duly use their means, and by the due use of them,
attain to the knowledge of all things, necessar to Salvation, as well as your
Clergy men can do? whether, a false Religion, and acknowledged by your self
to be a false Religion, may not use duly their mids as well as you? Now I know
all their things, will be called by you nonsense, childish things, and not
worthy of the sublimitie of your understanding, and such railing will be all
the answer that I will get.

Likewise when you was asked, whether a man can believe a thing to be true,
precisly for this motive, because it is revealed and spoken by GOD, unless he
be assured, that GOD speaks by the mouth of him, that propons such a thing? To
this you answer here, That a Preacher may propone and give the true sense of
Scripture, and the hearer may have sufficient ground, to believe the thing
proponed to him, though he have no antecedent knowledge, conifying him, that
the Proponer has such assistance, that he cannot propone a false revelation,
in place of a true; as a Judge may give the true sense of a municipall Law, and
the hearer may have sufficient ground to believe that the sense given is the
true sense, though he have no antecedent knowledge, that the Judge has
infallible assistance. But in this answer you (...) your self altogether
Ignorant, of the nature of supernatural faith. Since supernatural faith is
not every sort of assent and adhesion, but an assent above all things, and an
adhesion with such firmnes, as can be given only to the supreme authority of
GOD, when he speaks a thing: Now I ask, how is it possible, that the
intellect, who in matters of faith hes no other motive, to induce it to assent,
bot the mere authority of the speaker, can produce any assent, whereby it
adheres above all things, and with all sort of firmnes to a thing, which it
knows not otherwise to be true, bot precislie because GOD hes spoken it, and
revealed it, except there preceed a knowledge certifying that GGD speaks by
the mouth of him, that propones such a thing, and that he cannot deceive him,
in saying GOD to have spoken a thing, which he hes not spoken, or else one
would either suspend his assent, or else not give it in that high degree of
firmnes, and adhesion which is necessarly required to supernatural faith, and
which he is oblidged to give in case he knew certa^nlie, that GOD speaks by
the mouth of such a man. And the example which you bring of a Judge giving the
sense of the law, confirms manifestly, that you ar altogether Ignorant, of the
nature of supernatural faith, for the assent one gives to the law, exponed by
a Judge, is not a supreme assent, and so does not require in him that
believes, a knowledge of any infallible assistance, and yet according to the
degree of the firmnes of this assent, he must have a knowledge of a
correspondent ability in the Judge, for otherwise, he might believe with as
great firmnes another man, giving the sense of that law, though he knew that he
hade little or no skill of law.

In the end of your Paper you take the Person of a puffed up Goliath,
complaining of the weakness of yowr adversary, as an that brings nothing but
childish nonsense against you, and protests that you will altogether leaze this
stage, except there be substitute againes you, some (...) qualified Antagonist,
that you, may with some reputation wrestle with him. But this your braging,
will be reputed not so much an effect of pride, as of silliness and
pusillanimitie, that seeing how you cannot longer subsist, having voyded all
your Magazin, and spent all your powder, you would use braging words, as a
mean to save your reputation in this retreat. But though by this way you
provided so and so, for your own reputation, how do you provide for the
reputation of your Religion, that you leave with this blot and aspersion, that
there can be showen no difference betwixt it and a false Religion, and so
leaves it in the same condition, with a man, whose honesty being called in
question, and much pleaded for, did at last obtain a favorable sentence,
whereby he was judictallie declared, to be such an honest man, that there was
no difference betwixt him and a knave.

July, 6. 1666.
Mr. JOHN MENZEIS his Reply to the Jesuits sixth Paper, which was not delivered
to him till July 9.
An Answer to the Jesuits sixth, Lying, and Railing Paper.
I Have often heard, but now I find, that, Fides Jesuitice, est fides Punica. Who
but a Devil, or a Jesuit, would have had the Impudency to say, that I had
Disowned and recanted all the Grounds, which hitherto I had brought, for the
truth of the Religion of PROTESTANTS; as you have been bold to affirm, both in
the Tiole, and afterward in the body of this your sixth Paper. When I read
this, I remembered that word of Austin. lib. 1. Contra Iulianum, cap. 5. Mirum
est, si in facie hominis, tantum intervallum sit inter frontem et linguam, ut
frons non comprimat linguam It is strange (said he,) that there should be such
a distance, betwixt the front of a man, and his mouth, that the shame of his
forehead, should not repress the impudency of his tongue. But there is a
truth in that saying of Seneca, Contra Sycophantarum morsum non est remedium.
Produce if you can my own words, wherein I have resiled from one ground that
ever I brought, let be from all. Would ye not have done this, to verfie such an
ignominious challenge, had ye not been conscious to your self of Impudent
lying? I remember indeed that in my last Paper, I did discover your Roguery, in
representing some grounds as distinct, which are not distinct, to make your
Readers imagine, I had made such a foollish muster of grounds, as you draw up:
But never did I pass from any of them. I know likewise, that I did convict
you, of a base prevarication, in substituting that, as a third ground, assigned
by me, which was never given by me, as a ground of our Religion at all, but as
a reason (as is obvious to any of the weakest capacity,) why I was not tied at
this time, to have given you any grounds, albeit Ex superabundanti, I had
condescended to give you some. Yet, in stead of clearing your self of that
prevarication, or deprecating pardon for it, you add a grosser, saying, that I
had recanted all the grounds; which I had formerly given. Do you not by such
dealing, stigmatize your self to be, as Aegesippus said of Pilat, lib. 2. De
exeidio Hieros. cap. 5. Viruns nequam, and parvs facientem mendacium?
Henceforth therefore, you are required, when you go about to examine any thing
in my Papers, to propose it in my own terms, else I must desire the Reader, to
look upon it, as the forgery of a Sycephant.

This your horrid prevarication, will (I believe,) derogat faith from the rest
of your reproaches. But I confess, you have all the advantages of an effronted
Calumniator, since, like a man of prostitute reputation, you neither concern
your self in proving the accusations, which you bring against your Adversary,
nor in answering these recriminations which are retorted upon you. Yet, seeing
the lines which I have sent to you, may bid a defyance to you, or any Momus, or
Zoilus, I shall make no other Reply, to these virulent and groundless
reproaches, wherewith this your last Paper is stuffed, but what Michael the
Archangel did to the Devil, Jud. verse 9. Increpet te Dominus.

You must again be remembered, (for I find you wilfully forgetful of your
duty,) that neither as yet in this sixth Paper, have you attempted, either to
clear your self, of the fallacies, and prevarications, whereof I had in former
Papers convicted you, or to expede your self, from the contradictions, wherein
I have demonstrated you to be inextricably involved, or, to supply your
beastly omissions, and tergiversations, so often charged upon you. So noble a
Champion are you for this desperate cause, which you have undertaken. You
repeat now again the sixth time, acording to your Cacoethes, the old thread
bare Paralogisme, and you have the modesty, to accuse me of ignorance, because
I cannot so far brutifie my reason, as to acknowledge your three Negatives, to
be three Affirmatives, albeit you have not been able, either by all your
Summulistick. Art, or Iesuitick sophistry, to show how you could express them
more negatively in our language, had you intended to make them formal
Negations. But who needs wonder, that Romanists have the confidence, to obtrude
on Readers negations for affirmations, seeing they would impose upon the World,
contrary to faith, sense and luculent reason, the adoring of a vafer cake for
the real living and glorious Body of our Savior?

In my last, because I intended not to have exchanged any more Papers with you,
I thought good, to give you a more Spe^isick character of your ludicrous
Syllogism, which you have been hithertoo licking, as the Bear does her
deformed whelp, but have not as yet been able, to reduce it to any form. I
show therefore, that every proposition in it, both Major, Minor, and
Conclusion, might justly be questioned. But this you are pleased to wave,
accoring to your customarie tergiversing humor, thinking it enough, to jeer
this animadversion, as a New Light. There is no such Mystery I confess in
your Syllogism, that it required much study, to discover the trespasses of
it. Only your importunity, tempted me to lay open more of the nakedness, of
this your Idol, then at first I resolved. But whether you term it New light,
or Old, yet such a light it seems to be, that your eyes could not more look
upon it, then if they were of the same constitution with the eyes of an Howl.
In vocal debates, I acknowledge the challenging of many faults at once, and
putting the Opponent, to the probation of more propositions then one, might
breed confusion, but when matters are managed by writ, there appears no
inconveniencie therein. However, you should the more easily have obtained
pardon for this trespass, had you at length proven the Assumption, which from
the beginning was denied; and which in my last, you were pressed to prove by a
Dilemma, which if you had adventured to examine, would have constrained you,
either to profess your self a down right Atheist, and Infidel, or else to
produce some peculiar ground of the true Religion, by which both our Religion,
and yours, might be examined. But it appears, that your whole design, is to
decline a trial. Let the Reader here remarke, that the Major, Minor, and the
whole Structure of your Syllogism, has been questioned, and that the
probation of both Major, and Minor, are utterly declined by you, and to
justify the Form, you have no other evasion, but to affirm Negations to be
Affirmations. Transmit if you will this your conclusion, Ergo, the PROTESTANT
Religion cannot be the True Religion, to your Universities of Doway, Lovan,
Paris, and Rome, and set them judge, whether it be an Affirmative or Negative.

After you had again repeated that impudent Calumny, that I had Recallid the
grounds of Religion, which I had formerly given. You say, that now I produce my
Achilles, namely, the Scriptures as perspicuous in all things necessary to
Salvation. Where you insinuate two manifest Untruths. The first is, that Now,
as if never before, I had given the Perspicuity of the Scriptures, in all
things necessary, as the ground of our Religion. The other is, that this is
given as my Only ground, which are both notorious falsehoods in the matter of
fact. For neither was that the only ground, I having also given another, Viz.
The conformity of our Religion, with the faith of the Christian Church, in the
first three Centuries, from which I did demonstrate, the falsehood of the now
Romish Religion, because of its discrepancie, from that Ancient Christian
faith. Neither was my last Paper, the first time, that I produced these
grounds. Have you made lies your refuge? Had you no way to support your lying
cause, but by such manifest untruths? Do you not give occasion to your Reader
to say, Perisse frontem de rebus.

As for that, which you term my only ground, namely, The Scriptures, as
perspicuous in all things necessary, which by way of derision, you term my
Achilles, I have no cause to be ashamed of that ground. Scripture has proven
against Atheists, Infidels, and Heretics, and will prove against you Romanists
also, to be a brazen wall. You make the fashion, of moving some Objections,
against the Perspicuity of the Scriptures, in all things necessary. But
before, you were in Bona fide, to have objected against it, both the terms
should have been cleared, and you should have examined the Authorities, whereby
I confirmed it from Chrysostom, Austine, Jrenaeus, yea and from your own
Aquinas, and Sixtus Senensis. But to let this pass, Cum caeteris erroribus, I
proceed to the examination of your Objections, which I hop, I shall make
appear, to be nothing else, but Juggling shifts, (to use your own terms,) to
keep off, from the examination of the maine controversy. Only, that the state
of the question betwixt us may be clear; Let it be remembered, first, that we
do not affirm, that all Scriptures are Perspicuous, and clear, as the
Rhemists in their 1. Marginall Note, on Luke cap. 6. And other Rhomists have
traduced us. Secondly, That we do not exclude means of interpretation, as
Bellar, lib. 3. De verbo Dei, cap. 1. Prateolus in Elench Haereseon. lib. 17.
cap. 20. And Sixtus Senensis Biblioth. lib. 6. Annot. 152. Charge upon us. And
thirdly, that by Perspicuity, we do not means, that all things are expressly,
in so many words in Scripture: But, that they are either expressly in Scripture,
or by firm and clear consequence, are deduceable from it. And what is deduced,
by firm and clear consequence from Scripture, may well be said, to be
Perspicuously contained in Scripture. Even as a Conclusion, which is luculently
deduced from the Premises, is said to be clearlie contained in the Premises.
And this I add also against Bellarmin who in his fourth book, De verbo Dei,
cap. 3. States the controversy, as if Papists only mantained against us,
Totam doctrinam, sive de fide, sive de moribus, non continer^ express in
Scripturis. For if by Express, he means in so many formal words, neither do
we affirm it. Fourthly, by this Perspicuity, we means an external and
objective evidence, and therefore this perspicuity is nothing impeached by the
misunderstanding, of Heretics, or others. For their mistakes, flow not from
the obscurity of the Scripture, but from the defect Exparte subjecti, or from
the indisposition of their understanding^ who hear or read Scripture. And
fifthly, by things necessary, may be meaned either these truths, the explicit
belief whereof is necessary to Salvation, Necessitate medii, so as without
the belief thereof, Salvation cannot be had; or also, these articles, the
belief whereof are only necessary Necessitate praecepti. Many things may be
necessary, this latter way, which are not necessary, by the first kind of
necessity. Therefore you should have cleared, what kind of necessity you
meaned. For us, we freely acknowledge al things necessary, either of the ways,
are contained in Scripture, though not with equal clearness: But these
things, which are of absolute and indispensable necessity to Salvation, are
either expressly revealed in Scripture, or luculently deduceable by firm
consequence, from that which is expressly revealed therein. And of this last is
our present controversy.

I have told our Judgment, but you like a jugler bring Objections, yet do not
tell your judgment, nor I believe can you tell the judgment of your Church. I
could here have set down the discrepant opinions of your men in reference to
this point, for which I shall remit you, to Gerard, Tom. Vlt. Loc. Com. De
Script. cap. 20.. 422. and 423. Where he shows that some of you mantaine, all
things in Scripture to be obscure as your Rhemists, your Divines of Colen, and
Canisius, but that others grant many things in Scripture, especially these that
are necessary, to be clear, as Hieron. ab Oleastro, Thomas, Costerus,
Catharinus, etc. You are therefore required, if you can, to set down the
judgment of your Romish Church, in this matter, as clearly, as I have done
ours. And you may if you will in the entry consider this Dilemma. Either you
have a Definition of that Church, which you call infallible, against the
perspicuity of the Scriptures, or not. If you have it, produce it. Sure I am
your Council of Trent, has passed no such Decree, and for what I know, none
else. If none, then are you a manifest wrangler, and you have no certainty of
faith, for the Thesis which you mantaine. But let you wander in the mist as you
will, I have premised this to clear the grounds, on which I walk, and so I
shall proceed to examine your Objections, which are like so many roveing
arrows, shot without the prefixing of a mark.

First then, you object, That the perspicuity of the Scriptures, cannot serve
as a distinctive ground of our Religion, from a false, except first, I prove
that the sense which we give of Scripture, is the genuine sense intended by the
holy Ghost. But this precarious and merely assertory Objection, may with far
more reason be inverted against your self. For, if the Perspicuity of the
Scriptures in all things necessary, cannot serve as a distinctive ground of our
Religion, from a false, then must it either be, because Scripture is not
perspicuous in all things necessary, or else because the sense given by
PROTESTANTS, is not the genuine sense of Scripture, and consequently, it was
itcumbent to you as the Opponent, (who have undertaken in your fourth Paper, To
impugn any ground affigned by me,) I say, it was incumbent to you, either to
have proven that Scripture, is not perspicuous in all things necessary, or
else, that the sense given by PROTESTANTS, is not the genuine sense of
Scripture. But neither of these do you once attempt to prove. It is like you
did perceive the work would be too hard for you, and therefore, according to
your tergiversing humor, you set your self only to study shifts, and
evasions, whereof this Objection is the first, to decline your duty. But from
this your first subterfuge, you may easily be beaten, by this Dilemma. For
either Scripture is perspicuous in all things necessary, or not. If you say
not, then why do you not bring arguments to disprove its perspicuity, you
being the Opponent? If you grant that it is perspicuous, then why may it not be
a ground, to distinguish a True Religion from a false? Even as a clear luculent
Charter, or Patent under the great seal, may be a ground, to justify the title
of an honest Sempronius, against the pretenses of a cavilling Titius. Nor can
it be matter of such impossibility, for PROTESTANTS (as you falsely
insinuate,) to find out the true sense of Scripture, if Scripture be
perspicuous. May you not then see, what work is incumbent to you, if you
desire to have the matter in controversy canvased? Namely, either to prove,
That Scripture is not perspicuous in all things necessary, or else, That the
Religion of PROTESTANTS, is not agreeable to that true, and perspicuous sense
of Scripture And seeing you may as easily prove light to be darkness, as
disprove the perspicuity of the Scriptures, in all things necessary to
Salvation, you may try your Acumen, upon the consonancy of our Religion, with
the true and genuine sense of Scripture. Pitch therefore upon the chief points
in controversy, betwixt you and us, such as your pretended Infallibility, The
headship of your Pope, your Transubstantiation, and Sacrifice of the Mass, and
let it be tried, whether they be agreeable to the genuine sense of Scripture. I
shall be willing, to heat, and to examine, what you have to say for them, and
withal, Godwilling, I shall not be wanting, to repone to you, arguments, to
prove them to be impious errors, and dissonant or the perspicuous, and genuine
sense of Scripture. Then may you best discern, whether we PROTESTANTS, can
hold forth the true sense of Scripture. But your whole design appears, to be,
to shift a Scripturall trial. And this is generally observed now, to be the
way of your late Pamphleters, and herein you resemble the old Heretics, of
whom said Tertullian. Lib. De resurrections Carnis, cap. 3. Anfer Haereticis
quae cum Ethnicis sapiunt, ut de Scripturis solis suas quaestion^s sistant and
stare non possunt. A noble and luculent testimony, both for the Perspicuity and
Perfection of the Scripture, seeing all heresies may be confuted by Scripture.
And withal, a remarkable character of Heretics, in shuning to be brought to
this Test, as knowing then that they cannot subsist. And justly you, as well as
old Heretics, may on this account, be termed Lucifuga. But lest I should
seem, only to make use of Contra-argumentation against you: Therefore, I add
from what has been said, this brief and direct Answer, to your first
tergiversing Objection. If (say you, for this is all the force that I can
reduce it to,) The perspicuity of Scripture serves as a distinctive ground, of
our Religion from a false, then should I first have proven the sense given by
PROTESTANTS, to be the true sense of Scripture. Answer, had I sustained in
this debate, the part of an Opponent, this inference might have had some color
of reason: But seeing at the time, I only stand in the capacity of a Defendant
and Respondent, I simply deny, that any such thing, was incumbent to me at
present. I thus answer, not from any diffidence of the PROTESTANT cause, and
therefore forbear cavilling. But that I may keep with you, the exact rules of
disputing. The truth of our Religion, and its consonancy with the genuine sense
of Scripture, has been so often and so luculendy showed, by the Champions of
the PROTESTANT cause, that for me to add any thing thereto, were but to bring
a torch to give light to the Sun. All that could be expected of me, according
to the Rules of disputing, is to clear off any cavils, which you bring against
the consonancy of our Religion, with the true sense of Scripture. Yet will you
come to the examination of particular points in controversy, you shall perhaps
find, that I shall not only do the part of a Defendant. In the mean time, is
it not a strong presumption, that the truth shines brightly on our fide, seeing
after all your insolent boastings, and so many peremptory appeals from us,
you can bring no positive argument, either against the Scriptures perspicuity,
or the consonancie of our Religion, with the genuine sense of Scripture, but
only betake your self to your flieing shifts and declinaturs, and this for your
first objectio^.

Ye object Secondly, That before I affirm so boldly, that all things necessary
are contained in Scripture, I should first have drawn up a List, and Catalogue
of these necessary truths, whereas Scripture (say you,) makes no distinction,
betwixt these necessary truths and others. And now you would be making use of
an old example of mine, That there is no way to prove a piece of Gold to be
upright, but by producing it to be examined. To which I repon. First, that by
this your objection against the Scriptures, being a sufficient Canon, as
containing all things necessary to Salvation, you contradict your own self.
For a great part of the scop of your first Paper, and Syllogism, was to hold
out, That the true Religion has grounds to prove it self, to be conform^ to
the true sense of the letter of the word of GOD. But this were impossible, if
all Religion, and consequently, what ever is necessary to Salvation, were not
contained in the written Word of God. And therefore in my answer to your First
Paper, I concluded from that Syllogism, that you had overturned your Unwritten
traditions. So that now, you are not in Bona fide, to object against the
Perfection of Scriptures, as containing all things necessary to Salvation,
without contradicting your self. But this has been a fatalitie, which has
attended you throughout all this debate. Secondly, this your demand, Of drawing
up a Lift and Catalogue of necessaries, is an old cavil of your Romanists,
which our Divines have often canvased, and therefore, ^s I told you, that you
would be served, when you renewed old Refu^ed Cavills. Itemit you to see, what
has been said to this purpose, By Master Chillingwerth, in his Defense of
Petter part 1. capp. 3.4. And by Stilling-sleet, In his Vindication of the
Bishop of Canterbury, against T. C. part. 1. cap. 4. And Crakantliorp, in his
'Defens. Ecclesia Anglicana, cap. 47. Thirdly, you falsely affirm, that the
Scripture does pur no distinction betwixt, divine truths, of absolute
necessity to Salvation, and others, the belief whereof is not so indispensably
necessary. Says not the Scriptore, Heb. 11.6. He that comes unto GOD must
believe, (...), that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently
seek him? Is the like Character of necessity put upon every truth? Is there I
pray as great necssi^tie to believe that Paul left a Clok at Treat, 2. Tim.
4.13. As to believe there is a GOD? Know you not that of Austin. lib. 1. Contra
Iulianum, cap. 6. Alia sunt in quibus inter se, aliquande etiam doctissimi,
atquod optimi regulae Catholicae defensores, salva fidei compage non consonant,
and alius alio de una re, melius aliquid dicit and verius, hoc autens unde nunc
agimus ad ipsa pertinet sidei fundamenta. Where the Father acknowledges, there
are some Foundation truths in Christianity, absolutely necessary, and others
not so. You may see this larglie proven, by Master Baxter, in his Key for
Catholics, part. 1. cap. 16. And Crakanthorp, loco citato, no to mention
others. Fourthly, I absolutely deny, that it was incumbent to me, at this
time, to draw up a Lift of truths, simply necessary to Salvation, and it was a
tergiversing Shift in you, to demand it, that so you might keep off the
eximination, of that which is mainlie in controversy betwixt us. For though I
with reformed Divines do affirm, that all things necessary to Salvation, are
contained in Scripture. Yet, neither they, nor I affirm, that it is necessary
to Salvation, to have a precise Catalogue of things necessary, containing
neither more not less. Did, I pray you, Chryfostome draw up a Catalogue of
necessaries, when he said, Hom. 3. In epist. 2. Ad These. That all things
necessary are clear and manifest in the Scripture, (...), or Augustine, when he
said, Lib. 2. De doct. Christ. cap. 9. that, In ^is quae aperte posita sunt, in
these things which are plainly laid down in the Scripturs, Inveniuntur amnia,
are found all, which belong to faith or manners? Or Tertullian, when he said,
Scripturae plenitudinem adero? Cannot this general be proven, that all things
necessary, are contained in the Scriptures, unless a precise Catalogue be
drawn? Is there no way, to prove an Universal conclusion, but by an
induction, and enumeration of all particulars? Cannot I conclude, that all the
dead shall rise at the last day, unless I can draw up, a list of all the race
of Mankind? Or, that all the Reprobat, shall be eternally shut up in hell,
unless I can give you a catalogue, and definit number of that generation of
GODS wrath? Can I not conclude, that all Jesuits are devoted Slaves to the
Pope, unless I can give a catalogue, and a definit number of these locusts? Is
not the general, which we affirm, abundantly proven by these Scriptures, in
which, the sufficiency of the Scripture, to bring men to Salvation, is held
forth, As 2. Tim. 3.15.16.17. John, 20.31. Gal. 1.8.9. etc. In so much, that
Tertullian was bold to say, Contra Hermogenens, cap. 22. Doceat Hermogenes
Scriptures esse, si non est Scriptum, timeat illud vae, adjicientibus ant
detrahentibus destinatum. Yea, what if it should be added, that the explicit
belief of more truths, may be necessary to the Salvation of one, then of
another. Said nor the Lord Christ, Luke, 12.48. Unto whom much is given, much
shall be required. Whereupon, a great Divine spared not to say, That, to call
for a precise catalogue of necessary truths, is as unreasonable, as if one
should desire us, to make a coat to fit the Moon in all her Changes, or a
garment to fit all statures, or a dyall to serve all Meridians, or to design
particularly, what provision may serve a^ Army for a year, whereas there may be
an Ar^^ie of a thousand, and an Army of an hundredth thousand, whose provision
therefore cannot be alike. But what ever be of this, let it suffice, to have
given you this general character of necessary truths, that no truth of
Religion is further to be accounted necessary, then Scripture puts a character
of necessity upon it. And here by the way, I might let you see, what a fool you
were in meddling with my example, Of trying pieces of gold severally by the
Tonchstone. For in the present case, it can import no more, but, that before
any truth be concluded necessary, it must first be found, that the Scriptures
has put a character of necessity upon it, and consequently, all necessary
truths must be contained in Scripture, Quod erat demonstrandum. You would
therefore not meddle with my weapons, lest they cut your hands. But Fifthly, and
lastly, I add, that you Romanists, are as much concerned, to draw up a list
and catalogue of necessaries as we, and I am sure in so doing, you shall find
greater difficulty, especially, if with your late Champions, you say, that all
that, and only that, is necessary, which your Church has defined. For first,
can ye agree among your selves, to tell me, what you mean by the Church? Or
secondly, can you enumerat a precise catalogue, of all that the Church has
defined? Or how can you ascertaine any of the true sense of these Definitions?
Or Thirdly, can you show me, who has empowered the Church, since the days of
the Apostles to put a Character of necessity to Salvation, upon a truth, which
had it not before? And Fourthly, did not I from this demonstrate, your Religion
to be a false Religion, because, it differs in its essentials, and in these
things, which to you are necessary to Salvation, from the faith of the most
ancient and primitive Church? Seeing your Formula fidei contrived by Pope Pius
the fourth, has made all the canons of the council of Trent necessary, which
I am sure, neither you, nor any man, shall be able to show, to have been the
faith of the most Ancient and primitive Church. Though this has been put to
you once and again, yet have you not dared to touch upon this string. Yea
Fifthly, from this your imposing new necessary articles of faith, (whereas,
Regula fidei, as Tertullian well said, Lib. de velandis Virgin: Una omnino est
immobilis and irrefomabilis,) many of our Divines, have demonstrated your
Church to be the most Schismatic society, that bears the name of a Church
under Heaven. For by this, you have cut your selves off, both from the ancient
Church, and from the greatest part of Christendom at this day. Among many
others who have convicted you of this grievous crime, you may try, how you can
expede your self, from that which has been said to this purpose, by Decter
Morton, in his book, entitled, The Grand Imposture of the Church of Rome,
cap. 15. by Stilling fleet, in his Vindicatione of the Bishop of Canterbury,
part, 2. cap. 2. And Voetius, in his Desperata causa Papatus, lib. 3. From this
it were easy to demonstrat, that notwithstanding your great pretenses to
Catholicisme, we, and not ye, are the true Catholics. For we acknowledge
communion with the whole Church both ancient and modern, which keep the
essentials and fundame^tals of Christianity. But your Chuch by imposing new
necessary articles of faith, which neither the ancient Church, nor yet the
greatest part of the present Church, did ever acknowledge, have cut your selves
off from the body. I shall close this Section with this Dilemma. Either the
Scriptures do contain all that is necessary to Salvation, or not; if they
do, then you are a perverse wrangling sophister, in cavilling against this
truth. If not, then instance one necessary truth not contained in Scriptures.
And this should have been, your work, if you would have done any thing to
purpose, against this precious truth, of the Scriptures, being a compleet
Canon; to have showed some Necessary article of faith not contained therein.
And if you set to this work, remember, that according to your own principles,
you must prove it by some infallible authority, which you will find as hard a
work, as to roll Sysiphi Saxum.

In place of your third objection, you enquire, What are the means for
interpreting Scripture? what is the due use of these means? Whether a false
Religion may not use the mean? And whether people without preaching, can duly
use the means of interpretation, and come to the knowledge of all things
necessary? And from the use of mean of interpretation, you would conclude the
Scriptures not to be perspicuous. Behold now of a disputant, you are become a
Querist. You have need I confess in your old days, to turn a Catechumen, and
if you would become a docile Disciple, you might receive convincing
instructions, and find that you had no just cause, to have turned a Runnagade,
from the Religion of PROTESTANTS, unto which you were baptized. But so long, as
your Queries proceed from a cavilling humor, you deserve no other answer, then
the retortion of some puzling Queries, as our Lord Christ, sometimes confuted
the insidious interrogaturs of his adversaries, A remarkable instance whereof
you may find, Luke, 20. from verse 2. to verse 8, And therefore, to pull down
these Spider webs, in which you seem not a little to confide, know First, that
the use of means of interpretation, does nothing derogat from the asserted
Perspicuity of the Scriptures; especially, seeing the principal means of
interpretation, are to be fetched from the Scripture it self. Suppose a man be
in a dark Room, with his eyes shut, because, he must first open both eyes and
windows, before he can see the Sun, will you therefore accuse the Sun of
obscurity? Is not the Perspicuity of Scriptures luculently attested, Psalm. 119.
verse. 105.2. Pet. 1.19. 2. Cor. 4.3.4. Romans 10.7.8. etc. If Scriptures be not
perspicuous in things necessary, it must be either, because GOD would not
speak clearlie in them, or because, he could not. It were too hard blasphemy,
to say, he could not. Who made man's mouth, Exodus 4.11. Hence, La^tantius, lib.
6. Institut. cap. 21. Number Deus linguae and mentit artifex l^^uin^n potest. Nor
can you say, because he would not, seeing this is the very end of Scripture,
to reveal unto us the way of Salvation. John, 20.31. Romans 15.4.2. Tim. 3.15.
Dare you say, that our holy and gracious Lord, did purposlle deliver the whole
Scripture obscurely, as Arist^tle did his Acromaticks, and therefore, said of
them, Edidi and non edidi. You might have learned a better lesson from Ierom,
on Psalm. 96. Where he makes this difference, betwixt the writings of Plato, and
the Apostles, Plato (said he,) purposlie affected obscurity, that few might
understand, but the Apostles wrote clearly, that they might accommodat
themselves, to the capacities of all the people of GOD. But, Secondly, Are not
you Romanists, as much concerned as we, in finding out the means for
interpreting Scripture, yea, and besides to find out also means for
interpreting the Decretalls, Bulls, and Breves of your Popes? Are you, not
acquaint with the perplexed debates of your Authors, and particularly, how
Stapletons eleventh book, de Principiis fidei Doctrinalibus, is wholly spent,
De mediis interpretandi Scripturam? And when all is done, you Jesuits, can
never think your Roman cause sufficiently secured, except your Pope, be made
the only Infallible Interpreter of Scriptures, and therefore, Gregorius de
Valentia, lib. 7. De analysi fidei cap. 1. Proposes this assertion, as that
which he would prove throughout the whole book; Pontifex ipse Romanus est in
quo authoritas illa residet, quae in Ecclesia extat ad judicandum de omnibus
omnino fidei controversiis. And though in his Lib. 8. he mentions diverse
rules, in determining controversies of faith, yet at last, he concludes in Cap.
10. That the Pope may use these according to his discretion, and that, he is
not tied, to take advice of Cardinals, or other Doctors, but according to his
pleasure, and that he may desyne as Infallibly without them, as with them. So
that, till the Scripture have no liberty to speak any thing, but what sense
your Popes are pleased to put upon it, you can never secure, either your Pope
or Papal Religion, from Scriptural Anathema's. Were it not easy for me here,
to give you, and the World, a Specimen of goodly expositions of these your
infallible interpreters, I mean your Popes, such as Syricius, Innocent the
third, Boniface the eight, etc. They who can expound Statuimus, by Abrogamus,
and Pasee ^ues meas, of deposing and killing of Princes, what Glosses can they
not put on scriptures? By this it may appear, that this your Querie, like all
the rest, returns upon your own Pate. But Thirdly, had PROTESTANTS, devysed
new Means of interpretation, which had not been made use of, by the Church in
all times, you might have had some pretext for this demand. But we do
cordially subscrive to that of the Apostle, 2. Peter, 1.20. No prophecy of
Soripture, is of any private interpretation. I shall therefore remit you to
Whitaker, controver. de Scriptur. Qu. 5. cap. 9.10.11 12. Chamier. Tom. 1.
Panstrati^, Lib. 16. A. cap. 4. ad finem, Zauchius, Tom. 8. tract. de script.
^u. 2. Gerard the Lutheran, In Uberiori exegesi loci de scriptura, cap. 25.
Where you will find the means of interpretation, acknowledged by PROTESTANTS,
and the way how they are to be used, luculently set down, and vinditated from
the cavil^ of Staplet^n and others. Or if your prejudice will not permit you,
to take them from our Authors; you may take them from Austin, in his Four
books de Doct. Christ. Where it is very remarkable, that though he be very
copious in assigning rules, for the right understanding of the Scriptures; yet
he never once makes mention of that Infallible assistance of the Bishop of
Ro^e: which is an undoubted evidence that Austin was not of your now Romish
faith. By this we understand, what an impudent calumny that is of Bellarmin,
lib. 3. De verbo Dei, cap. 1. who, when he is stateing this question, of the
perspicuity of the Scriptures, charges reformed Divines, as mantaining,
Scripturam esse tam apertam in se, ut sine explicatione sufficiat ad
controversias sidei terminandas: As if we mantained, that there were no need of
interpretation of Scripture, which none of our Divines do affirm. And
therefore, to cut off that cavil, I purpofly added that caution, of Using the
means of interpretation; albeit on the other hand, you would abuse this
concession, to derogat from the Scriptures perspicuty, but with equal ingenuity
with your Cardinal. Fourthly, Whereas you ask, Whether the people without
preaching, can duly use the means of interpretation, and come to the knowledge
of things necessary to Salvation? A ludibrious question as proponed by you
implying, as would seem, a clear Contradiction in it self. For preaching is
one of these means of interpretation, and therefore, it is all one, as if you
had asked, whether people may at once use all the means, and yet not use some
of them? Is it not a manifest Contradiction to use them all, and not to use
them all at once? But to take of all mistakes, we say, that attendance on
public preaching, is one mean to which people are tied Necessitate praecepti,
when they may have it, which is clearly confirmed by these Scriptures, 1 Thessalonians. 5.20. Despise not Prophesieing. Luke, 10.16. He that despyseth you,
despyseth me. Romans 10.17. Faith comes by hearing. Yet do we not affirm, that
the Public preaching of the Word, is a mean so indispenlably necessary, that
the true meaning of the word, can in no case be had by the use of Other means,
such as reading, Private instruction, etc. When the publict preaching is
providentially denied. To this purpose, you may see Ruffin, lib. 1. Hist.
Eccles. cap. 9. and 10. But Fifthly, there yet temaines one of your judicious
queries, namely, Whether a false Religion may duly use the means of
interpretation? I think you would have asked, whether people professing a false
Religion, may use duly the means, for it is a very incongruous speech, to
say, That Religion uses means. But passing that incongruicy, I answer
briefly, that people professing a false Religion, are bound De jure, to use the
means duly, though De facto, they do not use them duly, so long as they
adheare to A false Religion. For as I said, from the beginning of this debate,
there is such an Objective evidence in Scripture truths, that if they be not
perceived, when sufficiently proposed, it is still through some defect on the
part of the subject: As does luculentlie appear, from 2. Cor. 3.4. If our
Gospel be hid, it is to them, in whom the God of this world has blinded their
minds. And, Joh. 7.17. If any man do the will of GOD, he shall know the
Doctrine, whether it be of GOD. This far have I condescended, to satisfy your
Extravagant Queriet, and I hope, have sufficiently vindicated from all your
cavills, this First ground of the true Religion, taken from The Perspicuity and
Perfection of the Scriptures. But do not expect hereaftere, to meet with the
like indulgence, as if I would take notice of your 'Digressive questions, when
you neither observe rules of disputing, nor keep close to the maine hing of the
controversy.

I cannot here, but put you in mind again of another ground which I proposed
in my last two Papers, from which the truth of our Religion may be
demonstrated, namely, The conformity thereof in all its essentials, with the
faith of the most Ancient Church, in the first three Centuries. This you still
dissemble, as if you were deaf on that ear. Only in the close of one of your
observations, concerning the perspicuitie of the Scripture, to confuse these
two grounds together, (that so you might escape in the dark, and that your
tergiversation, and not speaking to this ground distinctly, might be the less
observable,) you do impertinently throw in this word. That the claims to
antiquity is common to other sexts. I believe, you would have said, Sects. But
besides what has been said in my former Papers, to redargue such a trifling
Reply, now I add, that the falsehood of the claim of the other Sects, may be
evicted, by holding out the discrepancy, betwixt the faith of the ancient
Church, and false Religions. As I proved the falsehood of your Romish Religion,
from the dissonancy, betwixt your now Romish faith, or Formula fidei of Pope
Pius the fourth and the faith of the ancient Church in these ages; which as
yet, you have not once endeavored to answer, though now it be the third time
put to you. If you had intended to say any thing to purpose, against us
PROTESTANTS, to this particular, you should have instanced Some essentials of
the Christian Religion, wherein the ancient Church did differ from us. But I
find, that the chief facultio of your Romish Champions, lies in braging, and
false accusing. How often have they accused PROTESTANTS, as Innovatours? And
who are such pretenders to antiquity as they? But it is a true character, which
Scaliger gave long ago, of our and your writers, Non sumus nos novatores, sed
vos estis veteratores. And therefore to vindicate the truth which we mantaine,
from all their reproaches, I have offered, to dispute the cause of Religion,
betwixt us and you, both from Scripture, and Antiquity, But you do shift the
trial, from both these grounds, as much as a Theif would shift to be examined
by a Jury. You are therefore again required, to answer my argument, From the
diserepancy betwixt your now Romish Creed, and the faith of the Ancient Church,
And to instance, if you can, One difference in essentialls, betwixt the faith
of the Ancient Church and our Religion; else it must be held for confessed,
that our Religion, which you so much reproach, is, The truly Ancient Christian
Religion, and yours, but the tares which the envyous one, did latly sow in the
Lords field, and that your pretense to Antiquity, is no better, then the
Gibeonits mouldie bread, Ies. 9.5.12.

Toward the Conelusion, you are so discreet, as to upbraid me, as Altogether
ignorant of the nature of supernatural faith. Because foresooth, I would not
acknowledge, That the assent of faith, which is given to articles of Religion,
must be founded, upon the foreknowledge of the infallible assistance, of the
propounders thereof, I suppose you mean the Clergy, of whom you spoke in
your former Papers. But First, were you not concemed, (if you had looked to
your reputation,) before you had taken the boldness, to reproach me for
Ignorance in this matter, first to have cleared your self from these
Contradictions, wherein I have demonstrated you to be involved, from your
former assertions, concerning This infallible assistance of the Clergy?
Secondly, were you so shallow, as not to discern, that you entangle your self
in a New contradiction, by this your present discourse? For if every
supernatura assent of faith to a divine truth, must be founded, upon The
foreknowledge of the infallible assistance of the propounder thereof, then the
first assent to The necessity of the foreknowledge of this assistance in the
Propounder, must presuppose it, as being, according to you, An Act of
supernatural faith: And yet it cannot presuppose it, because it is the first
assent which the person has concerning that assistance: And consequently, if
it did presuppose a former knowledge of that assistance, it should be first,
and not first. Is not this a goodly Religion which you have, that you cannot
move one step in mantainance thereof, without intangling your self still in
contradictions? But Thirdly, either This necessity of the foreknowledge of the
infallible assistance, of the propounder of divine truths, which you make the
foundation, of all supernatural faith, can be proven or not. If not, then all
your faith is founded upon a fancy, which cannot be proven. If it can be
proven, why shun you to do it, I having so often required it of you? But
now I will lay this Dilemma about you. If it can be proven, either it must be
from Scripture, or from some Unwriten Word, to use your Romanists phrase. Not
from Scripture, for according to you, no sense of Scripture can be known, unles
first the Infallible assistance of the propounder thereof be known, and
therefore, when one doubts of the infallible assistance of the proponer, it is
impossible, according to your principles, that this can be proven from
Scripture. Nor can you prove it by any Unwriten Word. For you have asserted in
your former Papers, that a point of Religion To be true, and to be conform to
the Written Word of GOD, are Synenima's, and that the one of these, cannot be
proven before the other. Therefore, you cannot prove the truth of this point,
conceming the Clergies assistance, merely by an unwriten Word, else it should
be known to be true, before its conformity to the written Word were known, which
is the Contradictorie of your former assertion. But besides, to know the sense
of a Decretal, Canon of Council, or Tradition, or what ever else you will
run to, as distinct from the Scriptures of GOD, there is as great necessity
of The foreknowledge, of the assistance of the propounder thereof, as for the
knowing of the true sense of Scripture. And therefore, before I assent to the
true sense of a Decretal, Canon of Council, or Tradition by a supernatural Act
of faith, I must first know, that the propounder is guided by an infallible
assistance, and consequently, when one doubts of this infallible assistance of
the propounder, neither can it be proven by any Unwritten word, Decretal, Canon
of Council, or Tradition. Expede your self from this Dilemma, if you can,
without destroying your own principles, by which you are locked up in
Contradictions. Nay more, I here freely offer, will you, or any prove to me,
either From Scripture, or Universal Tradition, That the foreknowledge, of such
infallible assistance of your Clergy, is a necessary prerequisite before I
can give a supernatural assent of faith to an article of Religion, and I will
turn Romanist. Can I make a fairer proffer to you? Will you not have so much
compassion upon me, as to make me your Proselyte? But I may divine here, and
not be a Propher, you will as scone remove the Earth out of its place,
according to Archimedes bold undertakeing, as to prove your Hypothesis, from
either of these forementioned grounds. Fourthly, when you talk so liberally of
this Assistance of the Propounder, of articles of faith, ought you not to
determine, whom you mean by This Propounder? I hope you extend it not to all
the people, nay, nor to all who have received Orders. It was (...) pretended,
that every one of these was infallible, whether therefore is it the Pope, or
General Council, or both, that you mean? If you cannot agree among your
selves, who this Infallible Propounder is, do you not reel as to the
Foundation of your faith? I therefore require you again to determine to me, if
you can, An Infallible Propounder of articles of faith, agreed upon by you
Romanists, and to produce the evidences for this infallibity from Scripture, or
Universal Tradition, or Canon of general Council. You would make the world
believe, that you had an infallible Propounder of divine truths, and yet you
cannot agree who he is. Nor have any of the parties, into which you are broken
in this matter, Evidence from your Romish principles, for the infallibility of
him, or them, whom they would place in App^llo's chair. Pitch therefore on
whom you will, as your Iufallible Interpreter, and let us see if his
Infallibility can abyd the Test. Who knows not how impiouslie your Popes have
erred, and that both In cathedra and extra cathedram? How Pope Liberius
subscrived to to the Arrian confession of the Council of Sirmium, and to the
condemnation of Athanasius? How Pope Honorius, being consulted by Sergius of
Constantinople, gave out sentence for the Monethelite Heresy? How Pope John,
the twentysecond, denied the immortality of the Soul? Yea, not to insist
further, in taking this Dunghill, your own Platina, in the life of Stephan^s
the sixth, records, that it is almost the constant custom of the succeeding
Popes, to infringe, Or wholly abrogate, the decrees of their Predecessors. Are
these the infallible propounders of divine truths, upon which our faith must be
built? It were easy also, to give an account of the errors, and lapses of
Councils, though I should be loath, to derogat in the least from their due
esteem. I shall therefore at present, but mind you of that luculent testimony
of Austin, lib. 2. De Baptis. contra Donatistas, cap. 3. where he affirms,
Concilia plenaria priora a posterioribus emendari, that former plenatie, and
general Councills, are amended by the latter, and consequently, the former
undoubtedly erred. The figetree ^^ves, wherewith Bellarmin, and other of your
authors would palliat these things are so fully examined by Chamier, and other
our controversists, that I shall remit you to them. But Fifthly, if the peoples
faith, must be built upon the foreknowledge of the propounders assistance, then
whereupon is the faith of your Infallible Propounders built? Must they not be
perfect Enthusiasts? What difference I pray you, is there betwixt them and
Quakers? You may see, if you will, a pretty parallel to this purpose, written
by Clopenburg, in Syntagmate selectarum exercitationum, disp. 2. The title
whereof, is, Papistarum and Enthusiastarum discordia concors. Sixthlie, suppose
it were granted, that either Pope or Council, or both together, were
infallible; yet, seeing Christians dispersed through the world, cannot receive
the sentence of Pope or Council, immediately from themselves, but at the second
hand, from such fallible persons as you: How shall they know, that you have
sensed the Canon or Decretal aright? Or what rule of interpretation have you,
for finding the true sense of these Canons, or Decretals? Did I not show you in
my Fourth Paper, how your own Authors, altercate without end, concerning the
sense of your Canons? What advantage then, shall your people have, by that
supposed Infallible assistance, of Pope or Council? How shall they know, that
such a one as you, who pretend not to Infallibility, is not deceived, in
taking up the sense of Canon, or Decretal, or that for base ends you will not
deceive them? But Seventhly, did I not in a former Paper show, that your
Tridenti^e and Florentine principle, of suspending the efficacy of Sacraments,
from the intention of the Priest, does destroy all certainty of Clergy men
among you, so that none of you can tell, who is Pope, Bishop, or Priest? And
therefore, you cannot have certainty of infallible assistance, attending any
person, as a Clergy man, and consequently, you Romanists, can have no
certainty of faith at all, the very foundation of it being overturned? And
yet, you have the impudence to reproach us, as having neither certainty of
falth, nor knowing what the nature of a supernatural assent is.

Quis tulerit Gracches de seditione querentes? Know therefore Eighthly, that the
assent which we give to divine truths, Is truly supernatural. I shall not blot
Paper at the time, with the aerie debats of your Schoolmen, concerning the
nature of a Supernatural being. They who would recreat themselves with a
diversion, may see enough of these needle headed nyceties, In Ripalda de Ente
supernaturali, in Arriag. 1. part. Disp. 3. And Carleton Tom. 1. Disp. 12. No
to mention others. Only the assent we give, is Supernatural, both Objectively
and Effectively. That is, both in regard of its Formal object, Viz, divine
revelation, or the testimony of GOD, that cannot lie, and in regard of the
Efficient cause, namely, infused grace, which does elevat, corroborat, and
quicken out understanding to the production of this assent. Now, whether there
be no more to be said, for the Supernaturality of our assent, which is founded,
on the authority of Divine Scriptural testimony, then for yours, which is only
founded upon the authority of your Propounders, that is, a Priest, or Jesuit,
(for these are your immediate Propounders,) or at best, a Pope, or Council,
whose Infallibility you can never prove, and concerning whose sense, you may
fluctuat till you die, whether I say, there be not more to be said, for the
Supernaturality of our assent, then for yours, let these who are rational
Judge? But Ninthly, that I may cut off all ground of cavilling, whereas you
propound the question thus, Whether a man can believe a thing to be true
precisly, because it is revealed and spoken by GOD, unless he be assured, that
GOD speaks by the month of him that proponed such a thing? I Answer to both
the branches of your question distinctly. And to the First, I say, that if by
Precistie, you mean a seclusion of the Means of interpretation, (for the
question at present is of the sense of Scripture,) or a seclusion of extrinsick
motives of credibility, you may know that we PROTESTANTS, mantaine no such
Seclusion. But if you mean the seclusion only, of any Vlterior formal object,
into which the assent of faith is to be resolved, then indeed we mantaine, that
the authority of divine testimony, is the Vltimat formal object, into which,
our assent of faith is to be resolved. And this seems clear from the nature of
Divine faith, which in this, is distinguished from the assent of Humane faith,
or purely Sciential. That Humane faith, is built upon the authority of an
Humane testimony, and a Sciential assent on the Principles of reason; but
Divine faith, upon the authority of Divine testimony. Should we therefore in
the resolution of Faith, proceed to an Ulterior formal object; It would either
cease to be a Divine faith, or else we should only proceed, from one Divine
testimony to another: And so, we must either run In infinitum, from one to
another, or else, rest in some last; and then, why not rather in the first
Scriptural testimony, which by the acknowledgement of all, is Divine? Whereas
the divine authority, of all your other testimonies, are justly questioned,
and will never by you be solidlie proven, except in so far, as they speak
consonantlie to the Scripture. To the second branch of your question, I Answer
thus. If your meaning be, that the assurance of the Clergies assistance, In
actu primo, to propound nothing but truth, be a necessary prerequisire, then I
simply deny it, and often, (though in vain,) have required you to prove it.
Nay, I have demonstrated you to be involved in Contradictions, by asserting it.
And if yet you will mantaine such a thing, I shall but demand of you, whereon
that assurance of the Clergy or propounders assistance, is founded; Wherein I
believe, you shall never be able to satisfy your self, nor any rational
person. But if you mean no more but that, when we give an Assent of faith to
an article of Religion, propounded by another, we must also, Simul and semel,
assent, that the testimony which he has given thereto is true: This is indeed
granted. But from this it does not follow, that the Previous assurance of the
propounders infallibilty, is the ground of my assent. Even as, when a
Mathematician, demonstrats a proposition of Enclide, the sciential assent of
the Hearer, is not founded upon the authority of the Mathematician, but upon
the evidence of the Premises, from which he deduceth his Conclusion: Albeit
the Mathematicians propounding the premises, was a mean to draw forth the
hearers assent, and in assenting to the demonstration, he assents to the
Mathematicians discourse as true. The same was the importance of that other
example, of a man's assenting to the sense of a Municipal Law, given by a civil
Judge, though he had no previous assurance of his Infallibility; which example
you strive to elude, saying, That assent was not supreme. But I desire to
know, what you mean by a Supreme assent? If you mean a Supernatural assent,
I acknowledge it is not Supernatural; neither did I compare the assent which we
give, to the sense of a Municipal Law. and the assent of Divine faith in that
regard. But if you mean, that it is not a Firm and Certain assent, but
fluctuating, and doubting; then you speak falsely, and are confuted by men's
daily experience. And herein only made I the parallel betwixt these two
assents: That as we may give a firm and certain assent, Ordinis naturalis, to
the sense of a Municipal Law, propounded by a Civil Judge, without a Previous
assurance, ordinis naturalis, of the judges Infallibility; so why may we not
assent, by a Supernatural Act of faith to divine truths, propounded by a
Minister, though we have not an Antecedent supernatural assurance of his
infallibility, in actu primo? And it is a gross mistake in you, to say, That
the assent which we give, to the sense given by a civil Judge, is founded on
his abilities, and therefore, that the degrees of our certainly is
correspondent to the Stronger, or Weaker persuasions, that we have of his
ability. I say, this is a gross mistake, for sometime an able Judge may give a
wrong sense of the Law, and a weaker Judge the right sense, and the hearer,
considering the evidence, which the wecker brings for his sense, may give a
firm assent to the sense propounded by the weaker Judge. Even so, a weaker
Divine, like a Paphnutius, may give at a time the true sense of Scripture, when
abler Doctors may give a wrong sense, and the hearer may upon good ground,
subscrive to the sense given by the weaker. And consequently, it is the
evidence which the Propounder brings for the sense which he give^, that is the
ground of the assent of the hearer, and not the persuasion of the Propounders
Ability. Hence was that of Austin, Epist. 19. Fateor Charitati tuae solis eis
Scripturarum libris, qui jam Canonici appellantur didici, hunc timorem
honoremque defer, ut nullum eorum authorem scribendo aliquid errasse
firmissime credam. Alies autem ita lego, ut quantalibet sanctitate doctrinaque
prapolleant non ideo verum putem, quia ipsi ita senserunt; sed quia mihi vel
per illos authors canonicos vel probabili ratione, quod a vere non abhorreat
persuadere potuerunt. From which is evident, that Austin did not believe the
sense given by any Doctor, because of the Previous persuasion, he had of his
abilities or assistance, but because of the evidence he brought for his sense.

Thus have I examined your whole Paper, not misrepresenting your Assertions, as
you do mine; not setting up a man of straw, and then fighting against him, as
your custom is; nor dissembling any thing of seeming weight, as you are not
ashamed almost constantly to do. Therefore, if you have a mind to insist in
the debate, let me once prevail with you, to leave your Tergiversations, and
misrepresentations. Propose first my words faithfully, and then you shall have
liberty to impugn them as hardly as you can; and I promise to you the like
measure. If otherwise, I must again discharge with you, for to exchange Papers
with you in your scurvie strain, will be but as if when an Ass kicks at a
Man, he should kick at the Ass again.

As for that boundle of Revilings, against not only me, but our Religion also,
wherewith you close your Paper, I will not defyle my pen in resuming them. I
can as easily, and with as little hurt throw them off, as Paul did the Viper.
When I read them, I smyled and remembered that of the Poet, Claudicat ingenium
delirat linguaque mensque. Yet if you suppose, that you have any advantage to
your cause by this debate, you shall have free liberty for me, to transmit both
your Papers and my Answers to Rome, providing you do it faithfully; and let
your masters there judge, whether they owe you thanks for your service. But I
fear, if all these Papers should come to an unpartial Consor, he should remit
them back to you with this superscription, Desperata causa Papatus, and send
you to the Hospital of the Desperati.

Think not strange, that this Answer has been delayed a while, for I not
only have many returns of duty upon my hand; but also, it was a doubt with
me, whether to make any further return to you, upon the ground mentioned in my
last. Yet at length I was moved to writ this Answer, upon the consideration of
that of Solomen, Proverbs, 26.5. Answer a fool in his folly, lest he seem
wise in his own conceit.

Aberdene August, 9. 1666. John Menzeis.
POSTSCRIPT.
Take in patience the blots and blutres of the Amanuensis, I am truly sorry,
that it is not more nitidly written.



The READER may perceive, how faithful a transcript of these Papers is here
presented to him, when not so much as a word of Apology in a Postscript, for a
blot of the Amanuensis, is omitted.

The Jesuits seventh Paper. Answer to a sixth Paper of Mr. JOHN MENZEIS,
wherein he labors to propt the truth of the Protestant Religion with two
Shifts and Evasions. 15. August 1666.
I Received your sixth Paper of the ninth of August, containing a mass and
heap of digressions, copied out of controversy books, of misapplyed phrases,
of gross mistakeings, and of injurious and railing words, where you are
pleased to honor me with their Titles, Vir nequam, a sycophant, an effronted
calumniator, a man of a prostitute reputation, a fool, etc. You have been often
defired, and are now desired again, to give a proof of your valor, and to
show, that you are able to put ten only lines in Paper to the purpose;
observing three things, which every one will judge to be rationally demanded of
you. First, That you lay aside all Digressions, that is to say, that you omit
all these things, without nameing of the which, the present controversy may be
fully decided. Secondly, That you omit all base and histrionical expressions,
and contumelious words. Thirdly, That you omit all these things which cannot
serve to prove the truth of your Religion; but with this inconvenient, that it
is equally applyable to prove a false Religion to be true. But since this
reasonable favor cannot be obtained of you, you will give me leave, as I have
often protested, and protests of new, that I will take no notice, but close
misken all that is out of the way, and out of this our first line.

The Protestant Religion cannot be the true Religion, nor the Religion, to the
which GOD has annexed the promises of supernatural happiness, and
conscquentlie, whosoever aims at eternal happiness after this life, or
intends to save his Soul, is obliged in conscience to quit it, and to betake
himself to a diligent search, where the True Religion is to be found,
prescinding for now, where it is to be found, and insisting meerlie in this,
that the Protestant Religion cannot be it. This is proven by this one
Syllogism.

That Religion cannot be the True Religion, which has no special ground or
principle, whereby it can be proven to be a True Religion, or to be a Religion,
conform to the true sense of the letter of the word of GOD. But the Protestant
Religion has no special ground or principle, whereby it can be proven to be a
True Religion, or a Religion conform to the true sense of the letter of the
word of GOD. Ergo, the Protestant Religion cannot be a True Religion.


You denying here the Subsumption, were advertised of this one thing, that a
true principle or ground is not an indifferent nature, but is essentially
determined to prove and infer only truth, and so, not to produce any thing for
a principle or ground, to prove the truth of the Protestant Religion, which may
serve with as great reason to prove a false Religion to be true.

After much fluctuation, and many shifting toes and froes, at lentgh you have
pitched on two things, which you say you will mantaine as solid grounds, to
prove the Protestant Religion to be true, and to be distinguished from all
false Religions. The first is, The perspcuity of Scripture, in all points
necessary to Salvation. But it was shown you, the great juggling that lies
under this answer. For first, by Scriptur of which is affirmed, that it
contains perspicuously all things necessary to Salvation, must be understood,
the true letter, and the true sense of the true letter of Scripture. Ergo, it
cannot serve for a ground to prove the Protestant Religion, to be a true
Religion, except it be first proven, that the Protestants, has both the true
letter and Translation, and likewise the true sense of the letter. To this, in
which the maine point consists, you give no answer, nor brings no proof, but
only, remits me to read your Protestant Authors, whom you call Champions, and
who, as you say, have made all their things clear as the Sun. But wherefore do
you not produce the reasons of these your Champions, that they may be examined
and impugued?

Secondly, It was asked, how you could so boldly affirm, that all things
necessar to Salvation, or rather that all the tenets, which the Protestant
Religion holds as necessary to Salvation, were contained clearly in Scripture,
except first, Drawing op a catalogue of all things that the Protestant Religion
holds, as points necessary to Salvation, and as contradistinguished from all
other things not necessary. To this you answer now, that a Proposition in
general may be believed, though the believer cannot make an induction of all
particulars contained in it. So we believe, that all the dead shall rise,
though we cannot give a particular account of their persons. But it seems this
answer has escaped your pen, when you were thinking on other things. For
though I believe a proposition in general, when that proposition is revealed
in general. But where is it revealed, that all the tenets that the Protestant
Religion holds, for points nocessar to Salvation, are clearly in Scripture?
For, giving and not granting, that this general proposition, All things
necessar to Salvation are clearly set down in Scripture, were revealed by
Scripture it self attesting it; yet it does not follow, that this other
general proposition is revealled, All the tenets that the Protestant Religion
holds, as necessar to Salvation, are clearly contained in Scripture: or that
they may be clearly deduced out of things, clearly set down in Scripture. Ergo,
it cannot be an object of divine faith, but by deduceing it by Induction of
particulars. And to this serves your own example of a purse full of an hundred
pieces of Gold; for though I may believe in general, that all the gold
contained in that purse is upright gold, if this were revealed in general by a
sufficient authority, yet prescinding from all authority, affirmeing this, I
cannot assent, that they are all, and none excepted upright gold, except taking
them all one by one, and putting them to the trial, because, if only one of
them were not upright, the whole assent would be false.

Thirdly, Though you say all things necessar to Salvation, to be clearly set
down in Scripture, yet you require the due use of certain mids to attain to
the true knowledge of their things, and being demanded, to specify their mids,
and what you mean by the due use of them? And for answer to this, you bring
now only a long Digression, about rules to interpret Scripture, slightin the
maine print, which is to show in this, a difference betwixt you, and these of a
false Religion, and whether these of a false Religion, may not use as duly
these mids, as you can do, for attaining to the true sense of Scripture. To
this you only answer, that De facto, they do not use duly these mids,
and, That the God of this world has blinded their minds, etc. But what if they
apply this to your self?

The second ground that you have pitched upon, to prove the Protestant Religion
to be a true Religion, and to be distinguished from all false Religion, Is the
conformity it has with the doctrine of the first three Centuries. But this
cannot be a ground, distinct from the conformity which you say your Religion
has, with the true sense of the letter of Scripture. Because giving and not
granting, that your doctrine had this conformity, you cannot by this prove,
that it is a true doctrine, since by you All these were fallible, and might
have erred; And conformity with doctrine, that may be error, cannot serve to
prove a doctrine to be true. And if you reply, that though they were fallible
and might err, yet they did not err because the doctrine they gave, is
conform to the true, sense of the letter of Scripture, Ergo, the conformity
with them, is not a ground distinct from the conformity with the true sense of
the letter of Scripture. Or else you might prove the conformity, with the Acts
of Parliament, in matters of Religion, to be a ground to prove the truth of
your Religion, and a distinct ground, from the conformity which these Acts has
with the true sense of the letter of Scripture. Ergo, to make good, that the
conformity of your Religion, with the doctrine of the Church in the first three
centuries, is a distinct ground, from the conformity with the true sense of the
letter of Scripture, you must give some Authority to the Fathers who were
then, whereby they were preserved from error, though of themselves they were
fallible. And this must consist, either in some intrinsecal quality inherent in
them, or in some special extrinsecal assistance, founded on Christ's promite.
And here you have likewise to prove, that this intri^secal quality, or
extriusecal assistance, did expyre, and was extinguished in the end of The
third Centurie inclusive, so that it did not pass to the Fourth Centurie, nor
to none afterward. Wherein I expect likewise some Blasphemy out of your mouth;
to wit, that Christ dispenses the protection promised to his Church, that
manner of way that natural Agents does dispense their activity, within a
certain Sphere, Uniformiter, Difformiter, produceing more in parts near, and
less in the parts more remote. But since Christ has promised to be with His
Church to the end of the world, and that the ports of hell shall not prevail
against her, then the dogmes and doctrine of the Church, in the fifteenth
Centurie when Luther and Calvin leap out, were as pure, and as free from all
error, as they were in the first three Centuries, and the one may be called
as-much in question, as the other, since both are equally founded upon Christ's
promise, having no shorter Sphere and term, then the end of the world.

I cannot omit by the way, to mar and disturb a little the complesance, and
contentment that you seem to take, in dealing with your own shadow, fancying
Contradictions upon my part, which are all founded upon your misapprehendings,
mistakeing one thing for another. For you suppone, that the knowledge of the
ability and assistance in him, who propones matters to be believed, because it
is prerequired to all Acts of divine faith, that therefore it is in it self, an
Object of divine faith, and so you confound the Evident assent, and judgment
of credibilitie, with the Obscure Act of faith, and the motive of the one, with
the motive of the other. For though the Act, or assent of divine faith, cannot
be had, except this other preceed, yet faith existent, has its own proper
formal motive, distinct from the motive of that other Act, and judgment
prerequired to it. As likewise out of the fear of hell, a Sinner may be induced
to make an act of Contrition, for his sins, though his act of Contrition
existent, have no ways for the motive of it, the pains of hell. Another
contradiction you fancy to your self, founded upon another ignorant
mistakeing, as if I had said, that a point of Religion to be true, and to be
conform to Scripture, were two Synonims: Since this was only said, Ad Hominem,
and to oppugn you out of your own principles, who holds that nothing can be a
point of faith, but that which is contained in Scripture, or in the written word
of God, and so in this you do, as other of your Champions has done, citeing
for the assertions of scholasticks and fathers objections that they make
against themselves.

Out of this appears, how true it is that was told you that you show your self
Altogether ignorant, of the nature of divine and supernatural faith, since that
out of this, that faith has for the formal motive of it, only GODS word and
revelation, you infer, that it may be obtained and exist, though there not
preceed a knowledge, that GOD speaks by the mouth of the Propounder. Yea, in
this you show your self also altogether ignorant, of the nature of our
intellect, and understanding, who as it cannot but assent, when the object
propounded is in it self evident, so it cannot assent by faith whether divine
or humane, except it know the authority of him that speaks, or propones; and
according as the hearer knows him that speaks, to be of less or more
authority, he adheres with more or less firmnes, to the thing that is spoken,
because otherwise, our intellect might assent to a thing, though there were
nothing to induce him, since here, there interveins nothing, to induce one to
believe, but only the authority of the speaker. And what makes it to the
purpose, the instance which you bring against this, to wit, That sometimes a
more skilful Judge, and Doctor, may give a wrong sense of a Law, and a weaker
may give the true sense? Since it may be likewise, that an Old Wife give the
true sense of a text of Scripture, and you, though both a Minister, and a
Teacher of Divinity, give a false sense And yet it does not follow, but the
understanding of the hearer will be inclined more to adhere, and assent to your
sense, though false, then to hers though true, supponing that there interveene
no other thing to move, save only your authority and hers: Because, that which
induces immediately the understanding to assent, is not the objective truths of
things in themselves, but only, as they appear; according to that saying of
Aristotle, that oftentimes false things are more likely then true.

You can never end one of your Papers without some bragging, and you end this,
persuading your self, that your Papers contains such pregnant and convincing
reasons against Popery, that if they were revised by impartial Judges, they
would turn back to you again with this superscription, Desperata causa
papatus. But this must be believed, because you say it, and you your self must
be of a sweet temper, who can solace your self with such dreams.

Mr. JOHN MENZEIS, his Reply to the Jesuits seventh Paper.
An Answer to Master Dempster the Jesuit, his seventh Paper, wherein he
declines to have the truth of Religion tried, either by Scripture, or Antiquity.
IT appears to be a true character, which an old acquaintance of yours, as I
hear, gives of you, that if you be put from your Common place, you signify
nothing: And therefore, you consume a great part of all your Papers, in
repeating, In terminis, your first Paralogisme, together with some cunned
scurvie preambles thereunto.

You seem displeased, that I should have termed you an Effronted calumniator,
etc. If these names be so unpleasing to you, why took you such pleasure, to
practice the crimes expressed thereby? Why did you put a necessity upon me,
either to brand you with such a black character, or to take with your false
accusations, which no man, but he whose forehead cannot blush would have
uttered? Did I not instance the particular Calumnies, Falsehoods, and
Prevarications, whereof you are guilty? If you were innocent, why did you not
vindicat your self? But who can less endure the name of a Whore, then the
veryest strumpet? What integrity is in that person, who hates Non Crimen, sed
criminis nomen, not the crime, but the name of the crime.

You have the boldness again, to demand from me Ten lines to the purpose.
Must all these my Papers be condemned, as impertinent and histrionick
digressions, (so civil are you in your complements,) because your dull and
lethargick head, has not been able to examine The tenth line of them, yea, not
one to purpose? Did I not tell you from the beginning, that I needed not Ten
words, let be Ten lines, to answer all that you have said, but only these Two
words, Nego Minorem. Now I give other two, which likewise might suffice, Nego
Conclusionent, I deny the conclusion, in regard of the informalitie, of the
whole structure of your Syllogism, which is the marrow of al you have hitherto
said. You have bestowed many years, (if my information fail not,) in studying
this your rare Syllogism: Could you not in all that space, have put it In
modo, and figura? But it seems, you will take as many years, to prove either
the Major, or the Minor thereof. But so much has been said to these things
before, that now I shall add no more, least I should seem, Cum Batto
balbutire.

In my first three Papers, I required you, to prove the Assumption of your
Syllogism. But this like a Thersites, you still declined; which I could not
but look upon, as an evidence, that you succumbed in your probation. I did
likewise appeal you, to produce a ground of the true Christian Religion, which
does not agree, to the Religion of PROTESTANTS. But neither durst you adventure
upon any. Hereupon I might have turned my back upon you, as a smattering
fellow, wholly incapable to mantaine a Theological debate. But to render you
the more inexcusable, and to convince all, to whose hands these Papers may
come, how desirous I was to have the truth examined, I condescended Ex
superabundanti, (though not tied thereto by rules of disputing,) to produce in
my fourth Paper, Two irrefragable grounds, by which the truth of Religion may
be examined. Viz, The perspicuity of the Scripture, in all things necessary to
Salvation, And Conformity with the faith, of the most Ancient Christian Church.
Hereupon I have urged, with all the earnestness I could, in my Fourth, fifth,
and sixth Papers, that both your Religion, and ours, might be brought to these
Tests, and examined thereby; namely, both by Scripture, and Antiquity. But you,
like one who is (...), self condemned, knowing in your conscience, that it is a
wicked cause which you do mantaine, have still declined. And the scop of this
your seventh Paper, is yet to decline the examination of Religion, by either of
these grounds. But Veritas non quaerit angulos. It is he who does evil, that
hates the light, Joh. 3.21. Yet have you the impudency in this your Seventh
Paper, to say, that after many toes and froes, now I have produced two grounds;
as if either I had delivered some inconsistencies, or had been driven to
produce these grounds, by force of your arguments, or that now only in my last
Paper, these grounds had been first produced: All which are manisest untruths.
Is this your gratitude to him, who had so liberally gratified you, with the
production of these grounds, When you were clearly at a Nonplus?

The two grounds which I produced, I did prove in my Fourth Paper, to be solid,
and sufficiently distinctive of the true Religion, from a false, and from them,
I did demonstrate the truth of our Religion, and the falsehood of yours, (for,
Rectum est sui and obliqui Index,) but you have not once dared to examine these
arguments. While therefore you hold on in this your tergiversing way, it might
be enough for me, to say to you with the Poet, Carpere vel noli nostra vel ede
tua. Ought you not, either to acquiesce to these Grounds, produced by me, or to
produce others more solid, especially, you being the Opponent? But yet once
more, I offer against you, to disput the truth of our Religion, both from
Scripture and Antiquity, and shall withal, examine the scurvie, pellucid, and
tergiversing evasions, which you have made use of in this your seventh Paper.

You repeat here again your three cavils, against The Perspicuity of
Scripture, in all things necessary to Salvation, or rather, your three cowardly
subterfuges, to decline a Scriptural trial; but without any confirmation,
deserving a review. I should the more patiently have borne with these
taudologies, had you been pleased, for clearing the state of the controversy,
betwixt you and us, to have delivered the judgment of your Romish Church,
concerning the Perspicuity of the Scripturs. I told you the judgment of
PROTESTANTS, and show you, how they are injured by your writers. I required
you, with the like plainness, to set down the judgment of your Romish Church,
and the rather, because your Authors are found to be inconsistent with one
another, in this matter. And though I have looked upon your ablest
Controversists, namely. Bellarmin, lib. 3. De verbo Dei, cap. 1. Gretser, In
defensione capitis primi libri tertii Bellarmin. De verbo Dei, and Stapleton,
lib. 10. De principijs fidei, cap. 3. Yet can I not find one Canon of a
Council, produced by any of them, as to this particular. Would they not have
done it, if they had any? Do you not manifest to the World, you play the
jugler, when you dare not adventure, to tell the judgment of the Romish
Church, even in that, against which, you do so eagerly cavil?

You think you have disgraced all that I have written, by calling it A heap of
digressions copied out of controversy books, I find you indeed, still better
at calumniating, then at arguing. If my Paper did contain any impertinent
Digressions, why do you not particularize them? But I have already unfolded
the Mystery: That which you cannot answer, must be branded as a Digression,
to palliat your ignorance. I acknowledge, I have improven against you, somewhat
of the writings of Ancients, of Schoolmen, and of modern Coutroversists, both
of your side, and of ours, nor am I hereof ashamed. This I hope is not the base
Plagiarie trade, which I leave to your Jesuits, as being better acquainted with
stealing other men's Papers. Have you not heard, how your famous Iesuis, Antony
Possevin, did steal from Doctor James a learned PROTESTANT, his Cyprianus
redivivus, and put it in his great Apparatus, under his own name, for which you
may find how sharply he is chastised, by Doctor James, in his excellent
treatise concerning The corruption of Scriptures, Councils, and Fathers, by the
Prelates, Pastors, and Pillars of the Church of Rome? Part. 2. page, 9.10. Go
trace back all the Papers which I have sent to you, and see if you can fix any
such trespass upon me. As for you, I confess, we have no cuase yet to accuse
you of ripping up the bowels of many Authors: All the Authority, wherewith you
have hitherto loaded us, is, Master Dempsters (...). You need not fear, that
any thing which as yet has come from you will be standered, as Olens lucernam;
you only ramble out any fleeing tergiversing Shifts, that come first In
buccam, as a man, who minded not to dive into the controversy. However, once
yet, as I have said. I will trace your footsteps.

In your first Cavil, you allege, that The Perspicuity of the Scripturs,
cannot serve as a distinctive character of the Religion of PROTESTANTS from a
false; except I first prove, that the PROTESTANTS have the true letter, and
translation, and true sense of the letter, To which you say I answered nothing,
but remitted you to our PROTESTANT Authors. Here we have a new Specimen of your
Jesuitical Candor, for First, there was no mention of the Translation, in your
first proposal of this Objection. But Secondly, to let this Peccadillo pass,
how are you so impudent, as to say, that I had given no other Answer but
remitted you to our PROTESTANT Authors? Look back on my Paper, and blush for
your lying. Had I not first inverted the Objection against your self, and then
did I not Answer directly, that this Objection might have had some color of
reason, had I sustained the part of an Oppouent, but none at all, I being the
Defendant, or Respondent? Did I not show you, that it concerned you to prove,
that we PROTESTANTS, had not the true sense of Scripture, and that all
incumbent to me at present, was, to answer your arguments? And the same now, I
desire to be acco^modated to the True letter, and translation, of Scripture.
Prove, if you can, that we are either destitute of the true letter, translation
or sense of the Scripture. What I said of PROTESTANT Writers, that they have
showed our Religion, to be conform to the true sense of Scripture, (which
indeed they have done, as with a Sun beam,) was not, that they in that had
performed, what now I was tied to do, but as then I told you, that it were no
impossible task, but had often been performed, though at present, I resolved
to keep you to the Rules of argueing. Yea, did I not deal more liberally with
you, and require you, to pitch on some chief points in controversy, betwixt
you and us, and for your encouragement, promised, that I should not only hold
the Defendants part? But you cannot be drawn out of your lurkeing holes, and
thereby you discover both your desperate cause, and cowardly Spirit. Nay more,
have I not in my last Paper, proven sundry points of controversy against you?
Such as the Perfection of Scripture, the perspicuity of Scripture, the
falliblity both of Popes, and Councils, etc. Yet have you nto once had the
boldness, to canvase these my arguments. Should I have passed through other
Controversies, is it not like, that you would have waved all under your common
pretense, that they were but impertinent Digressions? But though you had kept
silence at other points, I think not so strange, as that you could hear your
Popes in cathedra and extra cathedram, charged with error, and yet not awake
out of your Lethargy. I will mind you of a testimony of your Alphonsus a
Castro, concerning your Popes, to see if it can alarm you, In lib. 1. Adversus
Haereses. cap. 4. Thus he writes, Omnis homo, errare potest in side, etiamsi
Papa sit. Nam de Liberio Papa refert Platina, illum sensisse cum Arianis, and
Anastasium secundum hujus nominis Pontificem favisse Nestorianis, qui historias
legerit, non dubitat. Caelestinum Papam etiam erresse circa matrimonium
fidelium quorum alter labitur in Haeresin, Res est omnibus manifesta. Neque hic
Caelestini error talis fuit qui soli negligentiae imputari debeat, ita ut illum
errasse dicamus velut privatam personam and non ut Papam, qui in qualibet re
seria definienda consulere debet viros doctos, quoniam hujusmodi Caelestini
Definitio habebat^r in antiquis Decretalibus, in cap. Laudabtle^, titulo De
Conversione infidelium quam ego ipse vidi and legi. So your A Castre.

In your second Cavil, you allege (for it seems you dare adventure upon no
more Syllogisms,) That before I affirm so boldly, that all things necessary
to Salvation are contained in Scripture, I ought first to have drawn a
catalogue of all these necessary points; and now you foyst in a word again,
which was not in the first proposal of this cavil: Or rather say you, a list
would be drawn of all these points, which the PROTESTANT Religion holds as
necessary. All the ansvere you bring me in making to this, is, That a
proposition in general may be believed, though the believer cannot make an
induction of all the particulars contained in it. Are you become so shameless,
that in every step you must deal unfaithfully? Who may not see that ye
Romanists are moved, by the same Genius with the old Heretics, of whom
Austine observed, Hareticorum frontem non esse frontem? Did I not make Five
Replies to this your Second Cavil? And you pitch but upon one branch of one of
them, and that also, you misrepresent. I must therefore pull you by the ear,
and remember you, that First I show, that you were not In bona fide, to object
against the Perfection of Scripturs, as containing all things necessary to
Salvation; neither could you do it, without contradicting the grounds which
you had laid down in your First Paper. Secondly, I show, that this demand of A
catalogue of necessaries, was an old cavil of your fellows, confuted by many;
particularly, by Chillingworth, Crakanthorp, Stillingfleet, etc. to whom
indeed I remitted you. To these now I add a very late, but learned Author,
Master Tillotson, part. 2. Sect. 3.. 15. In his confutation of a much eryed up
Romish pamphlet, entitled, Sure footing, where he calls This canting demand of
a Catalogue of necessaries one of the expletive topics, which Popish writers
of the lower form do generally make use of, to sil up a book: And withal,
brings in Doctor Holden, in his Analysis fidei, lib. 1. cap. 4. One of the
great Patrons of your traditionarie way, showing that this demand of a
catalogue of necessaries is unreasonable, and mantaining it to be not only
Impossible, but also if it could be had, Useless and Perni^ions. Thirdly, I
show from Scripture, and Augustine, that you falsely affirmed, that the
Scripture did put no difference betwixt necessary truths and others. Fourthly,
I show it was unreasonable in you, to demand of me a precise Catalogue of
necessary truths, for proving whereof, I did coacervat a heap of arguments.
And Fifthly, I show, that it concerned you Romanists no less then us, to draw
a Catalogue of necessary truths, and that it would prove a more difficle task
for you then for us. Yea, from your putting a character of necessity upon mary
articles, which sometimes had it not, I demonstrated your Religion to be a
false Religion, and your Church (notwithstanding all her great pretenses to
Catholicisme,) to be the most schismatical society under Heaven; and remitted
you to Doctor Morton, Voetius, and Stillingfleet, who had demonstrated this at
large. Whereupon now I must mind you, how Master Chillingworth, urged his
adversary Master Knot, to produce a Romish catalogue of necessaries, assureing
him, when ever he received that with the one hand, he should deliver his
catalogue with the other; but this could never be obtained from Master Knot.
The like offer is lately made by Master Tillotson, to Master Sergeant, the
Author of Surefooting; but though Master Sergeant have made the fashion of a
Reply, yet has he not adventured upon such a Catalogue. But all these My five
answers you pass, (so accurat an Antagonist are you,) except one branch of
one reason, in my Fourth Reply, which also you misrepresent: For you propose
it, as if I bad granted, that a catalogue of necessary truths could not be
drawn up, which you will not find in all my Paper. That which I said, was,
Cannot this general be proven, that all things necessary, are contained in the
Scripturs, unless a precise catalogue of them be drawn? And I brought sundry
instances to prove, that an universal proposition, might be proven without an
induction, and enumeration of all the particulars. Yea your self here confesses,
That when an universal proposition is revealed, or that revealed, from whence
it may be deduced then the universal proposition may be believed, though the
believer cannot make an induction of particulars. Whereupon I subsume, But in
Scripture, that is revealed, from which it may be concluded by firm
consequence, that all things necessary to Salvation are contained in
Scripture, Ergo, by your confession it must be granted, that this universal
proposition ought to be believed, That all necessary truths are contained in
Scripture, though a particular induction of these truths could not be made. The
Assumption is easily proven by all these Scripturs in which it is held forth,
that the Scripture is sufficient In suo genere, as a rule to bring us to
Salvation, which you will find accumulated by our divines, in the controversy,
De perfectione Scripturae. And I instanced some of them in my last Paper,
purposlie to preoccupie this poor evasion of yours, though you have not had the
boldness to meddle with them. Hence Austin, in Epist. 166. In Scripturis
didicimus Christum, in Scripturis didicimus Ecclesiam. And, Lib. De unitate
Ecclesi. cap. 3. Non audiamus, haec dice, haec dicis, sed haec dicit Dominus.
Sunt certe libri dominici, quorum authoritati utrique consentimus, utrique
credimus, utrique servimus, ibi quaeramus Ecclesiam, ibi discutiaemus causam
nostram. And a little after, Nolo humanis documentis, sed divinis oraculis
Sanctam Ecclesiam demonstrari. And in cap 19. Vtrum ipsi, (Namely the
Donatists,) Ecclesiam teneant, non nisi de divinarum Scripturaru^ libris
canonicis ostendant. The evidence of these testimonies, made your own
Stapleton, In lib. 1 De principiis fidei, cap. 24. To say, Ecct apertissime
dicit Augustinus in Scripturis quaerendam esse Ecclesiam, and ex ipsis
Scripturis demonstrari Ecclesiam. Hoc sane totum verissimum est. So says your
Stapleton. This truth is so clear that Theodoret was bold to say, Dial. 1. Noli
mihi humanis ratiocinationibus obstrepere, ego enim in sola divina Scriptura
acquiesco, and Dial. 3. Non adeo confidens sum ut ausim aliquid affirmare quod
Scriptura silentio praeterit. And Austin, de bono Viduitatis, cap. 1. Sancta
Scriptura nostrae doctrinae regulam figit. But perhaps now, you think to betake
your self to that subterfuge, which you foist into the second edition of this
Objection. Giveing and not granting, say you, that all things necessary to
Salvation were clearly revealed in Scripture, yet does it not follow, That all
these things which the PROTESTANT Religion holds as necessary, are clearly
revealed therein. But this poor evasion discovers gross ignorance, and
inadverrence in you. For if you had remarked what I have said, in the
explication of the terms in my First Paper, you would have seen this
preoccupied. There I told you, that by The Religion of PROTESTANTS, we
understand only, The True Christian Religion, as revealed in the holy
Scripturs. And consequently, where ever these things are revealed, which are
necessary, according to The True Christian Religion, there also the necessary
points of Our Religion are revealed. And to evidence, that the Religion of
PROTESTANTS, and the True Christian Religion is the same, produce if you can
any one point, which we hold as necessary to Salvation, which is not
necessary, according to the True Christian Religion revealed in Scripture, and
I profess, I will instantly disowne it; and I know, so will all ingenuous
PROTESTANTS. I Therefore warned you from the beginning, when you undertook to
impugn our Religion, that you undertook the cause of an infidel, namely, to
impugn the Christian Religion. Hence, some have well observed, that they who
would speak properly, should not term our Religion, the PROTESTANT Religion,
but the Religion of PROTESTANTS: It is not Religio PROTESTANS, but Religio
PROTESTANTIVM; or the True Christian Religion professed by them, who do reject
and protest against Popish errors and inventions. Since therefore, all the
points that are necessary to Salvation, according to the True Christian
Religion, are revealed in Scripture; as has been confirmed by luculent
testimonies, both of Scripture, and Antiquity, (for I will not be addebted to
you for your Concessions,) then all the points, which the Religion of
PROTESTANTS holds necessary to Salvation, are therein likewise revealed. And
consequently, as you would believe all the pieces in a purse to be upright
Gold, if it were attested to you, by a sufficient authority: So you may believe
all things necessary to Salvation, to be contained in Scripture, this being
attested by divine authority. Or if you will not acquiesce to all this
evidence of reason, produce one article necessary to Salvation, or
acknowledged by us to be such, which is not contained in Scripture. Let it be
brought to the Touchstone and examined. But it seems, ye Jesuits are more
exact in trying your pieces of Gold, then points of Religion. For your pieces
of gold, must either have the Attestation of a sufficient authority, or be
brought to the Touchstone. But you can take the points of your Religion
Implicitly upon trust, and your interest so bribes your judgment and
affections, that you will not come to the trial, by which the cheat may be
discovered.

In your third Cavil, you had propounded sundry idle Queries, concerning the
Means of interpretation of Scripture, insinua^ng That the use of these means,
is inconsistent with the Scripturs perspicuity. In reply whereto, I First not
only show, That the perspicuity of Scripturs, was nothing impeached by the use
of means of interpretation; but also, did prove both from Scripture, and
reason, the Scripturs to be perspicuous. Secondly, I remembered you, that your
Romanists were as much concerned as we, in resolving the questiones Concerning
the means of interpretation of Scripture, and besides that they were tied, to
find out means for the sure interpretation of Canons of Councils, Bulls, Breves,
and Decretals of Popes, many whereof ar purpostie contrived like Appollo's
dubious Oracles, to ludifie the Reader. Thirdly, I show that PROTESTANTS
devised no new Means of interpretation, which were not still approven by the
Christian Church, and therefore to avoid prolixitie, I remitted you to
Augustine, His four books, de Doctrina Christian^, and withal, to sundry
famous PROTESTANT Authors, particularly, to Chamier, Whitaker, Zanchre, and
Gerard, (to whom now I add, Doctor Strange, de interpretatione and perfectione
Scripturae, lib. 1. cap. 8.) Where you might have found a full account, of the
right means of interpreting Scripture, and of the right way of useing these
means, and consequently, of the difference betwixt them that used them rightly,
and others who do not use them duly. Fourthly, I resolved a Querie of yours,
whether without the preaching of the Word, the means of interpretation may be
used, and the true sense of Scripture attained. But of all these things in your
reply, like a perfect Fuge bellum, you take no more notice, then to asperse
them as long Digressions, about the rules of interpreting seripture: A rare and
compendious confutation I confess. But if I did extravague in these
discourses, was it not in following such a vagrant guide as you? Do you not
play the Devil first to temp: me to thse D. gressions, and then to accuse me
for them? Yea, do you not show your self a silly fool, to wound your self
through my sides. For if it be an impertinent Digression for me to answer your
Queries, must you not be an impertinent fool to propound them? But perhaps you
thought it your wisdom, rather to come off with this reflection of folly, then
to adventure to graple with these things, which would prove too hard for you.
After you had waved all these particulars, lest you should seem to say nothing
at all to that Section, you fall upon a word, which I spoke in answer to
another of your judicious Queries. Viz. Whether these of a false Religion might
duly use all the means of interpretation? To which I answered, De jure, they
ought to use them, though De facto, and in sensu composito, they did not use
them, which I confirmed by some Scripturs. To confute this my answer, What
(say you,) if they of a false Religion say as much of as? And who questions but
they may say it? Our lips are our own, (say the worst of men,) And who is Lord
over us, Psalm. 12 verse 4. Have we not sufficient experience of the licentious
tongues of your Romanists? does it therefore follow, that you do duly use the
means of interpretation, and not we? Si accusare sufficiat quis innocens? We
do not desire any man to receive our expositions, because we affirm them to
be true: nor are we so brutish, as to suffer your Romish interpretations, to be
obtruded upon us, on your bare affirmatio^. If you would come down out of the
clouds, and not insist still on generals, you should find it is upon convinceing
grounds, from the series of the context, other Scripturs, the Analogy of
faith, etc. That we reject your Romish senses, and embrace these which are
approved by PROTESTANTS. As for Example, there is a great Controversy betwixt
you and us, touching the sense of these words of Christ, Hoc est Corpus meum,
This is my Body. You will have them to be understood, in A proper and lueral
sense, and by the Priests pronounceing, or rather whispering them in Latin,
the Body of Christ, to be substituted under the Accidents of bread: We on the
contratie affirm, the sense of these words, as is usual in Sacramental
speeches, to be Figurative; the Bread being called the Body of Christ, because
it is a Sacramental figne, and exhibitive Symbol of his Body. You will find
Armies of arguments brought by our Divines, particularly, By Whitaker, Chamier,
Morton, Nethenus, etc. To justify our sense, and to confute yours, I shall at
the time give you but a hint of this one. According to your received Romisn
gloss, these words of Christ should be inexplicable false, and imply a
manifest contradiction, therefore you Romish gloss must surely be false. The
Sequel is clear: The Antecedent I prove. And first I say, these words of Christ
should be inexplicable. Strain your wit, and squeeze your Authors, to tell me
what Hoc, or the pronowne This can signify? Surely it can neither signify
bread, nor the Accidents of bread, else the Proposition were not proper: For all
know, that one Disparat, cannot be properly predicated of another. Nor can it
signify The Body of Christ: For according to you Christ's Body, is not there
until all the Words be finished. But the pronowne This, does clearly demonstrat
something. then present, when it was spoken. What therefore remains, but that
with other your Authors, you betake your self to the desperate refuge of your
Individun^ vagum, Eus in confuso, and Contentum sub speciebus, and what is
that, but something you know not what? Was Christ's understanding clouded with
such confusion, that he knew not what he meant, when he said, This? But
besides, when ever any thing is truly predicated of an Individuum vagum,
though it be disjunctivly enunciated of many things, yet it is determinatly
verified of some one thing, and therefore, suppose the pronown Hoc. or This;
were taken as an Individuu^^ vagum, yet it must signify something then
present, identificated with The Body of Jesus. But that is impossible,
according to you, seeing Christ's Body is not present until all the words be
uttered. More of the Vertigo of your authors, touching this particular, may be
seen in the forementiond writers. But I not only said, that this Proposition
of Christ, according to your Romish gloss, would be Inexplicable, but also
False, and Imply a contradiction. For it implies a manifest contradiction, that
a true affirmative proposition De praesenti, should produce its object. But
this proposition, which must be true, as being Christ's, and which all see to be
affirmative De praesenti, according to your Romish gloss, does produce its
object. For according to you, it substitutes the Body of Christ under the
accidents of bread, either by Adduction, or Reproduction. Ergo, this
proposition, according to your Romish gloss, implies a manifest Contradiction.
The Major is clear, because, if a true proposition De praesenti, should produce
its object, then in the Iustant of nature, wherein the proposition is conceived
before its object, as the cause before its effect, the proposition should be
true, and not true. True, ex hypothesi, for it is supposed to be a true
proposition. Not true, because, not conform to its object: For it affirms its
object to be De praesenti; yet in that Instant of nature, the object is not;
for it is the instant of Priority before the object: And consequently, if this
proposition, This is my Body, do substitute Christ's Body under the accidents
of bread, His Body should be under these accidents, before it be under them.
For it should be under them in the first Instant of nature, wherein this
proposition is conceived, else the proposition should be false: And yet it
should not be under them, because the proposition, as the productive cause of
the presence of Christ, must be presupposed for One instant of nature, before
its effect. But what speak I of Instants of nature? Is it not at least
requited, to the truth of an Affirmative proposition de praesenti, that the
object thereof, do exist in that article of time, wherein the Copula of the
proposition is pronounced? But according to you, Christ Body is not under the
accidents of bread, when the Copula of the proposition is pronounced: for
according to you, Christ's Body is not in the Sacrament, till all the Words be
ended. Therefore, the proposition according to your Gloss, cannot be true. And
yet it must be true, as being the word of him who is truth it self: And
consequently, it must be Ture and Not True. Your Schoolmen have perplexed
themselves with these Aenigma's, but could never extricat themselves out of
this labyrinth, in so much, that what one of them affirms, the other confutes.
As these hints prove the falsehood of your Romish gloss, so the truth of the
sense given by PROTESTANTS, is manifest from the Series of the context. For, if
by the pronowne, Hoc, or This, Christ meaned the bread, then the sense of the
proposition must be figurative: But by the pronowne, This, he surely understood
the bread, Ergo, etc. The Major is clear, because disparats cannot be
predicated of one another, but Figuratively. The Minor is easily proven:
Because, what he took, blessed and did break, of that he said, This is my
Body, as is clear from the Series of the context: But undoubtedly he took,
blessed and brake the bread, therefore it was the bread which he did
demonstrate by the pronowne, This. And consequently, the sense must be
Figurative. Neither is this a late invention of PROTESTANTS. Said not Austin,
Contra Adimantum, cap. 12. The Lord doubted not to say, This is my Body, Cum
daret signum Corporis sui? That is, when he gave the sign and figura of his
Body. And long before him, Tertullian, Lib. 4. Adversus Martionem, cap. 40.
Acceptum panem and distributum Corpus suum fecit, hoc est Corpus meum dicendo,
ad est, figura Corporis mei. Could Calvin, or Beza, have more luculently
affirmed the meaning of Christ's proposition to be Figurative. I know your two
Cardinals, Bellarmin, and Perron, have scrued up a multitude of wrested
testimonies of Antiquity, as if the Ancient Church had favored your monstrous
sigment of Transubstantiation. But Spalatensis, Lib. 5. De Rep. Eccles. cap. 6.
a number. 22. Ad numerum 164. (not to mention other Authors,) has copiously
examined, and fully vindicated all these testimonies, and clearly demonstrated,
that the Church in the first Eight Centuries, was in the same judgment, as to
the Sacrament of the Eucharist, with the Reformed Churches. By this touch, the
judicious Reader may discern, whether our exposition of that rext be not built
upon solid grounds; The like might be showed, if our expositions and yours were
compared, of other much tossed Scripturs, such as Luke, 22.32. I have prayed
for thee, that thy faith fail not Matthew. 16.18. Upon this rock I will build my
Church. 1. Tim. 3.15. The pillar and ground of truth. Job. 21.16. Feed my
sheep, etc. And this were the most compendions way, to try, whether your
exposition, or ours, were the more genuine. This also was the advice of
Augustine, of old, Lib. 3. Contra Maximin. Arianum, cap. 14. Nec ego Nicaenum,
nec tu debes Ar^minense tanquam prajudisaturus proferre Concilium. Nec ego
hujus authoritate, nec tu illus detineris. Seripturarum authoritatibus, non
quorumcunque proprys, sed utrisque commun^bus testibus, res cum re, causa cum
causa, ratic cum ratione concertes. It is true throogh prejudice, interest or
blindness, men may oppose the most luculent truth, after all these means. But
then the whole defect is, (as we have often advertised you,) Ex parts subjecti,
on the part of the subject. And so much of your three frivolous cavils against
the Scripturs perspicuity, in all things necessary to Salvation.

In your next section, as you declined a trial by Scripture, so likewise you
shun to have your Religion tried by Antiquity, and you pretend two noble
shifts. The first is, that according to us, al these in the first three
Centuries were fallible, and therefore, though our Religion were conform to
theirs, it will not follow that it is the True Religion. I doubt, if ever any
had to do with such a shameless tergiversing fellow. For First, suppose it
were true, that our Divines did say that all these of the three first Centuries
were Fallible, yet if you grant their Religion to be the True Religion, and I
admit their Religion as to all essentials, to be a Test, whether ours be true,
or not, with what face can you decline it? Know you not that Maxim of Law,
Testem quem quis inducit pre se, tenetur recipere contrase. Secondly, how could
you say, That we affirm, that all these of the first three Centuries were
fallible, seeing in these centuries were the Apostles, whom we acknowledge to
have been Infallible in their Doctrine? But Thirdly, by saying That we
mantains, that all in these ages, (even excepting the Apostles, and penmen of
holy writ,) were fallible, and subject to errors, you discover your self, to be
either grossly ignorant of the judgment of PROTESTANTS, or to be a base scurvie
sophister, which will appear, by distinguishing two words in your assertion.
For First, the particle (All,) may be taken either Collectively, or
Distributively. And Secondly, Errors of Religion are of two sorts: Some in
points fundamental and essential, some in points which are not of such
indispensable necessity. This being premised, I propose this Distinction. If
you mean, that we mantaine that All in these ages Collectively taken, that is,
the whole Catholic Church, may err in Fundamentals, and Essentials, it is a
most absurd falsehood; for PROTESTANTS mantaine no such thing. We acknowledge
the promises for the perpetuity of the Church, Isa. 59. ver. 21. Matthew. 28,
ver, 20. etc. But if the whole Catholic Church collectively taken did err in
Fundamentals in any age, then the Church for that time should utterly cease to
be upon earth. It is True sundry of your Writers, either through Ignorance, or
through their calumniating Genius, have charged this on PROTESTANTS, that they
mantaine, that the Church may utterly fail. But this is so impudent a slander,
that Bellarmin himself is ashamed of it, Lib. 3. De Ecclesia Militants, cap.
13. Notandum (says he,) Multos ex nostris tempus terere dum probant absolute
Ecclesiam non posse desicere, nam Calvinus and cateri Heretici id concedunt. If
therefore this be your meaning, you charge PROTESTANTS falsely. But if you only
mean, that All in these ages taken Distributively. (remember that now we
speak not of Apostles, or of pen-me^ of holy writ, or of these who had an
extraordinatie Prophetic spirit,) might err in things not Fundamental, this
is granted. Yet this hinders not, but that the truth of our Religion, may be
proven by its conformity with the faith of the Ancient Church. For though every
one Distributively taken may err in Integrals, yet, seeing, Al collectivly
taken, or the Catholic Church cannot err in Essentials, if the faith of the
Catholic Church in these ages, can be found out in the undoubted writings of
the Fathers in these times, then Conformity with their Religion will
irrefragably prove Our Religion to be the True Religion, as to all Essentials.
Yea, if from the writings of the A^^ients in these ages, we can find what was
the faith of any one true Particular Church, we may solidly argue thence as to
the Truth of Religion in essentials. For though a true particular Church may
err, yet so long as it is a True Church, it retains the essentials of faith,
else it were not a true Church. This Distinction, which I have proposed, is not
mine only, but of our PROTESTANT Writers, in this question, concerning The
Churches infallibility. As you may see in Whitaker, De Ecclesia, quaest. 3.
cap. 1. Doctor Field, His way to the Church, lib. 4. cap 2. And others. So that
it is no evasion I propound to you, but the received Doctrine of the Reformed
Churches; and hence the rest of this your cavil, on which you foolishly dilate,
may be cut off. If we grant, say you, Any infallibility to the Church in these
three Centuries, how did that gift expyre in the fourth, and after following
ages? It is easily Answered: This infall blility which we grant to the
Collective body of the Church, as to the Essentials and Fundamentals of faith,
agrees to her in every age; else the Church in some ages should be utterly
lost, But though we grant, that the whole Catholic Church cannot err in
Fundamentals, be not so foolish, as to apply this to your Romish Church. You
might as well say, that Italians are the collective body of mankind, as that
you Romanists are the collective body of the Catholic Church. Remember Jeroms
smart admonition, In Aepistola ad Evagrium. Orbis major est urbe. Only this I
add, that though the Catholic Church be exempted from error in Fundamentals,
in every age; yet the Church in all ages, is not blessed with Equal purity, and
splendour. For in some ages, the Integrals may be much more vitiated then in
others. Yea, some particular Churches, may err in Fundamentals, and so cease
to be True Churches, and many of these who were eminent Lights in the Church,
may be smitten with these Fundamental errors, and the sincere Professors of the
truth, may be reduced to a great Paucitie, and through persecution, be
scattered into corners, as in the days of Athanasius, Quando totus orbis
miratus est se factum Arianum. Lest therefore you cavil further, at the
restricting of my argument to these First three Centuries, you may remember the
first occasion of it, which was this, as you will find in my Fourth Paper: I
was speaking of the Ancient Apologists, in the first Three Centuries, who
pleaded the truth of the Christian Religion against Heathens. And I appealed
both to Their grounds, and their Religion in these days, that it might be
tried, whether our Religion were not agreeable to theirs in all Essentials, and
whether the solid grounds which they brought, for the truth of the Christian
Religion, did not agree to the Religion of PROTESTANTS? This I say, was the
occasion of limiting the argument to these ages; though it might have been
extended further. Yea, and (as then we told,) was extended further by Bishop
Juel, and Crakanthorp, even to the Sixth Centurie; so also, is it by learned
Whitaker, Contra rarionem quintam Campiani: Nay others have extended it to all
ages. Nor need you carp, at the limiting of the argument to the first Three
Centuries: For the faith of the Catholic Church in these Three ages, was the
faith of the Catholic Church in all Ages. For there is but one Faith, and
therefore, if it be proven, that our Religion, was the Religion of these ages,
it does consequently follow, that it was the faith of the Catholic Church in
all ages. So that this is the most compendious way, to try, whether a Religion
be the faith of the Church in all ages, by ascending to the fountain: I mean,
to these first three centuries, concerning which there is least doubt made by
any Party; and which was less viriated by superstition, or errors in
integrals, then was the Church in some after times.

I come now to your second Evasion, wherein you pretend, That conformity with
the Ancient Church, is at least no distinct ground from conformity with the
Scriptures; seeing the truth of the faith of the Ancient Church, can only be
proven, by its conformity with the Scripturs. But the vanity of this
subterfuge, does easily appear. For First, whether it be a Distinct ground or
not, yet if it be a Real ground, why decline you to be tried thereby? You must
surely have an ill conscience, and know your wares to be sophisticat, that they
cannot abide the light. Secondly, If these grounds be not distinct, how does
your Melehior Canus, In his book of commone places, distinguish them, giveing
the first place to the Seripturs, of which he treats Lib. 2. and only the Sixth
to Ancient fathers, of whom he discourses, Lib. 7? Or how does Bellarmin, and
other your Controversists, ordinarily distinguish their argume^^s founded on
Scripture, from the arguments founded upon Antiquity? But Thirdly, wholly to
remove this cavil, I grant that the truth of Religion in any former age, may be
proven from its conformity with the Scriptures, and therefore, that conformity
with the holy Scriptures, is the only Primarie ground of discerning a True
Religion from a false; whereupon, I did put it in the first place. Yet we may
abstract, Pro hic and nune, from this way of procedour, and argue from the
faith of the Church in some ages, without proceeding at the time, to examine
the truth of every point by the Scripture: And the rather, seeing in Scripture
there are general promises of the perpetuity of the Church, and consequently of
preserving in her all fundamental truths. If therefore we can have evidence,
that this was the faith of the Catholic Church, I mean of the whole
collective in any age, then I may conclude, this is the true faith, and the
True Religion; and consequently, what is agreeable thereto, must also be the
True Religion: for nothing can be consonant to truth, but truth. From this it
appears, that sisting in the Religion of the Catholic Church in the Second
and Third Centurie. as a Principle, upon the general promise of the Churches
perpetuity, without a further progress, (for the time,) to examine the truth
of every particular, it may become in some manner, a Distinct ground of
argueing, from that according to which, every point is severally reduced to
Scripture-tryal. Even as in Subalternas sciences, the Conclusions of the
Subalternant science are made use of as Principles, without making a further
progress. The Astronomer takes the Geometricians Conclusion as a Priuciple,
not seeking a Demonstration thereof. So may the Divine in some cases take the
faith of the Catholic Church, in the Second or Third Centurie, and argue
thence as from a Principle; especially, when he has to do with an Adversary,
who may admit the faith of the Ancient Church, as a Test, and will decline the
Scriptures, under pretext of obscarity. or ambiguity. Yea, (as I have said
before,) A Divine may in such a case, argue from the faith of one true
Particular Church. Suppose that an Original writ, were either lost, or blotted
and blurred, from which there has been several Transumpts taken; and that
there were two persons pretending to have Transumpts, but each of them,
questioning the fidelity of the others Transumpt. This Question could not be
decided by the Original, it being supposed, either to be lost, or blotted
utterly, and blurred, and neither of the two Parties willing yield to one
another. But there being found another Transump, which both the Parties
acknowledge, to have been the First Copy, that was taken from the Original,
Could there be any way so good for decyding the Question, (next to the
compareing of both the Transumpts, with the Original, if it could be had, or
were clear,) as to compare the two controverted Copies, with this
uncontroverted Transumpt? In this case, would not he who shunned to bring his
Copy to the trial, leave a strong presumption, that his Paper were but a
forged draught? Now though all the authority, which the unquestioned Transumpt
has, was derived from its conformity with the Original, yet in these
circumstances, it may have the place of a Test, to distinguish betwixt true and
adulterat Copies. The application is obvious. The Papists like old Heretics,
accuse Scriptures as being blotted and blurred, yea as in a manner lost: The
Originals, if you may be believed, being corrupted; albeit indeed Scripture is
clear, and by the good hand of GOD preserved to this day. Yet seeing you
sometimes seem to magnify Antiquity, as if you did acknowledge the faith of
the Ancient Church, to be a faithful Transumpt from that authentic Original of
the Scriptures, what more condescension, can we PROTESTANTS in this case show
to you, Then seeing you will not be judged by the Scriptures, which are out
Heavenly Fathers authentic Testament, then I say, to acquiesce, that the cause
betwixt us be tried by that Transumpt, which you seem to acknowledge? And when
you decline this trial also, does it not speak you out to be real
Prevaricators and Cavillers?

But because some may wonder whence it is, that you do not only decline a
trial by Scripture, but also by Antiquity. I will here open the Mystery that
lurkes under it. Though you Romanists seem sometimes to magnify Fathers,
Councils and Antiquity, yet there are none who set them more at naught then
you, as, if you put me to it, I will make good by particular instances. And
therefore laying them aside, it is only your present Romish Church, that is
your sure Author-hold: And by your present Church, your Jesuited Party means
only the Pope. I do not stander you: Hear your great Champion Gretser, who
comes in to succor Bellarmin at a dead lift, Tom. 1. Defens. cap. 10. lib. 3.
Bellarmin, De ver be Dei, colum. 1450. Quando Ecclesiam dicimus esse omnium
controversiarum fidei juaicem intelligimus Pontisicem Romanum qui pre te^pore
praesens naviculam militantis Ecclesiae moderatur: When we affirm (says he,)
the Church to be the judge of all controversies of faith, by the Church we
understand the Bishop of Rome, who, for the time being, Governs the ship of the
Militant Church. So that there is no security for your unhappie Religion,
unless ye be made Chancelours in your own Assyze. If it be asked, how shall
any know that the Romish Church, is the True Church? The answer must be,
because she, that is, her head the Pope, says she, is the True Church. If it
be again asked, how shall it be known, that the Pope is the Head of the
Church? The answer must be, because he says, he is it. But how shall it be
known, that he is Infallible in so saying? The answer must be, because he
says, this is his prerogative. And how shall it be known, that the Romish
Religion is the only True Religion? The only plain answer is, because the
Pope whose grandour is mantained thereby, says, it is the True Religion. And
how shall it be known, that the Religion of PROTESTANTS, is a Wrong Religion?
Because forsooth, the Pope, whose triple Crown is shaken by the Religion of
Protestants, says, that it is an heretical Religion. Alace! abcel that poor
simple people should be so miserably chea^ed and seduced. GOD I trust will err
long open their eyes, to see these damnable impostures.

You had asserted in your last, That every supernatural act of faith, must be
founded on the foreknowledge of the infallible assistance of the Popounders of
divine truths. To which in my last, I had Replied many thing; most of which
(according to your custom,) you never once touch: I must therefore reminde you
of the heads of them. As First, you were demanded, who these Infallible
Propounders are? Whether you Romanists can agree upon them? Whether you can
produce grounds for their infallibility from Scripture, or Universal Tradition?
I hope you will not pretend, every one of your Shavelings to be infallible.
Yea, I brought luculent evidence, that both Popes, and General Councils, may
err, and have erred. Secondly, I asked, whereupon the Faith of these pretended
Infallible Propounders was builded, and wherein they differed from Enthusiasts?
Thirdly, supposing Pope, or Council, or both had this Infalliblity; yet seeing
the people receive their sentence, from the mouth of such fallible and
fallacious persons as you, how can they be assured, that either you have not
taken up the sense of their Decrees wrong, or that for base ends you do not
falsify them? And Fourthly, how it can be known, who are your Clergy men,
that are gifted with this assistance, seeing the efficacy of Sacraments, of
which Ordination with you is one, depends on the secret intention of the
Priest? But none of these do you once touch. Are not you fitter, to be a
Trencher Chaplain to a Biggotted, and implicit Proselit, then a Disputant? I
Might here also commit you, with the late Patrons of your Traditionarie Way,
particularly, with Master Cressy, who in his Exomologesis, Cap. 51. Sect. 4.
Acknowledges, That the pastors of the Church proceed not now as the Apostles
did, with a peculiar infallible direction of the holy Spirit, but with
prudential collection, not always necessary, and that to the Apostles, such
an infallible certainty of means was necessary, but not so now to the Church.
And in his chap. 40. Sect. 3. He acknowledges the unfortunatness of that word,
infallibility, And said, that he could find no such word in any Council; and
that there appeared no necessity to him, that any PROTESTANT should ever have
heard that word named, let be pressed with so much earnestness; and that Master
Chillingworth has combated that word with too too much success. I Know Master
Cressy, finding that this his assertion, had given offense to sundry Zelots of
you Romish Church, published afterward an explication of these words. But what
an unhandsome, and dis-ingenuous retreat he made, is judiciously discovered by
Master Tillotson, In his book, Entitled, The Rule of faith part. 2. Sect. 4.
Where also he shows, that the same principle of infallibility, has been
contradicted, by White, Holden, and Rushworth, the late pleaders for your
Traditionarie way. You may see more of the Contradictions of your Iesuit-Party,
who contend for the infallible assistance of your Propounders, and the late
Patrons of your Traditionarie way, held forth by Master Stillingsleet, in his
Appendix, to Tillotsons Rule of faith, 10. And you may try, how you can
reconcile these your intestine discords, about the ground of your faith, before
you expect others to close with either of you.

But you not dareing to reply, to any of these four forementioned particulars,
study only (though in vain.) to extricat your self from Two contradictions,
wherein I left you enwrapped. The First was this. If all supernatural faith, be
founded on the previous assurance of the Propounders infallibility, then the
first assent to this infallibility, most presuppose the previous assurance of
this infallibility, as being an act of faith, and not presuppose it, as being
the first assent to this infallibility. To this you answer, not without your
usual reproaches of ignorance, as if forsooth you were an illuminat, and
profound Doctor, you answer, I say, That the prerequired knowledge of the
Propounders assistance, (you mean infallible,) Is not an act of faith, but an
evident assent, founded on the motives of credibility. But this miserable
subterfuge, affords you no help; For First, either you mean that all the
assent, which is given to the Infallibility of your Propounders, is Evident,
founded upon the Motives of credibility; or beside that pretended Evident
assent, you hold also, that this Infallibility is believed by an Assent of
divine faith. If you mean, that it is only known by that pretended Evident
Assent, then the Infallibility of your Propounders, should not at all be, De
fide, or an article of faith. Consequently, it should be no Heresy, to deny or
imp^gne the Infallibility of your Popes, or Councils, and so the very
foundation of your Romish faith, should be overturned. If therefore you say,
that beside this Evident assent, the Infallibility of your Propounders is also
believed by an assent of divine faith; then either that Assent of faith, is
resolved into the previous pretended Evident assent, or not. If it be resolved
into it, then your Assent of faith should be Divine faith, Ex hypothesi, for
such you suppose it to be; and yet not Divine faith, as being ultimatly
resolved into that pretended Evident Assent, and having for its Formal Object
these Motives of Credibility, which according to you are Evident, and so not a
proper Formal Object for an assent of Faith, but in very deed, as shill after
appear, they are but fallacious grounds of this pretended Infallibility. If
therefore again, to evite this Contradiction, you say, that this assent of
Divine faith, is not resolved into that Previous evident assent, then that
previous Evident assent, contributs nothing to clear the maine difficulty
wherewith I urged you, which was, to hold forth the Formal object, which moves
you to give the first Assent of divine Faith, to the Infallibility of your
Propounders, which I call upon you to do, if you can. But I believe you will
find, that no ground of such an Assent of divine faith, can be assigned without
contradicting either your self, or Scripture, or evident reasone. Let but the
Credentials of your Propounders be impartially examined, and it will appear,
that the Faith that you give to their infallibility, deserves not the name of a
prudential Humane faith, let be of a Divine faith. Any judicious man, who is
versed in your Controversy Writers, may see all the starting holes to which
you can rune. But I will wait til I see, to which of them you do betake your
self, lest you should say, that I fight with an Adversary of my own devising.
Now, only I shall desire you to consider this Demonstration, a posteriori.
Your Propounders have certainly erred De fact. and Dogmatically, both in
Cathedra, and Extre Cathedram, as I show in my Sixth Paper; therefore it is
impossible to assign a solid ground, why their Infallibility should be
believed by a Divine faith, unless your divine faith be of such a nature, that
by it, you may assent unto falsehoods. But Secondly, I add this that the whole
foundation of your subterfuge, is a gross falsehood, namely, that there are
Motives of credibility, which do evidently conclude the infallibility of your
Propounders. Produce if you can these Motives, and frame your arguments from
them; and I undertake, through the grace of GOD, (Sub periculo causae,) to
discover the falsehood and fallacy of them. In the mean time, lest you run
from the point, let me remember you, that the Question betwixt us, is, whether
there be such Motives of credibility, which do Evidently prove your
Propounders to be Infallible? And therefore take heed you digress not to
speak of the Motives, which persuade the Credibility of the Christian
Religion; For the Christian Religion may be Credible, though we have no
previous assurance, that your Propounders are Infallible. Could I find an
evident demonstration, of the Infallibility of any Propounder, I should
instantly captivat my understanding to such a Person. Demonstrat therefore
from your Motives of credibility, that your Propounders are Infallible, and
produce a solid Formal Object of the first Assent of faith thereto, and I shall
ingenuously acknowledge, that you have made your escape from the Contradiction
objected to you. But if you do not demonstrat their Infallibility, as I am
sure you cannot, be you as ingenuous on the other hand to acknowledge, that you
are shut up in a Contradiction, as in iron chains; and that thither you are
led by the Principles of your Religion. From these things, the impertinency of
your example, taken from Attrition and Contrition, may appear, First, because
it is clear from Scripture, that Attrition does usualy go before Contrition.
But that an assurance of the Infallibility of your Propounders, must go before
every act of Divine Faith, can no way be proven, either by Scripture, Reasone,
or your Motives of credibility, as shall be made evident, Solutione argument or
(...)? Next, because Attrition, and Contrition, have distinct and assignable
Formal objects, as is both confessed by your self, and might be luculently also
cleared from Scripture. But the Formal object, of this first pretended Assent
of divine faith, to the Infallibility of your Propounders, is not assignable,
as has been showed already. It might here be a divertisement to the Reader, to
give an account of the Vertigo of your Authors, concerning these Motives of
credibility. They who are curious, may find a touch of their contrary opinions
in your Cardinal De Lugo, tract. De fide Disp. 5 Sect. 1.2.3. But at this time
also, I have purposly waved the absurdities, which our Divines have deduced
from your Romish Doctrine, concerning these Motives of credibility; Because, I
would keep you closse to the point. And therefore, I shall demand no more of
you, but that you demonstrate the Infallibility of your Propounders, from these
Motives of credibility, which till you do, you remain shut up within the
lines of that objected Contradiction.

I Now proceed to the other difficulty objected to you, in expeding your self
from which you are as unhappie, For evidenceing whereof, there needs no more be
said, but to propose the Aenigma, which you pretended to enervat; for you
craftily wrap it up in silence. The Argument did run thus: If our faith must
be built upon the Precognition of the Infallible assistance of your
Propounders, the either this their pretended Infallibility, can be proven or
not. If not, then the whole Romish Faith is built upon a Fancy, which cannot be
proven. If it can, then First you were required to produce your Arguments for
proving it. And Secondly, you were persued by this Dilemma. If the
Infallibility of your Propounders can be proven, then either by a Written or
Unwriten Word. Not by a Written Word, seeing the sense of it cannot be known,
according to you, until first the Infallibility of the Propounder, and
Interpreter be known; but now that is supposed to be the (...), the very point
in controversy. Not can it be proven by an Unwriten Word: Both because you had
asserted before, That a point of Religion to be True, and to be conform to the
written word, are Synomma's; And because there is as much need of an Infallible
Propounder, that we may be assured of the truth, and true meaning of an
Unwriten word, as of that which is written. If therefore, we cannot know the
sense of the Written word, till first we be assured of the Propounders
infallibility, neither can the truth, or the true sense of the Unwritten word be
known, till first we be assured of the Propounders infallibility; and
consequently, when the thing to be proven is his Infallibility, it cannot be
proven at all, either by a written, or an unwriten word. This Argument you dared
not to propound, and make a formal answer thereunto. But all you say to this
Suppressed Argument, is, that when you affirmed, That a point of Religion to be
true, and to be conform to the written word of GOD, were Synonima's, you spoke
it only Ad Hominem. This is all your Reply, and suppose it were true, let any
who has sense judge whether you have evacuated the Argument. For you touch but
one part of the confirmation, of one branch of the Dilemma, which is abundantly
prove^ by another reason, which might suffice, suppose that which you touch
were wholly laid aside. You are far from the gallant resolution of Alexander,
who said, Nola furari Victoriam. Nay you are so base, that when you cannot
solve an Argument, you wrape it up from the knowledge of the Reader, and having
given a touch of that, without which the Argument abydes in its entire force,
you have the confidence to give out, that you have confuted the whole Argument.
This is not the first experience, I have of your Iesuitical ingenuitie. But I
must add, that even that which you have said cannot be admitted, as if the
Equipollencie of the two forementioned Propositions, had only been asserted by
you Ad Hominem: And the rather, because what you say in this, is agreeable to
the grounds which you lay down in your First Paper, which there, Interminis,
you affirm, should be agreeed unto by all. Now the chief scope of the First
Paper, and Syllogism, is to hold out, that the True Religion has grounds to
prove it self, to be conform to the true sense of the letter of the word of
GOD. And therefore, both in my answer to your First Paper, and in my Answer to
your Third, wherein you had asserted the Equipollencie of these Propositions, ^
drew an Argument against your Romish unwriten Traditions, to which then you
durst make no Reply; albeit now (as if what you had then written, had been
forgoten,) you would flinsh from what you had formerly said, upon this pretext,
as if it had been spoken Ad Hominem. If you had said, that you had spoken that
only Pro tempore, from your Iesuitical principle of equivecation, when you
meaned nothing so, I could indeed have believed you.

Though you have bewrayed as much baseness, as I believe, ever man did, in so
much writing, yet you have the boldness to traduce some of our Divines, (not
telling whom,) as citeing the Objections of your Authors for their Assertions.
But, Turpe est Doctori cum Culpa redarguit ipsum.

Has not the strength of your Romish Writers lain in misrepresenting both the
lives and writings of Reformed Divines? Yea. your baseness in this has
stretched it self beyond them. How grossly have you corrupted and falsified the
writings, both of Ancient and Modern Authors, as has been demonstrated by
Doctor James, In his Treatise of the corruptions of Scriptures, Councils, and
Fathers, by the Pastors, Prelates, and Pillars of the Church of Rom^, and by
Cocus in his Censura veterum Scriptorum, Beside many others?

You close all with a Tale of an Old wife. And I confess all you have said may
well be reckoned Inter Aniles fabulas. Yet you have the boldness again to
accuse me of Ignorance, because I cannot homologat your absurd assertion, That
before we believe a Divine truth, there must preceed a knowledge that God
speaks by the Propounders. Had you so often charged another with Ignorance,
you might perhaps have heard from him or now, Sus Minervam. I doubt truly if
ever your dsperat Romish cause. met with a more Blocksh Advecat then your self.
If I know that GOD speaks by such ^ man, must I not Simul and semel, believe
it to be truth which he speaks? How then were you so stupide, as to affirm
that the knowledge that GOD speaks by a man, must preceed the be^^^f of the
truth spoken? Were you not more cautions before, ^hen you only required the
previous knowledge of the Propounders assistance In actu primo? But now your
words would seem to require the previous knowledge of GODS assistance In actu
secundo. For in propriety of speech, GOD speaks not by a man, but when he
assists him In actu secundo. Is this the nature of man's intellect, to assent to
a proposition, which has no evidence in it self, without any reason? Why then
demand you an assent from me, to your proposition concerning this Infallible
assistance, (which I am sure is not Per se nota,) when neither can a reason be
extorted from you to prove it, not can you solve the objections brought against
it? Is there no ground upon which a Hearer may be convinced, that this is the
genuine sense of Scripture, but only the authority of the speaker? Surely then
nothing spoken by you, or your fellow Jesuits and Friars, can be received as a
Divine truth, for you pretend no Infallibility: Nay your fallacies are become
so notorious to the World, that it has past into a proverb A Friar, a liar.
But perhaps you mean your Popes or Councils by your Propounders. Yet besides
that your people do not hear them immediately, and their sentences may be
vitiated in the conveyances by the hands of fallible persons, besides this, (I
say,) must not your Popes and Councils, have a reason that moved them to own
rather this sense of Scripture, then the opposite? Or else they must be perfect
Enthusiasts. If they have a reasone, why may not the same reasone that moved
them, move the people also, when it is sufficiently proposed to them? Let the
indifferent Reader now observe to what fluctuating uncertaintes you expose your
hearers when you say, that their faith must be resolved upon the authority of
the Speaker, whether you mean Pope or Council or both, for I suppose you
cannot determinatly tell which of the three. Now how many things are here to be
cleared, before the faith of the poor people can be at a stand? As First, that
these whom you call Popes, are true Popes and successors to Peter, and your
Councils true and legitimat General Councils. Secondly, that these Popes and
Councils have an Infallible authority. Thirdly, That this which you give out is
the true and genuine sense of the Popes or Councils. All which, while the World
stands, you will never be able solidly to prove: And I do appeal you, if you
can, to do it.

But I must here reveal another prodigious Mystery of your Romanists. Namely,
that what ever is proposed, not only by your Popes and Councils, but also by
your inferior Clergymen, though by your own Confession Fallible, yet the
poor People, who cannot examine by themselves the truth or falsehood of what is
proposed, ought not only to believe upon the authority of the said Fallible
Clergymen, but also Do merit by believing, though the thing believed be
Erroneous, and Heretical. Hear this from your Great Casuist, Cardinal Talet,
Lib. 4. De Instruct. Saterd. cap. 3. Si rusticus (says he,) circa articulos
credat suo Episcopo proponenti aliquod dogma haereticum, meretur in credendo
lieet sit error, quia tenetur credere donce si constet esse contra Ecclesiam. I
will english it, If a country man (says he,) believe his Bishop, propounding
some heretical doctrine about the articles, he meriteth by believing though it
be an error, because he is bound to believe, until it manifestly appear, that
it is against the Church. What a damnable Religion must this be, according to
which men merit Heaven by believing lies? If this doctrine of Cardinal Tolet be
true, that people are bound to believe your Fallible Clergymen, even speaking
lies, and may Merit thereby; How dare you conclude, that our Faith to
unquestionable Divine truths is no Supernatural faith, because our Preachers
do not arrogat an Infallibility to themselves? Is it better, for a Romanist to
believe a lie, then for a PROTESTANT to believe a Divine truth? Think you still
to abuse the World with such prodigious impostures?

As for your ludicrous Example of an Old Wife: We bless God, there are old
Wiwes, young Boys, and Girls amongst us, who could instruct all old deceiver
like you, in the true grounds of Religion. Did not Priscilla a poor Wife,
instruct Apolles in the mysteries of Christianity, of whose Infallibility
Apollos had no previous assurance? Yet from the Scripture she convinced him,
Act. 18.26. So that from this your Example, though brought in by you only as a
foolish jeer, all that you have said may be redargued. If there may be a ground
to assent to divine truths proposed by a Poor Wife, such as Priscilla, of whose
Infallibility there is no previous assurance, then it is a falsehood which you
affirm, that the Faith of divine truths must only be founded upon the
Authority of the Speaker. But the first appears to be true, from the Case of
Priscilla and Apolles. A poor Priscilla may hold forth convincing and luculent
grounds of what she asserts from the Scripture, when a Priest, A Jesuit, a
Cardinal, a Pope, an Annas, or Cajaphas, may obtrude on the consciences of
others erronio^s and groundles fancyes. To this purpose I might produce many
testimonies, from your own most famous Writers, as of Gerson, Panermitan, etc.
But I shall at the time content my self with one, from Ioannes Picus
Mirandulanus, De Ordine credendi, Theor 16. (Which though I have at the second
hand, the author not being by me, yet have I it from so many good Writers, that
I doubt not of the truth of it,) Quin imo, (says he,) simplici potius rustice
and infanti and anicula quam Pontifiti Maxim, and mill Episcopis credendu^,
si contra Evangetium isti and illi pro Erangelio verba facereut.

I Have been more copious in this Reply, then your Scurvy Paper did deserve:
yet if in this I have superogated, it is without the least tincture of Popery.
You but play the fool in upbraiding me with boasting, or gloriation, upon the
account of the frequent losses which you are left at. For I reckon it no point
of honor, either to deal with, or to vanquish such an insignificant persons,
as hitherto you have discovered your self by your Papers. I have rather so far
endeavored to deny my self, as to be at the pains to give a check to an
arrogant but an empty Caviller against the truth. But because Cepious Answers
do oppress your dry and steril brain, therefore I have subjoined a Succinct
answer, confuting all your Seven Papers in two words. And if you find not your
self comperent to answer this Long Paper, in all the particulars thereof,
without your usual Tergiversations, you may deal with this Succinct One. In
the mean time let this suffice.

Aberdene October 31. 1666. John Menzeis,
POSTSCRIPT
A Short Answer in two words to all Master Dempster the Jesuit, alias Rind or
Logan, his seven Papers.

Nego Minorem Or, Nego Conclusionem.

Aberdene October 31. 1666. John Menzeis.



The Reason why the return of this Paper has been so long delayed, it,
because, how soon I read your Seventh Paper, I found that it ran upon the
old trifling strain, and therefore, I threw it by me for sundry weeks: For it
was likesome to me to be still examining your Titivilitia and scurvie
Tautologies. Now therefore, either come to the point and answer Categeries,
without your tergiversations, or else, get you gone for ever.

The Jesuits eight Paper. Reply to a seventh Paper of Mr. JOHN MENZEIS, wherein
is showen, that the pretended conformity of Protestant Religion with Scripture,
is a mere imaginary and groundles conformity. 6. November 1666.
This Paper was not delivered to Master JOHN MENZEIS, until November 9. 1666.
YOUR Seventh Paper did come to my hands the fourth of November, and I do not
wonder of your long silence, of near three months, for it is patched up of so
various and copious Digressions, copied out, as it seems, of Controversy
books; that you will scarce find one of twenty, that will take the pains to
read only over: And to make it grow, you have adjoined a long and tedious
discourse, about Real presence, which appearingly is the substance of all you
taught your Scholars this last Year.

But all this your painful labor for so many months is lost, since as always
I have protested to you, that I take no notice of things out of the way:
Neither will begiune any other thing, before we have fully ended the maine
point.

This debate was occasioned of a continual Railing, made by you in the Pulpit
againes Catholic Religion, but with such ingenuity, out of that your Chair of
Verity, that in place of Catholic Dogmes to be impugned, you did often
substitute and propone, in a ridiculous manner to the people Problematick
opinions, holden by some Scholastickes and Casuists, as manifestly appeared out
of the conference we had by mouth. Whether this did proceed out of gross
Ignorance, or Malice, or out of both, I remit to your self.

Seeing that you did show so great fervor in skaring your Auditors from
Catholic Religion, you were desired to confirm them in their own Religion, by
produceing some solid, but special ground and principle, whereby might be
proven the truth of the PROTESTANT Religion. And though in the beginning, under
the pretext that you had only the Defenders part, you stood stiff, not to be
obliged to this. Yet because, you saw that it could not consist with the
reputation of a man in your place, to play altogether the Dumme, in a matter of
Religion of so great concernment, as is the putting in question, whether the
PROTESTANT Religion be a True Religion or not, lest this declineing should be
imputed either to your ignorance, or to the want of positive grounds, after
that with defuse digressions of all sorts, you did run your self as it were
out of breath, At long lang length, you were forced to have your recouse to the
Old jock trot, that your PROTESTANT Authors teaches you, to wit, that your
Religion is proven to be true by this Medium or principle, because it is
grounded upon Scripture, and conform to the true sense of the letter of
Scripture, As containing perspicuously all things necessary for man's
Salvation. This then being by your own confession, the chief and most plausible
ground for the truth of your Religion, you are desired to lay asid all other
things, and hold you at this precisly, until you make it good and proportion at
to confirm your own PROTESTANTS, in their Religion.

You say ^^en that your Religion is proven to be a True Religion, because it is
grounded upon Scripture, and conform to the true sense of the letter of
Scripture. But it cannot be showen that it is conform to the true sense of the
letter of Scripture, excep first it be showen that you have the true sense of
the letter of Scripture. Ergo, to make this good, you must first produce some
special ground or principle, whereby a judicious man may be reasonably induced
to think that you have the true sense of the letter of Scripture, that is to
say, the sense intended by the holy Ghost. For as it is impossible that a thing
be conform to a true sense, except it be supponed that there be a true sense,
so it is impossible to show or prove a thing to be conform to the true sense,
except it be first shown and proven that there is a true sense.

Al then that is required of you, is, that you produce some special ground or
principle, to make it appear, that you have the true sense of the letter of
Scripture, since all the rest depends upon this only one thing, and that the
ground which you produce to prove this, be such, as cannot equally serve to
prove a false Religion, acknowledged by your self for a false Religion, to have
the true sense of the letter of Scripture. And this incumbes upon you, if you
will vindicat your Religion from this foul note, that there can be shown no
difference betwixt it and a false Religion; And consequently, that it is
impossible, that your Religion can be shown or proven to be a True Religion.
And it is expected that you will perform this, with a clear Substantious,
Laconick, and School-way, laying altogether aside your diffuse reviling Pulpit
way.

It is fatal to you, to close your Paper with braging, and praising your self,
and extolling your own answers, and withal, to undervailne all that is
brought against you, but this as other things do not reach to the maine point.

Mr. JOHN MENZIES Answer to the Jesuits eight Paper.
Some Animadversions upon Master Dempster, alias Rind or Logan the Jesuit his
eight Paper, wherein he so shamlesly tergiverseth, that he answers not to one
word of that which was replied to him.
HOW now you Thersites? Have you so shamlesly deserted the Scene? Is your
Syllogism which Seven times you had repeated in Folio now relinquished,
without proving either Major, Minor, or justifying the Form thereof? Had you
nothing at all to say for your Cavils, about Acatalogue of necessaries, the
Rules of interpretation of Scripture, the Infallibility of your Propounders, or
your Motives of credibility, nor yet the ingenuity, to acknowledge your self to
be overcome by reason? Are all your whisperings, why the truth of Religion may
not be examined, By its conformity with the faith of the most Ancient Church
silenced, and yet dare you not commit your cause to the trial? Is it a
sufficient confutation of what was replied to you, to say, that the Prolixitie
of the Reply would outwearie the patience of the Reader? Would such a
complement have been taken from Whitaker, and Chamier as a sufficient
confutation of Bellarmin's Vast volumes? What a lazy Drone are you, who could
hardly digest the pains of reading two poor sheets of Paper? Had I not so far
condescended to your dulnes, as to give you a confutation of all your Seven
Papers in two words? Could I be more Laconick? Did I not put it in your option,
either to deal with the Large Paper, or with these Two Words? Could you
neither read nor confute Two Words? Are not you fitter to be a Neat-Herd, then
a Disputant? Do you not deserve that very character, which Mel^hior Canus puts
upon the author of your Golden Legend, Lib. 11. Loc. Com. cap. 6. Where he calls
him, Hominem ferrei eris and plumbei cerdis, a man of a brazen face, and a
leaden heart, that is, both shamless and witless?

Do you not nobly act the part of a Champion for your Romish Cause, who in
stead of a consutation of a Polemick discourse, stricking at the foundation of
your Papal Superstition, do substitute a calumnious reflection upon the first
occasion of the debate: Who is now guilty of the impertinent Digression, you
or I, the Reader may judge. All the color you could put upon this shameless
and cowardly tergiversing, is, That it seems, say you, These large discourses
of mine are copied out of controversy Writers. But why would not you copy an
Answer thereto out of your controversy Writers? Why at least do you not name
The Authors with whom I had made so bold? Especially I having in my last given
a particular instance of the Plagiary trade of Jesuits, and appealed you, if
you could, to convict me of the like crime. If you put me to it, I will rip up
yet more of their sores of this nature. Could the confutation of all your
Papers in Two Words, be copied from any Author? But I had so brow-beaten this
cavil before, that like a self condemned Malefactor, who, (to use Tertullians
phrase), is, Acorde suo fugitivus, you dare not now positively affirm it, only
say you, It seems. But I will deal more squarely with you. You not only seem,
but really are an effronted calumniator. If you take ill with this freedom,
learn henceforth to affirm no more then you are able to prove.

Had it not been to clear a little of the matter of Fact, against these your
lying representations, of the first occasion of this debate, I had not denzied
a return to this your impertinet Paper, wherein you have not answered one word
that was replied to you. But I am the rather moved to examine these your
calumnies, because it is long since I heard, that Scurvie Lybels to this
purpose, were disseminated by persons of your profession, and now I find, that
by this your Paper, you do homologate the same reproaches. Yet no to notice
these diffamatorie Pasquils, which no man durst own, I shall at the time, only
discover the falsehood of some few of your allegeances in this your Eight Paper.

And First, you say, That this debate was occasioned by our continual railing
against your pretended Catholic Religion. As if it were our custom, to charge
your Religion falsely with these things which you do not mantaine. A great
crime I acknowedge, if it were a truth. But why did you not for the
satisfaction of the Reader, and our conviction, instance some of these
falsehoods? Do you not hereby manisest the calumniating genius, by which you
have been acted all along? Know therefore that we PROTESTANTS hold it not
lawful to lie for GOD. Job. 13.7. The truth of GOD needs not men's lies to
support it. Did I see that the PROTESTANT cause could not be mantained without
calumnies and falsehoods, I should instantly disowne it, as not being of GOD. I
reckone it my mercy, that I have been helped in some measure, to give a
faithful testimony against the Abominations of Popery, and will account it my
duty so to do while I live. I have inded said it from Pulpit, and I hope I
have also made it good, that your Romish Doctors have corrupted much, both of
the Dogmaticals, and Practicals of Christianity. And what I have said herein, I
shall be ready, through the grace of GOD, to mantaine, not only against such
an Ignoramus as you, but the whole unhallowed crew of Jesuits. This has been
often charged upon you, and demonstrated against you by our Divines. But
because I see you are not for large Volumes, I shall remit you at present,
only to a little, but learned tractare to this purpose, written by Doctor
Jeremy Tailor, Entitled, A Dissuasive from Popery. But what? Does a Jesuit
accuse us of Railing? Does not the World know, that persidious lying and
equivocation, are the Piae frauds, the holy (I should have said Hellish)
Chears whereby their cause is mantained? Have they ever been able to wipe off
those stains, which Watson their own Romish secular Priest fixed upon their
society, in so much, that he is not afraid to say, that Lucian Machiavel, yea
and Don Lucifer might go to school and learn Satanical practices from your
Jesuits. And as for you, is it not too too apparent by all these your Papers,
that you serve for nothing unless it be to rail and lie like a Shimet? At
arguing have you not proven, according to the Proverb, Quaesi asinus ad lyram?
Remember therefore that smart admonition, Matthew 7.5 Thou Hypocrite, first cast
the beam out of there own eye, then shall thou see clearly to cast the mote
out of thy brothers eye.

You are pleased, Secondly, to say, That in stead of impugning your Catholic
dogmes, (as you term them,) We propound to the people, and that in a
radiculous manner, (so gravely forsooth do you occuse us,) Problematick points
out of your Casuists and Schoolmen. If you Jesuits were not Persons Effrontis
impr^bitatis and linguae effrauis, habituated in confident asserting of lies,
would you not have examined the truth of this report, before you had given it
under your hand? Whether we behave our selves ridiculously in Pulpit, grave
Auditors can witness. Indeed if the Supremacy of your Pope, and the
infallibility of your Church, if your Transubstantiation and Sacrifice of the
Mass, it your Adoring of Images, and invocating of Saints and Angels, if your
Purgatory, and Praying for the Dead, etc. If these I say, and such as these,
be the Problematick points you speak of: Them I confess we do publicly
propound and solidly confute. If these be only Problemes, which a man may
innoce^tly affirm or deny, why for opposing these, do you Romanists
anathematize PROTESTANTS? Why have you brunt so many of them alive, and cruelly
imbrewed your hands in the blood of so many thousands of them? Sometimes (I
deny not,) occasions may occur of speaking concerning the particular tenets
of some of your Doctors. But then judcious Hearers can bear us witness, (for
we teach nothing in a corner,) that we no otherwise represent these, then as
the judgment of such Doctors. This appeared when I was confuting from Pulpit,
that impious tenet (which I suppose is the Problem you hint at,) of many of
your Doctors, That a sinner is not bound by the law of GOD, immediately after he
has sinued to repent. For in Pulpit I did only charge it upon many of your
Doctors. But though we be so ingenuous in representing the tenets of your
Doctors, I shall desire you to confider, what a stain and reflection these
impious tenets of particular Doctors among you leave upon your Romish Church
Are they not published with the approbation of your Authorized Licencers of
books as containing nothing Contrary to the Catholic Faith? Are either Authors
or Licencers of the books censured by your Church? Have not your Expurgatoris
indices deleted much better stuff in the writings boon of Ancient and Modern
Authors, whereof you may find many examples in Doctor James, his excellent
book of The corruption of Scriptures, Councils, and Fathers, by the Prelates,
Pastors, and Pillars of the Church of Rome, part. 4? But the impious tenets or
your Casuists and Schoolmen, stend uncensured with the approbation of your
Authorized Licencers, to the eternal ignominy of your Church.

But Thirdly, it appeared, say you, By the Conference betwixt us, that we often
propounded in Pulpit, problematick points in stead of your Dogm's. How so I
pray you? Was there nothing spoken of in that conference, but of
School-Problems? Did I not conclude the impiety of your Romish Religion,
because it destroys all certainty of divine faith from your Florentine and
Tridentine Canons, which suspend the efficacy of Sacraments, from the
intention of the Administrator? For all certainty of divine faith according to
you, Is grounded upon the infallible assistance of your clergy. But if
Ordination, which is one of your Romish Sacraments, depend upon the intention
of the Ordainer, you can have no certainty of faith, who are your Clergy men,
or who have this pretended Infallible assistance. For how can you be certain
of other men's inte^tions? To this you had not the confidence to make any Reply.
Can you say that this is a mere Problem? Are the Canons of Councils problems
with you? Is it a Problem among you, whether that be an impious Religion which
destroys all certainty of faith?

But perhaps you will say, There was another question tossed, whether a man
after he has sinned be bound presently to repent. I confess, and the sober
Christian may judge, how much that man differs from an Atheist, who affirms
this to be a Problematick point. Yet to put a stop to your lying
misrepresentations, concerning this particular. I must crave leave to do these
two things, I shall first give a true account, how that Question concerning
Repentance, came to be moved at the Conference; and in Order to this, I must
give a touch of the occasion of the Conference sit self. Secondly, I shall
examine a little, whether that point may justly be reckoned among Problems, and
how far it may be charged upon your Church of Rome. You may readily exclaim on
these discourses, as Digressions, but I am drawn to them by your Calumnies.

For the First, the real occasion of that Conference, and of moving that
Question at the Conference, was this. In April last, I received two challenges
from a Gentleman of your profession. The First was, that I had wronged your
Authors, by affirming some days before in a Sermon, concerning Repentance,
that many of your Doctors did mantaine, That when people sin, they are not
bound immediately to repent. Yea, the Gentleman was so confident, as to promise
by the Messenger whom he sent to me, that he would turn PROTESTANT, if I
would make good that my Assertion: To whom I answered, that I was sure of a
convert if the Gentleman would stand to his promise, and if he would come to
my Study, his eyes should be judge, whether my Assertion were true by reading
their own Authors. Some days after the Gentleman came to me, not to have the
truth of his former challeng examined, but with a New provocation to me, and to
my Colegue Master MELDRVM who then was with me, to debate at his Lodging with a
Catholic scholar, (as his phrase was,) concerning the truth of the Religion of
PROTESTANTS. We told him, we knew how conferences of that nature had been
misrepresented by Papists, and therefore to obviat such misrepresentations, we
condescended with him upon some Conditions of the meeting, which you know were
violated by your Party. When we came, after we had regrated the violation of
promise made to us, I told, I had received the Two foresaid Challenges, and
desired you who there appeared as their Champion, First to answer whether I
had wronged your Authors in the forementioned Assertion concerning Repentance,
and then we should willingly disput the point of Religion, not against you
only, but against the whole Conclave of Rome, if they had been there present.
To the First you refused to give an Answer; and as to the Second, you said,
You came only to impugn the Religion of PROTESTANTS, but not at all to
answer arguments against your Romish Religion. But it was Replied to you, that
our Religion was not only the truth of GOD, but also was established by the
Law of the Land, and therefore, we could not suffer it only to be questioned
in such a public way. But would you answer us Six arguments against Your
Religion, we should answer you other Six arguments against Ours. Or would you
answer us Two, we should answer you other Two. But you stiffly denied to
answer at all, till at length by the importunity of your friends you were
moved to condescend to answer. Yet as to the Matter of fact, Concerning the
Doctrine of Repentance, you utterly refused to answer at al, unless I would
frame it in an Argument against Your Religion. Wherefore to gain time, and to
satisfy the Gentleman, who had been my Accuser, I framed an argument in more
general terms, concerning the Doctrine of Repentance, then I had spoken
thereof in Pulpit, hoping to have had liberty thereafter, to propound Other
arguments of more general concernment against Your Religion.

The argument touching Repentance ran thus. The religion which teaches that a
man when he has sinned, is not bound presently to repent, is impious. But the
Popish religion teaches that a man when he has sinned, is not bound presently
to repent, Ergo the Popish religion is impious. You admitted the Minor, and
denied the Major, That it was an impious religion, which so taught. Whereupon I
took all the Auditors to witness, and in special the Gentleman who had been
my Accuser, that you admitted this to be the doctrine of the Romish Church,
That a man who has sinned, is not bound presently to repent. And consequently,
that I had spoken truth, when I affirmed from Pulpit, that many of Your Romish
Doctors taught this. But now, you being ashamed, that you should have admitted
such a Doctrine, (which all sober Persons are ready to cry down as impious,) to
be the doctrine, of the Church of Rome, you have devysed this after-evasion, to
term it a Problematick point. Whether it ought to be looked upon as a
problem, I may speak a little anon.

Now let the Reader observe: This question concerning Repentance, was only
moved by me to vindicat my self from the accusation of the Gentleman who had
provoked me to the Disput; hoping to have had occasion for Other Arguments
afterward. And therefore, when you had admitted the Assumption, that is was
the doctrine of Your Romish Church, I would have left that argument, as having
obtained all by it which I intended. Yea, I did propound the argument in larger
terms then I had spoken of that matter in the Pulpit, only to extort an
Answer from you. So that whether it be a Problematick point or not, you could
conclude nothing from it, as to the ordinary strain of our preaching, seeing
you refused to speak to it in these terms wherein we delivered it in Pulpit.
Nay more whoever will term this point a Problem, yet you are not In bona fide
to do it, for you did simply and without limitation at the Conference admit
the Assumption, which did assert this to be the Doctrine of your Church. This I
hope may suffice concerning the occasion of the Conference, and the moving of
that question at it.

I come now to consider a little of the Point it self, whether it ought to be
reckoned as a Problem, and whether it be espoused by many of your Doctors, and
how far it may be charged upon Your Church: In order to which I shall say but
Two things.

The First is, that this is surely the received Doctrine of many of your Chief
Doctors in the Present Romish Church, That a man when he has sinned is not
tied by the command of GOD, presently to repent. For clearing this I shall not
(...) your puny and obscure Writers, but as many of your Grandees as I hope
shall suffice, to justify what I have said from Pulpit. I begin with your
voluminous Suarez. in 3 part Tom. 4. disp 15. sect 5 I add to him his
contemporary Jesuit of no less renown, Vasquiz in 3. part. Tom. 4. quaest.
86. Dub. 5. With whom you may join another of your Champions, Gregory de
Valentia, Tom. 4. disp. 7. quest. 8. punct. 4. and Aegidius Coninck disp 3 de
tanit. (...) 3. as also your famous Bishop of the Canaries, Mcl^hior Canns
Relect de Paenit. part. 4. Yea, and from all these, you may second to your
eminent Cardiua^ de Lugo. tract. de pauit. disp 7. sect. 11. 1. number. 196. And
if you would go yet higher, your Casuist Navar In Enchirid. cap. 1. number. 27.
Is not only for it himself, but also cites for the same your Rope Adrian the
sixth. What should I blot Paper with the names of Bican, Meratins, Bonaciuae,
Layman etc? Take that one general testimony of De Lugo, in the place cited,
Sententia har, says he, Communis est jam omnibus th^ologis uno vel altero
recentiore except. This doctrine is now commone to all Divines except it be
one or two late Writers. Yea diverse of the forecited Authors, and others of the
like stamp have gone a greater length in this unhappie doctrine, then I
charged upon you. For they not only teach, That a sinner is not bound to
repent immediately after his trespass, but also in many Remarkable
eireumstances, when GOD seems to be signally calling for Repentance. As First,
That a man is not bound to repent, when he seriously calls his sin to
remembrance. Nor Secondly, When a grievous calamity is upon him, or the
Country he lives in. Nor Thirdly, on holy and festival days, all these and
much more you will find in Vasquez, Quest. 86. dub. 6. For after the
enumeration of these, and other weighty cases at length, he peremptorly
concludes, That the precept of Repentance never obliges Per se, that is, but by
Accident, Except in the article of death. Yea there are of your Doctors, who
go yet a further length, and Do deny that a sinner by divine precept is bound
to repent at all, even in the article of Death, of which a little hereafter.
What Christian ears can hear of these things and not tingle? May not this
suffice to justify the truth of my Assertion in Pulpit, viz, That many of your
chief Doctors mantaine, that a man is not bound immediately after he has sinned
to repent.

But I add in the next place, that your great Doctors seem to lay more weight
upon this point, then upon a mere Problem, yea and that Your Church cannot
clear her innocence as to this matter. For your Cardinal de Lugo, speaking of
this Doctrine in the place forecited, calls it, Communem sensum omnium
fidelium, The commone sense of all Believers. Do your Authors speak so of
mere Problems? Nay the chief argument whereby the forecited Authors confirm
this there tenet, is, from the Universal practice of your Romish Church.
Because, says Lugo, no penitent De dilatione penitentiae se unquam accusat,
nec ullus Confessarius de hoc paenitentem interrogat: And he adds this reason,
quia siz, nemo in praxi existimat esse novam culpam actualem ex dilatione
paenitentiae. Hereupon the same Cardinal concludes the contrary doctrine to be
Injurious to your whole Romish Church, both Pastors, and People. Because it
charges them with no small guiltynesse, seeing neither Delinquents in their
Confessions, nor Confessors in their examinations take any notice of the Delay
of repentance. I shall give you the words of your Cardinal, Minus digne
sentiunt de Ecclesiae corpore cum velint ab universis Ecclesiae non selum
subditis, sed Prelatis ex ignorantia omitti debitum. And this was one ground,
whereupon in the conference I did charge Your Romish Church with this doctrine,
when you would not speak to it under these restrictions, with which I had
spoken of it in the Pulpit. And if herein I have trespassed in charging it upon
Your Church, you may see, that not so much I, as your great Cardinal is to
blame for it, and other your Authors, whose chief argument to confirm this
doctrine, is taken A praxi Ecclesia. If this be the judgment of Your Church,
why give you it out for A Problem? If it be not the judgment of Your Church,
then how comes it that there is no notice taken of the delay of Repentance, in
your Penitential court of Conscience either by Priest or People as your great
Authors do testifye? But that you may see that I deal not with you merely
upon the testimonies of your Schoolmen and Casuists: Does not your Council of
Trent sess. 14. cap. 4. Manifestly declare, that Attrition with Sacerdotal
absolution, without Contrition is sufficient, yea the words of the Council are
so clear, says Aegidius Coninck Tom. 2. de Sacram. disp. 3. dub. 1. number. 5.
Us sine aperta violentia non possint aliter explicari. Therefore according to
your Romish Tridentine faith, a man may be saved eternally without Contrition.
Now let the world judge, whether Our Religion or Yours have the greatest
tendency to Holiness. We say that an adult Sinner cannot be saved without
Contrition; you say he may be saved with Attrition and sacerdotal absolution.
We say that a man how soon he sins, Is bound to repent; Most of the doctors
of your Present Romish Church, say, That a man is not so much as bound
presently to Attrition, far less to Contrition: Yea your own greatest Clerks
testify that in your Confessions, there is no notice taken of the Delay of
repentance, either by Priest, or Penitent. Would not the serious consideration
of this one particular, make any sober person whose mind is not prepossessed
with prejudice, abhor Your Papal Religion?

But it may be Objected in your behalf, That some of your old Doctors, such as
Guliel: Parisiensis, Johannes Major, etc. Did mantaine that a sinner was
presently bound to repent. I grant it was so, but this makes nothing against
that which I have said. Who knows not, that your Romish Church like an old
Whore, does still wax worse and worse? How often have our Divines
demonstrated, that your Romish Church is much more corrupt, and gross in her
Tenets, since the Council of Trent then before? Do not we know how often you
set at naught Old Doctors, when they agree not with the principles of your
Present Papal faction? Hence your Jesuit Escobar, Tom. 1. theol. moral. in
praeloq. cap. 2. number 8. frequenter accidit, (says he,) ut quae opinio paucis
ab hinc annis in ^su non erat, mode communi consensu recipiatur, and e contra.
Yea though you do vainly brage of your Unity, how few points of controversy
are there betwixt you and us, wherein you are not sub-divyded amongst your
selves? You may find this, learnedly made out by Doctor Morton, in his Appeal
for PROTESTANTS, out of the confession of Roman Doctors. I will give you but
one Instance at the present. Your Papal indulgences are one of your now
received Romish articles, and yet some of your Ancient Doctors mantained them
to be but Pias frauds, mere impostures. So our of your Aquinas, testifyeth
Gregory de Valentia lib. de indulg. cap. 2.

It may be Objected secondly, That your Jesuit Escobar has disputed(...) may
safely go away, he is not bound to do it, but may without sin kill the man
who intends to strick him, though but lightly: or if the Priest be consulted by
another that over-reaches in his passion, he may flatter him, declaring with
the same Tolet. Lib. 4. cap. ^3. number. 4. That if a man be in a great passion,
and so transported, that he considers not what he says, if in that case he
does blaspheme, his blasphemy is not mortal sin. So may the Priest sooth
them who commit horrid crimes in their drunkenness with the foresaid Cardiual,
Tolet. lib. 5. cap. 10. number. 3. That if a man be beastly drunk, and then commit
fornieation, that formeation is not sin. Yea he may with the same Cardinal,
lib. 5. cap. 13. number. 2. Declare, that if a man desires carnal pollution, that
he may evite carnal temptations, or for his health, it were no sin. Time
would fail me in reckoning out such Probable, nay Damnable Doctrines of your
Casuists, according to which, your Confessors can determine exceeding many
cases suitable to the inclination of the party with whom they have to do,
either according to their own opinion, or according to the opinion of some
other Grave Doctor. And what ever is delivered according to a probable opinion,
may be warrantably practiced, though there be another more probable. Quaelibet
opinio probabilis tutam reddit conse^entiam in operando, says your Escobar,
Tom. 1. Theol. Moral. lib. 2. Sect. 1 cap. 2. number. 22. Now, shall your Casuists
be permitted, to introduce such unheard of impieties into the World, by the
pretended authority of Out grave Doctor, without check or control? Shall
their Problematick decisions, warrant such shavelings as you, to encourage lewd
persons to murder their Neighbor, blaspheme GOD, violat women's chastity, and
cut off Princes, (for to that purpose also they have many Problematick
decisions,) and when we oppose these impieties, shall we be rated as ridiculous
Railers? Does your Church of Rome think to wash her hands in innocence, as if
she were not guilty of these impious decisions, because they are not ratified
by the decree of a General Council? What, I pray you, bath she decreed against
them? Your Religion, at least, is such, with which all these impieties are well
consistent. There is nothing in your Religion repugnant to them. But besides,
are not these Casuistick tractats, written by your gravest Doctors in the face
of the Sun, under the Popes nose? Is not this pernicious doctrine of Probables
publicly avouched and known among you? Yea, are not these books approven by
your authorized Licencers, who are entrusted to look, Ne fides Ecclesiae
detrimenti aliquid patiatur? Your Church therefore will never be able to
vindicat her self, either before GOD, or rational Men, from being an abettor of
these impieties. Nay, this leaves an undeniable conviction upon the consciences
of your own authors, in so much, that Dominicus a Soto cited by Doctor Tailor,
in his Dissuaesive, cap. 2. sect. 1. (I am so fat from stealing, as often times
do your Jesuits, that I ingenuously tell you when I have not a book by me,)
says, Non ilico ut ^^mo se reum sentit culpae, paenitentiae lege paenitere
constringitur. Haec profecto conclusie more and usu Ecclesiae satis videtur
constabilita. Where he charges your Church with this Prophans doctrine, which
hardens men in impenitencie. But of this enough for the time.

After your impertinent and calumnious Digression, concerning the first
occasion of our Debate, and your Problematick points, (for my work in all
these eight Papers has been, to follow a roving Vagrant from one impertinencie
to another,) you claver to as little purpose concerning the sense of holy
Scripture. Before say you, that our Religion be proven from Scripture, it must
be first proven that we PROTESTANTS have the true sense of Scripture. But
First, Ought you not remember that in this written debate, you do sustain the
part of the Opponent? might it not therefore be better retorred upon you, thus.
Before you prove that the PROTESTANTS have not the True Religion, you ought
first to prove that they have not the true sense of Scripture? And may it not
be a convinceing argument Ad Hominem against you, that PROTESTANTS have the
true sense of Scripture, and consequently, the True Religion, seeing in all
these Eight Papers, you who appeared as the Romish Champion, to disprove the
Religion of PROTESTANTS, have not been able to produce one Medium to prove the
falsehood of their Religion, or of their sense of holy Scripture. But it seems
that you would willingly forget that you are the Opponent. I wonder nothing,
that you who turn the weighty points of the Law to Problems, should make a
Problem of this matter of fact, how evident so ever it be. So miserably have
you discharged the Opponents office, that you may truly be ashamed to own it.
But Secondly. Could I make fairer proffers to you then I have done; Have I not
offered to disput, whether PROTESTANTS have the True Religion, and the true
sense of Scripture, both by Intrinsic Arguments from the Series of the context
of Scripture, from parallel places, and the analogy of faith; as also, by a
more Extrinsick test, namely, the conformity of Religion with the faith of the
most Ancient Christian Church? But as a perfect Coward, who distrusted your
cause, you durst adventure on neither of these. Nay, all your cavils which once
you started against both these grounds, such as a catalogue of necessaries,
rules of interpretation of Scripture, etc. I have so convinceingly confuted,
that you have not dated once to mention them again in this your last Paper.
Yea Thirdly, Flave I not gone a further length, and though I was only the
Defendant, yet being out-wearied by your Cowardlynesse. Have I not demonstrated
that in sundry chief points of controversy, such as the Perspicuity and
perfection of Scripture, the fallibility of Popes and Councils, and in the
matter of transubstantiation, that the PROTESTANTS had the right and true sense
of Scripture, and that you Romanssts were in the trespass? But you as a
Catholic Doctor have one Catholicon, by which you coufute all that your
Adversary objects, namely, by calling it a Digression, for with that Reply,
you have satisfied your self throughout all your Papers. Only as to the last
Specimen which I gave you, concerning Transubstantiation, you think you come
off with honor, by saying, That it savours of what I taught my Scholars this
last year. Are not you a brave Champion indeed, who are as afraid of an
Argument that has been handled in the Schools, as you would be of a
Crocodile? What sport would your men have made, had our Whitaker, Iunius,
Chamier, and Danaaus, declined to examine Bellarmins arguments, because he had
handled them before in that College where he was Professor? But whereas you
say, That the Argument which I brought against your transubstantiation, seems
to have been the sum of all that I taught in the School this last year, you
shall know, that I have not been accustomed to such laziness, as to drone whole
years like you upon one Syllogism. As in these forementioned particulars, I
have demonstrated that PROTESTANTS have the true sense of Scripture, and not
you, the same might be showen in all the rest of the points of controversy
betwixt you and us, and has been abundantly done by our Divines. But to
propose more Arguments to you, is but Margaritas porco projicere. For it would
seem you dare graple with none of them. Fourthly, I must advertise you of a
Radical error, which leads you into many more. For you seem still to suppose,
that who ever are a true Church, must have one general ground, from which the
truth of all the points of Religion, which such a society do own, may be
demonstrated, without an examination of particulars. And this, if I mistake
not, is your (...) which leads you into all the rest of your errors. And
therefore you still wave the examination of particulars, and call for such a
general ground. But in this you show extreme baseness, that you neither prove
the necessity of such a Principle, nor yet produce that Principle, by which
your and our Religion is to be examined. Only you insist still upon one general
false Hypothesis, as if it were an undeniable Axiom, and a Datum. Whereas in
very truth, a true Church may mantaine the fundamentals of Christianity, and
yet alas! have the Tares of some errors mingled with the Wheat, as is largely
demonstrated by our Divines, in that Question, Number Ecclesia possit errare. And
therefore, there is not one General Ground to be expected, proving that all the
points of Religion mantained by such a society are truth, without examining
particulars. And this may be strongly confirmed Ad Hominem against you: For if
there were any such Commone Ground, it would be the Infallibility of your
Propounders, but not this as I have proven in my former Papers. Nay, I have so
soundly cudgelled this your Romish principle in my Last, that you durst not
once mention it in this your Eight Paper. How ever if there be any ground,
which you suppose to prove the truth of Religion, as a Test which none can
justly decline, I appeal you to produce it, and I undertake by the help of
GOD to show, that either it is a false ground, or else, that it agrees to the
PROTESTANT Religion. Fifthly, this Assertion of yours, That before we c^in
prove the truth of our Religion from Scripture, we ought first to prove that we
have the true sense of Scripture, had need of a very favorable and benign
interpretation, else it is perfect nonsense, and a very contradiction. For if
you mean by our having the true sense of Scripture, that our Religion is
contained in Scripture, as the true sense thereof intended by the holy Ghost;
then if we must prove, that we have the true sense of Scripture, before we
prove that we have the True Religion, we must prove we have the true Religion,
before we prove that we have the true Religion: A noble stick of Romish
nonsense. Sixthly, how easy were it to demonstrate against you Romanists,
that we PROTESTANTS have the true sense of Scripture, seeing in most of all the
Positives of our Religion, you do agree with us; as, that there is a GOD, that
he is to be adored, and that there are three Persons, etc. Consequently, The
PROTESTANTS sense of Scripture must be the true sense, else your Religion
cannot be true. You must either acknowledge that we have the true sense of
Scripture, or condemn your own Religion. The chief controversy that remains
betwixt you and us, is, concerning your Supernumerarie Additions, as, whether
not only GOD is to be adored, but also Images, and Crosses, and not only GOD
is to be invocated, but also Saints, and Angels, etc. That is, whether there
be so many more Supernumerarie senses of Scripture, besides those which
PROTESTANTS mantaine, and you Papists dare not deny: Whether I say, besides
these, there be other sen^es of Scripture, mantained by you Romanists, and
denied by us. Ought not you then to prove these your Supernumerarie senses? And
are not we sufficiently warranted to adhere to the Negative, except there be
solid grounds for these Superadded sexses, which I believe, neither you, nor
the whole s^lb: of Jesuits shall be able to shovv, though you get a
superaddition of all Lucifers Acumen. But Seventhly and Lastly, Seeing nothing
will satisfy you, unless I, though only the Defendant, do also prove
against you the Negative, that is, that not only Our sense of Scripture is
true, but also, that these Your superadded and supernumerarie senses are not
true; therefore, to draw you, if it be possible our of your lurking holes, I
will try you by this Argument. The sense of Scripture given by your present
Romish Church, in many things contradicts the sense given by the Ancient Romish
Church, Ergo, the sense put upon Scripture by your Present Romish Church, in
many things cannot be true. The Sequel is clear, because two contradictories
cannot be true. If therefore, you confess that the Ancient Romish Church had
the true sense of Scripture, which ye must do, or else destroy the great
foundation of your Religion, namely, the pretended Infallibility of the Church
of Rome in all ages, then wherein you contradict the Ancient Romish Church,
therein surely you deviat from the true sense of Scripture. It remains
therefore only, that I confirm the Antecedent, which I do by a few clear
Instances.

Instance first, Your present Romish Church mantains that Images are to be
adored. Not so the Ancient Romish Church. As appears by the Verdict of Pope
Gregory the first, concerning the deed of Serenus, Bishop of Massils, for
breaking the Images which he saw abused to Idolatry, Lib. 9. epist. 9. Et
quideus quia eas adorari vetuisses emnino laudamus. Hereupon your Cassander, in
Consult. art. 21. De picturis, says he, Quae fuerit men's and sententia Rom
iuae Ecclesiae adbuc aetate Gregorii satis ex ejus scriptis manifest um est,
viz. Ideo hiberi picturas, non quidem ut colantur and adorentur, sed ut
imperiti picturis inspiciendis haud aliter as literis legendis rerum gestarum
admonerentur. Yea the Council of Eliberis, c^x. 36. More ancient, as is
supposed, then the Nicen, expressly prohibited the drawing of pictures in
Churches. But to manifest how little regard you Romanists have to Antiquity,
when it plays not to your Tune, your Melchior Canus, lib. 5. loc. Cont. cap.
4. Speaking of this Ancient Canon, says, Lex illa non imprudenter modo, verum
eti^^^ impie a concilio Elibertino est lata de tollendis imaginibus.

Inst. 2. Your present Romish Church pantainet that prodigious and bloody tenet
of Iransubstantiation in the Sacranent. Not so the Ancient Romish Church. As
appearet by the with^g of Gelasius Bishop of Rome contra Nestor. Et Eutych. in.
tom 4. biblioth Patrum. where expressly he says, Non desinit substantia panis
and vini. This testimony is so luculent, that your Cardinals Bellarmine, and
Barronius, would question whether that Tractat were written by Gelasius Bishop
of Rome, although it pass under his name in Bibliotheca Patrum, and would
ascrive it to another Gelasius Cyzicenus, or Caesariensis. But you may see
these allegeances learnedly consured by Doctor John Forbes of Corse, in his
Iustruc. historico. theol. lib. 11. cap. 16. And giving but not granting, that
there allegeances were true, yet that Gelasius Cyzicenus as also Caesariensis,
are acknowledged to be Catholic authors, and more ancient then Gelasins Bishop
of Rome. And the same which Gelasius asserts of the tem ^oi^g of the substance
of Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, is affirmed by other ancient and Catholic
Authors, particularly, by T^endoret dialog. 2. Hence your own Scotus, if
Bellarmine may be credited, Lab. 3. 'De Eu^har. cap. 23. Acknowledged that
Transubstantiation was no article of says, before the late Lateran Council,
under Innocent the th^d, Anno. 1215.

Inst. 3. Your present Romish Church mantaines, the publick^solemne and
ordnarie celebration of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper under one kind. Not
so the Ancient Romish Church As appears by Pope Leo the first, who in his
Se^m. 4. de quadragesim: condemns the partaking of the Bread wi^^ out die Cup,
as a Manichean abomination. Hence your Cassan^er in consult, art. 21, De
administratione sacro sancti sacraments Eucharistiassatis compertum est
Vniversalem Christ's Ecclesiam in hanc usque diem, Occidentaelem vero, seu
Romanam mill ampi^n^ a Christ, annis, in solcr. ni praesertim and ordinaria
hujus Sacraments dess ensatione utrainque paris and vins speciem omnibus
Ecclesiae Christ's mer^br is exh^lu^sse, ^d quod ex ^^umeris veterum Scriptorum
tam Graecorum: quam latinerum testimon^^ manisestum est. Bus seeing I mentioned
Pope Leo's sermons, let ^^^^member you that Ancient Bishops of Rome, such as
Lce and Gregory, etc. were Preaching Bishops; not so your Present Popes. Yea
your Bellarmin, to apolog z^ for these your Idol shepherds, has not spared to
say, Lib. 3. De Pont. Romans cap 24. Non tenentur Pontifices per se concionars --
Satis est st curent per alios ista prastari. If they Preach only by Proxies,
take heed they go not to Heaven, only by prexies also. Have you not heard how
your Espencaus, and others of the more moderat sort among you, have bitterly
lamented this profane and lazy desuetud of preaching in your Popes.

Inst. 4. Your present Romish Church mantaines, the Popes universal suprcamacie
and his Title of universal Bishop. Not so the Ancient Romish Church. As
appears by Pope Gregorte the first, his many invectives against that title, as
a title of Noveltie, Error, Impiery, Blasphemy, etc. I give you but two
testimonies from him. I be one is, In lib. 6. Aepist. 30. Ego fidenter dico,
quisquis se universalem sacerdotem vocat, vel vocari desiderat, in elatione sua
antichristum praecurrit, quia superbiendo se caeteris praeponit. The other is,
In lib. 4. Aepist 36. Nullus decessorum meorum hoc prophano vocabulo
universalis Episcopi uti consensit. Thus your very Popedom it self, whose
vitals seem to consist in this Universal supreamacie, is condemned by the
Ancient Church of Rome. Hence Cyprian with eighty and seven Bishops in an
African council, says, Neque quisquam nostrum Episcopum se esse episcoporum
constituit aut tyrannico terrore collegas suos ad obsequends necessitatem
adigu: Where he calls it a tyrannical terror, for one Bishop to impose on others.

Inst. 5. Your present Romish Church mantaines, the Apocryphal books to be
canonical, and of equal authority with the undoubted Seriptures of GOD. Not so
the Ancient Romish Church. As any ears by lerome and Gregory, if your own
Occam may be credited, In Dialog part 3. lib. 3. can. 16. Secundum Hieronymum.
says he, Et Gregorium liber ludith Tobiae and Maccabiorum, Ecclesiasticus,
and liber sapientiae non sunt recipiendi ad confirmandum aliquid in fids. This
same you will find copi^^sl. de^^onstrated by Doctor Cousin in his Scholastical
history of the canon of Scripture.

Inst. 6. You Jesuits, who are the prevalent faction at the present in your
Romish Church, and your Canonists mantaine the dominion and jurisdiction of
your Pape over Princes. So did not the Ancient Romish Church. As appears by
Pope Gregory the first, who thus writer to the Emperor Maurice, lib. 2.
epist. 61. Sacerdotes meos tuae manus commisi. -- Utrobique ergo quae debui
exsolvi, qui and Imperatori obedientiam praebui, and pro DEO quod sensi minime
tacui. Know you not Bernards inference from the Apostles word, Romans 13.1. (Let
every Soul be subject to the higher Poriers,) writing to a great man of your
Romish Church, Siomnis anima tum vestra, quis vos excipit ex universitate, si
quis tentat excipere tentat decipere. And have you not heard of Chrysostoms
enumeration long before him, In epist. ad Romans cap. 13. hom. 23. Sive Apostolus
sis, sive Propheta, sive Evangelista, sive Sacerdos subditus sis.

Inst. 7. Your present Romish Church mantaines Papal indulgences, for easing
souls under the pains of Purgatory. Not so the Ancient Romish Church. For
there is no mention of such indulgences in all Antiquity. Nay so novel is that
invention, that they are not mentioned either by Gratian, or Lombard, who were
so very diligent in gathering up al your Romish chafe and stuble. Hence your
Durand in 4. sent. disp. 20. quaest. 3.. 4. Says, De indulgentiis pauca dici
pissunt per certitudinem, quia nec Scriptura express de eis loquitur. --
Sancti etiam Ambrosius, Hill. rius, Augustinus, Hieronimus, minime loquuntur de
indulgentia, And your Aiphonsus a Castro, lib. 8. de Haeres. Tit. Indulgentiae.
^mer omnes res, (sayeth^^,) De quilus in hoc opere disputamus, nulla est qu im
minus aperte s^^crae literae pr^^^^^^int, and de qua minus vetusti scriptores
dixe^int. And your Rassensis, contra Lutherum, art. 18. Quis jam mirari potest,
quod in principio nascentis Ecclesiae nullus fuit indulgenti trum (...)? Where
he plainly con^esses, that there was no use for these Indulgerces in the
prin^inve Church. Yea, your Agrippa, de vanitate seien. cap. 61. Is bold to
dore^mine the first broacher of this impierie, namely, Bomsare the eight, who
lived a thousand and three hundred years after Christ. He was the first,
says Agrippa, who extended Indulgences to Purgatory. I know Bellarmine, Lib.
1. de Indulg. cap. 3. and other Your Romish Authors, that they might seem to
lay some claim to Antiquity, allege, that Gregory the first give indulgences
In diebus stationum. And for this they cue Aquinas and Altisiodorensis. But you
may see this allegiance judiciously confuted by Doctor John Forbes, in his
Instruct historico-theol. lib. 12. cap. 8.. 13. For though it were as they
affirm, it would fall short of Primitive Antiquity; Gregory living about six
hundred years after Christ. But no such thing is affirmed by Gregory himself
in all his writings, or by any contemporarie Author, yea, or by any credible
Historian, for the space of other six hundred years thereafter. What credit
then is to be given to two of your Superstitious-schoolmen, who lived above six
hundred years after Gregory? Especially seeing to these, other Schoolmen of
eminent fame testifying the contrary, are opposed by our Authors, as
particularly, by Doctor Morton, in his Appeal lib. 1. cap. 2. sect. 20. and by
Gerard, tom. 5. loc. de Eccles. cap. 11. sect. 6.. 206. your great Autoninus,
whom also youn ave Saincted, is cited Part. 1. sum. titul. 10. cap. 3. saying,
De ind dgentiys nibil express habemus, nec in scripturis, necex dictis antiqu
rum doctorum. Chemnitius produces the like testimonies out of Magister
Augelus, or as some write him Angularis, and Sylvester Prieras, which
Bellarmine in his Reply to Chemnitius testimonies Lib. 2. de indulg. cap. 17.
does quite and quie^lie omit. They that^vo ^^ infer any thing conceraing
Indulgences, as extended to Purgatory, from the Stations used in the Aucient
Church, discover them elves to be grossly agnorant of the nature of Stations
amonest the Ancients, as may be seen in Doctor John Forbes, his Inst^uc.
hist^^ (...) cit.. 14.

Should I enumerate more Irslances. wherein your Present Romish Church is found
(...) the Ancient Romish Church, and to other Ancient (...), I should perhaps
^tempr your patience too much, for (...) to be very sher^o^^^thed. Only now
from these to (...) let me renew my Argument this. If the Ancient Romish Church
And the tr^e sense of holy Scripture, as you dare not deny, then surdly your
Present Romish Church in many things has not the true sonse of Scripture:
Seeing the sense of your present ROMI^H Church, is contradictorie in many
things to the the sense of the Ancient Romish Church; and two controdictories
cannot be true. Consequently therefore, seeing our PROTESTANT Churches do
agree with the Ancient Romish, and other Catholic churches, in these things
wherein they are contradicted by you, consequently, I say, we Protestants must
have the true sense of holy Scripture, in these Negatives also, Quod erat
demonstrandu^. Perhaps you may lay aside al these things, as imperine^t
Digressio^s, as you have done other things before. But let an impartial Reader
compare your Papers and mine, and have the umpirege betwixt us.

You clamor greatly, that my last Paper was not returned sooner to you: As if
I had no work to do in School, or Pulpit, but to revise your Pasquils. GOD
knows, whether your raw Rapsodies require much time to confute them. I
confess neither Quakers Sermons, not your Papers require much Study. Albeit
you, as seems, to counterfie a piece of more quick dispacth, have dated most of
all your Papers some days before they came to my hand. But I should advise
you, if you would have your lines of any significancie, to take some more time
to them. Fistina lent. Have you not heard, how that Zeuxes the curious
Painter, b^i^g demanded, why he took so much time in drawing his draughts,
answered, Pingo Aeternitati. If I be justly blameable for any thing, in this
exchange of Papers with you, it is, that ever I should have denzied an answer
since the first, to such tantolig zing bab^i^gs. But seeing you seem only to
contend for the last wo^d how impertine^s so ever, I can easily indnige that to
an empty vain glorious Rabula. Yet to let you know, that the wh^le last Paper
remains unanswered, I will subj^ine yet again, the former socci^ct
confutation of all your Eight Papers in two words, with which alone you may
deals, if this ^arg^t discourse o^ too burdensome to your lazy head.

Aberdene January, 31, 1667. John Menzeis.
A succinct Confutation of all Master Dempster the Jesuit, his eight Papers in
two words.

Nego Minorem, Or, Nego Conclusionem.

Aberdene January, 31. 1667. John Menzeis.



Roma diu titubans variis erroribus acta;
Corruet and mundi desinet esse caput.

The Jesuits ninth Paper.
Answer to an eight Paper of Mr. JOHN MENZEIS, wherein is confirmed, that the
pretended conformity of Protestant Religion with Scripture, is a mere imaginar
and groundless conformity. 8. February, 1667.
YOur Papers carieing the date of the thirtyone of Iannary came to my hands the
sixth of February, wherein you complain that (...) the pretext of prolixity of
your Papers, does not answer to the contents of them, (...) your thou do not
fail to answer to the I omes of Bellarmine, notwithstanding of their great
vastues. But it is not the Prolixity that makes your Papers to be slighted, but
the Barrennes and superfluity of them, being stuffed with all sort of
Digressions, and diverticles out of the way. Mend your self in this, and bring
only things that are proportionat, to show a solid difference betwixt the
Protestant Religion, and afalse Religion, which is the only thing controverted
with you from the beginning, and you shall be fully answered, though you should
writ whole Tomes, for you know, how often it has been protested, that there
would be taken no notice at all of any thing you bring out of the line. And to
speak only of the superflaous excursiores that you use in the same very Last
Paper. What makes it to ^^ our purpose, your Digressions about Images, about
Transs bstantiation, about Communion under one kind, about The Popes
Supremacy, about Apocryphal books, about Indulgences, Purgatory, etc?
Likewise, what makes it to our purpose, your long and tedious discourse,
whereby you labor to justify your proceeding in that Conserence, which we had
be mouth, since you should remit all that thing to the judgment of these
illustrious persons that were then present, and let them judge, whether you did
feebly, and cowaraly act your part, and seem to compeare there only to game
time. Likewise, in what school did you learn this civil title wherewith you
honor me, calling me a Neat-herd rather nor a Disputant, that I am a man of ^
br^sen face and a leaden heart, that I am both shameless, and as ^lesse, that
I am a Lazy drone, etc? But this proceeds, because my Popers which you
verbally vilisie, calling them Pasquills and not w.r. ^ie to be answered, yet
you sind they gall you, and seeing your self not s^^ff^^ent with reputation to
answer, to supply this desiciency, you seek help from the desusion of Bile,
that it may subministrat to you such u^comely and ume sonable words. But let us
come to the matter it self.

In my first Paper, and in all others since there was nothing urged up^r you,
but only, that since you (...) gerinrailing against Catholic Religion, you
would produce s^^^e ground to show the truth of your PROTESTANT Religion, and
whereby it may be distinguished from a false Religion, that be this means, you
might bath confirm PROTESTANTS in their Religion, and ^ime others to embrace
the same. But hitherto, in so many Papers, all that can be extorted out of you,
is, that your PROTESTANT Religion is proven to be a true Religion, be this
Medium, because it is grounded upon the word of GOD, and conform to the true
serse of the letter of Scripture, a reason indeed most solid and convincent, if
it were true. But this pretended conformity of PROTESTANT Religion with
Scripture, was showen this way to you, to be a mere imaginar and groundless
conformity, because, as it is impossible, a thing to be conform to a true
sense, except it be supponed to be a true sense so it is impossible that a
thing can be proven to be conform to a true sense, except it be first showen
and proven that there is a true sense: Ergo, you cannot prove your Religion to
be true, because it is conform to the true serse of the letter of Scripture,
except first you bring some pregnant reason, whereby the understandings of men
may be convinced, that you have upon your side the true sense of the letter of
Scripture. Now, since all dependes upon this one point, you were desired to
apply your self wholly to satisfy this only, and to do in a substantious and
school way, laying aside for a while your diffuse, railing Pulpit way. But let
us now examine the noble answers that you give in this your last Paper.

The first answer is not direct, but rather a declining of the difficulty,
under pretext that it makes a Non-sese, to say, That before a Religion can be
showen or proven to be true, it must first be proven, that there is the true
seat of the letter of Scripture upon their part who professes such a Religion,
because the true sense of the letter of Scripture, and the truth of Religion,
are one and the self same thing, and so ^^ would follow, that a thing were
proven before it were proven, which is a gross Nonsense. But this subtility,
in the which you seem to take some complesance, and put great force, serves
only to discover gross Ignorance. For First, he this you show your self
altogether ignorant of the nature of Formal Praecisions, who have u^rtue, where
they interveen to make as^^fficient distinction, betwixt the Medium and the
Proble^me. None, you show your self Ignorant of the (...) be no Objective
difference betwixt true Religion, and the truths contained under the letter of
Scripture. But their two are seperab^^, Since all the truths contained under the
letter of Scripture may be, and yet not componit any Religion at all, to wit,
if there be no obligation imposed upon us to believe them, or if GOD had not
decreed it, nor made the faith and belief of these things necessar to obtain
our Salvation Lastly, giving and not granting, that this your speculation had
some soliditie, yet it cannot serve to better your cause, since all this just
as it lies, may be wuh as great reason assumed be a falfe Religion, for a
scouge and refuge of their ignorance, when they are pressed to assign some
ground, wherely it may appear, that they have the true sense of the letter of
Scripture upon their side, or bring some disparity betwixt you and them.

Your second answer, to prove that the true sense of the letter of Scripture
is upon your side, is, Because your sense is conform to the sense of the
Fathers, that lived in the first three Centuries. But first in this you resile
from your foundator Calvin, who as you know disclaimes the Fathers in many
things, taxing them of errors, and hitherto your other reformers harped always
upon this string, that all doctrines, even of the Fathers, should be examined
be the sell Scripture as the only rule admitting no wise the doctrine of the
Fathers themselves, but in so far as they did agree with Scripture. But now
since you invert altogether this order, you give occasion to suspect that you
are hatching Some new Religion of your own, leaving their principles. Again
this conformtiy cannot serve your purpose, except first you show that the
Fathers of the first three Centuries, did in the books that are now extant,
teach all points that are necessar to Salvation. And this must be proven,
either be some tectin any drawn either out of Scripture, or out of themselves,
or else we will have nothing for this, but only your bare saying,

In the closing of your Paper. beside your ordinary braging, whereby you do
over value all your own things and undervalue all things brought against you,
you play the Prophet in Ryme.

Roma diu titubans, variis erroribus acts,
Corruet, and mandi desinet esse caput.
Bo sie yat yis your prophecy, be not lyk your Patriarche Lutheris prophecy,
who when he lept out: of the church, did brage, that with tuo yeiris
Preaching, he would abolische and eliminat all Popery out of the world, sa yat
efteryir tua yeiris yair would be no moir in the world, nather Pop, nor
Cardinalis, nor Monkis, nor Nuns, nor Mase, nor Belis etc.

This Paper was not delivered to Master JOHN MENZEIS, many days after it was
dated, but to excuse this the following Postscript, was subjoined to the Paper
with an other hand.

POSTSCRIPT,
Tho this Paper came from the author, the day after it was dated, it could not
be sent sooner to Master JOHN MENZEIS, in regard the Person to whom it was
adressed was not in Town.

Master JOHN MENZEIS his Answer to the Jesuits ninth Paper.
Some Reflections, upon Master Dempster the Jesuit, his ninth Paper, wherein he
scarce touches what has been Replied to him: and yet foolishly imagines that
he has confuted, the conformity of the Religion of PROTESTANTS with the holy
Scripture.
DID ever Nature produce such a ludibrious trifling tergiversing Caviller? Is
not the great controversy betwixt you and me, whether the Religion of
PROTESTANTS, or your Popish Religion, be the Christian Religion? How then were
you not ashamed, when I had demonstrated the falsehood of many of the chief
articles of your Religion, such as the Adoration of Images, Transubstantiation.
Communion under one kind, The Popes supremac^e, the holding of Ap^criphal books
for canonical Scriptrue, the Jurisdiction of Popes over Princes, your Papal
Indulgences as extended to Purgatory, and consequently, that PROTESTANTS who
contradict you in all these particulars, have the truth on their side, how then
I say were you not ashamed to make no other Reply to all these things? But
only to say, What make these things to the purpose? Is it nothing to the
purpose, to prove the Fundamentals of your Religion to be falsehoods, and that
the truth of GOD is mantained by the PROTESTANTS against your Popish Church? Is
not your Religion so unhappie, that if it be convicted of one Falsehood, the
whole fabric and systeme thereof is overturned? The Infallibility of your
Church being a Fundamental point with you, and yet when the falsehood of so many
points of your Religion is demonstrated, What is that to the purpose say you.
Do not such Papers deserve as Hierome said, Alversus Vigilantium,
Indignationem scribentis, rather to be answered with contempt and disdain,
then with any serious confutation?

Are you not as ludibrious in your next Period? Did not I in my last expostulat
sharply with you, that in stead of making a polemick Reply to my Seventh
Paper, (to which you answered not one word,) you did substitut a Railing
Digression, concerning the occasion of this Debate, and of our verbal
conterence, and so did put upon me a necessity of confuting your Calumnies
concerning that Matter of Fact? How then have you a face to charge me, as if I
had of my own accord, and free choice, fallen upon that Digression? But though
conscience move you not to answer to the arguments, proving the falsehood of
your Religion, (for perhaps an ill cause, and your Ignorance, stand as
invincible impediments in your way,) yet ought you not in commone honesty, to
have vindicated your self from the Falsehoods charged upon you in that Matter of
Fact? Is it enough for you, to say, To what purpose are these discourses, and
ought not the matter of that conference be left to the judgment of the
Auditors, Who, (if you may be credited,) did see my feeblenes? Am I from the
purpose, when I confute the lies of your Paper? If you judge it not to the
purpose, to vindicat your self from so many Falsehoods, let you be stigmatized
for the man you are? If you would have had the matter of that conference,
remirted only to the judgment of the Auditors, (among whom you had a company
of judicious proselyts of the female sex,) why did you fall upon a Calumnious
representation of it in your Last? Why were Diffamatorie pasquils stuffed with
reproaches, long ago disseminated through the Country? May it not seem
strange, that a person who has given such shameful demonstrations of His
feebleness in nine Papers, should have the confidence to reproach another with
Feebleness? Loripedem derideat rectus. But what occasion gave you in that
conference, to try either the feebleness or gallantrie of any? Was any thing
heard from you? And if it should have been heard, what noble stuff it should
have contained, these your Nine Papers may testify. We should have had an
Informal Syllogism repeated Ad nauseam, without probation of Major, or Minor,
or rectifying the Form thereof. Would such a formidable Achilles have
affrighted a poor School Boy? Was there not an Argument propounded to you
concluding the impiety of your Religion, because it destroyed all Certainty of
faith, which you dared not once to examine? And when you declined to answer
thereto, was there not cause Ex justa indignatione, (which you may reproach as
Feebleness,) to refuse to hear you? And in that which you were drawn with
much importunity to answer, with what credit came you off either of your self,
or your Church, I am content that such of the hearers as had capacity may judge.

How comoe it, that you touch not at all, the foul stain which I shaw your
Doctors leave upon your Romish Church, by their Impious Doctrine of Probables?
How is it that you do not at least turn thi^ off as you have done the rest,
with your usual tergiversing Querie, To what purpose is all this discourse? Are
you utterly silent as to this matter, because you had occasioned this discourse
by challenging us for proposing before our Auditors your Problematick
Doctrines? But then you should have kept silence concerning the former
particulars also; for to them likewise were we led by your impertinencies. Or
does your silence proceed from the conviction of conscience, that you know not
how these impieties could be justified, like a School Boy who skips over the
word in his lesson which he cannot read? If this be the account of your
silence, I should not blame you so much, only I could wish that in your old
days, you might learn the ingenuity of acknowledging error to be error, when
it is convi cingly demonstrated to you.

Yet notwithstanding all these tergiversing shifts, and silent transitions, you
have the confidence to avouch Your readiness to answer whole Tomes; It is not a
strange thing to see a Thraso, and a Thersites joined in one person. Who will
believe, that you who have sucoumbed these Eight or Nine times, in answering a
poor sheet or two, (for in all of them you have tergiversed, and to some not
answered one word at all,) that you are in such a Capacity to deal with
Volumes? Look back on the Papers which you have received, and take a view of
the Fallacies charged upon you, as also, how many Chief articles of your
Religion I have impugned, and all to his hour unanswered: When you have
discharged your self of that work, which already lies upon you, you may
purchase some more credit to your empty brags. But I must correct my self, I
confess you have invented a compendious Method of confuting both sheets and
volumes, by your usual Querie, To what purpose are these discourses? If you
please, you may cause add this your invention to the next addition of
Pancirolli, nova reperta. Yet whether that compendious confutation, look like
the Reply of a Disputant, or of that which you are not willing to hear, your
self may judge?

Your Last apology for not examining my Papers, taken from the Prolixity of
them, seems now too slender and pellucid to your own self, therefore you are
pleased to strengthen it, by accusing my Papers of Barrenness and Superfluity;
how well these your Rhetorications cohere together, others may judge, if my
Papers be guilty of Barrenness, then have they too little matter in them, if
of Superfluity, then have they too much, if to reconcile this repugnant
indytment, you say, that these Papers have much matter, but little to the
purpose, you must remember, that this may be more easily affirmed then proven;
withal I appeal you to instance any thing in my Papers, which has not a
tendencie to confute you and your Romish Religion, and consequently to
establish our, or, that has not a genuine rise from some^^ing in your Papers.
And are not these the measures by which the Pcrtinencie of my Replies to you
are to be judged?

Among the many doc ments, of prodigious impudency, which you have given in
your Papers, I could not but smyle at one, how ye could say, That your Papers
galled me, because I could not answer them; have I not rather been too
superstinious in examming every (...) of these your despicable Pasquils, which
truly are unworthy of one glance of a serious persons eye? But what I have
done was to check the vain petulancy of your party, who are ready to make
Eliphantem exmus^a. All the galling I have, is that I should have to do with a
Tristing, Tergiversing, Riviling Civiller, and this indeed has extorred from
me some sharp pressions, if peradventure thereby you might have been quickened
to love your trifling, and tergiversing strain. But I have so much comassion
for you, that I am ashamed in your behalf, that in every now Paper, you should
give new confirmations of these character (...) you extort from me. Amend your
fashiones, and I will mitig^^^ s^yl^. Are you not sensible that your Papers are
not only b^r^^n of matter, but full of nastie and scurvie language, such as
Midde^, Jecktrot, scouge etc. And for your trespasses in Orthogra^ (...) and
Syllabic^^ions, were not, that I take you to be Sexagen rius, you might gos to
School again. Whether therefore you deserve th^^ cha^acter which Hiercm gives
to Vigilantius in that forecited Epiflle others may judge, Est quidem, (says
he,) Et verbis and scientia and sermore inconditus. ne vera quidem potest
defendere, sed propter homines saeculi and mullerculas oner atas peccatis,
semper discentes, and nunqu^m ad scientiam veritatis pervenientis, un
lucubratiuncula illius naeniis responde^.

After that by these forementioned whimsies, you have waved most of the matter
in my last Paper, then say you like a Material Disputant indeed, Let us come to
the matter. But (...) For (...) some great matter. I (...) the Ghost of your
old Syllogism, or the same Rhapsody, which you had in your Last Paper,
concerning The sense of holy Scripture, repeated in terminis, as if you thought
to fright us with the frequent apparitions of this Specter. All the sense which
I can gather out of the heap of confused expressions which you have jumbled
together, is as I told in my Last, That before PROTESTANTS prove their Religion
to be true, or conform to the true sense of Scripture, they must first prove
that they have the true sense of Scripture. To which, it might be sufficient
for me now to tell you, that to this your allegiance I have given Seven
answers in my Last, and you never resumed but One of them, namely the Fifth,
which is but hypotheticallie expressed, to draw from you a clear explication of
your meaning. Till therefore you do the rest of your work, I need give no
further Reply.

Yet I shall at this time propose these Considerations to you. And First, you
must suffer me to advertise you, that you represent the Case betwixt you and me
very deceitflly, as if the Case were, whether I can prove the Religion of
PROTESTANTS to be the true Religion? whereas indeed, The present case, is,
whether you can prove that the Religion of PROTESTANTS is not the True
Religion; In evidence hereof, in your first Paper you propose a Syllogism, to
impugn the Religion of PROTESTANTS, concluding, that the PROTESTANTS Religion
cannot be the True Religion. Beside other defects both in the Matter and Form
of your Syllogism, I denied the Minor thereof, which to this day you could
never be able to prove, and ther^ote sin li^g that you are not able to impugn
the Religion of PROTESTANTS, you would craftily alter the Scene, and of
Opponent t^rne Responden. But you must not ^o easily escape. Yet to let you
know that i^ is not from weakness of our cause that I kept you to your work, I
offered ^o you to turn Opponent, if you will but ingenuously acknowledge that
you are not able to impugn our Religion. But Secondly, I must i^ form you,
that this your ^oo Cavil, which it is like you have learned from some o^ your
Masters, is an Old Heathenish objection brought against he^rath of the
Christian Religion, as you may find in Chrysostom. hom. 33. in actae. Apost.
Venit (says he,) Gentilis and dicit vellem siers Christianus, sed nescio quod
dogma eligam: singuli dicunt ego verum dico: cuicredam niscio, cum Scripturarum
sim ignarus and ills idem ^trinque pratexunt Is not this your very Objection in
the mouth of the Pagan, or rather the Paganes objection in your mouth? But how
answered Chrysostom? Not as a Romanist, or a Jesuit would have done today: we
have an Infallible propounder, a Pope that cannot err, in determining articles
of faith. Chrysostom had not learned These Romish principles, nay, but be
Answers like a PROTESTANT thus, Sea cum Scripture simplices sint and vera,
facile tibi fuerit judicurs. Siguso illis consentit Christianus est. But
Chrysostom brings in the Heathin instancing again like a Jesuit. Quod si
ventens ille dicat hoc habers scripturam, tu autem aliud dicas altter sciz
enarrando scriptu as mentem earum pro te trabens, and still he answers like a
PROTESTANT, Tu dic mihi, mentem ne habes and judicium. But yet the Pagane
Replies again like a Romanist, Quomode inquies passum judicurs vestra
^rsciens? Discipulus fieri vellem, cu autem me dactorem facis. But Chrysostom
holds on in the same way, Empiurus vestem quamvis artis texio is imperi^^sis,
hac verba non decis, nescio emere, illudunt ^^ihi sed fa^is omnia ^t dasias.
Where you may see the same cavil moved against the Christian Religion by a
Heathen, and Chrysostom who well understond the principles of Christianity,
never made use of your Romish principles, but still asserted the Perspicuity of
the Scriptures in all things necessary, and that a judgment of discretion was
allowed to private persons, and therefore a little after concludes, Itaque ne
c^villemur, ne pratex us quaramus, has enim facilia sunt. But Thirdly you may
consider this Argument, if the PROTESTANTS Religion have all the solid grounds
to prove its conformity with the true sense of the holy Scripture, which the
true Christian Religion has, then surely the PROTESTANTS Religion has solid
grounds to prove its conformity with the true sense of holy Scripture, but the
first is true, Ergo, etc. The Sequel of the Major you dare not but admit,
unless you mine Insidell, and deny that the true Christian Religion has solid
grounds to prove its conformity with the Scripture. And for the probation of
the Assumption, you cannot but allow me that measure against you, which you
allow your self against me, and therefore, I appeal you to produce any solid
ground, which the True Christian Religion has, which the Religion of
PROTESTANTS wants; Yea, or any solid ground, which you R^^anists can pretend
to, for confirmation of your Religion, which we want. You have never adventured
to name any, but the pretended Infallibility of your Propounders. But this we
have so battered to you, that now you have stolen fom it, not daring to mention
it again in any of these your Two last Papers. Nay Fourthly, I must remember
you of a Dilemma ad Hominem, against you Romanists, which you might have
gathered from my last. If we deviat from the sense of holy Scripture, then it
must be either in our Affirmatives, or in our Negatives, Not in our
Affirmatives, you and we agreeing in most of these; Therefore, either in these
we have the true sense, else you have it not: Nor in our Negatives, else your
contradictorie Affirmatives should be true. But I proved in my Last, that in
many of these you do manifestly err, as contradicting the Ancient Romish
Church, particularly in your Adoration of Twages. Transubstansiation, Communion
under one kind, The Poper suprexmatie the Canonical authority of Apocry; ha
books, The jurisdiction of the Pope over secular Printes and your papal
Indulginces at extended to Purgarotse. And I am ready to prove the falsehood of
the rest of your Super-induced articles, when ever you have the confidence to
come to a particular trial. But I am utterly discouraged, from multiplying
more instances against a tergiversing fellow, who is neither moved by credit,
nor conscience, to examine what is replied to him. Fifthly seeing you shun to
tell a ground, by which the truth of Religion is to be tried lest the Balfardie
of your Religion should be proven, I will give you a solid ground from a person
of great fame in your Romish Gourc^^ though a Grecian by extract: This is
Goorgius Scholarius, who pleaded for the interest of the Latin Church, in the
matter of the Processio^ of the holy Ghost from the Father, and the Son, at the
Council of Florence. Now this Scholarius, tom. 4. Conciliorum in Orat. 3. ad
Council. Florent, proposes these rules for determining controversies in
Religion. Et primo quidem (says he,) non decet velle omnia disertis verbis e
scriptura desumere, cum and multos. haereticos scimus pratextu hoc usos. Sed si
quid verbis it a prolatis sit consequens, adaeque erit honorandum; similiter
quod veris and confessis fuerit repugnans and contrarium nullo modo est
admittendum; deinde eorum quae obscurius dicta sunt, sumendae sunt e scriptura
ipsa veluti magistra explicationes, per ea quae uspians clarius illa disserit.
Where this learned Author, holds these four choice Positions, for discerning
betwixt truth and error in Religion, to all which we PROTESTANTS do cordially
agree. The First is, That all divine truth are not revealed in so many words in
Scripture. Secondly, that some divine truths are plainly set down, Diserris
verbis, and what by firm consequence is deduced from these, ought to be
believed, and received with the same respect, as these which are delivered In
terminis. Thirdly whatsoever is repugnant to these truths which are plainly,
Diserris verbis, set down or confessed upon all hands, ought to be rejected as
erroneous. Fourthly, that these things which are more obscurely treated of in
Scripture, are to receive their explications from other clear Scripture, as
the Mistres of our faith. These grounds so laid down, he afterward accon
moda^s to his present Hypothesis for decyding the controversy betwixt the
Latin and Greek Church, concerning the procession of the holy Ghost, and may
by the same measure be applied to the controversies betwixt us PROTESTANTS and
You Romanists. If therefore, you will dire to adventure upon the trial of
particular controversies betwixt you and us, according to this standard, I
trust you shall see (if prejudice do not blind you,) that all the points of
the Religion of PROTESTANTS, are either revealed in Scripture plainly, and In
terminis, or the by solid consequence, are deduceable from these which are
revealed In terminis. And on the contrary, that your Supe irauce Romish
article, wherein we differ from you, are neither In terminis in Scripture, nor
yet by solid consequence deduceable from these things which are clearly
revealed in Scripture, but on the contrary, are repugnant thereunto. I hope
therefore, the intelligen Reader will observe, that if you descend not to a
particular trial, it is not, because a ground was not assigned to you, from
discerning truth in Religion from error, but from diffidence of your desperate
cause. Only that you do not return to your usual trifling Cavil, that
Heretics. and those of a false Religion, may pretend the same grounds for
justifying their Heresies, let me tell you, that Heretics may indeed pretend a
patrocinie from these grounds, which upon examination will overturne their
cause. And therefore, what I say to you, I say the same of all other Heretics,
Socinians, Pelagians, Nestorians, A^^baptists, Antinomians, etc. That if they
will come to a particular discuss, according to these premised rules, what
ever their pretenses be, it shall appear, that their Heresies are neither In
terminis contained in Scripture, nor yet are deduceable by solid reason from
these things which are clearly revealed, but are repugnant thereunto. Sixthly,
I answer Directly to this your Cavil by this Distinction. If you mean that
PROTESTANTS, or whatsoever society acclaiming the True Religion, before they
prove the truth of their Religion, or the conformity thereof to the true sense
of Scripture, must first produce one ground, proving all the senses which they
give in Scripture In cumulo to be true, without a particular examination of the
several senses and points of Religion mantained by them, that I say is a gross
falsehood and mistake; For a Society may profess the true Religion, and
mantaine all the essentialls the cof, and yet as I told n my last, have some
errors mingled in with these (...), as our D^vines have demonstrated in the
Question, Nom Ecclesi^ possit errare? Therefore, if this be your m^^ning, it
concerns you to have proven it, for I do, and in my Last I imply did deny it.
But if you only mean, that PROTESTANTS or others acclaiming the truth of
Religion, must either have the essentials, and all truths in their Religion,
plainly, and In terminis revealed in Scripture, or else solidly deduceable upon
a particular discuss from these things that are so plainly revealed, I grant
it freely, that it ought, and must be so. And therefore, it you will come to
the examination of particular Articles, I engage to disclaim the Religion of
PROTESTANTS, if it be not found to be so, and shall only demand but the like
ingenuity, readynesse, and engagement from you, that you will renounce your
Romish superstition, if is neither be In terminis in Scripture, nor solidly
deduceable from these things which are there plainly revealed. If there be not
enough said to put an end to your general whifling Cavils, let these who are
not fascinated by prejudice judge? Is it not time after the exchange of nine
Papers, to come once to the matter, for you are not as yet come to it?

The rest of your Paper, you pretend to spend in examining the Answers given
by me, to this your forementioned Cavil, Concerning the sense of holy
Scripture. But it would seem, you had been either dreaming, or drunk when you
wrote this for you bring me in only making Two answers, whereas indeed I have
made Seven, and of the two which you mention only one of them is to be found in
my Last Paper. But however, I will try how you behave your self in examining
these. That which you say is my First Answer, is indeed my Fifth, as you will
find when you awake from your sleep, and look on my Paper. But before I take
in your Reply. I will first propose my former Answer, not in your words, for I
seldom find them faithful, but in my own, as I proposed them in my Last: My
words then were these. This Assertion of yours, that before we can prove the
truth of our Religion from the Scripture, we must first prove this we have the
true sense of the Scripture bad need of a verse favorable and benigns
interpretation, else it is perfect Nonsense, and a very contradiction. For if
you mean, by our having the true sense of Scripture, that our Religion is
contained in Scripture, as the true sense thereof intended by the holy Ghost,
then if we must prove that we have the true sense of Scripture, before we prove
that we have the True Religion, we must prove that we have the True Religion,
before we prove that we have the True Religion. These were my words, and if the
inference be not solid upon the Supposition laid down therein, these who have
common sense may judge. Yet to this you have made Three Replies, but each of
them more ludibrious then another.

Your First Reply, is a pedantick whifle about formal Praecisions; you say.
That I show my self to be altogether ignorant of the nature of formal
praecisions, which have virtue, where they interverne to make a sufficent
distinction betwixt the Medium and the Problem. For all your pretended skill of
these Pracisions, there are school. Boys with us, who could adventure to the
lists with you concerning them. Yet I confess in some sense, you may commence
Doctor in the matter of Praecisions; For you have a notable faculty of
praescinding from the purpose. But if you had said any thing to the point, you
should have showed, that there interveens a Formal Praecisions, sufficient to
make a distinction betwixt the Medium and Problem, betwixt these two, V.Z.
That our Religion is contained in Scripture as the true sense thereof intended
by the holy Ghost. And this, That our Religion is the true Religion. Can you
either conceive or conclude, that our Religion is contained in the Scripture,
as the true sense thereof intended by the holy Ghost, and not conceive Ipso
Facto, and Formaliter, that it is the True Religion? Especially, seeing from
the beginning of your Papers you have acknowledged. That a Religion to be a
True Religion, and to be conforms to the true sense of Scripture are
Synonima's. You may try in the next how you can prove this, for you still leave
the greatest part of your work behind you. But in the Second place from this
pedantick notion, you proceed to a more absurd position, as if here There were
an objective distinction betwixt the Medium and the Problem, still out of your
Modesty, Vphraiding me with Ignorance. For say you, The True Religion and
truths contained under the letter of Scripture, are separable one from another;
because all the truths of Scripture, may be, and yet not comp^u^^ any Religion
at all to wit, if there had been no obligation imposed upon us to believe them.
And hereupon. You conclude me ignorant of the nature of True Religion. A
greater cry me I confess, then the ignorance of the nature of formal
Praecisions. Only you had need to guard well, that this your insolent
accusation do not recoyl upon your own head. For First, were you not
sophistic^ting Ab Ignoratiore Elenchi, you should have concluded, that our
Religion may be contained in the Scripture as the true sense hereof, and yet
make up no Religion at all. But who sees not this to be a manifest
contradiction? And yet these were the two which you ought to prove to be
separable, for that was the Supposition whereon my Inference was builded. But
Secondly, what ignorance and absurdity do you bewray, when you say, That all
the truths contained under the letter of Scripture may be, and yet make up no
Religion at all. I will instance to you a few Scripture truths, which it is
impossible they should be, and not make up a Religion. Matthew. 4.10. It is
written, thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shall thou serve.
John 20.31. These things are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the
Christ the Son of God, and believing, ye might have life through his name. 1.
John 3.23. This is his commandment, that ye should believe on the name of his
Son Jesus Christ. These Scripture truths cannot be, unless they concur to
make up a Religion; and the reason is evident, which also destroys your fond
Supposition, and pretended reason to the contratie, because, they include in
them a Form all obligation of worshipping GOD, and believing in order to the
obtaining or Salvation. Do not you the refore bewray brutish ignorance of
Scripture, and of Religion when you say, That all truths contained in the
Scripture may be without an obligation to believe them, and so compound no
Religion at all. For it is one Scripture Truth, that we are commanded, and
obliged in Scripture, to believe these truths, in order to the obtaining of
Salvation. Your Third Reply is nothing less ludibrious then the former Two, in
which you say, That what was said in that answer of mire to you, may be said
by persons of another Religion, alswell as by us, And who doubts but Heretics
may justly repel your Nonese^se? May not Heretics be otherwise solidly
confuted, albeit they laugh at your ridiculous Cavils? I hope these transient
to ches may suffice to discover, with how little success you have dealt with
that Fifth Answer of mine which you call the first, For I judge it unbeseeming
for me, in handling so weighty a controversy as this, Whether the Religion of
PROTESTANTS or Papists be the true Christian Religion, to dilate upon Pedantick
notions, more proper for School-Boyes then Divines. But suppose you had
discussed it utterly, there remain other Six answers, which you have never
once touched.

I proceed now to that which you call my Second Answer, wherein you bring me
in, answering, That it appears that we have the true sense of Scripture,
because our sense is conform to the sense of the Fathers of the first three
Centuries. I know not whether to call this a Delirium, or a Dream. For in that
Eight and Last Paper of mine, to which only you now answer, there is no
mention of the Fathers in the First three Centuries. I had indeed upon another
occasion in some former Papers, offered to examine the truth of Religion, by
conformity to the faith of the Church in these three Centuries, and had so
confuted all your objections against that Test, that in your Last you had made
no Reply thereto. Wherefore in My last, I only insinuated some challenges for
your ^ergiversing, and speaking nothing to that particular, but brought not in
this Directly as an Answer to this Cavil of yours. But though you in your
Reply stagger like a Drunken-man, going back and fore, leaping from one Paper
to another, yet, because in a Former Paper, I was willing to have tried whether
our Religion or yours be the true Catholic Religion, By examining the
conformity thereof with the faith of the Ancient Church in the first threee
hundred years, I do stand to it, and shall examine what you Reply hereto,

First then, you say, That I resile from Calvine our foundator, who disclaimed
the Fathers in many things, and taxed them of erros, and so did other Reformers
harp upon this string, that the doctrines of the Fathers should be examined be
the Scriptures. But First, how call you Calvine our foundator? Were not
ZUINGLIUS, LVTHER, OECOLAMPAIUS, MELANCHTON, etc. Prior to CALVINE? Were not
HIIROM of Prague, and JOHN HUS (whom your Council of Constance did
treacherously murder) before these? And WICKLEF before them? And the Waldenses
prior to him? Of whom your Friar Reyner, cited by Morney in Myster. Iniq.edit.
2. page 731. gave this testimony, That the Waldenses continued from the days of
Pope Sylvester. yea some say, (says Reyner,) from the Apostles days. How
absord then are you to call Calvine our foundator? Nay, come to the Trial, and
if our Religion be found of latter standing, then since the days of the
Apostles, I will disclaim it. For I assent to Tertullian, lib. 4. contra
Marcion. cap. 5. Id verius quod prius, id prius quod ab initio, id ab initio,
quod ab Apostolis. But Secondly, why charge you Calvine, as taxing the Fathers
with some errors? Who have been more liberal in the Censures of the Fathers
then you Romanists? Take a few instances, Bell. lib. 1. De Beatitud. Sanct.
cap. 6. after he had objected to himself the testimonies of Iustine Martyr,
Irenaus, Epiphanius, etc. answers, Eorum sententiam non video, quo pacto
possimus ab errore defendere. Maldonat the Jesuit, expounding these words,
Matt. 16.18. The gates of Hell shall not prevail against her, says, quorum
verborum sensus non mihi videtur esse, quem omnes praeter Hilarium quos legisse
me memini Authors putant. And on these words, Matthew. 11.11. He that is least
in the kingdom of Heaven, is greater then John the Baptist. After he had
brought many expositions of Ancients, at length concludes, Libere fatebor in
nulla prorsus earum meum qualecunque ingenium acquiescere. Melchior Canus, in
lib. 7. loc. com. cap. 1. number. 3. affirms, that though all the Fathers with
one mouth conclude the Virgin Mary to be guilty of Original sin, yet, that
is an argument of little weight, and that the contrary is piously defended in
the Church. Hear his own words, Sancti omnes qui in ejus rei mentionem
incidere, uno ore asseverarunt Beatam Virginem in peccato Originali conceptam,
and cum nullus sanctorum contravenerit, infirmum tamen ex omnium authoritate
argumentum ducitur, quin potius contraria sententia and probabiliter and pie in
Ecclesia defenditur. You may see multitudes of more instances of your Romanists
contemning and condemning of Fathers, in Dallaus de usu Patrum, lib. 2. cap. 6.
and in Doctor James, his Treatise of the corruption of Scripture, Council, and
Fathers, by the Prelates, Pastors, and Pillars of the Church of Rome, Part. 4. I
shall only now add two more out of learned Dallaeus. The One, is of your
Jesuit Brisacerius, who in a Disput against Collaghanus a Iansenist. When the
Iansenist had objected many of the authorities of Ancients, the Jesuit called
the authorities of Councils and Fathers, Regulas mortuas quaunllum alium
vigorems habent, quam quem iis dat viventis ac praesentis Ecclesiae approbatie
vel interpretatio. That is, Dead rules which have no further significancy or
worth, then they receive from the approbation of the present living Church:
that is, the Pope, as they know, who are acquaint with your Iesuit-Dialect. Yea
the same Jesuit yet more ignominiously calls the Authorities of Fathers,
Vitulinos franos, that is, bridles wherewith only brutes, such as Bullocks and
young Hiefers suffer themselves to be musled up. The other Testimony shall be
that of Cornelius Mussus, Bishop of Bitonto, one of the famous Prelates of your
Council of Trent, in epist. ad Romans cap. 14. Ego (says he,) ut ingenue
fatear, plus uni Sum Pontifici credorem in his quae fidei mysteria tangunt,
quam mill Augustinis, Hieronimis, Gregoriis, nedicam Richardis, Scotis,
Gulielmis. Creed enim and scie quod Summus Pontifex in his quae fidei sunt
errare non potest, quoniam authoritas determinandi quae ad fidem spectant in
Pontifice residet. Did ever Protestants speak so disdainfully or contemptuously
of Ancient Fathers? by which it may appear, that you Romanists use the Fathers
as Merchants do their casting Counters, which sometime stand for pounds,
sometime for shillings, sometimes for pennies, and sometime for nothing, as they
serve their interest. But Thirdly, wherein have I resiled from Calvine and
other Reformers? Did Calvine look upon Fathers as persons obnoxious to error?
So do I. And so did Fathers judge of themselves, as Austine witnesses Epist.
19. ad Hieron. Hence is that of your Melchier Canus, lib. 7. cap. 3. number. 4.
Hanc falicitatem Deus in solis divinis voluminibus inesse voluit, ut in iis non
esset quicquam erroris, cateroquin nemo quant umvis eruditus and sanctus non
interdum hallucinatur, non alicubi cacutit, non quandoque labitur. Does Calvine
or other Reformers, say, that the doctrine of Ancients is to be examined by the
Scriptures? Never said I any thing to the contrary, nay, I cordially subscribe
to that apostolic Anathema, If an Angel, let be a Father, shall teach any
other Gospel to us, let him be accursed. Yet notwithstanding all this, our
Reformed Divines, have often offered to disput against you Romanists, the
controversies of Religion out of the Fathers. Did I not show you this before
from Juel, Whitaker, and Crakanthorp? And how often does learned Calvine, in
his Institutions confute you Romanists from Antiquity, as your
transubstantiation, Lib. 4. cap. 17.. 14. Your Communion under one kind,
Ibid.. 47. 48. 49. 50. The necessity of Auricular confession, Lib. 3. cap. 4..
7. Your Papal Indulgences, Lib. 3. cap. 5.. 3. and 4. The Popes supreamacie
over the whole Catholic Church, Lib. 4. cap. 7.. 3. 4. 5. etc. Yea, and not to
insist in reckoning out particulars, when he is treating of Councils and their
authority, Lib. 4. cap. 9.. 1. Veneror Councilia, (says he,) ex animo,
suoque in honor apud omnes esse cupio, and a little after, Sicuti ad plenam
doctrinae nostrae approbationem and totius Papismi eversionem, abunde verbo DEI
instructi sumus, ut nihil praeterea requirere magnopere opus sit: ita si res
flagitet, magna ex part quod satis sit ad utrumque vetera Concilia nobis
subministrant; where Judicious Calvine affirms, that out of Ancient Councils,
both the Religion of PROTESTANTS may be confirmed, and the Papal superstition
confuted. From all this, may it not appear how ludibriously you say, that I
seem to be hatching a New Religion of my own? Am I not offering to defend the
received Religion of PROTESTANTS, and to have the truth thereof tried By its
conformity with the faith of the Ancient Primitive Church? Is the Ancient
Religion, a New Religion? Is the Religion both of Ancients and PROTESTANTS, a
Religion peculiar to me? Will you not blush, that such foolish Nonsense should
have droped from you?

But you have another trifling Shift, Before (say you,) That conformity with
the faith of the Ancient (hurch, in the first three Centuries, be admitted as a
Test, by which the truth of Religion may be discerned, it ought to be proven,
that all the necessaries of the Christian Religion, are contained in their
writings, which are now extant. But First, may it not with better reason be
resorted on you, that before you had rejected it from being a Test, you ought
first to have proven, that there were some necessaries, and essentials of the
Christian Religion no where to be found in any of the writings of these three
ages? If any be wanting, produce them, and your evidence of their absolute
necessity? If you can produce no necessary article that is wanting, why
decline you the trial? But the truth is, you Romanists, mantaine such a
desperate cause, that if either Scripture or Antiquity be Umpyre, you must
surely be condemned. There is no way to get a favorable Interloquitur for you,
but by setting up your Infallible Propounders, that is, your own selves, to be
Supreme judges to the whole World. If such a Religion be not to be suspected,
let the World judge. But Secondly, do not you Romanists boast bigly sometimes
of Universal traditions? And here by the way, I tell you, I shall never declyne
to have all the Essentials of Religion tried by the famous rule of Vincentius
Lyrinensis, in Commonitorio primo, contra Haereses, cap. 3. Quod ubique, quod
semper, quod ab omnibus est creditum. But if any of the necessaries, or
essentials of Christianity, are not to be found in the writings of the Three
first Centuries, how shall we have a Perpetual and universal tradition for
these, seeing the current is supposed to be broken off at the fountain, for
three hundred years thereafter? Must we take the voice of your Present Church
as an Oracle, to tell us what was believed by the Church so many ages ago,
though there be no record left, that such a thing was ever believed? We must
examine her Credentials, before we become so implicit to her, in matters of
Fact. But Thirdly, If any of the Necessaries of Christian Religion, be
altogether wanting in the writings of Ancients of these ages, how did your
Gualterius the Jesuit undertake to prove the truth of your Religion, by the
testimonies of the Church in all ages? It is true, he was most unhappie in his
undertaking, in so much that Chillingworth in his Defense of Doctor Potter
part. 1. cap. 2.. 119. affirms that he heard an able man of your Religion say,
That Gualterius had not produced one pertinet testimony in the first three
Centuries. The like may be said of Ioannes Andreas Coppenstenius a Predicant,
in his Historical supplement to Bellarmine, who undertakes the like, but with
as little success. Yet do not such undertakings suppose that all necessary
and essential truths of Religion may be found in the writings of these times?
Sed laterem lavo, I do but lose my travel, what wonder to see a Thief declyne
the Court and jurie? He knows upon trial he must be condemned. I have pressed
you to come to be examined either by Scripture or Antiquity, or both, or to
produce any other solid way, of discerning a true Religion from a false, but
you declyne all. Have I not just cause therefore, to discharge finally with
such a babbling Lucifuga?

After I had signed my last Paper, that known Distich dropped from my pen in a
Postscript.

Roma diu titubans variis erroribus acta,
Corruct and mundi desinet esse caput.
At this you behoved to have a fling, though you scarce said any thing to the
controversall points of the Paper. Bot sie (say you,) yat yis your Prophecy,
be not lyk your Patriarche Lutheris Prophecy, who when he lept out of the
Church did brage yat with tue yeiris Preaching he would abolische and eliminat
all Poprie out of the world, sa yat ester yir tua yeiris yair would be no mor in
the world nather Pop, nor Cardinalis, nor Monkis, nor Nuns, nor Mase, nor
Belis, etc. I have set down your own words, with your own spelling, that the
Reader, may discern what a Famous Clerk you are? But here I must Querie you
in a few particulars, and First, how call you this my Prophecy? Are they not
the lines of a Germane Prince? Were they not sent to Pope Gregory the ninth,
by Frederick the second the Emperor, who felt the heavy hand of your usurping
Popes, as other Princes have done. Secondly, how call you Luther our Patriarch?
We indeed honor Luther and Calvine as precious servants of GOD. But we make
neither of them Pope, or Patriarch, or Master of Sentences. Non sumus jurati in
verba Magistri. Our faith is pinned to no man's slieve. Though you be implicit
Slaves to the Pope, yet we to no man. Thirdly, what Church I pray you do you
mean, when you say that Luther did leap out of the Church? Is it the Catholic
or universal Church? But when I pray you did the Roman Church become the
Catholic, a part become the whole? Are not the Grecian, Russian, abyssine,
etc, Churches, parts of the Catholic? Yea, have not you of the Papal faction
rent your selves from the Catholic Church? Have not you revived the Schism of
the Donatists? As they limited the Catholic Church to Africa, do not you
limit it to the Sea of Rome? Is not subjection to the Pope, as universal Bishop
an Essential of your Religion? Was ever that an Essential of Religion in the
Ancient Church? Yea, or in the Roman, till of late, especially in your
Iesuit-sense, as if the Pope had supreme jurisdiction on Earth, even above
General Councils? Surely your Councils of Constance, and Basile, were of
another opinion, who not only determined the Council to have jurisdiction over
the Pope, but also the Council of Basile, Sess. 45. in decreto. 5.
conclusionum, is bold thus to affirm, Nec unquam aliquis peritorum dubitavit
Summum Pontificem in his quae fidem concernunt judicio Concilioru^ universalium
esse subjectum. And yet contrary to the judgment Peritorum omnium, of all
understanding Christians, for the space of a thousand and four hundred years
after CHRIST, (if your Fathers of Basile be to be trusted,) your late Laterane
Conventicle under Pope Leo the tenth, Sess. 11. has defyned on the contrary,
the Pope to have jurisdiction above General Councils. Do you not by this your
Schism, cut off your selves from the Body of the Catholic Church, both of the
Present, and Former ages? Do you not oblige other Christian Churches, to
refuse Communion with you, lest they should be involved in your Schism, and
rent themselves with you, from the Communion of all Christian Churches, who
acknowledge not the usurped supreamacie of your Pope? If therefore you say,
that by the Church, you mean only the Particular Roman Church, then why call
you the Roman Church the Church, as if there were no Church in the World but
she? Why do you say that Luther did leap out of her? Was he not driven out by
Excommunication, as learned Doctor Morton in his grand Imposture of the church
of Rome, cap. 15. Sect. 13. 14. 15. 16. has copiously demonstrated, in so much
that your own Thuan, as cited by the same Doctor Morton, spares not to say, Non
defuerunt qui jam tum culpam in Leonem Papam rejicerent. That there wanted not
among your selves, who laid the blame on Pope Leo the tenth. But may not a man
be a member of the Catholic Church, though not of your Roman? How often have
PROTESTANTS declared, that they only refuse communion with you, in so far as
you reject the truth? Embrace the truth, and lay by your supercilious Schism,
and we are ready to join in communion with you. But Fourthly, why do you not
cite some Author for this Apocryphal prophecy, which you impose on Luther,
That he would root out Popery out of the World in two years? Is it not
observable, that in all these your Nine Papers, these two citations of Luther
and Calvine, are the first citations of any Authors that we have met with from
you, and you cite them at large, without mentioning Book, Chapter, or Page?
And I verily look upon this which you allege of Luther, as an egregious
calumny. For I have some of Luthers works by me, and many grave Authors
writing of him: But that I neither find in his own Works, nor yet that is
affirmed of him, by any Credible Historian. It is true, your Bellarmine, (from
whom it seems you have borrowed this fiction,) In lib. 4. De Ecclesia
Militante, cap. 15. affirms that your Lying Cochlaeus reported such a false
prophecy of Luther, But who knows not that Bell ^rmine and other your
Controversists are ready to scratch up the dirt, which lying and calumniating
adversaries have thrown upon our Reformed Divines, and that Cochlaeus in
particular, has labored to traduce Luther most calumniously, even as that
Runnagad Bolsecus has most impudently reproached Master Calvine? Who but an
Ignorant, or one possessed with Malice, will give credit to Cochlaeus in this
marter, who is known to have been a most viruleut Adversary of Luthers? Am I
the first who have given such a character of your Cochlaeus? Hear what learned
and modest Whitaker said of him, when he is pondering the same allegiance of
Bellarmine out of Cochlaeus; Controvers. de Ecclesia, quaest. 5. cap. 13.
Respondeo, (says he,) nullam fidem adhibendam esse Cochlaeo, homini
mendacissimo, nec ullam habendam esse illius rationem, fuit enim homo nullius
fidei. That is in English, I answer, that no faith is to be given to
Cochlaeus, a person exceedingly addicted to lying, neither is any account to be
made of his testimony, for he was a man of no faith. But I shall now only
remit you to a Lutheran Gerard, in loc. com. loc. de Eccles. cap. 11. sect.
12.. 290. where you will find both this Objection of Bellarmine, and that
Cochlaeanum mendacium, (as Gerard terms it,) that Lie of Cochlaeus concerning
Luther copiously confuted. But though it pleases GOD in the depth of his
Judgments, to permit your Papal usurpation to continue for a time, as he has
permitted the Delusions and Usorpations of the Mahumetane faction; Yet your
Bellarmine acknowledges, that Luther gave a blow to the Papacy, which it never
recovered. Lib 3. De Romano Pontif. cap. 21. Ab eo tempore (says he,) quo per
vos Papa Antichristus esse caepit non modo non crevit, sed semper decrevit ejus
imperium. Hence this Distich was written of him, And again, Vir sine vi ferri,
vi verbi and inermibus armis, Vir sine re, sine spe, contudit orbis opes.
Lutherus decimum confecit strage Leonem, De clava noli quaerere, penna fuit.

And yet further. Roma Orbem domuit, Romam sibi Papa subegit, Viribus illa
suis, fraudibus iste suis. Quantum isto major Lutherus, major and illa Orbem
urbemque uno qui domuit calamo.



As for predictions of Rom's overthrow, I may remit you to more Canonick
Prophesies thereof, then that of Frederick. You may, if you will, take one,
from Revel. 14.8. Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great city, because she
made all Nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication. You may
take another, from Revel. 17.16. The ten horns which thou saw upon the beast,
shall hate the whore, and make her desolat and naked, and eat her flesh, and
burn her with fire. You may add a third, from Revel. 18.2. And the Angel
cried mighty lie with a strong voice, Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen,
and is become the habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and
the cage of every unclean and hateful bird. Go not to say that these are but
our Lutheran comments, to expound Babylon by Rome. Did not Hierome so expound
it, Epist. ad Algasiam quaest. 11. and epist. ad Asellam. And Austine, lib. 18.
de civit. DEI cap. 22. and Tertull. lib. contra Indaeos. cap. 9. and Eusebius
lib. 2. hist. eccles. cap. 14? Yea there is such evidence for this exposition,
that your own Barronius, Sixtus Senensis, Ribera, and others have acknowledged
Rome to be Babylon. Nor can this denomination be limited to Heathnish Rome, for
not only is Rome called Babylon by Tertullian, who lived under the Heathnish
Emperors, but also by Hierome, Esebius, Austine, and many others cited by your
own Ribera, who lived under Christian Emperors. But I shall not now enter on
that controversy. Only let me remember you of Lactantius boldness, Lib. 7.
Instit. cap. 15. Romanum nomen, horret animus dicere, sed dicam quia futurum
est, tolletur de Terra. Is it not the refore the concernment of you Romanists,
to hearken to that advyce which Hierome long ago tendered concerning this
matter, Lib. 2. Adversus Iovinianum, speaking of Rome, Maledictionem quam urbi
Salvator in Apocalypsi comminatus est potes effugere per paenitentiam, habens
Ninivitarum exemplu^. But seeing you are so good at descanting upon Poetic
Rythmes, I will give you another, which I assure you is no more mine then the
other, but what truth it contains the World may judge.

O Roma, a Roma, quantum mutata vetusta es?
Nunc caput es scelerum quae caput orbis eras.
Fifthly and Lastly, if ever Luther uttered such a speech as you allege,
(wherein we are not concerned,) yet can I not be induced to believe that he did
it in such a ludibrious manner as you have expressed it. For you would
insinuat, that he had foretold, That within two years there should be no more
Pope, or Mass, or any other relict of your Papal superstition. Yet you have
foolishly heaped up so many Negatives, that what you intend for a Negative
becomes an Affirmative, and so you destroy your own Scope. Indeed your
Bellarmine, in setting down this calumny of Cochlaus had more wit, then to
heap such a multitude of Negatives, as you have done. But as for you, as you
begane ludibriously, so you end, Dignum talli patella operculum.

If Hierome thought he had co^descended far, in bestowing one lucubration
against such a Trifler as Vigilantius, have not I supererogated above measurein
allowing nine Papers upon you, who deserve more the Title of Dormitantius, then
that Adversary of Hieromes? Now therefore I do finally discharge with you,
except you come to the purpose. Yet to reduce you to that, from which you have
digressed in your Last eight Papers, I subjoyne again the confutation of all
the nine, in two words.

Aberdene May 10. 1667. John Menzeis.
POSTSCRIPT.
A succinct confutation of Master Dempster the Jesuit his nine Papers, in two
words.

Nego Minorem, Or, Nego Conclusionem.

Aberdene May 10. 1667. John Menzeis.



The Jesuits tenth Paper. Answer to a ninth Paper of Master JOHN MENZEIS,
wherein is confirmed, that the pretended conformity of PROTESTANT Religion with
Scripture, is a mere imaginar, and groundless conformity. 14. May, 1667.
This Paper was delivered to Master JOHN MENZEIS, on May 15.
I Received the twelfth of May your ninth Paper, and it seems that you have
made an obstinat resolution, that since you cannot bear out your cause with
solid reasones, that in supple of this, and to bl^nd simple People, you will
carry it out by a Bastard sort of eloquence, that is, by a multitude of words,
that either wants a sufficient signification corresponding to them, or else,
are about objects altogether disparat and out of line. You carp at that which I
said, that the cause wherefore I did not answer to all things contained in
your Papers, was not the prolixity of them, but barrenness and superfluity of
them. This you say is a contradiction, for if they be barren, how are they
superfluous? But I tell you over again, that there is no contradiction in
affirming your Papers, to be both barren of stuff that makes to the purpose,
or to our present controversy, and stuffed with superfluous digressions out of
purpose. And with this occasion I call to your mind other sort of
Contradictions upon your part. For when you was urged to give some ground
whereby might be proven the truth of the PROTESTANT Religion. Your answer was,
that Religion is not an indivisible truth, but a complex of many, and so, that
ye were not obliged to prove in general the truths of your Religion, but that
you would descend to all the particulars, and to this effect, you brought an
example of a purse, holding an hundred pieces of gold in it, which must be all
applied to the touch stone, one be one. But afterward, when you assigning for
the ground of the truth of your Religion, the perspicuity of Scripture in all
particular points that you hold as necessary to salvation, you were desired to
give a list of all these particular points, that so they might be tried,
whether the perspicuity of Scripture did shine brightly over them all, here you
disclaimed your former example of the purse, alleging that you was not obliged
to descend to particulars. Is not this to breath out of the same mouth, both
heat and cold? Likewise you are always pretending, that you are a mere
Defendant and not Opugnant, and yet your Papers contains almost nothing else
but Impugnations of Catholic doctrines, which make nothing to our present
controversy. Neither will it avail to say, that the Defendant may Retort
arguments, because the retortion of arguments in our present controversy, does
only serve to condemn your own Religion, of falsehood and error; For giving and
not granting, that you had all the grounds for the truth of your Religion,
which Catholics have for the truth of theirs, (though it be most false,) and
that this is all that you pretend by your retortions, yet it cannot serve to
prove the truth of your Religion, because, you violently putting out the
Catholic Religion, under pretext that it was false and erroneous, were obliged
to bring in another which was better and consequently that had better grounds.
And if you did proceed reasonably, this only were sufficient to close your
mouth, and to make you lay aside all such superfluous digressions, and to
insist only in bringing such solid reasons, that could not be applied to any
Religion that you esteem to ^e erroneous.

I purposly omit as I have professed always to do all your digressions that
maks nothing to our present purpose. As that misapplyed discourse of Saint
Chrysostom with the Pagans, since just as it lies, and as it is cited by you,
it may be assumed by any new Upstart Sectarie if they were cited before your
assembly, and asked in what Scripture he did found his error. And though you
call it a trisling cavil, to object so often to you, that all you bring to
prove the truth of the PROTESTANT Religion, may be with as great reasone
assumed to prove a false Religion to be true, yet you must know that is no
trisling matter, but a maine point, and an argument both of the weakness of
your Religion, and of your insufficiency to mantaine it, for since you can
bring nothing that is sufficient to distinguish your Religion from a false
religion, it remains alwise in that state as has been often told you, that a
man is in, who is affirmed indeed to be an honest man, but such an honest man
that there is no difference betwixt him and a knave. Likewise I omit here that
long discourse whereby you disclaim Calvine as the author of your Religion,
and claims to John Hus and the Albigenses, at last to be upon your side,
though the world knows, that they^ were not of your Religion Likewise I slight
your long patrocinie that you make to defend your patriarch Luther; that he did
not leap out of the Catholic Church, but only out of the Romish Church, though
if you had done completely this defense, you should have shown what Visible
Church was then in the World to the which he did adh^^e, and with which he did
keep external communion when he left the Roman Church.

Good Sir leaving all your Paterga's, remember that the occasion of this
debate, was your continual railing in Pulpit against Catholic Dectrines, and
being desired to give some good solid ground, for the truth of your own
religion, whereby both your own might be confirmed and others induced to
embrace it. You did very stoutly undertake the bussines, and did bragingly
protest that ye would mantaine the truth of the PROTESTANT Religion against
whomsoever, before whomesoever, or in whatsoever place or time, but when it
came to the purpose and you were desired to produce your grounds and reasons,
whereby it might be mantained to be a true religion. Your first refuge was,
that you as the Defendant, was not obliged to produce any ground, but all the
burden incumbed on me as the Opponent, to prove that you had no grounds. And
in this, you behaved your self just as if one should come as sent from the
Council, to impone upon the L. Provest and venerable Council of Aberdene, a
charge to apprehend a person as suspect of Disloyalty to his Prince, and the
L. Provest, desiring to see his Commission, he should reply, that he was not
obliged to show his Commission, but that the Provest would prove that he had no
Commission, and that his Commission was sufficiently proven by this that there
could not be produced reasons to show that he had no commission. So you have
undertaken to mantain the truth of the PROTESTANT Religion, and being demanded,
that you show your grounds, whereby the truth of it may be mantained, you
reply, that you are not obliged to produce grounds, but that another should
prove that you have no grounds, not considering that religion is a positive
thing, and a complex of positive dogm's: and so cannot be mantained to be true,
but by producing of positive grounds, and the shifting to produce them, will
make all to give sentence, that it is destitute of solid grounds.

Your next refuge was, that your Religion was proven to be true, because it was
conform to Scripture, that is to say, to the true sense of the letter of
Seripture. Now this pretended conformity, was proven to be merely imaginary and
groundless, because, as it is impossible that a thing can be conform to a
true sense, except it be supponed that there is existent a true sense: so it is
impossible that a thing can be proven to be conform to a true sense, exceept
it be proven that there is a true sense. Now you were desired to lay aside your
diffused Pulpit railing style, and by a judicious and school way, to produce
some soild ground, whereby men's understanding might be convinced, that
PROTESTANT Religion has the true sense of the letter by the holy Ghost, of the
letter of Scripture. To this you answered, first, that it makes a Nonsense, to
say, that a Religion cannot be proven to be conform to the true sense of the
letter of scripture, except it be proven that there is a true sense. Now I ask
you, where lies here a nonserse, or point me out any thing here that is not
most clear? Indeed you, in place of this my proposition, did substitute one of
your own, and with your own words, and I willingly grant to you, that yours
makes a Nonsense. Next, you seem to chasse, because I taxt your discourse to
be founded upon gross ignorance, both about the nature of Formal Precisions,
and about the nature of True Religion; and to this you reply first, that to
speak to you of Formal Precisions is a Pedantick thing. But is it possible,
that you who professes your self to be a Divine, should so slight Precisions,
since they are the very quintessence of all superior sciences, and Aristotle
might teach you, that there is no science of particulars, but in so far, as the
are reduced to some commone abstraction or Precision, and that every science
has his own particular abstraction, whereby it is both constitute and
distinguished from all other sciences. Next, you remit me to your School-Boyes,
who will teach me the nature of Formal Precisions. I am glade that Scholars
are so learned, but if it be so, they out-shut their Master, and knows more
nor their Master, at least shows to know; as appears in this same answer
that you make here, For I telling you, That the objective grounds of
precisions, is separability, and that this is to be sound betwixt truths
revealed in Scripture, and True Religion, and that on both parts; because True
Religion is separable from conformity with Scripture, Since there was true
religion in the World, before there was any Scripture written: And on the other
part, All the truths revealed in Scripture, might be, though they componed no
Religion, to wit, If GOD had so revealed them, that he had not imposed an
Obligation upon us to believe them, as he might have done, or wherefore might
he not have done it? Now to impugn this, you bring texts of Scripture, to
prove that De Facto, this obligation to believe is not seperat. I speak of
Separability, and what GOD might have done, and you argue against Actual
separation, as if I had said, that De Facto, there is no obligation to believe
things revealed in Scripture. Are you not ashamed of such ignorant mistaking?
Or, were not well applied to you, those civil terms that your self use in
this Paper, to wit, that you behoved to be drunk, or dreaming when their things
escaped your pen? Likewise how gross mistaking is it, to say, That I
granted, that a Religion to be true, and to be conform to Scripture are
Synonima's; whereas I said only this Ad Hominem, and to argue you out of your
own principles, who admits no rule of divine truth, but the written word. And in
this you imitat many other of your Champions, who as I told you else where, did
cite for positive doctrine of Fathers and Scholasticks the objections they made
against themselves.

Your second answer is, that the sense which you give to the letter of
Scripture, is proven to be a true sense, because it coincids with the sense
that the fathers gives. And you are to be praised, for the recanting of your
former confining of this to the Fathers of the first three Centuries, but
withal, you should have shown, how far, and to how many more ages you do
now extend your former confining. And who would not smyle to hear you recur to
the Fathers, who takes all authority from them, holding them for men as
obnoxious to errors as your selves are? And when you are pressed with their
authorities against you, you run back to Scripture alone, saying, that you will
admit them only in so far as they agree to scripture, that is to say, to the
arbitrarie glosses that you give to the letter of Scripture.

At length you have taken a compendious way to end all Controversy, and to
take away all doubt concerning the truth of your Religion, making this offer:
that you will be content to disclaim PROTESTANT Religion, if there can be
brought any one article of it, which you will not show to be contained either
clearlie and in terms in some place of Scripture, or else by a solid
consequence, that it is deduceable out of verities clearlie and in terms
revealed in Scripture. This is your offer, and I hope you mean that faling,
you will make this recantation publicly and with some solemnity. Now I out
of the love, I carry to this your conversion, accepts your offer, and not to
burden you with many things, I propone for the present this one article,
whereby you hold that there are only Two Sacraments, desiring you to assign
either a place of Scripture, where this is clearly and in terms revealed, or
assign some verity clearly and in terms revealed, out of the which this
article by a solid consequence may be deduced. But remember, that the question
is not, Whether there be two Sacraments, but all the question is about this
exclusive particle, only two Sacraments. Likewise be pleased to remember, that
the deductio^ must besolid, according to your own word that you use, and it is
not sufficiently proven to be solid, because you call it solid, or, because you
say, it will appear solid to all those, Whose eyes the God of this World has
not blinded, which is your ordinar expression in such like matters.

Master JOHN MENZEIS Answer to the Jesuits tenth Paper.
Some Observes upon Master Dempster the Jesuit, his tenth Paper, wherein he
vainly imagines, that he has confuted the conformity of the Religion of
PROTESTANTS with the Scriptures, and yet has said nothing, either to weaken
the Religion of PROTESTANTS, or to establish the ruining Religion of Papists.
I Know not if ye do blush, but I am truly ashamed in your behalf, that so
much of my work should have stood, rather in discovering and confuting your
Calumnies, and Prevarications in matter of Fact, then in examining your
Arguments. This your Tenth Paper comes short of none of the former, as to this
kind of st^ffe. For in it I desiderat nothing of a Jesuit, but the Acumen,
whereof these Children of Pride do arrogantly boast, though often times on
very slender grounds, whereof your Empty Papers may be a luculent
demonstration.

Toward the close of your Tenth Paper, you at length seem to agree, (but with
how little ingennity, may hereafter appear,) to have one Particular
controversy betwixt us and you examined: namely, concerning the Number of
Sacraments. I have such an appetite, once to try your behavior on a Particular
Controversy, that I shall not insist in ripping up all the Trespasses of your
Tenth Paper. Yet some Specimen of them I must give, least you should say that I
do charge you unjustly, or least the credulity of a simple Reader should be
abused by your bold Asseverations.

Should I but give a complete Index of your shameless Omissions, it might
satisfy the Reader that your Pasquil deserves nor the name of an Answer to my
ninth Paper. I shall hint only at a few, whereof I doubt if a Person of
ingenuity would have been guilty.

As First, I show from Chrysostom, that your Objection concerning the sense of
holy Scripture (which has been the substance of your two former Papers,) was
an old rotten Cavil of Heathens against the Christian Religion; and that
Chrysostom of old did answer thereunto, as we PROTESTANTS do now a days to
you Jesuits. But this you say, You purposlie omit as a Digression, making
nothing to our present purpose. Is it nothing to our present purpose, that you
have nothing to object against our Religion, but Heathnish cavils against the
Christian Religion? Is it nothing to the purpose, that Chrysostom answered
these Cavils, as we PROTESTANTS do you Jesuits? Does not this demonstrat a
consonancy betwixt Our Religion, and the Old Christian Religion; betwixt our
principles, and the principles of Chrysostom, and consequently of other
Ancient Fathers? But to salve this your absurd omission, you exercise your
calumniating vein, saying, That I misapply Chrsostome, and what I cite from
him may be assumed by any Sectarie. Is it enough for you to say that I
misapplyed him? Ought you not to have discovered my Trespass? Did I not give
you the Formalia verba of the Father? Should I regard your revileings, who
spare not to say, that Chrysoslomes answer to the Paganes Objection may be
assumed by any Sectarie? Is not this an evidence, that Chrysostom, were he
alive to day, should be a Sectarie with you, and of the Religion of
PROTESTANTS? But Secondly, because you still clamoured (though without cause,)
That there is no assignable ground of the conformity of the Religion (...)
PROTESTANTS had solid grounds to prove its conformity (...) the Scripture. One
argument was proposed in a Syllogisticke frame, the Medium whereof was, that
the Religion of PROTESTANTS had all the solid grounds which the True Christian
Religion has. The other Argument was drawn up by way of D^lemma, because if
our Religion deviat from the sense of Scripture, then must it either be in our
Positives, or in our Negatives, but in neither, as I did demonstrate. Yet
neither of these Arguments do you once touch. Had you intended a Paper
correspondent to your Inscription, To prove the conformity of our Religion with
scripture to be imaginary, and groundles, ought you not to have examined and
discussed these Arguments? How would your men laugh at one who would set down a
magnificke title, promising a confutation of all Bellarmins arguments, and yet
in the body of the discourse, touch none of them? Is the strength of
imagination so strong with you, as to imagine, that you have proven the
conformity of the Protestant Religion with Scripture to be imaginary and
groundless, when you dare not once touch the Arguments which are brought to
prove the conformity of the PROTESTANT Religion with the Scriptures to be
real? Have you not need to be sent to Pythagoras School, to be taught to be
mute, until you learn to speak to purpose? But Thirdly, I did not only
prove, that the Religion of PROTESTANTS had grounds to prove its conformity
with the Scriptures, but also, to stop the mouth of a Caviller, I declared to
you what was that ground, and I took it from Georgius Scholarius, his Third
Oration in the Council of Florence, and did appeal thereunto for the decision
of all controversies betwixt us and you. But you never once touched this
ground. How then could you imagine, that you had confuted the conformity of the
Religion of PROTESTANTS with Scripture? Does the Devil abuse the imaginations
of Jesuited Heretics, as somesay, that he does the fancy's of Witches, making
them imagine that they do the thing of which they only dreamed? Fourthly, did
I not give a Direct Answer to your Objection by a formal distinction? If any
thing should have been taken notice of, ought not this? Yet ye wholly overleap
it. A goodly Dispistant indeed. Fifthly, I refuted some new Cavils, which you
started to prove, That the truth of Religion, ought not to be tried by its
conformity with the faith of the Ancient Church, in the first three Centuries.
But you found my Replies thereto so thornie, that you have not dared to meddle
with them. Only you have an impudent Calumny concerning that matter, which I
may afterward touch. Sixthly, whereas as you had accused Calvine, and our
Reformers, as contemners of Antiquity, I show not only, that Calvine had
confuted your Religion from Antiquity, but also, that Antiquity is more
contemned by you Romanists, then ever it was by the Reformed Churches. I
brought many Instances hereof from Bellarmine, Maldonate, Melchior Canus,
Brisacerius, and Cornelius Mussus, but all these you smother in silence. Thus
have I given an overly touch of some few of your Omissions. Whosoever will be at
pains to compare my ninth Paper with your Tenth, will find you guilty of many
more. Only now let me ask, are these the Digressions, the Parerga's, and the
Superfluities which you talk of in my Paper? Do not every one of those touch
the Cause? Have they not a genuine rise from Your Papers? Who that regarded
either truth, or his own reputation, would have overleaped all those? You have
made great haste to transmit your Papers to me, but you have still left your
work behind you. I have gotten Ten Papers from you, but not One Answer. Take
a view of your Omissions, and you will find all My Papers unanswered. Your
(...), your after thoughts have need to be set on work to supply your
Omissions.

In the next place, I shall gleane up some of your Unfaithful
misrepresentations, in doing whereof, I shall not need to stand to the precise
Method of your Rapsodick Paper. And first, you have such a shameless fore
head, as to say, That I had recanted the confineing of my discourse, concerning
the conformity of our Religion with the faith of the Ancient Church in the
first three Centuries. This is that Calumny of yours, at which I was hinting in
your Fifth Omission. How could you hatch such a manifest unteach? Let all the
Jesuits in Europe play the Critics on My Papers, and see if I have recanted
one Syllable that ever I avouched in any of them. I told indeed in my Last,
that you like a^ Dreamer ^ha^ substituted that, Concerning conformity with the
Fathers of the first three Centuries, as a Second Answer which I had given in
my Eight Paper, to your Cavil, concerning the sense of Scripture; whereas in
all that Eight Paper of mine, there was no express mention at all of the
Fathers of the first three Centuries. Is my discovery of your Mistake, a
recanting of ought that ever I had said concerning the Fathers of the first
three Centuries? Do you not behave your self like a Dreamer, when you
substitute Quid pro quo? Any hint I had in my Eight Paper at that Matter, was
to challenge you, that though in your Eight Paper, you had been reduced Ad
metam silentii in that point, all the Cavils mentioned in your Seventh, being
so fully confuted, that you had nothing to Reply in your Eight, yet you durst
not adventure to have the truth of Religion examined, By its conformtie with
the faith of the most Ancient Church. In my Ninth, I did expressly confute some
New Cavils, which upon further deliberation you had started in your Ninth,
against the trial of Religion, By the conformity thereof, with the faith of
the Ancient Church, in the first three Centuries. So far was I from recanting
or refusing to admit that as a discretive Test, for trying the truth of
Religion. Surely the first 300. years, were the flower of the Primitive Church,
Hence is that testimony which Egesippus in Eusebius. lib. 3. hist. Eccles. cap.
29. gives to the Church in those days. Ad ca tempora Virgo pura and incorrupta
mansit Ecclesia, (...). The Church then had continued a pure and a chaste
Virgin. Shall you never have the ingenuity, to Recant such impudent Calumnies?
But I nothing wonder, that you cannot be induced, to have the truth of Religion
examined By its conformity with the Church in these Centuries. For as a
Learned Divine has observed: In these ages most of your present R^mish tenets
were unknown to the Would, Your Papal Indulgences were then unhatched:
Purgatory fire was then unkindled to make your kitchin's smoke: The Mass was
then uumoulded: Transubstantiation unbaked: The Treasury of Merits was then
unmiuted: The Popes transcendent power was uncreated: Ecclesiastics were
unexempted: And deposing of Kings was then undreamed of: The Lay People were
not cozened then of the Cup, Communion under one kind only, was not then in
kind: It was not then known, that Liturgies and Prayers were publicly made in
an unknown tongue: They did not then worship or adore any wooden or breaden
God: They worshipped that which they knew, and that in Spirit and in truth. Thus
Simon Birkbeck in his Tractat, entitled the Protestants Evidence. Sect. 3.
page 18. Edit. 3. By which you may perceive, That it is no new sect of my own
that I am hatching, when I appeal to the Religion of the Church in the Three
first Centuries, as you foolishly whisper in your Ninth Paper.

But because, you use these invidious words, of Confyning my discourse to the
three first Centuries: You may remember, that in my Seventh Paper, I cleared
that the First Restriction of my Argument to the Three first Centuries, for
proving the truth of our Religion and the falsehood of yours, was occasioned by
the discourse I was then upon, concerning the Ancient Apologists in these
Centuries; And that my argument might have been extended further, as in such
like exigences it had been further extended by Juell, Whit^ker, Crak^nthorp,
and other learned PROTESTANTS. Now only I tell you, that if you have the
confidence to try the truth or falsehood of Religion, By the consonancie thereof
with or dissonancie to the faith of the Catholic Chruch in the first three
Centuries, you shall find that I never intended so to astrict my self to these
ages, as not to go further. After we have gotten the verdict of the First
three Centuries, I shall not then declyne to trace you successively through all
succeeding ages to this day. And I am confident upon a through discuss it will
appear that Your present Romish Faith, as to all its Essentials, was never the
faith of the Catholic Church in any age, let be in All. And upon the
conttarie, neither you, nor any of your Adherents shall be able to prove, that
our Religion differs in Its Essentials, from the faith of the Catholic Church
in any age. Now in such an enquiry, can we fall upon a more convenient Method,
then to begin at the fountain, I mean at the most pure, Ancient and
(according to Egesippus Elogie,) Virgin Church, in the First three Centuries.
If our Religion be found conform thereto in all Its Essentials (as I am
confident it shall) then sure it is conform to the True Catholic Religion in
all ages. If yours be found dissonant thereto (as I doubt not but it will,)
then sure it is dissonant to the Christian Religion, in all ages. For there is
but one faith, Ephesians. 4.5. and one True Religion.

But Secondly, you have the boldness to upbraid me with Two contradictions.
Only before I propose them, I must mind you, that neither of these pretended
Contradictions are in my Ninth Paper, to which you now answer. So glad it
seems you have been of any thing to fill up the room, wherein you should have
answered that Ninth Paper. If my Former Papers were guilty of these
Contr^adictions, were you not very obtuse who did not discover them more
timely? Yet let the unpartiall Reader judge of these Contradictions.

The first alleged contradiction is, That upon the one hand, I should have
affirmed Religion to be a complex of many truths, which are to be severally
tried, as the several pieces of gold in a purse, and that I would descend to
the several particulars, yea, and that all points necessary to salvation, were
contained perspicuously in Scripture: Yet when you called me, to give a list of
all these particular points, then I disclaimed my former example of a purse,
and alleged that I was not obliged to descend to particulars. I see now I was
in no mistake, when I said, that you walked by that Machiavillian principle,
Calumniare audacter etc. Resume all my Papers, and see if ever I refused to
descend to a trial of any particular Controversy betwixt you and us? Yea,
have I not all this time been pressing you to this, and you dared not to peep
out of your lurking holes? Have I not passed through many of the Controversies
in particular, to which you have not adventured to make any Reply? Produce the
page or leaf in any of my Papers, where ever I disclaimed that forementioned
example, Of trying the several pieces of gold by the touch stone, yea, or one
(...) that once I gave you under my hand? But I shall ingenuoussy tell the
truth of that which you so deceitfully misrepresent, and when I have done,
contradict me if you can. I said indeed, That Religion is a complen of many
truths, and to prove them all, as matters are now stated bemint us and you
Remanists, were to write a body of controversies. But yet that I should never
decline to examine any of those with you. And I have further said, that all the
necessary points af Christian Religion, were contained perspicuously in the
Scriptures. But when you in stead of comeing to a discuss of par^^cular
points, only started that old thread bare Cavil, Concerning a precise
catalogue of necessary points, I show That it was but a mere tergiversing
shift in you, and demonstrated by many reasons, which you was never able to
answer, That there was no necessity lying upon me, in order to the decision
of the maine controversy, at present betwixt us, to determine a precise
Catalogue of necessary truths. You may call in for your assistance, the rest
of your Society, and try if you can find a real Contradiction in all this.
Indeed if I had promised to give you a Catalogue of points necessary to
Salvation, and hereafter had refused to give it; o^ if since I declared a
readiness to debate with you any point in Controversy, betwixt the Reformed
Churches and the Church of Rome. I had declined to perform my promise; you
might have accused me of Inconsistencie with my self: Or if having ^ffi^med,
that all things necessary to Salvation are clearly contained in Scripture, I
had denied any article of faith necessary to Salvation, to be contained
clearly in Scripture, you might have charged me with a Contradiction. But you
and your Associats may canvase what I have said again and again, and try if
you can find either a Contradiction, or that I have declyned any thing that is
necessary for the decision of the present Controve sie. Cannot all the points
in Controversy betwixt the Reformed Churches and Pomanists, be particularly
examined without Desyning a precise catalogue of truths, simply necessary to
Salvation? Have I ever said, that every one of your Romish errors is
Fundamental? Or, that no points of truth are clearly revealed in Scripture,
but only Fundamentals, or such, the explicit belief whereof is absolutely
necessary to Salvation? Nay, I tell you, that on maine reason, why I did, and
do forebear, for the time to pitch upon such a Catalogue, was, because I stand
now to justify the Religion of PROTESTANTS against your Cavills. But the
Reformed Churches, in their Harmony of Confessions, have not, so far as I
have observed, determined that Precise Catalogue of necessaries. So that in
pirching upon such a Catalogue, at the time, I should leave my work to follow
a tergiversing vagrant. Yea some of our Divines, particularly, acu^e
Chillingworth in his book, entitled, The Religion of Protestants a safe way
to Salvation, part. 1. cap, 3. 13. Affirms that more may be necessary to the
Salration of some then of others. And therefore to call for a precise catalogue
of points necessary to the Salvation of every one, were, as if one should call
for a Dyall to serve all Meridians, or for a coat to serve the Moon in all her
Changes. You may likewise remember, that I show in my Sixth and Seventh Papers,
that Romanists are no less concerned to give a Catalogue of necessaries, nor
exposed to fewer difficulties in doing it, then we, and that in this matter,
your Authors have been often Non-plussed by PROTESTANT Divines. For you have
made points Necessary, which the Ancient and Catholic Church, never held as
Necessary. And so have separated your selves from the Catholic Church of
JESUS CHRIST. But to let you see, that I am still ready to perform what ever I
undertook: pitch you upon any point controverted betwixt the Reformed churches
and You, whether belonging to the Essentials or Integrals of Religion, that is,
whether simply necessary to Salvation or not, and you shall find, that I shall
never declyne the discuss thereof with you, or any of your Romish Synagogue.

But let us take a view of the other pretended Contradiction, which you object.
Namely, That I affirm that I do sustain in this debate the part of the
Defendant, and that yet the greatest part of my Papers contain impugnations of
your Romish Doctrines. And is not your shame so much the greater, that I have
impugned so many of your Doctrines, and you durst never adventure to vindicat
one of them? If most of my Papers contain impugnations of your Religion, how
did you before allege that I declyned to come to particulars? Should not alyat
have a good memory? But is there any apparent Contradiction in that which you
object? It might perhaps be disputed, whether it be proper for a Respo^dent to
use Contra-argumentations, but who ever said that it was a Contradiction? May
not I as a Respondent hold you to your work to prove the Negatum, and yet
Exsuperabundanti, reach forth a blow against you by Retortion? Nay your self
perceived that this would be reponed to you, therefore say you, That retortion
does not serve the turn in the present case betwixt us, because it is not
enough, that PROTESTANTS have all the grounds for their Religion which
Romanists have for theirs, seeing PROTESTANTS have rejected the Romish
Religion, and the grounds thereof. But this is like the rest of your cobwebs,
for though a valid Retortion does not always suffice to establish positively
the Hypothesis of the Respondent; yet it conduces to stop the mouth of the
cavilling Opponent. And besides, you Romanists do often pretend to Grounds,
which do not compet to you, as to a Conformity with Scripture, and with
primitive antiquity. Shall conformity with Scripture and Antiquity, cease to be
grounds, by which the truth of the Religion of PROTESTANTS may be demonstrated,
because you Romanists do falsely pretend thereunto? How often has this been
hammered upon you, that conformity with the Law may prove luculently one to be
an Honest-Man, though a Knave pretend thereunto? Excellently said Austine, Lib.
3. de Baptism^, contra Donatistas, cap. 19. Haeretici Scripturas tenent ad
speciem non ad veritatem, -- and again, Ad imagines phantasmatum suorum
convertunt omnia Sacramenta and verba librorum sanctorum. Nec tamen quia illae
imagines falsae sunt, and doctrinae Daemoniorum propterea illa Sacramenta, and
divind eloquia sic exhonoranda sunt ut illorum esse putentur. The sum of this
choice testimony of Austine, is, that Scriptures must not be laid aside, as no
being grounds of the True Religion, because Heretics boldly, though fasly
pretended thereunto. By this time you may see, that notwithstanding all your
Jesuit breeding, you may go to School again, and searne what a Contradiction
is.

I come now to take some notice, how you behave your self, in vindicating your
poor cavil, Concerning the sense of Scripture. Suffer me therefore to lay
before you some Instances of your weakeness herein. As First, You now
acknowledge, that in the sense wherein I proposed your objection in my nynth
Paper, it is perfect Nonsense. But in my Ninth Paper, I gave no other sense of
it, then I had given before in my Eight Paper. Nay in my Ninth Paper, I did
repeat In terminis what I had said in my Eight, to make you sensible of your
ludibrious whifle, concerning Formal precisions: But notwithstanding the sense
which I had given of your objectio^ in my eight paper, you mantained it to be
Good sense, and that there interveened a sufficient distinction betwixt the
Medium and the Problem; But now without any variatio^ since it is become
perfect Nonsense, according to your own acknowledgment. If this be your skill
of Formal precisions, wherein you glory, to turn Sense to Nonsense, neither
I, nor others, will much-envy your Acumen. Secondly therefore, to make some
sense of this your cavil, you exhibit it thus to us, A Religion cannot be
proven to be conform to the true sense of the letter of scripture, except it
be first proven that there is a true sense. And you cry out, Where lies there
any nonsense here? And you call on us to point you out any thing which is not
clear. But I do yet desiderat both clearness and truth in this your
Assertion, as it is now proposed by you. I say First, I desiderat Clearness,
for hereby you would seem to question, Whether scripture had a true sense? As
if the GOD of Truth could not speak Sense, or had delyvered Nonsense in the
holy Scriptures. Yet I have more charity to you, then to think that you are
come to that height of profane Scepticisme. This only I have said, to show
that the Sense of your words appears not so clear; and that they might suffer
such a Blasphemous construction. But I am apt to conceive, that the thing which
you would have said, was, That before we PROTESTANTS prove our Religion to be
conform to the scriptures, it must be proven, that the sense which we give of
scripture is true. But, (besides all which has been said in my two former
Papers to this, most of which to this hour remains unanswered,) I now say,
that I desiderat the Truth of this, Assertion, even as thus expressed. For a
Proposition may be so suculent, that the words being understood, the
understanding, if it be sound, cannot but presently take up the sense thereof
without any antecedent proof: Else in proving the true sense of any
Proposition, we should run In infinitum. And therefore, that a Religion may
be proven to be conform to the sense of the letter of the Scripture, it is
only requisite, that the sense of the letter of Scripture be either in it self
luculent, obvious and clear, the words being once understood; or if it be not
so obvious and clear, that in that case, it be proven. This I freely grant, and
shall never decline in the handling of any controverted point with you. But
Thirdly, in stead of proving that there does interveen a Formal precision,
sufficient to make a distinction betwixt the Medium and the Problem in your
Proposition, as it was glossed upon by me in my Eight Paper, which was the
thing incumbent to you, you only fall out upon a commendation of Formal
Precisions, together with some scoffing jeeres against me and my Scholars,
which discover more of your folly, then injure either of us. I meddle not with
such excentrick foolries. Neither do I deny, but Divines may make use of
Precisions as occasion serves. But to turn so grave a Theologick debate into a
Logical scuffle, about Formal precisions, savoures at best, but of a Pedantick
spirit: Especially, when it appears that it is brought in only to cloacke that
which now you confess to be a Nonsense. Fourthly, after this whifle about
Formal Precisions, you bewray gross inadvertencie, about your Objective
precisions, and separability betwixt all the truths contained in scripture and
true Religion. Because, say you, all the truths in Scripture might have been
revealed, and no obligation laid upon us to believe them. And in this you blame
me, That I only proved by the Scripture-instances which I brought that there is
no actual separation betwixt all the truths contained in Scripture, and the
true Religion, but did not prove them insenarable. But if you look again to
my Paper, you will find that your inadvertencie is only to be blamed. For I
did prove the absolute inseparabilitie. betwixt all the truths contained in
Scripture and the true Religion. Which again I thus demonstrate, according to
the grounds laid down in my Last. If all the truths in Scripture cannot be
without an obligation to believe them, in order to the obtaining of Salvation,
then All the truths of Scripture cannot be, except they compound a Religion.
But the first is true, therefore also the last. The Sequel of the Major is
clear, because this is the only pretense, upon which you suppose that all
Scripture Truths may be, and yet compound no Religion, because they may be, and
yet no obligation be laid upon us to believe them. If therefore they cannot be,
except an obligation be laid on us to believe them, then surely they cannot be,
except they compound a Religion. It remains therefore only that we prove the
Assumption, that they all cannot be revealed without an obligation to believe
them, and this is clear from the Scriptures cited in my Last Paper, because
this is one of the Truths, in those Scriptures, that we are obliged to believe
these Truths. And I cited purposlie these Scripturs to prove this? And therefore
it is impossible that all Scripture truths can be, and we not be obliged to
believe them. For this is one Scripture truth, that we are obliged to believe
the Truths revealed in Holy Scripture. What now I have demonstrated more
prolixlie I set down clearly enough, though more succinctly, in my Last:
Albeit it seems you have been so taken up with your Precifive airie Notions,
that you have not understood the Paper which was sent to you. But to prevent
your further mistake in this, I think it fit to let you know, that I
distinguish betwixt these two. I do indeed confess, that a Religion may be,
though nothing be committed to Writing: And this was the case of the Ancient
Church before Moses: But this concerns not our present debate. But the thing I
deny, is, That all the truths contained in Scripture, way be, and yet make no
Religion at all. And this I hope now I have demonstrated against you, both in
this and in the former Paper: Though your Notional precisions have made either
your sight or your judgment Preseind from the Paper, which you should have
examined, and consequently, from the purpose. By these hints you may consider,
whether you have added any strength to your insignificant Objection, Concerning
the sense of Scripture.

But because you are still harping upon this Cavil, About the sense of the
Scriptures. It would appear that you Look upon Scripture as so obscure, as not
able to be a ground for decision of controversies in Religion, unless there be
some infallible visible-judge. I shall desire you to consider how different you
are in your apprehersions, as to this matter, from the Ancient Church, in which
the decision of Controversies in Religion was committed, sometime to Secular
persons, yea, sometime to Heathens, which your self will confess not to be
Infallible. Have you not read that writing, which passes under the name of
Vigilius, Bishop of Trent, in which there is a dispute betwixt Sabellius,
Photinus, and Arius upon the one side, and Athanasius on the other, concerning
the Trinity, and Deity of the Lord Jesus Christ? and Probus a Heathen is
constituted judge to determine betwixt them, not according to his own fancy,
but according to the proofs which they should produce from the Scriptures, and
after hearing of both, he gives sentence for the Truth. This dispute you will
find set forth among Cassanders works, from Page 460. and the sentence of
Probus the Judge, page 506. etc. I do not say that this Conference was real,
for the Collocutors were not contemporarie: Yet the Learned and Ancient Author
of this Dialogue, who by some is supposed to be Pope Galosius, does clearly
insinuate, that the most sublime Mysteries of Christianity are so luculently
revealed in Scripture, that a mere Pagane may find out the true sense of
Scripture concerning them. Have you nor t^ad in Epiphanius, haeres. 66. how
that Archelaus, an Orthodox Bishop, had a dispute against the pernicious
Heretic Manet in Caschara a City of Mesopotamia, and how by commone consent
they ^^b^^ic^ed unto Four Heathen Judges, to Marcipus a Phil s^ph, to Claudius
a Physician, to Aegialous a Gramariare, and to Clerb^lus a Sophister, who after
hearing adjudged the Victory to Archelaus. And this was no fiction, but a
real deed. What should I tell you, how Laurentius a secular person was
Arbiter, in a dispute betwixt Augustine and Pascortius an Arian, as appears by
Austine^, Aepist. 178? Or how Marcellinus a Tribune did preside by the
appointment of Honorius the Emperor, at a conference betwixt the Orthodox and
the Donatists, as Augustine holds forth Tom. 7. in Brevic. Collat? Do not all
these make it evident, that the Ancient Church did not apprehend such
impossibility of finding out the true sense of Scripture, without the previous
decision of an Infallible visible judge? How did Christ command us to Search
the Scriptures, John 5.39. if their sense be unsearchable? Is not this on
controversy in Religion, whether there be a necessity of an Infallible visible
judge and Propounder, and who he is? And who I pray you shall determine this,
if not the Scriptures? If you have an Infallible Propounder, without whose
decision the sense of Scripture cannot be attained, how injurious is he to the
Christian World, who will not put forth a clear Comment, upon the Whole
Scriptures, for the final decision of all Controversies? Why does he not at
least give a Decision, concerning these inrestine debates among your selves, as
betwixt your Dominicans and Jesuits, etc. Are you so far deluded, as not to
know, that this Fable of Infallibility, is the cunning imposture, whereby men
of your employment, have labored of a long time to cheat the World? But now
these of the Traditionarie way, among you begin to perceive that the World is
too wise to be still cheared by that one Trick, therefore they are betaking
themselves to another Method, but as fallacious as the former.

You have a Querie, which you expect that I should notice. You desire to know,
When Luther leapt out of the Church of Rome, (as you phrase is,) if there was
any Church on earth, with whom he had visible Communion. May ye not be ashamed
to move such a Question to me? I having convicted you of so many Falsehoods, and
Foolries concerning your last discourse of Luthers separation from Rome, and of
a Lying Prophecy, which you following Bellarmine, and Cachlaeus imposed on
him, to none of which you have answered one word. But though you snake away in
the d^^ke when you are Non-plussed, and though your scutvie behavior merit no
Answer, yet for the satisfaction of others into whose hands these Papers may
fall, I Answer there was a Church on Earth with which Luther had visible
communion. For clearing whereof: By having visible communion, I understand that
there was a visible society, who did profess the same Religion which Luther
did, as to all the essentials thereof. If you ask, what that Church was? I
answer, the Catholic visible Church. And do not wonder, that I speak of a
Catholic Church as distinct from your Roman. There was a Catholic Church
before there was a Church at Rome, and the Church of Rome in her greatest
integrity was but a part of the Catholic. When therefore Luther departed from
the present Apostatick Church of Rome because of her imperious usurpation upon
the Catholic Church, he retained Communion with the rest of the body, who did
never submit to her usurpations. For when Luther did brake off from Rome, there
remained four gaeat Christian Patriarchships disunited from Rome, viz, of
Constantinople, Antioch, Alexandria, and Jerusalem. Whatsoever Christians
therefore under any of these Patriarchships, or in other remot Nations, have
not ruinated any Fundamental Article of the Christian Religion, and are united
to the True Catholck head of the Church, the LORD JESUS CHRIST, PROTESTANTS do
profess Communion with all these. I do not deny, but there may be some
differences betwixt us, and other Churches, as to some Integrals of Religion:
But diversity of Integrals makes no different Religions, so long as the
Essentials remain the same. You may learn, if you know not, from Hoornbeck,
(beside others,) in his Summa controversiarum lib. 11 de Graecis, page 978.
etc. Edit. 2. how Josephus Patriarch of Constantinople, sent Demetrius a Deacon
of that Church to Wittemberg, in the year 1559. to enquire into the state of
the PROTESTANT Churches, and how Demetrius after an half years abode at
Wittemberg, carried with him to the Patriarch a c^pi^ of the Augustan
Confession, translated into Greek by Philip Melanchton, under the name of
Paulus D^lscins. You may also learn from the forecited Author, how Hieremia^
another Patriarch who afterward sat in the same Chair, kept correspondence by
letters with the PROTESTANT Divines at Tubing, from the year 1574. for a long
time thereafter. And though they had there own debates about some particular
points, (which your Stanislaus Socolovius labors invidiously to exaggerat,) ye
both the Patriarch himself does give GOD solemn thanks, That, the doctrine of
the PROTESTANTS was in so many things consonant to the doctrine of the Greek
Church. And likewise Johannes Zygowalas, a person of great account with the
Patriarch, in his letter which he wrote to Martine Cruzius in the year 1576.
declares, that it may be evident, that the Greek Church and PROTESTANTS do
agree In continuis and causam fides praecipue continentibus articulis, or in
the most important articles of the Christian faith; and that in other things
they may easily come to agreement, and the rather, (as Stilling fleet in his
Rational account of the PROTESTANT Religion, part. 2. cap. 8.. 15. relates out
of the same letter from David Chytraeus, de statu Eccles. Orient.) (...), etc.
That is, Since neither party does agree with the Bishop of old Rome, or with
the church which joines with him, but both do oppose the evil customs
brought in by him. Have you not heard, how Cyrill Patriarch of Alexandria wrote
to George Abbat Archbishop of Canterbury, in the year 1616. and did commend to
him a Student Metrophanes Chrysopulus, to be bred in the Universities of
England, and to be farther instructed in our Religion? And accordingly the said
Metrophanes did avoid Romish Superstition, and always join with the worship
of the Church of England; as is testified by Doctor Morton in his Grand
imposture of the Church of Rome, cap. 14. sect. 3. The Letters exchanged
betwixt the Patriarch, and the Archbishop, you may find published in Ephraim
Pagitts Christianography, edit. 3. part. 3. You may read also in the forecited
book of Hoornbeck, of the respect which Meletius Patriach of Contstantinople
had for the PROTESTANT Churches, and of his aversation of the Bishop of Rom's
usurpation. But above all, memorable is the Confession of says put forth by
Cyrillus Lucaris, Patriarch of Constantinople, in the year 1631. in the name of
the Greek Church, exactly conform to our Reformed Religion, for which your
bloody Jesuits did persecute that Holy Matyr to the death. I know that this his
Confession, was afterward distallowed by Cyrill Berrhoeus, and Parthenius, two
factious and bloody men, who by ill means got into the same Chair, whom
Hoornbeck spares not to call, Pseudo-Patriarchs. But besides that, they shortly
suffered for their villainies, being disgracefully, as the same Author
testifies, ejected from their Patriarchships, the Lord also stirred up another
Parthenius in the same Chair, to vindicat the fame and cause of Cyrillus
Lucaris. The aversation which the Greek Church have of you Romanists, is
sufficiently known to the World. At the time, that one Testimony of your
Prateolus, in Elench. haeres. lib. 7. tit. de Graecis page 202. might suffice.
Where he says of the Grecians, Summum Pontificem Christi Vicarium, omnesque
Latinos pro excommunicatis habent, that is, They look upon the Pope of Rome,
and all these of the Latin Church who adhere to him as persons excommunicated.
To which you may join that of Alphonsus a Castro, lib. 6. de Haeres. tit. de
Eucharistia. haeres. 2. Where he not only testifies, that the Greeks do
anathematize Latinos omnes, all who are of your Latin Church; but also that
they Will not permit your Priests to consecrat on their Altars, or if they do
it at any time with out their knowledge or consent, they wash their Altars,
before they co^secrat on them, as judging them polluted by your Priests. Nay
further, Ephraim Pagit in his Christianography, Part. 1. cap. 4. branches forth
the agreement of the Greek Church, and many other Oriental Churches with the
PROTESTANT Churches, in the chief heads wherein we differ from the Papists. But
because some Heresies, destroying the Foundations of Christianity, are objected
to these Churches, such as the Denial of the procession of the holy Ghost from
the Son, to the Greek Church; and Nestorianism to these under the Patriarch of
Mosal; and Eutychianism to many others; I shall remit you to see what is
particularly said for the vindication of the Greek Church, by Doctor Field, in
his way to the Church, Lib. 3. cap. 1. Where he undertakes to show both from
Greek and Romish Doctors, of great fame, I hat the difference betwixt the Greek
and Latin Church, touching the procession of the holy Ghost, is merely verbal.
Yea, and he endeavoures to clear many other Oriental and African Churches, from
Nestorianism and Eutychianism. The same also is confirmed by Ephraim Pagit, in
his Christianography, part. 1. cap. 10. where he likewise undertakes to prove,
that these Churches are not Heretical, but Orthodox in the maine. But
concerning the vindication of the Greek Church in particular, at least from a
Fundamental error, touching The procession of the holy Ghost, I shall refer
you to learned Stilling fleet, in his Rational account of the PROTESTANT
Religion, part. 1. cap. 1. I know your Cardinal Barronius, in the end of the
Sixth tom of his Annals, labors to persuade the World that an Embassy was sent
to Pope Clement the eight, from Gabriel Patriarch of Alexandria, submitting
himself and all the Churches under his jurisdiction, both in Egypt, and
Abassia, to the Pope. But as learned Breerwood observes, in his Inquiry about
the diversity of Languages and Religiones, Cap. 22. this upon examination was
found to be a mere Trick of imposture. Yea, this cheat is acknowledged not only
by your Historian Thuan, lib. 114. ad annum 1595. but also by Thomas a Jesu,
the Carmelit, De conversione omnium gentium, lib. 7. cap. 6. page 364. Have you
no way to persuade the World of the Catholicisme of your Church, but by such
Impostures? I might besides remember you of the Waldenses, and Albigenses, a
people nearer hand, who professed as to Substantials the same Religion with
PROTESTANTS long before Luther. Yet we never looked on them or Luther or
Calvine, as the Authors of our Religion, as you do rantingly talk. For it
derives its Original from Christ alone and his Apostles. Prove it to be of
meaner or latter extract, and I will disowne it. I know the Waldenses were
loaded with grievous aspersions, by the Zealots of the Romish faction, as if
they had been Arrians, Manichees, Necromancers, and what not. But they are
abundantly vindicated from these Calamnies by learned Divines, out of the
writings of Authors, who cannot be suspected to have been too favorable to
them. I shall only at the time remember you of that known testimony of the
Inquisitor Reyner concerning them, Quod coram hominibus just vivant, and been
omnia de Deo credant, and omnes articulos qui in symbolo continentur. Solum
Romanam Ecclesiam blasphemant and oderunt. That is, They live justly before
men, they believe all things well concerning GOD, and all the Articles of the
Creed. Only they hate and blaspeme the Church of Rome. You may judge of the
rest of the Calumnies thrown upon them, by these two chief ones, whereof
learned Prideaux, lect. 9. De visibilitate Ecclesiae, 11. gives this account.
They were (says he,) charged as mantaining with the Manichees, Due Principia,
Two beginnings of things, GOD and the Devil, because forsooth they mantained
that the Emperor was independent from the Pope. They were likewise (says
he,) charged with Arriantsme, because they denied Crustam in Christum esse
transubstantiatam, That a crust of bread was transubstantiated into Christ in
the Sacrament. You may see a large vindication of them in Vsser, De successione
Ecclesiarum in Occidente ab Apostol^rum temperibus ad nostram aetatem, capp. 6
8.10. Let it suffice at the time, to remember you that he cites cap. 10. page
373. edit. 2. luculent testimonies out of Paradius Annals of Burgundy, and
Girardus French History, that because of their freedom, in reproving the
dissolute life and debauched manners of the Romish Clergy, Plures nefariae eis
assingebantur opiniones a quibus fuerunt omnino al^eni. That is, Many impious
opinions were atributed to the Waldenses which they altogether abhorred. I
might also make mention of these in Bohem, who were termed the Hussits, to
whom, Hoornbeck in the forcited place, testifies that the Church of
Constantinople wrote a letter in the year 1451. exhorting the^ to Communion with
the Greek Church, in oppositio^ to the Bishop of Rome. Yea your own Cochlaeus
and other Popish writers are quoted by Prideaux, Lect. 9.. 11. acknowledging
that the Lutherans derived their doctrine from the Hussits, the Hussits from
the Wicklevists, and the Wicklevists from the Waldenses. When therefore ye are
better instructed, you will acknowledge that there Religion and ours, as to
Substantials, are the same. But I may come yet nearer, and tell you that Luther
had Communion with many thousands, who before his appearance were groaning
under the corruptions of the Church of Rome, and breathed after the shaking off
the yoke of the Papal faction. As beside others, Doctor Field has demonstrated
in Lib. 3. of his way to the Church, cap. 12. and more largely in his Appendix
to that Third book. Think you the World to be strangers to the piteous
complaints of Nicolaus Clemanges, Alvarez Pelagius, Theodoricus a Niem,
Gulielmus a Saucto Amore, etc. Concerning the Corruptions of the church of
Rome? Yea, did not Pope Adrian the sixth, acknowledge the necessity of a
reformation, and that the World was hungrily expecting it? I know your late
Papal parasites would persuade us, That it was only a reformation of manners
and not of Doctrine, which was groaned after in the church of Rome. But the
contrary is luculently demonstrated by our Authors. I shall at the time, only
remit you to Sir Humphry Lynd's defense of Via tuta, against I. R. entiuled, a
case for the spectacles, cap. 4. page 165. etc. Where he bringes testimonies,
not only from the Cardinal de Al^aco, Gerson, Grostead, Occam, and from the
Council of Pisa, but also from the Council of Trent it self, to prove that
before, and about the first sitting down of that Council, Romanists themselves
were sensible, that There was a necessity of reformation of doctrine, as well
as of manners. Hence was it, that so many thousands in most of the nations of
Europe, did join with Luther at his appearance, who did not only oppose The
corrupt manners, but also the Corrupt Doctrines of the Church of Rome. Hence is
that of your Alphonsus a Castro, adversus haeres. in Aepist nuneupat. ad
Pac^ec. Cardinal. Nec solus Lutherus hoc saculo prod^it, sed multorum
Hareticorum agmine, ceu quodam satellitio stipatus processit, qui illum tanquam
ducem primo egredientem spectasse videntur. Where he acknowledges that Luther
came forth accompanied as with an Arm^^, who but waited for his appearance as
their Captain and Leader. But that I may shut up this Section, had you
considered how this Queri^ is retorted by our Divines upon you, I believe you
would have spared it. They ask where your Present Romish Religion, as now it
stands, was before the council of Trent, which was confirmed by Pope Pius the
fourth, Anno 1564. long after Luthers death? Our Divines know, that there were
many corruptions in the Church of Rome before the Council of Trent, against
which the Waldenses, the Wicklevists, the Hussits, Luther and others did
witness. But the question now is, Whether the then Church of Rome mantained all
the points of Religion as necessary to Salvation, which your council of Trent,
and your Pope Pius the fourth, in his formula fidei, have declared to be
necessary to Salvation. If she did, then you may be pleased to produce
evidences hereof, wherein you may perhaps find more difficulty then you are
awarre of. If she did not, then is your present Romish Church a new upstart,
and Schismatical Church, of a distinct faith from the Catholic Church in all
ages. You may notice how Doctor Field in the Appendix to his fifth book, part.
2. cap. 2. goes about, to prove that the Church of Rome is not now the same
that it was before Luthers appearance. Things being now defined as Articles of
faith necessary to Salvation, which were not so before. I sincerely profess
the Noveltie of your Romish Faith, and the Schismatic constitution of your
Church, are not the least grounds of my disatisfaction with your Religion, You
may desire your Masters to calculate to you the Antiquity of the Romish Canons,
establshing the points following as Articles of faith, viz, First, The equality
of unwriten traditions with the holy scriptures of GOD. 2. That concupiscence
in the regenerat is not properly sin. 3. The desinit number of seven,
properly so called Sacraments, neither more nor fewer. 4. The Popes supreamacie
above general Councils. 5. Your Indulgences and Purgatory. 6. The abstraction
of the Cup from the people. 7. Your Transubstantiation. 8. The infallibility of
the Church of Rome. 9. The adoration of Images. 10. The Popes jurisdiction over
secular Princes. Not to mention more at the time. I believe you will find some
of these latter then Luthers appearance. Others but a little before, and all of
them, not only short of Primitive and Aprstolick antiquity, but notone of them
within the Verge of the Three first Centuries. You may if you will, take a
brief hint of the novel dates of most of these Romish Canons, from Drelincourt
in his PROTESTANTS Triumph, Discourse 2. from page 39. to page 52. As also of
sundry of your ritualls, such as the Procession of the Sacrament, the feast of
the Sacrament, your Jubilees, the Canonizing of Saints, nay of your present
Romish Missal, and how lately it was received, both in the Gallican, and
Spanish Churches, etc. Is it safe to venture the eternal Salvation of Souls
upon a Religion so Novel, both in its Articles of Faith and Rituals?

You have one Trifle more which I cannot let slip. Because I have required you,
to prove the Assumptio^ of that goodly Syllogism which ye proposed in your
first Paper, wherein you said, That the PROTESTANT Religion had no grounds to
prove its conformity with the sense of Scripture, and to this day, you have
been able to bring nothing in Confirmation of it: Now therefore when Arguments
fail you, you would try if you could bring your self off, or creat Odium to
your Adversary, with a popular, but reallie impertinent Example. You say, That
I have behaved my self, as if one should come as sent from the Council, to
require the Provest of Aberdene to apprehend a person suspect of Disloyalty,
but when the Provest did demand his commission, he should answer, that he was
not bound to show his Commission, but his Commission was sufficiently proven by
this, that there could not be produced reasons to show that he had no
Commission. Is this the Scholastic method which you call for, in stead of
Arguments, to substitute popular, declamatorie, Scenick examples, which by a
person of any Acuteness, may be transformed into a thousand various shapes? But
seeing you will have the matter managed by Examples, I must Examplisie
time-about. Suppose therefore, First, that a man were reallie Commissionated by
the Secret Council, to require the Magistrates of such a City to apprehend a
disloyal person, and for this effect did produce his Commission, but the
Magistrates did cavil at the sense of the Commission, how luculent soever in it
self, alleging that they could do nothing upon that Commission until the
sense of it were cleared, and that the sense of it could not be cleared without
an infallible Expounder. Would not the Secret Council have just cause to be
moved with indignation against these Magistrates, who had so ludified their
Order? And is not this the very case betwixt us and you? Do not PROTESTANTS
still produce the Tables wherein the Ground of our Faith is contained, Viz, the
Holy Scriptures? Do not we tell you, if all our Religion be not found
luculently there, we shall disclaim it? Is not this your very Cavil, that the
Sense of Scripture is so obscure, that without an Infallible Bropounder it
cannot be understood? Have you not cause then to fear the indignation of the
Almighty, who do thus reproach the Scriptures of GOD, and go about to subvert
the faith of his people, suspending it till they get Propounders, of whose
Infallibility they must have an Antecedent and previous assurance, whereas
there are none such now on Earth. The Fallibity of your Popes and Councils we
did before demonstrat, and you like a mute Advocat, had not a word to mutter
for them. But Secondly, in the case which you propose, of a man pretending a
Commission, and having none, and requiring the Magistrates to prove that he had
none, therefore the Rogue is justly blameable, because he refuses to prove the
Affirmative, which was incumbent to him, and requires the Magistrates to prove
the Negative. But betwixt you and us the case is quite contrary. For though you
framed the Assumption of your first Syllogism in Negative Terms, yet upon the
matter, you refused to prove the Affirmative, and required us to prove the
Negative. For what is it for us to prove the Truth of our Religion, in points
controverted betwixt you and us, but to prove that there i^ no Purgatory, no
Transubstantiation, no Proper sacrifice in the Mass, that your Pope has no
supreamacie over the Catholic Church, that there Are not seven Sacraments,
that Saints are not to be invocated, nor Images adored, etc. All which are
meet Negatives, and so are the most of the points controverted betwixt us and
you. Now suppose that there were no Revelation from Heaven for Purgatory,
Transubstantiation, the Sacrifice of the Mass, the Popes supreamacie, etc.
Will not you confess in that Case, that it were not duty to believe any of
them, and that then it were a sufficient Argument against them; there is no
Divine revelation produceable for these things, therefore they are not to be
believed: and if any would obtrude the belief of them upon others, that he were
bound to produce a Divine revelation for them. Now we PROTESTANTS mantaine De
facto, this to be the Case. I would therefore demand of any rational man, if
there be a possibility to confute us, but by produceing a Ground or Divine
revelation for these things? Are not you then guilty of the same Absurdity
with the Knave in your own Example, who refuse to prove the Affirmative, and
require us to prove the Negative? But yet further, Thirdly, Is not he, at
least, bound to prove a Negative, who undertakes the Probation thereof? Should
one undertake to prove, that such an one had no Commission from the Secret
Council, would not his undertaking of this, oblige him to prove it? Seeing
therefore by the Proposal of your Negative Syllogism, you undertake to prove
the Premises thereof; how can you deny that you are bound to prove them? But
Lastly, though I have kept you to your duty, that it might appear, that you
have undertaken an impossible task, yet I was so far from shunning to give a
Ground of our Religion, that I have often produced to you the Grounds thereof
as my Papers will witness, and have cut off your Cavills against them. Whether
therefore I who have given Grounds, on which we walk, and appealed you to try
accordingly the particular points of our Religion: Whether then, I say, I, or
you, who shun to give the Grounds of your Religion, yea, or Any ground
whereby the truth of Religion may be examined, be like to the Knave in your
Example; let these who are not Knaves themselves judge.

You have frequently clamoured, That those of a false Religion may assume the
grounds which we have given, with as much reason as we, and so you repeat your
old Knavish example, comparing our Religion to an Honest-man, betwixt whom and
a Knave there is no difference. How often has this been confuted before? But
you have the impudency to repeat Ad nauseam, often confuted Calumnies, not
once concerning your self to examine what was replied to them. I confess an
Heretic could soon give all the Grounds to prove his Religion, and a Knave to
prove his Honesty, which you have brought to prove your Religion. For though
you have been often required to condescend upon the Ground^ of your Religion,
you have been able to produce none; only some hints you had at the
Infallibility of your propounders, but were soon beaten off from that pretense.
How often has it been told you, that these of a False Religion may pretend,
though falsely, to the same Grounds with those of a True Religion, as a Knave
may pretend to the same Arguments to prove his Honesty which a truly
Honest-Man does? Do not Quakers pretend to Infallibility, as well as your
Popes? Did nor Appallonius Thyanaeus boast of Miracles as well as your Romish
Synagogue? Did not the old Arians and Donatists claim the title of the
Catholics as well as you? Do not the Patriarchs of Alexandria, whom you hold
for Schismatics, allege a Personal and Local succession, as well as your
Popes? Will you for this disclaim your Popes infallibility, the Miracles of
your Church, the Title of Catholics, and Your succession? But whereas you say,
That these of a false Religion may assume the same grounds which we have
proposed, with as good reason as we, Is I pray you, a False Religion plainly
laid down in Scripture, or deduceable by firm consequence from Scripture? Is
not this the Test, by which you have been required to try all points of
Controversy betwixt you and us? But you have judged it your interest, to hold
rather on general Calumnies, then to come to a particular discuss.

I come now to your last Paragraph, wherein you make a Bravade, of
condescending to have one point of controversy betwixt us and you examined;
but with your usual candor. Have I not been obtesting you all this time that
you would leave your trifling Generals, and come to a discuss of Particulars?
Did I not assure you in my Last, that if upon a particular examination, it
should not appear, that all the points of our Religion, are either plainly in
Scripture, or solidly deduceable from that which is plainly there, I would
renounce it, and only required the like ingenuity in you, that if it be found,
that your Popish Religion is neither plainly in Scripture, not by solid
consequence deduceable from that which is clearly there, that you would be as
can did in disowning your Papal Superstition? To this you say, You embrace the
offer, and only desire, that I would prove this one point of Religion, viz.
That there be only two Sacraments. Where I desire, First, it may be observed,
that in professing your acceptance of my Offer, you dissemble the one half of
it. You make mention of my undertaking for the PROTESTANT Religion, but you
altogether wave the provision on your part for the Popish Religion: and
therefore you require me to prove that there be only two Sacraments, yet you
do not once offer to prove that there are seven, which is the Popish
assertion. What unfaithfulness and cowardlinesse is bewrayed by this
mutilation of my Proffer, the unpartial Reader may judge. Were I to be blamed,
though I declyned to prosecut my Offer, you not accepting it Entirely? But I am
not so base, nor distrustful of our cause. You say, That love to my conversion
moved you to accept the offer. If your love to me were sincere, you would not
tergiverse as you do, for you ought to prove Positively that there be Seven
Sacraments, neither more nor fewer. Though I could not prove that there be only
two, yet I could be no Papist in that point, except I be convinced, that there
be only seven: As your Cursing (I had almost said Cursed,) Council of Trent
has defyned, Sess. 7. Can. 1. Si quis di^^erit Sacramenta novae legis, aut
esse plura vel pauciora quam septem, viz. Baptismum, Confirmationem,
Eucharistiam, Paenitentiam, Extremam Unctionem, Ordinem and Matrimonium,
anathema sit. That is, If any shall say, that the Sacraments of the new law are
more or fewer then seven, ^^^ly Baptism, Confirmation, the Euch ^rist,
Penance, Extreme unction, Order and Matrimony, let him be accursed. If
therefore one should (...) antaine that there were three, or four, or five, or
six, or eight, or nine, or twenty, etc. Sacraments, he should indeed differ
from us in this particular, but yet be no Papist. Your tergive^fing assures me,
you have no strength of reason with you, to persuade me to become your
Proselyt. And if you had such a zeal for my Conversion, why did you not embrace
this Offer sooner, I having often made such like appeals to you in diverse of
the foregoeing Papers? But Secondly, if there be any point of Controversy
betwixt PROTESTANTS and Papists, where a cavilling Sophister may lurk under
ambiguity of words, and darken the Debate with Logomachies, this is the point
which you have chosen concerning the number of Sacraments. For the word
Sacrament in the strict notion, wherein it is taken either by our or your
Divines in this controversy, is not used in Scripture; no not in your Vulgar
latin, unless you will be pleased to acknowledge that the Whore of Babylon
is one of your Sacraments. For Revel 17.7. your Vulgar latin reads thus, Dicam
tibi Sacramentum mather is. I will tell thee the Sacrament of the woman, but
your Rhemists are there ash^^^ed to use the word Sacrament. Nor is there any
word either in the Hebrew, or Greek, exactly correspondent to the strict notion
of a Sacrament, which is not extended to other things; which neither you nor we
hold for Sacraments: as Chamter bath demonstrated, Lib. 1. de Sacramentis in
genere, capp. 3.4. And besides, Ancient Fathers have used the word Sacrament,
in so large a sense that they have designed many things by this name, which on
all sides are acknowledged to be no proper Sacraments. As Austine gives the
name of a Sacrament, lib. 2. de peccatorum merit is and remissione, cap. 26. to
the meat given to Catechumens, and lib. 4. de Sym^olo, cap. 1. to Exercismes,
lib. 19. contra Faustum, cap. 14. to the sign of the cross, yea, lib, de bono
conjugali, cap. 18. to Polygamie, none of which you Romanists will acknowledge
as Sacraments. So that, according as the word Sacrament is taken in a larger or
stricter sense, PROTESTANTS do not deny, but there may be said to be more or
fewer Sacraments. Yea, if the word be taken largely, Doctor Featly in his
Stricturae in Lindo-Mastigem, page 90. will grant that it may be said, that
there be not only seven, but seventeen Sacraments: And Doctor Whitaker,
praelect. de Sacramentis, quaest, 6. cap. 1. will admit that seven times seven
may be found in Ancient Fathers: and Doctor Morton, in his Appeal lib 2 cap.
26. Sect. 5. ascends to seventy seven: And Crakanthorp, in defensione Ecclesiae
Anglicanae contra Spalat. cap. 30.. 1. spares not to affirm, that you may
as well number seventie times seven as seven: And Hierom, as cited by Gerard, de
Sacramentis, cap. 1.. 6 says Sacramenta Dei sunt praedicare, benedicere,
confirmare, communionem reddere, visitare infirmos, orare. And Tertullian, lib.
4. contra Marcion cap. 2. calls all Christianity a Sacrament, Religionis
Christianae Sacramentum. How little weight some of our great 'Divines have laid
on this Controversy, you may see in learned Whitaker loco citato, where he
spares not to say, that barely to extend the name of a Sacrament to other
things, which are not so properly called Sacraments, Error est non admodum
periculosus, is not an error of dangerous consequence, provyding there be not
Ordinances brought into the Church which are not of divine institution. And
learned Master Baxter, in his Treatise of Confirmation, page 88. and 89.
propos. 10. grants that there are more then seven Sacraments in the largest
sense, that there be five in a large sense, but only two, Baptism and the
Lords Supper, in the strictest sense. Is this the Characteristick for
distinguishing a True Religion from a False, where a Caviller may wrap himself
up in such Logomachies? Have not some of your Divines affirmed, that a
Sacrament cannot be defyned, as Occam, Major, and Richardus cited by your own
Bellarmine, lib. 1. de Sacramentis in genere, cap. 10? But one thing is
remarkable, that among all the various acceptions of the word Sacrament, in
Ancient writers there was never one of them, who determined the number of
proper Sacraments to be seven, neither more nor less, as you Romanists do to
day. How unhappie then were you to pitch on this particular Controversy,
seeing the precise septenarie number of Sacraments can never be proven, either
from Scripture, or Antiquity? You may consider, what a low ebb in this matter
you are at, when your Bellarmine lib. de effect. sacram. cap. 24. is put to
that shift, Non debere adversarios petere a nobis, ut ostendamus in Scripturis,
vel Patribus, nomen septeuarii numeri Sacramentorum. Scripturae enim and Patres
non scripserunt Gatechismum That is, Our Adversaries (he means PROTESTANTS,)
should not demand of us, to show either from Scripture, or Fathers, the name
of the number of seven Sacraments: For the Fathers wrote not Cathechisms. Yet
we shall hear the same Cardinal a little after, rendering this as the reason,
why Ambrose, and Cyril of Jerusalem, did not reckon our seven Sacraments,
because they did write to Catechumens. Is this the pregnancie of your Jesuits
Acumen, to use contradictorie Mediums to prove the same Conclusion? Sometime
thus, the Fathers wrote not Cathechisms, therefore they did not express the
desinit number of seven Sacraments: And at another time infer the same
Conclusion, because they did write Catechisms. May not such Sophisters infer.
Quidlibet ex quolibet? But sure it is, Cyril of Jerusalem did write Catechisms,
why then did not he, at least, mention your Septenarie of Sacraments? I suppose
your Council of Florence, and Trent, were not writing Cathechisms, when they
targht a Septenarie of them. But our Divines deal liberally with you in this
matter. They stand nor upon words. They demand not the name of the number of
seven. They only ask a real demonstration of a precise septenarie, though not
in so many words. Hence Doctor Mortone, in the place last quoted: We exact not
(says he,) the name of the number of seven, but only, as two and three make
five, so would we have demonstrated, that any of the Fathers, in any place of
their writings of the Sacraments of the New Testament, did give any certain
intimation of the number of seven. Can PROTESTANTS be more condescending in
their demands? Yet this could never be performed by any of you. A clear
evidence, that all your Popish Party cannot Proselyte me to you in this point.
For they cannot show, that either Scripture, or Fathers, did approve the
pretent Romish faith, concerning a precise Septenar^e of properly so called
Sacraments of the New Testament. Thirdly, had you been a person of ingenuity,
would you not first have cleared these articles of your Religion, which I have
impugned in my former Papers, before you had started a new Question? But by
your deep silence as to these, it is easy to guesle, what satisfaction is to
be expected from you as to this. Nay Fourthly, is it not a mere Negative,
whereof you demand the Probation from me, That there be only two Sacraments.
For you say, It is not the probation of two, but that there are no more then
two, which you desire, so that it is a mere Negative, you would have me
proving: Now would not all the reason of the World say, that ye who mantaine
the Affirmative, viz, that there be more then two, properly so called Gospel
Sacraments, and that there be precisely seven; Ought to prove this your
Assertion, and that we are sufficiently warranted to mantaine the Negative,
until you prove the Affirmative, for Ab authoritate negativa, in rebus fidei,
optima est consequentia. You must also know, our Positives are the articles of
our faith, and by the Negatives, which we mantaine in opposition to you, we
declare that your errors are no part of our faith, so that when you lay the
whole stresse upon your proving this Negative, that there are no more then two
Sacraments, you do not require us to prove an Article of our faith, nor should
we succumb in proving an article of our faith, though we did not prove it. Our
Negative is only a declaration, that your five super added Sacraments are no
part of our faith. But if you prove them not to be Sacraments, you succumb in
proving an article of your Romish faith. How scurvily then deal you, who
require us to prove the Negative, which is no article of our faith, and yet
shun to prove the contradictorie affirmative; which without question is an
article of your Romish faith. How little candor you have showed in this matter,
by these particulars may be discerned.

Yet to give a touch of the Question in particulare, that the State thereof may
be clear betwixt us, know that we do not affirm, that the word Sacrament is
to be found in Scripture; neither do we deny, but in a large sense, as some
have taken it, pro signo rei sacrae, for an holy sign, or the sign of an holy
thing, which is the first definition given by Bellarmine, lib. 1. de
Sacramentis in genere, cap. 11. out of Austine and Bernard, it may be
attributed to many things beside Baptism and the Lords Supper, as to Christ's
washing of the Disciples feet, to the holy kiss used in Scripture times, etc.
Shortly therefore, leaving both the Etymology of the word Sacrament, about
which Critics have traveled, and the various definitions of a Sacrament given
by Divines of both sides: When we affirm that there be two Sacraments only in
the new Testament, we understand by a Sacrament of the new Testament, a
substantial visible sign, instituted by GOD, since the incarnation of the Son
of GOD, recorded in the Gospel to seal up the promises of salvation, which is
to endure in the Church to the end of the World. Where we do require these
things to the nature of a proper Sacrament of the new Testament, First, that it
be a substantial visible sign, instituted by GOD since the incarnation, and
recorded in the Gospel. That it be a sign, (...), is not only held forth by
the Apostle, Romans 4.11. and by the Ancient Fathers of the Church, but also, is
acknowledged by your Bellarmin, lib. 1. de sacram. in genere, cap. 9. That it
be instituted of GOD, is not only proven from Scripture by our Divines, but
also is acknowledged in the Definition of your Roman Catechism, part. 2. cap.
1. qu. 6. That it be instituted since the Incarnation, I suppose you cannot
deny, to distinguish it from the Sacraments of the Old Testament, of which we
are not now debating. I add likewise, that it must not only be a sensible
Sign, but also Visible, to distinguish it from the preached Word; which is a
sensible and audible Sign, but not Visible; and this Austine holds forth in
that famous sentence of his, Tract. 80. in Johannem. Accedit verbum ad
elementum and fit sacramentum, and ipsum quasi visibile verbum: Where he
clearly distinguishes the Element which becomes a Sacrament from the audible
Word: Hence Chamier, lib. 1: de sacram. in genere, cap. 14. 6. brings in
Damascen, calling Sacraments (...). Visible Symbols of intellig^le mysteries.
Hence also was that definition of a Sacrament by your Master of sentences
Lombard, lib. 4. sent. did. 1. tit. B. Invisibilis gratiae visibilis forma, A
visible sign of invisible grace. Bellarmins cavills against the visibilitie of
sacramental Elements, are learnedly confuted by Chamier in the place last
cited, lib. 1. de sacram. in genesis cap. 14. It is further required to the nature
of a proper Sacrament, that it be a substantial sign, for it must be such a
sign as may co^gruonsly be termed an Element, as it is frequently designed,
not only by Ancients, but also by your Roman Catechism; particularly part. 2.
cap. 1. quast. 8. and likewise have an Analogy with the thing signified, else
says Austine. epist. 23. Sacramenta omnino non essent. They should not be
sacraments at all. I know Bellarmine, lib. 1. de sacram. in genere, cap. 14.
quartels with Chemnitius, that he required, that the institution of a Sacrament
be found in Scripture. It is enough says Bellarmine, that the divine
institution thereof be proven. But these Arguments, whereby our Divines prove
Scripture to contain all articles of faith, conclude irrefragably, that they
contain the divine institution of all properly so called Sacraments. Yet if
you, or any will prove to me the divine institution of any Ordinance, I shall
never declyne to accept of a divine institution, whether written or not, when it
is solidly proven; but surely you must outstrip Bellarmine, Valentia, and the
test of your Champions, before you prove the divine institution of unwriten
sacraments. Secondly, it is required to the nature of a proper Sacrament, that
it be a seal of the promises of salvation, or of the righteousness of faith,
as the Apostle phraseth it, Romans 4.11. (...). Where though the Apostle be
treating of Circumcision, yet he gives a general Description of a Sacrament,
which does compet to Circumcision, and to all other Sacraments. I know that
Bellarmine, and other your Authors quarrel at this clause of the Description,
but the Objections against this, you may find abundantly discussed in Whitaker
de sacramentis, quaest. 1. cap. 4. Gerard de sacram. cap. 3. sect. 2..
17.18.19. and in Chamter, lib. 2. de sacram. in genere, cap. 9. It is Thirdly
required, that a sacrament of the new Testament be to endure in the Church to
the end of the World; which Bellarmine himself acknowledges, lib. 1. de sacram.
in genere, cap. 14. and on both sides it is confessed, that proper Guspel
Sacraments must endure, so long as there is a Visible Church on Earth. And this
does exclude from the nature of a proper Sacrament, those Visible signs which
were used under the Gospel, but were not perpetually to endure in the Church

This being shortly premised, concerning the nature of a Sacrament, we do
affirm that in this sense there be only two proper Sacraments in the New
Testament, viz. Baptism and the Lords Supper. Or as others express it, that
there is no other Ordinance under the Gospel, which may be so termed a
Sacrament, as Baptism and the Lord's Supper. Neither are we the first who judge
so. Does not Austine, lib. 2. de symbolo ad Catechumenos, cap. 6. call them
expressly Gemina Ecclesiae Sacramenta, The two twin Sacraments of the Church?
Was it ever heard, that Gemina signified Seven, or more then Two? And again
the same Austine, Epist. 118. Says, that the Sacraments of the Gospel, are
numero paucissima and significatione facillima, then instancing only in the
sacraments of Baptism and the Lord's Supper. But if there were seven
Sacraments, yea or more then two, they could not be numero paucissima, the
fewest for number? what ever exceeds two, is not the least number. I know the
usual subterfuge of your Authors, that Augustine in the last cited place adds
these words; Et si quid aliud in divinis literis commendetur. If any thing else
be recommended in the Scriptures. But First, he calls our two Sacraments in the
former place, the two twin Sacraments, without any such addition. Secondly, the
addition he makes in the latter place, is only Hypotheticall, therefore no
positive inference can be deduced from it; as if Austin had believed, that
there were more proper Sacraments then two. Thirdly, I have already showed,
that Austine in a Large sense, called many things by the name of Sacrament,
which are not proper Sacraments; such as the sign of the Cross, Exorcisms,
Polygamie. Yea sometimes he reckoned improper sacraments with the proper, as
the sign of the Cross with Baptism, in his En^rrat. on Psalm. 141. Why then
in this additional hypothesis, may he not be supposed to point at Sacraments
improperly so called? Especially seeing Fourthly, if here he meaned that here
were more properly so called Sacraments, he should manifestly contradict
himself, who had immediately before said, that they were numero pa^cissima, the
fewest in number, and else where Gemina, two twin sacraments. And lib. 3. de
doctrina Christiana, cap. 9. Fewer in number then the Jewish sacraments, pauca
pro multis cademque factu facillima, instancing also particularly in Baptism
and the Lord's Supper only. But it may suffice against you Romanists, that
Austine does no where affirm Sacraments to be precisely seven. Let all the
Romish antiquaries try where they can find ground in Austine, or in any one
Ancient Father for their precise septenarie. Had there been more then two,
would Justine Martyr, in his second Apology, where he gives an account of the
Worship, Ordinances, and Sacraments which Christians went about to apologize
for the Christian Religion, would he, I say, only have made mention of Baptism
and the Lords Supper? How destitute you are of Antiquity in this matter, may
appear by this, that Bellarmine, lib. 2. de sacram. in genere, cap. 25. could
produce none for the definit number of your seven Sacraments ancienter then
Lombard, who lived in the twelfth Centurie, nor any Council before the
Florentine; a late Council, about the middle of the fifteenth Conturie, and
neither free nor general. As beside others, learned Stilling fleet has
demonstrated in his rational account of the PROTESTANT Religion, part 1. cap.
1.. 13. out of Sylvester Sguropulus, who was present at the most secret
transactions of that Florentine Assembly, and your Cassander, in consult. art.
13. has noted that Lombard was the first Author who introduced the definite
number of seven Sacraments, and yet neither He, nor the Florentine Council,
declare these your seven Sacraments to be Sacraments properly so called, or
that there be seven precisely, neither more nor less. Yea, Spal. de Repab.
Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 4. number. 21. spares not to affirm, that the Article
concerning seven Sacraments, was never either ^hs^^ssed or defy^ed
conc^li^r^^er, in public face of Council at Florence. So that your present
Romish Article of a precise septenarie, can i^ seems, (...) no higher
c^^ciliarie Authority, then from the desinition of ^o ^^ late Trent
Conventicle. Is it probable, that the Author of the Catechisms, commonly
attributed to Cyril of Jerusalem, or of the six books de Sacrament^s, which
go under the name of Ambrose; would have passed your seven Sacraments in
silence, and satisfied themselves with mentioning our Two, Baptism and the
Lord's Supper, if the Church in their time had believed, that there were seven
proper Sacraments? Were it not a great absurdity, if a man should undertake to
write a Tractat of the Planets, or of the Pleiades, both which are in number
seven; and yet never mention but two of them? To what straites is your
Bellarmine reduced, Lib. 2. de sacram cap. 27. when he has no better Evasion,
then to say as I hinted before, That the design of Ambrose and Cyrill in these
books, was only to instruct Catechumens, and therefore, it was not needful
that they should make mention of all the Sacraments. Is not this both False on
the matter, so far as it concerns these six books of Ambrose, (for they
were not only designed for the instruction of Catechumens, as Chamier, Featly,
and other our Divines have largely demonstrated,) and also Frivolous? For
suppose it were granted, that these Books had been written only for
Catechumens, yet what is more usual in Catechisms then to set down all the
Sacraments? Look to Catechisms both Popish and PROTESTANT, if it be not so.
Has not your Roman Catechism set forth by the command of Pope Pius the fifth,
all your seven pretended SACRAMENTS? Though Catechumens be not presently
admitted to all Sacraments, yet ought they not to learn what they all are,
that they may be the better prepared to receive them in due time? Or why should
the other five be rather kept up from the notice of Catechumens, then Baptism
and the LORD'S SUPPER? Are there not more Mysteries in the Eucharist, especially
according to your fancies of Transubstantiation, then in any other Sacrament?
If any then of the Sacraments should have been concealed from the Catechumens,
should it not have been that of the Eucharist? I deny not that Cyrill, Ambrose,
and other Au^sents do make mention of Chrisme, and indeed Chrisme was
anciently used. Yet suppose that by Chrisme, they had meaned a peculiar and
Distinct Sacrament, this would come far short of the Popish five spurious
Sacraments. Bot learned PROTESTANTS have showed that the Chrisme mentioned by
Cyrill, Ambrose, and others, was no pecuculiar and distinct Sacrament, but an
Appendix of Baptism, and a Mutable Ceremony at the Churches pleasure, like a.
Kneeling betwixt Easter, and Whitsuntide, the Love feasts, etc. Hence the same
Ambrose, lib. 1. de sacramentis, cap. 2. Venimus (says he,) ad fontem.
Ingressus es, -- unctus es quasi Althleta. That is, We came to the water, thou
went in. -- thou was anointed as a Wrestler. And Tertullian de Baptismo, cap.
7. Exinde egressi de lavacro, perungimur benedicta unctione. That is, being
come out of the laver, we are anointed with the blessed unction. Yea the Author
of the Tractat, De Spiritu Sancto ad Amphilochium, which goes under the name of
Basil cap. 27. acknowledges that there was no Scriptural warrant for that
Unction. (...). That is What written word has taught this anointing with oil?
Surely then this Anointing was but a Ceremony, which the Church brought in by
her own power, and therefore might be laid aside by the same power. And
consequently, was no Proper Sacrament, which by the confession of Romanists,
and according to the Tridentine definition, most all be instituted by JESUS
CHRIST Himself. In a word, our Divines have frequently produced Fathers,
asserting our Two Sacraments directly, yea and calling them Gemina, which seems
clearly Exclusive of others. But Romanists to this day, could never produce one
Father that makes mention of their seven Sacraments, either in so many words,
or yet that said so much on the matter, from which a precise Septenarie could
be concluded. Nay this very point concerning the number of Sacraments, in which
it seems, you thought to have triumphed, furnishes me with a considerable
Argument against your Religion, from which you may try how you can exped your
self. I frame it thus.

A precise Septenarie of SACRAMENTS, neither more nor fewer, is an Essential
of the Present Romish Religion.

But a precise Septenary of SACRAMENTS, neither more nor fewer, was not an
Essential of the Ancient Christian Religion.

Ergo, the Ancient Christian Religion, and the Present Romish Religion, differ
in Essentials, and consequently, are not the same Religion.

The Major is clear from your Council of Trent, sess. 7. Can. 1. And from Pope
Pius the fourth, his Creed or Formula fidei. As for the Assumption, I appeal
you, if you can, with the help of all your Associats, to produce me one
testimony from any one Ancient Father, from which a precise septenarie of
Sacraments can be concluded. For express testimonies, all know that you have
none. Is it probable, if the Ancient Church had been of your present Romish
faith, concerning the number of Sacraments, that not one Testimony for a
precise Septenarie, either direct or indirect, should be found in any one
Father? I know the way of your Authors has been, to patch up testimonies out
of several Authors, whereof, one may give the denomination of a Sacrament to
one of your pretended Sacraments, and another to another. But not one Father
have they produced, that gives the Denomination of a Sacrament to All of them.
And as some Fathers give the name of a Sacrament to some of these, so also they
have honored many other things with the same title, which by the confession of
your own Authors are no proper Sacraments; concerning which you may be
sufficiently informed by your own Suarez. In his Preface, to his Tom. 3. in 3.
part. And therefore from these general Apellations, nothing can be c^tt^inly
concluded, as to the definit number of Properly so called Sacraments, else we
might conclude more then twice seven Sacraments from the writings of the
Ancients. Your own Bonaventure, in 4. sent. did. 1. teaches that it was many
time observed that the word Sacrament, was exceeding variously taken.
Communiter, proprie, and propri^ssime: That is, sometimes Commonly, sometimes
Properly, and sometimes most Properly: When therefore, the Denomination of a
Sacrament, is given by a Father to any thing beside Baptism, and the LORDS-
Supper, before it can be concluded, that they looked on that as a proper
Sacrament, it remains to be proven, that they took the word Sacrament in that
discourse, not Communiter, but proprie, or propriissime, not in a large or
common sense, but strictly, and properly. Yea, and further it concerns you, to
prove that they believed, that there were precisely seven of these, properly so
termed Sacraments, neither more, nor fewer. When you set seriously to this
work, you may readily find it so hard a task, that it put you to repent, that
you should have pitched on this particular controversy concerning the number
of Sacraments.

But because you desire it to be proven by scripture, that there be two
Sacraments only, I shall present you with this one Argument. If there be only
two substantial visible signs instituted by GOD, since the Incarnation
recorded in the Gospel, to seal the promises of salvation, and to endure in the
Church to the end of the World; then are there only two Sarcraments of the new
Testament. But the first is true, therefore also the last. The consequence of
the Major is clear. For this only we mean by a proper Sacrament, when we
affirm that there be only two. Though more should be proven in another sense,
it would be but a Sophisme, ab ignoratione elenchi; for the Conclusion would
not be the contradictory of our Assertion. The Assumption is easily proven from
Scripture, for it contains two branches, first, that there are two of that
kind of visible signet. And secondly, that there be only two and no more.
First then, for the positive part, that there be two, you your self do
acknowledge, and if it were needful, it were easy to show, that all the parts
of the foresaid Description, do agree to Baptism and the Lords Supper. For
first, they are substantial visible signs, instituted by GOD since the
Incarnation, and their institution is recorded in the Gospel: You have the
Divine institution of baptizing with water, Matthew 28.19. And of the Lords
Supper, 1. Cor. 11.23.24.25. Secondly, that they are seals of the promises of
salvation is no less clear, and first of Baptism, Acts, 2.38.39. and also of
the Lords Supper, in so much that the Cup is called the New Testament, which you
must acknowledge to be no proper speech, but it is only so called, because it
is Sigillum faederis; hence also in the Institution, mention is made of the
Remission of sins, and of the giving of the Body of CHRIST and shedding of
his Blood for us, holding forth, that foregiveness of sins, and all other
blessings purchased by the Death of CHRIST, and promised in the New Covenant,
are by this Ordinance sealed to the people of GOD. The third and last condition
is no less manifest, that these Ordinances are to continue to the end of
World, from Matthew. 28.20. and 1. Cor. 11.26. All the Question then betwixt you
and me, must be concerning the other Branch of the Assumption, viz. that there
be only two of these signs, or two and no more, and this seems no less
certain then the other. For first, to use your way of argueing in Negative
cases, if there be any more substantial visible signs, instituted by GOD since
the Incarnation, recorded in the Gospel, to Seal the Promises of Salvation, and
to endure in the Church to the end of the World, then they may be produced, but
more cannot be produced, as shall be proven, solutione objectionum. Produce
them therefore if you can, and show that the premised conditions of a Sacrament
do compet to them. This way of arg^ing in this case, is the su^er, because the
Scripture, as I have held out before, and proved against you is a perfect Canon
of Faith and Manners, therefore if no more such signs can be held out from the
Scriptures, it follows there are none. May I not here make use of Hieroms.
Quia non legimus, non credimus. This may suffice for a Scriptural
demonstration, that there be only two properly so called Sacraments. For if the
Scriptures teach upon the one hand, that the Scriptures are a complete Canon of
Faith, and upon the other, hold out no more but two of these Ordinances, to
which the name of a Sacrament, in the strict and proper Notion thereof is
applicable; then surely it follows, that according to the Scriptures there be
only two proper Sacraments. Excellently said Cyrill of Hierus. in Catech 4. or
who ever be the Author thereof (...). That is, Of the divine and holy
Sacraments of faith, nothing ought to be delyvered without the holy scriptures.
But secondly, I might argue thus ad Hominem against you, were it not that I
feared too great Prolixity, if there be any more then these two, it would be
some, or al of your five pretended Sacraments Confirmation, Pe^nance, Marriage
Extrem Unction, or Ordination. But none of these, far less all of them,
therefore, there are no proper Sacraments at all besides these two, which we
acknowledge. The sequel is clear, for there are none else, besides these which
you can allege. Yea, if I prove that any one of these is not a proper
Sacrament, the Infallibility of your Church, and consequently, the whole
structure of your Religion is gone. To insist upon the probation of this last
Assumption at large, would engage me upon too voluminous a discourse. You may
see it largely done by Chamier, tom. 4. lib. 4. a cap. 7. ad 32. treating
severally of each of these pretended Sacraments, and more succinctly by
Maresius, tom. 2. contra Tirinum, controv. 20.23.25.26. and 27. no to remit you
to many Authors. Now only to give you a short hint, I say that none of these
your five pretended Sacraments, have all the forementioned conditions of a
Sacrament, and consequently, none of them are properly so called Sacraments of
the New Testament.

First then, to begin with Confirmation: The Matter thereof, (which we call
the Visible sign, or Element,) says your Pope Eugenius the fourth, and your
Council of Florence, in Decrete ad instructionem Armenorum, and your Roman
Catechism, part. 2. cap. 3. quaest 6. Is oil mixed with balsome. consecrated
by a Bishop. The Form of it, or words to be pronunced at the celebration
thereof, (As the same Eugenius and Catechism ibid quaest. 10. do declare,) is,
Sigte signo crucis and confirmo te chrismate salutis, in nomine Patris, Filis,
and spiritus sancti. But there is no divine institution, either of that matter
or form recorded in all the New Testament, as your own Authors are constrained
to acknowledge, particularly, Suarez, in 3. part. tom. 3. quaest. 72. disp. 33.
sect. 1. and 5. If the sign you use in Confirmation be not of divine
institution, then it cannot seal to the Soul the promises of Salvation, nor is
it of necessity perpetually to endure in the Church. If you say, that you have
a Divine institution for it, though not in the Scriptures, yet attested by
unwriten tradition. You must first prove the Canon of the Scriptures to be
imperfect, and then demonstrate by universal tradition in all ages, that there
was a divine institution of Chrisme mixed with balsome, as the matter of a
distinct and peculiar ordinance, together with these words which you now use in
the Romish Church, which you may find a difficult task. Nay your famous Jesuit
Escobar, confesses that these words which you call the form of this Sacrament,
were not instituted by CHRIST. Hear himself, lib. 12. Theol. Moral. Sect. 2.
cap. 14. probl. 15. number. 116. Christus (says he,) verba illius formae non
determinavit, sed Ecclesiae determinanda reliquit. That is, Christ determined
not the words of this form, but left them to be determined by the Church. As
much is confessed by Alexander of Hales, and Bonaventure. (As Suarez testifies,
tom. 3. in 3. part. quaest. 72. disp. 32. sect. 2.) concerning your visible
matter of this Sacrament, viz, Oil Olive mixed with balsom, that neither were
these instuted by Christ. So that now it is tossed among your selves as a
Problem, whether Oil mixed with Balsom be the necessary matter of this
Sacrament. And many Authors of great fame among you mantaine the negative, as
you may find in Escobar, lib. 12. Theel. Moral. Sect. 2. cap. 12. probl. 3.
number. 78. And in Suarez, tom. cit. disp. 33. sect. 1. If therefore you say that
imposition of hands is the visible sign in Confirmation, as Bellarmine seems
to do, lib. de confirm. cap. 2.. Jam vero medium, (albeit afterward, he
likewise capp. 8. and 9. pleads for the necessity of the Unction also,) you may
see this copiously confuted by Chamier, tom. 4. lib. 4. de sacram. novi
Testamenti, cap. 10. Take now but these passing hints. And first, imposition of
hands may be a Rite, but who can say that it is a substantial sign, or such a
sign as may congruously be termed an Element? Secondly, how can that be the
Visible sign of this pretended Sacrament, which neither belonges to the matter
nor form thereof, if Pope Eugenius and your Roman Catechism have rightly
designed them? Thirdly, how can that be the peculiar sign of Confirmation,
which is commone to other Sacraments, according to your Romish compuration,
particularly to Ordination and Extreme Unction? Well did Austine speak
concerning this Rite of imposition of hands, lib. 3. de Baptismo contra
Donatistas. cap. 16. Quid est aliud manus impositio, nisi oration super homine^.
Fourthly, either by this imposition of hands, is meaned the Unction with
Chrisme, or some distinct Imposition. If the first, no institution thereof is
mentioned in Scripture: If the second, though imposition of hands, some times
was practiced by the Apostles, for conferring the gifts of the holy Ghost, yet
there is no command for the perpetuity of it. Hence Suarez, loco citato sect.
4. determines that no Imposition of hands distinct from the Unction, is of the
Essence of this pretended Sacrament of Confirmation. But your Cassander, in
Consultatione art. 13. brings in Hoscot a learned Doctor in the Roman Church,
as questioning whether Confirmation be a proper Sacrament. What respect
judicious Calvine had for Confirmation in a sound sense, himself declares. lib.
4. institut. cap. 19.. 4. But how much and justely he dislykes your Romish
pretended Sacrament of Confirmation, and the superstitious Rites thereof, may
be seen, ibid. from. 5. to the 13. But though you Romanists pretend a kind of
zeal for Confirmation as a proper Sacrament; yet have not many of your late
Casuists and Jesuits disputed it almost into contempt? Is it not a Problem
among you whether there be any command of God, or of the Church to receive
Confirmation? Or whether it be so much as a venial sin to omit it, when a
person has convenient opportunity for it? Has not your Jesuit Escobar diverse
problemes to this purpose lib cit. cap. 16. problem. 31.32.33. etc? Yea does
not Escobar positively mantaine that there is no command either divine or
ecclesiastic for it? Hear himself, problem. 31. number. 181. Existime (says
he,) nullum dari nec divinum nec ecclesiasticum praeceptum confirmationts
recipiendae. That is, I judge that there is no command either of GOD, or of the
Church to receive confirmation. A noble Sacarment, forsooth, which persons are
not bound to receive, even when they have convenient opportunity for it, yet,
lest he should seem to be alone of this judgment, he cites for the same in
his next problem, number. 183. Henriquez, Coninck, Lessius, Tolet, Reginaldus,
Ledesma, Vivaldus, Sayrus, Valentia, Bonacina, etc. It is also noted by Doctor
Jeremy Tailor, in his little Treatise of Confirmation. sect. 1. page 10. that
your Missionary Jesuits, who come hither to traffic in BRITAIN, do
generally teach the same Doctrine to serve their own ends. Is this one of your
Mysteries of Iesuitisme, to cry up and down, to magnify and vilify the same
thing, as it serves your interest?

The second pretended Sacrament which I shall examine is your Penance. The
necessity of the Grace and Duty of Repentance, we PROTESTANTS do unanimously
acknowledge, and that much more then you Romanists, as I showed in my eight
paper. But the proper Sacramentality of it we justly deny, and are hereunto
induced upon many accounts; For first, you Romanists cannot agree among your
selves concerning the matter and form, or the outward sign of this pretended
Sacrament. For albeit your Bellarmine is bold to affirm, lib. 1. de
paenitentia, cap. 18. that your Authors do agree summo consensu, with a full
harmony, that the Sacrament of Penance does consist both in the Sacerdotal
absolution, and in the confession, contrition, and satisfaction of the
delinquent. Yet your Cardinal de Lugo, tract. de paenitentia, disp. 12. sect.
2. number. 11. reckons forth six different opinions among you. I touch but some
few. Your Durand, in 4 sent. distinct. 16. qu. 1. n. 4. mantaines the Sacrament
of Penance. to consist only in the delinquents confession, and the Priests
absolution excluding contrition and satisfaction. Scotus, Major, and Gabriel
cited by Carleton, tom. 2. theol. schol. disp. 85. sect, 1. number. 1. exclude not
only contrition and satisfaction, but also confession, and hold the Sacrament
only to consist in the Priests absolution. But Soto a^ cited by the same
Carleton, in the same place excludes the Sacerdotal absolution, from being a
part of the Sacrament. Yea, your own Councils both of Florence and Trent, when
they speak of contrition, confession, and satisfaction, as the matter of this
Sacrament. seem to speak very dubiously; for they say only that they are
quasi materia, as is were the matter thereof. And your own Authors use this as
an argument, for Scotus his opinion, that none of these three are truly parts
of this Sacrament, as you will find in Conink, tom. 2. de sacram. disp. 4. dub.
4. number. 31. Ought you not to agreee among your selves, before you so rigidly
censure and anathematize others, for not receiving your Penance as a proper
Gospel Sacrament? Secondly, I cannot find assigned by any of your Authors in
this Sacrament, a substantial visible sign instituted by GOD in the Gospel.
For neither confession of the delinquent, nor absolution of the Priest, are
either substantial or visible, but audible signs. And as for satisfaction,
sure I am, many of the things which your Church prescribe as satisfactions,
were never of CHRIST'S institution, and none of them were appointed to be
satisfactorie to divine justice for sin in your Romish sense. Does not your
Rushworth in his Dial 3. sect. 3. reckon these as your chief satisfactions, viz
praying to Saints, and for the Dead, keeping and reverencing pictures of
Christ, and his Saints, and above all the presence of GOD in the B. Sacrament?
Neither you nor any of your Party shall be able to prove a divine institution
of any of these, not to speak now of other Foppry's which in your Church are
imposed as satisfactions. But to prevent your cavills concerning the last of
these, I advertise you that PROTESTANTS do not deny the real presence of
Christ in the Eucharist, as your Romanists do calumniou sly traduce them. They
acknowledge him to be most really present to the hearts of Believers. They only
deny against you Romanists, a substitution of CHRIST'S Body and Blood under the
Accidents of Bread, so as his Body and Blood may be received into the mouths
and stomaches not only of Ungodly men, but also of Rats and other beasts. This
therefore is it which you have to prove to be warranted by a divine testimony.
and that religious reverence to that transubstantiated presence was instituted
by GOD, as a satisfaction for sione to Divine justice: Which I suppose you will
find to be a hard task. Yea, according to many of the chief Doctors of your
Communion, satisfaction is so far from being of the essence of this pretended
Sacrament of Penance, that your Sacrament of Penance, may be in many cases
without any Injunction of Satisfaction at all. So teaches your Jesuit Escobar,
lib. 17. Theol. Moral. Sect. 1. cap. 4. number. 30. etc. Where he also cites for
it Suarez, Cajetan, Coninck, Fagundez. Whether then shall you run to find a
visible sign? Except you take the sins confessed, which ordinarily your
Authors make to be the remote matter of this Sacrament? But were ever sins,
signs of divine institution, to seal the promises of salvation? Sure sins are
rather the Devils sacraments then GODS. These of your men that speak most
Philosophically, say, that sins are signified by this Sacrament but in obliquo,
and therefore they cannot be that sign which is predicated of the Sacrament,
in recto. Thirdly, is Repentance any peculiar Gospel institution since the
Incarnation? Do you not find in David, contrition and confession? Did he not
also receive absolution by Nathan the Prophet? Instance if you can an
institution of CHRIST for your secret auricular confession, that pick-lock of
Consciences? Where did ever CHRIST or his Apostles, impose a necessity of
confessing all mortal sins (as your Romanists term them,) how secret so ever
to a Priest under the pain of eternal damnation, as your Council of Trent
defynes sess. 14. c^in 6. and 7? Is not the jus divinum of the necessity of
this confession, questioned by your own Authors particularly by B^rnesius in
his Cath l^co-Romanus P^cisicus sect. 8. de paenit. confess. and s^t^^fact.
Where speaking of this confession which the Ch^re^o Rome ^mpoie^h, he says
Now constat adhuc an ju^e divino debeat fieri. That is, it is not yet certain,
if the necessity of this confession be warranted by a divine institution. He
cites also many other Romish Doctors as mantaining the same. Know you not how
your Authors altercat about these w^^'s of absolution, which are pretended to
be the form of this Sacrament, according to your Council of Trent, sess. 14
caep. 3. Ego to absolvo, etc. Whether to the form of this Sacrament, there be
a necessity of the pronowne Ego? Or of the pronowne Te? Or of the particle ab
omnibus? Or of the words a peccatis tuis? Or of the Invocation of the Trinity,
in uo^tiue Patris Filii and Spiritus Sancti? Or whether the words may not be
pronounced in deprecatory terms thus, absolvat te DEUS etc. Let GOD absolve or
pardone thee? Are you not thrown upon these, and many more perplexityes, (of
which I leave you to receive a brief su^me from Escobar, lib. 14 Theol. Moral.
cap. 6. probl. 41. etc.) by your coining Sacraments without a divine
Institution? As for Satisfactions in your Romish sense, they are greatly
Injurious to the complete satisfaction of JESUS CHRIST, whose Blood cleanses
us from all our sins, 1. John 1.7. Hence was that of Ambrose on Luke 22.
speaking of Peter's mourning for his denial, lachrymas ejus lego,
satisfactionem non lego. I read of his tears but not of his satisfaction. And
besides your Satisfactions, are ordinarily performed, according to your present
Romish discipline after absolution, and so cannot belong to the essence of this
pretended sacrament. This made Petrus de Osma as your Cardinal de Lugo reports
sect. cit. number. 42. to assert, that satisfaction should be ended before
absolution. But for that his assertion as Lugo restifies, your Pope Sixtus the
fourth issued forth a Bull against him. Yet they who have any tolerable
knowledge of the Ancient discipline, cannot but know that the disciplinary
satisfactions then used, (which were vastly different from your Romish
satisfactions at this day,) were ordinarily closed before absolution, except it
were in the case of sickness when they despaired of the persons recovery, as
Bellarmine himself is constrained to acknowledge, lib. 4. de paenit. cap. 5.
But for a larger Confirmation of this, I shall remit you to Spal. lib. 5. de
Repub. Eccles. cap. 7. number. 49. etc. And cap. 8. number. 10.11. etc. Have you not
here a new specimen of your Romish Innovations.

As to your pretended Sacrament of Marriage, you may first take another view of
your intestine Debates, how you are divyded among your selves, concerning the
matter, form, and minister thereof. Victorellus in his additions to Tolet,
lib. 7. de instruct. sacerdot. cap. 6. m^sters up your Authors into four
distinct parties and opinions. Aegidius, Conink, tom. 2. de sacram. disp. 24.
dub. 3. distribures them into six sundry classes, Vasq. tom. 4. in 3. part.
tract. de matrimonii sacram. disp. 3. ca^p. 1.2.3.4.5. numbers no less then
nine different Sects among you as to this one particular. Is this your Papal
unity, whereof you use to glory? Neither can you allege that this is only a
School-nicety, about which you are thus broken. Are not your Sacraments points
of faith with you? And do you not all acknowledge, that there is nothing more
essential to Sacraments then the matter and form thereof? When therefore your
greatest Rabbi's are so divyded among themselves, that what one affirms
another confutes, is it not a strong presumption that there is no true
assignable matter and form of this pretended Sacrament, and consequently that
there is no proper Sacrament of Marriage at all? Neither are your private
Doctors only, at a loss in this point, but also your Infallible Oracles, I
mean your Popes and Councils. For your Pope Eugenius the fourth, in Decreto ad
instructionem Armenorum, (which is reckoned by your Romanists, as a Decree of
the Council of Florence,) takes upon him to determine the matter and form of
all the rest of your pretended Sacraments. But when he comes to this of
matrimony there is nothing but deep silence as to the matter and form thereof.
Hence your famous Bishop of the Canary's, Melchior Canus, lib. 8. loc. com.
cap. 5. professes concerning your Romish Divines. In materia (says he,) and
forma hujus sacramenti statuenda, adeo sunt inconstantes and varii, adeo
incerti and ambigui, ut ineptus futurus sit qui in tanta illorum varietate and
discrepantia rem aliquam certam, constantem and exploratam conctur efficere.
That is, Romish Divines are so uncertain, unconstant and divided among
themselves concerning the matter and form of Matrimony, that (in Melchior
Canus his judgment,) they are fools who would attempt to determine any thing
certainly therein. And among other reasons of this his assertion, he brings
that which I have been hinting at, Concilium certe Florentinum (says he,) de
materia, forma, ministro matrimonti praestitit nihil. Id quod sine dubio
faceret cum hoc in caeteris omnibus Ecclesiae Sacramentis fecisset, si de its
rebus videret quippiam esse a Theologis, in schola definitum. The sense hereof
is, The Council of Florence has determined nothing concerning the matter and
form, or minister of the Sacrament of Matrimony, which the Council would not
have neglected, having passed sentence concerning the matter and form of other
Sacraments, but that they saw nothing concluded among Divines concerning this
matter. Secondly, I might here give an account how weakly, yea how ludibriously
your chief Champion Bellarmine behaves himself in this matter. For lib. 1. de
matrimonii sacramento, cap. 6. he distinguishes two states of the Sacrament of
Marriage, one, when it is in fieri, in doing, another when it is in facto,
done, taking for granted that the Sacrament of Marriage continues after it is
solem^ized, as long as the married couple do live. This being premised, he
affirms, that while this pretended Sacrament is in fieri, or in doing, the
matter and form thereof consists in the Words whereby the Parties do express
their mutual consent, and that the parties themselves are the ministers who
clebrat this Sacrament. And if you ask how the Words of the married couple can
be both the matter and form, it is answered, the expression, as first uttered
by one of the Parties, is the matter, and as afterward uttered by the other
Party, is the form. So Victorellus a famous Romish Doctor in his Additions to
Tolet, de instruct. sacerdot. lib. 7. cap. 6. expounds your Cardinals opinion,
for I confess his words, as to this, have need of a commentary. But if you
speak of the Sacrament in facto, or after it is done, then (says
Bellarmine,) the Bodies or Persons of the Married couple are the matter, not
only circa quam, about which the Sacrament is conversant, but also ex qua, or
the visible sign, which intrinsecally constitutes the ^^crament, and in this
case he makes the form to consist in the words of the Parties, and so still he
concludes the Parties to be the Ministers of this Sacrament. Thus your
Cardinal. But ought he not to have brought some Arguments to confirm his
assertions, especially the point being so much controverted? Is his test me
ipso, confirmation enough^ Must not the doctrine be very absurd for which so
skilled a sophister could not devise one paralogism? Indeed in his next cap. he
is very ferve^t in impugning Melchior Canus opinion; but in cap. 6. where he
lays down his own opinion, be brings not one Argument to confirm it. It is
easier I confess for Sophisters to impugn their Neighbors fancy, then
solidly to confirm their own. Are not all Bellarmins notions as to this
particular, confuted by his own fellow Jesuits, though for reverence to his
Eminency, suppresso nomine. Is not the first rejected by Vasquez disp. cit.
cap. 2. number. 9. and 10. with a Nunqam mihi placuit, I never loved (says
Vasquez,) that opinion which made the matter of this Sacrament the expression
of consent, as given first by one of the Parties, and the form the like
expression as afterward given by the other Party, for then (says Vasquez.)
if both should signify their consent at once, there should be a Sacrament
without either matter or form. The other notion of making the Bodies of the
Parties, the materia ex qua, is zealously confuted by Coninck, dub. cit. number.
31. as repugnant to the nature of all contracts, and he shows that the Bodies
of the Parties, may well be the materia circa quam, but cannot be the materia
ex qua, or that which constitutes the contract. Yea as he goes on to confute
this Whimsy, he distroyes the foundation of all Bellarmines discourse,
concerning the two states of Matrimony, as being repugnant to the commone
opinione of your own Divines, qui communiter docent omnia sacramenta excepta
Eucharistia consistere in action transeunte, That all sacraments except the
eucharist, do consist in a transient action, and that they do not endure but
in the time of the celebration. Beside these impugnations from his own fellow
Jesuits, let me but desire sober Persons to consider if it be probable that in
a Sacrament the visible sign, the Persons receiving, and the Minister of the
Sacrament shall be one and the same thing? Yet this must be it the Persons
married, be both the matter of the Sacrament and also the minister, as
Bellarmine affirms. Or can their be a parallel found where that which was both
the matter and form of a Sacrament in one instant, becomes only the form in
the next? The words of the Parties according to Bellarmine, are both matter and
form when it is in fieri, and only the form in facto. Does not Bellarmins
dreams make of Marriage two Sacraments, the one in fieri and the other in
facto, differing specifically in their essentials? For the Bodies of the
Parties which are made the matter in facto, are specifically distinct from the
words which were the matter in fieri. Is there not here a Mystery feigned in
Marriage, beyond what you Romanists fancy in the Eucharist? For though you
imagine the Sacrament of the Eucharist to continue extra usum, yet you do not
diversifie the matter and the form of the Sacrament. But here Bellarmine would
make a new transmutation, I had almost said Transubstantiation, of that which
was both Matter and Form into the Form alone, and of that which was only
materia circa quam, into the materia ex qua. I am irked to insist further in
the refutation of this reasonlesse Romantic fancy. Yet I cannot let pass
Aegidius Coninck's notion, whereby he thinks to escape the rocks, upon which
other of his fellows have split. He therefore asserts, that the words or
signs, whereby the Parties do express their mutual consent, to be both
Matter and Form, yet not as Victorellus expounded Bellarmins meaning. But
(says he,) the words of the Parties may be conceived, either as a mutual
tradition of the Parties to one another, and thus they are the matter of the
Sacrament; or as they are a mutual acceptance of the tradition made one by
another, and thus they are the form. This notion I find likewise improven by
diverse others, Becan, Bonae Spei, etc. And perhaps some favorite of Bellarmins,
would in this sense expound his affirming the words of the Parties, whereby
they express their mutual consent to be the matter of the Sacrament, in fieri.
But grant he had meant so, yet it would advantage him nothing; for this
likewise is another cobweb of a Jesuits brain. For a proper Sacrament (as I
held out before,) must be a substantial sign instituted by GOD since the
Incarnation, and recorded in the Gospel, etc. Now can words of the Parties, in
what ever notion they be taken be visible signs? Or are they substantial
signs? Or such signs as may be fitly termed Elements? Were the words of the
Parties instituted by GOD in the Gospel, and recorded there to be both Matter
and Form of this Sacrament? Let all your Jesuits try there Acumen, in
produceing such an Institution from the Gospel. If they cannot, then sure
Matrimony is no such Sacrament, as Baptism and the Lord's Supper, (whose matter
and form can be showed from the Gospel,) which is all that PTOTESTANTS do
affirm. Had there been any solid stuff among you, would we not have found it
in these your chief Champions? But the man I find among you dealing most
ingenuously, is your great School-man Durand, in 4. sent. did. 26. quaest. 3.
number. 15. where he positively says, Matrimonium non esse Sacramentum, stricte
and proprie dictum, sicut alia Sacramenta novae legis, or, That Marriage is not
a Sacrament, strictly and properly so called, as other Sacraments of the Gospel
are. This was plain truth, but because it savoured so much of that which you
call PROTESTANCY, or Calvinisme, therefore your Cardinal Tolet, lib. 7. de
Instruct. Sacerdot. cap. 5. number. 1. stigmatizeth this ductrine of Durand as
heretical. Is this the best entertainment of plain truth among you Jesuits,
when it does not suit with your Romish interest? But Thirdly, Sacraments are
peculiar to the Church, and these of which we debate are peculiar to the
Gospel Church. But Marri^ge is among Heathens, and was of old in the Jewish
Church. If you say, that Marriage in the Gospel Church is only a Sacrament, and
not without it. It will concern you to prove that assertion, and particularly,
to show how Marriage in the Gospel Church is a Sacrament, and yet was not one
in the Jewish Church. Are you not here again piteously broken among your
selves? Some, as Alphonsus a Castro, adversus haeres. lib. 11. lit. nuptiae.
hares. 3. and others mantaining, that Marriage was instituted as a Sacrament
from the beginning of the World, (and if so, then it is no proper
Gospel-Sacrament,) others again affirming, that Marriage was only instituted
as a Sacrament under the Gospel. But they could never produce to this day a
solid ground for that Sacramental institution, under the Gospel. But of this,
and many other considera^^e breaches among your selves, concerning your
pretended Sacrament of Marriage, I leave you to receive information from our
learned Country man, Doctor JOHN FORBES, in his Instruct. historico-theol. lib.
9. cap. 8.. 30. etc. But (...) o^ but take some notice of the absurd and
impious differences, which your Authors make betwixt Marriage as in the
Gospel Church, and Marriage not only as among Heathens and Infidels, but also
as it was of old in the Jewish Church, thereby to advance Marriage, now under
the Gospel, to the dignity of a Sacrament. Cardinal, Tolet, lib. 7. de
instruct. Sacerdot. cap. 5. number. 2. mentions three differences betwixt them,
viz, First, That Marriage in the Christian Church, is a Sacrament, not so among
either Jews or Heathens. But all see that to be a begging of the question,
therefore I let it go. Secondly, That Marriage in the Gospel Church conferrs
grace, ex opere operato. And Thirdly, That in the Gospel Church, actus
conjugalis est meritorius, the conjugal act, (They who are acquaint with your
Jesuit Dialect, will understand his meaning, I am ashamed to make it plainer,)
Is meritorious, not so among Heathens, or ancient Jews, These things the
Jesuit boldly asserts, but does not once offer a probation for them. They might
be solidly confuted, (but that I doubt I be already guilty of too too much
prolixity,) by all the Arguments which our Divines bring against your opus
operatum in the general, and against your doctrine of Merit, all which hold, a
Fortiori, in this particular. Hither if in any case I may apply that saying, O
Spes fallaces Meritis confidere vanis!

I shall only desire you, if you dare own these impious positions of your
fellow Jesuit, to try how you can bring any shadow of reason why Marriage does
confer grace, ex opere operato? Or why conjugal acts are meritorious, now
among Christians, and not of old among believing Jews? Are Christians now in a
state of Grace, so were believing Jews? Have Christians now a respect to the
ends why Marriage was instituted, so had believing Jews? Where then is the
difference as to the specific nature of the ordinance then and now? But
Fourthly, If Marriage be a proper Gospel Sacrament, how are your Priests
interdyted from it? Does one Sarcrament render persons incapable of another?
How did Siricius and Innocent the first, Bishops of Rome, pass such an impious
gloss (if the Deeretals ascribed to them be genuin) upon that text Romans 8.8.
They that are in the flesh cannot please GOD: As if persons in a married estate
could not please GOD, because they are in the flesh? If this gloss were true,
marriage were so far from confering grace Ex opere operato, and conjugall
acts so far from being meritorious, that they should rather put a person in a
state of enmity against GOD, which to affirm, says the Apostle, 1. Tim.
4.1.3. Were a doctrine of Devils. Fifthly, how can it be made out, that
Marriage is appointed of GOD as a Seal of the Covenant of Grace, or promises of
Salvation? Does not your own Cassander assirme, that your Master of sentences
Lombard, denies Marriage to confer Grace, which you Romanists require as
necessary to the nature of a proper Gospel Sacrament? Sixthly and Lastly, does
not your great Cajetan teach, that from Ephesians. 5.32. (Which yet is the only
Scripture, that can be pretended to favor your Sacrament of Marriage,) It
cannot be solidly concluded, that Marriage is a propper Sacrament? Non habes
(says Ca^etan on the place,) ex hoc loco, prudens lector a Paulo conjugium
esse Sacramentum: But of this point I suppose enough.

Shall I here give you a touch of your extreme Unction? And First, though your
Council of Trent have defined, Sess. 7. can. 1. That every Sacrament of the
New Testament was instituted by Christ himself, yet many of your chief Doctors
have denied that extreme Unction was instituted by Christ, such as Hugo de
sancto victore, Lombard, Bonaventure, Alensis, Alt^siodorensis, as is restified
by your Jesuit Suarez, tom. 4. in 3 part. disp. 39. sect. 2. number. 1.
Consequently, if that opinion of these your great Doctors hold, Extreme unction
can be no proper Sacr^ment of the New Testament. But Secondly, where have you
warrant from the Scripture, that the matter of this Sacrament must be Oil
O^ive con^ecrated by a Bishop? Or that seven parts of the body should be
anointed therewith, viz. Eyes, Ears, Nose, Mouth, Hands, Feet, and Reins? Or
that the Form of this Sacrament should be these words which you use, viz. Per
istam unctionem, and suum piissim^m misericord^^m indulgeat tibi Dominus
quicquid deliquishi^per visium, etc. All which are determined by your Pope
Eugeni^^s the fourth, in that alleged Decret of the Council of Florence for
the instruction of the Armenians; Or that this Unction as so administrated, is
a Seal of the Covenant of Grace, and perpetually to endure in the Christian
Church? If you essay to prove all these, you may find it a difficult work.
Thirdly, might I not here give an account of your altercations among your
selves, concerning this pretended Sacrament, as whether it be necessary to this
Sacrament, that the Oil be consecrated by a Bishop, or that the body be
anointed in all the forementioned parts, which your Pope Eugenius the fourth
has specifyed? Whether the words must be pronounced Deprecatively, or whether
they might be used Indicatively, according to that which your Authors call the
Ambrosian Form? Ungo te oleo in nomine Patris, etc. Yea, is it not debated
among you, whether there be any command at all for receiving this pretended
Sacrament of Extreme Unction? Are not the greatest part of your Doctors for the
Negative? Hear your own Suarez, tem. 4. in 3. part. disp. 44. sect. 1. number. 2.
Communis (says he,) opinio est nullum esse affirmativum praeceptum de
suscipiendo hoc sacramento, etiam in extremo vitae discrimine. That is, It is
the commone opinion of the Romish Divines, that there is no positive precept
obliging persons to receive this sacrament of extreme unction, even when they
are in the most extreme hazard of death. A noble Sacrament indeed, which by the
confession of your own Romanists, ye are tied by no command of GOD to receive.
The same is granted by your Romish Doctors, concerning all your five
controverted Sacraments, except Penance. That there is no positive command of
GOD to receive any of them. Whence I argue thus. There are positive precepts in
the holy Scripture for receiving Baptism and the Lord's Supper, but there is no
positive precept of GOD, either in or our of Scripture, for receiving four at
least of your Sacraments, viz. Confirmation, Marriage, extreme Unction, and
Ordination; as is confessed by your own Romanists. Therefore, these four at
least are no such Sacraments, as Baptism and the Lord's Supper. And though your
interest and Commodum Curiae, induces you to assert a necessity of Penance,
(for thereby you make your selves Masters, both of Purses and Consciences, and
privy to all Secrets,) yet try when you will, you will be as little able
solidly to prove a positive command of GOD for Penance, in your Romish sense,
and as it is practiced among you, as for any of the other four. And
consequently, none of these your five Sacraments is sub pracepto, and therefore
none of them are such Sacraments, as are BAPTISM and the LORDS SUPPER; which
is that which PROTESTANTS mean, when they affirm that there be only two
properly so called Sacraments of the New Testament. Fourthly, not only have our
Divines proven, that the two places of Scripture which Romanists deprave for
this pretended Sacrament, viz, Mark, 6.13. and James 5.14.15. make nothing for
you: But also eminent Authors among your selves have done the same. The first
place your great Champion Bellarmine, lib. de Extrem: Vnct. cap: 2. denies, to
hold out any Sacrament, and urges no few Arguments for that purpose. Iansenius
Gandavensis in Concord. Evang. cap. 55: is of the same judgment, as also
Aegidius, Coninck, tom: 2. de sacram. disp. 19. dub. 1. number. 3. so likewise
Suarez, Cornelius a Lapide, Carleton, etc. As for the other place, your great
Cardinal Cajetan, is as express in denying, that any solid ground for your
Sacrament, of Extreme Unction, can be drawn from the words of the Apostle
James. Hear himself on the chap. 5. of James, Nec ex verbis (says he,) nec ex
effectu verba hac loquuntur de Sacramentali Unction, sed magis de Unction
quam instituit Dominus in Evangelio a Discipulis exercendam in agros. And
thereafter, the Cardinal brings diverse Arguments to prove this his Assertion.
If it be true, (as certain it is,) which Bellarmine and many other Romish
Doctors have affirmed, that the Unction spoken of by Mark, is not a proper
Sacrament; then neither is the Unction spoken of by James a proper Sacrament.
For both are one, as not only our Divines have proven, by comparing the places,
and answering the Arguments brought by Bellarmine to diversifie them, but also
the same is acknowledged both by Beda, Theophylact, O Ecumenius, as testifyeth
your Jesuit Becan. part. 4. theol. scholast. tract. de sacram. cap. 27. quast.
1. number. 2. and likewise by many Romish Doctors cited by a Lapide, Co^menton
Mark 6.13. I shall only mention your famous Jesuit Maldonat, on that same
place, who falls very sharply upon them who would understand them of different
Unctions. I add fifthly, that learned PROTESTANTS have demonstrated, that the
Unction spoken of by Mark and James, were in order to a miraculous healing of
diseased persons. On this account learned Chamier, lib. 4. de sacram. cap. 18..
8. spared not to call it, miraculosum and extraordinarium Sacramentum. A kind
of miraculous and extraordinary Sacrament, And Calvine, comment* in Jacob cap.
5. calls it Symbolum temporable, a temporary Symbol, which was made use of in
the Primitive Church, so long as these gifts of healing continued. But these
having long ago ceased by the confession of all, Recedente gratia recedit and
disciplina, The grace departing, there is no more use of the ceremony. I know
your Romanists have some cavills, by which they labor at least to pervert that
place of James, in favor of your pretended Sacrament of Extreme Unction.
Should I now insist in examining them, this Paper would swell to a nimious
bigness, and I confess it has already grown beyond my expectation. Let it
therefore suffice to advertise you, that all these your Cavills are abundantly
confuted to my hand by Chamier, lib. 4. de sacram. N. T. capp. 18.19. By Doctor
Fulk, in his confutation of the Rhemists notes, on James. 5.14. and by other
PROTESTANT Authors. So that, if in your Reply you repeat to me these old
cavils, and do not confute the answers given to them by our Authors, you will
discover your self to be a superficiary Theologue and unable to dive to the
bottom of the Controversy. To sum up all therefore, this your greasy Unction
as now it is gone about in your Church, has no Scriptural foundation, but it
seems to have too great resemblance to the practice of the Heracleonita, a
kind of Heretics sprung from the Valentinians, of whom Austine writes in his
Book, ad Quod vult Deum, cap. 16. Something also not unlike to this, Irenaus
testifies concerning the Valentinians themselves, lib. 1. con. hares. cap. 18.
And so much of your Extreme Unction.

Now it remains, that I take some notice Lastly of your pretended Sacrament of
Ordination. Know therefore, that we PROTESTANTS, do cordially acknowledge,
that Ordination ought to be observed in the Church. Yea, learned Calvin, lib.
4. Instit. cap. 14.. 20. admits that in a large sense, it may be termed a
Sacrament. So likewise have other our Divines, as did Austin of old, lib. 2.
contra Epist. Parmeniani cap. 13. and other Ancients. Yet Calvin in the place
quoted, justly denies as do other reformed Divines, that it ought to be
reckoned among ordinary and properly so called Sacraments, Inter ordinaria
sacramenta (says Calvin,) nou numero. I shall desire you but to take notice
of the ensuing Considerations. And First, how piteously are your Authors
broken among themselves, concerning the matter or visible sign of this
pretended Sacrament? You may take an account of this, from your Jesuit Becan,
part. 4. the dischol. tract. de sacram. cap. 26. quaest. 4. Where first he
brings in Dominicus a Soto, and Valentia, affirming that the porrection of the
instruments, as of a Plater with Bread, and Cup with Wine, in the ordination of
a Presbyter, to be the only essential matter of ordination. Then Petrus a Soto.
Ledesma, Bellarmine, and Henriquez, asserting both the Porrection of
instruments, and also Imposition of hands, to be the essential parts of
ordination. But lastly, Becan himself affirms only Imposition of hands, to be
the essential matter of this pretended Sacrament and that the Porrection of the
instruments is accidental thereto. This is another specimen of your Papal
Unity. Do you not perceive this fat^lity attending you, that where you divide
from us, there you also divide among your selves. Secondly therefore, I would
ask what you really make the visible sign in this Sacrament? Is it only the
Porrection of the instruments, of which alone your Pope Eugenius the fourth
speaks, in that pretended Decree of the Council of Florence? Or is it only the
Imposition of hands, or both? Not the first, for there can be no evidence of a
divine institution thereof, nor does Scripture make mention of any such
Porrection of instruments, as is well observed by your own Jesuit Becan. Nor
the second, for Imposition of hands is a rit^ and action of the ordainer, but
no substantial Element, such as is requisite to the nature of a Sacrament: And
besides according to your Authors, it is commone to other Sacraments, such as
Corfirmation, and Extreme Unction. How then can it be the sole and peculiar
sign in this Sacrament? Neither the third, for the arguments which prove that
the matter of this pretended Sacrament can be neither of these separately,
prove also, that it cannot consist in both conjunctly. The porrection of the
instruments cannot be the matter of this Sacrament, either in part or whole, as
not being of a divine institution; neither Imposition, of hands as being no
substantial Element. Thirdly, that which your Pope Eugenius the fourth, gives
out as the form of this Sacrament, or words to be pronounced, were never of
divine institution. The words he speaks of at the ordaining of Presbyters are
these, Accipite potestatem offerendi Sacrificium in Ecclesia pro Vivis and
Mortuis. Where have you a divine institution for these words? Nay, they are
manifestly repugnant to the Scriptures of GOD, for they suppose Ministers to be
Sacrificers of a proper propitiatory sacrifice, for the sins of Living and
Dead. The absurdity whereof, and repugnancy to the Scriptures, might be
demonstrated by many Arguments, if by digressing to that Controversy, I should
not be longer entangled then at present is convenient. Fourthly, you will find
it hard, to prove that Ordination is a seal of the promi^es of eternal
Salvation. It is indeed a Seal of vocation to such an office, not of a right to
eternal life. Fifthly, Ordination is peculiar to one Rank of men in the
Church, But when our Divines deny it to be a proper Sacrament of the Gospel,
they require to the nature of a proper Sacrament, as Doctor FORBES holds forth,
in his Instruct. Historico-Theol. lib. 9. cap. 1.. 27. That it be, Commune
omnibus faederatis, quos neque aetas neque exiguus in gratia progressus, vel
aliqua Physica incongruitas, vel nondum peracta paenitentia impedit. That is,
That it be commone to all within the bond of the Covenant, who are not impeded
either by age, or by guiltnesse or some Physical incongruity. Therefore
Ordination, from which the greater part of believing Christians are excluded,
(though upon none of these accounts,) can be no Sacrament in that sense in
which it is denied by PROTESTANTS. Sixthly, by Ordination with you men are
rendered incapable of Marriage, which also according to you is another
Sacrament. Strange Sacraments whereof the one does incapacitat to partake of
the other. But lastly, what should I here insist upon the facundity of this
pretended Sacrament of Ordination, how it has begotten to you as learned
Calvine expresses it. lib. 4. institut. cap. 19.. 22. septem Sacramentula,
seven other petty Sacraments? Do you not subdivide your Ordination into seven
kinds, viz, Ordination of Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, Exorcists,
Door-keepers, Readers, Acolythes? Yea do not some of you reckon out eight
kind of orders, some nine, some ten; as testifyes your Jesuit Fornarius, de
sacram. ordinis cap. 1. number. 3. If all these be Sacraments, have you not a
goodly number of Sacraments? Where have you a divyne institution for all these,
yea for the first seven or eight? Or for the Symbols you use in conferring
these orders? Are you agreed among your selves, how many of these are
Sacraments, and whether any of these, or how many of them be proper species of
the Sacrament of Order? If these of them be proper species, which your Coninck
supposes disp. 20. dub. 7. number. 51. will not the number of your Sacraments be
much increased above a septonarie, if you divide them into species
specialissimas? But a more full account of the Vertigo, wherewith your Authors
are smitten in this matter, may be had in Chamier lib. 4. de sacram. N. T. cap.
23. and in Doctor FORBES, his Instruct. historico-thcol. lib. 9. cap. 7.

Perhaps I have expatiated on these particulars too far, I shall now leave
you to examine seven other Sacraments, (as a learned Author terms them,) or
rather Mysteries of iniquity, which Doctor Beard in his Retractive from
Popery, has charged upon your Church, viz, Turpitudinem: Impietatem,
Falsitatem, Novitatem, Idololatriam, Scripturarum Vituperationem, and
Ignorantiae Defensionem. That is, Turpitude, Impiety, Falsehood, Novelty,
Idolatry, Reproaching of the Scriptures, and Patrociny of Ignorance. How
justly these are charged upon your Church, I leave you to receive: an account
from the learned Author throughout the forecited Tractat.

I shut up this whole discourse, concerning the number of Sacraments, with two
testimonies from your famous Cassander, in Consult. art 13. de Numero
Sacramentorum, which I suppose may stop the mouths of your Romanists, and if
you would lay aside a contending Humor, might do much to put a period to this
Question. His first testimony is this, In hoe certe controversia nulla est, duo
esse praecipua salutis nostrae Sacramenta, quomode lequuntur Rupertus Tuitien
sis; and Hugo de Sancto Victore, nempe sacrum Baptisma, and Sacramentu^
Corporis, and Sanguinis Domini. That is, There is no controversy concerning
this, that there be two chief Sacraments of our Salvation, as Rupertus
Tuitiensis, and Hugo de Sancto Victore do speak, namely, holy Baptism, and
the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of the LORD. The other testimony of
Cassander follows a little after, thus. Et de his quoque septem Sacramentis
certum est, ne ipses quidem scholasticos existimasse omnia aeque proprie
Sacramenta vocari. That is, Concerning the seven much talked of Sacraments, it
is certain (says Cassander,) that the schoolmen themselves never esteemed
them all alike properly so called Sacraments. What can I, or an indifferent
Reader conclude from these testimonies of Cassander, but that you Romanists are
convinced in your own consciences. that there are no other ordinances which may
be termed Sacraments in that strict notion wherein Baptism and the Lords
Supper may, which is that which PROTESTANTS affirm.

Yet that you may remember, that you are not liberated from your old task, but
remain where ye were at the transmission of your first Paper to me. I subioyne
again the confutation of all your ten Papers in these two words.

Nego Minerem, Or, Nego Conclusionem.

John Menzeis.

Augustine, lib. 2. de Bapt. cont. Donat. cap. 5. Aliquid aliter sapere quam se
res habet humana tentatio est. Nimis autem amande sententiam suam, vel
invidendo melioribus usque ad pracidendae communionis and condendi Schismatis
vel Haeresis Sacrilegium pervenire, Diabolica praesumptio est. In nullo autem
aliter sapere quam se res habet Angelica perfectio est. Qui igitur homines
sumus and spe Augeli sumus, quibus aequales in Resurrectione futuri sumus,
quamdiu perfectionem Angeli non habemus, praesumptionem Diaboli non habeamus.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 5. Lin. 24. Read Heretic, page 8. lin. 11. R. Negative, page 10. lin. 1.
R. Ecclesiam, page 51. lin. 32. r. would, page 55. lin. 34. r. Ecclesiae, page
91. lin. 11. r. necessity, page 100. lin. 13. r. supernatural, page 129. lin.
24. r. figment, page 135. lin. 8. add, to be, page 142. lin. 9. r. only, page
145. lin. 26. r. young Boys and, page 182. lin. 19. r. for, page 183. lin. 21.
r. edition, page 200. lin. 23. add; it, ibid. lin. 33. r. virulent, page 215.
lin. 11. r. conformity, page 227. lin 4. r. yet, page 230. lin. 22. r.
nefariae, page 241. lin. 11. r. our, page 248. lin. 27. r. in his time, for,
many time, page 251. lin. 27. r. Signo, page 256. lin. 25. r. jure, page 260.
lin. 1. r. fancy, page 262. lin. 13. r. suite.

The rest of the Escap's are humbly referred to the correction of the discreet
READER. As for the Jesuits papers, the Original Copies transmitted by him to me
were so full of grosse-errours, that I could nor undertake the correction of
them. But of his papers a further account may be had in the Epistle to the
READER.


