A COLLECTION OF Acts of Parliament, Charters, Trials at Law, and Judges
Opinions Concerning Those GRANTS to the College of Physicians London, taken
from the Originals, Law Books, and Annals.

Commanded By Sir EDWARD ALSTON Knight. President, and the Elects and Censors.

Made by CHRISTOPHER MERRETT, Fellow and Censor.

Anno Dom. 1660.

CONTENTS.
ACts, 3. H. 8. page 1. Search for the Original, 122, 123 ACts, 14, 15. H. 8.
3. ACts, 32. H. 8. 14, 18. ACts, 34, 35. H. 8. 27. ACts, 1. Mariae 30.
Surgeons and their Liberties, 18. Charters, 10. H. 8. page 3. Confirmed, 9,
11, 19, 30, 34, 39, 40, 41, 61. Queen Eliz. for Anatomies, 34. King James, 37.
to be confirmed next Parl. 62. An Abridgment of it, 134. Allowed in the
Exchequer. 65. His Letter in prosecution of it, 130. The like from his Council,
133. Trials, College versus Gardener, 67, 110, 112. Trials, College versus
Dr. Bonham, 75. Bugge, 65, Trials, College versus Barton, 101. Trials,
College versus Jenkins and Read, 113. Trials, College versus Barker, 122.
Trials, College versus Trigge, 124. Trials, College versus Blanke, 124, 133.
Trials, College versus Butler, 133. Bonham versus College, 79. Butler versus
College, 106. Concerning the Kings Physicians, 129. Lord chief Justice Pophams
Resolves, 113. Lord Chancellor, Chief Justice, and Judges, resolves, 116.
Several trials nonsuits and directions, 122, 123, 124, 133. 1. Form of a
Declaration, 67. 2. an Information in the Exchequer, 67. 3. a Warrant to commit
to prison, 101.
PRIVILEGES.
Coll. Incorporated, page 4, 5. To choose a President, 5 To have a Common Seal,
6. To purchase Lands, 6, 60 To plead and be impleaded, 6, 124. To make Bylaws,
6, 56 To have a Hall and meetings, 55. To imprison non-payers of fines, 52. To
have all fines, 53, 57 To pay 6 l. per annum for those fines, 63. Not to be in
Inquests, juries, etc. 8. Freed from Watch, Ward, and Offices, 15. Freed from
Arms, compare 19, and 22. 61, 126. May practice Surgery, 18. Elects to be
chosen, 10. What Physicians they may license, 11 Register his office and oath,
57, 58 Officers to choose and swear, 58, 59 Censors are to be yearly chosen,
and their office concerning Physicians and Medicines, 7 May fine and imprison
for mala praxis, 7, 31, 32, 47 And for that only, 97, 98 Keepers to receive
whom they commit to prison, 31 Must be sworn, 16. their forfeiture for
non-swearing and searching, 16 May search Apothecaries, etc. shops, 16, 32, 44,
50, 52 Apothecaries refusing search, how fined, 17, 33. May summon, examine,
fine, and convent Physicians and witnesses, 45, 51. May fine and imprison
witnesses not appearing, etc. 46 May swear witnesses, 49. May take a bond of
100 l. for no farther practice, 59 May punish non admissos, and how, 47.
Discovery of offenders, and how, 48 May convent Apothecaries, etc. 51 Admitted
by the Universities, 3, 11, 75 College, 7. Bishops, 2, 3. Elects, 11 Penalty
of non admissi, 2, 7, 42 By the Common Law, 66 In what cases any person may
Practice, 27.
ANNO TERTIO HENRICI Octavi.
CAP. XI. By whom every Physician and Surgeon shall be allowed.
TO the King our Sovereign Lord, and to all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and Commons in this present Parliament assembled. For as much as the science
and cunning of Physic and Surgery (to the perfect knowledge whereof, be
requisite both great learning and ripe experience) is daily within this Realm
exercised by a great multitude of ignorant persons: of whom the greater part
have no manner of insight in the same, nor in any other kind of learning: some
also can no letters on the book, so Inconveniences ensuing by ignorant persons
practicing Physic or Surgery.
far forth that common Artificers, as Smiths, Weavers, and women boldly, and
customably take upon them great cures, and things of great difficulty: in the
which they partly use sorcery and witchcraft, partly apply such medicines unto
the disease, as be very noyous, and nothing meet therefore, to the high
displeasure of God, great infamy to the Faculty, and the grievous hurt, damage,
and destruction of many of the Kings liege people: most especially of them that
cannot discern the uncunning from the cunning. Be it therefore (to the surety
and comfort of all manner people) by authority of this present Parliament
Enacted, That no person within the City By whom they which practice Physic or
Surgery in London, etc. shall be allowed. St. 14. H. 8. 5. 34. H. 8. 8.
of London, nor within seven miles of the same, take upon him to exercise, and
occupy as a Physician or Surgeon, except he be first examined, approved, and
admitted by the Bishop of London or by the Dean of Paul's, for the time being,
calling to him or them, four Doctors of Physic, and for Surgery, other
expert persons in that Faculty, and for the first examination such as they
shall think convenient, and afterward always four of them that have been so
approved, upon the pain of forfeiture, for every month that they do occupy as
Physicians or Surgeons not admitted not examined after the tenor of this
Act, of v. li. to be employed, the one half thereof to the use of our Sovereign
Lord the King, and the other half thereof to any person that will sue for it by
action of debt, in which no wager of Law, nor protection shall be allowed.

And over this, that no person out of the said A Physician or Surgeon
allowed by the Bishop of the Diocese.
City and precinct of vii. miles of the same, except he have been (as is
aforesaid) approved in the same, take upon him to exercise and occupy as a
Physician or Surgeon, in any Diocese within this Realm, but if he be first
examined and approved by the Bishop of the same Diocese, or he being out of the
Diocese, by his Vicar general: either of them calling to them such expert
persons in the said faculties, as their discretion shall think convenient, and
giving their Letters testimonials under their Seals to him that they shall so
approve, upon like pain to them that occupy contrary to this Act (as is above
said) to be levied and employed after the form before expressed.

Provided always that this Act nor any thing The Privileges of Oxford and
Cambridge.
therein contained, beprejudicial to the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge,
or either of them, or to any privileges granted to them. Rast. pla. fol. 426.

Anno xiiii and xv. Henrici octavi.
CAP. V. The privileges and authority of Physicians in London
IN their most humble wise show unto your Highness, your true and faithful
subjects, and liege men, John Chamber, Thomas Linacre, Fernandus de Victoria,
your Physicians, and Nicholas Halsewell, John Fraunces, and Robert Yaxley, and
all other men of the same faculty within the City of London and seven miles
about, that where your Highness (by your most gracious Letters Pattents,
bearing date at Westminster the 23. day of September, A body corporate of the
faculty of Physic within London and vii. miles compass. Anno 10. H. 8.
the tenth year of your most noble reign) for the Commonwealth of this your
Realm; in due exercising and practicing of the faculty of Physic, and the good
ministration of medicines to be had, have incorporate and made of us, and of
our Company aforesaid, one body and perpetual Comminalty or Fellowship of the
faculty of Physic, and to have perpetual succession and common seal, and to
choose yearly a President of the same Fellowship and Comminalty, to oversee,
rule and govern the said Fellowship and Comminalty, and all men of the same
faculty, with diverse other liberties and privileges, by your Highness to us
granted, for the Commonwealth of this your Realm, as in your said most
gracious Letters Pattents more at large is specified and contained, the tenor
whereof follows in these words.

HEnricus Dei gratia, Rex Angliae and Franciae, and Dominus Hiberniae, Omnibus
ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint, Salutem. Cum Regii officii nostri munus
arbitremur ditionis nostrae hominum faelicitati omni ratione consulere: ^ Id.
autem vel in primis fore, si improborum conatibus tempestive occurramus,
apprime necessarium duximus, improborum quoque hominum, qui medicinam magis
avaritiae suae causa quam ullius bonae conscientiae fiducia profitebuntur, unde
rudi and credulae plebi plurima incommoda oriantur, audaciam compescere. Itaque
partim been institutarum civitatum in Italia, and al^is multis nation^bus
exemplum imitati, partim gravium virorum Doctorum Joannis Chamber, Thomae
Linacre, Fernandi de Victoria medicorum nostrorum, Nicholai Halsewel, Joannis
Francisci, and Rob. Yaxley, medicorum, ac precipue reverendissimi in Christo
patris, ac^domini, dom. Thomae Tituli sanctae Ceciliae, trans Tiberim
sacrosanctae Romanae Ecclesiae Presbyteri Cardinalis, Eboracensis
Archiepiscopi, and Regni Nostri Angliae Cancellarii charissimi, A perpetual
College of Physicians ^rected and gran^ed in London and the Suburbs.
simi, precibus inclinati, Collegium perpetuum doctorum and gravium virorum,
qui medicinam in urbe nostra Londino and suburbibus intraque septem millia
passuum, ab^ea urbe quaquaversus public exerceant, institui volumus a^que
imperamus. Quibus tum sui honoris tum publicae utilitatis nomine, curae ut
speramus erit, malitio^^sorum, quorum meminimus, inscientiam temeritatemque,
tam exemplo gravitateque sua deterrere quam per leges nostras nuper editas, ac
per constitutiones per idem collegium condendas punire. Quae quo facilius rite
peragi possint memoratis Doctoribus Johanni Chamber, Thomae Linacre, Fernando
de victoria medicis nostris, Nicholao Halsewell, Joanni, Francisco, and Roberto
Yaxley, medicis conc^ssimus, quod ipsi omnesque homines ejusdem facultatis de
and in civitate praedicta, sint in re and nomine unum corpus and communitas
perpetua, sive Collegium perpetuum. Et quod^ eadem communitas sive collegium
singulis annis in perpetuum eligere possint and facere de communitate illa
aliquem providum virum and in facultate medicinae expertum in praesidentem
ejusdem A president of the College, and his office and duty. The College
shall have perpetual succession and a common seal. They shall be of ability to
purchase land.
Collegii sive communitatis, ad supervidend. recognoscendum, and gubernand. pro
illo anno Collegium, sive communitatem praed. and omnes homines ejusdem
facultatis and negotia eorundem. Et quod idem praesidens and collegium sive
communitas habeant successionem perpetuam, and commune sigillum negotiisdict^^^
communitatis and praesidentis in perpetuum serviturum. Et quod ipsi and
successores sui in perpetuum sint personae habiles and capaces ad perquirendum,
and possidendum in feodo and perpetuitate terras and tenementa, redditus and
alias possessiones quascunque.

Concessimus etiam eis and successoribus suis pro nobis and haeredibus nostris,
quod ipsi and successores sui possint perquirere si^i and successoribus suis,
tam in dicta urbe quam extra, terras and tenementa quaecunque, annuum valorem
duodecim librarum non excedendum. Statuto de alienatione admanum mortuam non
obstante. Et quod ipsi per nomina praesidentis Collegii, seu communitatis
facultatis medicinae Land. pl' itari and impl' itari possint coram quibuscunque
Judicibas in curiis and actionibus quibuscunque. Et quod praedict. praesidens
and They must sue and be sued.
Collegium sive communitas, and eorum successores congregationes licitas and
honestas de seipsis ac Statuta and Ordinationes pro salubri gubernatione
supervisu and correctione Collegii, seu communitatis praedictae, and omnium
hominum eandem facultatem in dicta civitate They must make lawful assemblies,
and ordinances for government.
seu per septem miliaria in circuitu ejusdem civitatis exercen. secundum
necessitatis exigentiam (quoties and quando opus faerit) facere valiant licite
and impune, sine impedimento nostri, haeredum vel successorum nostror.
justiciariorum, escaetorum, vicecomitum, and aliorum ballivorum, vel
ministrorum nostrorum haeredum vel successorum nostrorum quorumcunque.
Concessimus etiam eisdem praesidenti and Collegio, seu communitati and
successoribus* suis, quod nemo in dicta No man shall practice Physic in London
or vii. miles thereof, unless he be allowed.
civitate, aut per septem milliaria in circuitu ejusdem, exerceat dictam
facultatem, nisi ad hoc per dictum praesidentem and communitatem, seu
successores eorum, qui pro tempore fuerint, admissus sit per ejusdem
praesidentis and Collegii literas sigillo suo communi sigillatas, sub poena
centum solidorum pro quolibet mense, quo non admissus eandum facultatem
exercuit, dimidium in^e nobis and haeredibus nostris, and dimidium dicto
praesidenti and Collegio applicandum.

Praeterea volumus and concedimus pro nobis and successoribus nostris (quantum
in nobis est) quod per praesidentem and Collegium praedictae communitatis pro
tempore existen. and eorum successores in perpetuum quatuor singulis annis per
ipsos eligantur, qui habeant supervis^m and scrutinium, correctionem and
gubernationem, omnium and singulorum dictae civitatis medicorum Four Physicians
of London shall be yearly chosen to have the oversight of the others.
utentium facultate medicinae in eadem civitate, ac aliorum medicorum
forinsecorum quorumcunque facultatem illam medicinae aliquo modo frequentantium
and utentium infra eandem civitatem and suburbia ejusdem, sive intra septem
milliaria in circuitu ejusdem civitatis, ac punitionem eorundem pro delictis
suis in non been exequendo faciendo and utendo illa. Necnon supervisum and
scrutinium omni modo medicinarum and earum reception. per dictos medicos, seu
aliquem eorum hujusmodi ligeis nostris pro eorum infirmitatibus curandis, and
sanandis, dandis, imponendis, and utendis quoties and quando opus fuerit pro
commodo and utilitate eorundem ligeorum nostrorum. It a quod punitio hujusmodi
medicorum utentium dicta facultate medicinae, sic in praemissis delinquentium
per fines, amerciamenta, and imprisonamenta corporum suorum and per alias vias
rationalibiles, and congruas exequatur.

Volumus etiam and concedimus pro nobis haeredibus and successoribus nostris
(quantum in nobis est) quod nec praesidens, nec aliquis de Collegio praedicto
medicorum, nec successores sui, nec eorum aliquis exercens facultatem illam,
quoquo modo in futur. infra civitatem Physicians shall not be summoned in
Juries in London. St. 32. H. 8. 40.
nostram praedictam, and suburbia ejusdem seu alibi summoneantur, aut ponantur
neque eorum aliquis summoneatur, aut ponatur in aliquibus assisis, juratis,
inquestis, inquisitionibus, attinctis, and aliis recognitionibus infra dictam
civitatem, and suburbia ejusdem imposterum coram Majore ac vicecom. seu
coronatoribus dictae civitatis nostrae pro tempore existen* capiendum, aut per
aliquem officiarium, seu ministrum suum, vel officiarios sive ministros suos
summonend. licet iidem jurati, inquisitiones, seu recognitiones summon. fuerint
super brevi, vel brevibus nostris, vel haeredum nostrorum de recto, sed quod
dicti magistri, sive gubernatores, ac communitas facultatis antedictae, and
successores sui and eorum quilibet dictam facultatem exercentes, versus nos,
haeredes and successores nostros, ac versus majorem and vicecomites civitatis
nostrae praedictae (pro tempore existente) and quoscunque officiarios and
ministros suos sint inde quieti, and penitus exonerati in perpetuum per
praesentes.

Proviso quod literae nostrae, seu aliquid in eis content. non cedent in
prejudicium civitatis nostrae L^nd. seu libert. ejusdem. Et hoc absque fine seu
fe^do pro praemissis, seu sigillat. praesentium nobis faciend^, solvenda, vel
aliqualiter reddenda, aliquo Statuto, ordinatione, vel actu in contrarium, ante
haec tempora facto, edito, ordinato seu proviso in aliquo non obstante. In
cujus rei testimonium has literas nostras fieri fecimus patentes. Test^ meipso
apud Westmonasterium, xxiii. die Sept. An. reg. nostri x. Per ipsum regem and
de data praedicta authoritate Parl.

Tunstall.

ANd for so much that the making of the said Corporation is meritorious, and
very good for the Commonwealth of this your Realm, it is therefore expedient
and necessary to provide, that no person of the said politic body and
Comminalty aforesaid, be suffered to exercise Character of Physicians.
and practice Physic, but only those persons that be profound, sad, and
discreet, groundly learned, and deeply studied in Physic.

In consideration whereof, and for the further authorizing of the same Letters
Patents, and also The Kings Letters Patents and every Article therein confirmed.
enlarging of further Articles for the said Commonwealth to be had and made:
Pleases it your Highness, with the assent of your Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, to enact,
ordain, and stablish, that the said Corporation of the said Comminalty and
Fellowship of the faculty of Physic aforesaid, and all and every Grant,
Article and other thing contained and specified in the said Letters Patents, be
approved, granted, ratified and confirmed in this presen Parliament, and
clearly authorized and admitted by the same good, lawful, and available to your
said body Corporate, and their Successors for ever, in as ample and large
manner as may be taken, thought, and construed by the same. And that it please
your Highness, with the assent of your said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
the Commons in this your present Parliament assembled, surther to enact,
ordain, and establish, That the six persons beforesaid, in your said most
gracious* Letters Patents named as principals, and first named of the said
Comminalty and Fellowship, choosing to them two more of the said Comminalty from
hence forward, be called and cleaped Elects. And that the same Elects yearly
choose one of them There shall be eight Elects of the Physicians of London.
to be President of the said Comminalty, and as often as any of the rooms and
places of the same Elects shall fortune to be void, by death or otherwise, then
the Supervivors of the same elects (within thirty or forty days next after the
death of them or any of them) shall choose, name, and admit one or more, as need
shall require, of the most cunning and expert men, of and in the said faculty
in London, to supply the said room and number of eight persons. So that he or
they that shall be so chosen, be first by the said Supervivors straightly
examined, after a form devised by the said Elects, and also by the same
Supervivors approved.

And where that in Dioceses of England out Physicians in other places must be
examined by the President and three of the Elects. 3. H. ^. 11.
of London it is not light to find always men able sufficiently to examine
(after the Statute) such as shall be admitted to exercise Physic in them, that
it may be enacted in this present Parliament, That no person from henceforth be
suffered to exercise or practice in Physic through England, until such time
that he be examined at London by the said President, and three of the said
Elects: and to have from the said President or Elects Letters testimonials of
their approving and examination, except he be a Graduat of Oxford or Cambridge,
which has accomplished all things for his form, without any grace. St. 32. H.
40. 1. M. 9. Coke li. 8. fo. 14.

At the head of the Parl. Roll.
PArliamentum inchoatum and tentum in Civitate Londonniar* quinto decimo die
Aprilis Anno Prorogation of the Parl.
Regni metuendissimi ac potentissimi Regis, Henrici octavi fidei defensoris
quarto decimo and deinde prorogatum usque Westminster. and ibidem tentum die veneris
ultimo die Julii Anno ejusdem Regis quinto decimo.

At the foot of the same Roll.
Die Mercurii vicesimo nono die mensis Julii Cmo xvimo die Parliamenti peste in
dies magis and magis in urbe Londino ac praesertim circa palatium Dni Regis de
Bridewell invalescente Reverendissimus Dus Legatus Cancellarius exhibuit,
ostendit certis Dnis spiritualibbus and temporalibbus quandam Commissionem Dni
Adjournment of the Part.
Regis magno sigillo suo sigillatam cujus tenor sequitur in hec verba Henricus
octavus dei gra. Angl. and Franc. Rex. sidei defensor and Dns hibn,
reverendissimo in Xp^ pa^ri intimoque ac dilcissimo Consiliario suo Dno Thome
miseratione divine tituli sce Cecilie sacorste Roman Ecclie presbytero
Cardinali Ebor Archiep^ Angl. primati aplice sedis etiam de latere legato
Cancellar. suo salt^, Sciatis quoth propter infeccoem a^ris pestiferi ubique per
Civitatem nram London* invalescentem de advisamento and assensu consilii nri
assignavimus vos ac vobis tenore presencium committimus potestatem and
auctoritatem spialem ad presens Parliamentum nrm usque Westminster* ad diem Veneris
prox. futur. prorogand. and continuand. ibidemque tenend. dantes ulterius
univsis and singulis tam Archepis Epis Abbibbus Prioribbus Ducibbus Comitibbus
vicecomitibbus Baronibbus Militibbus Civibbus Burgensibbus qm omnibus aliis
quor. interest ad dictum Parliamentum nrm praedict. conventur. tenore
presenciu^ sirmiter in mandatis quoth vob. in premissis faciend. and exequend.
pareant obediant and intendant prout decet. In cujus rei Testimon. has Iras
nras fieri fecimus Patentes, Test meipo apud Westminster. xxix. die Julii Anno Regni
nri Quinto decimo. Qua quidem Commissione public per Clicum Parliamenti lca
dcus Reverendssimus Dns Legatus Cancellarius virtute ejusdem Commissionis
prorogavit continuavit and adjornavit presens Parliamentum usque Westminster. ad diem
veneris tunc. prox. futur. ibidemque tenend. hora consueta Mandavit insuper
dcus Reverendissimus Dns Legatus Cancellarius Attorn. and Solicitatori Dui
Regis quoth assumpta secum dca Commissione die sequenti accederent in domum Coem
intimaturi eis de domo coi dcam prorogacoem continuacoem and adjornacoem
lcurique coram eis dcam. Commissionem ad intencoem quod ipsi Coes diem prefixum
apud Westminster. observent prout decet.

Die Jovis tertio decimo die mensis Augusti Cxxx. Confirmation of this Act, etc.
die Parliamenti ad horam ferme sextam post meridiem Dno Rege in sol^o matis.
sedente in Camera vulgariter dca Camera Parliamentor. infra pala^ium suum
Westminster. assidentibbus dnis tam spiritualibbus hatibbus sive robis
Parliamentaribbus decoratus present etiam de domo coi sive inferiori toto
populo and plebe Thomas Moore miles eor. Prolocutor. silentio prius indict.
gravit. eloquent. and magno cum honoris and humilitatis ac modest. honestament.
regiam affatus est Matem. ^and. summis and merit. quidem extolle^s laudibbus
dotes graves nature and fortune eidem sue Mati. a Deo maximo concessas
copiosissime prosequebatur magnam in prudencia excellenciam promptam
fortitudinis agilitatem mirum temperancie moderamen divinum justitie ardorem
Innatam clemency erga subditos benignitatem subditor. erga eandem suam
majesta^em amorem obedientiam ac debitam observantiam multa per exempla
declarabat In cujus rei comprobaconem quoddam scrip^um Indentatum concessionem
cujusdam maximi Subsidii in se continen. Regiae Mati. optulit Argumentum certe
evidentissimum su^me devocois ^onor. Regem subditor. Cui tam excellenti ^racoi
fine^ t^m imposito dictus Reverendissimas Dns Legatus Cancellarius Dno Rege
prius consult. singula egregie recitando respondebat, Quo fact. idem
Reverendissimus Dns Legatus Cancellarius Acta omnia* in presenti Parliamento
pro bono publico edita and fca ex mandato Dni Regis recitari and publicari
jussit Quibus ex ordine per inicia recitatis and lcis and singulis per Clcum
Parliamenti responcoe secdm ann^tacoes Regiae voluntatis declarativas a dorso
scriptas fca dictus Reverendissimus* Dns legatus Cancellarius exhortando and
admonendo noie Regis omnes Dnos and Coes supradictos ut diligent. ordinata and
Statuta pro bono publico in hoc Parliamento observarent and ab aliis observari
procurarent post great. ex part Dni Regis accoem dict. Dnis and Coibbus pro
^or. diligenti and laboriosa perseverancia circa expedicoem premissor.
Parliamentum predictum noie Regio duxit finiend. and dissolvend. and illud
realit. finivit perit and dissolvit concedens omnibbus liberam ad propria
recedendi facultatem Anno Regni sup. dicti metuendissimi ac potentissimi Dni
nri Regis Quinto decimo.

Anno xxxii. Henrici octavi.
CAP. XL. Privileges granted to Physicians in London.
IN most humble wise shown unto your Majesty your true and faithful subjects,
and liege men, the President of the corporation of the comminalty and
fellowship of the science and faculty of Physic in your City of London, and
the Commons of the fellows of the same, that whereas diverse of them many times
having in cure, as well some of the Lords of your most honorable Council, and
diverse times many of the Nobility of this Realm, as many other your faithful
and *liege people, cannot give their due attendance to them and other their
patients with such diligence, as their duty were and is to do, by reason they
be many times compelled as well within the City of London, and Suburbs of the
same, as in other Towns and Villages, to keep watch and ward, and be chosen to
the office of Constable, and other offices within the said City, and Suburbs of
the same, as in other places within this your Realm, to their great fatigation
and unquieting, and to the peril of their Patients, by reason they cannot be
conveniently attended. It may therefore please your most excellent Majesty,
with the assent of your Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, and by authority of the same to enact, ordain,
and establish, that the The Physicians in London shall be discharged to bear
certain offices there.
President of the said Comminalty and fellowship for the time being, and the
commons and fellows of the same, and every fellow thereof that now be, or that
any time hereafter shall be their successors, and the successors of every of
them, at all time and times after the making of this present Act, shall be
discharged to keep any watch and ward, in your said City of London, or the
Suburbs of the same, or any part thereof: And that they or any of them shall be
chosen Constable, or any other officer in the said City or Suburbs. And that if
any time hereafter the said President for the time being, or any of the said
commons, or fellows for the time being, by any ways or means be appointed or
elected to any watch or ward, office of Constable, or any other office within
the said City or Suburbs, the same appointment, or election to be utterly void
and of none effect, any order, custom or law to the contrary before this time
used in the said City notwithstanding.

And that it may please your most royal Majesty, by the authority aforesaid,
that it may be further enacted, ordained and established, for the Commonwealth
and surety of your loving subjects of this your Realm, in, and for the
administration of medicines to such your said subjects as shall have need of
the same, That from Four Physicians shall be chosen yearly to search Apothecary
wares in London.
henceforth the said President for the time being, commons, and fellows, and
their successors, may yearly at such time as they shall think most meet and
convenient for the same, elect and choose four persons of the said commons, and
fellows of the best learned, wisest, and most discreet, such as they shall
think convenient, and have experience in the said faculty of Physic: and that
the said four persons so elected and chosen after a corporal Oath to them
ministered by the said President, or his Deputy, shall and may by virtue of this
present Act, have full authority and power, as often as they shall think meet
and convenient, to enter into the house or houses of all, and every Apothecary,
now or any time hereafter using the mystery or craft of Apothecary within the
said City, only to search, view, and see such Pothecary Wares, Drugs, and
stuffes as the said Apothecaries, or any of them have, or at any time hereafter
shall have in their house or houses: And all such Wares, Drugs, and stuffes as
the said four persons shall then find defective, corrupted, and not meet, nor
convenient to be ministered in any medicines for the health of man's body, the
same four persons calling to them the Wardens of the said mystery of
Apothecaries within the said City for that time being, or one of them, shall
cause to be brent, or otherwise destroy the same, as they shall think meet by
their discretion. And if the said Apothecaries, or any of them, at any time
hereafter do obstinately, or willingly refuse, or deny the said four persons
yearly elected and chosen, as is before said, to enter into their said house or
houses for the causes, intent and purpose before rehearsed, That then they and
every of them so offending contrary The forfeiture of an Apothecary that
refuses to have his house searched. St. 1. M. 9.
to this Act, for every time that he or they do o offend, do forfeit C. s. the
one half to your Majesty, and the other half to him that will sue for the same
by action of debt, bill, plaint, or information in any of the Kings Courts
wherein no wager of law, essoine, or protection shall be allowed. And if the
said four persons or any The forfeiture of such as being elect, refuse to be
sworn or to make search.
of them so elected and chosen as before is said, do refuse to be sworn, or
after his said oath to him ^^ them administered, do obstinately refuse to make
the said search, and view once in the year at such time as they shall think
most convenient by their discretions, having no lawful impediment by sickness
or otherwise to the contrary: that then for every such wilful and obstinate
default, every of the said four persons making default, to forfeit forty
shillings.

And forasmuch as the Science of Physic does comprehend, include and contain
the knowledge Any of the Physicians of London may practice Surgery.
of Surgery, as a special member and part of the same, therefore be it
enacted, that any of the said Company or fellowship of Physicians, being able,
chosen, and admitted by the said President and fellowship of Physicians, may
from time to time as well within the City of London, as elsewhere within this
Realm, practice and exercise the said Science of Physic in all and every his
members and parts, any Act, Statute or provision made to the contrary
notwithstanding.

CAP. XLII. The authority and liberties of Barbers and Surgeons in London,
being made of one Company.
THe King our Sovereign Lord by the advice of his Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of
the same, by all their common assents, duly pondering among other things
necessary for the Commonwealth of this Realm, that it is very expedient and
needful to provide for men expert in the Science of Physic and Surgery for
the health of man's body, when infirmities and sickness shall happen, for the
due exercise and maintenance whereof, good and necessary acts be already made
and provided. Yet nevertheless, forasmuch as within the City of London, where
men of great experience as well in speculation, as in practice of the Science
and faculty of Surgery, be abiding and inhabiting, and have more commonly
the daily exercise and experience of the same Science of Surgery then is had
or used within any parts of this Realm: And by occasion thereof many expert
persons be brought up under them, as their servants, apprentices and others,
who by the exercise and diligent information of their said masters, as well
now, as hereafter shall exercise the said Science within diverse other parts of
this Realm, to the great relief comfort, and succor of much people, and to the
sure safeguard of their bodily health, their limbs and lives. And for as much
as within the said City of London, there be now two several and distinct
Companies of Surgeons, occupying and exercising the said Science and Faculty
of Surgery, the one Company being By whom and at what time the Barbers of
London were incorporate.
commonly called the Barbers of London, and the other Company called the
Surgeons of London, which Company of Barbers be incorporated to sue, and be
sued by the name of Masters or Governors of the Mystery and Communalty of the
Barbers of London, by virtue and authority of the Letters Patents under the
great Seal of the late King of famous memory King Edward the fourth, dated at
Westminster the four and twentieth day of February in the first year of his
reign, which afterward, as well by our most dread Sovereign Lord, as by the
right noble and virtuous Prince King Henry the seventh, Father unto the Kings
most excellent Highness now being, were and be confirmed, as by sundry Letters
Patents thereof made, amongst other things in the same contained more at large
may appear. And the other Company called the Surgeons, be not incorporate,
The benefit like to ensue by joining the Barbers and Surgeons in one Company.
nor have any manner of Corporation: which two several and distinct Companies
of Surgeons were necessary to be united and made one body incorporate, to
the intent that by their union and often assembly together, the good and due
order, exercise, and knowledge in the said Science or Faculty* of Surgery,
should be as well in speculation, as in practice, both to themselves and all
other their said servants and apprentices, now and hereafter to be brought up
under them, and by their learning, and diligent, and ripe informations, more
perfect, speedy, and effectual remedy should be then it has been, or should
be, if the said two Companies of Barbers and Surgeons should continue
severed asunder, and not joined together, as they before this time have been,
and used themselves, not meddling together. Wherefore in consideration of the
Premises, be it enacted by the King our Soveriagn Lord, and by the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and by the Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, and by the authority of the same, That the said two several and
distinct Companies of Surgeons, that is to say, both the Barbers and the
Surgeons, and every person of them being a freeman of either of the said
Companies after the custom of the said City The Barbers and Surgeons of
London made one Company and incorporated.
of London, and their successors from henceforth immediately be united, and
made one entire and whole body corporate, and one Comminalty perpetual, which
at all times hereafter shall be called by the name of Masters, or Governors of
the mystery and Comminalty of Barbers and Surgeons of London for evermore,
and by none other name: And by the same name to implead, and be impleaded
before all manner of Justices, in all Courts, in all manner of Actions and
Suits. And also to purchase, enjoy, and take to them and to their successors
all manner of lands, tenements, rents, and other possessions whatsoever they
be, and also shall have a common Seal, to serve for the business of the said
Company and Corporation for ever. And by the same name peaceably, quietly, and
indifferently have, possess and enjoy to them and to their successors for ever,
all such lands and tenements, and other hereditaments whatsoever, which the
said Company, or Comminalty of Barbers have and enjoy, to the use of the said
Mystery and Comminalty of Barbers of London. And also shall peaceably, and
quietly have, and enjoy all and singular benefits, grants, liberties,
privileges, franchises, and free customs, and also all manner of other
things, at any time given or granted unto the said Companies of Barbers or
Surgeons, by whatsoever name or names they or any of them were called, and
which they, or any of them now have, or any of their predecessors have had, by
acts of Parliament, Letters Pattents of the Kings Highness, or other his most
noble progenitors, or otherwise by any lawful means had at any time before this
present Act, in as large and ample manner and form, as they, or any of them
have, had, might, or should enjoy the same, this union, or conjunction of the
said companies together notwithstanding. And as largely to have and enjoy the
premises, as if the same were, and had been specially, and particularly
expressed, and declared with the best and most clearest words, and terms in the
law, to all intents and purposes. And that The Barbers and Surgeons in
London shall be exempt from bearing of arms, or to be in watches or inquests.
5. H. 8. 6.
all persons of the said Company now incorporate by this present Act, and their
successors, that shall be lawfully admitted, and approved to occupy Surgery
after the form of the Statute in that case ordained and provided, shall be
exempt from bearing of armor, or to be put in any watches or inquests: And
that they, and their successors shall have the search, oversight, punishment,
and correction as well of Freemen, as of foreins, for such offenses as they, or
any of them shall commit, or do against the good order of Barbery, or
Surgery, as before this time among the said mystery and Company of Barbers of
London, has been used and accustomed, according to the good and politic rules
and ordinances by them made, and approved by the Lords Chancellor, Treasurer,
and two chief Justices of either Bench or any three of them after the form of
the Statute in that case ordained and provided. 19. H. 7. 7.


And further be it enacted by the authority The Surgeons may take yearly
four condemned persons for Anatomies.
aforesaid, that the said Masters or Governors of the Mystery and Comminalty of
Barbers and Surgeons of London, and their successors yearly for ever after
their said discretions at their free liberty and pleasure, shall and may have
and take without contradiction four persons condemned, adjudged, and put to
death for felony, by the due order of the Kings Laws of this Realm, for
Anatomies, without any further suit or labor to be made to the Kings Highness,
his Heirs or Successors for the same. And to make incision of the same dead
bodies, or otherwise to order the same, after their said discretions at their
pleasures, for their further and better knowledge, instruction, insight,
learning, and experience in the said Science or Faculty of Surgery. Saving
unto all persons, their heirs and successors, all such right, title, interest,
and demand, which they, or any of them might lawfully claim to have, in, or to
any of the lands and tenements with the appurtenances belonging unto the said
Company of Barbers and Surgeons, or any of them, at any time before the
making of this Act, in as ample manner and form as they or any of them had or
ought to have had heretofore: Any thing in this present Act comprised, to the
contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And forasmuch as such persons being of the Mystery or Faculty of Surgery,
oftentimes meddle, and take into their cure, and houses, such sick and diseased
persons, as been infected with the pestilence, great Pocks, and such other
contagious infirmities, do use, or exercise Barbery, as washing, or shaving,
and other feats thereunto belonging, which is very perilous for infecting the
Kings liege people, resorting to their shops, and houses there being washed or
shaven. Wherefore it is now enacted, or dained, and provided by the authority
aforesaid, that no manner person within the City of London, Suburbs of the
same, and one mile compass of the said City of London, after the Feast of the
Nativity of our Lord God next coming, using any Barbery or shaving, No Barber
in London shall use Surgery.
or that hereafter shall use any Barbery or shaving within the said City of
London, Suburbs, or one mile circuit of the same City of London, he nor they,
nor none other for them, to his, or their use shall occupy any Surgery,
letting of blood, or any other thing belonging to Surgery, (drawing of teeth
only except.) And furthermore in like manner whosoever that uses the mystery
or craft of Surgery, within the No Surgeon in London shall use the art of
shaving.
circuit aforesaid, as long as he shall fortune to use the said mystery or
craft of Surgery, shall in no wise occupy nor exercise the feat or craft of
Barbery or shaving, neither by himself, nor by none other for him to his or
their use: And moreover, that all manner of persons using Surgery for the
time being, as well freemen, as foreins, aliens, and strangers within the said
City of London, the Suburbs thereof, and one mile compass of the same City of
London, before the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel next coming, shall have
an open sign on the street side where Every Surgeon in London shall have a
Sign at his door
they shall fortune to dwell, that all the Kings liege people there passing by
may know at all times whether to resort for their remedies in time of necessity.

And further be it enacted by the authority asoresaid, None shall be a Barber
in London but a Freeman of that Company.
That no manner of person after the said Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel
next coming, presume to keep any shop of Barbery or shaving within the City of
London, except he be a Freeman of the same Corporation and Company.

And furthermore, at such times as have been heretofore accustomed, there shall
be chosen by Four Wardens shall be chosen, and their authority.
the same Company, four Masters or Governors of the same Corporation or
Company, of the which four, two of them shall be expert in Surgery, and the
other two in Barbery, which four Masters, and every of them shall have full
power and authority from time to time, during their said office, to have the
oversight, search, punishment, and correction of all such defaults and
inconveniences, as shall be found among the said Company using Barbery, or
Surgery, as well of freemen, as foreins, aliens, and strangers, within the
City of London and the circuit aforesaid, after their said discretions. And if
any person The forfeitures of the offenders.
or persons using any Barbery, or Surgery, at any time hereafter, offend in
any of these Articles aforesaid: then for every month the said persons so
offending shall lose, forfeit and pay five pounds, the one moity thereof to the
King our Sovereign Lord, and the other moity to any person that will or shall
sue therefore by action of debt, bill, plaint, or information in any the Kings
Courts, wherein no wager of law, essoine, or protection shall be admitted or
allowed in the same.

Provided that the said Barbers and Surgeons, and every of them shall bear
and pay lot and scot, and such other charges, as they and their predecessors
have been accustomed to pay within the said City of London, this act nor any
thing therein contained to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it enacted by authority Any person may keep a Barber or
Surgeon as his servant.
aforesaid, that it shall be lawful to any of the Kings Subjects, not being
Barber or Surgeon, to retain, have, and keep in his house, as his servant,
any person being a Barber or Surgeon, which shall and may use, and exercise
those arts and faculties of Barbery and Surgery, or either of them, in his
masters house, or elsewhere by his Masters license or commandment, any thing
in this Act above written to the contrary notwithstanding.

Anno xxxiiii. and xxxv. Henrici octavi.
CAP. VIII. Any person being no common Surgeon, may minister outward
medicines.
WHere in the Parliament holden at Westminster, in the third year of the Kings
most Gracious reign, amongst other things for the avoiding of sorceries,
witchcrafts, and other inconveniences, it was enacted, That no person within
the City of London, nor within seven miles of the same, should take upon them
to exercise and occupy as Physician, or Surgeon, except he be first
examined, approved, and admitted by the Bishop of London and other, under and
upon certain pains and penalties in the same Act mentioned. Sithence the making
of which said Act, By what means the Surgeons of London have abused the
Statute of 3. H. 8. 11. for their own gain.
the company and fellowship of Surgeons of London, minding only their own
lucres, and nothing the profit or ease of the diseased or patient, have sued,
troubled and vexed diverse honest persons, as well men as women, whom God has
endued with the knowledge of the nature, kind and operation of certain herbs,
roots and waters, and the using and ministering of them, to such as been pained
with customable diseases: as women's breasts being sore, a pin and the web in the
eye, uncomes of hands, scaldings, burnings, sore mouths, the stone, strangury,
saucelim, and morfew, and such other like diseases* and yet the said persons
have not taken any thing for their pains or cunning, but have ministered the
same to poor people only for neighborhood and Gods sake, and of pity and
charity. And it is now well known, that the Surgeons admitted will do no
cure to any person, but where they shall know to be rewarded with a greater sum
or reward then the cure extends unto, for in case they would minister their
cunning unto sore people unrewarded, there should not so many rot and perish to
death for lack of help of Surgery as daily do: but the great part of
Surgeons admitted, been much more to be blamed, then those persons that they
trouble.

For although the most part of the persons of the said craft of Surgeons
have small cunning, yet they will take great sums of money, and do little
therefore, and by reason thereof they do oftentimes impair and hurt their
patients, rather than do them good.

In consideration whereof, and for the ease, comfort, succor, help, relief and
health of the Kings poor Subjects, inhabitants of this his Realm, now pained,
or diseased, or that hereafter shall be pained or diseased.

Be it ordained, established and enacted by the authority of this present
Parliament, that all time from henceforth it shall be lawful to every person
being the Kings Subject, having knowledge and experience of the nature of
herbs, roots and waters, or of the operation It shall be lawful for any person
to cure outward sores notwithstanding the Statute of 3. H. 8. 11.
of the same by speculation or practice within any part of the Realm of
England, or within any other the Kings Dominions, to practice, use and minister
in and to any outward sore, uncome, wound, apostemations, outward swelling, or
disease, any herb or herbs, ointments, bathes, pultes, and emplasters,
according to their cunning, experience and knowledge in any of the diseases,
sores, and maladies beforesaid, and all other like to the same, or drinks for
the stone, and strangury, or agues, without suit, vexation, trouble, penalty or
loss of their goods, the foresaid Statute in the foresaid third year of the
Kings most Gracious reign, or any other Act, Ordinance or Statute to the
contrary hereof, heretofore made, in any wise notwithstanding.

Anno primo MARIAE, Sessio secunda.
CAP. IX. The Incorporation of Physicians in London.
WHereas in the Parliament holden at London the fifteenth day of April, in the
fourteenth year of the reign of our late Sovereign Lord King Henry the eighth,
and from thence adjourned to Westminster the last day of July, in the fifteenth
year of the reign of the same King, and there holden: It was enacted, that a
certain Grant by Letters Pattents, of incorporation made and granted by our
said late King, to the Physicians of London, and all clauses and Articles
contained in the same Grant, should be approved, granted, ratified, and
confirmed by the same Parliament.

For the consideration thereof, be it enacted by A confirmation of the St. of
14. H. ^. 5. touching the Corporation of Physicians of London.
authority of this present Parliament, that the said Statute or act of
Parliament, with every article and clause therein contained, shall from
henceforth stand and continue still in full strength, force, and effect. Any
Act, Statute, Law, Custom, or any other thing made, had, or used to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And for the better reformation of diverse enormities, happening to the
Commonwealth, by the evil using and undue administration of Physic, and for
the enlarging of further Articles for the better execution of the things,
contained in the said Grant enacted.

Be it therefore now enacted, That whenever Whosoever shall be committed to
prison by the President of the College of Physicians in London, shall be
received and kept thereby.
the President of the College, or Communalty of the faculty of Physic of
London, for the time being, or such as the said President and College shall
yearly, according to the tenor and meaning of the said Act, authorized to
search, examine, correct, and punish all offenders, and transgressors, in the
said faculty, within the same City and precinct, in the said Act expressed,
shall send or a commit any such offender or offenders, a Co. li. 8. fo. 114.
for his or their offenses or disobedience, contrary to any article or clause,
contained in the said Grant or Act, to any Ward, Goal, or Prison, within the
same City and Precinct (the Tower of London except.) That then from time to
time, the Warden, Jailer or Keeper, Wardens, Goalers, or Keepers of the Wards,
Goals and Prisons, within the City or Precinct aforesaid (except before
excepted) shall receive into his or their Prisons, all and every such person
and persons so offending, as shall be so sent or committed to him or them, as
is aforesaid, and there shall safely keep the person or persons, so committed,
in any of their prisons, at the proper costs and charges of the said person or
persons, so committed, without bail or mainprise, until such time as such
offender or offenders, or disobedient, be discharged of the said imprisonment,
by the said President, and such persons as by the said College, shall be
thereunto authorized, upon pain that all and every such Warden, Jailer, or
Keeper, doing the contrary, shall lose and forfeit The offenders forfeiture,
and who shall have it, and by what means.
the double of such fine and amerciament, as such offender and offenders, or
disobedients, shall be assessed to pay, by such as the said President and
College shall authorize, as aforesaid, so that the same fine and amerciament,
be not at any one time above the sum of xx. li. the moity thereof to be
employed to the use of our Sovereign Lady the Queen, her Heirs and Successors,
the other moity unto the said President and College. All which forfeitures to
be recovered by action of debt, bill, plaint, or information in any of the
Queens, her Heirs, and Successors Courts of Record, against any such Warden,
Jailer, or Keeper, so offending: in which suit no essoine, wager of Law, nor
protection shall be allowed, ne admitted for the defendant.

And further be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, Searching in London for
Apothecary wares. 32* H. 8. 40.
for the better execution of the search and view of Poticary wares, Drugs and
Compositions, according to the tenor of a Statute, made in the two and
thirdieth year of the reign of the said late King Henry the eighth, that it
shall be lawful for the Wardens of the Grocers, or one of them, to go with the
said Physicians in their view and search, that if the said Warden or Wardens,
do refuse or delay his or their coming thereunto, forthwith and immediately
when the said President, or four of his College Elect, as aforesaid, do call
upon him or them, that then the said Physicians may and shall execute that
search and view, and the due punishment of the The penalty for resisting search
of Apothecary wares.
Apothecaries: for any their evil and faulty stuff, according to the Statute
last before mentioned, without the assistence of any of the said Wardens: any
clause in the aforenamed statute to the contrary hereof notwithstanding. And
every such person or persons, as will or shall resist such search, shall
forfeit for every such resistance x. li. the same penalty to be recovered in
form aforesaid, without any of the delays aforesaid to be had in suit thereof.

And further be it enacted, that all Justices, Other Magistrates shall assist
the Physicians in their search.
Majors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, and other Ministers, and Officers,
within the City and Precincts above written, upon request to them made, shall
help, aid and assist the President of the said College, and all persons by
them (from time to time) authorized for the due execution of the said Acts or
Statutes, upon pain for not giving of such aid, help and assistence, to run in
contempt of the Queens Majesty, her Heirs and Successors.

Queen ELIZABETH'S Charter for Anatomies.
ELizabetha Dei gratia Anglie Francie and Hibernie regina fidei defensor etc.
Omnibus ad quos presents litterae pervenerint salutem.
Cum preclarissime memory Pater noster Henricus octavus nuper Rex Anglie inter
nonnullas alias in commodum and utilitatem regni sui Anglie preclare admodum
statutas and stabilitas ordinationes saluti subditorum suorum summopere
invigilans per literas suas patentes Collegium perpetuum quorundam gravium
virorum medicorum qui medicinam in urbe sua Londino and suburbiis ejusdem,
intraque septem miliaria ab ea urbe quaqua versus public exercerent,
instituerit and incorporaverit eos in corpus corporatum and politicum per nomen
Presidentis Collegii seu communitatis facult at is medicine Londini and
concesserit eidem presidenti Collegii sive communitatis predicte and
successoribus suis diversas libertates and privilegia. Quas lras patentes and
omnia in iis contenta idem Pater nr non solum per senatus consultum seu
Parliament^m suum tentum Annis quarto decimo and quinto decimo regni sui
confirmavit, sed etiam per idem statutum in multis ad auxit and amplificavit.
Quod Quidem pium institutum dci Patris nri quandoquidem in reipublice
commoditatem cessit manifestam and in majorem indies cessurum verisimile sit,
sinos quod rem medicam profitentibus maxim necessarium est, concesserimus
predictis presidenti Collegii sive communitatis predicte and successoribus suis
inperpetuum quotannis quaedam humana corpora ad anatomizandum ut informamur.
Sciatis quoth nos non modo preclaram instituco^em dicti Patris nostri merito
recolentes, verumetiam regi^ officii nri munus arbitrantes regiminis nostri
subditorum incolumitati, saluti and securitati quantum in nobis est, providere
de gra nra spiali ac ex nra scientia ac mero motu nostris concessimus ac per
presents pro nobis heredibus and successoribus nostris concedimus prefato
Presidenti Collegii sive communitatis medicine Londini predict. and
successoribus suis sive eorum assignatis quoth habeant and accipiant annuatim
Temporibus futuris inperpetuum una vice vel diversis anni vicibus ad discrecoem
voluntat^m and libertatem predict. presidis pro tempore existm. and successorum
suorum unum duo tria vel quatuor corpora humana ad discindend. and anatomizand.
quod jure publico hujus regni furti homicidii vel cujuscunque felony
condemnatum and mortuum fuerit, vel que jure publico hujus regni furti
homicidii vel cujuscunque felony condemnat. and mort. fuerint intra Comitatum
Midd. vel infra Civitatem London predictam, vel alibi ubicunque infra sedecim
miliaria predict. Civitatis prox. in quocunque Comitatu sine impedimento nostri
heredum vel successorum nostrorum, aut vicecomitum Ballivorum, servient. ad
clavam, seu aliorum officiariorum aut subditorum nostrorum quorumcunque, sive
eorum alicujus. Et Quod licebit eidem presidenti Collegii and communitati
predict. and successoribus suis and aliis, quibuscunque eorum assignatis
medicine professoribus seu expertis eadem corpora secare, dividere and aliter
pro voluntate and judicio suo cum ea reverentia qua humane carni debetur
tractare ad incrementum cognitionis medicine experimentum ejusdem and ad
salutem ligeorum nostrorum sine contradictione alicujus. Et hoc absque ulla
pecuniarum summa, vel ullis pecuni arum summis pro eisdem reddend. seu
cuicunque solvend. Proviso semper quod cum hujusmodi anatomia de tempore in
tempus transacta and perfecta fuerit predicta corpora sumptibus ipsorum
presidentis and successorum suorum debitis exequiis and sepulture committa^tur.
Eo Quod expressa mentio de vero valor Annuo aut de aliquo alio valor vel
certitudine premissorum sive eorum alicujus aut de aliis donis sive
concessionibus per nos vel per aliquem Progenitorum nostrorum prefatis
presidents Collegii sive communitati facultatis medicine Londini ante haec
tempora factis in presentibus minime fact. existit. Aut aliquo statuto Actu
ordinatione proclamacoe provisione sive restricoe inde in contrarium habit.
fact. edit. ordinat. sive provis. Aut aliqua alia re caussa vel materia
quacunque in aliquo non obstante. In cujus rei testimonium has litteras nostras
fieri fecimus Patentes. Test meipa apud Westmonasterium vicesimo quarto die
Februarii Anno regni nostri septimo.

Per breve de privato sigillo etc. Naylour.

Letters Pattents granted by King JAMES to the College of Physicians in
London. dat. 8. Octobr. 15o regni sui.
JAmes by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all to whom these presents shall come greeting:
Whereas our most noble and Preamble.
renowned Predecessors, King Henry the eight late King of this our Realm of
England, in his Princely wisdom deeply considering and by the example of
foreign well governed States and Kingdoms, truly understanding how profitable,
beneficial and acceptable it would be unto the whole body of this Kingdom of
England, to restrain and suppress the excessive number of such as daily
professed themselves learned, and profound practisers in the Faculty of
Physic, whereas in truth they were men illiterate and unexperienced, rather
propounding unto themselves their private gain, with the detriment of this
Kingdom, then to give relief in time of need, And likewise duly considering
that by the rejecting of those illiterate and unskilful practisers, those that
were learned grave and profound practisers in that Faculty, should receive more
bountiful reward; and also the industrious Students of that profession would be
the better encouraged in their studies and endeavors. For these and many other
weighty motives, Recital of the Patent of incorporation.
causes and considerations, our royal and Princely Predecessor King Henry the
eight, by his Letters Pattents bearing date at Westminster the three and
twentieth day of September in the Tenth year of his reign, of his especial
grace and Princely favor, did erect found and establish a College, Comminalty
or Incorporation of Physicians in the City and Suburbs of London and for seven
miles every way in distance from the same, to be, remain, and have existence
for ever: and by the same Letters Pattents, our aforesaid noble Predecessor did
further give and grant unto John Chamber, Thomas Linacre, Ferdinando de
Victoria, Nicholas Halsewell, John Francis, and Robert Yaxley, then learned,
discreet, and profound practisers in the said Faculty of Physic in the
foresaid City of London. That they and all of the said Faculty of Physic of
and in the foresaid City of London, should for ever, from thenceforth be in
name and deed one Body Comminalty and College; And further by the said Letters
Pattents did give and grant unto the said College and Comminalty, full power,
ability and authority for ever, annually to elect and make one of the said
College or Comminalty to be President of the said College, Corporation and
Comminalty; And that the said President so elected and made, and the said
College and Comminalty, should have perpetual succession and a common Seal for
the behoof and benefit of the said Presideut, College and Comminalty, and
their Successors for ever. And also by the said Letters Pattents did further
give and grant unto the said President, College and Com. minalty, and their
Successors, diverse and sundry other liberties, privileges, immunities, power,
ability and authority, not only to and for the benefit, advantage and commodity
of the foresaid President, College and Comminalty and their Successors, but
also for the more certain and easier discovery, speedy restraint, and certain
repressing of the before mentioned unskilful and illiterate practisers in the
said faculty of Physic as aforesaid. As by the foresaid Letters Patents
remaining of record amongst other things therein contained, more plainly and
fully it does and may appear. Which said Letters Patents, and Confirmed by
Parliament. 14. H. 8.
all and every Grant, Article, and other thing contained and specified in the
same, were by Act of Parliament made in the xiiii. year of the reign of our
said noble predecessor King Henry the eight, approved, granted, ratified and
confirmed, and clearly authorized and admitted by the same good lawful and
available to the said body corporate and their successors for ever, and that
the best construction that might be invented should be made thereof, and of
every part and parcel thereof for the best benefit, behoof, power and authority
of the foresaid President, College and Corporation of Physicians as aforesaid.
And further, by other several Acts of Parliament, diverse and sundry other
Privileges, liberties, By other Acts.
ability, power and authority are and were established, ordained, given and
granted unto the said President, College and Corporation of Physicians and
their successors, as by the said several Acts of Parliament thereof made more
fully and at large it does and may appear. Sithence the making of which said
Letters patents and several Acts of Parliament, we do nevertheless daily find
that diverse enormities and abuses, not as yet sufficiently provided for and New
Abus^s.
reformed, do abound and increase to the apparent damage of us and our loving
Subjects of this our Realm of England, by and through the unskilfulness, fraud
and deceit of Physicians, Apothecaries, Druggists, and such like, and are
likely much more to abound, unless timely and festine remedy be by us provided
and applied for the curing of so public a disease. Know ye therefore, that we
graciously affecting so pious K. James's Grants.
and charitable a work, and intending hereby a more full and perfect
reformation of the said abuses, grievances and enormities, which these later
times have abundantly brought forth in this our Realm, out of our Princely
disposition and care for the repressing thereof; and of our special grace,
certain knowledge and mere motion at the humble Petition as well of our trusty
and well beloved Henry Atkins Doctor in physic, now President of the said
College, and one of our Physicians, Theodorus de Maierne Doctor in Physic,
one other of our Physicians, Thomas Mounford and Edward Lister Doctors in
Physic, Fellows and Elects of the said College, as of other the Doctors of
the said College, have given, granted, ratified, approved, allowed and
confirmed, and by these presents, do for us our Heirs and Successors, give,
grant, ratify, approve, allow and confirm unto the aforesaid President and
College or Comminalty and their A Confirm^tion of all former Patents and Acts
of Parliament.
Successors, the said Letters patents of our said noble predecessor King Henry
the Eight, herein before mentioned, and every article, clause, gift and grant
therein contained, and not herein altered, for the honor, peace and quiet of
the said College; and that the said President and College or Comminalty and
their Successors shall and may for ever hereafter have, receive, take, retain,
keep, use, exercise and enjoy all and singular such rights, titles, liberties,
privileges, immunities, freedoms, executions, ability, power, authority and
other things, as by the said Letters patents, or by any Acts of Parliament, are
or were given, granted or confirmed, or were thereby mentioned or intended to
be given, granted or confirmed, notwithstanding the not using, misusing or
abusing of the same; and that the same Letters Patents, and every article and
clause therein contained, shall be adjudged, taken, and construed most benignly
and favorably, to and for the best benefit, avail and advantage of the
foresaid President, and College, or Comminalty, or their Successors, any
Ordinance, Custom, or usage to the contrary in any wife notwithstanding. And
whereas our said noble Predecessor, by the aforesaid Letters patents, (amongst
other things) therein contained, has given and granted unto the foresaid
President, and College or Comminalty and their Successors; and thereby
expressly appointed and provided, that no person whatsoever should exercise
Against not ad^^^^ed.
the said Faculty of Physic within the aforesaid City of London, or within
seven miles in circuit thereof; unles* the said person should first be admitted
to do the same, by the foresaid President, and College or Comminalty, or their
Successors, by Letters testimonial of the said President and College or
Comminalty sealed with their common Seal, upon pain of forseiting sive pounds
for every month wherein the said persons should exercise the said faculty
being not admitted thereunto, the one half thereof to be for^^ited and given to
our said Predecessor, his heirs and successors, and the other half thereof to
be forfeited and given to the said President, and College or Comminalty and
their Successors, as by the said Letters patents may appear. Now know ye, That
we in our Princely wisdom, Power to sue for the Pe^^lues.
d^ep^y considering how need^ul it is and will be, that all and singular person
and persons practicing or exercising the said faculty of physic contrary to
the intent and true meaning of the foresaid Letters patents, shall be duly and
condignly punished: and for the better encouragement of the foresaid President,
and College or Comminalty and their Successors to sue for the said penalty of
five pounds specified and mentioned by the said Letters patents, of our
especial grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion. Have given and granted, and
by these presents, for us, our heirs, and successors, do give and grant unto
the said President, and College or Comminalty and their Successors full power
and lawful authority in the name of us our heirs and successors, or otherwise
in their own name, by the name of the President and College of the Faculty of
Physic within the city of London in any our Courts of record, or in any other
place or places within this our Realm, according to our Laws to sue for,
recover and have execution of and for all and singular such penalties,
forfeitures, sum and sums of money as now are or hereafter from time to time,
shall accrue or grow due unto us our heirs or successors, or to them by force
or virtue of the foresaid Letters patents or any the said Statutes, or any
clause or thing in them, or in these presents contained (other then the
Recognizance hereafter expressed, or by reason or, means of any offense or
misdemeanor whatsoever committed, perpetrated, or done or hereafter to be
committed, perpetrated or done contrary to the intent and meaning thereof; and
after the same shall be duly recovered, levied or received as aforesaid. We
will and by these presents Penalties to the Colledg^ use only.
for us our heirs and successors, do give and grant the same penalties,
forfeitures, and sums* of money, and every part and parcel thereof to the said
President, and College, and Comminalty, and their Successors to be retained,
had, taken, converted and enjoyed to their sole and proper use benefit and
behoof, without rendering, making or yielding unto us, our heirs or successors,
any part or parcel thereof: or any rent, account or recompense for the same
(other then the yearly rent hereafter by these presents reserved) the said
Letters patents, or any the said Statutes before mentioned, or any clause,
article or reservation in them or any of them contained to the contrary hereof
in any wise notwithstanding. And we do further by these presents of our
especial grace, certain knowledge and mere motion for us, our heirs and
successors, give and grant unto the foresaid President, and College or
Comminalty and their Successors, that the four persons to be annually chosen by
the said To the Censors power to survey ^ll Me^lie^nes.
President, and College or Comminalty for the time being, and their Successors
according to the intent and meaning of the foresaid Letters patents of our said
Predecessor King Henry the Eight, now commonly called the four Censors of the
said College, or any three of them for the time being, shall have full power
and lawful authority at all time and times hereafter, when and as often as to
the said four Censors, or any three of them shall seem requisite and convenient
to examine, survey, gover^, correct and punish all and singular Physicians and
Practisers in the facul^y of Physic, Apothecaries, Druggists, Disti^^ers and
Sellers of Wa^e^s or Oils, Preparers of Chemical Medicines, to be ^old or
employed for gain, and all and every other person and persons practicing in the
same faculty, or using the art or mystery of an Apothecary, or the trade or
craft of a Druggist, Distiller, Preparer or seller of any Oils, Waters, or
Medicines as aforesaid, or that shall sell or put to sale any Stuff, Drugs,
Oils, Waters, or Medicines, or other thing whatsoever, fit, apt, and used or
pretended to be fit, apt, and used for Medicines either simple or compounded,
at or in any place or places within the foresaid City and Suburbs of London, or
within seven miles of the same, by fines, amerciaments, and imprisonments, and
by other lawful ways and means according as the nature and quality of his or
their offense or offenses in the premis^s shall deserve or require. And we do
further of our like especial Power of the Censors to summon examine and fine.
grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, for us, our heirs and successors,
give and grant unto the foresaid President, and College or Comminalty and
their Successors; and do by these presents declare our will and pleasure to be,
That the said four Consors of the foresaid Physicians not licensed.
College for the time being, or any three of them for ever hereafter, when and
as often, as to the said Censors or any three of them shall seem mee^ and
convenient, shall have full power and authority to send for, summon, convent,
and cause to appear and come before* them the said four C^nsors for the time
being or any three of them, all and every Physician and Physicians, practiser
and practisers in the said Faculty of Physic within the foresaid City and
Suburbs of London, or within seven miles thereof, at such times and places, as
by the said Censors or any three of them shall be reasonably limited, prefixed
and appointed, and to examine them concerning their skill or practice of the
said faculty of Physic, and their manner of practice therein: And if any
Physician Penalty for not appearing,
or practiser in the said Faculty of Physic upon reasonable summons, and
garnishment to be made and given in that behalf, shall make default, and not
appear before the said Censors or any three of them at such time and place as
by the said Censors or any three of them shall be reasonably limited, prefixed
and appointed, or shall refuse to answer, or to be examined as aforesaid; that
then Or refusing to answer.
and so often the said four Censors for the time being, or any three of them,
shall and may lawfully assess and impose a reasonable penalty, fine, or
amerciament upon every or any such delinquent or offender for every several
default of appearance made upon several summons, or for every several refusal
to answer or to be examined as aforesaid, at several times upon several
appearances made, so as the same penalty, fine or amerciament so to be imposed
for any one default of appearance or refusal to answer, or to be examined as
aforesaid, do not at any one time exceed the sum of forty shillings of current
English money: and if any person or persons so summoned or warned as aforesaid
do make his or their personal appearance before the foresaid Censors, at such
time and place, as is or shall be limited and appointed as aforesaid; and it
shall then and there appear unto the said Censors, that such person or persons
has or have ministered or prescribed Medicines or Physic unto any person or
Penalty of Practisers without license by the Gensors.
persons, or has or have practiced in the said faculty of Physic at any one
or more time or times within the foresaid City or Suburbs of London, or within
seven miles thereof, without admission and license first had and obtained of
and from the said President, and College or Comminalty, or their Successors by
Letters Testimonial under their Common Seal, according to the meaning of the
Letters patents before mentioned: then it shall and may be lawful to and for
the said four Censors or any three of them to assess and impose a reasonable
penalty, fine, or amerciament upon every such person and persons so practicing,
for every such his and their offense and default in that behalf; so as the same
exceed not the sum of three pounds of lawful English money, and to Three pounds*
imprison him by the space of seven days or under, Imprisonment. 7. days.
for such his offense, and not to detain him in prison any longer, unless he
shall not have made satisfaction and payment of the same Fine so imposed upon
him for the same offense, in which case it shall be lawful to detain him in
prison until the same fine be satisfied. And if it shall then and there appear
unto the said Censors, or any three of them as aforesaid, that any such person
or persons so making his or their appearance, has at any*time administered or
prescribed any noisome, unwholesome, or unfit medicine or physic For bad
practice.
unto any person or persons within the limits a^oresaid, then the said Censors,
shall and may from time to time punish the said delinquent or offender by
reasonable amerciament, fine or imprisonment according unto their discretions
to be by them imposed as aforesaid, so as the same fine do not exceed the sum
of Ten pounds, and so as Ten pounds.
the imprisonment for such offense exceed not the space of fourteen days,
unless it shall be for nonpayment of such fine, for which it shall be lawful to
detain such offender in prison until the same fine be satisfied. And to the
end that the said offenders in the premises may be the better Discovery of
offenders.
known and discovered, and may be for their said misdemeanors and offenses duly
and condignly punished according to the merits of their said offenses, We do
therefore of our more abundant grace, certain knowledge and mere motion, for us
our heirs and successors, give and grant unto the said President, and College
or Comminalty and their Successors full power and lawful authority, that it
shall and may be lawful to and for the said President, and College or
Comminalty and their Successors by any precept or process to be made under
their Common Seal, to summon and warn any person or persons whatsoever, whom
they shall know or think meet, being any Apothecary, Surgeon, Druggist, or
employed in or about ministering of any physic or medicines, or attendant or
servant upon any that shall have received physic or medicines to declare,
testify or prove against any such delinquent or offender in the premises, his
or their misdemeanors or offenses upon reasonable summons and warning to appear
and come before the said President, and College or Comminalty and their
Successors, or the said Censors or any three of them, to be examined touching
his or their knowledge of the said offenders and their misdemeanors and
offenses in the premises; and upon his or their appearance made as aforesaid to
administer and give to him or them so to be produced to testify as aforesaid
an Oath or Oaths, To give (...): Oath.
and him and them to swear upon the holy Evangelists, to testify and declare
the truth of his and their knowledge concerning the said offenders in the
premises and their said misdemeanors and offenses, or otherwise to examine him
or them without oath as they shall think fit. And that if any such person or
persons as shall be thought fit as aforesaid to declare and testify concerning
the said offenses upon reasonable summons and warning given as aforesaid shall
wilfully make default, and shall not accordingly appear before the said
President, and College or Comminalty, and their Successors, or the said
Censors or any three of them, or if he or they shall appear, and yet
nevertheless shall refuse to take such oath or oaths as shall be then offered
or tendered unto him or them as aforesaid, or otherwise shall refuse to be
examined without oath, or shall refuse to make answer to such questions as
shall be then asked or demanded of him or them by the said President, and
College or Comminalty and their Successors, or the said Censors or any three
of them concerning his or their knowledge touching the said offenses and
misdemeanors or any of them, or any other matter or thing concerning the same,
or the discovery thereof; then every such person and persons shall for every
such default or refusal as aforesaid, forfeit and pay to the said President,
and College or Comminalty and their Successors the sum of Twenty shillings of
lawful English money. And we do further of our especial grace, certain
knowledge and mere motion, for us our heirs and successors, give and grant unto
the said President, and College or Comminalty, and their Successors, That the
said four Censors for the Censors search.
time being or any three of them shall and may have full and absolute power and
lawful authority at all time and times, when and as often as to them as
aforesaid shall seem meet and convenient, at fit and reasonable times to enter
into the house, shop, cellar, vault, workhouse or warehouse, or any other rooms
of the house of any Apothecary, Druggist, Distiller, and Seller of Waters,
Oils, or other compositions for the ends aforesaid, or of any other person or
persons that now does or hereafter shall put or set to sale any Medicine,
Drugs, Waters, Oils, or Stuff, fit, apt or used, or pretended to be fit, apt or
used for Medicines within the foresaid City or Suburbs of London, or within
seven miles thereof; and then and there to search, view, try, examine, and see
the said Medicines, Wares, Drugs, Waters, Oils, Medicines and Stuffs, of such
Apothecaries, Druggists, Distillers, Preparers, or Sellers of Waters, Oils, or
Medicines, or other person or persons as aforesaid, and to examine them upon
oath or without oath, as they shall think best concerning the receipts and
compositions thereof; and all such Medicines, Wares, Drugs, Waters, Oils, and
Stuffs, as the said four Censors or any three of them as aforesaid shall find
or conceive to be defective, corrupted or not meet not convenient, to be
ministered or used in medicine for the health of man's body, the said four
Censors or three of them, shall or may take, burn, or otherwise destroy the
same or cause to be taken, burned; or otherwise destroyed according to their
discretions.

And we do further for us our Heirs and Successors, Power to Convent
Apothecaries, etc.
give and grant unto the said President or College, and Comminalty, and their
Successors, that the said four Censors for the time being or three of them,
shall and may have full and absolute power and authority at all times, when and
as often, as to them shall be thought meet and reasonable, to send for, summon,
convent, and cause to appear before them the said four Censors for the time
being or any three of them, at such times and places within the foresaid City
and Suburbs of London or within seven miles thereof, all or any such
Apothecaries, Druggists, Distillers, Preparers, and Sellers of such Waters,
Oils, or Medicines as aforesaid, or any other person or persons whatsoever,
using the Art or Mystery of an Apothecary or Druggist, or the Trade or Craft of
a Distiller, Preparer, or Seller of Waters, Oils, or Medicines, or that shall
put or set to sale any Stuff, Drugs, Waters, Oils, Medicines, or other things
whatsoever, apt, fit, or used for Medicine either simple or compound within the
foresaid City and Suburbs of London, or within seven miles from the same: And
if any such person or persons so summoned or warned as aforesaid, upon
reasonable summons and garnishment to him or them made in that behalf, shall
not accordingly make his or their personal appearance before the said Censors
for the time being, or any three of them at such time and place, as by the said
Censors or any three of them is or shall be reasonably limited and appointed,
Then we do by these presents declare that it shall and may be lawful to and for
the foresaid four Censors for the time being, or any three of them, to impose
and inflict such reasonable penalty, fine and amerciament upon every such
person or persons, so making default of appearance as the said four Censors or
any three of them shall think meet in that behalf. So as such fine or
amerciament for any one such default, exceed not the sum of Twenty shillings of
lawful English money.

And if any person or persons summoned as Bad Medicines.
aforesaid, shall make his or their personal appearance, before the aforesaid
four Censors for the time being or any three of them, at such time or place as
is or shall be limited and appointed, and then and there it shall appear unto
the said fonr Censors or any three of them, that the said person or persons so
appearing then or of late did put or set to sale, keep or retain in his or
their shop or shops, house or houses, any wares, drugs, waters, oils, medicines
or stuffs, defective, corrupted, and not meet or convenient to be ministered in
medicine for the health of man's body, or that any such person or persons, so
summoned and appearing as aforesaid, then or of late did make, or compound, or
deliver out any medicine either simple or compounded, differing from, and not
agreeable in name, nature, and quantity, unto the prescript or direction
delivered unto the said person or persons before the making, compounding or
delivery of the said medicine, then the said four Censors for the time being,
or any three of them shall have full power and authority to impose a reasonable
penalty, fine and amerciament upon all and every person and persons, so
offending, so as the same penalty, fine or amerciament for any one default or
offense exceed not at any one time the sum of Three pounds of lawful English
money. And further to imprison such offender until he have made satisfaction
and payment of the same fine so imposed upon him for the same offense.

And we do further of our especial grace, Grant of fines to the College.
certain knowledge, and mere motion, for us, our heirs, and successors, give
and grant unto the foresaid President, and College or Comminalty and their
Successors, all and singular the fines and amerciaments, penalties and
forfeitures and every of them hereafter to be forfeited, assessed or imposed
upon any Physician or practiser in physic as aforesaid, or to be forfeited
imposed or assessed upon any Apothecary, Druggist, or other person or persons,
for or by reason of any misdemeanor, offense, contempt, o^ default whatsoever,
before in these presents declared, mentioned, or specified, and that the said
President, and College or Comminalty and their Successors, shall and may by
the name of the President and College of the faculty of Physic within the
City of London at all times hereafter, and from time to time in any Ou^ Courts
of Record according to Our Laws sue for, recover, levy, and take execution of
and for the said fines, amerciaments, penalties, and forfeitures, and every or
any part thereof; and the same being recovered and levied, to have, take,
retain and enjoy to the only use, behoof and benefit of the said President, and
College or Comminalty and their Successors, without the let, disturbance, or
interruption o^ Us, Our heirs or successors; or any of the officers or
ministers of us, our heirs or successors; and without giving or rendering any
account or recompense thereof, to us, our heirs or successors. And that if any
offender upon whom any such fine or amerciament Imprisonment of such as pay not
their Fines.
shall be imposed, shall be present before the four Censors, or any three of
them, at the time of such fine or amerciament imposed, and shall not then pay
the same, That then it shall and may be lawful to and for the said four Censors
or any three of them by whom such fine or amerciament shall be imposed to
commit such offender to prison, and detain him in prison until he shall have
satisfied the said fine or amerciament and no longer.

And further we will, and by these presents for us our heirs and successors of
our especial grace To have a Hall.
and favor do grant unto the said President, and College or Comminalty and
their Successors, that it shall and may be lawful to and for them, or the
greater part of them, to have, appoint, retain, and enjoy a certain Hall or
Council house within our City of London or the Liberties of the same; And that
the said President for the time being and his Successors shall and may when and
as often as to him shall seem meet and necessary, call, assemble, and keep
within the same Hall or House a certain Court or Convocation of the said
President and College or Comminalty and their Successors, to the number of Six
persons or more. whereof the said President for the time being to be always
one; And that in the same Court or Convocation, the same President and College
or Comminalty and their Successors to the number of Six persons or more,
(whereof the President for the time being to be one) shall and may treat,
confer, consult, and consider of Arcicles, Meetings by whom and for what.
Statutes, Acts, and Ordinances touching and concerning the said President and
College or Comminalty and their Successors, and the good rule, sta^e and
government of the same, and the reformation and redress of the abuses,
mischiess and enormities herein before mentioned, and hereby intended and meant
to be provided for, and suppressed in the time to come.

And further we will, and by these presents for us our heirs and successors, do
grant to the said President and College or Comminalty and their Successors,
That the said President and College or Comminalty and their Successors to the
number of Six persons or more, whereof the said President for the time being to
be always one upon public summons thereof first made, being assembled
together in their said Hall or house, shall and may have full power and lawful
authority from time to time, to ordain, constitute, make and set down in
writing, such wholesome and reasonable Acts, Ordinances, Orders, Decrees, To
make By-lawes.
Articles and Constitutions, as to the said Six persons or more of them so
assembled, or the greater part of them so assembled, (whereof the said
President to be one) shall seem good, profitable and necessary, according to
their good directions, for the good rule, order, and government of the said
President and College or Comminalty and their Successors, and of all other
practisers of Physic, and other the persons before named, and all others
offending in the said faculty, or any other way touching or concerning the
same, for the reformation and redress of the abuses, deceipts, misdemeanors and
enormities, and other the premises herein before mentioned or expressed. And
that the said President and College or Comminalty and their Successors to the
number of six persons or more, (whereof the said President to be one) shall and
may punish all and every delinquent or offender against the same Acts,
Ordinances, Orders, Decrees, and Constitutions, or any of them, by imprisonment
of his and their bodies, or by fine and amerciament to be by them as aforesaid,
adjudged, imposed and inflicted from time to time as need shall require. And
that the said President and College or Comminalty and their Successors, shall
and may lawfully levy, receive, have, and take the said fines and amerciaments
to their own proper use, benefit, and behoof, without the impeachment Fines to
be paid to the College.
or impediment of us, our heirs, or successors, or of any the officers or
ministers of us, our heirs or successors, and without any account to us, our
heirs or successors to be rendered or made for the same, other then the rent
hereafter reserved. All which said Acts, Statutes, Ordinances, Articles and
Constitutions so as aforesaid to be made, we will shall be observed and kept
under the pains and penalties in the same to be limited and contained, so as
the same Acts, Statutes and ordinances, imprisonments, fines, and amerciaments
be not contrary or repugnant to the Laws and Statutes of this our Realm of
England.

And further we will, and by these presents, for us, our heirs and successors,
do grant to the said President, and College or Comminalty and their
Successors. That they, and their successors, or the greater part of them
assembled together in their said Hall, shall and may nominate, elect and
appoint one honest and discreet person, which A Register his Office.
shall be and be called the Register to the said College, who shall from time
to time be attendant on the said President and College or Comminalty and their
Successors, at their Assemblies, Courts, Congregations, or meetings, and shall
set down in writing, register, and enter into a Book, all such rules, orders,
statutes, decrees, acts, ordinances, and other things as shall from time to
time be had, made, done, provided and ordained by the said President and
College or Comminalty and their Successors, or the greater part of them,
assembled together in their said Hall; which said Register so to be named,
elected and made as aforesaid, shall be and continue in the said office and
place, for and during the will and pleasure only of the said President and
College or Comminalty and their Successors or the greater part of them whereof
the President to be one. The said Register first taking his corporal Oath upon
the holy Evangelists, before the His Oath.
said President and four Censors for the time being, or any three of them,
whereof the President to be one, for the doing and performing of his true and
faithful service to them in the said office and place from time to time.

And we do likewise will, and for us, our heirs and successors do by these
presents grant unto the said President and College or Comminalty and their
Successors, that they and their Successors or the greater part of them,
assembled in their said Hall, shall and may from time to time, when and as
often as to them shall seem meet, ordain, Power to elect Officers.
make, constitute and appoint such and so many other fit and meet officer or
officers, minister or ministers, as to the said President and College or
Comminalty and these Successors, or the greater part of them shall be thought
fit and necessary for their service and benefit, unto all and every which said
officers or ministers, it shall be lawful to the said President and College or
Comminalty and their Successors, or to the Censors or any three of them
assembled together To give Oaths.
in their said Hall, to administer and give oaths upon the said holy
Evangelists, for the due performance and execution of his and their office and
place. And the same Register, and all and every other officer and minister by
them to be elected, made, constituted or appointed as aforesaid, from time to
time upon reasonable and just cause, to remove, expel and put out, of his and
To expel.
their said offices and places, and to elect and put others into his and their
rooms and places, when and as often as to the said President and College or
Comminalty and their Successors, or the greater part of them, shall seem meet
and convenient.

And furher we do for us, our heirs and successors, give and grant unto the
said President and College or Comminalty and their successors, That it shall
and may be lawful to and for the said President and four Censors for the time
being, or any three of them (whereof the President to be one) to cause such
persons, which shall be convented, for any the offenses aforesaid, and To take
bonds of 100 l. to practice no more to his Majesty's use.
shall be found offenders therein, to become bound to us, our heirs or
successors, and to our use in one or more several recognizances in such sum as
they shall think fit, not exceeding the sum of One hundred pounds, with
conditions for restraining them to offend any more in that behalf, as to the
President and four Censors or any three of them shall seem meet. And if such
person shall refuse to become so bound by such recognizance with such
condition, That then it shall and may be lawful to and for the said President
and four Censors, or any three of them, (wereof the President to be one) to
commit such Or to imprison such refusers.
person to prison, and him to detain in prison until he shall become bound in
such recognizance, with such conditions as aforesaid.

And we do further of our especial favor, certain knowledge, and mere motion,
for us, our heirs, and successors, give and grant unto the foresaid President
and College or Comminalty and their Successors, special License, free and
lawful liberty, power, and authority, to acquire, To purchase Lands.
purchase, receive and take unto the said President and College or Comminalty
and their Successors, Manors, Lands, Tenements, Tithes, Rents, Reversions, and
Hereditaments, of or from any person or persons whatsoever, not exceeding in
the whole the clear yearly value of One hundred Marks of lawful English money
above all charges and reprises. So as the same Manors, Lands, Tenements,
Tithes, Rents, Reversions and Hereditaments, by virtue hereof to be acquired
and purchased, be not holden of us, our heirs or successors, immediately in
chief, or by Knights service, or of any other person or persons by Knights
service, the Statute of alienation in Mortmayne or any other statute, law,
ordinance, or provision to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And we do further give and grant for us, our heirs and successors unto the
foresaid President and College or Comminalty and their Successors, that all
and every Physician and Physicians, that now is or are, or that hereafter shall
be elected, admitted, and made a Member of the foresaid College or Comminalty,
shall from time to time be wholly and absolutely freed, exempted and
discharged, of and from providing and bearing of any Armor, or other munition,
within our Coll. freed from providing or bearing Arms.
said City of London, and the Liberties thereof, or within seven miles compass
as aforesaid. Any Statute, Act, Ordinance, Constitution or Usage, to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And we do further for us, our heirs and successors, A general Grant.
give and grant to the foresaid President and College or Comminalty and their
Successors, and by these presents declare and manifest our pleasure for ever to
be, That the said President and College, or Comminalty and their Successors,
shall and may have, take, receive, use, exercise, and enjoy, all and singular
the gifts, grants, liberties, privileges, immunities, freedoms, benefits,
advantages, profits, commodities, power, ability and authority herein before
mentioned, or otherwise by any other former Letters Patents given, granted or
confirmed unto the President and College or Comminalty, or any of them,
without the let, hinderance, interruption, or disturbance of us, our heirs, or
successors, or of any the officers or Ministers of us, our heirs or successors,
or of any other person or persons whatsoever.

And further of our like especial grace, certain This Patent to be confirmed
next Parliament.
knowledge, and mere motion, we will and for us, our heirs and successors, do
promise and grant to and with the said President and College or Comminalty and
their Successors by these presents. That at the next Parliament or Session of
Parliament, of us, our heirs or successors, to be holden within this our Realm
of England, We, our heirs or successors, will give and grant our Royal and free
assent and consent to any Act, Bill, or Petition, by the said President and
College or Comminalty, or their successors, or any of them in the same
Parliament, or Session of Parliament, to be exhibited or preferred, and by the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Comminalty of the said Parliament, to be
approved, and assented unto, for the better enabling, authorizing, and
investing of the said President, or College and Comminalty, and their
Successors, to and with the several grants, powers, privileges, authorities,
exemptions, immunities, and other matters and things, in these presents to them
given, granted, and confirmed, or intended to be to them given, granted or
confirmed according to our gracious intent and meaning herein before specified
and expressed.

And further we will and by these presents for us, our heirs and successors, do
grant unto the said President and College or Comminalty and A farther
Confirmation of this Cha^ter.
their Successors, That these our Letters Patents, and all and singular the
gifts, grants, authorities, powers, privileges, and immunities, and other
things therein contained, shall be good, firm, available, and effectual in the
law, to the intents and purposes aforesaid, and shall be in all and every our
Courts of Record, and elsewhere had, taken, construed and adjudged most strongly
against us, our heirs and sucessors, and most benignly, favorably, and
beneficially to and for the said President and College or Comminalty and their
Successors, any Statute, Act, Ordinance, Custom, Usage, Gift, Grant, or any
other matter, or thing heretofore had, made, used, ordained, or provided, to
the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Nevertheless we will and our intent and meaning is, That the said President
and College or Comminalty and their Successors, shall answer and pay to us,
our heirs and successors for and in respect of the fines, amerciaments,
penalties, forfeitures, and sums of money herein before mentioned, and by these
presents to them granted, as aforesaid, the yearly Rent of Six pounds of lawful
Six pound Rent to the King.
money of England at the Receipt of our Exchequer at Westminster, at the Feast
of the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin Mary, and St. Michael the Archangel,
by even and equal portions, any thing herein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding. Although express mention of the true yearly value or certainty
of the premises, or any of them, or of any other gifts or grants by us or any
of our progenitors or predecessors to the foresaid President and College or
Comminalty heretofore made, in these presents is not made, or any Statute, Act,
Ordinance, Provision, Proclamation or Restraint to the contrary thereof,
heretofore had, made, ordained or provided, or any other matter, cause or thing
whatsoever, to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

In witness whereof we have caused these our Letters to be made Patents.
Witness our self at Westminster the eighth day of October in the fifteenth year
of our Reign of England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland the one and
fiftieth. Young. Per bre. de privato Sigillo.

Irr. in memorand. Scacc. de Anno octavo Regis nune Caroli viz. inter Record.
de termino sci. Michis To. Ex part Reverend. dci. dom. Regis.

In magno Rotulo de Anno 23. Regis Caroli London.
PResidens Colleg. and Coitas Medicor. Land. deb. 27 l. 10 s. medietas 55 l.
versus Johannem Bugge de parochia Ecclie Xpi London* recuperat per Judicium
Cur. quia exercuit facultatem Medicin. per spatium xi. men's. integr. non
existen. admissus ad exercendum and occupand. dict. facultat. medicin, per
President. Collegium seu Communitat. facultat. Medicin. London lris sigillo suo
comui sigillat. contra formam statuti iu hmoi casu edit. and provis. super ipos
onerat. virtute Ordinis hujus Scacc. dat. tertio Julii Anno 15to Regis Caroli.

But the said sum of 27 l. 10 s. is allowed to the President and College of
the Faculty of Physic within the City of London by Letters Patents under the
Great Seal of England, bearing date the 8. day of October, in the 15. year of
the late King James, of England, and of Scotland the 51. and by Judgment of the
Barons of this Court of public Exchequer entered among the Records of Easter
Term in the 7. year of the reign of the late King Charles in the custody of the
first Remembrancer there, Roll the 24.

And they are quit.

Examined by Hen. Croke Clerk of the Pipe.

The Common Law against them that practice, being not admitted.
SI un que nest Physician ou Surgeon emprent sur luy un cure que murrust in sa
main que cest felony. Stanford Pleas of the Crown, cap. 9. Fitz Herbert. tit.
Cor. page 311. Briton fol. 14. Which Dalton thus Englisheth, And if one which
is no Physician or Surgeon (or which is not allowed to use or practice such
Faculty) will take a cure upon him, and his Patient dies under his hand, this
has been holden to be felony. Lambard Eiren. tit. Felony, says thus, That
Thorpe 43. Edw. 3. 33. says he knew one to be indicted accordingly. But if this
should be drawn to felony, then I see not but that the same must be accounted
murder in respect either of the bold presumption or of the will to do harm,
which does amount to malice. And Dalt. in his Country Justice chap. 93.
querieth thus of this Case, It cannot be discerned whether the Patients death
comes by any wilful default in the party, taking such Cure upon him or by the
Patients infirmities. Again, there appears in them no will to do harm, but
rather to do good; and then the Stat. 34. Hen. 8. cap. 8. leaves so great a
liberty of such practice to unskilful persons, that it will be hard now to make
it felony.

A Copy of an Exemplification of a Recovery against Edmund Gardener 11. Feb. 6.
Jac.
JAcobus dei Gra. Angl. Scot. Fran. and Hibernie Rex fidei defensor. etc.
O^ibus ad quos presents l^re n^re pervenerint saltem
inspeximus quoddam Recordum coram nobis hitum in hec verba ss. Plita coram dno
Rege apud Westminster. Termino sci Michis anno Regni dom. Jacobi nunc Regis Anglie
tertio Rotlo 438. ss. London ss. memorand. quod als scilt Termino sce
Trinitatis ultimo preterit. Coram dno Rege apud Westminster. ven. Thomas Langton in
Medicinis Doctor Presidens Collegii sive Coitatis facultatis Medicine London
qui tam pro dno Rege qm pro seipo and Collegio predcto sequitur per L. G.
Atturnat. suum Et protulit hic in Curia dct. dom. Regis tunc ibm quandam billam
suam versus Edmundum Gardener in Custod. Mar. etc. de plito debi and sunt
pleg. de proc. scilt. Johes Do and Ricus Roo Que quidem billa sequitur in hec
verba ss. Londn ss. Thomas Langton in Medicinis Doctor Presidens Collegii, sive
Coitatis facultatis Medicine London. qui tam pro dno Rege quam pro seipo and
Collegio predco sequitur queritur de Edmundo Gardener in Custod. Mar. maresc.
dni Regis coram ipo Rege existen. de plico quod reddat eidem dno Regi ac
prefat. Presiden. and Collegio predco Sexaginta libras legalis mouete Anglie
quas eis debet and injuste detinet pro eo viz. quod cum dns Henricus octavm
nuper Rex Anglie per lras suas Paten. magno sigillo suo Anglie sigillat.
Curieque hic prolat. geren. dat. apud Westminster. in Com. Midd. vicesimo tertio die
Septembris anno Regni sui decimo pro publico bono hujus regni in debito
^xercitio facultatis Medicine and bona administracone Medicinar. hend.
incorporasset and fecisset de Johe Chamber, Thoma Linacre Ferdinando de
victoria ad tunc Medicis ejusdem nuper Regis and Nicholao Halswell Johe
Francisci and Robto Yaxley and oibbus aliis viris ejusdem facultatis tunc de
and infru Civitat. London. unum corpus and perpetuam Coitatem sive societatem
facultat. Medicine. Et ad hend. perpetuam successionem and Coie Sigillum and ad
Eligend. annuatim unum President. ejusdem societatis sive Coitatis
adsupervidend. regend. and gubnand. eandem societatem sive Coitatem and omnes
hoies ejusdem facultatis cum diversis aliis privileg. and aliis rebus per
predom nuper regem eis concesss pro republica hujus regni, prout in predcis
lris paten. before continetur Quar. tenor sequitur in hec verba ss. Henricus
Dei grac. Rex, etc.

Cumque etiam in Statuto in Parliament. dci. nuper Recital of the Charter.
Regis Henrici octavi tent. apud London. decimo quinto die Aprilis anno Regni
sui quarto decimo and abinde adjornat. usquam Westminster* in Com. Midd. ultimo die
Julii anno regni dci. nuper regis quinto decimo and tunc and ibm tent.
inactitat. fuit quod predca Corporaco predce Civitatis and societat. facultat.
medicine predce and oia and singula concessa articul. and al. res content. and
spec. in predcis lris paten. forent approbat. concess. ratisicat. and
confirmat. and clare authorizat. and admiss. bona litima and valida Anglice
available prefat. Corpori incorporat. and eorum successoribus imperpetuum in
tam amplo and largo modo qm posset capi putari and construi pro cadem, prout in
eodem statuto inter alia before continetur.

Predictus tamen Edmundus Gardener qui ad dcm. Charge against Gradiner.
facultat. exercend per Presidentem and Coitatem facultatis Medicine London.
predct. per lras President. and Collegii predci. sigillo suo Coi sigillat. non
admissus est, nec unquam ante bec admissus fuit statutum predcm minime
ponderans nec penam in predcis Lris paten. content. verens dcam facultatem
Medicine per spacium duodecim mensium jam ult. elapss. and prox preceden. ante
diem impetraconis hujus bille scilt ultimum diem Maii anno regni dni Jacobi
nunc Regis Anglie tertio in Civitate London. predca vidlt in parochia bte Marie
de Arcubus in Warda de Cheap London. exercuit and adhuc exercet contra formam
Irar. paten. predcar. and Statut. predct. per quod acco accrevit eidem
Presidenti qui tam etc. ad exigend. and hend. de prefat. Edmundo Gardener pro
predco dno Rege nunc and eidem Presidenti and Collegio predco predcas sexaginta
libas vidlt pro quolibet mense predcoru^ duodecim mensium Centum solidos
predcus tamen Edms licet sepius requisite. and predcas sexaginta libras prefato
dno Regi and eidem Presidenti and Collegio predco seu eorum alteri nondum
solvit sed i^^aei huc usque soluere omio contradixit and adhuc contradic. ad
damnum ipius Presidentis qui tam etc. quadragint. librar. and inde tam pro
eodem dno rege quam pro eodem President. and Collegio predco pred. sectam etc.
Et modo ad hunc diem scilt diem Mercurii prox. post octabis sci. Michis islo
eodem Termino usque quem diem predcus. Edmundus Gardener huit licenc. billam
predca^ interloquendi and tunc ad respondend. etc. Gardiners Answer.
coram dmo rege apud Westminster. ven. tam predict. presiden. qui tam etc. per
Atturnat. suum predcum quam predcus Edus Guard. per W. S. Atturnat. suum. Et
idem Edus defend. vim and injur. quando etc. and dic. quod predict. Presiden.
and Collegium qui tam etc. acconem suam predcam inde versus eum here seu
manutenere non debet, Quia dic. quod per quendam Actum in Parliament. dci. dni
Henrici nunc Regis Anglie octavi apud Westminster. predcam in dct. Con. Midd. Anno
Regni sui Tricesimo quarto and tricesimo quinto tent. edit. recitando in eodem
Actu. Cum in Parliamento tent. etc. quor. pretextu idem Recites the Act of 34.
35. Hen. 8. ca.
Edms existens subdit. dci. dni Regis nunc natus infra hoc Regnum Anglie, vidlt
apud London. vidlt in parochia bte Marie de Arcubus in Warda. de Cheap London
Achens cogniconem and experientiam nature herbar. radicum and aquar. ac
opaconis eordem per tempus predcum in narracone predca superius spec. apud
London. predcam in parochia and Warda predcis practizabat usus fuit and
ministrabat in and ad diversas exteriores penas les uncomes vulner a
impostumacones exteriores intumacones and morbos diverss herbam and herbas
unguent. lavacra lez pultesses and emplastra ac potiones de Calculo and
Stranguria and febribus secundum cognitionem experientiam and notitiam suas in
morbis penis and lez maladies predict. scdm formam and esscm predci Actus edit.
in Annis 34. and 35. supdcis. A^sque hoc quod idem Edms dcam facultatem
medicine infra Civitatem London. predcam aliter seu alio modo exercuit seu
exercet, prout predcus Presidens and Collegium qui tam etc. per narracoem suam
predcam superius versus eum queritur. Et hoc parat. est verificare unde pet.
judm. si predcus Presidens and Collegium qui tam etc. acconem suam predcam inde
versus eum here seu manu tenere debeat etc. Et College Replies.
predcus Thomas Langton qui tam etc. dic. quod ipe pro aliqua per predcum
Eamundum Gardener superius plitando allegat. ab accone sua predca versus ipm
Edmund. hend. precludi non debet, quia dicit quod per quendum actum in
Parliamento dne Marie nuper Regine Anglie tent. per prorogaconem apud Westminster. in
Com. Midd. 24. die Octobris Anno Regni ipius nuper regine primo and ibm
continuat. usque sextum diem mensis Decembris ex tunc prox. sequen. recitan.
quod cum in dco Parliamento tent. apud London. dco decimo quinto die Aprilis
Anno decimo quarto Regni dci. Regis Henrici oct^vi and inde adjornat. usque ad
Westminster. predct. ultimo die Julii in anno decimo quinto Regni ejusdem Regis, and
ad tunc tent. inactitat. existit quod dca Concessio Corporationis per Lras
Paten. fact. and concesss per eundem nuper Regem Medicis London. and oes
Clausul. and articuli content. in eadem Concessione essent approbat. concesss.
ratificat. and confirmat. per idem Parliamentum pro consideracone inde
stabilit. existit in dco Parliamento dce nuper Regine Marie, quod Statutum
illud sive Actus Parliamenti cum quolibet Articulo and Clausula in eodem
content. ex tunc deinceps staret and continuaret semper in plenis robore vigore
and effectu Aliquo Actu Statuto lege consuetudine vel aliqua alia re fact.
habita vel usa in contrar. in aliquo non obstan. Prout per idem Statutum Anno
Regni dce nuper Regine Marie primo supradco edit. before liquet. Et hoc parat.
est verificare unde ex quo predcus Edms practitiam and exercitium predcte
facultatis Medicine superius recogn. idem Thomas Langton qui tam etc* pe^it
judicium and debit. predcum tam dco dno Regi quam eidem Thome et Collegio (...)
predco unacum dampnis suis accone detenconis debi. illius sibi adjudicari etc.

Et predcus Edms Gardener dic. quod plitum predcm Gardener Rejoynes.
per predct Thomam Langton modo et forma predctis superius replicando plitat.
materiaque in eodem cont. minus sufficien. in lege existunt ad acconem predci
Thome Langton predicam versus ipm Edmuna Gardener hend. manutenend. Ad quod
idem Edms Gardener necesse non habet nec per legem terre tenetur aliquo modo
respondere unde pro defend sufficien. replicaconis in hac part idem Edms
Gardener ut prius petit indicium. Et quod predctus Thomas Langton ab accone sua
predca versus ipm Edmundum Gardener hend. precludat etc. Et predcus Thomas
Langton qui tam etc. dic. quod plitum predcum per ipm Thomam modo et forma
predcis superius replicando plitat. materiaque in eodem content. bona et
sufficien. in lege existunt ad acconem ipius Thome Langton predcam versus
predcum Edmundum Gardener hend. manutenend. Quod quidem plitum materiamque in
eodem content. idem Thomas Langton paratus est verificare et probare prout Cur
etc. Et quia predcus Edmundus Gardener ad plitum illud non respond. nec ill.
huc usque aliqualiter dedic, idem Thomas Langton ut prius petit Judicium et
debm predctm tam dco dno Regi quam eidem Thome et Collegio predco unacum
dampnis suis predictis accone detenconis debit. illius sibi adjudicari etc. Et
quia Cur dni Regis hic de Judicio suo de and super premissis reddend. nondum
advisatur, dies inde da^. est partibus predcis coram dno Rege apud Westminster. usque
diem Jovis prox. post octabis sci. Hillari^ de Judicio suo de and super
premissis audiend. etc. eo quod Cur. d^i Regis hic inde nondum etc. Ad quem
diem coram dno Rege apud Westminster. ven. parts predce per Attornat. suos predcos.
Et quia Cur. dni Regis hic de Judicio suo de and super premissis predcis
reddend. nondum advisatur dies ulterius inde dat. est partibus predcis coram
dno Rege apud Westminster. usque diem Mercurii prox. post xviii. Paschae de judicio
inde audiend. etc. eo quod Cur. dni Regis hic inde nondum etc. Ad quem diem
coram dno Rege apud Westminster. ven. parts predce per Atturnat. suos predcos. Et
quia Cur. dni Regis hic de Judicio suo de and super premissis predcis reddend*
nondum advisatur dies ulterius inde dat. est partibus predcis coram dno Rege
apud Westminster. usque diem Veneris prox. post Crastin. sce Trinitatis ex tunc.
prox. sequen. de Judicio inde audiend. eo quod Cur. dni Regis hic inde nondum
etc. Ad quem diem coram dno Rege apud Westminster. ven. parts predce per Atturn.
suos predcos, super quo viss. and per Curiam dni Regis hic before intellcis
oibbus and singulis premissis, maturaque deliberacone inde hita pro eo quod
videt. Cur. dni Regis hic quod Plitum predcm per predcm Thomam Langton qui tam
etc. superius replicando plitat. materiaque in eodem content. bona and
sufficien. in lege existit ad acconem ipius Thome Langton qui tam etc. versus
predcm Edmundum hend. manutenend. Ideo conss. est quod predcus Thomas Langton
qui tam etc. recuperet versus Edmundum debitum predcm unde dns Rex heat unam
medietatem, and predcus Thomas Langton qui tam etc. and Collegium pd* heat
alteram medietatem juxta formum lrar. paten. predcar. and Statut. pr^d^^.
Quodque idem Thomas Langton qui tam etc. recuperet versus Costs.
eum sex libras tresdecim solidos and quatuor denarios pro damnis suis que
sustinuit tam accone detenconis debi predci quam pro miss and custagiis suis
per ipsum circa sectam suam in hac part apposit. eidem Thome Langton qui tam
etc. per Cur. d^i Regis hic ex assensu suo adjudicat. Et predcus Edmundus in
miserecord. etc. Postea scilt die Sabbi prox. octab. sci Martini Anno regni dni
Jacobi nunc Regis Anglie sexto coram eodem dno Rege apud Westminster. ven. predcus
Praesidens per Atturnat. suum predcum and Cogn. se esse satisfact. per predcm
Edmundum Gardener de tota part sua debi predci and d^ damnis predcis que ad
ipn Praesidentem pertinet ideo ipe idem Edms de tota part illa and de damnis
illis sit quiet. etc. Quod quidem Recordum coram nobis sic hitum duximus
exemplificand. In cujus rei Testimonium has lras nras sieri fecimus patentes

Test Thoma Fleminge apud Westminster. undecimo die Februarii Anno Regni nri Anglie
Francie and Hibnie sexto and Scocie quadragesimo scdo. Byng. and Byng.

A Copy of an Exemplification of a Recovery against Doctor Bonham 13. Feb. 6.
Jacobi.
JAcobus Dei grac. Angl. Scot. Franc. and Hibnie Rex fidei defen. etc.
Omnibus ad quos presents etc.
ut supra sss Plita coram dno Rege apud Westminster. Termino sci Michis Anno Regni
dni Jacobi nunc Regis Anglie quinto Rotulo 299. sss London sss Memorand. quod
als scilt. Termino sce Trinitatis ultimo preterito Coram dno Rege apudwestm.
ven. Presidens Collegii sive Coitat. facultatis medicine London qui tam pro dno
Rege quam pro eodem Praesidente and Collegio predco sequitur per Laurencium
Gibson Atturnat. suum. Et protulit hic in Cur. dci dni Regis tunc ibm quandam
Billam suam versus Thomam Bonham in Custod. Mar. etc. de plito debi and sunt
pleg. de pross. scilt. Johes Do and Ricus Roo. Que quidem Billa sequitur in
hec verba sss. London. sss. Presidens Collegii feu Coitat. facultat. Medicine
London. qui tam etc. (as in Gardiners Case.)

Et modo ad hunc diem scilt. diem Veneris prox. post Bonhams Answer.
octab. sci. Michis isto eodem Termino usque quem diem predcus Thomas Bonham
huit Licenc. ad billam predcam interloquendi and tunc ad respondend. etc. Coram
dno Rege apud Westminster. ven. tam predcus Praesidens Collegii seu Coitatis dce
facultatis Medicine London. qui tam etc. per Atturnat. suum p^^ predcum qm
predcus Thomas Bonham per William Edwards Atturn. suum. Et idem Thomas defend.
vim and (...). quando etc. Et dic. quod predcus Praesidens Collegii seu Coitat.
dce facultat. Medicine London. qui tam etc. pro dco dno Rege quam pro ^odem
Praesidente and Collegio predco sequitur acconem suam predcam inde versus cum
habere seu manutenere non debet, quia dic. quod been and verum est, quod
predcus dus Henricus octavus nuper Rex Anglie per predcas lras suas patent.
magno sigillo suo Anglie sigillat* geren. dat. apud Westminster. in predco Com. Midd.
predco Vice simo tertio die Septembris Anno Regni sui decimo sup. dco pro
publico bono hujus Regni in debo exertio facultat. Medicine and bona
administracone Medicinar. hend. and pro causis and considerationibus in eisdem
lris patentibus expressis incorporasset and fecisset de predcis Johne Chamber,
Thomas Linacre and Ferdinando de victoria ad tunc Medicis ejusdem nuper Regis
and Nichao Halsewel Johe Francisci and Robto Yaxley and oibus aliis viris
ejusdem facultatis tunc de and infra dcam Civitatem London* unum Corpus and
perpetuam Coitatem sive societatem facultat. Medicine and ad hend. perpetuam
successionem and Coe sigillum, and ad eligend. annuatim unum presiden. ejusdem
societatis sive Coitatis ad supervidend. regend. and gub^and. eandem societatem
sive Coiatem and omnes homines ejusdem facultat. Cum diversis aliis privilegiis
and al. rebus per dnm nuper regem eis concess (...) reipublica hujus* Regni
prout in predcis lris paten. ut prefertur before continetur. Ad quod predcus
^uper Rex concess^. etiam per easdem lras patent. eis^em tunc Presidenti and
Collegio seu Coitat. and successor. suis quod nemo in dca Civitate aut* per
sept. milliar. in Circuit^ ejusdem exerceret dcam facultatem nisi ad hoc per
predcum Praesidentem and Coitat. seu successures eorum qui pro tempore fuerint
admisss foret per ^jusdem Praesidentis and Collegii lras sigillo suo Coi
sigillat. sub pena Centum solidor pro quolibet mense quo non admissus eandem
facultatem exerceret, dimid. inde dco dno nuper Regi and heredibus suis et
dimid. dco Praesidenti and Collegio applicand. etc. and recites the Statute of
14. Hen. 8. cap. 5.

Et predcus Thomas Bonham ulterius dic. quoth ipe idem Thomas diu ante predum
vicesimum quintum diem Junii Anno Regni dci dni Regis nunc Anglie quinto
supradicto, scilt. scdo die Julii Anno Dni millimo quingentesimo nonage simo
quinto in Alma Academia Cantabrigie suscepit gradum and dignitat. Doctoris in
Medicinis and ad tunc and ibm scilt. eodem scdo die Julii an. dni millimo
quingentesimo nonagesimo quinto supradicto apud Cantabrigiam predcam in Com.
Cantabr. rite et li^ime Ordinat. and fact. fuit Graduat. Anglice a Graduat pred
vidlt Doctor in Medicinis sedum leges statuta constitucones and Ordinacones dce
Academie Cantabrigie. Quodque idem Thomas tunc et ibm adimplevit omnia Anglice,
did accomplish all things pro forma sua sine aliqua gratia Quorumque pretex^u
idem Thomas hujmodi Graduat. Cantabrigie vidlt Doctor. in Medicinis in forma
predca existen. qui adimplevisset omnia Anglice, had accomplished all things,
pro ^orma sua sine aliqua gratia dcam facultatem Medicine per predcm spatium
duodecim mensium vlt. elaps. et prox. preceden. ante diem impetraconis bille
predce scilt. predcm vicesimum quintum diem Junii ann. Regni d^i d^i Regis nunc
Anglie quinto supradicto in dca Civitati London. vidlt. in predca parochiab^e
Marie de Arcubus in Warda d^ Cheap London. exercuit modo et forma prout
predcus Presidens qui tam etc. superius versus eum narravit prout ei been
licuit. Et hoc paratus est verificare, unde petit Judicium si predcus
Praesidens qui tam etc. acconem suam predcam inde versus eum habere seu
manutenere debeat etc.

Ad quem diem coram dno Rege apud Westminster. ven. tum predcus Presidens qui tam
etc. qm predcus Thomas Bonham per Atturnat. suos Predcos. Super quo visss et
per Cur. dni Regis hic before intellcis oibus et singulis premissis maturaque
deliberacone inde hita pro eo quoth videtur Cur. dni Regis hic quoth plitum predcm
per pre fat. Thomam Bonham modo et forma predcis superius plitat. materiaque in
eodem content. minus sufficien. in lege existunt ad ipm Praesidentem qui tam
etc. ab accone sua predca versus ipm Thomam hend. precludend. ideo concess. est
predcus Presiden. qui tam etc. recuperet versus ipm Thomam Bonham debm predcm
unde dns Rex heat unam medietatem etc. et recuperet duodecim libras pro damnis
suis que sustinuit etc.

In cujus rei testimonium etc. dat. 13. die Febr. Anno Regni Anglie Fr. et Hib.
6. et Scot. 42. Byng. and Byng.

Trinity 7. Jacobi 1609. In the Common Bench.
College of Physicians Case.
Brownlow's Reports: Second Part.
THomas Bonham brought an Action of false Action of false imprisonment.
Imprisonment against Doctor Alkins and diverse other Doctors of Physic: The
Defendants justified, that King H. 8. Anno Decimo of his Reign, founded a
College of Physicians, and pleaded the Letters Patents of their Corporation:
And that they have Authority by that to choose a President, etc. as by the
Letters Patents, etc. and then pleads the Statute of 32. H. 8. chapt. 40. and
that the said Doctor A^kins was chosen President, according to the said Act and
Letters Patents, and where by the said Act and Letters Patents it is provided
that none shall practice in the City of London or the Suburbs of that; or
within seven miles of the said City, or exercise the faculty of Physic, if he
be not to that admitted by the Letters of the President and College, sealed
with their common Seal, under the Penalty of a hundred shillings, for every
Month (that he not being admitted) shall exercise the said faculty; further we
will and grant for us and Our Successors, that by the President and College of
the Society for the time being, and for their Successors for ever, that they
may choose four every year, that shall have the overseeing, and searching,
correcting, and governing, of all in the said City being Physicians, using the
faculty of Medicines in the said City, and other Physicians abroad whatsoever
using the faculty of Physicking by any means frequenting and using, within the
City or Suburbs thereof, or within seven miles in compass of the said City, and
of punishing them for the said offenses, in not well executing, making and
using that: And that the punishment of those Physicians using the said faculty,
so in the premises offending, by Fines, Amercements, Imprisonments of their
Bodies, and by other reasonable and fitting ways shall be executed: Note the
preamble of these Letters Patents is, Quod cum ^^regii officii nostri munus
arbitremur, ditionis nostrae, Hominum felicitati omniratione Consulere: Id
autem vel inprimis fore, si improborum conaminibus tempestive occurramus,
apprime necessarium fore deximus, improborum quoque hominum, qui medicinam
magis avaritiae suae causa, quam ullius bonae conscientiae fiducia
profitebuntur unde Rudi and credulae plebi plurima incommoda oriuntur, audaciam
compescere. And that the Plaintiff practiced in London, without admission of
the College, and being Summoned to appear at the College, and examined if he
would give satisfaction to the College according to the said Letters Patents
and Statute, he answered that he had received his decree to be Doctor of
Physic by the University of Cambridge, and was allowed by the University to
practice, and confessed that he had practiced within the said City, and as he
conceived, it was lawful for him to practice there, that upon that the said
President and Commonalty fined him to a hundred shillings, and for not paying
that and his other contempt, committed him to prison, to which the Plaintiff
replied as aforesaid, and upon this demurrer was joined: And Harris for the
Defendant, says, that this has Sergeant Harris the younger.
been at another time adjudged in the Kings Bench, where the said College
imposed a Fine of five pound upon a Doctor of Physic which practiced in London
without their admission, and for the non payment of that, brought an Action of
Debt, and adjudged that it lay well, and that the Statute of 32. H. 8. extends
as well to Graduats, as to others, for it is general, and Graduats are not
excepted in the Statute, nor in the Letters Patents, and all the mischiefs
intended to be redressed by this, are not expressed in that, and the Statute
shall not be intended to punish Impostors only, but all other which practice
without examination and admittance; for two things are necessary to Physicians,
that is, learning and experience, and upon that there is the proverb, Experto
creed Roberto: And the Statute intends that none shall practice here but those
which are most learned and expert, more then ordinary: And for that the Statute
provides, that none shall practice here without allowance and examination by
the Bishop of London and the Dean of Paul's, and four learned Doctors: But in
other places the examination is referred only to the Bishop of the Diocese, and
the reason of the difference is, for that, that London is the heart of the
Kingdom: And here the King and his Court, the Magistrates and Judges of the
Law, and other Magistrates are resident, and with this agreed the government of
other well governed Cities in Italy and other Nations, as it appears by the
preamble of the said Letters Patents: and it appears by the Statute, that this
was not intended to extend to Impostors only, for that the word Impostor is not
mentioned in the Statute: And the Statute provides that they shall be punished,
as well for doing and using, as for ill using: And also it is provided that the
Statute of 1. Marie 1. Parliament, chap. 9. That the Guardians, Goalers, or
Keepers of the Wards, Goals, and Prisons within the City and Precinct of that,
shall receive unto his Prison all such person and persons so offending which
are sent or committed to them, and those safely shall keep without Bayl, till
the party so committed, shall be discharged by the said President, or other
person by the said College to that authorized, by which it appears, that the
Goalers, Keepers of Prisons, have power to retain such which are committed:
That then the President shall have power to commit, for things Employed are as
strong as things Expressed; as it appears by the Com. Stradling and Morgans
Case: and also in the Earl of Leicesters Case, where it is agreed, that
Jointure before Coverture cannot be waved, and this is employed within the
Statute of 27. H. 8. And so the Statute of 2. Ed. 6. Provides that after seven
years Tithes shall be paid, by which it is Collected by Implication, that
during seven years, Tithes shall not be paid; and so he prayed Judgment for
the Defendants.

Dodridge Sergeant of the King, for the Plaintiff said, that the Statute of ^4
H. 8. chap. 5. and the Letters Patents give power to four Censors to punish for
ill executing, doing, and using the faculty of a Physician, and the Plantiff
was not charged for ill executing of it, doing or using: But it is averred,
where Revera the Plaintiff was nothing sufficient to exercise the said Art, and
being examined, less apt to answer, and thereupon they forbade him, and being
sent for and not appearing, was amerced five pound, and order that he should be
Arrested, and being Arrested, upon his appearance, being examined if he would
submit himself to the said College; he answered and confessed, that he had
practiced within the said City, being a Doctor of Physic as aforesaid, as well
to him it was lawful, and that he would practice here again, for which he was
committed to Prison: So that he was amerced for his contempt in the using of
the said Art, and committed to Prison for his answer upon his examination: And
he conceived that there are two questions considerable.

First, if the College may restrain a Doctor of Physic of his practice in
London.

Secondly, admitting that they may, then if these are the causes for which they
may commit by their Letters Patents; the first reason is drawn from the Letters
Patents, and the said Statutes, in which he said that the intent of the King
was the Walter.
end of his work: And this intent shall be expounded for three reasons apparent
in the words contained in the Grant.

First, Intempestive conatibus occurrere.

Secondly, Improborum Hominum, qui medicinam magis avaritiae suae causa, quam
ullius bonae Conscientiae fiducia profitebantur, audaciam Compescere.

Thirdly, which would invite learned men to practice here, and for that would,
quod collegium (...) Doctorum and graviorum virorum qui medicinament in urbe
nostra Londino and suburbibus infra septem millia passuum in urbe quaquaversus,
public Exerceant institui volumus and imperanus: And further he said, that
there are three sorts of men, which meddle with the Body of a man.

First, is the learned man which reads all Books extant, and his knowledge is
speculative, and by that he knew the nature of all simples.

And the second is practive, the knowledge of which is only his experience, he
may give Probatum est: But the ignorance of the cause of the disease, and the
nature of the things which he applies for the cure of that.

And the third is an Impostor, which takes upon him the knowledge which he has
not, and every of them the College may punish, for Male utendo, faciendo vel
exequendo, by what they will: And this was not the first care which was had,
for in the 9. H. 5. was a private Act made for Physicians, by which there is
great regard to them which are learned and educated in the University: And for
that the Act provides that they shall not be prejudicial to any of the
Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, and with this agrees 3. H. 8. 11. and the
privileges of them, and the Docti and graves homines, mentioned in the Letters
Patents, are the learned men mentioned in the Act, for the Statute provides
that they shall punish according to these Statutes, and late edicts: And by the
former Laws the Universities, that their privileges were excepted, and by
their former Statutes, the Letters Patents ought to be directed, for it is
referred them: Also the Statutes of this Realm have always had great respect
to the Graduats of the Universities, and it is not without cause, for Sudavit
and Alsit, and has no other reward but this degree which is Doctor, and for
that the Statute of 21. H. 8. prefers Graduates, and provides that Doctors of
Divinity or Bachelors shall be capable of two Benefices with Cure without
dispensation: And so 13. Eliz. provides that none shall be presented to a
Benefice above the value of thirty pound per annum, if he be not a Doctor or
Bachelor of Divinity: And to the objection, that none shall practice in London
or seven miles circuit of it without license, that this clause shall be
expounded according to the matter, and to that he agreed, for the other
branches of the Statute are made to cherish grave and learned men, and for that
it shall not be intended, that this branch was made for the punishment of
those, but of others which the Statute intended to punish.

And to the second objection, that every Doctor is not the learned and grave
man intended within the Statute, for the knowledge of many of them is only
speculative without practice, to that he answered, that all their Study is
practice, and that if they have no practice of themselves, then they attend
upon others which practice, and apply themselves to know the nature of Simples.

And to the third objection, that in London ought to be choice men, for the
Statute appoints that they shall be examined by the Bishop, and Dean, and four
others at least, and for that there is a more strict course for them, then in
other places, to that it is agreed: But he said that in the University there is
a more strict course then this, for here he ought to be publicly approved by
many after he has been examined and answered in the Schools to diverse
questions, and allowed by the Congregation-house: And 35. H. 6. 55. Doctor is
no addition, but a degree, ( quia gradatim and progressione Doctrinae provenit,
to that, and that Doctor is teacher, and that he was first taught by others as
Scholars, afterward he is Master, and Doctor dicitur a docendo, quia docere
permittitur, and they are called Masters of their faculty, and that the
Original of Doctor came of the Synagogue of Jews, where there were Doctors of
Law; and it appears that they had their ceremonies in time of H. 1. And when a
man brings with him the Ensign of Doctrine, there is no reason that he should
be examined again, for then if they will not allow of him, he shall not be
allowed, though he be a learned and grave man, and it was not the intent of the
King to make a Monopoly of this practice.

And to the second point that he propounded, it seems that the Justification is
not good, which is, Quia non comparuit upon Summons, he was amerced, and
ordered that he shall be arrested, and being arrested, being examined if he
would submit himself to the College, he answered that he was a Doctor, and had
practiced and would practice within the said City, as he conceived he might
lawfully do, and for that showing of this case he was committed to prison; and
he conceived two things upon the Charter.

First, That it does not inhibit a Doctor to practice, but punishes him for
ill using, exercising, and making, and may imprison the Emperick and Impostor,
and so prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff; and after in Hillary Term, in the
same year, this case was argued by all the Justices, of the Common Bench, and
at two several days, and the first day it was argued by Foster, Daniell, and
Warburton, Justices, at whose Arguments I was not present, but Foster argued
against the Plaintiff, and Daniell and Warburton with him, and that the Action
of false imprisonment was well maintainable. And the second day the same case
was argued again by Walmesley Justice, and Coke chief Justice, and Walmesley
argued as follows, that is, that the Walmesley.
Statute of 3. H. 8. was in the negative, that no person within the City of
London or seven miles of that, take upon him to exercise or occupy, as
Physician or Surgeon, etc. And he does not know in any case where the words
of the Statute are negative, that they admit any Interpretation against that
but one only, and that is the Statute of Marlebridge chapter 4. Which provides
that no Lord shall distrain in one County, and the beasts distrained drive into
another County, in which case though that the words are negative, yet if the
Lord distrain in one Country, he may drive his beasts to his Manor in another
County, of which the Lands, in which the distress was taken, were held, but it
is equity and reason in this case, that the Statute should admit such
exception, for it is not of malice, but for that, that the Beasts may remain
within his Fee, but in the principal case there is not the like reason nor
Equity. And also the King H. 8. in his Letters Patents recites as follows,
that is, Cum Regii officii nostri munus arbitremur, ditionis nostrae hominum
selicitati omni ratione consulere, id autem vel imprimis fore, si Improborum
conatibus tempestive occurremus, apprime necessarium duximus improborum quoque
hominum, qui medicinam magis avaritiae suae causa quam ullius bonae
conscientiae fiducia profitebantur, etc. By which it appears, that it is the
office of a King to survey his Subjects, and he is as a Physician to cure their
Maladies, and to remove Leprosies amongst them, and also to remove all fumes
and smells, which may offend or be prejudicial to their health, as it appears by
the several Writs in these several cases provided, and so if a man be not right
in his Wits, the King is to have the Protection and Government of him, lest he
being infirm, waste, or consume his Lands or Goods, and it is not sufficient
for him that his Subjects live, but that they should live happily, and
discharges not his Office, if his Subjects live a life, but if they live and
flourish, and he has care as well of their Bodies as of their Lands and Goods,
for Health for the Body is as necessary as virtue to the mind, and the King H.
8. to express his extraordinary care of his Subjects made the said Act, in the
third year of his Reign, which was the beginning of his Essence, to that
purpose, and by the Common Law, any Physician which was allowed by the
University might practice and exercise the said faculty within any place within
England, without any dispensation, examination or approbation of any, but after
the making of the said Act made in the third year of King H. 8. none may
practice, exercise, or occupy as Physician or Surgeon within the City of
London and seven miles of that, if he be not first examined, approved, and
admitted by the Bishop of London, and the Dean of Paul's for the time being,
calling to them, four Doctors of Physic or Surgeons* etc, And that no
practiser may occupy or exercise the said faculty out of the said Precincts, if
he be not first examined, approved, and admitted by the Bishop of the Diocese,
or in his absence, by his Vicar general, every of them calling unto him such
expert persons in the said faculty, as their discretions think covenient, and
the reason of this difference as he conceived, was for that, that in this City,
and the said Precincts, the King and all his Council, and all the Judges and
Sages of the Law, and diverse other men of quality and condition, live and
continue, and also the place is more subject unto Infection, and the air more
pestiferous, and for that there is more necessity, that greater care,
diligence, and examination be made of those which practiced here in London and
the Precincts aforesaid, then of those which practice in other places of the
Realm, for in other places the people have better air, and use more exercise,
and are not so subject to Infection, and for that there is no cause that such
care should be used for them, for they are not in such danger, and in the
Statute there is not any exception of the Universities nor of those which are
Graduats there, and for that they shall be tried by the said Act, and the
Statute of 14. H. 8. chapter 5. only excepts those which are Graduats of Oxford
or Cambridge which have accomplished all things for the form without any Grace;
and if this Exception shall be intended to extend to others, then all the
University shall be excepted by that, and such exception was too general; and
over he said, that the Plaintiff gave absurd and contemptous answer, when he
being cited before them, said that he would not be ruled nor directed by them
(being such grave and learned men,) and for that, that he has practiced
against the Statute he was worthily punished and committed, for it should be a
vain Law if it did not provide punishment for them that offend against that;
and Bracton says, Nihil est habere Leges, si non sit unus qui potest Leges
tueri, and for this here are four grave and discreet men to desend and maintain
the Law, and to punish all Offenders against that, according to the Statute, by
Imprisonment of their Bodies and other reasonable ways, and the said four men
have the search as well of those men, as of other Mediciners, and the Statute
of 1. Marie provides that the Keepers of Prisons, shall receive all which are
committed by the said four grave and learned men, and though there be great
care committed to them by the said Statute, and the said Letters Patents, yet
there is a greater trust reposed in them then this, for we commit to them our
lives, when we receive physic of them, and that not without cause, for they
are men of Gravity, Learning, and Discretion; and for that they have power to
make Laws, which is the Office of the Parliament, for those which are so
learned may be trusted with any thing; and for the better making of these, they
have power to assemble all the Commons of their Corporation, and the King
allows of that by his Letters Patents, for it is made by a Congregation of
wise, learned, and discreet men, and the Statute of 1. Marie inflicts
punishment upon Contempts, and not for any other offenses, and they held a
Court, and so may commit as every other Court may for a contempt of common
right, without Act of Parliament, or Information, or other legal form of
proceeding upon that, as it appears by 7. H. 6. for a contempt committed in a
Leet, the Steward committed the Offender to Prison; and it was absurd to
conceive that the Statute will allow of commitment without cause, and it is a
marvelous thing that when good Laws shall be made for our health and wealth
also, yet we will so pinch upon them, that we will not be tried by men of
experience, practice, and Learning, but by the University, where a man may have
his Degree by grace without merit, and so for these reasons he concluded that
this Action is not maintainable.

Coke chief said, that the Cause which was pleaded Coke.
for, that the Plaintiff was committed, was for that, that he had exercised
Physic within the City of London by the space of a Month, and did not very
fitly answer, for which it was ordained by the Censors that he should pay a
hundred shillings, and that he should forbear his practice, and that he did not
forbear, and then being warned of that, and upon that being summoned to appear,
did not appear, and for that it was ordained, that he should be arrested, and
that after he was summoned again; and then he appeared, and denied to pay the
hundred shillings, and he said that he would practice, for he was a Doctor of
Cambridge, and upon that it was ordained that he should be committed, till he
should be delivered by the Doctors of the College, and upon this was the
Demurrer joined, and in pleading the Plaintiff said, that he was a Doctor of
Philosophy and Physic, upon which the Lord took occasion to remember a saying
of Galen, that is, ubi Philosophia desinit, ibi medicina incipit, and he said
the only question of this case depends not upon the payment of the said hundred
shillings, but upon the words of the Letters Patents of the King, and the said
two Statutes, the words of which are Concessimus eidem praesidenti, etc. Quod
nemo in dicta Civitate, aut per septem milliaria in circuitu ejusdem exerceat
dictam facultatem, nisi ad hoc per dictum praesidentem and communitatem seu
successores, eorum qui pro tempore fuerint, admissus sit, per ejusdem
praesidentis and Collegii literas sigillo suo communi sigillatas sub paena
centum solidorum pro quolibet mense quo non admissus eandem facultatem
exercuit, dimidium inde nobis, and haeredibus nostris, and dimidium dicto
praesidenti and Collegio applicandum, and praeterea volumus and concedimus pro
nobis, etc. Quod per praesidentem and Collegium communitat^^ pro tempore
existent. and eorum successores in perpetuum, quatuor singulis annis per ipsos
eligantur, qui habeant supervisum, scrutinium, and correctionem and
gubernationem omnium and singulorum dictae Civitatis medicorum utentium
facultate, medicinae in eadem Civitate, ac aliorum medicorum, forinsecorum
quorumcunque facultatem illam medicinae, aliquo* modo frequentantium and
utensium infra eandem civitatem and suburbia ejusdem vel septem milliaria in
circuitu ejusdem Civitatis ac punitionem eorundem pro delectis suis, in non
been exequendo, faciendo and utendo illa, nec non supervisum and scrutinium
hujusmodi medicorum and eorum receptionum, per praedictos medicos sive aliquem
eorum hujusmodi legeis nostris pro eorum Infirmitatibus curandis and sanandis,
dandis imponendis and utendis quoties and quando opus fuerit, procommodo and
utilitate eorundem legiorum nostrorum; Ita quod punitio hujusmodi medicorum
utentium dicta facultate medicinae sic in praemissis delinquentium, per Fines,
Amerciamenta, Imprisonamenta corporum suorum and per alias vias rationabiles
and Congruas exequantur, as it appears in Rastal Physicians 8018, 392. So that
there are two distinct Clauses.

The first, if any exercise the said Faculty by the space of a Month without
admission by the President, etc. shall forfeit a hundred shillings for every
Month be that good or ill, it is not material, the time is here only material,
for if he exercise that for such a time, he shall forfeit as aforesaid.

The second clause is, that the President, etc. shall have Scrutinium
Medicorum, etc. and punitionem eorum pro delictis suis in non been faciendo,
utendo and exequendo, etc. And for that the President and the College may
commit any delinquent to Prison: And this he concluded upon the words of the
Statute, and he agreed with Walmesley, that the King has had extraordinary
care of the health of the Subjects. Et Rex censetur habere omnes Arts
inscrinio pectoris, and he has here pursued the Course of the best Physicians,
that is, Removens and promovens, removens Improbos illos, qui nulli bonae
conscientiae fiducia profitebantur and audaces, and promovens ad sanitatem: And
for that the Physician ought to be profound, grave, discreet, grounded in
learning, and soundly studied, and from him comes the medicine, which is
removens and promovens.

And it is an old rule, that a man ought to take care, that he do not commit
his Soul to a young Divine, his Body to a young Physician, and his Goods or
other Estate to a young Lawyer, for in Juvene Theologo est Conscientiae
detrimentum; in Juvene Legislatore bursi detrimentum, and in Juvene Medico
Coemeterii incrementum, for in these cannot be the privity, discretion, and
profound learning which is in the aged: And he denied that the College of
Physicians is to be compared to the University, for it is subordinate to that,
Cantabrigia est Academia nostra nobilissima totius Regni oculus, and sol ubi
humanitas and doctrina simul fluunt: But he said, when he names Cambridge he
does not exclude Oxford, but places them in equal Rank: But he would always
name Cambridge first, for that was his Mother: And he says that there is not
any time, Pro non been faciendo, utendo and exequendo, for this non suscipit
Majus and Minus, for so a man may grievously offend in one day, and for that in
such a case, his punishment shall be by Fines, Amercements, Imprisonments of
their Bodies, and other ways, etc. But if practice well, though it be not an
offense against the Letters Patents and the Statutes yet the punishment shall
be but pecuniary, and shall not be Imprisoned, for if he offend the Body of a
man, it is reason that his Body shall be punished, for Eodem modo quo quis
delinquit, eodem punietur, but if a grave and learned Doctor or other, come and
practice well in London by the space of three weeks and then departs, he is not
punishable by the said College, though that be without admission, for
peradventure such a one is better acquainted with the nature and disposition of
my Body, and for that more fit to cure any Malady in that then another which is
admitted by the College, and he said that it was absurd to punish such a one,
for he may practice in such manner in despite of the College, for all the
Lords and Nobles of the Realm, which have their private Physicians, which have
acquaintance with their Bodies, repair to this City, and to exclude those of
using their advice, were a hard and absurd exposition, for the old verse is,

Corporis auxilium medico commit sodali: And also he said that the said
President and College cannot commit any Physician, which exercises the said
faculty without admission, for the space of a Month, nor bring their Action
before themselves, nor levy that by any other way or means: but ought to have
their Action or exhibit an Information upon the Statute, as it appears by the
Book of Entries, for they ought to pursue their power which is given to them by
the Statute, for otherwise the penalty being given, the one Moity to them, and
the other to the King, they shall be Judges in Propria causa, and shall be
Summoners, Sheriffs, Judges, and Parties also, which is absurd; for if the King
grant to one by his Letters Patents under the Great Seal, that he may hold
Plea, although he be party and if the King does not appoint another Judge, then
the Grantee which is party, the Grant is void, though that it be confirmed by
Parliament, as it appears by 8. H. 6. 44. Ed. 3. The Abbot of Readings Case,
for it is said by Herle in 8. Ed. 3. 30. Tregores Case, that if any Statutes,
are made against Law and Right, and so are these, which makes any man Judge in
his own cause, and so in 27. H. 6. Fitz. Annuity 41. that the Statute of
Carlisle will that the order of Cistertians and Augustines, which have Covent
and Common Seal, that the Common Seal shall be in keeping of the Prior, which
is under the Abbot, and four others which are the most Sages of the house, and
that any Deed sealed with the Common Seal which is not so in keeping shall be
void, and the opinion of the Court that this is a void Statute, for it is
imperttinent to be observed, being the Seal in their keeping, the Abbot cannot
Seal any thing with it, and when that it is in the hands of the Abbot, it is
out of their keeping, ipsofacto: And if the Statute shall be observed, every
common Seal shall be defeated by one simple surmise, which cannot be tried, and
for that the Statute was adjudged void, and repugnant: And so the Statute of
Gloucester which gives Cessavit after Cesser by two years to be brought by the
Lessor himself, was a good and equitable Statute: But the Statute of
Westminster 2. chap. 3. which gives Cessavit to the Heir for Cesser in time of
his Ancester, and that, that was judged an unreasonable Statute in 33. Ed. 3.
for that, that the Heir cannot have the arrearages due in the time of his
Father, according to the Statute of Gloucester, and for that it shall be void:
And also the Physicians of the College, could not punish any by Fine and also
by Imprisonment, for no man ought to be twice punished for one offense, and the
Statute of 1. Mariae does not give any power to them to commit for any offense
which* was no offense within the first Statutes, and for that he ought not to be
committed by the said Statute of 1. Mariae: But admitting that they may commit,
yet they have mistaken it, for they demand the whole hundred shillings, and one
half of that belongs to the King: And also they ought to commit him forthwith,
as well as Auditors which have Authority by Parliament, to commit him which is
found in arrearages: But if he do not commit him forthwith, they cannot commit
him afterward, as it appears by 27. H. 6. 9. So two Justices of the Peace may
view a force and make a Record of that, and commit the offenders to Prison, but
this ought to be in Flagranti Orient: and if he do not commit those
immediately upon the view, he cannot commit them afterward, and the Physicians
have no Court, but if they have, yet they ought to make a Record of their
commitment, for so was every Court of Justice: But they have not made any
Record of that: And Auditors and Justices of Peace, ought to make Records, as
it appears by the Book of Entries: So that admitting that they may commit, yet
they ought to do it forthwith, but in this case they cannot commit till the
party shall be delivered by them, for this is against Law and Justice; and no
Subject may do it, but till he be delivered by due course of Law, for the
commitment is not absolute, but the cause of that is traversable, and for that
ought to justify for special cause; for if the Bishop returns that he refuses
a Clerk, for that he is Schismaticus Inveteratus, this is not good, but they
ought to return the particular matter: So that the Court may adjudge of that:
Though it be a matter of Divinity and out of their Science, yet they by
conference may be informed of it, and so of Physic: And they cannot make any
new Laws, but such only which are for the better government of the old; and
also he said plainly, that it appears by the Statute of 1. Mariae: That the
former Statutes shall not be taken by equity, for by these the President and
Commons have power to commit a Delinquent to Prison, and this shall be
intended, if they shall be taken by equity, that every Jailer ought to receive
him which is so committed: But when it is provided by 1. Mariae, specially that
every Jailer shall receive such offenders: That by this appears, that the
former Statute shall not be taken by equity: And so he concluded, that
Judgment shall be entered for the Plaintiff, which was done accordingly.

Coke in the conclusion of his argument observed these 7. things for the better
direction of the President and Comminalty of the said College for the time to
come. 1. That none may be punished for practice of Physic in London but by the
forfeiture of 5 l. a Month, which is to be recovered by Law. 2. If any one
practice Physic there less then a Month, that he shall forfeit nothing. 3. If
any person prohibited by the Statute offend in non been exequendo, etc. they
may punish him according to the Statute within the Month. 4. Those whom they
may commit to prison by the Statute ought to be committed presently. 5. The
fines which they impose according to the Statute belong to the King. 6. They
may not impose a fine or imprisonment without Record thereof. 7. The cause for
which they impose fine or imprisonment must be certain.

The Proceedings of the College against Christopher Barton Weaver.
UPon the complaint of diverse persons against the said Barton for practicing of
Physic, the said Barton was sent for by a Messenger of his Majesty's Chamber,
who appearing before the President and Censors the 6. of September. 1639. and
many things being laid to his charge, yet for some reasons he was bound with
sureties to appear again before them the 4. of October following; And he then
also appearing was for the Causes in the Censors Warrant expressed, committed
Bartons Commitment.
to the Prison of Woodstreet-Compter London, where he remained till the 19. of
October following, never having by all that time petitioned the College for
his liberty; and then by virtue of a Writ of hab. Corpus, which he had sued
forth of the King's Bench, he was carried with his Cause to the King's Bench Bar
at Westminster. The Copy of which Warrant and the return thereof here
immediately ensues.

Nos Johannes Warner and Thomas* Adams vic. Civit. London ss. ^ Sheriffs.
R^^^turn.
London, Serenissimo Dno Regi in brevi huis schedul. annex. noiat ad diem and
locum in eodem bri. content. certificamus, quod ante adventum nob. predct. bris
scilt. duodecimo die Sept. Anno Regni dci. Dni Regis nunc Angl. etc. decimo
quinto Christophorus Barton in dco. bri noiat. comissus fuit prisone Dni Regis
scilt. Computator. situat. in Woodstreet London predct. and in eadem prisona
sub Custodia Isaaci Pennington and Johannis Wollaston tunc vic. Civit. predct.
and in eorum exit ab officio suo, sub custodia nr. detent. virtute cujusdam
Warranti Otwelli Meverell, Laurentii Wright, Edmundi Smith, and Willmi Goddard
in Medicinis Dctor. et Censor. Collegii Medicor. in London. sub sigillo Coi.
Collegii Medicor. London pred. Custod. predct. computorii London predct. vel
ejus deputat. direct. cujus quidem Warranti tenor sequitur in haec verba.

ss. We Otwell Meverell, Lawrence Wright, Edmund College Warrant.
Smith, and William Goddard, Doctors in Physic and Censors of the College of
Physicians in London being chosen by the President and College of Physicians
aforesaid to govern and punish for this present year all Offenders in the
Faculty of Physic within the City of London and the Suburbs thereof, and seven
miles compass of the said City, according to the authority in that behalf to us
duly given by certain Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England made and
granted to the said College and Comminalty by the late King of famous memory
King Henry the 8th bearing date the 23. day of September in the tenth year of
his reign; and one Act of Parliament made in the 14. year of the reign of the
said late King Henry the 8th concerning Physicians, where by the Letters
Patents aforesaid and every thing therein are granted and confirmed. And by
virtue of the said Act of Parliament and Letters Patents aforesaid, and one
other Act of Parliament made in the first year of the reign of our late
Sovereign Lady Queen Mary, entitled, An Act touching the Corporation of
Physicians in London, Did cause to be brought before us the sixth day of this
instant September, at our Colledge-house in Pater noster-Row in London, one
Christopher Barton, and we have examined the said Christopher Barton, and upon
his examination and other due proofs, we have found that the said Christopher
Barton has unskilfully practiced the Art of Physic within the City of London
and Precinct aforesaid, upon the bodies of Richard Ballady of Aldermary Parish
London, Michael Knight of S. Botolphs Parish Aldgate London, and the Child of
one Jane Big, and some others, in the month of January in the year 1638.
contrary to the Laws in that behalf made and provided; whereupon we have
imposed upon the said Christopher Barton a Fine of 20 l. for his evil practice
in Physic aforesaid; And we have also for the same cause sent you the Body of
the said Christopher Barton, willing and requiring you in the Kings Majesty's
name to receive and keep him in safe custody as prisoner, there to remain at
his own costs and charges without bay^ or mainprize until he shall be
discharged of his said imprisonment by the President of the said College, and
by such persons as by the said College shall be there unto authorized
according to the Statute in that behalf made, and this our Warrant shall be
your discharge. Given at the said College the eleventh day of September in the
fifteenth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles.

Otwell Meverell, Edm. Smith, Lawr. Wright, William Goddard.

To the Keeper of Woodstreet Compter London, or his Deputy.

To Mr. John Penyall one of the Messengers of his Majesty's Chamber in Ordinary
to execute this Warrant:

Et haec est causa accepcois and detenconis prefati Christophori Barton in
prisona predct. sub custodia nra corpus Cujus quidem Christophori coram prefat.
Dno Rege apud Westminster. parat. habemus.

Being at the Bar the said 19. of October, for that the Lord chief Justice Sir
John Bramston was not present, the other Judges present would not accept of
Bayl, which the said Barton tendered, but suspended the matter until Tuesday
the 22. of October following, Barton for that time was returned back; and
coming to the Bar again on the said Tuesday with his Council and Bayl, the Lord
Bramston being then present, my Lord demanded the return of the warrant, which
was neglected by the Clerks of the Court, and left in the Crown Office in the
Temple, so my Lord would not proceed, but respited the cause until Thursday
the 24. of October following, when all parties appearing with Council on both
sides, the Warrant and Return was read, and the Cause debated, and there the
Court plainly declared, that he should not be bayled, it being against the Law,
and the Letter of the Warrant grounded upon the Statutes. Then it was desired
by Bartons Council, that he might go over to the King's Bench, which also was
denied, because he was committed originally to the Compter in Woodstreet, as
appeared by the Warrant, and so Barton was remanded by the Court to the said
Compter, and willed if he would have Liberty to submit to the Barton remitted
to prison.
College and make his peace there: Barton being in Custody of the Sergeant
that carried him up to the Bar e^^^ibited his humble Petition to the President
and Censors the 25. of October signed with his own hand for abatement of part
of his Fine and for his enlargement, submitting in all things unto them;
whereupon the President and Dr. Meverell one of the Censors* were contented to
abate the half of his Fine of 20 l. and to accept of 10 l. the one half to be
paid in hand (which was paid) and the other half at our Lady day next. And so
upon the 29. of October signed his discharge and set him at liberty, he being
put again before his enlargement into the said prison.

Termino Trinitatis, anno octavo Caroli Regis, in Banco Regis.
Crokes Reports, the First Part.
Butler versus the President of the College of Physicians, Pasc. 7. Car. rot.
519.
ERror of a Judgment upon a Demurrer in the Common-Bench. The first Error
assigned was because the Record was, Ad respondendum Domino Regi and
Praesidenti Collegii etc. Qui tam pro Domino Rege, quam pro seipso sequitur
quod reddat eis sexaginta libras, unde idem Praesidens qui tam etc. dicit, etc.
Whereas the Action ought to have been brought by the President only, qui tam,
etc. and not by the King and President, etc. sed non allocatur: For being an
Original Writ, the Writ is most often so, and sometimes the other way: And they
conceived it good both ways. But Informations are always, that the party qui
tam for the King, quam pro seipso sequitur, etc. Vide Plowd. 77. new Book of
Entries, 160. old Book of Entries, 143. 373. The second Error was, that the
Replication was a departure from the Count; For the Count sets forth, That King
Henry the eighth, anno decimo Regni sui incorporavit (and per le Statut of
decimo quarto Henrici octavi confirmavit) the College of Physicians by the
name of the President, etc. that no man should practice Physic in London, or
within seven miles, without License under the Seal of the College, upon
penalty of 5 l. for every month that he so practiced, the one moity unto the
King, and the other unto the President of the College, to the use of the said
College, And for that the Desendant not being allowed, etc. had practiced
Physic for twelve months in London, The said Action was brought, etc. The
Defendant pleads the Statute of tricesimo quarto Henrici octavi cap. 8. That
every one who has Science and experience of the nature of Herbs, Roots and
Waters, or of the operation of the same by speculation or practice, may
minister or apply in and to any outward Sore, Uncome, Wound, Aposthumations,
outward Swelling or Disease; any Herb, Ointments, Baths, Pultes, or
Implaisters, according to their cunning experience and knowledge, etc. or Drink
for the Stone and Strangury, in any part of the Realm, without suit, vexation,
etc. any Act or Statute to the contrary notwithstanding. And that he having
skill in the nature of Herbs, Roots, and Waters, by speculation and practice,
applied to persons requiring his skill, Herbs, Ointments, Baths, Drinks, etc.
to their Sores, Uncomes, Wounds, and for the Stone and Strangury, or Agues, and
to all other Diseases in the said Statute mentioned, prout ei benelicuit. Et
quoad aliquam aliam practisationem seu facultatem medicinae aliter vel alio
modo quod non est culpabilis. Et de hoc ponit, etc. And makes his averment, Et
hoc paratus est verificare, The Plaintiff replies, and shows the Statute of
primo Mariae capite nono, which confirms the Charter of decino Henrici octavi,
and the Statute of decimo quarto Henrici octavi, and appoints that it shall be
in force, notwithstanding any Statute or Ordinance to the contrary. And upon
this it was demurred, because it is a departure; for it intitles him by another
Act, viz. the Statute of primo Mariae, which is not mentioned in the Count: and
therefore 'twas assigned for Error. But all the Court here conceived, That it
is no departure; Because it fortifies the Count, and is as to revive the
Statute of decimo quarto Henrici octavi, if it were repealed in this particular
by the Statute of tricesimo quarto Henrici octavi: And for that the Case of
Woodhead was shown to the Court, Mich. 42. and 43. Eliz. rot. 397. where the
President of the College of All Souls, bringing an Action upon the Case for
taking Toll in, and shows a Charter of vicesimo sexto Henrici sexti to be
discharged of Toll, the Defendant pleaded the Act of Resumption of Liberties
granted by Henry the sixth, made, and so the Liberty gone. The Plaintiff
pleaded a Reviver of them by the Statute of quarto Henrici septimi: And it was
held to be no departure, but as it were a confession and avoiding. The third
and principal Error assigned was, if the Statute of tricesimo quarto Henrici
octavi, be not repealed by the Statute of primo Mariae, and if not, Whether the
Defendant has made a sufficient Jusification? And quoad that, Whether the said
Statute be repealed, the Court was not resolved. But Richardson, Chief Justice,
conceived it was repealed by primo Mariae, by the general words, any Act or
Statute to the contrary, of the Act of decimo quarto Henrici octavi
notwithstanding. But I conceived, that the Act of tricesimo quarto Henrici
octavi, not mentioning the Statute of decimo quarto Henrici octavi, was for
Physicians: but the part of the Act* of trices* quar. Henrici octavi, was
concerning Surgeons, and their applying outward Medicines to outward Sores
and Diseases: And Drinks only for the Stone, Strangullion and Ague; That
Statute was never intended to be taken away by the Act of primo Mariae. But to
this point Jones and Woitlock, would not deliver their Opinions, But admitting
the Statute of tricesimo quarto Henrici octavi, be in force, yet they all
resolved, the Defendants Plea was naught, and not warranted by the Statute; for
he pleads, That he applied and ministered Medicines, Plasters, Drinks,
ulceribus, Morbis and Maladiis, Calculo, Strangurio, Febribus, and aliis in
Statuto mentionatis; so he leaves out the principal word in the Statute (
Externis.) And does not refer and show, That he ministered potions for the
Stone, Strangullion or Ague, as the Statute appoints to these three Diseases
only, and to no other. And by his Plea his Potions may be ministered to any
other sickness; wherefore they all held his Plea was naught for this cause, and
that Judgment was well given against him; Whereupon Judgment was affirmed.

Termino Trinitatis anno quarto Jacobi Regis in Banco Regis.
Crokes Reports the Second Part.
Doctor Langhton versus Gardener.
DEbt upon the Statute 14. H. 8. cap. 5. by the (4)
Plaintiff, as President of the College of Physicians in London, and of the
Corporation of Physicians there: For that the Defendant used the Art of Physic
in London, without License from the College there, against the Statute, and
their Charter: For which he demanded 5 l. for every month, being the penalty
given by the Statute: The Defendant pleaded the Statute of 34. H. 8. which
enables every one to practice Physic or Surgery, being skilful therein,
notwithstanding any Act to the contrary. The Plaintiff replies, and shows the
Statute primo Mar. cap. 9. which confirms their Charter, and every Article
thereof to stand in force; Any Act, Statute, Law, or Custom to the contrary
notwithstanding. Hereupon the Defendant demurred; First, because this general
clause in this Law does not restrain the Statute of 34. H. 8. Secondly, that
this pleading is a departure: For it ought to have been shown before. Stephens
argued for the Plaintiff. First, That the Act of 34. H. 8. is repealed by the
Statute of of Prim. Mar. Quoad the College of Physicians in London, as fully
as if it had been by express words recited and repealed: For when it confirms
the Charter of 14. H. 8. and appoints, that it, and every part thereof shall
stand, and be available: The Statute of 34. H. 8. cannot stand with it, Quia
leges posteriores leges priores contrarias abrogant, 4. Ed. 4. Porters Case Co.
1. fol, 25. Secondly, That it is not any departure: Because there is not any
new matter; but matter pleaded in reviving of the former, or fortification
thereof: And a Record was shown, Mich. 10. and 11. Eliz. betwixt Bomelins
and..... where the Record was in the same manner as this Record is; and there
the Plaintiff had Judgment: Wherefore, etc. And there being none on the
Defendants part to argue, The Court upon hearing of the Record, gave rule, that
Judgment should be entered for the Plaintiff, unless, etc.

Termino Paschae anno quinto Jacobi Regis in Banco Regis.
Doctor Atkins versus Gardener.
Scir. fac. Upon a Judgment in Debt upon the (^^)
Statute 14. H. 8. by Doctor Langhton President of the College of Physicians
in London, who died before execution had; and thereupon the successor brought a
Scir. fac. to have execution; It was thereupon demurred, because the Scir. fac.
ought to be brought by the Executor or Administrator of him who recovered, and
not by the successor. But upon hearing of the Record, without argument, the
Court held, that the successor might well maintain the Action; For the Suit is
given to the College by a private Statute: And the Suite is to be brought by
the President for the time being; And he having recovered in right of the
Corporation, the Law shall transfer that duty to the successor of him who
recovered, and not to his Executors: The Action being brought, for that he
practiced Physic in London without License of the College of Physicians,
against the Statute of 14. H. 8. Wherefore it was adjudged for the Plaintiff.

Coram Judice D. Jo. Popham.
APrilis die 8. Anno Dom. 1602. Compauerunt Rogerus Jinkins and Simon Read in
Aedibus Primarii Angliae Justitiarii D. Johannis Popham Equitis Aurati: coram
ipso Judice quiritantes, de Injuria illis illata per Praesidentem and Censores
Collegii Medicorum, quorum authoritate, ob illegitimam Medicinae praxin, in
Carcerem conjecti sunt, ibidemque jam per aliquot septimanas detenti.

Adfuerunt ex part Collegii per Praesidentem missi Censores tres, D. Johannes
Nowell. Edwardus Lyster and Johannes Argent.

Incarceratorum causam agebat quidem Magister Harris Jurisperitus.

Judex prius sedulo perlectis iis Regni statutis, quae ad medicinam faciunt:
Jinkins urgebat, ut rationem redderet cur ausus sit Medicinam exercere,
licenti^ non prius impetrata a Collegio Medicorum? Is Primum Praxin denegavit,
Postea, urgente magis Judice, haesitanter, and ambigue respondit. Tandem
metuens ne Jurejurando premeretur; fassus est se aliquando Practicasse, idque,
ut putabat, non illicite, Quid, inquit Judex: Obtinuistine unquam Collegii
Commune Sigillum? Non, inquit ille; Sed quia Chirurgus sum: and in opere
Chirurgico saepe necessarius est internorum Medicamentorum usus. Respondit
Judex; re ita urgente, advocandum esse Medicum, atque nullo modo licere
Chirurgo medicum agere.

Objecit Jurisperitus Praesidentis, and Censorum authoritatem non eam esse, qua
possint quenquam in Carcerem conjicere, ideoque a Collegio, ad alios Judices
causam omnem esse promovendam.

Hunc reprehendit Judex, asserebatque validam esse, maximeque legitimam, hac ex
part Collegii authoritatem.

Multum tandem conquestus est Jinkins, quod ob raram praxin, eamque ex aliorum
Praescripto, tam gravis ei Mulcta sit inflicta.

Tum Libro Annalium ostenso; Compertum est eum jam antea sexties Public
accusatum esse, and aliquoties etiam leves mulctas subiisse. Unde Judici
aequissimum visum est, ut, cum clementer tractatus, incorrigibilem tamen se
praebuisset, graviori tandem mulcta premeretur. Et eo quod aliorum Medicorum
Praescriptis ad suam Praxin saepius sit abusus, Consultissimum putavit Medicor.
praescriptis Dies Mensis, cum patientis Nomine adscribendus.
Judex, ut omnes Medici, Praescriptis suis omnibus, and diem mensis, and
Patientis nomen inscribant unde fraus iis abutentium, facilius deprehendi
possit.

Judex, Re audita; Collegiique Censura optime approbata, Jinkins redditur
Carceri.
Jinkins denuo Carceri reddendum censuit, donec Praesidenti and Censoribus
satisfactum sit.

Cumque quorundam Amicorum instantia rogatus est Judex, ut fide-jussoribus
admissis, immunitatem illi concederet a Carcere: Non est, inquit Judex, penes
me, ut hoc faciam; Legibus enim Regni, illis solum datur, ut istud concedant.

Quidam qui astabat, objecit; Statuto quodam regni cautum esse, ne quis liber,
Civis Londinensis, per forinsecum aliquem incarceretur. Perlectis statuti
verbis, nulloque modo sensum hunc ferentibus,

Hujusmodi, inquit Judex, interpretationibus, meam etiam possitis infringere
authoritatem.

These words the Lord Chief Justice said in hearing this Cause.
1. There is no sufficient License without the College Seal. 2. No Surgeon,
as a Surgeon, may practice Physic, no, not for any disease, though it be
the great Pox. 3. That the authority of the College is strong and sufficient
to commit to prison. 4. That the Censure of the College, rising from lesser
mulcts to greater, was equal and reasonable. 5. That no man though never so
learned a Physician or Doctor may practice in London, or within seven miles,
without the College License.
Annal. l. 1. page 155, 156.
Read conquestus est Collegium contra regni statutum ultra 20 l. paenam
erogasse, verbis statuti perpensis pronuntiavit Judex Collegio licere quam
velint mulctam infligere, custodem tamen carceris non esse astrictum ut eum
detineat si sit ultra 20 l.

Read praxin suam asseruit quod statuto regni cuivis concessum est per herbas
etc. aliquos saltem morbos curare: at respondit Judex nonlicere, quoniam non
ad. missus erat per Collegium.

Resolutions of Questions concerning the College, by the Lord Chancellor and
Judges.
THe King having directed his Letters to the Right Honorable Thomas Lord
Ellesmere Lord Chancellor of England, Sir John Popham Lord chief Justice and
one of his privy Council, They the said Lord Chancellor and Lord chief Justice,
by virtue of the same Letters called unto them Sir Thomas Fleminge then Lord
chief Baron, Sir Thomas Walmesley and Sir Peter Warburton Knights, Justices of
the Court of Common Pleas, and Sir David Williams, and Sir Lawrence Tanfield,
Justices of the King's Bench; and after due consideration had, both of the
Charter of King Hen. 8. and several Acts of Parliament thereof made in the 14.
year of the same King, and the other in the first year of Queen Mary, did on
the first of May 1607. at the house of the said Lord Chancellor, called
York-house, resolve the several Questions hereafter mentioned.

Oxford and Cambridge may practice in London or seven miles compass of the same
without License under the said College Seal; by virtue of the clause in the
end of the Statute of 14. Hen. 8. and whether that clause has not relation to
the Statute of 3. H. 8. only, or how far it does extend?

London or within seven miles compass of the same.



H. 8. ca. 11. of Graduates in the two Universities is to be understood only of
Graduates of Physic, and of no others* And all resolved, that by that
Exception those Graduates may practice in all other places of England out of
London, and seven miles of the same, without examination, but not in London,
nor within the said circuit of seven miles.

London, practice there, whether for evil practice or misdemeanor therein, they
be not subject to the correction and government of the College?

They all agreed that they are subject to the Supervisionem, scrutinium,
correctionem, and Gubernationem of all persons using the practice of Medicine
within the City.

Then whether such Graduates are not subject to the Examination, without which
there were never any admitted, and without which the admission cannot be
approved, because every Graduate is not absolutely good ipso facto?

London, or within the compass of seven miles of the same, must submit
themselves to the Examination of the President and College if they be required
thereunto by their authority, notwithstanding any License, allowance, or
privilege given them in Oxford or Cambridge, either by their degree or
otherwise.

Concerning punishment and correction against Offenders.
primo Mariae, and how long? Whether till he have paid such Fine as shall be
assessed upon him, or have submitted himself to their order, and in what manner?

by virtue and according to the power and authority to them granted, they may
commit the offenders without Bayl or Mainprise, as the words of the Statute
are, which they all resolved could not be altered or interpreted, otherwise
then the express words of the Statute are.









non been exequendo faciendo and utendo facultate Medicinae, as in the Letters
patents, and such as are sufficient and not admitted, are to be sued for 5 l. a
month, and not be committed?

Non been exequendo faciendo and utendo facultate, but for the committing to
prison of such as practice (not being admitted by the College) they held it
doubtful, for that the Charter and Statute do in that case inflict a punishment
of 5 l. a month against such practiser, without admittance by the College.
But they all resolved, that if the President and College made an Ordinance to
prohibit the practicing of all without admittance under the common Seal of the
said College; That for breach and contempt of this Ordinance, the President
and College might both impose a reasonable Fine upon the offender, and commit
him without Bayl or Mainprize.



London or within seven miles of the same shall obstinately or wilfully refuse
to be examined by the Censors of the College in non been exequendo faciendo
and utendo the Art of Physic or his medicines or receipts, That the said
President and Censors may commit him to prison there to remain without Bayl or
Mainprize until he be delivered by the President and Censors, and to forfeit
and pay to the said College some reasonable sum of money, that the same
Ordinance will be good and lawful. And if any after shall offend contrary to
the same Ordinance, the President and Censors may lawfully commit such offender
to prison, there to remain without bayl or mainprize until he shall be
delivered by the said President and Censors.

It pleased the Lord Chancellor to move these Questions To the Judges, as
material for the execution of the Statutes.





London or seven miles of the same, but once, twice, or thrice in one month, be
an offender against the Charter and Statutes of the College?



AT a Trial had at Guild hall before Justice Nicholas, Nov. 27. 1656. upon an
Information, it was found for Barker upon these words in the Information
mislaid ( by Letters of the said President and Comminalty Sealed) whereas the
words of the Charter are, Sealed by the Seal of the President and College.

Barkers Council at the Bar pressed it upon the witnesses whether they gave
Barker money for advice only, or for Physic only, or both; They said that he
only sold his Medicines as Apothecaries and any Freeman of London might do.
Our Witnesses swore that Barber took their money for both.

Sergeant Maynard then urged that the King never gave his assent to this
Charter as appears (said he) by the Rolls of that Session of Parliament, a
Copy whereof he brought into the Court. And the reason then assigned was
because the usual words le Ray le veult were not subscribed to this Act. But
Mr. Finch desired that point might be put upon demur in Law after trial,
Sergeant Maynard then waved the point.

After this trial, search was made for the Act upon the Physicians Charter at
the Tower of London, but found that there were no Acts kept there, made since
the reign of H. 7.

Then search was made at the Clerk of the Parliaments Office at Westminster,
but not one Act of that Sessions of Parliament nor any other from the 7. to the
22. of Hen. 8. found there, for most of the Acts kept there concern only
particular actions or persons.

But at the Rolls this Charter was found, and that none of that part of the Act
which is in English in the Book of Statutes was there set down in writing, but
the bare words of the Charter only, at the end whereof these words, but plainly
in another hand ( huc usque) were written, and after all this a good large
space in the parchment wholly blank left as it seems to inscribe the rest of
the Act.

After this Charter these words subscribed per ipsum regem, etc. which words as
it appears by all other Acts passed in the same Roll, and as Mr. Clayton one of
the keepers of the Parliament Rolls told me, in all other Acts made it manifest
were passed by the King himself being personally present in Parliament.

Upon farther search at the Rolls, I found the Act of Parliament its self, and
had it exemplified under the Seal Dec. 18. 1658. So that the Charter its self
is in one Roll, and the Act of Parliament in another distinct Roll.

Now as to that objection, that these words le Roy le veult are not subscribed
to this Act concerning Physicians, I answer, that neither were these words
subscribed to some Acts preceding this, nor to any that followed it. And at the
end of all this Roll it is said, the King having heard all the Acts recited and
read, did confirm them, and commanded the Parliament to see them all observed.

Rastals and Poultons Statute Books, our Charter and Exemplification have all
of them per Nomina Praesidentis Collegii seu Communitatis, etc. But in Bonhams
Case in Cooks Reports it is per Nomina Praesidentis and Collegii. 'Twas the
opinion of two of our Council that Et would make a variation and nonsuit
consequently. They both said that for the Tithes of London, and Magna Charta,
there was nothing extant but prescription.

If a Statute be special, particular, or private (as this of the College is)
then if any man will have benefit by or make use of it, or will charge another
upon it, he must plead and show the Statute at large, vide Shepard in folio
page 917. Crompton, fol. 15. 1617.

Lord chief Baron Steel at a Plea holden at Kingston upon Trent 1655. the
Action being laid in Nomine Praesidentis Collegii seu Communitatis, etc. and
the Defendants pleading it ought to run according to Cooks Reports, in Nomine
Praesidentis and Collegii, salved it thus, by saying there was to be put a
Comma after. Praesidentis, betwixt it and Collegii, and so did tantamount to
Praesidis and Collegii.

At a Trial at Guild Hall against Trigge for ill practice, Judgment for Trigge,
because the College could not prove what Medicines he gave, for he made his
Medicines privately himself.

Blank for ill practice fined by the Censors 20 l. and upon a habeas corpus was
remitted to prison, and paid the Fine. Ann. l. 2. page 186.

Trigge fined by the Censors for a Paracentesis 20 l. sent to Newgate, and
paies the 20 l.

14 15. H.8.
By Easter Record 1656. first draught.
BE it remembered that the President of the College or Comminalty of the
faculty of Physicians in London, who follows as well for Charles by the grace
of God King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith,
etc. as for himself, did come before the Barons of this Exchequer the 6. day of
June this Term in his own person, and as well for the said King as for himself,
did give the Court here to understand and to be informed, That one Richard
Barker of the Parish of St. John the Baptist in the Ward of Dowgate London,
Gent. between the first day of July last past, and the day of the exhibiting of
this Information, that is to say, by the space of 11. months at the Parish of
St. John Baptist aforesaid, did exercise the faculty of Physic, the said
Richard Barker not being admitted to exercise the said faculty of Physic by
the said President and Comminalty by Letter of the said President and
Comminalty sealed with their common Seal, contrary to the form of the Statute
in such case made and provided: whereupon the said President as well for the
said King as for himself prays the advice of the Court in the premises. And
the said Richard Barker for the offense aforesaid may forfeit 55 l. of lawful
money of England, that is to say, for every month of the said 11. months in
which he did exercise the said faculty of Physic not being admitted in form
aforesaid 5 l. of like lawful money of England. And that he the said President
may have the moiety of the forfeiture aforesaid according to the form of the
Statute aforesaid, and that the said Richard Barker may come here to answer the
premises.

SEcretary Walsingham writes a Letter in 88. to the Major and Aldermen of
London, who had then charged the College with Arms, that they should no more
trouble them hereafter, but should permit them to live quietly and free from
that charge. L. Annal. 1. cap. 67. Anno 1614. October 4. the College being
charged with Arms, Sir William Paddy pleaded the privilege of the College
before Sir Thomas Middleton Lord Major and a full Court of Aldermen, and Sir
Henry Montacue Recorder, alleging that in former times by virtue of their
Charter and Acts of Parliament, they have been exempted from this service, and
that 1. The Statute 14. H. 8. confirms not only all Grants, Articles and other
things contained in the said Letters Patents; but also for enlargement of
farther Articles for the said College are to be interpreted available to the
said College in as large and ample manner as may be taken, thought and
construed by the same. 2. In Anno 32. H. 8. they and every of them of the said
body corporate or fellowship and their successors, shall at all time and times
be discharged to keep any watch or ward in London or the Suburbs of the same.
Here observe the word ( any) which in true right of construction was to be
extended as if that clause had been in more words expressed. 3. In the Act for
the Surgeons in the first entrance there are these words: It was thought
expedient by the wisdom of the land to provide for men expert in the science
of Physic and Surgery. And therefore when it follows in their Act of
Parliament, that the Surgeons by express words are exempted from the bearing
of armor, it may truly be inferred that Physicians are exempted (as before)
from any watch or wards; as also Physicians here recited in the preamble should
receive a greater, or at least the same immunity, especially since Physicians
are by their Science and Act of Parliament Surgeons without farther
examination, and approbation to be had from the Bishop of London, whereunto
mere Surgeons are subject. An Alderman objects, that by the words of this
Act of Parliament, viz. bearing of Armor, were to free their persons, but not
to exempt them from the charge of the service.

Answer, That the difference (...) and wearing of arms was such, that the very
Etymon of the word bearing, as in many other cases comprehended both, and
therefore should give immunity for both. 4. In all foreign or domestic wars,
Physicians do attend the Armies in person, and for this produces the
regigister. The Recorder then perusing every branch of the Statutes recited,
and the reasons urged, and opening every part thereof at large, did conclude
that the Acts of Parliament did extend to give to the College as much immunity
as in any sort to the Surgeons. Whereupon the Court desired a Catalogue of
the Members of the College, in number then 41. (which was immediately done)
that others not of the College might not delude them, and so claim privilege.
Hereupon ordered a dispensation of the College from bearing of Arms, and also
a precept then awarded by the Major and Court to commit all other Physicians or
Surgeons refusing to bear or find arms, who were not by the College
allowed, or Surgeons licenced according to form. L. 2. Annal. page 17, 18.

Rot Parl. 32 H. 6. M. 17.
REx adversa valetudine laborans de assensu Consilii sui assignavit Joannem
Arundel. Joannem Saceby, and W. Ha^cliffe medicos Robertum Warren and Joan
Marshal Chirurgos ad libere ministrandum and exequendum in and circa personam
suam Inprimis viz. quod licite valiant moderare sibi dietam suam and quod
possint ministrare potiones syrupos Confectiones laxativas medicinas clysteria
supositoria caput purgia gargarismata lealnen epithemata fomentationes
embrocationes capitis rasuram unctiones emplastra, cerata ventosa cum
scarificatione vel sine, Emorodorum Scarificationes etc. Dantes singulis in
mandatis quod in executione praemissorum sint intendentes, etc. Upon this four
things are to be observed. 1. That no Physic ought to be given to the King
without good warrant. 2. This Warrant ought to be made by advice of his
Council. 3. They ought to minister no other Physic then that is set down in
writing. 4. That they may use the aid of those Surgeons named in the
Warrant, but of no Apothecary, but to prepare and do all things themselves,
etc. And the reason of all this is, the precious regard had of the health and
safety of the King which is the head of the Commonwealth. Cokes institutes
pars 4. page 251.

Physicians and Surgeons soient sages en lour faculties eyent sans les
consciences cy que rien ne ent failli a fair cure silz ne scavoyent a bone
chief mitter ou silz a bon chief scav^yent and entre-mettent nequidant
follement ou negligentment issent que ilz mittont froid pur chaude ou le
revers, ou trop peu de cure, ou nemi mitter un due diligence and nosmement en
arsons and ad abscissions que sont defend a fair forsque al peril des mesters
si lour patients morerent ou perdent memory en tiels cases sont ilz homicides
ou Mayhemers. Mirror cap. 4. de Homicide verb (daut' part.)

To Our trusty and welbeloved the President and Censors of the College of
Physicians within the City of London.
JAMES REX.

TRusty and welbeloved We greet you well; Whereas the Art of Physic by many
unlearned men (making gain by the profession thereof, to the great hurt and
prejudice of many of Our loving subjects) is much abused in many places of this
Our Realm, but especially in our City of London and the Suburbs thereof, the
government whereof (as touching the practice of the said Art, and the
practitioners thereof) being by the Laws and Statutes of the Realm committed
unto you the President and Censors of our College of Physicians, and you
having also from us by our Letters Patents more ample authority for the
suppression and correction of such delinquents: We therefore minding so far as
in us lies the speedy reformation of all such abuses and inconveniences, do by
these presents as heretofore yet more strictly charge and command you the
President and Censors aforesaid to call before you all such irregular and
ignorant practitioners as contrary to our Laws and authority do abuse that
Art, and to examine their sufficiency, and such as you shall find not
sufficient to punish for their bad practice according to our Laws in that case
provided. And Whereas we are credibly given to understand that many having been
punished and warned by you to desist from any further practice do yet
obstinately notwithstanding persist in their former contempt of our Laws and
commandments, We will and command you that you proceed against such delinquents
with all severity according to the tenor of our said Letters Patents and the
due course of our Laws, by fine and imprisonment, or by causing them to enter
into recognizance with condition restraining them to offend any more, or
otherwise as the case shall require and shall be agreeable to justice. And our
will and pleasure is, that such offenders as shall be so imprisoned, shall
there remain without being enlarged, unless it be upon their conformity and
submission to you the said president and Censors, or other due course of Law
wherein we require all our Judges and Justices that they be very careful and
circumspect not to do any thing that may give encouragement to such offenders,
by enlarging any such too easily or without due examination of the causes of
their commitment, first calling thereto the said President and Censors or some
of them to declare the true reasons and causes thereof. And whereas we are
given to understand that oftentimes upon the solicitation of some or other
friend or person of quality suitor to you for the said delinquents after their
conviction you have been moved to wink at their faults, and neglect their
punishment, to the great prejudice of the health of many our poor subjects: Our
will and pleasure is, and we do hereby straightly charge and command you, that
henceforth neither for favor, friendship, or respect of any you forbear the
just censure and punishment due by our Laws unto such delinquents as you shall
answer to us on the contrary at your peril, and that you require the aid and
assistance of the Lord Major and Aldermen of our City of London (whom by our
Letters we have so required to do) for your better expedition in the execution
of this our Royal Will and Commandment, not doubting but that you with more
care will seek to suppress such intolerable abuses, and satisfy our trusts in
this case committed to you.

Given under our Signet at our Palace of Westminster the second day of July in
the twentieth year of our Reign of England, France, and Ireland, and of
Scotland the five and fiftieth.
The Kings Council about the same time send a Warrant for Attachment of
Empericks, directed to all Justices of Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Baileys,
Constables, Headboroughs, and all other his Majesty's Officers and Ministers
within the City of London and seven miles.

Butler made extraordinary Surgeon to the King, was permitted by the Lord
Keeper to be sued. Annal. page 97.

Blank had a Habeas Corpus 1637. but by the Judges was sent back to prison,
having been fined by the Censors 20 l ob malam praxia, though he had Letters
Patents from the Archbishop of Canterbury.

A Brief of what King James granted, and defective in former Grants.
1. THat whereas they were by the former Act enabled to keep Courts and
Convocations, and thither to convent, and there to punish offenders, but had no
certain place limited; now they have power to purchase a Hall peculiar for that
purpose.

2. Whereas they are by the former Act enabled to purchase only 12 l. revenue
to the said College; now they have power by the Letters Patents to purchase to
the value of 100 Marks per annum.

3. Whereas the College is authorized of old by suite to recover from all
practisers in Physic without approbation from the College 5 l. a month. By
the last Letters Patents they are authorized to punish such offenders contempt
in not coming to the College upon the President and Censors Warrants: or in
refusing to answer being come by a Fine of 40 s. and imprisonment till they
have paid the same. And for practicing without License, upon conviction they
may fine the offenders in 3 l. and imprison them for seven days, and until
they have paid such fines.

4. Whereas of old the College might punish evil practitioners in Physic
within their Limits by a Fine of 20 l. By their new Grant they may examine for
Witnesses against them (upon oath) Surgeons, and Apothecaries, and
Druggists; And the Servants and Attendants upon the Sick (and no others) and
fine them 20 s. for refusing to come or answer before them; and upon conviction
they may fine evil Practisers in Physic 10 l. and imprison them for 14.
days, and until they pay the same Fine.

5. Whereas of old the Physicians had power to search the Shops and Warehouses
of all Apothecaries, Druggists, Distillers and Sellers of Medicines; and
finding unwholesome Drugs and Medicines, to burn them: By their new Grant they
are authorized to fine such offenders in 3 l. and to commit them until they
pay the same.

6. Whereas of old the one half of all Fines to be imposed by the College were
granted to the said Incorporation, in their new Grant all the said Fines are
granted to them; paying to the King his Heirs and Successors yearly 6 l.

7. In the new Grant the President and Censors are enabled to take
Recognizances to the Kings Majesty of Offenders convicted of unlawful or evil
practice, with condition that they shall not commit like future offenses, and
to imprison them if they refuse to be so bound.

8. In the new Grant, the Collegiates are freed from bearing or finding of
Arms, because they are subject to serve in person, both in the Kings Armies,
and in his Fleets upon occasion.

9. His Majesty promises his Royal Assent for enacting this Patent the next
Parliament.


