THE Parson's Monitor, Consisting of such CASES and MATTERS as principally
concern the CLERGY.

Collected from the Statute and Common Laws; as also the Constitutions and
Canons Ecclesiastical: Confirmed 1o Jac. Anno Dom. 1603. Together with the
Articles of Religion, Authority of the Convocation, Privilege of Churches and
Churchyards, Payment of First Fruits and Tenths: In whose Name and Style
Ecclesiastical Courts are to be kept, and the Process issuing out of the same
are to run in, and with what Seal to be sealed.

WITH Several other Matters (never before Extant) very material and necessary
to be known by the CLERGY in general, and all persons concerned either as
PATRON, or INCVMBENT.

Omnium Legum Inanis est Sensura nisi Divinae Legis imaginemgerit. By G.
MERITON, Gent.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of Richard and Edw. Atkins, Esquires, for
Richard Tonson within Grays-Inn-Gate next Grays-Inn-Lane. 1681.

To the Reverend CLERGYMEN OF ENGLAND.
Worthy Sirs,
HAving always had a great Honor and Esteem for Men of your Cloth, being
descended from a Grandchild to Dr. George Meriton Dean of York, in the time of
Archbishop Mathew^.
Clergyman my self: I have often debated in my thoughts, how I might lay out
some part of that small Tallent which God has blessed me withal to do you
Service. And calling to Mind, that Old saying, Ne Suitor ultra Crepidam, I
thought it would best become me to keep my self within the Limits of my own
Sphere, and so resolved to present you with some little necessary Collection of
the Law, relating to Clergymen, and having perused Sir John Dodderidge's
little Treatise, called A complete Parson Mr. Hughe's Parsons Law, and Sir
Simon Degg's Parsons Counselor, all relating to the Clergy, I found many
things therein, so brief and intricate, that I thought it well worth my time,
to enlarge and explain many of them, and to add several other matters which
they have not touched, which I imagined would not only be delightsome to
peruse, but very beneficial to and worthy of the Clergy's knowledge: So I have
taken their works in pieces, and framed a new Model of my own, and out of
their works, with some materials of my own, I have reared this small New
Edifice; I know it will not pass without it is Censures, for those
Inconveniences which are not discernable upon the projecting of a Model, are
easily discovered and obvious to the Eye after the House is built. Although I
have called this Treatise, the Parson's Monitor, yet I know to the Graver sort
it will appear to be no such thing. They perhaps knowing as much if not more
then they will find in this Collection, and so cannot be meliorated thereby in
their knowledge, yet to the generallity of Clergymen, I hope it may prove
serviceable, and not without it is use also to the other, for though it bring
nothing new to them, yet I presume it mayprove Memoriae Amicus, by continueing
those things that are in Memory, Retraxing those that are Elapsing, and
Retrieving the things that were vanished. It is possible several Persons,
especially those who have known my Education, will look upon this undertaking
as a great piece of presumption in me, that I (who never had the Honor to
assume any greater Title then a Practicer of the Common Law) should publish
this Treatise, when such Learned Men in the Laws, as those aforenamed have
written upon the same Subject already; To such Carpers my Answer is, I desire
they would not condemn me before they hear me speak, for if they please but to
give themselves the trouble to Peruse this little Collection, though perhaps at
the undertaking thereof, they may propound to themselves, that it will be time
ill spent, yet when they have done, I hope they will not conclude it time lost,
for although they have the Books aforementioned, and so think this useless, yet
possibly this may serve as a kind of Paralipomenon to the others, for let me
tell them, that they will find several things enlarged here, with Additions of
several other matters which are not touched there; for I have here brought in
the Canons in force, the Articles of Religion, the Privilege of Churches and
Churchyards, the Statutes concerning First Fruits, Tenths, and Mortuaries, the
Authority of the Convocation and Privilege of the Clergy there, and their
menial Servants, and several other matters which they will not meet with in the
other Authors: but put the Case I had meddled with nothing, but what they have
taken notice of, yet the same Dish dressed after another fashion, often gives a
fresh Appetite, and for my own part, I have found nothing more delightsome or
grateful to my Genius, then to read the same Case, reported four or five
times over in several Books for it is variety that makes a Feast. But some
perhaps will ask why I have not said something relating to Tithes, in Answer to
which I say, that Sir Simon Degg has taken such pains therein, as little or
nothing more can or need be said in that point, and besides, every Parson
studies more to be his own Monitor in those things then in the particulars
which I have here discoursed of, although there be several digressions in this
ensuing Treatise, which may seem Heterogeneall to the things intended to be
discoursed of, yet they falling accidentally in my way, I hope the Candid
Reader will rather Pardon then Condemn me for incerting them; for though at
first they may appear perhaps Impolite, yet upon second thoughts, they will not
(I hope) be adjudged altogether Impertinent; my Intentions at the first
undertaking of this Collection were honest and good, and if the Book fail in
the Effects, I wish that any of the Clergy would be so kind as to inform me,
wherein I might be more serviceable to them, that I might manifest to the
World, how ready and willing I am to be,

Reverend Sirs, Your very humble Servant, G. Meriton.

An Alphabetical Catalogue of the several Books and Authors consulted and made
use of in this ensuing Treatise.
A.
ANderson's reports, 1 part. Anderson's reports, 2 part. Book of Articles of
Religion.
B.
Bendlowe's reports. Boulstred's reports, 1, 2, and 3, part. Bracton. Britton.
Brooks grand Abridgment. Bridgman's reports. Brownlowe's reports, 1, and 2,
part.
C.
Book of Canons. Cook's Institutes, 1, 2, 3, and 4, part. Cook's reports, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7. 9, 10, 11, Lib. Cook's Entries. Crook's reports, 1, 2, and 3, part.
D.
Davis reports. Degg's Parsons Counselor. Dyer's reports. Doderidge complete
Parson. Doctor and Student.
E.
Edward the first. Edward the third. Edward the fourth.
F.
Fitz. Natura Brevium. Fleta.
G.
Godbolts reports. Godolphins Orphan's Legacy. Gouldesborough's reports.
H.
Henry the Third. Henry the Fourth. Henry the Fifth. Henry the Sixth. Henry the
Seventh. Henry the Eight. Hetley's reports. Hobart's reports. Hughe's grand
Abridgment, 1 part. Hughe's Parsons Law. Hutton's reports.
I.
Jones reports.
K.
Kelloway's reports. Keebles Statutes.
L.
Latch's reports. Leye's reports. Leonards reports, 1, 2, 3, and 4, part. Liber
Assisar. Lind wood.
M.
March's reports. Moor's reports.
N.
Noye's reports.
O.
Owen's reports.
P.
Poulton's Statutes. Plowden's Commentaries, Phopham's reports.
R.
Rastall's Statutes. Register. Roll's reports, 1 part, Roll's Cases, 1, and 2,
part.
S.
Savill's reports. Swinburus Wills, etc.
V.
Vaughan's reports.
W.
Winch's reports. Wingate's Statutes. Yelverton's reports.
A Catalogue of the several Statutes or Acts of Parliament, made use of in this
Treatise.
H. 3.
MAgna Charta, cap. 14. Marlebridge, cap. 10.
E. 1.
Circumspecte Agatis. Stat. of Winchester. Ne Rectores prosternerunt arbores,
etc.
E. 2.
Articuli Cleri, cap. 1. 3, and 4.
E. 3.
50 E. 3. cap. 5.
H. 7.
1 H. 7. cap. 4. 7 H. 7. cap. 13.
H. 8.
21 H. 8. cap. 6. 21 H. 8. cap. 13. 25 H. 8. cap. 19. 25 H. 8. cap. 21. 26 H.
8. cap. 3. 26 H. 8. cap. 14. 27 H. 8. cap. 8. 28 H. 8. cap. 11. 28 H. 8. cap.
13. 32 H. 8. cap. 22. 32 H. 8. cap. 28. 33 H. 8. cap. 28. 37 H. 8. cap. 21.
E. 6.
1 E. 6. cap. 1. 2 and 3. E. 6. cap. 1. 5 E. 6. cap. 4. 5 and 6. E. 6. cap. 1.
5 and 6. E. 6 cap. 4. 7 E. 6. cap. 4.
Q. M.
1 Mar. Sess. 2. cap. 3. 2 and 3. P. and M. cap. 4.
Q. Eliz.
1 Eliz. cap. 1. 1 Eliz. cap. 4. 1 Eliz. cap. 19. 5 Eliz. cap. 1. 5 Eliz. cap.
5. 13 Eliz. cap. 2. 13 Eliz. cap. 5. 13 Eliz. cap, 10. 13 Eliz. cap. 12. 13
Eliz. cap. 20. 14 Eliz. cap. 7. 14 Eliz. cap. 11. 18 Eliz. cap. 11. 31 Eliz.
cap. 6. 35 Eliz. cap. 1.
Jac.
1 Jac. cap. 3.
Car. 2.
12 Car. 2. cap. 14. 13 Car. 2 cap. 1. 14 Car. 2. cap. 4.
An Alphabetical Table of the several Cases cited in this Collection.
A.
ACton and Pitcher, 276 Agard and B. of Peterborough and Denton. 141 Albany and
Bishop of S. Asaph, 3 and 149 Arrundel and Bishop of Gloucester, and Chaffin.
B.
Babington and Wood, 220 Baker and Rogers, 212 Baldock's Case, Sir Robert
Bannister's Case, 286 Bawderock and Mackaller, 212 Bailey and Murnes, 292
Baskervil's Case, 137 Belfore and Foord, 285 Bellamie's Case, 110 Bennifield
and Pickering, 151 Bennet and Edwards, 132 Birt and Manning, 217 Boughton and
Gousley, 196 Bunny and Wright, and Stafford, 280 Buck's Case, 216 Broom and
Hudsons, 195
C.
Calvert and Kitchen, 136 Canning and New-man, 195 Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Corn-Wall, 138 Bishop of Carlisle and Whitton 149 Carter and Croft, 17
Catesby's Case, 174 Carry and Yeo, 222 Chaffin's Case, 285 Bishop of Chichester
and Freeland, 289 Cholmly's Case, 118 Cornwall's Case, 138 Corven and Pim, 109
Costard and Winder, 294 Cox's Case, 180 Crane and Tailor, 268 Creswick and
Rookby, 105 Cross and Stanhope, 105 Cumber and Bishop of Chichester and Green,
138
D.
Dalton and Pamphlin, and Bishop of Ely, 156 Dothick's Case, 116 Digby's Case,
147 Dobbins and Gerrard, 292 Draper and Stone, 107 Dodson and Line, 143
E.
Edes and Bishop of Hereford, 124 Elmer and Gale, 273 Parishioners of
Ethelborough's Case, 108 Bishop of Ely's Case, 289 Sir William Elvis, and
Archbishop of York and Tailor, 159 Evans and Ascough, 145 Evans and Heister,
291 Evelin's Case, 107 Eytru's Case, 297
F.
Fairbanck and Durham, 131 Fairchildand Gair, 144 and 155 Flemming's Case, 37
Sir Godfry Foliamb's Case, 129 Fox and Collyer, 278 Freeman and English, 216
G.
Gerrard's Case, 158 Goodale and Butler, 194 Gosnall and Kindlemarch, 298 Green
and Guy, 179 Gregory and Oldbury, 214
H.
Hare and Buckley, 17 Harris and Hayes and Nichols, 127 Hele's Case, 124 Bishop
of Hereford's Case, 141 Dean and Chapter of Hereford, and Bishop of Hereford,
296 Higden's Case, 30 Hind and Bishop of Chester, 259 Hitchin and Glover, 130
Holland's Case, 146, 147 Hutchinson's Case, 226 Hunt and Singleton, 282
I.
Jackson's Case, 271 Jefferies and Kenshly and Foster, 111 Jones and Lawrence,
219 Jurden's Case, 132
K.
The King and Bishop of Chichester, 183 The King and Champion, 132 The King and
Emmorson, 118 The King and Bishop of London, and Baldock, 147 The King and
Bishop of Narwich, and Cole and Saker, 212 The King and Bishop of Worcester,
146 Knowles and Dobbins, 17 Knowles and Hargrave's, 251
L.
Lancaster and Low, 151 Leak and Bishop of Coventry and Babington, 126 Bishop
of Lincoln's Case, 138 Earl of Lincoln and Hoskins 298
M.
Mabie's Case, 296 Mackallor and Toddericks, 223 Marler and Wright, and Green,
279 Marrow's Case, 291 Martin and Gunniston, 305 Martin's Case, 198 Mawnd and
French, 287 Morgan and Glover, 179 Mot and Hales, 292
P.
Palmer and Smith, 154 Palmer and Munson, 115 Paget's Case, 112 Paget and
Crompton, 111 Palmer and Thorp, 95 Parkhurst's Case, 182 Pascall and Clerk, 221
Penhallow's Case, 116 Perchall's Case, 116 Pescod and Yardley, 131 S. John and
Pettit's Case, 298 Phips and Hayter, 147 Sir Edmund Plowden and Oldfield, 286
Q.
The Queen and Blancher, 245 The Queen and Bishop of Lincoln, 138 The Queen and
Bishop of Lincoln and Cock, 151 The Queen and Bishop of Gloucester and Savaker,
171 The Queen and Bishop of Lincoln and Drewry, 172 The Queen and Bishop of
Lincoln and Skiffin, 173 The Queen and Bishop of Peterborough and Acton, 176
The Queen and Bishop of Salisbury and al. 175
R.
Reyner and Parker, 244 Riersby and Wentworth, 214 Rickman and Garth, 295
Robins and James, 179 Robins and Gerrard, and Prince, 179 Parishioners of
Rovenden's Case, 107
S.
Saccar's Case, 250 Sale and Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, 296 Bishop of
Salisbury's Case, 141 and 250 Scot and Nicholas, and Brewster and Stubbing, 278
Searl and Williams, 98 Sheldon and Brett, 244 Shepherd and Twoulsy, 194 Shute
and Higden, 30 and 181 Smalwood and Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, 132
Smith and Shelborn, 216 Smith and Bowls, 284 Smith and Clayton, 121 Smith and
Clerk, 30 Specot's Case, 140 Searl's Case, 140 Stanford and Hutchinson 212
Stockman and Withers, 250 Starkey and Brown, 66
T.
Talentire and Denton, 295 Tomlinson and Crook, 285
V.
Viner and Eaton, 115 Underhill and Savage, 179
W.
Waller and Scott, 135 Walker and Lamb, 289 Walter, and D. and C. of Norwich,
282 Watkinson and Man, 176 Webb and Hargrave, 220 Wheeler and Danby, 300
Whetston and Hickford, 172 Whistler and Singleton, 131 Woody and Bishop of
Exeter and Mannering, 145 Dean and Chapter of Worcester, 274 Wright's Case, 123
Wright and Bishop of Norwich, 135 Lady Wyche Case, 108 Winchcombe and Bishop of
Winchester and al. 214 Windsor and Archbishop of Canterbury and al. 128
Y.
Young and Steel, 289


THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I. WHat Qualifications are required by Scripture and Law, in such
Persons as intend to enter into the Ministry, and also a Word or two concerning
Ordination, and what the Canon requires, as to the apparel and behavior of
Clergymen, pa. 1. CHAP. II. What things are required both by the Laws of this
Kingdom, and the Canons in force, to be observed and performed by Ministers,
upon and after their Admission, Institution and Induction to a Living; with
some few things relating to the Convocation, and lastly, the King's Majesty's
Letters and Directions in the fourteenth Year of his Reign, to the Archbishop
of Canterbury, concerning the Clergy, pa. 15. CHAP. III. The Articles of
Religion, which every Minister is to subscribe unto both at his Ordination, and
at his Admission and Institution to a Living, agreed upon by the Archbishops
and Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole Clergy in the Convocation holden
at London, 1562. put forth by Authority, for avoiding Diversities of Opinions,
and for the establishing of consent, touching true Religion, pa. 111. CHAP. IV.
Several Cases, touching the Privileges of Ministers and Churches, and
Churchyards, pa. 99. CHAP. V. Some things necessary for Clergymen to know,
concerning Presentations, Nomination, Deprivation, Resignation, etc. and of
avoidance of Spiritual Livings by Death, Creation, Cession, Lapses, etc. pa.
118. CHAP. VI. Of Pluralities, Dispensations, and non residence, pa. 159. CHAP.
VII. Of the Oath which every Minister is to take before his Institution to a
Living against Simony, with a Recital of the Statute, and some few Cases
concerning the same, pa. 201. CHAP. VIII. Of first Fruits, Tenths,
Dilapidations, and Mortuaries, pa. 228. CHAP. IX. What Qualifications are
required in Leases made by Ecclesiastical Persons, pa. 260. CHAP. X. How
Clergymen are incapacitated to take Farms, or follow Secular Affairs, and how
they are punishable for Incontinency by their Superiors, and by whose power and
Authority, Courts Ecclesiastical are to be kept, and in whose Name and Style,
their Ecclesiastical Process are to be, and with what Seal to be sealed, pa.
301.
ADVERTISEMENT.
CHoice Presidents upon all Acts of Parliament, Relating to the Office and Duty
of a Justice of Peace.

With necessary Notes and Instructions thereupon, taken out of the said Acts of
Parliament, and other particular Cases in Law adjudg'd therein.

As also a more useful Method of making up Court Rolls, then has been known
or hitherto published in Print. By Rich. Kilburne Esquire late one of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of Kent, and Principal of
Staple-Inn.

The Second Edition, with many useful Additions, made public by G. F. of
Grayes-Inn Esquire

Newly Reprinted for R. Tonson, 1681.

THE PARSON'S MONITOR.
CHAP. I. What Qualifications, are required by Scripture and Law, in such
Persons as intend to enter into the Ministry, and also a word or two
concerning Ordination; and what the Canon requires as to the Apparel and
behavior of Clergy Men.
What Qualifications are required in Ministers by Scr^pture.
SAINT Paul in his first Epistle to Tymothy, says, That Deacons must be grave,
not double-tongued, not given to much wine, not greedy of filthy lucre, holding
the mystery of the Faith in a pure Conscience, and let these also (says the
Apostle) first be proved, then let them use the Office of a Deacon, being found
blameless, and he says further, they must be the Husbands of one Wife, ruling
their Children and own Houses well, 1 Timothy Chap. 3. ver. 8, 9, 10, and 12.

What Qualifications the Law requires in them.
Thus far speaks S. Paul, now observe that the Law requires that every one that
intends to be a Parson, must Regularly be of free Condition, and not Criminous
Out-lawed, nor Excommunicate, nor a Jew, Misc^eant, Infidel, Schismatic, or
Heretic: He must also be Conformable to the Government and Doctrine of the
Church of England, and by the Statute of the 13 Eliz. he must be 24 years of
age, 13 Eliz. cap. 12. and vide 5 H. 7. 20. a. 14 H. 7. 28, b. Co. Rep. 5. lib.
58. a. and Degs Parson's Counselor, cap. 1.

The difference between Malum in se and Mala
Neither is one capable of being a Parson, Vicar, etc. If he be guilty of
Murder, Manslaughter, Perjury, Foriury, or other foul crime, That is Malum in
se, and in this case it matters not whether the party be Convict of this crime
or no, so that the Ordinary have certain knowledge thereof, but for a Man to be
guilty of haunting of Alehouses, or a player at unlawful games, which are
only Mala Prohibita, and not Mala in se, it is no Impediment to his hei^^^
Parson, Vicar, etc. Co. Rep. 5. lib. f. 58. (...) 38. E. 3. f. 2. b. Dye^s Rep.
French, f. 293. b. and 254. b. and vide Rolls Cases, 2. part, fo. 355. z. 1.
4. 5. 6. 8.

Every Minister ought to be learned in the Language the People speak and
understand.
Every Parson, Vicar, etc. must also be competently well learned and skilled in
the Language the People speak and understand, where he is to be Parson, Vicar,
etc. otherwise the Bishop may refuse him; as it was resolved in the Case of one
Albany, in a Quare Impedit against the Bishop of S. Asaph, where the Bishop
pleaded that the service of the Church, to which the Presentee was presented,
was in the Welsh Tongue: and that the Parishoners understood not the English,
and that the Presentee could not speak Welsh, and therefore he refused him. And
all the Justices held this to be a good Cause of refusal: for if he understand
not them, nor they him, he cannot instruct his s^ock according to his duty and
charge, m. 30. and 31 Eliz. B. R. Albany and the Bishop of S. Asaph's Case,
Cro. Eliz, f. 119. pl. 5. Degrees. cap. 1.

Ordination to be but four times in the Year.
Note, that Ordination is to be but four times in the Year, that is to say^ the
Sunday immediately following the four Ember weeks, and no Man is to be made
Deacon and Minister together upon one Day, Can. 31. and 32.

The penalty of obtaining Orders corruptly.
And by the 13 of Eliz. it is enacted, that if any Person or Persons whatsoever,
shall or do at any time receive or take any Money, Fee, Reward, or any other
profit, directly or indirectly, or shall take any Promise, Agreement, Covenant,
Bond, or other assurance, to receive any Money, Fee, Reward, or any other
profit, directly or indirectly, either to him or themselves, or to any other of
their, or any of their Friends, (all Ordinary and Lawful Fees, only excepted)
for, or to procure the Ordaining or making of any Minister or Ministers, or
giving of Orders, or License, or Licenses to Preach, that every Person and
Persons so offending, shall for every such offense, forfeit forty Pounds, and
the party so corruptly Ordained, or made Minister, or taking Orders, shall
forfeit ten Pounds. And if at any time within seven Years next, after such
corrupt entering into the Ministry, or receiving Orders, he shall accept or
take any Benefice, Living, or Promotion Ecclesiastical, that immediately from
and after the Induction, Investing, or Installation thereof, or thereunto had
the same Benefice, etc. shall be merely void: And that the Patron or Person to
whom the Advowson, Gift, Presentation, or Collation shall by Law appertain, may
present or collate unto, give or dispose of the same Benefice, etc. in such
sort to all Intents and Purposes, as if the party so Inducted, etc. were
naturally dead; one Moiety of which forfeitures shall be to the Queen, her
Heirs and Successors: and the other Moiety to the party that will sue for the
same in any of her Majesty's Courts of Record, 13 Eliz. cap. 6. Cave quid
solvis. All Ministers are to be Consecrated according to the Book of
Common Prayer.


All Ministers are to be made and Consecrated according to the Book of
Common Prayer, as it is now settled, and he that is otherwise made, or present
at any other making of them then according to that Book, and shall be thereof
Lawfully Convicted by Verdict of Twelve Men, or by his or their Confession, or
otherwise for the first Offense, shall be Imprisoned six Months without Bail,
for the second Offense, one whole Year, and for the third Offense, during Life,
5 and 6 E. 6. cap. 1 and vide 14. Car. 2 cap. 4.

None is to be admitted, either Deacon None to be admitted Deacon or Priest,
except he exhibi^ to the bishop a Presentation ^ of himself, to some
Ecclesiastical preferment, etc.
or Priest, except he exhibit to the Bishop of whom he desires Imposition of
Hands, a Presentation of himself to some Ecclesiastical Preferment, then void
in that Diocese, or shall bring to the said Bishop a true and undoubted
Certificate, that either he is provided of some Church, within the said
Diocese, where he may attend the cure of Souls, or of some Minister's place,
Vacant, either in the Cathedral Church of that Diocese, or in some other
Collegiate Church therein, where he may Execute his Ministry: or that he is a
Fellow, or in right as a Fellow, or to be a Conduct or Chaplain in some College
in Cambridge or Oxford, or except he be a Master of Arts of five Years
standing, that lives of his own charge in either of the Universities: or
except by the Bishop himself that Ordains him, he be shortly after to be
admitted either to some Benefice or Curateship then void. And if any Bishop
shall admit any Person into the Ministry that has none of these Titles, then
the Bishop is to keep and maintain him till he do prefer him to some
Ecclesiastical Living; And if the Bishop refuse to do so, the Archbishop
assisted with another Bishop, may suspend the said Bishop from giving of Orders
by the space of a Year, Can. 33.

No Person to be admitted into Orders, except he exhibit Letters Testimonial of
his good Life and Conversation, etc.
No Bishop is to admit any Person into Orders, which is not of his own Diocese,
except he be either of one of the Universities of this Realm, or bring Letters
Dimissory from the Bishop of whose Diocese he is, and exhibit Letters
Testimonial, of his good Life and Conversation, under the Seal of some College
in Cambridge or Oxford; where he remained; or of three or four Grave Ministers,
with other credible Persons who have known his Life and Behavior by the space
of three Years beford: and be able to yield an account of his Faith in Latin,
according to the Articles of Religion; approved in the Synod of the Bishops
and Clergy of this Realm: 1 Inno. Dom. 1562. And desiring to be ^ Deacon is
twenty three Years Old, and to be a Priest twenty four Years complete, Can. 24.
and 13 Eliz. cap. 12. and vide Co. Inst. 4 part, f. 324.

None to be admitted into Holy Orders without Examination.
The Bishop before he admit any Person into Holy Orders, is either to examine
such Person himself, or cause some Ministers of his Diocese to examine him; and
if any Bishop or Suffragan, admit any to Sacred Orders, who is not qualified
and examined, then the Archbishop of that Province, with the assistance of
another Bishop, may suspend such Bishop or Suffragan so offending, from making
either Deacon or Priest, for the space of Two Years, Can. 35.

None is Preach without License and Subscriptions, first, (...) and made.
And note, that none are to be received into the Ministry; nor suffered to
Preach, Catechize, or to be a Lecturer, or Reader of Divinity, in either
Universitie, or in any Cathedral, or Collegiate Church, City, or Market Town,
Parish, Church, Chapel, or in any other place, except he be Licenced, either
by the Archbishop, or Bishop of the Diocese, (where he is so placed) under
their Hands and Seals, or by one of the two Universities, under their Seal; and
do first subscribe to these three Articles following, viz. First, That the
King's Majesty under God, is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of
all other his Majesty's Dominions and Countries; as well in all Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical things or Causes, as Temporal. Secondly, That the Book of
Common Prayer, and of ordering Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, contains in it
nothing contrary to the word of God, etc. Thirdly, That he allows of the Book
of Articles of Religion, made in the Year, 1562. and acknowledges them to be
agreeable to the word of God, etc. Which Subscription is thus to be made by
such Persons as shall enter into Orders, viz. I. A. B. 'do willingly and ex
Animo, Subscribe to these three Articles above mentioned, and to all things
that are contained in them. And if any Bishop Ordain, Admit, or License any
Person, except he first Subscribe, as aforesaid, he may be suspended from
giving of Orders, and Licenses to Preach, for the space of Twelve Months, Can.
36. and vide Co. Inst. 4 Part f. 324.

The punishment of Revoling after Subscription.
If any Minister after Subscription to the said three Articles do Revolt, he may
be suspended, and if after a Month he do not Reform, he may be Excommunicated:
and if he submit not within the space of another Month, he may be deposed from
the Ministry, Can. 38. 1 Such Persons as are not Episcopally The Penalty of
such Persons as are admitted to any Benefice, or Administer the Sacraments, not
being Episcopally ordained
Ordained according to the Book of Common Prayer, are not capable of, or to be
admitted to any Parsonage, Vicarage, Benefice, or other Ecclesiastical
Promotion, or Dignity whatsoever, nor shall presume to Consecrate and
Administer the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, before such time as he shall be
Ordained Priest, according to the Book of Common Prayer, upon pain of an
Hundred Pounds for every offense, one Moity thereof to the King, and the other
Moity to be divided between the Poor of the Parish, where the offense is
Committed, and the Informer: and the Person so offending, to be disabled from
taking or being admitted into the Order of Priesthood, by the space of one
Year, then next following, 14 Car. 2 cap. 4.

And if any do affirm or teach, that The Penalty of such as affirm that the
manner of making Pr^iests etc. ^s contrary to the word of God.
the form and manner of making, and Consecrating Bishops, Priests, and Deacons,
contains any thing in it that is Repugnant to the word of God, or that they
who are so made, are not Lawfully made and Ordained: they are to be
Excommunicated, ipso facto, and not to be restored till they Repent, and
Publicly Revoke such wicked Errors, Began. 8.

Also if any affirm, that the King's The Penalty of such as Impugn, the King's
Supremacy, etc.
Majesty has not the same Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical, that the godly
Kings had, amongst the Jews: Or, Impeach in any part, his Regal Supremacy: Or,
affirm that the Church of England, by Law established under the King's Majesty,
is not a true and an Apostolical Church: Or, that the Form of God's Worship,
contained in the Book of Common Prayer, and Administration of Sacraments, is
Corrupt, Superstitious, and Unlawful: Or, that any of the 39 Articles of
Religion, made in the Year, 1562. are in any part, Superstitious or Erroneous:
Or, that the Rites and Ceremonies established in the Church of England, are
wicked, Antichristian or Superstitious: Or, that the Government of the Church
of England, under his Majesty by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, and
the rest that bear Office in the same is Antichristian, or Repugnant to the
word of God, they are also ipso facto, to be Excommunicate, and not to be
restored till they Repent, and Publicly a revoke such wicked Errors, Can. 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

And if any affirm that such Ministers The punishment of such as affirm, that
such Ministers as refuse to subscribe to the form of God's Worship, in the
Church of England, may take unto the Name of another Church, etc.
as refuse to subscribe to the form of God's Worship, in the Church of Engl.
and their Adherents, may take unto them the Name of another Church, not
established by Law, or that they a long time groaned under the burden of
certain grievances imposed on them: Or, that there are other Assemblies of the
King's Subjects within the Realm (other then such as by the Laws of this
Kingdom, are held and allowed to be such) who may rightly challenge to them
selves the Name of true and Lawful Churches: Or, that it is Lawful for any
Ministers or People to join together, and make Constitutions in Causes
Ecclesiastical, without the King's Authority; They are to suffer the like pain
of Excommunication: and not to be restored till Repentance, and Public
Revocation of their Errors: Can. 10, 11, 12.

The punishment of these which affirm, that the Sacred Synod of the Nation
assembled by the King's Authority is not the (...) Church by Representation.
Likewise, if any affirm, that the sacred Synod of the Nation assembled in the
Name of Christ: and by Authority of the King, is not the true Church of
England, by Representation: Or that none are bound by the Decrees of such
Synod, that are not present there themselves, or do not agree to them. Such
Person so affirming, is to be Excommunicate, and not to be restored, till he
Repent, and Publicly Revoke his Errors, Can. 139. 140.

How Ministers are to be Apparelled.
Note, That all Ministers shall usually wear Gowns with standing Collers, and
Sleeves straight at the Hands, or wide Sleeves as is used in the Universities;
and in their Journies, they shall usually wear Cloaks, with sleeves commonly
called Priests Cloaks, without Gards, Welts, long Buttons, or Cuts, and no
Ecclesiastical Person shall wear any Coif, or wrought night Cap, but only plain
night Cap, of black Silk, Satin, or Velvet; and in private Houses, and in
their Studies, They may use any comely and Schollar-like Apparel, provided it
be not Cut or Pinkt, and that in Public they go not in their Dublet and Hose
without Coats or Cassocks, and also that they wear not any light colored
Stockins; likewise, Poor Beneficed-men and Curates, (not being able to Provide
themselves long Gowns) may go in short Gowns, of the Fashion aforesaid, Can.
74. Ecclesiastical Persons not to frequent Taverns or Alehouses


No Ecclesiastical Persons shall at any time, other then for their honest
necessities, resort to any Taverns or Alehouses, neither shall they board or
lodge in any such places: Nor shall they give themselves to any base or servile
labor, or to drinking, or riot, spending their time idly by Day or by Night;
Playing at Cards, Diee, or Tables, or any other unlawful Game. But at all
times convenient, they shall hear or read somewhat of the Holy Scriptures, or
shall occupy themselves with some other honest study or exercise, always doing
the things-that-shall appertain to Honesty; and endeavoring to profit the
Church of God, having always in mind that they ought to excel all other in
purity of Life, and should be Examples to the People, to Live well and
christianly, under pain of Ecclesiastical Censures, to be inflicted with
severity, according to the Qualities of their Offenses, Can. 75.

Ministers not Relinquish their callings.
No man being admitted a Deacon, or Minister, shall voluntarily Relinquish the
same, nor afterward use himself in the course of his Life, as a Layman, upon
pein of Excommunication; Can. 76.

CHAP. II. What things are required, both by the Laws of this Kingdom, and the
Canons in force, to be observed and performed by Ministers: upon, and after
their Admission, Institution, and Induction to a Living; with some few things
relating to the Convocation; And lastly, the King's Majesty's Letters and
Directions in the fourteenth year of his Reign, to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, concerning the Clergy.
SUCH Person as is Qualified as the He who is presented to a Living, must carry
his Presentation to the Bishop, etc.
Law requires, and hopes to obtain a Living; and is promised to be presented
according to Law, must in the first place, get a Presentation from the right
and undoubted Patron of the Church, where he designs to be Parson, the form of
which Presentation see in the fifth Chapter: and after such Presentation
obtained, he is within six Months after the Church becomes void by Death,
Creation, or Cession of the last Incumbent, to tender his Presentation to the
Bishop of that Diocese, within which the Church is, or to his Vicar General, or
in the Vacation when there is no Bishop of such Diocese, to the Guardian of the
Spiritualities, to whom the Law allows a reasonable time to Examine his
Abilities; for the Ordinary is not bound to dispatch him as soon as he goes:
but may appoint him a convenient time within the six Months, to attend him for
his Approbation, Hob. Rep. f. 317. Hughe's Parson's Law, cap. 11. 15. H. 7. 7.
b. Examine del Incumbent, degrees. cap. 2. Hughe's grand abridgm, 1 part, p. 134.
Case, 5.

What Admission and Institution signify.
And if the Bishop or Ordinary, etc. upon Examination of the Clerk find him
capable and able, he may then admit and Institute him; Admission in propriety
of Speech, is when the Bishop finding the Clerk able says, admitto te habilem,
and Institution is when the Bishop says, Instituo te Rectorem talis Ecclesiae,
cum cura Animarnm, and accipe curam tuam and meam, etc. And note, that every
Rectory consists of Spiritualities, and Temporalities: and as to the
Spiritualities; to wit, Cura animarum, he is complete Parson by the
Institution: and may celebrate Divine Service, Preach, etc. but not to the
Temporalities as to the Glebe etc. for he has no freehold in them till his
Induction: vide Hare and Buckle's Ca. Plo. Com. f. 528. Co. Lit. f. 344. a. and
Hill. 41 Eliz, B. R. Digbie's Ca. Co. Rep. 4. Lib. f. 79. a. Hughe's Grand.
Abridgm. 1. part, p. 135. Ca. 7. Goldes. Rep. p. 163. and 164. and vide, 32. H.
6. 28. b. and 33. H. 6. 24. and Hughe's Parson's Law, cap. 11.

A Bishop may Institute out of his Diocese.
Note, That the Bishop may Institute a Clerk as well out of his Diocese, as
within it, for as to this matter it is not local, but follows the Person of the
Bishop wheresoever he goes, Cro. Car. f. 342. Hughe's Gran. Abridgm. 1 part, p.
134. Ca. 7. and vide, 21. Jac. B. R. in Knowle's and Dobbin's Case, Godbolt's
Rep. p. 342. pl. 446. Hughe's Parson's Law, cap. 11. and 27 Eliz. C. B. Carter
and Croft's Case.

None to be admitted to any Living; till he be a Priest in Orders.
But observe that none can be admitted to any Living till he be a Priest in
Orders, which he cannot be by the Statute of Uniformity, till he is four and
twenty Years of Age, and if any Person shall be Admitted, Instituted, and
Inducted into any Living; before he is in Holy Orders, his Admission,
Institution, and Induction, are void, 14. Car. 2. cap. 4.

And every Clerk before his Admission to be Incumbent, must subscribe the Every
Clerk to subscribe to his Declaration, before his Admission to a Living.
Declaration following, to wit, I. B. C. 'do declare that it is not Lawful
upon any pretense whatsoever, to take Arms against the King; And that I do
abhor that Traiterous Position of taking Arms by his Authority against his
Person; or against those that are Commissioned by him. And that I will conform
to the Liturgy of the Church of England, as it is now established by Law. And I
do declare, that I do hold there lies no Obligation upon me or any other
Person, from the Oath commonly called the Solemn League and Covenant, to
endeavor any change or alteration of Government, either in Church or State.
And that the same was in it self, an unlawful Oath, and imposed upon the
Subjects of this Kingdom, against the known Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom,
14. Car. 2 cap. 4. After the five and twentieth Day of March, 1682. There shall
be omitted out of the said Declaration or acknowledgment the latter part
thereof-beginning. And I do declare, that I do hold there lies no Obligation on
me or any other Person, from the Oath, etc.

After this Subscription made, every A Certificate to be procured after
Subscription, and the same to be read within three Months.
Parson, Vicar, Curate, and Lecturer, is to procure a Certificate under the
Hand and Seal of the respective Archbishop, Bishop, or Ordinary of the Diocese,
(who are to deliver the same upon demand) and shall publicly and openly read
the same, together with the declaration or acknowledgment aforesaid, upon some
Lord's day, within three Months then next following, in his Parish Church,
where he is to Officiate, in the time of Divine Service; (before all the
Common Prayer be ended) in the presence of the Congregation there assembled,
upon pein to loose his Parsonage, Vicarage, or Benefice, Curate's place, of
Lecturer's place, and shall be utterly disabled, and ips facto, deprived of the
same. And that the said Parsonage, Vicarage, or Benefice, Curate's place, or
Lecturer's place, shall be void, as if he were naturally Dead, 14. Car. 2. cap.
4.

What Induction is, and how to be performed.
When the Bishop has Instituted the Clerk, the Ordinary etc. makes a Mandate
under Seal to the Archdeacon of the place, or to such other Clergymen as he
pleases, to Induct the Clerk: and it may be done by the Dean and Chapter by
Prescription, but not by the Patron, and the usual way of Induction is by the
delivery of the Bell-Rope, to the new Parson, who is to toll the Bell, that the
People may thereby take notice, when the Archdeacon inducts the Parson: his Fee
is 40 Pence, but a Donative may pass by the gift of the Patron, without
Institution or Induction, 8. Ass. pl. 13. Davis, Rep. f. 46. b. Roll's Cases, 2
part, f. 356. B. 1. and 357. C. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, Degrees. cap. 2. and vide, 38. E.
3. 3. b. 11. H. 4. 9, and 10.

What Remedy, where the Archdeacon refuses to Induct.
If the Archdeacon will not Induct the Clerk, after such time as the Bishop has
admitted and Instituted him, and directed his Mandate to the Archdeacon, to
admit him: some have been of Opinion, that the Clerk may have an action of the
Case against him, because the Induction is a Temporal act, but others are of
Opinion (and so it was adjudged, p. 13. Eliz. C. B.) that a Citation shall be
awarded in such Case out of the Spiritual Court, against the Archdeacon, to
answer the same there, where he shall be punished, if there be Cause, because
the Archdeacon may allege some special Cause, which by the Spiritual
Ecclesiastical Law, the Clerk ought not to be Inducted: which Cause may not be
triable or determinable in the Temporal Court, Fitz. N. B. 47. H. Hughe's Par.
Law, cap. 12.

Ecclesiastical Persons to take the Oath of Supremacy
All and every Person and Persons, that shall be Preferred, Promoted, or
Collated to any Archbishopric, or Bishopric, or to any other Spiritual
Promotion, or Ecciesiastical Benesice, Promotion, Dignity, Office, or
Ministry: before he or they take upon him, or them to Receive, Use, Exercise,
Supply or Occupy any such Promotion; they shall take the Oath of Supremacy
before such Persons as have Authority to admit any such Person to any such
Office or Ministry; 1 Eliz. cap. 1. 5 Eliz. cap. 1.

Clerks to swear Canonical Obedience.
And when any Clerk is admitted, and instituted to any Benefice, he is usually
sworn also to Canonical Obedience, to his Diocesan, Co. Inst. 4 part. f. 324.

The form of the Oath of Supremacy.
The form of the Oath of Supremacy is as follows. viz, I. A. B. 'do utterly
declare and testify in my Conscience: That the King's Highness, is the only
Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other his Majesty's Dominions, and
Countries, as well in Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things, or Causes as
Temporal; and that no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate,
has or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Preeminence, or
Authority Ecclesiastical, or Spiritual, within this Realm; And therefore I do
utterly renounce and forsake all foreign Jurisdiction, Powers, Superiorities,
and Authorities; And do Promise, that from henceforth, I shall bear Faith, and
true Allegiance to the King's Highness, his Heirs, and Lawful Successors. And
to my Power; shall Assist and Defend all Jurisdiction, Privileges,
Preeminences, and Authorities, granted or belonging to the King's Highness, his
Heirs and Successors: or United and Annexed to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm: So help me God and the Contents of this Book, 1. Eliz. cap. 1.

The Penalty for refusing the Oath.
If any Person or Persons, who shall be Promoted, Preferred, or Collated, to any
Spiritual Promotion, or Ecclesiastical Benefice, do Peremtorily refuse to take
this Oath upon tender thereof, then he or they so refusing, shall presently be
adjudged, disabled in the Law: to receive take, or have the same Promotion
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, to all Intents, Constructions and Purposes; 1
Eliz. cap. 1. and by the 5 Eliz. cap. 1. Refusal of the Oath upon the first
tender, being Indicted or Presented, according to the Laws of the Realm: within
one Year after such refusal, incurs the danger of a Praemunire; and if after the
space of three Months, after the first tender, it be refused a second time upon
tender, such second refusal is High Treason; and this second tender,
Principally concerns Ecclesiastical Persons, 5 Eliz. cap. 1.

The Penalty for extolling any foreign Power.
If any Person or Persons, dwelling within this Kingdom: or any other the King's
Dominions, shall by Writing, Printing, Teaching, Preaching, express words,
deed, or act, advisedly, maliciously, and directly affirm, hold, stand with,
set forth, maintain, or defend the Authority or Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, of any foreign Prelate or Person, etc. heretofore claimed or
usurped, within this Realm: or other the King's Dominions; or shall advisedly
put in Ure, or Execute any thing for the extolling, etc. any such pretended
Power or Authority. And being thereof Lawfully Convicted and Attainted, for the
first Offense, forfeits all his Goods and Chattels real and Personal, and if he
be not worth twenty Pounds, then to suffer a Years Imprisonment, without Bail,
besides the forfeiture of such Goods and Chattels; and shall also loose all his
Spiritual Promotions, and Dignities whatsoever: and that the same shall be
utterly void, as if the Incumbent were Dead, and the Patron, etc. may present,
de novo: The second Offense Incurs the danger of a Praemunire, and the third
Offense, is High Treason; the Offenses for Preaching, Teaching, or Words to be
Indicted, within the space of a Year, next after such Offense committed, and if
any be Imprisoned, for any of the said Offenses, of Preaching, Teaching, or
Words: and be not Indicted within half a Year after such Offense committed,
then to be set at Liberty: two Witnesses or more, to prove such Indictment, and
to be brought Face to Face, upon the parties arraignment, to give Evidence, 1
Eliz. cap. 1.

And if any Person or Persons, shall The Penalty for defending the Authority of
the Bishop of Rome.
by Writing, Cyphering, Printing, Preaching, or Teaching, Deed or Act,
advisedly and willingly set forth, etc. or defend the Authority of the Bishop
of Rome, or of his See, or any Bishop thereof, heretofore claimed within this
Kingdom, or any other of his Majesty's Dominions; such Person or Persons so
offending, and their Abetters being Lawfully Indicted and presented for the
same, within One Year, after, and attainted at any time after, shall for such
First Offense, incur the danger of a Praemunire: and for the Second Offense,
suffer such like Pains, Forfeitures, Judgments, and Executions, as for High
Treason; Corruption of Blood, and Forfeiture of Dower, excepted, 5 Eliz. cap. 1.

Note, That in Hillary Term, the 11 What shall be said an Offense, within the 5
Eliz.
Eliz. it was Resolved by the Justices of both Benches, at Sergeants Inn, in
Fleet Street, the Chief Baron being also present: That if a Man imports Books
over Sea, written against the Supreamacy, knowing the effect of them; and
utters them to any Subjects here, he is within the compass of the stat. 5 Eliz.
cap. 1. but the Receivers of such Books, if they in Conference of them, do not
allow them, they are not within the said Statute; but if they in Conference,
they do allow them; then they are also within the Statute, and so are they who
hear the Contents, and affirm them to be good: The like of him, who conveys the
Books secretly to his Friends; and persuades them to be of the same Opinion.
And so of them, who Print and utter such Books within this Realm: Also, if such
Books written within the Realm, are conveyed out, and are there bought, read,
and Conference had upon them: such Persons sending them out, are within the
Compass of the Statute, Dyer f. 281. b. and 282 a.

Ecclesiatstical Persons to take the Oath of Allegiance.
By the stat. 7 Jac. cap. 6. every Archbishop and Bishop, are to take the Oath
of Allegiance, set down in the 3 Jac. cap. 4. before the Lord Chancellor, or
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, for the time being; and all Parsons, Vicars, and
Curats, and all other Spiritual Persons whatsoever, taking Orders, are to take
the same Oath, before the Bishop of the Diocese, or other Ordinary in the same,
sitting in open Court, the Tenure of which Oath follows, in these words, viz.
I. A. B. 'do truly and sincerely Acknowledge, Consess, Testify, and Declare in
my Conscience before God and the World, That our Sovereign Lord King Charles,
the Second, is Lawful and Rightful King of this Realm, and of all other his
Majesty's Dominions and Countries; And that the Pope neither of himself, nor
by any Authority of the Church, or See of Rome, or by any other means with any
other, has any power or Authority to depose the King; or to depose any of his
Majesty's Kingdoms, or Dominions; or to Authorize any Foreign Prince, to
invade or anoy him, or his Countries; or to discharge any of his Subjects of
their Allegiance, and Obedience, to his Majesty; or to give License, or leave
to any of them, to bear Arms, raise Tumult, or to offer any violence or hurt to
his Majesty's Royal Person, State, or Government, or to any of his Majesty's
Subjects, within his Majesty's Dominions. Also, I do swear from my Heart, that
notwithstanding any Declaration or Sentence of Excommunication^, or Deprivation
made or granted, or to be made or granted, by the Pope, or his Successors; or
by any Authority derived, or pretended to be derived from him, or his See,
against the said King, his Heirs or Successors, or any Absolution of the said
Subjects, from their Obedience: I will bear Faith, and true Allegiance to his
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors; and him and them will defend, to the
uttermost of my power, against all Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever, which
shall be made against his or their Persons, their Crown and Dignity, by reason
or color of any such Sentence or Declaration, or otherwise; and will do my
best endeavor to disclose, and make known unto his Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, all Treasons and Traiterous Conspiracies, which I shall know or
hear of, to be against him or any of them. And I do further swear, that I do
from my Heart, abhor, detest, and abjure, as Impious and Heretical, this
damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes which be Excommunicated, or
deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered, by their Subjects, or any
other whatsoever. And I do believe, and in my Conscience am resolved, that
neither the Pope nor any Person whatsoever, has power to absolve me of this
Oath, or any part thereof, which I acknowledge by good and full Authority to be
Lawfully Ministered on to me, and do renounce all Pardons, and Dispensations to
the contrary. And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge, and
swear, according to these express Words, by me spoken, and according to the
plain and common sense, and understanding of the same Words, without any
equivocation, or mental evasion, or secret reservation, whatsoever: And I do
make this Recognition and acknowledgment heartily, willingly, and truly, upon
the true Faith of a Christian, so help me God, 3 Jac. cap. 4.

Note, That every Person that is admitted Minister, to read the ^9 Articles of
Religion, within Two Months after Induction.
to a Benefice with cure, must within two Months after his Induction to the
same, read the 39 Articles of Religion (set down verbatim, in the next
Chapter) in the same Church, where he shall have cure; in the time of
Common Prayer there, (that is, after some part thereof be read, and before all
the Prayers be done) and then declare his unfeigned assent thereunto, and must
be admitted to Administer the Sacraments, within one Year after his Induction,
if he be not admitted so before; and if he fail in either of these things, he
shall be (ipso facto) immediately deprived, 13. Eliz. cap. 12.

The reading of the Articles, and subs^^iption must be abs^^u^e.
And observe, that this reading of the Articles, must be of the very Book it
self and no other, and it must be verbatim, as it is in the Book, and not
otherwise; and the subscription must be absolute and not qualified, as to say,
I subscribe them with this or the like addition, viz. so far forth as the same
are agreeable to the Word of God, for if the subscription be not absolute, it
is not good: and so it was resolved, m. 33. and 34. Eliz. B. R. in Smith's and
Clerk's Case, Cro. Eliz. f. 252. p. 19. Co. 4 part, Inst. f. 324. and vide, H.
22. and 23 Car. 2. C. B. Rot. 680. Shute's and Higden's Case, where Higden lost
the Rectory of Elm, in the County of Somerset, for not reading the Articles
within two Months after his Induction, Vaugh. Rep. f. 129.

Every Person also, who shall be presented, Every Person put into any
Ecclesiastical Benefice, is within two Months after Induction, to read the
Morning and Evening Prayers, etc.
collated, or put into any Ecclesiastical Benefice or Promotion; is within two
Months after Induction or Installation in the Church, Chapel, or place of
public Worship belonging to his said Benefice or Promotion; upon some
Lord's Day, publicly, openly, and solemnly to read the Morning and Evening
Prayers, appointed to be read by, and according to the Book of Common Prayer,
now appointed and allowed, at the times thereby appointed; and after such
reading thereof, shall openly and publicly before the Congregation there
assembled, declare his unfeigned assent and consent to the use of all things
therein contained and prescribed in these following Words, and no other, viz.
I. A. B. do here declare my unfeigned assent and consent to all and every thing
contained and prescribed in and by the Book Entitled, The Book of
Common Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and
Ceremonies of the Church, according to the use of the Church of England,
together with the Psalter or Psalms of David, pointed as they are to be sung or
said in Churches, and the form or manner of making, ordaining, and consecrating
of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. And every Person, who (withoutsome Lawful
Impediment be allowed by the Ordinary) shall neglect or refuse to do the same
within the time aforesaid; (or in Case of such Impediment, within one Month
after such Impediment removed) shall (ipso facto) be deprived of all his said
Ecclesiastical Benefices and Promotions, and the Patrons may present again, as
if such Persons were naturally dead 14 Car. 2. cap. 4.

In^umbents Rese^en^, and keeping Cura^es to read the Common Prayers, once
every Month themselves.
In all places, where the proper Incumbent of any Parsonage, or Vicarage, or
Benefice with cure, does reside on his Living, and keeps a Curate, the
Incumbent himself in Person, (not having some Lawful Impediment, to be allowed
by the Ordinary of the place) shall once every Month at least, openly and
publicly read the Common Prayers, and Service prescribed, in and by the Book
of Common Prayer, and also Administer each of the Sacraments and other Rites,
if there be occasion, in the Parish Church or Chapel, of or belonging to the
same Parsonage, Vicarage, or Benefice, on pain of Five Pounds to the use of the
poor of the Parish, for every Offense, upon Conviction by Confession or proof
of two Witnesses on Oath before two Justices of the Peace, and in default of
payment within ten days, to be Levied by distress and sail of his goods, and
Chattels, by the Churchwardens or Overseers of the poor of the same Parish, by
Warrant from the said Justices, rendering the Surplusage to the party, 14 Car.
2. cap. 4.

In all cases of avoidance or deprivation N^ Lapse to In^^r upon avoidance on
the stat. 14 Car. 2. without notice given.
(ipso facto) by virtue of the stat. 14. Car. 2. no Title to confer or present
by Lapse, shall accrue, but after six Months after notice of such deprivation
given by the Ordinary to the Patron, or such sentence of deprivation, openly
and publicly read in the Parish Church of the Benefice, Parsonage, or
Vicarage, becoming void, or whereof the Incumbent shall be deprived, 14 Car. 2.
cap. 4.

Lecturers ^o read the Common Prayers at their entrance, and once every Month
afte^
Every Person who shall be Licensed and appointed, or received, as a Lecturer to
Preach upon any day of the week, in any Church, Chapel, or place of public
Worship, the first time he Preaches, (before his Sermon) shall openly and
publicly read the Common Prayers, appointed to be read for that time of the
day, and declare his assent to the Book, as aforesaid; and upon the first
Lecture day of every Month, afterward, so long as he continues Lecturer, and
Preaches there, at the place appointed for his said Lecture or Sermon, before
his said Sermon, he must also read the said Prayers, and declare his assent to
the Book, as aforesaid; and for neglect hereof, every such Lecturer is disabled
from thenceforth to Preach the said, or any other Lecture or Sermon, in the
said, or any other Church, Chapel, or place of public Worship, until such
time as he Conform in all points, as aforesaid; but if the said Sermon or
Lecture, be to be Preached or read in any Cathedral, or Collegiate Church, or
Chapel, it is sufficient for the Lecturer at the said time, to declare his
assent to the said Book of Common Prayer, in Form as aforesaid; 14 Car. 2. cap.
4.

When any Sermon or Lecture is to be Preached, the Common Prayers shall be read.
Every time, when any Sermon or Lecture is to be Preached, the Common Prayers,
and Service, appointed for that time of the day, shall be publicly and openly
read by some Priest or Deacon, in the Church, Chapel, or place of public
Worship, where the said Sermon or Lecture is to be Preached, before such Sermon
or Lecture be Preached, and that the Lecturer then to Preach, shall be present
at the reading thereof. But this is not to extend to the public University
Lectures, but that they may be Preached as formerly they used, 14. Car. 2. cap.
4.

No Form or Order of Common No Order of Common Prayer, but what is in the Book
of Common Prayer, to be used.
Prayers, Administration of Sacraments, Rights, or Ceremonies, are to be openly
used in Church or Chapel, or other public place of Worship, other then what is
prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer aforesaid; but the said Prayers and
Service in the Chapels or other public places of the Colleges and Halls in
both the Universities, and in the Colleges of Westminster, Winchester, and
Eaton, and in the Convocations of the Clergy in either Province may be in
Latin. 14 Car. 2 cap. 4.

The Penalty for refusing to use the Common Prayers, or using any other Form of
Prayers.
And if any Minister refuse to use the same Form and Order of Prayers, etc.
according to the said Book, or wilfully use any other Rite, Ceremony, Order, or
Form of Prayers, or Administration of the Sacraments, etc. openly or privily
then is prescribed there; or shall Preach, Declare or Speak any thing in the
derogation or depraving of the said Book or any thing therein contained, or of
any part thereof, and be thereof lawfully convicted by verdict of twelve men,
or by his own Confession, or by the notorious Evidence of the Fact, shall for
the first Ofsence forfeit to the King's Highness the profit of such one of his
Spiritual Benefices or promotions as his Majesty shall Assign or Appoint, for
one whole year, then next following after such Conviction, and suffer six
Months Imprisonment without Bail; and for the second Offense they forfeit all
their Spiritual promotions, and the Patrons may present as if the parties were
naturally dead; and for the third Offense they are to be Imprisoned during
Life, and if the person offending have no Spiritual promotion, then the first
Offense is Imprisonment six Months without Bail; and the second Offense
Imprisonment during Life. 2. 3. Eliz. 6 cap. 1. and by the 1 Eliz. cap. 2. the
first Offense aforesaid forfeits the profits of all his Spiritual promotions
for a year, and to suffer six Months Imprisonment without Bail; the second
Offense a years Imprisonment without Bail, and (ipso facto to be deprived of
all his Spiritual promotions, and the Patrons to present as aforesaid; and the
third Offense Imprisonment during Life, and (ipso facto) to be deprived of all
his Spiritual promotions; and if such Person have no Spiritual promotion then
the first Offense is Imprisonment for a year without Bail; and the second
Offense during Life; both these Statutes of the 2, and 3, Eliz. 6 cap. 1. and
1, Eliz. cap. 2. are to have Relation to the Book of Common Prayer now used. 14
Car. 2. cap. 4. one Flemming was Indicted a second time for giving the
Sacrament of Baptism in other Form than is prescribed in the stat. 1 Eliz. and
in the Book of Common Prayer, and it was Awarded that he should suffer
Imprisonment for a year, and should be Adjudged (ipso facto) deprived of all
his Spiritual promotions. m. 26, and 27, Eliz. B. R. Flemming's Case, Leon.
Rep. 1. part f. 295. pl. 403.

If any Person or Persons whatsoever The Penalty for depraving of the Common
Prayer Book, or compelling any Minister, etc. to say any other Common Prayer.
shall in any Interludes, Plays, Songs, Rymes, or by other open words declare
or speak any thing in derogation of the Common Prayer Book, or of any thing
therein contained, or shall by open Act, Deed, or by open threatening compel or
cause, or otherwise procure or maintain any Parson, Vicar, or other Minister,
in any Cathedral or Parish Church, or Chapel, or other place to say any Common
or open Prayer, or to Administer any Sacrament otherwise than is mentioned in
the Common Prayer Book, or shall unlawfully interrupt them in saying or singing
of the said Prayers, according to the said Book, and be thereof Lawfully
Convicted, as aforesaid; for the first Offense, he forfeits to the King's
Majesty, ten pounds, and if not paid within six weeks after Conviction, then
instead of the said ten pounds, to suffer three Months Imprisonment, without
Bail; the second Offense, to pay twenty pounds, and if not paid within six
weeks after Conviction, then instead thereof, to suffer six Months
Imprisonment, without Bail; and for the third Offense, to forfeit all his Goods
and Chattels, and suffer Imprisonment during Life, 2. 3 Eliz. 6. cap. 1. but by
the 1 Eliz. the first of these Offenses, is an hundred Marks, forfeiture: and
if not paid within six weeks, to suffer six Months Imprisonment without Bail;
the second Offense, is four hundred Marks, and if not paid within six weeks, to
suffer twelve Months Imprisonment without Bail; and the third Offense, is a
forfeiture of all their Goods and Chattels, and Imprisonment during Life. But
no Person is to be Impeached for any of these Offenses, or the Offenses
mentioned in the last Section, unless he be Indicted at the next General
Sessions, to be holden before any Justices of Oyer, and Terminer, or Justices
of Assize, next after such Offense, committed or done, nor is any one to be
punished twice for one Offense, that is both by the Ecclesiastical Judge, and
Civil Magistrate: 1 Eliz. cap. 2. these statutes are to have Relation to the
Common Prayer Book, now used, 14 Car. 2. cap. 4.

Any Man understanding the Greek, Any Man may say privately the Common Prayer
in Hebrew etc. or such other Language as he understands.
Latin, and Hebrew Tongue, or other strange Tongue, may say the Common Prayers
beforementioned, in Latin, or any such other Tongue, saying the same
privately, as they do understand, and in the Universities of Cambridge, and
Oxford, they may use and exercise in their Common and open Prayer in their
Chapels, (being not Parish Churches) or other places of Prayer, the Mattens,
Evening Song, Litany, and all other Prayers (the Holy Communion Excepted)
prescribed in the said Book, in Greek, Latin or Hebrew, and all Men, as well in
Churches, Chapels, Oratories, or other places, may use openly, any Psalms or
Prayer, taken out of the Bible at any time, nor letting or omitting thereby the
service, or any part thereof mentioned in the Book of Common Prayer, 2. 3 Eliz.
6. cap. 1.

If any Person or Persons, who do not Conform, and are disabled to Preach The
Penalty against such persons who Preach and are disabled by 14. Car. 2.
by the statute of the 14 Car. 2. shall, during such time as they continue so
disabled, Preach any Sermon or Lecture: that then for every such Offense, the
Person and Persons so offending, are to suffer three Months Imprisonment in the
common Goal, without Bail; and any two Justices of the Peace, of the County,
and the Mayor or other chief Officer of any City or Town Corporate, upon
Certificate from the Ordinary of the place, to him or them of the Offense
committed, may commit the Person or Persons to the Goal of the County, City, or
Town Corporate, accordingly, 14 Car. 2. cap. 4.

The Penalty for refusing to hear Common Prayer, and being present and joining
with other Religious Assemblies.
If any Person or Persons, above the age of sixteen Years, shall obstinately
refuse to repair to some Church, Chapel, or usual place of Common Prayer, and
shall forbear by the space of a Month, to hear Divine Service; and shall either
of him or themselves, or by the persuasion of any others, willingly join in, or
be present at any Assemblies, Conventicles, or Meetings, under color or
pretense of the exercise of Religion, contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this
Realm; every Person so offending, and being Lawfully Convicted, are to be
committed to Prison, there to remain without Bail, till they Conform and yield
to come to some Church, Chapel, or usual place of Common Prayer, and hear
Divine Service established according to Law; and make such open Submission and
Declaration of their said Conformity, as hereafter follows, and if the Person
offending, shall not within three Months after Conviction Conform and make
Submission being required thereunto by the Bishop of the Diocese, or any
Justice of the Peace of the County where the party is, or by the Minister or
Curate of the Parish, then such Offender shall abjure the Realm: and refusing
to abjure, or returning again after abjuration without the King's License,
shall be adjudged a Felon, and suffer as a Felon: But if such party, before he
be warned to make abjuration, do repair to some Parish Church, on some Sunday,
or Feastival day, and hear Divine Service, and before Sermon time, or reading
of the Gospel, and make open Submission; then the Offender is to be clearly
discharged from all the Penalties and Punishments aforesaid, 35 Eliz. cap. 1.
16 Car. 2. cap. 4.

Popish Re^usant and Feme Covert not to abjure.
No Popish Recusant, or Feme Covert, shall be compelled to abjure by virtue of
the said Act, 35 Eliz. and every Person that shall abjure by virtue thereof, or
refuse to abjure, shall forfeit to the King's Majesty, all his Goods and
Chattels, for ever: and loose all his Lands and Tenements, during his Life; but
the Wife not to loose her Dower; nor any Corruption of Blood to be for any of
the said Offenses, and the Heir to enjoy the Lands, and Tenements after the
Offender's Death, 35 Eliz. cap. 1.

The Form of Submission.
The Form of the Submission aforementioned, is to be in these words, viz. I. A.
B. do humbly confess and acknowledge, that I have grievously offended God, in
contemning his Majesty's Godly and Lawful Government, and Authority; by
absenting my self from Church, and from hearing Divine Service, contrary to the
Godly Laws and Statutes of this Realm: and in using and frequenting disordered,
unlawful Conventicles, and Assemblies, under pretense and Color of Exercise
of Religion; And I am heartily sorry for the same, and do acknowledge and
testify in my Conscience, that no other Person has or ought to have, any Power
or Authority over his Majesty; And I do promise and protest, without any
dissimulation, or any color or means of any dispensation, that from
henceforth, I will from time to time, obey and perform his Majesty's Laws and
Statutes, in repairing to the Church, and hearing Divine Service; and to my
uttermost, endeavor to maintain and defend the same, 35 Eliz. cap. 1. The
Penalty of Relapsing after Submission.


Note, That if after such Submission, the Offender Relaps, then he loses all
advantage got by his Submission; and shall be in the same condition, as if such
Submission had never been made. And every Minister, or Curate of every Parish
where such Submission is made, is to enter the same into a Book, to be kept for
that purpose; and within ten days then next following, to Certify the same in
writing to the Bishop of the same Diocese, 35 Eliz. cap. 1. this stat. is
declared to be still in force, by the 16 Car. 2. cap. 4.

Observe, That the Governor, or Masters of Coll^ges etc. to Subscribe to the
Articles of Religion, and Book of Common Prayer, etc.
Head of every College and Hall, in either of the Universities; and the
Colleges of Westminster, Winchester, and Eaton, within one Month after his
Election, or Collation, and Admission into the said Government, or Headship;
must openly and publicly, in the Church, Chapel, or other public place of the
same College or Hall, and in the presence of the Fellows, and Scholars of the
same, or the greater part of them, then Resident, Subscribe unto the Book of
Articles of Religion; and declare his unfeigned assent and consent unto, and
approbation of the same; and to the use of all the Prayers, Rites, and
Ceremonies, Forms, and Orders, in the Book of Common Prayer: And they must also
once every quarter of a Year at least (not having a Lawful Impediment) openly
and publicly read the Morning Prayer, and Service, in and by the said Book,
appointed to be read in the Church, Chapel, or other public place of the same
College or Hall, upon pein, to loose and be suspended of, and from all the
benefits and profits belonging to the same Government, and Headship; by the
space of six Months, by the visitor, or visitors of the same College or Hall;
and being suspended for the causes aforesaid, if they do not at, or before the
end of six Months, after such suspension, Subscribe unto the said Articles, and
Book, and declare their consent thereunto, as aforesaid; or read the Morning
Prayer, and Service, as aforesaid; then such Government or Headship shall be,
(ipso facto) void, 14 Car. 2. cap. 4.

If any Person Ecclesiastical, or having Ecclesiastical Living, shall advisedly
The punishment for affirming any Doctrine, contrary to the 39 Articles of
Religion, or any of them.
maintain or affirm any Doctrine, directly contrary, or repugnant, to any of
the nine and thirty Articles of Religion; and being Convented before the Bishop
of the Diocese, or the Ordinary, shall persist therein, or not revoke his
Error; or after such revocation, affirm the same again, either of these
Offenses shall be just cause to deprive such Person of his Ecclesiastical
Promotions; and the Bishop of the Diocese, or the Ordinary may deprive him, 13
Eliz. cap. 12.

The Sacrament to be Administered in both kinds.
Every Minister is to administer the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper in both
kinds, that is to say, of Bread and Wine, to every Person that humbly and
devoutly desires it, and shall at least one day before, exhort the People to
prepare themselves for it, 1 Eliz. 6 cap. 1. And the forfeiture for using any
other Form of Administration of the Sacraments of Baptism, and the Lord's
Supper than is set down in the Book of Common Prayer, for the first, second,
and third Offense you may see before in this Chapter.

The Penalty for depraving the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, or Administering
the same not being Ordained a Priest.
If any Person shall deprave, despise or contemn the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper by any contemptuous words, and be thereof lawfully convicted within
three Months after such Offense committed, by a Jury of twelve men upon the
Testimony of two lawful Witnesses, in any of the four quarter Sessions, he is
to be Imprisoned, and make Fine and Ransom at the King's Will and Pleasure. 1
Eliz. 6. cap. 1. And he that shall Administer the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, who is not Ordained a Priest according to the Book of Common Prayer,
forfeits an hundred pounds. 14 Car. 2 cap. 4.

Ministers to give notice the Sunday before they Administer the Sacrament; the
Parishioners to Communicate three times in the year, and every Minister who
keeps a Curate must twice every year Administer the Sacraments himself, etc.
Every Minister is to give warning to his Parishioners publicly in his Parish
Church at Morning Prayer, the Sunday before every time of his Administering the
Sacrament, for their better preparing of themselves; and every Parishioner is
to Communicate at the least three times in the year (whereof Easter is to be
one) and the Minister is first to receive it himself, and deliver it in both
kinds to every Communicant severally, and no Bread and Wine newly brought in
must be used, before the words of Institution be rehearsed when the Bread and
Wine are upon the Table; and every Minister possessed of a Benefice with Cure
(who keeps a Curate under him) and every other Stipendary Preacher that reads
any Lecture, Catechiseth, or Preaches in any Church or Chapel, must twice
every year upon two several Sundays, Forenoon and Afternoon in his Church or
Chapel read Divine Service himself, and as often every year Administer the
Sacraments of Baptism (if there be any to be Baptized) and of the Lord's Supper
upon pain of Suspension or Removal from his place by the Bishop of the Diocese,
until he submit to perform the said Duties. And no Minister is to Preach or
Administer the Communion in any private house, except in Case of Necessity,
where one is so Impotent that he cannot go to the Church, and being
dangerously sick desires to receive the Communion, upon pein of Suspension for
the first Offense, and Excommunication for the second; but in houses where
there are Chapels allowed by the Ecclesiastical Laws, the Chaplains may Preach
or Administer the Communion in such houses in the Chapels there only, but the
Lords and Masters of such houses and their Families must receive the Communion
at least once every year in their own Parish Churches; and no person is to
refuse the Communion at the hands of an unpreaching Minister upon pein of
Suspension, and Excommunication after a Months obstinacy; and if any Parson,
Vicar or Curate, receive any such Persons to the Communion, which are out of
his own Church and Parish, thereby strengthening them in their Errors, he may
be Suspended and not released thereof till he promise not to offend therein
afterward, Car. 21, 22. 56, 57 71.

Note, that the Communion is to be Administered in all Colleges and Halls The
Communion to be Administered in Colleges, etc. the first or second Sunday in
every Month, etc.
within both the Universities, the first or second Sunday of every Month, and
the Masters, Fellows and Scholars, and all the rest of the Students, Officers,
and all other the Servants, are to Communicate four times in the year at the
least, kneeling decently upon their knees when they receive it; and all Deans,
Wardens, Masters, or Heads of Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, Prebendaries,
Cannons, Vicars, petty Cannons, Singing-men, and all others are also to
Communicate four times in the year; and in all Cathedral and Collegiate
Churches, it is to be Administered on principal Feast-days, sometimes by the
Bishop if then present, and sometimes by the Dean, and at sometimes by a Cannon
or Prebendary, the principal Minister using a decent Cope, and being assisted
with the Gospeller or Epistler; and in such Cathedral and Collegiate Churches
in time of Divine Service and Prayers, when there is no Communion, it is
sufficient to wear Surplices only, but all Deans, Masters, and Heads of
Collegiate Churches, and Cannons, and Prebendaries being Graduates, are to wear
such Hoods with their Surplices as are agreeable to their degrees, and all
Ministers saying the public Prayers, or Administering the Sacraments or other
Rites of the Church are to wear decent Surplices with sleeves to be provided at
the charge of the Parish, and such as are Graduates must upon their Surplices
at such times wear such Hoods as are agreeable to their degrees, which no
Minister must wear (being no Graduate) under pain of Suspension; but such as
are no Graduates may instead of Hoods wear some decent Tippet of black, so it
be not Silk. Can. 23, 24. 25. 58.

What Parsons Ministers may refuse to admit to the Communion;
No Minister is to admit, to the receiving the Holy Communion, any of his
Parishoners, who are openly known to live notoriously in sin, without
repentance; nor such as are at variance with their Neighbors, till
Reconciliation; nor any Churchwardens or Sidemen, who have neglected or
refused to present such public Offenses, as they themselves know are committed
within their Parishes, or are notoriously offensive to the Congregation there:
nor are the Ministers to give Communion to any but such as kneel, nor to any
that refuse to be present at public Prayers, or deprave publicly the Book of
Common Prayer, or any thing that is contained in the nine and thirty Articles
of Religion, or in the Book of ordering Priests and Bishops: nor to any that
have spoken against his Majesty's Supremacy; under pein to be suspended,
unless every such person do first acknowledge to the Minister before the
Churchwardens, his Repentance for the same, and promise by word (if he cannot
write) to do so no more, and if he can write, then to give it under his hand
to the Minister, who is to send it to the Bishop of the Diocese or Ordinary of
the place; Provided that every Minister so repelling any for the causes
aforesaid, upon complaint to the Ordinary shall obey his Order and Direction
therein; and the Minister is to observe whether all his Parishioners come so
often every year to the Communion as is required, and whether any Strangers
come commonly from other Parishes to his Church, and shall acquaint their
Minister with it, least they be such as their own Ministers turn back, that so
they may be remitted and sent home to their own Parish Churches and Ministers,
there to receive the Communion with the rest of their own Neighbors. Can. 26,
27, 28.

No Ministeris to delay the Christning of any Child that is brought to him upon
Ministers not to delay Christning, or Burial, Registers to be kept, etc.
Sundays or Holy Days to be Christened, nor to Bury any Corpse brought to the
Church or Churchyard (convenient warning being given him thereof before) upon
pein in either of these cases to be suspended by the Bishop of the Diocese for
three Months, unless the party to be Buried were excommunicated majori
excommunicatione, and in such case he may refuse to bury him; and if an Infant
be weak and in danger of Death, the Minister upon notice and request thereof is
to go to the place where it is, and Baptize the Infant without delay, upon
like pein as aforesaid, and not to be restored till he promise before the
Ordinary not to incur the like again willingly; but if the Minister keep a
Curate, then this shall not extend to the Parson or Vicar, but to the Curate;
and no Minister can urge any Parent to be present, nor is any Parent to be
Godfather for his own Child, nor is any Godfather or Godmother to make any
other answer than is prescribed by the Book of Common Prayer; or to be admitted
to be Godfather or Godmother to any Child at Christning or Confirmation, before
they have taken the Communion; nor is any Minister to omit Signing every Infant
at Baptism with the Sign of the Cross; and in every Parish there must be
provided a Parchment-Book at the Parish charge, for Registring all Christnings,
Weddings and Burials in; and this Book is to be kept in a Coffer with three
Locks and Keys, whereof one is to remain with the Minister, and the other two
with the Churchwardens, and upon every Sabbath Day after Morning or Evening
Prayer, they are to take the Book out of the Coffer, and the Minister in the
presence of the Churchwardens must write down in the said Book, the Names of
all persons Christened, together with the Names and Sirnames of their Parents,
and also the Names of all persons Married and Buried in that Church in the week
before, and the day and year of every such Christning, Marriage, and Burial,
and then the Book to be laid up again; and to every page of the Book when it is
filled with Subscriptions, they are to Subscribe their Names, and the
Churchwardens once every year within a Month after the five and twentieth day
of March are to Transmit a true Copy thereof to the Bishop of the Diocese or
his Chancellor, Subscribed with their hands as aforesaid, to the end the same
may be faithfully preferved in the Registrie of the said Bishop, which
Certificate is to be received without Fee. Can. 68, 69. 29.30.70.

The Common Prayer is to be said Ministers to read the Common Prayer upon
Holy Days, and all Wednesdays and Fridays, etc.
or sung reverently upon all Holy Days, appointed by the Book of Common Prayer,
and their Eves, at the usual time of the days in such place of the Church, as
the people may be most Edified; and all Ministers are to observe the Rites and
Ceremonies prescribed by the said Book, without diminishing or adding any
thing; and Ministers upon Wednesdays and Fridays weekly, though they be not
Holy Days, are to say the Littany, and give warning to the people to repair to
the Church by the Tolling of a Bell; and in the whole Service and
Administration of the Holy Communion, in all Colleges and Halls in both the
Universities, the Ceremonies, etc. prescribed by the Book of Common Prayer, are
to be duly observed, without adding or diminishing any thing, and all the
Masters, Fellows, Scholars, and Students of such Colleges and Halls in their
Churches and Chapels upon all Sundays, Holy Days, and their Eves, at the time
of Divine Service must wear Surplices, and the Graduates Hoods upon their
Surplices according to their several Degrees. Can. 14, 15, 16, 17.

No Minister not Licensed by the Bishop None to expound unl^ss he be a Licensed
Preacher, etc.
to Preach, is to take upon him to expound any part of the Scripture: but is to
read the Homilies without making a gloss upon them; nor is any Minister to
suffer any Man to Preach within his Church or Chapel, but such as are Lawfully
Licensed; nor are the Deans, Presidents, and Residentiaries, of any Cathedral
or Collegiate Church, to suffer any stranger to Preach without Lawful License;
and if any such stranger in his Sermon, Preach any thing contrary to the Word
of God, or the nine and thirty Articles of Religion; the Dean or Residents
shall by their Letter, subscribed with some of there Hands that heard him, so
soon as they can give notice thereof to the Bishop of the Diocese: and the
Churchwardens and Sidemen, are to have a Book, wherein they are to take care
that every strange Minister, that Preaches in their Church, shall subscribe
his Name, the day when he Preached, and Bishop's Name, from whom he had his
License. And no Preacher before he has acquainted the Bishop of the Diocese,
and received his Order, is purposely to Impugn any Doctrine delivered by any
other Preacher in the same Church, or any other near adjoining, and if any
offend herein, the party grieved, or Churchwardens are to acquaint the Bishop,
and not to suffer him to Preach there any more: unless he promise to forbear
all such matter of Contention; till the Bishop take Order therein, who is
withal speed so to proceed, that public satisfaction may be made in the
Congregation where the Offense was given, and if either party offending do
appeal, he must not Preach (Pendente Lite) Can. 49, 50, 51, 52, 53.

Every Parson, Vicar, or Curate, upon Ministers to Catechize every Sunday
before Evening Prayer, and to Marry none without License, or asking in the
Church etc.
every Sunday and Holy Day, before Evening Prayer, is, for half an hour or
more, to examine and instruct the Youth and Ignorant Persons of his Parish, and
teach them the Catechism, set forth in the Book of Common Prayer: and if any
Minister neglect, for the first Offense, he is to be sharply reproved by the
Ordinary, upon complaint made; the second time wilfully offending, is
suspension; and the third time, Excommunication; and all Fathers, Mothers,
Masters, or Mistresses neglecting to send their Children, Servants, or
Apprentices, to be Catechized, or the Servants, or Apprentices, refusing to go
to learn, are to be suspended, and if they persist so by the space of a Month,
then to be Excommunicated. And every Minister that has cure, is to prepare,
make able, and procure, as many as he can, to be brought and confirmed by the
Bishop; and every Bishop or his Suffragan, in his accustomed Visitation, is in
his own Person to Confirm such, and if in that Year, by reason of some
Infirmity, he is not able Personally to Visit, then he is not to omit it the
next Year after. And no Minister, upon pein of Suspension; (ipso facto) for
three Years, is to celebrate Matrimony, between any Persons, without a Faculty
or License, granted by such as have Episcopal Authority; or the Commissary for
Faculties, Vicars General of the Archbishops, and Bishops, Sede plena, or Sede
vacant, the Guardian of the Spiritualities, or Ordinaries exercising of right
Episcopal Jurisdiction, in their several Jurisdictions respectively, except the
Banes of Matrimony, have been published three several Sundays, or Holydays, in
the time of Divine Service, in the Parish Churches, or Chapels, where the said
parties dwell; neither shall any Minister under the like pein, Marry any such
Licensed Persons, in any other place, but in the Church or Chapel, where one of
them dwells, and between the hours of eight and twelve, in the Forenoon, in
time of Divine Service; nor when Banes are thrice asked, (and no License
necessary) till the Parents or Governors of the parties to be Married, being
under the age of one and twenty Years, shall either personally or by sufficient
Testimony signify to him their consents to the said Marriage. And if any
Minister under color of any peculiar Liberty or Privilege, claimed to
appertain to certain Churches, shall offend herein, he may be suspended for
three Years, by the Ordinary of the place, where the offense was committed: and
if the Minister remove from such place before suspension, then may the Ordinary
of the place, where he remains, upon the other Ordinarie's Certificate, under
Hand and Seal, execute that censure upon him; Can. 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 101.

Every Parson, Vicar, or Curate, is Ministers to bid Holy Days, conferr with
Recusants, etc.
solemnly to bid Holy Days, or Fastingdays, the Sunday before they fall, as the
Common Prayer Book directs, and all Ministers are solemnly in time of Divine
Service, in their Parish Churches, upon some Sunday, to denounce Recusants and
Persons Excommunicate: and every Preaching Minister, having any Popish
Recusant, or Recusants in his Parish, is to confer with them, to see if he can
reclaim them from their Errors: The Minister also, or Curate, when any Person
is sick in their Parish, (having knowledge thereof) if the disease be not known
or probably suspected to be Infectious, are to repair to instruct and comfort
them, after the Order of the Communion Book, if he be no Preacher, and if he be
a Preacher, then as he shall think most convenient; and when any is dying, then
a Bell shall be tolled, and the Minister then is to perform his last duty, and
after the party's death, (if it so fall out) there shall be rung no more, but
one short Peal, and one other before the Burial, and one other after the
Burial. And no Minister, without the Bishop's License under Hand and Seal, is
to keep any solemn Feasts, either in public or in private Houses, other than
such as by Law are, or shall be appointed, nor shall be willingly present at
any of them, under pein of suspension the first fault; Excommunication, the
second; and deposition from the Ministry the third: Nor shall any Minister
without such License, as aforesaid, hold any meetings for Sermons, termed
Prophesies, or Exercises, in Market Towns, or elsewhere, under the same peins:
neither may any Minister upon any pretense whatsoever, either of possession or
obsession; by Fasting and Prayer, attempt to cast out any Divil or Divils,
under pein of being accounted an Impostor, and to be deposed from the
Ministry; And no Priests or Ministers of the Word of God, are to hold private
Conventicles, which may in any way tend to the impeaching or depraving of the
Doctrine of the Church of England, or Book of Common Prayer, or any part of the
Discipline, established in the Church of England, upon pein of Excommunication,
(ipso facto) Can. 64, 65, 66, 67. 72, 73.

The Penalty for Preaching, or Teaching, that eating Fish or forbearing Flesh,
is of necessity to Salvation.
If any Minister or other Person, by Preaching, Teaching, Writing, or open
Speech, maintain the eating of Fish, or forbearing of Flesh, to be of necessity
to Salvation or the Service of God, otherwise than other public Laws are and
be, they may be punished as spreaders of false News, by the stat. 5 Eliz. and
it is there also enacted, that if any Parson, Vicar, or Curate, do License any
Person to eat Flesh on Fish days, other than such who are sick, and evidently
appear to have need thereof, by reason of their sickness, the License shall be
void: and every such Parson, Vicar, or Curate, shall forfeit for every such
License otherwise granted, five Marks, the Offense to be prosecuted within half
a Year after it is committed, or else no loss or forfeiture to be answered, 5
Eliz. cap. 5.

If any Minister or other Person during The Penalty for declaring that the K.
is an Heretic, etc.
the King's life, do maliciously and advisedly by Writing, Printing, Preaching,
or other Speaking, publish or declare that the King is an Heretic or Papist,
or that he endeavors to introduce Popery; or if they incite or stir up the
people to the hatred or dislike of his Person or Government, and being thereof
Legally convicted, such person so offending is made incapable of holding,
enjoying, or exercising any place, office, or promotion Ecclesiastical, Civil,
or Military; and if they preach or maintain, etc. that the Parliament begun the
third of November 1640. is yet in being, or that there is any Obligation on the
King or any other person, from any Oath, Covenant, or Engagement whatsoever, to
change the Government in Church or State; or that the two Houses of Parliament,
or either of them have a Legislative power without the King, such person
offending herein incurs the danger and penalty of a praemunire. 13 Car. 2. Cap.
1.

What Statutes Ministers are to read in their Churches;
Every Minister is once every year in his Church upon some Sunday in the time of
the greatest Assembly, to read the Statute of the 5 and 6 Eliz. 6. cap. 1. and
show the power and effect of the unanimous Prayers of God's people in their
necessities; and every Minister is also every year the Sunday before the fifth
day of November, publicly to read to his Parishioners in his Church, after
Morning-Prayer or Preaching, the Statute of the 3 Jac. cap. 1. And they are
also twice every year, upon some Sunday after Evening-Prayer, to read in their
Parish Churches the Statute of the 20 Jac. cap. 20. against profane cursing
and swearing; and once every year upon some Sunday or Holyday in the Afternoon
before Divine Service, they are to read the Book of Canons, agreed upon in the
Synod begun at London Anno Dom. 1603. and every Minister every year in his
Church the Sunday next before the 29 day of May at Morning-Prayer, is to read
the Statute of the 12 Car. 2. cap. 14.

Ministers before their Sermons, Lectures What Order Ministers are to observe
in their Prayer before their Sermons, etc.
and Homilies, are to Pray first for the Holy Catholick-Church of Christ,
through the whole World, and especially for the Churches of England, Scotland
and Ireland; then for the King, Queen, and Royal Family; next for all
Archbishops, Bishops, and other Pastors and Curates of God's Holy Word and
Sacraments; then for the King's Privy Council and all the Nobility and
Magistrates of his Realm, and for the Commons that they may live in true Faith
and fear of God, in humble Obedience to the King, and Brotherly Charity one to
another; and lastly they must praise God for all those who have departed out of
this Life in the Faith of Christ, and must pray to God that we by Grace may
learn to follow their Good Example, that after this Life ended, we may be
partakers with them of the Glorious Resurrection of the Life Everlasting, and
must always conclude with the Lord's Prayer; Can. 55.

The Supreme Ecclesiastical power in the King.
Note, That the King has the Supreme Ecclesiastical Power in him, as it has
been held and agreed, and may without Parliament make Orders and Constitutions
for the Government of the Clergy, and may deprive them if they obey not, and
they can make no Canons or Constitutions without his Assent. Cro. Jac. f. 37.
Mo. Rep. f. 155. pl. 1043. and Vaugh. Rep. f. 329.

The power of the Convecations.
But some Clergymen seem to think, and others do not stick to say that no
Orders or Constitutions can be made to bind them but what are agreed upon in
the Convocations of the Clergy, therefore I think it will not be amiss to
insert here the Authority of the Convocation, as my Lord Coke sets it down in
his fourth part of his Institutes, which take as follows, he says it is
called Convocation a Convocando, because they are called together by the King's
Writ; and their Authority (being never assembled together but by the King's
Writ) was to deal with Heresies, Schisms, and other mere Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical Causes, and therein they did proceed juxta Legem Divinam and
Canones Sanctae Ecclesiae, and as they could never assemble but by the King's
Writ, so they were oftentimes commanded by the King's Writ to deal with nothing
that concerned the King's Laws of the Land, his Crown and Dignity, his Person,
or his State, or the State of his Council or Kingdom; and so whatsoever Act is
done in the Convocation, is under the Power and Authority of the King, but not
e contra, what he does, under them, see the King's Letters in the conclusion of
this Chapter, vide Co. Inst. 4 part f. 322. 26 H. 6. 13. and 21 Eliz. 4. f. 45.
a. p. Vavasour, and f. 45. 6 p. Starkey and Brown, and Rolls Cases, 1 p. f.

No Canons to be made in the Convocation without the King's License.
And the Lord Coke says further that the King did often appoint Commissioners
by writ to sit with them at the Convocation, and to have Conusance of such
things as they meant to establish; that nothing should be done in prejudice ut
supra: And therefore the Statute of 25 H. 8 cap. 19. (whereby it is provided
that no Canons, Constitutions, or Ordinance should be made or put in Execution
within this Realm, by Authority of the Convocation of the Clergy, which were
contrariant, or repugnant to the King's Prerogative Royal, or the Customs,
Laws, or Statutes of this Realm) is but declaratory of the old Common Law, but
by the said Act their Jurisdiction and Power is much lestned concerning making
of new Canons, for they must have both License to make them, and after they be
made, they must have the King's Royal Assent to the allowance thereof, before
they be put in Execution, 25 H. 8. cap. 19. Co. Inst. 4 part, f. 323.

The King's Letters of direction to the Archbishop of Canterbury. concerning
the Clergy.
The King's Majesty, in his Letters and Directions to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, dated the fourteenth Year of his now Majesty's Reign, in the Month
of October, declares there to this effect: First, That no Preachers in their
Sermons, shall presume to meddle with matters of State, to model new
Governments, or take upon them to Declare, Limit, or Bound out the Authority
and Power of Sovereign Princes, or to State and Determine the difference
between Princes and People, but that as they have occasion, they Faithfully
tell the People of their duty of Subjection and Obedience to their Governors,
Superior and Subordinate of all sorts, and to the established Laws, according
to the Word of God, and the Doctrine of the Church of England, as it is
contained in the Homilies of Obedience, and Articles of Religion, set forth by
public Authority: Secondly, That they spend not their time in the search of
speculative and abstruse Notions, especially in and about the deep points of
Election, and Reprobation; the Incomprehensible manner of the Concurrence of
God's free Grace, and Man's free Will, and such Controversies as depend
thereon. And that however, they do not presume possitively and doctrinaly, to
determine any thing concerning the same: Thirdly, That they forbear in their
Sermons, ordinarily and causelessly to enter upon the handling of any other
Controversies, of less moment and difficulty. And when occasionally they be
invited, by their Text or Auditory, to fall into them, that they do it with
all Modesty, Gravity, and Candor: asserting the Doctrine and Discipline of the
Church of England, from the Cavils and Objections of such as are Adversaries to
either, without bitterness, railing, jeering, or other unnecessary or unseemly
Provocation: Fourthly, That they Catechize the Younger sort according to the
Book of Common Prayer, and in their ordinary Sermons, do chiefly insist upon
Catechistical Doctrines, (containing the necessary Truths of Christian
Religion) and setting forth withal, what Influence such Doctrine ought to have
in their Lives and Conversations; and stirring up the People by their Lives and
Doctrine, to the practice of such Religious and Moral duties, as are the proper
result of the said Doctrines, as Self-denial, Contempt of the World, Humility,
Patience, Meekness, Temperance, Justice, Mercy, Obedience, and the like: and to
hate and shun sin, especially the sins so rife, and common amongst us, and more
especially, those usually called the seven deadly sins, and all kind of
Debauchery, Sensuality, Rebellion, Profaneness, Atheisin, and the like. And
that where there is any Exercise in the Afternoon, that there it be specially
spent, in explaining some part of the Church Catechism, or some Scripture,
that may lead to the handling and explaining of it; or that may conduce to the
Exposition of the Liturgy, and Prayers of the Church: And Lastly, That they
labor with their People, to draw them from Idle, Debauched, Profane Courses,
and persuade Men to frequent Divine Services, Sabbath Days, and other
Festivals, appointed to be kept solemn, and prevent them from haunting Taverns
and Alehouses, or to use unlawful sports on the Lord's day.

CHAP. III. The Articles of Religion, which every Minister is to subscribe
unto, both at his Ordination, and at his Admission and Institution to a Living;
agreed upon by the Archbishops and Bishops, of both Provinces, and the whole
Clergy in the Convocation holden at London, 1562. put forth by Authority: for
avoiding diversities of Opinions, and for the establishing of consent, touching
true Religion.
1. Of Faith in the Holy Trinity.


2. Of the Word of God, which was made very Man.


3. Of the going down of Christ into Hell.


4. Of the Resurrection of Christ.


5. Of the Holy Ghost.


6. Of the sufficiency of the Holy Scriptures, for Salvation.


7. Of the Old Testament.


8. Of the three Creeds.


9. Of Original, or Birth-sin.
Adam (as the Pelagians do vainly talk) but it is the fault and corruption of
the Nature of every man, that naturally is engendered of the Offspring of Adam,
whereby man is very far gone from Original Righteousness, and is inclined to
evil, so that the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and therefore in every
Person born into the World, it deserves Gods wrath and damnation. And this
Infection of Nature, does remain, yea, in them that are Regenerated, whereby
the Lust of the Flesh, called in Greek (...), which some do expound the wisdom,
some sensuality, some the affection, some the desire of the Flesh, is not
subject to the Law of God. And although there is no condemnation for them that
Believe and are Baptized, yet the Apostle does confess, that concupiscence and
lust has of it self the Nature of sin.

10. Of free Will.
Adam, is such that he cannot turn and prepare himself by his own Natural
strength and good works, to Faith and calling upon God; wherefore we have no
power to do good Works pleasant and acceptable to God, without the grace of
God preventing us, that we may have a good Will and Working with us, when we
have that good Will.

11. Of the Justification of Man.


12. Of good Works.
out necessarily of a true and a lively Faith, insomuch, that by them, a lively
Faith may be as evidently known, as a Tree discerned by the Fruit.

13. Of Works before Justification.


14. Of Works of Supererogation.
Whereas, Christ says plainly, when ye have done all that are commanded to
you, say, we be unprofitable Servants.

15. Of Christ alone without sin.
John says) was not in him; but all we the the rest (although Baptized, and
Born again in Christ) yet offend in many things; and if we say we have no sin,
we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us.

16. Of sin after Baptism.
the Holy Ghost, we may depart from grace given and fall into sin; and by the
grace of God (we may) arise again, and amend our Lives, and therefore they are
to be condemned, which say they can no more sin as long as they live here, or
deny the place of forgiveness to such as truly Repent.

17. Of Predestination and Election.
God's mercy they attain to everlasting Felicity. As the Godly consideration of
Predestination and our Election in Christ is full of sweet, pleasant, and
unspeakable Comfort to godly persons, and such as feel in themselves the
working of the Spirit of Christ, mortifying the works of the Flesh, and their
earthly Members, and drawing up their minds to high and heavenly things, as
well because it does greatly establish and confirm their Faith of Eternal
Salvation, to be enjoyed through Christ, as because it does fervently kindle
their Love toward God: so for curious and carnal persons, lacking the Spirit
of Christ, to have continually before their Eyes the Sentence of God's
predestination, is a most dangerous downfall, whereby the Devil does thrust them
into desperation, or into wretchlesness of most unclean Living, no less perilo
us than desperation. Furthermore we must receive God's promises, in such wise
as they be generally set forth to us in Holy Scripture, and in our doings, that
will of God is to be followed, which we have expressly declared unto us in the
word of God.

18. Of obtaining Eternal Salvation only by the Name of Christ.


19. Of the Church.
Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Antioch, has erred, so also the Church of Rome
has erred, not only in their living, and manner of Ceremonies, but also in
matter of Faith.

20. Of the Authority of the Church


21. Of the Authority of General Councils.
ordained by them as necessary to Salvation, have neither strength nor
authority, unless it may be declared, that they be taken out of Holy Scripture.

22. Of Purgatory.


23. Of Ministering in the Congregation.


24. Of speaking in the Congregation in such a Tongue as the people understand
not.


25. Of the Sacraments.
Gospel, being such as have grown, partly of the corrupt following of the
Apostles, partly as States of Life allowed in the Scriptures; but yet have not
like nature of Sacraments, with Baptism and the Lord's Supper, for that they
have not a visible sign or ceremony ordained of God; the Sacraments were not
ordained of Christ to be gazed upon, or to be carried about, but that we should
duly use them. And in such only, as worthily receive them, they have a wholesome
effect or operation; but they that receive them unworthily, purchase to
themselves damnation, as Saint Paul says.

26. Of the Unworthiness of the Ministers, which hinder not the effect of the
Sacraments.
hearing the Word of God, and in the receiving of the Sacraments: Neither is
the effect of Christ's Ordinance, taken away by their wickedness, nor the grace
of God's gifts diminished from such, as by Faith, and rightly do receive the
Sacraments Ministered unto them, which are effectual, because of Christ's
Institution and Promise, although they be Ministered by evil Men. Nevertheless,
it appertains to the Discipline of the Church, that inquiry be made of evil
Ministers, and that they be accused by those that have knowledge of their
Offenses; and finally, being found guilty, by just judgment be deposed.

27. Of Baptism.
the Holy Ghost, are visibly signed and sealed, Faith is confirmed, and Grace
increased, by virtue of Prayer unto God. The Baptism of Young Children, is in
any wise to be retained in the Church, as most agreeable with the Institution
of Christ.

28. Of the Supper of the Lord.
and Spiritual manner, and the means, whereby the Body of Christ is received
and eaten in the Supper, is Faith. The Sacraments of the Lord's Supper, were
not by Christ's Ordinance reserved, carried about, lifted up or Worshipped.

29. Of the wicked, which do not eat the Body and Blood of Christ, in the use
of the Lord's Supper.
Augustine says) the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ; yet in no wise
are they partakers of Christ, but rather to their Condemnation do eat and drink
the Sign or Sacrament of so great a thing.

30. Of both kinds.


31. Of the one Oblation of Christ, finished upon the Cross.


32. Of the Marriage of Priests.


33. Of Excommunicate Persons, how they are to be avoided.


34. Of the Traditions of the Church.
(that other may fear to do the like) as he that offends against the common
order of the Church, and wounds the consciences of the weak Brethren: Every
particular or National Church, has Authority to Ordain, Change and Abolish
Ceremonies, or Rights of the Church, Ordained only by Man's Authority, so that
all things be done to Edifying.

35. Of Homilies.
Edw. the sixth; and therefore we judge them fit to be read in Churches by the
Ministers, diligently and distinctly, that they may be understood of the People.

36. Of Consecration of Bishops and Ministers.
Priests and Deacons, set forth in the time of Edward the sixth, and confirmed
at the same time by Authority of Parliament, does contain all things necessary
to such Consecration and Ordering; neither has it any thing that of it self is
superstitious and ungodly. And therefore whosoever are Consecrated, or ordered
according to the Rites of that Book, since the second Year of the aforenamed
King Edward unto this time, or hereafter shall be Consecrated, or Ordered
according to the same Rites, We decree all such to be Rightly, and Orderly, and
Lawfully Consecrated and Ordered.

Note, that this last Article, by the stat. 14. Car. 2. is to be construed and
taken to extend, and shall be applied unto the Book, containing the manner of
Making, Ordaining and Consecrating of Bishops, Priests and Deacons, which is
now set forth in such sort and manner, as the same did heretofore extend unto
the Book set forth in the time of King Edward the sixth, mentioned in the said
Article, 14. Car. 2. cap. 4.

37. Of the civil Magistrate.
England, and other her Dominions, unto whom the chief Government of all
Estates of this Realm, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Civil, in all causes
does appertain, and is not, nor ought to be subject to any foreign
Jurisdiction. Where we attribute to the Queens Majesty, the chief Government,
by which Titles we understand the minds of some slanderous Folks to be
offended, we give not to our Princes the Ministering either of God's Word, or
the Sacraments, the which thing the Injunctions also sometimes set forth by
Elizabeth, our Queen, do most plainly testify. But that only Prerogative, which
we see to have been given always to all godly Princes in Holy Scriptures by
God himself, that is, that they should rule all Estates and degrees, committed
to their charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical, or Temporal, and
restrain with the Civil Sword, the stubborn and evil doers. The Bishop of Rome,
has no Jurisdiction in this Realm of England. The Laws of the Realm, may
punish Christian Men with death, for heinous and grievous Offenses. It is
Lawful for Christian Men, at the Commandment of the Magistrate, to wear
Weapons, and serve in the Wars.

38. Of Christian Men's Goods, which are not common.
Anabaptists do falsely boast: Notwithstanding, every Man ought of such things
as he possesses, Liberally to give Alms to the Poor, according to his Ability.

39. Of a Christian Man's Oath.
James his Apostle; so we judge, that Christian Religion does not prohibit, but
that a Man may swear when the Magistrate requires, in a cause of Faith and
Charity, so it be done according to the Prophet's teaching, in Justice,
Judgment and Truth.

CHAP. IV. Several cases, touching the privileges of Ministers, and Churches,
and Church Yards.
The punishment for laying violent Hands on a Clergyman.
MAny are the privileges which the Laws of this Realm allow to Clergy Men in
Holy Orders, some of which I shall insert in this Chapter: If one lay violent
Hands upon the Person of any infra sacros Ordines, such Offender may be cited
into the Spiritual Court, to have him Excommunicated, or do Corporal Penance;
But the party offending, if he think good, may redeem his Penance, for a
certain sum of money to be paid to the party grieved, who may sue for the same
in the Spiritual Court, if it be not paid, and no Prohibition will lie, vide
stat. Articuli Cleri, 9 E. 3. cap. 3 and 4. and Circumspecte Agatis, 13 E. 1
Regist f. 45. 49. 51, 52. 54. 57. Co. Institutes, 2 part, f. 492. and 620. 7 H.
3. Prohibition, 30. 5 H. 3. Prohibition, 29. 12. H 7. f. 23. a. p. Butler, Co.
Rep. 4. Lib. f. 20. b. Bro. action sur Case, 15. F. N. B. f. 51. R. 52. D. F.
53. A.

In what Court a Minister may sue for a scandal.
If one call a Minister Heretic, Schismatic, Fornicator, etc. or such other
words, as are merely Spiritual, in such case, he cannot sue in the Spiritual
Court for damages, but he may cite the party offending, pro salute animae, and
he must express in particular, the defamation in his Libel: and for the costs
of suit recovered, he may sue in the same Court, if they be not paid, Co. Inst.
2 part, f. 492, 493. F. N. B. 51, I. 52, M. 53. A. and see Tr. 25 Eliz. B. R.
Palmer and Thorp's Case, Co. Rep. 4. Lib. f. 20. a.

A Minister is not bound to appear at Ministers not bound to appear to Sheriffs
Tourns or Leets, etc.
the Sheriffe's Tourns, nor at Court Leets, by the Statute of Marlbridge,
unless their appearance be especially required for some particular cause, and
if they be distrained to come, they may have a Writ, reciting the said Statute,
which Writ in the Register begins thus. Cum de communi Consilio Provisum
sit, quod viri Religiosi non habent necesse venire ad Tournum Vicecom, etc.
Regist. f. 176 8 H. 4. f. 15. stat. Marlbridge, cap. 10 Co. Inst. 2 part, f.
120, and 121.

Parsons not compellable to appear at Leets, by the Common Law.
By the Common Law also, Parsons of Churches, that had curam animarum, were not
compellable to come to Tourns or Leets, and if they were distrained to come,
they may have a Writ for their discharge in this Form: Rex, etc. Cum secundum
Consuetudinem Regni Nostri, Personae Ecclesiasticae, ratione Terrarum and
Tenementorum suorum, Ecclesiis suis annexorum, venire non debeant ad Visum
Franci Pleg. in curia nostra vel aliorum quorumcumque, etc. Regist f. 175. F.
N. B. f. 160. C. Co. Inst. 2 part, f. 121.

Men of the Church, not to be amercied after the quantity of their Spiritual
Benefice.
No Man of the Church, shall be amercied after the quanty of his Spiritual
Benefice, but after his Lay Tenement, and after the quantity of his Offense;
and note, that the word Beneficium is a large word, and his taken for any
Ecclesiastical Promotion, or Spiritual Living whatsoever: vide, Magna Charta,
cap. 14. and Co. Inst. 2 part, f. 29.

The Plough Beasts of Religious Persons, Their Plough Beasts not to be
distrained etc.
or their Sheep shall not be distrained for the King's Debt, nor the Debt of
any other Man, nor for any other cause, by any Bailiffs whatsoever, but until
such time as they can find another Distress or Chattels sufficient, whereof
they may Levy the Debt, (except in case of damage Feasant) and such distress is
also to be reasonable after the value of the Debt or demand, and by the
Estimation of Neighbors, and not by Strangers, nor outrageous, stat. de
districtione Scaccarii, 51 H. 3. and vide dyer, f. 312. a. pl. 86.

May make their Wills of Corn sown down.
Spiritual Persons may make their Wills of such Corn as is sown upon the Glebe
Land, at the time of their death, 28 H. 8 cap. 11. and vide 34 H. 6. 38.

The punishment for Arresting Ministers, doing Divine Service.
No Man upon grievous forfeiture, is to Arrest any Minister in Church, or
Churchyard, whilst he is attending Divine Service, 50 E. 3 cap. 5. and by the
1 R. 2. if any offend herein, and be thereof duly Convict, he is to be
Imprisoned, and Ransomed at the King's Will, and must make agreement with the
party, 1 R. 2 cap. 15. and vide Boulstr. Rep. 2 part, f. 72, and Cro. Jac. f.
321. pl. 4. and Brow. Rep. 2 part, f. 301.

A Clergyman guilty of Felony, not to be burnt the Hand in
If a Clerk in Holy Orders be Convicted of any crime, for which the benefit of
Clergy is allowable, upon producing his Orders, he shall not be burnt in the
Hand, and if he have not his Orders, the Court ex gratia, may give him time to
produce them; and if afterward, he be Convicted again, he shall have his
Clergy again, and so ad Infinitum, and though the party that may have benefit
of his Clergy, must pray it, the Court not being bound to tender it ex Officio,
yet the 22 E. 3 F. Coronae 254. says, that if the Judge know him to be a Clerk,
they will not give Judgment, though he pray not his Clergy, vide. 4 H. 7 cap.
13. and see Searle and William's Case, Hob. Rep. f. 288. and 294.

By the Register it appears, that Spiritual Ministers to be excused from paying
Tell, etc.
and Ecclesiastical Persons, are to be quit of and from the payment of Toll in
Fairs and Markets, for the Goods and Merchandises, which they buy to be spent
on their Rectories, and Church Livings; and for such Goods and Merchandises as
are gotten on their Church Livings; and they are also to be quit of Murage,
Pontage, and Pannage, and the like, and if they be troubled for payment
thereof, they may have a Writ out of the Chancery* commanding the parties to
desist, and so an Alias and Plures, and then an Attachment, and the Form of the
Writ de essendi quietum de Toloneo, runs thus. Rex etc. Ballivis suis de B.
salutem, cum Personae Ecclesiasticae, secundum consuetudinem bactenus in Regno
nostro usitatam and approbatam, ad Toloneum, Pannagium, and Muragium, de bonis
suis Ecclesiasticis, alicubi in eodem Regno prestand. nullatenus teneantur,
vobis praecipimus, quod R. B. Personam de L. etc. vide Regist. f. 260. F. N. B.
227. F. and 228. A. and Co. 2 part, Inst. f. 4.

Clergymen are not to be chosen into Temporal petty Offices.
And if a Clergyman, who holds certain Lands and Tenements, by reason of his
said Lands, ought to be chosen Bailiff, Beadle, or Reeve, or in such like
Office for his Lands, and by reason thereof, shall be chosen into such Office;
he may discharge himself by Writ out of the Chancery as follows, Rex etc.
Ballivis de L. salutem cum secundum Legem, and consuetudinem Regni Nostri,
Angliae, clerici infra sacros Ordines constituti ad Officium Ballivi eligi non
debent nec bactenus consueverunt, ac jam ex part, W. M. etc. There is also the
Form of a Writ, in F. N. B. to free them if they be distrayned by the Sheriffs,
or Collectors of Tenths or Fifteens, in their Spiritual Possessions, anciently
belonging to their Churches, by their Goods there. Register f. 187, 188. F. N.
B. 175, B. 176. A. Co. Inst. 2 part, f. 3. and 628.

Ecclesiastical Persons ought not in They are not bound Pers^nally to serve in
War, etc.
Person to serve in War, and in an action, brought against a Clergyman,
(wherein a Capias lies) as in Trespass, Debt, Account, etc. If the Sheriff
return, quod clericus est Beneficiatus, nullum habens Laicum feodum, in which
he may be summoned, in this Case, the Plaintiff cannot have a Capias to the
Sheriff, to take his Body, but he must have a Writ to the Bishop, to cause him
to come and appear; but if the Sheriff return, quod Clericus est nullum habens
Laicum feodum, then a Capias may be granted to the Sheriff, because it appears
not by the return that he is Beneficiatus, so as he may be warned by the
Bishop, so note the deversity, vide 18 E. 3. proc. 205. 9 E. 3. 30. 32 E. 3.
Process, 58. 21 H. 6. 16. 34 E. 3. scire fac. 153. Co. Inst. 2. part, f.

A Clergy Man's Body not to be taken upon a Statute acknowledged.
If any Ecclesiastical Person acknowledge a Statute Merchant, or Statute Staple,
or a Recognizance, in the Nature of a Statute Staple, his Body shall not be
taken, by force of any Process thereupon, for the Writ runs, Si Laicus sit, and
if he be bound in a Recognizance in the Chancery, or any other Court, etc. and
pay not the sum at the day; by the Common Law, if he had nothing but
Ecclesiastical Goods, the Recognizee could not have had a Levari facias, to the
Sheriffs to Levye, but the Writ was to be directed to the Bishop of the
Diocese, to Levye the same upon his Ecclesiastical Goods, but now by the
Statute of Westminster, 2. cap. 18. the Recognizee may sue forth an Elegit,
directed to the Sheriff, to have Execution of the Moiety of his Lands, and of
all his Goods and Chattels, except his Beasts of his Plough, Regist. f. 300. 16
E. 3. Process, 165. F. N. B. 266. A. B. Co. Inst. 2 part, f. 4.

What Remedy Ministers have, if the may be step^ where they should ^eade their
Tithes
If any of the Parishioners do disturb their Parson, or Vicar, to carry his
Tithes by the usual ways and passages, the Parson may sue in the Spiritual
Court, for the disturbance; and if the other party sue a Prohibition upon the
matter sued, a Consultation shall be granted, F. N. B. 51 A.

In the 25 H. 8* There was a Statute made against the excessive number of
Ministers may keep what number of sheep they ple^se.
Sheep, wherein there is a Proviso, that it might be Lawful to all Spiritual
Persons and every of them, to keep such and so many Sheep, upon their own
Lands, as they might have done before the making of the said Act, 25 H. 8. cap.
13.

The Privilege of the Clergy and their Servants in the Convocation.
Note, that the Clergy of the Kingdom, called to the Convocation by the King's
Writ, and their Servants and Families shall have such privileges, in coming,
tarrying, and going, as the great Men and Communality of this Realm, called to
the King's Parliament do enjoy, 1 H. 6. cap. 1. Co. Inst. 4 part, f. 323.

The punishment for disturbing Ministers.
If any Person or Persons, of their own Power or Authority, do, or shall
willingly and of purpose, by open and overt Word, Fact, Act, or Deed,
maliciously or contemptuously molest, let, disturb, vex, or trouble, or by any
other unlawful ways and means, disquiet or misuse any Preacher or Preachers,
Licensed, allowed, or Authorized to Preach, by any Archbishop, or Bishop of
this Realm, or by any other Lawful Ordinary, or by either of the Universities,
etc. or otherwise Lawfully Authorized or charged, by reason of his or their
Cure, Benefice, or other Spiritual Promotion or Charge, in any of his or their
open Sermon, Preaching or Collation, that he or they shall make, Declare,
Preach, or Pronounce, in any Church, Chapel, Churchyard, or in any other place
or places, used or appointed to be Preached in, or if any Person, etc. do
maliciously, willingly, or of purpose, molest, let, disturb, vex, disquiet, or
otherwise trouble any Parson, Vicar, Parish Priest, or Curate, etc. saying,
doing, singing, Ministering, or Celebrating Divine Service, Sacraments, etc.
that at any time after the said Statute shall be allowed, set forth, or
Authorized, etc. The Offenders herein, upon Conviction before two Justices of
the Peace, by two sufficient Witnesses, or their own Confession, may be
committed by the said Justices, to the Gaol without Bail or mainprize for three
Months, and after that, to the next Quarter Sessions; where if upon the
appearance there they Repent, and be Reconciled, then to be discharged of
Imprisonment, finding sufficient suerties for their good Behavior for one
whole year then next ensuing; and if they refuse to be reconciled and repent,
then to be continued in the Gaol without Bail, etc. until they shall be
reconciled and repent. 1 Mar. Sess. 2. cap. 3.

The penalty against such as rescue disturbers of Ministers.
If any person shall unlawfully rescue any Offender in the premises aforesaid,
or hinder the Offender or Offenders to be Arrested, such rescuer or disturber
is to suffer Imprisonment as aforesaid, and forfeit five pounds to the Queens
Majesty, her Heirs and Successors, and if the Town suffer such Offender to
escape, and be lawfully presented for it, at the next Quarter Sessions, then
the Town forfeits five pounds in like manner; such Offenders as are punished in
the Ecclesiastical Court, are not to be punished by the Justices, neither are
such as be punished by the Justices to be troubled by the other Court. 1 Mar.
Sess. 2. cap. 3.

An Action of false Imprisonment was brought against four Justices of Peace, by
one who had disturbed a Preacher and adjudged it did not lie
Although this Statute was made in time of Popery, yet it is still in force as
to the Offenses before mentioned, for in the 10. year of King James, one
Creswick brought an Action of false Imprisonment against four Justices of the
Peace, and they justified the Imprisonment upon this Statute, and set forth
that the Plaintiff disturbed one Robert Thompson a Licensed Minister, and
hindered his Preaching in the Church of (...) in the County of York, and so they
committed the Plaintiff to Prison, and upon a Demurrer to this Plea it came to
be argued, and was strongly debated several Terms, but at length in Hill. Term
11 Jac. Judgment was given against the Plaintiff Creswick by all the Judges.
Tr. 10 Jac. Rot. 1647. B. R. Creswick against Rookby and alium Bolst. Rep. 2.
part. fo. 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53.

The like case.
Also one Cross brought an Action of false Imprisonment against one Stanhop and
other two Justices of Peace in the County of York, and they Justified the
Imprisonment by reason of this Statute, 1 Mar. cap. 3. for disturbing
Preachers, and the Plaintiff demurred to their Plea, and upon argument it was
adjudged against him. Hill. 11. Jac. B. R. Cross and Stanhop's Case, Godbolts
Rep. fo. 246. pl. 343.

By whom the Parish Clark is to be chosen.
The Minister, Parson, or Vicar, is to choose the Parish Clark, which said choice
is to be signified by the Minister, Vicar, or Parson to the Parishioners, the
next Sunday following, in the time of Divine Service, and the Clark is to be
twenty years of Age, at least, and of honest Conversation, and sufficient for
his Writing, Reading, and also for his competent Singing, (if it may be) which
Clark so chosen shall receive their ancient wages, without fraud or diminution,
either from the Churchwardens at the accustomed time, or by their own
Collection according to the custom of the Parish. Can. 91. but if the Parish
have a custom contrary to this Canon, then the custom is to be observed and not
the Canon, as appears by several Cases in Rolls Cases, 2 part. fo. 286.

All Churchwardens, Questmen, By whom Churchwardens, etc are to be chosen.
Sidemen, or Assistants in every Parish are to be chosen by the joint consent
of the Minister and Parishioners if it may be, but if they cannot agree, then
the Minister to choose one, and the Parishioners another. Can. 89. 90. but where
there is an ancient custom in any Parish for the choice of Churchwardens
contrary to the Canon, in such case the custom is to be observed, for if the
Parishioners of a Parish have used time out of mind to Elect one Churchwarden
and the Vicar another, and afterward a Canon is made, that the Vicar shall
Elect two, and he does so accordingly, and the Parishioners Elect one according
to their Custom, and the Ordinary dissallows him, and establishes the other
two, in this Case a Prohibition shall be granted, P. 5 Jac. B. R. the
Parishioners Case of Rovenden in Kent, Roll's Cases, 2 part, f. 287.

The like,
A Prohibition was granted against a Churchwarden, chosen by the Parson of S.
Magnus, ^igh London Bridge, by force of a Canon, upon a surmise that the Parish
has a Custom to choose two Churchwardens, Tr. 7 Car. 1. B. R. between Shirly
and Brown, the like between Draper and Stone, for Abchurch in London, P. 4.
Car. 1. B. R. Rot. 420. Roll's Cases, 2 part, f. 287. the like against a
Churchwarden, chosen by the Parson of Alhallows London, P. 17 Jac. B. R.
Warner's Case, and P. 5 Jac. the Parishioners of Walbrook's Case, in London,
Cro. Jac. f. 532. the like against a Churchwarden chosen by the Parson of S.
Thomas in London, Tr. 15 Car. B. R. Evelyn's Case, Cro. Car. f. 551. and Jo.
Rep. f. 453. the same Case, and see also the Case of the Parishioners of
Ethelborough in London, Mar. Rep. p. 22. pl. 50. and pa. 67. pl. 104.

The right of the Church and Churchyard, are in the Parson.
The Parson has the right of the Church and Church yard in him; and if the
Walls, Windows, or Doors of the Church be broken down, or the Trees in the
Churchyard be cut down, or the Grass thereof be eaten up, the Parson, or
Vicar, and not the Churchwardens shall have an action for it, Quare vi and
armis domum and clausum fregit, etc. 8 H. 6. f. 9. but for Ornaments in the
Church, or Bells in the Steeple, or a seat in the Church taken away, the Parson
here shall not have the action for such things, but the Churchwardens must sue
for them: and if the Coat of Armor, or Scutchions, or Pendants of Arms, that
are hung in the Church or Chancel, in Honor of the party buried, or the Grave
Stone laid over one, be taken away by the Parson, or any other, the Heir, or
Executors of the party buried, shall sue for them, 9 E. 4. 14. a. Lady Wyche
Case, vide. 10 H. 4. 9. 21 H. 7. 21. 11 H. 4. 12. 27 H. 3. Prohibition, 26. 31
H. 4 12. F. N. B. 9 R. and see Co. Inst. 3 part, f. 202. M. 10 Jac. C. B.
Corven and Pym's Case.

A Bell hung in the Steeple, or Pew set in the Church, cannot be removed by the
party.
If a Man buy a Bell, and hang it up in the Church Steeple, or make a Pew, and
set it up in the Church, though he makes neither words nor writing thereof, yet
by this, the Bell and Pew are so dedicated to the Church, that the party that
did owe them, can never have them again, for if they should come to remove
them, the Churchwardens might sue them for it, 8 H. 7. 12. 10 H. 4. 9. and
vide Ritchin, p. 277. a.

Churchwardens to sue for Organs taken away.
If the Organs be taken out of the Church, the Churchwardens may have an action
of Trespass for the same, for the Organs belong to the Parishioners, and not to
the Parson; and therefore the Parson cannot sue such party in the
Ecclesiastical Court that took them, Tr. 21 Jac. B. R. per curiam, Roll's
Cases, 1 part, f. 393.

Trees in the Churchyard, belong to the Parson.
All Trees growing in Churchyards, belong to the Ministers, but they are not to
presume to cut them, or fell them down unadvisedly, but when the Chancell of
the Church does want necessary Reparations, and they are not to be converted to
any other use, except the Body of the Church does need like repair, and my Lord
Cook says, meliorem conditionem Ecclesiae facere potest praelatus deteriorem
nequaquam, vide stat. ne rectores prosternant arbores in Coemiterio, 35 E. 1.
Co. Rep. 11. Lib. f. 49. b. and vide M. 13 Jac. B. R. Bellamie's Case, Roll's
Rep. 1 part, f. 255. pl. 23.

No Fairs or Markets to be kept in Churchyards.
By the Statute of Winchester, it is provided, that neither Fairs nor Markets be
kept in Churchyards, for the Honor of the Church, stat. Winchester made at
Westminster, 13 E. 1. and he that does keep any Fair or Market there, may be
fined for it, Lamb. 419.

By whom Churches are to be repaired.
And note, that the Body of the Church is to be repaired at the charge of the
owners of Houses and Lands in the Parish, for that it is the place where Divine
Service is Celebrated, and the Bodies of the Parishioners of the best sort and
quality are buried, in respect whereof, the Law does allow the Ecclesiastical
Court to have Conusance thereof, and for the providing decent Ornaments for the
Celebration of Divine Service, they are also to repair such public Chapels, as
are annexed to the Church, but not the private Chapel of any though annexed to
the Church, for that must be repaired by him that has the proper use of it;
for qui sentit commodum sentire debet and onus, circumspecte agatis, 13 E. 1.
Co. Inst. 2 part, f. 489. F. N. B. 50. N. Regist. f. 44. b. Brit. f. 11. and
vide, M. 31, 32 Eliz. B. R. Jeffery, and Rensly, and Foster's Case, Co. Rep. 5.
Lib. f. 66. and P. 41 Eliz. B. R. Paget and Crumpton's Case. Cro. Eliz. f. 659.
pl. 5.

By whom the Churchyard is to be incl^sed.
The Parishioners are also to repair the Enclosure of the Churchyard, because
the Bodies of the common sort are buried there, and for the preservation of the
Burials of those that were, or should have been whilst they lived the Temples
of the Holy Ghost, and Coemeterium is derived of the Greek word (...) that is
Dormio, and therefore Coemeterium est quasi Dormitorium, quia mortui Dormire
dicuntur usque ad Resurrectionem. And also, if the Churchyard be not decently
Enclosed, the Church which is Domus Dei, cannot decently be kept, and therefore
this the Parishioners ought to do, per consuetudinem notoriam and approbatam,
and the Conusance thereof is allowed by the 13 E. 1 stat. circumspecte agatis,
Co. Inst. 2 part, f. 489. Regist. 44. b. Brit. f. 11. and vide, Jeffery, and
Rensly, and Foster's Case, M. 31, 32 Eliz. B. R. Co. Rep. 5 Lib. f. 66. and P.
41 Eliz. B. R. Paget's Case, there cited, f. 67. b.

What things are to be provided by the Church-Wards.
The Churchwardens, or Questmen of every Parish, are at the Parish charge, to
provide the great Bible, for every Church and Chapel, with the Book of
Common Prayer, and Books of Homilies, a Font of stone for public Christning,
with a decent Communion Table, which is to be covered in time of Divine
Service, with a Carpet of Silk, or other decent stuff, and with a fair Linen
Cloth at the time of the Communion; and the ten Commandemens to be set upon the
East end of the Church or Chapel, where the People may best see, and read
them, and other chosen sentences to be written upon the Walls of the said
Churches and Chapels; and a decent Pulpit is also to be set in a convenient
place therein, with a Chest for Alms, having a hole in the upper part thereof,
and three Kayes, one to remain with the Parson, Vicar, or Curate, and the other
two with the Churchwardens: they are also to take care, that the Church
Windows from time to time be well Glased, and that the Floors be kept paved
plain and even without dust, or any noisome or unseemly thing; and to take care
that the Churchyard be sufficiently repaired and fenced with Walls, Rails, or
Pales, according to the Custom, at their charges, who by Law ought to repair
the same; and they are also to see that the peace be well kept, at every
meeting of the Congregation; and that Persons Excommunicated, and so denounced,
be kept out of the Church, and they are not to suffer any Plays, Feasts,
Banquets, Suppers, Church-Ales, Drinkings, Temporal Courts or Leets,
Lay-Juries, Musters, or any other profane usage to be kept in the Church,
Chapel, or Churchyard, nor the Bells to be rung superstitiously on Holy Days
or Eves, abrogated by the Book of Common Prayer; and all those who have
Authority to hold Ecclesiastical Visitations, shall either in Person, or by
Substitute, survey the Churches of their Jurisdiction, once every three Years,
to see if all things be in good repair, Can. 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86, 88.

If any Person whatsoever, shall by words only Quarrel, Chide, or Brawl The
punishment for quarrelling or fighting in Church or Churchyard.
in any Church, or Churchyard, the Ordinary upon Proof of two Lawful
Witnesses, if he be a Layman, may suspend him ab ingressu Ecclesiae, and if a
Clergy Man, from the Ministration of his Office, for so long time as the
Ordinary thinks meet, according to the fault; And if any Person or Persons
whatsoever, shall smite, or lay violent Hands upon any other, either in any
Church or Churchyard, then every Person so offending, shall (ipso facto) be
deemed Excommunicate, and be excluded from the company of Christ's
Congregation; And further, if any Person shall maliciously strike any, with any
weapon, in any Church or Churchyard, or shall draw any weapon there, to the
intent to strike another with the same weapon, every Person so offending, being
Convicted by Verdict of Twelve Men, or by his own Confession, or by two Lawful
Witnesses, before Justices of Assize, Justices of Oyer and Terminer, or
Justices of Peace, in their Sessions, shall loose one of his Ears, and if he
have no Ears, then to be marked in the Cheek, with an hot Iron, with the Letter
F. and (ipso facto) be Excommunicate, 5 E. 6. cap. 4 Co. Inst. 3 part, f. 176,
177.

An action of false Imprisonment, brought by one Imprisoned for quarrelling in
the Churchyard.
An action of false Imprisonment, was brought against two Justices of the Peace,
who pleaded that the Plaintiff was Excommunicate at the time of his action
brought, and then because, malitiose extraxit pugionem suum in quendam E. ea
intention ad percutiendum ipsum tam in Coemiterio Sanctae Margaretae,
Virginis, infra clausum Cathedralis Ecclesiae, Lincoln, quam in Caemiterio
ejusdem Ecclesiae, etc. and was indicted for the same, And it was doubted by
the Court, whether this Plea was good or no, and if the Plaintiff by the
Statute aforesaid, shall immediately without any proof made, or trial had, or
sentence given, or proof of Witnesses before the Ordinary, by reason of the
words (ipso facto) be deemed Excommunicate, P. 10 Eliz. Dyer's Reports, f. 275.
b. pl. 48. Palmer and Mounson's Case, and vide Viner and Eaton's Case, Hetley's
Rep. f. 86.

Several Indictments, for quarrelling in Church and Churchyards.
Many Indictments have been framed upon this Statute of 5 E. 6. cap. 4. but none
of the Offenders have undergone the punishment that I can find, for all the
Indictments have been quashed for insufficiency of Forms, as may appear by the
Cases following.

One Perchal was Indicted upon this Statute for drawing his dagger in the
Church against J. S. without saying that he did draw it to the intent to stick
the Plaintiff, and therefore the Indictment was holden void as to the Statute,
and for the Assault also at Common Law, because the Indictment concluded contra
formam Statuti. M. 32. El. B. R. Perchal's Case, Leo. Rep. 2. part fo. 188. pl.
234. and see also p. 33. Eliz. B. R. an Indictment against one Penhallow,
quashed for the same Reason. Cro. Eliz. fo. 231. pl. 23.

An Indictment for fighting in the Churchyard.
An Indictment was also found against one Dethick upon this Statute for striking
in St. Paul's Churchyard, and being by the Queens Pattent created Garter-King
of Arms, by the words Creamus, Coronamus and Nomen imponimus de Garter Rex
Heraldrorum, because he was not so named in the Indictment, being parcel of his
Dignity and not of his Office, he was therefore discharged of the Indictment,
p. 23. Eliz. B. R. Dethicks Case, Cro. Eliz, fo. 224. pl. 7.

A man was Indicted also upon this Statute, that in the Churchyard such The
like.
a day extraxit Gladium against I. L. and ipsum percussit, and because the
Statute is, if any person maliciously strike another, or shall draw any Weapon
with an intent to strike any person, and the Indictment was extraxit, but does
The like.
not say ad percutiendum, and because it was quod percussit, without saying
malitiose the party was discharged. Noyes Rep. fo. 171.

The like.
And two Cholmleys Jasper and John being Indicted for assaulting Doctor Higham
in Ecclesia de Shoreditch praedicta, and praedict. Johannem Higham ad tune and
ibid, etc. verberaverunt, vulneraverunt and maletractaverunt contra formam
Statuti, etc. and upon this the Grand Jury finding Billa vera against Jasper,
and Ignoramus against John; and Jasper pleading not guilty it was found against
him, and it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that the Indictment was not good,
being fecerunt, and the Bill found only against one, but this exception was
not allowed, but another exception was taken because it was said in Ecclesia de
Shoreditch praedicta, and Shoreditch was not named before, and for this fault
the Judgment was stayed. Tr. 12. Car. 1. B. R. Cholmleys Case, Cro. Car. fo.
464. pl. 2.

CHAP. V. Some things necessary for Clergymen to know concerning
Presentations, Nomination, Deprivation, Resignation, etc. and of avoidance of
Spiritual Livings by Death, Creation, Cession, Lapses, etc.
What Presentation is.
NOte, that Presentation is derived a praesentando, quia praesentare nihil
aliud est quam praesto dare seu offerre, etc. and this may be done as well by
Word as by Writing, and if it be by Writing it is no Deed, but it is only in
Nature of a Letter to the Bishop; and this is the reason that the King himself
may present by Word i^ the Ordinary be present. Doderidge pa. 63. Co. Lit. fo.
120. a. 19. Eliz. ^^ Quare Impedit, 60. Rolls Cases 2 part f^ 353. S. 1, 2, 3,
4. Cro. Jac. fo. 248. 3^ E. 3.3. and vide King and Emmersons Cas^ Tr. 8. Jac.
C. B. Brownl. Rep. 1. pa^^ fo. 162.

Presentations or Commendatorie The Form of a Presentation.
Letters, are usually in this or the like Form. Reverendissimo in Christo
Patri, and domino, R. permissione divina Eboracensis Archiepiscopo, Angliae
Primati and Metropolitano, ejusve in absentia Vicario suo in rebus
spiritualibus generali, T. S. Armiger verus and indubitatus patronus Ecclesiae
Parochialis de H. in Com. Ebor. salutem in domino sempiternam, ad Ecclesiam
Parochialem de H. praedictam vestrae Diocesis modo per mortem (vel
Resignationem, C^ssionem, Deprivationem, etc. as the Case is) T. R. vacantem,
and ad meam praesentationem pleno jure spectantem, dilectum meum in Christo W.
C. clericum, in artibus Magistrum, paternitati vestrae praesento, (or commendo)
humiliter supplicans, ut praefatum W. C. ad dictam Ecclesiam admittere,
ipsumque Rectorem ejusdem Ecclesiae instituere, and induci facere cum suis
Juribus and pertinentiis universis, caeteraque omnia and singula peragere, and
adimplere in hac part quae ad vestrum munus Episcopale pertinere vedebuntur
dignemini cum favore, in cuius rei Testimonium his praesentibus sigillum meum
apposui datum primo die Decembris, Anno. Regni, etc.

Generally, all Persons who have ability Who may make a Presentation.
to grant or purchase, have ability to present unto any Benefice with cure of
Souls. Yea, an Infant under the Age of 21 Years, may present in his own Name
and Right; and if he do not present within six Months, the Church shall Lapse
to the Bishop, but a Feme Covert cannot present by her self, but her Husband
shall present either in his own Name, or else in both their Names together; but
the Queen of England, is as a Feme Sole, and may present to any Church, without
the King, also, Men Outlawed or Excommunicate, etc. may present, and their
presentiments shall stand good, till they be avoided by Plea, 9 H. 6. 5. 17 E.
3. 9. 3 H. 7. 14. Hughe's cap. 22.

One may have the Presentation, and another the N^mination to a Living.
And note, that one may have the Presentation, and another the Nomination to a
Living; and so they may be Diverse distinct Inheritances: As if I being seized
of an Advowson in fee do grant to B. and his Heirs, that he and his Heirs every
time the Church becomes void, shall Nominate to me a Person to be presented to
the same Church, which Person so Nominated, I or my Heirs shall present to the
Ordinary of the place, to be admitted accordingly into the Church. And it has
been a question in this Case, who shall be said to be Patron of the Church,
some think he that has the Nomination, and that he that ought to present, is
only as servant to him that has the Nomination, vide, 24 E. 3. 70. 14 H. 4.
11. a. 1 H. 5. 2. F. N. B. 33 B. Doder, p. 65. Plo. Com. 157.

Where one has the Presentation, and another the Nomination, who shall be
Patron.
And therefore, in the 14 E. 4. 2. b. the Justices distinguished, that if one be
seized of an Advowson, and grants to I. S. and his Heirs to Nominate at every
avoidance, to him and his Heirs, a Person to be presented to the same Church,
which Person so Nominated, shall be by him or his Heirs, presented to the
Ordinary; that in this Case, he to whom the Nomination is so granted, shall be
Patron. But if I grant to I. S. that at every avoidance, he shall Nominate to
me two Clerks, of which I shall present one to the Bishop, in this Case I
remain Patron, because the Election is in me, which of the parties named shall
be presented, and have the Benefice, Doder. pa. 65. 14 E. 4. 2. b. Smith and
Clayton's Case, 32 H. 8. 48.

And if one have the Nomination, Where a Title of Presentation accrews to the
King, it shall prejudice the Nominator.
and another the Presentation; if such Right of Presentation accrue to the
King, this shall not prejudice the Inheritance of him that has the Nomination,
but he shall Nominate to the Chancellor still, who in the name of the King,
shall present to the Ordinary, and if the King present without any such
Nomination, the Nominator shall bring his Quare Impedit against the Incumbent
only, because the King cannot be termed an Usurper, Doder. pa. 69.

Where an Incumbent is made Bishop, the King shall present.
If the King create a common Person, who is Incumbent on a Living: Bishop, then
the King shall have the Presentation of that Living hac vic^ and not the
Patron, though the Law formerly has been otherwise taken and if a Church be
void, to which the Bishop has Title to present as Patron^ in respect of his
Temporalties, if h^ dye before Presentment, the King shall have the
Presentation, by reason ^^ the Temporalties, and not the Executors of the
Bishop; and so in like cas^ if the Church become void after the Bishop's Death,
and before the seizu^ of the Temporalties, yet the King shall have the
Presentment, 50 E. 3. 26. 9 H. 6. 16. b. admit. 24 E. 3. 26. b. 12 E. 3. Quare
Impedit, 56. 21 E. 3. 6. b. 29 E. 3.44. 24 E. 3. 30. adjudg. Roll's Cases, 2
part, f. 343. C. 3, 4 D. 5. 345 E. 4. and 366 Z. 2. and vide P. 37 Eliz. Rot.
1427. Wright's Case, M. Rep. f. 399. pl. 522. and see Cro. Jac. f. 692.

In what Cases the King may present, where a Bishop is Patron.
If the Church of the Patronage of a Bishop, Abbot, or Prior be void, and the
Bishop, etc. present, and after dye before Institution, the King by his
Prerogative may present to the said Church, and if the Bishop live till
Institution, and dye before Induction, in this case also the King may present
by his Prerogative, Liber. Par. 21 E. 1. the Prior of Bermundsie's Case,
adjudged in Parliament, F. N. B. 34 K. 38 E. 3, 4. Roll's Cases, 2 part, f. 345
E. 6. and vide Savill's Rep. f. 119.

Where a Bishop helds a Living in Commendam, the Patron shall present after his
Death.
Although the King by his Prerogative shall have the presentment where the
Incumbent is made Bishop, yet if the King grant to the said Incumbent, before
he is created Bishop, a dispensation to retain the said Benefice with his
Bishopric, and afterward he is created Bishop, and dies Incumbent: in this
Case the King shall not then present by his Prerogative, but the Patron shall
present, because the Church is not void by reason of being made Bishop, but by
death of the Incumbent, in which the Prerogative has no place. Co. Entr. 474.
Hele's Case, Roll's Cases 2 part f. 343. D. 2. or if the Bishop resign his
Living it is the same, vide p. 6. Eliz. C. B. Sir Henry Sydny's Case, Dyer f.
228. pl. 48. Hob. Rep. f. 157. and p. 19. Car. 1. C. B. Edes and Bishop of
Hereford's Case, Vaugh. Rep. f. 18.

A Composition to present, not binding to the King.
If during the vacancy of the Archbishop of York, and his Temporalties being in
the King's hands, the Deanery become void, the King shall present to it,
although that by Composition between the Archbishop and the Chapter, the
Chapter is to choose one of Right, the Patronage belonging to the Archbishop;
and the composition shall not bind the King who comes in paramount as supreme
Patron. 17 E. 3. 40. adjudg. Roll's Cases, 2 part f. 343. C. 6.

What shall serve for a turn.
If two men have Title to present by Turn, and one of them presents and his
Clerk is Admitted, Instituted, etc. and afterward he is deprived for Crime or
Heresy, or other cause, yet he shall not present again, but this shall serve
for his turn; so if he be mere Laicus or Illiterate who is presented, admitted
and Instituted, etc. although it be declared by Sentence that he was Incapable
ab Initio, yet because the Church was full till Sentence declaratory came, he
being Parson de facto, although this deprivation relate to some purposes, yet
it shall serve for his turn, Co. Rep. 6. Lib. f. 102. a. Roll's Cases, 2 part*
f. 347 K. 2, 3, 348 L. 6. 7 Hob. Rep. f. 148. 149. and vide M. 12. 13 Eliz.
Dyer, f. 292. b.

Where a turn shall be lost.
If two Men present by turn, and the first presents his Clerk, who is Admitted,
Instituted and Inducted, and afterward the Church becomes void, then the other
presents in his turn, whose Clerk is also admitted, etc. and afterward
deprived, after which, the the Bishop without giving notice Collates, he who
ought to have this turn, and might remove the Bishop's Clerk, grants away the
Advowson, then the Bishop's Clerk dies, in this Case, the Grantee of the
Advowson cannot present this turn, for the Collation of the Bishop has
prevented him, although it were without notice, and so Tortious, and though the
granter might have outed the Bishop's Clerk, by a Quare Impedit, yet it is but
a thing in action, and when he has granted the Advowson over, the Grantee
cannot have this thing in action, nor the granter cannot have it, so as none
can now have it, but it shall serve for a Presentation as in his turn for this
time, and the other, whose Clerk was deprived, shall present again; M. 42, 43
Eliz. C. B. Leak and Bishop of Coventry, and Babington's Case, Cro. Eliz. f.
811 pl. 17.

And if two have right to present, Where two having right, they ought to join
in a Quare Impedit.
and the Church becomes void, and then one of them releaseth to the other this
release is void, and they ought to join in a Quare Impedit, M. 30, 31 Eliz. C.
B. Brookesby, and Wickham, and Bishop of Lincoln's Case, Leon. Rep. 1 part, f.
167. pl. 237.

If two Copartners be of an Advowson, Grantees of Copartners, are in like case
as they who granted, etc.
and they severally grant their parts to two several Men, the advantage that
was between the Partners, does hold place between the Grantees, so that the
first presentment shall go to the Grantee of the Eldest, and the next to the
other, and an Usurpation of the one shall not put the other out of Possession;
but if they were mere Tennants in Common, and did not derive their Estates from
Copartners, the Book says, perhaps it might be otherwise, P. 25 Eliz. C. B.
Harris and Haye's, against Nichols, Cro. Eliz. f. 18 pl. 6. What shall serve
for a turn.


A. who has one turn presents B. who is Admitted, Instituted and Inducted, and
afterward is deprived by sentence, upon which C. who has the second turn,
presents D. who is ^dmitted, etc. and afterward he is deprived also, and the
first sentence is repealed, and B. is restored to the Living again; and
afterward D. the second Incumbent dies, and then after that, B. dies also,
hereupon C. presents again as in his turn, for though his Presentee were Parson
for the time to all purposes, during the deprivation of B. yet when the second
sentence comes, and B. is restored, then he is Incumbent, by virtue of his
first Presentation, Institution and Induction, and needs no new Institution,
and so after his Death, C. may present again as in his turn, but if B. had dyed
before he had been restored, or had not reversed the sentence of deprivation
against him, then it had been otherwise, and C. should not have presented again
as in his turn, P. 41 Eliz. B. R. Rot. 513. Windsor, and Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Fletcher's Case, Co. Rep. 5 Lib. f. 102. and see Cro. Eliz. f.
686. pl. 22. Roll's Cases, 2 part, f. 347 K. 4, 5. and M. Rep* f. 558. pl. 760.

But when the Admission and Institution are merely void, then without When
Admission, etc. i^ voi^, it serves not for a turn.
question it shall not serve for one turn, as if the Presentee have Institution
and Induction, but did not Subscribe to the Articles of Religion, according to
the Statute of 13 Eliz. by which the Admission, Institution and Induction are
void; this shall not serve for a turn, because the Admission, Institution and
Induction are merely void by the Statute, Co. Rep. 5 part, f. 102 b. Roll's
Cases, 2 part, f. 347 K. 6. and if a Woman be Presented, Instituted and
Inducted, this is a mere Nullity, because her Incapacity is apparent, Roll's
Cases, 2 part, f. 348 L. 8. Hob. Rep. f. 149.

Three Grantees, two of them may present the third.
If a grant of the next avoidance be made to three, and afterward the Church
becomes void, and two of the three present the third Grantee being a Clerk,
this is a good presentment, and the Bishop ought not to refuse him, although
all the three were joyntenants of it by grant, and only two of them join in the
presentment, because the third Person cannot present himself, but if one of the
three only had presented the third Person, the Bishop might peradventure, have
refused him; as it is said in Dyer, f. 304 b. 14 H. 8. 2. 21 Eliz. 4. 66. a.
but in Moor it is held and adjudged, that if one of them had presented the
third Person, it is good enough, Tr. 31 H. 8 Rot. 348 Sr. Godfrey Foliamb's
Case, M. Rep. f. 4. pl. 14. and Bendl. Rep. f. 34

Institution makes the Church full against all Persons, but the King.
Where a Church is Presentative, the Church is full by Admission and Institution
against any Common Person, but not against the King, unless the Clerk be
Inducted, and that is the reason that regularly, Plenarty shall be tried by the
Bishop, because the Church is full by Institution, which is a Spiritual Act,
but void or not void, shall be tried by the Common Law, 24 E. 3. 30. 25 E. 3.
47. 38 E. 3. 9. 9 H. 6. 31. 22 H. 6. 27 Co. Lit. f. 119 b. 344. a. Roll's Rep.
1 part, f. 191 Co. Rep. 6 Lib. f. 49. a.

If a Man present his Clerk to the A Man may vary from his first Presentation.
Bishop, yet he may present another before the Bishop has received the first,
and the Bishop may admit which of them he pleases, but where an Incumbent of a
Church is deprivable, yet the Patron nor the King himself cannot present before
the party be deprived, because the Church is not void till then, 38 E. 3. 36 b.
Roll's Cases, 2 part, f. 349 O. 2 P. 1, 2. and 353 T. 5. 14 E. 3, 2 b.

Institution makes the Church full.
If I. S. present his Clerk, who is Admitted and Instituted, by this the Church
is full against a Common Person, for by the Institution he has curam animarum,
but if the King have right to present, it is not full against him before
Induction of the Presentee; but if the King have no right to the Church, then
it shall be full against him also by Admission and Institution, P. 13 Jac.
Hitching and Glover's Case, Roll's Rep. 1 part, f. 191. and 227 Cro. Jac. f.
463 pl. 11. and vide, M. 4, 5 Eliz. Dyer. f. 217 b. pl. 62. 22 H. 6. 27. a. 38
E. 3, 4 Co. Kep. 4 Lib. f. 79. a. 6 Lib. f. 49. a. 11 H. 4. 9. Davis Rep. f.
82. Roll's Cases, 2 part, f. 349 Q. 1, 2, 3. 33 H. 6. 24. 21 E. 4. 34 b.

When a Man Usurps upon the King, Presentment by Usurpation, where it binds the
King.
and his Clerk is Instituted and Inducted, although by this the Patronage is
not out of the King, but the King may remove the Incumbent by a Quare Impedit,
though there have been a double and treble Usurpation, yet till the Incumbent
be removed, who is Parson de facto, though not de jure, the Church is full
against the King, so that he cannot present any other to the Church during this
time, for by the Usurpation, the presentment hac vice is out of the King,
neither can the King before the Clerk be removed, present the same Clerk who is
in by Usurpation, for it cannot enure as a surrender or new presentment, and so
are all the Books which seem to differ in this point to be intended, as 4 E. 3
Quare Impedit, 33. 18 E. 3. 16. 43 E. 3. 14. 47 E. 4. 1. H. 7. 19 Bro. Quare
Impedit, 39 Dyer, f. 351. a. for thus it was adjudged in point, as my Lord Cook
reports it, in P. 25 Eliz. C. B. Pescod and Yardlie's Case, Co. Rep. 6 Lib. f.
30. a. M. Rep. f. 338 pl. 457. and Rep. 1 part, f. 81 pl. 147. and Owen's Rep.
f. 43. the same Case, vide, P. 13 Jac. B. R. the King against the Bishop of
Norwich, Cole and Saker, Cro. Jac. f. 385 pl. 16. and Roll's Rep. 1 part, f.
235. pl. 7 Co. Lit. f. 344 b. Tr. 4 Jac. B. R. the King and Champion's Case,
Cro. Jac. f. 123 pl. 8. Godbolt's Rep. f. 263. pl. 362 Co. 2 part, Inst. f.
358. Roll's Cases, 2 part, f. 349 Q. 4, 5. and 372 I. 8 Co. Rep. 6 Lib. f. 49
b. in fine.

If one recover in a Quare Impedit against an Incumbent, the Incumbent After
recovery in a Quare Impedit, the Patron may present without removal.
is so removed by the judgment upon the Quare Impedit, that the Recoverer may
present to the Church, without any other removing of the Incumbent, although he
continue Incumbent de facto, till the Recoverer do present; but a stranger to
the recovery cannot present till the Incumbent be removed, note the diversity
M. 12 Jac. B. R. Whistler and Singleton's Ca. To. Rep. 1 part, f. 62 pl. 6. and
see f. 213. and M. 13 Jac. Fairbank and Durham's Ca. f. 242 H. 14 Eliz. B. R.
Bennet and Edward's Ca. M. Rep. f. 571 pl. 784. Boulstr. Rep. 3 part, f. 38.
and Roll's Cases, 2 part, f. 350.

Collation be Lapse without good Title, puts not the Patron out of Possession.
If the Bishop Collate without good Title of Lapse, this does not put the Patron
out of Possession, but he may present afterward, although the Bishop's Clerk
be Inducted, for it shall be taken only to be provisionally made for
Celebration of Divine Service, until the Patron do present, but such an
Usurpation by Collation shall take away the right of Collation that is in
another Bishop, so that he cannot present till the Incumbent be removed, 17
Eliz. 3. 64 Co. Lit. f. 344 b. 30 Eliz. B. R. Jorden's Case.

Collation Tortious where.
A Bishop Collates without good Title, either of Lapse or otherwise, and
afterward the Patron dies, and then the six Months pass, and the Executors
bring a Quare Impedit, by virtue of the stat. 4 E. 3 cap. 5. and the Bishop and
Incumbent plead Plenarty for six Months, and upon demurrer, this was adjudged
no Plea, because such Collation is no Plenarty, being Tortious, M. 32, 33 Eliz.
C. B. Smalwood, and other Executors of Sale, against the Bishop of Coventry and
Litchfield, Cro. Eliz. f. 207 pl. 1. Roll's Cases, 2 part f. 350.

If the King present ratione Lapsus, Where the King is deceived in his
Presentment, it puts not the Patron out of Possession, etc.
where he has no Title to present by Lapse or otherwise, and upon this, the
Ordinary Admits, Institutes and Inducts the Clerk, yet this does not put the
right Patron to his Quare Impedit, but he may present, for the Presentment was
void, the King being deceived, and so the Institution and Induction without any
Presentment; and if the King present ratione Lapsus, where he has Title, pleno
jure, and so mistakes his Title; in this Case, although the Clerk be Instituted
and Inducted, yet this does not put the King to his Quare Impedit, for the
Presentment is void, and so the King is not out of Possession, but may present
before removal of such Clerk. Also if the King repeal his Presentation before
Induction of the Clerk, and give notice thereof to the Ordinary, who
notwithstanding afterward Institutes and Inducts him; yet the King may present
another, for the Church is not full, because it is no Presentation; and in such
Cases, where the King repeals his Presentation, though he give no notice to the
Ordinary, yet if the Ordinary after such repeal Institutes and Inducts, it is
void, and if the King presents A. and upon refusal of him, brings a Quare
Impedit, and pending the same, B. procures a Presentment of the King for
himself in deceit of the King, and upon this, is Instituted and Inducted by the
Ordinary, yet this does not put the King out of Possession, because the
Presentment is void, and so the King may present before the removal of B. by
Quare Impedit; if a Man present in time of War, and the Presentee is Instituted
and Inducted in time of Peace, this does not put the Patron to his Quare
Impedit, but he may present, for this is but as in Institution and Induction
without a Presentation, Roll's Cases, 2 part, f. 350. in fine, 351. 353 S. 6 T.
1. 354 V. 3. 5. Co. Rep. 6 Lib. f. 29 b. 25 Eliz. 3. 47 Dyer, f. 292. a. pl.
70. and 330 b. Vaugh. Rep. f. 14. Roll's Rep. 1 part, f. 236. F. N. B. 34 C.
271 D. Co. Lit. f. 344 b. and vide, M. 15, 16 Eliz. Waller and Scott's Case,
And: Rep. 1 part, f. 38 pl. 99.

If the King's Presentee dye before Induction, he may present again.
It is said in Co. 9 Rep. and admitted in Dyer, 360. that if the Presentee of
the King dye after Institution and before Induction, yet in this Case the King
may present again, because he had not the effect of his Presentation, Co. Rep.
9 Lib. f. 132. and Dyer, f. 360. b. pl. 7 vide Roll's Cases, 2 part, f. 353 T.
3354 V. 4 Tr. 32 Eliz. C. B. Wright, and the Bishop of Norwich Case, Leon. Rep.
1 part, f. 156 pl. 218.

If the King present to a Benefice, What is a Revocation of the King's
Presentation.
and dye before his Clerk is Admitted and Instituted, the Presentation is
revoked in Law by his Death; and if the King first present one Man, and then
another without any Revocation of the first, or mention made of it, yet this is
a Revocation in Law of the first Presentation, if the second be not obtained by
fraud in deceit of the King pending a Quare Impedit, M. 8 Jac. in Sccar. inter
Calvert and Kitchen, Roll's Cases, 2 part, f. 354 V. 1. 2, 3 M. 8 Jac. C. B.
Waller's Case, Godb. Rep. p. 179 pl. 25 Co. Rep. 6 Lib. f. 29 b. and vide M.
15, and 16 Eliz. 372 b. and H. 17 Eliz. Dyer, 339 b. pl. 47.

Death of a Patron, no Revocation of his Presentation.
But if a Common Person present, and dye before Institution, this is no
Revocation in Law of the Presentation, but it remains still in its force, and
if the Executors, after the Testator's Death, should present another, yet the
Bishop is not chargeable to admit any other, but him that was first presented,
Savil's Rep. f. 95. 44 Eliz. 3. 30. Roll's Cases, 2 part, f. 354 V. 6.

Where Usurpation shall prejudice the King.
If the ^^ing have Title to present ratione Lapsus, and the Patron usurps upon
him, and presents one who is admitted, etc. and dies, in this Case the King
has lost his Presentation, for he having the first Presentation he shall not
have the second, for otherwise the King may suffer Strangers to present one
after another, and take his turn when he pleases, and by that means, the
Patron shall in a manner be disinherited, and the Statute Praerogativa Regis,
nullum tempus accurrit Regi, is to be intended where the King has a permanent
Title, and not Transitory, when time is the substance of his Title, 27 Eliz.
Baskervil's Case, Co. Rep. 7 Lib. f. 28. Owen's Rep. f. 5. 89. 90 Cro. Eliz. f.
790.

Where the King shall lose his Presentation.
And where it is said in my Lord Hobbarts Reports to be his Opinion, that if a
Church Lapse to the King, yet if the Patron presents before the King take the
advantage of the Lapse, the King shall not then have the advantage thereof, for
he says it is not fully within the Rule Nullum tempus occurrit Regi, for the
Patron's Title continues till the Lapse Executed, Hob. Rep. f. 152, but this I
suppose is to be intended where the Presentee of the Patron by Usurpation upon
the King dies before the King present, as it is in the Case before, for
otherwise there are Diverse Authorities against my Lord Hobbarts Opinion, 27 E.
3. 84 b. Roll's Cases, 2 part, 368 B. 2, 3, 4 Tr. 10 Eliz. Dyer, f. 277. pl.
55. Co. Rep. 7 Lib. f. 28. and H. 6 Jac. B. R. Cumber, and the Bishop of
Chichester's Case, Cro. Jac. f. 216, and vide Beverly, and the Archbishop of
Canterbury and Cornwall's Case, Cro. Eliz. f. 44. Owen's Rep. f. 2. Gold. Rep.
pa. 44 pl. 25. Savil's Rep. f. 89 pl. 166. Ander. Rep. 1 part, f. 148 pl. 196.
Leon. Rep. 1 part, f. 63 pl. 84. and 226 pl. 307. Roll's Cases, 2 part, f. 351.
and Bishop of Lincoln's Case, Owen's Rep. f. 5. 89, and 90.

An Ecclesiastical Patron cannot vary from his Presentation.
An Ecclesiastical Patron cannot vary from his presentment quia praesentatio a
Clerico Patrono facta vim habet Electionis, and eligens indignum privatur ipso
jure, 31 Eliz. 1 Quare Impedit, 185. neither can a Common Lay Patron by our Law
revoke his Presentation, H. 18 Eliz. Dyer. f. 348. a. Roll's Cases, 2 part, f.
354.

If the Chancellor present when he ought not, the King may repeal it.
If the Chancellor present to a Benefice, supposing it to be under value when it
is not, and hereupon the Presentee is Admitted and Instituted, and before
Induction the King being made acquainted with it, repeals the said
Presentation, and presents one in his own Name, this is a good repeal, for that
it appears to the King he had a right precedent, and was deceived in the first
grant, Roll's Cases, 2 part, f. 353 T. 4.

What are good causes of deprivation.
If a Miscreant or Schismatic be presented, Admitted, and Instituted, and
Inducted, it is a good cause of deprivation, 5 R. 2 Tit. Trial, 54. so if he be
Irreligious, he may be refused, as it is said in the 5 H. 7. 6. but where he is
charged with one, or refused for another, it ought to be alleged in particular
what the cause is, so that the party may answer to it, as in the 5 H. 7. 19.
11. H. 7. 7. and 27. as that the Presentee is a Villain, Bastard, under age,
not infra sacros Ordines, or Illiterate, etc. or as in the 15 H. 7. 7 b. that
the Patron had been Excommunicate for forty days, and therefore his Presentee
ought not to be admitted, or that the Presentee had committed homicide, as it
is held in the 38 E. 3, 2. or that the Presentee is Out-lawed, for then he is
not Idonea Persona, or one who is mere Laicus, M. 12, 13 Eliz. Dyer, f. 292 b.
in a Quare Impedit if the Bishop return that at the time of the Presentation,
the Presentee was a common haunter of Taverns and other places, and a player at
unlawful and prohibited Games, ob quod and diversa alia crimina le dit
Presentee fuit criminosus and non Idoneus, it was adjudged, that these
particular defects did not make the Presentee criminosus, because they are not
mala in se, but mala prohibita, and the other words, quod ob diversa alia
crimina, he was criminosus, and non Idoneus, were too general and uncertain,
vide H. 32 Eliz. B. R. in Specot's Case, Co. Rep. 5 Lib. f. 58. a. Leon. Rep. 3
part, f. 198 pl. 251. An. Rep 1 part. f. 189. pl. 225 Roll's Cases, 2 part, f.
355 Y. 1 Z. 1 if a Parson be convicted of Homicide, it is good cause of
deprivation, Tr. 15 Jac. B. R. Searl's Case, Cro. Jac. f. 430 pl. 10 Hob. Rep.
f. 121. Hughgr. Abr. 1 part. f. 633 Ca. 3. 634 Ca. 5. 635 Ca. 12.

Causes of deprivation are good causes of refusal of a Presentee.
All such causes as are sufficient causes to deprive an Incumbent, are
sufficient to refuse a Presentee; it is no cause to refuse a Presentee because
he has another Benefice, for that is at his own Peril, and peradventure the
second Benifice is better than the first, and the first shall be only void, and
therefore it would be mischievous to the Presentee if he should be refused for
that cause, if the Bishop once refuse the Presentee, he cannot afterward
accept him, P. 26 Eliz. C. B. Bishop of Hereford's Case, Cro. Eliz. f. 27 pl.
10. and vide Co. Rep. 5 Lib. f. 58. b. 14 H. 7. 28. b. Roll's Case, 2 part, f.
355 Z. 2, 3.

A Church being void, upon the What shall pass by a gram, of proximam
advocationem.
stat. 21 H. 8. for taking a second Benefice of eight pounds value without
qualification, the Patron thereupon grants to one, primam and proximam
advocationem dictae Ecclesiae, cum primo and proximo vacare contigerit, by
virtue whereof the Grantee presents to the said Church, and being disturbed,
brought his Quare Impedit, and it was holden that the present avoidance did not
pass by the said grant, for the avoidance being before the said grant it cannot
be said to be prima and proxima post donum and concess. praedictt, etc. P. 2,
3. P. M. Agard, and the Bishop of Peterborough, and Denton's Case, Dyer, f.
129. b. and vide, P. 11 Eliz. Dyer, f. 283. a. 28 H. 8. 26. b.

It is good cause of refusal of a Presentee, Simony, good cause of deprivation.
for that he is Simoniacus, in the same Presentment to wit has made a corrupt
contract to be presented, or that he is Simoniacus to another Benefice, besides
this he is presented to, also if a Parson do or suffer Dilapidations, he is
deprivable. Bishop of Salisbury's Case, 12 Jac. B. R. Godb. Rep. pa. 259 pl.
357 Tr. 16 Jac. Boughton, and the Bishop of Rochester's Case, Roll's Cases, 2
part, f. 356.

Where the Ordinary shall be no disturber.
If the Ordinary Admit and Institute the Presentee of the Chancellor, and
command the Archdeacon to Induct him, and afterward before Induction the King
sends an Inhibition reciting that the Church is above the value of forty pounds
per. ann. and so belongs not to the Chancellor to present, and commands the
Ordinary to receive A. B. his Clerk whom he presents; in this Case, if the
Ordinary d^ not command the Archdeacon not t^ proceed in the Induction, but
suffer the same to be done a Month afterward, yet he shall not be adjudged
disturber, for there is no default in him but if the Inhibition had come to the
Ordinary before the Warrant made t^ the Archdeacon, if he had made ^ Warrant
afterward, by which he ha^ been Inducted, then he should be a d^sturber, 38 E.
3. 3, and 4. Roll's Case* 2 part, f. 356 A. 1, 2.

If the Archbishop Visit his Inferior Bishop, and Inhibits him, during the The
Ordinarie's power suspended, during Inhibition.
Visitation, to execute any Jurisdiction, if the Bishop have Title to Collate
to a Benefice within his Diocese by Lapse, yet he cannot during the Inhibition
Institute his Clerk, but must present him to the Archbishop, and he shall
Institute him; because during the Inhibition his power of Jurisdiction is
suspended, Tr. 11 Car. 1. B. R. Rot. 446. Dodson and Lin's Case, Cro. Car. f.
471. and Roll's Cases, 2 part, f. 357 C. 1. 367. Z. 1.

After Institution, a Presentee may resign where a common Person is Patron, but
not where the King is Patron.
And note where a Parson is only Admitted and Instituted, although as concerning
the Spiritual Function, he be a Parson before Induction, yet because no part of
the freehold of the Spiritual Benefice is transferred to him but by the
Induction, he cannot therefore until after Induction, if the King be Patron,
make any good and effectual Resignation, vide plo. Com. 526. and 21 E. 3. 5. a.
but if a Subject be Patron, and his Presentee be admitted, such Presentee (if
he be willing to leave his charge) may before Induction resign the Church, for
the Spiritual Dignity was full of an Incumbent, in respect of his Patron, and
because also there is no other means to clear the Church of him, but by such
Renunciation; Doderidge, pa, 80, and 81.

Resignation to whom to be made.
The Word Resignare is not the proper Word in Law for a Resignation, but
Renunciare, cedere and demittere, are the usual Words of Resignation, M. 12,
and 13 Eliz. Dyer, f. 292. a. Doder. pa. 79. and note that a Resignation ought
to be made to the immediate Ordinary, and not to the mediate Ordinary, Roll's
Cases, 2 part, f. 358 E. 1. F. 1. but the Incumbent of a Donative, may resign
to his Patron, because it is of the Patron's Foundation, and of his Visitation
and Correction, and the Ordinary has nothing to do with him; P. 3 Jac.
Fairchild and Garie's Case, M. Rep. f. 765 pl. 1062. and vide Doder. pa. 81.

The King shall present where an Incumbent is made Bishop.
If the Incumbent be made a Bishop, the Church is void, and the King shall
present to it by his Prerogative, and so it is of a Prebendary, and it the
Incumbent be created Bishop of the same Diocese where he was Incumbent, the
Church is void, for he cannot be Sovereign and Subject, and so it is if he be
made Bishop of another Diocese, or a Bishop in Ireland, but note the Church is
not void till Consecration; and in Case, where the King grants a License to the
Bishop, to hold his Living in Commendam with the Bishopric, if the Bishop
afterward dye, or surrender that same Living, then the Patron, and not the
King, shall present to it, vide, 7 H. 4. 25. b. 11 H. 4. 37. b. 24 E. 3. 26. b.
Davis Rep. f. 69. a. and see M. 42 Eliz. C. B. Sir Robert Basset, and Gee's
Case, Cro. Eliz. f. 790 pl. 31 and Tr. 3 Car. I. B. R. Evan's and Ascough's
Case, Jone's Rep. f. 58. Noye's Rep. f. 93. Latche's Rep. f. 32. and 234. 19 E.
Trial, 57. 5 E. 3. 9. 11 E. 3. 1. Vaugh. Rep. f. 22. Wynch. Rep. f. 98, 99.
Woody and Bishop of Exeter, Cro. Jac. 691.

Where Lapse shall incur without notice, and where not.
Before the stat. 21 H. 8. cap. 13. if one had a Benefice with cure, and did
accept another Benefice with cure, the first became void, but this avoidance
was not by the Common Law, but by the Constitution of the Pope, of which
avoidance the Patron might take notice if he pleased, and might present without
any deprivation; but because the avoidance did accrue by the Ecclesiastical
Law, no Lapse did incur without notice, as it is upon deprivation or
Resignation; and yet the Patron may present and take notice of it, if he
please, and according to this diversity, it is adjudged, H. 24 E. 3. f. 33. in
the King, and the Bishop of Worcester's Case, and with this agree the Books in
the 9 E. 3. 22. a. 10 E. 3. 1. 14, H. 7. 28. b. 14 H. 8. 17. a, F. N. B. 34 L.
as my Lord Cook reports in his 4 Lib. in Holland's Case, and where it is said
in the 5 E. 3. 9. and 11 H. 4. 37. that the Church is not void without
deprivation, this is to be interpreted, that it shall not be void to the
Patron's disadvantage, but for his advantage it shall, as it is showed before,
and so all the Books are reconciled: So it appears that the stat. 21 H. 8. is
but in affirmance of the Law aforesaid; but no^ because it is affirmed by Act
of Parliament, if the first Benefice be of the value of eight Pounds per ann.
the Patron at his Peril, to prevent a Lapse ought to present to it, because to
a^ avoidance by Act of Parliament, eve^ one is party, and ought to take notic^
at his Peril, but it is otherwise if the Church be not of the yearly value o^
eight pounds, for then it is void merely by the Ecclesiastical Law, of which
the Patron is not bound to take notice at his Peril as aforesaid, see Tr. 39
Eliz. B. R. in Holland's Case, Co. Rep. 4 Lib. f. 75, b. 76. a. and H. 41 Eliz.
B. R. in Digby's Case, f. 79. b. Davis Rep. 69. a. M. Rep. f. 542. pl. 719.
Roll's Cases, 2 part, f. 360, 361. L. 1, 2, 3, 4. Cro. Car. f. 357. and vide
Tr. 14 Car. 1 B. R. the King, and the Bishop of London, and Baldock's Case,
Jones Rep. f. 404. and see f. 337 P. 7 Eliz. Dyer, f. 237. a. pl. 29. and 255.
a. pl. 5.

If an Incumbent be deprivable, the Church is full till deprivation.
If an Incumbent be deprivable, yet the Church is not void before deprivation;
if after a Caveat entered, etc. a Clerk is Presented, Instituted and Inducted,
although this be accounted Illegal by the Canon Law, yet the Church by this is
full, according to our Law, for the breach of the Caveat is only a breach of
the Canon, and makes not the Institution void, M. 15 Car. 1 inter Phipps and
Hayter, per curiam, Roll's Cases, 2 part, f. 361 M. 2, 3. and vide Doder. pa.
74.

How the six Months for Lapse shall be accounted.
The six Months whereby Lapse is Incurred, shall be accounted from the time of
the last Incumbent's death, as it is said in Catesbie's Case, Co. Rep. 6 Lib.
f. 62. b. and the six Months are to be accounted and reckoned according to the
Calendar, in dividing the Year into days, to wit, 182 days, and for the odd day
in the Year, the Law does not regard it, Hol. Rep. f. 100. Cro. Jac. f. 141.
and f. 166. pl. 6 Co. 2 part, Inst. f. 361. M. 4. Jac. C. B. Catesby, and
Bishop of Peterborough, and Baker's Case, Co. Rep. 6 Lib. f. 61. b.

When the Patron is bound to take notice to prevent a Lapse, and when not.
If the Living become void by Death, Creation or Cession of the last Incumbent,
then the Patron is bound at his Peril to take notice to present within six
Months, 26 H. 6. 29. b. Dyer. f. 237. a. and 255. a. but if it become void by
Deprivation, or Resignation, then he may present within six Months, after Legal
notice given to him by the Ordinary, Dyer. f. 327. ^. Doct. and Stud. 2 part,
cap. 31. Roll's Cases 2 part, f. 364.

Who is to give notice to the Patron.
In such Cases, where the Patron is to have notice before the Church can Lapse,
he ought to have it from the Bishop himself or Ordinary, which notice must be
given personally to the Patron, if he lives in the same County, and if he live
in another County, the^ the notice may be published in the Parish Church, and
affixed on the Church door, and this notice must express in certain the cause
of deprivation, etc. Dyer. f. 328. a. Hill. 18 Eliz. Bacon, and the Bishop of
Carlisle, and Whitton's Case, Dyer. f. 346. a. b. and note it is there said,
that the Opinion of the Civillians was, that such notice ought to be vere,
proprie, and personaliter, and non ficte, see M. 30, and 31 Eliz. B. R. Albany,
and the Bishop of S. Asaph's Case, Cro. Eliz. f, 119. and Leon. Rep. 1 part, f.
31. pl. 39 Tr. 44 Eliz. B. R. Green and Baker's Case, Co. Rep. 6 Lib. f. 29.
vide Hob. Rep. f. 318. Hell. Rep. f. 7. and Roll's Cases, 2 part, f. 365. T. 1,
2.

The Patron after Lapse incurred, may present before the Bishop Collate
In all Cases where the Church does Lapse to the Bishop or Archbishop, and the
Patron does present his Clerk before the Bishop or Archbishop have Collated,
the Bishop, etc. is bound to admit the Clerk of the true Patron, and cannot
take advantage of the Lapse; but if the Bishop Collate, and the Patron present
before Induction, he comes then too late, 13 E. 4. f. 3. b. 11 H. 4. 80. a. and
vide Tr. 10 Eliz. Dyer. f. 277. a. pl. 56. Roll's Cases, 2 part, f. 367. A. 1,
2. if the Bishop Collate wrongfully, and the Patron dies, the Executors may
bring a Quare Impedit to remove the Clerk, Leon. Rep. 4 part, f. 15. pl. 53.

Lapse shall incurragainst on Infant, or Feme Covert.
If an Infant Patron, or Feme Covert do not present where they have Title,
within six Months, their Churches shall Lapse to the Ordinary, 33 E. ^. Quare
Impedit, 46. Roll's Cases, 2 part, f. 367. H. 1, 2.

Where Lapse shall incurr without notice, and where not.
If the Ordinary refuse a Clerk because he is Criminosus or Illiterate, in this
Case the Patron shall not have six Months to present, after notice given, but
from the avoidance, but in such Case no Lapse shall accrue, unless the Patron
shall have notice, and if the Clerk be refused for a private cause, o^ for a
notorious crime, as that he is ^ common Advowterer, or a Murdere^, yet no Lapse
shall be of such Church without notice; but if a Spiritual Patron present a
Clerk who is refused because he is illiterate, in such Case it shall Lapse
without notice, because the Law supposes that he may have Cognizance of his
sufficiency before he presents him, vide M. 15, and 16 Eliz. Dyer. f. 327. b.
pl. 7. 14 H. 7. 21. a. Rell. f. 49, b. 50. b. 38 E. 3. 2. Roll's Cases, 2 part,
f. 364 Q. 8, 9 R. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5* and see P. 12 Eliz, C. B. Bennyfield and
Pickering's Case, An. Rep. 1. part f. 16. pl. 34. and f. 62, 63. and f. 30. pl.
70.

From what time the six Months shall* be reckoned.
If a Church become void by Deprivation or Resignation, the six Months shall be
reckoned from the time of the notice given to the Patron, and not from the
avoidance; and if a Resignation be made to the Bishop, no Lapse accrews without
notice, and the six Months to be reckoned from that time, so if the Bishop dies
who takes the Resignation, yet no Lapse shall accrue to his successor or
without notice given to the Patron, and where notice ought to be given and none
is given within eighteen Months, by which the King ought to have presented by
Lapse, if notice had been given, yet in this Case no Lapse shall accrue to him,
because no Lapse shall be given to the King, where no Title of Lapse was to the
inferior Ordinary, because the King comes in to supply his default, 1 H. 7. 9
Doct. and Stud. 2 Lib. cap. 31. 5 E. 4. 3. b. Rell. 49. b. Dyer. f. 348. a.
Roll's Cases, 2 part, f. 364 Q. 10. 365 R. 7, 8, 9 S. 1, 2. 367 Z. 3. and vide
Tr. 24 Eliz. C. B. the Queen, and Bishop of Lincoln and York's Case, An. Rep. 1
part, f. 62. pl. 136.

In a Quare Impedit against a disturber, the Bishop not being named in the How
a Lapse shall be prevented when the Bishop is not named in a Quare Impedit.
Writ, if the Plaintiff recover within the six Months, yet if the six Months be
run out before the Writ to the Bishop taken out, the Lapse shall accrue to the
Ordinary, and his Clerk shall not be removed, if he Collate before recept of
the Writ; and so if after the recovery within the six Months, the Defendant
brings a Writ of Error, and pending that the six Months pass, the Lapse shall
accrue to the Ordinary, but if the Plaintiff in such Case brings a Quare
Incumbravit against the Bishop, and after the six Months pass, there the Lapse
shall not accrue to the Ordinary, for the Quare Incumbravit prevents it, 17 E.
3.75.5 E. 1. 75. Roll's Cases, 2 part, f. 366 V. 3, 4 X. 2. 11 H. 4. 80. Co.
Lit. f. 344. b. and vide Cro. Jac. f. 93.

If, the Ordinary be not named in a If the Bishop be named in a Quare Impedit,
he cannot C^lla^^ by Lapse.
Quare Impedit, he may Collate by Lapse if the six Months incurr Pendente Lite,
as is showed before, but if he be named, he cannot take advantage of the Lapse,
but ought to see that the Clerk be served, by allowance out of the profits, to
be taken by Sequestration, and as he is bound not to take advantage of any
Lapse, so is also the Matropolitan and the King; for where no Lapse incurrs to
the Ordinary, there none can incurr to them, and so it was adjudged in one
Duke's Case, as my Lord Cook said, and it was said by Popham, that the course
to stop strangers from presenting Pendente Brevi, is after a Quare Impedit
brought, to sue out a Ne Admittas to the Bishop, and if the Bishop then admit
the Clerk of any other pending that suit, and the Plaintiff recovers, he shall
have a Quare Incumbravit, and thereby remove any who comes in pending the Writ,
by whatsoever Title he comes in, and shall force him who has right to recover
by Quare Impedit; but if he sues not out such a Writ of Ne Admittas, if then
the Incumbent of a stranger should come in by good Title, Pendente Brevi, he
shall bar him in a Scire Facias, and shall hold it, and note that this Writ of
Ne Admittas, may be sued out either by the Plaintiff or Defendant in the Quare
Impedit to the Bishop, vide 21 H. 6. 45. 2 E. 4. 11. b. F. N. B. 37. F. H. and
38 B. C. 48 I. If a Man do recover his Presentation in the Common Pleas against
the Bishop, then he may have a Writ to the same Bishop to admit his Clerk, or
unto the Metropolitan, and after that, he may have an Alias and Plures, and so
an Attachment if the Bishop do not execute the Writ, see M. 3 Jac. B. R. in the
argument of Lancaster and Low's Case, Cro. Jac. f. 93.

^f a Bishop be a disturber, no Lapse shall incurr by it.
If the Bishop be a disturber, no Lapse shall be by this disturbance, although
the Church be void six Months; so if the Patron present to the Bishop, and he
will not examine the Clerk, but delays him, by which the six Months pass, yet
no Lapse shall accrue to the Bishop by this because he is a disturber, and it
comes by his own act, Tr. 3 Jac. B. R. inter Palmer and Smith, Roll's Cases, 2
part, f. 366 V. 5, 6. and 369 E. 3, 4.

Note, that a Church Parochial may be A Church Parochial may be donative, etc.
donative and exempt from all Ordinary Jurisdiction, and the Incumbent may
resign to the Patron, and not to the Ordinary, unumquodque eodem modo quo
Colligatum est dissolvitur, neither can the Ordinary visit, but the Patron by
Commissioners to be appointed by him; yet a mere Laicus is not presentable to
such ^ donative, but an able Clerk, infra sacros ordines, for albeit, he come
in by the Donation, and not by Admission or Institution, which in this Case is
not requisite, yet his Function is spiritual, and if such a Clerk donative be
disturbed, the Patron shall have a Quare Impedit of this Church donative, and
so it is of a Prebend Chantry Chapel donative and the like; and no Lapse shall
incurr to the Ordinary, unless it be specially provided so in the Foundation;
but if the Patron of such a donative does once present to the Ordinary, and his
Clerk is Admitted and Instituted, it is by this become presentable, and never
shall be donative after: and if a donative become void, and a stranger presents
to it, and his Clerk is Admitted, Instituted and Inducted, yet this is no
Usurpation to the true Patron, but all this is merely void, H. 1 Jac. B. R.
inter Fairchild and Gayer, Co. Lit. f. 344. a. Cro. Jac. f. 63. pl. 1 H. Rep.
f. 60 Brownl. Rep. 1 part, pa. 201. F. N. B. 35 E.

An Usurpation upon a Bishop, bind^ not his Successor.
If a Bishop suffer an Usurpation of a Church in right of his Bishopric, this
shall not bind his successor, but himself only during his own time, and the
successor may have a Quare Impedit, or present to the next turn, and so it was
resolved, M. 21 Jac. B. R. inter Dalton and Pamphlin, and the Bishop of Ely,
Cro. Jac. f. 673. pl. 6. Jone's Rep. f. 45. and Laye's Rep. f. 80.

In what Cases Lapse incurs not without notice.
When the Church does become void by Deprivation or Resignation, or by refusal
of the Presentee, for Non Ability or for crime, in such Case the Bishop ought
to give notice thereof to the Patron, otherwise no Lapse incurrs, but after the
six Months past, the Patron may have a Writ to the Bishop, if the Church remain
void, and the Bishop has not Collated thereunto, F. N. B. 35 H. I.

To what Benefices of the King's, the Chancellor shall present.
The Chancellor of England shall present to all the King's Churches which are
under the value of twenty Marks by the Year, which are in the King's gift, and
in the right of the Crown, but if the King have them by any other Title, then
the Chancellor shall not present unto them, F. N. B. 35 R. Note, that the Lord
Chancellor presented to a Benefice which belonged to the King, which was above
value, and in this Case it was agreed by Hobbert Chief Justice of the Common
Pleas, and Tanfield Chief Barron, that this Presentation remained good till it
was avoided, Parson and Morlee's Case, Winch. Rep. f. 19.

To whom Lapse shall* incurr.
Where Lapse incurrs after the first six Months to the Ordinary or Bishop of the
Diocese, if he present not within six Months after, then it goes to the
Metropolitan of the Province, and if he present not within other six Months,
then it goes to the King as Supreme Ordinary of all Benefices, Doct. and
Student, 125. Hughe's gr. Abr. 1 part, pa. 134. Ca. 1.

How many ways a Church may become void
Note, a Church Presentative may become void five manner of ways, viz. 1 by
Death, 2 by Creation, 3 by Resignation, 4 by Deprivation, 5 by Cession; as by
taking a Benefice Incompatible, Co. Lit. f. 120. a. Doder. pa. 7.

If a Church be Litigious, as where two Patrons present to the same Church When
the Bishop may award a Jure Patronatus.
by several Titles, and the Bishop knows not which has the very true and
rightful Title to the same, and so knows not which Clerk to admit with safety,
least by admitting the one and refusing the other; he become a disturber, in
this Case the Bishop may award a Jure Patronatus, to inquire who is the true
and undoubted Patron, and who ought to present to the Church for that turn, and
this Writ is usually obtained at the Prayer of one or both Parties, to such
Commissioners as the Bishop thinks good to name, who send their Mandate to some
Officer of their own to summon a Jury, who are to be one half Clerks, and the
other half Laymen, and after they are sworn, they hear the Evidence, and are to
give their Verdict to the Commissioners, but the Bishop is not bound to award
this Writ ex Officio, but at the Prayer of the parties, 8 E. 4. 24. b. per
curiam, 5 H. 7. 20. b. per Reeble, 22 H. 6. 30. per Mark, 34 H. 6. 40. 35 H. b.
19. b. and vide, Rol^'s Case, 2 part, f. 384 P. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12. and P. 26 Eliz. C. B. Gerrard's Case, Leon. Rep. 2 part, f. 168. pl.
205. Degrees. cap. 3.

But note the Verdict upon this Inquest, is neither binding to the Bishop, The
Verdict upon a Jure Patronatus not binding.
nor the parties in some respects, for the Bishop may accept the Clerk of him
against whom the Verdict does pass if he please, but then it is at his Peril,
for if the other party bring a Quare Impedit and recover, then the Bishop will
be found a disturber, but if the Bishop admits the Clerk of him for whom the
Verdict is given, then if the other bring a Quare Impedit and recover, yet if
the Bishop plead this special matter it shall excuse him, though it bind not
the other parties right, and of this Opinion was my Lord Hobbert, in his
argument in the Case between Sir William Elvis Knight, and the Archbishop of
York, and Tailor and Bishop, Hob. Rep. f. 317, and 318.

CHAP. VI. Of Pluralities, Dispensations, and non residence,
If one have a Living with cure of eight pounds vallue, and accept another* the
first is void.
NOte, that by the stat. 21 H. 8. it is enacted, that if any Person or Persons,
having one Benefice with cure of Souls, being of the yearly value of eight
pounds or above, accept and take any other with cure of Souls, and be
Instituted and Inducted in possession of the same, that then and immediately
after such possession had thereof, the first Benefice shall be adjudged void,
and it shall be Lawful for every Patron having the Advowson thereof, to
present another, and the Presentee to have the benefit of the same in such
manner and Form as though the Incumbent had dyed or resigned, any License,
Union, or other Dispensation to the contrary notwithstanding, 21 H. 8. cap. 13.
the yearly value of eight pounds or above, is usually taken to be according as
Benefices were rated in the 26 of H. 8. and is now made use of in the first
fruits office; but some hold that it shall be taken according to the very true
improved value, Ideo Quaere. vide pa. 128.

Who may have Plurality of Livings.
But there is a Proviso in the same Statute, that all Spiritual Men which are of
the King's Council, may purchase License, or Dispensation to take and keep
three Parsonages or Benefices with cure of Souls, and that all others, being
the King's Chaplains, and not sworn of his Council; and the Chaplains of the
Queen, Prince, or Princess, or any of the King's Children, Brethren, Sisters,
Uncles, or Aunts, may purchase License, or Dispensation to receive and keep two
Parsonages or Benefices, with cure of Souls, and so the eight Chaplains of
every Archbishop, the six Chaplains of every Duke, the five Chaplains of every
Marquess and Earl, the four Chaplains of every Viscount, the six Chaplains of
every Bishop, the three Chaplains of the Chancellor of England, and of every
Baron and Knight of the Garter, the two Chaplains of every Duchess,
Marchioness, Countess and Baroness being Widows, the two Chaplains of the
Treasurer and Controller of the King's House, and of the King's Secretary, Dean
of his Chapel, Almner and Master of the Rolls, may also procure License, or
Dispensation to receive and keep two Parsonages or Benefices apiece, with cure
of Souls, 21 H. 8. cap. 13. and the Chief Justice of the King's Bench, and
Warden of the Cinque Ports, may keep one Chaplain apiece, who may Purchase,
License, or Dispensation to receive and keep two Parsonages or Benefices with
cure of Souls, and so may the Brethren and Sons of all Temporal Lords, and of
every Knight, who are born in Wedlock, and all Doctors and Batchellors of
Divinity, Doctors of Law, and Batchellors of Law Canon and every of them, which
shall be admitted to any of the said degrees, by any of the Universities of
this Realm, and not by Grace only, may also purchase License, or Dispensation
to receive and keep two Parsonages or Benefices with cure of Souls, and it is
provided that every of the Chaplains abovesaid so purchasing License, and
Dispensation to receive and keep Benefices with cure of Souls as abovesaid,
shall be bound to have and exhibit where need shall be, Letters under the sign
and Seal of the King or other their Lord and Master, testifying whose Chaplains
they be, or else not to enjoy any such Plurality of Benefices, by being such
Chaplains, 21 H. 8. cap. 13.

None to take more Chaplains then above Limited, to advance them to Plurality
of Benefices.
Note, that it is provided, that no Person or Persons, to whom any number of
Chaplains, or Chaplain by any of the Provisions aforesaid is Limited, shall in
any wise, by color of any of the same Provisions, advance any Spiritual Person
or Persons above the number to them appointed, to receive or keep any more
Benefices with cure of Souls, than is above Limited, and if they do, then every
such Spiritual Person and Persons so advanced, above the said number, to incurr
the pain and penalty contained in the said Act: and it is further provided,
that every Duchess, Marchioness, Countess, and Baroness Widows, that shall
take any Husbands under the degree of a Baron, may take such number of
Chaplains as is above Limited to them being Widows, and that every such
Chaplain may purchase License to have and take such number of Benefices with
cure of Souls, in manner and Form as they might have done, if their said Ladies
and Mistresses had kept themselves Widows, 21 H. 8. cap. 13.

What shall be accounted no Benefice with cure.
No Deanery, Archdeaconry, Chancellorship, Treasurership, Chantership or Prebend
in any Cathedral or Collegiate Church, nor Parsonage that has a Vicar endowed,
nor any Benefice perpetually appropriate, are to be taken or comprehended under
the name of Benefice with cure of Souls, 21 H. 8. cap. 13.

The Archbishop of Canterbury for The Archbishop of Canterbury may grant
Dispensations, etc.
the time being and his Successors, after good and due examination by them had
of the causes and qualities of the Persons procuring for Licenses,
Dispensations, Compositions, Faculties, Delegacies, Rescripts, Instruments or
other writings, by themselves or by their sufficient Commissary or Deputy, by
their discretions from time to time, have power to grant and dispose by an
Instrument, under the Name and Seal of the said Archbishop, to any of the
King's Subjects all manner of such Licenses, Dispensations, Faculties,
Compositions, Delegacies, Rescripts, Instruments, or other writings, for any
such cause or matter, whereof heretofore such Dispensations, etc. have been
accustomed to be had at the Sea of Rome, or by the Authority thereof, or any
Prelate of this Realm, but no such Licenses, etc. which have not been
accustomed to be had or obtained at the Court of Rome, nor by Authority
thereof, nor by any Prelate of this Realm, shall be granted without the
approbation of the King and his Council, upon pein that the Granter of such
Licenses, etc. shall make fine at the King's will and pleasure, 25 H. 8. cap.
21.

And no manner of Dispensations, Licenses, etc. to be granted by the What
Licenses, etc. are to be confirmed under the King's great Seal.
Archbishop or his Commissary, whose Tax for the Expidition thereof at Rome
extended to the sum of four pounds or above, are to be put in Execution, till
the same be first confirmed by the King, under the great Seal, and Enrolled in
the Chancery by the Clerk appointed for the same; which writing under the
Archbishop's Seal, and the Confirmation thereof under the great Seal, are to be
remitted to the parties from time to time procuring the same, but such
Licenses, etc. whose Tax for the Expedition thereof at Rome, was under four
pounds, shall pass under the Archbishop's Seal, and need not be confirmed under
the great Seal, unless the parties desire to have them confirmed, and in such
Case they are to pay for the great Seal only five Shillings, and not above;
over and besides such Taxes as are to be paid for the writing, making,
registring, confirming, and inrolling of such Licenses, etc. under the said Tax
of four pounds, and all such Licenses, etc. granted as aforesaid, have the same
force and power as those formerly obtained of the Sea of Rome, any decree
Canon, Decretal, etc. to the contrary notwithstanding; and both the
Archbishop's Clerk or Register, for Dispensations, Faculties, etc. and the
King's inrolling Clerk in Chancery must subscribe their names to every such
License, Dispensation, etc. that shall come to their Hands, to be written,
made, granted, sealed, confirmed, registered, and enrolled in Form aforesaid;
and those that receive more for Dispensations, etc. than is set down in the
Books of Taxes, one whereof remains with the Archbishop's Register of
Faculties, etc. and the other with the King's inrolling Clerk of Dispensations,
etc. in Chancery, are to forfeit ten times the value of what they so exact and
receive, one Moiety to the King, and the other to the Informer, 25 H. 8. cap.
21.

Note, that it is provided by the said What remedy where the Archbishop
refuses to grant Dispensations, etc.
Statute, 25. H. 8. that nothing therein contained, shall be prejudicial to the
Archbishop of York, or to any Bishop, or Prelate of this Realm, but that they
may Lawfully dispense in all causes, in which they wont to dispense by the
Common Law or custom of th^^ Realm, before the making of the sai^ Act, with a
Proviso also, that when the See of Canterbury should at any tim^ be void, that
then such Licenses, Dispensations, etc. may be granted und^ the Name and Seal
of the Guardian ^^ the Spiritualities of the said Archbishopric for the time
being, according to the Form aforesaid, which shall have the same force as if
they had been granted by the Archbishop himself; and it is further enacted,
that if the Archbishop of Canterbury, or Guardian of the Spiritualities, do
refuse to grant such Licenses, Dispensations, etc. as aforesaid; then the
Chancellor of England, or Keeper of the great Seal for the time being, upon
complaint thereof, shall direct the King's Writ to the said Archbishop or
Guardian so refusing, enjoining him thereby upon a certain pein therein to be
Limited, by the discretion of the said Chancellor, or Keeper of the great Seal,
that he do in due Form, grant such License, Dispensation, etc. according to the
Request of the Procurers of the same, or else signify to the King in Chancery
at a certain day, the occasion why he denies the same, and if it appear to the
Chancellor, etc. by such Certificate, that the cause was reasonable and good,
and being proved by due search and examination of the said Chancellor or Lord
Keeper, it is to be allowed, and if it appears upon the said Certificates, that
the said Archbishop or Guardian, wilfully without just cause, do refuse or deny
to grant such Licenses, etc. then it being made appear to the King that such
Licenses, etc. may be granted without offending the Holy Scriptures and Laws of
God, his Majesty in such Case may send his Writ of Injunction, under the Great
Seal, out of his Court of Chancery, commanding the Archbishop or Guardian so
refusing, etc. to make sufficient grant theof by a certain day, under a certain
pein, and if the Archbishop or Guardian, after the recept of the said Writ,
refuse or deny to grant such Licenses, etc. and show and prove before the
King's Majesty, no just cause for the same, then the said Archbishop or
Guardian so refusing, shall forfeit to the King, such penalty as is expressed
in the said Writ of Injunction; and the King may grant his Commission under the
great Seal, to any two Spiritual Prelates whom be pleases, as will grant the
same Licenses, etc. so refused to be granted by the Archbishop or Guardian as
aforesaid, and such Licenses, etc. granted by such two Prelates, shall have the
same force, as if they were granted by the sai^ Archbishop or Guardian, 25 H.
8. cap. 21.

And it is further provided, that this The penalty for suing to the Court of
Rome, for Dispensa^ions, etc.
Act shall not extend to the repeal or derogation of the 21 H. 8. cap. 13. nor
to give License to any Person or Persons, to have any more number of Benefices,
than is Limited in the said Act; and it is also provided, that if any Person
or Persons, Subject or Resiant within this Realm, or within any of the King's
Dominions, do sue to the Court or See of Rome, or to any Person claiming to
have his Authority by the same, for any License, etc. or put in Execution any
such License, etc. obtained from Rome or the Sea of Rome, or from any claiming
Authority by the same, or attempt or do any thing or things contrary to the
stat. 25 H. 8. aforesaid, or maintain, allow, admit, or obey any manner of
Censures, Excommunications, Interdictions, or any other process from Rome, of
what Name or Nature soever it be to the Derogation of the said Act, or of any
thing or things to be done by Authority of the same, every Person so offending,
and being convicted thereof, shall incurr and run into the pein of a
Praemunire, 25 H. 8. cap. 21. and see the 13 Eliz. cap. 2. if this be not made
High Treason by that Statute.

No Nobleman or other can, after their just number of Chaplains are advanced,
take any more to qualify them during the other Chaplains lives.
If any Nobleman or other Person, who are Capacitated to keep Chaplains, have
once retained their full number, who are admitted to two Benefices apiece, they
cannot then whilst the others are living, retain any more to qualify them to
take a second Benefice, as appears by this Case following, Sr. James Crofts,
Controuller of the House to Queen Elizabeth, had two Chaplains according to the
stat. 21 H. 8. who were both preferred to two Benefices apiece, according to
the Purport of the said Statute, and afterward he takes another Chaplain,
(having one Benefice) who procures a second, as being his Chaplain, and the
Queen presented to his first Benefice, and brought a Quar^ Impedit against him;
and all the Court held, that after two are advanced, a third cannot be
advanced, for there can be but two at one time, who shall take advantage of the
Statute. And it was agreed in that Case, that there is a difference between the
words to be advanced to a Benefice, and to be advanced to take and keep a
Benefice, for one may be advanced to a Benefice who cannot Lawfully keep it,
for if one who has a Benefice with cure, etc. take another, he cannot keep
these two Lawfully, but such a Chaplain who is advanced according to the
Statute, may receive and keep two Benefices, Tr. 27 Eliz C. B. the Queen and
Bishop of Gloucester, and Savaker's Case, An. Rep. 1 part, f. 200. pl. 236. and
vide Co. Rep. 4 Lib. f. 90. a. the same Case cited there, but said to be P. 28.
Eliz Rot. 1130.

First Chaplains only qualified to take Plurality of Benefices.
Also, where a Lord, Countess, or other Person, have retained their full number
of Chaplains, and afterward retain one or more Supernumerary Chaplains, these
last Chaplains are not qualified to have Pluralities of Livings, although they
obtain Dispensations and are first preferred; for though by the Common Law, a
Countess may retain as many Chaplains as she pleases, yet she can have but two
capable of Dispensation by the Statute, and reason requires that he who had
served longest shall be first preferred, et qui prior est tempore, potior est
jure, and although the two first were dead before the advancement of the third,
yet because they were alive at the time of the Retainer, which Retainer was by
the Common Law and not by the Statute, therefore he ought to have a new
Retainer after their Death, and before his advancement: for quod ab initio non
valet, in tractu temporis non convalescet, Tr. 43 Eliz. C. B. the Queen and
Bishop of Lincoln and Drurie's Case, Co. Rep. 4 Lib. f. 89. b. M. Rep. f. 561.
pl. 763. Cro. Eliz. f. 723. pl. 56. and 839. pl. 15. and see P. 31 Eliz. Rot.
728. the Queen and Bishop of Lincoln, and the President and Scholars of
Mawdlin College in Oxford, and Skiffin's Case, M. Rep. f. 277. pl. 431. and
Savil's Rep. f. 101. pl. 181.

A Retainer may be as well by word as by writing.
And note that a Retainer to be Chaplain, may be as well without writing as with
writing, for it is not of necessity, but only in Case where the same is to be
showed, and if a Chaplain obtain a Patent or Testimonial from his Lord or Lady
whose Chaplain he is, before he come to be Impleaded, so that he have it to
show to the Court, although he had it not, at the time of his taking a Second
Benefice yet it is well enough, and so it was Adjudged, M. 35 and 36. El. in
the Exchequer between Whetstone and Hickford, Savills Rep. Rep. fo. 135. pl.
213. and see the Queen and Bishop of Lincoln, and Skiffin's Case, Moo. Rep. fo.
277. pl. 432.

How Chaplains may loose or gain qualification for plurality.
If the Son and Heir Apparent of a Baron or other Lord, Retain a Chaplain, and
give him a Testimonial under his Hand and Seal, and afterward his Father dies,
and the Honor descends to him, and the Chaplain purchases a Dispensation,
this Retainer and Testimonial will not serve his turn, because they were not
availeable at the Commencement; And if a Baron or other Lord Retain their full
number of Chaplains according to the Statute, and then the Lord or other Person
discharges one of them out of his Service, in this Case he cannot Retain
another during that Chaplain's Life, to qualify him for pluralities, for by
such means he might Advance Infinite of Chaplains without number, and so the
Statute should be defrauded, Co. Rep. 4. Lib. fo. 90. a. But if a Lord or other
Person whose Chaplains are qualified according to the Statute, be dis^harged
out of his Service by his Master* (as he may) before he be preferred to a
Second Benefice, or if his Master dye, or is attainted, degraded, or displaced,
before such Chaplains preferment to a Second Benefice, in all these Cases he
^ooseth his qualification, to have plurality of Livings Incompatible. Moo. Rep.
fo. 678. pl. 924. and vide Co. Rep. 4. Lib. 117. b. 118. b.

A Lord, etc. to Retain a number of Chaplains according to his best quality.
If a Baron who by the Statute may have Three Chaplains, be made Warden of the
Cinque Ports, who may by the Statute have one Chaplain in respect of his
Office, yet he shall have but Three, and so if he be made an Earl, who may by
the Statute have Five Chaplains, yet in such Cases he shall not have Eight as
Baron and Earl, but only Five according to his best Title, and so it is of
other Persons who by the Statute may Retain Chaplains, Quia difficile est ut
unus homo vicem duorum sustineat, as the Book says, Co. Rep. 4. Lib. fo. 90.
b. 118. a.

If a Chaplain be preferred to two Benefices, his Lords death, etc. death not
Incapacitate him.
Where the Chaplains of a Baron or other Person, who are Capacitated to have
Chaplains by the Statute, are in the Lifetime of their Lords, preferred to Two
Benefices according to the Statute, if their Lords dye afterward, they may
notwithstanding keep their Livings, but although they be Resident upon one of
them, yet they shall be punished for Non-Residence upon the other, as my Lord
Cook says it was Adjudged in Parson Boyton's Ca^^, and therefore it behooves
such Persons to obtain of the King a Non-obstante; the like Law is when a Baron
is Attainted of Treason or Felony, or when any Officers who may have Chaplains,
are removed from their Office, and sic de similibus; Co. Rep. 4. Lib. fo. 119.
a. Dyer, fo. 312. b.

An Infant Lord may qu^lifie Chaplains.
It is said to be Adjudged, that if an Earl or other Lord that is an Infant, be
in the Guardian ship of another Lord, and live in the House with him, yet he
may Retain and Qualify Chaplains by the Statute, for the words of the Act are
general, and although the Guardian be a Nobleman, and have Chaplains allowed
him by the said Act, yet the Pupil may Retain Chaplains also, p. 44. El. in a
Quare Impedit between the Queen and the Bishop of Salisbury and others, Co.
Rep. 4. Lib. fo. 119. a.

The Marriage of a Wid^ow, does not incapacitate per Chaplaing R^tained before.
If a Baroness who is a Widow Retain Two Chaplains, and they purchase a
Dispensation, and then the Baroness Marries either to a Nobleman or one below
the degree of Nobility, before the Chaplains accept a double Benefice, yet this
is no Countermand, discharge or disability to them, no more it is if her Second
Husband dies, and she is a Widow again, but if she dies before they are
preferred, then it is otherwise, M. 44, 45. El. C. B. The Queen and Bishop of
Peterborough and Acton and Cartmell's Case, Co. Rep. 4. Lib. fo. 117. and Moo.
Rep. fo. 678. pl. 922.

If a Lord retain his double number of Chaplains, the first are only qual^fied
for plurality, etc.
If a Lord retain his double number of Chaplains at one time, as if a Baron who
is to have Three Retain Six by his Letters Testimonial, and all these Six are
preferred to six several pluralities, in this Case the Three which are first
promoted are warranted by the Statute, and yet the Retainer was not according
to the Statute; in aequali Jure melior est Conditio possidentis, and the other
Three last are not by the Statute Reputed for his Chaplains, so long as the
first Three who are promoted by his Service do Live, for otherwise the Statute
should be defrauded; and by the opinion of Catlyn Sanders and Dyer, where the
Chaplain of a Lord, has two Benifices with Cure, without a special License or
Dispensation of the Metropolitan, he is not in danger to loose his Plurality by
force of the Statute of 21 H. 8. for the words are not that he ought to Sue for
a License, etc. but that he may Sue for a License, etc. but notwithstanding
such Chaplains fall within the danger of the Spiritual Law, Tr. 14. Eliz. C. B.
Dyer f. 312. b. pl. 88. and vide Co. Rep. 4. Lib. f. 90. a.

Dispensation after Institution comes too late.
Where one is possessed of a Benefice with Cure, and being Qualified, is
presented to a Second Benefice, and is admitted and Instituted to the same, and
before his Induction he procures a Dispensation, in this Case the Dispensation
comes too late, for upon the bare Institution, Ecclesia plena and consulta
existit, against all Persons but the King, for by the Institution he is
complete Parson (if he Subscribe to the Articles of Religion) as to the
Spiritualities; to wit, Cura Animarum, and may Celebrate Divine Service,
Preach, etc. but as to the Temporalties, as the Glebe Land, Tithes, etc. he
has no Right, or can Sue for them till Induction; and before the Statute 21 H.
8. the acceptance of a Second Living, whatsoever the value of the first were,
made the first void, as appears by a Canon made in the year 1215. at the
Council of Lateran held under Pope Innocent the Third, the Tenor whereof is
here inserted, Statutum est quod quicunque receperit aliquod Beneficium habens
Curam Animarum annexam, si prius tale Benesicium obtinebat eo sit Jure
privatus, and si forte illud retinere contenderit aliam etiam spolietur; Is
quoque ad quem prior^s spectat donatio illud post receptionem alterius conferat
cui merito viderit Conferendum; by which it appears that by the acceptance of a
Second Benefice, the first is void ipso Jure, and the Patron may present if he
please; And it was resolved that a grand Inconvenience would ensue, if the
first Benefice should not be void by Institution to the Second, for then one
might be Instituted to diverse Benefices with Cure; so that he could not be
able to discharge them all, and yet no other could be presented to any of them,
which would be inconvenient; And it has been adjudged that where one is
Presented, Admitted and Instituted to a Benefice with Cure, above the value of
Eight pounds Per annum, and afterward before his Induction, he accepts another
Benefice with Cure, and is Inducted into it, that by this the first is void by
the Statute, 21 H. 8. for the words of the Act are, If any Person having one
Benefice with Cure, etc. accept and take another, etc. and he which is
Instituted to a Benefice, is said in Law to have accepted a Benefice, and to
have a Benefice, H. 41. Eliz. B. R. Digby's Case, Co. Rep. 4. Lib. f. 78. b.
and M. Rep. f. 433. pl. 609. the same Case by the Name of Robin's and Gerrard
and Prince there, and see p. 31. Eliz. B. R. Underhill and Savage's Case, Leon.
Rep. 1. part, f. 316. pl. 442. Vaugh. Rep. f. 131. Co. 2. part, Inst. f. 358.
H. 43. Eliz. C. B. Robin's and James's Case, Gouldes. Rep. part 162. pl. 97. p.
15. Jac. C. B. Morgan and Glover's Case.

Dispensation for Triality not good.
A Chaplain of the Archbishop of Canterbury having a Benefice of the Queens
Gift, procured a Dispensation of the Archbishop of Canterbury his Lord and
Master to have a Triality, the Queen under her Great Seal Confirmed the
Dispensation with these words, Scil. Ita quod omnibus and singulis in iisdem
Literis specificat: frui, uti, and potiri valeat, libere, quiet, and Impune
absque Impedimento, etc. aliquo Statuto Actu vel Restrictione in contrarium
edit. and proviso, aut aliqua alia re, causa vel materia quacunque in aliquo
non obstante, etc. so by force hereof the Chaplain took two other Livings
Incompatible, by reason of which Acceptance it was adjudged the Living became
void, notwithstanding the Confirmation of the Dispensation, Tr. 18. Eliz. C. B.
Coxe's Case, Dyer, f. 351. pl. 25. and vide f. 327. a. pl. 4.

Not Reading the Arti^les, etc. makes the Living ^oi^.
Note this Case following, one Higden was lawfully Presented, Admitted,
Instituted and Inducted into the Rectory of Wringlington in Somerset shire,
being a Benefice with Cure of Souls of Fifty pounds Per annum, and in the
King's Books but of Five pounds Per annum, and afterward he was lawfully
Presented, Admitted, Instituted and Inducted into the Rectory of Elm in the
same County of Forty pounds Per annum, and but Ten pounds in the King's Books,
and Subscribed the Articles of Religion according to the Act 13 Eliz. Cap. 12.
and was lawfully Incumbent of the said Rectory of Elm, but after did not read
the Articles of Religion within two Months after his Induction, to the Church
of Elm according to the Act, 13 Eliz. And in this Case it was Adjudged that
Higden had lost both his Livings; for as to the first Living, if a Man have a
Benefice with Cure of Souls, whatsoever the value be, and is Admitted and
Instituted into another Benefice with Cure of what value soever, having no
Qualification or Dispensation, the first Benefice is so ipso. facto void, that
the Patron may present another to it if he please, but if the Patron do not or
will not present to it, then no Lapse shall Incur if the Living be under value,
until deprivation of the Incumbent and notice thereof given to the Patron; but
if the Living be of the value of Eight pounds or above, the Patron at his Peril
is to present within Six Months, by the Statute, 21 H. 8. and as to the Second
Living, by his not reading the Articles, he stands deprived ipso facto, and so
both are lost, H. 22, 23. Car. 2. C. B. Shute and Higden's Case, Vaugh. Rep. f.
129.

Note that a Dispensation granted by A Dispensation good though not Inro^^ed.
the Archbishop of Canterbury, to one who is Created Bishop to hold a Benefice
in Commendam, although it be not Enrolled in Chancery according to the Statute,
25 H. 8. but is only entered in the Register of the Archbishop, yet it is good
enough, and so it was Adjudged, M. 6. 7. Eliz. C. B. in the Case of John
Parkhurst Bishop of Norwich, Dyer, f. 233. a. Doder. pa. 94.

A D^spensation after Consecration is too late.
But such Dispensation must be before Consecration, or else it comes too late;
yet the King ex summa Authoritate Ecclesiastica qua fungitur, may Grant (to the
Bishop that is Consecrated) power to take and Retain, by Presentation,
Institution and Induction, any Spiritual Benefice, and to hold the same in
Commendam notwithstanding his Estate of being Bishop, for so the Pope used to
do, and the same Authority is acknowledged by the Statute, 25 H. 8. to be in
the King of this Realm, which was within this Realm by the Pope, Doder. pa. 95.

By the Statute, 13 Eliz. None shall Who qualified for a Living of Thirty
pounds, etc.
be admitted to any Benefice with Cure, of or above the value of Thirty pounds
yearly in the Queens Books, unless he be a Batchellor in Divinity, or a
Preacher lawfully Licensed by some Bishop within this Realm, or by one of the
Universities of Cambridge or Oxford, 13 Eliz. cap. 13.

Acceptance of Three Benefices, the first only void.
If a Parson have a Benefice of above the yearly value of Eight pounds, and
afterward he takes another Benefice with a Dispensation, and after this he
takes a Third Benefice, his first Benefice is only void, Adjudged per Curiam,
M. 5. Jac. C. B. Godb. Rep. pa. 153. pl. 201. but it said by Heron in Noye's
Rep. that both the first and second shall be void; vide the King and the Bishop
of Chichester's Case, Noye's Rep. f. 149.

A Suffragan Bishop capable of plurality.
By the Statute, 26 H. 8. every Bishop's Suffragan, exercising the Office by the
Bishop's Commission, for the better maintenance of his Dignity, may have two
Benefices with Cure, 26 H. 8. cap. 14. and note that the Eight pounds value of
a Church shall be according to the valuation in the King's Books, and not
according to the Improved and just value, 8. Car. 1. C. B. Drake and Hill's
Case, Cro. Car. f. 456. there cited to have been so Adjudged.

Note by the Statute, 21 H. 8. It is The penalty of Non-residence.
enacted that every Spiritual Person promoted to any Arch-deaconry, Deanery, or
Dignity in any Cathedral Church, or other Church Conventual or Collegiate, or
being Beneficed with any Parsonage or Vicarage, shall be Personally Resident,
and abiding in, at and upon his said Dignity, Prebend or Benefice, or at one of
them at the least, and in Case that any such Spiritual Person keep not
Residence at one of his said Spiritual Dignities, Prebend or Benefices as
aforesaid, but absent himself wilfully by the space of one Month together, or
by the space of two Months to be accounted at several times in any one year,
and make his Residence and Abiding in any other places by such times, then he
shall forfeit for every such default Ten pounds Sterling, the one half thereof
to the King's Majesty, and the other half to the Party that will Sue for the
same in any of the King's Courts by Original Writ of Debt, Bill, Plaint, etc.
21 H. 8. cap. 13.

But it is provided that this Act of Who excuseable for Nonresidence.
Non-residence shall not in any wise extend nor be prejudicial to any such
Spiritual Person as shall chance to be in the King's Service beyond the Seas,
nor to any Person or Persons going to any Pilgrimage, or Holy place beyond the
Sea, during the time that they shall be so in the King's Service, or in the
Pilgrimage going and returning home, nor to any Scholar or Scholars being
Conversant and abiding for Study without Fraud, or Covin at any University
within this Realm or without; nor to any of the Chaplains of the King's or
Queen's, daily or quarterly attending and abiding in the King's or Queen's most
Honorable Households; nor to any of the Chaplains of the Prince or Princess;
or any the King's or Queen's Children, Brethren or Sisters; nor to any Chaplain
of any Archbishop or Bishops, or of any Spiritual or Temporal Lords of the
Parliament; nor to any Chaplain of any Duchess, Marquess, Countess,
Vicecountess, or Baroness; nor to any Chaplain of the Lord Chancellor, or
Treasurer of England, the King's Chamberlain or Steward of his Household for
the time being; nor to any Chaplain of any of the Knights of the honorable
Order of the Garter, or of the Chief Justice of the King's Bench, Warden of the
Cinque Ports, or of the Master of the Rolls; nor to any Chaplain of the King's
Secretary, and Dean of the Chapel, or Almner for the time being, daily
attending and dwelling in any of their Honorable House-holds, during the time
that any such Chaplain or Chaplains shall abide, and dwell without Fraud or
Covin in any of the said Honorable House holds; nor to the Master of the
Rolls, or Dean of the Arches; nor to any Chancellor or Commissary of any
Archbishop or Bishop; nor to as many of the Twelve Masters in Chancery, and
Twelve Advocates of the Arches, as be spiritual Men, during so long time as
they shall continue and occupy their said Rooms and Offices; nor to any such
Spiritual Persons, as shall happen by Injunction of the Lord Chancellor, or the
King's Council to be bound to any daily appearance and attendance, to answer
the Law, during the time of such Injunction, 21 H. 8. cap. 13.

There is also another Proviso, that it The King may License non residence.
shall be Lawful for every Spiritual Person or Persons, being Chaplains to the
King, to whom he shall please to give any Benefices or Promotions Spiritual, to
what number soever it be, to accept and take the same without the danger of the
said Statute; and further, that it shall be Lawful for the King to give
License to every of his own Chaplains for non residence upon their Benefices
notwithstanding the said Act, 21 H. 8. cap. 13.

Who may be non resident.
And by the 25 H. 8. it is enacted, that every Judge of the Courts of King's
Bench, and Common Pleas, Chancellor and Chief Baron of the Exchequer, the
King's General Attorney, and Geneneral Solliciter, may retain and have
singularly to every of them in his House, or attending on his Person, one
Chaplain, having one Benefice with cure of Souls, which may be absent from his
said Benefice, and not resident upon the same, 25 H. 8. cap. 16. And the
residence of every Bishop's Suffragan, over the Diocese where he shall have
Commission, shall serve him for his residence, as sufficiently as if he were
resident upon any other his Benefice, 26 H. 8. cap. 14.

The Chancellor of the Duchy of Who may be non resident.
Lancaster, the Chancellor of the Court of Augmentations, the Chancellor of the
Court of first Fruits and Tenths, the Master of the Wards and Liveries, and
every of the King's General Surveyors of his Lands, the Treasurer of his
Chamber, the Treasurer of the Court of Augmentations, and the Groom of the
Stool and every of them, may retain in his House, or attendant unto his Person,
one Chaplain having one Benefice with cure of Souls, who may be non resident,
provided that every of the said Chaplains being Beneficed as aforesaid, and
dwelling with any of the Officers aforenamed, do Personally repair two times in
every Year at the least, to his said Benefice, and there tarry and abide by the
space of eight days, at every such time at the least, to visit and instruct his
said cure, upon pein to forfeit for every time so failing, forty shillings, one
Moiety to the King, and the other to such as will sue for the same, in any of
the King's Courts of Record, 33 H. 8. cap. 28.

Scholars in the Universities, when excusable for non residence.
Note, that the clause in the 21 H. 8. cap. 13. which says that the Penalty
for non residence, shall not extend to any Scholar or Scholars, being
Conversant, and abideing for study without Fraud or Covin at the Universities,
is restrained and made more strict by the 28 H. 8. for there it is enacted,
that all and singular Spiritual Person and Persons, which shall be promoted to
any Benefice or Benefices as aforesaid, being above the Age of forty Years,
(the Chancellor, Vice Chancellor, Commissary of the said Universities, or any
of them, Wardens, Deans, Provosts, Presidents, Rectors, Masters, Principals,
and other head Rulers of Colleges, Halls, and other Houses or Places Corporate,
within the said Universities or any of them, Doctors of the Chair, Readers of
Divinity in the common Schools of Divinity, in any of the said Universities
only excepted) shall be resident, and abideing at and upon one of their said
Benefices, according to the intent and true meaning of the said former Act,
upon the pein and Penalty therein contained. And that none of the said
Beneficed Persons being above the Age aforesaid, except before excepted, shall
be excused of their non residence, for that they be students or resiant within
the said Universities, or any of them, any Proviso in the former Act, to the
contrary notwithstanding, 28 H. 8. cap. 13.

What Students excusable for non residence.
And it is further enacted, that all and singular such Beneficed Persons, being
under the Age of forty Years, Resiant, and abiding in the said Universities or
any of them, shall not enjoy the Privilege and Liberty of non residence,
contained in the Proviso of the former Act, made for the Scholars of the said
Universities, unless he or they be present at the Ordinary Lectures, as well at
home in their Houses, as in the common School or Schools, and there in Person,
keep Sophemes, Problemes, Disputations, and other exercise of learning, and be
Opponent and Respondent in the same, according to the Ordinances and Statutes
of either of the said Universities, where he or th^^ shall be so abiding and
resiant, an^ thing in the former Act notwithstanding, 28 H. 8. cap. 13.

And by the said Statute it is furthe^ Readers of public Lectures, etc.
excusable.
provided, that nothing therein contained, shall extend to any Person ^^
Persons, who shall be Readers of a^^ public or common Lecture, in Di^^nity,
Law Civil, Physic, Philosophy, Humanity, or of any of the Liberal Sciences, or
public or common Interpreters, or Teachers of the Hebrew Tongue, Caldee or
Greek, in whatsoever College or Place of any of the said Universities, the said
Persons for the time being, shall read the said common or public Lectures,
nor to any Person or Persons, above the Age of forty Years, which shall resort
to any of the said Universities, to proceed Doctors in Divinity, Law Civil, or
Physic, for the time of their proceedings, and Executing of such Sermons,
Disputations of Lectures, which they be bound by the Statutes of the
Universities, there to do for the said degrees so obtained, 28 H. 8. cap. 13.

Non residence, (...) is.
And now having showed what the Statute Law says, concerning non residence, I
shall proceed to show what the Judges Opinions have been in such Cases
concerning the same as I find in our modern reports: In an Information upon the
Statute for non residence, upon not guilty pleaded, a special Verdict was
found, that the Defendant was Parson of Downham in Norfolk, and had a Parsonage
House and Glebe Land within the Parish, but he Inhabited not therein, but in a
Coppy-hold Tenement which he had in the right of his Wife in the said Parish,
and always served the cure, and whether this were a non residence or no within
the Statute was the Question; And Gaudy and Popham Justices, held it was not a
residence within the Statute, which was made for three causes, first, that the
cure should be served, secondly, that the People should be fed, thirdly, that
the Parsonage House should be upholden and maintained, and if the Statute
should be otherwise construed, many inconveniences would ensue, for Parsons
would purchase other Houses within their Parishes, and be always resident upon
them, and suffer their Parsonage Houses to decay, and sterilitate their Glebe
Land, and meliorate their own Possessions, in prejudice of their Successors,
and where the Statute says he shall be resident upon his Benefice, it shall be
intended where there can be residence, for he cannot be resident upon the
Tithes, nor upon the Glebe Land where there is not any House, but only his
Habitation is within his Parsonage House, but Justice Clynch and Fenner held
the contrary, and said if he be resident within his Benefice, (which extends to
the whole Parish) it is sufficient, but if he be resident upon any other House
adjoining upon his Parish, but not within his Parish, although every Sunday and
Holyday, he serve the cure, yet it is not sufficient, and they said that the
intent of the Statute is, that he should pascere gregem, cibo, exemplo and
verbo, all which he may do when he is resident in any part of the Parish, and
where it is said in, at and upon his Benefice, it is clear that all the Parish
is his Benefice, so he is resident in his Benefice, but peradventure, he is not
resident upon his Benefice, unless he Inhabits within the Parsonage House, but
there are Diverse Parsonages which have no Parsonage House, for it may be
aliened by the former Parson, with the consent of the Patron and Ordinary, or
let out, so as his successor cannot have it, and therefore his residence may be
in any other House within the Parish, and it is sufficient; and upon this
difference of the Justices in their Opinions, Crook reports the Case to be
adjorned, and so does Moore and Gouldesborough, but my Lord Cook reporting the
same Case says, it was resolved by the Court, that the Parson ought to reside
in the Parsonage House, and not in any other House within the Parish, M. 39, 40
Eliz. B. R. Goodale and Butler's Case, Cro. Eliz. f. 590. pl. 28 M. Rep. f.
540. pl. 712. Gouldes. Rep. pa. 169. pl. 100. and Co. Rep. 6 Lib. f. 21. b. the
same Case, but there said to be P. 40 Eliz. and see P. 9 Jac B. R. Shepherd
and Twoulsie's Case, Boulstr. Rep. 1 part, f. 111.

What residence, and what not.
Another Information was also brought upon the stat. 21 H. 8. for non residence,
and it was found by special Verdict, that Doctor Newman was Incumbent,
invested in the Rectory of Staplehirst, in the County of Kent, and that he was
also seized of an House in Staplehirst aforesaid, Situate within twenty Yards
of the said Rectory, and that the Mansion House of the said Rectory was in good
repair, and that Doctor Newman held that in his hands, and occupation with his
own proper goods, and did not let it to any other, and that he Inhabited in the
said Message and not in the Parsonage, and whether this were non residence or
no was the Question; and it was argued by the Plaintiff's Council, that it was
non residence, and it is there said, that the Statute was made for seven
causes, two of which are for Hospitality, and relief of the Poor, and these are
to be done in the Parsonage House, for this is the free Alms of the Church, and
so it was adjudged, B. R. 24 Eliz. in Broom and Hudson's Case, the Defendant's
Council argued to the contrary, but the Case was compounded by the Lord Cook
and so no judgment in it, but he intended this was no residence within the
Statute, as the Book says, H. 8 Jac. C. B. Canning and Doctor Newman's Case,
Brownl. Rep. 2 part, f. 54.

What a Dignity to excuse non residence.
Upon another Information for non residence, the Defendant pleaded that he was
chosen Gospeller in the Church of S. Paul's, London, and was resident there by
reason of that Dignity, and it was thereupon demurred, and it was said by the
Plaintiff's Council, that this was not any Dignity to excuse the Defendant, the
Civilians divide spiritual Functions into three degrees, first, a Function
which has a Jurisdiction as a Bishop, Dean, etc. secondly, a Spiritual
Administration with a cure, as Parson of a Church, etc. thirdly, they who
neither have cure nor Jurisdiction, as Prebends, Chaplains, etc. and defined a
Dignity to be, Administratio Ecclesiastica, cum Jurisdictione, vel potestate
conjuncta, and thereby they exclude the two last degrees, from being any
Dignity, a multo fortiori, the Common Law does so, and to that purpose, vide 27
H. 6. 5. 25 E. 3. 41. Br. Nosme 25. that an Archdeacon is not a Name of
Dignity, 17 E. 3. 31. A Provost is not a Name of Dignity, 11 H. 4. 40. A Parson
is not a Name of Dignity, 14 H. 6. 14. A Presentor is not a Name of Dignity, 27
H. 6. 3. A Chaplain is not a Name of Dignity, 27 H. 8. 10. is if a Vicar of S.
Paul's, has a Benefice with cure, he ought to be resident upon it, and that is
a greater Dignity than Gospeller, and of that Opinion were Popham and Clinch,
Caeteris Justiciariis absentibus, but the cause was adjorned, and afterward
the Defendant compounded, P. 41 Eliz. B. R. Boughton and Gonsley's Case, Cro.
Eliz. f. 663 pl. 13.

Information for non residence, where to be brought.
An Information was brought upon the Statute for non residence, before the
Justices of Assize, in the County of Essex, and it was resolved it did not lie,
but only in the King's Courts, where there may be Essoyn, Gager del Ley, or
Protection, M. 4 Car. 1 B. R. Green and Guye's Case, Cro. Car. f. 146. pl. 26.

Note, if a Baron have three Chaplains, Non obstant when necessary.
and every one of them has two Benefices apiece, and afterward the Baron
dies, yet they shall enjoy their Benefices with cure, in which they were
Lawfully settled before, but though they continue and abide upon one of the
Benefices, yet they may be punished for non residence upon the other, and so it
was adjudged in Parson Boyton's Case, as the Lord Cook reports, therefore says
he, such Minister ought to obtain of the King, a non obstante, so if the Baron
dye, be attainted of Treason or Felony, or if any Officer be removed from his
Office, who is Capacitated to retain a Chaplain, and sic de similibus, Co. Rep.
4 Lib. f. 119. a.

Non residence excusable when.
It has been agreed, that Lawful Imprisonment without fraud, is a good excuse
of non residence, so if there be no Parsonage House, for impotentia excusat
legem, and these Cases are excepted out of the Act, by Construction of the Law,
and it was also held in the Exchequer, Tr. 19 Eliz. that sickness without fraud
is also a good excuse, to wit, if the Patient remove by advice of his Physician
bona fide, for better Air, and for the recovery of his health, Co. Rep. 6 Lib.
f. 21. b. Martin's Case, M. 10 Jac. B. R. Boulstr. Rep. 2 part, f. 18.

Who excusable for non residence by the Canon.
I shall now set down what is required by the Canons in force, concerning
Dispensations and non residence, and first it is said, no License, or
Dispensation for the keeping of more Benefices with cure than one, shall be
granted to any, but such only as shall be thought very well worthy for his
learning, and very well able and sufficient, to discharge his duty, that is who
shall have taken the degree of Master of Arts, at the least, in one of the
Universities of this Realm, and be public and sufficent Preacher Licensed,
provided always that he be, by a good and sufficient caution, bound to make
his personal residence in each of his said Benefices for some reasonable time
in every Year, and that the said Benefices be not more than thirty miles
distance asunder, and lastly, that he have under him in the Benefice where he
does not reside, a preacher Lawfully allowed, that is able sufficiently to
teach and instruct the People, Can. 41.

Every Dean, Master or Warden, or Chief Governor of any Cathedral or Deans,
etc. to keep residence.
Collegiate Church: shall be resident in his said Cathedral or Collegiate
Church, fourscore an ten days conjunctim or divisim, in every Year at the
least, and then shall continue there in Preaching the Word of God, and keeping
good Hospitality, except he shall be otherwise let, with weighty and urgent
causes to be approved by the Bishop of the Diocese, or in any other Lawful
sort dispensed with, and when he is present, he with the rest of the Canons or
Prebendaries resident, shall take special care, that the Statutes and laudable
customs of their Church, (not being contrary to the Word of God, or Prerogative
Royal) the Statutes of this Realm being in force, concerning Ecclesiastical
Order, and all other Constitutions now set forth, and confirmed by his
Majesty's Authority, and such as shall be enjoined by the Bishop of the
Diocese, in his visitation according to the Statutes and customs of the same
Church, or the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm, be diligently observed, and
that the petty Canons, Vicars Coral, and other Ministers of their Church, be
urged to study the Holy Scriptures, and every one of them to have the New
Testament, not only in English but also in Latin, Can. 42.

No Prebendaries nor Canons in Cathedral or Collegiate Churches, having
Residence required in Prebendaries, etc.
one or more Benefices with cure, (and not being residentiary in the same
Cathedral or Collegiate Churches) shall under color of their said Prebends,
absent themselves from their Benefices with cure, above the space of one Month
in the Year, unless it be for some urgent cause, and certain time to be allowed
by the Bishop of the Diocese; And such of the said Canons and Prebendaries, as
by the Ordinances of the said Cathedral and Collegiate Churches do stand bound
to be resident in the same, shall so among themselves, sort and proportion the
times of the Year, concerning residence to be kept in the said Churches, as
that some of them always shall be personally resident there. And that all
those who be or shall be residentiaries in any Cathedral or Collegiate Church,
shall after the days of their Residence appointed by their Local Statutes or
Customs expired, presently repair to their Benefices, or some one of them, or
to some other Charge where the Law requires their presence, there to discharge
their duties, according to the Law in that Case provided; And the Bishop of the
Diocese shall see the same be duly performed and put in Execution, Can. 44.

CHAP. VII. Of the Oath which every Minister is to take before his Institution
to a Living, against Simony; with a Recital of the Statute, and some few Cases
concerning the same.
Symony.
INtending in this Chapter to Treat of the detestable sin of Simony as the Canon
calls it: I shall first give you the derivation of the word as the Lord Cook
defines it, then show you what the Canon says concerning it, and how the
Parliament of England in the 31 of Queen Elizabeth has taken care to prevent
it, and lastly the Book Cases upon it.

The Derivation of the word.
Simonia est vox Ecclesiastica, a Simone illo Mago deducta, qui donum Spiritus
Sancti pecuniis emi putavit; but this derivation of the word is thought by some
to be most properly applicable to such as corruptly give Moneys to get into
Orders, and not to such as give Moneys to be Presented to a Living, vide C.
Inst. 3. part, f. 153.

The Oath against it.
To avoid the detestable sin of Simony, because buying and selling of Spiritual
and Ecclesiastical Functions, Offices, Promotions, Dignities and Livings, is
execrable before God, therefore the Archbishop and all and every Bishop or
Bishops, or any other Person or Persons having Authority to Admit, Institute,
Collate, Install, or to Confirm the Election of any Archbishop, Bishop, or
other Person or Persons to any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Function, Dignity,
Promotion, Title, Office, Jurisdiction, Place or Benefice with Cure, or without
Cure, or to any Ecclesiastical Living whatsoever, shall before every such
Admission, Institution, Collation, Installation, or Confirmation of Election,
Respectively Minister to every Person hereafter to be Admitted, etc. the Oath
in manner and form following, the same to be taken by every one whom it
concerns in his own Person and not by Procter: I N. N. do Swear that I have
made no Simoniacal Payment, Contract or Promise, directly or indirectly, by my
self, or by any other to my knowledge, or with my Consent to any Person or
Persons whatsoever, for or concerning the procuring and obtaining of this
Ecclesiastical Dignity, Place, Preferment, Office or Living, (respectively and
particularly naming the same, whereunto he is to be Admitted, Instituted,
Collated, Installed or Confirmed) nor will at any time hereafter perform or
satisfy any such kind of Payment, Contract or Promise, made by any other
without my knowledge, or consent, so help me God through Jesus Christ, Can. 40.

The Penalty of Symoniacal Contra^is.
By the 31. Eliz. it is Enacted, That if any Person or Persons, Bodies Politic
and Corporate, shall or do for any Sum of Money, Reward, Gift, Profit or
Benefit, directly or indirectly, or for or by reason of any Promise, Agreement,
Grant, Bond, Covenant or other Assurance of or for any Sum of Money, Reward,
Gift, Profit or Benefit whatsoever, directly or indirectly Present or Collate
any Person to any Benefice with Cure of Souls, Dignity, Prebend or Living
Ecclesiastical, or give or bestow the same, for or in respect of any such
corrupt cause or consideration, That then every such Presentation, Collation,
Gift and Bestowing, and every Admission, Institution, Investure and Induction
thereupon shall be utterly void, frustrate, and of none effect in Law. And that
it shall and may be Lawful to and for the Queens Majesty, Her Heirs and
Successors to Present, Collate unto, or Give or Bestow every such Benefice,
Dignity, Prebend and Living Ecclesiastical, for that one time or Turn only; And
that every Person or Persons, Bodies Politic and Corporate, that from
thenceforth shall give or take any such Sum of Money, Reward, Gift, or Benefit
directly or indirectly, or that shall take or make any such Promise, Grant,
Bond, Covenant, or other Assurance, shall forfeit and loose the double value of
one years profit of every such Benefice, Dignity, Prebend, and Living
Ecclesiastical; And the Person so corruptly taking, procuring, seeking or
accepting any such Benefice, Dignity, Prebend or Living, shall thereupon and
from thenceforth be Adjudged a disabled Person in Law, to have or enjoy the
same Benefice, Dignity, Prebend, or Living Ecclesiastical, 31 Eliz. cap. 6.

And it is further Enacted, That if The Penalty of Simoniacal Admissions, etc.
any Person for any Sum of Money, Reward, Gift, Profit, or Commodity whatsoever
directly or indirectly (other than for usual and Lawful Fees) or for, or by
reason of any Promise, Agreement, Grant, Covenant, Bond, or other Assurance, of
or for any Sum of Money, Reward, Gift, Profit, or Benefit whatsoever, directly
or indirectly Admit, Institute, Install, Induct, Invest or Place any Person in,
or to any Benefice with Cure of Souls, Dignity, Prebend or other Living
Ecclesiastical, That then every such Person so offending, shall forfeit and
loose the double value of one years profit, of every such Benefice, Dignity,
Prebend, and Living Ecclesiastical; And that thereupon immediately from and
after the Investing, Installation or Induction thereof had, the same Benefice,
Dignity, Prebend and Living Ecclesiastical shall be merely void; And that the
Patron or Person to whom the Advowson, Gift, Presentation or Collation shall by
Law appertain, shall and may by virtue of the said Act, Present, or Collate
unto, Give and dispose of the same Benefice, Dignity, Prebend or Living
Ecclesiastical, in such sort to all Intents and Purposes, as if the Party so
Admitted, Instituted, etc. had been or were Naturally dead, 31 Eliz. cap. 6.

The Penalty o^ Corrupt Resignation.
And it is likewise Enacted, That if any Incumbent of any Benefice with Cure of
Souls, do or shall corruptly Resign or Exchange the same, or corruptly take for
or in respect of the resigning or exchanging of the same, directly or
indirectly, any Pension, Sum of Money, or Benefit whatsoever, That then as well
the Giver as the Taker of any such Pension, etc. shall lose double the value of
the sum so given, taken or had, the one Moiety thereof, as also of the
forfeiture of double value of one years profit before mentioned, to be to the
Queens Majesty Her Heirs and Successors, and the other to him or them that will
Sue for the same in any of Her Majesty's Courts of Record by Action of Debt,
etc. But note that no Lapse accrews upon any Avoidance by this Act, till after
Six Months after notice given of such Avoidance by the Ordinary to the Patron;
neither does it take away or restrain the power of the Laws Ecclesiastical in
such Cases, 31 Eliz. cap. 6.

It is also Enacted concerning voices The Penalty of corruption in voices, etc.
in Colleges, etc. That if any Person or Persons, Bodies Politic or Corporate,
which have Election, Presentation, Nomination, Voice or Consent in the Choice,
Election, Presentation or Nomination, of any Fellow, Scholar or other Person,
to have Room or Place in any of the Churches, Colleges, Schools, Hospitals,
Halls or Societies within this Realm, shall have, receive, or take any Money,
Fee, Reward, or any other profit directly or indirectly, or shall take any
Promise, Agreement, Covenant, Bond or other Assurance to receive or have any
Money, etc. directly or indirectly, either to him or themselves, or any other
of their or any of their Friends for his or their Voice or Voices, Assent or
Assents, or Consents in Electing, etc. any Officer, Fellow, Scholar or other
Person to have any Room or Place in any of the said Churches, Colleges, etc.
shall be void; And that then as well the Queens Majesty, Her Heirs and
Successors, and every other Person or Persons, and their Heirs and Successors,
to whom the Presentation, Donation, Gift, Election or Disposition shall of
Right belong or appertain, of any such of the said Rooms or Places of the said
Person offending as aforesaid, shall or may at their pleasure Elect, etc. any
other Person or Persons in the Room or Place of such Person or Persons so
offending, as if the said Person or Persons so offending were then Naturally
dead, 31 Eliz. cap. 6.

Also if any Fellow, Officer or Scholar The Penalty of corrupt Resignation of
a Fellowship, etc.
of any of the said Churches, Colleges, etc. or other Persons having Room or
Place or any of the same, shall directly or indirectly take or receive, or by
any way, device, or means, contract to agree or have, or receive any Money,
Reward or Profit whatsoever, for leaving or Resigning up of the same his Room
or Place, for any other to be placed in the same, That then every Person so
taking or Contracting, or agreeing to take or have any thing for the same,
shall forfeit and lose double the sum of Money or value of the thing so
received, etc. And every Person so giving Money etc. shall be incapable of that
Place or Room for that time or Turn, and shall not be taken to be a Lawful
Fellow, etc. to have such Room or Place there; but they to whom it shall
appertain may Elect, etc. another fit Person into the same Room or Fellowship,
as if the said Person so giving Money, etc. were Naturally dead, or had
Resigned and Left the same.

And for more sincere Election, etc. The Statute to be read every Election, etc.
of Fellows, Scholars, Officers, and other Persons to have room or place in
any of the same Churches, Colleges, etc. At the time of every such Election,
Presentation or Nomination as aforesaid to be had, as well the said Statute of
31 Eliz. as the Orders and Statutes of the same places concerning such
Election, etc. shall then and there be publicly read, upon pain that every
Person in whom default shall be made, shall forfeit Forty pounds, all which
Forfeitures shall be Sued for and Recovered in any of Her Majesty's Courts of
Record, by any Person or Persons, Bodies Politic or Corporate that will Sue
for the same, one Moiety to the Party Sueing, and the other to the use of the
College, etc. where such Offense shall be committed, 31 Eliz. cap. 6.

Note, that by this Statute if any Simoniacal Contract makes the Presentation
void, etc.
Clerk comes to a Living upon a Simoniacal Contract, whether he be privy to it
or no, it makes the Presentation, Admission, Institution and Induction all
void, whereas before the said Statute they were but voidable by deprivation;
And if a Man by Usurpation present to a Benefice, by reason of any corrupt
Contract, Agreement, etc. that Presentation and the Institution and Induction
thereupon are void, for the Act extends to all Patrons as well by wrong as by
right, with this difference, that where any presents by Usurpation, the Right
Patron and not the King shall present, for otherwise every Rightful Patron may
lose his Presentation; And such an Incumbent that comes in by the Lawful
Patron, by reason of any such corrupt Agreement, if he be privy to the same, is
so absolutely disabled for ever after to be presented to that Church, as the
King himself to whom the Law gives the Title of Presentation in that Case,
cannot present him again to that Church, for the Act being made for suppression
of Simony and such corrupt Agreements, so binds the King in that Case, that he
cannot present him that the Law has disabled; for the words of the Statute be,
shall thereupon, and from thenceforth be Adjudged a disabled Person in Law to
have or enjoy the same Benefice; And the party being disabled by the Act of
Parliament which (being an absolute and direct Law) the King cannot dispense
therewith no more than with the Common Law, by any Grant, etc. with a Non
obstante, as he may do when any thing is Prohibited sub modo, as upon a penalty
given to the King, or to the King and the Informer; but if the Incumbent were
not privy to, or did know of the corrupt Agreement, etc. then he shall not be
accounted a disabled Person within the said Act to be presented de novo; And
note that this Act does not only extend to Benefices with Cure, but to
Donatives, Dignities, Deanries, Prebends and all other Ecclesiastical Livings,
Co. Lit. f. 120. a. Co. 3. part, Inst. f. 153, 154, 155. and vide M. 42. 43.
Eliz. C. B. Rot. 3333. Baker and Roger's Case, Cro. Eliz. f. 788. pl. 30. and
M. Rep. f. 914. pl. 1292. see also M. 13. Jac. B. R. the King and Bishop of
Norwich, and Cole and Saker's Case, Roll's Rep. 1. part, f. 235. pl. 7. Cro.
Jac. f. 385. pl. 16. Hob. Rep. f. 75. and Boulstr. Rep. 3. part, f. 88. vide
Plo. Com. f. 502. 2. H. 7. 6. 11. H. 7. 11. Hetlye's Rep. f. 51. and M. 9. Car.
1. B. R. Bawderoicke and Mackaller's Case, Cro. Car. f. 330. pl. 15. M. 10.
Jac. Stamford and Hutchinson's Case, Cro. Rep. 12. Lib. f. 101.

A Wife may Contract Simony.
If one Contract with the Wife of the Patron to be presented for Money, and is
presented accordingly by the Husband, this is Simony within the Statute 31
Eliz. and makes the Presentation void, for 27 H. 8. 26. the Contract of the
Wife is the Contract of the Husband, and 30 Eliz. 3. 39. he ought to declare
accordingly, and if the Contract be made with the Patron by a mere Stranger, it
makes the Presentation void; Roll's Rep. 1. part, f. 236. Cro. Jac. f. 385.
Boulstr. Rep. 2. part, f. 182. and 3. part, f. 90.

Guardian in Seccage cannot Present.
Simony is odious in the Eye of the Common Law, for a Guardian in Soccage of a
Manor whereunto an Advowson is appendant, shall not present to the Church,
because he can take nothing for the Presentation, for the which he may account
to the Heir, and therefore the Heir in that Case shall Present of what Age
soever he be; and the Common Law would have the Patron so far from Simony, as
it denied him to Recover Damages in a Quare Impedit, or Assize of Darrein
Presentment before the Statute of Westminster, 2. cap. 5. and it is the more
odious because it is ever accompanied with Perjury, for the Presentee is Sworn
to Commit no Simony, as appears by the Oath before mentioned in this Chapter;
vide Co. Inst. 3. part, f. 196. F. N. B. 33. T. 7. E. 3. 39. a. Co. 2. part,
Inst. f. 362, 363. and Co. Rep. 6. Lib. f. 51. and it has been agreed by the
Court of Common Pleas that Simony is most properly Triable in the Spiritual
Court; M. 40. Eliz. C. B. Reishye and Wentworth's Case, Cro. Eliz. f. 642. pl.
42. M. 3. Jac. Close Case; M. Rep. f. 777. pl. 1077.

A contract when the Parson is sick, is Simony.
Note, that it has been held, and so adjudged in Chancery as the Book says,
That if a Man obtain a grant of the next avoidance for money, when the Parson
is sick in his Bed ready to dye, it is Simony, for the Statute is, if the
contract be made directly or indirectly, by any way or means, P. 21 Jac. C. B.
Shelden and Bret's Case, Winch Rep. f. 63. and see P. 4 Jac. C. B. Rot. 1926.
Winchcombe and Bishop of Winchester and Puleston's Case, M. Rep. f. 877. pl.
1231. Noye's Rep. f. 25. and Hob. Rep. f. 165.

In Case where Bond, or other assurance, Bonds, etc. for mo eyes no^ void.
promise, etc. is made for moneys, to be presented to a Benefice, though the
Simoniacall contract, make the Presentation, etc. void, yet the Statute does
not make the Bond, Promise, etc. for the money void, and so it was adjudged, P.
40 Eliz. C. B. Rot. 1745. in Gregory and Oldbury's Case, cited by the Lord Cook
in the Margin of his 3 part, Inst. f. 153 M. Rep. f. 564. pl. 769. and Boulstr.
Rep. 2 part, f. 182.

Note this Case following, where a What contract no Simony.
contract was made with the Patron, for the next avoidance, the Parson being
then sick, and yet adjudged no Simony, as Crook reports it, the Case was this,
the Father of one Smith, came with his Son to the Patron, the Parson being then
sick, and in the presence of his Son, contracted with the Patron for the next
avoidance to the Church, for 100 pounds, who thereupon made a grant thereof,
the Parson afterward dies, and the Father presents his Son, who is Admitted,
Instituted and Inducted into the Living, and was sued in the Spiritual Court to
be deprived for Simony, and thereupon a Prohibition was granted, and it was
adjudged to be no Simony, and the reasons there given are, that the Father
might buy the Advowson, and present his Son, and it is no Simony, in any to buy
an Advowson. And although the Son here was privy thereto, yet it is not
material, for it being no offense in the Father, who was Principal, it cannot
be an offense in the Son, who is but Accessory; for there cannot be a particeps
criminis, where there was not any crime committed, but if the Parson himself
had contracted for a Benefice, to the intent another should present him, that
is Simony; But the Father is bound by Nature to provide for his Son, and
therefore his buying an Advowson to the intent to provide for his Son, is not
any Simony, and of this Opinion were three of the Justices, but Anderson was of
a contrary Opinion, but was over ruled by the other three, P. 41 Eliz. C. B.
Rot. 1001, Smith and Shelbourn's Case, Cro. Eliz. f. 685. pl. 21. but this same
Case being reported by Moore, f. 916. pl. 1299. he says that it was clearly
agreed to be Simony, but all the Justices, except Anderson, held it to be no
Simony if the Son had not been privy to the bargain, Ideo Quaere, and vide 39
Eliz. Buck's Case, and 3 Jac. Freeman and English^s Case, Hughes cap. 16. P. 3.
Car. 1. B. R. Rot. 362. Godb. Rep. f. 390. pl. 475. and f. 435. pl. 500. Noye's
Rep. f. 25.

What contract no Simony.
In an Ejection firm the point was, the Patron takes an Obligation of the Clerk,
(which he presented) that he should pay ten pounds yearly to the Son of the
last Incumbent, so long as he should be a Student in Cambridge unpreferr'd: And
this was adjudged to be no Simony, but if it had been to have paid ten pounds
to the Son of the Patron, etc. then it had been Simony. And Justice Foster,
vouched the Earl of Sussex's Case, an Obligation made by the Presentee to the
Patron, to pay fifty pounds yearly to the Wife and Children of the last
Incumbent, and held to be no Simony, Baker and Mountford's Case, Noye's Rep. f.
142.

What Covenant no Simony.
And if a Father in Law, upon the Marriage of his Daughter, Covenant with his
Son in Law, without any consideration but voluntarily, that he will procure him
to be Presented, Admitted, Instituted, and Inducted into such Benefice upon the
next avoidance of the same Church, this is no Simony, but if such a Covenant
had been made in consideration of Marriage of his Daughter, etc. or other
consideration that he would procure him to be presented, etc. to such a Church
that had been a Simoniacal contract, M. 11 Car. 1. B. R. Birte and Manning's
Case, Cro. Car. f. 425. pl. 16.

Obligation ^o resign no ^imony.
In debt upon an Oligation for a thousand Marks, the Case was thus, that whereas
the Obligee had procured from Queen Elizabeth, Letters of Presentation to the
Church of Sretham, to which he intended to present his Son, breeding him a
Scholar after he should attain the Age of 24 Years, and in the mean time
presented one Lawrence, and after Institution and Induction, etc. took the Bond
abovesaid of him, that if after his Son was of Age and Capacitated, he should
absolutely resign the said Benefice within three Months after request to him
made, then the Obligation to be void, otherwise to remain in full force and
virtue; to this the Defendant Lawrence pleaded non requisitus, which upon the
Trial was found against him, and it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, that it
appeared by the condition of the Bond, to be a Simoniacal contract, and against
Law, and therefore the Obligation void, but notwithstanding, the Court gave
Judgment for the Plaintiff; And afterward a Writ of Error being brought, the
Principal Error insisted upon was that this condition is against Law, being for
Simony, but all the Judges of the Common Pleas, and Barons of the Exchequer
held, that the Obligation and condition were good enough; for a Man may bind
himself to resign and it is not unlawful, but may be upon good and valuable
reasons without any color of Simony; as to be obliged to resign if he take a
second Benefice, or if he be non resident by the space of so many Months, or as
this Case is to resign upon request, if the Patron will present his Son thereto
when he should be capable to take it. But if it had been averred, that it was
per colorem Simonii, viz. if he did not suffer the Patron to enjoy a Lease of
the Glebe or Tithes, or if he did not pay such a sum of money, that had been
Simony, and it is possible might have made the Obligation void, but in this
Case there is no such thing, and so adjudged no Simony, Tr. 8 Jac. Rot. 1130.
B. R. Jones and Lawrence's Case, Cro. Jac. f. 248. pl. 8. and 274. pl. 2.

Also in Hill. 15 Car. 1. an action of debt brought upon a Bond conditioned
Bond to resign ^o Simony, without ^^^^ment, etc.
whereas the Plaintiff intended to present the Defendant to such a Benefice,
that if at any time, after his Admission, Institution and Induction, at the
Plaintiff's request he should resign the said Benefice into the hands of the
Ordinary, that then etc. upon Oyer of the condition, the Defendant demurred
generally, etc. and upon argument his Council showed, that the condition being
to resign when the Patron should request, it was Simony and against Law, and so
the Bond void, but all the Court held the contrary, but if it had been averred,
that the Obligation was made per colorem Simonii, as to bind the Presentee to
pay such a sum of money, or to make a Lease of the Tithes, or other Act which
appears in it self to be Simony, then upon such a Plea, peradventure it might
have appeared to the Court to have been Simony, and so the Bond questionable;
But as it is here it does not appear, that there is any Simony, for such a Bond
to cause him to resign, may be good and upon good reason and discretion
required by the Patron, viz. if he be not resident, or takes a second Benefice
by Qualification, etc. or intended to present his Son when qualified as in the
last Case, and for these reasons, judgment was given for the Plaintiff; H. 15
Car. 1. B. R. Babington and Wood's Case, Cro. Car. f. 180. pl. 4. Hut. Rep. f.
110 and Jone's f. Rep. 220. pl. 1. and vide M 43, 44 Eliz. C. B. Webb and
Hargrave's Case, M. Rep. f. 641. pl. 883.

Indeed there is a Case in Noy, where it is said, that the Court held it to be
Averment requisite to make a Bond Simonical.
Simony, where the Patron had presented one, and taken Bond of him, to resign
when the Patron pleased, after three Months warning, but the reasons are not
set down in the Book, so I suppose the condition has been general to resign
and averment made by the Presentee, that it was per colorem Simonii, etc. as is
showed before, Tr. 15 Jac. C. B. Rot. 2051. Sir John Pascal and Clarke's Case,
Noye's Rep. f. 22.

There is also another Case in Roll's, which contradicts this in Noy, besides
Bond to resign no Simony, etc.
the two beforementioned, so that it can be of no great Authority, the Case was
thus, A. was bound to B. that whereas A. within a short time was to be
Presented, Instituted and Inducted into a Benefice, if therefore after his
Admission, Institution and Induction at all times, upon request of B. his
Heirs, Executors, or Administrators, he should resign the same to the Ordinary
or Guardian of the Spiritualities for the time being, so that B. his Heirs, or
Assigns, Patrons of the said Church, may present anew to the same, discharged
of all Encumbrances, made or suffered by A. then the same Obligation to be
void, otherwise, etc. and this upon demurrer, was held to be a good condition,
without averment, that it was for a Simoniacal purpose, for otherwise it does
not appear to the Court to be so, and there is a difference between malum inse,
against the Common Law, and malum prohibitum, by Statute Law, or by the Civil
or Ca^on Law, whereof the Judges at Common Law take no notice; and it is there
further said, that if the condition were that after the Institution and
Induction into the Church, the Obliger shall at all times afterward be
Ordinarily resident, and serving the cure of the said Benefice without absence,
by 80 days in any one Year, during the time that he shall be Parson there,
this is a good condition, without any averment to be taken for any Simoniacal
purpose, M. 14 Car. 1. B. R. Carey and Yeo's Case, Intratur H. 13 Car. 1 Rot.
445. Roll's Cases, 1 part, f. 417. V. 1, 2. and vide Co. Inst. 3 part, f. 153.
in the Margin.

Simoniacal promise void.
A Parson did promise a Man, that if he would bestow his labor and pains to
procure him to be Presented, Instituted and Inducted into the Chapel of the
Tower, being then void, and a Donative in the King's Gift, that he would pay
him twenty pounds upon request, whereupon he did procure him to be presented,
etc. to the same, and then required his money, which the Parson refused to pay,
and thereupon he brought his Action in the Court of the Tower of London, and
had a Verdict and Judgment for the money, upon which the Parson brought a Writ
of Error, and it was agreed that the Judgment was Erroneous, for the
consideration was Simoniacal and against Law, and no good consideration, and
therefore the promise not good, and so the Judgment was reversed, as Justice
Jones reports it, but in Justice Crook's reports, it is there said, that the
Declaration was held not to be good, for the Plaintiff had laid the promise to
pay after the Defendant was Rector, and shows that he was Rector by his
procurement upon the said promise, which could not be, for he was never Rector,
but a Person utterly disabled to be a Parson by this Simoniacal contract, as by
the 13 Eliz. for not reading the Articles of Religion, M. 9 Car. 1 B. R.
Mackaller and Todderick's Case, Jone's Rep. f. 341. pl. 1 Cro. Car. f. 337. pl.
24. and 353. pl. 18. and 361. pl. 2. and Roll's Cases, 1 part, f. 18.

The King's turn lost when.
If a Clerk be Presented by Simony, and be Instituted and Inducted into the
Living, and dye possessed thereof, yet this does not take away the King's turn,
but he may present after the Incumbent's Death, if he please, but if the
Incumbent in his Life time resign or the like, and a new Clerk were presented
and dyed, then the King's turn had been lost; and if a Patron contract with one
for Simony, and then present another without Simony, the King gains nothing,
for there must be an actual, though not an effectual Presentation; but if once
the Patron have presented by Simony, the King is straightwaies Interested,
(though no Admission follow) by the express words of the Statute; but where the
Patron is Innocent, and the Simony begins in the Institution and Induction,
there the Church is void from the Induction only, and the Patron shall present
de novo (because no fault in him) and not the King; And so where a Clerk gets
Orders by Simony, and obtains a Living within Seven Years Lawfully, in this
Case it is void from the Induction, as if he were Dead, and the Patron shall
present again and not the King, see P. 14 Jac. C. B. Rot. 1026 Winchcome and
Bishop of Winchester and Puleston's Case, Hob. Rep. f. 165, 166, 167. Noye's
Rep. f. 25. and M. Rep. f. 877. pl. 1231.

Presentment by Simony, serves for a turn.
If one who has the grant of the next avoidance to a Church present by Simony,
and his Clerk is received, he shall never present again, as taking this to be
void, and so his turn to remain, for as to him it is full, and he shall not
disable his own Act: And if a Parson who comes in by Simony, sue for Tithes in
the Ecclesiastical Court, or for his treble damages at Common Law, his
Parishioners may plead him no Parson because of his Simony; for otherwise, if
the King should present and his Clerk be received, he must not pay both, and to
whom he shall pay, it is at his peril upon the Simony or not, and if the
Ordinary refuse his Plea, he may have a Prohibition, for it is made void by a
Statute Law, by which the Spiritual Courts are bound, Hob. Rep. f. 168. Noye's
Rep. f. 25. and see Tr 10. Jac. C. B. Dr. Hutchinson's son's Case, Godb. Rep.
f. 202. pl. 288.

Note, that the Clause of the Act of Precipitate Admissions, etc. to be avoided,
Parliament (mentioned before in this Chapter) which says, that if any Person
shall for any sum of Money, etc. other than for usual Fees, Admit, Institute,
etc. that every Person so offending shall lose double value, of one years
profit of every such Benefice, etc. and that immediately after the Induction
such Benefice shall be merely void, etc. was made as the Lord Cook says (who
was a Member of that Parliament) to avoid hasty and precipitate Admissions,
Institutions, etc. to the prejudice of them that have Right to present, by
putting them to a Quare Impedit, for no such have or precipitation is used but
for Reward, etc. as it is to be presumed; for there be two great Enemies to
Justice and Right, viz. Praecipitatio, and morosa Cunctatio, and although the
Church be full by the Institution, etc. against all but the King, yet the
Church becomes not void by this branch of this Act, until after Induction,
neither does it Incapacitate the Clerk from whom such sum of Money or Reward
was exacted above the usual Fees, but that he may be presented again to the
same Living; and in all the Cases before mentioned, where it is said that they
shall forfeit and lose the double value of one years profit, etc. this shall be
accounted according to the true value, as the same Living may be Letten, and
shall be Tried by a Jury, and not according to the Extent or Taxation of the
Church, whereof one was made both of the Spiritualities and Temporalities in
the 28 E. 1. Anno Dom. 1292. in the time of Pope Nicholas the Third, and the
other in the 26 H. 8. Anno Dom. 1535. in the time of Pope Paul the Third, but
this last Taxation (which is now the Rule they go by in the First Fruits
Office) was made after the Popes Authority was denied here in England, vide Co.
Inst. 3. part, f. 154.

CHAP. VIII. Of the First Fruits, Tenths, Dilapidations, and Mortuaries.
Court of the First Fruits dissolved.
OBserve that in the time of H. 8. when the First Fruits were annexed to the
Crown, there was a Court of First Fruits and Tenths instituted and appointed by
the 32 H. 8. cap. 45. consisting of a Chancellor, Treasurer, King's Attorney,
two Auditors, and two Clerks, a Messinger and an Usher, with Authority given to
Compound for First Fruits, and that Bonds taken therefore should be of the
force of a Statute Staple; but this Court was Dissolved by Queen Mary, 1. Mar.
2. Sess. cap. 10. and all the Clergy Exonerated and Discharged from the payment
of First Fruits and Tenths given to the Crown by the 26 H. 8. cap. 3. and this
was Enacted by 2. and 3. p. M. cap. 4.

First Fruits Rest^^ed to the Crown.
But afterward the Stat. 26 H. 8. cap. 3. was revived, and First Fruits and
Tenths of the Clergy Reunited to the Crown, by 1 Eliz. cap. 4. but no Court is
revived, but First Fruits and Tenths to be within the Rule, Survey and
Government of the Exchequer, and a new Office and Officer was Created, viz. a
Remembrancer of the First Fruits and Tenths of the Clergy, who takes all
Compositions for the First Fruits and Tenths, and makes process against such as
pay not the same; and note that the First Fruits, are the profits for one whole
year, of every Spiritual Living after Avoidance (except Vicarages not exceeding
Ten pounds, and Parsonages not exceeding Ten Marks in the King's Books
according to the Taxation made in the 26 H. 8. and now remaining in the
Exchequer) but all are to pay Tenths, 1 Eliz. cap. 4. Co. Inst. 4. part, f. 120.

First F^^i^s given to ^^e King.
By the Stat. 26 H. 8. it is Enacted that the King's Highness, His Heirs and
Successors Kings of England shall have and enjoy from time to time to endure
for ever, of every such Person and Persons as shall be Nominated, Elected,
Preferred, Presented, Collated, or by any other means appointed to have any
Archbishopric, Bishopric, College, Hospital, Arch deaconry, Deanery,
Provost-ship, Prebend, Parsonage, Vicarage, or other Dignity, Benefice, Office,
or Promotion Spiritual within this Realm, or elsewhere within any of the King's
Dominions, of what Name, Nature or Quality soever they be, or to whose
Foundation, Patronage or Gift soever they belong, the First Fruits, Revenues
and Profits for one year of every such Archbishopric, Bishopric, etc. And
that every such Person and Persons before any Actual or Real possession or
meddling with the Profits thereof, shall satisfy, content and pay, or compound
or agree to pay to the King's use at reasonable days, upon good Suerties the
said First Fruits and Profits for one year; and all Writings Obligatory taken
or the payment of the same, by any Person deputed to Compound for the First
Fruits, shall be of the same strength, quality and force, to all I^^^nts, as
Writings Obligatory made by any Lay Person by Authority of the S^atute Staple;
And if any Person or Persons (...) said do enter into the ^ea^ and (...) of any
of the (...) aforesaid, (...) thereof, (...) he First Fruits, or compounded and
given Suerties as aforesaid to pay the same: Then every such Person so
offending, and being Convicted by Presentment, Verdict, Confession or Witnesses
before such as have Authority to Compound the same, shall be taken as an
Intruder upon the King's Possession, and they their Heirs, Executors or
Administrators shall pay double the value of the said First Fruits and Profits
of such Dignity, etc. wherein they shall so enter before Payment or Agreement
for the same; but Archbishops and Bishops and all other having Ordinary
Jurisdiction, may give and deliver Letters of Institution and Induction as they
might do before the making of the said Act, notwithstanding the same, 26 H. 8.
cap. 3.

Tenths given to the King.
And it is also further Enacted by the said Statute, that there shall be paid
yearly for ever to the King, His Heirs and Successors, one yearly Rent or
Pension amounting to the value of the Tenth part of the Profits of all and
every Benefice or Promotion Spiritual, etc. as abovesaid according to the
Taxation in the King's Exchequer aforesaid, to be paid yearly before (...)
first day of April, and every Archbishop and Bishop within their proper
Diocese, as well within places exempt as not exempt, and in time of Vacation
the Dean and Chapter of the Cathedral Church, shall Collect and Receive the
same, and pay in the said Sums yearly before the last day of May, 7 E. 6. cap.
4. to such Persons as have Authority to receive the same; And every of the said
Archbishops and Bishops, their Executors and Administrators and Possessions of
their Dignities and Churches, shall stand Charged and Chargable for the same
Sums of Money which they shall Collect and Receive of the said yearly Rent or
Pension; and the Bishop of Norwich and his Successors, and in the time of
Vacation the Dean and Chapter of the Cathedral Church of Norwich are to gather
the same within that Diocese, by the Statute 32 H. 8. cap. 47. and the Rents
and Pensions reserved by H. 8. out of the Five new Bishoprics Established by
him to wit, Chester, Gloucester, Peterborough, Bristol and Oxford, which by the
34 and 35 H. 8. c. 17. were to be paid into the Court of First Fruits and
Tenths, are made payable by the 1 Eliz. to the same Persons who receive the
First Fruits and Tenths of the other Clergy, 1 Eliz. c. 4.

Process to be made out for non-payment of Tenths.
And by the 26 H. 8. cap. 3. It is further Enacted, That the Treasurer,
Chancellor and Barons of the King's Exchequer, shall yearly cause Process to be
made by their Discretions for Non payment of the Tenths or any part thereof,
against every Archbishop and Bishop of this Realm, for so much as the
Dignities, Benefices, etc. within their several Diocesses are Taxed and Charged
at; every of the said Archbishops and Bishops to be Charged only for so much
as is within his own Diocese; And the Archbishops and Bishops have Power and
Authority by the said Act, to levy, take and perceive by Authority of Censures
of the Church, or by Distress or otherwise by their Discretion, all such Sums
of Money as are Rated for the said Tenths, upon the Lands, Tenements, Profits,
etc. of all such Spiritual Promotions as aforesaid within their Diocese; And no
Replevin, Prohibition nor Supersedeas upon any Excommunication, nor any other
Writ or Impediment shall be Sued, Allowed or Obeyed for any Person or Persons
making default of payment of such part and portion as they shall be Rated at,
till such time as they have truly satisfied their said Part and Portion; And in
Case where the Tenths are due, and being reasonably demanded at their
Dignities, Churches or Houses, etc. by the Arch bishop or Bishop or such as
shall be charged with the Collection thereof, or by any other their Ministers,
Servants or Officers, and be not paid at the time of such Demand or Request or
within Forty days after at the furthest, that then every Incumbent making such
default of payment, after such default certified into the King's Exchequer in
Writing under the Seals of any Archbishop or Bishop, or of such as be charged
to the Collection of the said Pension, shall be Adjudged deprived ipso facto of
that only Dignity, Benefice, etc. whereof such Certificate shall be made, as if
the said Incumbent were dead, 26 H. 8. cap. 3. 2. E. 6. cap. 20. 1 Eliz. cap.
4. and vide p. 7. Eliz. C. B. Dyer, f. 237. a. pl. 29.

And every Archbishop and Bishop How Bishops, etc. may be discharged of Tenths.
or any other having Authority to Receive the Tenths, making a Certificate into
the Exchequer before the last day of May (by the Statute 7 E. 6. cap. 4.) that
they have reasonably demanded the Tenths of any Incumbent of any Dignity,
Benefice, etc. due for him to pay, and that he has not paid the same, or that
such Benefice remains void and no Incumbent can be had, shall be a discharge to
every such Archbishop and Bishop or other having Authority to receive the
Tenths, for so much as such Incumbent or Benefice being void ought to pay; And
the Treasurer, Chancellor and Barons of the King's Exchequer shall devise and
direct upon every such Certificate, such Process out of the said Court, against
every Incumbent so Certified and their Executors and Administrators for
Insufficiency of them, against the Successors of every such Incumbent; so that
the King may be truly Answered the said Tenths for such Dignity, etc. and may
Levy and take all the Glebe Lands, Tithes, etc. of the Benefice being vacant to
which no Incumbent can be had to satisfy himself, 7 E. 6. cap. 4. also where
the said Archbishop, Bishop or other Accomptants charged with the Collection
of Tenths, make Oath before the Treasurer, Barons and Chancellor of the
Exchequer or the Major part of them, or before such other Persons as have power
to hear such Account, that they cannot or may not for some sufficient Cause or
matter lawfully Levy the Tenths which they stand charged in Account, then upon
such Oath made they shall be discharged for so much, 32 H. 8. cap. 22.

Acquittances made by such as have Acquittances for Tenths by whom to be made,
etc.
power to receive Tenths or any part thereof, to such Person or Persons who are
charged with the Collection thereof, shall be of as good strength, force,
virtue and effect to the parties having the same, as if they were made in the
King's Name under his Great Seal, and shall be allowed, admitted and accepted
in all Courts of this Realm, and no Officer of the Exchequer shall take any
matter, thing or reward of any Archbishop or Bishop, or of any other Persons
having Charge with the Collection and Payment of Tenths for making their
Account or Quietus est, upon pein to lose his Office, and make Fine to the King
at his will and pleasure, 26 H. 8. cap. 3. 1 Eliz. cap. 1.

By the 27 H. 8. the Tenths are to What Remedy for Arrearages of Tenths
be paid by every Archbishop, Bishop, etc. the first year they enter on their
Spiritual Dignities, Benefices, etc. and they are to have allowance thereof in
the payment of their First Fruits; and where any Incumbent is chargeable with
the Arrears of his Predecessors Tenths, in such Case he may distrain such Goods
and Chattels of his Predecessors as shall happen to be and remain in and upon
the Dignity, Benefice, etc. for which the same Tenths were behind, and retain
the same till such time as his Predecessor pay if he be alive, and if he be
dead, then till ^is Executors or Administrators, or those to whom his Goods and
Chat^els should belong do pay the same, and if the Money be not paid within
^welve days after the distress taken, ^^en the said distress to be apprized ^y
two or three Indifferent Persons to ^e Sworn for the same, and then ac^^rding
to the said Appraisement so ^uch of the distress to be sold as will ^y the said
Arrear and reasonable ^osts about the Distress, and if no Di^ess can be found
on the said Dig^^y, etc. then the Predecessor if he be alive, and if dead, his
Executors, Administrators, and other, to whom his Goods and Chattels shall
appertain or belong, shall be compelled to pay the same by Bill in Chancery, or
Action of debt to be prosecuted by such successor, by Order of the Common Law,
27 H. 8. cap. 8. 1 Eliz. cap. 4.

When the Year for first Fruits shall begin.
Note, that the Year for the first Fruits, is to begin from the time of the
avoidance or vacation of the Benefice, etc. and the Tithes, Fruits, Oblations,
Obventions, etc. during the time of such vacation, are to go to such Person as
shall be next presented, etc. to the same Benefice or Dignity, and to his
Executors, toward the payment ^^ the first Fruits; And if any Archbishop,
Bishop, Archdeacon, Ordinary, or any other Person or Persons, to the^^ uses,
and behoofs do receive and tak^ the said Tithes, etc. and do not upon
reasonable request, tender and pay t^^ same to the next Incumbent, being
lawfully Instituted, Inducted, or A^mitted to such Benefice, etc. then the
shall forfeit and lose the treble val^ of so much as they have received of t^^
Fruits, etc. one Moiety to the Ki^^ and the other to the Incumbent, to ^
recovered in any of the King's Courts, by Action, Bill, Plaint, Information, or
otherwise, but every Archbishop, etc. may Retain so much of the Tithes, etc. in
their hands, as shall pay for serving the cure, during such vacation, and the
charges of gathering the said Tithes, etc. and where the Fruits of the vacation
of such Spiritual Promotion be not sufficient to pay the Curate's stipend and
wages for serving the cure, then the same is to be paid by the next Incumbent,
within fourteen days next after that he has the Possession of the said
Promotion Spiritual, 28 H. 8. cap. 11.1 Eliz. cap. 4.

Churches United to pay first Fruits and Tenths.
By the 37 H. 8. there was saved to the King, his Heirs and Successors, all the
Tenths and first Fruits of all such Churches and Chapels as then were, or
afterward should be United and Consolidated in one, according to the same or
such like rates and valuations, as the same Churches and Chapels were then
rated and valued at to the King's Majesty, in his Court of first Fruits and
Tenths, 37 H. 8. cap. 21.

Collect^rs of Tenths to be bound for the payment of the same.
All Collectors of Tenths, under any Archbishop or Bishop, having Letters
Patents, or other writings of their Office of Collectorship, are to be bound by
their sufficient writing, Obligatory or Recognizance, in the Court where the
King's revenues of the Tenths shall be answerable in such sum or sums of money,
as shall be due within their Collection or Office, to save and keep the said
Archbishop or Bishops, harmless, and without damage against the King for the
same, and all such Grants, Patents or Writings to such Collectors, shall
continue no longer in force then during such time as such Archbishop or Bishop
who granted the same, shall remain Archbishop or Bishop of the same See or
Bishopric whereof he was possessed when he granted the same, 7* E. 6 cap. 4.
and by the 14 Eliz. cap. 7. the Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattels of such
under Collectors of Tenths, are made liable to answer the Queen, her Heirs and
Successors for such sums as they shall gather yearly within their Collection,
and every Archbishop, Bishop, and Dean, and Chapter, (sede vacant) to whom the
Collection of such Tenths shall appertain, shall be discharged of so much as
shall be satisfied of or by the Lands Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods o^
Chattels of such under Collector, or his Heirs, without any other Warrant
whatsoever in that behalf to be obtained, 14 Eliz. cap. 7. and 13 Eliz. cap. 4.

First Fruits in what time to be paid.
Vicarages not exceeding ten pounds, and Parsonages not exceeding ten marks in
the King's Books, are not to pay any first Fruits as is showed before; and
every Incumbent liable to pay first Fruits, that lives one half Year after the
last avoidance, so as he has or might have received the Rents and Profits of
that half Year, and before the end of the next half Year he happen to dye, or
be Lawfully evicted, removed, or put from the same Promotion Spiritual by
Judgment in an action at Common Law, without Fraud or Covin, then he is to pay
but a fourth part of the first Fruits; and if he Live one Year, and dye or be
evicted, etc. before the next half Year, then he is to pay one half of his
first Fruits; and if he Live one Year and an half, and dye or be evicted, etc.
before the end of six Months then next following, then he is to pay three parts
of his first Fruits; and if he Live two Years, then he must pay his whole first
Fruits, for such Promotion Spiritual, 1 Eliz. cap. 4.

By the 1 Eliz. all Grants, Immunities and Liberties, given to either of
Colleges, etc. discharged of first Fruits, etc.
the Universities of this Kingdom, or to any College or Hall in either of them,
and to the Colleges of Eaton and Winchester, by any of the Kings of England, or
by Act of Parliament, touching the release or discharge of first Fruits and
Tenths, are to be and remain in full force and strength; and that all such
conveyances and assurances in Law, as were then had or made to either of the
Universities, or to any College or Hall, within either of them, or of any of
the Parsonages or Benefices Impropriate, or of any Patronage for the
maintenance of students or learning, are good and effectual notwithstanding the
same Act of Parliament; and all the Possessions of the free Chapel, Deanery and
Canons of Windsor, are discharged of Tenths and first Fruits, but all the
Rectories and Spiritual Promotions belonging to the Archdeaconry o^ Wells, are
made chargeable to the payment thereof, and all the Rectories, Parsonages, and
Benefices Impropriate Glebe Lands, Tithe, Oblations, Obventions, Pensions,
Portions, and other Profits and Emolluments, Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, as
were in the Survey Rule and Order of the Court of the Duchy of Lancaster, were
to continue so. And lastly by the same Act it is provided, that no Hospital
founded and used, and the Possessions thereof employed to and for the use and
relief of Poor People, or any School or Schools, or the possessions or revenues
of them, shall be charged with the payment of any Tenths or first Fruits, 1
Eliz. cap. 4.

A demand of Tenths, how and where to be made.
Note, that the demand of the Tenths ought to be express, and not a summons to
pay them at another place, as appears by the Case following; An Apparator came
to the Church to the Parson, and said to him, that he must pay his Tenths to
such an one, and at such a place, being four miles distant from the Church, and
the Parson not paying, the Bishop certifies according to the Statute, that he
refused to pay his Tenths, and whether this were a good demand or no was the
Question; and all the Justices agreed that it was not, for they said a summons
to pay was not sufficient, but it ought to be an express demand, and by one who
has Authority to receive it, M. 39, 40 Eliz. C. B. Reyner and Parker's Case,
M. Rep. f. 541. pl. 714.

Bishop's Certificate of what force.
The Bishop of York, certified in the late Court of first Fruits and Tenths,
Anno 5, and 6 E. 6. in these words, adhibuimus omnimodam diligent. per
Subcollectores nostros per totam diocesim Eborum. Et comperimus, I. C. Vicarium
de Gargrave Recusantem solvere subsidia Vicariae suae qui nullo modo metu
paenarum huiusmodi produci potuisset ad solutionem subsidii praedict sed
perseverans in obstinatiori sua malitia, and this is left as a quaere in Dyer,
whether by this Certificate the Vicarage were void or no, Dyer, f. 116. a. pl.
69. but in Crook's reports it is said there, that the Justices held such a
Certificate not to be Peremptory, but that it may be Traversed, for the Bishop
does it only as an Officer, and not as a Judge, as in Case of Bastardy, and
here is to be a default in the Parson, viz. not payment, which is tryable per
pais, for otherwise, all the Parsons in England may be put out of their
Parsonages by such nude surmise, and bare Certificate without any answer, and
the Law never intended to make the Certificate so Peremptory as the Book says;
and it is there said also, that the Officer of the Bishop, which is to demand
the Tenths, ought also to be Authorized to receive them, for he cannot appoint
them to be paid at another place, or to another Person, for the Parson is to
pay them at his own House, and to the Person that demands them, in the Name of
the Bishop, M. 29, and 30 Eliz. in Scaccario, the Queen and Blancher's Case,
Cro. Eliz. f. 80. pl. 44.

Dilapidations cause of deprivation.
Now we come to Dilapidations, which every Clergy Man ought to take care to
prevent, for there can be nothing worse becoming the Dignity of a Clergyman
than Dilapidations, and non residence, and as the Canon Law made Provision
against it, so also has the Common Law of this Kingdom, as appears by the
Books of 20 H. 6. 46. a. 2 H. 4. 3. b. 29 E. 3. 16. a. for if Spiritual Persons
waste the Lands, Woods, or Houses of their Churches, they may be deprived or
deposed by their Superiors, who have the Visitation and Superiority over them,
Roll's Rep. 1 part, f. 167. and Godb. Rep. f. 259. pl. 357.

Grants to avoid remedy for Dilapidations made void.
And by the 13 Eliz. it is enacted, that if any Archbishop, Bishop, Dean,
Archdeacon, Provost, Treasurer, Chaunter, Chancellor, Prebendary, or any other,
having any Dignity or Office in any Cathedral Church, within this Realm, or if
any Parson, Vicar, or other Incumbent of any Ecclesiastical Living, whereunto
do belong any House or Houses, or other buildings, which by Law or Custom he is
bound to keep and maintain in reparation, do make any deed or deeds of gift or
alienation, or other like conveyances of his moveable Goods or Chattels, to
defeat or defraud his Successor of his just action and remedy; then in such
Case the Successor may have the same remedy in the Spiritual Court, against the
Grantee of the same Goods and Chattels for reparation of the Dilapidations, as
he might or should have had against the Executors or Administrators of the
Predecessor for the same, 13 Eliz. cap. 10. And such fraudulent deeds also to
defraud Persons of their just Debts, Suits, Accounts, Damages, Penalties,
Forfeitures, Herriots, Mortuaries and Reliefs, by another Act in the same
Parliament, are made void to such Persons to whom any such thing is due, and to
their Heirs, Successors, Administrators and Assigns, and those whoshall set
such Covenous and Fraudulent deeds afoot, being privy to or knowing of the
same, forfeit the value of all such Goods and Chattels, and all such money as
shall be contained in such covenous and fained Bond, one Moiety to the King,
and the other to the party grieved, to be recovered in any of the King's Courts
of record, 13 Eliz. cap. 5.

Moneys recovered for Dilapidations to be imployedure pairs.
By the 14 Eliz. it is enacted, that all sums of money, that shall be recovered,
for or in the name of Dilapidations, by Sentence, Composition, or otherwise,
shall within two Years after the recept, be truly employed upon the Buildings
and Reparations, in respect whereof such money for Dilapidations shall be paid,
on pein that every Person so receiving and not employing as aforesaid, shall
forfeit double as much as so by him shall be received and not employed, the
which forfeiture shall be to the use of the Queens Majesty, her Heirs and
Successors, 14 Eliz. cap. 11.

A Prohibi^ion lies against one that would wast the Woods of the Church.
If a Parson of a Church, and one A. are Tennants in Common of a Wood, and A.
endeavors to make waste in the Trees, the Parson for preservation of the
Timber Trees, may have a Prohibition against him, that he shall do no waste,
and the reason thereof as the Chief Justice said, was, that if the Parson of a
Church, would waste the Inherritance of his Church, to his private use, in
cutting down the Trees, the Patron may have a Prohibition against him, for the
Parson is seized in right of his Church, and his Glebe is the Dower of his
Church, for he is Endowed thereof, and so say many ancient records, and so
because a Prohibition lies against him, it is reason that he shall have the
same remedy against him who holds in Common with him, F. N. B. 49 and Co. Rep.
11 Lib. f. 49. a.

The Lord Cook says, there was a notable Resolution in Parliament, held A
Prohibition granted against the Bishop of Durham, 35 E. 1.
at Carlisle, 35 E. 1. against Clergymen, making waste of their Spiritual
Promotions, I shall set it down verbatim, as he inserts it viz. Voile Nostre
Seignior Le Roy entendre, que Sir Anthony Evesque de duresme waste and destruit
tout le Bois apperteinant a Son Esglise in Lenesquerie de duresme, per done and
vende and manuais guard and per rearer des forge de Far and Plombe, and ardre
Carbons, etc. dot si Nostre Seignior Le Roy que est Avowee del Esglise, ny ymit
remedy, Lefglise avandit serra dish^rite and impoverie, in prejudice de nostre
Seignior Le Roy in sa Corone, and de Chapter de duresme, To which the answer
was Inhibeatur per Breve de Cancellaria, Episcopo and Ministris suis ne faciat
vastum de contentis in Petitione, by which it appears, that the Parliament
referrs him to the ordinary remedy of the Common Law, by Writ of Prohibition in
such Case, 35 E. 1. Co. Rep. 11 Lib. f. 49. a. and vide Roll's Rep. 1 part, f.
86. 176. and 335.

And the Lord Cook says further, A Prohibition granted against the Bishop of
Dublin, etc.
that M. 23 E. 1. amongst the Judgments before the King, Hunt. f. 83. in the
Treasury of the Exchequer it is thus adjudged, quod Ecclesia est infra aetatem,
et in custodia domini regis, qui tenetur jura et haereditates ejusdem
manutenere et defendere, et Rot. patent. Anno 14 H. 3 M. 8. Archiepiscopus
Dublin fecit finem de 300 marcis deafforestroatione forestae Archiepiscopatus
sui, and see 2 H. 4. f. 3. b. If a Bishop or Archdeacon pull down and cut all
the Woods which he has, he shall be deposed as a Dilapidator of his House, 29
E. 3. 16 Ac. and see 27 Ass. pl. 10. 20 H. 6. 46 Co. Inst. 3 part, f. 304. And
the Tratise Entitled, Ne Rectores prosternant arbores in coemeterio, etc. is
no more but a Declaration of the Common Law, and it is regularly true, meliorem
conditionem Ecclesiae facere potest Praelatus, deteriorem nequaquam, Co. Rep.
11 Lib. f. 49. b.

Where suits for Dilapidations are to be.
Although suits for Dilapidations are most properly to be sued in the Spiritual
Court, and if any Prohibition be granted, the same ought to be superseded by a
Consultation, as F. N. B. says, f. 50. F. yet this is intended where the suit
is grounded upon the Canon Law, for by the Custom of England, the Successor may
have a special Action upon the Case, against the Dilapidator, his Executors or
Administratros, and in the King's Bench it was agreed by all the Justices, that
a Prohibition is grantable against one who wastes the Houses of a Parson
Incumbent, or cuts the Trees, or makes waste and sells them, and does not
employ them for repairs, vide 2 H. 4, 3. M. 12. Jac. B. R. Bishop of
Salisbury's Case, Godb. Rep. f. 259. pl. 357. H. 13. Jac. B. R. Saccar's Case,
M. Rep. f. 916. pl. 1303. and so it was also agreed, M. 12 Jac. B. R.
Stockman's and Wither's Case, Roll's Rep. 1 part, f. 86. pl. 34. and vide f.
335 and Boulstr. Rep. 3 part* f 91, 92.

The Vicar of the Parish of Alesbury For what use Clergymen may fell down Wood.
in Devon-shire had cut diverse great Trees of Timber, and did not Repair the
Church with them, and upon Suggestion thereof to the King's Bench, and that he
would cut more Trees in like manner, a Prohibition was thereupon granted by the
Court, H. 13. Jac. B. R. Knowl's and Hargrave's Case, Roll's Rep. 1. part f.
335. pl. 44. and Cook Lord Chief Justice, M. 12. Jac. said that a Bishop is
only to fell Timber for Building, for Fuel and for his other necessary
occasions; and there is no Bishopric but the same is of the Foundation of the
King, and the Woods of the Bishopric are called the Dower of the Church, and
these are always carefully to be preserved, and if he fell and destroy them,
upon motion to the Court a Prohibition will be Granted, and so it shall be also
in the Case of a Dean and Chapter, Boul. Rep. 2. part f. 279.

Mortuaries where and how to be paid.
As to Mortuaries observe that by the 21 H. 8. it is Enacted that no Mortuary or
Corse present, shall be given or demanded of any Person, but only in such place
where heretofore Mortuaries have been used to be paid and given; nor shall any
Person pay Mortuaries in more places than one, that is to say, in the place of
his most habitation or dwelling, and there but one Mortuary; and no Mortuary
shall be taken or demanded of any Person whatsoever he be, which at the time of
his death has in moveable Goods under the value of Ten Marks: Neither shall
any Parson, Vicar, Curate, etc. nor any of their Farmers, Bailiffs or Lessees
take for any Person dying or dead, and at the time of his death being in
moveable Goods to the value of Ten Marks or more, his Debts being paid and
under Thirty pounds, above the sum of Three shillings and four pence for his
Mortuary in the whole; nor where the Goods amount to Thirty pounds or more
above his Debts paid and under Forty pounds, above the value of Six shillings
and Eight pence for his Mortuary in the whole; nor where the Goods amount to
Forty pounds or above, to any sum whatsoever above his Debts paid, more than
the sum of Ten shillings for his Mortuary in the whole, 21 H. 8. cap. 6. Swin.
Test. part, 6.. 16. Godol. Or. Legacy f. 148.

Nor shall any Parson, Vicar, Curate, Who are to pay no Mortuaries.
etc. or other, take, demand or ask any Mortuary, or any other thing by way of
Mortuary of any Woman, being Covert Baron, nor for any Child, nor any Person
not keeping House, nor for a Wayfaring Man, or other that makes no Residence
in the place where they shall happen to dye; but the Mortuary of such Wayfaring
Man shall be answerable (in places where Mortuaries are accustomed to be paid,
in Manner, Form and Rate before mentioned and not otherwise) in the places
where such Wayfaring Persons at the time of their death had their most
Habitation, House and dwelling places and no where else, 21 H. 8. cap. 6. Swin.
part 6. 16. and Godol. f. 148.

Where Mortuaries (...) not to be (...).
No Mortuaries nor Corse present, ^or any Sum of Money or other thing for them,
shall be demanded or had in the Parts of Wales, nor in the Marches of the same,
nor in the Town of Barwick nor Marches of the same, but only in such places
where Mortuaries have been accustomed to be paid, neither shall any Mortuaries
or Corse present, nor any thing for the same be demanded or had in those
places, but only after the order and manner above specified and none otherwise,
nor of any other Person than is above Limited; But it is made Lawful for the
Bishops of Bangor, Landaffe, St. David's and St. Asaph, and likewise to the
Archdeacon of Chester to take such Mortuaries of the Priests within their
Diocesses and Jurisdictions as heretofore have been accustomed, 21 H. 8. Cap.
6. Swin. part 6.. 16. Godol. f. 148.

And in such places (where Mortuaries Mortuaries to be paid according to
Custom, etc.
have been accustomed to be taken of less value) than is aforesaid, there they
shall not be compelled to pay any other Mortuaries, or more for any Mortuary
than has been accustomed, nor shall any Mortuary be demanded, taken or had in
such place of any Person or Persons exempted by the Act* nor contrary to the
said Act: And if any Parson, Vicar, Curate, etc. or their Farmers, Bailiffs,
etc. do take, receive or demand of any Person within this Realm, for any Person
dying within the same a Mortuary, etc. more than is before mentioned, or do
Convent or call any Person or Persons before any Judge Spiritual for the
Recovery of any such Mortuary, etc. more than is before mentioned, he shall
forfeit for every time so demanding, conventing, etc. so much in value as he
shall take above the Sum Limited, and also Forty shillings to the Party grieved
contrary to the Act, to be Recovered in any of the King's Courts, etc. but it
is Lawful for any Spiritual Person to take any Sum of Money or other thing
which by any Person dying shall be given or bequeathed unto him, or to the High
Altar of the Church, 21 H. 8. cap. 6. and all fraudulent Deeds made to deceive
any of their Mortuaries are made void by the 13 Eliz. cap. 5.

Prohibition lies not, when.
The King's Prohibition does not lie, when any Oblations, Obventions or
Mortuaries (where Mortuaries have been used to be paid) be by those Names
demanded, in any Ecclesiastical Court, although for the long withholding of
the same they be esteemed at a certain Sum of Money: Articl. Cleri, 9 E. 2.
cap. 1. and vide Co. Inst. 2. part f. 491. 619. but Doctor and Student, Lib. 2.
cap. 55. says a Prohibition does lie, Quaere.

And where Mortuaries are due they How Mortuaries are payable.
ought to be paid out of the Death's part only, and not out of the whole before
division (where by the custom of the Country the Widow and Children are to have
their Reasonable parts) by the opinion of Dr. Swinburne, and his Reason is,
because a Mortuary is of the Nature of a Legacy, and Termed in Law the
Principal Legacy; And being that Legacies are to be paid out of the Death's
part, therefore the Mortuary is to be paid out of the same part, but before any
other Legacy, and without any defalcation, as well for that it is a Principal
Legacy, as by force of the Statute aforesaid, Swin. Test. part 6.. 16. in fine.

Six things due to the King upon the death of every Bishop.
After the Death of every Bishop there is a Duty due to the King, which some
have called a Mortuary, but the Lord Cook says it is not any Mortuary, but he
says, true it is that the King after their Deceases has Six things; viz.
Optimum Equum sive Palefridum ipsius Episcopi cum Cella and Freno. 2. Vnam
Chlamydem sive Clocam cum Capella. 3. Vnum Ciphum cum coopertorio. 4. Vnum
Pelvem cum Lavatorio sive Aquar'. 5. Vnum Anulum Aureum. 6. Necnon Mutum Canum
quae ad Dominum Regem ratione Prerogativae suae spectant and pertinent; inter
Communia, H. 2. E. 2. in Scaccar. post mortem Episc. Bath and Well. Tr. 36. E.
3. Ibidem post mortem Episc. Cirences. H. 5. E. 4. Ibidem Rot. 47. post mortem
Archiep. Ebor. Co. Inst. 2. part f. 491.

For this duty there is a special Writ A Writ lies for these things after every
Bishops death; see the form thereof Co. Inst. 4. part f. 338.
that issues out of the Exchequer after the Decease of the Bishop for
answering of the same, and in the Records this is called Multa Episcopi or
Multura Episcopi, derived a Mulcta, for that it was a Fine or Final
satisfaction given to the King that they might have power to make their Last
Wills and Testaments, and to have the probate of other Men's Testaments and
granting Administrations, for it is true where it is said, Nullam habebant
Episcopi Authoritatem praeter eam a Rege acceptam referebant, Jus Testamenta
probandi non habebant, Administrationis potestatem cuiquam delegare non
poterant, nec ipsi quidem Testamenta facere de Jure Communi, dum id illis
regnante Henrico Tertio Concessum erat, and Confirmatum vivente Edw. 1. Rot.
Claus. 7 H. 3. M. 16. Rot. Parl. 36. H. 3. M. 1. And Linwood says,
Beneficiatus non potest testari de communi Jure, sed de Consuetudine Angliae;
And he says also that Probate of Testaments de Consuetudine Angliae, and non
de Jure Communi belong to Court Christian; Lin. cap. de Foro compet. f. 7. Lib.
7. f. 44. and vide Britton. f. 11. b. Bract. Lib. 5. f. 403. etc. Fleta, Lib.
2. cap. 53. and Lib. 6. cap. 36. and Co. Inst. 2. part f. 488. and 491. but
this seems to be a Digression from our intended purpose, but I hope the
Reverend Clergyman will Pardon it, vide Co. Inst. 4. part. f. 338.

Prohibition where a Mortuary is demanded, when grantable.
The Bishop of Chester in the Consistory Court of Chester, before the Commissary
there, Sued for a Mortuary after the Death of William Hind a Priest of the
said Diocese, Surmising that by Custom there, he ought to have for a Mortuary
after the Death of every Priest dying within the said Arch-deaconry of Chester,
the best Horse or Mare, his Saddle, Bridle and Spurs, his best Gown or Cloak,
his best Hat, his best upper Garment under his Gown, his Tippet, his best
Signet or Ring; as to the Bishop de debit' consuetud fore supponitur, etc. upon
this the Defendant obtained a Prohibition, averring that there is no such
Custom, and that she had paid a Mortuary to the Parson of Bumberry, and in this
Case it was moved for a Consultation, and the Suit being for a Mortuary, the
Court was divided in opinion; but it appearing that the Bishop had Sued after
the Prohibition, which was a Contempt and ought to be answered, it was
thereupon appointed that he should Plead or Demur; And then the Court would
give Judgment upon the Record before them, M. 7. Car. 1. B. R. Margaret Hinds
Case, and the Bishop of Chester, Cro. Car. f. 237.

CHAP. IX. What Qualifications are required in Leases made by Ecclesiastical
Persons.
FOrmerly by the Common Law Bishops What Estates Bi^hops, etc. might have made
by the CommonLaw.
with the Confirmation of the Dean and Chapter, Master and Fellows of any
Colleges, Deans and Chapters, Masters or Guardians of Hospitals, and their
Brethren, Parsons and Vicars with Consent of the Patron and Ordinary,
Archdeacon, Prebend or any other Body Politic, Spiritual and Ecclesiastical
(Concurrentibus his quae in Jure requiruntur) might have made Leases for Lives
or Years without Limitation or Stint; And so might they have made Gifts in
Tail, or Estates in Fee, at their own Will and Pleasure, whereupon not only
great decay of Divine Service, but Dilapidations and other Inconveniences
ensued; but now the Law is altered in these Cases by the Statutes of the 32 H.
8. 1 Eliz. 18. Eliz. 13. Eliz. and 1. Jac. of which Statutes one is enabling,
and the rest disabling, Co. Lit. f. 44. a.

I shall first begin with a Recital of Leases in Writing by certain Persons of
what force, etc.
the Statutes, then give you the Book Cases thereupon: By the Stat. 32. H. 8.
All Leases to be made of any Manors, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, by
Writing endented under Hand and Seal for Term of years or for Term of Life, by
any Person or Persons being of full Age of One and twenty years, having any
Estate of Inheritance either in Fee-Simple, or in Fee-Tail, in their own Right
or in the Right of their Churches or Wives, etc. shall be good and effectual in
the Law, against the Lessors their Wives, Heirs and Successors and every of
them, according to such Estate as is Comprised and Specified in every such
Indenture of Lease, in like manner and form as the same should have been, if
the Lessors thereof and every of them at the time of making such Leases, had
been Law^ully seized of the same Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments comprised
^n such Indenture of a good, perfect and pure Estate in Fee-Simple there^f to
their own only uses, 32 H. 8. ^^p. 28.

Provided that this Act shall not extend to any Leases to be made of any Old
Leases to be Surrendered, etc.
Manors, Lands, etc. being in the hands of any Farmer or Farmers by virtue of
an Old Lease, unless the same Old Lease be expired, surrendered or ended within
one year, next after the making of the said new Lease, nor shall extend to any
Grant to be made of any Reversion of any Manor, Lands, etc. nor to any Lease
of any Manors, Lands, etc. which have not most commonly been letten to Farm,
or occupied by the Farmers thereof by the space of Twenty years next before
such Leases thereof made, nor to any Lease to be made without Impeachment of
Wast, nor to any Lease to be made above the number of One and twenty years, or
Three Lives ^^ the most from the day of the making thereof; And that upon every
suc^ Lease there be reserved yearly duri^^ the same Lease, due and payable ^^
the Lessors, their Heirs and Successo^ to whom the same Lands should ha^^ come
after the death of the Lessors if no such Lease had been there made, and to
whom the Revers^ thereof shall appertain according their Estates and Interests,
so much yearly Farm or Rent or more, as has been most accustomably yielded and
paid for the same within Twenty years next before such Lease thereof made; And
that every such Person and Persons to whom the Reversion of such Manors,
Lands, etc. so to be letten, shall appertain as aforesaid after the deaths of
such Lessors or their Heirs, shall and may have such like Remedy and Advantage
to all Intents and Purposes against the Lessees thereof, their Executors and
Assigns, as the same Lessors should or might have had against the same Lessees,
etc. 32 H. 8. cap. 28.

Parsons and Vicars excepted out of the Act.
And it is also further provided that this Act shall not extend to give any
Liberty or Power to any Parson or Vicar of any Church or Vicarage, for to make
any Lease or Grant of any of their Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Tithes, Profits
or Hereditaments belonging to their Churches or Vicarages, otherwise or in any
manner, than they should or might have done before the making of the same Act,
any thing therein contained to the contrary thereof Notwithstanding, 32 H. 8.
cap. 28.

By the 1 Eliz. All Gifts, Grants Leases by Bish^ps, etc. to be made for 21
years or 3 Lives.
Feoffments, Fines and other Conveyances or Estates, from the first day of the
said Parliament to be made, done or suffered by any Archbishop or Bishop, of
any Honors, Castles, Manors, Lands, Tenements or other Hereditaments, being
parcel of the Possessions of his Archbishopric or Bishopric, or united,
appertaining or belonging to any of the same, to any Person (other than to the
Queen, He^ Heirs or Successors) whereby any Estate should or might pass from
the Archbishop or Bishop, other than for the Term of One and twenty years or
Three Lives, from such time as any Lease, Grant or Assurance shall begin, or
whereupon the old accustomed Ren^ or more shall be reserved, payable yearly
during the said Term of On^ and twenty years or Three Lives shall be utterly
void, 1 Eliz. cap. 19. B^ by the 1 Jac. All Archbishops an^ Bishops are
disabled in Law to make do, levy or suffer any Act or Acts, thin^ or things,
whereby or by means where of any of the said Honors, Castles Manors, Lands,
etc. shall or may b^ Aliened, Granted, etc. to the King His Heirs or
Successors, but that all such Grants shall be void, 1 Jac. cap. 3. Co. Rep. 10.
Lib. f. 62. a. and 11. Lib. f. 71. b. 72. a.

Leases made by Spiritual Persons, etc. for what Term to continue.
And by the 13 Eliz. it is enacted, that all Leases, Gifts, Grants, etc. to be
made, had, done or suffered, by any Master and Fellows of any College, Dean and
Chapter of any Cathedral or Collegiate Church, Master or Guardian of any
Hospital, Parson, or Vicar, or any other, having any Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Living, or any Houses, Land, Tithes, Tenements or other
Hereditaments, being any parcel of the possessions of any such College,
Cathedral Church, Chapel, Hospital, Parsonage, Vicarage or other Spiritual
Promotion, or any ways appertaining or belonging to the same, or any of them,
to any Person or Persons, Bodies Politic or Corporate, (other then for the
Term of 21 Years, or three Lives, from the time as any such Lease or Grant
shall be made or granted, whereupon the accustomed yearly Rent or more, shall
be reserved and payable yearly, during the said Term) shall be utterly void and
of none effect, to all intents, constructions and purposes; but it is provided,
that nothing in this Act shall be taken or construed, to make good any Lease or
other Grant, to be made by such College or Collegiate Church, within either of
both the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, or else where, within the Realm
of England, for more Years then are limited by their private Statutes, 13 Eliz.
cap. 10. and vide 14 Eliz. cap. 11.

Leases by ^ Parsons, etc. to be void upon non residence.
And further it is enacted, that no Lease to be made of any Benefice, or
Ecclesiastical Promotion with cure, or any part thereof, and not being
impropriated, shall endure any longer then while the Lessor shall be Ordinarily
Resident, and serving the cure of such Benefice, without absence of fourscore
days in any one Year, but that every such Lease, immediately upon such
absence, shall cease and be void; and the Incumbent so offending, shall for the
same loose one Years profit of his said Benefice, to be distributed by the
Ordinary among the poor of the Parish; And that all chargings of such Benefices
with cure, other then Rents to be reserved upon Leases shall be utterly void;
provided that every Person allowed to have two Benefices, may demise the one of
them, upon which he shall not be most Ordinarily Resident to his Curate, only
that shall there serve the cure for him; but such Lease shall endure no longer
then during such Curate's Residence, without absence above forty days in any
one Year, 13 Eliz. cap. 20. 14 Eliz. cap. 11.

Bonds, etc. for enjoying etc, void.
Likewise all Bonds, Contracts, Covenants and Promises, made for suffering or
permitting any Person to enjoy any Benefice or Ecclesiastical Promotion with
cure, or to take the profits thereof, shall be to all intents and purposes,
adjudged of such force and validity and not otherwise, as Leases by the same
Persons made of such Benefices, etc. with cure; and that all such Leases,
Bonds, etc. concerning such Benefices and Ecclesiastical Promotions with cure,
made by any Curate, shall be of no other nor better force, validity or
continuance, then if the same had been made by the Beneficed Person himself,
that demiseth the same to any such Curate; But Masters and Fellows of Colleges,
Deans and Chapters of Cathedral or Collegiate Churches, Masters or Guardians of
any Hospital, or any Parson or Vicar, or any other, having any Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Living, may make a Grant, Assurance, or Lease of their Houses
and Grounds, appertaining to the same, being situate in any City, Borough, Town
Corporate, or Market Town, or the Suburbs of any of them, after such manner as
their several Statutes do permit; so that such House be not the Capital or
dwelling House, used for the habitation of the Persons abovesaid, nor have
Ground to the same belonging above the quantity of ten Acres, 14 Eliz. cap. 11.
and vide Tr. 14 Jac. C. B. Crane and Taylor's Case, Hob. Rep. f. 269.

Leases of Houses in C^t^^s, etc. how long to continue.
But it is provided by the same Statute, that no Lease be made in Reversion, nor
without reserving the accustomed yearly Rent, nor without charging the Lessee
with reparations, nor for longer Term then forty Years at the most, nor are any
Houses to be aliened, unless that in Recompense thereof, there shall before,
with, or presently after such alienation, be good, lawful, and sufficient
assurance made in Fee simple, absolutely to such Colleges, Houses, Bodies
Politic or Corporate, and their Successers of Lands of as good value, and of
as great yearly value at the least, as so shall be aliened, any Statute to the
contrary notwithstanding. 14 Eliz. cap. 11.

Old Leases to be ended within three Years, when a new Lease is made.
And by the 18 Eliz. all Leases to be made by any Ecclesiastical, Spiritual or
Collegiate Persons, above mentioned, of any of their said Ecclesiastical,
Spiritual or Collegiate Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, whereof any former
Lease for Years is in being, not to be expired, surrendered or ended within
three Years next after the making of any such new Lease, shall be void,
frustrate, and of none effect; And all and every Bond and Covenant whatsoever,
to be made for renewing or making of any Lease or Leases, contrary to the true
meaning of this Act, or of the Act made, 13 Eliz. cap. 10. shall be utterly
void, any Law, Statute, Ordinance, or other thing whatsoever, to the contrary
in any wise notwithstanding, 18 Eliz. cap. 11.

Sequestration when to be granted.
And where an Incumbent offends against, 13 El. 20. in letting his Benefice,
etc. after complaint made to the Ordinary, and Sentence given of any Offense,
whereby he shall or ought to lose one Years profit of his Benefice, the
Ordinary within two Months after such Sentence given, and Request to him made
by the Churchwardens of the said Parish or one of them, shall grant the
Sequestration of such profits, to such Inhabitant or Inhabitants within the
Parish, where such Benefice shall be, as to him shall seem meet and convenient;
and upon default therein by the Ordinary, that it may and shall be Lawful to
every Parishioner where the Benefice is, to retain and keep his or their
Tithes; and likewise for the Churchwardens of the said Parish to enter and
take the profits of the Glebe Land, and other Rents and Duties or every such
Benefice, to be employed to the use of the Poor as aforesaid; until such time
as Sequestration shall be committed by the Ordinary, and then as well the
Churchwardens as Parishioners to yield Account of, and make payment to him or
them, to whom such Sequestration shall be committed; and that he or they to
whom it shall be committed, shall justly and truly employ and bestow the said
profits, or the true and just value thereof, without Fraud or Guile to such
uses* as by the said Statute is limited and appointed, upon pein of forfeiture
of double the value of such withheld profits, to be recovered in the
Ecclesiastical Court by the Poor of the Parish, 18 Eliz. cap. 11. and vide H.
43 Eliz. C. B. Jackson's Case, Goldess. Rep. pa. 154. pl. 82.

Judges to take notice of general Laws.
And note that it has been Resolved, that the stat. 13 Eliz. cap. 20. and 18
Eliz. cap. 11, concerning Leases made by Deans and Chapters, Colleges, etc. are
general Laws, of which the Court is to take notice, although they be not found
by the Jurors, and so it was Resolved between Claypool and Carter, in a Writ of
Error in the King's Bench, as my Lord Cook cites it in his Rep. 4 Lib. f. 120.
b.

Nine Rules to be observed in Ecclesiastical Persons Leases, etc.
Having taken the Heads of the Statutes which have been made, concerning
Ecclesiastical Persons Leases, let us now see what our Law Books say concerning
the same, and first observe, that whereas before the making of the Statute of
the 32 H. 8. cap. 18. no Archbishop, Bishop, Archdeacon, Dean or Prebend, could
have made any Lease, to have bound his Successors, without the Confirmation and
Consent of their Chapters, etc. now by this Act they are enabled to make Leases
for three Lives, or 21 Years, to bind their Successors without any Confirmation
at all, observing these Nine Rules following in their said Leases.

Paroll. Co. Lit. f. 44. a.

Co. Lit. f. 44. a. Co. Rep. 5 Lib. f. 6. a.

Co. Lit. f. 44.

e converso, for the words of the Statute be to make a Lease for three Lives,
or 21 Years, so as one or the other may be made but not both, Co. Lit. f. 44. b
Tr. 30. Eliz. B. R. Elmer and Gale's Case, M. Rep. f. 253. pl. 400. and Co.
Rep. 5. Lib. f. 2. a.

Co. Lit. f. 44. b. and Co. Rep. 5. Lib. f. 2. b.

Co. Lit. f. 44. b. and 144. a. Vaugh. Rep. f. 203, 204. Tr. 30. Eliz. B. R.
Jewell's Case, Co. Rep. 5. Lib. f. 3. a. and vide 10 H. 6. 2.

but a Tenant at Will according to that Custom, and so it is of a Lease at Will
by the Common Law, but these Lettings to Farm must be made by some Seized of an
Estate of Inheritance, Co. Lit. f. 44. b. Tr. 3. Jac. B. R. Dean and Chapter of
Worcester's Case, Co. Rep. 6. Lib. f. 37. a.

etc. so much yearly Rent, or more as has been most accustomably yielded or
paid for the Lands, etc. within Twenty years next before such Lease made;
hereby first it appears that nothing can be demised (as has been said before)
by Authority of this Act, but that whereout a Rent may be lawfully reserved.
Secondly, that where not only a yearly Rent was reserved formerly, but things
not Annual as Herriots or any Fine, or other Profit at or upon the death of the
Farmer, yet if the Yearly Rent be reserved upon a Lease made by force of this
Statute, it is sufficient by the express words of the Act. Thirdly, if he
reserve more than the accustomable Rent, it is good also by the express Letter
of the Act, but if Twenty Acres of Land have been accustomably Letten, and a
Lease is made of those Twenty, and of one Acre which was not accustomably
Letten, reserving the accustomable Yearly Rent^, and so much more as exceeds
the value of the other Acre, this Lease is not warranted by the Act, for that
the accustomable Rent is not reserved, seeing part was not accustomably Letten,
and the Rent Issues out of the whole. Fourthly, if the accustomable Rent had
been payable at Four days or Feasts of the Year, yet if it be reserved yearly
payable at one Feast it is sufficient, for the words of the Statute be,
reserved Yearly, Co. Lit. f. 44. b. and vide M. Rep. f. 199. and Co. Rep. 6.
Lib. f. 37 and 38.

etc. this is not warranted by the Statute, because it is dispunishable of
Wast; but if a Lease be made to one during Three Lives this is good, for the
Occupant if any happen shall be punished for Wast; the words of the Statute be
(seized in the Right of his Church) yet a Bishop that is seized in Jure
Episcopatus, a Dean of his sole possessions in Jure Deconatus, an Archdeacon
in Jure Archidiacona^us, a Prebend and the like are within the Statute, for
every of them generally is seized in Jure Ecclesiae, Co. Lit. f. 44. a. b.

Leases made by Parsons and Vicars, to be Confirmed by Patron and Ordinary.
Note, that Parsons and Vicars are excepted out of the Statute of the 32 H. 8.
and therefore if they make a Lease for Three Lives or one and twenty years of
Lands accustomably. Letten, reserving the accustomable Rent, such Lease must be
Confirmed by the Patron and Ordinary, because it is excepted out of the Statute
aforesaid, and not restrained by the Statutes of the 1 or 13 of Eliz. Co. Lit.
f. 44. b. 3 E. 6. 1. Mar. Bro. 62. Tit. Leases.

Prebends may make Leases as Bishops may do.
But a Prebend is not excepted, therefore he may make Leases as Bishops may do,
by the said Statute, vide M. 36 and 37 Eliz. B. R. Watkinson and Man's Case,
Cro. Eliz. f. 350. pl. 27. and Tr. 31 Eliz. C. B. Acton and Pitcher's Case,
Leon. Rep. 4. part f. 51. pl. 132.

And whereas in the 1 Eliz. being Leaes to be all made according to the Pattern
in 32 H. 8.
one of the disabling Statutes, the words of the Restraint are, other than for
the Term of one and twenty years or Three Lives, from such time as any such
Grant or Assurance shall be given, whereupon the Old and accustomed Yearly Rent
or more, shall be reserved; and to that effect is the Exception in the 13 of
Eliz. yet it is to be understood that neither of these disabling Statutes nor
any other do in any sort, alter or change the enabling Statute of the 32 H. 8.
but leaves it for a Pattern in many things for Leases to be made by others,
and no Lease made according to the Exception of the 1 and 13 Eliz. and not
warranted by the 32 H. 8. if it be made by a Bishop or any Sole Corporation,
but it must be Confirmed by the Dean and Chapters or others that have Interest;
and such Leases for years to be made according to the Exceptions of the 1 or 13
Eliz. must have also the Nine qualities required by the 32 H. 8. before
mentioned (Concurrent Leases only excepted) although the Statutes of the 1 and
13 Eliz. do not direct them to be so; only the Leases made by force of the 32
H. 8. must begin from the day of the making, and the Leases made within the
Exception of the other Statutes from the making, so note the difference of the
Penning of the said Statutes, Co. Lit. 44. b. 45. a. Bridge. Rep. f. 30. and Co.
Rep. 10. Lib. f. 60. b.

Bishops may ma^e Co^current Leases.
If a Bishop make a Lease for one and twenty years, and all these years are run
out save Three or more, yet may the Bishop make a new Lease to another for one
and twenty years to begin from the making according to the Exception of the
Statute, and this Concurrent Lease being Confirmed by the Dean and Chapter,
shall be good to bind his Successors, within the Exception of the 1 Eliz. in
the Case of Bishops, as also upon the 13 Eliz. which extends to Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical Corporations agregate of many, as Deans and Chapters, etc. vide
Tr. 21 Eliz. Fox and Collyer's Case, M. Rep. f. 197. pl. 251. Ander. Rep. 1.
part f. 65. pl. 140. and M. 22 and 23. Eliz. Scot and Nicholas against Brewster
and Stubbing Cited in Moor, and see Leon. Rep. 1. part f. 148.

Note, that Bishops are not conceived Bishops not c^mprehend ed within the 18
Eliz.
to be comprehended within the Proviso of the Restraining Act of the 18 Eliz.
11. for though the words are general enough, yet the particulars mentioned
before the general words, being of an inferior Rank, the general words cannot
draw in the more worthy; Godb. Rep. f. 395. and Goldes. Rep. pa. 171. pl. 102.
And although Deans, Prebendaries, Heads of Colleges, Masters of Hospitals, and
other Ecclesiastical Persons, etc. may also make Concurrent Leases as Bishops
may with Confirmation, yet they must observe it must be within Three years of
the determination of the former Term, by Expiration, Surrender or otherwise; so
that in this Case the Bishops have the Advantage; but note that a Bishop cannot
make a Concurrent Lease for Lives, if there be a Lease for years in Esse to
bind his Successors, though the Tennant do Attorne, and such Lease is also
Confirmed by the Dean and Chapter; nor can he make a Concurrent Lease for
years, if a Lease for Lives be in Esse, Co. Lit. f. 45. a. Tr. 30. Eliz. C. B.
Rot. 803. Marler and Wright and Green's Case, Cro. Eliz. f. 141. pl. 3 Tr. 29
Eliz. Rot. 903. B. R. Elmer and Gale's Case, Co. Rep. 5 Lib. f. 2. a. and M.
Rep. f. 253. pl. 400. and see Brow. Rep. 2 part, f. 134. and P. 29 Eliz. B. R.
Bunny and Wright and Stafford's Case, Leon. Rep. 1 part, f. 59. pl. 77. and f.
148.

Several concurrent Leases, that which is firmed to be preferred.
And where a Bishop makes several Concurrent Leases, and the last is first
confirmed, and then the first is confirmed, in this Case the first Lease shall
be preferred, because nothing passes by the Confirmation in point of Interest,
but a mere consent to make it perdurable and effectual, and of this Opinion was
Dyer, Weston and Carus, Justices, being asked their Opinions by Bendlows, Tr. 6
Eliz. M. Rep. f. 66. pl. 180.

Where a Bishop has two Chapters both must confirm.
If a Bishop has two Chapters, they ought both to confirm, or else it is not
good to bind the Successor, but if a Bishop had two Chapters, and one of them
surrender without the Bishop's License, is suspended or dissolved, then the
confirmation of the other is sufficient, and this question coming in debate
amongst the Justices in Ireland, in a Case concerning a Lease made by the
Bishop of Dublin, and the Justices there being divided in Opinion, Dyer, and
the rest of the Justices of the Common Pleas here in England, were all of
Opinion, that after surrender, etc. such a Confirmation by one Chapter was
good, though formerly it used to be by both, and a Certificate thereof was made
accordingly of their Opinions to Sir Henry Sidney, Knight, Lord Debuty of
Ireland, P. 11 Eliz. Dyer f. 282. b. pl. 26. and see Roll's Cases, 1 part, f.
477 H. 4, 5, and 6.

Confirmation before Inrollment good, etc.
If a Bishop make a Lease to the King for Years, and before Inrollment thereof,
the Dean and Chapter confirms it, and after the Lease is Enrolled, this is a
good Confirmation, for this is only an Assent, which may be as well before the
Lease as after, Tr. 8 Jac. in Scaccar. Sir Edward Dimmock's Case, Roll's Cases,
1 part, f. 478. but a Confirmation after the Death of the Bishop comes too late
by the Opinion of Catlin, Southco^e and Windham, Harur's Rep. M. 14, and 15.
Eliz.

Grants, etc not warranted by the Statutes bind the Grantors.
And note, that although it be said ^y the 1 Eliz. and 13 Eliz. that all Grants,
Leases, etc. made, granted, etc. (other then Leases for three Lives, ^^ one and
twenty Years, according ^^ those Acts) should be utterly void and of none
effect, to all Intents, Constructions and Purposes, yet Grants or Leases, etc.
not warranted by those Statutes, though they are void against the Successor,
yet they are good, and shall bind the Grantor or Lessor, if it be a Sole
Corporation, or so long as the Dean or other Head of the Corporation remain, if
it be a Corporation agregate of many, for the Statute was made in benefit of
the Successor, Co. Lit. f. 45. a. Co. 3 Lib. f. 59, b. 60. ^* P. 39 Eliz. C. B.
Hunt and Singleton's Case, there cited to be so adjudged, Brow. Rep. 2 part, f.
134, and 135. God^* Rep, f. 302. and vide P. 10 Jac. Walt^^ and Dean and
Chapter of Norwich Case, M. f. 875. pl. 1223. in fine, and C^* Rep. 10 Lib. f.
59. a. and 11 Lib. f. 73. a*

Confirmations by whom ^o be made.
Observe, that concurrent Leas^^ made by Archbishops and Bishops, a^^ to be
confirmed by the Dean and Chapter or Deans and Chapters, if there b^ several
Chapters; Grants made by Dean, are to be confirmed by the Bishop and Chapter;
Grants made by ^ Archdeacon or Prebend, by the Bisho^ Dean and Chapter, Dyer.
f. 61. a. ^ 30 Roll's Cases, 1 part f. 481. P. ^ 3. and the Grants of Parsons
and V^cars, are to be confirmed by their Patrons and Ordinaries, Co. Rep. 11
Lib. f. 77. a. Roll's Cases, 1 part f. 481 Q. 2. and Grants by an Incumbent of
a Donative, by the Patron alone, Roll's Cases, 1 part f. 481 R. 1. and where
the Patron of a Prebend, then the King, and Dean and Chapter, and not the
Bishop ought to confirm.

Confirmation of the Bishop alone where good.
Where a Parson of a Church, of which the Bishop is Patron and Ordinary makes a
Lease, which is confirmed by the Bishop, without the Dean and Chapter, who
ought to have joined, and afterward the Parson dies, and the Bishop Collates
another to the Benefice, who makes a Lease of his Parsonage, which is confirmed
by the Bishop, and Dean and Chapter, and afterward the Bishop is Translated,
in this Case it was held the first Lease was good, and that it should be
binding, during the Life of the Bishop, and Successor Incumbent, who found the
Church charged, P. 19 Eliz. C. B. Dy^r, f. 356. b. pl. 42. so if a Prebend make
a Lease, and the Bishop being Patron confirms it, though this be not good to
bind the Successor of the Bishop, yet this shall bind the Bishop during his
Life, and all claiming under him, for the Confirmation of the Dean and Chapter,
is required only that the Possessions be not aliened in prejudice of the
Successor, and so it was agreed in point, in Smyth and Bowl's Case, Tr. 15 Jac.
B. R. Roll's Cases, 1 part, f. 479 M. 2, 3. and f. 481. P. 2. and vide Leon.
Rep. 1 part, f. 235.

Assent a good Confirmation.
If a Dean Lease any of his Possessions, of which he is Sole seized with the
Assent of the Chapter, this is a good Confirmation, because the Dean has
solely the Estate, and the Writ desine assensu Capituli, does prove that there
needs only an Assent, and if a Dean be Sole seized, and not with Chapter of
certain Possessions, and Lease them by these words in the Deed quod Deoanus ex
assensu totius Capituli d^misit, and the Seal of the Chapter ^^ put to the
Deed, this is a good Confirmation, for it is a good Assent; but the Dean and
Chapter are jointly seized and the Dean Leases with Assent of t^^ Chapter, and
annexes the Seal of t^^ Chapter to the Deed, this is void a^ shall not bind the
Chapter, becau^^ they have an Estate in them, as well the Dean has in him, and
may ma^^ P. 10 Jac. B. R. inter Tomlinson and Crook, so agreed, and vide 21 H.
7. 7. and Hill. 29 H. 8. C. B. Chasin's Case, Dyer f. 42. b. pl. 72. and Roll's
Cases, 1 part, f. 478 R. 1. 2. 4.

Confirmations when void.
Grants by Parsons, Vicars, Prebends, etc. after Collation, Admission and
Institution, and before Induction or Installation, although confirmed as
aforesaid, are not binding to the Successor, for Persona Ecclesiae nunquam
dicitur Impersonat' ante inductionem, nec habet jus in re sed ad rem ante
inductionem, P. 5. Eliz. C. B. Dyer f. 221. pl. 18.

Confirmation for part of the Term good.
If a Parson, Vicar, Prebend, etc. make a Lease for Years, the Land may be
confirmed to the Lessee for part of the Term that is for so many Years thereof,
but if dimissionem praedictam be confirmed for part of the Term, et ^^n ultra,
that would be absurd and re^ugnant, and would stand good for the whole Term;
and as such Lease may be confirmed for part of the Term, so it ^ay for part of
the Land, M. 16, 17. Eliz. C. B. Dyer f. 338. b. pl. 43. and f. ^2. b. pl. 4.
and vide M. 37, 38 Eliz. C. ^. Bellfore and Foord's Case, Cro. Eliz. f. ^47.
pl. 12. and f. 472. pl. 34. and Co. ^ep. 5 Lib. f. 81.

A Parson made a Lease, which was Succeeding Patron, etc. confirms and good.
confirmed by the succeeding Bishop and Patron, neither of them being Bishop or
Patron, when the Lease was made, yet this was adjudged a good Confirmation, Tr.
2 Car. 1 C. B. Sir Robert Banister's Case, Cro. Car. f. 38. pl. 3.

Confirmation of an Usurper not good
If an Usurper present, and his Presentee makes a Grant, which is confirmed by
the Usurper and Ordinary, and after the Presentee is removed by Quare Impedit,
etc. this Grant shall not bind the Incumbent that comes in by the Presentation
of the true Patron, because when the Confirmation was made, there was neither
any Patron nor Parson of right 9 H. 6. 33. and a Church before the 13 Eliz.
being full of an Incumbent, the true Patron grants away the next avoidance, and
then confirms a Lease made by the said Incumbent, who afterward dies, and then
the Grantee of the next avoidance presents; the Incumbent of such Grantee shall
avoid the Lease made by his Predecession, and his entry upon the Lessee avoids
the Lease for ever, both for himself and his Successor, P. 16 Car. 1. B. R. Sir
Edmond Plowden and Oldfield's Case, Roll's Cases, 1 part, f. 480 N. 4, 5. and
Cro. Car. f. 582. pl. 7. and Jones Rep. f. 454.

Husbands Confirmation bind^ not the Wife, etc.
If an Husband be seized in right of his Wife of an Advowson, and the Incumbent
makes a Lease warranted by the Statutes, which is confirmed by the Ordinary,
and the Husband and his Wife being Patrons, this shall bind the right of the
Wife but during Coverture, and the Successor after the Incumbent's Death, that
comes by Presentation of the Wife, shall avoid it; so if Tenant in Tail being
Patron, confirm the Grant of the Parson with the Bishop, this shall not bind
the Incumbent of the issue in Tail; but if a Parson make a Grant which is
confirmed by the Patron and Ordinary, and afterward he is deprived, yet the
Grant remains good, M. 3, and 4. P. and M. Dyer f. 133. a. pl. 1. Roll's Cases,
1 part, f. 479 N. 1, 2. and f. 476. F. 1, 2 P. 14 Jac. B. R. Mawnd and French
Case, Roll's Rep. 1 part, f. 161.

Confirmation void where.
If a Church be full of a Parson, and afterward another is made Parson, and
Inducted by the Ordinary, and he makes a Grant which is confirmed by the Patron
and Ordinary, this Grant is void because he was not Parson at the time of the
Grant, 9 H. 6. 34. and if a Church be void, and one enters and occupies the
same wrongfully, without any Presentation or Institution, and such Parson makes
a Grant which is confirmed by Patron and Ordinary, yet it is void, because he
was never Parson, for one cannot be without Presentation or Collation, 9 H. 6.
34. 10 H. 6. 11. and Roll's Cases, 1 part, f. 477.

Grants of Offices bind not the Successor without Confirmation.
It has been Resolved, that the Grant of an ancient Office, as Commissary,
Official, Steward, Bailiff, Park Keeper, etc. to one with the ancient Fee by a
Bishop, shall not bind the Successor, if it be not confirmed by the Dean and
Chapter, for such Grants are not restrained by the 1 Eliz. but remain still at
Common Law, and therefore ought to be confirmed by the Dean and Chapter; but if
such ancient Office has formerly been usually granted to one for Life, and be
afterward granted to 2 for Life, and the Grant is confirmed by the Dean and
Chapter, yet this Grant shall not bind the Bishop's Successor, because such
Office had not been usually granted so before; And note that although the
Bishopric be founded lately, yet the Grant of a necessary Office* with a
reasonable Fee, of which the Court shall Judge, being confirmed, etc. will bind
the Bishop's Successor, Tr. 11 Jac. Bishop of Salisbury's Case, Co. Rep. 10
Lib. f. 58. b. 61, b. 62. a. and Tr. 8 Car. 1. B. R. Walker and Lamb's Case,
Cro. Car. f. 258. pl. 2. and Jones Rep. f. 263.

Offices grantable as formerly.
And if such Office have been granted formerly in Reversion it may be granted so
still, M. 8 Car. 1. B. R. Young and Stoell's Case, Cro. Car. f. 279. pl. 19.
and Jone's Rep. f. 310. and it has been held by some, that where such Office
is granted with the usual Fees, and also a new Fee over and above the old
accustomed Fees, which Grant is confirmed by the Dean and Chapter, or if the
old Office with the ancient Fees, and also a new Office which was never granted
before, be granted by one Deed, and duly confirmed as aforesaid, although this
be void against the Successor as to the new Office, yet it is good for the
ancient Office, and ancient Fees, sed Quaere vide P. 1 Car. 1. Rot. 607. Bishop
of Chechester and Freeland's Ca. Brid. Rep. f. 29 Leye's Rep. f. 71. and see M.
9 Jac. C. B. Bishop of Elye's Case, Brownl. Rep. 2 part, f. 137. and Cro. Car.
f. 47. pl. 7.

A Parson let a Lease for three Years, Lease for three Years, etc. how
interpreted.
and those ended for three others, and those ended for three others, during the
Life of the Lessor, and by the Opinion of most of the Benchers of the middle
Temple, and Diverse Justices of the Common Bench, this was held to be but a
Lease for nine Years if the Lessor so long live (and be resident upon his
Parsonage and not absent, ultra 80 days in any 1 Year) but if the words had
been and so from 3 Years to 3 Years during the Life of the Lessor, perhaps it
would have been otherwise, M. 28 H. 8. Dyer f. 24. a.pl. 155. and see 14 H. 8.
12. and Plow. Com. 274. a.

A Rectory Leased, who m^st serve the cur^.
The King Let a Rectory to one Tavernor rendering Rent, and granted to him to be
discharged, de omnibus and singulis Pensionibus, Portionibus, and denariorum
summis excunt' de Rectoria, and it was decreed in the Court of Augmentation,
that the K. should find the Curate; and if a Common Person Let without such
words of discharge, and no clause in the Indenture, who shall find the Curate,
then the Lessor shall find him, because the service of the cure is a Spiritual
Administration, and cannot be Let, and the service is not issuing out of the
Parsonage, but annexed to the Parson, Tr. 36 H. 8. Dyer f. 58. b. pl. 8.

Leases by Parsons void by non residence.
If a Parson or Vicar, having cure of Souls, make a Lease, it shall be in force
no longer then he is Resident and serves the cure there, without being absent
above 80 days in one Year, by 13 Eliz. cap. 20. so that it seems it shall be
void against himself, and all Covenants and Bonds, made by any such Parson or
Vicar, for suffering any Person to enjoy any such Benefice, or to take the
profit thereof (which in effect, amounts to a Lease) shall be adjudged void to
all intents and purposes, and of no other force then such Leases are, 14 Eliz.
cap. 11. and vide Brownl. Rep. 2 part, f. 132. and 27. Eliz. C. B. Marrow's
Case, Godb. Rep. pa. 20. pl. 38.

When the avoid^nc^ of such Lease shall be^^^.
But there is a Quaere in Dyer, whether such Leases shall be void upon 80 days
absence, ab initio, or but from the time of the absence by 80 days, and as to
this, some have held one way and some another, vide M. 22, 23 Eliz. C. B. Evans
and Heister's Case, Dyer f. 372. b. pl. 11. but observe that this not serving
the cure must be voluntary, for it seems if a Parson, Vicar, etc. be suspended,
inhibited, or disabled, to serve the cure by the space of 80 days, this shall
not make such Lease void, but it has been held, that if a Parson be Resident
and do not serve the cure, or serve the cure and be absent 80 days, simul and
semel, that in both these Cases it will make the Lease void, P. 39 Eliz. B. R.
Dobbins and Gerrard's Case, Gouldes. Rep. p. 162, 163. and vide M. Rep. 448. in
principio, and P. 9. Jac. B. R. Shepherd and Towlsie's Case, Boulstr. Rep. 1
part, f. 111.

Lease void when.
It has been a Quaere also, whether after 80 days are incurred after the Death
of a Parson or Vicar, etc. making such Lease, if thereupon it shall not be
void, and Justice Crook in his reports says, it was adjudged in Mott and
Hale's Case, that after 80 days incurred, after their Deaths such Leases
should be void, but Moor in his reports says, that the Judges where divided in
Opinion as to that point, H. 31 Eliz. B. R. Mott and Hale's Case, Cro. Eliz. f.
123. pl. 1. and M. Rep. f. 270. pl. 422. but some say that this point coming in
question, Tr. 14 Car. 2. B. R. between Bailey and Mournes, it was then adjudged,
that Death does not avoid such Leases, Ideo Quaere, and note that Confirmation
of Patron and Ordinary in such Cases amends not the matter, for if the Lease be
void, the Confirmation is of no force.

What Lease within the Statute, etc.
Note, it has been held, that where an Archdeacon makes a Lease for three
Lives according to the Statute, and the Lessee makes a Lease for an 100 Years,
and the Archdeacon, Bishop, and Dean, and Chapter confirm it, yet this shall
not bind the Successor, for if such Confirmation shall not be said a conveyance
within the Statute, then shall the Statute signify little or nothing, and the
good intention and meaning of the Act shall be defeated and defrauded, Co. Rep.
5 Lib. f. 15. a.

Obligation to enjoy, etc. where good.
A Lay-Person being presented to a Benefice before the 13 Eliz. made a Lease for
60 Years, which was confirmed by the Patron and Ordinary, and the Successor of
the Parson became bound in an* Obligation after the Statute, 14 Eliz. that the
Lessee should enjoy the Term, and after the Obligation entered, the Successor
was absent above 80 days in one Year, and so the Obligation became void by
such absence or no was the Question, and it was adjudged that it was not void
by the Statute 14 Eliz. for the Lease being good, so the Obligation for
injoyning the same should be good also, P. 42 Eliz. Rot. 127. B. R. Costard and
Wingate's Case, M. Rep. f. 606. pl. 836. and Cro. Eliz. f. 775.

Bond to enjoy, etc. where void.
A Parson made a Bond to resign upon request, and after his Induction, he made a
Lease to his Patron of part of the Glebe for one and twenty Years, and
afterward was absent above 80 days in one Year, and upon an Action brought
upon this Bond, the Incumbent pleaded the 13, and 14 of Eliz. and averred, that
this Bond was made to secure this Lease; and to compel him that he should not
avoid the Lease by absence, least he should be required to resign, and this was
adjudged a good Plea, and an apt Averment, M. 43, 44 Eliz. C. B. Webb and
Hargrave's Case, M. Rep. f. 641. pl, 883.

Acceptance makes the Lease good when and when not.
If a Bishop seized of Tithes in right of his Bishopric, make a Lease of the
same for life or lives, rendering the ancient Rent (the Tithes having been
usually demised for the same Rent) and then dies, this Lease is void against
his Successor, and no acceptance of the Rent will make it good, for this Rent
being reserved upon a Lease of Tithes for Life, there is no remedy for it by
distress or Assize, so the Lessee is not compellable to pay it, and because it
is not payable as the Law appoints it is therefore void, vide 5 E. 3. 30 Ass.
5. but if it had been a Lease for Years, i^ had been otherwise, because Debt
lies, yet the Books make a Quaere in it, vide Tr. 2 Jac. B. R. Talentire and
Den^on's Case, M. Rep. f. 778. pl. 1078. and Tr. 5 Jac. B. R. ^ickman and (...)
Case, Cro. Jac. f. 173. pl. 14.

Lease void against the Successor when.
A Prebend was usually Let, with the Exception of all Crab Trees, and such like
Trees, and afterward the Prebendary made a new Lease of the Prebendship,
omitting the exception of the Crab Trees, etc. receiving the ancient Rent, and
this Lease was held to be void against the Successor, for there is more Let
then was anciently, because the Trees were formerly excepted, and so this Lease
not binding against the Successor, P. 15 Jac. B. R. Smith and Bowle's Case,
Boulstr. Rep. 3 part, f. 290. Cro. Jac. f. 458. pl. 5 and vide Leye's Rep. f,
74.

If a Parson let his Rectory excepting Ex^^p^ion etc. void,
the Glebe, the exception is void, for no Rectory can be without Glebe, but he
may except parcel of the Glebe, and it shall be good, but in pleading the Lease
of a Rectory, this shall be taken for the whole Rectory, and not for parcel
Mabie's Case, Wynch Rep. f. 23.

Grant of the next avoidance by a Bishop, etc. v^id.
It ha^h^ been adjudged* that the Grant of the next avoidance of a Benefice* by
a Bishop or Dean and Chapter* i^, within the Restriction^ of the Sta^^tes*
before ment^o^^d in this Chapter, and shall be void against the Successors, and
it has also been Resolved, that if a Dean and Chapter grant^^ Rent Charge out
of their Possessions, that it is restrained by the equity of the Statute,
though these cannot be said any part of the Possessions, of their Churches, Co.
Rep. 5 Lib. f. 15 a. and so it was adjudged, M. 37, 38 Eliz. C. B. between the
Dean and Chapter of Hereford, and the Bishop of Hereford and Ballard, as my
Lord Cook reports it, and see M. 32, 33 Eliz. C. B. Sale and Bishop of Coventry
and Lichfield, cited in Co. Rep. 3 Lib. f. 59. b. and Roll's Cases, 1 part, f.
159. and 169. and Brid. Rep. f. 39 Co. Rep. 10 Lib. f. 60. b. and Leon. Rep. 1
part f. 307.

If a Writ of Annuity should be brought against a Parson or Vicar, upon
Recovery in a Writ of Annuity against a Parson binds not the Successor.
a feigned Prescription or Grant supposed to be made before the Statute, and he
Prays in aid of the Patron and Ordinary, and the Plaintiff obtains a Verdict,
and all this is done by Practice and Fraud charge the Glebe, this shall be void
against the Successor, for although the Annuity charge the Parson or Vicar and
not the Possessions, yet this is within the mischief, to Wit, the impoverishing
of the Successor, cause of Dilapidations, and decay of Spiritual Livings and
Hospitality, which are the mischiess mentioned in the Preamble, Co. Rep. 5 Lib.
f. 14. b. Eytru's Case there cited, and vide Co. Rep. 10 Lib. f. 61. a. and
Bridge. Rep. f. 30.

Plea to a bad where bad.
A Parson became bound in an Obligation with condition not to be absent from his
Benefice by the space of 80 days in one Year, not permute or resign without
the consent of the Patron, and afterward he became non resident, and the Bond
being sued, he pleaded the Statute, 14 Eliz. by which all Leases of Parsons
made of their Benefices, and all Obligations for enjoying, where they are
absent by 80 days et ultra in one Year, shall be void, and averred, that he
was absent 80 days and says not and ultra, and this upon demurrer was
adjudged an ill Plea, for he may be absent for 80 days, and come again in the
Night of the 80 day, and then the Bond is not void, H. 30 Eliz. B. R. Gosnall
and Kindlemarsh Case, Cro. Eliz. f. 88. pl. 10. and 490. pl. 7 M. 37, 38 Eliz.
B. R. Rot. 31. Earl of Lineoln and Hoskin's Case, M. 26 Eliz. B. R. Coxe's
Case, Leon. Rep. 3 part, f. 102. pl. 148. and P. 30 Eliz. B. R. S. John and
Pettit's Case, Leon. Rep. 1 part, f. 100. pl. 129.

Lease in Reversion not binding to the Successor.
The Dean and Chapter of Paul's, made a Lease of an House in London, to one for
forty Years, which House was then in Lease for 10 Years to another, and this
Lease was adjudged void by the 13 Eliz. and not warranted by the 14 Eliz. which
makes Leases of Houses in Cities to be good for 40 Years, so as it be not in
Reversion of any other Lease, for although this Lease be to Commence
immediately, yet it is in Law, a Lease in Reversion, and therefore within the
words of the Statute and shall be avoided by the Successors P. 39 Eliz. C. B.
Hunt and Singleton's, Case, Cro. Eliz. f. 564. pl. 25. and vide Co. Rep. 3 Lib.
f. 60. a. and Roll's Cases, 1 part, f. 159.

Acceptance it will make the Lease good where not.
Note, where a Lease is void ipso facto by the Death of the Lessor, there no
acceptance of the Rent by the Successor, will make the Lease good, as if a
Parson, Vicar or Prebend, make a Lease not warranted by the Statutes, for one
and twenty Years, rendering Rent and dies, here no acceptance of the Rent by the
Successor will affirm the Lease, because the same was void without entry or
Ceremony, but if a Parson, Vicar or Prebend, make a Lease not warranted by the
said Statutes, for life or lives reserving Rent and dye, and the Successor
before entry accepts the Rent, or receives fealty of the Tenant, then such
Lease shall bind him for his time, for this being an Estate of freehold, cannot
be avoided before entry, Co. Rep. 3 Lib. f. 65. a. 11 E. 3 Tit. Abbot. 9. 8 H.
5. 19. 37 H. 6. 3. 24 H. 8 Tit. Leases, Br. 19. F. N. B. 50. and Dyer f. 239. b.

Acceptance where it bind^.
But if a Bishop make a Lease for Years not warranted by the Statutes and dye,
if the Successor accepts the Rent, he shall not avoid the Lease during his
time, Co. Rep. 3 Lib. f. 65. a. or if the Bishop appoint a Bailiff to receive
his Rents, and he receives the Rent from such Tenant (amongst the rest of the
Tenants) who holds by such voidable Lease, and pays the same over to the Bishop
with the other Rents, not acquainting the Bishop therewith, and he receives the
Rent, this is a good acceptance and shall bind the Bishop, H. 5 Jac. C. B.
between Wheeler and Danby, adjudged by the Court, Roll's Cases, 1 part, f. 476
D. 1. and vide Cro. Car. f. 95.

Where it binds not.
If a College make a Conveyance in Fee, within the 13 Eliz. reserving Rent, and
the Master dies, and his Successor being Master accepts the Rent, and gives a
note under his Hand of the recept thereof, without putting his Seal to the
same, and without Authority of the College, this acceptance shall not bind the
College, but they may enter during the Life of the Master who accepted the
Rent, Roll's Rep. 1 part, f. 172. but having (I fear) Trespassed too much in
this Chapter upon the Reader's Patience, I shall here conclude and proceed to
the next.

CHAP. X. How Clergy men are Incapacitated to take Farms, or follow secular
Affairs, and how they are punishable for incominence by their Superiors and by
whose power and Authority Courts Ecclesiastical, are to be kept, and in whose
name and style their Ecclesiastical Process are to be, and with what Seal to be
Sealed.
The Penalty of Spiritual Persons Farmi^g Lands etc.
FOr the more quiet and virtuous increase and maintenance of Divine Service,
and the Preaching and Teaching of the Word of God, with godly and good example,
and increase of Devotion, it is enacted by the 21 H. 8. that no Spiritual
Person of what degree soever, shall take to farm to himself, or to any Person
or Persons to his use, of any Person whatsoever, by Letters Patents,
Indentures, Writings, by Word, or otherwise by any manner of means, any Manors,
Lands, Tenements, or other Hereditaments, for Term of Life, or Term of Years,
or at Will, upon pein to forfeit ten pounds for every Month, he or any to his
use shall occupy the same by virtue of such Lease or Grant, one Moiety to the
King, and the other to the Informer, to be recovered in any of the King's
Courts, 21 H. 8. cap. 13.

The Penalty for buying and selling.
And it is further enacted, that no Spiritual Person or Persons, of what Estate
or Degree soever they be, shall by himself, nor by any other for him, nor to
his, buy to sell again, for lucre, gain, or profit, in any Markets, Faires or
other Places, any manner of Cattle, Corn, Lead, Tin, Hides, Leather, Tallow,
Fish, Wool, Wood, or any manner of Victuals or Merchandise whatsoever, on pein
to forfeit the treble value of the things so brought to sell again, one Moiety
to the King, and the other to the Informer, to be recovered as aforesaid, 21 H.
8. cap. 13.

In what Cases they may sell goods, etc.
But it is provided by the said Act, that if a Spiritual Person, without Fraud
or Covin, do buy any Horses, Mares or Mules, for himself or Servants to ride
about their necessary business, or any other Cattle or Goods, to be employed
and put in and about his necessary apparel of his own House, or of his Person
or Servants, or in, for or about the* occupying, manuring or tillage of his
Glebe or Demesne Lands annexed to his Church, or for the expenses of his
Household keeping, and after such buying, they prove not for the purposes they
were bought for, then such Spiritual Person may Lawfully bargain and put away
the same. And it is further provided, that every Spiritual Person, not having
sufficient Glebe or Demesne Lands in their own Hands in right of their Churches,
for Pasturage of Cattle, or for increase of Corn, for expenses of their
Households or for their Carriages or Journies, may Farm other Lands, and buy
and sell Corn and Cattle, for the only manuring, tillage, and pasturage of such
Farms, so that the increase thereof be always employed and put to, and for the
only expenses in their Households and Hospitalities, and not in any wise to buy
and sell again for any other Commodity, Lucre, or Advantage, any Corn or Cattle
renewing, coming or growing in and upon any such Farm or otherwise, but only
the Remainer and Overplus above their expenses of their Household, if any such
shall happen to be bread and increase thereof without Fraud and Covin, 21 H. 8.
cap. 13.

And it is further enacted, that no The Penalty for k^^^i^g T^^^^^use or
Brew House.
Spiritual Person Beneficed with cure of Souls, shall occupy by himself, or any
to his use, any Parsonage or Vicarage in Farm, of the Lease or Grant of any
Person or Persons, nor take any Profit or Rent out of any such Farm, upon pein
to forfeit forty shillings a Week, and ten times the value of the Rent, or
Profit he shall take out of such Farm. And it is further enacted, that no
Spiritual Person of what degree or condition soever he be, shall have, use or
keep by himself, or any to his use, any manner of Tanhouse or Tanhouses,
Brew House, or Brew-houses, to any other use, intent or purpose, then only to
be spent and occupied in his or their own Houses, upon pein to forfeit ten
pounds a Month, one Moiety to the King, and the other to the Informer, to be
sued for as aforesaid, 21 H. 8. cap. 13.

They may Farm Houses, etc.
But note it is provided by the said Statute, that it may be Lawful to every
Spiritual Person or Persons, to take in Farm, any Messes, Mansions, or dwelling
Houses, having but only Orchards or Gardens, in any City, Borough and Town, for
their own habitation and dwelling; so that no Person Spiritual, other then such
as are Licenced and allowed by Law, have any Liberty of non residence by color
of the said Proviso, 21 H. 8. cap. 13.

An Information was exhibited against two Parsons, upon the Statute, 21 H. 8.
against one of them for non residence, and against the other for taking of a
Farm, and one of them pleaded sickness, and that by advice of his Physicians,
he removed into better Air for recovery of his health, and the other pleaded
that he took the Farm only for the maintenance of his House and Family; and
these Pleas were held justifiable by the whole Court, M. 10 Jac. I. S.
Plaintiff against Martin and Gunnistone, Boulstr. Rep. 2 part, f. 18.

Priests, etc. punishable for incontinence.
In the 1 H. 7. I find a Statute in the Printed Books of Statutes, put forth by
Rastal, Poulton and Keeble, and not any where repealed that I can find, so I
suppose it is still in force and power, by which Statute it is enacted, that it
shall be Lawful to all Archbishops and Bishops, and other Ordinaries, having
Episcopal Jurisdiction, to punish and chastise Priests, Clerks, and Religious
Men, being within the bounds of their Jurisdiction, as shall be convicted before
them, by Examination, and other Lawful proof, requisite by the Law of the
Church, of Advowtry, Fornication, Incest, or any other fleshly incontinence, by
committing them to Ward and Prison, there to abide for such time as shall be
thought by their discretions convenient for the quality and quantity of their
Trespass, and none of the said Archbishops, Bishops, or other Ordinaries
aforesaid, shall be thereof chargeable to or upon any Action of false or
wrongful Imprisonment, but that they be utterly thereof discharged in any of
the Cases aforesaid, by virt^^ of the said Act, 1 H. 7. cap. 4.

All Citations, etc. to be in the King's Nam^.
In the 1 E. 6. cap. 2. it is said, that whereas the Archbishops and Bishops,
and other Spiritual Persons in this Realm, do use to make and send out their
Summons, Citations, and other Process in their own Names, and in such Form and
manner as was used in the time of the usurped power of the Bishop of Rome,
contrary to the Form and Order of the Summons and Process of the Common Law,
used in this Realm, (seeing that all Authority of Jurisdiction, Spiritual and
Temporal, is derived and deducted from the King's Majesty, as Supreme Head of
these Churches and Realms of England and Ireland* and so justly acknowledged by
the Clergy of the said Realms) that all Courts Ecclesiastical, within the said
two Realms, be kept by no other Power or Authority, either foreign or within
the Realm, but by the Authority of his most excellent Majesty; it is therefore
enacted, that all Summons and Citations, or other Process Ecclesiastical, in
all Suits and Causes of Instance betwixt party and party, and all Causes of
Correction, and all Causes of Bastardy o^ Bigamy, or Jure Patronatus, Probates
of Testaments, and Commissions of Administrations of Persons deceased, and all
acquittances of and upon accounts made by the Executors, Administrators, or
Collectors of Goods of any Dead Person, be from the first Day of July, then
next following, made in the Name and with the Style of the King, as it is in
Writs Original or Judicial at the Common Law, and that the Test thereof be in
the Name of the Archbishop or Bishop, or other having Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, who has the Commission and Grant of the Authority
Ecclesiastical, immediately from the King's Highness, and his Commissary,
Official or Substitute exerciseing Jurisdiction under him, shall put his Name
in the Citation or Process after the Test, ^1 E. 6. c^p. 2.

The King'^ Arms, etc. to be put in the Seals of Office, etc.
And it is further enacted, that all manner of Person or Persons, who have the
Exercise of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, shall have expressed in their Seals of
Office, the King's Highness Arms decently set, with certain Characters under
the Arms, for the knowledge of the Diocese, and shall use no other Seal of
Jurisdiction, but wherein his Majesty's Arms be Engraven, upon pein, that if
any Person shall use Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in this Realm of England,
Wales, or other his Dominions or Territories, and not send or make out the
Citation or Process in the King's Name, or use any Seal of Jurisdiction, other
then before limited, that every such Offender, shall incurr and run in the
King's Majesty's displeasure and indignation, and suffer Imprisonment at his
Highness's Will and Pleasure, 1 E. 6. cap. 2.

But it is provided, that the Archbishop Archbishop of Canterbury, etc. may use
his own Seal.
of Canterbury, for the time being, shall use his own Seal, and his own Name,
in all Faculties and Dispensations, according to the Tenor of an Act thereof
made, and that the said Archbishops, and Bishops shall make, Admit, Order, and
Reform their Chancelcellors, Officials, Commissaries, Advocates, Procters, and
other their Officers, Ministers, and Substitutes, and Commissions of Suffragan
Bishops, in their own Names, under their own Seals, as they have used
heretofore. And shall certify to the Court of Tenths, their Certificates under
their own Names and Seals, and shall make Collations, Presentations, Gifts,
Institutions, and Inductions of Benefices, Letters of Order, and Dimissories
under their own Names and Seals, as formerly, notwithstanding the said Act, or
any thing therein contained, 1 E. 6. cap. 2.

Certificates how to be made.
And it is further provided, that all Process to be made or awarded by any
Ecclesiastical Person or Persons, for the Trial of any Plea or Pleas, that
shall depend in any of the King's Courts of Records at the Common Law, and
limited by the Laws and Customs of this Realm, to the Spiritual Courts to try
the same; that the Certificate of the same, after the Trial thereof, shall be
made in the King's Name for the time being, and with the Style of the same
King, and under the Seal of the Bishop, Graved with the King's Arms, with the
Name of the Bishop, or Spiritual Officer, being to the Test of the same Process
and Certificate, and to every of them, 1 E. 6. cap. 2.

Minister deprived by whom.
Note, that when any Minister is complained of in any Ecclesiastical Court,
belonging to any Bishop for any crime, the Chancellor, Commissary, Official, or
any other, having Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to whom it shall appertain, shall
expedite the Cause by Process, and other Proceedings against him, and upon
Contumacy for not appearing, shall first suspend him, and afterward his
Contumacy continuing Excommunicate him. But if he appear and submit himself to
the course of Law, then the matter being ready for Sentence, and the Merits of
his Offense exacting by Law, either Deprivatio^ from his Living, or Deposition
from the Ministry, no such Sentence shall be pronounced by any Person whosoeve^
but only by the Bishop, with the Assistance of his Chancellor, the Dean, (...)
they may conveniently be had) and some of the Prebendaries, if the Court be
kept near the Cathedral Church, or of the Archdeacon if he may be had
conveniently, and two other at the least Grave Ministers, and Preachers to be
called by the Bishop, when the Court is kept in other places, Can. 122.

The Conclusion.
And now, Reverend Sirs, having (not without great pains and study, which
Solomon says is a weariness to the flesh) arrived at the Period of my intended
purpose, before I conclude, give me leave to acquaint you, that my Lord Cook in
his Epilogue to his fourth part of his Institutes says, that he that takes
upon him to Write, does Captivate all the Powers and Faculties both of his Mind
and Body, and must be only Intentive to that which he Collecteth, without any
Expression of Joy or Cheerfulness, whilst he is in his Work, the truth whereof
I have sufficiently experienced, whilst I was Composing this Treatise; So after
this, if my pains do not Merit your thanks, yet I hope you will be so Candid as
gently to censure, lovingly to Correct, or easiy to Pardon, such errors and
mistakes as have either escaped the Press or my Pen, knowing that humanum est
errare, and so I take leave, and shall wind up all in this short Sentence, Vide
quod non mihi soli Laboravi, sed omnibus exquirentibus scientiam.

Deo gloria and gratia.
FINIS.

