MERCURIUS SCOTICUS Giving the World to ground upon this evident truth,
Videlicet, That the Scottish Rebels, the Presbyter, or Kirck-faction: Never
intended that CHARLES the second should be their King.

Published to underceive the Cozoned Covenanters of the three Nations, merely
drawn into Blood and Ruin by the Iugling of Some ruling Iockeys.

Printed at Rotterdam by P. C. and are to be sold By GYSBERT van ROON,
Bookseller in the Draybridge-steegh, in the English Bible, 1650.

WHen the news of Charles the firsts death came into Scotland, the Statesmen
who were invested with the government of that kingdom before, by L. Genesis
Cromwell and the English army, in Octo. 1648. (Duke Hamiltons army being
defeated and betrayed three months before.)

The Kings death seemed to them to be much grieved for, and those Estates
pretended to be as forward to revenge it as any.

And least it should appear to the people, that they with L. Genesis Cromwell had
complotted his death, at my Lady Humnes her house in the suburbs of Edenbrough,
they complain against the Independants of England or murdering the King, but
the furious Kirkmen, which could not so well dissemble, in their Kirkprayers
and preachments: in plain terms told their credulous, ignorant, easy
auditors, that he deserved to die, having been a hinderer of Reformation, I,
and had shed much blood of the Saints.

He, fiery Sir John blamed the Independent for doing it without the house of
Lords, did not disclaim the act as unjust or contrary to the laws of God and
man, as an unchristian, as an inhumane and unheard of, savage, monstrous bloody
act, in their answer to L. Genesis Cromwells declaration to the equal scarlet
Scots in Scotland July 20. 1650. These states of that nation (never without a
cloak, for their designs,) proclaimed Charles the second, to make the world
believe that they and the elder Iuncto in England were not united in hearts and
councels, and equally abominated Monarchy.

Yet so proclaimed they the king, that no judicious man, but might see they
never intended to receive him to be their King, (what ere, to gull the simple,
they pretended,) whereupon a royal party in the North betook themselves into
the field, finding he must not be their free Prince, but in bonds: for they
heard him proclaimed King with this limitation that he should give such
security to preserve Liberty, Law and Religion, as the Kirk and State should
judge satisfactory, that is, he should give what ever the factious Rebels
should ask of him, before he should be admitted to enter the kingdom,
hereupon the Scottish Statesmen dispatch Commissioners unto him at the Isle of
Iersey with such unreasonable propositions and demands; as that his Majesty
could not in honor or safety grant them. In this treaty his Majesty disclaimed
his Scotch friends who were in arms for him, May 15. 1649, The Treaty being
dissolved, the Commissioners return his Majesty's negative answer to the
State and Kirk of Scotland, which was most acceptable to the Grandees of that
rebellious crew, for now they had some ground of quarrel.

His title to the Crown was unquestionable, his innocent age blameless, O but
now, now they have what they fisht for, his negative answer will afford them
matter enough to declare against him, as now concluding him (one overruled by
evil Counsel, the old way of worming in) an enemy into the Estate and Kirk,
whereupon they resolved at that instant to declare peremptorily against him,
and for a month continued in this resolution, but upon further debates and
second thoughts, finding the greatest part of the kingdom loyal and ready to
join with the Marquis of Montrose, if he came in with any considerable force,
they resolve once more to send to his Majesty before they would publish the
declarations they had then provided, judging it a far better way to defeat the
Marq. Montrose his design, in making his Majesty an absolute Monarch by a
Treaty, then opposing his General in the field, this being subject to the
chance of war: but the other safe and sure a subtle way, and finding diverse
eminent persons that had power with the King, to persuade him to desert
Montrose, and cast himself upon them and their faithful, godly party.

Upon this consideration Mr. George Windrum was sent to the Isle of Iersey, to
desire his Majesty would be pleased to appoint a convenient place and time for
a second treaty, which he according to the good meaning of his innocent royal
heart did, naming Breda, and the 15 of March 1649. the place and time of
meeting.

In the beginning of which second treaty, his Majesty did stand to his former
principles: But at last some eminent persons prevailed with him to yield to the
Scots demands, to work which the Hamiltonian faction in the Court, to my
knowledge, were also exceedingly assistant, representing to his Majesty that
the Marq. Montrose was not 200 foot strong in Orkney, and that such an
inconsiderable force could not be able to raise the country of Scotland, and
that for foreign aid from Princes, there was no possibility of expecting it,
most of them being unable, and much engaged in war, and others having scare
quenched the fire in their own dominions, were not willing to involve
themselves, or subjects in a foreign war, which would require a daily supply
of men and money from them.

They told him it would be encouragement to his friends abroad to be aiding and
assisting to him, if he were possessed of one of his kingdoms, and that his
yielding to the Scots party would give great satisfaction to the Presbiterians
of England, and much hearten them and others to take up arms against the
Rebels of England.

Upon these and other motives, with the earnest solicitation of those persons,
his Majesty concludes an absolute agreement with the Scots Commissioners, and
sends a letter to the Marq. of Montrose commanding him to disband his forces,
and retire to Denmark until further order, and that he should deliver up his
arms and ammunition to the Scots Commissioners, or to the Sheriff of the
County wherein he was.

But before the Gentleman could come into Scotland the Marq. of Montrose was
taken prisoner, and most barbarously murdered by the Kirk and State, for his
loyalty and fidelity to the King. Here judge you if Charles the first was not
murdered, and Charles the second wounded, not in effigies or in picture: but
in the highest image and character that could represent Majesty, in his
General and Viceroy.

Now all this while his Majesty is treating at Breda, the Scots hold known
correspondency with those of England, Mr. Ansley being Agent at Edenbrough,
sending daily provision to the garrisons of Barwick and Newcastle, and
soliciting them daily for aid against the Marq. of Montrose, but a week before
the Marq. landed, a Statesman wrote a letter to Sr. Arthur Hasselrig, giving
him a true account of their present condition April 14. 1650, assuring him
that the affairs of that kingdom were come to that height, that the godly
party would be forced to fly to England very suddenly, if that the English did
not advance presently toward their borders,

During this treaty also likewise the Ministers did endeavor both by their
prayers and preachments, to make the royal Family odious to the people, and to
disgrace the loyal party, affirming them to be more wicked and greater enemies
to God and true Religion, then the Sectaries or Independants of England, and
that they might with greater safety join with Independants, then with the
Malignant party, that were honored by the King, but dishonorous of God and his
true worship, such and some of them were Mr. Hog, Lesley, Mungalaw, John
Sterling, and Hamilton.

The States of Scotland being now free of all fear of being annoyed any more by
the Kings party, his General and Viceroy hanged, and his body quartered, they
begin to assume their former resolutions and design of having no King. And to
that end dispatch Mr. William Murray with letters and new instructions to their
Commissioners, requiring them forthwith to break off the Treaty and return,
because their proclaimed King had broken faith with them, in sending the Marq.
of Montrose to invade Scotland in the time of treaty, (wherein they highly and
falsely abuse his Majesty, for there was no cessation agreed on) and that if
they had made any agreement with their King to disclaim it, in their name, as
having gone further then their Commission or Instructions led them or would
warrant them.

And that they might have some color of reason for this, they send some
Animadversions upon their first instructions, showing their true meaning and
intention in them, (which I may one day get and publish,) and that their
Commissioners had missetaken their meaning in concluding and agreeing with the
King.

They command Mr. Murray to present unto the King, how much the kingdom of
Scotland was enraged against him, and how by common consent and the universal
cry, his General was executed (that in him, and his death he might see the
affections of that people alienated from him, and what his own fate might
prove,) that he dyed excommunicate, being denied absolution, was quartered, his
head staked up, and bowels buried under the gallows.

And that it might clearly appear he could not go for Scotland in safety, they
give him a list of fourteen Noblemen and Gentlemen that were banished Scotland,
without whose personal presence his Majesty could not continue in the kingdom
one day in safety.

And that these Machevills might have some show of reason for disclaiming their
King, and draw the people to join with them in this their last design against
his Majesty, they appoint two declarations to be penned, one by the Kirk,
another by the State, and that the penners of those declarations might be the
better furnished with matter, they examine their then prisoners of Montroses
party concerning their Commissions granted to them to invade the kingdom,
interogating them what Princes his Majesty had solicited to that end, and
whether they ever heard his Majesty call them Rebels and Traitors, and whether
he did not threaten to destroy Scotland with fire and sword, in case they did
not submit to him.

And whether they did not think his Majesty popishly affected, and whether,
while he was in France he did not go to Mass.

These and the like intergatories were put to the prisoners, in hope that
through fear to displease them, some of them would depose what might contribute
to a charge against their innocent King.

And that the people might be the better persuaded for disclaiming their King,
their Ministers in there Pulpits and Sermons told the people that his Majesty
did now show himself an Hawk of the right nest, and that he would be more
bloody then ever his father was, or any of his Progenitors; Mr. Lesly, Mr.
Hog and others.

That it appeared clearly, God had such a controversy with the royal Family,
as he had with Ahabs, and that he hoped to live to see that Race out off Root
and Branch.

In their prayers they made the King and his father of ever blessed memory,
guilty of all the blood that had been shed in the three kingdoms, and prayed
God that Charles the second might never come to sit upon his Throne until he
repented himself of granting Commissions to wicked men, to shed the blood of
Gods peculiar people.

But further, these Rebels knowing that a baredeclaration would not maintain
the quarrel against the King and his party, they resolve to rue model their
army, and to keep open correspondency with the State of England, and to make a
league offensive and defensive with them. To this end they dispatch one Major
Dicsn, a known Independent to the State of England, to let them know they had
sent to their Commissioner Mr. Will. Murray to recall them, and disclaim any
agreement with him their proclaimed King.

Having thus clothed their design, they dream of a perpetual enjoyment of
their usurped power, and of settling the peace of that State in such a way, that
the whole world should not be able to disturb it.

But vain and foolish prove the counsels of men, where God sits not president,
the wisdom of these Achitephels, a months time finds turned into folly, for
before Mr. Murray could get into Holland, his Majesty and the Scots
Commissioners were fully agreed, and his Majesty gone with them into Scotland,
and before the Parliament of Scotland knew his Majesty was landed, the
agreement which was made at Breda was ratified by both parties on Scotch ground
and so fully confirmed, that it was not possible in the State to question the
Agreement,

The unexpected news of his Majesty's landing, though it amazed the Statesmen,
and such as I will not name (for some reasons until my next,] yet was the
hearts of all sorts of other people transported with unspeakeable joy, insomuch
as they received him as King, and as another Moses sent of God to deliver them
from their unjust and overtiring Task masters, which did not only oppress
them in their estates, by continued illegal taxes and impositions, by free
quarter and excise, and in their persons by banishments and imprisonments: but
in their very souls, forcing them to go on in, and perpetrate their wicked
courses against God and their King.

But upon his Majesty's arrival, as if at present they felt ease by his
presence from all these, general joy is expressed by fireing beacons and
making bonefires three nights together, and such like publications to the world
of honoring their King, with much studied joy, and that it was in vain now
for the Scotch party to oppose the King, or confine him to the castle of
Dunnotter, as some of them after his arrival moved he might have been, but his
Majesty's unexpected and sudden coming, together with the peoples universal
joy for an honorable reception of him

Not only prevented the plots of the rebellious party of Kirk and State
against him: but likewise it increased the jealousy the English had of the
Scots Presbitry. and did engage them against their brethren of Scotland, who a
week or two before had given them assurance that they had sent a messenger into
Holland to recall their Commissioners, and that they were resolved absolutely
to have no King,

And wrought upon the State of England to command Genesis Cromwell forthwith into
Scotland with a powerful army, and a squadron of ships to be sent to sea: but
unsearchable are the works of God, and his ways past finding out, now are the
wicked ensnared in their own devices, and brought to such a straight they know
not what to do. Their King having given all satisfaction, and being brought
home by their Commissioners, is so high in the heart of his subjects, that they
find it impossible to eject him.

And the English enraged, as if undoubtedly they had been deceived by the Kirk
and Parliament of that kingdom, In wrath approach with a powerful army,
whereupon the Parliament and Kirk send a messenger unto Genesis Cromwell, desiring
him not to approach near the borders, but that a Treaty might be admitted,
whereby a right understanding between the Nations might be preserved, and that
they might the more plainly make it appear, that their intentions were true
and real in keeping the solemn league and covenant of peace between the
nations.

To this, Genesis Cromwell replied, he would treat with them when he came to
Edenbrough, This answer being returned, the Parliament put it to the vote,
whether an army should be raised for the defense of the country. Eight of the
prime Statesmen vote no army: (their names you shall have in the next) but the
Ministers or Kirk faction, whose interest the Independent could not, or they
knew would not secure, voted for an army, and the forward of those Kirkers gave
assurance for the raising of a Regiment of horse for Major Straughan.

And that they might abate the fury of the English, they set forth a
declaration, in which they call heaven and earth to witness, that they never
intended to invade England.

His sacred Majesty within a day, after his landing wrote two letters, one to
the Parliament, and the other to the Committee of Kirk, signifying to them,
that he had satisfied their demands to the full, and that he was come into that
his kingdom, with a resolution to be ruled by them, and that it should
evidently appear to be their fault, and not his, if there were failer in any
thing, These letters seemed to give satisfaction to his greatest enemies, and
hereupon they voted for the speedy Coronation of his Majesty, in that he had
given full satisfaction to their Commissioners, and had himself taken the
Covenant, so they grounded their vote for Coronation, as by a true extract from
their Parliament journall book is witnessed.

Now observe next, that his Majesty traveled from the North of that kingdom
to the Southward, and was received (as before) at Aberdeen, Dundee, St.
Andrews, St. Iohnsons, etc. by the Earls of South Ask, and Martial, The more
the people express their love and loyalty to him their King, the more jealous
grew the State factions in Kirk and Parliament.

And thereupon the Parliament is wrought upon to send forth a Proclamation,
commanding the English that came in with his Majesty (but such as should be
approved of by Kirk and State) to depart the kingdom, and that no Malignants
should come within ten miles of the court. And to second this, the leading
Kirkmen bellow it out, that the peoples rejoicing would ere long be turned into
mourning, and that for all they knew, God had sent them a King in his anger.

Within a fortnight after his Majesty came to Faulkland, he removed to
Sterling, where he received an invitation from the Committee to come to the
army, which his Majesty cheerfully embraced, and was no sooner entered their
Trenches, but the soldiers raised a shout (which gave an Alarm to the Enemy)
and in their exclamamations said, We have a good cause, We have a good cause,
Now let us fight for God and our King.

But this heartinesse of theirs, gave exceeding great offense, and spurred up
the leading Kirkmen, in their things, a little like Sermons, that they had a
good cause, when they had no King, yet say what they could, whilst his Majesty
was in the army (which was five days) the soldiers express most observeable
resolutions, chalked upon their Arms when they went out to charge the Enemy,
We are for King Charles, and when they saw Sir James Hacket make a cowardly
retreat in the sight of his Majesty and Army, the soldiers cried out, let
Colonel Hacket be hanged, for he is a Coward and a Traitor.

The leading Kirkers finding his Majesty to have such an unexpected influence
upon the army, ruggedly desired him to be gone, for that they had observed,
that since his Majesty's coming into the army, the soldiers did neglect their
duty to God and themselves his Ministers, and therefore he must away.

The King being gone, they fall to purging the army of all Malignants English
and Scots, to the number of five thousand assured fighting men, who knew what
enemies were,

Within a week after his Majesty went from the army, the English Rebels retreat
to Dunbar, which was some twenty miles, whereupon the Kirkers are raised to
such an height of pride and insolency, as that nothing fills their stalles more,
then that God had shown they were beloved of him, his dear children and chosen,
whom he would protect as he did Hezekiah and Jerusalem, to which purpose the
Chap. ordered to be expounded by all the Levites in the Camp was 2. Kings 19.
But woe and alas, these jocund thanksgivings of theirs prove very fatal, for
the enemy by his retreat drew them from their Trenehes, to gain oppertunity,
the better to fight them abroad, whom he knew could never stand one charge in
open field, being an irregular fresh and raw number of men, from whom the
fighting Nobility, Gentry and soldiers, were (as Genesis Cromwell could have
desired) either forced or casheared the field, and inhibited bearing Arms.

Remarkable now is it, how this Kirk and States presumption, treachery,
insolency and pride did forerun their destruction, for no sooner did the
English rebels Army charge them, but they fled. threw away their Arms, and cry
for quarter. Thus wicked men hasten to their ruin, and are resolute to their
own overthrow: for had they not been led by the headstrong Kirkers to pursue,
but had kept within their Trenches, the English Army through want of health by
famine, and many distresses to which they were driven, must uncontrovertibly
within few days have retreated with as infinite shame and dishonor on their
parts, as it would have been advantage and encouragement to their now beaten
brethren, dear brethren of Scotland.

For the confirmation of much (if not of all) here asserted, (my unbyased
Reader) excuse the incerting of the Kirks own declaration Aug 15. 1650. worth
thy running over.
THe Commission of the general Assembly, considering that there may be just
ground of stumbling from the Kings Majesty, refusing to subscribe and emit the
declaration offered unto him by the Committee of Estates and Commissioners of
the general Assembly, concerning the firm carriage and resolution for the
future, in reference to the cause of God, and the enemies and friends thereof:
Does hereby declare: That the Kirk and Kingdom do not own, or espouse any
malignant party or quarrel or interest; But that they fight merely upon their
former grounds and principals, and in defense of the cause of God and the
kingdom, as they have done the twelve years past, and therefore as they
disclaim all the sins and guilt of the King and his house, so they will not
own him nor his interest, otherwise then with a subordination to God, and so
far as he owns and prosecutes the cause of God, and disclaimes his and his
fathers opposition to the work of God and to the Covenant, and likewise all the
enemies thereof. And that they will with all convenient speed, take in
consideration the papers sent to them from Oliver Cromwell, and vindicate
themselves from all the falsehoods contained therein, especially in those things
wherein the quarrel betwixt us and that party is mistated, that is if we owned
the late Kings proceedings, and were resolved to prosecute and maintain his
present Majesty's interest, before and without acknowledgement of the sins of
his house and former ways to Gods people in both kingdoms.

A. Ker.

The Committee of Estates having seen and considered a declaration of the
Commissioners of the general Assembly, anent the stating of the quarrel
wherein the army is to fight, do approve the same and heartily concur therein.

Tho. Hend.

Printed by Evan Tyler Printer to the Kings most excellent Majesty. 1650.

Further Collectives conducing to the proof of the purposed ground.
Since the Scotch Army was routed, the Kirk have commanded a general Fast, and
have in Print, given these reasons to incite thereunto,

1. For that we have sinned, and find the displeasure of the Lord upon us of
this Nation in general. 2. For the sins of our Commissioners, in bringing
our King so soon, contrary to the mind of the godly party. 3. For our
acceptance of him for our King before he had more sufficiently repented him of
his by past sins. 4. For not thoroughly purging the Army of the Malignants of
the Nations. 5. For our too much trusting to the Arm of flesh.
Consider these things, and I shall only offer two or three more for thee to
ruminate at present. Vize.

1. Their moulding the gross lump of their Scottish State according to the
English Rebels present Plotforme. 2. Their murdering his Majesty's General,
or executing them who appeared with him in Arms, that had any spark of
loyalty, No cessation being agreed upon. 3. Their depriving those Ministers
that affected Monarchy, hated independancy and antemonarchicall Sectaries. 4.
Their establishing their government of that kingdom these last years to this
very day, in the hands of those who were enemies to Monarchy, and engaged to
destroy the royal Family, having been so highly active in the late rebellion
against Charles the first. 5. Their entrusting the Army and Forts of that
kingdom to this hour, with none but the known Enemies of Monarchy. Their not
being in a posture of defense in their kingdom to receive the enemy, at their
not fortifying Leeth and other places. 7. Their making no provision for the
reception of the King, by preparing any of his houses for him before he came.
8. Being come, the banishing his Majesty's domestic servants. 9. Their
Ministers Mr. James Guthery, Mr. Blair, Mr. Rotherford, etc. impudently as
falsely disgraceing and dishonouring his Majesty, and his father of eternally
blessed memory in their Court sermons, or such like things to his face. 10.
Their not crowning his Majesty. 11. Their not suffering his Majesty to abide
in the Army, or to call to his aid those whom he knew would not fear an enemy.
12. Their not setting, or suffering him to set up his Standard royal. 13.
Their daily setting forth most dishonorable Proclamations of their own in his
sacred name.
And to look a little back, for keeping correspondency with the English Rebels,
and entertaining Mr. Ansley as their Agent from England, during the time the
Commissioners were in tretay at Breda.

To all which, add Mr. Murrays commission and instructions to the Scots
Commissioners at Breda, to break off the Treaty, and to disclaim any agreement
with their King, and now Mercurius Scotius appeals to the judgments of
rational men through the world, whether he be from such premises, false in his
conclusion, Vizt.

That the carrying Kirkmen and Committee of State in Scotland, never intended
their King should come into Scotland, or themselves to engage in a war with the
English upon his Interest. In short, that they never intended or do intend to
have a King.

Salutes due, etc.
SIr, at present to satisfy you further of our public affairs here, this
nation is divided, and stands upon three Interests, Colonel Straughan and Carr
have one Army in the west of Scotland, David Lesly and Argile abut Sterling and
St. Iohnstons, Major General Middleton and the Marq. of Huntly another in the
North, which last army has made a new Covenant, almost in the old language.
The loyal party in Athold have cut off a Regiment of David Leslys horse,
suprising them in their quarters by night. Dr. Frozer contrived a conveyance of
his Majesty from Argiles party to Clova in Angus: but was betrayed in his
design by the treachery of some of them that carried him away, and his Majesty
forced back again. The old plot only the Scene altered, God prevent.

Aberdeen October. ult.

I thank my friend for his intelligence, much more for his Prayers, and have
some reason to join with him, God grant it be not turned upon the King. he
deserted us, we are at large to desert him, and the fate of Charles the second
be not the same with the first.

The change of affairs may be strange upon this small action of Major Genesis
Middleton: Grant a uniting of these Interests, and find an expedient for the
preserving Argiles person and securing his friends, and I shall proclaim hopes
for the abused King.

FINIS.

