MERCURIES MESSAGE, OR THE COPY OF A LETTER sent to William Laud late
Archbishop of CANTERBVRY, now prisoner in the Tower.

PROVE. 11. 10.
When it fares well with righteous men,
The City is glad and joyful then:
But when with Wicked it fares ill,
There Is none of them, take pity will,
JOB. 27. 23.
Clapping of hands with joy there is apace,
Hissing them out of there great Lordly place.
JOB. 32. 9.
The great ones are not always wise,
Who in great pomp and state do rise.


Printed in the year, of our Prelates fear. 1641.

REVELL. 13. 16.
The man that understanding has
Behold and see, the Scripture says
The number of the Beast is numbered
And comes unto the sum Six hundred
Sixty and six: the name here writ amounts
Unto the same if we do rightly count.
The beasts number
W 10 L 50 I 1 A 0 L 50 V 5 L 50 D 500 666.

Revelat. 19. 20.
Into the lake the beast was cast
Which never dies: but everlasting lasts
It burns with brimstone and with fire,
According to Gods dreadful ire.
TO The late famous, now Infamous Archbishop, WILLIAM, a CANTERBVRY.
MY LORD,
I Call you what, not long ago you were,
But now those golden days are past I fear,
And so does all the drooping Hierachy
Of Lordly Bishops, that er'e while so high,
Bore up theirs heads to show themselves superiors,
And proudly trod upon their poor inferiors.
How did you Domineere in your vain pride
Whilst in prosperity you did abide,
With envious Rage, and foul maliciousness,
Striving to bring Gods people in distress
Down went all painful and laborious teaching,
The Service Book more useful was, then preaching
In your account, having an Inclination
With Popish rites to blind our British nation.
But men of sounder Judgment know full well,
That Gods pure word man's wisdom does excel
And yet for sooth your will being a Law,
Men better then your self, you kept in aw
Well, next our weekly Lectures liked you not,
To put down them your zeal was wondrous hot.
It seems your Lordship had conceivid a thought,
And feared poor Ignorants would too much be taught,
And so your Soul deludements learn to see,
When with Rooms (...) does no whit agree;
Else you might think, with plenty being fed,
They might have loathed that heavenly bread,
For men by Solomon's rule may (...) get
If finding honey, they too much on it eat.
Therefore your Grace took a sure course for such,
Y'ad rather see them starve then have too much
But now the Sabbath day in your esteem
Is kept too strictly, this a fault you deem,
For squaring thus our actions by Gods word
We with the Papists never should accord
Therefore by smooth, false, base Insinuation
You did persuade the King by Proclamation
To give his subjects leave to sport and play
In spite of all gainsayers on that day:
This done, one Sermon must content us to
And that but one hour long, for if men do
Exceed their time prescribed, tho their intention
Be never so good, they may expect suspention:
In all which did not we Religion fly,
With Room observe a sweet close simpathy.
But is this all; no, Altars next you raise,
And waxen Tapers must upon them blaze;
Yea in these heaps of Stone such worth is found.
That passers by must bow to'em down toth' ground:
Is Jesus with a large pronunciation
Uttered by some time serve't being the fashion,
Legs, Congjes, Bowings, wait upon that name
In outward Adoration of the same.
Indeed the Country did this trick refuse,
Because their scraping spoiled their Sunday shoo's:
Besides being full of Nails and Iron specks,
They made a Parish charge to buy new bricks.
To ratify all this, Cannons are made,
And yet I think the Authors are not paid
For that good work of theirs, but let that pas,
This Parliament then never dreampt of was,
Or if it were and things had come toth' worst;
Perhaps you thought to dash it like the first:
Therefore in uncontrouled pride you reigned
Virtue opposed, all vices you maintained:
Which made men think you had an itching hope
To be some Cardinal or little Pope.
Whereby an ancient Proverb's verifide,
Beggars if set on horse back, love to ride:
Did any Minister detest these things,
To see you Bishops rule like petty Kings
Did they out of true zeal and conscience sake,
A scruple of your Popish orders make:
Cross, Surplice, Tippet, would they not allow
To high Altar, did they scorn to bow:
Was there no outward sign of Reverence shown
When Jesus was pronounced, and that made known
To your Lordship; straight off went the offenders ears
Though nere so old, no pitties took of years:
Your worships pillary must their necks adorn
A triple Tree they say shall serve your turn.
They peep through wooden windows; as for you
Gregory has a hempen Lattice fair and new.
Men hope to see you mounted er'e you die,
I Am sorry for it my Lord, but cannot cry.
Sure your well wishers hymmes of praise will sing,
To see you go to Heaven in a string:
Or if not so, the common people swear,
You Will grace the Block as well as your compere:
Others suppose that a Clothworkers son,
Shall never have such honor to him don:
Thus all men censure, none cares what they say,
Pusse being cag'd, the Mice may freely play.
So in a Country pasture have I seen
The little Lambkins skipping on a green,
Whilst the poor wolf lies tangled in the net
The careful Sheapheard for his ruin set:
This is the talk my Lord that goes about,
He Is nobody now a days that cannot flout.
Imprisoned Canterbury, when it is clear
Your back's to norrow all these quips to bear;
Oh had your thoughts and stature but agreed
Together, then all had been well indeed:
But when such Pigmy Lords as you will cherish
Ambitious great desires, both lightly perish.
How true this happens to your helpelesse woe,
And sad destruction, sure I am you know;
For now y're falling it is the general cry
Down with him Tyrant fie upon him fie.
Blessed were the man could light on such good hap,
To beat our's eyes with his Babylonian cap.
Thus are our wits employed early and late
With some quient leere to break your Graces pate,
We scorn says one his vices to applaud,
We know the Divill must have little Laud:
O says a second, he is a gallant prize,
And by his fall, young Gregory will rise.
Who swears when Surplice and Lawn sleeves h'as got
Heel send Romes Strumpet a veneriall smock.
As for the Song which goes Blue cap for me,
He Will have it changed to Black cap that is his fee.
Lastly, (to pass all others) some suppose
You have a trick of art to fetch back those
Showed us their Heels, where ever they remain,
Or else be hanged when you come back again:
I know you have a great desire to do it.
Could you persuade the Parliament unto it;
But were you sent on such an errand now,
When should we see ye return, never we know:
Oh it is whipping Time my Lord most think,
When such as you, for fear begin to stink:
Some run for it their Activity to show,
Their Heads may thank their Legs, if they escape so.
Others that cannot go; Blood sucking Leeches,
Make Buttons backwards, and defile their breeches:
So may you see some dogs when death draws near,
Being lifted from the Earth perfume the air:
Me thinks your Honor, yea your Honors head,
Hangs in the air by a small twisted Thread:
Which to Heavens praise, Hells joy, and Londons wonder
The Sword of Justice Arives to cut asunder.
Alas what Remedy, if down you must,
It Is but a little grace transformed to Dust;
Where Dirt and Ashes having stopped your breath,
You Will find this truth, wages of sin is death;
Did you expect my Lord a year ago,
To see your glorious light extinguished so;
Did you once dream of this disaster sad,
Sure no, y'ad lived much better if you had.
So have I seen the treacherous fox over shot,
Persuing his prey with rage and malice hot;
Till in the height of's pride at unaware
Thinking to catch the spoil, he falls in the snare.
I know my Lord, you now consume your days
In bitterness, be it spoken to your praise
And that is good Reason't should be, so for why?
You Have worn whole years away in vanity:
And yet we doubt y' are only discontented
To see your hellish aims so well prevented.
But is the head sick, and the members free,
Do not our other Bishops grieve to see
Their PROP so sorely shaken; sure they do
For you once down they needs must tumble to;
They know a house that Built upon the Sand,
In time of windy storms can never stand.
Now if great Beelzebub himself be scared
Needs must th'inferior Devils be afeard.
Some other things I meant to write, whic I
Will now omit t'avoyd Prolixity:
I fear already I Have too tedious been,
And that you ever judged a heinous sin.
Therefore to close up all, let me I pray,
Inform you what the bonny Scotchmen say:
They hope in quiet to go home unbang'd,
And wish the causer of their coming hanged:
And so they vow to see him ere they go,
Then farewell England, Iockey is no foe.
Therefore my Lord, take a friends advise,
And learn to swing adays if you be wise:
For I Am perrwaded it is your Honors lot,
To have your old bones stretched, why should you not?
Old men must dye you know, and young men may:
When your turn comes comes, then we will make holyday;
And like old Israel skip and sing amain,
To see Goliath on the Mountains slain.
My Muse grows weary Sir, and now I Will rest
Mine own, not yours, I see the Sun's ith west.
Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula Cantem.
But some will nere learn wit till'its dearly taught them
An Accrosticall Caveat to beware of Ambition
What news is this I hear
In all men's mouths so sweet,
Laud's taken in the snare
Laid for another feet.
Indeed I always thought
Ambitious pride would fall
Men's ways being lewd and naught.
Lead them toth pit of thrall.
Agreat man's hope is vain
Unless his life be just,
Death ends his days in shame.
And then where is human trust
Riches will not avail
Cold worlds be then produced
Honor and wit will fail
Because they have bin abused
In pomp and dignitee
Sometime tho he remain
His greatness soon will be
Obscurd with foul disdain
Proud Nimrod thus and's troop,
Of late have lost their power
For Babell gins to stoop.
Confusion shakes their tower
Anortherne blast has blown
Nere thirty flat caps down
That were so stately grown,
Each one ore topt the Crown
Rome wailes their sudden fall,
But it is in vain to rore
Usurping Prelates shall
Rule us in pride no more:
Iure devino made an Ass you see,
Enland rejoice, it is happy news for thee.
FINIS.

