EXALTATIO ALAE.

THE EX-ALE-TATION OF ALE.

Done into Verse by T. C. P.

Anno Dom. 1666.

PROLOGUS.
NEc art carmen expolire festivum
Didici; Camaenis haud faventibus natus:
Nec praepotens vinum dedit, Poetarum
Vt interesse me putem, sacris dignum:
Nec hydromeli, vel Cambriensium, Hyblaeo
Generosius, Lymphaque Pegaso nata,
Magis efficax lyrae facit sciens ut sim:
Sed neque adeo sublimis ingens fomes
Alesburia qualem, ac Deorbia princeps,
North-dounaque Rutupina carius vendit
Cervisia me divum inserit Choro natum.
Quid, inquis, ergo, Rhythmicus Poetaster
Ita rudis? an dolosior Lucelli spes
Refulget? aut sequax eduliorum te
Parasitus, huc, miselle, venture instigat?
Horum nihil sane. Sed atra me bilis
Hebetem licet, rudemque semi-paganum
Splenis latenter in fibras mihi repens
(Qua pruriam, et scripturiam iners, potens artis,
Quasi minxerim in cineres patris, vel Aetnaeo
Famosus igne postulem celebrari.)
Offuciis, ineptiisque lactatque
Epistrophisque lusitare titillat.
Quid obvius quod vatibus tabernatim
Qui factitant versus, canunt, bibunt, saltant;
Egone at, Ala symbolumque praegnantem
Sale quem, facetiis, leporibus, nugis
Iisdem facit idem, non reponerem ignavus?
Ala sed enim neque his disertior, vulgus
Qua in bibimus, ingenium reddit redundatum;
Neque nos asymboli sumus Poetastri,
Vt aurium demus operam et (...) gratis
Quisquam aut sine talione (sobrius, potus)
Lacessat; impares licet Palaestritae,
Quin Bromius ut animat, pares reluctemur.
Pari quis enim? quidve impedit referri par?
Id propter and periculum, vel ingratis
Nolens, volens feci, vicem Poetastris
Amusus ut reddam. Poeta qui non est
Ausis tamen, quibus excidit, Poetarum
Assecla potis est, inter, vel instar ut fiat
Pede qui nequit rectus, deambulet (...).
THE PROLOGVE.
NO skill in polite verse, and mirth;
(The Muses frowned at my birth;)
Nor potent Sack has dubbed my name
With Title of a Poets fame,
No Walsh Metheglin (nobler far
Than Hybla's; and beyond compare
For Efficacy, to that Spring
Which rose where Pegasus took wing.)
Has tuned my Harp. No; Nappy Ale
Wits cordial tipple (good and stale)
Such as Alesburie, Darby chief
And North-down sells (to Poets grief)
At an high rate) has ranked my verse
Amongst the Laureat Choristers.
Why then Poor wretch! do rhyme and prate?
Is gain the thing thou aymest at?
Or does thy Gutt, that Parasite
Egg thee to dare above thy might?
Nor this; nor that; But Melancholy,
Dull as I am, and prone to folly,
Surprising unaware my spleen
(A scribbling itch I cannot wean;
An artlesse Art, which drives like mad
To do, what Reason me forbad;
As vain as he, to get a Name
That leapt into Mount Aetna's flame.)
Fraught with the Kick-shaw's of our Time,
Has set me thus a gogg to rhyme.
What? when I hear all Taverns ring
With such as club, dance, rhyme, and sing;
Should I, whom Ale makes full as wise,
In jest, and toys, and fooleries;
Should I alone sit mute, and sneak,
While others wits run out and leak?
Their Ale is not more eloquent
Then ours, to give their Muses vent:
Nor escape we shot-free, to be bound
To hear, and plaud their empty sound;
That scribbling (whether Wet, or Dry)
They should provoke without reply.
And though upon unequal terms,
Bacchus himself shall find us Arms
To quit their score. And that is One why
To match these Rhymesters Rhyme, and I
Thus put our selves in Jeopardy,
Maugre both Will, and Skill; and so
But play the fool, as Others do.
He that is no Poet, yet may be
For his attempt in some degree
Their Page or like; and Hobble on,
Where feet him fail, as I have done.
EXALTATIO ALAE.
NEc sobrius, nec potus, nec utroque remotus,
Conveni ami cum in Ales-buri valle?
Per faciem sensit, mi nitus quod men's sit
Non lauds deterere nobilis Alae.
Tunc sic me affatus (ut amplexatus
Meminitqne gratus de celebri valle)
Fert animus nuper, Alesburia super
Edisserere lauds nobilis Alae.
Meque alacrem prorsus, ita denique adorsus
Per si quid in Ala sit Nectarale?
Ut any mi follem, exuscitans tollam,
Quae sint ad praeconia nobilis Alae.
Non ausim hoc, inquam, ne forte delinquam,
Nec adeo ingenij sum preditus sale:
Et sunt, qui peccare existimant fari
Quae sunt ad praeconia nobilis Alae.
Sed flocci non pendo, nil mali offendo;
Nec est quod reverear aliquid tale:
Nam creed Roberto, jamdiu experto,
Est virtus in medio nobilis Alae.
Nec tamen est sapor, dulciculus vapor,
Qui placido tendens adilia call
Ventriculum rorat, et gulam adorat.
Fragranti saliva praenobilis Alae.
Nec blandior Aspectus, oculis dilectus,
Amaena dum floret in Cyathi valle,
Genis renidescens, ceu Porrum virescens,
Qui color prae aliis est nobili Alae.
Sed animus volo, quem primitus colo,
Vt simul cum corpore sentiat vale,
Corpusque animusque, ut valiant usque
Acceptum referant nobili Alae.
Nam anxietas in animi vas,
Aut aliud Cordolium ut repsit lethale,
Nil citius medetur, quo cura levetur,
Quam plenior haustus nobilis Alae.
Vidua, maritum quae misit ad Ditem,
Non cogitat ultra crimen Capitale,
Sed anxia cubat, ni denuo nubat,
Titillatu accensa praenobilis Alae.
Perbellus est ventus, intusque retentus,
Calfacit ingenium, citatque vitale,
Ingenium quod viget, nec te tui piget,
Hoc debes ingenio nobilis Alae.
Nudus qui degit, haud vestibus eget,
Nec terga dat frigori (sit Hyemale)
Ventos diffindit, nasoque rescindit,
Iudutus Amiculo nobilis Alae.
Cui nil est Demensi, nil habet et pensi,
Par quamvis edendo sit Clavo trabali;
Nam famis oblitus, simulatque conditus
Praedulci intinctu est nobilis Alae.
Pauperculus plaudit, and unice gaudet,
Cui nil est in penu lautum, ac dapale,
Hinc Epulas haurit, hinc Mensam instaurat,
Cum crusta, cum poculo uobilis Alae.
Opilio, Sator, Messor, Tribulator,
Hic sarculo potens, hic falce mala;
Hos cape viritim inteream! suim
Ni velint extinguere nobili Ala.
Ferrarius faber, cui ingens labor,
Et follis, cum facie Vulcanali,
Si guttur arescit, mentiri nescit
Quin aedes indigitet nobilis Alae.
Qnicunque negabit, Misellus laudabit,
Ad clathros mendicans, vinctusque fala,
Compedibus laetus, et pellitur metus,
Vt guttur immaduit nobili Ala.
Mendicaque natio, eui sors est Rogatio,
Neque quidquam in tergo, quod pendeat, quale;
Ditior est in pannis, quam Miser, quotannis
Si ansam attigerit nobilis Alae.
Paupertas in mente, tunc est pro non Ente,
Jus, crusta, cum pera, nil materiale;
Quasi pediculus cum sex pedibus
Caprissat, aculeo nobilis Alae.
Qui foveas tergit, dum Sol totus vergit,
Aut lassus arando, reliquit dentale,
Crepabit nil minus, quam Reges, Reginas,
Fastigium si tetigit nobilis Alae.
Ingenio rudi est Cos; et incudi
Quod reddis invita fit Minerva tale;
Dat bebeti nuper, Lunam per and super,
Spectare a specula nobilis Alae.
Tum si quis amatur, interritus fatur.
Ingenio Corydon ante rurali,
Glutinatque suavia, crepitatque bravia,
Si prius occurrerit nobili Alae.
Haec tollit Aurigam, ut deserat trigam,
Res rusticas orans Rhetorico sale?
A front, a tergo, fit Aulicus ergo,
Vt stylum exercuit nobilis Alae.
Qui dentes exutus, fit lingua solutus,
Expectorans sputus, prout Natural,
Saltabit inanis, ceu in rest canis,
Fervore si caluit nobilis Alae.
Et Clericus bonus, cui legere est onus,
Post humidum desicit qua in radicale,
Literulas leget, specillis haud eget,
Vigorem indutus praenobilis Alae.
Genae et maxillae reddant laudet mill,
Pallidulae quamvis, and cute nivali,
Hac namque colorem rosis pulchriorem
Imbutis tinctura dat nobilis Alae.
Viden' Antagonistis, miserisque Sophistis,
Vt aegrae apparent, strigosaeque malae?
Vt buccae flaccescunt, spiritusque vanescunt
Alienant qui animos nobili Alae.
Et postquam est Byna, capitis Inquilina,
Me posse nunc videor Enthusiasmo tali,
Quot commoda terrae, tot cuncta refer
Accepta virtutibus nobilis Alae.
Hac perperam usus, de Musis paramusus:
Quae cantitant instar Philomelae,
Melodia grata, larynge rorata,
Pegaseio font praenobilis Alae.
Et fidicen gnarus (fide, ceu voce rarus)
Ad summum ascendit hac, Musicae scalae:
Maceratque pulmonem, superatque Spadonem,
Cantherium inscendens nobilis Alae.
Poeta divinus, vino peregrinus,
Quia non est in loculis aliquid tale,
Sublimia pangit, and sidera tangit,
Incessit quem (...) nobilis Alae.
Quis lirico sono, par ELDERTONO?
Qui lepide lusit, and Musico sale,
Velisque expansis; prius tamen ansis
Arrepto Carches^o nobilis Alae.
Sed nec otiosa, dicatur in Prosa,
Nam genium exacuit style florali,
Et lingua Culullis fit Ocyor Pullis,
Cum fluat a flumine nobilis Alae.
Et Philosophorum, si quis bibit horum,
In siliquis Nemo dat operam male,
Sed nucleum rimatur, and Philosophatur,
Ad imum, et fundum praenobilis Alae.
Sit Oxoniensis, da sexdecim mensis,
Et Circopithecus, dic probet, quod tale;
Sexdecies inventum, melius argumentum
Dat haustus a Botley, praenobilis Alae.
Ingenium fovet, linguam proque movet.
Virtutem exauget, quantum ad Morale;
Tum nequis gravetur, si paucis laudetur
Morale quod spectat praenobilis Alae.
Ecclesiae prodest (Pietatis quod est)
Aut nostri Majores fecerunt male,
Qui ubique locorum, propter Aedem Sanctorum
Dicaverint aedes praenobili Alae.
Verum nunc (perhibetur) Lupulata fovetur;
Infandum! nefas tolerari tale;
Nam cum lupulata, primum Haeresis nata,
Catholicum Nectar est nobilis Alae.
Quid debeant Templa, sunt public exempla,
Nam ubi ruinam dant, aut quid fatale,
Paganalia statim, reficiunt vicatim;
Quod sunt sarta tecta, dent nobili Alae.
Hanc Veritas dutem, qua prodit in lucem
Agnoseit: Arcanaque facit haec palam;
Qui bibunt, loquentur, quae siccis tacentur,
In fundo est Veritas. Nobilem Alam!
Institiae Amicam hanc merito dicam,
Mensuris, and numeris quae dat aequale:
Numeri and mensurae, Justicolis curae,
Et hoc ad praeconia nobilis Alae.
In proximo tendit, quod Martem accendit;
Qui metuit animal haud cubitale,
Jurabit, and ringet, gladiolum stringet
Armatus ab animo nobilis Alae.
Habet Milites Illa, Magnates e villa,
Quibus nec lorica, nec sit lorale;
Sed Scyphis ad morem pugnant Centaurorum,
Armigeri fortes praenobilis Alae.
Tum siquis delirat, Haec mentem inspirat,
Materiam and verba ne digerat male,
Dat ore rotundo, salibuique faecundo
Assessor ut prodeat nobilis Alae
Aut si quis Mercator, lucri sit Venator,
Emendo, vendendo quod est venale,
Quo lutum vitetur, ad focum stipuletur,
Test sigillo praenobilis Alae.
Sed fateor quidem, haud sobrius idem,
(Nam ardua res est, dicere VALE)
Simulac potabit, sibi temperabit,
Quae sunt leocinia nobilis Alae.
Est tamen in fatis, quod compensat satis,
Et recta tendit ad placidum quale;
Quam bibas enormis, tam altum dormis,
Sie mali nil inest praenohili Alae.
Qui cespitant, labant, aut forte si cadaent,
Resurgere licet adminiculo Pali,
Qui aqua merguntur, non sic moriuntur,
Quod falum donatum est nobili Alae.
Si more bibentum, ad jurgia ventum:
Ne metuas Classitum fore mortale;
Sieo titillet, ut nasiis distillet,
Restituet gratiam nobilis Ala.
Favet huic medicamen, nec injuria tamen,
Horrens Lupulatam, ceu quid Lethale;
Per hanc reddit vitam, domatim quaesitam,
Et primas ascribit nobili Alae.
Alamenta, sorbilla, posraeque cum illa.
Quam recens Oxygalam praebet mulctrale,
Multis numeratis, nullum lupulatis
Miscetur, sed poculo nobilis Alae.
Neque haec mala verba; Lupulus mala herba,
Trant ad nos portata, jus contra Regale;
Lex, O si servetur! Haec ne misceretur
Vt cuncti participent nobilis Alae.
Lex nempe non mala, fovel ALAM sub Ala
Nam in qualibet Guria, jus qua Legale
Serenissimo Regi, solet Cognitor legi,
A peculit Cognitor nobilis Alae.
Quis Dominus ille proediorum, aut villae?
Quae mari, quae terra, quae monte, quae valle,
Qui non aequum censet, Coronae ut penset
Jus, and mensuram praenobilis Alae
Superior edicta dat Curia siricta
Jus prohibens, infra quod sit, Curiale:
Alae tamen favet, nullique negavit
Quin Guriam adeat nobilis Alae
Res-publica multis est in ore stultis:
Sed ab Hispale vinum, and Burdigala
Si minus vehatur, tum demum sciatur,
Quod Publica res, haec nobilis Ala,
Qui ALAE assuescunt, bibuli quiescunt,
Et Rei nil student Publicae mali,
Non sunt Perduelles, flammae jue rebels
Solato, quod biberint nobilis Alae.
CAMBIVIO detur, quod laudis meretur,
Qui excogitavit (si Credimus Walae)
Hoc foelix inventum, ter sexies centum
Annis ante Christum, praenobilis Alae.
Sed ille Gentilis, and ALA tum vilis;
Quid CHRISTVS ut mundo jam dixit VALE?.
Don davy ne pipit lupulatam ut fifit,
Sed tot Cwwrwwbibley pot nobilis Alae.
Qui Roream colunt, super omnia tollunt,
(Qua rivulus qnisque dat nomina Valli.)
Et senes ubivis, sunt illic in vivis,
Qui Nectar haud norunt, nisi nobilis Alae.
Pictique, Scotique, pugnabant utrique,
Tam abditum fuerat hoc in penetrali;
Sed funditus Picti, a Scotis devicti,
Quod artem celabant hos Hetheraeale.
Verum hac sit, an illac, tu prorsus nil fac;
Oportet haberi; non vivitur Kala;
Nam nee Haverhannocks, sed nec Haverjannocks,
Quod Scotis in votis est, nobilis Ala.
Nec inficiabor, (foret irritus labor)
Quod multi hinc dixerint ultimum VALE;
Da poculum ori, quam dulce est MORI,
Decoris a spiculis nobilis Alae.
Innocuis tamen, hoc esto solamen,
Consciscit quod suum sibi quisque fatale:
Nam peccat, nec Byna, vetulave divinae,
Si potus quis potu sit nobilis Alae.
Quot morte offectet, hic si quis objectet;
Sit memor et quibus est Medicinale;
Lupulata necantur, qui ALA sanantur,
Quae salubris virtus est nobilis Alae.
Sed long hoc a re MORTEM nominare,
Convitia nolim ingerere mala,
Quamvis Lupulata sit lupis enata;
Bonumque sit omen praenobilis Alae
Hoc multis compertum, et exitio certum,
(Archiva ni fallant) exemplo paenali;
Nam pendulus mox fit, qui lupulum coxit,
Lupulatam expertus, quod amarior Ala.
ALAM ab alendo, vitalem defendo;
Balanae si foret nunc os mihi quale!
Nam parvulum est mi, nec tantillulum qui
Praeconia praedicem nobilis Alae.
Animus tamen fallit, qui paucula callet,
Ni dixerim nil, ut durat male:
Sed propter bibendum numerato solvendum,
Hoc unicum onus est nobilis Alae.
Tune Vir ille bonus; Hoc mi erit Onus,
Fecisti tu satis; Dicendum jam Vale;
Sex calices addam, Obaeratus si cadam,
Vt praestem praeconia nobilis Alae.
THE EX-ALE-TATION OF ALE.
NOt drunken, nor sober, but neighbor to both,
I met with a friend in Ales-burie vale,
He saw by my face, that I was in the case
To speak no great harm of a Pot of good Ale.
Then did he me greet, and said since we meet,
(And he put me in mind of the name of the Dale)
For Ales-buries sake, some pains I would take
And not bury the praise of a Pot of good Ale.
The more to procure me, then did he adjure me,
If the Ale I drank last was nappie and stale,
To do it its right, and stir up my Sprite
And fall to commend a Pot of good Ale.
Quoth I, to commend it, I dare not begin,
Lest therein my credit might happen to fail,
For many men now do count it a sin,
But once to look toward a Pot of good Ale.
Yet I care not a pin, for I see no such sin,
Nor any thing else, my courage to quail;
For this we do find, that take it in kind,
Much virtue there is in a Pot of good Ale:
And I mean not the taste, though thereby much graced,
Nor the merry-go-down, without pull, or hale,
Perfuming the throat, when the stomach's a float
With the fragrant sweet scent of a Pot of good Ale.
Nor yet the delight that comes to the sight,
To see how it flowers and mantles in graile,
As green as a Leek, with a smile in the cheek,
The true Orient color of a Pot of good Ale.
But, I mean the mind, and the good it does find,
Not only the body, so seeble and frail,
For body and soul, may bless the Black Bowl
Since both are beholden to a Pot or good Ale,
For when heaviness, the mind does oppress
And sorrow and grief the heart do assail,
No remedy quicker, than to take off your liquor
And to wash away cates with a Pot of good Ale
The Widow that buried her husband of late,
Will soon have forgotten to weep and to wail,
And think every year twain, till she marry again,
If she read the contents of a Pot of good Ale.
It is like a Belly-blast to cold Heart,
And warm's and engenders the Spirits Vitale,
To keep them from damage all Spirits ow their homage
To the Sp'rit of the Butterie, a Pot of good Ale.
The naked complains not for want of a Coat,
Nor on the cold weather will once turn his tail;
All the way as he goes, he cuts the wind with his nose;
If he but well wrapped in a Pot of good Ale.
The hungry man takes no thought for his meat,
Though his stomach could brook a ten-penny nail,
He quite forgets hunger, thinks on it no longer
If he touch but the Sparks of a Pot of good Ale.
The poor man will praise it, so has he good cause,
That all the year eats neither Partridg, not Quale,
But sets up his rest, and makes up his Feast,
With a crust of Brown-bread, and a Pot of good Ale.
The Shepherd, the Sower, the Thresher, the Mower,
The one with his scythe, the other with his flaile,
Take them out by the Pole, on the peril of my soul
All will hold up their hands to a Pot of good Ale,
The Blacksmith, whose bellow's all Summer do blow
With the fire in his face still, without e're a veil,
Though his throat be full dry, he will tell you no lie,
But where you may be sure of a Pot of good Ale.
Who ever denayes it, the Prisoner will praise it
That begs at the grate, and lies in the jayle,
For ever in his fetter, he thinks himself better,
May he get but a two penny Black Pot of Ale.
The Beggar, whose portion is always his Prayer,
Not having a tattar to hang on his tail,
Is as rich in his rags, as the Churl in his bags
If he once but shake hands with a Pot of good Ale.
It drives his poverty clean out of mind,
Forgetting his Brown-bread, his Wallet, and Male,
He walks in the house, like a six footed Louse,
If he once be enricht with a Pot of good Ale.
And he that does dig in the ditches all day,
And wearies himself quite at the Plough-tayle,
Will speak no less things, than of Queens, and of Kings,
If he touch but the top of a Pot of good Ale,
It is like a Whet-stone to a blunt wit,
And makes a supply where Nature does fail;
The dullest wit soon, will look quite through the Moon,
If his Temples be wet with a Pot of good Ale,
Then Dick to his Darling full boldly dare speak,
Though before (silly fellow!) his courage did quail;
He gives her the smouch, with his hand on his pouch
It he meet by the way with a Pot of good Ale.
And it makes the Carter, a Courtier straightway;
With Rhetorical terms he will tell his tale,
With courtesies great store, and his Cap up before,
Being schooled but a little with a Pot of good Ale.
The old man, whose tongue wags faster than his teeth,
(For old age by Nature does drivel and drayle,)
Will frig, and will fling, like a Dog in a string,
If he warm his cold blood with a Pot of good Ale.
And the good old Clerk, whose sight waxes dark,
And ever he thinks the Print is too small;
He will see every letter and say Service better
If he glaze but his eyes with a Pot of good Ale.
The Cheeks, and the Jaw's to commend it have cause,
For where they were late, but even wan and pale,
They will get them a Color, no Crimson is fuller,
By the true Die, and tincture of a Pot of good Ale.
Mark her enemies, tho they think themselv's wise,
How meager they look, with how low a wail,
How their cheeks do fall without Spirits at all
That alien their minds from a Pot of good Ale.
And now that the Grain's do work in my Brain's,
Methinks I were able to give by retale,
Commodities store, a dozen and more,
That flow to Mankind from a Pot of good Ale.
The Muses would muse, any should it misuse,
For it makes them to sing like a Nightingale,
With a lofty trim note, having washed their throat
With the Cabaline Spring of a Pot of good Ale.
And the Musician, of any condition,
It will make him reach to the top of his Scale,
It will clear his pipes, and moisten his Lights
If he drink alternatim a Pot of good Ale.
The Poet divine, that cannot reach Wine,
Because that his money does many times fail,
Will hit on the vein, to make a good strein,
If he be but inspired with a Pot of good Ale.
For Ballads, ELDERTON never had Peer,
How went his wit in them, with how merry a gale,
And with all the sails up, had he been at the Cup,
And washed his beard with a Pot of good Ale.
And the power of it shows no less in Prose,
It will file ones phrase, and set forth his tale,
Fill him but a Bowl, it will make his tongue trole
For flowing speech flows from a Pot of good Ale,
And Master Philosopher, if he drink his part,
Will not trifle his time in the husk, or the shale,
But go to the Kernel, by the depth of his Art:
To be found in the bottom of a Pot of good Ale,
Give a Scholar of Oxford a Pot of sixteen;
And put him to prove that an Ape has no tail,
And sixteen times better his wit will be seen,
If you fetch him from Botley a Pot of good Ale.
Thus it helps speech and wit: And it hurts not a whitt
But rather does further the Virtues Morale;
Then think it not much, if a little I touch
The good Morall-parts of a Pot of good Ale.
To the Church and Religion it is a good friend,
Or else our Forefathers, their wisdom did fail,
That at every mile, next to the Church-stile
Set a Consecrate house to a pot of good Ale.
But now (as they say) Beer bears it away;
The more is the pity, if Right might prevail,
Forth with the same Beer, came up Heresy here,
The old Catholic Drink, is a Pot of good Ale.
The Churches much ow, as we all do know;
For when they be drooping, and ready to fall,
By a Whitson, or Church-ale, up again they shall go,
And ow their repairing to a Pot of good Ale.
Truth will do it right, it brings Truth to light,
And many bad matters it helps to revaile;
For they that will drink, will speak what they think,
Tom-tell-troth lies hid in a Pot of good Ale.
It is Justices friend, she will it commend,
For all is here served by measure and tale;
Now true tale, and good Measure, are Justices treasure,
And much to the praise of a Pot of good Ale.
And next I alledg, it is Fortitudes edg;
For a very Coward that shrinks like a snayle,
Will swear and will swagger, and out goes his dagger,
If he be but armed with a Pot of good Ale.
Yea, ALE has her Knights, and Squires of degree,
That never wore Corslet, nor yet shirt of Male,
But have fought their fights all, twixt the pot and the wall,
When once they were dubd with a Pot of good Ale.
And (sure) it will make a man suddenly wise,
Ere-while was scarce able to tell a right tale,
It will open his jaw, he will tell you the Law,
As made a Right Bencher of a Pot of good Ale.
Or he that will make a bargain to gain,
In buying, or setting his goods forth to sale,
Must not plod in the mire, but sit by the fire
And seal up his match with a Pot of good Ale.
But for Soberness, needs must I confess
The matter goes hard; and few do prevail
Not to go to deep, but temper to keep:
Such is the Attractive of a Pot of good Ale.
But here is an amends, which will makes all friends,
And ever does tend to the best avail,
If you take it too deep, it will make you but sleep;
So comes no great harm of a Pot of good Ale.
If (reeling) they happen to fall to the ground,
The fall is not great, they may hold by the Rail;
If into the water, they cannot be drowned,
For that gift is given to a Pot of good Ale.
If drinking about they chance to fall out;
Fear not the Alarm, tho flesh be but frail;
It will prove but some blows, or at most a bloodynose,
And friends again strait, with a Pot of good Ale.
And Physic will favor ALE, as it is bound,
And be against Beer, both tooth and nail;
They send up and down all over the Town
To get for their Patients a Pot of good Ale.
Their Ale berries, Cawdels, and Possets each one,
And Syllabubs made at the Milking-Pale,
Although they be many, Beer comes not in any,
But all are composed with a Pot of good Ale.
And in very deed, the Hop's but a weed,
Brought over against Law, and here set to sale,
Would the Law were removed and no more Beer brewd
But all good men betake them to a Pot of good Ale.
The Law, that will take it under her Wing,
For at every Law-day, or Moot of the Hale,
One is sworn to serve our Sovereign the King,
In the ancient Office of a Conner of Ale.
There is never a Lord of Manor, or of Town,
By Strand or by Land, by Hill, or by Dale,
But thinks it a Franchise, and a Flower of the Crown,
To hold the assise of a Pot of good Ale.
And though there lie writs from the Courts Paramount,
To stay the proceedings of the Court Paravaile;
Law favors it so, you may come, you may go,
There lies no Prohibition to a Pot of good Ale.
They talk much of State, both early and late;
But if Gascoign, and Spain, their wine should but, sail,
No remedy then, with us Englishmen,
But the State, it must stand by a pot of good Ale.
And they that sit by it, are good men and quiet,
No dangerous Plotters in the Commonweal;
Of Treason, or Murder, For they never go further,
Then to call for, and pay for a Pot of good Ale.
To the praise of CAMBIVIUS, that good British King,
That devised for his Nation, (by the Welchmans tale)
Seventeen hundred years before CHRIST did spring,
The happy invention of a Pot of good Ale.
But he was a Paynim, and ALE then was rife,
Yet after CHRIST came, and bid us all hail,
St. Taphie tid never trink Peer in her lise,
But all Cwwrwwhibley a Pot of good Ale.
The North, they will praise it, and praise it with passion,
(Where every River gives name to a Dale)
There men are yet living, that are of the old fashion,
No Nectat they knew but a Pot of good Ale.
The Picts, and the Scots, for ALE were at Lots,
So high was the skill, and so kept under seal;
The Picts were undone, slain each mothers son,
For not teaching the Scots to make Hether-eale.
But hither, or thither, it skills not much whether;
For drink must be had, men live not by Keal,
Nor by Havorhannocks, nor by Havor-jannocks,
The thing the SCOTS live on, is a Pot of good Ale,
Now, if you will say it, I will not denay it,
That many a man it brings to his bale;
Yet what fairer end, can one wish to his friend,
Than to die by the dart of a Pot of good Ale?
Yet let not the innocent bear any blame,
It is their own doings to break over the pale;
And neither the Malt, nor the Good-wife in fault,
If any be potted with a Pot of good Ale
They tell whom it kills, but say not a word,
How many a man lives both sound and hale,
Tho he drink no Beer any day in the year,
By the Radical humor of a Pot of good Ale.
But to speak of killing, that am I not willing,
For that in a manner were but to rail;
But Beer has its name, cause it brings to the Buyer
Therefore welfare say I to a Pot of good Ale.
Too many (I wis) with their deaths proved this;
And therefore (if ancient Records do not fail)
He that first brewed the HOP, was rewarded with a ROPE,
And found his Beer far more bitter than Ale.
O ALE ab alendo, thou liquor of LIFE!
That I had but a mouth as big as a Whale!
For mine is too little, to touch the least tittle,
That belongs to the praise of a Pot of good Ale.
Thus (I trow) some virtues I have marked you out;
And never a Vice in all this long traile,
But that after the Pot, there comes a Shot,
And that's the on'ly blot of a Pot of good Ale.
With that my friend said, That blot I will bear;
You have done very well, it is time to strike sail;
We Will have six pots more, tho I die on the score,
To make all this good of a Pot of good Ale.
EPILOGVS.
PAr pari dicis coeat: Latinae
Barbaco sed munia civitatis
Potui quis donet, ut inde fiat
Nobilis Ala?
Hac pedi, ventri, laterique dives
Cuncta pleno suppeditare cornu
Quae potest, annon merito vocetur
Nobilis Ala?
Fare, sodes, Heluo, quisquis extra
Quisquis intra vis tibi quod voluptas:
Haec utrobique tibi namque praestat
Nobilis Ala.
Est Solaecismus; nec enim negabo:
Et Poetastris ita (...)
Vsus est, interdum opus et Poetis
Nobilis Ala.
Nam (...) juxta sonat, ac (...)
Et celebre est (...) Graeculorum,
Nempe sons quem Pegasus excavavit,
Nobilis Ala.
Gatiarum chorus, and Minerva
Quo bert, Liber simul, and Camaenae,
Par pari fac sis coeat, Poetae
Nobilis Ala.
Nobilem tu quam titulis honestis
Nobilem te dat salibus jococis,
Mutuo sic nobilis ipse, and ipsa
Nobilis Ala.
Nec Poetastri tamen inficeti
Sunt; neque ALA non duce tu Poeta
Ster potes quondam fieri; faceta est
Nobilis Ala.
Fac Poetastris igitur suaque
ALA quat de te meruit, suasque
Gratus ut lands tribuas Patronus
Nobilis Alae.
FINIS.
THE EPILOGUE.
OF like to like, none but allow.
But ALE which Rome did never know,
How comes it to be Latin now,
And Noble Ale?
What back, and belly does adorn,
And with a full and merry Horn
Yields all things that may serve our turn,
Is Noble Ale.
Thou that art full up to the chin;
And thou that wear'st a shining skin;
ALE causes both (without, within)
Say, it is Noble Ale.
But ALE'S not Latin: who denies?
Rhymesters are wont to Barbarize,
And Poets need to glaze their eyes,
With Noble Ale.
Poet, and Pot sound much at one;
This to the ancient Greeks was known,
For that Hors-pond in Helicon
Was Noble Ale.
Would have the Graces, Muses nine,
Pallas, and Bacchus God of wine
Be-friend thee? Pot and Poet join
With Noble Ale.
Title ALE noble, as it is fit,
For that ennobles thee with wit,
So both are noble, thou, and it
Is Noble Ale.
Hence Rhymesters get a lick sometime,
And ALE will make of thee a Rhyme-
Ster too; tacetious and whym
Is Noble Ale.
To Rhymesters therefore give some praise,
To me, as it deserv's always,
And be a patron all thy days
To Noble Ale.
THE END.
ALE Aele-vated.
WHen the Chill Chirocco blows,
And Winter tells a heavy Tale;
When Pyes, and Dawes, and Rooks, and Crows
Do sit and curse the Frosts and Snows,
Then give us ALE
ALE in a Saxon Rumkin then,
Such as will make Grim Malkin prate;
Bids Valor Burgen in Tall men;
Quickens the Poets Wit and Pen;
Despises Fate.
ALE which the absent Battle fights;
That forms the March of Swedish Drums,
Disputes the Princes Laws and Rights;
What Is done, and past, tells mortal Wights,
And what is to come.
ALE that the Plough man's heart up keeps,
And equals it to Tyrants Thrones;
That wipes the eye, which over-weeps
And lulls in sweet and dainty sleeps
Their weary Bones.
Grandchild of Ceres, Barley's Daughter,
Wines Emulous Neighbor (if but stale)
Ennobling all the Nymphs of the Water,
And filling each Man's heart with laughter.
Ah! Give me ALE.
FINIS.

