THE CHANGELING: As it was Acted (with great Applause) at the Private house in
DRURY LANE, and Salisbury Court.

Written by THOMAS MIDLETON, and WILLIAM ROWLEY. Gent'.

Never Printed before.

LONDON, Printed for HUMPHREY MOSELEY, and are to be sold at his shop at the
sign of the Princes-Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1653.

Drammatis Personae.
Vermandero, Father to Beatrice. Tomazo de Piracquo, A Noble Lord. Alonzo de
Piracquo, His brother, Suitor to Beatrice: Alsemero, A Nobleman, afterward
married to Beatrice. Jasperino, His Friend. Alibius, A jealous Doctor. Lollio,
His man. Pedro, Friend to Antonio. Antonio, The Changeling. Franciscus, The
Counterfeit Madman. Deflores, Servant to Vermandero. Madmen, Servants.
Beatrice, Daughter to Vermandero. Diaphanta, Her Wayting-woman. Isabella Wife
to Alibius.
The Scene Allegant. The Changeling.
ACTUS PRIMUS.
Enter Alsemero. It Was in the Temple where I first beheld her,
And now again the same, what Omen yet
Follows of that? None but imaginary,
Why should my hopes or fate be timorous?
The place is holy, so is my intent:
I love her beauties to the holy purpose,
And that (me thinks) admits comparison
With man's first creation, the place blessed
And is his right home back (if he atchieve it.)
The Church has first begun our interview
And that is the place must join us into one,
So there is beginning and perfection too.
Enter Jasperino. Jasp. O Sir, are you here? Come, the wind's fair with you,
You Are like to have a swift and pleasant passage.

Als. Sure you are deceived friend, it is contrary
In my best judgment.

Jas. What for Malta?
If you could buy a gale amongst the Witches,
They could not serve you such a lucky penyworth
As comes a Gods Name.

Als. Even now I observed
The temples Vane to turn full in my face,
I know it is against me.

Jas. Against you?
Then you know not where you are.

Als. Not well indeed

Jas. Are you not well sir?

Als. Yes, Jasperino.
Unless there be some hidden malady
Within me, that I understand not.

Jas. And that
I begin to doubt sir, I never knew
Your inclinations to travels at a pause
With any cause to hinder it till now.
Ashore you were wont to call your servants up,
And help to trap your Horses for the speed.
At sea I have seen you weigh the anchor with 'em,
Hoyst sails for fear to lose the foremost breath,
Be in continual prayers for fair winds,
And have you changed your orizons?

Als. No, friend,
I keep (...) same church, same devotion.

Jas. Lover I Am sure you are none, the Stoic
Was found in you long ago, your mother
Nor best friends, who have set snares of beauty,
I and choice ones too, could never trap you that way
What might be the cause?

Als. Lord, how violent,
Thou art; I was but meditating of
Somewhat I heard within the temple.

Jas. Is this violence? it is but idleness
Compared with your have yesterday.

Als. I Am all this while a going, man.

Enter Servants. Jas. Backwards, I think, sir. Look your servants.

1 Serve. The seamen call, shall we Board your trunks?

Als. No, not to day.

Jas. It Is the critical day,
It seems, and the sign in Aquarius.

2 Ser. We must not to sea to day, this smoke will bring forth fire.

Als. Keep all on shore, I do not know the end
(Which needs I must do) of an affair in hand
Ere I can go to sea.

1 Serve. Well, your pleasure.

(Serve. Exeunt 2 Ser. Let him e'n take his leisure too, we are safer on land.

Enter Beatrice, Diaphanta, and Servants, Joannna. Jasp. How now! The Laws of
the Medes are changed sure, salute a woman, he kisses too: wonderful! where
learnt he this? and does it perfectly too; in my conscience he nere rehearst it
before. Nay, go on, this will be stranger and better news at Valentia, then if
he had ransomed half Greece from the Turk.


Bea. You are a Scholar, sir.

Als. A weak one, Lady.

Bea. Which of the Sciences is this love you speak of?

Als. From your tongue I take it to be music.

Bea. You are skillful in it, can sing at first sight.

Als. And I have showed you all my skill at once.
I want more words to express me further.
And must be forced to repetition:
I love you dearly.

Bea. Be better advised, sir:
Our eyes are Sentinels unto our judgments,
And should give certain judgment what they see;
But they are rash sometimes, and tell us wonders
Of common things, which when our judgments find,
They can then check the eyes, and call them blind.

Als. But I am further, Lady; yesterday
Was mine eyes employment, and hither now
They brought my judgment, where are both agreed.
Both Houses then consenting, it is agreed,
Only there wants the confirmation
By the hand Royal, that is your part, Lady.

Bea. Oh there is one above me, sir, for five days past
To be recal'd; sure, mine eyes were mistaken,
This was the man was meant me, that he should come
So near his time, and miss it.

Jas. We might have come by the Carriers from Valentia, I see and saved all our
sea-provision: we are at farthest sure, methinks I should do something too, I
meant to be a venturer in this voyage. Yonder Is another Vessel, I Will board
her, if she be lawful prize, down goes her top-sail.


Enter Deflores. Def. Lady, your father.

Bea. Is in health, I hope.

Def. Your eye shall instantly instruct you, Lady.
He Is coming hitherward.

Bea. What needed then
Your dutious preface? I had rather
He had come unexpected, you must stall
A good presence with unnecessary blabbing:
And how welcome for your part you are,
I Am sure you know.

Def. Wilt never mend this scorn
One side nor other? Must I be enjoined
To follow still whilst she flies from me? Well,
Fates do your worst, I Will please my self with sight
Of her, at all opportunities,
If but to spite her anger, I know she had
Rather see me dead then living, and yet
She knows no cause for it, but a peevish will.

Als. You seemed displeased Lady on the sudden.

Bea. Your pardon Sir, it is my infirmity,
Nor can I other reason render you,
Then his or hers, or some particular thing
They must abandon as a deadly poison,
Which to a thousand other tastes were wholesome,
Such to mine eyes is that same fellow there,
The same that report speaks of the Basilisk.

Als. This is a frequent frailty in our nature,
There Is scarce a man amongst a thousand sound,
But has his imperfection: one distastes
The sent of Roses, which to infinites
Most pleasing is, and odoriferous.
One oil, the enemy of poison,
Another Wine, the cheerer of the heart,
And lively refresher of the countenance.
Indeed this fault (if so it be) is general,
There Is scarce a thing but is both loved and loathed,
My self (I must confess) have the same frailty.

Bea. And what may be your poison sir? I am bold with you.

Als. And what might be your desire perhaps, a cherry.

Bea. I am no enemy to any creature
My memory has, but yon' Gentleman.

Als. He does ill to tempt your sight, if he knew it.

Bea. He cannot be ignorant of that Sir,
I have not spared to tell him so, and I want
To help my self, since he is a Gentleman
In good respect with my father, and follows him.

Als. He Is out of his place then now.

Jas. I am a mad Wag, wench.

Dia. So me thinks; but for your comfort I can tell you, we have a Doctor in
the City that undertakes the cure of such.


Jas. Tush, I know what Physic is best for the state of mine own body.


Dia. It Is scarce a well governed state, I believe.

Jas. I could show thee such a thing with an Ingredian that we two would
compound together, and if it did not tame the maddest blood in the town for two
hours after, I Will nere profess Physic again.


Dia. A little poppy Sir, were good to cause you sleep.

Jas. Poppy; I Will give thee a pop in the lips for that first, and begin there:
Poppy is one simple indeed, and Cuckoo (what you called) another: I Will discover
no more now, another time I Will show thee all.


Bea. My Father, Sir.

Enter Vermandero and Servants. Ver. Oh Joanna, I came to meet thee, your
devotion's ended.

Bea. For this time, Sir,
I shall change my Saint, I fear me, I find
A giddy turning in me; Sir, this while
I am beholding to this Gentleman
Who left his own way to keep me company,
And in discourse I find him much desirous
To see your castle: He has deserved it, Sir,
If ye please to grant it.

Ver. With all my heart, Sir.
Yet there is an article between, I must know
Your country; we use not to give survey
Of our chief strengths to strangers, our citadels
Are placed conspicuous to outward view,
On Promonts tops; but within are secrets.

Als. A Valentian, Sir.

Ver. A Valentian,
That Is native, Sir; of what name, I beseech you?

Als. Alsemero, Sir.

Ver. Alsemero; not the son of John de Alsemero?

Als. The same Sir.

Ver. My best love bids you welcome.

Bea. He was wont to call me so, and then he speaks
A most unfeigned truth.

Ver. Oh Sir, I knew your father,
We two were in acquaintance long ago
Before our chins were worth Julan Down,
And so continued till the stamp of time
Had coined us into silver: Well, he is gone,
A good Soldier went with him.

Als. You went together in that, Sir.

Ver. No by Saint Jaques, I came behind him.
Yet I have done somewhat too, an unhappy day
Swallowed him at last at Gibralter
In fight with those rebellious Hollanders,
Was it not so?

Als. Whose death I had revenged,
Or followed him in Fate, had not the late League
(...) me.

Ver. I, I, 'twas time to breath:
Oh Joanna, I should he told thee news,
I saw Piracquo lately.

Bea. That Is ill news.

Ver. He Is hot preparing for this day of triumph,
Thou must be a Bride within this sevenight.

Als. Ha!

Bea. Nay good Sir, be not so violent, with speed
I cannot render satisfaction
Unto the dear companion of my soul,
Virginity (whom I thus long have lived with)
And part with it so rude and suddenly,
Can such friends divide never to meet again,
Without a solemn farewell?

Ver. Tush, tush, there is a toy.

Als. I must now part, and never meet again
With any joy on earth; Sir, your pardon,
My affairs call on me.

Ver. How Sir? by no means,
Not changed so soon, I hope, you must see my castle,
And her best entertainment ere we part,
I shall think my self unkindly used else.
Come, come, let us on, I had good hope your stay
Had been a while with us in Alligant;
I might have bid you to my daughters wedding.

Als. He means to feast me, and poisons me before hand,
I should be dearly glad to be there, sir,
Did my occasions suit as I could wish.

Bea. I shall be sorry if you be not there
When it is done sir, but not so suddenly.

Ver. I tell you, sir, the Gentleman's complete,
A Courtier and a Gallant, enricht
With many fair and noble ornaments,
I would not change him for a son-in-law,
For any he in Spain, the proudest he,
And we have great ones, that you know.

Als. He Is much bound to you, sir.

Ver. He shall be bound to me,
As fast as this tie can hold him, I Will want my will else.

Bea. I shall want mine if you do it.

Ver. But come, by the way, I Will tell you more of him:

Als. How shall I dare to venture in his castle,
When he discharges murderers at the gate?
But I must on, for back I cannot go.

Bea. Not this Serpent gone yet?

Ver. Look Girl, thy glove's fallen,
Stay, stay, Deflores help a little.

Def. Here, Lady.

Bea. Mischief on your officious forwardness,
Who bade you stoop? they touch my hand no more:
There, for to others sake I part with this,
Take 'um and draw thine own skin offwith 'um.

Exeunt Def. Here Is a favor come; with a mischief: Now
I know she had rather wear my pelt tan'd
In a pair of dancing pumps, then I should thrust my fingers;
Into her sockets here I know she hates me,
Yet cannot choose but love her:
No matter, if but to vex her, I Will haunt her still,
Though I get nothing else, I Will have my will.
Exit.
Enter Alibius and Lollio. Alib. Lollio, I must trust thee with a secret,
But thou must keep it.

Lol. I was ever close to a secret, Sir.

Alib. The diligence that I have found in thee,
The care and industry already past,
Assures me of thy good continuance.

Lollio, I have a wife.

Lol. Fie sir, it is too late to keep her secret, she is known to be married all
the town and country over.

Alib. Thou go too fast my Lollio, that knowledge
I allow no man can be barred it;
But there is a knowledge which is nearer,
Deeper and sweeter, Lollio.

Lol. Well sir, let us handle that between you and I.

Alib. It Is that I go about man; Lollio,
My wife is young,

Lol. So much the worse to be kept secret, sir.

Alib. Why now thou meet'st the substance of the point,
I am old, Lollio.

Lol. No sir, it is I am old Lollio.

Alib. Yet why may not this concord and sympathize?
Old trees and young plants often grow together,
Well enough agreeing.

Lol. I sir, but the old trees raise themselves higher and broader then the
young plants.

Alib. Shrewd application: there is the fear man,
I would wear my ring on my own finger;
Whilst it is borrowed it is none of mine,
But his that uses it.

Lol. You must keep it on still then, if it but lie by,
One or other will be thrusting into it.

Alib. Thou conceiv'st me Lollio, here thy watchful eye
Must have employment, I cannot always be at home.

Lol. I dare swear you cannot.

Alib. I must look out.

Lol. I know it, you must look out, it is every man's case.

Alib. Here I do say must thy employment be.
To watch her treadings, and in my absence
Supply my place.

Lol. I Will do my best, Sir, yet surely I cannot see who you should have cause
to be jealous of.


Alib. Thy reason for that Lollio, it is a comfortable question.


Lol. We have but two sorts of people in the house, and both under the whip,
that is fools and madmen; the one has not wit enough to be knaves, and the
other not knavery enough to be fools.


Alib. I those are all my Patients, Lollio.
I do profess the cure of either sort:
My trade, my living it is, I thrive by it;
But here is the care that mixes with my thrift,
The daily Visitants, that come to see
My brainsick Patients, I would not have
To see my wife: Gallants I do observe
Of quick entising eyes, rich in habits,
Of stature and proportion very comely:
These are most shrewd temptations, Lollio.

Lol. They may be easily answered, Sir, if they come to see the Fools and
Madmen, you and I may serve the turn, and let my Mistress alone, she is of
neither sort.


Alib. It Is a good ward, indeed come they to see
Our Madmen or our Fools, let 'um see no more
Then what they come for; by that consequent
They must not see her, I Am sure she is no fool.

Loll. And I Am sure she is no madman.

Alib. Hold that Buckler fast, Lollio my trust
Is on thee, and I account it firm and strong.
What hour is it Lollio?

Lol. Toward belly hour Sir.

Alib. Dinner time, thou mean twelve a clock.

Lol. Yes Sir, for every part has his hour, we wake at six and look about us,
that is eye-hour; at seven we should pray, that's knee-hour; at eight walk,
that is leg hour; at nine gather flowers, and pluck a Rose, that is nose-hour; at
ten we drink, that is mouth hour; at eleven lay about us for victuals, that is
hand hour; at twelve go to dinner, that is belly hour.


Alib. Profoundly, Lollio it will be long
Ere all thy Scholars learn this Lesson, and
I did look to have a new one entered -- stay
I think my expectation is come home.

Enter Pedro and Antonio like an Idiot. Ped. Save you sir, my business speaks
it self,
This sight takes off the labor of my tongue.

Alib. I, I Sir, it is plain enough, you mean him for my patient.

Ped. And if your pains prove but commodious,
To give but some little strength to his sick
And weak part of Nature in him, these are
But patterns to show you of the whole pieces
That will follow to you, beside the charge
Of diet washing, and other necessaries
Fully defrayed.

Alib. Believe it, sir, there shall no care be wanting.

Lol. Sir, an officer in this place may deserve something,
The trouble will pass through my hands.

Ped. It Is fit something should come to your hands then, sir.

Lol. Yes, sir, it is I must keep him sweet, and read to him, what is his name.


Ped. His name is Antonio, marry we use but half To him, only Tonie.

Lol. Tonie, Tonie, it is enough, and a very good name for a fool, what is your
name Tonie?


Ant. He, he he, well I thank you cousin, he he, he.


Lol. Good Boy hold up your head: he can laugh, I perceive by that he is no
beast.


Ped. Well sir, if you can raise him but to any height,
Any degree of wit, might he attain
(As I might say) to creep but on all four,
Toward the chair of wit, or walk on crutches,
'Twould add an honor to your worthy pains,
And a great family might pray for you,
To which he should be heir, had he discretion
To claim and guide his own; assure you sir,
He is a Gentleman.

Lol. Nay, there is no body doubted that, at first sight I knew him for a
Gentleman, he looks no other yet.


Ped. Let him have good attendance and sweet lodging.


Lol. As good as my Mistress lies in sir, and as you allow us time and means,
we can raise him to the higher degree of discretion.


Ped. Nay, there shall no cost want sir.

Lol. He will hardly be stretched up to the wit of a Magnifico.

Ped. Oh no, that is not to be expected, far shorter
Will be enough.

Lol. I Will warrant you make him fit to bear office in five weeks,
I Will undertake to wind him up to the wit of Constable.

Ped. If it be lower then that it might serve turn.

Lol. No fie, to level him with a Headborough, Beadle, or Watchman, were but
little better then he is; Constable I Will able him: if he do come to be a
Justice afterward, let him thank the Keeper. Or I Will go further with you, say
I do bring him up to my own pitch, say I make him as wise as my self.


Ped. Why there I would have it.


Lol. Well, go to, either I Will be as errant a fool as he, or he shall be as
wise as I, and then I think 'twill serve his turn.


Ped. Nay, I do like thy wit passing well.


Lol. Yes, you may, yet if I had not been a fool, I had had more wit then I
have too remember what state you find me in.


Ped. I will, and so leave you: your best cares I beseech you.
Ex. Ped.
Alib. Take you none with you, leave 'um all with us.

Ant. Oh my cousins gone, cousin, cousin, oh.

Lol. Peace, Peace Tony, you must not cry child, you must be whipped if you do,
your cousin is here still, I am your cousin, Tony.


Ant. He, he, then I Will not cry, if thou be my cousin, he, he, he.


Lol. I were best try his wit a little, that I may know what Form to place him
in.


Alib. I, do Lollio, do.


Lol. I must ask him easy questions at first; Tony, how many true fingers has
a Tailor on his right hand?


Ant. As many as on his left, cousin.

Lol. Good, and how many on both?

Ant. Two less then a Dewce, cousin.

Lol. Very well answered; I come to you again, cousin Tony, How many fools goes
to a wise man?


Ant. Forty in a day sometimes, cousin.

Lol. Forty in a day? How prove you that?

Ant. All that fall out amongst themselves, and go to a Lawyer to be made
friends.


Lol. A parlous fool, he must sit in the fourth Form at least, I perceive that:
I come again Tony, How many knaves make an honest man?


Ant. I know not that cousin.


Lol. No, the question is too hard for you: I Will tell you cousin, there is three
knaves may make an honest man, a Sergeant, a Jailer, and a Beadle; the Sergeant
catches him, the Jailer holds him, and the Beadle lashes him; and if he be not
honest then, the Hangman must cure him.


Ant. Ha, ha, ha, that is fine sport cousin.

Alib. This was too deep a question for the fool Lollio.

Lol. Yes, this might have served your self, tho I say it;
Once more, and you shall go play Tonie.

Ant. I, play at push-pin in cousin, ha, he.

Lol. So thou shall, say how many fools are here.

Ant. Two, cousin, thou and I.

Lol. Nay, you are too forward there, Tonie mark my question, how many fools and
knaves are here? a fool before a knave, a fool behind a knave, between every
two fools a knave, how many fools, how many knaves?


Ant. I never learnt so far cousin.

Alib. Thou putst too hard questions to him, Lollio.

Lol. I Will make him understand it easily; cousin stand there.

Ant. I cousin.

Lol. Master, stand you next the fool.

Alib. Well, Lollio.

Lol. Here Is my place: mark now Tonie, there a fool before a knave.

Ant. That Is I cousin.

Lol. Here Is a fool behind a knave, that is I, and between us two fools there is
a knave, that is my Master, it is but we three, that is all.


Ant. We three, we three, cousin.

Madmen within. 1 Within. Put's head in the pillory, the breads too little.

2 Within. Fly, fly, and he catches the swallow.

3. Within. Give her more onion, or the Devil put the rope about her cragg.


Lol. You may hear what time of day it is, the Chimes of Bedlam goes.


Alib. Peace, peace, or the wire comes.

3 within. Cat whore, Cat whore, her permasant, her permasant.

Alib. Peace, I say, their hour's come, they must be fed, Lollio.

Lol. There Is no hope of recovery of that Welsh madman,
Was undone by a Mouse, that spoild him a Permasant,
Lost his wits for 't.

Alib. Go to your charge, Lollio, I Will to mine.

Lol. Go you to your mad-mens Ward, let me alone with your fools.


Alib. And remember my last charge, Lollio.

Exit.
Lol. Of which your Patients do you think I am? Come Tonie you must amongst
your School-fellows now, there is pretty Scholars amongst 'um, I can tell you
there is some of 'em at stultus, stulta, stultum.


Ant. I would see the madmen, cousin, if they would not bite me.

Lol. No, they shall not bite thee, Tonie.

Ant. They bite when they are at dinner, do they not cuz.

Lol. They bite at dinner indeed, Tonie; well, I hope to get credit by thee, I
like thee the best of all the Scholars that ever I brought up, and thou shall
prove a wise man, or I Will prove a fool my self.


Exeunt. ACTUS SECUNDUS.
Enter Beatrice and Jasperino severally. Bea. OH Sir, I Am ready now for that
fair service,
Which makes the name of friend sit glorious on you.
Good Angels and this conduct be your guide,
Fitness of time and place is there set down, sir.

Jas. The joy I shall return rewards my service.
Exit.
Bea. How wise is Alsemero in his friend?
It is a sign he makes his choice with judgment.
Then I appear in nothing more approved,
Then making choice of him; for it is a Principle, He that can choose
That bosom well, who of his thoughts partakes,
Proves most discreet in every choice he makes.
Me thinks I love now with the eyes of judgment.
And see the way to merit, clearly see it.
A true deserver like a Diamond sparkles,
In darkness you may see him, that is in absence,
Which is the greatest darkness falls on love,
Yet is he best discerned then
With intellectual eyesight; what is Piracquo
My Father spends his breath for, and his blessing
Is only mine, as I regard his name,
Else it goes from me, and turns head against me,
Tranform'd into a Curse; some speedy way
Must be remembered, he is so forward too,
So urgent that way, scarce allows me breath
To speak to my new comforts.

Enter Deflores. Def. Yonder Is she
What ever ails me, now a late especially,
I can as well be hanged as refrain seeing her;
Some twenty times aday, nay not so little,
Do I force errands, frame ways and excuses
To come into her sight, and I have small reason for it,
And less encouragement; for she baits me still
Every time worse then other, does profess herself
The cruellest enemy to my face, in town,
At no hand can abide the sight of me,
As if danger, or ill luck hung in my looks.
I must confess my face is bad enough,
But I know far worse has better fortune,
And not endured alone, but doted on,
And yet such pickhaird faces, chins like Witches,
Here and there five hairs, whispering in a corner,
As if they grew in fear one of another,
Wrinkles like troughs, where swine deformity swils
The tears of perjury that lie there like wash,
Fallen from the slimy and dishonest eye,
Yet such a one plucked sweets without restraint,
And has the grace of beauty to his sweet,
Though my hard fate has thrust me out to servitude,
I tumbled into the world a Gentleman.
She turns her blessed eye upon me now,
And I Will endure all storms before I part with it.

Bea. Again -- this ominous ill-fac'd fellow more disturbs me,
Then all my other passions.

Def. Now't begins again,
I Will stand this storm of hail though the stones pelt me.

Bea. Thy business? What Is thy business?

Def. Soft and fair, I cannot part so soon now.

Bea. The villain's fixed -- Thou standing toad-pool.

Def. The shower falls amain now.

Bea. Who sent thee? What Is thy errand? leave my sight.

Def: My Lord your father charged me to deliver a message to you.

Bea: What another since, do it and be hanged then, let me be rid of thee.

Def: True service merits mercy.

Bea: What Is thy message?

Def: Let beauty settle but in patience, you shall hear all.

Bea: A dallying trifling torment.

Def: Signior Alonzo de Piracquo Lady, sole brother to Tomazo de Piracquo.

Bea: Slave, when will it make an end?

Def: Too soon I shall.

Bea: What all this while of him?

Def: The said Alonzo, with the foresaid Tomazo.

Bea: Yet again.

Def: Is new alighted.

Bea: Vengeance strike the news,
Thou thing most loathed, what cause was there in this
To bring thee to my sight?

Def: My Lord your father charged me to seek you out.

Bea: Is there no other to send his errand by?

Def: It seems it is my luck to be in the way still.

Bea: Get thee from me.

Def. So -- why am not I an Ass to devise ways
Thus to be raild at? I must see her still,
I shall have a mad qualm within this hour again,
I know it, and like a Common Garden Bull,
I do but take breath to be lug'd again.
What this may bode I know not, I Will despair the less,
Because there is daily presidents of bad faces
Beloved beyond all reason; these foul chops
May come into favor one day, amongst his fellows:
Wrangling has proved the mistress of good pastime,
As children cry themselves asleep, I have seen
Women have chid themselves abed to men.
Exit Def:
Bea. I never see this fellow, but I think
Of some harm toward me, danger's in my mind still,
I scarce leave trembling of an hour after.
The next good mood I find my father in,
I Will get him quite discarded: Oh I was
Lost in this small disturbance and forgot.
Afflictions fiercer torrent that now comes,
To bear down all my comforts.

Enter Vermandero, Alonzo, Tomazo. Ver. You Are both welcome,
But an especial one belongs to you, sir,
To whose most noble name our love presents
The addition of a son, our son Alonzo.

Alon. The treasury of honor cannot bring forth
A Title I should more rejoice in, sir.

Ver. You have improved it well; daughter prepare,
The day will steal upon thee suddenly.

Bea. How e're, I will be sure to keep the night,
If it should come so near me.

Tom. Alonzo.

Alon. Brother.

Tom. In troth I see small welcome in her eye.

Alon. Fie, you are too severe a censurer
Of love in all points, there is no bringing on you
If Lovers should mark every thing a fault,
Affection would be like an ill set book,
Whose faults might prove as big as half the volume.

Bea. That Is all I do entreat.

Ver. It is but reasonable,
I Will see what my son says to it: Son Alonzo,
Here Is a motion made but to reprieve
A Maidenhead three days longer; the request
Is not far out of reason, for indeed
The former time is pinching.

Alon. Though my joys
Be set back so much time as I could wish
They had been forward, yet since she desires it,
The time is set as pleasing as before,
I find no gladness wanting.

Ver. May I ever meet it in that point still:
You Are nobly welcome, sirs.

Exeunt. Ver. and Bea. Tom. So, did you mark the dullness of her parting now?

Alon. What dullness? Thou art so exceptious still.

Tom. Why let it go then I am but a fool
To mark your harms so heedfully.

Alon. Where Is the oversight?

Tom. Come, your faith's cousened in her, strongly cousened,
Unsettle your affection with all speed,
Wisdom can bring it too, your peace is ruined else.
Think what a torment it is to marry one
Whose heart is leapt into another bosom:
If ever pleasure she receive from thee,
It comes not in thy name, or of thy gift,
She lies but with another in thine arms,
He the half father unto all thy children
In the conception, if he get 'em not,
She helps to get 'em for him, in his passions, and how dangerous
And shameful her restraint may go in time to,
It is not to be thought on without sufferings.

Alon. You speak as if she loved some other then.

Tom. Do you apprehend so slowly?

Alon. Nay, and that be your fear only, I am safe enough,
Preserve your friendship and your counsel brother,
For times of more distress, I should depart
An enemy, a dangerous, deadly one
To any but thy self, that should but think
She knew the meaning of inconstancy,
Much less the use and practice; yet we are friends,
Pray let no more be urged, I can endure
Much, till I meet an injury to her,
Then I am not my self. Farewell sweet brother,
How much we are bound to heaven to depart lovingly.
Exit.
Tom. Why here is loves tame madness, thus a man
Quickly steals into his vexation.
Exit.
Enter Diaphanta and Alsemero Dia. The place is my charge, you have kept your
hour,
And the reward of a just meeting bless you.
I hear my Lady coming; complete Gentleman,
I dare not be too busy with my praises,
They Are dangerous things to deal with.
Exit.
Als. This goes well, these women are the Ladies Cabinets,
Things of most precious trust are lock into 'em.

Enter Beatrice. Bea. I have within mine eye, all my desires,
Requests that holy prayers ascend heaven for'
And brings 'em down to furnish our defects,
Come not more sweet to our necessities,
Then thou unto my wishes.

Als. We Are so like in our expressions, Lady, that unless I borrow
The same words, I shall never find their equals.

Bea. How happy were this meeting this embrace,
If it were free from envy? This poor kiss
It has an enemy, a hateful one,
That wishes poison to it: how well were I now
If there were none such name known as Piracquo?
Nor no such tie as the command of Parents,
I should be but too much blessed.

Als. One good service
Would strike off both your fears, and I Will go near it too,
Since you are so distressed, remove the cause
The command ceases, so there is two fears blown out
With one and the same blast.

Bea. Pray let me find you sir. What might that service be so strangely happy?


Als. The honorablest piece 'bout man, Valor.
I Will send a challenge to Piracquo instantly.

Bea. How? Call you that extinguishing of fear
When it is the only way to keep it flaming?
Are not you ventured in the action,
That Is all my joys and comforts? Pray no more, sir.
Say you prevaild, your dangers and not mine then
The law would claim you from me, or obscurity
Be made the grave to bury you alive.
I Am glad these thoughts come forth, O keep not one
Of this condition sir; here was a course
Found to bring sorrow on her way to death:
The tears would never a dried, till dust had choked 'em.
Blood-guiltiness becomes a fouler visage,
And now I think on one -- I was too blame,
I ha marred so good a market with my scorn;
'T had been done questionless, the ugliest creature
Creation framed for some use, yet to see
I could not mark so much where it should be.

Als. Lady.

Bea. Why men of Art make much of poison,
Keep one to expel another, where was my Art?

Als: Lady, you hear not me.

Bea. I do especially sir, the present times are not so sure of our side
As those hereafter may be, we must use 'em then
As thrifty folks their wealth, sparingly, now till the time opens.

Als. You teach wisdom, Lady.

Bea. Within there Diaphanta.

Enter Diaphanta. Dia. Do you call, Madam?

Bea. Perfect your service, and conduct this Gentleman
The private way you brought him.

Dia. I shall, Madam.

Als. My love's as firm as love e're built upon.
Ex. Dia. and Als.
Enter Deflores. Def. I have watched this meeting, and do wonder much
What shall become of the other, I Am sure both
Cannot be served unless she transgress; happily
Then I Will put in for one: for if a woman
Fly from one point, from him she makes a husband,
She spreads and mounts then like Arithmetic,
1, 10, 100, 1000, 10000, proves in time Sutler to an Army Royal.
Now do I look to be most richly raild at,
Yet I must see her.

Bea. Why, put case I loathed him
As much as youth and beauty hates a Sepulcher,
Must I needs show it? Cannot I keep that secret,
And serve my turn upon him? -- see he is here -- Deflores.

Def. Ha, I shall run mad with joy,
She called me fairly by my name Deflores,
And neither Rogue nor Rascal.

Bea. What have you done to your face a-late? you have met with some good Physician,
You Have pruned your self me thinks, you were not wont
To look so amorously.

Def. Not I, it is the same Phisnomy to a hair and pimple,
Which she called scurvy scarce an hour ago: How is this?

Bea. Come hither, nearer man.

Def. I Am up to the chin in heaven.

Bea. Turn, let me see, vauh it is but the heat of the liver, I perceiv't.
I thought it had been worse.

Def. Her fingers touched me, she smells all Amber.

Bea I Will make a water for you shall cleanse this within a fortnight.

Def. With your own hands, Lady?

Bea: Yes, mine own sir, in a work of cure, I Will trust no other.

Def. It Is half an act of pleasure to hear her talk thus to me.

Bea. When we are used to a hard face, it is not so unpleasing,
It mends still in opinion, hourly mends, I see it by experience.

Def: I was blessed to light upon this minute, I Will make use on it.

Bea: Hardness becomes the visage of a man well,
It argues service, resolution, manhood, if cause were of employment.

Def: 'Twould be soon seen, if e're your Ladyship had cause to use it.
I would but wish the honor of a service so happy as that mounts to.

Bea: We shall try you -- Oh my Deflores!

Def: How Is that? She calls me hers already, my Deflores,
You were about to sigh out somewhat, Madam.

Bea: No, was I? I forgot -- Oh!

Def: There it is again -- the very fellow on it.

Bea. You are too quick, sir.

Def. There Is no excuse for it, now I heard it twice, Madam,
That sigh would fain have utterance, take pity on it,
And lend it a free word, alas how it labors
For liberty, I hear the murmr yet beat at your bosom.

Bea. Would Creation --

Def: I well said, that is it.

Bea. Had formed me man.

Def. Nay, that is not it.

Bea. Oh it is the soul of freedom, I should not then be forced to marry one I
hate beyond all depths, I should have power Then to oppose my loathings, nay
remove 'em for ever from my sight.


Def: Oh blessed occasion -- Without change to your Sex, you have your wishes.

Claim so much man in me.


Bea. In thee Deflores? There Is small cause for that.

Def. Put it not from me, it is a service that I kneel for to you.

Bea. You are too violent to mean faithfully,
There Is horror in my service, blood and danger,
Can those be things to sue for?

Def: If you knew how sweet it were to me to be employed
In any act of yours, you would say then
I faild, and used not reverence enough
When I receive the charge on it.

Bea. This is much methinks, belike his wants are greedy, and to such
Gold tastes like Angles food -- Rise.

Def. I Will have the work first.

Bea. Possible his need is strong upon him, there is to encourage thee
As thou art forward and thy service dangerous,
Thy reward shall be precious.

Def: That I have thought on, I have assured my self of that before hand, and
know it will be precious, the thought ravishes.


Bea. Then take him to thy fury.

Def. I thirst for him.

Bea: Alonzo de Piracquo.

Def: His ends upon him, he shall be seen no more.

Bea: How lovely now do thou appear to me!
Never was man dearlier rewarded.

Def: I do think of that.

Bea. Be wondrous careful in the execution.

Def. Why? are not both our lives upon the cast?

Bea. Then I throw all my fears upon thy service.

Def: They never shall rise to hurt you.

Bea. When the deed's done, I Will furnish thee with all things for thy flight,
thou may live bravely in another country.


Def. I, I, we will talk of that hereafter.

Bea. I shall rid my self of two inveterate loathings at one time,
Piracquo and his Dog-face.
Exit.
Def. Oh my blood, methinks I feel her in mine arms already.
Her wanton fingers combing out this beard,
And being pleased, praising this bad face.
Hunger and pleasure they will commend sometimes
Slovenly dishes, and feed heartily on 'em,
Nay which is stranger, refuse daintier for 'em.
Some women are odd feeders -- I Am too loud.
Here comes the man goes supperless to bed,
Yet shall not rise to morrow to his dinner.

Enter Alonzo. Alon. Deflores.

Def: My kind honorable Lord.

Alon: I am glad I have met with thee.

Def: Sir.

Alon. Thou can show me the full strength of the Castle,

Def. That I can sir.

Alon. I much desire it.

Def. And if the ways and straits of some of the passages be not too tedious
for you, I will assure you worth your time and sight, my Lord.


Alon. Puh, that shall be no hinderance.

Def. I Am your servant then: it is now near dinner time, against your
Lordships rising I Will have the keys about me.

Alon. Thanks kind Deflores.

Def. He Is safely thrust upon me beyond hopes

Exeunt. ACTUS TERTIUS.
Enter Alonzo and Deflores. (In the Act time Deflores hides a naked Rapier.)
Def. YEs, here are all the keys, I was afraid my Lord,
I Would wanted for the postern, this is it.
Ive all, I Have all, my Lord: this for the Sconce.

Alon. It Is a most spacious and impregnable Fort.

Def. You Will tell me more my Lord: this descent
Is somewhat narrow, we shall never pass
Well with our weapons, they will but trouble us.

Alon. Thou say true.

Def. Pray let me help your Lordship.

Alon. It Is done. Thanks kind Deflores.

Def. Here are hooks my Lord, to hang such things on purpose.

Alon. Lead, I Will follow thee.

Ex. at one door and enter at the other. Def. All this is nothing, you shall
see anon a place you little dream on

Alon. I am glad I have this leisure: all your masters house
Imagine I had taken a Gondela.

Def. All but my self, sir, which makes up my safety,
My Lord, I Will place you at a Casement here,
Will show you the full strength of all the Castle.
Look, spend your eye a while upon that object.

Alon. Here Is rich variety Deflores.

Def. Yes, sir.

Alon. Goodly munition.

Def. I, there is Ordnance sir, no bastard metal, will ring you a peal like
Bells at greet men's Funerals; keep your eye straight, my Lord, take special
notice of that Scone before you, there you may dwell awhile.


Alon. I am upon it.

Def. And so am I.

Alon: Deflores, oh Deflores, whose malice have thou put on?

Def: Do you question a work of secrecy? I must silence you.

Alon. Oh, oh, oh.

Def. I must silence you.
So, here is an undertaking well accomplished.
This vault serves to good use now -- Ha! what is that
Threw sparkles in my eye? -- Oh it is a Diamond
He wears upon his finger: it was well found,
This will approve the work. What, so fast on?
Not part in death? I Will take a speedy course then,
Finger and all shall off. So, now I Will clear
The passages from all suspect or fear.

Exit with Body, Enter Isabella and Lollio. Isa: Why sirrah? Whence have you
commission
To fetter the doors against me? If you
Keep me in a Cage, pray whistle to me,
Let me be doing something.

Lol: You shall be doing, if it please you, I Will whistle to you if you will pipe
after.

Isa. Is it your Masters pleasure, or your own,
To keep me in this Pinfold?

Lol: It Is for my masters pleasure, lest being taken in another man's
Corn, you might be pounded in another place.

Isa. It Is very well, and he will prove very wise.

Lol: He says you have company enough in the house, if you please to be
sociable, of all sorts of people.


Isa: Of all sorts? Why here is none but fools and madmen.


Lol: Very well: And where will you find any other, if you should go abroad?
There Is my master and I to boot too:


Isa: Of either sort one, a madman and a fool.

Lol. I would even participate of both then if were as you, I know you are half
mad already; be half foolish too.


Isa: You Are a brave saucy Rascal, come on sir,
Afford me then the pleasure of your Bed^^m;
You were commending once to day to me,
Your last come lunatique, what a proper
Body there was without brains to guide it,
And what a pitiful delight appeared
In that defect, as if your wisdom had found
A mirth in madness; pray sir let me partake
If there be such a pleasure.

Lol. If I do not show
You the handsomest, discreetest madman, one that I may
Call, the understanding madman; then say I am a fool.

Isa. Well, a match, I will say so.

Lol. When you have a taste of the madman, you shall (if you please) see Fools
College, o'th side, I seldom lock there, it is but shooting a bolt or two, and
you are amongst em.

Ex. Enter presently. Come on sir, let me see how handsomely you will behave your
self now.

Enter Loll: Franciscus. Fran. How sweetly she looks! Oh but there is a wrinkle
in her brow as deep as Philosophy, Anacreon drink to my Mistress health, I Will
pledge it: Stay, stay, there is a Spider in the cup: No, it is but a Grape-stone,
swallow it, fear nothing Poet; so, so, lift higher.


Isa. Alack, alack, it is too full of pity
To be laughed at; how fell he mad? Can thou tell?

Lol. For love, Mistress,
He was a pretty Poet too, and that set him forwards first;
The Muses then forsook him, he ran mad for a Chambermaid,
Yet she was but a dwarf neither.

Fran. Hail bright Titania, why standst thou idle on these flowery banks? Oberon
is dancing with his Dryades, I Will gather dazies, primrose, violets, and bind
them in a verse of Poesy.


Lol. Not too near, you see your danger.

Fran. Oh hold thy hand great Diomed, thou feedst thy horses well, they shall
obey thee; Get up, Bucephalus kneels.


Lol. You see how I aw my flock, a Shephard has not his dog at more obedience.


Isa. His conscience is unquiet, sure that was
The cause of this. A proper Gentleman.

Fran. Come hither Esculapius, hide the poison.

Lol. Well, it is hid.

Fran Did thou never hear of one Tiresias a famous Poet?

Lol. Yes, that kept tame wild-geese.

Fran. That Is he, I am the man.

Lol. No.

Fra: Yes, but make no words on it, I was a man seven years ago,

Lol. A stripling I think you might.

Fra. Now Im'e a woman, all feminine.

Lol. I would I might see that.

Fra. Juno struck me blind,

Lol: I Will never believe that; for a woman they say, has an eye more then a man.


Fra. I say she struck me blind.

Lol. And Luna made you mad, you have two trades to beg with.

Fra. Luna is now big bellied, and there is room for both of us to ride with
Hecate; I Will drag thee up into her silver sphere, and there we will kick the Dog,
and beat the bush that barks against the Witches of the night, the swift
Licanthropi that walks the round, we will tear their wolvish skins, and save the
sheep.


Lol. Is It come to this? nay then my poison comes forth again, mad slave,
indeed, abuse your Keeper!


Isa. I prithee hence with him, now he grows dangerous.

Sing. Fra. Sweet love pity me, give me leave to lie with thee.

Lol. No, I Will see you wiser first: To your own kennell.

Fra. No noise she sleeps, draw all the Curtains round,
Let no soft sound molest the pretty soul,
But love, and love, creeps in at a mouse-hole.

Lol. I would you wo^d get into your hole.
Exit Fra. Now Mistress I will bring you another sort, you shall be fooled
another while, Tony, come hither Tony, look who is yonder Tony.


Enter Antonio. Ant. Cousin, is it not my Ant?

Lol. Yes, it is on of 'um Tony.

Ant. He, he, how do you Uncle?

Lol. Fear him not Mistress, it is a gentle nigget, you may play with him, as
safely with him as with his bawble.


Isa. How long have thou been a fool?

Ant. Ever since I came hither, Cousin?

Isa. Cousin, I Am none of thy Cousins fool.

Lol. Oh mistress, fools have always so much wit as to claim their kindred.


Madman within. Bounce, bounce, he falls, he falls.

Isa. Hark you, your scholars in the upper room are out of order.

Lol. Must I come amongst you there? Keep you the fool mistress, I Will go up,
and play left handed Orlando amongst the madmen.

Exit.
Isa. Well, Sir.

Ant. It Is opportuneful now, sweet Lady! nay,
Cast no amazing eye upon this change.

Isa. Ha!

Ant. This shape of Folly shrowds your dearest Love,
The truest servant to your powerful beauties,
Whose magic had this force thus to transform me.

Isa. You are a fine Fool indeed.

Ant. Oh it is not strange: Love has an intellect that runs through all
The scrutinous Sciences; and like
A cunning Poet, catches a quantity
Of every Knowledge, yet brings all home
Into one mystery, into one secret
That he proceeds in.

Isa. You Are a parlous Fool.

Ant. No danger in me: I bring naught but Love,
And his soft wounding shafts to strike you with:
Try but one arrow; if it hurt you,
I Will stand you twenty back in recompense.

Isa. A forward Fool too.

Ant. This was Love's teaching:
A thousand ways she fashioned out my way,
And this I found the safest and nearest
To tread the Gallaxia to my Star.

Isa. Profound, withal certain: You dreamed of this;
Love never taught it waking.

Ant. Take no acquaintance of these outward Follies; there is within
A Gentleman that loves you.

Isa. When I see him, I Will speak with him; so in the mean time
Keep your habit, it becomes you well enough
As you are a Gentleman, I Will not discover you;
That Is all the favor that you must expect:
When you are weary, you may leave the school,
For all this while you have but played the Fool.

Enter Lollio. Ant. And must again; he, he, I thank you Cozen, I Will be your
Valentine To motrow morning.


Lol. How do you like the Fool, Mistress?

Isa. Passing well, Sir.

Lol. Is he not witty, pretty well for a Fool?

Isa. If he hold on as he begins, he is like to come to something*

Lol. I, thank a good Tutor: You may put him to it; he begins
To answer pretty hard questions. Tony, how many is
Five times six?

Ant. Five times six, is six times five.

Lol. What Arithmetician could have answered better? how many is One hundred and
seven?


Ant. One hundred and seven, is seven hundred and one, Cozen.

Lol. This is no wit to speak on; Will you be rid of the Fool now?

Isa. By no means, let him stay a little:

Madman within. Catch there, catch the last couple in hell.

Lol. Again, must I come amongst you? Would my Master were come home! I am not
able to govern both these Wards together.

Exit.
Ant. Why should a minute of Loves hour be lost?

Isa. Fie, out again! I had rather you kept
Your other posture: you become not your tongue,
When you speak from your clothes.

Ant. How can he freeze, lives near so sweet a warmth? shall I alone
Walk through the orchard of the Hesperides.
And cowardly not dare to pull an apple?
This with the red cheeks I must venture for.

Enter Lol. above. Isa: Take heed, there is Giants keep 'em.

Lol. How now fool, are you good at that? have you read Lipsius?
He Is past Ars Amandi; I believe I must put harder
Questions to him, I perceive that --

Isa. You are bold without fear too.

Ant. What should I fear, having all joys about me? Do you smile,
And Love shall play the wanton on your lip,
Meet and retire, retire and meet again:
Look you but cheerfully, and in your eyes
I shall behold mine own deformity,
And dress my self up fairer; I know this shape
Becomes me not, but in those bright mirrors
I shall array me handsomely.

Lol. Cuckoo, Cuckoo --
Exit.
Madmen above, some as birds, others as beasts.

Ant. What are these?

Isa. Of fear enough to part us, yet are they but our schools of Lunatiques,

That act their fantasies in any shapes
Suiting their present thoughts; if sad, they cry;
If mirth be their conceit, they laugh again.
Sometimes they imitate the beasts and birds,
Singing, or howling, braying, barking; all
As their wild fancies prompt 'um.

Enter Lollio. Ant. These are no fears.

Isa. But here is a large one, my man.

Ant. Ha, he, that is fine sport indeed, cousin:

Lol: I would my master were come home, it is too much for one shepherd to
govern two of these flocks; nor can I believe that one Churchman can instruct
two benefices at once, there will be some incurable mad of the one side, and
very fools on the other. Come Tony.


Ant. Prithee cousin, let me stay here still.

Lol. No, you must to your Book now you have played sufficiently.

Isa. Your fool is grown wondrous witty.

Lol. Well, I Will say nothing; but I do not think but he will put you down one
of these days.


Exeunt Lol. and Ant. Isa. Here the restrained current might make breach,
Spite of the watchful bankers, would a woman stray,
She need not gad abroad to seek her sin,
It would be brought home one ways or other:
The Needles point will to the fixed North,
Such drawing Articks women's beauties are.

Enter Lollio. Lol. How do thou sweet rogue?

Isa. How now?

Lol. Come, there are degrees, one fool may be better then another

Isa. What Is the matter?

Lol: Nay, if thou giv'st thy mind to Fools-flesh, have at thee.

Isa. You bold slave you.

Lol. I could follow now as the other fool did,
What should I fear, having all joys about me: do you but smile,
And love shall play the wanton on your lip,
Meet and retire, retire and meet again:
Look you but cheerfully, and in your eyes,
I shall behold my own deformity,
And dress my self up fairer, I know this shape
Becomes me not; and so as it follows, but is not this the more
Foolish way? Come sweet rogue, kiss me my little Lacedemonian.
Let me feel how thy pulses beat; Thou have a thing
About thee, would do a man pleasure, I Will lay my hand on it.

Isa. Sirrah, no more I see you have discovered
This loves Knight arrant, who has made adventure
For purchase of my love; be silent, mute,
Mute as a statue, or his injuction
For me enjoying, shall be to cut thy throat,
I Will do it, though for no other purpose,
And be sure he will not refuse it.

Lol. My share, that is all, I Will have my fools part with you

Isa. No more your master.

Enter Alibius. Alib: Sweet, how do thou?

Isa. Your bounden servant, sir.

Alib: Fie, fie, sweet heart, no more of that.

Isa: You were best lock me up.

Alib: In my arms and bosom, my sweet Isabella,
I Will lock thee up most nearly. Lollio,
We have employment, we have task in hand,
At noble Vermonderos our Castle Captain,
There is a nuptial to be solemnized,
Beatrice Joanna his fair daughter Bride,
For which the Gentleman has bespoke our pains,
A mixture of our madmen and our fools,
To finish (as it were) and make the fagg
Of all the Revels, the third night from the first,
Only an unexpected passage over,
To make a frightfull pleasure, that is all,
But not the all I aim at; could we so act it,
To teach it in a wild distracted measure,
Though out of form and figure, breaking times head,
It were no matter, 'twould be heald again
In one age or other, if not in this,
This, this Lollio, there is a good reward begun,
And will beget a bounty be it known.

Lol. This is easy, sir, I Will warrant you: you have about you Fools and Madmen
that can dance very well, and it is no wonder, you best Dancers are not the
wisest men, the reason is, with often jumping they joult their brains down into
their feet, that their wits lie more in their heels then in their heads.


Alib. Honest Lollio, thou giv'st me a good reason,
And a comfort in it.

Isa. You Have a fine trade on it, Madmen and Fools are a staple-commodity.


Alib. Oh wife, we must eat, wear clothes, and live,
Just at the Lawyers Haven we arrive,
By madmen and by fools we both do thrive.

Exeunt. Enter Vermandero, Alsemero, Jasperino, and Beatrice. Ver. Valentia
speaks so nobly of you, sir,
I wish I had a daughter now for you.

Als. The fellow of this creature were a partner
For a Kings love.

Ver: I had her fellow once, sir,
But heaven has married her to joys eternal,
'Twere sin to wish her in this vale again.
Come sir, your friend and you shall see the pleasures
Which my health chiefly joys in.

Als. I hear the beauty of this seat largely.

Ver. It falls much short of that.

Exeunt. Mane^ Beatrice. Bea. So, here is one step
Into my fathers favor, time will fix him,
I have got him now the liberty of the House,
So wisdom by degrees works out her freedom;
And if that eye be darkened that offends me,
I wait but that Eclipse; this Gentleman
Shall soon shine glorious in my Fathers liking,
Through the refulgent virtue of my love.

Enter Deflores. Def. My thoughts are at a banquet for the deed,
I feel no weight in it, it is but light and cheap,
For the sweet recompense, that I set down for it.

Bea. Deflores.

Def. Lady.

Bea. Thy looks promise cheerfully.

Def, All things are answerable, time, circumstance,
Your wishes and my service.

Bea: Is it done then.

Def. Piracquo is no more.

Bea. My joys start at mine eyes, our sweet'st delights
Are evermore born weeping.

Def. I Have a token for you.

Bea: For me?

Def. But it was sent somewhat unwillingly,
I could not get the Ring without the Finger.

Bea: Bless me! what have thou done?

Def: Why is that more then killing the whole man? I cut his heart strings.
A greedy hand thrust in a dish at Court
In a mistake, has had as much as this.

Bea. It Is the first token my father made me send him,

Def. And I made him send it back again
For his last token, I was loath to leave it,
And I Am sure dead men have no use of Jewels,
He was as loath to part with it, for it stuck,
As if the flesh and it were both one substance.

Bea: At the Stags fall the Keeper has his fees:
It Is soon applied, all dead men's fees are yours, Sir,
I pray bury the finger, but the stone
You may make use of shortly, the true value,
Take It of my truth, is near three hundred Ducats.

Def. 'Twil hardly buy a capcase for ones conscience tho
To keep it from the worm, as fine as it is.
Well, being my fees I Will take it,
Great men have taught me that, or else my merit
Would scorn the way on it.

Bea. It might justly, sir: Why thou mistak'st Deflores, it is not given in
state of recompense.


Def. No, I hope so, Lady, you should soon witness my contempt to it then.


Bea. Prithee, thou lookst as if thou were offended.

Def. That were strange, Lady, it is not possible
My service should draw such a cause from you.
Offended? Coul'd you think so? That were much
For one of my performance, and so warm
Yet in my service.

Bea. 'Twere misery in me to give you cause, sir.

Def. I know so much, it were so, misery
In her most sharp condition.

Bea. It Is resolved then; look you sir, here is 3000. golden Florens,
I have not meanly thought upon thy merit.

Def. What sallery? Now you move me.

Bea: How Deflores?

Def: Do you place me in the rank of verminous fellows,
To destroy things for wages? offer gold?
The life blood of man; Is any thing
Valued too precious for my recompense?

Bea. I understand thee not.

Def. I could have hired a journey-man in murder at this rate,
And mine own conscience might have,
And have had the work brought home.

Bea. I Am in a labyrinth;
What will content him? I would fain be rid of him.
I Will double the sum, sir.

Def. You take a course to double my vexation, that is the good you do.

Bea. Bless me! I am now in worse plight then I was,
I know not what will please him: for my fears sake
I prithee make away with all speed possible.
And if thou be'st so modest not to name
The sum that will content thee, paper blushes not,
Send thy demand in writing, it shall follow thee,
But prithee take thy flight.

Def. You must fly too then.

Bea. I?

Def. I Will not stir a foot else.

Bea. What Is your meaning?

Def. Why are not you as guilty, in I Am sure
As deep as I? and we should stick together.
Come, your fears counsel you but ill, my absence
Would draw suspect upon you instantly,
There were no rescue for you.

Bea. He speaks home.

Def. Nor is it fit we two engaged so jointly,
Should part and live asunder.

Bea. How now sir? This shows not well.

Def. What makes your lip so strange? This must not be betwixt us.

Bea. The man talks wildly.

Def. Come kiss me with a zeal now.

Bea. Heaven I doubt him.

Def. I will not stand so long to beg 'em shortly.

Bea. Take heed Deflores of forgetfulness, 'twill soon betray us.

Def. Take you heed first;
Faith you are grown much forgetful, you are too blame in it.

Bea. He Is bold, and I am blamed for it.

Def. I have eased you of your trouble, think on it, I Am in pain,
And must be eased of you; it is a charity,
Justice invites your blood to understand me.

Bea. I dare not.

Def. Quickly.

Bea. Oh I never shall, speak it yet further of that I may lose
What has been spoken, and no sound remain on it.
I would not hear so much offense again for such another deed.

Def. Soft, Lady, soft; the last is not yet paid for, oh this act
Has put me into spirit; I was as greedy on it
As the parcht earth of moisture, when the clouds weep.
Did you not mark, I wrought my self into it.
Nay sued and kneeled for it: Why was all that pains took?
You see I have thrown contempt upon your gold,
Not that I want it, for I do piteously,
In order I will come unto't, and make use on it,
But 'twas not held so precious to begin with;
For I place wealth after the heels of pleasure,
And were I not resolv^d in my belief
That thy virginity were perfect in thee,
I should but take my recompense with grudging.
As if I had but half my hopes I agreed for.

Bea: Why it is impossible thou can be so wicked,
Or shelter such a cunning cruelty,
To make his death the murderer of my honor.
Thy language is so bold and vicious,
I cannot see which way I can forgive it with any modesty.

Def. Push, you forget your self, a woman dipped in blood, and talk of modesty.


Bea. O misery of sin! would I had been bound
Perpetually unto my living hate
In that Piracquo, then to hear these words.
Think but upon the distance that Creation
Set 'twixt thy blood and mine, and keep thee there.

Def. Look but into your conscience, read me there,
It Is a true Book, you will find me there you equal:
Push, fly not to your birth, but settle you
In what the act has made you, you are no more now,
You must forget your parentage to me,
You Are the deeds creature, by that name
You lost your first condition, and I challenge you,
As peace and innocence has turned you out,
And made you one with me.

Bea. With thee, foul villain?

Def. Yes, my fair murdress; Do you urge me?
Though thou writ^st maid, thou whore in thy affection,
'Twas changed from thy first love, and that is a kind
Of whoredom in thy heart, and he is changed now,
To bring thy second on thy Alsemero,
Whom (by all sweets that ever darkness tasted,
If I enjoy thee not) thou never enjoyst,
I Will blast the hopes and joys of marriage,
I Will confess all, my life I rate at nothing.

Bea. Deflores.

Def. I shall rest from all lovers plagues then,
I live in pain now: that shooting eye
Will burn my heart to cinders.

Bea: O sir, hear me.

Def. She that in life and love refuses me,
In death and shame my partner she shall be.

Bea. Stay, hear me once for all, I make thee master
Of all the wealth I have in gold and jewels,
Let me go poor unto my bed with honor,
And I am rich in all things.

Def. Let this silence thee,
The wealth of all Valentia shall not buy my pleasure from me,
Can you weep Fate from its determined purpose?
So soon may weep me.

Bea. Vengeance begins;
Murder I see is followed by more sins.
Was my creation in the womb so cursed,
It must engender with a Viper first?

Def. Come, rise, and shroud your blushes in my bosom,
Silence is one of pleasures best receipts:
Thy peace is wrought for ever in this yielding.
'Lasse how the Turtle pants! Thou Wilt love anon,
What thou so fear, and faintst to venture on.

Exeunt: ACTUS QUARTUS.
Enter Gentlemen, Vermandero meeting them with action of wonderment at the
flight of Piracquo. Enter Alsemero, with Jasperino, and Gallants, Vermandero
points to him, the Gentlemen seeming to applaud the choice, Alsemero,
Jasperino, and Gentlemen; Beatrice the Bride following in great state,
accompanied with Diaphanta, Isabella, and other Gentlewomen: Deflores after
all, smiling at the accident; Alonzo's Ghost appears to Deflores in the midst
of his smile, startles him, showing him the hand whose finger he had cut off.
They pass over in great solemnity. Enter Beatrice: Bea: THis fellow has undone
me endlesly,
Never was Bride so fearfully distressed;
The more I think upon the ensuing night,
And whom I am to cope with in embraces,
One both ennobled both in blood and mind,
So clear in understanding, that is my plague now,
Before whose judgment will my fault appear
Like malefactors crimes before Tribunals,
There is no hiding on it, the more I dive
Into my own distress; how a wise man
Stands for a great calamity, there is no venturing
Into his bed, what course soever I light upon,
Without my shame, which may grow up to danger;
He cannot but in justice strangle me
As I lie by by him, as a cheater use me;
It Is a precious craft to play with a false Dye
Before a cunning Gamester; here is his closet,
The key left in it, and he abroad in the Park,
Sure 'twas forgot, I Will be so bold as look in it.
Bless me! A right Physicians closet it is,
Set round with viols, every one her mark too.
Sure he does practice Physic for his own use,
Which may be safely called your great man's Wisdom.
What manuscript lies here? The Book of Experiment,
Called Secrets in Nature: so it is, it is so,
How to know whether a woman be with child or no.
I hope I am not yet; if he should try tho
Let me see folio 45. Here it is;
the leaf tuckt dow upon it, the place suspicious.
If you would know whether a woman be with child, or not,
Give her two spoonfuls of the white water in Glass C.
Where Is that Glass C: O yonder I see it now, and if she be with child,
She sleeps full twelve hours after, if not, not
None of that water comes into my belly.
I Will know you from a hundred, I could break you now
Or turn you into milk, and so beguile
The master of the mystery, but I Will look to you.
Ha! that which is next, is ten times worse.
How to know whether a woman be a maid, or not;
If that should be applied, what would become of me?
Belike he has a strong faith of my purity,
That never yet made proof; but this he calls
A merry slight, but true experiment, the Author Antonius Mizaldus.
Give the party you suspect the quantity of a spoonful of the water,
In the glass M. which upon her that is maid, makes three several
effects, 'twill make her incontinently gape, then fall into a sudden
sneezing, last into a violent laughing, else dull, heavy and lumpish.
Where had I been? I fear it, yet it is seven hours to bed time.

Enter Diaphanta Dia. Cuds Madam, are you here?

Bea. Seeing that wench now
A trick comes in my mind, it is a nice piece,
Gold cannot purchase; I come hither wench,
To look my Lord.

Dia. Would I had such a cause to look him too.
Why he is in the Park Madam.

Bea. There let him be.

Dia. I madam, let him compass,
Whole Parks and Forests, as great Rangers do,
At roosting time a little lodge can hold 'em.
Earth-conquering Alexander, that thought the world
Too narrow for him, in the end had but his pit-hole.

Bea. I fear thou art not modest, Diaphanta.

Dia. Your thoughts are so unwilling to be known, Madam,
It Is ever the Brides fashion toward bedtime,
To set light by her joys, as if she owed 'em not.

Bea. Her joys; her fears thou would say.

Dia. Fear of what?

Bea. Art thou a maid, and talkst so to a maid?
You leave a blushing business behind,
Beshrew your heart for it.

Dia. Do you mean good sooth, madam?

Bea, Well, if I Would thought upon the fear at first,
Man should have been unknown.

Dia. Is It possible?

Bea. I will give a thousand Ducats to that woman
Would try what my fear were, and tell me true
To morrow, when she gets from't: as she likes
I might perhaps be drawn to it.

Dia. Are you in earnest?

Bea. Do you get the woman, then challenge me,
And see if I Will fly from't; but I must tell you
This by the way, she must be a true maid,
Else there is no trial, my fears are not hers else.

Dia. Nay, she that I would put into your hands, madam shall be a maid.

Bea. You know I should be shamed else, because she lies for me.

Dia. It Is a strange humor:
But are you serious still? Would you resign
Your first nights pleasure, and give money too?

Bea. As willingly as live; alas, the gold
Is but a by-bet to wedge in the honor.

Dia. I do not know how the world goes abroad
For faith or honesty, there is both required in this.
Madam, what say you to me, and stray no further,
I Have a good mind in troth to earn your money.

Bea. You Are too quick, I fear, to be a maid.

Dia. How? not a maid? nay then you urge me madam,
Your honorable self is not a truer
With all your fears upon you.

Bea. Bad enough then.

Dia. Then I with all my lightsome joys about me.

Bea. I Am glad to hear't then, you dare put your honesty Upon an easy trial.

Dia. Easy? -- any thing.

Bea. I Will come to you straight.

Dia. She will not search me? will she?
Like the fore-woman of a female Jury.

Bea. Glass M. I, this is it; look Diaphanta,
You take no worse then I do.

Dia. And in so doing I will not question what it is, but take it.

Bea. Now if the experiment be true, 'twill praise it self,
And give me noble ease: -- Begins already,
There Is the first symptom; and what have it makes
To fall into the second, there by this time
Most admirable secret, on the contrary
It stirs not me a whit, which most concerns it.

Dia. Ha, ha, ha.

Bea. Just in all things and in order,
As if 'twere circumscribed, one accident gives way unto another.

Dia. Ha, ha, ha.

Bea. How now wench?

Dia. Ha, ha, ha, I am so so light at heart, ha, ha, ha. so pleasurable.
But one swig more, sweet Madam.

Bea. I, to morrow, we shall have time to sit by it.

Dia. Now I Am sad again.

Bea. It lays it self so gently too; Come wench, most honest Diaphanta I dare
call thee now.


Dia. Pray tell me, madam, what trick call you this?

Bea. I Will tell thee all hereafter; we must study the carriage of this business:


Dia. I shall carry't well, because I love the burden.

Bea. About midnight you must not fail to steal forth gently,
That I may use the place.

Dia. Oh fear not, Madam,
I shall be cool by that time: the brides place,
And with a thousand Ducats; I Am for a Justice now,
I bring a portion with me, I scorn small fools.

Exeunt. Enter Vermandero and Servant. Ver. I tell thee knave, mine Honor is in
question,
A thing till now free from suspicion,
Nor ever was there cause; who of my Gentlemen are absent?
Tell me and truly how many, and who.

Ser. Antonio, Sir, and Franciscus.

Ver. When did they leave the Castle?

Ser. Some ten days since, sir, the one intending to Briamata,
The Other for Valentia.

Ver. The time accuses 'um, a charge of murder
Is brought within my Castle gate, Piracquo's murder,
I dare not answer faithfully their absence:
A strict command of apprehension
Shall pursue 'um suddenly, and either wipe
The stain off clear, or openly discover it.
Provide me winged warrants for the purpose.
See, I am set on again.

Exit Servant. Enter Tomazo. Tom. I claim a brother of you.

Ver. You Are too hot, seek him not here.

Tom. Yes, amongst your dearest bloods,
If my peace find no fairer satisfaction,
This is the place must yield account for him,
For here I left him, and the hastytie
Of this snatched marriage, gives strong testimony
Of his most certain ruin.

Ver. Certain falsehood;
This is the place indeed, his breach of faith,
Has too much marred both my abused love,
The honorable love I reserved for him,
And mocked my daughters joy; the prepared morning
Blushed at his infidelity, he left
Contempt and scorn to throw upon those friends
Whose belief hurt 'em: oh 'twas most ignoble
To take his flight so unexepectedly,
And throw such public wrongs on those that loved him

Tom. Then this is all your answer.

Ver. It Is too fair for one of his alliance; and I warn you
That this place no more see you.
Exit.
Enter Destores. Tom. The best is, there is more ground to meet a man's revenge
on.
Honest Deflores.

Def. That Is my name indeed.
Saw you the Bride? Good sweet sir, which way took she?

Tom* I have blessed mine eyes from seeing such a false one.

Def. I Would fain get off, this man's not for my company,
I smell his brothers blood when I come near him.

Tom. Come hither kind and true one; I remember
My brother loved thee well.

Def. O purely, dear sir, me thinks I am now again a killing on him.
He brings it so fresh to me.

Tom. Thou can guess sirrah,
One honest friend has an instinct of jealousy
At some foul guilty person.

Def. 'Lasse sir, I am so charitable, I think none
Worse then my self -- You did not see the Bride then?

Tom. I prithee name her not. Is she not wicked?

Def. No, no, a pretty easy round-packt sinner,
As your most Ladies are, else you might think
I flattered her; but sir, at no hand wicked,
Till they are so old their sins and vices meet,
And they salute Witches; I am called, I think sir:
His company even ore-lays my conscience.
Exit.
Tom. That Deflores has a wondrous honest heart.
He Will bring it out in time, I Am assured on it.
O here is the glorious master of the days joy.
I will not be long till he and I do reckon sir.

Enter Alsemero. Als. You are most welcome.

Tom. You may call that word back,
I do not think I am, nor wish to be.

Als. It Is strange you found the way to this house then.

Tom. Would I Would nere known the cause, I Am none of those sir,
That come to give you joy, and swill your wine,
It Is a more precious liquor that must lay
The fiery thirst I bring.

Als. Your words and you appear to me great strangers.

Tom. Time and our swords may make us more acquainted;
This the business.
I should have a brother in your Place,
How treachery and malice have disposed of him,
I Am bound to enquire of him which holds his right:
Which never could come fairly.

Als. You must look to answer for that word, sir.

Tom: Fear you not, I Will have it ready drawn at our next meeting.
Keep your day solemn. Farewell, I disturb it not,
I Will bear the smart with patience for a time.
Exit.
Als. It Is somewhat ominous this, a quarrel entered
Upon this day, my innocence relieves me,
Enter Jasperino. I should be wondrous sad else -- Jasperino,
I have news to tell thee, strange news.

Jas. I have some too,
I think as strange as yours, would I might keep
Mine, so my faith and friendship might be kept in it.
Faith sir, dispense a little with my zeal,
And let it cool in this.

Als. This put's me on, and blames thee for thy slowness.

Jas. All may prove nothing,
Only a friendly fear that leapt from me, sir.

Als. No question it may prove nothing; let us partake it thou.

Jas. 'Twas Diaphanta's chance, for to that wench
I pretend honest love, and she deserves it,
To leave me in a back part of the house,
A place we chose for private conference;
She was no sooner gone, but instantly
I heard your brides voice in the next room to me;
And lending more attention, found Deflores
Louder then she.

Als. Deflores? Thou art out now.

Jas. You Will tell me more anon.

Als. still I Will prevent thee, the very sight of him is poison to her.

Jas. That made me stagger too, but Diaphanta
At her return confirmed it.

Als. Diaphanta!

Jas. Then fell we both to listen, and words past
Like those that challenge interest in a woman:

Als. Peace, quench thy zeal, it is dangerous to thy bosom

Jas. Then truth is full of peril.

Als. Such truths are -- O were she the sole glory of the earth,
Had eyes that could shoot fire into Kings breasts,
And touched, she sleeps not here, yet I have time
Though night be near, to be resolved hereof,
And prithee do not weigh me by my passions.

Jas. I never weighed friend so.

Als. Done charitably, that key will lead thee to a pretty secr^
By a Chaldean taught me, and I Have
My study upon some, bring from my closet
A glass inscribed there with the letter M.
And question not my purpose.

Jas. It shall be done sir.
Exit.
Als: How can this hang together? Not an hour since?
Her woman came pleading her Lady's fears,
Delivered her for the most timorous virgin
That ever shrunk at man's name, and so modest,
She charged her weep out her request to me,
That she might come obscurely to my bosom.

Enter Beatrice. Bea. All things go well, my woman's preparing yonder
For her sweet voyage, which grieves me to lose,
Necessity compels it; I lose all else.

Als. Push, Modesties shrine is set in yonder forehead.
I cannot be too sure tho my Joanna.

Bea. Sir, I was bold to weep a message to you,
Pardon my modest fears.

Als. The Dove's not meeker.
She Is abused questionless. -- Oh are you come, sir?

Enter Jasperino. Bea. The glass upon my life; I see the letter.

Jas. Sir, this is M.

Als. T's it

Bea. I am suspected.

Als. How fitly our Bride comes to partake with us!

Bea. What is it, my Lord?

Als. No hurt.

Bea. Sir, pardon me, I seldom taste of any composition.

Als. But this upon my warrant you shall venture on.

Bea. I fear 'twill make me ill.

Als. Heaven forbid that.

Bea. I Am put now to my cunning, the effects I know.
If I can now but feign 'em handsomely.

Als. It has that secret virtue it never mist, sir,
Upon a virgin.

Jas. Treble qualited*

Als. By all that is virtuous it takes there, proceeds.

Jas. This is the strangest trick to know a maid by.

Bea. Ha, ha, ha, you have given me joy of heart to drink my Lord.

Als. No, thou have given me such joy of heart,
That never can be blasted.

Bea. What Is the matter sir?

Als. See now it is settled in a melancholy,
Keep both the time and method, my Joanna:
Chaste as the breath of heaven, or mornings womb,
That brings the day forth, thus my love incloses thee.

Exeunt. Enter Isabella and Lollio. Isa. Oh heaven! is this the waiting moon?
Does love turn fool, run mad, and all once?
Sirrah, here is a madman, akin to the fool too,
A lunatic lover.

Lol. No, no, not he I brought the Letter from.

Isa. Compare his inside with his out, and tell me.

Lol. The out's mad, I Am sure of that, I had a taste on it.
To the bright Andromeda, chief Chambermaid to the Knight of the Sun, at the
sign of Scorpio, in the middle Region, sent by the Bellows-mender of Aeolus.
Pay the Post. This is stark madness.

Isa. Now mark the inside.
Sweet Lady, having now cast off this Counterfeit Cover of a madman, I appear
to your best Judgment a true and faithful Lover of your beauty.


Lol. He is mad still.

Isa. If any fault you find, chide those perfections in you, which have have
made me imperfect; It Is the same Sun that causes to grow, and inforceth to
wither.


Lol. Oh Rogue!

Isa. Shapes and transhapes, destroys and builds again, I come in winter to you
dismantled of my proper ornaments, by the sweet splendour of your cheerful
smiles, I spring and live a lover.


Lol. Mad Rascal still.

Isa. Tread him not under foot, that shall appear an honor to your bounties. I
remain -- mad till I speak with you, from whom I expect my cure. Yours all, or
one beside himself, Franciscus.


Lol: You are like to have a fine time on it, my Master and I may give over our
professions, I do not think but you can cure fools and madmen faster then we,
with little pains too.


Isa: Very likely.


Lol. One thing I must tell you Mistress, you perceive, that I am privy to your
skill, if I find you minister once and set up the trade, I put in for my
thirds, I shall be mad or fool else.


Isa: The first place is thine, believe it, Lollio,
If I do fall.

Lol: I fall upon you.

Isa: So.

Lol: Well I stand to my venture.

Isa: But thy council now, how shall I deal with 'um:

Lol: We do you mean to deal with 'um.

Isa: Nay, the fair understanding, how to use 'um.

Lol: Abuse 'um, that is the way to mad the fool, and make a fool of the madman,
and then you use 'um kindly.


Isa: It Is easy, I Will practice, do thou observe it,
The key of thy Wardrobe.

Lol. There fit your self for 'um, and I Will fit 'um both for you.

Isa: Take thou no further notice, then the outside.
Exit.
Lol: Not an inch, I Will put you to the inside.

Enter Alibius. Ali: Lollio, art there, will all be perfect think thou
To morrow night, as if to close up the solemnity:
Vermandero expects us:

Lol: I mistrust the madmen most, the fools will do well enough*
I have taken pains with them.

Ali* Tush they cannot miss; the more absurdity,
The more commends it, so no rough behaviors
Affright the Ladies; they are nice things thou know.

Lol: You need not fear, Sir, so long as we are there with our commanding
peesles, they will be as tame as the ladies themselves.


Ali: I will see them once more rehearse before they go.


Lol: I was about it, Sir; look you to the madmens Morris, and let me alone
with the other; there is one or two that I mistrust their fooling; I Will
instruct them, and then they shall rehearse the whole measure.


Ali: Do so, I Will see the music prepared: but, Lollio.
By the way, how does my wife brook her restraint:
Does she not grudge at it.

Lol. So, so, she takes some pleasure in the house, she would abroad else, you
must allow her a little more length, she is kept too short.


Ali. She shall along to Vermandero's with us,
That will serve her for a months liberty.

Lol: What Is that on your face, Sir?

Ali: Where, Lollio, I see nothing.

Lol. Cry you mercy, Sir, it is your nose, it showed like the trunck of a young
Elephant.


Ali: Away, Rascal: I Will prepare the music, Lollio

Ex. Ali: Lol. Do, Sir; and I Will dance the whilst; Tony, where art thou Tony?


Enter Antonio. Ant. Here, Cozen, where art thou?

Lol. Come, Tony, the footmanship I taught you.

Ant: I had rather ride, Cozen.

Lol: I, a whip take you; but I Will keep you out,
Vault in; look you, Tony, Fa, la la la la.

Ant: Fa, la la la la.

Lol: There, an honor.

Ant: Is this an honor, Cuz?

Lol: Yes, and it please your worship.

Ant: Does honor bend in the hams, Cuz?

Lol: Marry does it, as low as worship, squireship, nay yeomandry
It self sometimes, from whence it first stiffened,
There rise a caper.

Ant: Caper after an honor, Cuz.

Lol: Very proper, for honor is but a caper, rise as fast and high,
Has a knee or two, and falls to the ground again,
You can remember your figure, Tony?
Exit.
Ant: Yes, Cozen, when I see thy figure, I can remember mine.

Enter Isabella. Isa. Hey, how she treads the air, shough shough, to'ther way,
He burns his wings else, here is wax enough below Icarus,
More then will be cancelled these eighteen moons;
He Is down, he is down, what a terrible fall he had, stand up,
Thou son of Cretan Dedalus, and let us tread the lower
Labyrinth; I Will bring thee to the Clue.

Ant. Prithee, Cuz let me alone.

Isa: Art thou not drowned,
About thy head I saw a heap of Clouds
Wrapped like a Turkish Turbant on thy back,
A crookt Camelion colored rainbow hung,
Like a Tyara down unto thy hams.
Let me suck out those Billows in thy belly,
Hark how they rore and rumble in the streets.
Bless thee from the Pirates.

Ant. Pox upon you, let me alone.

Isa. Why should thou mount so high as Mercury,
Unless thou had reversion of his place?
Stay in the Moon with me Endymion,
And we will rule these wild rebellious waves,
That would have drowned my love.

Ant. I Will kick thee if again thou touch me,
Thou wild unshapen Antic; I am no fool,
You Bedlam.

Isa. But you are as sure as I am, mad.
Have I put on this habit of a frantic,
With love as full of fury to beguile
The nimble eye of watchful jealousy,
And am I thus rewarded?

Ant. Ha dearest beauty.

Isa. No, I have no beauty now,
Nor never had, but what was in my garments.
You a quick-sighted lover, come not near me.
Keep your Caparisons, you are aptly clad,
I came a feigner to return stark mad.
Exit.
Enter Lollio. Ant. Stay, or I shall change condition,
And become as you are.

Loll. Wy Tony, whither now? why fool?

Ant. Whose fool, usher of Idiotts, you Coxcomb.
I have foold too much.

Lol. You were best be mad another while then.

Ant. So I am, stark mad, I have cause enough,
And I could throuw the full effects on thee,
And beat thee like a Fury.

Lol. Do not, do not, I shall not forbear the Gentleman under the fool, if
you do; alas, I saw through your Fox-skin before now: Come, I can give you
comfort, My Mistress loves you, and there is as arrant a madman in the house, as
you are a fool; your Rival, whom she loves not; if after the mask we can rid
her of him, You earn her love she says, and the fool shall ride her.


Ant. May I believe thee?

Lol. Yes, or you may choose whether you will or no.

Ant. She Is eased of him, I have a good quarrel on it.

Lol. Well, keep your old station yet, and be quiet.

Ant. Tell her I will deserve her love.

Lol. And you are like to have your desire.

Enter Franciscus. Fran: Down, down, down a-down a-down, and then with a horse
trick,
To kick Latona's forehead, and break her bowstring.

Lol. This is to'ther counterfeit, I Will put him out of his humor,
Sweet Lady, having now cast this counterfeit cover of a madman.
I appear to your best judgment a true and faithful lover of your
beauty. This is pretty well for a madman.

Fran: Ha! what is that?

Lol: Chide those perfections in you which made me imperfect.

Fran. I am discovered to the fool.

Lol. I hope to discover the fool in you, e're I have done with you. Yours all,
or one beside himself, Franciscus. This madman will mend sure.


Fran: What? Do you read sirrah?

Lol: Your destiny sir, you will be hanged for this trick, and another that I know.


Fran. Art thou of counsel with thy mistress?

Lol. Next her Apron strings.

Fran: Give me thy hand.

Lol: ^tay, let me put yours in my pocket first: your hand is true, is it not?
It will not pick, I partly fear it, because I think it does lie.


Fran. Not in a syllable.

Lol. So, if you love my mistress so well as you have handled the matter here,
you are like to be cured of your madness.


Fran: And none but she can cure it.

Lol. Well, I Will give you over then, and she shall cast your water next.


Fran. Take for thy pains past.


Lol. I shall deserve more, sir, I hope, my mistress loves you, but must have
some proof of your love to her.


Fran. There I meet my wishes.

Lol. That will not serve, you must meet her enemy and yours.

Fran: He Is dead already.

Lol. Will you tell me that, and I parted but now with him?

Fran. Show me the man.

Lol. I that is a right course now, see him before you kill him in any case, and
yet it needs not go so far neither; it is but a fool that haunts the house, and
my mistress in the shape of an idiot, bang but his fools coat well-favouredly,
and it is well.


Fran. Soundly, soundly.

Lol. Only reserve him till the masque be past; and if you find him not now in
the dance your self, I Will show you.

In -- in my master.

Fran. He handles him like a feather. Hey!

Enter Alibius. Alib. Well said, in a readiness Lollio.

Lol. Yes, sir.

Alib. Away then, and guide them in Lollio,
Entreat your Mistress to see this sight.
Hark is there not one incurable fool
That might be begged? I have friends.

Loll. I have him for you, one that shall deserve it too.

Alib. Good boy Lollio.
The Madmen and Fools dance. It Is perfect well fit, but once these strains,
We shall have coin and credit for our pains.

Exeunt. ACTUS QUINTUS.
Enter Beatrice. A Clock strikes one. Bea: ONe struck, and yet she lies by it --
Oh my fears,
This strumpet serves her own ends, it is apparent now,
Devours the pleasure with a greedy appetite,
And never minds my honor or my peace,
Makes havoc of my right; but she pays dearly for it,
No trusting of her life with such a secret,
That cannot rule her blood, to keep her promise.
Beside, I have some suspicion of her faith to me,
Because I was suspected of my Lord,
And it must come from her -- Hark by my horrors,
Another clock strikes two.

Strike two. Enter Deflores. Def: Pist, where are you?

Bea. Deflores!

Def. I -- Is she not come from him yet?

Bea. As I am a living soul not.

Def. Sure the Devil
Has sowed his itch within her, who'd trust a waiting woman?

Bea. I must trust some body.

Def. Push, they are Tarmagants.
Especially when they fall upon their Masters
And have their Ladies first fruits, they are mad whelps,
You cannot stave 'em off from game Royal, then
You are so harsh and hardy ask no counsel
And I could have helped you to a Apothecaries daughter
Would have fallen off before eleven, and thank you too.

Bea: O me, not yet, this whore forgets her self

Def. The Rascal fares so well, look you are undone,
The Day Star by this hand, see Bosphorus plain yonder.

Bea. Advise me now to fall upon some ruin,
There is no counsel safe else.

Def. Peace, I have it now,
For we must force a rising, there is no remedy.

Bea. How? take heed of that.

Def. Tush, be you quiet, or else give over all.

Bea. Prithee I ha'done then.

Def. This is my reach, I Will set some part a-fire of Diaphanta's cham ber.

Bea. How? fire sir, that may endanger the whole house.

Def. You talk of danger when your same's on fire.

Bea. That Is true, do what thou will now.

Def. Push, I aim at a most rich success, strikes all dead sure,
The chimney being a fire, and some light parcels
Of the least danger in her chamber only,
If Diaphanta should be met by chance then,
Far from her lodging, which is now suspicious,
It would be thought her fears and affrights then,
Drove her to seek for succor, if not seen
Or met at all, as that is the likeliest,
For her own shame she will hasten toward her lodging,
I will be ready with a piece high-charg'd,
As 'twere to cleanse the chimney: there it is proper now,
But she shall be the mark.

Bea. I Am forced to love thee now,
Cause thou provid'st so carefully for my honor.

Def: 'Slid it concerns the safety of us both,
Our pleasure and continuance.

Bea. One word now prithee, how for the servants?

Def: I Will dispatch them some one way, some another in the hurry,
For Buckets, Hooks, Ladders; fear not you;
The deed shall find it is time, and I Have thought since
Upon a safe conveyance for the body too.
How this fire purfies wit! Watch you your minute.

Bea. Fear keeps my soul upon it, I cannot stray from't.

Enter Alonzos Ghost: Def: Ha! What art thou that take away the light
'Twixt that starr and me? I dread thee not,
'Twas but a mist of conscience -- All Is clear again.
Exit.
Bea: Who Is that, Deflores? Bless me! it slides by,
Some ill thing haunts the house, t'has left behind it,
A shivering sweat upon me; I Am afraid now.
This night has been so tedious; Oh this strumpet!
Had she a thousand lives, he should not leave her
Till he had destroyed the last -- List oh my terrors,
Three struck by St Sebastians.

Struck 3 a clock Within: Fire, fire, fire.

Bea: Already! How rare is that man's speed!
How heartily he serves me! his face loathes one,
But look upon his care, who would not love him?
The East is not more beauteous then his service.

Within. Fire, fire, fire.

Enter Deflores servants: pass over, ring a Bell. Def: Away, dispatch, hooks,
buckets, ladders; that's well said,
The fire bell rings, the chimney works, my charge;
The piece is ready,
Exit:
Enter Diaphanta. Bea: Here Is a man worth loving -- oh you are a jewel.

Dia. Pardon frailty, Madam,
In troth I was so well, I even forgot my self.

Bea: You Have made trim work.

Dia: What?

Bea: Hie quickly to your chamber, your reward follows you.

Dia. I never made so sweet a bargain.
Exit.
Enter Alsemero. Als: Oh my dear Joanna,
Alas, art thou risen too, I was coming,
My absolute treasure.

Bea: When I mist you, I could not choose but follow.

Als: Thou Art all sweetness, the fire is not so dangerous.

Bea: Think you so sir?

Als: I prithee tremble not* Believe me it is not.

Enter Vermandero, Jasperino. Ver: Oh bless my house and me.

Als: My Lord your father.

Enter Deflores with a Piece. Ver. Knave, whither goes that piece?

Def: To scour the chimney,
Exit.
Ver: Oh well said, well said,
That fellow's good on all occasions.

Bea: A wondrous necessary man, my Lord.

Ver: He has a ready wit, he is worth 'em all, sir,
Dog at a house of fire, I ha'seen him sindg'd ere now:
Ha, there he goes.

The piece goes off. Bea: It Is done.

Als: Come sweet to bed now; alas, thou will get cold.

Bea: Alas, the fear keeps that out;
My heart will find no quiet till I hear
How Diaphanta my poor woman fares;
It is her chamber sir, her lodging chamber.

Ver: How should the fire come there?

Bea: As good a soul as ever Lady countenanced,
But in her chamber negligent and heavy.
She escaped a Mine twice.

Ver. Twice?

Bea. Strangely twice, sir.

Ver. Those sleepy sluts are dangerous in a house,
And they be never so good.

Enter Deflores. Def. Oh poor virginity! thou have paid dearly for it.

Ver. Bless us! What Is that?

Def. A thing you all knew once, Diaphanta's burnt.

Bea. My woman, oh my woman!

Def. Now the flames are
Greedy of her, burnt, burnt, burnt to death sir.

Bea. Oh my presaging soul!

Als. Not a tear more, I charge you by the last embrace
I gave you in bed before this raised us.

Bea. Now you tie me,
Were it my sister now she gets no more.

Ver. How now?

Enter Servant. Ser. All danger's past, you may now take your rests, my Lords,
The fire is thoroughly quenched; ah poor Gentlewoman,
How soon was she stifled!

Bea. Deflores, what is left of her interre,
And we as mourners all will follow her:
I will entreat that honor to my servant,
Even of my Lord himself.

Als. Command it sweetness.

Bea. Which of you spied the fire first?

Def. 'Twas I, Madam.

Bea. And took such pains in it too? a double goodness!
'Twere well he were rewarded.

Ver: He shall be, Deflores, call upon me.

Als. And upon me, sir.

Exeunt. Def. Rewarded? precious, here is a trick beyond me;
I see in all bouts both of sport and wit,
Always a woman strives for the last hit:
Exit.
Enter Thomazo: Tho. I cannot taste the benefits of life
With the same relish I was wont to do.
Man I grow weary of, and hold his fellowship
A treacherous bloody friendship, and because
I am ignorant in whom my wrath should settle,
I must think all men villains; and the next
I meet, who ere he be, the murderer
Of my most worthy brother -- Ha! What Is he?
Enter Deflores, passes over the Stage. Oh the fellow that some call honest
Deflores;
But me thinks honesty was hard bested
To come there for a lodging, as if a Queen
Should make her Palace of a Pesthouse,
I find a contrariety in nature
Betwixt that face and me, the least occasion
Would give me game upon him; yet he is so foul
One would scarce touch with a sword he loved,
And made account of, so most deadly venomous,
He would go never to poison any weapon
That should draw blood on him, one must resolve
Never to use that sword again in fight.
In way of honest manhood, that strikes him;
Some river must devour't, 'twere not fit
That any man should find it. -- What again?
Enter Deflores. He walks a purpose by, sure to choke me up,
To infect my blood.

Def. My worthy noble Lord.

Tho. Do offer to come near and breath upon me?

Def. A blow.

Tho. Yea, are you so prepared?
I Will rather like a soldier die by th'sword
Then like a Politician by thy poison.

Def. Hold, my Lord, as you are honorable.

Tho. All slaves that kill by poison, are still cowards.

Def. I cannot strike, I see his brothers wounds
Fresh bleeding in his eye, as in a Crystal,
I will not question this, I know you are noble.
I take my injury with thanks given, Sir.
Like a wise Lawyer; and as a favor,
Will wear it for the worthy hand that gave it:
Why this from him, that yesterday appeard,
So strangely loving to me?
Oh but instinct is of a subtler strain,
Guilt must not walk so near his lodge again,
He came never me now.
Exit.
Tho. All league with mankind I renounce for ever,
Till I find this murderer; Not so much
As common courtesy, but I Will lock up:
For in the state of ignorance I live in,
A brother may salute his brothers murderer.
And wish good speed to the villain in a greeting.

Enter Verman: Ali: and Isabella. Ver: Noble Piracquo.

Tho: Pray keep on your way, sir,
I Have nothing to say to you.

Ver: Comforts bless you sir.

Tho: I have forsworn complement, in troth I have, sir;
As you are merely man, I have not left
A good wish for you, nor any here.

Ver: Unless you be so far in love with grief,
You will not part from't upon any terms,
We bring that news will make a welcome for us.

Tho. What news can that be?

Ver: Throw no scornful smile
Upon the zeal I bring you, it is worth more sir,
Two of the chiefest men I kept about me,
I hide not from the law, or your just vengeance.

Tho: Ha!

Ver. To give your peace more ample satisfaction,
Thank these discoverers.

Tho: If you bring that calm,
Name but the manner I shall ask forgiveness in
For that contemptuous smile upon you:
I Will perfect it with reverence that belongs
Unto a sacred altar.

Ver: Good sir rise,
Why now you over-doe as much a this hand,
As you fell short a'tother. Speak Alibius;

Ali: 'Twas my wives fortune, as she is most lucky
At a discovery to find out lately
Within our Hospital of Fools and madmen,
Two counterfeits slipped into these disguises;
Their names Franciscus and Antonio.

Ver: Both mine sir, and I ask no favor for 'em.

Alib. Now that which draws suspicion to their habits,
The time of their disguisings agrees justly
With the day of the murder.

Tho: O blessed revelation!

Ver. Nay more, nay more sir, I Will not spare mine own
In way of justice; They both faign'd a journey
To Bramata, and so wrought out their leaves,
My love was so abused in it.

Tho: Time's too precious
To run in waste now; you have brought a peace
The riches of five kingdoms could not purchase,
Be my most happy conduct, I thirst for 'em,
Like subtle lightning will I wind about 'em,
And melt their marrow in 'em.

Exeunt. Enter Alsemero and Jasperino Jas: Your confidence I Am sure, is now of
proof.
The prospect from the Garden has showed
Enough for deep suspicion.

Als: The black masque
That so continually was worn upon it,
Condemns the face for ugly ere't be seen,
Her despite to him, and so seeming bottomless.

Jas. Touch it home then, it is not a shallow probe
Can search this ulcer soundly, I fear you will find it
Full of corruption, it is fit I leave you,
She meets you opportunely from that walk
She took the back door at his parting with her.

Ex Jas. Als. Did my fate wait for this unhappy stroke
At my first sight of woman? -- she is here.

Enter Beatrice. Bea: Alsemero!

Als. How do you?

Bea. How do I? Alas! how do you? you look not well.

Als. You read me well enough, I am not well.

Bea. Not well sir? Is It in my power to better you?

Als. Yes.

Bea. Nay, then you are cured again.

Als. Pray resolve me one question, Lady.

Bea. If I can.

Als. None can so sure. Are you honest?

Bea. Ha, ha, ha, that is a broad question, my Lord,

Als. But that is not a modest answer, my Lady:
Do you laugh? My doubts are strong upon me

Bea. It Is innocence that smiles, and no rough brow
Can take away the dimple in her cheek.
Say I should strain a tear to fill the vault,
Which would you give the better faith to?

Als. 'Twere but hypocrisy of a sadder color,
But the same stuff, neither your smiles nor tears
Shall move or flatter me from my belief,
You are a Whore.

Bea. What a horrid sound it has!
It blasts a beauty to deformity;
Upon what face soever that breath falls,
It strikes it ugly: oh you have ruined
What you can never repair again.

Als. I Will all demolish and seek out truth within you,
If there be any left, let your sweet tongue,
Prevent your hearts rifling; there I Will ransack
And tear out my suspicion.

Bea. You may sir, it is an easy passage, yet if you please.
Show me the ground whereon you lost your love.
My spotless virtue may but tread on that
Before I perish.

Als. Unanswerable,
A ground you cannot stand on, you fall down
Beneath all grace and goodness, when you set
Your ticklish heel on it; there was a vizor
Over that cunning face, and that became you,
Now Impudence in triumph rides upon it;
How comes this tender reconcilement else
'Twixt you and your despite, your rankerous loathing
Deflores? He that your eye was sore at sight of,
He Is now become your arms supporter, your lips Saint.

Bea. Is there the cause?

Als. Worse, your lusts Devil, your adultery.

Bea. Would any but your self say that,
'Twould turn him to a villain.

Als. 'Twas witnest by the counsel of your bosom Diaphanta.

Bea. Is your witness dead then?

Als. It Is to be feared,
It was the wages of her knowledge, poor soul,
She lived not long after the discovery.

Bea. Then hear a story of not much less horror,
Then this your false suspicion is beguild with,
To your beds scandal, I stand up innocence,
Which even the guilt of one black other deed,
Will stand for proof of, your love has made me
A cruel murdress:

Als. Ha.

Bea. A bloody one.
I have kissed poison for it, stroakt a serpent,
That thing of hate, worthy in my esteem,
Of no better employment, and him most worthy
To be so imployd; I caused to murder
That innocent Piracquo, having no
Better means then that worst, to assure
Your self to me.

Als. Oh the place it self ere since
Has crying been for vengeance, the Temple
Where blood and beauty first unlawfully
Fired their devotion, and quenched the right one,
'Twas in my fears at first, 'twill have it now,
Oh thou art all deformed.

Bea. Forget not sir,
It (for your sake) was done, shall greater dangers
Make the less welcome?

Als. Oh thou should have gone
A thousand leagues about to have avoided
This dangerous bridge of blood, here we are lost.

Bea. Remember I am true unto your bed.

Als. The bed it selfe's a Charnell, the sheets shrowds
For murdered Karkasses, it must ask pawse
What I must do in this, mean time you shall
Be my prisoner only, enter my Closet.
Exit Beatrice. I Will be your Keeper yet; Oh in what part
Of this sad story shall I first begin? -- Ha
This same fellow has put me in -- Deflores.

Enter Deflores. Def. Noble Alsemero!

Als. I can tell you news sir, my wife has her commended to you

Def. That Is news indeed my Lord* I think she would
Commend me to the gallows if she could,
She ever loved me so well, I thank her.

Als. What Is this blood upon your band Deflores?

Def. Blood? No sure, 'twas washed since.

Als. Since when man?

Def. Since to'ther day I got a knock
In a Sword and Dagger School; I think it is out.

Als. Yes, it is almost out, but it is perceived tho.
I had forgot my message; this it is,
What price goes murder?

Def. How sir?

Als: I ask you sir,
My wife's behind hand with you, she tells me,
For a brave bloody blow you gave for her sake
Upon Piracquo.

Def. Upon? 'Twas quite through him sure,
Has she confessed it?

Als. As sure as death to both of you,
And much more then that:

Def. It could not be much more,
'Twas but one thing, and that she is a Whore.

Als. I could not choose but follow, oh cunning Devils!
How should blind men know you from fair faced saints?

Bea. within. He lies, the villain does be-lye me.

Def. Let me go to her, sir.

Als. Nay, you shall to her.
Peace crying Crocodile, your sounds are heard,
Take your prey to you, get you into her sir.
Exit Def. I Will be your pandor now, rehearse again
Your Scene of lust, that you may be perfect
When you shall come to act it to the black audience
Where howls and gnashings shall be music to you.
Clip your adultress freely, it is the pilot
Will guide you to the Mare mortuum,
Where you shall sink to fadoms bottomless.

Enter Vermandero, Alibius, Isabella, Thomaz^, Franciscus, and Antonio. Ver. Oh
Alsemero. I have a wonder for you

Als. No sir, it is I, I have a wonder for you

Ver. I have suspicion nere as proof it self
For Piracquo's murder.

Als. Sir, I have proof
Beyond suspicion, for Piracquo's musder.

Ver. Beseech you hear me, these two have been disgui'd
E're since the deed was done.

Als. I have two other
That were more close dsguis'd then your two could be,
E're since the deed was done.

Ver. You Will hear me, these mine own servants.

Als. Hear me, those nearer then your servants
That shall acquit them, and prove them guiltless.

Fran. That may be done with easy truth, sir:

Tho. How is my cause bandied through your delays!
It Is urgent in blood, and calls for have;
Give me a brother alive or dead;
Alive, a wife with him, if dead for both.
A recompense for murder and adultery.

Bea. within. Oh, oh, oh.

Als. Hark, it is coming to you.

Def. within. Nay, I Will along for company.

Bea within. Oh, oh.

Ver. What horrid sounds are these?

Als. Come forth you twins of mischief.

Enter Deflores bringing in Beatrice. Def. Here we are, if you have any more
To say to us, speak quickly, I shall not,
Give you the hearing else, I am so stout yet,
And so I think that broken rib of mankind.

Ver. An Host of enemies entered my Citadell,
Could not amaze like this, Joanna, Beatrice, Joanna.

Bea. O come not near me sir, I shall defile you,
I am that of your blood was taken from you
For your better health, look no more upon it,
But cast it to the ground regardlesly,
Let the common shewer take it, from distinction,
Beneath the stars, upon yon Meteor
Ever hang my fate, amongst things corruptible,
I never could pluck it from him, my loathing
Was Prophet to the rest, but never believed
Mine honor fell with him, and now my life.

Alsemero, I am a stranger to your bed,
Your bed was coz'ned on the nuptial night,
For which your false-bride died.

Als: Diaphanta!

Def. Yes, and the while I coupled with your mate
At barly-break; now we are left in hell.

Ver. We are all there, it circumscribes here.

Def. I loved this woman in spite of her heart,
Her love I earned out of Piraequos murder.

Tho. Ha, my brothers murderer.

Def. Yes, and her honors prize
Was my reward, I thank life for nothing
But that pleasure, it was so sweet to me,
That I have drunk up all, left none behind
For any man to pledge me.

Ver. Horrid Villain!
Keep life in him for further tortures.

Def. No, I can prevent you, here is my penknife still,
It is but one thread more, -- and now it is cut.
Make haste Joanna by that token to thee.
Can not forget so lately put in mind*
I would not go to leave thee far behind.

Dies. Bea. Forgive me Alsemero, all forgive,
It Is time to die, when it is a shame to live.

Dies. Ver. Oh my name is entered now in that record,
Where till this fatal hour 'twas never read.

Als. Let it be blotted out, let your heart lose it,
And it can never look you in the face,
Nor tell a tale behind the back of life,
To your dishonor, justice has so right
The guilty hit, that innocence is quit
By proclamation, and may joy again.
Sir, you are sensible of what truth has done,
It Is the best comfort that your grief can find.

Tho. Sir, I am satisfied, my injuries
Lie dead before me, I can exact no more,
Unless my soul were loose, and could ore-take
Those black fugitives, that are fled from thence
To take a second vengeance; but there are wraths
Deeper then mine (it is to be feared) about 'em.

Als. What an opacous body had that moon:
That last changed on us? here is beauty changed
To ugly whoredom: here servant obedience
To a master-sin, imperious murder.
I a supposed husband changed embraces
With wantonness, but that was paid before;
Your change is come too, from an ignorant wrath
To knowing friendship. Are there any more on's?

Ant. Yes sir, I was changed too, from a little Ass as I was, to a great Fool
as I am; and had like to have been changed to the gallows, but that you know my
Innocence always excuses me.


Fran. I was changed from a little wit to be stark mad,
Almost for the same purpose.

Isa. Your change is still behind, but deserve best your transformation.
You are a jealous Coxcomb, keep Schools of Folly,
And teach your Scholars how to break your own head.

Alib. I see all apparent wife, and will change now
Into a better husband, and never keep Scholars
That shall be wiser then my self.

Als. Sir, you have yet a sons duty living,
Please you accept it, let that your sorrow
As it goes from your eye, go from your heart,
Man and his sorrow at the grave must part.

EPILOGUE.
Als. ALL we can do, to Comfort one another,
To stay a Brothers sorrow, for a Brother;
To Dry a Child, from the kind Fathers eyes
Is to no purpose, it rather multiplies:
Your only smiles have power to cause re-live
The Dead again, or in their Rooms to give
Brother a new Brother, Father a Child;
If these appear, All griefs are reconciled.

Exeunt omnes. FINIS:
PLAYS newly Printed.
THe Wild-goose-Chase, a Comedy; written by Francis Beamont and John Fletcher,
Gent'.

The Widow, a Comedy; written by Ben: Johnson, John Fletcher, and Thomas
Midleton, Gent'.

PLAYS in the Press.
FIve Plays written by Mr James Shirley, being All of his that were Acted at
the Blackfriars: Together with the Court-Secret, written by the same Author,
but never yet Acted.

Also, The Spanish Gypsies.


