THE LIFE OF THE MOST LEARNED FATHER PAUL, Of the Order of the Servie.

COVNCELLOUR OF STATE to the most Serene Republicke of VENICE, And Author of
THE HISTORY OF THE COUNCIL OF TRENT.

Translated out of Italian by a person of Quality.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and Richard Marriot, and are to be sold
at their shoppes in St Paul's Churchyard, and in St Dunstans Church yard, 1651.



THE TRANSLATOR To the READER.
THou art here presented in English with what has been often printed and
reprinted in a foreign Nation, a relation of the life and death of the famous
Friar, FATHER PAUL: of whose incomparable knowledge and prudence there needs
noother testimony, then that the wise state of Venice took him for their
Oracle. In it thou shall find his Judgment and Counsels to be so
irrefragable that his very enemies durst not enter an appeal against them, but
to their own conviction and shame.

I may say of him, as it was said of Adryanus Turnebus, that be not only knew
more then others, but what he knew be knew better; (he knowing by causes by
definitions by relations and practice) for as he that has been twice or
thrice in a man's company, may be said to know him; yet, he that knows him by
his parentage from his youth and education, even to his age and death, may say
he knows him better.

And so indeed the faithful relatour of his life may be truly said to have
known the Father; who to the world was like the Center to the Circle that
draws lines to it self from all parts. Vndique and undiquaque.

Solomon had wisdom by patent and lost it: but thou shall here find, that
FATHER PAUL seemed to have wisdom by habit, which never returned to privation;
nature and industry, with a concomitance of supernall grace, having endued him
with such a proportion of Knowledge, Justice, Temperance, and Humility, that
he may well pass for a prodigy of wisdom, insomuch, that I am struck with
an Admiration of finding these in so great a perfection in this one man, and
again, that I find them in no more; and that where they are in any in any
degree, yet they be (being compared to the Fathers) weak and defective.

But to hold thee no longer in a Preface, they that have read the Council of
Trent, the History of the Inquisition and other his writings (of which too many
are kept in the Cabinets of Princes, and will never be made vulgar) may now if
they please read the man in what follows

I have this to add.

If the Traduction of this Story have made it self obscure by a too near
pursuance of a litterall sense, wherein the Idioms of two so different
languages as the Hetruscan and the English cannot be perfectly reconciled, that
ought to be or now must be excused.

FOl. 18. l. 27. for affection in him, r. affection to him. f. 19. l. 18. for
receipts, r. rescripts f. 25. l. last, for home, r. Rome. f. 48. l. 14. for
from, r. some, f. 62. l. first, for best r. last. f. 69. l. 17. for venerall,
r. venerall f. 72. l. 3. for all his, r. all the f. 100. l. 14. for there, r.
three f. 157. l. 2. for, this was not none to advance his kindred, r. be had no
kindred to advance. f. 165. l. 17. for surgeon r. stringe. f. 168. l. 1. for
sixteen, r. sixty one f. 168. l. 2^. for must not believe, r. must believe. f.
173. for jumps. r. snares. f. 197. l. 4. for could do, r. could not do f. 208.
l 29. for such, r. which. f. 209. l. 13. for defailling, r. defailance. Also
some other small errors in the Italian.

THE LIFE OF FATHER PAVL, Of the Order of the Servi, and Theologist of the most
Serene Republike of Venice.
PADRE PAOLO was borne at Venice, in the year 1552. upon the fourteenth of
August, being known by the name of Pietro, but, being of a very thin body,
was by a nickname of the City called Piernio, or little Peter. His father was
Francesco di Pietro Sarpi originally by his ancestors of Saint Vido, and of the
province of Fruili. In Venice he exercised Merchandice, though with no great
prosperity. He traffiqued also into Soria, but with no better fortune; He was
a fierce man, addicted more to war then Merchandise; wherein he had successes
that brought him to a low condition: His mother was a Venetian, of an honest
City-family, called Isabella Morelli, who died in the contagion of the year
1576. I remember I have heard it of her from some of the old fathers of
Monastry, that de servi; and from an old cosen of hers in the fourth degree --
yet living, who told it in merryment that when the marriage was made betwixt
Francesco and her: it seemed by the diversity of their conditions, a monstrous
thing to those that understand not disparity in matrimony to be a great
mischief in the policy even of humanity it self, and consequently remedies,
except it be by a medicine worse then the disease, as we see among the
Barbarians of Canada, and new France, and heretofore anciently in S. Parta.
Francis was a man of a low stature; of a broune color, and of a terrible
aspect. Isabella was of great stature, of fair complexion, and of a
countenance as humble, and gentle as it was possible. He was addicted to war,
and defiances, she to fasting, and devotion. In which kind of life (after she
was set free by the death of her husband) she proceeded so far, that receiving
a religious habit, she got a fame of singular sanctity: of spirit, and of
prophecy. From whom as he took his complexion and favor (especially in his
eyes and face wherein he did marvellously resemble her) so it seems also he
had his principles of religion, and singular piety from her.

The father died leaving her a widow with her son Peter, and a daughter that
was very young, which for charity and honesty was taken into education by a
brother of the mothers, being the chief titular Priest of the Collegiate
convent of St. Hermagora, upon which occasion the mother begun to have almost a
perpetual conversation among those immured hermites of Saint Hermogora; where
in her life and piety she made afterward great progressions.

This priest and brother Ambrosio Morelli was a man of grave and severe
behavior, and very learned in all kind of humane literature, whereof he kept
a particular school to teach diverse noble men's children both Grammar and
Rhetorique. By the mother and uncle were fomented in Peter those seeds of
Piety, which after by divine assistance grew up in process of age, like that
grain of mustard seed, to which our Savior compared the kingdom of heaven,
which is indeed the very piety toward God. But from his uncle he received his
first rudiments, together with diverse gentlemen, of whom some are improved to
an excellency of learning; and become grave Senators; (as signor Andre a
Moresini, that writer of the Venetian history worthy of eternal memory.)
Others are yet living, and give witness of the felicity of the wit and
abilities of father Paul, of whom we now write, who by the diligence of a
master being his uncle, became in short time so great a proficient, that he was
capable of the more solid arts; and greater sciences of Logique and philosophy.
And the priest Ambrosio having discovered in his nephew a conjuncture, which is
seldom seen of a great memory, with a profound judgment, thought fit to
cherish the one and the other: because exercise either improves, or disposes
for actions, and discovers, or otherwise takes away those impediments which
hinder the expression of activity. And if man's wit seemed to that old
Philosopher to be Campi Animati, spirited fields fit for diverse seeds, and of
unequal secundity, or barrenness. The Priest was no less careful to apply
his wit to a right cultivation. Wherefore he daily exercised his judgment by
keeping him to continual composings, holding him to more strictness then was
convenient for his childhood; specially being of so weak a complexion; And
exercised his memory not only by forcing him to repeat many things by heart,
but some particulars upon the first hearing. The fathers of the convent
observing in him a rare inclination to learning, reported strange things of his
memory. But he told them seriously, that in that way of exercise, his uncle had
never made him exceed the repetition of a matter of thirty verses together out
of Virgil, or some author, after a running kind of reading once over. His
carriage of himself even at that age, gave a true presage of his future
deportment, which we will rather call natural inclinations, the better sort
whereof he has since raised to a great perfection, having corrected the rest
which were more imperfect by virtue, being in himself a mere retiredness,
and of a semblant or mean, always thoughtfull, and rather melancholique then
serious, of a continued silence even with those of his own age: always in
quiet without, being addicted to any of those excercises, wherewith children
are by nature most pleased, (though but in a gentle motion, and only for
preservation of health.) A notable thing, and never observed in any other. And
since then he has kept himself so in the whole course of his life, being used
to say upon occasion, that he could never understand the delight of a gamester
except it were out of affection to Avarice. He knew not the pleasures of the
palate, he never longed for any meat, but nourished himself with so little
food, that it was a wonder how he could live; which course he has constantly
observed all his life long, and was never used to drink wine till he was above
thirty years of age.

There dwelt at that time in the Convent of the order of Servi one Father John
Maria Cappella of Cremona, Doctor and Theologist, esteemed one of the most
consummate and perfect men of his time in Religion, and a particular follower
of Scotus, in whose doctrine he had the fame to have had but few equals. The
neerenesse of their habitations bred an acquaintance betwixt Ambrosio and this
Father, who upon this occasion finding the pregnant wit of Peter, began to
read Logique to him. And because as some soiles are so fruitful, that upon
every little tillage, they exceed not only the hopes, but also the wishes of
the labourer; so it happened in a very short space that he made the like
progression, passing on to the studies of Philosophy and Theology, running
before all expectation, and the Master confessed himself that he could teach
him no longer, because it happened many times that the Scholar apprehending a
different sense from his Master, was able to maintain it with so much subtilty
of reason, that he made him change his opinion. Whereof, among the notes that
are come to my hands, there are many particulars which I spare to relate. He
began likewise in his childhood to learn the Mathematiques according to the
manner of the wise men of old times, tongues, with the Greek and Hebrew by the
opportunity of eminent Masters that lived at that time in Venice.

But by continual conversation and study amongst them he became desirous to
receive the habit of that order of the Servi, either because it seemed to him
c. life of more conformity to his inclination which was retired and
contemplative, or otherwise being allured thereto by his Master.

It is the property of man's mind in all things that are come to effect, to
seek no further than to the next causes, and particularly in those wherein it
is neereliest concerned, and so settling ajudgement upon those alone without
regard to an investigable number of other foregoing causes in a longer tract;
resolves thereupon to ground the cause of his fortune.

But the Divine providence which orders all things by a connection of causes and
effects, guides us to higher considerations. The effects following leave us no
place to doubt that it was a Divine compulsion, and a Divine vocation of Peter
to render himself religious, because his Mother, and his Uncle Ambrosio the
Priest having opposed themselves against him out of a desire to make him a
Priest of their Church, having already put him into the habit, yet he could not
be removed from his first resolution, neither by exhortation nor by constraint,
whereof he suffered very much, and at last in the year 1566. the 24. of
November he was received into the habit of the Religion of Servi: And to what
height of learning he was grown in his youth may be argued from hence. That
(the day following) there being held an annual and solemn disputation in the
Church of the Father Minors of St. Francis, called Sancta Maria de' frati, he
was sent to dispute against the Theses that were then given in, where he put
the company into admiration of his great and solid spirit, and at the beginning
of the disputations gave them a pretty occasion to be merry, having forgot
himself that he had changed his habit the day before, he did in those actions
of courtesy that are common among disputants (thinking to put off his hat) pull
off his hood, and held it hanging in his hand; he continued his Novitiat in
that Convent and his studies under the same Master. And the Father Benedetto
Ferro yet living and of his own age, who lived with him in his Novitiat
relates of him, That in his childhood he was of great retiredness, silence and
quietness, and that he was wont to withdraw himself from every childish
sport. And they spoke it of him as a common by word. All we are for trifles and
pamphlets, but Friar Paul is for Books: And being now entered into the 17.
year of his age, and settled in a state of profession, but yet silently
according to those times wherein the decree of the Council of Trent to that
purpose was not yet put in execution (for all the regular orders continued with
professions as yet unexprest) the Council then intending to provide in that
case, which was shortly made express in Cremona in the hand of the General
Master Stephano Bonutio, who was after master Cardinal alone in the year
1572. about the tenth of May, he being then 20. years of age when the
congregation of the order of the Servi Church comprehended about 70.
Monasteries great and little, and was after raised and reduced into two
provinces, the one in Venice, the other in Mantova by Pius V. and was governed
by Vicars General) held a Chapter or general congregation in the City of
Mantova. And it is the manner of such meetings of Religious men to put
themselves upon several virtuous exercises of preaching and disputations,
whether for the most part resort men of greatest eminency to honor the
meetings, and to give a testimony that they have not spent their time in
idleness, but in holy and laudable operations.

Friar Paul, this young man, who (in his childhood) did so far exceed others
of riper years in sciences, was commanded to be one of those (who in that
honorable concourse) was to give a taste of his virtue by answering and
defending 118. of the most difficult propositions that were in sacred Theology
or natural Philosophy (which said charge with how much felicity, with what
acclamation and wonder was by him maintained before that venerable assistance
may be acknowledged by the success thereof. But there lived at that time Il
serenissimo Duke William of Mantova, of whose glorious memory we find so much
witten in History. This Prince was a man of excellent parts, and so profoundly
learned in the Sciences, that it was not easily discerned whether his prudence
in government or his erudition in all the Sciences and arts were the greater,
even as low as Music. He had not his wit so confined, that while it was
applied to learning, it abated any thing of what belonged to the wisdom of
governing his people. There was a confluence to his Court (as of a most
virtuous Prince and liberal Moecenas) from all parts of such as in the
Sciences and Arts were of any note or excellency, and they were all received,
favored, and largely entertained; The Bishop of Bold^ino Pastor of that Church
moved by the example of so virtuous a Prince, endeavored to do the like. His
function was merely ecclesiastic, which he attended with all possible piety,
charity and diligence, and among other things was careful to furnish his
Cathedral with a sufficient lecturer.

It was worth observing, that at the same time, the Duke taking notice of the
great learning of Friar Paulo, made it his request to the Superiors, to receive
him into the family of the Monastery of Saint Barnaby of Mantova, honoring him
with the title of his Chaplain; And also the Bishop made him reader in the
Cathedral of positive divinity, of cases of conscience, and of the sacred
Canons. I shall not need to tell you with what wonder of all his audience he
discharged the place, for it may be easily believed. True it is, that for
diverse years, and even at this day, amongst the old fathers; there continues a
fame at Mantova, and it became a common saying, Non veneramai in un Fra. Paolo.
There will never come more among us another friar Paul. At this time in Mantova
he learned the Hebrew tongue to a greater perfection then he had done at
Venice. But the occasion of his conversation in Court: and of serving that
Prince, made him see a kind of necessity of understanding the histories of
the times, wherein he was in a short time so great a proficient, that without
injury either to times or persons I may lawfully say he was without parallel.
In the study whereof he continued a course, which he likewise used in all his
other studies; which was, that when he encountered with any history or passage
of learning, or any problem or Theoreme. He would never give himself any
intervalls but presently either rising from the board, or from his bed at
midnight, or whenever applying himself wholly and indefatigably to the
subject, would never take himself of till he had seen whatsoever could be
seen, which was by confronting of authors, of places, of times, and of
opinions, and by a kind of pertinacity. He would leave himself no occasion to
return again to that subject, but would be resolved once for all, how far
the knowledge of it could be carried. And his very intimate friends would say
of him, that in his riper age sitting down sometime upon a Mathematical
problem, or any other speculation, he would continue there in making figures
or numbers a whole day, and a whole night together, without leaving it until he
could say O, l'zo pur vinta opui non ci voglio pensare. I have either overcome
it, or else I Will think no more on it.

Diverse accidents befell him during his abode in Mantua, where among other
conversations which he had in that City, he took the greatest pleasure in
discoursing with Camillo Olivo who had been secretary to Hercules, Cardinal
of Mantua (that had been legate in the Council of Trent) and commended him
for a personage of great piety and learning. But nevertheless a man that could
not fly from his ill fortune, because the Cardinal having incurred the
indignation of Pius quartus (for some things which concerned the council)
those crimes from which greatenesse had privileged the master, came to be
charged upon the servant; who by the Inquisitours was much troubled, and kept
long in prison, after the death of the Cardinal his Lord, from whence although
he had a free deliverance, because the Pope himself lived not long after, yet
he could never make his reentry into the favor of the Court of Rome, and
therefore lived a private life in Mantua. The chief pleasure that Friar Paul
took in concoursing with him was: because he found him a man of singular
moderation, learned, and by being with the Cardinal at Trent, had had a great
manage in those actions: knowing the particularities of the most secret
business, and had besides many memorialls in perusal, whereof Friar Paul
took much delight; Because the conciliary action being newly dissolved (which
by so long a course of time had held all Christendom in so much expectation)
and (specially men of high spirit and intellectuals) in whom it begot a great
curiosity to know how things had really past, of all which he had taken notes
with his own hand. He had like wise a very near familiarity with the father
Inquisitor, of the Dominican order, Fra. Gilolemo Bernerio da Correggio, who
was after made cardinal of Ascoli by Sixtus V. of the congregation of the holy
office, and protector of the order of the Servi, with whom he continued
servitude till his death.

How much he esteemed Friar Paul, shall be mentioned hereafter where it may be
more necessary. All persons of learning that came to that Court, had a desire
to confer with him, because he was already gotten so forward in all the
sciences, that he did not only give all men satisfaction, but left them with
so much wonder of his profoundnes in every thing (being yet but young) as if he
had been verst in that alone, and applied himself to nothing else. And the
service of that Prince seemed to require no less. Because as persons of diverse
professions resorted to his court, so he was desirous that his chaplains should
treat and hold argument with all men of all things that fell into discourse.
And he himself would ever propound some extravagant question, and at public
disputations, where he would appear sometime unexpected. He used to command
Fra. Paul to argue to some conclusion, wherein it was impossible he should be
premeditated. As among others at one time (which may serve for an example of
many) in a Theological Thesis that Christ our Lord died at the age of three
and thirty, being a subject to puzzell any indifferent wit. But Friar Paul with
confronting the evangelists by their Easter, as if under his eye he had had the
whole concordance of the Gospel, and with some allegations out of Eusebius,
did to the wonder of all that understood him, reduce his respondent to so
narrow a straight, that he was driven to say of Eusebius, Historia est non vera
narratio, whereat the Duke breaking into a laughter, replied. Father, those of
Saint Alexis of the living and of the dead, are histories to you, and such like
as are sold by the Mountebanks. And so in a kind of whispering and jeering the
disputation was broke up.

Nature at some certain times produces wits that are apt for any particular
science; as in many ages after we see not the like again. Many such and very
famous ones have been in former times. In this of ours Vieta in the Algebra,
Gilberto in the speculations of the Magnetique virtues, Galileo in his
knowledge of the motions. The brain of Fra. Paul seemed to have a rare
excellency in all these: but in the Mathematiques it was a thing incomparable,
because whatsoever remains of antiquity, or of modern writers, was but the
least part of what he knew. He was no less curious to know all that had been
said of the Astrologiques, the vanity and inutility thereof he did always, and
absolutely despise, because things in futurity either cannot be known, or
cannot be avoided. But not long before his going from Mantua there happened a
pretty accident. The Duke who willingly interposed the pleasures of wit and
facetiousnesse with the grave cares of his government, tempering wisely his
troubles with Joviality of words and actions, had in his stable (whereof by the
example of his ancestors, he kept a race of so great esteem, that it is
reported that at the battle of Pavy 15.25. Francis the first king of France
was there mounted upon a horse which had been given him, by the Marquise of
Mantua. And Charles the fifth in his wars made use of another of the same race
which was bestowed on him; I say this Duke William had a mare that was in fool
of a mule, and being near the time of her foling, he desired Fra. Paolo to
bestow a nights study with Astronomicall instruments that the horoscope, and
the natale minute of the beast might be known with the situation of the
Heavens, and the posture of the stars at that time: which being done, and
reduced into the form of a figure or apotelesme, the Prince caused copies to
be sent abroad to all the famous Astrologers of Europe, as well in Italy as in
other places, with this declaration; That at such an instant of time a bastard
was borne in the Dukes house, and I can very well tell that a good while after
the Prince made himself merry to read the indigents that came from diverse
parts. One would have this bastard to be a Cardinal, others that he should be
a great commander; others, that it prognosticated triumphs, or miters even as
high as the very Pontificate.

There came rumor which got some credit, and is not yet extinct: That Fra.
Paulo taking discontent at this action, was willing to leave the Princes
service, fearing lest at some time or other by the Capricio's of the Princes
brain, a worse encounter might befall him: and to say truth Friar Paul
commended much the excellency of the Princes wit; but withal had observed some
toyish fancies wherewith he was too much pleased. But he himself has
seriously affirmed, that this was no cause of his departure, nor yet the
example of another Friar of the same order called Cornelio da Codomo, who being
likewise entertained by the Duke had incurred his displeasure, and was put in
prison, from whence he made his escape, leaving a general opinion by the great
means that were used to catch him again, that he meant to put him to death.
But has always rather confirmed it; That the Duke had all the reason in the
world. And the Duke did honor him so much as to give him an account of the
business and the writing it self which is extant, (and I have seen it) which
moved this great Prince to so just a disdain (and this it was) That when the
Cardinal Hercules de Gonsaga dyed, a certain young man that qualified
himself to be his son, not conceiving that he had quick justice done him by
the Magistrates in the execution of certain goods pretended to belong to him,
did in the form of a supplication deliver the Duke a real and famous Libell,
taxing him to be an usurper and an unjust Tyrant, threatening him with divine
revenge, and citing him before the tribunal of God, whereupon being
imprisoned, he confessed that it was Cornelio da Codomo that had formed that
scandalous writing.

Fame bore it out, that these two were the causes of his departing the Court,
to which the course of time gave so much credit, that it is yet received for a
truth among the elder sort, though it were undoubtedly false. But the true
cause of his departure (which he made with the Princes favor and approbation)
was, because that a court life was so absolutely averse to his Genius, and his
fame in religion made him to be perpetually importuned by his friends and
superiors, who had a design to make use of his labors in their profession.
Friar Paul had added to his learning such an integrity of Religious carriage,
that being but a very young man he was had in reverence of all men as an Idaea
of modesty, of Piety, and all other virtues both Christian and Moral. Some
things may seem paradoxes, but they are so well known, and have so great a
testimony from men yet living, that he that should go about to question any
of them must needs have put on a vizard of impudency poisoning his tongue with
untruth, and his corrupted heart with malignitie of passion.

Let Friars speak, let so many Senators witness, whether Fra. Paulo were ever
heard to swear by his faith, or speak an unseemely word: or ever seen to be
angry, yet these are not the only singularities of his later times when was he
a servant to the state of Venice; but these and others have been in him from
his youth in such a perfection, that he never had any public correction as
was usual with others of religious orders. He was never reprehended for
speaking an undecent word, nor doing an unbeseeming act. It was a mavelous
thing how in so young a man that had not exceeded the age of twenty two, so
many sciences (in so high a degree) should be united; besides those that are
ordinary in them that live in Cloisters are (after literature of humanity) the
logique, Philosophy and Theology. But to those, he had also joined the
knowledge of the laws, perfectly of the common law, and more then meanly of
the civil, all the Mathematiques and medicine, the knowledge of simples, of
Herbs, of or Plants, of Mineralls, with their transmutations, a sufficient
understanding of diverse tongues, beside the latin, the Greek, the Hebrew, and
the Caldean. All which learning together would have had something of monstrous
in it, though it had been found in a maturer age, but from the holiness of his
conversation, he received such a splendor that even in that Spring of his
years he did prognosticate what store and perfection of fruit might be
expected from him: if it should please God to reserve him for further times.
Although it be as true, that the knowledge alone of all that which humane
understanding can raise it self to makes not a man perfect, though it may
render him admired: Nay the devils themselves are known for their great
wisdom, and have a name of mighty knowledge. But goodness is that which
gives the form, piety, religion, and the virtues of the mind are the soul of
this body. And the accumulation of sciences, and probity made this religious
young man so venerable, and (I may say) so majesticall, that as it is a custom
in Venice among the noble, and ingenuous youth, that if any of them be not so
decent in their habit, or that they be of a less modesty in discourse or
carriage, then they ought to be, yet when they appear before the first Senator,
they are careful to put themselves into their best habit and posture, so in
this order of the religion of Servi (for even among the religious, especially
those of the younger sort, are not always under rule, nor as we say with
their bows bended,) yet at the appearance of Fra. Paolo they were all composed
reducing themselves to a more seriousnes of behavior, setting aside both sport
and Joviality, as if his only presence had been the black rod; whereupon it
became a proverb among them, whenever he was present or appeared. E^qua
sposa la mutiamo proposito, let us change our discourse, here comes the bride.
Such power has the presence of a man of known probity and innocence: even
over the behavior of others: yet nevertheless he was so pleasing, so humble
with all men, that hitherto I have not known that man that could say (except
when he was in the public employment) that he had received a sharp word, or
seen a gesture from him expressing rigor to others, (although with himself)
he were most severe.

Being consecrated Priest at the age of 22. he seemed to increase the
strictness of his retiredness, and to be more intense upon the actions of
piety and meditation. During which age and a good while after, he had never
tasted wine, except it were at the Celebration. His food was so sparing, that
for the most part he fed but upon bread and fruit; of flesh he had very little
use till he was past 55. saying, that he abstayned or tasted very little,
because his complexion would not bear it, but make him sick, and because it
bred him much headache. He went at that age to Millan, and it happened in a time
when Cardinal Borromeo (at this day Saint Carlo) was in the fervor of the
reformation of that Church, and in particular reduced the confessors by a
rigorous zeal to so small a number (which either was because he found them very
ignorant) or understood of great abuses committed in the administrations of
penitence, whereof he clearly purged their Churches. This great pastor had
found the means to know the conditions, the life and quality of the Cloisters,
as it appeared by so many that took their heels, and tarried not for his
judgment. It may be well imagined what intelligence he held with Padre Paolo
whom he sent for, and against his inclination made him hear confessions,
making use of him not only in the Church of his own order, but in others (as
it was needful) and took great affection in him, being much pleased with his
company. He would always be present at the most difficult discussions of cases
of conscience and other consultations upon diverse accidents, where the opinion
of the most learned divines were had, and would often make him stay to dine
with him in his refectory: because that Cardinal in imitation of those ancient
holy pastors. Ambrose and others, did frequently make a common life and table
with those of his clergy.

At that time, and before his departure from the province of Mantua by that of
Venice, as it is an ordinary thing, that how virtuous and innocent soever a man
be, he cannot be without trouble and emulation; being complained of to the holy
office of inquisition by one Maestro Claudio Piacentino his contemporary, but
one that was unable to raise himself by his study and virtue to that credit
which Padre Paolo had, and therefore thought to equalize him by pulling him
down. But it proved much to his own disadvantage, because howbeit the
inquisitor received the accusation and formed the process, yet in fine, the
father would not answer, but appealed to Rome about the formation of the
process, whither (the cause being called) after many writings and receipts, It
was concluded, that the Inquisitor should have a heavy reprehension with a
taxation of ignorance. And indeed it could not well be otherwise: The
accusation being that the father, who well understood the Hebrew tongue, had
maintained that from the first chapter of Genesis the article of the most holy
Trinity could not be deduced; whereupon he opposed the Judge, not only because
he agreed with his accuser, but because he was not able to judge the cause, as
having no knowledge of the Hebrew Tongue. And as soon as the cause was seen at
Rome, it was thrown out of the Court, without so much as calling the Father to
be examined, but only by giving a checque to the Inquisitor. In this very time
there was added to his natural weakness two other infirmities, which he has
endured for many years; because living (as we have said) with an extreme
slenderness of diet, and drinking nothing but water, and many days not at
all; and when thirst invited him, he went to the pit, and drank only once,
and thereupon fell into such a costivenesse, that although it may seem
strange, yet it is very true, that ordinarily he stayed three days, sometimes
a whole week, before those natural parts which are designed to expel the
excrements could do their office, and with so much more pains, because it was
accompanied with the disease of the Hemoroids, which by the long and violent
force bred the falling down of the straight gut, accompanied with a Flux from
the Liver, which has remained with him even to his old age. Upon this occasion
begun the prescripts of Physicians (with whom he converst rather to discourse
of their art, than to make use of their Receipts, having formerly made a good
progress in that Science, wherein he became marvellously excellent, and among
other things it was an exhortation of his friends to persuade him to drink
Wine. But to that he never rendered himself, till after the thirtieth year of
his age, nor then but with much averseness; nor ever in forty one years which
he lived after, could he take any liking to wine, except it were white, and
that only for the resemblance it has to water, and amongst other things which
he said he had repented himself in his life time, this was one, that he had
been persuaded to drink wine.

Natural affections may be sometime moderated, but I can hardly believe that
they are ever extinguished. There are very few men that have been able to
command themselves: But peradventure it will not be easy to find any one, who
generally, and upon all occurrents was more a patron, and commander of his
affections than he. If once his judgment preceded, nothing was ever sufficient
to remove his resolution, no kind of meat could ever move his appetite, if he
thought it dangerous, nor Physic would he take, otherwise then he took
delightful food, if he believed it to be good for him. And so in all other
things, yet nevertheless he was used to say, that he never overcame any thing
with more difficulty, than forsaking water to drink Wine. But partly by his
complexion, which was of an incredible meagrenesse, and partly by his
additionall infirmities, he could never be made believe, that he could live a
year to an end. This is witnessed by all those that were his familiars, that
if he did not compute every day for the last, yet at least he computed every
year, contrary to those that use to say, There is none so old, that he may not
hope for a year of life; And he said, he never remembered himself so young,
that he could hope for a years life. To this it may be added, that he having
made a progress above all belief, in his studies, whereunto he was so
devoted, that very few days past in his private life, wherein he studied not
eight hours, although he would never write any thing for publication until he
were constrained by a public necessity. And in his actions among his friends
(as they themselves would say) he never appeared active nor resolute, but cold
and reserved, because he that has no hope of life, seldom applies himself to
actions of any great consequence. And nevertheless the affairs of his own
province, and the instance of his friends, were able to call him back to his
own Country in Venice, and his province, where immediately, al those that were
of greater years giving place to an eminency of virtue, and integrity, more to
be admired then related; he being already gone through all those degrees which
the laws of his order had appointed; of student, of Bachelor, of master,
(which is the title of the Doctorates in Theology) and being a year before
that, aggregated to that most famous College of Padua, was with universal
applause 1579. created Provincial, (with this addition that he should govern
the study as regent) for so they call the readers of the sacred Theology.

That great Prince, who at his death desired an applause from his friends that
stood about him, gave us to understand, that in every vocation whosoever
carried himself well should not be defrauded of his due commendation. The
dignities among religious men, being considered either by their profit, or
their splendor are not things to be stood upon; but to sustain the change of
them with a due charity and prudence, is more then can be performed by many.
In these things, Padre Paolo chalkt out a way to his successors, by which they
might arrive at their end with great reputation. In matters of judgment he gave
them all an essay of an inflexible rectitude, and that which he strictly
observed all his life long, was never to receive a donative (how little soever)
never to admit any other proceeding in matter of justice but with acceleration,
and expedition. No judgment of all those of his (which were innumerable) were
at the instance of any higher judgment, found fit to be repealed. And I shall
say this particular more by way of anticipation, that the Cardinal Santa
Severina (for reasons that may be alleged) showed himself very violent, that
certain sentences which the Father had given against some that were forward in
the Cardinals favor might be retracted, and having caused the proceedings to
be well compared with the relations of his auditors, was constrained to
confess, that in point of justice, it could not be otherwise, nor better
determined.

In his government he banished all factions, and particularities. None had ever
cause to complain of him, except it were some indifferent friends, that
promised themselves more of his friendship than they had reason.

He left his Province with such orders and customs as (if they had been
observed) had prevented a greater deal of inconvenience, wherewith they have
been since afflicted. This (as the beginning of his employments) discovered a
fraught age of prudence in the manage of business, and dexterity of
government, which (with age) was increased in him to such an excellency, that
in so great an heap and innumerable number of affairs that passed through his
hands, none were so involved in difficulty, but that his more than humane wit
found a way to the head of it, either to dissolve it, or to show that it was
inextricable. And as it is reported of some famous Chyrurgeons, that where they
set to their fortunate hands, no wound proved incurable; so to him, there were
brought from all sorts of people the most arduous businesses, with this
confidence, that either he would presently find out the knot, or that no man
else could ever have the hope to do it. And although it have seemed to some,
that his inclination stood rather to severitie and rigor, than to clemency or
sweetness, yet that proceeded rather because he was of a serious and retired
disposition, than any way facile or joviall. But he was really of so
compassionate a nature, that he would neither do injury himself to any, nor
suffer another to do it. And this, either goodness of nature, or tenderness
of affection, had so rooted it self in his soul in his graver age, that as it
chances not only in natural things, but in his affections (above all other)
the excess whereof had not only extended his compassion toward men, but to
all other sorts of creatures: Insomuch as his nature could not endure that any
thing should be grieved or molested. And if it had been needful to kill any of
those creatures with his own hand, which God had appointed for food and
sustenance of life, true it is, that in the latter years of his life (excepting
a great necessity) he would rather have abstained and fasted. But because he
had formerly cut in pieces a number of living creatures with his own hands to
make Anatomies, whenever he fell into the occasion of that discourse, he
seemed to resent it with a kind of compassionate displeasure and reluctance:
And if in discourse or writing, he seemed at any time more punctual in matter
of justice, nothing being able to make him decline from the strict course
(blaming often the too great mildness of punitive justice) as an occasion of
much and many abuses: yet withal, if it had concerned himself to administer
it, I am very well assured that in all his governments, and many years
super-intendence of his province, you would rather have discovered in him a
defect of rigor than of mercy.

But in the administration of his own charge, what a reputation of integrity,
piety, and prudence, and of every virtue he had gained to himself, it may be
gathered from hence. He was made provincial of his order at the end of the
twenty sixth year of his age (which was never conferred upon any so young as
he) by any information that I could receive neither before nor since, in 340.
years that this order of the Servi had had a beginning. In this year of 1579.
there was held a general Chapter of the whole order in Parma, and because
about ten years before, by many Statutes made at diverse times, and by the
Popes themselves, concerning Secular Friars, as also by the Council of Trent,
it was resolved to be necessary to make new constitutions and rules for the
government of the whole order. It was therefore decreed at that Chapter, for
the deferring no longer of so good a work, that three of the most learned,
pious, and prudent men, should be chosen out of all the order of that religion
to execute a business of such importance, as every one which well understands
that knows what belongs to Government. One of these was Padre Paolo, who was
but a youth in respect of the venerable and hoarie hairs of the other two.
Upon this occasion he tarried a good while at home where he made a discovery
of his most rich Talent to the cardinal Alexander-Farnese Protector, and to
the other Santa Severina Vice Protector of the order. The charge that was
particularly laid upon him, was to acco^modate that part which concerned the
sacred Cannons, the reformations by the Council of Trent which were but newly
come forth, and the forms of their judgments. All the work lay upon the three
that were deputed, but because he had a more exquisite knowledge of the Cannon
and civil laws, and of the Conciliary determinations, the business of that
particular was wholly remitted to him; and he alone gave form to that whole
part which treated of judgments in accommodation to the Claustrall state, and
that with so much brevity, cleernesse, and profundity, that those judges that
were so knowing and only exercised in matter of judicature, have admired it as
the action of one that had consumed his age in nothing but study of the Jaws
of that order. And it is an argument to convince the error of those that
believe, that they which give themselves most to the study of sciences, are
thereby rendered unable for government and policy. It being an error every way
as gross as it is pernicious. Whereof we shall give a lively example in the
following course of the life of father Paul.

But leaving at Rome (by the occasion of this employment) a great fame of his
knowledge, and prudence, not only in the Courts of these two Cardinals, (from
whom by order expressed in the Apostolical Brief of Gregory the thirteenth.) It
was appointed that all statutes which were made should receive approbation. For
it was sometimes necessary to resort to, and treat with the Pope himself;
From which burden being now discharged, he returned to his own government.

When he had ended this charge of Provinciallship, and easing his shoulders of
so great a weight, he entered into some more quietness, which he said was all
the repose he enjoyed in the whole course of his life, because nothing fell out
in his government, wherein the evils were not well discerned, or else were
grown tolerable without factions or discontentments. And as a weary man
relisheth his rest with more sweetness: so for three whole years he gave
himself to nothing but speculations of natural things. And his knowledge in
them being grown to some perfection, he past further to operations with his
own hand, in the transmutation, and distillation of all sorts of mettalls. Not
that he was ever touched with the vanity of the possibility of making gold, or
that he thought a discreet man could any way engage himself in such an
inquiry. Of this it may be an argument, that at that time (for many months
together) there continued in Venice (after he had traveled Italy, and deluded
so many Princes and Prelates) That famous impostor Mamugna, who was believed to
make gold, which expressed very well the sense of Diogenes when he said (he did
not segregate from the vulgar no not Kings themselves) Because into that
credence, or rather into that Comedy, the vulgar did not only rush with such
an excess of confidence, that they called all men miscreants that did not
believe the making of gold. Yea Cardinals, Princes, the Pope himself, Sixtus
quintus so great a Prince, and of such knowledge and experience, had given out
that he would question the state of Venice, for giving protection to such an
Impostor if his knavery were not discovered. The father Paul made it always a
matter of Jest, and to some of his friends that would have carried him to the
experiment, he always answered, that if he should do so, they would not only
repute him inconstant, but esteem him for a very fool. And among his intimate
friends (with whom he had conference concerning this Imposture) were some
gentlemen who, relying upon the fathers judgment, were the inventors of a
Mascherada to express his opinion. One clothing himself like the Mamugna, in
a boat with fire and coals, and bellows, and and glasses, and other
chymicall tools went about the city crying, Al Magmugna Atre lire il soldo
del loro fino. who buys a shillings worth of of fine pure gold for nine pence!
And one of these is at this day a most excellent Senator of Venice, whose
singular life, and virtue deserves a recomendation upon a better occasion. The
father used to mock those that told him they had seen him make gold, and
would always say, why now we shall see what the Chaus had wont to say. There
being at that time in Venice one of those Nuntios that came from Constantinople
about affairs; whom they called a a Chaus. And this Chaus having heard of this
man that he made gold, made no other answer to it (but by a Laconicall brevity
which is usual with that nation) Il gran signore dumque verra aservirlo. If
you make gold the great Turk shall come to be your servant. And the father who
so willingly held argument with any that professed distillations, could not be
satisfied how the humor of gold could be made entrant, because al his exercise
was only for the knowledge of nature. Wherein the great Physician of our age
can testify the greatness of his experience, and of the many things of his
finding out, which were communicated to others of that profession, wherewith
they have honored themselves; there being no admired effect, no occult
property; nothing either written or experimented: which he had not either
seen or examined. And beyond humane belief he was verst in all the things of
those arts, in so much as men thought he had employed his whole life in nothing
else.

About that time, and long after he exercised himself in the anatomy of all
sorts of creatures, and for the most part of living creatures which he used to
cut up himself: particularly the anatomy of the eye, wherein he was so
perfect, that Aqua-pendente did not disdain to allege in his reading, nor in
his printed book the authority of father Paul. And that famous man when he
spoke of him, he spoke as of the Oracle of that age. Besides other learning, he
was much verst in the knowledge of the propriety of simples, of the nature of
mineralls, in so much as in those professions whatsoever he knew not, was not
cognoscible. But such as are well informed of the truth, have made it a
rational wonder, that as Aqua pendente in his tractat de visu in genuously
confesses, that he had learned from him the manner whereby in the Crystalline
humor vision is made by refraction, and that he was the first observer that
the tunicles of the eyes were dark and thick (as all the rest) but that they
only became diafa^ious and transparent by being continually drencht, and
moistened with a clear humor, as the nature of Cavernes in Mountains and
rocks renders the earth transparent, which is of it self most dark and dusky
by a continual irrigation (as we may see in pibbles and flint-stones.) And
more over how infusion by art makes bark of trees and shells and roots
translucide, which of themselves are of darkness and densitie. So the whole
tractate concerning the eye which passes under the name of Aqua-pendente, or
at least so much as conteyns new and rare speculations and experiments, is the
work of Padre Paolo, whereof I have had speech with some that were eyewitnesses,
and knew that a due part of the praise was not attributed to him that deserved
it all. But much more in another matter of more moment which was the finding
out of those valvule, those inward shuts or folds that are within the veins.
Of which argument I do not find, that any, either ancient or modern has
made mention, because it was a thing unthought of till these times that
Aqua-pendente moved the question at a public Anatomy. But there are still
living many eminent and learned Physicians, among which are Santorio and
Pietrou Asselineo a French man, which knew that it was no speculation nor
invention of Aquapendente but of the Fathers, who considering the gravitie and
weight of the blood, grew into opinion that it could not stay in the veins,
except there were some bunch to hold it in, some folds or shuttings, at the
opening and clofing of which there was given a passage and necessary
Equilibrium to life. And upon his own natural judgment he set himself to
cutting with more exquisite observation, whereupon he found out those Valvuie,
and the right use of them, which do not only stop and hinder the blood from
dilating it self by his weight into the veins (as we observe in some crooked
and sweld knots, but also that blood running up and down with so much liberty,
and in so great quantity) it might easily suffocate the natural heat of those
parts which ought to receive their nourishment from it. And in consequence he
made discovery, that the Athletick Habit, which in his judgment, and according
to Hippocrates (bonitatis summum attingit) had no other cause of being so
dangerous and deadly, but because the blood being in so great a quantity in the
veins, might hinder the use of those Valvule, whereby of necessity followed
suffocating for want of ventilation. Of this he gave account to some friends
of that profession, and especially to Aqua-pendente, who made very great use of
it in a public Anatomy, after which diverse famous Authors have written much
upon that subject.

But me thinks I see always the very gesture of the good Asselenio who when he
takes occasion to speak of the father, lift up both his hands, shruggs his
shoulders, and hanging his head on one fide (to speak it in a kind of a French
phrase.) Oh how many things have I learned of Padre Paulo in anatomy, in
mineralls, and simples. This is a pure soul in which there shines a Candor,
an excellency of nature, and an ignorance of doing any thing but well. A father
being most a famous physician of of Orleans, had a son whom he had designed
to be of his own profession, and bred him in such a way, that at nine years
practice he begun to work in distillations. And although in Phyfick and
Anatomy he be second to very few, yet I believe him to be before all others in
the knowledge of simples of mineralls, and of their virtues and uses for man's
body. He came very young into Italy, being sent thither by his father to be
withdrawn from the danger of the civil wars in France which were then very
violent. And being come to Venice, he fell in love with the place as a Country
of benignity to all travelers, and had no mind to leave the place, where he
exercised the profession of Physic, rather as a friend with his friends, then
for gain, having done many cures that were miraculous when he wrought alone,
but not willing to show his talent among others, because by nature he was
averse from contending or making any oftentation. This man from his very
arrival took conversation with the father, which has continued with a most
holy friendship preserved betwixt them for eight and thirty years. And he more
then any other can speak of the fathers wondrous knowledge in the foresaid
professions, and of things by him invented, whereof an entire volume might be
written.

But being not like to continue long in this holy and virtuous quietness; the
fame of his prudence and hability of government, after three years drew him
away (and as I may say) from that garden of spiritual delights, into a thorny
field of toil and weariness of spirit and body, and at a general Chapter he
was by common consent created Procurator of the Court called Proctor general.

This is the supreme dignity of that order under the General, and in those
times that religion flourished with learned men, none were assumed into that
order except men of exquisite prudence, (because the charge bears with it a
necessity to defend all the variances and controversies at Rome, that are
promoted in all the religion, besides the necessities of appearing in all
courts and congregations to maintain the causes that are brought to the court)
and of singular learning to be able to pray before the Pope upon days that are
designed to that order. And because the Proctors of Court are much employed by
the Popes in the congregations as in reading a public lecture upon wisdom.

In these three years that he dwelt in Rome, beside that incomparable prudence
wherewith he treated of matters of religion, there was known to be in him a
great aptness to greater things, and by order from the Pope himself he entered
into diverse congregations, where there was occasion to discourse in occurrent
actions upon important difficulties of doctrine. At which meetings he came to
know and take intimate acquaintance with father Bellarmine, who was often
present, and was afterward a Cardinal, whose friendship continued even to the
end of his life. He knew there likewise the Doctor Navarro, who was then at
Rome about that famous cause of the Archbishop of Toledo, and he was wont to
tell with a great deal of delight that he had many times had discourse with
one of the ten compagnons of father Ignatius who then lived. And I believe it
was father Bobadiglia, wherein I should be sorry to be mistaken. Only it is
remembered that he found him often doing his exercise in certain remote places,
and that he seemed to be full of holy simplicity, and that he told him freely
at one time, that it was never the mind of the father Ignatius, that his
company should be reduced to what they were now, and if he returned into the
world he should not know them, being become a quite other thing, and so much
changed from what he left them.

How he behaved himself toward the Cardinal Santa Severina protector appears
in this, that he alone among so many that were employed, went away in his good
grace and favor, which was no small matter with a Prelate of his disposition,
who was used to call those that went according to his by as, without
contradiction, poor spirited fellows and flatterers, and those that made
lively opposition against him, and spoke their mind undauntedly; them he hated
for being too free and insolent. But above all he was entered so far into the
grace of Cardinal Castagna, who was after Pope, by the name of Urban the
seventh, and succeeded Sixtus V. that he was infinitely pleased with him. And
it is very like that this Prelate (being of a more then humane meekness, of
life, most innocent, and for his carriage irreprehensible) the similitude of
their dispositions might be the cause of uniting their affections. The father
never visited him, but by the cherfulness of his face he might discern
that his visit was so much the more accepted by how much it was more frequent.
And after his going from home, he always continued to be his servant. The
short time that he lived in the Pontificate, which was only thirteen days,
gave no assurance how his favor would have continued to the Father after his
assumption to that Throne; for this very opinion that he had of the Father to
be a subject of so incomparable learning and ability (I have this testimony
from one that was present when the news was brought him of his death) that he
said without any show of alteration; Ideo raptus est ne malitia mutaret
intellectum ejus. He had once occasion to go to Naples to sit President as
Vicar General at the Chapters, and to make the Visitation, where he grew
acquainted with that famous wit Gio. Battista Porta, who in some work of his
that came to light makes honorable mention of Padre Paolo as of no ordinary
personage, and particularly of his specular perspective. The time of his Office
of Proctor General in Court, happened to be at the beginning of the
Pontificate of Sixtus the sift, who (as it is believed, having been a Friar,
knew much of the worth of those religious persons that were remarkable, and
among others having had information of the quality of the Father) gave him
employment in congregations, and other manages more frequently then was usual.
He was present at the discussion of that matter: Whether the Duke de Ioyeuse
being a Capuchin were dispensable, and to that purpose were spoken (by those
that would flatter) such exhorbitances of the untimely power, or rather the
pontifical omnipotency, that Father Bellarmine being present told the Father
in his ear: These are the things that have made Germany revolt, and will
produce as much in France, and other Kingdoms.

Upon a time the Pope being in the street in his Litter, called the Father unto
him, holding him a good while in discourse, which was nothing else but of
certain memorials that were come to his hands against the General of that
time. This unwonted passage, and observed by the Court that used to make
observations upon all things, was presently divulged abroad how much the Father
was in the Popes favor; what would you have more? The vanity had already made
him a Cardinal. But this favor which was neither sought nor desired by him,
cast him into a most troublesome persecution. At his going from Venice he had
left his friends at the Council, and directions of master Gabriell Collison,
with whom he had formerly joined in the taking away certain ill customs, and
grievances which some superiors had imposed upon others that were weaker then
themselves, and were detested under the odious name of Tyranny. But as it often
happens, that what we detest in others, we are ready to justify in our selves,
and the nature of Gabriel being (as it was afterward discerned) to be only a
friend and lover of his own interest: In those three years of the Fathers
absence from the Province, he had gotten an absolute Dominion whereto he had
attained and maintained himself by very great extortions: one only impediment
was a mighty traverse to him, that the Father was shortly to return to Venice,
to whom he knew such practices would be no ways pleasing; and he was out of
hope of inclining him to those courses of his, because he had had experience of
his integrity, and that he was not to be corrupted. He conceived his only
remedy was to make him a proposition, against which the wisest men can hardly
make a defense (which was) the way of Honors, and therefore to remain at
home. And began seriously to persuade him by letters, engaging some of his
dear friends to propound it to him: That the credit which he had got at court
might make him a way to the advancement of his fortune. The Father among other
rejections of that Counsel, and to be troubled no more with those arguments
answered him by a letter in cipher (which was usual betwixt them) wherein were
words of discredit cast upon the Court, as if dignities were obtained by ill
means, and for his part, he made so little account of honor so gotten, that
he did rather abhominate it; Master Gabriel kept the letter, and cipher, and
after three years end, that his office was expired, the Father returned home
to his Country, to his quietness and to his studies, but was not able to
approve the extortions which Gabriel had used in the Province, wherein he was
maintained by the favors of some Courtiers of the Cardinal Sancta Severinas
Court, who did not favor him gratis neither, (it being kept upon very good
account) that the Generalship, whereunto he was at last preferred, stood him
in no less then 40000 ducats) as there are many that can very well make the
computes and tell the particulars,) all of it being taken out of other men's
purses, wherein the Father alone declaring himself not to approve, and less
to consent to those courses of his, they came at last to a rupture, and
manifest dissension, wherein that he might prevail being already crept into
so much favor at Court that it was a wonder, and particularly to see the
Cardinal Protector, who was then chief of the holy office of the inquisition,
to whom the letter with the Cipher, was presented, who did not think it fit to
proceed against the father by way of the holy office (as master Gabriel hoped
he would have done) yet nevertheless he showed an implacable indignation
against him. And as the multitude are used to turn on that side where the
wind blows fairest, although he had reduced himself to his quietness without
meddling any further with matters of government, because he saw the disease was
grown incurable: yet nevertheless he was much troubled (although not in his
own person) wherein neither art nor violence could ever find the least defect
(whereupon to attacque him:) but in some of his friends who being not exempt
from ordinary defects, were not only made incapable of degrees and honors,
but every venial sin of theirs was imputed to be a mortal vice. And Santa
Severina himself employed even the authority of the holy office against them,
by means so strange and ends so base, that I dare not mention what I have
heard, for fear it might give the world too great a scandal; In which way of
prosequution this is all the remedy that can be had, that such as are so
narrowly in quisited may in their recourse to Rome with their commissions find
Justice.

Among the fathers great disturbances (whereof we shall have occasion to
speak hereafter) this was one. There was one Friar Julio an old confessor, who
being of an irreprehensible life, had much concourse to him to confession: with
a notable emolument of alms.

This man from the first entrance of Friar Paul into Religion (having been his
mothers confessor) undertook to keep him so far as belonged to his clothing,
and the expense of his journeyes and books; because the father to the very
last of his lif would never have more then one simple garment, so that if he
had fallen into the river he must have kept his bed till that had been dried
again. He never had any ornament of chamber, and so he has continued till the
expiration of his soul, his movables being only a portable quadrant of
Christ in the garden, a crucifix with a natural deaths head at the foot, as
his peculiar looking-glass, and three hour glasses of sand to take measure of
his time. He never had of money more then was necessary for a days use. And
this Friar Julio, till he was so old that he began to lose the vigor of his
intellectualls, kept him meanly clothed and only according to necessity. The
Monastery always supplying him, with what was necessary and convenient for his
garments, and other necessary expenses. In fine, the father was never put to
provide for him self while he was under the care of this good old man. It is
not to be doubted that the tranquillity of the mind has a principal
foundation in the internal part, in a profound knowledge of divine and humane
things, without which every external thing is insufficient and vain, because
a man that is once dejected, cannot be sustained nor held up by any of those
things. Although it cannot be denied but that external helps may add
something to quietness. Now to disturb the father in the contentment which he
had (without weariness) in those poor mentioned necessaries, and seeing that
as a square figure is immovable in every posture, so they applied themselves
to an experiment, whether in the person of this nursing father of his he had
any sense, and by divelish informations they first moved the Patriarch Priuli
to deprive him of his faculty of confessing, thereby to shorten the father of
his wonted, but poor, and yet satisfactory allowance.

And this course they held, that the Patriarch being entered into some pretenses
with the Hermits of St. Hermagora, who by their perpetual retiredness, or
rather imprisoning themselves, were found to be in such a reputation of
holiness, that they needed no other defense. They gave that Prelate to
understand, that Fra. Julio who had been confessor, and minister of the holy
mass and communion to them for many years, was the man that went about to
excite such as were devoted to him; and others of the prime nobility to oppose
themselves against him; And it went so far that the business was represented
at Rome as a disobedience, and from the Protectors Court, where they held
intelligence, they produced a letter that served to their purpose, and so they
took away Fra. Julio, and sent him out of the dominions (as far as Bologna)
after he had dwelt at Venice in high esteem of honesty, above five years.
Charity toward the poor man made Padre Paolo take a journey to Rome, where he
solicited and obtained the return of his innocent father again to Venice,
whither he himself also returned shortly after his wonted study, and exercise.

We are not to concur in opinion with some Philosophers, that our sensitive
and mental faculties are pure and mere possibilities, because, holding that
opinion it would not follow what fortune were a good encounter, either to have
a better or a worse complexion, or temperament of nature. And it is most
certain, that the temperament and complexion have a great part in the
habilities or inhabilities of men. The father had his senses the most subtle
and of the greatest vivacity that were possible to be found in any, especially
his eye being of a most quick and sharp sight. His taste most perfect, whereby
he was able to discern things that were almost insensible. But in compounded
meats it was a wonder how quickly he was able to distinguish either the
benefit or the danger, discerning infallibly the one from the other; whereof
when there was occasion, and that he knew by certain evidence, and reasons,
that it concerned him to have a care to prevent poisoning; he would not only
not seem to have the least dislike or suspicion of any thing, as one that knew
by proof, that those are miraculously preserved that are in Gods protection,
but besides for as much as might concern humane prudence, he held himself
secure, that in his meat the exquisiteness of his sense, would give him
notice, and in his drink, where the greatest danger lay, he held a more
watchful care. This exquisitenes or passibility of senses reflected upon his
mind as by consequence, whereby it was a thing to be admired, that every thing
took impression, and stuck with him so tenaciously; when he entered into any
place or room, all the images or forms of the least things he carried away
imprinted in his memory: and upon occasion his friends would ask him how it
was possible he could take notice of such pretty things. If he read a book
(and he used to read all of any account) that came forth, he knew all, and
could remember the very leaf where he had observed any thing though of very
little moment. But with me it happens otherwise, when in books I cannot find,
or else go searching for what I know; and many times I skip it over, at least
in a kind of study, which they call Studium vagum, a wandering study. But in
him no such distinction was known, with whom every thing was fixed. And the
thing of greatest wonder was, that all impression being so easy with him, the
cancelling or loss of it as difficult. And with these excellencies he had so
much humility, that he would grant it no otherwise to any that praised him for
that perfection, then to tell them that they praised him for a great
imperfection, and for an excellent weakness: which in all other things was
prejudicial to him, for he would seriously affirm, that he employed no great
care in his reading or other observations, but that his great passibility, and
imperfection was the reason of his retention. And to those that argued it to be
a perfection, because the retentive was so easy and stable, he would reply,
that it showed a weakness, and a greater passibility, because not only the
object in him was mooving, and consequently inferred passion; but, every little
relic, and Idea of the object, continued it.

But this problem we leave to others to dispute of. From hence, and from his
perpetual study, (wherein both before and after he had laid down Magistracy)
he had so plunged himself; I believe his exquisite knowledge was raised.

It is was an admirable thing that he did not only understand the Canonical
laws, and decrees, but that he knew the times when every Canon was made, the
fountains from whence they were drawn, and the cause which had moved the
making of them. In the matter of Benefices which is so intricate, so various,
and so many relations, he knew all the reasons controverted, the progresses,
changes, and alterations. But with this Theorie, he brought from home with him
all the practice of so many congregations and tribunalls as are there, with
their presidents and their proceedings. And which is yet more strange; he had
as it were painted in his memory the places, situations, the figures, the
statutes, and whatsoever he had at any time seen remained as imprinted with
him. But howsoever from this either passibility or imperfection of temperature
(as he called it) or sublimity or felicity of understanding as others esteemed
it; (and not from any study of Physiognomy that he was ever known to make,)
there was bred in him that great knowledge which he had of persons; In which
kind of knowledge I cannot truly find in all course of time, that there is
mention made of any that knew so much as he. And if I should tell you the
particular successes (as many times from beholding but the faces of men) but
most of all from one single conference or discourse, (as if they had had the
little window in their breast which Momus so much desired) how far he could
penetrate into the nature, the customs, the inclinations, and carriages of
men, I should be afraid that with pure truth I should take away the credit of
what I write. But this necessity of observing things so minutely (though either
he were not willing, or cared not much for it) yet in length of time it had
reduced him to such a subtilty of judgment, that even in the religon and among
the Friars themselves there grew a report (which fince Malevolent people have
augmented in his latter years,) that he had a familiar spirit. A vanity which
has no need of confutation. From this root sprung that mavelous way of
treating with all sorts of persons to their satisfactions, because hecould
immediately penetrate the nature, the inclination, the designs, and like a
perfect Musician make his judgment of the instrument by the first touch: so by
making men speak, he knew their ends, their interests, their drift, their
resolutions upon business, and with most admirable quickness, the very
answers that they could make; And he regulated himself so in all his
proceedings, that having treated with him of all qualities of persons, of
Princes, of subjects great and mean ones, seldom any man left him without
admiration, but both by consent and conceit it was the testimony of all that
father Paul was an eminent personage. From this fountain flowed that
quickness of knowing immediately what answer to make to all persons in all
matters that were propounded to him. Whereof I would bring you some proofs if
so many hundreds, and thousands of persons yet alive, had not seen the
experience (and as I may say) not in a few but in all things.

In histories both sacred, and profane he ravished men into admiration of his
answers, by the very places, the times and occasions, and precise acts, as if
his fancy had been the very scene where he had seen them acted. There have
happened to come to Venice in our days diverse Virtuosi in several
professions. One from beyond the mountains (who had made exquisite study in
the properties of the loadstone, believing) and with very good reason (that he
knew as much as any other) was admitted to confer with the father, and finding
that he could not allege neither speculation nor experiment, wherein the
father was not as knowing, and much more then he both in his reasons, and the
fabric of his instruments, he became so much amazed that he had forgotten
where he was. The most rare inventions of instruments, engines for measures,
for weights, for horologies, for mathematical and military uses, and for all
purposes were brought to him to see, and thereof to give his opinion, a thing
to be admired, how as if he had understood nothing but the Mechaniques, he
would presently comprehend the design, and give judgment whether it would
serve for the thing it was intended for; or not, with the means how to better
it, how to facilitate, and make another like it, with what oppositions or
defects. But they say more of him, those that brought him instruments to see
with what facility he told them what they were made for; saying. This
instrument is to take a situation, or to measure a voyage, or to lift a great
weight, or to know how to return to unknown places by the same way they came.
The particulars would make a volume. Signor Alfonso Antomini a Cavaglier of the
most sublime virtues moral, civil, politic and military that can any way
render a gentleman amiable; after he had been in Germany and Flanders to see
the wars, and so likewise with observation in others as with exercise of his
own person, and especially of his wit in observing all things, was raised to
such a degree of military knowledge as very few have arrived to, and was called
back by the most serene Republique of Venice, to do them some service
concerning the commotions that were then in Italy. But those being fallen into
a condition which might rather be called rumors of war then open war, and
not obtaining a liberty to depart to any place of real wares, gave himself to
a remeditation of what he had formerly observed, especially the orders of the
Prince Maurice of Oranges, and withal to se what Plobyus and some other
authors, wherein he might know the orders of the ancient Roman militia, and of
other people, and upon this occasion wrote a book how a present militia might
be managed. But having conceived in his mind the inventions of many
instruments and military engines; he was desirous to go to Venice, to have
conference with the father, and to impart his thoughts; and and receive his
judgment therein, and being accidentally fallen upon the subject of glasses and
perspectives, in which study Antonini had lately employed his wits, the father
did not only discourse with him ex improviso upon the fabric of many sorts of
glasses and of their effects, which seemed to to have some thing miraculous,
but presently taking pen and paper gave him the figures in form with their
demonstrative reasons, as if he had come newly from studying. Halazen, or
Vitellio, and others of that profession, although he was able to give a true
account, that it was above forty years fince he had been verst in any of
those authors.

But to return to my discourse, he being come from Rome to his rest, and to
his studies, returned also to his virtuous conversations, and all the time that
he could spare from divine offices, (wherein he was always constant, when not
hindered by public employment) and never omitting his private devotions, he
spent at his book. About that time he wrote some of his own conceits,
natural physical, and Mathematical, which when he took a review of
afterward, he made no account of, and was wont to say. Oh what childish things
past through my mind? And I am very certain, that if they had been seen by
learned men, they would not have deemed them childish. His quietness then
begun to be a little distracted by an accident that happened in religion. It
was a common expectation in the religion that a Milanese, who was thought to
deserve well should be made general; But the great Duke of Toscany opposed it,
and by his power at Rome caused a Bolognise borne at Budri to be created
General, who was a reader in Pisa of the Mathematiques. This was a man of
great learning and goodness, but not able so for government as was needful,
to sustain such a charge in times of so great factions and discontent. And
very shortly after there flew such memorialls and advertisements to Rome
concerning his simplicity, and the crime of his companions, which were all laid
to his charge, that favor failing him by the death of the great Duke Francesco
which happened 1587. Sixtus V. and the Cardinal Santa Severina Protector
concurring both in one mind, which was not to favor that man in his office of
General (because he was inclined another way) resolved that his cause should
come to examination. And after a long time of striving about the deputation of
Judges by the Cardinal Santa Severina because the religion was then in
factions, and what one man proposed another refused, at last the Pope who had
taken knowledge of Padre Paolo, undertook to determine the controversy, and
commanded him to go thither to understand the business. So he was appointed
to go to Bologna where he continued many months in the treaty of that
troublesome cause. Because the General having obtained that advertisement of
the proceedings, should be given from time to the Auditor of del Torrone there
being also before him at that time some Crimininall causes of of importance and
it was in the public prison they sat; when rethey fell often into differences
of what was fit to be done. For satisfaction whereof it had been necessary to
write, and to expect resolutions from Rome. And it was well worth observing,
that in all the controverted Points, the opinion of the father was ever
approved of, notwithstanding the Auditors themselves use to be the most
consummate and and absolute men in matters of judicature. But the process and
the cause were both determined by the death of the General, although some
sentences which the father had given against some of the Friars, stood
unrepealed.

The father being come back to Venice, resumed the course of his former
studies, and of his retiredness from bufinesse frequenting his accustomed
virtuous conversations, and the resort that was to the house of fignor Andrea
Moresim (whom we name before) being grown very numerous, and frequent because
there came thither a great part of such as professed learning, and not only of
the nobility whereof some subjects are since risen to be great Senators, and
like stars in the firmament of the most serene Commonwealth for goodness,
Religion learning and civil prudence; but there were likewise admitted into
that meeting, all sorts of virtuosi, as well seculars as religious, beside the
most eminent persons of learning that were then met at Venice, or in Italy or
of any other nation that did not fail to be present in that place, as in one
of the most celebrated conventions that had ever been consecrate to the Muses.
In my life I have not seen more virtuous exercises, and I wish it had pleased
God that as the virtues of those two Andria and Nicolo the uncles (which
descended by inheritance unto their nephews) so there might have been in
Venice such another meeting, where there were met at sometimes five and twenty
or thirty men of rare endowments. At this meeting the ceremony (which is a
thing so much affected in our times and so superfluous) had no countenance
which tries the brains of the wiser sort, and vainly spends so much time in
an an artificial kind of lying, that signifies nothing because it signifies so
much, but a civil and free confidence was only there in use. It was allowed
every man to make his discourse of whatsoever pleased him best, without
restriction of passing from one subject to another, provided it were always of
new matter, and the end of their disputation was for nothing else but to find
out truth. But the felicity of our father was rare, who upon any subject that
was propounded did not only discourse without premeditation; but made no
difference of sustaining or impugning any proposition in a scholastique way.
All which he did with so much facility that it raised a wonder in all men. And
afterward in his riper age, when he was put in mind of those exercises, he
would simile at them as at puerilities. At this time the civil wars in France
flam'dout, and the father was pleased to hear such as could discourse of them.
And that pleasure continued with him to his lives end, to hear and understand
any thing of the state of the world, and how things were carried. This was a
general Idaea with him, wherein he seldom failed in his judgment, if any
news that were spread abroad, was either true or false, that upon things
present he would settle a judgment with so much prudence in relation to what
succeeded, that it made men wonder and seek after his opinion, as if it had
been a prognostication. And for as much as at the golden ship in the merchants
street there used to meet a sont of gallant and virtuous gentlemen to recount
their Intelligences, one with another; among which the good Perrot a frenchman,
(whom for his candor and civility, besides his firmness in religion, they
called the true Israelite, alluding to that Saying of our savior. Hic est
verus Israelita in quo dolus non est) thither also came Merchants that were
strangers, and such as had not only been over all Europe, but in the east and
west Indies, and the father among others found means to be among them. And as
in that mind of his every little thing took impression, so he had likewise an
admirable dexterity to make other men enter into discourse.

Himself was in all his life time of very few words, but pithy and
sententious, acute without scoffing, ye he took great pleasure to make men
speak and with a dexterity, like Socrates delighted to make discovery of the
abilities that were in others. And this he called, to make them deliver
themselves, or to help them to bring forth. And the dexterity arose, not
only from being verst, but consummate, and made up in all sorts of learning,
because he was able to follow every one, in his own element. Physicians in
medicine, and Mathematicians in the Mathematiques, and so in all other things.
And upon what subject the discourse fell, he that knew him not very well, went
away persuaded that that subject was his principal profession and master
piece. And when he met with any person that was eminent in any art or science,
he would take occasion to ask him questions with an inexplicable mildness,
till he had drawn out of him what was possible to know, without showing any
importunity or troublesome curiosity. But his greatest pleasure was to
discourse with those that had been abroad, and would give him a true relation
of countries, of customs, of people, and of religions, having himself also
had an extreme desire of peregrination. Signor Bernardo Sichini patron of the
shop, where they used to meet, had among others a son (that yet lives) of a
wit far above the profession that he follows, both because he had studied at
Lovaine, and besides, nature is not so malignant, and partial as she is
accused to be, but produces many time in persons of mean fortune, wits that
are of a great eminence and capacity. With this man, the father entered a great
familiarity, which continued betwixt them till death. And in this he seldom
failed, when he met with any man, that had knowledge or practice in foreign
countries to discourse at larg with him. Thus much I observe by the way, that
the fathers acquaintance in this place began in 1586. about one and twenty
years before the differences fell out betwixt the most excellent commonwealth
of Venice, and Paul V. after which there were invented so many calumnies, and
falsities which drew a prejudice to the Merchant, in his trading. And thereupon
he begun to withdraw himself from that company. But Signor Alnise would
never give his consent, preferring the familiarity of the father, before all or
any detriment, that could befall him. This was the time wherein the father had
the greatest happiness and the most quiet enjoyments of his life. Because
although he had three great infirmities which were bred together in him, and
with which he made account to be accompanied to his grave. The flux from his
liver, the falling down of the strait gut, and a periodicall or intermittent
headache, beside the trouble of the Hemorroyes, all which were by him supported
with so much cherfulness, and serenity of heart as if he had been the
soundest man in the whole world, and he reputed them divine favors and
natural admonitions of the dislodging, which he believed his soul must ere
long make out of her earthly mansion for any thing else it may be said that he
thought himself to be in a garden of delights, and to tread upon roses.
Because for matter of want he knew none, having no desire of an thing, being
most rich in his poverty, without money without industry how to advance any,
without thoughtfullnesse, having left al his cares to father Giulio and without
books (except such as were daily supplied him by his great friends, which he
had read all over, and had made in his understanding the greatest library that
any Prince in the world had, beside the unfurnisht nakedness of his chamber,
with the slenderness of his diet, which was sent him from the Monastery, being
to him most plentiful. All his life was only employed in three things; the
service of God; the time which he spent in his study and in conversations. In
this course he was constant, never failing to be present at divine officer. To
his studyafter his private devotions he dedicated the morning which he begun
always before sun rising, but for the most part, he prevented the morning,
until the hour of common service. The afternoon time was divided either into
operations by his own hand, and transmutations and sublimations and such like,
or into conversations with his friends that were learned, and other famous
persons in Venice or else strangers that resorted thither.

The ordinary place of their meeting in Venice was at the shop of Sechim. And
in Padua whither they often transported themselves, was the house of Vicenzo
Pinelli, which was the receptacle of the Muses, and an Academy of all the
virtues in those times. And what an estimation Signor Pinelli had of the father
the success shall show, whereof there are yet living testimonies which I know
by name. The good Assilineo the french man before named, and the Signor Sechim.
In the company of Signor Pinelli was oftentimes Monsieur Perrot a Frenchman,
worthy of eternal fame for integrity, and the Signor Marmo Ghetaldi a most
principal gentleman of Ragouse, whom I believe to be still alive, known of me
both at Rome and at Venice, an Angel in his behavior, and a devil (I
understand this name only in science) in the Mathematiques, His Apolomus
redivivus, and other works of his that are in print can easily testify, that
he has either none or very few equals. The father coming by accident to
visit Pinelli, who at that time was pricked with a nail of the gout, and yet
made a great shift to go forth to receive him, as he did after, when he went
away to bear him company; where at some that were present, making it a wonder
to see so much honor done to a Friar Ghetaldi desired to know who that man was,
to whom such an extraordinary respect was expressed. To whom Pinelli made answer
(I relate it in his own words) il Miracolo de questo secolo, and Ghetaldi
demanding further in what profession, Pinelli answered him; In whatsoever you
please. And observing him to be entered into some admiration. He added futher;
Signor, I know your excellency in the Mathematiques, let us make some trial of
him, I Will invite him with you to morrow to dinner, be you in a readiness with
some proposition of such a science, as you think may serve for a touchstone of
trial; and in the mean time study to be well provided, and so you may be
satisfied concerning his ability. I will be the proponent, and will seem to
understand nothing of you, till we come to the washing of our hands, and
accordingly the business was carried. I could not attain to know the particular
problem or Theoreme, nor what it was that Ghetaldi brought into the field, but
I am assured that at the discourse of the father; he was so much astonished and
confused, that he confessed, he should never have believed, a man could have
known so much in any profession; whereupon he desired to become his intimate
friend, and to confer all his inventions with him, and so much of the
Mathematiques as he has since consecrated to immortality. And likewise the
good Perrot took an affection to him, which continued till he past to a better
life: which he willing to testify in his last sickness, left him by his will
his silver Ewre, with which he used to power water upon his hands. But the time
was now come, when the pureness of the gold should be tried by the touchstone.
It pleased God, who guides those that are his, by toylesome ways, that now he
should be drawn out of the haven of his rest, into the tempestuous seas of new
troubles, which happened in this manner.

The favor of the Cardinal Santa Severina (Protector of the order of the
Servi) had at the instance of the Cardinal of Medici (who was afterward Leo
the 10. and of Ferdinand great Duke of Tuscany) presented to be General, one
master Lelio Baglioni a Florentine, a man truly of a great vivacity, being
bold and learned, and more then all that, of an unblameable carriage, and when
he preferred him to that dignity, he discovered his intention to him, defiring
him to cooperate with him, that when he had finished his course in the office,
master Gabriel might be his successor in the place. The general (as it is
usual with all that obtain such a dignity) to have two ends the one to
continue in the charge as long as they can, and when they are necessitated to
leave it, to make a successor of offer their own choice) receives the
Cardinals declaration of himself into serious consideration, although secretly
he was resolved to traverse it by all the means he could possibly. And because
the ordinary ones were too little purpose, as to say that he was a subject
without virtue, without merit, without any learning, since the continual
presents and bribes, that Gabriel gave in the Cardinals Court, and the favor
with his nephew Paulus Emilius, and with the Cardinal himself did presently
disperse those thin clouds like a North me wind, and were so far from not
sustayning him, that they were more like to have Canonized him; He took
another course which was more violent, to make it known in Court to the
congregation of reformation which was over the Regulars, and to the Pope
himself, that master Gabriel was a vicious and facinorous man, culpable of
great crimes. And he went yet further to divulge it abroad in the Court, that
whatsoever profit he could raise in making spies, in any laws proceeding, in
soliciting causes, or any thing else that was reprehensible in another and much
more in a man of Religion, that pretended to a Generallship, the profits of
which practice were all brought home to the Protectors Court. This divided the
poor religion of the Servi into two factions, the heads of which were, on the
one side master Gabriel among the friars, and the Cardinal abroad, who being
imprudently interessed (by Lelius) carried himself with more passion, then any
of the Friars; and of the other side the General with his abbettors, who
wanted not his seconds, being like quicksilver, and never failing to publish
all occurrents, as well in the Courts of the Cardinals, as of the Pope
himself: amplifying the extorsions that were brought into the Cardinals
Court; and in particular complaining, that the Protector had taken all the
authority from the General, to the end that favor and Justice might only be
expected from master Gabriel, who made them venall to furnish the Court with
presents. A thing that made the Cardinal stark mad, by reason of an humor
then raging under Clement the eighth who had made so many bulls Contra munerum
largitiones, which is a mischief in Court like judicial astrology, whereof
Tacitus says, Semper vetabitur and semper retinebitur (Factions in Religions
being a disease of humanity, are not so easily shakt off by entering into
Cloisters, but that it happens many times, that under the titles of
fraternities, many mischiefs are concealed.) The Bianchi and Neri, the
Guelphes and Gibelines had not been so fierce against each other, but that by a
necessity they were linkt so near together in their Cities, in their houses,
and in the same geniall beds. And among the Regulars they have got a custom
(which was used in Sparta) that both parts first make war against their
neutralls. The innocent father had enjoyed a virtuous quietness, and had
opposed these differences as long as he was able, but it was necessary for him
now to declare himself of one side. And being no longer with his honor, and
by his former declarations, to approve of the extorsions and rapines which
master Gabriel had used to supply his bribes at Rome, became presently united
in interest with the General; And although it were his chief desire, either
to have have sweetened the bitterness, or reduced things to civil terms,
which in order of Religion are said to be done by votes, and suffrages: yet he
could never bring that to pass. For now master Gabriel resolved to accuse him
of criminalities, making it a matter against him in the Inquisition at Rome,
that he had held commerce with the Hebrews, and to foment the quarrel the
more, he drew out the letter (which we told you of before,) with the counter
cipher, and stirred up a nephew of his at Venice to do as much against him
there as was done at Rome, making this his ground, that they being on a time
upon discourse of compounding differences, the nephew should make answer that
he believed the faction of his uncles part was much the superior, because at
their Chapter they had an expectation to be inspired by the holy Ghost; and
that thereupon the father should reply, that it was fitter to operate by
humane means upon this Maestro Santo (for so was he called) accused him to the
holy office at Venice, that he had denied the assistance of the holy ghost.

But that Tribunal having examined testimonies that were present at the
treaty, thought it no Justice, so much as to call the father to his answer, but
extinguished the action without speaking a word more of it. But at Rome that
point of the letter with the Cipher brought the father into a very ill opinion,
that he was an enemy to their greatness, but in secret, they neither durst nor
could tell, how to frame any thing against him upon judgment of religion. I
have heard some say at sundry times, I know not whether I should call him
ignorant or malignant, that represented it as an irrefragable argument against
the integrity of the father, that he had been thrice denounced to the holy
office of the Inquisition; in his youth by Master Claudio da Piacenza, and in
his riper age by master Gabriel, for that letter in Cipher against the Court,
and this last time by Maestro Santo his nephew: as if to be denounced were so
great a mark upon him. And truly, if the doctrine of faith or religion had
been in question, it had been capable of no excuse. But to this opposition,
and to these men that consider not so much the end of judgment as the beginning
of a trouble; Let them take their answer from Padre Maffeo a Jesuit, who tells
us in the life of Father Ignatius (now canonized for a saint) that he was nine
times put into the inquisition, (if I err not in the number) but with this
difference, that the Saint was called, examined and absolved, and this father
of ours three only times, but never called nor examined. And then let 'em tell
me, what strength is in that argument of theirs that it should follow, either
that the father was not right, or that the Magistrate was not just in receiving
such accusations. But concerning his communication with heretics, although
nothing was proved, yet it took a very great impression in Clement the eight,
who remembered it against him a good while after. In so much that the father
being proposed to the Bishopric of Nova, although the Pope confessed him to be
a man of learning, and of great capacity, yet he added that he deserved no
preferment from the Church, for the practices that he had held with heretics.
All which had no other foundation but this, that the City of Venice being so
great, that it drew from all parts of the world, no tonely by reason of the
business of Merchandice, but also such men as have any relish of things that
are curious, and fit for admiration.

And the father being there at that time in a reputation of one of the most
learned men in the world, the professors of sciences that came not only from
Italy, but from other regions, and chiefly the greater personages, that
esteemed it a thing worthy of their travel, to see and hold discourse in
matter of learning, with one that in all professions, was not only able to give
them satisfaction, but to send them away with wonder, and he that knew not
only terms of humanity and civility, but the most strict Canonical rules
oblige not to avoid the company of any, except he be by name and individually
condemned by the Church; He without any further scruple thought all sorts of
strangers worthy of his virtuous conversation. Sometimes he came into company
by command, as when Mounsieur D'eureux afterward Cardinal Peron came to To.
where he had the first time unsuccesfully treated the reconciliation of Henry
the fourth, and Perron passing by Venice, there were deputed to bear him
company, the most illustrious Linigi Lollino, after Bishop Bellano, Peerlesse
in humanity and the Greek tongue, and the father also spent many days with
him, and almost always in discourse either of state matters or of learning.
And this great brain of whom it is reported that he should say that in Italy
it is well known that in Padova in the house of Vincenzo Pinelli and upon
other occasions he found few persons of notable learning, he celebrated the
father for a transcendent wit. And it was upon the same occasion that Lollino,
and the father, falling into commendation of the great knowledge of that
Prelate, and his extreme wisdom in disputing, and confounding those whom he
disputed with, especially in religion, he told them again in modest language,
that he had not only found the Hugonets in France without learning or
knowledge especially in the old fathers in councels and Historians, but he had
likewise found them Choleric and impatient; whereupon besides matter of
doctrine, whenever he disputed with any of them, his chief aim was by some
picquant words or argutenesse to put them into choler (and that being done, he
was assured to carry the victory. And truly that elevated spirit of his had
that natural aptitude and inclination (observing always in his disputations
about religions tenants that are in print) an argute manner of disputing and
extremely provocative. Occasions of this kind were very frequent. But
passion, and ignorance (which in this age) have rendered Religion like the Dye
of factions, and the desire of envious people to give intelligence at Rome
thereby to appear more zealous then other men. So soon as they saw any man
appear to visit the father, that was uttred all, Oltramontana, like a German
or a Frenchman, immediately they concluded him to be an heretic, like a fellow
that denounc't his preacher to the holy office, because forsooth having cited
the prophet Habacuc, he said he knew him to be a Lutheran, because of
pronouncing the best syllable cuch. But divine providence by such gradations as
these, began to inure her servant to the injurious calumnis of that government,
which in the progress of his life for being a faithful servant to the divine
Majesty, to his Prince, and to the holy church, were prepared by an higher
hand for the trial of his unconquered, and constant piety, and for proof of
an heroic patience.

The domestique turbulencies endured many years with an implacable ardour on
both sides, wherein the father had occasion enough to show his moderation in
restrayning the violence of his adherence, his mildness in never giving
offense to any body (although himself offended) the evennesse and serenity of
his soul that never lost himself upon any wretched success, nor took pride
or too much confidence by any thing that fell prosperous, as of necessity it
happens with others after long contentions, although they be but business of
factions. His singular prudence in redressing whatsoever was in his power for
accommodation, but above all the sweetness of an incomparable mind which was
never seen to be angry, nor ever to resent anger by any expression of words.
And yet with all this, His virtue was not accompanied with fortune, because he
neither satisfied those of his own side, nor the General with whom he was
united, nor yet the Cardinal Protector. Those of his part in the faction that
carried themselves with more affection then prudence, accused him of coldness,
and that he behaved himself, as if it concerned him not to the quick (as who
should say) that their levity should disturb the quietness of his mind which
was so well composed, and so much Superior to their destructions. The General
who was ardent in his nature, whenever any new difficulty or controversy
was set on foot, used to make himself merry with it, and was wont to say. Mi
chiamovo al mio givoco. Now they call me to mine own game. But he could have
wished that the father had not stood so much upon the sole defensive part,
observing the advantages of the time, and ever throwing out words that tended
to pacification, and settling the commotion. They would have had him pursue all
routs, and engage himself into every cause by vehement affections, and by
resenting effects. But the Cardinal, who was secure that the Generals
overthrow would be the victory of his cause, attributed all the directions and
managings to proceed from the fathers counsels, which his own business would
not give him leave to traverse.

This dissension continued till the year 1597, at which time though it were
not quenched, yet it had some abatement, wherein the father alone obtayn'd his
end, though not entirely what he aimed at; concerning the pacification of his
province, but by a diversion or sport of divine providence (which is no less
active in things that we value least, then in the greatest) there appeared
demonstration of the vanity of humane designs, and therefore to that purpose,
this digression of ours may not seem unnecessary.

A Friar, one Giovanni Battista, perugino who was surnamed Il Lagrimino
(whether it were because he had tears at command) but being a mixed and cunning
man (and flying from the punishment which the General was ready to inflict
upon him for some delinquencies) came to Venice, where the largnesse of that
City, and the commodities of concealment make many of that sort bold to make
their refuge. But this fellow had no need to hide himself, because the very
flying from the General was enough to bid him welcome to the Provincial,
which was master Gabriel. But to get a living and subsistence he procured a
license from the Nuntio, and begun to play the exorcist, as I have seen many
of that runaway race (who not able to live in obedience) would give a leap
into such a compendious way of life, to enjoy their pleasure, and suddenly to
raise a present fortune. (Because though it be certain that sometimes God
permits to come upon humane creatures, the vexations of evil spirits: yet it
stands as consonant to reason, and to the harmony of our faith, that he does it
but seldom, and upon very great causes.) But when those exorcists come upon
the Piarras, they are presently filled with the sudden and violent motions of
the matricall humors, nay that all the infirmities which they have contracted,
either from a licentious life, or by communication with their husbands, that
they proceed either from ill encounters or of witchcraft. And of the other
side the exorcists fail not to play their pranks, who having given a blessing
to their violent medicaments, and by sleight of hand made some pretty show of
art, cause their patients to throw out of their stomachs, that which never came
there, nor could be contained therein. But it is a pretty observation, that to
heal the greatest part of these diseases, the true remedy is contrary to all
other cures, which is to drive away their Physicians, whereas upon the
appearance of any of these mountebancke Physicians, there comes abroad a world
of conceald and unknown infirmities, which no body ever understood. Our
Lagrimino among other of his undertakings, had the cure of a trades man's wife
at the sign of the cock, in the Mercery, whose name was Deffendi. And as it
happens very often, that practice is prolonged beyond hope or expectation. The
Friar besides his exorcismes in the Church, came often home to her house to
visit her, and the dance was not quite done before the husband began to take
notice that many things in his shop were missing, as such a quantity of Satin,
and some other stuff of value; that he was almost ready to turn banckrupt.
Hereupon he caused his apprentice to be arrested, who being examined confessed,
That the Friar with his wives knowledge had carried them out of the house, and
upon further examination, confessed, that a great part was conveyed to Master
Gabriel, and no small part to the Court of the Popes Nuncio. So the mystery was
unfolded, although the General had enough to do to be believed.

That Lagrimino was an Apostata, and fit to be imprisoned, for neither the
Provincial, nor the Nuncio would hear him, but cried him down, for a
persequtour. The trades man (that still lives) considering no further but that
he was a Friar of the Servi, made his complaint to some other of that
Fraternity, telling them the business, which after was so managed, that a
coppie of the process was taken forth, and sent to Rome to the General, where
it happened at the same time that master Gabriel was present. The General
carried the cause, and the process before the Governor of Rome, who
perceiving the knavery, and ignorant how much favor Gabriel had then at Court
without any further consideration committed him to prison. I do not believe
that in his life time the Cardinal Sancta Severina ever showed himself to be a
man, nor discovered so much passion, and weakness; (for great ones are but men
and subject to the same passions with those of the lowest people) He stamped, he
cried, he cursed, he walked between the Pope and the Governor, and for all he
could do, he could not enlarge the prisoner for many days after. Because
Lagrimino that was gone into Vmbria had been imprisoned at Rome, and being
confronted, had sustained the things mentioned. And though after he were made
recant by charging it upon the General, and so set free, yet nevertheless he
disappeared and vanished out of the world (though not like Enoch) By this time
the Cardinal saw that it was not possible to create master Gabriel his
General at a chapter that was then called at Rome, but yet he was able to put
him that was General under judgment, and to that purpose kept him in the
prison of Santa Maria in via and particularly because Lagrimino had accused
him, to be suborned; and by the Cardinals order there were committed many
exorbitances and violences in the order under certain pretenses, both with
cause and without cause employing the officers of the Inquisition so far, that
except to those that had seen them the things were beyond belief.

During these passages, there being a provincial chapter at Venice to be
celebrated in Vicenza, he created president by a writ from the Pope, the Bishop
of that City Michel Priuli a man of great sense and prudence, who perceiving
of one side the disposition of the Friars, and on the other side the Cardinals
commands, knew not which side he should adhere to; And seeing the spirits of
the factions inflamed, he was persuaded by those of the Cardinals faction to
consent to an innovation, which was never tried before, and that was to move
the Rectors to admit some sergeants and other officers into the Monastery to
prevent disorder, but really intended to intimidate (if not use violence) upon
the other party. But this made things worse, then formerly before, making the
parties more obstinate. And prolonging the Chapter to eight days length, which
had wont to be determined in a few hours. And these sergeants seeing all
things settled in quietness, and about eight Friars without arms (so much as
their knives,) they laid down their gunns, and left their arms carelessly upon
certain tables, that stood in the Cloisters, and the soldiers without further
thought of any thing either stood still, or went into the cellars to drink, or
into the storehouse, or forth into the Mount to sport themselves. In the mean
time the Friars fretted, and knaw'd the chain to see such a company of idle
fellows without any employment, a thing never done before, and so scandalous
to religion, to see them consume those provisions which ought to be the aliment
of the convent. And their spirits were the more imbittered by the provoking
language of those that gave it out that they that did not render themselves
shortly to the Cardinals order, should either be thrown in prison, or sent to
the galleys, or be otherwise disposed of like dogs. And the last stroke which
was like to end the business was, that one evening there came from Vicenza to
this Monastery of the mount (where the Chapter sat) the Bishop with another
brief from his holiness (besides that of his Presidentship) which was sent
from Rome to Vicenza in less then forty hours, giving order that the
president might have power to expel the General vicar out of the Chapter,
beside a most ample authority to suspend, transfer or prolong the Chapter, and
whatsoever he should think fit. Whereat some of the wiser sort rather laughed,
then wondered, to see that in a capitular action being a thing of so small
moment, there should be sent forth two apostolical briefes. And the Pope
himself enter into the Comedy after so great a Cardinal with the authority
of the two Saints Sanctorum Petri and Pauli, which was according to the adage
Magno conatu nugas agere. That faction to which so much favor was expressed, was
added into the Bishops train, entering into the monastery in a tumultuous way,
with much noise, and to solemnize their triumph the more, they caused to be
carried two naked swords before them, with certain acclamations which had
been more convenient for plebeians, then religious men. This occasioned so
great an alteration, that immediately a crew of young fellows brought that
very night (the door being set open) into the Friars chambers with great
silence, a number of those brave Vicentines with whom they had intelligence,
and were resolved the next morning when the Bishop and the chapter were met
(which was always in the refectory) and sergeants having left their guns
carelessly (as they used to do) to fall upon them, and take such a revenge as
their anger, and the memory of such injuries should suggest.

Yet they lingered a while till they could speak with one that might give
notice of their design to Padre Paulo. But it is a very hard matter that a
thing known to so many, should be concealed; wherefore he among others having
had an inckling of the business, it is most certain that with much labor and
waking a great part of the night, by entreating some, and commanding others,
and giving a clear understanding to all, of the danger they should bring upon
themselves, of the slight consequence of the things in question, and the
scandal that might arise. But above any thing else the venerall esteem that
they had of his authority was potent means to suppress the conspiracy. Yet he
saw well that it was a matter of necessity to put an end to those discords,
which were no longer to be contained within the confines of voting, but would
be sure to rise into higher terms. And because that being once admitted for a
president, and so horrid a resolution settled, it would be an encouragement to
others to attempt the like. There is not in matters of government a more secure
restraint then to know what mighty mischiefs are possible to ensue, wherefore
the father was resolved to do his uttermost endeavor to compose the divisions
which he could not do so well, as by making a journey in person to Rome. But
the matter of the aforesaid letter in Cipher, and that of his communication
with heretics was a great discouragement to his going. Because (although he
might well discern an insubsistence, and that the Cardinal Protector was not
much incens't by any instances against him upon those accusations; although he
sent other causes of very light value, to the Inquisitors against Friars and
others (and as soon again took them off, as the matter of voting in the
Chapter house was past) which for the most part was one of the chief ends of
those practices of his, nevertheless, the father took into consideration,
what the displeasure of so great a man might do, that had the power of
judgment in his hands, as Santa Severina (being head of the Congegation of the
holy office) had. And that in Rome it was well known how near he was after
Clement in election to the Papacy, and the question was not only extinct,
whether that election of Clement were valid or not. Wherefore Clement was
willing to feed the Cardinals humor by giving him leave to do what he lifted,
besides that he was truly a great personage, and very active, and able to bring
any business to what end he pleased, as it is an eafie matter for great men to
serve themselves upon any pretense, to justify every thing after it is done.
So he consulted with his intimate friends upon that point, whose opinion was,
that he could receive no great damage, especially, since by a great number of
the Cardinals letters which are yet in being (and I have seen them when I
intended to make this life like an epistolary history, and to have prduced the
letters for a confirmation of what I had written, if the length and multitude
had not dissuaded me) it appeard, that he had a great opinion of the fathers
integrity, and prudence, and that he had desired to see him at Rome, and to
have interessed him in that Court. But the father facetiously remembered the
fable how the prudent Fox, when the Lion made proclamation for all horned
beasts to come in) hid himself saying, what if the lion would have his ears
to be horns, who should be able to defend him? yet notwithstanding he was
resolved to go. But as it was his manner to be as confident in the divine
providence, as if second causes had not been considerable, and yet omitting no
fit means where second causes might be the producers of their effects; And
first of all he got good letters from his friends to the Ambassadors of Venice
at Rome, and to diverse great Prelates at Court; Then by letters he made known
the whole business, to the Cardinal of Ascoli (for he was likewise of the
congregation of the holy office) with whom he had always continued his
servitude by a commerce of letters, and from him he was advised to come. At
Rome there was a general Chapter celebrated, wherein the Cardinal not being
able to make master Gabriel his Genenerall: he called from Florence a father
that had been fifteen years shut up in his chamber in a holy life, but yet
with him neither, he was not very well pleased, be cause whether for zeal of
conscience, or for any other respect, I know not, but he also extremely
abhorred to consent that Gabriel should succeed him: and loved and honored the
father as much as was possible, (although against the orders which he said, had
been given him,) and offended the Cardinal in a very high degree, by writing
him a very long letter, in an apologetique way, blaming him for all his
mischiefs that had happened in religion, and for using such violent ways to
make a wicked wretch his General; touching, without any respect, upon the
briberies and gifts that were brought to his Court, by the sale of al
preferments, and graces, and by the pillage and robbing of Convents. But that
which cut him to the quick, was, that he affirmed that he had written unto him
not only after a long consideration; but with particular inspiration of the
Holy Ghost.

At the reading whereof the Cardinal broke out into passion and cried out, Tu
menti santarieto Cacamienda, for he had always kept a tang of the Neapolitan
Dialect. But this poor General was called to Rome where in a very short time
he ended his life. It was said to be of a heat which he gave himself by
walking about the seven Churches, and there are some that said it was by some
cost that was bestowed upon him. But his death gave a great scandal to all
religion, because (as it is already said) he had lived fifteen years shut up in
his cell at a holy life, where by pontifical indulgence he celebrated the
mass, and every wednesday expounded upon his altar the holy sacrament, before
which he continued praying til the friday following without tasting any food,
and his diet was always lenten fare, and for the most part bread and fruit
and water. In which life he continued for matter of abstinence after his coming
to his charge, and he was esteemed a Santo; and as of such a one is his life
written and printed. His very enemies reported him to be a man of holy
intentions, though not so able for government. But the blame which fell upon
the Cardinal for putting him under censure cannot be expressed.

The father treated with the Cardinal and sought always to please him,
because, that being done all other things were determined. And it fell out
extraordinary well for him, because they had no speech of any other matter, but
only these two. The one that he had adhaered to, and fomented the late
tumults, or rather stirred up the General, the other, that he would not be
friends with Master Gabriel.

To which he answered, that he would remit the whole business to his Lordship,
and was desired to be reconciled to him: To the particulars he answered more at
length. That by his Lordships power and favor he had seen Master Laeli^ made
Proctor General; and after that vicar general Apostolical, and subsequently
General, and that he had desired the friendship of Laelio as of one of his
Lordships creatures, and had corresponded with him in all things which he
thought might concern the service of God and religion. And that it was his
duty to honor that man whom he saw raised above others, without any curious
investigations of the reasons why it was done. That if things grew after to be
changed, he conceived that to be an accident of a fortune. And thereupon he put
him in mind of letter, which when Laelio was created General his Lordship had
written with his own hand, whereby he recommended him unto him, that by his
vote, and the votes of friends he might be preferred before any other of his
concurrents, so that he could not interpret such a recommendation for less
then a command. For of such a nature he said were the requests of persons that
were eminent. And as to that of having stirred up the General, his eminency
having by his public letters to all the Religion (directed to the Chapters of
Provinces) made great complaint of the impetuous and violent nature of Lelio,
he was sure his Lordship had not that conceit against him of himself, but by
the suggestion and false relation of some others, whereto he would at all
times be ready to make answer in his own excuse, only referred it to his
prudence which was able to penetrate that and greater matters, nor was it like,
that seeing a coach run swiftly by, he would make it a doubt, whether the
coach drew the horses, or they it. He insinuated moreover that four years
before that 1593 in the vacancy of the Bishopric of Milopotamo, his Lordship
had begged it for him of his Holiness, and in a letter written to him
thereupon, and exhorting him to dispose himself to receive it, when it should
be conferred upon him; He added that in a second place he had named him to
another in event of his not accepting that, because he was not sure of his
intentions being so retired a man, and alienate from every thing else but a
total immersion in his studies, and a lover of a quiet life. All which letters
he had kept together, as the titles of his obligation to his illustrious
Lordship. Hereupon the Cardinal gave great testimony of good satisfaction, and
replied; that truly having taken notice of his deportments, he believed no
otherwise, and told him further that he would have him and Master Gabriel made
friends, as also by the Protectors power it was effected.

He returned to Venice to his beloved retiredness, and not without some
grievance of his natural indisposition imbittered by his voyage and other
sufferings. And though there might continue with him (as we use to say) a
little of the old sea of his turbulent fortunes, yet he moderated them all with
an incomparable patience and prudence. And it seemed that for a few years
after his infirmities made their peace with him, which the space of 25 years
before had yielded him but short and uncertain truces of his Epaticke flux, he
remained cured, without any other cause, but that it had spent the Course. He
had from time to time used diverse remedies as well by the great knowledge which
he had in medicine, as also by the opinions of the most conspicuous and famous
Physicians, with whom he had great familiarity both in Venice and Padua, and
for the falling of the straight gutt (which in time and with increase of age
might render him unable for any action, and fix him if not to his bed at least
to his chamber,) He had continually proved many remedies without profit; after
he gave himself to seek out some instrument to keep it up, and having tried
many, he found one at last so proper and fit, that with it alone he was able to
carry his disease to the last day of his life without hindrance from any
action, more then if he had not had the disease, and it is of so easy and
ready a use, that having imparted it to others, it has had the same effect
with them, by keeping them in ability of motion and action; without which they
must have remained in great pain and difficulty. This quietness continued
about six years more, his life being all the while employed in divine office,
(wherein as it was said) he spent all his time, and in the conversation of
virtuosos without the least hindrance.

From some notes that were found and are yet extant, it appears about that
time that he changed the quality of his studies, and gave himself altogether
(besides the Ecclesiastical and profane stories) to the study of Moral
Philosophy, peradventure that which is written of Socrates, is no singular
act, or rather voluntary, but is as it were natural to all those
understandings that have any thing oftranscendent, who after they have made a
discovery at what they can arrive upon universalities, they transport
themselves totally to morality;) which study (as to inferior things) is the
only speculation of humanity. This arises either from a defire made more
intense to better it self, or from some incomprehensibilitie that is met with;
or from a solid judgment of the vanity even of Sciences, and of the
excellencies of virtue, or the singularity of that part of Metaphysick, whose
object is intelligence, and the means thereof, and of humane actions that
either are internal or from others.

It is most certain that Father Paul applied himself to such kind of
studies, having before that examined all the works of Aristotle and of Plato,
with little notes of his own extant from one part to another upon the one, and
from Dialogue to Dialogue on the other, but so short, and for the most part
writing only the first letter of a word, that one may easily perceive that
either he wrote to himself alone for rememoratives, or else that in his age he
designed matter from some further work. But I do rather believe the first,
because he never promised himself a years life, as he would always
constantly affirm.

He had examined the Doctrine of all the ancient Philosophers of all sorts, so
far as there remains any mention or memory dispersed among writers, and given
his judgment upon them. He had also examined the opinions of Schoolmen
as well of the real as the nominall, which he made much account of, as appears
by some other short notes of his. The Mathematiques of all sorts, the
medicinal, the anatomicall, the simples, the minerals, the mechaniques and of
all the qualities, upon which his notes (as aforesaid) yet remain, whereof
that little that is intelligible is verypretious, and shows what rules were
hidden in the Mine of that rare understanding. There are yet letters of some
very learned men of his time, wherein it appears that they sought to receive
his opinion in some of the most arduous things of Sciences, and particularly of
the Mathematiques, and when any of them had either observed or invented any new
or strange thing, they presently sought to have his judgment upon it. Oh the
great loss, that we cannot see his answers. I have seen a certain discourse
which was sent him from one Marioti, who in many chapters treates of the ebbing
and flowing, which it seems the father approved not of, by a coppie of a
letter of his own wherein he tells him, that he sends him what he understood,
and had observed about the motion of the waters. I deplore the loss of his
letters, and the misfortune of men therein, that from time to time there should
be any loss of that which has been found out by great wits. What a
misfortune is it to us that in History it should be necessary to begin from
Herodotus, and all that was before to be nothing but fables and confusion. (In
this account we rank not the sacred story of the Bible which was Gods gift,
and no humane industry.) In Astrology and Geographie to begin from Ptolomy, in
the Mathematiques from Euclide, and all the remainder (that is) the work of so
rare and excellent spirits whose names are scarce in memory, should be
perished. The loss of what the father wrote concerning the moving of the
waters, draws from my pen the deploration of a misfortune which I persuade my
self if it had been extant, had been like food to the minds of so great
understandings, which have been famish't without so much as hope of
encountering any thing that might at least in appeareance give fat is faction
upon that subject.

But in those following years whereof we speak, He seemed to be wholly engaged
to that sort of study which is only verst in weeding out the vices of the
mind, and planting and cultivating it with virtues. And upon this subject he
has written so many little treatises, which he used to carry about him with
sentences and documents as well of the most ancient celebrated writers, as of
his own, that if ever they came to light it will show a collection of precious
jewels of inestimable value. Three things I have only seen, elaborate after
the manner of Plutarkes little works. On the medicine of the mind, wherein
applying the Aphorisms which are written for the health and cure of the body
to the cure and sanity of the mind which he limits (as it seems) to maladies
that are only in state and not in motion, or in freedom from pain (whereat a
man in this life can never arrive) only he directs many singular means to
obtain a tranquillity. Another little treatise of the rising and ceasing of
opinions in us. And the last that Atheism is repugnant to humane nature, and
is not found therein, but that they which acknowledge not a true Deity, must
necessarily feign themselves false ones. There also two little books which go
together like a Metaphysick, but imperfect and full of new and abstruse senses.
There is also a short examen of his own defects whereunto he had proposed a
cure, and this was fit to fall into the hands of those who after his death like
dogs that draw dryfoot have not left the least by-way untraced to find out
some odours of imperfection: and here they might have seen a man that never
flattered himself, but made a real scurtiny unto the most recluded corners of
his own heart, and both saw, and censured in himself those things which to
every other eye had been invisible. And those that in the rest of his life for
more then 20. years had lived intimately with him do most holily attest, that
they were never able to observe any such defects in him. Because peradventure
in those six years of his morrall studies, he had regulated himself like
those true possessors of wisdom, who study not so much to seem learned as
to be truly and really good.

But all this was nothing, compared to his being affixt to the divine
Scripture, particularly of the new Testament, without any expofitor except
only the Greek and Latin texts which he used toreade from one end to the
other, repeating it over so many times that he had it all in memory, and upon
occasion was able to repeat it all in the same manner, as by daily frequency
religious men use to recite the ordinary Psalms. His attention was so entire
and profound, that as in reading he observed any point for meditation, he
made in his Greek testament upon the word or verse a little line after this
manner -- And so by reading it over again there was scarce a line or almost a
word which had not a mark upon it, whereof a great Prince having heard after
his death, did for curiosities desire to see the book, we have also seen the
very same course formerly used upon the old Testament, as also his breviary
wherein he recited the office marked all (as aforesaid) but especially upon the
psalms which he knew all by heart, as also whatsoever was to be said in
celebration of the mass, whereof this is a sufficient demonstration that in his
last years he could not see, nor read any word that was either written or
printed without his spectacles, and yet without them he did always use to
celebrate the mass.

I could not learn whether in these six years he had borrowed from his
assiduity and immersion in his studies more then two deviations. The one was
that Leonardo Mocenigo being created Bishop of Caveda, who was one of those
that many times (though not so often as others) frequented that glorius meeting
of so many famous personages (the rendezvous of Morosini) was desirous first to
be instructed by the father in the profession Canonical, and in whatsoever
else (besides his own learning) was convenient for his new Episcopal calling,
and afterward to have his company along with him to Ferrara, where the Pope
Clement the eight was then abiding, and where he was to be examined and
consecrated. The other was that famous controversy which (by the power of the
Dominican and Jesuiticall faction,) remains still undecided. Of the efficacy
of divine grace called de auxiliis, whereof there has been so much said, and
so much written. In contemplation of which difference, The Bishop of
Montepeloso who was before that his intrinsecall friend by the name of Maestro
Hippolito da Lucca, a a man of much scholasticall learning, but of a greater
fame for goodness. This man had read Theology many years in the study and
university of Ferrara, and was also confessor to Madame the Duchess of Vrbin,
and a very confident servant of hers, when Alfonso the last Duke of Ferrara
died. That Princess was in an ill repute with many of the better sort, that
she had been unfaithful in the procuring of some advantage to Caesar of Este.
And this father himself either for truth or for some near respect of service
to the Princess, was also in a finister fame, to have either in confession, or
some other discourse (being himself corrupted) by large promises, and great
hopes, persuaded the Duchess to adhaere to the Eclesiasticall faction. So it
is; that he had (not long after) a slight recompense from Cardinal
Aldobrandine of the said small Bishopric in the kingdom of Naples, but he
was always entertained at Rome, and deputed for one of those Prelates to
examine the said controversy. And he, to whom the fathers great learning was
so well known, procured by letters, and by his utmost power to make him come
to Rome with large promises. After seeing him resolute not to open his mouth in
those windy and swollen differences, went about to induce him by friendship to
review the matter, and by letters communicated his sense to him. But this
employment was not worth the name of a deviation, he having formerly most
exactly read and studied all the ancient fathers, and had in them a singular
practice, but especially in Saint Augustine, in whom the doctrine of that point
is more fully handled then in all the rest (And it may truly be said, that the
two tomes, the sixth and seventh besides the tenth have no other scope) and
those were so familiar to him, that a place could not be sooner touched, but his
hand was as ready to be laid upon it, and in hearing it alleged, was able to
say whether it were faithfully reported, and was able to recite both the
antecedent and subsequent words. In all his writings there was nothing found of
his in memory of that business, but only some responfive letters of the said
Bishops, whereby it appeared the father had written often unto him of that
business, and of things whereby the prelate receiving a great deal of honor,
did always move and urge the fathers coming to Rome, but in vain. He was, as
it could be gathered out of those letters, of the opinion of Saint Thomas, to
which he added the names of Saint Paul and Saint Augustine, against the ancient
and modern Pelagians and Semipelagians. There is only extant a short writing
to this purpose, in which it appears that at the instance of a Prince he had
explicated the state of that controversy in Italian, and what were the
opinions of the controversies with their explications and principal
foundation. A short work but which it shows the lucidnesse of that mind and
his felicity in explicating the most arduous things.

At the end of the said six years, or not long after, there were two occasions
out of which (it was believed) there sprung another disturbance; because upon
the death of the General, which was master Gabriel, who was created 1603
(being fifteen years later then the foundation of the design of that
creation was at first laid) there was supplied to that government a nephew of
his by the name of Maestro Santo with only the bare title of Definitor, who
having his uncles hopes, though not his power, and especially failing in that
aptitude of his to serve the Court at all assaies (which the General was
allwaies wont to do: to whom after his death therewere letters found that
Cardinal Aldobrandino had writ with his own hand, and Borghese both nephews
to Popes, wherein it was seen that at Venice he had been a servant to the
Court) in things that might either have cost him his life, or else advanced him
to a greater Prelacy. Maestro Santo imitated his uncle in this opinion, that if
he would domineere over the province, it was necessary to remove that mote out
of his eye, which was the veneration and honor wherewith the father was
followed. And to this purpose he attempted many exorbitant things, among which
there was one that was most ridiculous. It is a custom when Chapters are
called togegether, that those that have votes make a scrutiny among themselves
to legitimate their Capitular actions. And that it might be without exception
every one reserves himself a fredome to question or oppose whom or whatsoever
he think good. So Maestro Santo, and Maestro Arcangelo stood up, and to do
nothing with much diligence, and with power to make a conspicuous buffonery;
they opposed three heads of exception or reproach against father Paul, with the
indignation and derision of all the Chapter, and they were these. That he wore
a hat upon his head contrary to a form that had been lately published under
Gregory the fourteenth. That he wore pantables that were hollowed in the soles
of the French fashion (alleging falsely) that it had been decreed otherwise
upon pain of deprivation of their votes. That at the end of Mass he did not
use to repeat the Salve Regina. Things that were no sooner heard then resolved
by the Vicar general, the President and the Provincial into nothing, and
exploded by all the assembly, being rejected and kicked out. And because his
pantobles were taken off by order from the Judge, and carried to the Tribunal,
it became a proverb which is yet in use. Esser il Padre Paolo cosi incolpabile
and integro ebe sivio le sue pianisse erano state canonizate. The father Paul
is so blameles and pure that his very pantobler were canonized. That his not
reciting the Salve Regina arose not out of any indevotion.

It would be too long to deliver the ground or reason inducing him not to do
it. True it is that he had reasons so well grounded, that it was more lawfully
omitted by him at that time, then it was added by others, against the rights of
the mass, and derogating by a particular decree of about 30 Friars from the
universal order of the Church.

It was observed that in all that action of proposing, examining and exploding
those exceptions, he never spoke word, nor showed the least sign of being
affected with it: but went on upon occasion of discourse, and as he had used to
do with those his accusers, and in specie with Maestro Santo, who had
forgotten his uncles documents, which at his death he left with him; (viz.)
That he should never attempt any great thing in the province without the
opinion of father Paul. So not taking counsel where he should have done, and
being too confident of his uncles merits with the Court, and lastly puffed up
with vain hopes from a certain Abbot, who was an impostor, (and is yet
living) who sold him those hopes at the price of a good silver goblet, He trust
up his baggage, and carried with him to Rome whatsoever he could get, being
about five hundred ducats which belonged to the Monastery which he there spent
in four months; And whereas he went thither full of great hopes, he returned
again full of maltalent, and desperation, which sent him into Candy to raise a
fortune in merchandise, where not long after he left his life, having first
lost and spent what he had.

By this time (we may say) that the fathers quiet studies and his private life
were come to their period, and that from hence till the end of his life, he
entered upon another world; or rather came into the world, wherein it pleased
God to call him into employments, which he had never thought he should have
applied himself to.

But man is not borne alone for himself, but principally for his Country and
for a common good. That problem whether a wise man ought to apply himself to
government? let others dispute. This father of ours shall give us an example to
refuse no pains nor peril for the service of God; and of his Country. And
that an honest and wise man is far from that erroneous doctrine, invented by a
company of seditious coseners, who never speak of secular policy but with
disparagement, although it were instituted of God, and in which an honest man
may serve his divine majesty with a vocation as pious, as excellent, and that
no other employment can either exceed it or match it, as well for the common
good, as in obedience to that supreme piety which may be exercised in the
Church, and whereunto God from time to time, and since the very birth of the
Church, has called even the greatest Heroes of all the ecclesiastical order.

At this time was assumed to the Pontificate, the Cardinal Camillo Borghese of
Sienna, Paul the fifth, about the end of the year 1605. either because he had
been Auditor della Camera, and had taken a great habit of thundering out
censures, or perhaps being not well affected to the most severe Republique of
Venice, or else instigated by some religious men (as I have it more certain
and by cleerer arguments) who like vipers tear in pieces, and poison that
breast of state that gave them breeding, and nourishment; the pretense of the
difference being grounded upon some laws of that commonwealth which were said
to be against church privileges. So that things fell into a manifest
dissension among them: the Pope pretending that those laws were not only
unjust but cancelled and abolish't; on the contrary side the Repub lique
maintained that they were just, and good laws, and in no interpretation
contrary to the lawful liberties of the Church.

This business boiling betwixt those two great princes, some of the primary
Senators, who had formerly been the fathers familiars, began to confer
strictly with him about this controversy, for it could not be concealed; not
only in Venice (a City which for amplitude and concourse of all nations
knows all things and silenceth nothing,) but also over all Italy, and upon his
arguments which were confirmed by a precedent knowledge they had of him, they
proceeded to acquainte him with the business by a pulicke communication.

This fire lay long raked up under ashes of propositions and answers, and
arguments on both sides, by the space of a month, when about the entrance of
the year 1606. it threw forth greater flames of monitories and comminations of
censures. Because the matter being partly Thelogicall and partly legal, the
most excellent Senate came to a resolution, to chose next after their
consultors in Jure, a man that was both a divine and a Canonist. And after
having caused to be read a short writing to that purpose, they made choice of
the father into that charge, who has since served them seaventeene years, not
only in that faculty, but as a consultor of state in all their charges of
greatest consequence. Because though his hands (as it is said) are past all
sort of matters of peace, of war, of their confines, of their covenants, of
jurisdiction, of tribute, and of every other sort of treaties. But this alone
may make it known how universal, how faithful, and sincere his service was,
that upon the death of the consultors in law (men of eternal memory) Marc.
Antonio Pelegrini, Erasme Gratiani, Agostno del been) the commonwealth was so
well served by the father alone in all sort of business, that they chose no
successors into their places, as was formerly used to be done, except it were
one Il Signor Servilco Tree, and when he failed by death, the father remained
alone.

Being now entered upon this charge, he thought it of necessity to have
companions of experimented fidelity, whom he might trust as himself, and
specially to turn over books for him. Because the customs of those times
thought it not enough, to know things with resolutions, and reasons, but they
would have an addition of a long series of Allegations of Doctors of the one,
and the other law. And he that would not err upon the credit of others, which
often deceives men, thought it was necessary for him from point to point to see
the authors at the fountain, being a business rather of much toil then wit.

To this purpose he cast his thoughts upon Friar Fulgentio a Brescian (to whom
he had long before vouchsaf' the favor of a strict familiarity) making use of
him for ordinary studying, and being so directed, not by way of ordinary
readings, which he esteemed to be rather a way of ostentation, then any ways
fruitful, but after the manner of Socrates, and in a midwife-like way
appointing to read such books, or such a matter, and then after by discourse
to find out and produce the truth, to show the errors and so settle a right
understanding. A means truly both singular and excellent, to teach a man the
way to be wise, although it have been neglected and out of use, to prevent, as
they say, a show of pomp and ostentation.

The reader will be pleased to dispense with this little digression in this
place, because it serves to take away an objection made against the fathers
goodness, not only by the Friars, but by some of his own intimate friends,
that he being so rare a man in all learning should be so sparing to communicate
his knowledge to others. And many have gone so far as to tax him of an envious
disposition, that he took no pleasure in another man's wisdom, and loved
rather to hide those rich talents of his own from others. But really it was
not so, for he was rather of the most friendly and bountiful soul in this
particular, that could possibly be found, because he communicated with an
incredible readiness whatsoever was required upon occasion, and with a
prudence so much to beadmired, (though not to all men) but yet to every one
according to their capacity or profession, and in such manner as has been
already told.

Here I could put you in mind of Gentlemen and religious men whom he has made
perfect, some in the moralls, others in the Mathematiques and in naturalls. But
to make a professed reading upon Aristotle, Plato, Saint Thomas, Scoto or Gratian
(except the mathematiques) which to be taught without order and not to be
taught is all one, this was so contrary to his Genius, that he could not endure
it, and held it a pedantique way, as not serving to increase knowledge, or
better the mind, but only to be able to argue with subtillty, and make a show
of wit, and rather to breed a pertinacity of opinion, then to make a sincere
search of the truth.

Returning to our narration, he resolved to have with him for his compagnion
the foresaid Fra. Fulgentio, who was at that time in the universitie of
Bologna, and in the sixth year of his profession of reading school divinty,
having read before that three years at Mantova, and being further engaged from
the General of the order to read three years longer at Bologna, wherein he
had made his beginning. But the command of his master that required him
expressly and without exception, alleging that he stood in need of him as far
as concerned his life, made him break through all obstacles, and leaving his
lecture, and what hope soever he might conceive of preferment in religion, and
being well assured of what followed, which was the confiscation of his poor
library and those movables which were allowed him for his use, he came away
whither the charity of his beloved master or father invited him.

After this the controversy betwixt these two great Princes grew higher then
any terms of negotiation among themselves could compass, and before any other
Princes could interpose as they did after for accommodation: The father with
the other confulters was continually at the work and employed by the public
prudence, seeking out how the most excellent Senate (salva la ruierenza) which
was due to the Apostolical sea might govern themselves, to maintain their
liberty and power of a sovereign Prince as independent in their own Dominions.
The father made diverse informations by public order which are extant, and
chiefly one little tractate concerning excommunication, wherein with as much
brevity as a writing that was to be read in such a secrecy could import for
instruction, and wih greater clearenesse, all being comprehended that was
essential to that censure, as the instisution of it, the legitimate use of it
in holy church, the manner how Princes and republiques have grounded themselves
upon like occasions (although it will be hard to find such government among
Catholic Christians, which at some time or other has not suffered by those
encounters with the court of Rome) (since that about the eleventh age from our
Lord, that abuse crept in of employing spiritual arms to mundane ends,) all
was briefly comprehended in conformity to holy Scriptures, to holy Counsels,
to the sacred ancient Doctors, and how in such a subject a faithful pious and
catholic Prince ought to deport himself.

It is a great loss, that among other writings of his concerning the public
(which are many great volumes, and of inestimable value in all matters of
state) this should not be found, and he that kept under key all his life long
even to the least bolletines and short notes that he made upon every word that
concerned the public which he had written during all his faithful service,
and having searched for this with extraordinary diligence, yet it could never
be found: but we have a certain rudiment which seems to have been the first
draught of the discourse, which is full of solidity and christian piety.
Besides the writings and consultations whereof we need to say no more but that
the most excellent Senate, having by public decree commanded they should be
copied out into books for future use in government. He was constrained
against his will, and against what he had always proposed to himself to
publish some things that he had written upon these occurents.

First, it was thought necessary to give the world a short account of the state
of the controversy, which from those pens that were devoted to the Roman
Court, went so maskt and disguised, that the people were extremely abused, as
if the controversy had only concerned religion, whereas there was nothing else
in the question but of jurisdiction: and so at the very beginning there came
forth at Milan a long writing in print, which was on purpose nailed up in the
night, and fastened in the public places at Bergamo, and upon the Bergamasco,
(which are lands that in the temporality are subject to the state of Venice,)
and in the spiritualty are under the Archbishop of Millan.) They contained
things of much exorbitancy, That their Sacraments could not be valide, that
their Matrimonies were concubinates, their children illegitimate, and diverse
other things directly contrary to the doctrine of the very Canonical law. This
engaged a necessity of giving the world a short account of the truth.

And because the father never made profession of any language which he had not
well studied, but only to serve to the explication of his own sense, he made
a collection in writing into certain heads, of all that he thought fit to be
spoken of. And it was after given in charge to Gio: Battista Leoni a man that
was most vers't in the elegancies of the Italian tongue, having spent his time
in it, when he was the Secretary of Cardinal Comendone and of other Prelates,
and had to his honor, put diverse things in print which were well approved of.
And after he had been a whole day in the company of Leoni to inform him
thoroughly, being continually himself employed in greater matters, he required
Fra. Fulgentio, that had borne a great part in making that collection, to look
to diverse places in the authors themselves, and to discuss the matters from
point to point. And before he would accept the public charge for four
months together, he studied the matter day and night to be first well resolved
in his conscience of the justice of the Venetians cause and of the ground of
it. And while Leoni was busy in giving the style, the father called to mind a
tractate in the matter of excommunication written by Gio Gerson a Parisian
doctor, and famous for having been Chancellor of the Sorbone at Paris, who had
taken great pains at the council of Constance to remove a long schism which
had lasted seven and thirty years in the Roman Church, and was reputed a man
of learning and piety, living and dying with a same of perfect holiness. He
caused some of the great Senators to peruse it, who finding that it seemed to
be written as if it had been directed against the business in agitation, did
by their authority make the father translate it into Italian, and prefixing a
short epistle in the front, sent it to the press. Against which little work,
Cardinal Bellarmine having written, and given a particular encounter to the
letter in the frontispice, and charging the author with false interpretation,
and with doctrine contrary to that of the church, and after fell to confute the
little work it self of Gerson. The father being engaged into a necessity of
answering, and withal of defending Gerson: A book was thereupon printed,
which is now in being, and entitled the apology of John Gerson, in which, I
am sure that learned and pious Catholics who prefer not ambition, and flattery
of Court before the clear fountains, their own consciences, and the solid
Catholic doctrine, having not found any thing wanting either in the writers
modesty, nor for depth of learning, nor in the sufficiency of the defense, but
the work it self (being public) let the learned and pious professors of the
truth be the Judges.

Leoni also wrote, (who as in matter of elegancy and smooth language, gave more
satisfaction then needed) so in that which concerned soliditie and substance he
came as far too short. And truly it is impossible that he that of himself is
not capable of a matter should be able to write substantially at another man's
information, and how much more he shall strive by quaintnes of expression to
give it ornament, by so much the work will fail and be wanting in solid
sense. Nor yet did it give full content to those that read it, and because now
in the mean time, a number of little pamphlets flew abroad in printe, which
were full of petulancy and impudence, and wherein either not touching the
controversy they spent themselves in ill language against the Senate, and
seditious conceits with the people either perverted the state of the cause by
confuting their own fantacies, and blotting of paper in a vanity of discourse
and flattering declamations, or by touching the difference with so much
slightness diverted it to things that were impertinent. It was thought
necessary that father Paul himself should set pen to paper, which he did, and
wrote a work under the name and title of Considerationi sopre le censure.

Of the piety and solidity whereof the wisest are only fit to be judges, and
whether the confutations that were made against it be confutations or else
confessions of a desperate cause. And because against that, as at a mark, the
multitude of writers shot all their arrows (with which kind of men our age is
furnished abundantly) who make their gain the end of their writing, and their
honor more then the truth, and among others find-that one father Bovie a
Carmelite had written least foolishly, the father was willing his book should
be answered by a book that was called Le confirmationi, under the name of
Maestro Fulgentio, which if it deserve commendations, must be only attributed
to the father, by whose directions and help it was composed. His is also
(though cursorily written) la aggimita e supplimento all Historia degli
uscocchi; beside the tediousness of the letter and documents of Signor
Minuncio. And another little work De jure asylop Petri sarpi Juris, which is
the name that Padre Paolo was known by abroad. And an extract of a writing of
his, made by public order to give a rule of uniformitie how to proceed in
that matter of the immunity of consecrate places through the whole dominions of
Venice, but it is more ample in the original, as it was presented to the
public containing particular laws and treaties that had past with the Popes.
I have seen in the hands of some of the magistrates a long manuscript which
treates of the office of the holy inquisition at Venice, and of all the state,
but made by public order, which although it seem only restrained to the
particular use of the most excellent common wealth, yet, it is a most singular
piece, and worthy (for the exquisitors and rare things which it contains,)
that all Princes should purchase it as a precious jewel, not only at the
weight of gold, but as heretofore the works of Democritus were bought. But it
may well be believed, that those Lords which have it in possession are not
ignorant of that worth, but keep it as a Jewel.

These are the works of father Paul that are seen abroad in written hand, or
in printe under his only name; or that are certainly reputed to be his,
though made upon diverse occurrents. Because that tractate of the interdict set
out in propositions was compiled by the common consent of the seven divines,
which at that time the common wealth kept together to examine their difference
with the Pope. Since then, an opinion has got footing in in diverse places. But
in Rome it is published for an undoubted truth, that he was the author of the
History of the Council of Trent divided into eight books, and printed in
Italian at London, and presently after translated into all the most common
languages of Europe. And it may be that Rome took that assurance, the rather
because for a long time the father went gathering with extreme diligence,
whatsoever he could attain to know, either by cost or friendship, sparing no
labor about the celebration of the said Council, and not only in Italy but
abroad. And at such times as it was lawful for him to converse with ihe
Ambassadors of foreign Princes, which was betwixt his being a Divine, and a
Canonist, until his being made a consultor of state: he had all that while a
free entrance into their secrets. He was most intimate with those of France,
with Ferrar, Demete and Fresnes, and particularly with Ferrier, who being
present at the said Council of Trent, had many great memorialls (and letters
which are the most secure and real foundation of an History.) Of this we have
an argument although it be but a slight one which is, the inscription of Pietro
Soave Polano, whose Anagrammatisme makes Paolo Sarpio Veneto the name and
surname of of the father. But in these kinds of encounters the matter is
infinite, though the labor be but vain; yet be it how it will, I am of
opinion that a judgment of the fathers wisdom cannot be made upon his
writings, except it be with such a discretion as the subtle artificer, who by
the sight of one of the claws knows the greatness of the Lion, and as in
histories we find that by the measure of a finger is comprehended by the rule
of proportion, the greatness and vastitie of the Colossus at Rhodes, because
in works that were written in such a necessity of difference and
dispositions, it was a greater study to know what was fit to be silenc't then
what to be spoken. He that reads may well observe the great modesty where
with he speaks in a time whereas (with scandal to posterity) he was become
the object of all malignant and petulant pens, dipped more in the poison of
Calumny, and malediction, then of ink; yet for all this, as a man never
provoked, he chose with all exquisiteness rather to defend the cause which he
thought to be just, then to make answer to detractions.

There is also to be seen the Rubricks of 206 chapters of a work which he had
in Idea of the power of Princes, which gives some expectation to have been the
most desired and important composition that ever appeared to the world: whereof
this may stand for a proof, that he had extended the three first chapters to
so great a comprehension of matter, he having with his own hand bestowed the
first draught of them upon the most illustrious Lord Giorgio Contarini. This
Lord, who to the nobility of his great house has added an incomparable
vivacity of wit, a singular judgment and other gifts which have rendered him
conspicuous, making a collection of many rare things, especially of the vulgar
writings of the greatest persons, is possessed of this, and will not suffer it,
as I believe, to go out of his hands, because some of his Rubricks being
dispersed into diverse Countries, where there are men of famous learning and
knowledge, might stir them up (if it were possible) to undertake a
continuation of what the father had only left in Idea; wherefore to send
abroad the three said chapters as they were drawn up, would rather have been
a discouragement then an incitation, for fear of falling upon that deformity
which Horace speaks of, Humane capiti cervicem pictor equinam jungere etc. for
otherwise, that Lord besides his confidence of finding in a Friar such a
Magazine of eminent virtues, after he was grown acquainted, and had got an
intrinsicke conversation with him, he did not honor him but (as I may say) he
adored him like a Numen. He by his great wit being capable to penetrate the
excellency of that divine soul, and after the fathers death no man was so
zealous as he to honor his memory. This was he who after the father was dead
(while they that should have done more, took the least care) (as it often
happens in the like cases) caused his image to be made in chalk and after in
metal, that he might (as he has done) have it graved in mother of pearl,
and cut in brass. And in all this having not satisfied his fancy, he used all
the means he could to get it done in marble. These were the effects and
demonstrations a most generous heart, and arguments of a sublime intellect.

Here it comes to purpose to insist upon the manifest injury which churchmen
had done him, to conceive such an enraged hatred, and so unjust against his
writings and deportment, during the time that he was employed in the public
service, because in his actions he had always abstained from making any
recrimination, and had kept all the laws of a true divine, and one that had in
greatest veneration the sea Apostolic, and the Pontifical dignity and
authority. And I would it had pleased God that all men had done the like; For
then the church had been had in more honor, and that honor had extended it
self further. And as for other men's writings, I would not have churchmen
think that at that very time, there was a want of persons that made formal
answers to so great calumnies and maledictions against the most serene
Commonwealth, and the defenders of her cause.

But the father Paul did by public command with his fix other Colleagues,
reduce himself in a Canonical way to take examination of whatsoever was
presented to the press, and upon every thing there was a special care that no
offense might be given to the Court. And out of that respect it is, that there
are so many other writings which were never suffered to be put in print. And
the great piety of the Commonwealth deserves an eternal memory, who for this
end (besides the other examen) had deputed there of the greatest Senators for
age, for merit, and honor, who after the report was made by the said divines,
did themselves review every thing before it went to the press with a most
curious eye, that nothing should be impertinent to the cause: or offensive to
the contrary part, who on the contrary part are so far from giving the like
respect to them, as the world well knows, having given an eternal scandal to
Catholic religion and are grown to such a pass, that the Catholic
religionwith them is no more, but what their own interest and arbitrament
dictates.

And because in the writings which at that time and fince are come forth upon
several occasions (if they may have life, whereof there is no great
appearance, and much less reason, except for this, that they favor the
pretenses of the Roman Court) the maledictions against the poor father are
innumerable, the impostures, the impudent Calumnies, being the most notoriously
false, that perhaps were ever invented against a man, whereat prudent and pious
men need not wonder, but rather remember, that in all ages there have not
wanted some such pestiferous penns, who to become servile to the Court, have
adulterated so many tractates under the name of holy fathers, and famous
writers, corrupted true narrations, brought in fabulous legends, and above all
infected the world, with impostures and infamations of those, whose works they
were neither able to extinguish nor confute. But since the time that these
religions are set on foot which are so much tied to the interesse of the
Court, this license of altering, corrupting, lying, fayning, calumniating is
grown so great, that if other sects or ages should be put into the balance
with them, they deserve rather to be canonized then defended, because this
kind of impudency knows no limits but has a foundation beyond the ordinary
Topiques. Ill language is of easy entrance, and falsehood is spoken in a few
words, but the confutation is of greatest difficulty, and requires long
narrations which are read with impatiency, and of but a few, and when a slander
is once gone abroad, they are very few that think themselves concerned in the
excuse of him that is slandered, or in discovery of the truth: especially since
of the one side the rewards and allurements are large, and of the other side
there comes little or no mundane advancement.

But above all other these modern men have their own reasons to be in this
matter as the old saying is Guaviter impudentes, which is their security, that
how notorious soever the imposture be, yet it shall be fastened to a multitude,
and undoubtedly to an innumerable number of their devoted dependants, who
without further discussion of truth receive every thing upon other men's credit,
as did in former times the disciples of the Eleusinian mysteries, or (to speak
nearer to the purpose) those that were adherent to the Gnostics and Manichees,
and other such like sects with whom it was an only argument to believe any
exorbitancy, by an ( Ipse dixic) and thus much was necessary to be said
concerning these writings.

But in his actions Padre Paolo deserves rather among Churchmen to have a
blessed memory. And thus much the excellent Senate and commonweal will for
ever testify how unjustly this was objected, that either he sought to stir up
any thing against the lawful ecclesiastical immunities, or counseled any
thing that might redound to the diminution of the authority of the sea
Apostolic. They will also testify, with how much art and singular prudence
he has often tempered that ardour which (even in the most moderate Citisens)
the zeal of their liberty has used to inflame against any that are reputed
offenders or usurpers of their jurisdiction. They can also testify the great
reverence wherewith he has always spoken, and written concerning the Popes
and the Apostolical sea. Yet for all this moderation he could not prevent
being cited to Rome to render an account of his written doctrine. To the
citation he made answer by a Manifesto (which is in print,) wherein he proved
the nullity of the Citation, and an impossibility of transferring himself to
Rome, which yet remains without confutation. And the consequence will prove
whether he had reason to trust himself thither, whether it were just that (as
he had humbly petitioned) so a secure place might first be assigned him to make
his defense before further proceeding. But without further (scruple as it was
reported) he went to Rome, but there was never any lawful account or reason
yielded to declare him obnoxious to the censures or Ecclesiasticke penalties,
it being a report, that they were so far surprised with his Manifesto, that
they would never suffer it to be published. Besides he drew a long writing
which was after known to be presented to the Pope himself, wherein he made a
brief collection of many formal Heresies and tyrannical doctrines which are
found among those defenders which wrote on the Pontifical part. As for his
own writings he made them this offer, that if they would decline that
ambiguous and captious way of citation, pretending him guilty of heretical
propositions, scandalous, erroneous, offensive to godly ears, Respective, all
the rest being made unintelligible by the addition of that strange word,
Respective but as if he had in particular, and by name gathered and noted the
wretched and false propositions which were in the writings of the
Ecclesiastiks, so they would but deal with his writings, that then he offered,
himself being secured in an any place among Catholics; there to hold
disputation with any man, and presently to retract if there were any cause
showed that required retractation. And to this purpose the Ambassador answered
his holiness, carrying with him the said writing which he imparted to those
Prelates at Rome that desired to see it.

It seemed that God the just Judge (at the same time that this tempest of
persecution was raised against him) was pleased in another kind to comfort and
relieve him. And as his divine majesty does not use to leave his servants
under a greater weight, then what by his holy grace they may sustain,
increasing troubles out of his charity, and his persecutions coming from so
high a hand. He was clearly healed of those: great infirmities, which from his
youth he had borne with an unconquered patience, and under such a weakness of
complexion, he himself then being as healthful as he could wish: excepting
only that of the Procidentia the faling down of his guts, whereof he made no
great matter, having with his instrument found a means whereby it gave him no
impediment at all. And the retention of his urine troubled him no more until
the seaventieth year of his age, for in this time that that we speak of he
was but 55.

The fathers actions of this year would yield us matter of too long a
discourse, the piety wherewith the most excellent Senate did govern themselves
(after so great an offense and continued injuries) toward our holy Catholic
religion, and toward the Pope himself, who had done the injuries,) their
prudence in government, and charity toward their subjects is partly seen in
a particular relation which the father made by public order for memories
sake, which after stole into the press. But sure it is that it went printed
into France, and there it was reprinted. But to return to our purpose; we
find in the memorialls that remain in all histories, the deplorable tragedies
that have succeeded when Popes have proceeded to excommunicate Princes and
publish interdicts, and no less when with the like censur's, this excellent
Commonwealth was injured being paralelled with the successes of this which has
continued above sixteen months; the father has herein deserved eternal
memory, or rather to be canonized for one of the most pious, holy, well
deserving and prudent religious men, that ever serving Prince with uncorrupted
faith did likewise serve the holy Church, and the Popes themselves. If that be
true which writers of the Ecclesiasticke part have published in so many printed
books, that the fathers reputation was such that all his consultations were
received and executed like oracles. Because it was proceeded against those
religious men, who either for scruple of conscience (which were very few (or by
way of faction, and interest disobai'd the public orders, with so much favor
that not any one of them was punished with death for any offense, and very few
deprived of liberty to go where they listed. A precedent seldom seen upon
the like occurrents in other places, wherein the most serene Commonweal made
so little use of the power against offenders which God had given them to
vindicate the injuries of malefactors. And to say truth, the nature of the
father was so merciful, that it sorted well with the public Clemency, nor
was he ever consulted concerning any grievous public offense, wherein he did
not sweeten their deliberations as much as any living man could do, and excuse
whatsoever was capable of an excuse. To be short, he never served as a spur to
any thing but to meekness; he never served as a bridle to the prudence of
that government, but only in the restraint of some fiery spirits, and
particularly in the examination of things that were desired to be sent to the
stamp. In his own writings, all his care was to silence whatsoever might give
offense, not in what he could say in defense, for the matter was very ample,
and the work that lay upon him was more in defalcation then addition. And they
that have seen his originalls can make faith, how much he desired to stand to
the cause without suffering his pen to run riot in any thing which by
interpretation might be drawn into offense, although the malicious subtilty of
some flatterers has made it appear, that there can be nothing so moderately
spoken, which is not subject to depraved expositions.

The faction of the Court had (among other artifices) to get a victory in this
controversy, made use of this, to send diverse men under various pretexts to
seduce (either by promises, or threatenings, or both) those that served the
republique, particularly, those religious men that made up the college of the
seven divines, as it happened, That two of them deviated from the duty of
their consciences. And truly they did their offices with such violence, so much
of threatening, as of promise, that if the justice of the cause of Venice had
not been exceeding clear, and the infamy of deserting it so notorious after the
Just. of it examined, understood and defended, it had been enough to have
staggered a very solid brain.

But such was the conceit of the very enemies of the fathers integrity, that
having attempted all others by all their engines whereby their fidelity might
be shaken, they durst not so much as move the father by a word. And true it is,
that the General of the Servi Maestro Filippo Ferrari Alessandrino being an
intrinsike friend of the fathers, and going from Rome to Venice, Pope Paul gave
him a strict commission to remove from the service of the commonweal, two of
his order, Friar Paul, and Friar Fulgentio with ample promises of reward. But
the General made him answer, that for father Paul he thought he was able to
do no good. And going to the Cardinal de Ascoli, with whom the father had had
been very intimate, and communicating his thoughts to him of attempting that
revolt. The Cardinal told him that he had seen the Fathers writings, and
thereby knew that it was but a lost labor, and not to be attempted. This great
and learned Prelate understood the soliditie of the Venetian reasons, the
fathers incorruptibilitie and his mind that was impenetrable either by
allurements of Court, by ambitions, by profits or terrors. And when Don
Prancesco de Castro came extraordinary Ambassador from the Catholic King to
Venice, to treat of an accommodation, having in his company some religious
persons of emenency, there was not one of them that durst open his mouth to the
father to any such purpose. Only one of them once set a net to have caught
him, but in vain. One Martino Asdrale Vallone, one that was an excellent spy,
came to Venice, pretending a satiety and ill satisfaction of the Court, who
having long addressed himself to haunt the shop of Sechim (whereof you have
heard.) No man had better intelligence of what past at Rome concerning that
controversy then he. None more free to condemn the fury of of the Pope then
he. He was of no absurd wit, and with much practice he grew cunning enough to
let them know that the Pope was of a vindicative spirit, thereby laying a
foundation to his design, which he had given him in charge, and it might be
true.

At the end of this year, and the coming in of 1607. the accommodation was
concluded for the King of France by the means of the Cardinal Perone, and the
mediator of it had been the Cardinal of Joyeuse, who by the interposition of
Mounsieur de Fresnes Ambassador for the Christian king, had used all diligence
that the father and he might meet together for conference, alleging that
besides that he was comprehended by way of acco^modation in the public cause
as a counselor, he had moreover special commissions to treat with him of
things concerning his own greatness. The father penetrated the Cardinalis
end, giving an account thereof to the public, and thereupon the most
excellent College, were desirous to hear the fathers own opinion, remitting
the resolution to his only prudence, and to them he gave such an answer, that
by those most wise Senators it was resolved, that he should not treat with the
Cardinal. And among other reasons, the Senate never being inclined to grant
either benediction or absolution to such as needed it not, they could not
foresee to what end it was to grant a private conference betwixt so great a
Cardinal and a Friar. And although the Father where of himself very sparing
to speak, yet it was in the power of others to make it more or less as they
pleased. Nor can be that serves a Prince have a worse encounter being already
hated for another sake, then to hear a thing whereby one part may be made
jealous without hopes of pleasing the other. When the agreement wasmade, it was
one of the conditions, that the Common wealth should give thanks to all those
that were not specified by their names in that revolt. By reason whereof many
returned back to the state that had grievously offended the public. And the
father was also comprehended in Individuo, which was a thing beyond the course
of common reason, or the doctrine of laws, that peace being made with the
Prince, it should not be intended to be made with all his Counselors. All
which afterward the Pope himself Paul the V did nominally ratify to the then
Ambassador, Francesco Contarini; (and at this day the most serene Prince and
Duke of Venice.) And the truth of thus much shall be verified by things
subsequent. That the Pope speaking of father Paul in individuo said, that he
had given his benediction to all, and was not willing there should be any more
words of what had past.

Upon which promises of so great a Prince, and upon the integrity of his own
conscience, the father reposing himself in all cleerenesse and tranquillity,
serving his natural Prince with that faith and diligence which he kept
incomparably to his last breath. It fell after diverse times into debate,
whether the father should go to visit the Nuntio Gessi, that was sent to
Venice after that accommodation. It was answered that it was but an office
performed in relation to their own Ambassador at Rome, and howsoever that it
was but an expression of reverence; And it being referred to his own
consultation: He for his part showed himself most willing, but yet with regard
had to the manner how Nuntios use to treat with the Prince himself, having
power to color their treaty with a pretext of religion; whereupon it was
resolved, that he only use a set form of precise words that were prescribed
him from the most excellent College. And further what he should tolerate, and
what he should reply to, in case the Nuntio, as he pretended, should fall upon
the cause. This had so much variety of opinions and contrariety, that the
business without resolution fell to the ground. But it has since happened,
that the greatest Prelates of this state, as well Patriarchs as Bishops, have
indifferently upon all occasions treated with the father of these affairs,
some visiting him in his Monastery, and others sending to invite him to their
houses.

It fell out at this time when the differences were already composed in Venice,
that Gasparo Scioppio a man well known to the world by his writings in printe,
coming from Rome to pass into Germany (as he said) or that he brought with him
(as it was also said) a writing full of reproach against the republique to be
printed in Germany, beside, other writings full of impiety (as that of Friar
Tomaso Campanella a Dominican (who having attempted to betray Cosenza into the
Turks hands) was at that time kept a prisoner in the castle of the egg by the
Spaniards; In that of this, he gave documents to the King and government of
Spain, how under certain pretexts of religion they might impropriate the
papacy, or else stir up his Holiness to raise new controversies against the
lesser princes, continuing the practice until he found an opportunity to
seize upon their estates, and so proceeding as he would have the Spaniards do,
until they had gotten the Pontificate into one of their own, that they might
be both King and Pope at once, or else that the Pope might be held on as an
instrument of the oppression of others. Whether it were for this, or for any
other secret cause that he had incurred public indignation, he was detained
in prison three or 4 days (if they were so many) and afterward by public
order he had liberty to go where he listed.

But Schoppio was desirous to treat with the father, and they discoursed
together in matters of learning very long, and particularly of the doctrine of
the ancient stoicke, which he professed he would recall to light out of the
thick darkness wherein it was obscured, besides many other learned thoughts of
his, and very much also in matter of state, especially concerning the
protestants of Germany. And so falling into nearer discourse with the father,
he began to let him know that the Pope like a great Prince had long hands, and
having conceived some deep offense against him, it was impossible but that it
would fall heavy upon him, and that if he had defired to have him slain he did
not want the means.

But that the Popes intent was to have him alive into his hands and to fetch
him from Venice, and bring him to Rome. Yet nevertheless he offered himself
(whenever he pleased) to treat for his reconciliation, and with as much
honor as he could desire, affirming that he had many treaties in charge with
the protestant Princes of Germany about their conversions. To this the father
answered, that he had done nothing for which his Holiness had reason to be
offended, that he had defended a a just cause. That he was extremely sorry that
such a defense as was made, should be encountered with the Popes indignation;
That in the accommodation he was individually comprehended, and that he could
no way presuppose a falling of public faith in a Prince. But as concerning
his being slain, that that of all things troubled him the least. That it was a
thing plotted against Emperors, executed upon Kings, and great Princes, not
against private men of so low a fortune as his was. But if such a thing were
designed against him, he said he was prepared to submit himself to the divine
pleasure, and that he was not so ignorant of humane condition, but that he knew
what was to be thought both of life and death, and whether (of him that knew
them both well,) they were either of them to be desired or feared more then was
necessary. And if he should cause him to be taken alive, and carried to Rome,
yet all the power of a Pope could not arrive at this, to make another man
patron of his life before himself, and that he was resolved to be the patron
of his own life before the Pope. For the rest he gave him many thanks for his
good affection, not caring to make any party for him self, or his own
safety, since his cause was so united with the public, that they could not be
disjoined.

Those two propositions of killing or taken him alive seemed somewhat strange,
but that which followed, not long after will make it clear that Scioppio spoke
upon good ground, and that the things were already designed. He went away from
Venice, and in a satyricall composition relating that he had congresse with
father Paul. He attested that he had found him nec indoctum nec tumidum. But
the father was so good of himself, that he was not able to think an il
thought, but believed whether that these were both conceits of Scioppio,
besides that of his own nature he was beyond measure undaunted, and being so
resigned to the will of God, he lived most confident in his own innocence. And
though he were often admonisht to have a care of himself, by those Lords that
were the Inquisitors of state (this is a supreme Magistrary in Venice to whom
many secret things are made known) to whom intimation was given, that there
was a machination against the fathers life, which they (in their charity) as
often warned him of that he might be put upon his guard; yet he seemed to take
no care of himself, either out of the greatness of his spirit (as they that
have had often experience can give assurance) or else by being secure that
nothing could happen without the divine disposition, and that those things
which are appointed by God, cannot be hindered by any humane caution or warning,
but that rather many times too much caution and solitude are among the causes
of contrary events, and especially in such accidents, where travel may be both
uncertain and infinite. Certainly he was never inclined to change his
accustomed manner of life in the least kind, but would ever say, that it was
indifferent to him to die this way or that way, only that he might die
justified because he was resolved that in no way death should ever take him
unprovided. And among the excellent virtues of this man, it was not the least,
that he never valued his life, so it is a rare example of him that has this
resolution rooted in his mind, that it is an indifferent thing either to live
or to die.

Six months after this accommodation happened an accident, which gave the
world much to talk of, and confirmed Schioppio that he had not spoken in the
air, nor that those iterated admonitions to the father to guard himself were
superfluous; because in the evening of the first of October about 3 of the
clock, the father returning home to his convent from Saint Marco a Santa Fosca,
and coming down near the foot of the bridge, was assaulted by five
assasines, a part making watch, and the rest to do execution. So that the
innocent father had three wounds with stillettoes; whereof two were given him
in the neck, and one in his face, which entered at the right ear and came out
again betwix his nose and his right cheek. The assasine could not pull back
his stilletto, because it had past the bone where itstucke so fast, and went so
far in that it was bearded. In the success of humane things, divine providence
is ever to be admired, where humane prudence vanishes out of sight, it being
most certain that in actions there is an eternal force, and a long chain of
causes, so far without us, that neither our knowledge nor any consideration of
ours, can ever come near. It was above three months that the father (except
that night) was never left alone, but had in his company beside Fra. Marino his
servant, Padre Fulgentio, with another companion of spirit and valor.

For although the caveats to look to himself were now very frequent, yet
these religious men walked about with an entire confidence, fearing no ill,
because they knew they did none, but had defended so just a cause, and
believing that the heat of the controversy being once over, no man could be
of so impious and tyrannical a mind to presume (after so solemn an
accommodation) to give the world and all Princes so wicked an example, or to
think that Princes had not learned persons always about them to be able to
defend their actions, but that they must employ murderers, and cutthroates.
That night it happened he was left by Padre Fulgentio, and his other companion,
and it was upon this occasion. Two days before by a casual fire, there were
some houses burnt in a street that leads toward Saint Marks, and Fulgentio
hearing men talk of a fire, and that it could not be extinguished, was desirous
to go see it, asking the fathers leave, and intending at his return to go
home with him. But making his stay somewhat longer then he intended, and
believing the father to be gone home by the way of Saint Lio, came home
himself to the Monastery, by reason whereof the father was that only time
left so long together with his only single companion, who having behind him
swords drawn and gunnes, was seized by one of the murderers, and had his
arms straight pinniond behind him, while another of the murderers thought he
had dispatched the father, and thereupon gave over, leaving behind (as it is
said) the stilletto in the wound, then they took up their gunnes into their
hands to terrify such persons as were like to make noise or pursue them. After
which Fra. Marino being left by him that held him bound, and seeing three other
of the murderers stand together and shoot their gunnes, he took his heels
and ran away in a fright. A good old man Alessandro Malipiero deserves much
to be remembered upon this occasion for a sincere and virtuous soul adorned
with solid piety without hypocrisy, a friend of truth. This good man being
very nobly borne was yet more noble in the integrity of his life being of a
constant and wise judgment in a decrepiteage, and had used every evening to
accompany the father (to whom he bare a singular love and reverence) which was
also enterchangeable betwixt them. He went a little way before the father, so
that by the advantage of the bridge, the Assasine had a full opportunity to
strike and gave him fifteen stabbes, with his stilletto as it was seen by
some gentlewomen who stood in their windows, and the holes were afterward
counted in his hood, and the collar of his doublet, but he was only wounded by
three of them, wherein is easily seen a particular divine protection, which
deprived the murderer both of his wit and force, who with one light stabbe
either in his flank or the chine of his back might have slain this innocent
man, that all the while neither stirred nor spoke one word, but (as himself
after reported) he thought that at the two first stilletato's he felt like two
blows stricken with fire at one instant, and at the third, as if a great
weight had fallen upon him with some astonishment, which he felt but in a
confused manner. The women in the windows raised an outcry, and the Signor
Malipiero turned back again and seeing the stilletto sticking fast in the
fathers head with all his strength pulled it out and began to cry out murder, and
perceived immediately two of them with their pistolls in their hands running
down the street of Saint Marcilian, and from thence to Corte vecchia della
miserecordia, at the end of which they had a gondola ready, and their
companions that tarried for them, from whence they saved themselves in the
house of the Popes nuntio, then resident at Venice and from thence the same
night they past to the shore, where having prepared a flat boat with ten oars
and well armed (which waited for them) they went therein toward Ravenna, or (as
some said) to Ferrara. But it being divulged, and understood that the Assasines
had first sheltred themselves in the Nuncios house, the insurrection and
concourse of the people was so great, that although it were very late at night,
the house was surrounded, and what with reproachful words, and popular
clamours, the person of the Nuncio himself was seen to be in manifest danger;
The high councelloften were feign to send him a numerous and public guard to
prevent the occasion of a grievous inconvenience. The murderers were not so
quickly pursued as they might have been by another strange accident. Some
Comaedians who were allowed that night to represent at the theater which was at
Saint Luigi, where there was acted one of those Comedies which they call Opera
conintermedii, a Comedy with music, and there was come thither all the
neighborhood; so that in those streets of the parish of Santa Fosca, the like
number of people had not been seen together at any time, by reason whereof
the murderers had a more secure retirement. The executioner of this assasinate
was one Ridolfo Poma, who at first being a merchant in Venice, and esteemed for
a man of honor, but failing threein was retired to Naples for the recovering of
some of his debts, and from thence he went to Rome, where he was also well
respected. But every man began to wonder at the intimacy which he had got with
the Cardinal Borghesi, who brought him to his uncle the Pope, from whom by
great favor he obtained a promise that two of his daughters (which were left
in the state of Venice) should be received Nuns into a Monastery there. And
he put some of his friends into an amazement by writing to them, that ere long
(having recovered some of his debts) they should see him in a gallant
condition, and by his letters it might be gathered that he conceived hopes as
high as to be made a Cardinal. This was the conductor of the plot, together
with one Alessandro Parrhasio of Ancona, and there were companions added to
them, Giovani of Florence the son of Paul, who that he might remain at
Venice without being suspected till the treason were grown ripe for execution,
caused himself to be listed with a company of other soldiers, which were to
serve under a captain of some ships that were bound for Soria and Alexandria.
And one other there was by the name Pasquale da Bitonto, who was also in in pay
with another company, being all of them experimented men in such kind of
professions, as it may be well concluded by the rest of their bands, who were
all, or for the most part either banished men, or fugitives.

The spy or guide of the plot, was a Priest Michiel Viti of Berganio who had
sometimes officiated in the holy Trinity in Venice, which puts us out of doubt,
how many months this business had been hatching before it came to light.
Because this Priest in lent before, under color of being much taken with the
sermons of father Fulgentio, had used to go every morning into the convent of
the Servi, to the door of the pulpit (which answers to the inner part of the
convent) and treated with him very courteously, to be satisfied by him in some
scruples of conscience, and continued his respects every day by saluting him
and conferring with him of things which concern the soul. So easily and
ordinarily is religion made a stalking horse or instrument of the greatest
wickedness by those who being either fallen from a right course, or else
fascinated by some more potent error, suffer themselves to be guided by a
blind obedience.

Before the success of this cursed act, father Fulgentio had many times
observed, that as he came home with the father over the bridge of Santa Fosca
either at the one or at the other end of the bridge, he had seldom or never
failed to encounter one while with one, and another time with two soldiers,
which proved afterward to be those very murderers. And because he perceived
that they looked narrowly upon the father, and being gone past him, turned
again to look back after him, he began to advise him of some danger that was
toward him. But the father reprehended him of too much curiosity and
suspicion, because such things as must take effect can by no humane foresight
be prevented.

Before we return to the wounded father I would desire the reader to tolerate
a little transtemporation, and digression concerning the murderers, because
the mind is seldom satisfied without hearing something of matter of events.
It was verified by public report, that when Ridolso Poma came with his
confederates to Venice, he took up a thousand crowns at the chamber of
Ancona, and coming to Ravenna after the fact, with the news that father Paul
was slain, he was honorably welcomed, it being also said that from the chamber
of Ravenna he received a thousand crovnes more, but this I do not affirm,
because I have it not upon any certainety. There he got a coach and a guard of
armed men, and in the other rites of Romagna they went with their Harquebuses
in a kind of triumph. So in their way as they went they were entertained and
caresst in all places by Governors until they came to Ancona, whether the
fame by Sea being got before them, that the father was wounded but not dead,
did turn their glory into some Eclipse. Then they arrived at Rome where
though they were well received with assignation of entertainment: yet their
expectation was unsatisfied and there they continued until they fell all into
their several disasters.

The Priest Michel Viti was clapped up in prison in the Tower of Nona (whereof I
could never yet know the certain cause) where finding a Friar of father Paul's
order in prison, who told others of his order, the foolish things which he had
heard from Michel Viti, and what promises had been made him and the manner of
the whole business, wherein he said he had done the Church very great service.
As for Poma as he was apprehended by a provost marshall he was shot above the
him, or so wounded that he died of it. His son that was with him, and he,
were sent to Civita Vecchia, where he died in prison very miserably. There was
also seen some years after another son of Pomiani in Venice, a young man of
great stature, and beautiful aspect, but out of his wits, and followed in the
street by a company of boys, ragged in clothes, and begging his bread. He was
borne for an example of Gods punnishment which passes from fathers to their
children by a terrible visitation.

Of the other three I cannot tell the particular successes, nor which of them
was beheaded at the Castle of Perugia. But true it is, they came all to ill
ends. And because in Rome after they were secured and stipended for a time, it
came after to a resolution of casting them into prison, or banishing them (as
effect made it appear,) so the cause is in concealment, as it ordinarily
comes to pass in the resolution of great Princes. It was imputed to their
impatience because the promises were not performed, it being reported that Poma
was to receive 10000 crowns, and the others very great sums, which was the
cause why they began to speak in derogation of the Cardinal Borghese, and of
the Pope himself in extravagant language, discovering too clearly that which
was unperfectly executed, could have no absolute praise nor due reward, no not
from those that could have given luster to a thing that was done, and had
therefore been better wrapped up in silence. Then it was said or charged upon
them that they held a conspiracy to kill both Borghese and the Pope. (Such is
the faecunditie of finding out causes in Courts, and especially in Italy.) That
which I conceive more probable is that was told me by a Prelate now living,
that about the same time Ridolfo the Emperor being dead, and his brother
Matthias to succeed him, the Pope sent the Cardinal Mellini as his legate
into Germany to intervene in that action, upon those ordinary pretensions which
the Popes have had alawies in the creation of Emperors. At his return to Rome
he told them that the Catholics of Germany took very great scandal, that
persons which were guilty of such accursed crimes should find entertainment
at Rome. and that thereupon the Heretics took occasion to publish odious
writings against the person of the Pope, and to the reproach of all the order
of Cardinals. This discourse came to the Popes ears, or was else fomented by
the bold words which were spoken concerning the non-payment of the 10000
crowns which had been promised, and thereupon a just provocation given.

True it is, that he gave order they should be put away from Rome, although not
without entertainments in other places. This seemed to them a thing of so much
sharpness that they began to lament that they were betrayed, and that those
were not the promises which had been made them, and for which they had put
themselves upon such evident dangers of dying upon gibbets, and now to fail
with them in matter of faith, and in such manner as had been infamous among
the very Turks, but the provoking so much the minds of those great men, that
are impatient of the least in jurie, was the cause that the foresaid ill
fortune fell so heavy upon them, approving that old saying. That no kind of
Traitors are pleasing to Princes, and that divine justice though with a lame
foot fails not to overtake the swiftest forerunners.

Now returning to our wounded father, the first thing (after his wounds were
bound up and he tumbled upon his bed) was to prepare himself in his soul to
God; to receive (as he did the next morning) the most holy communion in the
greatest humility, entreating all the other fathers that were present with many
tears in their eyes to excuse him, if by the impediment of his wounds he were
not able to speak much (as he desired to have done,) that he might by greater
demonstrations of the sorrow for his sins have begged a pardon of God. And (as
it is the order of that Government) the Avogador being come to take his examen,
(who was then Signor Girolamo Trivisano, and at this time General in Candia)
the father told him, that he had no enemy that he knew of, nor had he known
any. Only he prayed the high Council often that as he with all his heart did
pardon him that offended him; so they would make no other demonstration of it,
but what might serve to defend him better, if God should be pleased to prolong
his life any further, expressing in his actions as a christian, and son of
the heavenly father, his due obedience to the Gospel, and as a Philosopher
that he had eradicated out of his soul all spirit of revenge (which is a kind
of savage Justice, but deeply inserted into humane nature.) It was not a
singular action of his upon this offense alone but observed by him formerly,
and after in the whole course of his life, never to procure a revenge although
the injury were never so great, and the most that was ever heard come forth of
that blessed mouth of his case of his wrongs though most unsufferable in words
or writings, or actions, was to say sometimes with a serene face, Videat
Dominus and requirat.

The next morning the General Filippo Alessandrino, hearing of the business,
came in all have to visit him; (having been intimate friends together) and
when he had heard how the business had been acted. He fell into such an
amazement that having communicated his commissions to Fra. Fulgentio, he
remained for a while speechless.

But observing his own order in avoiding ostentation or unnecessary shows of
weakness; it fell into consideration whether he should use the help of more
then one for his infirmity, and so he was willing that Signor Alvise Rag^ra a
young man but very discreet and in Chirurgerie of a light hand, and no hard
binding, should give attendance upon him. But the condition of his person, and
the public respects constrained him to give way that almost all the famous
Physicians and Chirurgions in Venice should have a hand in his cure (beside
such, as by public order came thither from Padua) among whom was Girolamo
Fabritio, Aquapendente (anold friend and an admirer of the fathers virtues) And
he was commanded not to stir from the Convent, (being assisted by Adriano
Spigelio who suceeded in the Anatomy Lecture at Padua) until it might be
discerned whether the malady would determine to life, or death, it being very
long in doubt of judgment whether the one or the other. Because beside that the
wounds themselves were very grievous, and much more by the complexion of that
was wounded, being so extenuated in nature that when at the best, he seemed but
a Skeleton (so distinctly might his bones be numbered) as also by so great a
Iosse of blood, that left him almost bloodlesse, continuing morethen 20 days
before he could move or life up hand. To this was added another accidental
mischief which was real. The multiplicity of Physicians which is a misery
common to great persons, because some were of opinion that the wounds by the
blackness of their orifice gave an argument of a poisoned weapon, and others
that the treacle in the medicaments had caused inflammations, and it seemed to
some that the inflammation went not far, but might be pared away, whereby the
patient was forced to suffer as much by his Physicians as by the disease, which
was very long with diverse recrudescencies and prognostiques both of life and
death. In all which continuance the father behaved himself with his wonted
piety and constancy. Wherein he was much to be admired; nor did he forbear in
his greatest dolours sometime to please himself with his own conceit. As at
one time he set all the Physicians, and Chirurgions a laughing, that were not
less then a dozen about him, because as he was in dressing, Aquapendente said
that the greatest wound was not yet cured, the father suddenly replied, I, but
the world will have it that it was given Stylo Romanae curiae. And the same
night being laid in his bed, and being told that the style was there which was
left sticking in his head, he caused it to be brought him, and having felt it
with his fingers he said immediately it is not filed.

Not many hours after, there ran a fame that the assasines where apprehended.
Those that were present, and yet alive, make faith that upon the news he
seemed to be much displeased saying, perhaps they may discover something that
may give scandal to the world, and prejudice to religion, which we may the
better believe he said, because he had received assurance, that they had
betaken themselves to the house of the Nuntio, as also of the tumult which we
told you of. But in the whole course of his infirmity he never showed the
least sign of pain, as in emplastering, in cutting to widen orifices, which
being made with a style, and so deep, require dilatation by the rules of art.
And because the bone of the upper jaw was broken, many times when the wound
made a show of healing, nature making abscesse to expel corruption, renewed
always the inflammations with excesses of considerable fevers until such time
as it was absolutely healed, and the scarres remaining in his face, both at the
entrance, and coming forth of the weapon.

Alessandro Malipiero would have the style as due to him because he pulled it out
of the wound. But considering the success, which if it were not full of
miracle, was yet a particular demonstration of divine providence, and the most
special custody of the innocent father, so he was content it should be hung at
the feet of a crucifixe in the Church of the Servi, (where it yet remains)
with this inscription, Dei filio liberatori.

The day after the receipt of his wounds he received the news of the death of
Mounsieur de Maisse, which afflicted him with an immense grief, whereof he
made demonstration to Pietro Assileneo saying. We have lost our dear friend
Monsieur de Maisse. This is a wound which admits no remedy. And in this humane
condition of ours where among friends we must expect to be either a spectator,
or a spectacle, and as the father loved him sincerely so in his loss he became
sensible of much discontent and sorrow.

The most serene Republique could not make a greater demonstration of their
respects to the father, nor of their public discontent upon that accident,
nor of their munificence (their ordinary property) nor of their charity
toward him that had been their servant, because upon the news of the
accident, the excellent Senate that were then assembled, broke up immediately
without proceeding any further, with an universal murmur of condolement. The
Council often being also met (who have the judicature of the greatest
criminal causes) and there was that evening so great a concourse of Senators
in the Convent of the Servi, that one would have thought that they had intended
to have held a Senate in the place.

They sent money to the Monastery to bespent upon the cure. And besides the
resort of the Primary Senators, that ordinarily visited him; He was sent to
every day by public persons, and the Senate commanded that the Physicians
should go to attend the Senate to make a true relation of the state of the
father, and with a rich recompense of a chain and Medalls; the Signor
Aquapenden^e was created Cavaglier, for having attended upon the cure. And as
for securing the fathers person in time to come whatsoever was imaginable was
done. As for the murderers who were presently known, and discovered by
particulars from whence they came, and whither they went, they gave them
banishment of the highest nature that the Supreme Council had ever done to
any for crimes of the greatest excess. They printed proclamations also with
promise of ample rewards to the people or any man that at any time upon the
like occasion (if any should attempt to offend the father) should raise
themselves to kill or apprehend the attemptors of any such offense with the
same rewards proposed to whosoever should make a discovery to justice of any
plot or machination against the said father. They gave allowance also for the
keeping of a guard about him with liberty to bear arms armed of any sort,
and for maintayning thereof an increase of stipend, with a house at Saint Marks
at the public charge where he might remain in security.

But the father was resolved never to change his course of life, and besought
them that he might continue in the Monastery among his brethren, with whom he
had lived until that age, affirming that he could not tell how to live
otherwise, and that was his calling, wherein they were content to gratify him,
only causing some little buildings to be added to his chamber, from whence by
a little gallery, and a ladder he might have the commodity to take boat; that
when it happened he was to return from the public service home to the
Monastery by night, he might not be exposed to treachery.

Necessity yet constrained him in part to make an eternal change of the tenor
of his life. Because (howbeit the serene Republique had from the beginning
assumed him into their service by assigning him a convenient stipend, yet) he
until those very times was never willing to make use of more then necessity
required without declining at all from the rigor of his religion, nor the
poverty thereof; being content with that simple food and raiment without any
alteration.

But by this accident he was constrained to go no more on foot from the Servi
to Saint Marks, it being necessary to have past through some blind alleys
which had given opportunity to such as sought his life, but to use the
commodity of gondolaes. For which consideration in sixteen years following
he has been accustomed to embarke himself, landing at the Rialto to go the
rest of that little street of the mercery in security being so frequented as
it is, and by the advantage of a daily exercise to keep himself in ability
of walking, likewise he foresaw a necessity of having a companions; the one to
serve him, and the other for a writer; to Fra. Marco which was one of them he
gave him at two several times six hundred duccats (besides a good revenew of
50 per An.) and upon the other Fra. Marnio 300 in bank to put forth 10 per
Cent, because he might have a subsistence, and afterward 40 per Annum. And
besides this in the Convent it was thought necessary for him to enlarge his
hand to those that managed bread and wine, and to some cooks he gave no less
then 60 duccats in one year. Nor will any that shall read his life, esteem
it either imprudence or prodigallity, but the necessary defense of his own
life. He went yet further to give largely upon all occasions, and to be
liberal among his conventualls, which things gayning him more benovelence, and
interesting many in his conservation, did likewise engage him to give over that
rigide resolutiom of not accepting those provisions which were assigned him
from the public munificence, which also enabled him to exercise those acts of
liberallitie. The habit of which virtue was so natural to him, that when he
was at the poorest of his fortune he never denied any thing that was asked him,
whether it were money if he had it, or else any of his books. And if it were
not of necessary use to himself, his parting with it was an irrevocable giving
it away. And in these latter times that he was able to give alms and gifts,
he has given so much to some one man that desired it of him by way of loan,
that he that knows it affirms by good proof that it did amount to above 2000
duccats. And his manner of lending was always with this condition, that except
he redemanded it, they should never offer to repay him (as one that was willing
to give in such a way, that the thing that he gave, should not have so much of
meandness and inferioritie that it might be said to be bestowed.) And very
often he had in his mouth this saying Imitiamo Dio e la natura, let us etc. who
whatsoever they give they never expect again, and let us avoid that Common
error of such as think that to lend is to lose, or else put a friend to blush
or be assured.

He made another change also in this, that from that time forward, while he
lived, he never converst abroad out of his chamber, in the Monastery, except
it were in public places, as the Church and the quire, or coming to divine
offices, or to the refectory at meals. His life being ever after, Hermit like
and totally solitary, as far as the public service could dispense with it,
and his narrow world was confined to his poor cell, and that little path
betwixt the Rialto and Saint Mark. Which is but the street of the Merzaria
spending the rest of his time in the exercises of his soul in his never
interrupted studies, and in the service of the public, or of his private
neighbors; it being come to that pass, that in all sorts of business they
came to him for advice, and he gave answer to all with such meekness and
profunditie, as if he had been every man's advocate, and to this particular
purpose two strange things fell into observation. The one that never any thing
was proposed to him, whereto he did not as readily and solidely give an answer,
as if it had been in his only profession, and yet he gave no resolution nor
answer so suddenly that it seemed not to be and studiously considered of, and
such an one as it was impossible to be bettered, and in sixteen years there
seldom happened any matter of consequence wherein he was not consulted because
from all the cities that were subject to the signiory, in the most difficult
causes his opinion was always desired, as in testaments, in matrimonies, in
feoffments, in hereditaments, and even as far as in points of honor for the
making of peace.

I omit those public respects which concern the substance of government. In
matters of benefices so abstruse and various, in all kind of Ecclesiastike
controversies, it is a strange thing that his foot never trod awry, no not so
much as that the whole Court of Rome could ever find any thing in his
judgments that was fit for reproof. But as often as it happened that things went
to consultation, although to the famous universities and colleges, if the
father were of a different opinion from those that gave answer at the instance
of the party, it was always concluded in matter of judgment that the father
had hit the nail on the head. In all suites and processes of private persons,
his answers were always taken for oracles.

And here I may summon the consciences of a number of people that live, to
acknowledge this for a truth, and whether in all those consultations which
surpass thousands, he has ever been known to err in his judgment. This is
the disadvantage of him that writes the life of this divine soul, that those
things which seem hyberpolicall, and merely Rhetorical, come not near the
expression of that which is, and which was more in fact then can be related. Of
matters of government it will not be necessary to say more then what the most
excellent Senate (the very Idea of politic Christian prudence) knows.
Another thing was rare in him, that having yielded his service freely in
private causes as well of the Church as secular (as if gifts had had a power
of enchantment according to that fiction of the poets Muneribus Divi placantur
and thereby an administration given to all men to take heed of receiving them,
so he would never receive a recognition from any man, whatsoever, not of the
least value, as others in the like kind did or would have done, and some have
enricht themselves by great sums of money that have not taken pains to the
tenth part of his employment. Besides many who understanding his merits, have
attempted to fix a gift upon him; yet to the glory of God and of this
excellent creature, there is no man alive that can say that ever he received
the least gratuity, being always content with this only reward of having done
well, and if when God and the public were served he had any spare time, he
would not lose a minute from reading or hearing others read or forming
Mathematical figures upon papers or astronomicall designs of diverse
instruments, which when he had after torn in pieces, it was to show that he
did it but to pass away time. The greatest part of his time he bestowed upon
the new testament and upon the moralls. In matters of experiment the humane
understanding is unsatiable, such was the life of this father, singularly
composed of active and contemplative, always yielding to God what he could; to
his Prince what he ought; and of that which belonged to his own dominion more
then he ought by any law but that of charity.

But yet nevertheless, this is so pious, so holy an institute and order of his
was not able to please the implacable, as it happens with engines of many
pieces, and instruments that though the motion took beginning from some
principal wheel nevertheless that impression which it makes upon others does
not cease, though the principal move no more, nay rather that impression which
is made upon the lesser Pieces draws after it with violence that piece which
gave motion from the beginning. So in some governments the motion that took
beginning from the Prince and was derived, and after divided among many
ministers; follows and continues a motion in them, although the Prince have
abandonde it; in like manner it happens concerning hatred and malevolence. That
the interest of Court advancements take deep root with many that persuade
themselves they shall do the Pope a very great service, and it is grown
almost natural for men to show that they having an affection to that which at
first they took from others, (being none of their own but fained that they
may arrive at some end of their own,) and so in progress of time forgetting
themselves become really transported in their affection, the like being also
observable in the corporal affections of nature, as in infirmities and
diseases of fancy. So there were many that from the beginning, knowing neither
why or wherefore, but only showing a hatred to the innocent father, and
believing that in so doing they struck into the humor of the Court, and were
thereby like to prefer themselves as many have done that have founded their
fortunes upon that only foundation, and since have really entered into
affections of hatred and malevolence, fomenting them by faining a false fame
that the father was opposite to other priests, that in consultations he went
always against Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and this is at this day the very
center where all their lines do collineate. A mere falsehood and well known to
them that govern which they being able to carry no further, must now testify
to the glory of God, whether he served for a bridle or for a spur according
to the urgency of occasions, and the good offices which he continued to do in
favor of the Clergy; and whether he were not a perpetual advocate for the
Jurisdiction and liberty of the Church. I mean the true Canonical and
legitimate Church, but not that which is now usurpt and employed to the
subsersion of public governments and of religion it self. Because the father
always offirmed with a most intense zeal, that nothing gave so great an
impediment to the progress of the Catholic religion as when they extended
their liberty into license, and that this alone had caused and maintained so
deplorable a division in religion, and some have been very injurious to
calumniate him, that either in consultation or in his writings he went about to
bear down the jurisdiction of the Church, and to exalt more then was
necessary, the power of secular Princes.

It is true that with a frequent zeal of the conservation of holy Church and
religion he was moved to blame Princes as guilty of a great sin, for not
caring to preserve that jurisdiction and power that God had granted them, upon
which subject he has written much, and grounded it upon piety and irrefragable
truth. Because authority is given by God to Princes, not for themselves but
for the benefit of the people, the Prince being but the depositary, the Custos
and executor, not the Patron of that authority to change or lessen it at his
pleasure. Wherefore it is a gross ignorance and a most wretched sin not to
keep up, that which God has conferred upon them. And Princes are not
peradventure guilty of a great sin and offense before God then out of an
ignorant zeal to have suffered so great a part of their power to be usurped,
and that they are no longer able to rule the people committed to their charge
without continuing a change of government. The negligences of Princes in this
particular has been pernicious to the Church of God; and to all
Ecclesiastique order. And whosoever shall without passion consider how far the
father was any way a breeder of controversies that have been in the Church,
shall find how he has deplored them to be the true original of all those
mischiefs, which have now brought into the Church the most politic mundane
government that ever was: and busied the Ecclesiastiques in things not only
different, but also contrary to the instituted ministry of Christ, keeping
Christendom in perpetual discord. And the divisions at this day, that are
among Christians so irrevocable by any other means then the omnipotent and
miraculous hand of God. He held it for certain that they were bred not so much
by obstinacy in diversity of opinions, and contrariety of doctrine, as from
the strife about jurisdiction which after by degeneration, and growing into
factions has taken up the mask of religion. And as one well verst in
histories has observed, that good Princes from time to time have been they,
that have kept their jurisdiction most entire. But effeminate ignorant and
vicious Princes are they, that have lost a great part or by their insufficiency
suffered others to usurp it, with such a deformation in the Church, and for a
proose of this, it is not necessary to run back to the examples of the
Constantines, the Thesdosio's, the Justinians, whose Laws and Codexes
whosoever will read shall find this to be verified, but to those that are
nearer our own age, and to those whom the Roman Church this day acknowledges
to be even the basis of their temporal greatness. Charles the fifth, Philip
the second, and other catholic kings.

But this malevolence has not been unfruitful to all sorts of men, for as it
has been helpful to some, so it has been hurtful to others, because in
the fathers life, and (which is more to be wondered at) after his death, it
has befriended many religious men, not only of the order of the Servi, but
others to the obtaining of degrees, and good offices, always giving the foil
to their concurrents, by saying no more but that they were affectionate, or
that they had but treated with the father, and by this means they have
supplanted those persons, that never spoke with nor ever saw the father even so
far as to be laughed at by those that have known the truth of particulars,
especially after his death: as of Alberto Testoni whom we named before, who to
obtain a prelacy from Pope Vrbane by way of brief, (which was against the
law,) used this as a means. That it having been formerly collated at a
Chapter, it had belonged to a dependent of father Paul's, who had been dead two
years before. And another to exempt himself from the command of his
provincial, wrote that he had been a disciple of master Paul, to whom the man
had never spoken at any time, and another obtained a very fair absolution for
having brought whores to live with him in his Cell. for wearing pistolls and
other things of that nature upon confession and conviction, and by his oenly
excuse that he had been in disgrace with the father, but all these are
ridiculous levities.

Returning to things that are more serious. This hatred thus nourisht, brought
to light a new machination against the life of the father in the year 1609. In
the time that the Cardinal Borghese (and before his uncle had ascended to the
pontificate) studied at Perugia. Fra. Bernardo Perugino infinuated himself
into his grace and friendship, and for certain youthful services, which he
performed to the Cardinal, he being but a young man himself, and one that did
not abhor the ordinary gustoes of his age. He grew into such intimacy with
him, that being after made a Cardinal, he called him after him to Rome there
to make him amends for the pleasure and service that he had done him. Whether
the Friar invited himself, or were invited, goes beyond my knowledge.

True it is, that he treated with, and instructed a Friar of Perugia Gio:
Francesco sending him to ^adova from the General of the Servi, under pretense
of being a student where he was after made a doctor although with very little
learning. This man by the vicinity of Padua come often to Venice to the house of
the Servi, where he frequented much with Fra. Antonio da Viterbo, who served as
a writer, and was very familiar with the father. The privacy was easily
obtained because they were both of one state and province, and had been
formerly acquainted in their country. This practice began to displease the
father, but his modesty was such that he did but cast out a word of dislike in
general terms only to Fra. Antonio, who in appearance seemed thereupon a
little to withdraw himself from that conversation, but in existence and really
they had private meetings together without the convent, whereupon the said Gio
Francesco was forbidden to come there any more. And yet notwithstanding they
wrote one to another, and the letters were brought to Fra Antonio by the hands
of a Jew. It fortuned that the Jew brought a letter when Fra. Antonio was from
home, and the letter came to the hands of Padre Gio Francesco Segnira, who
having received it, carried it preently to the father, and telling him that the
Hebrew had confessed to him that it was usual for him to carry letters betwixt
them. And as that nation of the Jews is very cunning, and timorous he told
him, that for his part he would de clare himself to Fra. Antonio, that he
should make him carry no more letters, because he knew not what the business
was, that was so secret betwixt them. The father caused Fra. Antonio to be sent
for, and giving him the letter told him, that he should either give over his
practice with the Perugine, or else to come no more into his chambers, for he
would have no more to do with him. He excused himself the best he could, and
past it over with a jest, (which he was very good at) and for which he was
esteemed good company, being reputed rather simple then malicious, and that all
the reason of his practice with him (as he said) was only to get a good dinner
out of him. But although he was forbidden this commerce, yet it was not so cut
off, but he followed it more covertly, in the house of a certain gentlewoman,
and in unsuspected places until the business grew ripe.

Because one morning about break of day they had a meeting and secret
conference in the vestry of the Servi, where having been a good while
together, and observed that at their parting they were very earnest Fra. Gio
Francesco pulled out of the pocket of his hose a bundle of soft wax lapt in
paper to take the print of some keys that were to be falsified, which being
heated with lying near his flesh, drew out with it from his pocket a little
packet of letters, which for the weight, the wax not being able to keep
sticking, fell to the ground (being unperceived,) And when Fra. Antonio had
received the wax, they parted, he to the Convent, and the other as his way
lay. The Sacristan that kept the Vestry Fra. Valentine da venetia (who yet
serves in that place) coming and finding the bundle of letters, took them up,
and went with them presently to Padre Fulgentio, who reading them, found them
to be in ciphers, and that it was a business of much importance, because Fra.
Bernardo had written to Fra. Gio Francesco to solicit Fran. Antonio to
dispatch the Quadragesimale, for that the four hundred crowns were in a
readiness, and should be put into his hands, but that the twelve thousand also
and more were as ready and secure.

In some of them he said that he had spoken with the Signor Padre, and another
while Col. Fratello with the little Friar and with diverse others, and that they
did all of them desire the Quadragesimall, That the father General of the
Servi entreated him not to doubt, but that he should be beatified. That the
Seignor Padre had caused all other Suitors, to withdraw to give him audience,
with many such particularities, which being made known to Father Paul, you
need not doubt but he would quickly penetrate the importance of the business,
but such was his meekness and mansuetude of mind, that he exhorted
Fulgentio to make no words, but to keep silence until the secret of this
business, might more clearly be discovered, only he added thus much, that
there was nothing more to be done, but to put Fra. Antonio out of his chamber
and out of the Convent. But Fulgentio was otherwise resolved, who without more
ado carried the letters to the inquisitors of state, telling them how he came
by them, whereupon Fra. Giova. Francesco was attached and first, then Fra.
Antonio, and what ensued further in that secret judgment remains in their
own papers: The things that came after to public notice, (and they are very
true,) that of many persons that were named in that cipher of Father, little
Friar and Cosens, It appeared upon the counter cipher that except the General
of the Servi, there was not any under the degree, and dignity of a Cardinal.
That under the Quadragesimale, there were three persons enciphred; The first
was, that because the Father, by reason of the falling of the gut Colon
(whereof mention has been made) had need to keep that part very fair and
clean, being every eight days washed and shaved, to which Office he would
never admit Barbers nor secular men, and of himself being not able to do it,
he made use of some Friar the most domesticke, and confident that he could
find. And this charity at this time was performed him by the said Fra.
Antonio, and to that purpose he was treated with, that when he served him upon
that occasion, he should give him a cut with his rasor with a sure way.

But Fra. Antonio refused so to do, either because he had no intention to
offend the Father that was his most bountiful benefactor, or else as he had
excused himself both by words and letters sent to Rome, that his heart did not
serve him, and affirmed that so soon as he should see blood he should fall
into a swound, as by nature it used always to be with him. The second was that
something should be sent him from Rome, to be given him either in his meat or
his drink, and this better fitted his fancy to be done, because with one bean
(such was their language he might catch two pigeons, which were the Father Paul
and Fra. Fulgentio. But this party carried along with it many difficulties.
First, how to find a thing of such efficacy, and how it might be sent with
safety: Then because the Fathers diet was of ordinary meats, simple and
without sauce, and such as were common with all those of the monastery, whereby
it was necessary, that above thirty other persons should partake of the virtue
of that drugge as well as they, or else it would fail of effect, since it was
now come to pass that every thing would be narrowly looked into, and that they
had an eye upon every one that came near him: And he that should watch a time
when they two would eat by themselves, would have a long business, and this
stood not with that expedition which was pressed by the letters for the having of
the Quadragesimales. There were likewise some that are alive suspected upon a
late accident, that they two having eaten a little quantity of a cake that was
presented to them at the table, they found themselves both very ill upon it,
and with the same accidents, whereby caution was grown very quick sighted.
The third (whereon they set up their rest) was that Fra. Antonio) which seemed
a thing without difficulty) should take the print of the keys of the fathers
chamber in wax, and thereupon make false keys, and to this purpose the wax
that had been prepared was to serve (as it was said before) the plot being, that
as Gio Francesco had those keys at his command, they should secretly bring
into the monastery two or more murderers, and by night to murder the innocent
father.

But God was pleased to discover this great wickedness, as you have formerly
heard. And because he that was guilty was a person of as much cunning as could
be found out, for such a purpose, and had prepared his expositions upon all
that could be demanded of him, which not being sufficient to satisfy the
minds of the judges, nor they able to convince him so clearly as they desired.
The most excellent council often desired extremely to see the bottom of this
practice, and all the distinct particularities whereupon they grew to give a
sentence that Fra. Gio Francesco should be hanged by the throat, but with this
alternative, that if within certain prefixed days he should discover the whole
practice with a full exposition and justification of the letters, that then
after a years imprisonment he should be under a perpetual banishment from the
most serene dominions with capital punishment in case of contravention.
Whereupon he desired that a public minister might be sent to his chamber in
Padova; where in a secret cabinet there were letters found in great number,
with Ciphers and Counterciphers, whereby all that you have formerly heard was
clearly justified, and some thing else which was not published, nor ever came
to any knowledge in particular. The piety of this government being such and so
great, that they thought fit to conceal, whatsoever gave no hinderance to the
execution of their most mild Justice.

But for all the gravity of the injury the father never forgot his gentle
nature, but besought and petitioned many times upon his knees, demanding this
as a favor in recompense of his best services which he had ever done to the
public, that for his sake they should not be made spectacles to the dishonor
of his religion, inwardly and cordially grieving himself that his life should
be the ruin of any others. And it was believed that his instances and
entreaties were a great part of the cause of the said alternative. Thus this
tedious business came to an end, which has produced many strange effects. In
the Churchmen a most sharp hatred and blame because it took no effect, in
the republique a most intense desire of the conservation of their good servant,
and in the universal a more glorious fame to see (beside other excellent
qualities) so singular a favor, and divine protection.

But besides the aforesaid attempts of treachery brought into justice, the
father has been advertised of many others from time to time in following
years, (not only in private from such as were in fee for discovery) but from
those persons that were interested in that state and government where such
secrets past. And among these one was of a bargain that was made to take him
alive, and with a barcke prepared for the purpose to carry him into anothrs
jurisdiction. But he never appearing but in the greatest frequence of the City,
or because it begun to be known that the Popes mind was mitigated toward
him, and therefore it would not be so acceptable a service as formerly it had
been. I believe that for these reasons the plot was not attempted.

There happened to come about this time to Venice a young man habited like a
soldier, but in his carriage and in his clothing more then in his sword and
dagger he seemed to be a Religious. He used all the means he could to speak
with the father, who by so many public admonitions was now brought to suffer
none to speak with him, except he were first known by his name and surname,
by his country and profession, or else brought in by some noble, and near
friend. By reason whereof he he could have no access unto him. But addressing
himself to Fra. Fulgentio he used all the art he could to be brought in by
his means affirming that he had something to say to the father of great
importance, which would be very well worth his knowing, and that if he might
speak with him, he would lay down his arms and submit himself to any
strictness the father would impose upon him. But the father excusing himself,
that although he he was not much in love with his life, yet after so many fair
warnings, it would be ascribed too great imprudence if any instructed man
should have offended him, as it has been lately seen in the case of a great
Prince, wherefore the young man's great importunity to speak with him was so
much the more suspected, and the ways that he took did accuse him more being
(as it was believed) a religious man of the modern order or at least one of
their education, And therefore he would never consent to hear him. But being
still instant with the father Fulgentio with whom he thought he had bred a
confidence, he told him that he was a near kinsman to Cardinal Baromus, though
fallen into disfavour with him, and that he would advise him something, that
concerned his life, whereof he would give him such instances as might assure
him of the truth. Whereupon it was further resolved that he should not hear
him, and then the father spoke it with some little passion, that it was a less
trouble to die, a violent death then to be put into a necessity of living in
continual fears, because mischiefs have their terminations, but fears go in
infinite. So being able to get nothing but an exhibition from Fulgentio
(according to his need) he resolved to desist in the business, and looking
upon him, when he parted with a fixed look, he said thus, Guardatevi da
traditori, guard your selves from traitors, for you have very great need; God
preserve you for you are honester religious men then others would you were. And
having made another attempt (but in vain) to speak with the father upon the
stayres of the palace, he went his ways, and was seen no more.

One other particular to the like purpose must not be silenc't. The Cardinal
Bellarmine with whom the father had some accquaintance (as has been said) and
although their writings one against the other were abroad in print: yet that
good affection whose root is from virtue and christian Charity was not
extinct neither in the one nor the other. He sent twice to him to present him
with salutations of love once by a Roman Secular, who told him from the
Cardinal that he wished him to look carefully to himself, for that he had
great cause. And by another time when Alberto Testini was come from Rome to a
Chapter at Mantua, the Cardinal imposed it upon him, that going to Venice, he
should salute the father in his name with much affection, and to assure him
that his love to him was not abated at all, And by this he desired him to take
an assurance that a Friar of Vicenza naming one Fra. Felice (that lives) had
under the title of the life of father Paul composed a famous libell and made it
to be presented to the Pope Paul the fifth, who had delivered it to him (the
Cardinal) to peruse, and to give him his opinion, whether it were fit to be
published, and that he the Cardinal made this relation, that he knew the
father very well, and that his holiness might take his word, that the things
mentioned were notorious calumnies, which would be dishonorable to whosoever
should publish them. Thus much Maestro Alberto Testoni told the father besides
some other things. In offenses of all sorts both against his life and his
honnour (the calumnies which have been put in printe against him, being
infinite) which such a member of libellers thinking to please the humor of the
Court written) and it has so far exeeded the limits of all Christian
profession, that like a swarm of frogs in a muddy marsh, they have taken that
emblem from their shamelessness, only to see how far their malediction could
be carried, yet the father never showed the least sign either of disdain, or
revenge, one of his most excellent virtues which has accompanied him to his
grave, was his meekness in such a perfection, that those of his religion with
a general voice render him this testimony, that they never knew him endeavor
any the least kind of revenge, and it is to be observed, that the author of
that famous libell whereof we made mention, was not Fra. Felice of Vincenza as
it was reported, but another whom for his discredit I spare to name, and one
whom the father might well have procured to be punished at his pleasure. But
he would not only not do it, but as long as the father lived, that man lived
in security, with employments of Honor, but the father was no sooner dead, but
that injury being resented by the public, with other failings and wretched
operations of his, brought him so far into the public indignation that he
was not suffered to remain in the Dominions of Venice. Philosophy and the
very law of Christ can very hardly eradicate a certain pleasant itch of
revenge, and it is no small matter to abstain from the action.

But this Father of ours, was arrived at such a degree of virtue, that when he
received the greatest wrong, he kept the same serenity of face, mildness of
language, extenuating the injuries that were done him as much as it was possible
to do, alleging this many times for a reason; That such an one either had his
brains cracked, or that his condition hung upon such interests, that he could
do no otherwise, after this time the Popes mind seemed to be much mitigated,
and he was somewhat sincerd in the opinion of the Fathers goodness and piety.

True it is that the Bishop of Tine being not long after called to Venice upon
a process formed against him by inquisitors of theirs, that were sent into the
Levant. His cause was committed to the consultation of the father Paul who made
such a judgment and relation upon it, that the Bishop was rather commended,
then reprehended by the public, obtaining diverse privileges for his Church,
and for his person, and returning afterward from Rome, and coming to Venice,
he told the Father that the Pope had enquired distinctly of his success in his
business, and understanding how the Father had comported himself, he seemed
to be much pleased, and broke into some expressions, that from diverse parts he
had heard that the Father was a great friend to justice, and carried himself
with much prudence and sincerity: And of the other side, the Father prayed and
desired God to send the Pope a long life, and that he might survive him, as he
was younger then he by a year or thereabouts, and he would often say to some
of his inward friends by way of prognostique that Pope Paul he believed had
sha'kt off his ill affection toward him, but if he were dead, whosoever should
succeed him, would revive it a gain, because the effects of the past
controversy continued still like scarres, which in some some sort or other
would quickly come into demonstration, and he was not at all deceived in his
judgment, (as will hereafter appear:) But notwithstanding withstanding this
malevolence, it was a thing more then certain, that even at Rome among the
great prelates, he had a mighty repute, and that when they had occasion to
speak of him though but to satisfy the Court, and their own interests, yet
they discovered that they had him in opinion of a great personage, both for
honesty and learning, and it is also certain that Cardinal Bellarmine found
much fault in public, that so little reckoning was made of a man of such
eminent parts, and said, that if he could have been reconciled to the service
of the Church, although they had given him but a dry flower to smell on (for
those were his very words,) conceiving that the father had formerly been
deeply distasted of the Court because Pope Clement had twice refused to give
him a small Bishopric, the one of Melopotamo, and the other of Nona in
Dalmatia: and he spoke it freely that he had always desired to have him live
at Rome, because he had known him, and practiced him, and knew very well how
great service he was able to have done the Church. The Signor Cardinal Forza
being a Prince of such a sublimity of virtue and blood as it is well known
might believed to have had the baseness of flatterers in abhorment; who to
feed the humor of the Court prostitute their tongues (making them venale) to
lying and calumnies) this Cardinal would often with much delight tempt another
father Fra. Amante Buonvicino that was at Rome (Parochian of Santa maria in
via) and went under the name of a Venetian, and put him into discourse
concerning Father Paul, seeming to oppose him in it, wherewith that Father
finding himself to be too far urged, would enter into a narrative of the
Fathers life, of his Studies, of the poverty wherein he lived, with all the
particularities in which he was both wise and cunning, perceiving how much the
Cardinal was pleased with it, because when he came to give demonstrations of
his excellent piety, he would answer him with a smile, and say that those
perhaps were but hypocrisies to cosen the world, but he spoke it after such a
manner that the Friar might well perceive it was spoken but in a way of
upbraiding, or giving the lie to such as thought so of him, and thereupon he
freely gave him the same reply which the Signior Villiers now Ambassador to
the most Christian King, had done to two Nuntios Zachia at present, and Ascoli
that was before him, who being often constrained in point of Argument by the
too notorioues truth of the innocent and exemplarie life of the father, would
always spit their venom, by saying he was an Hypocrite, whereunto the said
Ambassador Villers made them this reply: That the Fathers course was quite
contrary to that of Hypocrites, because they make all their actions to appear
clothed with piety in public as much as they can possibly, although they can
never go so concealed but that they make a discovery of their ends to be but
avarice, ambition, and temporal enjoyments, insomuch that the skin of the
lamb could never quite cover nor conceal that of the wolf: But the Father
never made any such show to the public, but lived in an absolute retirednes.
He was never known to use any hypocritical actions, not to hold out crowns
in his hand as he went through the streets, not to kiss medailles, not to
affect stations and places at times of concourse, not to speak with affected
Spiritualities, nor to use sordidnesse in his garments, but only a
cleanliness of attire, which though poor was yet condecent. And if this be
called Hypocrisy it is an unknown sort of hypocrisy, which has neither
objectnor end, nor so much as a circumstance of either.

The dialogue between the Nuntio Zachia and Villiers was occasioned in this
manner Monsieur Villiers is a Gentleman of great sincerity, and of a most
ingenious heart, but not very capeable of the artificies, especially of the
Courtiers of Rome, which are the most refined of the world. Pietro Assileneo a
frenchman was the Physician to his house, who was the very sincerity and
goodness of nature; and having been a great friend to the father, now by the
space of forty years, he made it known to him, how every time the Nuntios
talked with the Ambassador concerning the Father, They spoke always of him
with such prefaces of honor, as if they would make him to be one of the most
wretched men in the world; at this the Father laugh't and would sometimes say,
so it is fit, and so it should be, because I am the most diverse and differing
from their humor that is possible: And if they be the most perfect and holy
men, then I am the most lewd and wretched man that can be spoken of. But he
said yet further desiring to be satisfied how the fathers life seemed so
scandalous to deserve such Elogies from Churchmen, and that he knew not what
to do to give satisfaction to those great prelates, nor what to abstain from
to take away their sinister opinions, only he wished that the next time the
Nuntio spoke of him to the Ambassador, he would interrupt him a little, to know
what was his reason to charge him with such hypocrisy. His friend informed the
Ambassador of this discourse who taking his opportunity which happened to be
the 16 of February 1621. when the Nuntio entered into his usual custom of
railing upon the father. The Ambassador replied upon him, that from all other
men he had always heard the father to be much commended for his goodness and
integrity, but withal said he would be very glad to know from him, what ground
he had for the contrary, that he might the better know how to believe those
that informed him otherwise.

The Nuntio was suddenly surprised, with this demand of his, and durst not
deny what the Ambassador had said, because it was too well known, but desired
to disengage himself, by charging his good actions and his innocent life with
hypocrifie. But this foild him so much the more, because the Ambassador pressed
him again to know what end he had discovered in the father, or what external
action to prove him an hypocrite. To this the Nuntio knew not what to say, but
was defirous to divert the discourse to some other subject.

But because all things took easy impression with the father, especially
things of weight, the father after a little merriment and facetious discourse
conjured an inward friend of his to deal plainly with him and to advise him
of his defects, and in particular if according to the rules of holy
Evangelicall doctrine he found in him any arguments of hypocrifie,
acknowledging that a man is not better known to any, nor yet more concealed
from any then himself, and that the nature of self flatry is not easily
rooted out. Such dialogismes as these past betwixt them a little after those
times of the late co^motions in Spain, and also at the Court of the most
Christian King, betwixt the Ambassador Pietre Contarini and the Cardinal
Vbaldini, at that time Nuntio in that Court, This Cardinal did allwaies use to
infamize the father for his published writings with odious appellations.
Contarini on the other side, a gentleman of singular candor, of a placid
nature, sweet and nothing contentious, but yet solid, made him this answer,
that he himself was neither a divine nor yet a doctor of the laws to
maintain a difference with his most reverend Lordship, but concerning the
fathers writings he was well assured, that they were neither so ignorant nor so
impious as the Nuntio had made them, which was easily by so great a
commendation wherewith they were received in all the Catholic states, by the
most learned and pious professors of sciences, but concerning his life and
manners, he was very certain and knew it, not only by relation by experience,
that he was irreprehensible, and that he lived an holy retind and exemplary
life. To which the Nuntio Vbaldini made answer, that by so much he confirmed
himself more in his opinion that he was a lewd fellow and an exquifite
hypocrite from his irreprehenfible life; But Maffeo Barbarino that was the
Nuntio in France talked in a higher strain against him and with more violence
cried out with poetical amplifications that he was worse then Luther or
Calvin, and contained not himself from saying that it was fit he should be
assessinated. There he came to know that the father wrote to and received
letters from some of those Lords that were counselors of Parliament, and from
the Sorbonists who were very orthodoxe, and maintained the defense of the
lawful secular power, opposing themselves against the usurpations of Rome, and
maintayning the liberty of the Gallicane Church.

And true it is, that he did (...) write to, and receive letters from Monsieur
Gillet Peschasier Servino Richer Buniello, and some from Causabon after the
fame was grown constant, that he was turned Catholic. The letters were
always consulted by the jurisdiction. All men were heretics with Barbarino
to whom the father either wrote, or they to him. But they that knew not how to
convince him either in his profession or in his life, had that only common
place against him that he was an hypocrite. A fair confrontation of the
judgment of these prelates of the Roman Court with the doctrine of Christ and
his Holy Apostles, who taught us to know men's faith by their works, and the
tree by the fruit. And if a life led with a marvelous evennesse and constancy
from his childhood unto seaventie one years old, which for his actions none
could tax, and in whose words was never either obscaenitie, nor so much as an
oathe sworn, nor any base thing but in his life a most exquisite poverty, a
perfect observance of laws, far from all ambition and above all he was an
enemy to all delights, nor ever showed the least sign of avarice nor ambition
of any degree or dignity: And if these be th arguments whereby Christ has
taught us to know Hypocrites, let it be referred to the judgment of other men.
But neither God nor humanity will permit innocence to have so ill a fortune,
nor virtue such a misadventure that fame and infamy should allwaies be at the
disposition of great persons. The just man is like a palm tree, who raises
himself under the burden of Calumny. God was never pleased that those very
tyrants that had a total license against the life of poor innocents; should
likewise have any power over their fame and memory. And if this were but in
humanity it self (without a mixture of any virtue) it would lie under too
great an injustice. But because this mark (whereat all their poisoned arrows
were shot) could never be hit: his contempt of money being so well known, and
that he had nothing but to suffice his pure necessities, and those rather in
defect then plenty, much less delicates of every kind (whereof he was always
abhorring) even so far that to the last breath of his life he has constantly
been observed never to have any other gusto then that which took his
original, and was terminated in his studies and in virtue, and therefore his
life was the most arduous, the most toilesome and painful that any religious
man was able lead; he being in his last seaventeene years like a recluse
always shut up in his chamber, except it were when the public seevice or his
religious profession compelled him abroad, and to live so sparing and so
abstinently, and according to pure necessity, that the greatest part of his
time was past with a little bread tosted upon hot coals, and only one sort of
other food to his bread, which was both vile in quantity and quality This was
not ^one to advance his kindred (for of those there were none left) but this
ambition and appetite of glory (which among human affections is the last which
is subdued) and the wise man calls it the shirt which the wisest men ever put
off last. This is that putrid corruption whereupon all these fleshflies
fluttering up and down the world, do at last settle themselves. But against
the assaults of this vice, he had an impenetrable shield, in so much as if ever
man had totally subdued this affection of the appetite of glory, it was this
man of whom we write.

And first, for a certain proof that no advancement of fortune nor any credit
in the world, had moved him to any mutation of mind, so far as could be
concluded from external effects, (continuing always in the same, and his own
tenor of life, to which purpose he had always this saying in his mouth, si
Spiritus dominantis super te ascenderit, Locum tuum ne deseras; and in a way of
rest he was used to say. That he that walks upon stilts, or fits in an high
place, does not lessen his labor, but goes in a greater danger. Besides that
constant purpose of never writing, nor publishing any thing in any kind of
profession (being in all things eminent) and as I may say prodigiously perfect;
shows whether he were far from any such desire, and whether it could be done
with any vain glory or no.

These few things which necessity has drawn from him can well witness. He
has been curious to conceal himself for being known to be the author of
diverse sort of inrstuments. The two manners of Pulfiligio were of his
invention, the instrument of knowing the variation of heat and cold, of that
perspective which in Italy is called Galilean, and formed in Holland, the
artifice of it was discovered by him; when one of them was first presented to
the Signory of Venice, with a demand of 1000 Checchines the charge was
presently given to the father to make a trial what it would serve for, and to
deliver his judgment, and being not allowed to open it, to see how it was made
up, he imagined straight what it could be, and conferred with the Gallilean who
acknowledged that the father had found out the secret, and so of diverse others.
But it is a thing to be observed, that so many instruments as have been
invented by the authors of the Mathematiques and of Astronomy, and described
with so much solemnity, that it is a difficult thing to make them, and much
more to make use of them. He making them with his own hand, and giving out
modells to workmen, reduced them to such a facility and fimplenesse that one
would have thought he had had both the heavens and earth in his head. It has
been a great prejudice to those that are curious, that in the problem of the
motion of the earth being ancient but renewed by Copernicus, he had found the
means Salvare tutti i Fenomeni with one only motion, and sought workmen to
make him an instrument to put under ones eyes, for the discerning of it. I
silence those secrets which were unknown until his age, and he was ever well
pleased, that some of his friends should have the honor to publish them, as if
they had been their own; which shows a great moderation in this affection of
his. And of things of his that are in print, what glory has he sought by
those, having used such exquisite means to conceal his name: One particular
must not be past over, which was a firm resolution of leaving nothing, either
of his own hand, or other men's that might carry his name or preserve a memory
as may appear by this that he would never let his picture be drawn from the
natural, notwithstanding that it were desired both by kings and great Princes.
And although many of his pictures go abroad for originalls, yet they are all
but coppies of one which is said to be in the gallery of a great King, which
was taken against his will and by a stratagem.

But for himself this may give assurance that he did not endure to have his
picture drawn, because in the last years of his life being entreated by the
most illustrious and excellent Dominico Molini, and likewise of his confident
Fra. Fulgentio being set on to beseech him, yet it could not be obtained, so
much as to give a famous painter leave to take his picture although he were
promised that he should not sit at it above an hour. And yet he was solicited
by this great Lord in the virtue of the friendship that had been betwixt them,
and by such significant means, that for the denial which he gave him fifteen
days together whilst he entertained the painter in expectation, he grew so
angry with the father, that there past some months betwixt them without
speaking to each other. And yet the deportment of this Senator, and the esteem
which the father had of him as of a subject in whom to be nobly borne was the
least of his virtues and merits because of that exquisite learning which he had
in Histories ancient and modern,) a politic prudence most singular grounded
upon a marvelous understanding of the state of all the Princes in Europe, both
of the quality of their governments, and their interests, how they rule, and
who has most power with them, with all the notable particulars of their
current business with all the series of their important affairs,) have
rendered him conspicuous not only in this Commonwealth, but with all others
besides a certain ardour in him of the liberty and conservation of his
Country, and a total dedication of himself to the public service, which had
rendered him so intimate and familiar with the father that in seaventeene years
there past but a few days, wherein they spent not a long time together, and
yet for all this he could not obtain his request: so far the father was from
every thing that savoured of ambition, which together with avarice are the 2
maine rocks that cannot be avoided by Hypocrrites. But the abnorment which he
had to live in Court, which he showed first in his youth when he left that
Court of Mantua and in his virility that of Rome, and having constantly refused
to go thither upon the invitation of so great persons, and such opportunities
shall easily convince the most pertinacious, that at least they should not dare
to contradict Christ so-openly in this saying of his that those which wear
rich clothing are in Princes Courts, and in these days of ours it is well
known where ambition has her chiefest seat.

But in Churchmen it is certainly a thing most unseeming and scandalous to
calumniate so rare a piety of Hypocrisy, because to those ends which they
propose to themselves, to those apparances which are seen in them by that
language which they ordinarily speak, they show well enough that they do but
mock the world and very little believe that there is a God, while they pretend
their lives should be esteemed either Apostolical or Christian, and in the
mean time condemn the father of Hypocrisy. But the eye of God makes a
discovery of all hearts, and in the interim this shall be received for an
irrefragable testimony that these men which were so apt to make a sinister
interpretation of all things, being not able to oppose his actions, were feign
to pass to his intentions which are only reserved, and attributed to God by
those that believe him to be judge of intention and the searcher of hearts.

This digression cannot be superfluous to them that will consider the diligence
that has been used to trace the life of this innocent father and to find
imperfections in that fair soul for some further and hidden ends. But it was
not the father that gave them this offense it was his doctrine, and in this
matter the Ecclesiastiques were greatly guilty of offense, before God, and of
scandal to the world by having given so great a cause to confirm those in
their opinions who write that is Arcanum Curiae Romanae after it has drawn to
it self the authority of all Ecclesiasticke orders, and a great part of that
of Princes for the making good in religion of whatsoever turns to their
advantage, to assume yet further to themselves what belongs to the whole Church
by canonizing persons, to canonize those doctrines and opinions of theirs that
are profitable to their greatness. And so likewise to reprove those doctrines
which make not to their pretensions, although they be both true and catholic,
they have used from time to time the artificie of calumnitating the the persons
that have written how holy and blameless soever they have been. I do not
deliver this opinion for true, nor do I consent to those examples for proof,
but I speak honestly, and do attest before God. That in the example of this
father of ours, not the Church but the miymons of the Court have used this
style, and how much worse they make it, by so much they increase the scandal
and irritate Princes, or else awaken them to make them see, that to calumniate
those persons that serve to defend their just actions, is to condemn in
obliquity the Princes themselves and a making the world believe that they can
put a yoke of tyrany upon them at their pleasure by oppressing them in life and
after death, and consequently those that were their good and Catholic
defendors.

In the public service he was so daily an attendant, so faithful, and with so
much fervor to the good of his Prince, that the most serence republique
honored him with a thing that was never before granted to any of their
consultors, that he might enter into all their archives and records, into their
two secrets to see and manage all their writings and their government, to which
honor he has corresponded with so much fidelity as they very well know that
sit at the stern, and in a short time he grew so verst and knowing, having
seen whatsoever he could desire, that he was able by the felicity of an
incomparable memory immediately to lay his hand upon any memorial, or book or
writing, or relation, or whatsoever else was desired or sought for. He that
knows what is meant by the two secrets of Venice may very easily from that
alone draw an argument of a divine wit, and of a monstrous memory, because in
them there are beside the public reasons of state, the fundamental laws, the
treaties of war and peace of truces and confederations, and of whatsoever can
any ways belong to a great state, there are also all the great passage of all
Europe for some hundreds of years, the changes and alterations all
Christendom, and they are it old books in letters of former ages which, are
very hard to read. And if fire had not twice derived them of a great part of
that treasure, I dare be bold to say, it had been one of the most inestimable
things in the whole world.

Now this incomparable wit was grown to be so much the patron of those things
that at an instant he knew the places where to find, and particulars, in so
much as his mind was now become the very secret place, where without search
any one might read viva voce whatsoever was either of necessity or curiosity
to be known. And that this important benefit might not be lost nor perish with
his life, he has also made some indexes with so many notes and registers, that
the use of them is now made very easy for all times to come. And the
importance of his labor herein is found to be so useful that the that the
most excellent Senate have salaried with an honorable stipend the fathers
writer, for adjoining his consultations to the registry, which happily may rise
to a little less then 1000 tractates and counsels all bound up in volumes of
perchment. And in those treaties either of their confines or their their
jurisdiction which might happen during his service, the helps and instructions
are easily found, whereupon the causes are founded; whereof I must not insist
upon particulars, because it concerns the government. But the most excellent
Senate know very well the consequence of that service, and what he has revived
out of ignorance upon diverse negotiations which happened in his time Because
the allegations in law import so much, wherein the Republique have always
been served of the most able men of Europe, and which is yet nothing in
respect of the dilucidation in matter of fact, which is gathered from public
documents which how much it has imported in the matter of the confines of
their ancient dominions of the Golfe, of the jurisdiction of fees or the
precatia of Ceneda and Aquileia, has been clearly proved in the treaties that
followed in his time, by virtue whereof the Ecclesiastiques were never able to
prevail against them in any thing of consequence, nor were able to find out
any thing which could hold opposition against the true, real and fundamental
rights of the most serene Republique.

In all this time of the public service which continued seaventeene years, I
cannot say that he was subject to more then one infirmity which was of moment.
I find that he was once in the hand of the Physicians in the year 1612 which
was the first time that he referred himself to their cure, except when he was
constrained by necessity of Surgery which was only thrice, once in his
youth when riding from Lombardy toward Padova in the very heat of Summer he
was supprssed with a terrible squinancy, whereupon sending presently for a bar
bour to take some blood from a vein. The harbor refused to do it without
order of a Physician, and the father not being able to overruled him, but
finding the increase of the inflammation to grow upon him made show of
believing him, and agreeing with his opinion, but desired him that while he
went for a Physician he would let him see whether his Iron were good, and he
giving him the case, he took out his lancet, and presently set it to his own
arm, whereupon the barbor seeing his resolution did his office, and in a few
hours as it is usual in such accidents, he was free and well. Another time
likewise in a voyage from Vicenza to Padova he fell into a suppression of
Urine, which having not had his course for a whole day, he was constrained to
use the help of a surgeon by the hand of Aquapendente But knowing himself a
renicidence to that disease, he would be provided of a surgeon, and candles to
operate when need should require as he did always after with his own hand.
And although Coll aqua da virgin, he was so eased that he seldom relaps't
into that indisposition, yet for late years he has sometimes suffered, and
once among others with so much vehemence that making trial as he had formerly
done, and not able to help with his own hand, he held himself to be but a
dead man, and immediately with a true tranquillity and setlednesse of his mind,
he received the sacrament saying, Questo e da facere poi si pensara al
rimanente. This must now be done and after we shall think of the rest, but he
could not help himself as he had done at other times. In the mean time Fra
Fulgentio having without his knowledge fetched Carto Scivo^ and Lingi Ragosa
that were famous in that profession, the business ended with mirth, for so
soon as they were come to his presence, and he had had some discourse of the
disease, they desired him that since he had not help by his own hands, that
he would give them leave to try theirs. So rising up upon his feet without
any show of trouble, he said. But must I make a trial in your presence, what
will you say if I do it my self according to art and like a workman? and
immediately he fell to work with his candle, and so the business ended being
well laughed at.

Yet the father knew very well that age decreaseth strength and changes the use
of the very natural parts and instruments. He had also another disease growing
in one of his legs which troubled him for ten months, but for that he cut
himself with his own hand many times, and in many places were the aposteme
made, until it was well healed. A thing very rare in Venice.

But in those infirmities that are bred in humors which are occasioned by
agues, he was never in the Physicians hand until the year 1612 I know well
what it is to depart from common received opinions in matters of speculation,
but much more in operations, especially where it may concern life, But I have
not undertaken to justify, but only to give a narration of the fathers
actions. He was so subject to fevers, that every little accident caused him to
have long and sharp ones. In which he governed himself very differently from
the common practice. For first he would alter nothing of his ordinary diet
except it were from the more to the less. He would not keep his bed, but rise
and perform all his usual functions, he read, he studied, he wrote. In the
fury of any of his fits being in his clothes, he would lay himself a long
upon a chest, or a table but seldom in his bed. He ordered the hours of his
own eating, and would have his ordinary allowance as well of wine as other
things, except (as I said) from the more to the less, when he saw his best
time he would take Physic of his own appointment, but simple, not compounded,
as Cassia, Manna, Tamaris, or some such thing, which either he took by
themselves, or else being mixed, he received them as he did his other meat, so
much he was able always to command his affections. He held an opinion, and
professed it openly, that the way of medication in our time with a sudden and
change of diet, and living with so many purgations and receipts served for
nothing but to make slow recoveries, and to hold a disease in credit, and
particularly for men in years, to give over their wonted actions for many days
together did greatly disimprove them in the use of the parts of their body, and
that for one to betake him to his bed, observing so sudden and absolute a
mutation of diet and exexercise was a necessary weakening of a man's self. And
that concerning himself he was sure that he knew more then any body else did
or could. And it was truly a rare thing that in so weak a complexion a
convalescence could not be more easily discerned. Many times it could not be
judged whether he were sick except it were by his aspect which accused him,
for otherwise he would perform all his accustomed actions. And with this tenor
of governing himself he continued to sixteen years of his age, at which time
about July being in the house of Signor Servilio Treo upon a weighty
consultation he was surprised with a violent fever, that continued with him
eighteen days together, and begun by a strange accident, that it was not
possible for him neither to take meat nor drink, but so soon as it was
presented, his stomach abhorred it. In so much as he fell into a wonder of
himself, and seemed to grieve that he was not able to command, and as he said
to vanquish a false opinion, when the fits came upon him in those hot days of
July, as he desired that they would give him a little cold water, his stomach
loathed it as soon as it was presented unto him, whereat he would sometimes
laugh making a jest at it. It was not possible for him to be without the visits
of Physicians, because the public had commanded them to attend him. It was
often in his mouth, Questo ho avanzato che mi conviene ad altri pui credere ai
me cha me medisimo. This is all I have gotten that I must nost believe others
of my self more then my self. But he would go no further with them then often
to discourse of his sickness, and propose some medicament, and of many that
were proposed to make choice of some one which was proposed, to him by Santerio
who had been his ancient friend, and of a very strickt acquaintance.

The Physicians, and Santorio more then others held him a dying man, of which
the father Fulgentio speaking to him, father Paul answered him that he was
secure of his recovery from this sickness, but if he felt himself worse that
the Physicians should hear more of him. Fulgentio replied, bidding him take
heed, because he might be deceived, for it was the opinion of Santerio that
without doubt he should dye of that disease, seeing no amendment in him, and
that his spirits began to fail, like a plant that beginns to wither, and that
he knew the solidity of Santorios judgment why then (replied the father) you
had best believe him, and thereupon he fell a laughing with a witty conceit
which was spoken to another purpose by Speron Speroni who used often to say Che
ne si hoggi. And after when Santorio came to visit him, he began to jest with
him, and would not let him feel his pulse asking him why he would now flatter
him after he had peremptorily sentenced him to death. And when he prescribed
him the milk of an ass against his dryness, he slighted it facetiously by
saying this is fair counsel indeed from a friend now that I am above 60
years of age to make me an alliance with asses, and so went on smiling. And
do you not think it a pretty relation for me now to become foster brother to
that young ass of whose milk you would have me usurp a part? It was also his
custom that as in his sickness he never changed his course of life, nor his
wonted actions, so neither would he change his pleasant and argute replies,
which in in so distempered a body were a great argument of a full securenesse
and entire serenity of soul. He that was so well studied in medicine was able
to discourse of it as of his simple profession wherein of necessity there must
be a tincture, but in his later years he was entered into such a diffidence
that he seemed to believe no longer in his own skill of distinguishing what
was either good or hurtful. And whereas formerly he was taxed that ever and
anon he took some medicament for preservation of his health, afterward he
would receive none at all upon any condition, except some locale medicines, and
those upon great necessity.

From his very youth his learning had rendered him famous in all the parts of
Europe, from whence it happened that so many persons of value that came to
Venice (and the condition of that City draws to it from all parts the
greatest subjects) took great content to look upon him; and many to receive
into their books which they call Albus amicorum, some sentence of his which is
a thing very much in use beyond the mountains, and he used to do it always
with some notable ancient sentence or else of divine scripture. But the
occasion of the interdict a controversy betwixt two so great Princes of Italy,
(and wherein by way of accommodation the two Kings of France and Spain, the
Emperor and all the other potentates of Christendom were entered not only by
notice but by participation) made him very famous, and desired to be seen of
diverse great persons who made it not the least motive of their peregrinations,
and was a cause that he was known of all the learned men in Europe, but
especially of those that make profession of defending the lawful authority of
Princes. He was visited by letters from the most learned that were in France,
Gillot, Leschassier, Salmario, Richer, Boviel Causabon, many Princes have
likewise honored him with their letters and by the visits of their sons sent
into Italy, and in what esteem he was with them may be seen by their letters
if it be not thought affection: Only I may add this, that a great Prince
sending his son into Italy put it into his instructions that he should not
fail to visit Orbis terrarum ocellum giving that title to the father. And
when the Ambassador of the Holland estates Signor Arseus came to Venice,
having used all means possibly to have a sight of him he was satisfied
therein, being brought into the Antisecret to hear the answer read that was
given him by the most excellent Senate to his denialls (as it is the course)
and having seen the father as he crossed the chamber to go to his place, he
said to that Senator that bare him company, the illustrio Signor Guistimano,
that he was so well pleased to have seen that great man the most conspicuous
of all Europe that he should be well satisfied to return home again to his
Country, although he had obtained none of his demands from the republique, and
think the labor and expense of his journey very well bestowed. I have known
further also by very good information, that he was sought to, and invited from
two crowned heads, if he would have accepted their service in things of
greatest importance by relation had from their letters to the father delivered
by their own Ambassadors then resident at Venice. But he with terms of
acknowledgment due to so great Princes refused to depart from the service of
his natural sovereign whereunto God had called him.

Of one of these meetings it is necessary to make a particular mention. The
Prince of Conde 1622 being the last year of the fathers life but one, come to
see Italy, and desired by all means to have discourse with the father, who
would by no means condescend to be seen of him. But the Prince did so besiege
him in his Monastery that he was often constrained to shut himself up in his
Cell without so much as eating his dinner, because he would not come abroad,
and all the while the Prince knew him to be within. But at last breaking into
some impatience and laments, that it was a more difficult thing to see father
Paul, then to see the Pope himself. One of the gentlemen of Venice that
accompanied the Prince remembered to advise him that the father as he was a
consultor of state could not hold any congresse with Princes nor their
ministers by the law without a public knowledge, and leave first obtained.
Whereupon the father had leave and was commanded to let the Prince see him. To
which he obeyed although with a very ill will, only he would have their
meeting not to be in the Monastery, but else where and in the pulique presence
of some others, as if he had foreseen what happened afterward. So the Prince
visited him in the house of Signor Angelo Contarini a Cavalier who being lately
returned from an Embassy into France, was by public order appointed to Court,
and to attend that Prince. In that meeting the father was nothing deceived of
what he suspected, that befides the Princes own curiosity he should be
environed with interrogatories at the instance of others. All the discourse
that followed betwixt them is found written with the very conceits and words
that were then spoken and remains where it ought to be. The substance of it
was, that the Prince as he was of great birth which is very well known, so he
was of a great vivacity, and and an extraordinary spirit, joined with great
store of learning, and was continually upon a tempting way to sound the father
concerning the sects of the time, and chiefly concerning the reformed religion
in France (which he railed on as pernicious to government) and then concerning
superiority betwixt a council and the Pope, as also of the liberty of the
Gallicane Church, and whether it be lawful to make use of the service in arms
of those that dissent from us in religion, of the excommunicating of Princes,
and most of all who was the author of the history of the council of Trent,
which the Prince more by the instigation of some other then of his own Genius
was defirous to know, (such power has the contagion of those that practice
with some religious men.)

This flying discourse full of jumpes of provocations and interrogatories
seemed like a floting of waves that were to break themselves upon the rocks,
of rare, of brief and of only necessitated answers. His blaming of the
Hugonets in France without touching upon the least point of their doctrine was
by the father diverted with a singular dexterity, representing to his memory
the valor and prudence of his father and grandfather whereof the Prince being
very intelligent, did quickly perceive what that signified.

Concerning the difference of superiority between the Pope and Counsels,
from that he disentangled himself by putting him in mind of the Sorbonne, and
the alteration and depravation of that state since the admission of the Jesuits
into France, and the difference which is betwixt the ancient and modern
Sorbonits without touching any thing of the superiority which the Prince had
most desired. And likewise the liberties of the Gallicane Church, that he past
over in general terms, saying that the Parliaments of France, and the Sorbon
it self have maintained these liberties, as the natural rights of all the
churches, but in France they have been better defended then elsewhere from the
usurpations of others. As for the making use of the arms of those that differ
from us in religion, he said no more, but that Pope Giulio the second served
himself in Bolognia of Turks, and Paul the fourth of the Grisons at Rome,
calling them Angels sent from God to defend him, and yet that they were but
Heretics. More largely they continued their discourse of the excommunications
of Princes and the father reduced the Prince to the history of Gregory the
seventh, of this side the Alps, and particularly in France making him
confess that he had seen the private writings and also of the states upon the
like subject, where if the Popes had not pretended so far, that Princes should
not hear mass nor be present at other offices, perhaps the controversies had
not grown so hot. But the point was, whether Princes had a cause of complaint,
that under pretenses of excommunications which are spiritual pains, they
should suffer their subjects to rebel against them, and be disobliged of their
fidelities and subjection which is due to them by laws both natural and
divine, and stirring up wars, and seditions against them as far as to lay
wait for their lives, and take away their crowns and scepters.

To the point of the author of the council of Trent the father told him that
he knew well, that he himself was the man that had divulged it in France to be
his, and had also told as much to the Ambassador of Venice, then resident with
his Christian Majesty, whereupon the Ambassador was constrained to write of it
to the public, and further he did not answer him, but only this; That at
Rome it was well enough known who was the author, and after this with all his
windings and turnings he could get no more out of him.

He that shall consider thoroughly of these points, and that knows the father,
and knows the Prince well, though of an elevated spirit, will give his
judgment upon the report that was after divulged, I believe rather from others
then from the Prince himself who gave it out that he had confounded the
father, and reduced him to such a straightness, that he knew not what to say.
But as there is nothing in the world without his contrary, nor any thing so
holy that is not subject to a sinister interpretation after the father was in
public employment, and that his actions begun to be more observed, and
commented upon, it behooved him to restrain himself from such virtuous
commerces, wherein he was formerly frequent, although the occasions were less
frequent. Because those that were ill affected to him, made it a conclusion,
that he had no sincere sense in the Roman religion, because he treated with
such indifferency and moderation, not enquiring into occult things that
pertained not to him, and that he was now grown more sensible of such
defamations then he had been formerly: did arise from this consideration (and
he spoke itopenly) because heretofore he had only treated of things of his
own interest: but that being now a servant of the Republique it was fit he
should deny himself the pleasure of those learned conversation, with this
reason that those impostures which were put upon him as a minister of state
might not redound to the public prejudice. But his constancy in the purity of
religion, has no need of a defense, nor is it needful to make a digression
upon that. Only I shall touch this particular whereof so many men yet living
are able to make faith, and which whosoever goes about to deny shall find too
many adversaries to contend with.

One notable inconvenience from the imprudence of those writers that favored
the Ecclesiastical cause, in the the year 1606, was this; That the cause
being pure, and merely temporal, and matter of Jurisdiction, they procured by
all their cunning to represent it as a point of religion thinking that to be
their absolute advantage, not seeing how they could otherwise defend it, or at
least insinuate it to be defensible either at Court or among the people. In the
zeal of this course they did so far surpass the straight line of verity and
conscience, that they grew to publish in conference, in their pulpits, and in
printe, that at Venice they were resolved to change religion, having begun by
the denying of obedience to the Bishop of Rome, and by a manifest schism, it
is not much to be wondered at that this course took beginning from a swarm of
hungry ambitious libellers that were merely ignorant of former passages. But it
is more to be admired, that so wise and learned a Cardinal should enter into
this dance as Bellarmine, Baronius and Collonna that had reason to know what
prejudice such a fame (though false and now dispersed abroad) might bring to the
Ecclesiastiques.

In all Aristocracies, equality is by the necessity of humane condition most
unequal, as to the ability of the optimates there having never yet been a
college or society so well chosen that had had not their dreggs among them;
otherwise Aristocracies would consist of so many Kings, and the vulgar part of
it would be only among the Optimates. For this reason, (although for the
defense of their liberty, there were in all their bodies and counsels at
Venice a singular concord, yet) there were allwaies some subjects of more
valor and eminency then others that served as guides to the rest. Comparisons
are not to be admitted in commonweals, wherefore it will not be fit to name
any particulars But speaking of things in general it was a grace and
providence of almighty God that those which were the most resolute and disposed
to this Common defense, were the greatest not only in nobility, honors,
experience, hability, and activity, but even for piety and religion. A part of
them are yet alive, most eminent Senators, and for purity and reale of holy
religion known above all others. The rest of them are past away from hence, by
a most religious death to the glory of the blessed.

The said Ecclesiastike shot all their cursed darts especially against these
men as the most high and conspicuous objects taxing them for innovators of
religion, charging them with a design of making the common weal revolt to the
protestant religion. The Oltramontanes, that were most attentive to the
success of these passages, and to the settling of so famous a controversy did
greedily read and receive whatsoever came abroad, believing all to be true
that came from the Ecclesiastics with such asseverations, that the serene
republique was about to deny obedience to the Pope, and ready to change
religion because those that were the chief in government, had the same
design. And those that were the greatest zelots among them, assured with hopes
of enlarging their religion, and having observed that upon all those occasions,
which the Church of Rome had taken to excommunicate Princes, and interdict
states, there ever followed some notable revolts, thought fit it should be
fomented with a hope (which they had already conceived) of a change, and the
Princes of Italy failed not to procure a strikt intelligence with the
republique, who when they saw the King of Spain declare himself protector of
the Ecclesiasticke party, were constrained for reason of good government to
hear all, and adhere only to those whose interest was conjoined with their
own. And diverse private Doctors were not wanting to send out pamphlets, which
for any diligence that could be used in such a confusion were impossible to be
so suppressed, but that they were also received at Venice. The scope whereof was
to give color and credit to that change which the Ecclesiastiques gave out to
be in hand. The heads of all were to propose that the Pope excercised an
intolerable tyrany over the souls and bodies of those that were subject to
him, and to show the great happiness that those estates enjoyed that had quit
their obedience and might enjoy the goods and lands which were left by pious
Christians to pious uses, which were either employed to a right use, or else
enjoyed by the people of the country to a common benefit, whereas in those
states that are under the papacy, there was seen an abominable usurpation, a
venality and public theevery, and which was more, those goods conferred upon
seditious men, and enemies to those very states where they placed, the Popes
being arived at this quint-essence of subtlety to maintain in all their
dominions a formidable faction which for the most part is defraied by the purse
of those very states whose destruction and desolation they had in design. That
their religion was the same which was contained in holy scripture, in general
councels and in the holy fathers of the five first ages, agreeing with the
Church of Rome in all the old articles of faith, only their discord is in
those that are of their late invention which if any man will examine one by
one, he shall find that they make very little to the glory of God, but to the
gayning of riches, and reputation and of mundane Jurisdiction to the
Ecclesiasticke order.

They further insinuated that the Roman religion was insensibly abastarded,
and that nothing else was reduced to religion, but that which makes for the
interest and benefit of the Court. They made a collection of the intolerable
grievances of Princes who for the present make lamentable and continual
complaints. They descended to the particulars of the serene republique which
confining upon the Turks for above eight hundred miles, and as much upon the
house of Austria, and with the Pope very few miles which were nothing but of
sand and seashore, yet they received more offense from that side and more
trouble of jurisdiction in one month, then from both the others in ten years,
besides other continual troubles with their Nuncio's, who where they come to
treat with their Prince, they do it with so much insolency and sovereignty,
as if he were not only their subject, but their slave, carrying still before
them the head of Medusa, the pretense of Religion, to fright the timorous: And
the greatest Politicians that ever were, are not able to penetrate the
profundity of the Arcana of the Papacy, by his mischief, which was merely
caused by the Ecclesiastiques themselves, and was by them attributed afterward
to those eminent subjects in Venice, that were the principal maintainers of
the public cause.

But still the Father was he on whom the blame was laid. He it was (if we
believe the Courtiers) that excited Protestants to put forth books to
illuminate the people. He it was that counseled these great men to a necessity
of a change of Religion, under pretense that the Popes were grown to such a
greatness, that nothing could serve their turns but the servitude of all
Italy.

But if ever any thing were false and calumnious, it is this; and although the
Father seemed not much to regard their defamations, yet so far as it
concerned the declaring of himself, touching the provisions that were to be
made from time to time with the Senators, he gave his opinion and counsel viva
vece, and vehemently upon all occurrents, and often in writing upon innumerable
counsels, having always taught and inculcated, that not only for truth and
conscience sake, but even for necessity and reason of good government, every
faithful man, but most of all Princes ought to invigilate to the maintenance
and conservation of Religion. He affirmed that to this end God had constituted
Princes as his Lieutenants in those states wherein the Church was planted, and
conferred their greatness upon them, to make them Protectors, Defendors,
Conservators, and Nurses of holy Church, as sacred Scriptures make mention, in
which calling, the greatest of them can never give a sufficient discharge of
himself, except it be by a continual and vigilant care in matters of Religion.
That God by hissingular grace had placed them in this Catholic Apostolic
Roman Holy Church, for which they were bound to acknowledge his divine favor,
and render him continual thanks. No greater misfortune being able to befall
them from Heaven, then that they should abandon or forsake it. And howbeit
there be many abuses, yet that is not to be imputed to the fault of Religion,
but of them that abuse it. And all this being most true and undeniable, no man
ought to suffer himself to be shaken in his confidence, nor the Prince to
give way that a chang or alteration should be so much as spoken of. That
perfection, and absolute purity, is the very Terminus whereunto the Church, and
every faithful man ought to pretend, though it be not the path wherein always
they tread. Those Churches which were founded by the Apostles themselves, and
where they preached and resided, were not exempt from imperfections, whereof
the Epistle to the Galathians gives a clear testimony, but more clearly that
to the Corinths. That as for their charity some adhered to Peter, others to
Paul, others held of Apollo, with schism and express division from Christ. As
for opinions, there were some that denied the Resurrection. As for concord,
they drew their pleadings and differences to the Tribunals of Infidels. As for
manners, they had fornication among them, such as was unheard of among the
Idolaters. As for customs, the supper of the Lord was converted into banquets,
where some were drunk, and others hungry. And yet all this while the Apostle
acknowledges them to be a true Church, and a body of Christ. How much more
ought we then to stand firm in the Church, where God by his singular grace
has settled us, although in the Government thereof there be imperfections and
abuses, which are also since converted into intolerable grievances.

But if at this day those evils have gotten grouth, the fault will be found to
be in the Princes themselves, who having little regard to the divine Precept,
which so straightly obliges to take knowledge of Gods most holy Law, and of
Religion, but have altogether neglected this duty, as if Religion were a thing
that did not concern them, and as if they were not to render an account to
God, neither for themselves, nor their subjects, by neglecting the care and
defense of it against the divine precepts of Gods Word, the doctrine of holy
Councels and Fathers, and the use of pious Princes, contenting themselves with
a Religion, without knowing what it is, nor how it should be kept from
corruption, tolerating for their own interests, their adulation, and
connivancies, the cosenage of the people with continual alterations, under
color of devotion and piety, with a daily license, not only to religious men,
but to all sorts of persons, to invent new orders to their own gain, and
greatness, without considering that every custom carries his credit along
with it, and so Religion becomes changeable, and accommodated to the
advancements of them that manage it. And these ordinary alterations being
received, the Princes themselves have tolerated them, and so they have agreed
with posterity for approbation, by an authority which time and custom had put
upon them. A thing that happens in the greatest part of humane affairs, but
most in Religion where the vulgar are the inventers of superstition. The Pope,
beside that he is the head of Religion, is also a Prince, and one that from
above 500 years to this day has aspired to the Monarchy of Italy, whereunto
he is so near a neighbor: And what wonder can be made of it, if he practice
all the means he can to enlarge his jurisdidiction. He has three great
charges upon him; that of Religion; that of the Ecclesiastical affairs; and
the temporaltie of his Estate. And the Fountain from which all ill is derived,
is in this, that his right is not well distinguished from that of Princes.

There are also three kinds of Canons, of spiritual things, of temporal
things, and those that are mixed of both; Of the first, the care ought to be in
the Ecclefiastiques, of the second none can carry the exercise beyond their
own temporal estates, and for the third, it is as much the duty of Princes
to take care as of the Ecclesiastiques themselves if not more. In all the life
of the father, there has not happened in the most sereene dominion any
dissension of opinion in the least tittle, not in the first of these three
heads because the republique was borne Catholic, and has always continued
so. All the disturbance has happened upon the second head, whereof the Court
has made use to the augmentation of their jurisdiction, and of their temporal
dominion. From the third, that Prince is too ignorant and unworthy, that
suffers himself to be excluded. And that the Court at this day more then ever,
do their uttermost endeavor to enregister and authenticate the exclusion of
Princes: yet this is because Princes (having in favor of their cause such
clear sentences from the new and old testament from Counsels and holy
fathers, besides the practice of all times) do not seek to repair
themselves. If at such times as the Nuntios and Ecclesiastics apeare mask't
with religion in pretense, and the sacred Cannons (abusing the second and third
by the first) and if those which govern, and are instructed by divine precept,
would take notice what those Cannons were which concern faith (which the
republicke inviolately observes with high reverence (and those which concern
Ecclesiastique affairs of discipline, and administration of goods, of secular
affairs, and those which concern neither faith nor religion, but the
greatness of the Court, and that they understood and would maintain in them
the power which God has given Princes, they would quickly pull off the mask
and make those blush that thought so to abuse the goodness and simplicity of
others, and would vindicate themselves from that perpetual injury which is
offered them, as if they had offended religion by defending the power which God
has granted, and the jurisdiction whereof a Prince ought not to suffer the
least diminution, without being guilty of this grievous sin.

Of this pious sense of his, let that supreme reverence (wherewith in all his
consultations and writings, he had always honored the Sea Apostolical and the
Popes) be an argument. Although in the mean time he spared not to set forth
the truth in that which concerns the legitimate of power, which God has given
the Prince. But unjustly do these men complain, that would have churchmen be
without affections Erunt vitia donec homines, or of Princes servants that seek
the advantage of their masters. If churchmen serve themselves of the pretense
of religion to this purpose, let the other complain of none but themselves, if
they be not well enough instructed to reduce the opposites to this point, to
make them see that the zeal of religion is not weaker in any then in
Churchmen and so to go no further.

These and other discourses he used, inculcating always the duty of every one
for the defense and conservation of the Catholic religion, and not to suffer
themselves to yield to any abuse how great soever. But the Court (which has
known his picty, and holy course of life which began from his childhood, and
continued without reprehension to his last breath in all those exercises of
religion, which belong) not to a supersitious and passionate flatterer of the
Court, or a fautor of reformations) but to a solid and sincere Catholic and
a man religious by profession) have nevertheless gone so far with their
calumnies (as to attribute that to him) which God grant be not found in many of
themselves (an indeleble blemish) of having no religion at all. God forbid that
by the conceit of these men a blameless life, and irreprehensible
conversation in the view of so many severe enemies should be thought to be the
effect of Atheism, and impiety and that the argument of this so great a
censure should be drawn from the opinion of his learning. The divine scripture
which attributes Atheism to ignorance, to foolishness, to an unbridlednesse
in dissolutions, and a being given over as a prey to their own passions, has
taught it far otherwise. True it is, that the foolish and ignorant vulgar,
seeing some eminent subjects in sciences not to comply with their foolish
superstition which are only tolerated by their own guides and canonized
because they are gainefull, have been accustomed to judge thus sinisterly. But
it is a judgment is only worthy of those that formed it. But if a profound
knowledge of second causes do induce us to a more tenacious reverence of the
first (as Saint Paul teaches) the matter is clear enough. Besides, that those
very Courtiers who having their eyes dazzled at so great a light of goodness
and science; are grown so injurious to that rare virtue, as to be frequent in
such domestical arguments as these that those that are fallen from the right
hand and have banished divinity from their heart do usually strike into one of
these two extremes, either of a total dissolution or a violent superstition,
and perhaps never into the mean. Thanks be to God that in despite of
themselves they must confess the contrary of our father, in both these, nor
do I believe that the most superstitious, men will ever yield him the
commendation that either in word or actions he showed any favor to their
voluntary worship or their other impostures. And to say the truth, how can any
wise man comply with their opinions, and superstitious actions? which are the
very quintessence of humane fooleries and of highest injury to the Creator?

The necessity of public employment had brought him into the knowledge of the
principal men of public government, whose virtues if I should commemorate,
with their Honors due unto them it would be necessary to engage a volume of
praises. Let it suffice that with all the Grandees of the republicke he was in
the greatest conceit that any private person could obtain, nay rather, none
shall ever obtain the like, till God and nature shall produce another father
Paul, who in that way of prudence, which we will call conversation has not
only arrived at that excellent degree, which the wisest have observed to have
bin only in Socrates, but has gone beyond it, by conversing with, and
admitting to his conversation all sorts of persons and professions, and of all
ages, and has got the love of all who had nothing else to say of him, but of
the greatness of his modesty, humility, and affability.

In all companies he appeared the master, and in the variety of his opinions
some went away believing that he was of theirs, and others thought he had the
intentions of Socrates. And although he were now grown into years, yet with
the same hilaritie, and cherfulness, that as he converst with Senators of
his own age, so he applied himself to those young men of the primary
nobility who consecrate their wits to virtue, and to their country with
honor, which we will call the Tyrocinium or the young Militia of state in the
common wealth, who are called among us Savii dordini, the wise men of the
orders. To them he was a Treasury of records, a library, a history. Tacitus,
Polybius Zenophon, Thucydides and what not.

Those eminent subjects will always celebrate his memory. Pietro Contarini,
Leonardo Gustiniano, Giacomo Marcell^, Giorgi^ Contarini, Andrea Capello,
Marnizane. That flower of nobility of ingenuity and hope of his Country, that
sublime with Giacomo Moresini Oh bitter death, that whilst I am writing has
robbed us of this mean that was the delight of his friends, the great example of
those of his own years, a great Patron to his servants, great hope of his
country and many others. I have reserved for the last place Signor Marc
Tre^isan^, because I must not pass him over in a word.

This Signor began an intimate friendship with the father from the time that he
was created Savio de gliordini, as usually other did. But the privacy was so
stricktly knit betwixt them after he had renounced his attendance upon honors,
and given him self to moral Philosophy, and to all kinds of learning that
might improve a man, that he daily visited the father, who took so much
pleasure in his company, that notwithstanding the greatness of his
employments, he had given order that whenever Signor Marco came, he should be
brought in unto him which favor was vouchsaft to no other but himself. And
this was because their conversation was now past into such a degree of
friendship with a full liberty of saying to him, without offense when he came
to him. Go your way Signor for at this time I am very busy. The father
rejoiced infinitely among the other ingenuties, and rare qualities and virtues
that were in him, at this veracity, and would say freely Lodate iddie che ho
pur trovata uno che mi parla non in Maschera, praised be God that I have met
with one man that speaks not to me in a mask. And verily Signor Marce told
him without a veil the truth of all things in Venice, the conditions of
persons, their interests, their deportments, whereof he had exquisite
information, but where he discovered any defects in the father himself, those
with all candor. They call you (says he to him) the Patron of your
affections. And I observe you to have affections like other men though
different. This perpetual fitting in your Cell, and turning over books which
are not legible to others, this shutting your self up in your study without
ever coming abroad. This unrelented way of reading and writing (father) is a
kind of intemperance, as heretofore were my amorettes and wantonness, but yet
with this difference that opinion gives a title of lewdness to one, and to the
other names of honor.

He proceeded to tell him, that in this he seemed rather to be in a degree of
obstinacy then otherwise because in a declining age he would not remit, but
intend those travells which in his more vigorous years, he was hardly able to
undergo. He told him further (smiling) this is (pardon me) a kind of ambition
that reigns in you, and a thousand other learned and facetious galantries. The
first time that they discourst together, The father (who as his manner was to
say much in a few words) said when he was gone. This trevisanetto has a great
heart (alluding to the littleness of his body that had yielded so far to the
greatness of his mind) and is very able for great resolutions. But after he
came to know of the friendship that was betwixt him and Signor Barbarigo,
which, (let it be lawful for me to speak of a thing that by fatal encounters
has raised it self to such a height that it has wearied all penns) He was
also willing to contribute something to so rare a work. It was not fit that so
high a fabric of virtue should be raised at Venice, except this great
Architect put his hand to it. And hearing Signor Marco recount the various
accidents that had past betwixt them, and a desire of a total transmutation
and transfusion not only of external things but of themselves: according to
that of Amicorum ^mnia communia, which is in every man's mouth, and perhaps
never practiced but in this example. Certainly never in such a degree as
afterward it prooved to be betwixt these gentlemen. And having delivered some
excellent doctrines concerning friendship he did appoint Fulgentio to translate
out of French into Italian that essay of Michael di Montagna of friendship
which so soon as it was done. I cannot relate how acceptable it was to both
these gentlemen, finding in their own hearts and affections not only those
conditions of friendship which that great person had expressed with so rare
examples set out for an Idea of a perfect friendship, but also to find thereby
how far they had exceeded his description. And there was nothing else to be
done but to raise that fabric to the height, which after among civil virtues
was grown to be the right of miracles. The preparations to it were infinite,
not ordinary mutual offices, the foundation was a faith and secure confidence,
that one might believe his friend as far as himself. The construction a mere
charity, which has showed the world that Signor Marco did in a moment and not
by degrees strip himself of those excesses and inveterated habits of vices of
lascivious delights and other things which had brought him to a poor fortune,
because he would not be thought to be a waster of those fortunes, whereof he
was now by the virtue of friendship made a Patron. And in Signor Barbarigo that
had a wife and many children to be able in his life time to make another man
the absolute Patron of his fortunes, whom all men knew to be the consumer of
his own, and upon no other consideration save only of being his friend.

But the father did not live to see the garland with which this fabric was
crowned with the two Pyramides which were carved and engraven by the knife of
all the judicious with a Non plus ultra. Allthough in his life time he might
see Signor Marco (in the house of Barbarigo) Lord and Patron of all and knew
by his speculation, that they having settled in their hearts that rule of
Amicorum omnia communia might also make an external practice of it, in all and
every thing else. Wherein his charity (the greatest inventresse of the world)
did afterward put him in mind in a way to effect it, by procuration and
testament so far as it was in the power of law to do it. And these gentlemen
have arrived at such a perfection of charity that to die one for another
(which has been reputed the supreme point of friendship) in a mutual
preparation and readiness, and not in shadows but by effectual presenting
themselves to dangers, is a thing so far below their love, that they speak of
it as a thing not to be esteemed, and wherein they know no imaginable
difficulty. Many have suspected that this affection could not last always,
and the father himself observing the violence of Signor Marco made a question
of it. But being after acquainted with Barbarigo, if the mind may be called a
Sea in respect of affections, and perturbations, then this of his was a smooth
sea and always calm, and toward his friend without winds without ebbing or
flowing an eternal tranquillity, and a mind though without ostentive
profession of knowledges; yet capacious of all things, especially those that
regard humanity. Then he changed his opinion, and believed it would be
perpetual, and said it was like the conjunction of iron and steel were the
one gave toughness, and the other gave edge, and as it happened afterward, I
my self thinking of their friendship, which at this day is one of the glories
of our City: and of our age:, have concluded, that if it were possible for a
division to rise betwixt these two, it could not be upon any other ground then
this, that if it came in question to expose themselves to any danger the one
and the other would be he, and each would contest that the other should be
reserved, both believing they had reason, being so sharpened in their
charities, as to explicate, and confute each others reasons, and without doubt
this would have put them to discord, if charity it self had not found a
remedy of their being always together, wheresoever any danshould have
happened, because nature does not permit that two should be one alone except it
be by a concordance of wills. And I am of opinion, that that next to that
degree already esteemed the highest (which is to lay down, not verbally but
really their lives for one another) they have arrived at that great point to
which, as yet it is believed that nature nor moral virtue never came, but in
this only effect of an excellent divine charity, that if it fell into
question that one of them should be subject to damnation, and divine wrath, the
strife would be betwixt them which should take it upon himself and preserve
his friend. In which kind of access I find no example in the course of
histories nor in the redundance of divine graces, among mortal relations of
such an affection in any kind except it were of those two great Heroes, and
divine men Saint Paul and Moses, and in a fable of a kind of dark report of
Castor and Pollux which has but little to do with this living and known
example of ours, because they understood not what it was to be either blessed or
damned. And if among the Heroeique virtues there was found out an Apotheosis
which is nothing else then an extension of virtues and humane conditions to a
perfection not humane but chimericall and imaginary, then with more solidity by
true and real acts, and not distant from us either in times or places, but
existent and under our eyes have these two gentlemen so well deserving of
humanity merited for having taught us a new way of virtue, and made us see
that a sole consent in all things both divine and humane, is not a bargain of
wit alone, as hitherto the world has believed it to be, but a real work
truly heroical and excellent, whereat love and benevolence can only arive,
not only to be admired, and had in veneration, as an Idea of true friends, but
to be reputed the tutelar powers or numen of friendship.

Notwithstanding it be very true, that to multiply knowledge, is to increase
travail and sorrow, because the poor Father, from the fame of his knowledge,
the dexterity of his wit, the charity of helping all that came to him, and of a
goodness of nature to do well, was become noe only the servant of the
public, but of particular men; not only of this City, but of the whole
State, and even to strangers, because in all difficult causes his opinion was
sought and appeared in all things like the sentence of a divine oracle and to
the wonder of the world that his answers how unpremeditate soever were yet so
wise and solid to the most arduous dedemands, that upon a long meditation they
could not have been made better either for brevitie or speaking to the point.
And whatsoever proceeded from that blessed mouth of his was fixed gold weighed
in the balance of more then humane judgment.

That which made him most admired was the coupling together of virtues, and
with conditions which are not usually met in one and the same subject, as
knowledge and humility, prudence with meekness, retiredness and
officiousnesses, seriousness and pleasantness, argutenesse without offense,
brevity and perspicuity, sweetness and solidity. But it appears that science
has a veneficke virtue of swelling many men; but that is only proper to vain
and superficial sciences, but that which is consummate and profound is on the
contrary like an engine to cast down every proud thought, and the father had
particularly spent so much of his time in the study and knowledge of humane
nature, that if it should please God that some form were but given to his
notes that he left upon that argument, I am certain that hitherto, no
Philosopher has speculated so far into the knowledge of humanity. And I say
boldly that in all course of time hitherto, none ever arived at the depth of
that nothing of humane nature so it may be lawful for me to call it) because
the father himself said so, who esteemed himself as nothing. It is remembered
by one that told him of his humility that he blushed like a virgin to hear
himself praised for any of his excellent parts. And although he thought very
well of a gentleman yet living, and full of philosophical and politic
learning, and an eloquent orator, yet the father avoided him what he could for
this only reason, that when he saluted him he entitled him always
Illustrissimo Padre which was done with respect to his virtue and merit, and
not according to complements. And he resolved that his friend Fulgentio should
acquainte him with his dislike of those salutations but the gentleman answered
him again. To whom then can that title be due? if it be not due to that angel
of heaven. And always when he made enquiry of his health, or how he did, he
would do it in that or the like sort. How does, or what does that Angel of
Paradise? This was all the fruit of his great studies, which were not addressed
to ostentation but to true wisdom, to the cultivating of his mind (which is
the greatest felicity of this life) and to humility.

Prudence for the most part makes men somewhat rigide, and difficall to be
treated with, and truly in former times the father has been taxed of such
defects, and he himself in his anatomy of his affections and defections, where
it appears that he had listed them all for a combat and for a victory to be
had over them (which he had designed) and there he acknowledge him self to be
severe inofficious, and hard to please. But he had now so vanquished those
dispositions that his affability and mildness was grown to be singular: his
modesty so marvelous; that when he saw another in an error, or that he
understood not the business, he would never use a sharp reprehension, but
bring them to a review and confute them with so civil language, that he left
them not without some conceit of his own propension to their opinions only
excusing himself that what he could not condescend unto was, by reason of his
own incapacity, which neither gave him leave to see the reasons that had
induced them, nor how to resolve well upon his own.

And for that officiousness wherein (it seems) when he was in a lower
fortune, he had been wanting. He was grown so prompt and obsequious, that if
he could do a service, or a courtesy to him that required it of him, he
would be so discontent, that he could not conceal his displeasure. In one
thing he was insuperable to himself, in activity, and resolution, because as in
things of speculation, he was sudden and ready: So in consultations that were
to be put in action, he was grown slow and irresolute. He would turn over,
and revolve, and never seem satisfied, and this fluctuation still increast upon
him, whereupon I am sometimes of opinion, that a prudence in mediocrity makes
men active, and resolute; but too great an one, with an extraordinary knowledge
of Histories, and observation of examples and events, makes men timorous and
resty. Or whether this this be a weakness proper, and insuperable by old age,
or whether in the greatness of his soul, from that time forward, he beheld
all those things so far below himself, as to make that a Remora to his
activity. I am only sure that he was now reduced to so great an indifferency
concerning humane events, as no man could aspire to a greater.

Now I am in a kind of necessity of defrauding the Father of that which should
be the top and supreme degree of his heroique and most perfect virtues, and
which would make him to appear to be of an intrepide heart, and of a constancy
which in a good cause were invariable, by telling the true occasion for which
some Senators, not only the principal, but the very prime ones, and of the
greatest Families, conceived some ill affections toward him, which while they
were alive, and some of them after the Fathers death, could not dissemble. Now
with reverence to their illustrious Posterities, let them ever preserve this
picture of the Father truly, without either too much light, or in the purest
colors, and let it be drawn over with this veil, That Fra: Paulo (such as he
was) never had any enemies, neither as he was a public servant, nor a
Consultor of State, nor ever incurred the ill affection of any, except it were
for a public cause.

This famous man pleased himself with a writing of his, where he acknowledged
he had contracted the hatred of some great ones, and great in government, but
yet such as did for the most part postpose the public honor, to their own
interest, and private commodities. He might have comforted himself yet
further in this, that neither for promises nor threatenings, they were able to
make him decline the least point from that which was either of justice, or
public service. And it was not because he was ignorant how much it might have
turned to his advantage to have done otherwise, or that he had it not always
in his mouth Conviene fedelmen^e servire: And therefore he would do nothing
but what belonged to his charge, nor more willingly then what he was commanded
by the most excellent Senate.

But in a charge so universal, it is impossible that something of the public
service should not traverse the interests and affections of private men, which
are a part of the body of government, and in particular concerning
Ecclesiastic Benefices, and causes of that kind, wherein they are blinded by
their passions; for which respect the Father would always say, the Commonweal
chad need to have both a Divine and a Canonist among them; to which purpose,
before his death he had published a little tract, but to his friends he would
say more freely, that no man could be able for such a service, that had not
trodden under his foot both hopes and fears. The reason of which speech shall
be best understood by him that best understands Government, and knows how
impossible it is to find a body so united to the public good, in which there
shall not be some that will hate and threaten, and persecute, when they
apprehend that any one shall oppose the designs of their private profit, how
necessary, and clear, and just soever the opposition be, and this for the
most part abounds in Aristocracies.

The fervor, and total dedication of himself (next after God) to the
public service, may take argument from hence, that he was always resolved,
that by his means, nor for his sake, no controversies should arise. But under
Paul 5. there was no occasion, because all discord was put to silence, as it
was considered before. But Gregory the 15th being created his Successor, the
Father had heard of some discourse that was used by him to the Venetian
Ambassadors that were sent to congratulate his Election, that there would
never be a perfect peace betwixt the Republic, and the Sea Apostolic, but
such a one as the Father Paul should approve of. Whereupon the Father in that
now declining age of his, was strongly resolved, rather then there should be
any difference, not only to withdraw himself from the service of that Senate,
but declining the Popes anger if he should have persevered (as not long after
it removed out of his fancy, and there were no more words of it, it being the
nature of that Pope not to insist long upon any thing; and perhaps in this he
was not moved of himself, but by some others, or else that he had received
some more brief and significant satisfaction then he expected) to retire
himself out of the State of Venice. And because to have so disposed of himself
(as many great spirits would have done) neither his conscience, nor religion,
could well bear, and to pass himself into a Protestant country, had been to
expose himself to calumnies; or if into those States where the Court and the
Ecclesiastics have an absolute power, had been without prudence to hazard
himself again to poison, or stillettoes, he resolved to go into the East
Countries, to Constantinople, or into some other place, and made preparations
accordingly. He desired to be informed from some that had made voyages, and
particularly from an Hebrew, that had gone thither often by land, to be
distinctly instructed of every thing. He had found means also to have a
pasport from the Port of the grand Signor against the dangers of that voyage,
in case he went no further. He was also resolved to reserve some provisions for
his own use, whereof he was a creditor, and had formerly used to expend, and
give away in alms, and otherwise, without keeping any for himself, and the
sum that after remained in the Convent was about 1000. Duccats, and
consequently he had all things in readiness to encounter with any adverse
fortune, rather than that for his sake, eitherhis country or his Prince (whom
he had faithfully served) should suffer the least inconvenience, although he
were secure enough, that the Senate would rather have undertaken a war for him,
than abandoned his protection.

And of this transmutation he would speak with all cheerfulness, and say that
in his age he should enjoy that which in his youth he had extremely defired,
which was a peregrination, which although in his mind he had much affected,
knowing by Geography as much as could be known of Kingdoms, and Scituations
and People, and by History their actions and customs, yet that seemed to him,
in respect of that which a man sees with his eyes, but a dark knowledge, un
sapere in ombra, and the desire of knowledge increases with years. God and
Nature gave him not leave to prove what the successor of Gregory intended,
Maffeo Barbarini Urban the 8. who (as it was said) was Nuncio in France, when
he was created Cardinal 1606. having given testimonies of an implacable hatred
against the Father, by actions not worthy of a Christian, and by inventions
most base and chymerical, which for reverence we silence, and not to possess
the world, that the petulancy of speaking and writing falsehoods and
calumniations, (a thing bred in the bones of our modern Ecclesiastiques) is
arrived at the very height. In this state of absoluteness in all Sciences,
perfection of judgment, without defect of memory, which in him was so rich,
and more faithful than ever was in any, and with such health, as such a
complexion could bear in a person so continually tired out in the manage of so
great affairs, and without any relaxation at all, except sometimes in seeing
his friends: He entered upon the year of his age 69. and in the end of Lent, in
Sabbato Santo being in his accustomed place, which was a withdrawing Room of
the Senate house, there fell upon him such a sudden coldness, as if he had
been frozen, and withal a hoarseness instantly upon his voice, with a fearful
benumb'dnesse, being the first time in his life that he had known what a
Catarrhe was, and it held him above three months with a manifest Ague; for all
which yet he would not change his way of living, nor diminish his labor. An
apparent declination of his strength was to be discerned, and he would always
say, that he was never well after that distemper.

But as that continued indisposition did signify a divine admonition, it was
also observed by his nearest friends; that in things of the spirit, he was
much more devote and attentive than he had been formerly, and particularly in
meditation more assidual; so that, whereas before, besides his ordinary
prayers, and spiritual exercises the rest of his time was spent either in
making one of his writers read to him, or write at his appointment, or In
writing himself. After this time, he had no more reading or writing, but
precisely what the necessity of his charge, and public service constrained
him unto. All the remainder was spent in the meditation of another life, and
immediately he dispatched Fra. Marco, who at his return found him in his usual
place, which was before a Crucifix, at the foot whereof he had (as it is said) a
natural deaths head, whereunto he was so attentive that Fra. Marco at his
coming in sometimes surprised him before he could take notice of him; and yet
he was willing to disguise his devotion as far as he could, because when he
had a desire to be alone, he would fay to him, that he might go abroad a
while; because he defired to give himself a little pastime in making castles
in the air of Mathematical conclusions, and give his brains a little
liberty to range where they pleased. And when he was surprised at his
devotion, he was always ready with some excuse or other, that he had either
fabricated instruments, or figures, or the like. But before a Crueifix and a
deaths head, it may well be imagined that he had other contemplations more
suitable to his age and ill affected body. Thus he went on, bearing up as well
as he could, till his entrance upon Winter 1622. be in then entered into the
year of his age 71: when a manifest defaillance of vital virtue was visible in
him, and the declination of his forces gave evident signs of the dislodging
which this great soul (who in it self had never felt old age) was presently
ready to make from the cottage of his body. His stature was mean, his head
compared to his body was great, because he was so very lean, that inwardly he
seemed but a frame of bones; yet his head accused him not to be such, but
rather contrary. In the hinder part and upward it was round, and well
proportioned, his forehead very spacious, and declining a little from the
middle part toward the left side. There appeared so great a vein, that ending
about the midst where his nose begun to rise, when it was full, it showed as
big as a finger, and when it was empty it left a channel, where a little
finger might be laid, and it would often change from fullness to emptiness.
His eyebrowes were well archt, his eyes great, quick, and black; and in his
sight till he was 55 he had an extraordinary liveliness, that if with others
he had read a Letter, he had sooner read it all over than another had read the
beginning. His nose was large and long, but very straight, little beard, and
thin, and in some places without hair, but yet without deformity. Looking
him in the face you would rather have thought it fleshly than otherwise. His
color pleasing, and when he was in health, was mixed with white and red, with a
little yellowness, which became him not ill. His neck was suitable to the rest,
only showing meagernesse. Altogether he had a grave aspect, but pleasant, and
inviting one to treat with him. His hand was fair and very long, and his
fingers seemed to turn backwards, and were of an exceeding length. He suffered
ordinarily extreme cold in his hands and feet; for which he had not found a
better remedy then warm Irons, which he carried always in balls wrapped up. But
at the entrance of Winter, his passibilitie increased so much upon him, as if
his hands and feet had been turned to iron or stone, receiving from within no
heat, and externally but a flying heat. His face fallen, his lips that had wont
to be colored, especially the nether lip, with a smiling kind of sweetness,
were grown livide. So it seemed he had changed his form. His eyes hollow,
without their wonted vivacity. Nothing could be found to keep him warm. He
had lost his appetite that it was not possible to find that meat for him,
which after once taking he grew not to loathe, and in that he grew to wonder
that he had no more command upon himself. And although that at that age he had
all his teeth left, yet he began to chew his meat with much difficulty. He
began to go double, and very heavily, scarce able to go up and down into his
gondola, but worse up a pair of stairs.

In his dreams that little that he slept, was no more of his wonted nonsense,
or incongruities, but distinct natural, speculative, and regularly dicursive,
which he that observed all things, did not only observe to himself, but
conferred of it with his friends, and called a rising by little, and little of
his soul from the bond and commerce with his body. And thus much I do not
find that others have observed, but having told it you of so great a person as
this, it may perhaps upon some or others make a refection. Now nothing more
could give him entertainment not so much as to hear a a relation of the
success of affairs how the world went, wherein he had from his childhood a
special delight even to this time. One only delight remained with him, in his
waking after divine meditations to revolve in his mind his mathematical and
Astronomicall figures, and he would say smiling; How many words, and how many
wits have been framed in my brains. He had all the signs of a soul that was
ready to take her leave of her old body whose health beginning now to fail,
was supplied only by an indefatigablenesse of mind, so that he never forsook
his former charge, but gave answers to the exhortations of his friends, and the
authorities of his Patrones, concerning the abatement of his travailes, saying;
That this office was to serve, and not to live, and that every one should
always die in his profession above all the Signor Marco Trenisano (whose
liberty and veracity the father singularly approoved) He would often reproach
him of a manifest intemperance for seeming to continue his studies and his
travel as he had done at other times when his strength was greater and that it
was an indiscretion in him not to be sensible of approaching age, and other
such lilke things which he would hear with delight but yet without ever
slacking or letting his bow stand unbent. Many times he had so manifest a
failing of his strength that he was constrained as he went a long the street
of the Mercery, to lean and stay himself upon the arms of Fra. Marco. And he
would not conceal his being ill but gave manifest tokens upon diverse occasions
of foreseeing his instant end whereof he spoke more then he was wont to do not
only with a freedom of mind, and as of a debt to nature and and an
indifferent thing, but manifest cheerfulness as of a long rest after a weary
days journey. And besides his ejaculated prayers which he repeated often with
devout sentences of scripture, he would most frequently say Nunc dimittis
Domine servum tum, and to his familiars, courage my masters, we are almost at
the end of our journey. And upon a time as he went to confer of business
concerning the government of the province, and Particularly the time being at
hand that they were to nominate a Prior in this convent of the Servi, the
father spoke aloud to the provincial that was present, and others. A questo
pensarete voi here look you to that I pray you, for I shall not be present.
But he would often say to his familiar friends in a jesting way, that he should
die in security now that at his death there could be no miracles done, because
Baromus, Bellarmine and Colomna, and the Pope himself were so lately dead
before him, and almost all those that had written of the Ecclesiasticke part
although they were so much younger then he, alluding to that rash way of
writing which some men use who if a man happpen to die in disgrace with the
Roman Court, they write that same heavy judgment befell him, or that he was
strangely dead, and that God had inflicted some other punishment upon him, as
if having formed to themselves a God after their fancies, they had also made
him the executor of their partial and interested votes, or as if God had
nothing else to do but to punish and afflict such as were fallen into their
dissavour, or that those that were united in faction to them, could be
preserved from death more then others. And with such petulances as those their
writings were for the most part stuffed.

But Christmas being come, whereof Father Fulgentio used always to put him
mind of (being the most holy feast of the nativity of our Lord) with
accustomed complement which was merely used among themselves to salute the
father by saying, Ad multos annos sancte pater etc. He freely made answer that
this was the last that he should see, and that so seriously, that it was well
discerned to be spoken with more earnestness then that which he had wont to
say, concerning the brevity of his future end. And no doubt now he began to
feel himself very ill; and that he was in a high fever because at other
times, he had not used to change his custom for any length or continuance of
seaver. On the day of the Epiphany it appeared that his sickness trod upon
his heels, and that morning he took physic, which made him worse, because
being called to go to the palace, he would not excuse himself neither by
sickness, nor that he had taken a medicament (such was his modesty) So being
called the second and third time, he went, but returned with a manifest
impairement of his health, being not able for 2 days following either to take
food or rest, yet for all this he could not keep his bed, but rising upon
sunday about eight a clock he celebrated mass, and went to the table, at the
refectory, where after he had dined, came Signor Lingi Scchim to visit him,
and walked with him a pretty while, Secchim perceived that he was very ill, and
told him so, which he confessed, and that of necessity he must go lie down,
which he did, (according to his custom) in his clothes upon a chest, causing a
coverlet to be thrown over him.

He continued thus till friday following, betwixt such time and his death there
was but another day, still rising out of his bed, and clothing himself and
doing his ordinary function, as reading and writing, and when he could do no
more, to cast himself upon the chest, and make others read to him. But his
infirmity being one of the greatest demonstrations of the greatness of his
mind, deserves to be more particularly known, and I am resolved to set it
down with the same narrative, which with some other notes of the remainder of
his life are come to my hands, because that proverb seldom fails ( ze'l modo
della morte e sincer^ argomento della vita, e leva tutte le Maschere. The
manner of a man's death is an unfallible argument of his life, and pulls off all
maskes.

Upon monday morning being risen out of his bed and having put on his clothes,
he was surprised with a total defailling both in his hands and his legs, on
which he was not able to stand without support, nor move the other without
trembling, which was followed with so great an abhorment of his food, that if
it had not been borne out by the strength of his resolution he could not have
received a cordial But this accident did not at all disable his mind nor
deprive him of a fulness of judgment accompanied with the same memory, and
that which was of most importance, his tranquillity and cheerfullnesse of mind
never forsook him, in which manner he remained till saturday, comforting those
that were about him, and always intermixing something that was facetious, so
that upon the saturday he said to those that were about him, I have made you
merry as long as I was able, and now I can do so no longer, you must cheer
me up. The disease was suspected by the Physicians to be the beginning of an
epilepsie, and there were some that suspected poison. But truly there was
nogreat sign either of the one or the other, but rather of a natural
resolution and extinction of vital spirits. And being opened aftes his death,
there was found in all his parts the fairest conformity that could be desired,
except that his heart was exceeding little, and seemed (as it were) to be
deserted. His stomach was without any thing in it, either good or bad, but
without all figne of offense. The Tuesday after, he took his Physic, but it
did him no good. On Wednesday he would go out of his chamber, and go dine in
the Refectory, from whence to his chamber, besides the stairs, was a good
distance, and he went it supported by two, all trembling as as he went, but
with his former courage. He admitted all visits, discourst of all occasions
that he had used to do, and nothing of his own weakness, except with the
Physician (and that very short) and so past his time, fitting upon a stool,
and hearing one read to him.

In all those days he made a most exact examen of his soul, with a total
resignation unto God, and with a heart as cheerful as his body was afflicted,
and from those that were present, he concealed much of his infirmity, that
neither by show of grief, nor voice of laments, nor intermission of his
hilaritie, any thing could be discovered, except only by his want of strength,
and by his abhorment of meats, which accused him of a manifest relaxation.

I would have no man think that he had not a sull knowledge of his own Estate,
although to Father Fulgentio, when he asked him often how he did, (as he used to
do in all his sickness,) and whether he thought he were like to die of this,
he answered him, that he thought he should have a long sickness, and perhaps
fall into a quartane; but to the Physician, his most cordial friend, Signor
Pietro Assilenco, when he first saw his excrements, he put his finger in his
mouth, as men use to do when they would have filence kept, and then the Father
told him freely his estate, but desired him not to discover it to Father
Fulgentio, that it might not torment him. But he might have known it long
before, considering the Fathers preparations, and what he had told him. Many
times in his life he would say, that he trusted in God, that he should know
when he was near his end, but that he would not speak of it to any but to
Fulgentio, because it was to no other purpose but to breed confusion, and make
them give over those diligences which God would not have omitted. But he did
not observe that rule, for now he concealed his Estate, and did not think it
needful to be known any further then it manifested it self. On Thursday in
the morning he sent to call Amante di Brescia, the Prior of the Convent,
desiring him to recommend him to the prayers of the Fathers, and that after
celebration of divine service, he would be pleased to bring him the holy
communion, telling him further, that he had lived in the poverty of the
Religion, without any thing of his own. That whatsoever was in the chambers,
was granted him for his use, as others had the like, and being in his hands, it
was as it had been always, at the free disposition of his superiors, and gave
him a little key of a Cupboard, wherein were the remainder of the provisions
which the Republic had bestowed upon him, nothing being shut, but all open,
except that cupboard, and one other, wherein all the writings were kept that
concerned the public, which should not be meddled with. Yet he put on his
clothes, as he had been used to do, and spent all that morning in hearing
sometime Fulgemio, and sometimes Fra. Marco, reading either Psalms, or the
Stories of the holy Evangelists, of the passion of our Savior, making them
stop whenever he was entered into any devout meditation. Many times he
desired to try whether he could kneel upon his knees, but the freeness of his
spirit could no longer rule the languidnesse of his body. As soon as Mass was
ended, the Fathers of the Monastery came together upon the sounding of a little
bell, and processionally the Father Prior accompanied with all the rest (with
torches in their hands) brought him the holy Sacrament, which he being
apparrelled, and laid upon his bed, received with such demonstrations of piety,
as could be expected from so pure a soul; and drawing tears from the eyes of
all that stood about him, leaving an impression in their hearts of a singular
example of a religious man, that was well prepared to pass to a blessed life.

All this while he would not endure that any body in th the night should watch
with him in the chamber where he lay, which was observed by him in all his
sicknesses, and it was not possible to persuade him to the contrary, saying,
that it only served for pomp, and to incommodate others without doing him any
good, only it was his disquieting to see another lose his rest. And because
Fulcentio had showed his resolution to keep him company, and to sit up with
him, he rose the next morning, and put on his clothes, though very weak, and
would go supported from the first to the second chamber to try (as he said)
whether his senses served him, and what strength was left him. But (as it was
believed) it was only to see whether there were a preparation of another bed
for him in that chamber. Whereupon Fulgentio told him; Father you make
preparations as if you were to die within an hour, and yet you would hide your
estate from me, as if your infirmity would continue many months; whereto he
made answer; and why? must we not always be prepared?

The Father was most observant of all kind of Laws, and among so many
novelties of Reformations, which had been ordained in the ten last Popedomes,
he accommodated himself with admirable readiness and facility to all,
howbeit he did not much approve of them, because things of custom (he said)
had their remedies, but innovations are never without their mischiefs, against
which we have learned no cure. But whatsoever was ordained, he was ever the
first in the observance of it, whereof he gave an essay, that in the morning,
being Friday, he would neither take meat nor broth, nor any thing else, that
was not common to the day; and it seemed a difficulty to persuade him to take
any thing but Lenten meats, and in taking his dinner, he turned him to his Cook
Fra: Cosiuio, and meekly said to him, do you treat your friends of this
fashion, to make them break fasting days? (It was not superstition, but a
constant tenacitie, and an habited custom to observe ordinations with all
exquisiteness, though the least, and not essential.) For this consideration
he had always entirely observed Lent until the 69. of his age, valuing above
all things the giving of good example.

The night being come, he was resolved to be in the first chamber upon any
terms, and there he had three in his company with him. But consider a little
while the constancy of a sick man. He was a dying man, and of a languishment
by defect of nature, and that day it was necessary to put him in mind of his
restoratives, yet he continued all that night without speaking a word to any
of them, serving himself of those things that were necessary from their
accustomed places where they were used to be laid. And he was never heard to
say any thing, except sometimes oh Dio.

That Saturday (the last of his life) was the only day that he remained in his
bed, in great languishment of body, but full strength of mind, whereof they
took this for a demonstrative document. That morning the Prince of Venice, with
the rest of the Senate sent for Fulgentio to come to them, who being demanded
of the state of the Father, and having answered them that he thought he was
drawing to his last gasp without any hope of life, the excellent Signor Ocavian
bon Savie desired to know how he was in his mind, and having answered him that
in that languishing of his forces, the Prince and their illustrious
Excellencies might know that in his judgment and his memory he was the same
Maestro Paolo that for 17 years past they had known him to be, when he served
his Serenitiy and the Senate, and consulted with them in their most arduous
affairs. Then they enjoined him to enquire of him three things concerning the
most important public business, which was done that very night at 12. of the
clock, the Father causing his answers to be written from point to point by his
writer, and being sealed up they were sent and read that very night in the
Senate, who precisely determined the business in conformity to what the
Father had consulted.

Now let that sacred Session, the mirror of Christian piety, and politic
prudence, by the testimony of two hundred renowned Fathers, and against the
shameless and impudent slander which came out of the house of one the
Ecclefiastiques, by the Judge, whether the Father not long before his death had
lost his understanding, and his speech or no? And from this calumny so
malignant and shameless, let the world give a judgment of many others. The
very same Saturday he admitted visites, as he had done other days before, and
the same night after 12 of the clock, the most excellent Signor Giovanni
Basadona came particularly to visit him: The Father spoke to him, put off his
hat, and thanked him for his visit; and after his departure heard one read to
him a great while with quiet attention. And when the evening grew dark, thither
came Signor Marco, with whom he complied in the same manner that he had used
to do.

Night being come, and want of spirits increasing upon him, he caused another
reading of the Passion written by Saint John: He spoke of his own misery, and
of the trust and confidence which he had in the blood of Christ. He repeated
very often these words, Quem proposuit Deus mediatorem per fidem in sanguine
suo. In which he seemed to receive an extreme consolation. He repeated (though
with much faintness) diverse places of Saint Paul. He protested, that of his
part he had nothing to present God with, but miseries and finnes, yet
nevertheless he desired to be drowned in the Abisse of the divine mercy, with
so much submission of one side, and yet so much cheerfulness of the other
side, that he drew tears from all that were present.

About the 24. hours he was visited by Physicians that had been with him not
long before. And because the famous Thebaldi had not visited him much before
that time, the Father making some pause, because he was unwilling to spend out
his spirits, beckened to Fulgentie, to give him some account of his sickness.
In which relation, having told him of the accident on Monday, under the term
of a total defailance, the Father lift up his head, and interrupting said,
Defailance of mind? No, I say of strength: For as for my mind, it has
always kept its own constancy. And the Physician being willing to say
something, did it with those terms of prudence which they commonly use when
they go from sick men, and would not leave him without some spark of hope,
whereunto the Father Fulgentio) that understood the internals of the Father by
a long practice, how little he regarded living and dying) opposed him, and
said; Sir, The Father is none of those to whom you shall need to speak in a
mask, or by ceremonies; And therefore I pray you tell him freely, that he has
endured his sickness with a great deal of patience, which he said he was a
witness of more then any other, whereunto the Father making a figne of assent,
and seeming a little to smile, the Physician told him, that his pulse gave
warning of a flying life; and that it would fail him that night, and within a
few hours, to which the Father with gladsome cheer, and a face tending to
joy, made answer, Sia lodato Id^io, mi pi^ce cioch' a lin piace, Blessed be
God, whatsoever pleases him pleases me; with his help we shall well perform
this last action. And thereupon the Physician willing to put him in mind of
some cordialls: The Father interrupting said. Let us now sorgoe these
sooleries, and I defire you would resolve me of two doubts. The first, that I
am assured and have a full perswafion, that whatsoever you present to me is
very good, with such assurance I take it into my hand, and when it comes near
my mouth (as if my brains were changed in an iustant, it renders it self to me
horrid and abominable. The second (and having spoken that word) his breath
failed him, and he could not express the rest, so the Physician finding by his
vein, that his vital spirit began to wander away, appointed that at eight a
clock they should give him a Cordial, and in the mean time some rare Moscate,
which he would send him from home, at the receiving whereof (there being then
past six hours of night) he said, Questa vesta mi pare cosa violenta, this
seems to me to be a most violent thing.

I will tell you only one slight particular but to show what the constancy of
his mind was, and his absolute understanding and quickness of senses to the
very last. The Father had in his chamber disposed things in such order, that he
could presently lay his hand upon any thing that he sought for, as books,
writings, instruments, and such like, even to the very least and smallest
things. About six at night, the last of his life, he would cleanse his tongue
with an instrument that he had used to that purpose a great while, appointing
Fra. Marco to go fetch it him out of such a place. He went to seek it with a
candle in his hand, and returned telling him it was not there, and he could
not find it. The Father bad him go seek better; for it was a very small
thing: He returned and found it, wherewith he cleansed his tongue, continuing
with those that were present with an inestimable tranquillity, and without so
much as a groan or show of grief, with memorable words from time to time,
repeating some devout passages of Scripture, and very often he would say. Hor
sum audiamo one Dio chiama; Away, let us be gone whether God calls us. And the
standers by seeing his voice began to fail, and his pulses beat to an end,
entreated him to take a little rest, at which he laughed out; and so he past
the time in whispering to himself, that he could not be well understood,
except it were sometimes a word of Scripture, and once he said Audiaemoa S.
Marco che tardi. Let us go to Saint Mark, it begins to belate, which is all
that during his ficknesse was spoken without connection and right sense. In the
mean time it struck eight a clock. He counted it, and calling Fra Cossimo his
other servant to him said, now it is eight a clock dispatch if you will give me
that which the Physician ordained. But he not able to receive but a small part
of it. Afterward finding himself ready to die, he called Fulgentio to him, and
commanded him to leave him with these memorable words, which were like to be
always engraven in his heart. Hor sum non restate etc. Now stay no longer to
behold me in this state it will not he needful, go to your rest, and I will
go to god from whence we came, And so he was willing to be embraced and kissed
by him; And though Fulgentio knew well what it was to consirme his mind by the
example of such a constancy, yet he parted from him; not to leave him but to
execute his command, and to obey him in another point which was to go to the
fathers to show him so much charity as to come and assist him in his passage
with their prayers.

So he called the Prior, and the other Friars to come about his bed and make
their usual prayers and recommendations of that soul into the hands of God,
who although he could speak no longer, yet with his eyes and signs gave
assurance that he was in a fulness of understanding to the very last gasp.
His very last words (which were hardly unstood by Fra. Marco that stood over
him, yet often repeated) where these two Esto perpetua. I doubt not when in
that trance he recommended his soul to God with such servent votes and prayers
from his heart, but he remembered to recommend also, and to pray for the
perpetuity of the most serene Republique, to which he had done his service with
so much faith and charity. And with those words he lost his speech, and
shortly after drew to an end, which was accompanied with two notable
circumstances. One was that being unable to move his hands, yet of himself by
a force rather of spirit (which was all in God) then of his body, he formed
them into a cross. The other, that fixing his eyes upon the crucifixe which
was before him with a natural deaths head of a Calvary, he held it so a while,
and then casting them downward, and shutting them he breathed out his soul
into the hands of God.

Thus was the end of this great personage, and it pleased divine dispofition
that it should be so testified to the excellent Senate by a public writing
and under oath, and subscription of all the college of the reverend fathers of
the Servi that were present against the fabulous falsehoods and impudent lies
that were after divulged, that he died howling and crying out with apparitions
of black dogs and other things of that kind, as also that in his Cell and
chambers there were heard hideous noises. Things only visible and audible in
the far distant houses of the Ecclesiastiques, and heard to Rome, but never of
those that lived in the next chambers nor of any that were present.

Such inventions as these were also machinated against the memory of Duke
Leonardo Donato a glorious Hero, and before this they were grown to such an
impudency to publish prodigious things in print which were said to happen in
that year of the interdict against the defenders of the cause of Venice, and
this may serve for an argument how far the narrations of such accidents may be
believed, which are written of persons so long after, and so far distant, that
lived in abomination with the Court of Rome.

I confess that these examples so fresh make me doubt extremely of the
alterations and falsifications of so many narratives made in time past, first
kept secret, and after divulged when the only fautors of the factions of the
Ecclesiastickes had the command of the press, and who without difference have
either commended or dispraised so many great men, not for matter of truth, but
only because they were either favorable or contrary to their mundane
interests.

But the father died as you have heard with a fame to the world (of an
incomparable man and with them that knew him) and had to do with him, of so
singular integrity, and sanctity of life as are seldom seen, and with a
commendation which became proverbiall, that if he had been in the favor of
the Court, and served their interests he had been put in the Calender and
number of Saints.

In Rome they were very glad to hear of his death with such kind of
discourses, nor could his holiness contain himself from speaking of it, as
the handy-worke of God to take him out of the world, as if it had been a
miracle for a man to die at the age of 71. But he himself was not immortal,
for he died himself the same year about the beginning of July. He lived in
the world seaventle one years, which was a decrepit age if you consider his
complexion, or his consummate wisdom and perfection of virtue, and his either
desires or hopes to live being but too short a time if you consider the service
that the public received from him, or the common desire that was afterward of
him because it concerned the most excellent republique, that his service should
have been as durable as it was faithful. A pattern of so rare virtues was
worthy of a longer old age, or rather of a perpetual youth, if humanity
could have borne it in this life. But to him for his own sake, death which
could not be unexpected was not untimly yet at least to us and for our sakes
it was bitter, and if he lived long enogh for himself, yet lived he too little
for the public, for which he only lived. Upon this occasion his Cell was
seen and visited by very many who observing that religious poverty without
any ornament were very well satisfied, and the principal Senators said it was
a paradise where a good Angel dwelt. And the most excellent Leonardo Moro who
is one of the perfections of all virtues and particularly of religion, and
christian piety could not contain himself from saying. Is this the father
whom the prelates of holy church have so much defamed, Is he then a wicked man,
and are they the imitators of Christand his Apostles? His funerals were
conspicuous both for the public munificence, and for a numerous concourse of
great persons of every fort but for cost It exceeded not his private condition
save only in a public grief. And it was observed that his face was well
colored and smiling, and as they said more venerable and beautiful when he
was dead then when he lived. An after nine months that the coffin was opened
again wherein he was laid, they found him both entire, and with his face fresh
colored.

Father Fulgentio was the first that went about to honor his memory by some
works, but the Convent would not suffer him, who resolved to make it a
public act. But the most excellent senate decided the difference by a
public decree that at the public charge there should be made a memorial
and inscription, which may be so much the more illustrious and durable because
as yet there is nothing done in it. And likewise she fame and infamy of those
is like to be eternal who keep an implacable hatred against the dead with a
malignitie of finding blemishes in so precious a jemme, or clouds in so
resplendent a jewel, which in such an excellent creature either never were or
else so little that they were invisible, except it were to the eyes of of
consummate malignitie. And according to the wise man. The rash imprudence of
those men shall be had in derision who being raised into fortune presume to the
patrons even of fame and to extinguish it that it should not pass to
posterity.

And as for the glory of this great Hero's so excellent a creature, (as it
happens to some captains of great valor) his tryumphe encreast more being
denied then granted. As the impediment was known to arise from these wicked
tyrants Tiberius Nero and others so it may happen to father Paul. And if a
sneild should he made for him with his effigies the same event would befall it
as was said of the images of Brutus and Cassius, that in a funeral pomp they
were more conspicuous and prefulgent, because by the violence of the Tyranny
they were not seen among the others. And, if there remain any sense of these
humane consolations, to those that are in God. That great soul of father Paul
shall receive content, that the perversitie of others has favored his
intentions, which were despising of all other consolations of the living Father
Paul shall live eternally in God who is the only goodness desirable, but yet
he shall live in the memory of men by his heroique virtues, against which
monuments, neither time which consumes marbles and mettalle shall prevail,
much less that foolish poetique error of them that believe, that the fame of
men can live in a stone, which is subject to the injuries of the most wretched
sort of people.

And because the time that is past, is the best instructor of that which is to
come. I must not forget, that among others that were present at that pious
exemplarie and happy death of the good father, there was one sent thither who
went in obedience to some body that foresaw more then others, Maestro Agostino
Mesani of Venice) surnamed the Poet, who beving also tied up by the truth upon
his oath, and havingsubscribed to that narrative above mentioned (which was
presented to the most excellent Senate) (this man favored and defended by
Father Paul upon many occasions, who was the rather moved to compassionate him
for his inconsistent brain) This man being brought in by a kinsman of his that
was said to serve as a spy, or (as I have it more probable) by his own rashness
and foolish hopes, into the houseof the Signor Nuntie was also said to have
made relations there which where only worthy of himself. He that never knew
obligation to tell truth, nor to keep himself within terms of modesty. But that
he should be examined again and his narration registered, it was not very like,
although the Friar himself bragged of it.

True it is that from thence he returned to his Convent, being full of
conceits, which by his natural foolishness (because he was a fool, and
notoriously known to be so, but yet of an ill tongue and very mischievous) not
being able to conceal, or rather saying publicly, that he should shortly be
above either a General or a Provincial. But this lasted but awhile, because
those that were about the Nuntio understood too well the carriage of such
people, and what service could be expected from such as he was. It may be
also that they were informed of his customs and qualities to be such, as
cannot with honesty be related. But let it serve to cast a veil over him, by
saying that he is Muliebriter infamis, and vita probosus, and with Superiors
he had been privileged, only by his folly. That in more than fifteen years
he had neither made confession, nor recited office, although he had sometimes
celebrated Mass, and when the Superiors went about to reform it in him, he
presently turned Apostata, as he had done at other times before.

Let not this note be thought impertinent, because this man's relations another
time may appear under the name of a Theologist, or Master of Divinity, as
others in the like kind with, and without names, have caused to be committed
from Rome to the Vicar General Apostolical (Maestro Filippo Ferrari de
Alexandria) to make certain heinous inquifitions against others. But they have
had the ordinary event of those that move informations upon such subjects, and
the very letters themselves of the General have been seen by me to the like
purpose, where it has appeared that all that had been written and affirmed
were false.

FINIS.

