THE Counterfeit Bridegroom: OR THE Defeated Widow. A COMEDY, As it is Acted at
His Royal Highness THE Duke's Theater.

Licensed

October. 4th. 1677. ROGER L'ESTRANGE.



LONDON, Printed for Langley Curtiss in Goat-Court upon Ludgate Hill, 1677.

PROLOGUE
Spoke by Mrs. Currar.
WHo have we here, sine Sparks, faith Sirs I fear
You Will not be pleased with our Vacation Cheer;
Why, what a Devil make you now in Town
In The Mall, the Park, and Playhouse Clothes were shown,
Down, down to the Country, there show the Gay Baboon;
Cloris, and Celia do expect ye there,
To the honest Tradesmen leave this time of the year,
Who, (while their Wives (good men) are gone to meet
Some of you Sirs t'th' Country here can sit
Wonderously pleased with our Vacation Treat.
But since against the Rules of Gallantry
Ye keep in Town, faith take your Chance for me;
Huff, Damn and Swear, if you think good -- but then
Expect a brush fro'th' Trading Gentlemen,
For' it is their time to approve or to Condemn:
You Will say, it is hard, you cannot be allowed
To Judge, and censure with the Common Crowd;
Nay to be barred from damning, swearing too,
When, here, you have hardly little else to do,
Since Vizards are grown scarce: -- might I advise,
If you will come, let 't be in some disguise,
With Coat, Short wig, and Colbertein Crevat,
With greasy Gloves, and the broad flapping hat,
Then freely ye may give the Play its Fate;
But if you boldly will Usurp their Right,
And huffing damn the Play out of mere spite,
'Cause it affords not you deboacht delight,
You justly may expect that They will swear
Vacation Pocket it is, that keeps you here;
And Play at Half a Crown does now prove Dear.
The Persons Names.
Sir Oliver Santloe -- Mr. By A. Leigh. Peter Santloe -- His Son -- Mr. Bowman.
Mr. Sanders -- Mr. Gilloe. Mr. Noble -- Brother to Mrs. Hadland. Mr. Crosby.
Mr. Hadland -- Mr. Williams. Sir Gregory Lovemuch -- Mr. Persivall. Mr. Gazer
-- An Astrological old Fool -- Mr. Norris. Mr. Noddy -- A Country Squire -- Mr.
John Lee. Sam -- Sir O. Santloe's Man -- Mr. Richards. A Dutch Boy.
WOMEN.
Lady Santloe -- Mrs. Norris. Clarina -- Mrs. Gibbs. Widow Landwell -- Mrs.
Osborne. Eugenia -- Mrs. Le-Grand. Mrs. Hadland -- Mrs. Currar. Musicians,
Singers, Dancers -- etc.
The SCENE, LONDON.

THE Counterfeit Bridegroom: OR THE Defeated Widow.
Act the First. Scene the First.
Scene the Street. Enter Peter Santlow, and Sam. P. S. I Am at my Wits ends,
Sam.


Sam. Faith Sir, like a kind Friend, I Am following you as fast as I can.


P. S. My Wife will be forced from me, my pleasure, my delight.


Sam. How shall we help it, Sir, dull, dull dog as I am, my invention was
never so gravelled since I first set out upon it.


P. S. But this is not all my misery -- for I am branded with the breach of
Friendship: for Sanders does suspect that I make Love to his Mistress the
Widows Niece Eugenia; when Heaven knows, it is my Father that works against the
peace of both our spirits, and courts her for me.


Sam. Let him go on, Sir, She Will hardly yield to an Old Man's Courtships,
especially when she finds you appear not in it -- but Sir, here is Mr. Sanders
with looks as melancholy and angry as a Looseing Bulley of Marribone.


Enter Sanders. Sand. My treacherous Rival there! draw Sir --


P. S. What means my Friend? --


Sand. Not a word, but defend thy life.


P. S. I Will dye before I Will draw against the man that I love; what reason? --


Sand. Thy Perjuries have blotted out the name of Friend, and out of Cowardice
you endeavor to excuse an act, not Heaven it self can pardon, much less I, --
but thus I will repay thy falsehood.


[Runs at him -- Sam. steps between. Sam. Hold, hold, Sir, -- here is like to be
fine work -- Pray hear him first before you kill him, Sir, -- upon my life,
your anger is in an Error all this while; for it is my young Masters Injury and
not yours, you would kill him for -- Come Sir, I must have ye friends, a pox on
weapons -- Mr. Sanders your hand, Sir, -- Now yours, Sir, -- So, so -- Now
all is right again: This is a new way of reconciling Friends, which I learnt the
other day among the Town Blades --


Sam. takes Sanders by one hand, and P. S. by the other, and shakes them. Sand.
Thou Art a mad Slave.


P. S. Now Sam, tell him the Secret, which none knows but your self and I, and
he will confess he has wronged the patience of his Friend.


Sam. Be patient then and attend -- You must know, Sir, That about Seven Years
since my Lady, his Mother, went over to Flanders, to coop the Young Chick his
Sister in a Nunnery, she then being about Nine Years old; but on the Road to
Antwerp, they met Thieves, were robbed, stripped, and parted; for the Kites
conveyed the Young One-away, and left the Old one to cackle over her loss.


Sand. Strange accident!


Sam. From which time they were not heard off, till about Three Months since,
News came of all had past, in a Letter from the Mother, who was then but in an
ill condition at Colone; for thither she had wandered to find out her Daughter,
but despairing of that, she sent over for Money to bring her home with -- My
Old Master no sooner heard of the Sum, but told it out, gave it him, and sent
us over; but we unfortunately calling at Antwerp by the way, a little Gypsy at
an Inn, had so looked her self into his heart, that the Mother was forgot, and
he doated so, that he brought her over, and this day married her; but pretends
it is his Sister; for which she now passes with the Old Man.


Sand. But how came you off concerning her Mother?


Sam. With a Tale of my own devising, That about 3 Years since she dyed at a
little Village within Two Leagues of Antwerp.


Sand. Let me admire thee -- and withal confess my groundless Jealousy.


P. S. Which thus I pardon -- and renew our former friendship --


[They Embrace. Sam. But here is the Devil on it, my Old Master concluding her
his Daughter, has found out a Match for her, an Old Rank Fox, one Gazer.


Sand. What he that woes by the Almanac? observes the Full and Change oth'
Moon, and makes it his business to conform all his actions and designs to the
Influence of the Planets?


P. S. The very same, he will not shave his Beard, clip his Nails, nor cut a
Corn before he has consulted Erra Pater, whether it be a lucky day or no.


Sam. Even he, because the Fool demands no portion -- but if my skill fail not,
I shall give him the Go-by.


Sand. As how, good Sam?


P. S. Honest Rogue say how.


Sam. Thus -- when the Fool's cashiered, as that he shall be, I Will tell my Old
Master, that you admire his Daughter, and your Love's so great, that provided
you might have her, you would take her without a farthing -- it is no sooner heard,
but the bait is swallowed, you are admitted, and the Match concluded.


P. S. But how will you shift off the Marriage?


Sam. I have a Trick for that too -- and each shall have his own -- and both
being lodged in one house, as it is his pride to have his Childrens Children got
successively, on his forefathers Beds -- in the Day time to please the Old
Man, ye may dally and print a kiss on the wrong Lip, and no harm in it; for
Brothers and Sisters may do it: But for the Night, let each know his own
business, and there I Will leave you.


Sand. Honest Rogue, how I applaud thy Wit.


P. S. See, my Father's coming -- let us retire --


Sam. About it straight, my Master's time is precious -- and let me alone with
my Old Master --


Sand. P. S. Exeunt. Manet Sam. To him Sir Oliver Santlow. Sir O. How now
Sirrah, does the Love-business go well between the Young Ones?


Sam. Between your Son, and Mris. Eugenia the Line is Even, Sir --


Sir O. And shall I be a Grandsire then?


Sam. Oh questionless, Sir -- but Sir methinks there is no proportion between
that Equinoctial and my Young Mistress Clarina.


Sir O. You mean Gazer: why the better Man; the better.


Sam. How Sir, are you glad there is no proportion in it?


Sir O. Yes marry am I Sir; for I would have you to know, I hate all words that
end in portion -- for I Will give her nothing.


Sam. Say you should not, Sir, as I Will never urge your Worship against your
Nature -- is there no Gentleman (think you) of Worth and Credit, that will not
open his Bed to warm a plump, handsome, charming naked Lady? believe me, Sir,
there are Thousands in this Town would be glad of such Service; nay, and would
give Money rather then not be so employed.


Sir O. Say you so? then they shall give me money for my Girl, or they shall go
without her.


Sam. Yes, they do give, keep, and treat, but not marry Sir, which I suppose
you are for.


Sir O. For quoth I? my Daughter shall not be a Whore, no not to get money, which
is the best plea the Jades of the Town have for their lewdness, and in troth I
love wealth so, that in my conscience had I bin a Maid, I had turned Strumpet
mearly for money sake.


Sam. A Smiting one 'yfaith -- but Sir methinks there is a great inequality in
years -- Mr. Gazer is too old in conscience for my young Mistress.


Sir O. You lie Sirrah -- he is but fifty five years of discretion, and will
make a Staid Husband.


Sam. As tame as a Drone that has lost his sting -- but Sir, under correction,
I fear he is past getting of Children, which young Women love extremely, and I
should be loath my young Mistress should lie fallow before she has yielded fruit.


Sir O. Sarrah do not provoke me to wrath -- not he get Children, when it is
well known that a tough old Fox of Threescore and Nine got a Girl of ten with
Child -- but however should he prove impotent, it would be the better I say
still.


Sam. Would you not be a Grandfather by your Daughter, Sir?


Sir O. No Sir -- my Son will make me that, and should my Daughter too, 'twould
undo me, double charges Sam. double charges.


Sam. Then I know a young Gentleman, between you and I Sir, as impotent as an
Eunuch, that has all the passions of Love, but incapable of Action; besides he
has a great Estate.


Sir O. How say you? a rich Eunuch? what a blessings that! and is he in Love
with my Girl! blessing on blessing -- name him, honest Varlet, who is it?


Sam. Mr. Sanders, Sir.


Sir O. How, Mr. Sanders? -- why Sirrah, had not he last Session a Bastard laid
to his Charge, for which he was fined twenty Pounds.


Sam. True Sir, but 'twas his Footmans Bastard, which he only Fathered, for his
credit; the case of many Blades now a days to keep up reputation.


Sir. O. But he 'l have a portion too.


Sam To my knowledge not, Sir; alas he has a vast Estate already, which he
intends to settle on your Daughter, and then Sir when he dies 'twill all come
to your Family.


Sir O. Art sure of that?


Sam. He told me so himself Sir, and said likewise, he would leave all to your
Discretion.


Sir O. Nay then it is my own, and the Devil a penny he gets of me.


Sam. Sir shall I fetch him, ere it be too late; for he is so raving Mad, that
shortly he will either be in Bedlam, or break his neck off some Steeple.


Sir O. Now bless the young man's gristles, I should be loath to loose such an
Estate, and see a begging Courtier go away with what might have been mine --
therefore prithee find him out that I may pronounce words of consolation to him
-- before he be past all recovery; for I would not loose the blessing of an
Eunuch Husband for my Daughter, for the World --


Sam. But Sir you will send the Gull, the weathercock going First?


Sir O. Presently, instantly, my Daughter shall not be his Ephemeris, since I
can Prognosticate a happier Fortune for my Girl; prithee Sam, about it man, and
bring Mr. Sanders to me --


Sam. But Sir, take no notice for the World, that he is an Eunuch.


Sir O. Not a word, begone, begone man --


[Sam. Exit. Enter Gazer. Gaz. Let me see, let me see, what comfort gives my
Almanac to day --

Luck I beseech thee, good days evil days, June, July, August, speak a word
for me now, the Girl's my own; let me see the Eighth day between Hawk and
Buzzard, (I remember I was drunk then) the Ninth day on a slippery pin, the
Tenth day the Markets marred, the Eleventh day against the hare -- against the
hare! a pox on the hare, would it had bin left out, had it been against any
thing but the hare, I had not valued it -- however I Will try the fortune of a
good face, tho my Almanac leaves me in the Sudds.


Sir O. Mr. Sanders and an Eunuch too! -- well, it is a prodigious Match! nay I
thought I should have good luck to day, because I rise with my butt end foremost
this morning as they say.


Gaz. Oh here is my Father-in-Law that must be, Sir Oliver your most dutiful
Son-in-law and Servant.


Sir O. An Eunuch! by Gogmagog he is happier then all the Whoring Gallants of
the Town.


Gaz. How? an Eunuch! I scorn your words, Sir, it is well known I have three
chopping Bastards at Nurse -- but, Sir Oliver -- Sir Oliver Santloe --


Sir O. Oh, Mr. Moon-Calf, are you there? prithee depart, for I am very busy
at present --


Gaz. When shall I wait on you then, Sir? --


Sir O. Why, let me see, about a quarter of a year hence --


Gaz. A quarter of a year hence? what shall I come in September or October?


Sir O. No Sir, nor in November neither, good my Friend --


Gaz. You are not mad, Knight? you will not let your Daughter hang past August,
will you? if Sir you do, she will soon drop under the Tree, for she is no winter
fruit I Will assure you --


Sir O. By Gog and Magog it is no matter for that, my daughter is not fruit for
your tooth -- therefore be not impertinent, but march off --


Gaz. Your Promise is past --


Sir O. A fart for Promises -- I tell you you are troublesome -- what think you
I Will marry my daughter to a Planter of the Skies, pray what Settlement will you
make, of the 12 Planets, and once a year they march out of your Lordship; I Will
not bestow my daughter on one who can make no Jointure, but of Castles in the
Air --


Gaz. But I have an Estate --


Sir O. For ought I know it is one by Conjuration, and the Charm may be out if
you dye, and when my Girl thinks she is on substantial Land, may find her self
in the midst of an Irish Bogg -- in short, Sir -- you shall have none of my
daughter --


Gaz. Then may the Devil choke ye with Money, and may a Fiddler run away with
your daughter, not have your daughter? a Pox on your daughter. Adieu, Sir; now
for my Widow, I Will never leave an open hearted Widow for a narrow eyed Maid
again: go out of the Road-way like an Ass to leap over Hedge and Ditch -- I Will
fall into the beaten Road again, and invite the Widow home to a Banquet and make
amends for my neglect of not waiting on her yesterday --


My Almanac told me true, how I should fare:
Let no man think to speed against the Hair.
[Exit. Sir O. So, he is gone, may all the Stars by whatsoever Titles they are
dignified and distinguished look a skew upon all his Enterprises --

Oh luckey Rogue, ha'ye brought Mr. Sanders -- he looks so sad, he grieves my
very Soul, poor Fool --


Enter Sanders and Sam. Sam. Sir, there is the old Gudgeon, now catch him neatly
and your business is done.


Sir O. Oh, Mr. Sanders, what you are in love it seems; One might guess by your
hanging look you are possessed with that troublesome spirit --


Sand. I am so, Sir --


Sir O. For my daughter --


Sand. True, Sir --


Sir O. And you would kill your self for her --


Sand. My Life will be a burden if I have her not --


Sir O. In good time, Sir -- but then you expect no Portion?


Sand. Something by which you do acknowledge her your daughter, Sir --


Sir O. Acknowledge her your daughter! what a wheedling Phrase was that to get
Money -- but 'twont do -- in a word, Sir, if you like, love, and will marry my
Girl without a Portion so, if not -- Lord have mercy upon you, and so go hang
your self.


Sam. How dexterously he wheedles himself into the noose.


[Aside. Sand. But, Sir, if you will bestow no Portion, you will give her Clothes and
Wedding-dinner --


Sir O. Yes that I will, Sir, and more; you shall board in my House gratis for
three Years, if that will do: look out no further, for I Will reprieve you from
your grinning destiny --


Sand. Then thus I joyfully return my acknowledgments for your kind compliance,
and admire your judgment and discretion, for a Woman's Virtue is the richest
Dower she can possess --


Sir O. Now I love thee for thy wisdom, rise, rise, and a Blessing on you both
--


Enter Young Santlow. How now Son, whither so fast --

P. S. To visit my Mistress, Mr. Sunset's daughter, Sir --


Sir O. A good Boy -- ply it hard both of ye; these young Sluts are as skittish
as unbackt Colts -- Do ye hear, agree't so soon as possible, and one day, one
dinner shall serve for both.

[P. S. and Sand. Exeunt. How soon my Joys for my Girls good Fortune have
drowned the Sorrow for my Wife's Loss -- well 'twas a good Soul -- but why
should I grieve, since I enjoy her Picture in my daughter --

Enter Boy. How now, the News with you, Sirrah --


Boy. A Dutch Merchant, Sir, desires to speak with you --


Sir O. With me? what should his business be tro -- I have a Cousin in Holland,
perhaps some News from him, the old business, some Firkins of Butter with
Counterfeit Farthings, but tho the gain may be great, yet by Gog Magog I Will be
no Trayter I, so I Will roundly tell him --


[ Sir O. Boy, Exeunt. SCENE II.
Enter Mrs. Hadland with a Letter. Sir Gregory Lovemuch disguised like a
Porter. Mrs. Hadl. Well I must be revenged on this impertinent Leacher, he will
not be repulsed, yet in spite of poverty and all its cursed attendance of
Calamities, I Will keep my Virtue still, and my precious Sir, the Goat, will
appear under the Ass's skin --


[aside. Sir G. L. Thus far I am prosperous, Love, if it be thy will make her
comply: Poverty! thou blessed Bawd of Love, confute her sullen Virtue, make her
yield, and then I Am happy --

[aside. Now, Madam, what answer shall I give to the Worshipful Knight that
sent me?


Mrs. H. I Will comply seemingly till I have an opportunity to be revenged for
his unlawful Solicitations.

[aside. Friend, you may tell Sir Gregory, That the small Favor which in his
Letter he requests was no sooner read but granted --


Sir G. L. Oh divine Beauty! let me embrace my Treasure --


[Discovers himself. Mrs. H. Sir Gregory Lovemuch in the Habit of a Porter, it
amazes me.


Sir G. L. Oh Madam, Love, Love has a thousand ways to discover it self and its
Deity -- and this was mine -- speak, Madam, and with the harmonious sound make
me all rapture, new create me Young, say, shall I enjoy that mighty Blessing I
have so long toiled and labored for?


Mrs. H. I will consider further of it, Sir --


Sir G. L. Oh dally not with time, my fair, let us now improve this blessed time
of your Husband's absence -- I met him at the Temple, I suppose -- gone to his
Lawyer's Chamber --


Mrs. H. Very right Sir --


Sir G. L. Shall we, shall we withdraw then to your Chamber? -- fair one?


Mrs. H. And wrong my Husband, and the Widow whom you are about to Marry?
'twoud be unkindly done of me --


Sir G. L. I marry her Wealth, not Person -- when I Have the Blessing of her
Estate, it shall be at your Command, I marry her only to supply my Purse.


Mrs. H. I must confess 'twill be a home revenge upon her, for she now enjoys
my Estate, which her Husband by Knavish practices, cozened my Father of just
before he dyed --


Sir G. L. That Is my design to force her make a restitution of your Estate; for
all, all she has you shall be sole Commandress of --


Mrs. H. Your Promises are great --


Sir G. L. The performance too shall be so, her golden showers shall fall into
your lap, and one kiss shall ransom inestimable Jewels from their imprisonment
of her Cabinet; come, come, my sweet, let me partake of the boundless bliss of
Love.


Mrs. H. Let me a while consider Sir --


Sir G. L. Time enough to consider when we have tasted of Love's pleasing
banquet, and this minute lost may be ominous for the future. --


Mrs. H. I ask but one days time, Sir Gregory then, let the rest be yours.


Sir G. L. Happy, happy I, it is granted Madam; one kiss, my Dear, and then I Am
gone --

[kiss her. Oh how divinely does she kiss!

[Aside. So great a gift must be thus rewarded --


[Gives her a Ring. Mr. H. Within Wife, Sweet heart, where are you?


Mrs. H. Oh Heavens, Sir Gregory, my Husband! should he find you here? --


Sir G. L. Fear nothing, Madam, the Devil cannot know me in this disguise.


Mrs. H. He Is come as I could wish -- Sir Gregory, let me prevail with you to
step into my Closet; for should he come and see you here, I am so young a
Sinner, my guilt would quickly betray me.


Sir G. Do with me what you please -- I wish I were well off. --


[She locks Sir G. into a Closet. Enter Mr. Hadland. Mrs. H. Now, my Dear, what
comfort does the Law afford, shall werecover our lost Estate, or are we doomed
to eternal Poverty?


Mr. H. It Is past retrieve, Sweet heart, -- the Fox was too subtle for us; but
I am resolved to attempt something shall either end my life, or redeem our
Estate --


Mrs. H. It Is not thereabout yet, Husband, despair not, for I have thought upon
a way which I am resolved to prosecute, and if it take effect, say once a
Woman's undertaking may prosper -- and we may be said to share in wit, as well
as in your sorrows; but till that opportunity happens, I have a rare old Fool
in Limbo, a precious vigorous Lover, of Threescore and odd, who thinks our low
fortunes may make me stoop to his unlawful desires -- it is Sir Gregory Lovemuch
-- see here what a precious bate his Traps are furnished with to catch
distressed Virtue. --


Mr. H. It Is a rich Ring -- but where have you bestowed that lump of Leachery
and Impotence? --


Mrs. H. In my Closet, -- he is disguised like a Porter, do what you please with
him --


[Sir G. makes a noise within, crying out, scat, scat whore -- within. Sir G.
L. Hell and the Devil, out Cats, out.


Mr. H. What Is the matter with him --


Mrs. H. See if you please --


[Gives him the Key, he opens the Door -- slipped aside, Sir. G. runs out -- a
Cat is seen. Sir G. L. Gad take me, Madam, -- Is your Husband gone? -- a
confounded Spawn of the Devil has almost frighted me out of my wits; I wonder
what makes people fond of Cats, when their young they are absolute Succubusses,
and Witches when old -- your Tabby Satan, a Pox on her, has made me impotent
with her looks, and I am at present perfectly bewitched -- but I shall return to
morrow, sweet, with new joys and vigor, when these Charms are ended.


Mrs. H. Provided my Cat be not in the way --


Sir G. L. True, Madam, -- therefore pray let me prevail that Puss and Husband
may be decently removed, for the sight of either will make my Ague fit return.
--


Enter Hadland, meets Sir Gregory going out. Sir G. L. Ha! her Husband, then
world farewell, for now I shall be killed.


Mr. H. How no Sir, what are you?


Sir G. L. A poor fellow, an't please you. --


Mr. H. Stay friend, I must speak with you before you go. -- Sweet heart -- Ha,
a Letter, from whence came this? --


[Snatches the Letter: Sir G. L. Now welcome Death -- he will discover all --


Mrs. H. Nay, prithee Husband restore my Letter again, it is from our Cousin in
the City -- would have me --


Mr. H. How in a man's hand? --


Sir G. L. A Plague on it, that I could not counterfeit a Woman's hand --


Mrs. H. One of her Apprentices writ it for her --


Mr. H. Do not tell me Stories -- I partly know the hand; therefore will read
it. --


Mrs. H. But there are some secrets in it which she conjures me not to let any
one see --


Mr. H. Yet her Apprentice might write 'em -- Now I am resolved to read it. --


Sir G. L. Now I am past all hopes, I shall be killed for being my own Pimp --
Pox on him, he is poor, consequently desperate, and undoubtedly he will cut my
Throat, that he may be hanged, and be out of his misery.


Mrs. H. You see, Sir Gregory, what a misfortune your stay has brought upon us.
--


Sir G. L. Ay too late, I see Madam -- were I well off of this business, the
Devil should have Married Wives for me; the very thoughts of their Husbands
coming up, does in the midst of Enjoyment pall the appetite so, that half the
pleasure's lost.


Mr. H. A secret indeed, which you of all the world should have kept from me --
Is this the fruits of your pretended sanctity? are all your admonitions of
Patience come to this? must I be made the monster to maintain your lust,
ungrateful, false Woman? -- this now confirms what I too much have heard
abroad, concerng you and Sir Gregory that Goat, but I shall spoil the Amore. --

[Sir G. L. endeavors to steal off. How now Rogue, whether so slyly -- this
too's the Bawd to that Sir Fisty -- but I Will reward you e're you go. --


Mrs. H. Upon my knees, I beg --


Mr. H. Rise, not a word, out of my sight, go -- for fear my passion make me
rashly act what I may too late repent of -- prepare for the Country to go to
your Relations again -- for here, I Vow never to live longer with you, -- out of
my sight -- go --


[Exit Mrs. Hadl. Sir G. L. Then she is my own, I Will meet her at the Coach when
she is to go, take new Lodgings, and give her a false name, and the dear
delights of the Town will easily prevail with her to stay and embrace my offer;
besides, it is the Common practice of divorc't Wives to have Gallants under
their Husbands Noses -- ha she is gone, I like not his staying. --


Mr. H. Now Sir, for your reward, thus I make [Beats him. acknowledgment, for I
can never expect to be out of your debt.


Sir G. L. Hold, Sir hold, oh hold, what means your Worship --


Mr. H. To pay you for your pains. --


Sir G. L. I was paid before I came Sir; there is Porter paid, writ on the
Letter, Sir --


Mr. H. Now, Sirrah, take this and deliver it to that Dog of a Knight, or I Will
cut your Throat --


Sir G. L. Lord Sir, do you question it Sir? I am an honourer of your Worships
--


Mr. H. Tell him if he meets me not, he must expect to be posted for a Coward
--


Sir G. L. Gad for give me a Challenge? very fine, what have I got, to day a
dry basting, and to morrow must be run through the Lungs --


[Aside. Mr. H. Rogue do you grumble -- take that to remember you to save your
Windpipe --


Sir G. L. Nouns, I Will do it, I Will do it Sir.


[Exit. Enter Mrs. Hadland laughing. Mrs. H. Is he gone?


Mr. H. Yes, with a good basting, and a Challenge, which I Will undertake will
keep him waking beyond the Cure of Opium for this Night --


Enter Noble. No. Oh Sister, cursed Luck -- the Dice and Devil prove my
Enemies, my last, last dear stake of ten Guinnies are flown -- and now I begin
to reflect on our last discourse about the Widow, is your design perfect --


Mrs. H. It is -- take no care, for I am resolved to set all right, -- and
Brother, what I can spare, take and try once more, what kindness Fortune will
show --


No. Thanks kind Girl -- but still my mind runs on this damned Widow, no
revenge, prithee consider Girl, --


Mrs. H. Leave that to my Care -- for you are not like to know any thing, till
I see I shall succeed --


No. Well, honest Soul, I leave it to thy management; but let each other
exchange Prayers for our designs.


[Exit. Mrs. H. Now for my design, you will be assisting.


Mr. H. I will --


Mrs. H. We Will about it then straight --


Wit now perform, what Justice could not do;
All ways are just, when we our Rights pursue.
ACT II. SCENE I.
A Table. House. Mr. Gazer, Widow, Mr. Noddy. Gazer. Welcome, welcome Widow, to a
Batchelor's house here, a single man I, but for two or three Maids that I keep.


Wid. Are you double with them sometimes then, Sir, --


Gaz. An exceeding good mourning Wit, by Capricorn --


Mr. Nod. I protest Widow you are a most intolerable profound witty Lady -- and
so I kiss your paws --


[Scrapes and Cringes. Gaz. Well said, Mr. Noddy.


Wid. I am obliged to you for your Complement, Sir, --


Enter Sir Gregory Lovemuch. Sir G. L. A curse on Hadland, I shall not forget
him in have, [Shrugs. however I Am for the Widow, and will strike up the Match
the sooner, that I may send into the Country for one of her Tenants Daughters
-- for I must have a bit of young flesh.


Gaz. Sir Gregory! You honor me -- see our Mistress, keep her Company, whilst
I step aside and look after affairs --


[Exit. Sir G. L. Your Servant Brother Rival -- You see Widow, what power your
beauty has to make Rivals Friends and embrace -- as thus -- Mr. Noddy, your
Servant.


Noddy. Your Slaves slave, to the third and fourth Generation, Sir Gregory.


Wid. Sir Gregory you were remiss in your duty to day --


Sir G. L. Your pardon, your pardon Widow -- but when, when will the blessed day
arrive that I shall take possession of my treasure in thee, Widow?


Wid. In a day or two I shall make my Choice Sir Gregory, and then? --


Sir G. L. And then to bed Widow, ha Lady bright! -- this Noddy's a very Ass,
Gazer a Gull. --


Wid. A couple of Fops -- but Sir Gregory!


Sir G. L. I understand you, a kiss for the Conceit sake, Widow.


Nod. A murrion on him, how my mouth waters -- what a cursed thing is modesty.


Enter Gazer -- with his Tenants. Gaz. If conceit will strike the stroke, have
at the Widows Plumb-tree, I Will put 'em all down for a Banquet, Widow, and
Gentlemen, my Friends and Servants, I make you wait long here for a Batchelor's
pitance --


Wid. Oh Sir, you are pleased to be modest --


Gaz. No by my troth Widow, you shall find me otherwise.


Music plays softly -- Enter Tenants with a Banquet, Twelve Dishes with six
Men, being the Twelve Signs. Wid. How Is this? the Twelve Months for our Plates,
and the Twelve Signs for our Treat,


Gaz. These are the signs of my Love Widow --


Wid. I am sorry you should be at such Charges, Sir, to feast us a whole Month
together --


Gaz. Widow thou art welcome a month, a year, for ever to me --


Wid. What are those brought in the Banquet?


Gaz. My Tenants they stand for Fasting days.


Sir G. L. Or the weeks in Lent.


Gaz. You Are in the right, Sir Gregory, sweet Widow take your place here at
Aries, that is the head sign; a Widow is the head till she is married --


Wid. But married, what is she then? --


Gaz. The middle, the middle Widow -- Sir Gregory Lovemuch, pray sit here at
Taurus, they say y' are a good Town-Bull.


Sir G. L. Spare your Friends, Sir --


Gaz. Mr. Noddy don't fall back so -- here is Gemini for you Sir; for you had
two chopping Boys by your last Wife --


Noddy. No harm in that, Sir, the Widow may like me the better --


Wid. But, Sir, methinks your Signs are not perfect, your Tenants would do well
to help fill the Table --


Gaz. By the Mass it is true, Widow -- Tenants for once sit down with your Hearts
on; but spare the Meat I charge you, as you hope for new Leases, I must make my
Signs draw out a month yet, with a bit every morning at breakfast, and at Full
Moon with a whole one; that is restorative, sit round, sit round, and do not
speak good Tenants, You may be bold enough, so you eat but little: How like you
this, Widow? --


Wid. It shows well, Sir --


Gaz. By my troth, Widow, I Am sick that day my Table's empty; I wish some Ghest
or other to fill that gapp there --


Wid. Indeed the Feet for want of covering may catch cold, and then the head
will quickly feel it --


Gaz. Why then you may draw up your Legs and lie rounder together.


Sir G. L. In troth, Madam, my Neighbor's a Notable Wagg --


Wid. His Wit increases with his eating.


Enter Mrs. Hadland in Man's Clothes, comes in singing. Mrs. Hadland disguised
like her Serving-man. Mrs. H. Gentlemen, your Servants.


Gaz. Another Suitor? then Pisces will be covered.


Mrs. H. Madam, youl'e pardon my Intrusion; I heard your mirth, and thought a
sober Gentleman might be admitted to partake --


Wid. There needs no excuse, Sir, and with that Gentleman's leave I entreat you
to sit and do as we do.


Gaz. Young Gentleman pray sit, You Are heartily welcome by Ceres.


Wid. Pray make room for the Gentleman --


Gaz. Sit still Tenants, I Will call in all your Old Leases, and wrack you else.


Mrs. H. Sirrah, Take my Hat and Sword --


Wid. Then Sir, you mean he shall sit as he comes?


Gaz. I, and he were a Lord he shall not sit above my Tenants, I Will not have
two Lords to 'em; so I may look for my Rent in another man's breeches.


Mrs. H. Gentlemen sit still, I Will disturb no body, but here take my fortune --


[Sits down at the lower end o'th Table: Gaz. If you love Fish, pray fall too,
Sir; had you come sooner, you might happened among some of the Flesh signs, but
now they are all taken up; Virgo had bin a good Dish for you, had not one of my
Tenants bin somewhat too busy with her.


Mrs. H. I Am extremely pleased with my Fortune here, Sir, it is the conceited'st
Banquet I ever met with --


Sir G. L. What say you to a bit of Taurus?


Mrs. H. The Bull's too rank for me --


Sir G. L. How Sir?


Mrs. H. Too rank, Sir? does it offend you?


Sir G. L. Forbear, or I shall strike you as dumb as your watery Kindred --


Mrs. H. With your heels or horns?


Sir G. L. Perhaps with both --


Mrs. H. It must be when I am asleep then.


Mr. H. It Is a brave Girl, and nobly managed.


[Aside. Gaz. Hold Gentlemen, for the sake of Mankind let not the Planets fall
out; for if they destroy one another, what a world of abortive births, we shall
have -- Sirrah, run and fetch my Sun Cupp, his Beams shall disperse these
clouds of Contention.


Wid. Sir, I make it my request to you, to sit --


Mrs. H. Madam, you are obeyed --


Wid. Each look I take increases my desires, such charms I never saw before;
and should he not be a Servant, my hopes will be all defeated.


[Aside. Gaz. How is it Widow? Gentlemen cheer up, fair weather in all Quarters;
the Sun will rise anon, I Have sent for him -- Oh here he comes -- Sing sirrah,
sing the Song I gave you.


Enter a Servant with a great Cup like the Sun. Man sings.
1.
COme fill to the brim, for the Sun does go round,
And visits the World in a day;
Our glass is our Sun,
Through our World he does run,
And each little drop is a Ray.
2.
As the Sun with his Rays does ripen the Earth,
And guild all the World with his Light;
So powerful Wine
Our Wits does refine,
And ripens our Joys to delight.
Gaz. Now fill it to the Widow --


Wid. What Is here a Sun?


Gaz. It does betoken, Madam, a cheerful day to some body.


Wid. Gentlemen, my Service to ye all; for ye know the Sun must go through the
Twelve Signs --


[She drinks. Gaz. Most witty Widow, you jump with my Conceit; there is not a
hair between us.


Wid. Give it Sir Gregory.


Sir G. L. I am the next through whom the Golden flame must shine, the poor
Feet there must wait and cool a while.


Mrs. H. My time will come, Sir --


Gaz. So round it goes -- Fill it him again, Sirrah --


Nodd. Fill't me? why I drank last, Sir.


Gaz. I know you did, but Gemini must drink twice, unless you mean that one of
'em should be choked.


[ Noddy drinks again. Nod. Well Mr. Gazer, you are a merry Man --


Wid. Fly from my heart all variable thoughts; she that is enticed by every
pleasing object, shall find small Pleasure, and as little Rest -- [Aside. Sir
Gregory Lovemuch --


Mrs. H. With your pardon, Madam, is this Sir Gregory, Lovemuch?


Sir G. L. I am, Sir, I dare own my name --


Mrs. H. There Is a rank Villain bears that name; are you of that Family, Sir?


Sir G. L. How, Sir?


Mrs. H. Nay Sir, by Heaven stit still -- leave roaring, I intend anon to bait
you --


Gaz. Yet again? if you love me Gentlemen, let us have no roaring here -- If I
had thought of this, I Would have sent my Bull to the Bear-Garden.


Mrs. H. Sirrah, commend my Love and Service to the Widow, desire her Ladyship
to taste that Morsel --


Lays Sir G. L. Letter on a Trencher, and Mrs. H. carries it to the Widow. Mr.
H. This is the Bitt I watch't for all this while.


[Aside. Sir G. And wherein has this name of mine offended, that you are so
liberal of your infamous Titles? I am a stranger to thee, but it must be known
Sir, e're we two part --


Mrs. H. And good reason Sir -- I don't intend to end so calmly with you; for
my precious Sir, I design to cut your Throat.


Wid. Oh strike me dead! what is here -- this should be your hand, Sir Gregory.


Sir G. L. Undoubtedly, it is one of the Letters I sent to you, Widow.


Wid. Much good may do ye Gentlemen --


[Rises. Nod. Niggers, noggers, what ailes the Widow --


Gaz. The Widow paints White, some Aqua Coelestis there, quickly --


Wid. Oh Treachery unmatch't, unheard of Villainy!


Sir G. How do you, Madam? --


Wid. O impudence! does my Disease ask how I do? can it torment my heart, and
look with a fresh color in my face?


Sir G. What means the Widow?


Gaz. What qualm is this, Madam? I hope my Ram does not stick in your stomach.


Wid. No, but an Old Leacherous Goat, a false Villain does -- He that would
know a Villain when he meets him, let him look here; Here is a Glass will
reflect his perfect Character -- Oh thou preserver of my state, pray tell me,
Sir, [To Mrs. Low. that I may pay you all my Thanks together, what blessed
accident brought that Letter to your hand, which has been long kept secret from
me in my Enemies power?


Mrs. H. Please you to retire, Madam, I shall unfold this Riddle --


Wid. Thou Basilisk to Virtue out of my sight, and never come near me more --
Gentlemen pray come in and partake of a Story which may prove beneficial to you
--


Mrs. H. Wid. Exeunt. Gaz. and Nod. We follow, Madam --


Nod. Niggars, Sir, why don't you budge? -- s'heart thrust him out.


Gaz. Out of my doors thou treacherous Fox --


Sir G. All Curses scatter you --


[Exit. Gaz. Do you thunder? if you had staid I Would have made bold to have ripped
out some of my Bull out of your belly again --


Noddy. Now for the Widow, since the Knight's removed, I am resolved to get
drunk, infuse confidence, be very rude, and then they say a Widow will yield.


Gaz. Come, Brother Rival, let us to the Widow, and learn of her what Treachery
this is --


[Exeunt. Mr. H. Thus far my Wifes designs are successful; now to my Charge, I
must find out her Brother, and bring him hither to my Wife; what she intends I
know not.


[Exit. SCENE the Second.
Sam. Sam. My designs work rarely! well, if I go on and prosper, my Statute,
when I dye, shall be set up in Brass with an Inscription, Here lies the
Machiavel of Love Intreigues -- The two Young Blades are close at it on a wrong
scent, whilst the Old Men are ready to dissolve with joy.


Enter Sir Oliver with a Dutch Boy. Sir O. Oh come, come, are you there, Sir?
--


Sam. Life! what is the matter now?


[Aside. Sir O. There Is a new Reckoning come in since I saw you last.


Sam. Pox on it, I thought all had bin paid, I hate after-reckonings.


[Aside. Sir O. Pray come near Sir, let us be acquainted with you --


Sam. You honor me too much, Sir. --


Sir O. Sirrah, You Are impudence is great, nay you have bin bold enough too with
my purse abroad, if I am rightly informed; by Gogmagog if it be true, I Will have
thee hanged, drawn and quartered.


Sam. Who, I bold with your purse, Sir?


Sir O. Yes you Sirrah -- did not you bring me word about Ten Weeks since, my
Wife was dead?


Sam. Yes, true Sir, very true Sir.


Sir O. Pray stay, Sawce-box, and hear me out; and did not you likewise say,
That with the Money I sent to defray my Wifes Charges, she being, as you did
aver, dead, you brought home my Daughter, whom by accident you met with at
Antwerp?


Sam. Right as can be, Sir, I never found your Worship in a false Tale yet.


Sir O. I thank you for your good word, Sir; but I Am like to find your Worship
in two at once.


Sam. I should be sorry to hear that, Sir. --


Sir O. I believe you Sir -- within this month my Wife was alive (which a Dutch
Merchant, Father to this Boy who was just now with me, will justify), so
there is six Weeks of your Ten abated.


Sam. Strange! how men are grown to lying; that it is false, I Will justify it
with my life, Sir: I Am sure, poor Lady, I dropped a Tear over her Grave; so did
my Young Master too -- if this Merchant were here, I Would tell him to his face
that he wears a double Tongue; that is, Dutch and English -- will the Boy say
it, Sir? --


Sir O. Yes that he would, could you understand him; for he speaks nothing but
Dutch.


Sam. All the better, I Will gabble something to him -- [Aside Hoiste kaloiste
kalooskin se vou, Dar Zun alla gaskin?


[To the Boy. D. Boy. Ick wet neat watt bey zackt, Ick vnverston ewe neat.


Sam. I thought as much --


Sir O. What says the Boy?


Sam. He says his Father is troubled with an imperfection at one time of the
Moon --


Sir O. Does the Boy say so?


Sam. I knew there was something in it -- your Wife alive! will you believe all
Tales, Sir?


Sir O. But Sir he told me he saw this Wench you brought home, at Antwerp in an
Inn: he tells me I am plainly cousened, and that she is not my Daughter.


Sam. All Is discovered -- how Sir, not your Daughter? I must to it again.


Quisquivikin Sadlamara alla pisskickin sows clows, hoff tofte le cumbershaw,
bouns buss boxseeno.

D. Boy. Ick an sawth no int hein clappon de heeke, I dinke vte zein zennon.


Sam. Oh ho! zein zennon! I thought I should find it out at have; The Boy says
they never came near Antwerp, but a quite contrary way, round about by --
Parnia.


Sir O. What means he by Zein Zennon, Sam?


Sam. That is, he saw no such Wench in an Inn; it is well I came so opportunely
to get it out of the Boy before his Father comes: pray be wary Sir, the World
is subtle, come and pretend a charitable business, merely to work out a piece
of money on you.


Sir O. Mass art advised of that?


Sam. The Age is cunning, Sir; besides, a Dutchman will live upon any ground,
and work Butter out of a Thistle.


Sir O. Troth thou says true in that; they are the best thrivers in Turnips,
Cabidges, and Hartichokes, our English are not like 'em.


Sam. Oh fie Sir, when the Treat that a Statesman of Holland gives, would
either choke or starve an English man, dried Stock Fish, pickled Herring, or
the like, Sir. --


Sir O. Sam. ask him from whence they came when they came hither.


Sam. That I will, Sir -- Culluaron lagooso, lageen, lagan, rufft, punkatee.


D. Boy. Nime aweigh de cack.


Sam. What, what? I cannot blame him then.


Sir O. What says he to thee?


Sam. The poor Boy blushes for him, he tells me his Father came from making
merry with certain of his Contrymen, and he is a little steept in English
Beer; there is no heed to be taken of his Tongue now.


Sir O. Why this is strange, how came thou by all this? the Devil take me if
I heard him speak above three words to you.


Sam. Oh Sir, the Dutch is a very wide Language, you shall have Ten English
words go to the Explaining of one Dutch -- As for example, Gulldergoose --
there is a word for you, Master.


Sir O. Why what is that same -- Gull -- Gull -- Gulldergoose, ha?


Sam. The English is -- How do you and all your Generation?


Sir O. Why it is impossible, it is impossible, man --


Sam. Thus I prove it by the Explanation, Sir, -- Gull -- how do you? der, and;
Goose, -- your Generation.


Sir O. Methinks the Language is a little sawcey -- Goose, my generation --
quoth a? but sirrah, how came you to understand Dutch so well?


Sam. By going to fetch home my Young Mistress, Sir, we had in our Company a
Young Frokin, who taught us it in a trice, Sir. --


Sir O. What in a months time?


Sam. I Will undertake, Sir, in a Fortnights time you shall speak as good Dutch
as any Native of Holland, if you would learn, Sir -- I shall be tript anon --
pox on it would I were fairly off --


[Aside. I Will go seek out your Son, Sir; You shall hear what Thunder he will bring
with him --

Sir. O. Do so, for I le have ye all face to face --


Sam. Cuds me what Else, Sir, -- If you take me so near the Net again, I le give
you leave to wring my Neck off -- I am come off fairly: We are undone in Dutch,
all our Three months Rognery is come over in a Butter-Firkin.


[Exit. Sir O. By Gogmagog an intricate business this; I am so lost between two
Tales, I know not which to trust, -- The Boy is the likeliest to tell truth;
for he is not yet old enough to understand iniquity -- but then why should the
Father tell me a lie, he gets nothing, certainly expects nothing; but by my
troth if he does expect, he gets nothing of me, and so much good may it do him
-- but however, I Will in and examine the business further --


[Beckons the Dutch Boy. [Exeunt. ACT III. SCENE I.
Mrs. Hadland and her Man -- Husband. Mrs. H. I Have sent in to the Widow --


Mr. H. Thou plyest thy business close -- the Coast is clear yet -- that was a
good surprise you put upon Sir Gregory --


Mrs. H. I found him the sensiblest Fool of the three to whom the Widow was
inclined; therefore ought to be removed -- be sure, Husband, to stand Sentinel,
and let me have warning when they come, and I Will rout 'em all --


Mr. H. I Am gone my Witty Sweet --


[Exit. Enter Servant. Servant. My Lady, Sir, begs your pardon for making you
wait, and she will be with you so soon as she has dispatched some of her Tenants
come from Kent.


Mrs. H. Thank you Sir, it is fit I should attend her leisure.

[Servant Exit. Those were my Tenants once, but what relief now; yet e're we
part, Widow, I shall have full revenge -- Your heart is mine already, and when
the whole Cargoe's in my power, I Will hoist my sails, and with my streams
playing in the Air, make to the blessed Harbor of repose --


Enter Mr. Hadland. Mr. H. Wife, the pair of Fools are come just now lighted
out of the Coach, --


Mrs. H. Now to your duty -- for I shall deal a little roughly with you, but
you must not take it ill; for my obedience is in my Pettycoat Pocket, and not
about me at present.


Mr. H. Use me as you please --


Mrs. H. I hear 'em coming -- help me a little -- Now step back and be very
ceremonious -- Where be those Fellows, who looks out there? Is there never a
Rascal She pulls off Hat, Crevat, Garters, and makes as if dressing her self.
in the way to conduct the Gentlemen in -- I find I am like to be finely served
among ye, but I shall set a new face on the house e're it be long -- how
sneakingly do you stand there: but I shall make you fly to receive and execute
Commands, before I have done.


[Beats Mr. H. Enter Noddy. Nod. This is most insupportable! what beating your
Man! hold Sir, what mean you? --


Noddy goes to keep Mrs. H. from beating, and she beats him. Mrs. H. I beg
your pardon -- Gentlemen your Servant -- Sirrah call your Mistress, tell her I
wonder she stays so long? Gentlemen you must pardon Women's frailties, their
decking and trimming themselves, make 'em often commit such rudeness.


Nodd. How Is this? nay then we are choused -- and I have spent both time and
money to a fair end --


Star. What a new Lord in the Widows house? -- would I were fairly off; for
I Will lay my life he has struck the Widow in a fair Planet -- let me see, let me
see -- Venus in Cauda? then it is too true, for that is a damned Leacherous
^lanet.


Noddy. Sir, Your Servant --


[Offers to go. Mrs. H. By my faith you shall not stir till you have seen
Isbel, make haste and desire your Mistress to come down --


Mrs. H. She desires to be excused, Sir, the Milliner has brought Gloves to
show her --


Star. How plain Isbel? Then I know how the world goes, ay, ay, too true, he
has Isbell d her -- a Pox on these Widows, there is no trust in 'em --


Mrs. H. They are galled -- the Rogues begin to sneak --


Noddy. Come, let us steal off, and take no notice of him, for he will jear us to
death should we stay -- Love is not by desert, but such fluttering half-witted
Hectoring Blades are the only taking men with you buxome Widows -- come away.


Mrs. H. What, Gentlemen are you for the Wine-Cellar? -- Sirrah conduct 'em
down, by that time you have drank your Mornings draught Isbel will be ready --


Noddy. Spare your Wine Sir, I beseech you -- for since the Widow is disposed
of -- we have no business here.


Gaz. I Will see the Wine in a Drunkard's shoe first, and drink't after he has
brewed it -- Hang her, let her go, she is fitted in faith; a proud domineering
young Coxcomb -- he will quickly rattle her bones, and go to Dice with her Money,
or at least pick up some common Orange-wench, set up her Coach, gay Clothes,
teach her to confront his Wife, and laugh Modesty out of Countenance, or I have
no skill in Astrology; if he is so saucy now to call her plain Isbel, she will be
Bitch and Whore before a Month comes about --


[Noddy and Star Exeunt. Mr. H. They have given you the slip --


Mrs. H. Hang 'em -- there are three rubs past -- and now for the Widow. Thus
like a younger Brother I Will begin my fortune, put on impudence, talk wantonly,
-- and ruffle her lustily.


Mr. H. But if she should yield, what then --


Mrs. H. Well considered, to prevent that, you must step in most officiously,
and interrupt us -- but she is coming --


Mr. H. Adieu witty Wife, and I le be sure to stand Sentinel.


[Exit. Enter Widow. Mrs. H. My life, my Dear!


[Runs to her and Embraces her. Widd. I fear I have tired your patience with my
long stay Sir --


Mrs. H. Who would not be devout, and out-wait patience, when such a Heaven is
the reward -- but Widow, you are indebted to me --


Widd. As how, I pray --


Mrs. H. I love you Widow; nay, laugh not, for I expect return, or look to your
self, for I Am resolved to sue thee in Cupid's Court, and there I know what
decree will pass --


Widd. But if I would compound, pray Sir, what will satisfy?


Mrs. H. The endless enjoying thy sweet self, Widow, nothing less --


Widd, So by compounding a small Debt I may run into a greater --


Mrs. H. Your credit will be the better, there is many a young Blade would give
you half the purchase to trust you, -- nay, and pay use for it.


Widd. Some of those roaring Bawdy talking young fellows would be idle, were it
for such interest.


Mrs. H. Then it is a match -- Come Widow, short service, a kiss and to bed, for
I am desperately hungry in faith --


Widd. You Are in great haste, Sir --


Mrs. H. Troth Widow, I have an excellent stomach -- and to provoke thine;
know, that my kisses are Virgins, embraces perfect, strength sollid, love
constant, but to come to the point, all ecstasy, rapture!


Wid. Since you value your self on your honesty, I Will put you to it Sir, -- Will
you swear you never knew Woman --


Mrs. H. By all that is good, and by thy sweet self I swear, that never as Man I
ever yet knew Woman -- but if we do not agree, faith Madam, I expect you keep
it secret, for it may spoil my future being; for a sober man is more ridiculous
in this Age, then he was prized in the last --


Wid. How his mein and wit surprise me -- Well, I find I shall love him; for I
am very apt to believe what he says --


Mrs. H. Are you considering whether you may believe me or not, Madam -- then
take altogether -- for I add further, that you are the first Widow, Maid, or
Wife I ever made love to --


Wid. There Is never a Jury of young Women in Town that were to view you, but
would be inclined to find you guilty -- therefore, Sir, I am apt to believe
there is some secret reason, and not Devotion keeps you from it --


Mrs. H. None by Heaven -- I kept it in reserve for thee --


Wid. For Me, Sir? --


Mrs. H. Where can I bestow it better --


[Sings and rumples the Widow. Wid. What means this insolence and rudeness, Sir?


Mrs. H. Fie, Widow, fie, it is pleasing violence, that begets delight.


Wid. I Will call my Servants, Sir, --


Mrs. H. Do, and I le use thee ten times worse even before witness, and then
thou art my own Widow -- Come, come, dear, sweet, inticeing Widow, we must
withdraw -- we must in faith, now, now, or never Widow.


Enter Mr. Hadland. Mr. H. Does your Worship call?


Mrs. H. Pox on you Dog, are you peeping?

[Throws her Hat at him. Thanks good Tom, thou came in the critical Minute


[Aside. Wid. But Sir, let us breath a while, what Encouragement have I given
you to make you thus confident and forward, Sir? --


Mrs. H. Love, powerful resistless Love -- you see what Madmen you Women make
us -- Come, Madam, few words, kind consent and no Ceremonies are most pleasing
--


Wid. Well, I cannot withstand, for I begin to grow as impatient as he is,
within there who waits? --

[Enter Mr. Hadl. If Mr. Gazer and Noddy are below, bring 'em up. --


Mrs. H. I Have lost my Widow, I fear, there are but two ways that I know, which
leads to a Widows bed; they are, Wealth and Impudence -- Now if I have took the
wrong, how I shall curse my self; here they are, now love if it be thy will.


[Aside. Enter Gazer and Noddy. Wid. Gentlemen, you are welcome, I am now fully
resolved to choose one of ye here, let me see -- but first, Mr. Gazer, you are
a judicious Astrological Person, do the Stars smile to day? if not, I will
defer my choice.


Gaz. Let me see -- Oh the best time in the world, Madam; for just now Mars
being Lord of the Ascendant, is entering into the house of Venus -- about three
Minutes three quarters after Eleven this morning --


Wid. That Is well -- and Mr. Noddy, your judgment of that person walking there,
what think you of him.


Nodd. What I think? -- Why I think he is well made, has a aerie mein, I believe
he has a pretty Judgment, for his Trimings and Clothes are not very
contemptible -- but I believe he is a Whore-master, for he has notable waggish
Eyes.


Wid. Then bear all witness, this is the Man whom I have chose to be my Husband
-- and ye will infinitely oblige me if you come to my Wedding, and so your
Servants.


[Exit.] [Mrs. H. struts and Sings. Nod. Gaz. The Devil go with you --


Gaz. I never suspected my Almanac till now.


Mrs. H. Now Gentlemen, I can give you a true invitation and welcome, before
'twas but a flourish; but you see Fortune will be the bold Adventurers friend
--


Gaz. That I should overlook this damned Eclipse of the Moon, which was this
morning, tho not visible to us; but I wish it may have power here, and by a
forked Influence, make him beat her, she Cuckold him, he turn her out of Doors,
and with her Estate maintain a Whore --


[ To Noddy. Nod. Amen say I, -- Sir, your Servant, your Servant.


[Gaz. Nod. Exeunt. Mrs. H. A fair riddance of a brace of Fools.


Mr. H. But see your Brother's come --


Mrs. H. I intend to set his wit to work.


Enter Noble. Mr. H. Sir, this is my Master. --


Nob. You see, Sir, I have obeyed your Summons sent me by your man, and now I
would know your pleasure?


Mrs. H. Thus receive your welcome, Sir, -- and now I have a request to you.


Nob. Name it, Sir, if it consists with honor, and within my power you may
conclude it granted Sir --

It Is for your Sisters sake I make it.


Nob. You have named the dearest friend I have, and I can deny nothing is
desired in her Name.


Mrs. H. It Is this, that you would honor my Wedding, which is to be to Morrow,
with some small entertainments of your wit -- and you are void of all Excuses;
for I have been an ear witness of your Sisters frequent commendations of your
parts.


Nob. You oblige me with the Injunction; Is it with the Lady of this house you
Marry, Sir? --


Mrs. H. The same --


Nob. Then I must recall my promise Sir --


Mrs. H. Your reason, --


Nob. Her last Husband was an extorting Villain, and has undone our Family, and
now enjoys what is mine and my Sisters due.


Mrs. H. But Sir, for her sake, comply for once -- She shall not know who you
are, but shall be obliging to you -- and your Sister too to my knowledge will
give you thanks.


Nob. You have prevailed, Sir --


Mrs. H. Pray Sir, be pleased to walk in, that, I may recommend you to my Wife
that must be --


Nob. I wait on you, Sir, -- Now if I should in my Sisters absence strike up
the Widow -- Gad I Will try -- and this will be a good opportunity to attempt it.


[Exeunt. Enter Sanders, Clarina. Sand. Madam, I pity your misfortune, and if
there be any thing wherein I can serve you, you may command it.


Cla. You are all obliging, Sir, -- My Husband is now below, trying what he can
do with his Mother, who is unexpectedly arrived, after being reported to have
been dead two years --


Sand. That was a contrivance of my Friend Santloe's, occasioned by your
Beauty, which had such an Influence over him, that he ventured a Fathers Anger
to oblige his Passion --


Enter P. Santlow, Sam. P. S. Oh friend, Fortune begins once more to smile upon
my Actions, and has favored me in this last Enterprise beyond my wish --


Sand. As how -- Prithee inform us, that we may partake your joys --


P. S. Honest Sam. --


Sam. Who helps a lame Dog over the Style as well as the best.


P. S. Put me upon persuading my Mother to make my Father believe, that my dear
Wife here is my Sister; but the reason she knows not --


Sam. And my Mistress, like a kind overjoyed Mother to see her white Boy, most
readily consented, -- so that, Madam, if you at last should not be well gifted
by Nature, as the rest of Females are, with Dissimulation, all our designs are
spoiled, and you must trudg to Antwerp again; for as sure as death, my old
Master will turn ye both out of Doors. --


Cla. It Is an hard task for me, however I Will endeavor, what is it I would not
undergo, or suffer, for my dear Husband's sake --


P. S. They are coming -- Now Sweet heart carry thy self -- bravely now -- and
let fortune do her worst -- for we are for ever happy.


Sam. I Will withdraw --


[Exit. Enter Sir O. Santlow, Lady Santlow. Sir O. And have I thee in my Arms
again? Look see, I weep for Joy -- had I my Daughter too; but the Dutch Merchant
told me the thing I have of their bringing over was a Servant in Antwerp, and
not my Child --


La. S. They cannot deceive me, Sir, let me see her, and I shall soon discover
their cheat, if it be one -- Now heart hold, and let my tongue for once belie
thee --


[Aside. P. S. Take courage Love --


Cla. Lass how I tremble! --


Sir O. See there, Sweet heart, what a piece of flesh they have brought me,
that is the creature would be my supposed Daughter; but by Gogmagog, if she is
a Cheat, I Will have her stripped and whipped through every Parish, and cross the
Seas till she arrives to her old Kitchen at Antwerp again.


La. S. Bless her Eternal Powers! my life, my comfort, and my nine years grief;
but now my joys, thrice welcome to thy Mothers arms, it is she, my Daughter --
receive your Child, and thank Heaven for her wonderful restoration --


Sir O. What, what is this?


P. S. Kind Mother -- I shall love Dissimulation for thy sake, who would not,
that heard thee swear, conclude this not Counterfeit. --


[Aside. Sir O. My Daughter! it cannot be -- no, no, I shall never believe it --


Sam. Down on your knees --


[Aside to Cla. La. S. Rise into my bosom, and receive a Mothers blessing.


Sir O. Soft Wife, soft, have a care how you place your blessing; for the Dutch
Merchant who came over with you, affirmed, he saw her a Servant at an Inn in
Antwerp --


La. S. She was so, Sir, -- I often saw her there; but seeing she had acquired
to an honest way of living, I would not disturb her rest by discovering her
misfortunes -- forgive me truth, if I abuse thee with a false story, since it is
to preserve mutual love betwixt an injured Father, and beloved Son.


Sir O. Daughter Clarina! Let me kiss thee wench -- This unexpected joy has
forced tears, and my heart's so full with this surprise, I know not what to say
-- My joys are now complete, and this days happiness has countervail'd all my
past years of sorrow for my long lost dearest Wife, and Daughter --

Mr. Sanders here, by Gogmagog, the Girl is yours.


Sand. I Am proud of this mighty present, Sir, and thus I hug it as Misers do
their Gold.


P. S. I hope, Sir, I may be once more credited.


Sir O. Honest, honest Son, I have wronged thy faith; but thou will pardon me,
I hope; old men are apt to suspect Youth for Wags, that was the reason.


Sam. Now I may securely venture my head out of my Covert.


[Aside. Sir O. Where Is Sam: that honest merry fellow? I must have his pardon
too.


Sam. Look you Sir, I am very merciful, good natured, and prone to forgive; and
to show that I have no malice in my heart, if you have another Wife or Daughter
to find, and Money to spend, I shall be very ready to serve you, Sir --


Sir O. Come hither, Sirrah, let me hugg thee, and take my Curse from your
Knave's Shoulders.


Sam. For Heavens sake do, Sir, I feel it on my blade here, your Curse is at
least ten Stone weight, and a pound over, Sir.


Sir O. I Will do thee right Boy, I never knew thee but speak honest English,
marry in Dutch, I found thee a knave lately.


Sam. That was only to hold you in play, Sir, till further proofs came over.


Sir O. By Gogmagog, I love a harmless wit with my life -- Well, it is my Girl,
methinks her Eyes, Nose and Mouth strangely resemble her Mothers there -- ay,
ay, it is she, and there is an end; however I Will try further -- Wife, Wife,
prithee now kiss me, do I say --

[ La. S. Kisses him. Clarina, be obedient, and come and buss your Father --
[Kisses her. Very good, it is so, now I Will swear it is she; for they have both
the same way of kissing too; now Wife, since I find that my Daughter is my
Daughter, I Will prosecute my first intention, and this Gentleman shall have her
for his Wife.


Sand. I am proud of the honor, Sir, --


Sir O. Observe Wife, observe, he is one that handles his Tongue as well as
most men, a very Genteil Person, and as pretty a Spark as e're made love, or
kept Miss, I le say that for him -- I Will be sworn by his looks no one would
take him for an Eunuch --


[Aside. Sam. My design succeeds as I could wish --


[Aside. Sir O. Nay, I have not forgot my Son too, for I have found a Wife for
him, it is the Widow Landwels Neice, the Daughter of old Morley lately dead,
her own fortune, it is true, is none of the greatest; but her Aunt questionless
will give her a swingeing Blessing when she dies; it is the same Maid Eugenia,
that was Nursed with our Clarina; well, it is a pretty creature by Gogmagog,
she is a Nosegay of Beauty and sweet Conditions, how say you to it -- Boy -- ha?
--


P. S. The Blessing will be greater than I could ever have expected, Sir, --


La. S. What fortune was this! that I should come so opportunely to see my
happiness completed in the Marriage of my two Children.


Sir O. Well thought on Wife, I had almost forgot, we are invited to the Widows
Wedding, with a bold brisk young Spark that has clapped her on board in faith -- Do
you and your Daughter put on your Hoods and Scarfs, and we will expect you below
in the Parlor; come, Mr. Sanders, come along with me --


[Exeunt. Manent Peter Santloe, Clarina, La. Santloe, Sam. P. S. Oh Mother, I
am so transported with those new Joys, you kindly have created, I know not
which way to begin to pay my Duty.


La. S. But Son, the more I look on her, the more thy Sister runs in my mind.


P. S. Perhaps she is like her, that will carry on the Cheat the better, Madam.


La. S. I must examine her -- of what Country and Parentage are you?


Cla. Of England, Madam, -- and many are the afflictions I have undergone -- so
that my Parentage I have forgot --


La. S. If it will not renew your sorrows, give us a small relation of what has
past.


Cla. So much as my memory will give me leave -- for I was not above seven
years old when my Mother carried me beyond Sea, which was about ten years
since, with a design to put me into a Nunnery; but by the way to Antwerp, we
met with Robbers, who stripped us, conveyed me from my Mother into a Wood; but
they having committed several Outrages, were persued by Soldiers, so they left
me, and I wandering about, came at last to Antwerp, and was received by the
Mistress of an Inn, where I continued a Servant till this Gentleman persuaded
me to come to England.


La. S. Oh my blessed fortune! my dearest Child, thrice welcome to my Arms --


Sam. S'life if this should prove his Sister now --


[Aside. P. S. Look you Mother, my Father's gone -- now you may be plain --


La. S. I am sorry he is -- but l'le have to him to confirm what before I only
for your sake averred, but did not then know the truth.


P. S. But I hope you are not in earnest Mother, that it is my Sister.


La. S. Witness Heaven it is your Sister --


P. S. Hold, hold, good Mother -- Kill not your Son -- Why I am in love with
her Mother, and have made her my Wife.


La. S. But now your love must end as to Marriage, and with a Brothers Eyes you
must look upon her -- Come Daughter, let us go down to your Father, who shall
redouble his joys when he shall know the Truth --


Cla. Heavens! I love him so, I could wish my self any thing but his Sister --
farewell for ever Love, since thus I am deceived in my first desires.


[Exeunt. P. S. My Sister, that Northern blast has nipt my blooming joys --
must all my Courtship, Expense and Constancy, ay, Constancy, Sam. be jilted by
the resurrection of a long lost Sister.


Sam. A Pox on her, say I, she was ever a cross Brat when she was young, and
now she has lived in spite to cross your love.


P. S. It cannot be my Sister -- for I find no alteration in me, I am in good
temper, and my mind's not shook at that dreadful name of Sister -- therefore I
am certain there is some damned riddle in it, which we cannot at present expound.


Sam. To make us wise enough, Sir, let us to the Widows Wedding, drink briskly,
and then with nodding gravity unsold this mystery if it be one.


P. S. Agreed --


Tho Love was cruel, Fortune has bin kind,
Since I, a Sister in a Mistress, find.
ACT IV, SCENE I.
Enter Sir Gregory Lovemuch, Gazer, Noddy, Noble. Nob. COme Gentlemen, since
you are pleased to honor me with acting my little Essay of fancy, please you
to retire and dress, for they are ready to enter.


Sir G. Worthy Sir, we follow you --


Nob. I shall attend you within.


[Exit. Gaz. By Mercury, a neat contrivance, Sir Gregory I applaud your wit.


Noddy. It Is a profound device, an extravagant fancy, and an insupportable
design; and Sir Gregory, I am in an intolerable Consternation of your
Penicranium --


Sir G. This will be a brave opportunity to affront her for deceiving us -- are
all perfect in their parts, Rail and spare not, for that is all that we are
like to have for our Expenses on the Jilting Widow.


Gaz. I am ready in mine --


Nod. And mine is in Capite.


Sir G. Let us in to dress then -- Widow, look to it, we'll all your scorns
repay.


Gaz. Your Sun of Joys shall be Eclipsed to day.


Nod. Your Market shall be marred too, as they say --


[ Exeunt. Enter Sanders, P. Santloe, Clarina, Eugenia. P. S. But prithee tell
me, art thou in earnest, my Sister?


Cla. So our ill fate will have it, but so much I love, that I could wish I
were not.


P. S. Pox on Kindred -- like noble Savage, I would range and choose my
Mistress where I pleased -- now must sacred Love be curbed, and pleasures lost,
and all long of dull fantastic Law.


Cla. We must submit, for Reason tells us it would be a Sin, should we pursue
our Love --


Sand. Friend, I can but pity thy misfortunes in losing of a Mistress, but
must congratulate your Joys in finding of a Sister. Now, fair Eugenia, shall I
at last receive the fair reward for all my Constancy? speak kindly, and return
my love with yours -- and then I Am happy --


P. S. Faith Madam, yield -- do not cast away a handsome proper man, for so
small a toy; my Sister here has bin more kind to me, than hitherto you have
proved to him --


Euge. My Aunts to rule my fate, and I must choose a Husband with her liking,
I Will make it known to her, and if she approves of it, Heaven knows, I can enjoy
no greater happiness -- for without blushing, I confess, I love --


Sand. Oh my kind Saint!


P. S. Sanders, to your Post, see where they come -- But do hear, prithee do
not make love to her, for by Heaven, tho she is my Sister, I shall grow wondrous
Jealous, and consequently quarrelsom.


[Sand. goes to Cla. P. S. to Eug. -- Enter the Widow as Married to Mrs.
Hadland, Sir O. Santloe, Lady Santloe, Mr. Hadland as a Servingman, and
Attendants. Wid. Come my long wished for Lady, your happy return is a second
feast to me.


Mrs. H. Ye'are all most freely welcome --


Sir O. We thank you, Sir --


Mrs. H. But is my Brother, do you say, so much in love with my Widow?


[To Mr. H. Mr. H. I overheard him but now complaining on his destiny that
should make him so desperately in love with your Enemy, that I thought he would
have rebelled against himself, there is such a mighty feud between the two old
Enemies in his Breast, Love and Honor.


Mrs. H. Lass poor man -- I wish he had my place to day, he is abler than I to
perform the duty that belongs to a young Widow.


[Musick Sounds. Mrs. H. Come Gentlemen, pray sit -- that worthy friend of
yours, Madam, is pleased to entertain us for a while, and now I suppose they
are ready to enter --


[They seat themselves. Enter Noble. Nob. Madam, here you may beforehand read
the Argument of what I do design -- Now Love, prove but so kind to inspire her
with an equal slame, make her a true Widow, and my young Spark I shall soon
grast on your Stock --


[Aside. Wid. Ha, what is here? a Letter enclosed, this must be concealed till a
fitter time to be read -- [Aside. We are obliged to you, for this Nights
diversion, and shall study a requital -- If my young Blade here proves a
fashionable keeping Husband, this Gentleman, if his Letter speaks of love,
shall not long languish, nor despair -- for I like him strangely -- [Aside. See
here, Sir, the Argument is pretty --


Nob. Good, she has conveyed the Letter as I could wish, now half my toil is
over -- Madam, they are Entering --


[Soft Music. Then a thing like a Globe Ascends, Sir Gregory Lovemuch sitting
on it, in an habit representing fire -- On each side the Stage, ascends Noddy,
representing Water, and One representing Earth -- Gazer Descends, who
represents Air -- Noble goes behind Sir Gregory Lovemuch -- to promp him. Nob.
The flame of Zeal --

Sir G. L. -- The wicked fire of Lust
Does now spread heat through Water, Air, and Dust.

Nob. Ha! He Is out at the beginning -- The wheel of Time

[ Behind Gaz. Gaz. The Devil set fire on the Distaffe --

Nob. What a Devil means all this? --

[Aside. Sir G. I, that was wont in elder time to pass
For a bright Angel, now am made an Ass,
And so corrupted with the upstart fires
Of hated Avarice and hot desires,
Which in unlawful sheets were kindled first
By forward Girls, false Wives, and Widows lust.
That I, even Fire, who purest Gold did try,
From these base heats, my self cannot purify;
I once was reverenc't, Charity did thaw,
And did keep up the Hospitable Law,
But stead of me, a Bastard heat now burns,
And to supply my Landlord's lust, it turns.
Now Matron Widow's Leachery so great
They never consult their years, but lustful heat
And wed young Fops that may perform the feat.

Nob. Heart! Who should this be? -- Some Rogue -- but I Will let them take their
swing -- and afterward will be fully Revenged.


Wid. Upon my word, Monsieur Fire is a notable hot Satirical Blade --


Mrs. H. What should my Brother mean to rail so --


[Aside. Gaz. After this hear, you Ladies fat and fair,
Open your Casements wide, and take in Air;
But not that Air, false Women make up Oaths with,
No, nor that Air Gallants perfume their Clothes with;
I am that Air that keeps about the Clouds,
None of my Kindred were smelt out in Crowds;
Yet some there are that are my Chief Polluters,
Widows that falsify their faiths to Suitors,
And will give fair words, when the Sign's in Cancer,
But at the next remove a scurvy Answer;
Come to the poor men's Houses, Eat their Banquet
With smock-fac't Boy, at Night be tossed in Blanket.
He that believes a Widows word shall fail,
When Venus Gown-skirt sweeps the Dragon's Tail;
Fair weather the first day she makes to any,
The second Clowdy, and the third day Rainy;
The fourth day a great Storm, Lightning and Thunder,
A Bolt strikes the Suitor, a Boy keeps her under.

Nob. It Is so, some Rascal's crept in on purpose to disgrace me; but I Am
resolved they shall share in my disgrace --


[Exit. Sir O. S. By Gog Magog, a notable sharp Air this, Madam --


Wid. He has perfumed the Room well --


Sam. A man may smell her meaning two Rooms off, tho his Nose wanted
reparations --


Mr. H. Prithee step out, and know what his meaning is, is this the
Entertainment I promised to my self? --


Mr. H. His love sure has made him mad -- but I Will go know the Cause --


[Exit. Noddy. Now Gentiles all, since fire has made ye hot,
Come bath in me, for I Am a Water-pot:
Water's my Name, I come your Pipes to fill
Without the Charge of Water-house, or Mill --
But first, I will a Widows Cheeks besprinkle,
Which glow with heat, her leacherous Eyes do twinkle.
And I Will endeavor too, to lay the dust
Of Widows hot desires, and boundless lust,
Then will display her shame -- From such as she
I first took weakness and inconstancy;
I sometimes swell above my banks, and speed,
Widows are often with Child before they Wed.
Where I Am least seen, there my most danger lies;
So in those Parts hid most from humane Eyes:
He heart, her love, or what may be more close.
I know no Mercy, she thinks that no loss
In her poor Gallants, Pirates thrive in me,
I help to Cast away, and so does she --

Mrs. H. Curse on his Wit -- I am all confusion --

[Aside. A Man. Earth stands for a full point, me ye should hire
To stop the gaps of Water, Air, and Fire
Your Husband loved me, he locked me in his Chest,
I was the only Idol of his Breast.
Now he is dead --
He shall have Gold, enough to glut his Soul,
And as for Earth, I Will stop his Cranes throat full.
With ease a Miser's appetite we please,
But Lust in Widows, is a damned Disease.
And proves the most insatiate avarice.

Sir O. And now to vex you, Widow, to your face,
See, once four warning Elements, embrace.

Thunder and Lightning. -- Enter five or six like Devils; Water and Earth are
let down to the middle with two Devils -- Fire and Air, are carried up half way
into the Air, with two Devils -- Sir G. Gaz. Noddy. Help, help, help; Murder --
Murder --


Sir G. Widow, for Heavens sake, intercede for us to the Devils --


Noddy. Oh law, what will my Mother and Sister say, when they hear I am carried
away by the Devil --


Nob. Who are ye, discover your selves then?


Gaz. By Charles's Wain, don't you know me?


Noddy. Why look you, do you see, it is I, it is I --


Wid. My old Suitors, we are all obliged to you, my Masters, you have taken
great pains to make your selves Ridiculous -- -- ha, -- ha, -- Pray Sir release
'em for my sake --


Nob. You may Command, Madam, let 'em down there --


[They are Released. All Suit. Thanks good Widow.


Sir G. L. When faith since we were to lose you, Madam, we thought losers might
have leave to speak, and therefore by offering our Service to this Gentleman,
we got this opportunity to speak a little of our minds to you --


Gaz. And I think we have pretty freely, and at our own Costs too; for I owe
Money for some of the Painting -- but the Planets are sufficient to pay the
Painter --


Noddy. If ever I court Widow again for your sake, may I be made a Pissing-post
of; well, I find Widows are confounded insupportable witty Devils.


Wid. We are all obliged to you, Sir, for this discovery.


Nob. My shame, Madam, urged me to contrive some way to discover the Authors of
my disgrace -- But, Madam, to divert you I have brought a Servant of mine to
entertain you with a Dance --


Mrs. H. I am indebted to you for this favor, Sir -- Please Gentlemen to walk
in and partake of a small Collation, and then, my Dear, we will retire to
surfeit on Loves sweets --


All. We follow you, Sir --


[Exeunt. Manet Noble. Nob. Curse on ill luck! What a Devil should be become of
this Sister of mine, had she not promised to get the Widow for me, I had not
slipped the opportunity which now is irrecoverably lost, she is Married! now the
Pox or Impotence be his Curse, for I cannot with patience see my self thus
chous't -- ha -- here comes my brisk Bridegroom -- good, I have thought on an
excellent way, if possible, to retrieve her -- I Will wheedle him to drink, make
him damnably drunk, so consequently impotent, and a Widow disappointed, turns
Devil, will sue a divorce, and then she is mine. --


Enter Mrs. Hadland. Mrs. H. Oh Sir, most opportunely met -- are you alone? --


Nob. Yes, Sir, -- Your Pleasure --


Mrs. H. I am come to -- cut your Throat.


Nob. How Sir! -- cut my Throat, you will give me a reason, Sir, for it, I hope --


Mrs. H. I saw what amorous glances past between my Wife and you at Dinner, and
since too I have discovered that which has raised such a Storm within me, that
nothing but thy death can restore my former calmness --


Nob. Jealous by this light -- I hope he has not met with my Letter I conveyed
to the Widow -- [Aside. Heavens Sir, what jealous on the first night!


Mrs. H. I am all rage with jealousy, your Letter, Sir -- see there the
reason, Villain, and then judge if I can pardon such an injury -- Therefore
prepare to yield up either Life, or Love --


Nob. Nay, Sir, since you have discovered my passion, then know I do, must, and
will love your Widow, nay, dote upon the sight of her, and yet no harm to you,
since you possess the wealth, you cannot bar a longing stander by, to wish and
sigh, since you know it is in vain; therefore I will persist -- ah it is a
charming Creature!


Mrs. H. Hell and Furies! shall I stand tamely still, and hear a fellow boldly
to my face proclaim my Infamy!


Nob. A fellow, Sir* Provoke me not, I say provoke me not; if you do, by
Heaven, if possible, I Will cuckol'd thee before thy face --


Mrs. H. This is beyond all patience, base Villain draw --


Nob. Pish Sir, your little Bodkin frights not me, see I have one can match it
-- Yet I believe thee Valiant, or such a little whipper-ginnie durst not have
been so desperate to have ventured on a longing Widow --


Mrs. H. How, Sir, have at thy heart! --


Nob. Good Child, thou art too forward, -- reserve thy vigor for another
place, it will be little enough, I Will engage -- for young, Sir, there can be no
comparison between you and I, in love affairs --


Mrs. H. How mean you Sir?


Nob. You may perhaps be well enough for the Theory, to cringe, and whine, and
wheedle your self into a Virgins heart; but a Widows wise discerning Eye must
of necessity read here the only man that is fittest for the Practick part --


Mrs. H. Heavens! Do but hereafter look upon her with one pleasing glance, and
I Will damn thy Soul.


Nob. A Bully in Swadling-clouts by this light, it is the youngest Hector I ever
met with in my life -- a gad, little Squire, were she the great Turk's
favorite, I Would look and gaze although I knew my death should follow, and let me
tell thee, had somebody been true to their promise, your fortune had been mine
-- therefore, little one, you may thank my cross Stars for your good success. A
Pox on an absent Sister --


[Aside. Mrs. H. How Sir, obliged to you? Oh insupportable! thou base detracter
of my honor, who not only would supplant my love, but blast my reputation, and
make me undeserving of a Ladies favor.


Nob. If you come to that point, Sir, what can you boast of, should be so
attractive? I must confess thou appearest a hopeful Stripling, and I question
not you have the pretty impertinents of one of your Age, as Dancing, Singing,
affected Gestures, be peirtly witty, making bold with every new Play comes out,
and extravagantly tawdrey in every new fashion.


Mrs. H. Death and the Devil!


Nob. These accomplishments, I must confess, may be very surprising to a poor
young thing of a Boarding-School, who never had love made to her but by her
Dancing Master, or some such follow.


Mrs. H. This is beyond all sufferance --


[Strives to run at him, he Parryes. Nob. This will not do -- and now, little one,
I le discharge my Conscience, between you and I, I do verily believe, the Widow
that was, and your Wife that is, Married you only for a Drudg or Steward of her
Estate, while she spends it on pleasures, with such vigorous Blades as my self,
and who knows it may be my turn; which if it be, faith I Will be very reasonable,
and Cuckold thee as seldom as possibly I can --


Mrs. H. I Will hear no more; but thus will make a passage to thy Soul, for I
swear thy Ruin, Death, Damnation --


Nob. Say you so, then it is time to look about -- and since you provide me,
little one, know this, that if I kill thee, I swear to marry the Widow the next
day --


Mrs. H. Thus I prevent thy boasting -- dull, dull, Brother, not know your own
flesh and blood. Nob. makes up to her with his Sword, Mrs. H. discovers her
self.


Nob. My Sister* I Am all amazement*


Mrs. H. Now Sir, what think you of my design?


Nob. Design quotha! 'twas well you discovered your self, or I had spoiled all;
-- but I Am a Dog if I understand what you mean? -- you are Married --


Mrs. H. I am to the Widow, I knew not how to cheat the Parson; but I question
not, but to deceive the Widow e're I sleep --


Nob. As how, as how? -- I long to hear --


Mrs. H. See, my Husband comes with some intelligence --.


Nob. Is that my Brother Hadland? --


Enter Mr. Hadland. Mr. H. Sir, My Lady is retired to her Chamber --


Mrs. H. Leave off your distance now, sweet heart; for I have told my Brother
all.


Nob. Kind-Brother I obliging Sister! --


Mrs. H. But Brother, do you like my Widow in earnest?


Nob. Like her! Heaven's! I love her infinitely! were she not Mistress of a
farthing, agad, I believe I should have Married her, there is such an aerie
sweetness in her face --


Mrs. H. Say you so, then along with me, I have one design more, and if that
take, we are once more happy --


Nob. Lead on whilst I follow, and admire thy wit.


[Exeunt. ACT V. SCENE I.
The Ante-Chamber to the Widows, etc. Mrs. Hadland sola. Mrs. H. T Thus far I
am prosperous, Widow, I have not done with you yet; I have wheadled all her
Keys out of her Custody, and in her Closet I found the Writing of my Estate,
thou dear, dear Parchment, how I am overjoyed to hug thee in my Arms once more
-- the Widow comes --


Enter Widow, undressed in a Nightgown. My life, my Soul, my only joys on
Earth, haste, haste to Bed, that I may be completely blessed with an Heaven of
Pleasures and delight.

Wid. Oh let me embrace the mighty Treasure I have this day gained! --


Mrs. H. Delay not the Consummation of our bliss, to bed, to bed, my dear, and
there we will surfeit with delights unspeakable.


Wid. I go, but prithee stay not long behind --


Mrs. H. I Will but to my appartment, and undress, then fly to rifle all thy
Charms -- now, Widow, thou art safe --


[Wid. Exit. [Goes to the Door. Hist, Brother, are you ready? Enter Noble. Nob.
Kind Rogue, I am -- I cannot avoid laughing to think how surpised the Widow
will be, well Girl, I Will endeavor to behave my self so, that she shall have no
reason to complain, nor you to repent the trick you have put upon her.


Mrs. H. Do that, and I am well pleased, I believe I am the first Bridegroom
that ever procured for his Bride the first Night.


Nob. The obliging'st in the world, and the kindest Sister too.


Mrs. H. Away then -- be brisk, and disgrace me not.


Nob. Dear, honest, kind, obliging, witty Rogue, adieu -- now for the Widow.


[Exit. Mrs. H. Widow, you are caught at last --
Thy Husband's subtleties shall be repaid,
Thus Women are by Women best betrayed.

[Exit. SCENE the Second. The Hall.
Sir O. Santloe, Sanders, Gazer, Noddy -- Sam. Drinking at a Table. Sir O. Well
done, my friends, put it briskly about -- now the Bride and Bridegroom are
preparing for bed, let us Drink their healths -- Sam. give me a Glass -- Son
Sanders, top and bottom to you --


[Drinks. Sand. I Will do you reason, Sir -- Mr. Santloe, the Bride and
Bridegrooms healths.


P. S. Mr. Gazer --


Gaz. I Will Pledge you, Sir, tho by Aries the Sign is in the Head with me
already, Mr. Noddy have at you --


[Drinks. Noddy. Ay, ay, let it come, hang Sorrow, it must be drowned, I find
--


[Drinks half. Sir O. Nay, nay, Sir, I Will not bate you an ace of top and
bottom, off with it, off with it for shame, I say again, top and bottom is my
word --


Noddy. Lay aside Indignation, Sir, I Will do it, tho I dye for it, but yfeck I
have so topt and bottomed it already, I can hardly breath --


[Drinks it up. Sir O. Hye, that is he, that is he -- What, Son Peter, no
frollick, no frollick, Sirrah Boy, be merry, or I Will dis-inherit thee -- Ah,
when I was of your Age, and at the Temple, I was the Cock of all the Jovial
Blades in Town -- I was always the Captain of a Temple-Rebellion, broke
Benchers heads with the Temple pots most dexterously, lie with my Laundress,
got her with Bastard, and made her lay it at a Benchen's door, by Gogmagog --


P. S. So, so, all will out -- now shall I have pious instructions to follow
the Example of a sober Father --


[Aside. Sir O. I have beat Watches, have had my head broke, and been in the
Compter so often, that it cost your Grandfather above a Hundred pounds one year
to cure my broken head, and to ransom me from Limbo -- and yet you see, Sirrah,
I am a sober discreet man now --


P. S. Wondrous discreet thus to display your weakness --


[Aside. Sir O. Son Sanders, what never a Song in Budget -- by Gogmagog, this
whoring Age has spoiled all good harmless mirth and Company -- All the young
fellows now a days single out their Does, and retire as if it were nothing but
rutting time with 'em -- but in my Days we should not have sat half so long
without a Catch or two, and top and bottom going briskly about in faith --


Sand. Prithee let us have the Song, you made the last drinking bout, and one
glass more will lay your Father to rest --


P. S. I have a Song, Sir, which if you please well sing -- but all must join
in the Chorus. --


Sir O. Yes marry shall they, Sir -- and so will I -- but first let every one
take top and bottom in his hand --


SONG.
1.
COme troul it away,
We'll drink up the day,
Let none from his standing retire,
We Will Laugh, Drink, and Sing,
And Bacchus's Spring
We Will drain, and our prowess admire.
Cho. We Will Laugh, etc.
2.
Old Age we despise
Whilst Wine we can prize,
And briskly can take off our Glasses;
Wine, life does repair,
And banishes Care,
But Temperance would make us all Asses.
Cho. Wine, life, etc.
3.
Let the Pollitick fool
Live dully by Rule,
While our Wits we refine in our Liquor,
My Soul's in that Wine
Which puts the Divine
To a Nonplus, and turns up the Viccar.
Cho. My Soul's, etc.
Sir O. Well done in faith my Lads -- and now off with top and bottom -- [All
Drink. ho, ho, ho Boys, Peter I Will give thee an Hundred pounds a year more for
this Boy --


P. S. Say, and hold Sir, that you have often done in your Glasses; but has
forbid the banes when sober --


Sir O. Oh the sweet days of Youth -- I have roared it in my time in faith -- and
so topt and bottomed it, that by Gogmagog we have all bin top heavy before we
have parted -- Now Son Peter, never a Jig or Horn-pipe about you? how has my
Money bin spent at Dancing-School, I pray? --


P. S. He would make me as ridiculous as himself -- [Aside. Those Dances are
quite out of fashion, Sir, and Genteiler are now in Mode, Sarabands, Minuets
Entries, and the like --


Sir O. Pox on your hard named Dances and Wine too, they never prove good, nor
wholesome -- but Sirrah, to convince you, nothing can be finer than a Lancashire
Horn-pipe -- Fiddlers strike up --


[He Dances a Horn-pipe. Noddy. I Vow, Sir, it is in supportably admirable --


Sir O. Before I left the Temple, I was the only Reveller as old as I was; I
could have footed the Measures, and Danced Horn-pipes with e're a young fellow
of 'em all. Sam, Give me top and bottom -- Mr. Noddy, my Service to you --


[Drinks. Noddy. Yfeck I Will pledge you --


[Drinks half. SONG.
1.
Is not John Sanders dead? [Sir O. Sings.
And is not his Wife a Whore?
For she will go drunk to bed,
And yet she will have one Pot more?
2.
Our Cat is to be hanged,
And all to be tumbled in the mire,
For scratching my Wifes Huquissin,
As she sat by the Fire. --
Ah, when I was young, I had a thousand such frollicks as these, off with your
Liquor man, off with it, I say.

Noddy. Top and bottom, as you say, Sir Oliver, yfecks --


[Drinks off all and falls. Sir O. So ho, my Boys, who says I am old, see there
my conquest over Youth -- this Whoring weakens 'em so, they are not able to
take of a chirping Cup or two now adays --


P. S. Now Sam, thy frollick?


Sam. What grinding of Knives Sir? have at it then -- Knives to Grind, Knives
to Grind --


Takes off his Perriwig, and runs a Chair before him, like a Wheel-barrow. Sir
O. How now Sam, what art thou frollicking too --


Sam. A Well-willer to mirth Sir, and now you shall see me grind Knives as
dexterously with a Chair, as the Fellows in the Street with a Grind-stone --


[He mimicks Grinding. Sir O. Well done my Lad -- Here Is something to encourage
thee --


Sam. What Is here, a Newgate Groat, by this Light he is short lived, he is so
confounded liberal -- ah Sir, this is nothing; I can tumble with any
Bartholomew Fellow, Run up a Wall like a Cat; but I can act a Breast of Mutton
so naturally, that our Cook-Maid the other night had like to have spitted me
for one, I did it so to the life --


Enter Sir Gregory Lovemuch, beaten in by a Maid with a Spit -- Sir G. Hold,
hold, hold, Murder, Murder --


Maid. Out you old Leacher, invade my Honor?


All. Laugh.


Gaz. Wats the matter, Sir Gregory?


Sir G. I only desired a kindness or so, being set agog with the Widows
Marriage, and the Baggage had not only the incivility to deny me; but has most
unmercifully chastis'd me too.


Sir O. By Gogmagog well enough served, for leaving top and bottom -- and old
Letchery will be catteryauling, tho they are sure to come by the worst.


Enter Mr. Hadland -- Mr. H. For Heavens sake, Gentlemen, come to the
Bride-chamber, some accident or other has happened; for the Bride cries out, and
seems by her Speech to be in some strange confusion.


Sir O. It Is nothing but her being coy, and in faith the young Bridegroom seems a
man of Mettle, and will put her to it, I Will warrant.


All. What should this mean?


[Bride Shreiks. Sir O. Let us go see, I fear my young Blade's too brisk for
her -- gently, gently good Youngster, be not so boisterous -- [Shreiks again.
Again, what a stubborn Baggage it is -- on my lise he is ravishing her -- let us
in and see Gentlemen --


[Exeunt. SCENE the Last.
The Widow discovered sitting on a Bed in a Nightgown, Noble in Bed, holding
her by the Gown.
Wid. Heaven protect me! Villain unhand me --


Nob. I say, Widow come to Bed, or I shall grow very angry; for I Am impatient,
and will not be delayed any longer.


Wid. Guard me, ye Powers above! Protect my honor, or I Am lost for ever should
my Husband come --


Nob. Whose fault will that be; therefore be speedy, let me antedate my young
Squire, and I Will be gone -- Nay, no struggling, but yield quietly -- I need not
a resistance, for I am all on flame already -- not yet? agad persist in
stubbornness, and I Will publish it in all places that I have layn with thee, no
matter whether it be truth or no -- and then Lady bright, that trifling title
Honor, must be surrendered; but be kind, and I shall be all silence and
obedience --


Wid. I Will rather dye, than yield --


Nob. Say you so? Then I find I must try strength.


They strive, she gets from him -- is going out of the Door. Enter Mrs. Hadland
meets her. Wid. Ha! my Husband! --


[Stands amazed, and seems disorder^d. Mrs. H. What coming for me Widow? This
was kindly done -- let us to Bed, for now I am ready to perform the Rites of
Love.


Wid. What shall I do? undone, for ever wretched --


[Aside. Mrs. H. What means this strange Confusion!


Wid. Alas, Sir, I Am not well -- I was just going to call up my Maid, for some
Cordial -- It Is but too true, for my Spirits fail me.


[Aside. Mrs. H. Such vain excuses belong to Virgin Modesty, but Widows should
know better -- then, lay aside this veil, and meet my love with equal flames,
that both may be transported into Ecstasies --


Wid. For ever I am ruined --


[Aside. Mrs. H. Sure you are the first Widow ever feared the embraces of a
second Husband -- Come, come tremble not -- but to Bed.


[Leads her to the Bed, opens the Curtain, discovers Noble standing in a
Nightgown upon the Bed -- Ha! Noble here -- Hell and the Devil!

[They stand Gazing on one another. Base perfidious Woman, now I see the cause
of your disorders, was your Lust so hot you could not stay till the first Night
was past?

Wid. Good Sir, hear me --


Mrs. H. May thou be for ever dumb, or I deaf, rather than lend an Ear to
thy bewitching tongue -- Now Sir, how durst you attempt the dishonouring of my
Bed? Do you laugh? I shall spoil your mirth --


Nob. Who can forbear at such an Idle question -- rather Sir, how durst you
Marry, and fondly think to preserve such a tempting Creature entirely for your
self, -- Sir, where I love, I dare do any thing to enjoy; and a Pox on your
officious have and jealousy, had you but stayed two minutes longer, your
business had been done, and you never the wiser --


Mrs. H. Confusion! This to my face?


Nob. Yes, faith Sir, 'twas most uncivilly done, and very unlike a Husband to
intrude; but I pardon you for once, for I hope in time you will understand
better --


Mrs. H. Base Villain! Did I for this cast a friends Arms about thee? gave thee
the welcome of a man of Honor? and is this your return of gratitude? Hence,
begone, and take that Volume of corrupted Beauty; for henceforth shesh I be to
me like the Book of Fate, for ever claspt.


Wid. Wretched Woman, was this the promised blessing of an indulgent Husband!
Speak Sir, and clear my Honor, how you got here; for Heaven be my Witness, I
was as great a stranger to his being here, as you.


Mrs. H. In vain are idle words, out of my doors, for ever I discard you from
my house --


Wid. I find too late your drift, my Wealth (Curse on it) was the Original of
your design, take it to save my Honor; and what is it I would not give to be
rid of so base a fellow.


Mrs. H. I thank you for my own, sweet Lady -- but I scorn to be out done in
courtesy -- therefore in return, make you this present -- provided you will
confirm you Estate on me --


[Gives her a Cabinet. Wid. I will -- what laugh you at my misery --


[Mrs. H. laughs. Mrs. H. Faith Widow, you are caught; for know, I am already
Married to another --


Wid. How Married to another! I am all astonishment: Villain, how durst you
attempt so desperate an act; an act by which your life is forfeited? and
question not, but I Will have full revenge for this affront you have offered me.


Mrs. H. Rail on, it is Music in my Ears, but faith you are not like to stir
till we are friends --


Wid. What Is your design? who are you --


Mrs. H. Come, come, no more questions, my design was only to provide a Husband
for thee -- how say you to my Friend here, methinks he would make an able
Husband for a Widow.


Within. Sir O. So ho, Mr. Bridegroom open the Door, and let Sack-posset enter
--


Mrs. H. How say you, Widow, is it a match -- or they all enter, and I Will
forswear all I have said, and make you infamous to the world --


Nob. And faith so will I, Widow -- if you consent not.


Wid. Hold, hold Gentlemen -- What shall I do? my Honor this way will be lost
-- Leave me to my own choice, you know not what then I may do --


Mrs. H. All one for that, Widow, so it must be --


Nob. Or Egad they come -- see I am ready to unlock, is it a Bargain?


Wid. Take half my Estate, my House, Goods, any thing, rather than force me to
so rash an Act --


Nob. How rash! to Marry an able fellow! this is an affront, I cannot put up;
therefore thus I revenge my self --


[Offers to unlock. Wid. Hold, hold Sir, let me consider but one Minute --


Nob. I Will give thee a looking and a thinking time, that is but fair; for I am
certain the more you view me and consider, the more you will like me --


Within. Sir O. On my Conscience they are reconciled, done their business, and
fairly turned to sleep. --


Mrs. H. Now, Madam, what is it you resolve?


Wid. Not to consent --


Nob. Egad they come then --


[Offers to open the Door. Wid. Hold, what are you? --


Nob. No questions, for Conscience sake --


Wid. I yield, I yield --


Nob. Swear then --


Wid. By all that is good, I will be yours --


Nob. Seal it --


[He Kisses her. Mr. H. Gentlemen, pray enter --


Enter Sir O. Santloe, P. Santloe, Mr. Sanders, Lady Santloe, Clarina, Eugenia,
Sir G. Lovemuch, Gazer, Noddy, Attendants. Mr. Hadland without Disguise -- Sir
O. What Is here, two Bridegrooms? I Will warrant her crying out, was, for want of
the Second --


Mrs. H. Gentlemen, bear witness, I here discharge the Widow, from her Marriage
with me. --


Sir O. How, parting before ye have bedded? what is the meaning of this?


Mr. H. Some private Reasons, Sir Oliver, which more at leisure you shall know
--


Wid. Before these Gentlemen, I take him for my Husband.


Sir G. L. Gaz. Noddy. The Devil give you Joy then --


Mrs. H. See here the transformation -- and Widow in a young huffing Bully, see
your Friend and Servant Eliz. Hadland --


Mrs. H. and her Husband discover themselves. Mr. H. And Thomas Hadland, her
Serving-man and Husband.


Wid. Am I outwitted by my Enemy then!


Sir O. What a notable frollicking Woman is this! Is she the Bridegroom, and my
worshipful Serving-man, are you there?


Mr. H. A poor wronged Gentleman, Sir, willing to serve for his own --


Sir G. L. Pox on her, was it she disgraced me at the Treat, I Will steal off
before they take notice of me --


[Exit. Gaz. By Capricorn, and so will I --


[Exit. Noddy. Look you, Madam, do you see, I have spent at least Forty Pounds in
Clothes, Coaches, Journeys and so forth, in Courting of you, and since you have
choused me of your self, I expect satisfaction -- which I will have if there be
Law --


Wid. Take your course, Sir --


Noddy. So I will, by Jehosaphat --


[Exit. Mrs. H. Now Madam, no more your Enemy, but Sister; for I must call this
Gentleman Brother.


Wid. Then my fortune's better than I could have expected, since I am assured
he is a Gentleman in all respects -- and thus all animosities shall cease. --


Sir O. Why, now the Bells they go trim, they go trim -- Wife, with this Ladies
leave, we will make no more hours on it; for this is as fine a contracting time, we
could have wished for, and the Parson to morrow shall finish this Nights work,
come to the Book, to the Book young men --


P. S. 'Slid Sam, what is to be done now.


Sam. Your Friend and Servant knows no more than the post, Sir --


Sir O. How say you, Madam, is it a match between your Neice and my Son? do it,
and I am resolved Mr. Sanders shall be my Son in Law --


Wid. I freely consent, Sir --


Sir O. Mrs. Eugenia, your hand --


Eug. But not my heart, for that is Mr. Sanders's --


[Aside. Wid. But with your leave, Sir Oliver, I Will join 'em --


Sir O. With all my heart, Madam.


Wid. Mr. Sanders, take this Lady.


[ Gives Eug. to Sanders. Sand. Oh, Madam, blessed be your goodness for this
inestimable treasure.


Sir O. Cuds boddykins, what means she?


Wid. Here Mr. Santloe, in a Sister find a wise --


[ Gives Cla. to Santloe. P. S. Sure the Widow has dealt with the Devil, or
else has heard of our mutual love, and thus sooths our passions --


[Aside. Sir O. By Gogmagog, the Widow's mad -- my Son Marry his own Sister!
what Riddle is this?


Wid. One of Seventeen years standing, Sir -- You remember my Sister Morly
Nursed your Daughter, who at that time had a Daughter too --


Sir O. What of all this --


Wid. My Sisters fortunes decaying, she gave you her Eugenia, and kept your
Clarina with her self -- afterward fortune smiling on her Husband's industry,
she on her Deathbed did reveal this secret, and wished me when occasion served
to make it known --


Sam. Hyeday the Town's our own again --


P. S. Oh, Madam, this is beyond all president, not to be equaled -- and now
Sir, I may with confidence own I was this day Married to my supposed Sister.


Sir O. By Gogmagog, you were a desperate Boy; how could you tell but that it
was your Sister in earnest?


P. S. Nature was not so dull to let me languish for a Sister; for
notwithstanding what my Mother said, yet love retained its native heat, and bad
me still love on -- Oh my blessed Soul --


[ To Cla. Sir O. Daughter come into thy Father's arms, see, excess of Joy will
make affection melt.


La. S. What tears have I bestowed on a lost Daughter, yet left her behind me.


Nob. This is beyond all thought surprising -- and now, Girl, since your wit
has been the kind directer of my Fortunes, with my Widows leave here, freely
command whatever's in my power --


Wid. I shall comply with you in everything.


Mrs. H. I thank you for your obliging offer, and I shall desire nothing more,
but the confirmation of that Portion which your rigorous Husband had deceived
my Father of, before he dyed --


Wid. Your generosity is so great I can deny you nothing -- consult with your
Lawyer, and I shall willingly subscribe to any thing you shall desire --


Mrs. H. Mr. H. We are obliged to you --


Sir O. Cudsboddy kins, this was a notable waggish trick, and by Gogmagog, much
like a second Wedding, and I give you joy with all my heart.


Nob. Madam, fear nothing; tho I have appeared a wild Debauchee; yet you shall
find an Indulgent Husband -- and now, Gentlemen, let us in and congratulate
each others good success and fortunes.


Thus in the Storms of Fortune you may find,
Where Justice is deficient, Wit proves kind.
FINIS.
Epilogue.
Spoke by Mr. Crosby. KNowing too well, Gallants, your natural spite,
We bar your censuring privilege to Night;
For your Diversion, this was never designed,
How can our Author then, expect you kind?
Your malice is so great to One unknown
That like the Play, or not, you cry him down,
Who is not one of the huffing Wits of the Town:
Nay, your ill natures bare so great a sway,
Often ye Damn, before you have seen the Play;
Such Bully-Wits, like Butchers should not sit,
Nor be impannell^d at the Bar of Wit;
There Is such a Native Cruelty in them,
Without a Consultation they condemn.
Then to Vacation-Customers we sue,
We have our ends to Night, if we have pleased you;
Kind Sirs, let not the Critics of the Town
Awe ye -- But let your Judgments be your Own,
Consider well --
Here is no Satire on a Married life,
Nor damn^d Lampoon upon the City-Wife;
No Cheats discovered of the Man of Trade,
Nor who Gallants your Wives are here displayed,
Nor your own secret Pleasures too betrayed:
Then Judge the Play, unbiased may ye be,
And from the snarling Critics set us free.

