AN ACCOUNT OF THE TRANSACTIONS IN THE North of Ireland, Anno Domini, 1691.

AND Of many other Remarkable Passages, during our last Years Successful
Campaign in that Kingdom.

With a Particular Relation Of the Manner of Besieging and Taking the Town of
Sligoe by Storm, by the Honorable Colonel JOHN MICHELBVRNE, Governor of
Londonderry; and sometimes Governor of the Town and Fort of Sligoe, then
Commander in Chief of Their MAJESTY'S Forces in the Province of Vlster.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1692.

To His Excellency GODART Earl of Athlone, Viscount Aghrim, Baron of
Barronasloe, and Bar de Ginkell, Commander in Chief of Their Majesty's Forces
in the Kingdom of IRELAND.
My Lord,
THIS following Treatise, is a Subject that lies so wholly whithin Your own
Province of Honor, that it pretends a kind of Right to lay it self at Your
Excellencies Feet For though in general it relates the happy Managery of the
last Years Successes in the North of Ireland, yet since that cannot be done
without publishing some just Testimonials of the Courage, Fidelity, and
Services of my Worthy Friend Colonel John Michelburn, methinks it is a piece
of Duty (as the Pendant always attends the Flag) to usher his Bannoret under
Your Standard. And truly there is some farther Plea for my presumption, in this
Dedication, viz. That I may justly avow, that Collonel's Early Endeavors in
the Kingdom of Ireland, were at least the Phosphore to Your Excellencies
brighter Sun. His forward Hand gave the first fair Earnest for the Irish
Successes, when in his Exemplary Northern Services, his Preservation of
Londonderry, I may properly say, like a true Forlorn Hope, he held the Enemy
in play, till Your Excellencies heavier Mass of Glory could come up to sweep
the entire Victory. A Victory indeed, in which the World must do You this
public Justice, that the whole last Years Renown was entirely Your own. For
whilst in all the other Scenes of War, as Germany, Flanders, Savoy, etc.
Fortune in a manner kept wholly neuter, and the rest of the Neighboring Heroes
only stood at a Bay, Your Excellencies more Active Arm held the most
prevailing Sword, and only played the Conquering Game, whilst an entire Victory
followed no Chariot but Your own.

And as long as the Complete Reduction of Ireland fills so large a Page in the
English Annals, Your Excellencies never dying Merit must stand Chronicled with
so fair a Character, that they must give You this peculiar Renown, That you
made not War a Trade: You felt the Cause You fought; and in the Service of
England, consulted the Interest of Christendom, whilst the Expedition of Your
Triumph is possibly the brightest of Your Laurels.

But alas! It Is not my Province to be Your Excellencies Herald or Historian;
there is no occasion for my poor Pen to attempt what all Tongues are already
full of. It Is enough that with the Fame You have all the Virtues of a
Conqueror, and as such, this Gentleman's Cause can not come before an Abler,
or Properer Judge; the Assurance of which Justice, is the occasion of this
Confidence from,

My Honored Lord, Your Excellencies most Obedient (though Unkown) Humble Servant
and Admirer, J. H.

TO THE READER.
THough this following Discourse (as it contains a perfect Series of the most
important Affairs that were transacted in the North of Ireland the last
Campaigne; and consequently relates the Success of our English Arms in that
Kingdom; so much conduceing to the happiness of our own) cannot but be an
entertaining Subject to every honest Reader; yet the publishing this ensuing
Narrative is not altogether on that design. The Vindication of a private Cause
of the Honorable Coll. John Michelburne, a Person so eminently Instrumental in
the Recovery of Ireland, has in some measure been the Motive that engaged this
present Pen to be drawn in his Defense. Virtue does not always meet with
Justice from the Mouth of ill tongued Fame; Her Enemies are often so successful
(Detraction and Envy still striking at the noblest Merit) that in the false
Game they play, the Honest side is commonly on the Loosing hand, and the
Innocent receives its fall from the Treacherous stab of envious Malice, and
successful Villainy. Now it being the Misfortune of the Honorable Person I have
mentioned, to be unworthily a Sufferer in this kind, you will find that whilst
this Treatise I am writing, gives you an exact Relation from day to day, of the
manner and means he used to reduce Sligoe, which was taken by him, commanding
there in chief; it will not only satisfy the curiosity of those that are
pleased to look nicely into those Affairs in general, but will do a particular
Justice to his Honor, (whose Services have deserved a much Kinder Treatment,
than hitherto they have met with) by unloading him of those notorious Injuries
that most unjustly ill-minded Men had thrown upon him.

Coll. Michelburne being empowered by the Lords Justices, and the General, to
command all the Forces of the Province of Vlster; after he had made his second
Attack against the Garrison he lay before, without that Success he expected,
which was occasioned by some of the Militia's cowardly deserting him, a very
hard and untrue Character of his Management in that Affair, (by what means
transmitted we know not) was sent over to Her Majesty, which represented him so
faulty, that the Queen immediately sent particular Orders to the L. Justices of
Ireland, to take the matter into their Judiciary Cognizance and Examination. I
having the good fortune to be an Intimate Acquaintance of his, was much
surpised and troubled to hear the rumor of those unwelcome Untruths (as I
conceived 'em) that seemed to blacken so my Friends unspotted Honor; My
respect therefore for a Person who was so early a Defender of His Majesty's
Interest in the Kingdom of Ireland, to whose Vigilance, Courage, Conduct, and
Fidelity the most happy Success we met with at Londonderry, next under God,
ought chiefly to be attributed, would not suffer me to join with the unthinking
Populace in that Cry against him. But on the contrary, I was resolved to
continue the same Honorable Opinion of him, that his former actions had
established in me, believing it impossible for a Person that had so lately
signalized himself, could ever deviate from the Paths of his innate Virtue, and
unshaken Loyalty; being firm in this Belief, and zealous for my Friends'
Honor, I could not forbear enquiring by a Letter from him, what effects this
Calumny might have on his Affairs in Ireland, and whither, as yet he had healed
his wounded Reputation-before the Lords Justices. I soon received a very
satisfactory Answer, with a Copy of a Letter from General Ginkell to him (which
you will find inserted hereafter in its proper place) so much applauding the
Collonel's signal Services, that it rejoiced me to know, that the malice of his
ill-minded Enemies, could not divert his Excellency from conceiving the same
fair Character of him, that all just Men ought. But what pleased me most was to
understand, that the Lords Justices (after he had three public hearings before
their Lordships) where he was fully acquitted, had sent a Lerter to my Lord
Nottingham in his Vindication, which was in Answer to Her Majesty's, that
commanded them to inspect into the Collonel's Miscariages. This indeed was a
great satisfaction to me, but notwithstanding all this, considering how hard it
is when vulgar Tongues are set a barking, to lay the cry, and that this Letter
to the Queen in his Favor, might not be generally known; for want of which,
the public Clamours are not yet wholly silenced, and his Enemies through that
advantage may still carry on their private Intrigues to his dishonor; I have
therefore prevailed with him to deliver into my Hands what Papers he had
relating to the Transactions, where he commanded in Chief, as well all Orders
and Letters that were sent him from the Lords Justices, and the General, with
his Answer to 'em, and those which passed betwixt him and Sir Teague O Regan,
and others relating to the Military Affairs; as also the Journal of his own
Procedings, which I have here with his leave taken the boldness to print, with
his Trial in the Close, thereby not only to satisfy the World of the just
measures he took in reducing so important a place as Sligoe, the Key of
Connaught; but likewise to make his Reparation as public as his Injuries.

When the Impartial Reader shall have perused this following Narration, he will
easily perceive on what a weak Foundation they had built their hopes of ruining
this much injured Gentleman, when the height of their despised malice durst but
aim at forging so poor a Scandal on him, as Plundering. Why did they not
asperse him for want of Conduct or Courage? Oh! no, in both those Capacities
they thought he stood too visibly above their feeble Batteries, and even this
mean Chagre they Iay'd against him, how did they aim in vain to make it out?
Why even thus. The Grand Intriguers of this pitiful Design, were Forward and
Vaughan, two Militia Captains under the Collonel's Command against Sligo, Men
of so Renowned a Character, that they were both notoriously famous for quitting
their Posts (which is vulgarly called running away) when in all probability he
was just on the point of reducing Sligoe, of which Notorious Cowardice, being
Accused by Coll. Michelburne, these worthy Malcontents, to be revenged for the
just Disgrace he had thrown upon them, entered into a Conspiracy against him,
with one George Rob, an Inconsiderable Varlet, that the Colonel had threatened
with Hanging, for privately Conversing with the Enemy, and selling them Tobacco.

But whilst these three wretched Confederates were hatching their Villainies,
they were in a great strait how to have 'em brought to light, for the whole
Country was so well satisfied of Coll. Michelburne's Worth and Honor, that no
Justice of Peace would take any Affidavits against him, insomuch that Vaughan
himself was forced to act that part, and after he had taken such weak
Informations as were then new coined against him by this wretched Triumviri,
the Diminitive Tobacco Merchant was immediately dispatched away, on this Mighty
Embassy to Dublin. As to what happened thereupon, and how fully his impertinent
Evidence was answered, I refer you to the reading of the Collonel's Trial
before the Lords Justices. And now because I have hinted in the preceding part
of this Preface, what Fame is owing to that Exemplary Service, was done by this
Honorable Person in the Memorable Siege of Londonderry, I will give the Reader
to understand what Part he acted in that Memorable Siege. Though loud Tongued
Fame so highly has blown up the great Renown of Dr. Walker in England, as truly
much Praise was due to him for having been so great an Animator of the
Protestant Cause in those worst of Times, which was his proper Trade to do; yet
after the Death of Coll. Baker, which happened in the height of the Towns
Distress, and deepest Calamities, Coll. Michelburne was in joint Command with
the Doctor, whose Conduct appeared more conspicuous in the Eating part than the
Fighting, and reason good, the Charge of the Stores, and Provision being
committed to him alone, whilst his Brother Governor was only the Martial
Colleague, and the entire management of the Towns Defense lodged wholly in
Coll. Michelburne's Breast; during which time, as his Principles were too
Honorable to listen to any Allurements of the Enemy without the Walls, so his
Hardships within 'em were not able to shake his Loyalty, nor lessen his
Undaunted Courage, which appeared particularly in his planting the Bloody Flag
on the Royal Bastion, and afterward mounting it on the top of a Steeple, to
show the Besieged, as well as the Besiegers, the height of Resolution, as they
found in the Sequel, for when the Enemies Poltick Barbarity had drove the
Protestant part of all the Country around without respect of Persons, Age, or
Sex, to starve under Derry Walls; to return the great Civility with no less
Policy than Bravery, he erected a Lofty Gallows in sight of 'em, to hang 21
Lords, Knights, and other Commanders, which were taken before, as Trophies of a
Victory lately Obtained; which Stratagem obliged the Foe to let the Affrighted
People Retreat from Danger. Nor had he the Happiness, only to save the Town
through that Miserable Siege, a Service of so high Importance, that the King's
then Tottering Interest in Ireland was kept in AEquilibrio by him, till
Lieutenant General Kirk approaching turned the Scales; But he had the
unhappiness likewise of feeling, in a great measure, the smart of War, as well
as reaping the Glory of it, having had the irreparable Misfortune of loosing
his dear Lady, and Children, with all his Family, by the rage of Pestilence,
and deadly Famine in this terrible Siege. Yet though he had so dismal an Occasion
of exercising his Passive, as well as active Courage; my much honored Friend,
constant to both sorts of Magnanimity, with the same equal Temper bore the
Fortune that dressed his Brows with Cipress Garlands, as that which Crowned them
with Victorions Laurels; well knowing, that Fortior est qui se quam qui
fortissima vincit
Maenia --


Reader Farewell, but e're we part, that you may certainly be informed the
Eulogium I have given Coll. Michelburne may pass for Current Coin, behold the
Stamp a Copy of the King's own Letter has put upon it.

William R.
To Our Trusty and Wellbeloved George Walker, and John Michelburne, Esquire
Governors of Londonderry. TRusty and Wellbeloved We Greet you well,
The Eminent and Extraordinary Service that you have performed unto us and our
Kingdoms in General by your late Resolute and unparalled Defense of that our
City of Londonderry, as it does Oblige us in the first place to an Humble
Acknowledgment to Almighty God for his Signal Mercy in Supporting the Hearts
and Courages of our good Subjects, amidst their great and Various Difficulties
and Distresses, arising from a furious Opposition without, and yet a more
pressing Necessity within those Walls, and sending them at last Deliverance,
and bringing them by your Conduct to Triumph over their Enemies, which we
cannot but Attribute, to an immediate Divine Assistance, inspiring them with a
Zeal for the true Religion, a Love for their Country, and an Unshaken Fidelity
toward Us; and must ever own it as a Continuation of that Miraculous
Providence which has hitherto conducted Us throughout our Endeavors to
resettle these Nations in all their Civil and Religious Rights and Liberties:
So in the next place taking into our Serious Consideretion, as well the
Importance of this Success, as that Constancy and Bravery, by which it has
been brought to pass, We would not omit signifying unto you the just sense We
have of this whole Action, in which having the greatest Opportunity that can be
put into the hands of any Subjects of Obliging their Prince; you have in all
points acquitted your selves to Our Satisfaction, even beyond what could have
been expected; insomuch that it now lies on Our part to make such Retributions,
as well to you the Commanders in Chief, who have been the happy Instruments,
under God, of this Deliverance; as others who have Signalized their Loyalty,
Courage, and Patience in this time of Trial, that all Our Subjects being
Encouraged by this Example, may be stirred up to the Imitation of it, in the
like hazardous, but Honorable Enterprises. We Will therefore that you Rely on
Our Royal Favor toward you; and also, that in Our Name you assure the
Officers, Soldiers, and Inhabitants of that Our City, that we will take fitting
Occasions to recompense their Services and Sufferings in Our Cause, so that
they nor any other of Our Loving Subjects shall ever have reason to repent them
of a Faithful Discharge of their Duty; and so we bid you Farewell.

Given at our Court at Hampton Court, this 16th. Day of August, 1689. In the
First Year of Our Reign. By His Majesty's Command, Shrewsbury.

A TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE TRANSACTIONS IN THE North of Ireland, In the YEAR, 1691.
AT the Opening of the Campaign, when the Army drew into the Field, 'twas
thought reasonable, that when that part of the Army that was Quartered in
Vlster, under the Command of Lieut. Genesis Douglas, joined the other parts of the
Army at Mullingar, that a Regiment of the standing Army, as also a considerable
Body of the Militia, should be posted at several Passes on Lough, Hearne; as
that of Belturbet, Cavan, Eneskillin, as likewise at Belleick, and Ballyshanan,
called by the Name of the Earne Water, to defend those several Passes against
the Incursions of the Enemy from their several Frontiers, as that of Jamestown,
and Boil; and particularly the Town and Forts of Sligoe, Commanded by Sir
Teague O Regan, being the main Entrance into Vlster from Connaught, and the
most convenient and ready Access into the North, by way of Ballyshanan: 'Twas
therefore concluded by the General, and the Right Honorable the Lords
Justices, that Coll. Mitchelburne, with his Regiment, should be posted at the
places above mentioned, a Person capable of Command, being so well known by his
Indefatigable Pains in managing the Government of Derry, and especially the
Soldiery of the Garrison, during the whole time of that Memorable Siege, where
he baffled General Hamilton, and his whole Irish Army.

The Forces under his Command, were as follows.

Standing Army. Coll. Mitchelburne's whole Regiment. 1 Companys of Coll.
Venner's Regiment. 1 Troop of Dragoons, Sir Albert Conningham's. 1 Troop of
Dragoons, Coll. Win's.

These following, were under the Command of Sir Francis. Hamilton Bannoret,
Lieutenant of the County of Donegal.

Capt. Forward Capt. Vaughan Capt. Wray Capt. John Hamilton Capt. Sampson Capt.
Charles Hamilton Capt. William Stewart
Foot Companies. Capt. Tho. Ash. Capt. Pa. Hamilton. Capt. Oliver Maccashlin.

The Rivers at this time were very low, which required very strict Guards on
all the Fords, and the Patrols from Post to Post continually moving in the
Night: About the middle of June by the heedlesness of a small Party of our
Dragoons, who Patroll'd Morning and Evening 4 or 5 Miles in an open Country to
Burndervise, on a sudden were surprised by one Capt. Mac Sherry, and about Ten
of them taken Prisoners: Mac Sherry himself confessed he took them when they
were Fishing for Salmon: These Men were soon released, for one Lieutenant
Scott, Brother to Coll. Scott, Deputy Governor of Sligoe; but lost all their
Horses and Arms. Whilst the said Colonel was posting his Men to the best
Advantage for the Defense of these most Important Places, being the Inlet of
the whole North; for could the Enemy but get advantage, all Vlster would be in
great danger, the General, as also the Lords Justices being by several good
hands informed, that Jamestown on the Shanon, Boil, and Sligoe were Deserted
by the Enemy, sends these following Orders to Colonel Mitchelburne.

Dublin-Castle, the 4th. of July 1691. SIR,
THE Lords Justices being informed, that the Enemy have Deserted Sligoe and
Jamestown, in Connaught, do think it of very great importance that they be
forthwith possessed by their Majesty's Forces, and therefore have sent you the
enclosed Order, which you are desired to peruse with all the speed that
possible may be, if you find the Information true, and that it be feaseable to
be done, otherwise you are not to undertake it: And of your Proceedings from
time to time, you are to give their Lordships an Account. Which, by their
Lordships Command, is Signified to you by

Sir, Your very humble Servant, J. Davis.
I am Commanded to let you know that the Biscuit now at Belleik, is designed for
Galway; so that unless you find the design upon Sligoe and Jamestown, like to
succeed, you are not to take any of it.

J. Davis.



To Colonel Mitchelburne, for Their Majesty's Special Service.
The General's Letter on the same Occasion.
YOU are hereby Directed, and Required in case the Enemy shall have left and
quitted Sligoe, to send such part of the Standing Army under your Command in
the North thither, as may be sufficient to take possession of, and secure the
said Garrison; and your Proceedings herein, the Condition of the place, and of
what elsewhere you may think now or from time to time proper for me to know,
you are to give me a particular Account of.

Given at the Camp by Athlone this 5th. of July, 1691. Bar de Ginkell.

To Coll. Mitchelburne, and in his Absence to the Officer in Chief with the
Standing Forces in the North.
It is the General's Directions, that the Officers take care their Men behave
themselves Orderly, and not Abuse and Plunder the Country, and for what they
do of that nature, the Officers to be answerable.

George Clarke.




Coll. Mithelburne receiving these two Expresses, one from the Lords Justices,
and the other from the General, immediately sends away a Drummer to Sligoe to
Sir Teague O Regan, with some Letters that were sent from Londonderry by some
Prisoners that were taken by the said Coll. at Derry, in the time of the Siege;
in particular one Lieut. Scott, Brother to Coll. Scott, joint Governor with Sir
Teague, and Coll. of one of the Regiments Garrisoned in Sligoe.

Colonel Mitchelburne's Letter to Sir Teague.
SIR,
IT IS no small Satisfaction to me, to know that my, Old Acquaintance Sir Teague
O Regan, the happiness of whose Company I have so often enjoyed in the French
Campaign, should be in a Garrison so near me: As also Coll. Scott. I have sent
you a Packet of Letters by my Drum, from the Prisoners in Londonderry, one
whereof is to Coll. Scott from his Brother, to whom I have been Civil upon the
Collonel's Account, which he does kindly acknowledge. My Service to Colonel
Scott. I am.

SIR, Your most Humble Servant, John Mitchelburne.


The Drum was dispatched away immediately, with Orders not to spare
Horseflesh, but to return with all speed; but instead of coming that night, or
the next day, there being no News of the Drummer, the Colonel could not
conjecture what was become of him; he thought either he was knocked in the Head
by the Rapperees, or that Sir Teague O Regan was removing, and would not let
him return, least he should give an Account of the postnre they were in, which
might be the cause of our falling on their Rear. He resolves therefore to know
the truth of the matter; and the 3 d. day, having no News of his Drummer, calls
a Court Martial, and marched that Night.

The Court Martial. A General Court Martial held at Ballyshanan this 13th of
July, 1691.
WHereas by two Letters received, one from the General, and the other from the
Lords Justices, giving an Account of the Enemies quitting Sligoe and Jamestown,
We having sent a Drummer to Sligoe to observe their motion, and the truth
thereof; and finding no return of the Message sent, do think it highly
necessary for Their Majesty's Service, to march as many of the standing Army
and Militia as can be spared toward Sligoe, at Nine a Clock this Night, that
we may be able to give an Account of the Affairs of Sligoe, and full Answer to
each Letter.

John Forward. Charles Hamilton. George Vaughan. William Hewart. William Wray.
John Hamilton. John Mitchelburne. William Staughton. William Mead. Capt.
Caldwell. Capt. Nesbitt. George Gregory. Stephen Miller. Richard Bickerstaffe.
Mich. Coningham.


The Court Martial being over, and every one sworn to Secrecy, they march
their Troops and Companies over the River with as much Expedition as they
could. We set forward toward Sligoe about 9 that Night, the Strengths of what
we marched, leaving the Forts and Passes indifferently well guarded, were as
follows.

About 80 Dragoons, standing Army 080 The Collonel's Foot 200 Colonel Venner's
Foot 100 The Militia 200 580

By break of day we came to Mulloughmore midway, between Ballyshanan and
Sligoe, and about five came to the Grange, where the Colonel posted all the
Foot in the old Walls of the Grange in Ambush, commanded by Lieut. Coll.
Staughton.

When we halted and drew up, by reason of some difficulty whilst we were at
Muloughore, some Disputes were started by Capt. Forward, and some of the
Militia, of what ill consequence it would be if the Enemy should give us a
Defeat, that most part of the North say open to the Incussions of the Enemy,
the substance of which was discoursed with to the Colonel, by Captain Henry
Heart; the Colonel made answer, it was a shame to turn back, since they were
half way: As also, why did not they object this at the Court Martial; but said,
he would go if he had no more than the standing Army, and those of the Militia
as would not follow him, they might turn back; but if they would trust to his
Management, they need not in the least doubt; for his business was not to fight
the Enemy, but to know if Sligoe were deserted. And accordingly, as soon as the
Foot were posted, by way of Ambush, the Colonel takes all the Horse and
Dragoons with him, and mounts about Forty of his Granadeers on the Officers
Horses; he having about seven short Miles to Sligo, he marched with that
Precipitation, that it was impossible to be surprised by the Enemy, leaving
Seouts on every Hill, till he arrived within a Mile of Sligoe; where observing
no Horse appear, he advanced nearer, and obser'vd about 3 or 400 Foot drawn
out, by which means he discovered, that Sligoe was not deserted, as was
reported: the Colonel continued before the Town above an hour, and then
marched back; 'twas very remarkable, to march 20 Miles, and especially when we
marched so private, not so much as to meet with one Person to give us
Intelligence.

The Collonel's Letter to Sir Teague, concerning the Drummer, which was
detained by him in the Town, July 13th. 1691.
SIR,
I Think strange that you detain my Drummer these four days, which was never
yet practicable by the Law of Arms, and must needs be a great Reflection upon
you by this unjust dealing. IsI have him not speedily, I Will revenge his wrong
on the Prisoners in Derry, which is all from

Your humble Servant, John Mitchelburne.

To the Honorable Sir Teague O Regan, Governor of Sligoe.

This now he sent by a Girl into the Town to Sir Teagne, least he should detain
the Messenger, and then drew off his Men, and at Drumcleife strand the Enemy
advanced withsome Horse, where was some skirmishing on both sides, but at the
appearance of our Granadeers, the Enemy retreated, and we marched back to the
Grange, and joined our Foot, and marched that Night to Ballyshanan.

The next Morning the Drummer returned and brought this following answer.

Sligoe, July 14th. 1691.
I Received yours, and as to my Detaining the Drummer, I rather took him for a
Spy than a Drummer, for he was not satisfied to be in the Town, but must go up
into the Fort, and make his Observations; besides, his Considence, and giving
his Tongue that Liberty, that I could by no means suffer it; and I am sure you
would have don no less had any of Ours been guilty of half the Impertinence in
your Garrison; and for the future I desire that any other Drummer may be sent,
rather than that Fellow: I am very glad you are my Neighbor, and will treat
you with all the Civilities our Cause will allow. Colonel Scott gives you his
Humble Service. I am

Your most Humble Servant Teague O Regan.


Colonel Mitchelburne's Letter to the Lords Justices, giving them Account of
this his first Journey to Sligoe.
My Lords,
I Received two Expresses, one from Your Lordships, the other from the General,
to take Possession of Sligoe, if it was quitted by the Enemy; but the
Difficulty was such, that it is almost impossible to get Intelligence, for
there is not a Dweller between this and Sligoe. On Tuesday last I posted away a
Drummer with Letters from the Prisonars of Londonderry, to the Governor of
Sligoe, thinking by that means to know the certainty, but they detained the
Drum, and do still, which was a suspicion that they had, or were about to
Desert it. On Tuesday I called a General Council, as is herein Enclosed, and
about Eight that Night we Rendezvouzed three hundred Foot, and two hundred
Horse; and about Six next Morning We came to a small Village called the Grange,
within Six Miles of Sligoe, where I posted my Foot by way of Ambush, Commanded
by Lieut. Coll. Staughton. I marched the Horse within a Mile of Sligoe, where
we perceived the Garrison that was in that Fort to draw out, but not any Horse
to be seen, which gave me so much confidence, as to march and draw up nearer:
My Granadeers and some Dragoons advanced to some Ditches, and some Shot was
exchanged. We continued about an Hour, and then marched back and joined the
Foot, and about Eight that Night we came to Ballyshanon. I have no further to
acquaint your Lordships at present, but am

My Lords, Your Lordships most Faithful and Obedient Servant, John Mitchelburne.


The like Letter was sent to General Ginkell.

This is the Account of our first Journey to Sligoe.
Coll. Mitchelburne having taken a View of Sligoe, as also the Forts, was
resolved the second time to visit Sir Teague, and to stay some two or three
days before the place, to know if any Advantages might be gained toward
Reducing the Town, and therefore thus acquaints the Lords Justices in the
following Letter of it.

My Lords,
I Think it not amiss to give your Lordships an Account of what Militia I have
here, which is only six Troops of Dragoons out of Dunigal, and out of the
County of Londonderry only part of a Company commanded by Capt. Patrick
Hamilton. Since my last Advance to Sligoe, I am informed of the Ill condition
of the place, the Soldiers are a Rabble, all Ragged, and have no Allowance but
one pound of Bread a Day; it is likewise told me, that most part of their
Craights would come in on protection, so that if your Lordships would but allow
me some more force, and others to advance thither, I do not question but in a
short time to give your Lordships a very good Account of my Proceedings. Sir
Teague O Regan has been these two or three days very busy in repairing all his
Works about the Fort.

Your Lordships most Faithful and Obedient Servant, John Michelburne.


About this time Coll. Michelburne writ to Eniskillen to Lieut. Coll. Ramsey,
to join him with an hundred Men at Manner Hamllton, and to bring with him as
many of the Militia as he could, with an intent to Summons Sligoe, and to bring
them, if possible, to Surrender: but the same time came a Potent to him to
march back to Drogheda, and withal a Letter to Coll. Michelburne from the
General, to send a Detatchment to Convey the Ships loaded with Biskets to
Gallway, (viz.)

By the General Ginkell, Commander in Chief of Their Majesty's Forces.

THE Masters of the two Ships loaded with Bisker, at present in the Bay of
Ballyshannon, now are hereby required to set sall instantly for Gullway, if the
Frigate sent for their Convoy be come to them, which I hereby order immediately
without loss of time to guard them thither; if not, they are to go to the
Governor of Ballishannon, who, in that case, is required to give twenty five
Soldiers to each Ship to secure them to Gallway, as aforesaid forthwith; and
this shall be to him and them a sufficient Warrant Respectively. Given at the
Campal Loughrea this 16th. of July, 1691.

Bar de Ginkell. Geo. Clarke.

To Coll. John Michelburne Commander at Ballishannon.

This with the Potent that came to Lieut. Coll. Ramsey, hindered our design
against Sligoe, so that it was put off till some other time.

The day after C. Michelburne received this following Potent.

YOU are hereby directed, as soon as you shall be releived by the Regiment of
Coll. Samuel Vennor, to march with the Regiment under your Command from your
Respective Quarters to Athlone, and remain there till further Orders; and you
are to acquaint the Officers that they are to be answerable for the Behavior
of their Soldiers, and to see that they plunder not, nor abuse the Country in
their said March, and especially those to whom I shall think sit to grant my
protection. Given at the Camp by Aghtim, this 14th. of July, 1691.

Bar de Ginkell. Geo. Clarke.

To Coll. Michelburne Commanding one of Their Majesty's Regiments of Foot, or
the Officer in Chief with that Regiment.

The next Day he received this following Express.

NOtwithstanding any former Orders for your march with the Regiment under your
Command, so soon as you are Releived by that of Coll. Vennor, to Athlone; you
are now directed to remain in your present Quarters until you are other. wise
disposed of by the Right Honorable the Lords Justices, whose Orders you are
from time to time to follow, and march as they shall direct. Given at the Camp
by Loghrea, this 16th. of July, 1691.

Bar de Ginkell, Geo. Clarke.

To Coll. John Michelburne, or the Officer in Chief of the Regiment of Foot
under his Command.

Mr. Davis's Letter to Coll. Michelburne, giving a Relation of that Victory
against the Enemy.
Dublin-Castle, the 15th. of July, 1691. SIR,
THis Morning by an Express we have an Account of a very great Victory gained
over the Enemy, the particulars whereof, are as follows.

About six of the Clock on Sunday in the Evening, the Battle began at a place
called Aghrim in the County of Gallway, about three Miles beyond Bellenaslow,
the Enemy were advantagiously posted, encompassed almost round with Boggs, by
which means many were saved, who otherwise had gone with the rest, if our Horse
could have come in time enough to second our Foot.

The Battle was chiofly (by reason of the Bogs) between the Foot on both sidee,
whereof its believed the Enemy have lost 5 or 6000: on our side the loss is
between 500 and 1000.

The Battle lasted about 3 hours, and had not the Night overtaken us, in all
probability the Slaughter had been much greater, we persued the Enemy 5 Miles;
on their side, it is said, their General St. Ruth is killed, who Speech't them
greatly in the Morning. Animating them to Fight, as did the Priests the Common
Soldiers, who also gave them Absolution; We took all their Baggage, and 9
pieces of Cannon, Lord Gallway, the Lord of Clanrickerds Brother to Coll.
Bourke, and several others of Quality killed.

Maj. Genesis Hamilton, Maj. Genesis Darrington, Lord Bellew, Coll. Bourke, Coll.
Gorden O Neale, Coll. Butler, taken Prisoners.

On our side Maj. Genesis Holstaple, Coll Harbert, Coll. Mongath of the Danes,
Maj. Deanish, Maj. Coll, Maj. Cornwel, and Maj. Fox, Killed.

Sir George Hamilton, the Prince Hesse, Lord Cutts, Coll. Earl, and Lieut.
Coll. Brundal Wounded

I sent you this by Command of the Lords Justices, who doubt not you will
improve every Opportunity for Their Majesty's Service. I am

SIR, Your very Humble Servant, John Davis.
In short, it is a Total Defeat of the Enemy.




Here follows a Letter from the Lords Justices to Coll. Michelburne, in
Answer of one to their Lordships, (viz.)
Dublin-Castle, the 21th. of July, 1691. SIR,
WE have this day received your of the 13th. with the Enclosed, from Sir Teague
O Regan, and Coll. Scott. For Answer, we leave it to you to make the Exchange
proposed of the Lieutenant who is Prisoner at Londonderry, by them desired for
the ten Dragoons, and you may direct your Order as you see cause, to the
Officer Commanding at Londonderry, and the Magistrate of that place to send the
Lieutenant to you accordingly.

If you find any who are willing to come into protection, and will bring in
Stocks of Cattle with them, I do hereby Empower you to receive them, and to
assure them of the protection of the Government, they taking the Oath of
Fidelity and Allegiance, and behaving themselves as becomes good Subjects.

We are glad to find Sir Teague O Regan sowell inclined as to send away the
Protestants in safety out of the Enemies Quarters, and doubt not your Care in
all things that may conduce to Their Majesty's Service, desiring to hear
constantly from you, as there is any the least occasion. We are

Your very Humble Servants, Charles Porter, Tho. Coningsby.

For Coll. John Michelburne at Ballyshannon, in the County of Duingal.
To be sent by the Postmaster by Express of Eneskillen, from Eneskillen.

John Davis.


I had almost ommited a material Passage which was, when Coll. Michelburne sent
to give Orders for Lieut. Coll. Ramsey, Governor of Eneskillen, to join him
with a 100 Firelocks; on their March to Manner-Hamilton, an Express met them
from the Coll. acquainting them that he could not possible join them, and so
ordered them to return back; but those of Coll. Ramsey's being a good Party,
and with them a considerable number of Militla, which were never wanting on
such an occasion to hunt for Prey, prosecuted their Journey to Killkenny, and
entering into Terrerah, a Barony joining to Killkenny, they brought off a
confiderable Booty of Gattle, Horses, and Sheep; in the mean time the Garrison
of Sligoe was alarmed, Sir Teague and Coll. Scot being advertised of the number
of the Soldiers, as also the Militia that was with them, laid wait for them
with 500 Foot: Coll. Michelbourne being fearful, least the Garrison of Sligoe
should sally out, and fall on them at unawares, sends a Detachment of about 200
Horse and Dragoons, under the Command of Sir Francis Hamilton, to join the
former Party; by whose vigilant Traveling all Night, they luckily fell in when
the Eniskillen Party, and Sir Ieague O Regan were engaged; at the appearance of
Sir Francis Hamilton, both Parties desisted, and stood in a maze; and that at
the same time, when the Eniskilieners were in a likelihood to have been totally
lost; for that Coll. Scot was just come up with his Regiment to join Sir
Teague; but it was not long, till one might judge on whose fide the Victory
would fall, for the whole Party of the Irish fled, and out Militia after them
for above four Miles; but Sir Teague was the foremost Man, and just at the
Entrance of the Town of Sligoe, a Sergeant of the Dragoons seized on one
matholland, the Store-Keeper of Sligoe, who was with Sir Teague, and not half a
Pistol shot from him; but the Honorable Sir Teagne O Regan, Governor of the
Town and County of Sligoe, won the Race: This Matholland that was taken
Prisoner by the Sergeant, told him, Who do you think that Crook'd-back Fellow
was who rid before? The Sergeant replied, he believed him to be his Servant:
The Devil take me, quoth Matholland, but he was Sir Teague O Regan; By my Soul,
quoth the Sergeant, it is 20 Guineas out of my way; for I am sure the General
would have rewarded me very well. Sir Teague swore, that if they ever carch'd
Sir Teague so far again, he would agree to be cracked as a Hog oracks a
Pottato. At this time, by the earnest pursuit after the Enemy, one Lieut.
Patrick Macre, formerly a Lieut. in Dorry, during the time of the Siege,
pursuing the Enemy into the Town, apprehending still he was among his own Men,
cried out for King William's Boys, and the Honor of Londonderry; the poor Man
was mistaken, and knook'd down by the Enemy; but accidentally one of the Towns
Men knew him, and had him before Sir Teague. Sir Teague asked him his Name;
quoth the Lieut my Name is Patrick Moore: Then Sir Teague enquired what he was:
He told him he was a Servant in Derry; and enquiring after all things, he asked
him who was Governor in Derry: Hotold him Coll. Michelburne; to whom he
expressed great kindness, and allowed him good Quarter; which civility
afterward was Requited by Coll. Michelburne. But to pursue our Discourse, from
the Enemy we took 16 Prisoners, which were brought by Guard to Ballyshannou.
Sir Teague was not long before he heard who had his Prisoners, and sent this
following Letter to Sir Francis Hamilion.

Sligoe, the 24th of July. SIR,
UPon the last Exchange between us and Coll. Michelburne, that now Commands at
Ballyshannon, we writ to have certain Persons, that we thought they had
Prisoners there, sent us, they being as we computed in Arrear to us upon the
Exchanges. Whereupon we had a civil Letter from Coll. Michelburne, importing
that he would send them if he had them: This Letter I cannot find to send you,
but upon my Honor it was to this purpose; which shows that there is a fair
Corespondence between us and our Enemy on this side, as may be in such Cases
expected, other than which I never saw practiced, nor am acquainted with
between Persons of Honor though of different sides; you have now one Ensign
Rourke, Prisoner, together with some Inhabitants of this Town and Country I
commanded, and partly forced, and particularly one French, that is an
Inhabitant of this Town, and his Wife, and ten Children: We have one Lieutenant
Patrick Moore, of that Party, Prisoner here; if you will return the said Ensign
Rourke, and the said other Prisoners of this Town and County, that were no way
concerned in our Army, I will send you thither, or to any Frontier Garrison,
any of them that you will name, and will complete the Exchange in what shall be
found wanting, as occasion will offer; the said Moore had a Letter of Credit
about him from one Alexander Lecky, an Alderman in Derry, for Twenty or Thirty
pounds, which names this Person, a Lieutenant; whither he be so or not, the
Exchange shall be performed upon your Compliance with

SIR, Your Humble Servant, Teague O Regan.

To Sir Francis Hamilton, Barron. Capt. Montgomery, or any other Person,
commanding in Chief a Party of the Enemy in this Country.

A Copy of a Letter of Sir Teague O Regan's, to some of the Gentlemen in the
County of Sligoe, Intercepted.
Sligoe, July 15th. 1691. Gentlemen,
THOUGH we have Provisions coming by Water from Gallway, the uncertainty that way
makes our General Order me, without loss of time, to send Horses for some,
wherein, on your Allegiance to K. James, I require your speedy Compliance; and
Gentlemen, I pray let no Self-interest, Base Consternation, or other
Imbecility, make you neglect your Diligence and Care herein; if you do, I shall
not only Represent you accordingly, but in spite of Fate will make you the
first Sufferers, of so Fatal a Neglect: An Officer and Guard will expect 60
Horses, and Sacks, and Leaders, at Temple-House on Sunday next at Eight of the
Clock in the Morning, from the Barrony of Lyney. I remain,

Gentlemen, Your Humble Servant, Teague O Regan.
I desire the Cattle of your Barrony out of hand.



To Kean O Harra, Esquire Mr. Ecgeboy O Harra. Mr. Om. O Harra. Mitchel O Harra;
and the rest of the Gentlemen of the Barrony of Leyney. Have.

Coll. Mitchelburne is again contriving to make a second Journey to Sligoe, and
since Coll. Venner's Regiment was Marched away, and he seven Garrisons to keep,
did not know well how to bring it about, but sends to Lieut. Coll. Stanght. his
then Lieut. Col. to send Maj. Hamilton to join him with 100 Firelocks on a
certain day at Manner Hamilton, and in the mean time sends the following Letter
to Sir Teague O Regan by his Drummer, with a Present of some good Snuff, and
two Bottles of Vsquebaugh.

Ballyshannon, the 26th. of July, 1691. SIR,
YOU must needs be very sensible of your own Weakness, by the News you have of
your Army being totally beaten, how that they are not able to stand before us;
so pray seriously consider it; I presume you have not as yet seen the Lords
Justices Proclamation, which I enclosed send you: you have an opportunity to do
your self and your Friends a kindness if you do but lay hold of this
Opportunity in Treating with me as to the Surrender of Sligoe. I am

SIR, Your Humble Servant, John Michelburne.
I thank you for your Present of the Cask of Claret you sent me; be pleased to
accept of a Bottle of Usquebaugh, and some good London Snuff.




Sir Teagues O Regan's Answer, to Colonel Michelburne's First Summons.
Sligoe 28. July, 1691. SIR,
I Had yours by the Drummer the last Night, and do render you Thanks for all
your Civilities to me; yet I am sorry you would harbor so Ill and Weak an
Opinion of me, to think that I should be so great a Villain, as to betray my
Frust to my King and Country, and that in a time when I am very sensible, that
the Party I took is in the most likelihood of doing well, as ever they were
since this War began: As to the Proclamation it may take with such as want Wit
and Honesty, but never with me; neither do I know any particvlar thing wherein
the Weakness of your Cause appears more than by the Proclamation, which you
will find, if you do without partiality read it. If you will be pleased to send
me Mr. Mattholland, and the rest of the Prisoners which were lately taken by
some of your People; I will upon any such Occasion do the like, where I have
Prisoners from you: If you think it much that all should come, I hope you will
send John Duaney of Coll. Scott's Regiment, and the two Soldiers of Coll.
Ternon O Rourks Regiment. I am

SIR, Your most Humble Servant, Teague O Regan.
Coll. Scott, and his Brother, give their Humble Service.




The same Day the Coll. received an Express from General Ginkell, much to the
same effect as he had sent to Sir Teague O Regan the Day before, so that he had
no more in Answer to the General, than to send the above Letter of Sir
Teague's, which he immediately dispatched away by the same Express.

The General's Letter.
Camp before Gallway, 25th. July, 1691. SIR,
I Am to own the Receipt of three of your Letters, and am Obliged to you for
the Diligence, I find by yours of the 20th. you used in dispatching the
Provision Ships; they are not yet come hither; as for the Dispute about the
Command of Eneskillin, now the Lieut. Coll. is removed, it is at an end; but if
he had not I should have been very willing to have Gratified you in what you
desired.

I enclosed, send, you one of the Proclamations of Pardon, to those that do the
Service mentioned in it; you may from me assure Sir Teague O Regan, that though
the time may be expired, that is there limited, yet if he Surrenders Sligoe
I Will make it good to him and the Garrison; and if he will submit and take
Service, either an Employ equal to what he has, or such recompense, as in
reason he can desire. I am

SIR, Your most Humble Servant, Bar de Ginkell.

To Coll. Michelburne.

The Coll. The same Day received a Letter from Counselor Davir, Secretary to
the Right Honorable the Lords Justices, (viz.)

Dublin-Castle, 25th, July, 1691. SIR,
I Herewith send you a particular Account of the late great Victory obtained
against the Irish, and have this only to add, That the General being set down
before Gallway, sends word the 22 d. that the Fort being Stormed, and Taken on
the 20th. in the Moruing, the Town sent out in the Afternoon to treat. and have
agreed to Surrender on Sunday Morning next at Six of the Clock, and that
immediately the Outworks were delivered into our Possession, and all their
Cannon drawn from their Walls, and 5 Hostages delivered: The General designs
next to Lymerick, and we have some reason to believe that place will soon
Capitulate likewise. Of this I thought it convenient to give you an Account,
and to assure you that I am

SIR, Your very Humble Servant, John Davis.

For Coll. John Michelburne, Governor of Ballishannon.
To be sent him by the Postmaster of Eniskillen from Eniskillen.

John Davis.


Since we are Concerned with the Militia of the Northern Parts, it is not amiss
to give you an Account, that for the better ordering of the Militia, there were
three Superiors ordered to inspect them, Coll. Murray, Maj Touchburne, and
Cornet Mead. Coll. Murray had undertaken with the Lords Justices to enter into
Connaught with a considerable Body of Men, and not to lessen the Militia to
incommode the Rebels, and 'twas generally discoursed, that the Body of his Men
were to consist of 5000 Horse and Foot, but how that could have been
accomplished cannot well be understood; for when all the Militia of the Country
was summoned by the Lords Justices Orders to join Coll. Michelburne at
Ballyshannon, and then to join the Lord Granard likewise, they could not make
500; but we had two sorts of Services, that of defending the Frontiers, and
that of getting Prey; for wherever a design was for Plunder there you had
twenty for one. It was theresors thought not convenient for Coll. Murray to
enter into Connaught, but to join his Militia on the Frontiers, as by a Letter
from Coll. Murray to the Governor of Ballyshannon.

Colonel Murray's Order front the General.
The General's Orders to me.
IT being now found convenient for their Majesty's Service, that I enter not
with the Militia under my Command into the Province of Connaught;
notwithstanding any former Resolution; I am thereby directed to post them on
the Borders of the Province, which Instructions I will pursue with all
Expedition. I think it sit to give you an Account of this my Instructions.

We have raised all the Militia of the North, except the County of Ardmagh and
Mannoghan, which Maj. Touchburne, and Corner Mead are now viewing.

Upon an Express from the General, we are returned out of the County of Down,
and with all Expedition will march what of the Militia is Armed. What is not
Armed we have written to the Government about, and expect they will furnish
them.

Cumber, July 11th, 1691. Your Humble Servant, Adam-Murray.

For Their Majesty's Special Service. To Coll. John Michelburne, at
Ballyshannon.
Coll. Michelburne writes to Coll. Murray, to hasten his Militia; giving him an
Account of his Design against Sligoe, and that if Coll. Murray Marched to the
Frontier, he could Advance with a greater Force against Sligoe.

Colonel Michelburne expected Day after Day to hear of Coll. Murray's Militia,
but never heard from them or him: After he calls a Court Martial the 17th. of
July, 1691.

At a General Court Martial, held at Ballyshannon, this 17th. of July, 1691.
WE the under-named Persons, do think it necessary for Their Majesty's Service
(considering how the Juncture of Affairs stands, and the late Victory, (by the
Blessing of God Almighty gained over the Enemy) to Assemle a convenient number
of Troops and Companies to meet on the 21th. Instant, to make an Infalon
Connaught, particularly the County of Sligoe, by which means we may discover
the further design; of the Enemy in those parts, as also to Summons the
Garrison of Sligoe to a Surrender; and this we all agree to be most necessary
for Their Majesty's Service.

John Michelburne Patrick Hamilton William Vaughan Benjamin Touchburne Josias
Campbell. Tristram Swetnam Alexander Knox Dalway Clemens Thomas Ash William
Wray Francis Hamilton Hugh Caldwell Edward Nesbit Francis Boyd Stephen Miller
Richard Bickerstaffe William Stewart William Sampson John Hamilton.


This was the Result of the Court-Marital; and though all were sworn to
Secrecy, yet by the Indiseretion, or Treachery of some of the Members of it, it
was in two hours time public throughout the Country, which made the Coll.
resolve to call no more Court-Martials, but gave Orders that all should be
ready at an hours warning; but he was in the mean time mightily solicited by
Captain Forward, and Captain Vaughan, and Nicholson (whose Expectations and
Desires were more filled with Prey, than any thing else;) to disclose the time,
we should march. He had ordered Lieut. Coll. Ramsey from Eniskillin, to join
him with one Hundred Firelocks at Manner Hamilton; also two Companies of
Colonel Venner's Regiment, which lay at the Bar Mouth of Ballyshannon: but
they as well as Lieutenant-Collonel Ramsey, receiving Orders to march to their
own Regiments at Droghede, he was forced to defer it a day or two, till he
could send to Eniskillin and Belturbit for a Detachment of his own Regiment, to
meet them. On Thursday the 28th. of July, about three in the Afternnon he began
his March to Belleike, 3 Miles from Ballyshannon; from whence having viewed all
the Men, about five he marched toward Manner Hamilton, where we arrived by two
in the Morning, being 11 Miles of bad Road; from hence, about six on Friday we
marched toward Killowny, where we Encamped; where on the Road our Militia
perceiving some Cows and Horses, to the number of sixty, several of them broke
confusedly out of their ranks, but were soon forced back to their Post by Coll.
Michelburne's Order. It was here first their Robbing and Stripping began, they
considered his Business not as it was, but as if he had only designed for a
Prey. This Evening, as soon as we had encamped, Coll. Michelburne rid out,
accompanied with Sir Francis Hamilton, etc. to Ballisadare-Bridge, two Miles
from the Camp, to discover the Enemy with 100 Horse; and after our Guards were
set in the most advantageous places, our Men being so well stored with Mutton,
that they neglected Beef, we marched the next Morning early toward Sligoe,
being 6 Miles; about 11 we came thither. At our first approach, the Enemy
having discharged above 15 shot, about 17 Pounders; the Coll. beat a Parley, and
sent a Drum with a Letter to Sir Teague O Regan, Governor.

The Forces under the Command of Colonel Michelburne, that marched against
Sligoe the second time.
Of his own Regiment 300. Two Troops of Dragoons of the standing Army. Militia,
commanded by Sir Francis Hamilton, Horse. Capt. Charles Hamilton of Cavan.
Capt. William Stewart. Capt. John Forward. Capt. Vaughan. Capt. William Wray.
Capt William Sampson. Capt. John Hamilton. Capt. Henry Hillwell. Capt.
Nicholson, High Sheriff of Sligoe. Capt. Henderson. Capt. Henry Heart. Of
Militia Foot. Capt. Patrick Hamilton. Capt. Thomas Ash.
Colonel Michelburn's Letter, sent in by the Drummer, the Contents of which is
as follows.
From the Camp before Sligoe, Aug. 19th. 1691. SIR,
I Wrote to you last Week concerning the Surrender of Sligoe, but since I
received an Express from the General, which I have sent you to peruse; you may
see what fair Terms are proposed both to Officers and Soldiers. I presume you
are not ignorant of the Surrender of Gallway, and the great advantage they have
received by an early Complying with Their Majesty's Proclamamation, and what
further they in Reason desired. I come now with Authority from Their Majesty's
and the General, to offer you what reasonable Conditions you desire, as well
for Officers as Soldiers, hoping you will Commiserate the sad and deplorable
Condition the Country lies under, which must consequently sink into Ruin
without your speedy Compliance; I have taken all possible care to preserve the
poor Inhabitants, by giving Protections, or otherways; and my Business is not
to plunder and prey, to the ruin of the Country, as some from Eniskillin and
Bellurbit, have not long ago done; but for the Preservation and Safeguard of
it; we allow you may keep your Fort, till such time as some Cannon and Mortars
may be brought against it, and then it may be for Two or Three days, and no
more; for if Gallway and Athlone could not hold out, we may judge by your
Resistance, that you design the Desolation of your Country; your own Force
cannot defend you long, and your Army is entirely defeated: Therefore seriously
consider, if you abuse not the Grace that is offered to you, what advantages
may accrue, as well to your self, your Officers and Soldiers, as to the
Country, and Inhabitants thereof? In this I have done my duty, and desire to
know your Resolution, that I may make a report of it to the General, which is
all at present from,

SIR, Your Humble Servant, John Michelburne.

To Sir Teague O'Regan, Govern. of Sligoe Fort.

The Coll. received an Answer in these words.

Sligoe, August 1st. 1691.
I Have received yours of this days date, and whether Gallway be surrendered or
not, my Compliance to your desire would be a Breach of the Trust reposed in me;
but this I offer, which is as much as can be reasonably expected of me, and
more than which I will not do; if you will allow a free passage to one from me
with an Authentic Pass backward and forward; I will dispatch him to his Grace
the Duke Tyrconnell, and on his return I will finally resolve you, or your
General. You may see my Letters to his Grace: This has been allowed the People
of Gallway, whose Surrendering you would so fain have a President for me; but
you must give me leave at this time of day to look about me before I take such
Examples, which induces me to make this reasonable Offer: I am as much for the
Preservation of the Country, of which you write to me as you are; so tender as
any Man. I am

SIR, Your Humble Servant, Teague O Regan.

To Colonel Michelburne.

At the same time Colonel received the following Letter from Coll. Scott.
SIR,
I Had yours by the Drummer, and do render you thanks for your good will,
though the Prisoners are not come. Your Army did not make one shot of Cannon
against Gallway, till Sunday last; and have fired at it on Thursday last, so
that I am satisfied it was not surrendered, then I have as much reason to be for
the preservation of this poor Country, as most Men have; yet I hope you will
allow us to have your good Esteem, by not complying with your Demands, being a
thing much against our Honor and Interest; but as to my complying with what
Sir Teague desires in his Letter, an Absolute Answer may be expected at the
return of such a Letter: I am very willing to wait on you, with two Officers
along with me, on the top of Nocknagany. I suppose I shall meet with the same
number, when you send me word by the same Drummer. I am

SIR, Your most humble Servant, Edward Scott.


These Letters passing between the Coll. and Garrison, and the aforesaid
meeting agreed to, of Coll. Scott, Coll. Ternon O Rourke, and Lieut. Coll. O
Rourke of their side; of ours Coll. Michelburne, Sir Francis Hamilton, Lieut.
of the County of Dunigall, and Capt. Hugh Caldwell, where we had a Consultation
for near an hour, it being concluded to, that Sir Teague's desire should be
granted to send away a Messenger with Letters to the Duke of Tyrconnel, whose
Approbation was to be taken therein, but conditionally to be first viewed by
the General, About 6 that Evening we drew off from the Town, at which time the
Coll. was told, that some Troops of the Militia had deserted their Posts, and
were gone a plundering: On inquiry, he was further informed, they were those
Commanded by Capt. Henderson, and that Capt. Forward and Vaughan were missing:
Now considering the number of Men the Coll. had with him, and that he should
soon want Provisions, being wholly unprovided, when we came out, he Detached
Eight Men out of each Troop, under the Command of Capt. Anthony Shamborge,
Capt. of Granadeers, to follow the Troops which had left their Posts without
Orders, and to bring in some Cattle for subsistence to the Men, but instead of
these half the Militia stole away, so that that Night when we were marched back
to Killowny, and incampt there, it was as much as the two Troops of the
standing Army could do to keep the few that were left of the Militia together:
Next Morning they continuing to break off at all sides, the Colonel soon found
that it was in vain for him longer to depend on any but his own Foot, and those
two Troops of Dragoons, if any thing should happen, we being already in a
manner left alone. About two hours after, the Colonel had an Account of two
Troops, one Commanded by Capt. Vaughan, and another by Henderson; that with a
Prey of about 100 Cows, and 2 or 300 Sheep, with some Horses, were marching
entire with the Prey to their own home; on which, he sent about 30 Foot, who
over took them about 3 Miles from Killowny, but they would not be stopped till
the Coll. was forced to send a stronger Party, who brought the Prey into our
Camp: Our Men were well stored with Provisions, by whieh means the Coll.
secured two Troops of the Militia, which you see had quite left him. Captain
Shamborge with his Party, returned this day with about 7 or 800 Cows; but the
day being Sunday, proving very wet, we continued there that Night. He resolved
to give the General an Account in what manner he prosecuted his Design in going
to Sligoe the second time, Major Hamilton, as I told you before, having Orders
from Coll. Michelburne to detach 100 Firelocks from the Garrison of Bellurbitt,
Eniskillin, Cavan, etc. out of his own Regiment to Reinforce the 200 he
brought with him from Ballyshannon; and Two Troops of Dragoons: These 300 Men,
with the Militia, appearing before Sligoe the 1st. of August, 1691. was an
extraordinary Encouragement to the Coll. to Attack them the second time; it was
agreed upon the Night before, that a Lieut, from Coll. Michelburne, and one
from the Garrison should depart immediately to the General with these Letters
from Sir Teague, the Coll. sending this following Letter to the General.

SIR,
IN my last to your Excellency, I gave you an Account, that on Friday I
intended to march toward Sligoe; but the more to Expedite your Commands, I
marched on Thursday Night, and next day came before the Town by Eleven a Clock,
being upwards of 30 Miles, and the way we marched at my first Approach, I sent
to Sir Teague your Excellencies Proposals, but I find they still continue their
unbelief of the Surrender of Gallway, and tell me of a possibility of their
Army going to Dublin, of Five Regiments, sent to Re-enforce Gallway from
Lymerick by Sea, and of a signal Victory, gained by the French over the
Confederates in Flanders. However Sir Teague has made it his Request to have
free passage to send to Lymerick, there to understand the certainty of their
Condition, and to give your Excellency a final Answer. I humbly desire that a
Dispatch may be made with all Expedition, lest they make an Advantage of the
coming Harvest, for I understand they begin already to want Bread, and that
they have but a small quantity of Powder; I resolve to go back to morrow
Morning, and will refresh my Men for Three or Four days, in which time I will
furnish my self with Spades and Pick-Axes, and block them up until they comply
with what is expected, if this may be done with your Excellency's Approbation.
I am,

SIR, Your Excellency's most Faithful and Obedient Servant. John Michelburne.


The Major, as I told you before, joined the Coll, with a Hundred Firelocks, so
that they were now about Three Hundred Foot who marched back to Sligoe together
with the Militia, bringing all the Prey along with them; for he concluded, no
Prey, no Militia; we having arrived there about 10, the Coll. divided his whole
Party in two Bodies, about Four Hundred Men in each, the one he Ranged on the
top of a Hill, with which he designed to pass the River at Ebb-water: In the
mean time he blocked up the West part of the Town, with the other Four Hundred
Men; and having viewed well the Ground, he posted them on such places as he
thought most proper. He could at the same time have entered the Town, but
apprehending the ill Consequences that might have happened, if the Soldiers had
taken to plunder, which undoubtedly they would, he gave Orders on pain of
Death, not one to enter the Town. As soon as he saw his Men thus posted, he
lest the Command of that side of the Town with Major John Hamilton, and then
hasted to that Party that was to take the River, which they easily passed,
without any great Resistance, though several Shoes were made at them from the
Fort; every Horseman took a Footman behind him; the Coll gave Orders
immediately to draw up the Men, and marched toward the Town, where on the East
side we perceived the Enemy to form into a Body; we drew up our Men within
Cannon shot of the Town, on the left of a strong Danish Fort, where we encamped
that Night. The Coll. considering the great want of Ammunition; for at this
time we had left but six Charges, immediately dispatched an Officer with six
Dragoons to Ballyshannon, Twenty Miles from Sligoe, forbearing to Fire on both
sides the Town as little as we could that Night; and having blocked them up
closely on both sides the Town, we expected to hear from them, for we were not
in a Condition to Attack them on either side, they being two Regiments of Foot,
and we in all but 800; but this Order was given, that if the Enemy should
Attack us from the East side, those of the other side to fall on; and if they
of the other side were Attacked, we were to do the same.

The Coll. the same time being the 4th. of this Instant received this following
Letter from Mr. Davis, the Secretary, by Order of the Lords Justices, as
follows.

Dublin-Castle, August the 1st. 1691. SIR,
THE Lords Justices command me to acquaint you, that they received Yours of the
13th. and another from Major Ramsey of the 28th, and are very well satisfied
with the Account you both have given of the Business of Sligoe, and glad of the
good Success you had there; but the General having now taken other Methods
concerning that place, you are not to make any further Attempt upon it without
his Excellency, or the Lords Justices particular Order, which is by their
Lordships Command, signified to you by,

SIR, Your Humble Servant, John Davis.

To Coll. John Michelburne at Ballyshannon, to be sent by the Postmaster of
Eniskillin.

John Davis.


By the foregoing Letter, you see Coll. Michelburne, notwithstanding some
Instructions from the Lords Justices to do what he thought necessary for Their
Majesty's Service; yet here is a positive Order both from them and the General,
to make no further attempt on Sligoe, without their positive Orders, and the
truth of it is, both he on this side, and those on Connaught side, were in no
extraordinary secure post, but they might have been beaten off by the Garrison,
had they been brisk, and as they ought to have been, and then considering the
unruliness of the Militia, who were all their own Masters; for no sooner were
they posted on any post, either on advance Guard near the Town, or Guards on
far distance, in an hours time they were all gone; it cannot be thought but the
Militia must be very dissatisfied with Coll. Michelburne, who as they
apprehend, came out for no other design than to get a Prey; for when he would
find fault, and tell them he expected otherwise, and that what great concern
the gaining of that place was; they made Answer, they came not to Besiege
Towns, but to get Prey to stock their Lands. It was impossible to make the
Militia do any thing, but the whole burden lay on the poor Foot, and the two
Troops of Dragoons standing Army, for it was not two Days, but the Militia
Deserted their Posts on Connaught side.

The Day following, Colonel Scott sends out a Drummer to beat a Parley, with
the following Letter.

Sligoe, August 4th. 1691. SIR,
I Find by your Letter to Sir Teague and me the 1st. Instant that you were much
concerned for the sad Condition of the poor People of this Country, which is
likely to be ruined by both Parties, if not speedily prevented; you have here a
parcel of poor Men, whom we keep here against their Wills, to be serviceable to
our Garrison; if you will give them your Protection for themselves and their
Cattle, they are willing to go with them to your Quarters, according to the
desire of your Government, we giving them leave: I sent you such another Letter
to the other side, but could not be answered, you being on this: Pray let me
have your Answer by this Drummer. I am

SIR, Your most Humble Servant, Edward Scott.

To the Honorable Coll. John Michelburne.

Perusing which Letter, I sent him this following Answer.

Camp, August the 4th. 1691. SIR,
I Received yours, and would willingly serve you, if Sir Teague would agree to
what Proposals I made, and truly protecting your People would be a kindness;
and if on your part you would let them enjoy their Harvest, would be another;
both which your surrendering may complete, by which means our Charity will
extend to all. I am

SIR, Your Humble Servant, John Michelburne.


I presently after received an Answer from Sir Teague, in these words.

Sligoe, August 4th. 1691. SIR,
I Have seen your Letter to Colonel Scott, and having considered it, I intend
to call my Officers together, to resolve what proposals to take from, or make
to you, in order to which I will after return of this Drummer, and your
Compliance, send you Colonel Scott, and one other Field Officer, to know your
proposals, and time to consider of them with the rest of my Officers, as you
and Coll. Scott, and the other Officers shall agree. Mean time I am

SIR, Your most Humble Servant, Teague O Regan.

To the Honorable Coll. John Michelburne.

To which I sent this following Auswer.

SIR,
HAving perused yours brought hither by your Drum for proposals, the
Proclamation and Generals Letter must be my Guide, I am willing to meet
Colonel Scott and the other Officers where you please, and am ready to Comply
with what shall be Honorable on both sides. I am Sir,

Your Most Humble Servant, John Michelburne.

To Sir Teige O Regan.

About this time, one Captain Forward, a leading Card to the rest of the
Militia, quits his Post at midd time of day, with his whole Troop, and most
presumtuously marches away: forces our out Guards, and while we were drawing
Articles with the Garrison, Preys, Strips, and Plunders the Country without
reguard to any Protection. In the mean time the whole Militia quits their Posts
on Connaught side on their own accord, and their whole practice was to Raperee
and Scamper Cows and Horses as they call it. As well the Prey that was lately
got, as also from the protected People: we cannot altogether excuse the
Soldiers, for some of them had their hands in as well as the Militia, but only
they were under some better Command: but so it was that notwithstanding the
Enemies Guards, and our Guards lay within half Musket Shot one of another, yet
no sooner was the Colonels back turned, but he found them Roguing amongst the
Militia; and that which vexed the Militia most, was that as fast as the Garrison
of Sligoe forced their Cattle on our Ground, Colonel Michelburn forced them as
fast back, knowing that for no other reason they came to Capitulate, but for
the inconvenience they were put to, by the great number of Cattle that was
about the Fort. Here follows a Letter from the Lords Justices, which he
received about the same time.

Dublin the 3d Aug. 1691. SIR,
BY a Letter, which we received Yesterday from the General, we are told, that
the Garrison of Sligoe are upon some Treaty, for his Surrendering Sligoe into
their Majesty's hands; we having heard nothing of it from your self, cannot
tell what Terms he Demands, or what you have Offered, but you may assure him of
the entire benefit of the Proclamation, and if it be necessary you may also
propose a reasonable reward: had we sooner known of it, you should have had
earlyer Orders, for you cannot do the King greater Service, than to get that
place into your possession: Therefore conclude with him as soon as possible you
can. We are

Your faithful Friend and Servant, Cha. Porter Tho. Coningsby.


About noon, this day being the 4th. of Aug. the Governors beat a Parley, and
this following was brought to Colonel Miehelburne.

August 4th 1691. SIR,
I Had yours, and showed it to Sir Teige, who says that he answered it,
wherein you made some proposals for the Surrendering this place, and so have I
answered you to that purpose, which was then put off till an Answer was had
from our General, until which time he can do nothing; and though I Pity to
see the poor people suffer by these Terms, yet to mend it I would not loose the
least oppertunity of my serving my King, Therefore if you think their being
preserved, may be of any use to the Public good, it lies on you to preserve
them, it being for your profit if this Country be yours, and for your Credit if
it be done in Charity. If this be approved of, Acts of Hostility ought to Cease
till it be done, which requires but till to morrow Morning. I am

SIR, Your Most Humble Servant, Edward Scot.

To the Honorable Colonel John Michelburne.

Which in these words I Answered.

August 4th 1691. SIR,
I Can say no more than I did before, and do not find that giving you leave to
send an Officer to Limerick, was any restraint in persuing my design to block
up this place, and for any Acts of Hostility that are between us, I think they
are so small that they are hardly worth taking notice of. I am

SIR, Your Most Humble Servant, John Michelburne.

To Colonel Edward Scott.

Thus we continued this night. Next day I received the following from Sir Tiege.

Aug. 5th. SIR,
WE are upon reduceing the Articles to four, therefore shall desire that you
Command your Forces on both sides to retire to the several Posts they were in,
when we began to Treat of a Capitulation.

Yours Regan.

To Colonel John Michelburne.

Now comes up to the Camp whole droves of idle People, especially the
Lagganeers; and for one honest Man twenty Thieves, and not a man of the Militia
but had two or three attenders, to run away with what Horses or Cattle they
could Raparee or Scamper, as they called it. Esteeming all their own they laid
their hands on, the Militia was now out of patience to have the prey divided,
but the Colonel would not do it, for two Reasons, first, was that if they
divided, every one of them would go home, by which means the Enemy would take
advantage; the next was that as many of the Protected as could show their
Protections, he caused their Goods to be returned. One of the Certificats I
think not amiss to mention.

WE the under named persons, being Protestants, and Inhabitants of the Barroney
of Terreragh in the County of Sligoe, do Acknowledge to have received by the
Order of Colonel Michelburne, one Hundred and Twenty Cows in full satisfaction
of all the Horses and Sheep taken from us, and the rest of the Protestants of
the said Barrony and County (lately taken from us) by men under the Command of
the said Colonel. The 6th of August 1691.

At the Camp before Sligoe Witness present Patrick Hamilton.
Matthew Ormsby. Ja. Boyd. Dugall Boyd. John Shennan. Kath. Brown. John Ormsby.
Matthew Ratleidge. Ann Griffeth.


This was drawn by Mr. Patrick Hamilten. Attorney of Killetre.

One hundred and Sixty was delivered to some of the Irish Gendemen that were
protected, by an account given in by Captain Caldwell, and Captain Boyd, they
producing Certisicates, from the said persons.

To go on with our former Discourse in the Letter from the Lords Justices to
the Colonel, who as they tell him that he cannot do the King greater Service
than to get that place into his possession, and so orders him to conclude with
them as soon as possible. This Letter, with those of Sir Teigs and Colonel
Scotts, considering the Confusion, Distraction and Disorders that were in the
Camp by ungovernable people, such as has to deal with the Laggan Militia, must
needs give just cause to conclude with the Besieged. And the next day being the
6th of August, the following Articles were Signed and Sealed between Sir Teige
O Regan of one Part, and Colonel John Michelburne of the other Part.

Articles of War agreed to by the Honorable Sir Teige O Regan Knight, and the
rest of the Officers of the Garrison of Sligoe, of the one Part, and the
Honorable Colonel John Michelburne, in the behalf of himself, his General and
the rest of his Army, of the other Part.
1st. THAT all the said Garrison, viz. Governors, Officers, Soldiers,
Ingineers, Gunners, Gunsmiths, Bakers, Chaplains and all others that have a
mind to go Craights or other, shall have their lives secured, and March out
with their Arms, Baggs and Baggage; Drums beating, Colors stying, Match
lighted, Bullets in their Mouths, each Officer and Soldier twelve Charges of
Powder, with Match and Ball proportionable, and their Horses and Cowes as well
belonging to them respectively, as the Garrison in general, without any
Molestation; and at their several and respective Elections their Wives, Friends
and Cattle to be protected in any part of the Country, as well as any other
person whatsoever.

2dly. That the said Garrison may march the Nearest and best way, at their own
Elections into the City or Town of Limrick, and from thence to what place they
please, and not to be compelled to march above Eight miles a Day or Nine, or to
march from hence to what other place they please, at their own Elections.

3dly. That all Sick and Wounded Officers, Soldiers and other persons that are
not able to march at present may remain in the Town of Sligoe, till able to
march, then to have a Pass for to go where they have a mind to, and in the mean
time to be subsisted by the Garrison for the time being.

4thly. That none of our Army shall enter into any of the two Forts of Sligoe,
Except such as shall be appointed by the said Colonel John Michelburne to take
Possession of the same until the Garrison be Marched clear out of the Gates.

5thly. That the said Forts shall be put into the possession of such Forces as
the said Colonel John Michelburne shall thing fit, at Eight of the Clock, the
Fifteenth day of this Instant August, at which hour the said Garrison shall
march out; the Hour before the outward Gates shall be delivered to such Forces
as the said Colonel John Michelburne shall appoint, in case relief do not come
by that time to the said Garrison: and in case Galway be surrendered, and not
otherwise.

6thly. That the said Governor and his said Garrison shall be allowed to Carry
with them two Pieces of Cannon, with Horses and other Conveniences of Carrying
them, together with two Luggage for each Company, and three for the Governor,
with one Truckle Car for each Company, all this to be supplied by the said
Colonel John Michelburne.

7thly. That all such Persons, Parties, or Companies, of the respective
Regiments of the said Garrison, not now here, shall be allowed to come hither,
or join the said Regiments, in their said March, after the surrender of the
said Garrison.

8thly. That all Persons taken Prisoners by any of our Army, or Volunteers,
that any way belonged to any of the said Regiments of the said Garrison, or any
other Person, or Persons, belonging to the said Garrison, now in restraint with
us, shall be forthwith set at Liberty, before the surrender of the said
Garrison, and safely conveyed thereunto.

9thly. That such of the Inhabitants of the said Town of Sligoe, as have a mind
to continue there, shall be protected in their Bodies, Liberties, and Goods;
and shall have sree liberty to exercise, or use their several Trades and
Occupations, as formerly, and the People of the Country in like manner.

10thly. That all the Clergy of the said Town, that have a mind to stay, shall
be also protected in their Bodies, Liberties, and Goods, and shall have free
liberty to exercise their Function; and the Clergy of the County accordingly.

11thly. That there shall be a sufficient Effort appointed and sent with the
said Garrison, to convey them to the place abovementioned.

12thly. That one Officer from the said Colonel John Michelburne, and another
from the said Garrison shall be sent to General Ginkel, who in the presence of
the said two Officers, shall confirm all the things in these Presents
mentioned, and the Confirmation before the said surrender.

13thly. That all, and singular, the above mentioned Articles, shall be
inviolable performed on both sides, without any Equivocation, mental
Reservation, or Fraud whatsoever, according to the true intent and meaning
thereof.

14thly. That all Acts of Hostility shall cease betwixt the said Garrison; and
our Army, as soon as notice may be given on both sides.

15thly. That the said Governor and Garrison, shall use the Town Posture, and
all other Privileges and Advantages, in the same, or thereabouts, in as ample
and free a manner as hitherto, and that until the surrender aforesaid.

16thly. That the said Governor, Officers, and Soldiers, Garrison, Town, and
Country of Sligoe, shall have the benefit of all, and singular other
advantageous Articles, that Gallway, or any other got, in case it was
surrendered; in true performance of all and singular the Premises, forthwith
they do respectively pawn their Honors, both Parties having hereunto
interchangeably put their Hands and Seals, at the Castle near Sligoe, this
sixth day of August, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety and One.

Teige O Regan. John Michelburne.


Camp at Nenah, Aug. 10. 1691.
I do approve of the foregoing Articles, agreed upon by Colonel Michilburne,
and Sir Teige O Regan, for the surrender of Sligoe, except the last, which I
confine to those who are actually now in the said Town and Garrison, it not
being my Intention to extend Their Majesty's Grace and Favor to such who have
done them no Service, nor made no Application to me for it.

Bar. de Ginkell.


The Articles were now signed and sealed, and sent away with Major Hamilton:
and Lieutenant Scot, Coll. Scot's Brother, was commanded by the Garrison, to see
the General sign, and seal: Likewise, now began a Discourse of O Donnel's Men,
commonly called Ballderrog, coming to relieve -- which made Colonel
Michelburne give strict Orders for securing Ballisadeare-Bridge, three Miles
from the Camp, the Enemy having no other way to come to the Town: The Militia
began now to be very weary of the Campaigne, and were very pressing to have the
Prey divided, thinking now there was no more to do, but to go home, since
Articles were signed and sealed. The Colonel told them, that he expected more
to join, for that the Expresses that went to the General, would soon be back;
and that it would be but eight Days, and the Town would be surrendered. The Camp
was now like a Fair, Buying and Selling, Robbing and Stealing the Sheep in the
Night, and killing them for their Skins. The Colonel was advised to divide the
Prey, or else he would have none left; the very Officers and Soldiers that was
Guard of the Cattle, selling them in the Night. The Colonel was for selling
some of them, and sending for Meal to make Bread, and those that would not
stay, should have none: but the Officers were against it, as well as the
Soldiers: The Colonel ordered Capt. William Stewart, to make a Dividend, the
whole being counted, were 585.

To each of the 7 Troops Militia 25. 175. Capt. Caldwel's Troop of Dragoons 34.
Capt. Nesbitt's Troop 25. To the Detachment of 13 Companies Foot, 25 each C.
325. Capt. Ash's Militia Foot Company 13. Capt. Henderson 12. 585.

It being late that Night when the Cattle were divided, Capt. Coningham, and
Capt. Bickerstaffe, were ordered on the Guard, with 20 Men, being all that
could be spared, considering the several Guards, and the Main Guard, kept in
the Fort called Rabaceane: For although there was a Truce, 'till a return from
the General, yet the Colonel kept almost as strict Guards then, as before, not
suffering any of the Enemy to come into the Camp: About an Hour or two in the
Night, about two Hundred of the Militia forces the Guard that was on the Cows,
and drives all away; strips, plunders, and robs all before them, as well those
the Colonel had protected, as those that belonged to the Town: In this
distracted confusion, the Colonel was forced to double his Guards; and had his
Men at their Arms all Night. This following Certificate is signed by the
Officers that were on Guard with the Cattle.

WE do Certify, That being Commanded by our Colonel, with 20 Men, to Guard
the Cattle, the Militia, being in number about 2 Hundred, did force our Guards,
and drove away all the Prey of Cows, that was then under our Charge.

Given under our Hand, this 9th. Day of Aug. 1691. Michael Coningham. Richard
Bickerstaffe.


Here follows a Complaint by many, of Outrages committed by Capt. Forward, and
others of the Militia, who, we told you before, deserted Coll. Michelburne, and
with his whole Troop, and others joining him, to the number of 80 Horse,
plundered the whole Country.

SIR,
I Make bold to acquaint you of several Outrages committed by some of those
under your command, in this County, especially by Capt. Forward, who without
pity of the Poor, or respect to Their Majesty's Proclamation, took a Party with
him, who plundered, stripped, and preyed all the protected Persons they met
with, either in this County, or toward Boil, and took a black, cropped, pacing
Gelding of mine, marked I. C. from an Officer, who at Major Hamilton's request,
I sent as well to secure him from the Raparees, as to guide him the way to
Boil, the Officer having much ado to escape himself, leaving him my Horse.
This is left to your serious consideration, by

SIR, Your humble Servant, James O Conner.

To Coll. John Michelburne, Governor at Ballyshanan.

SIR,
I Had your Honor's Protection and Certificate, of claiming the benefit of the
Lords Justices Proclamation, and a Certificate from Gilbert Ormsby, my
Landlord, in being included in his Protection from the General, and lived
within the Line of Boil; yet Captain Forward, and his Troop, has took our
Beasts, only restoring a few Head; and therefore I humbly prostrate my felf for
Justice, and pray the Cattle may be delivered us. I am

Your Humble Servant Jasper Brett.


I received another from Sir Teige, to the same purpose.

SIR,
I Need not reccommend to you, to send a safe Convoy along with Mr. Brett, to
secure any Cattle you return him, or any thing else of the poor Peoples, preyed
by Captain Forward, 'till they come on this side of the Grange; they are
satisfied, that what is restored, be given to Mr. Brett. This is all from

Your very humble Servant Tiege O Regan.

To Coll. John Michelburne.

We continued three days after the Militia left us, and thought when they were
gone, we should remain quiet and peaceably within the Town; but then, as well
as before, we were continually disturbed in the Night, by Murders and
Out-crys, committed by some of the Militia, that probably had not got their
proportions, or at least had sent them home, and was hunting for more: The
Garrison of Sligoe was also continually disturbed, as appears by the following
Letters.

Colonel Ternon O Rourk's Letter.
SIR,
I Was unwilling to be often importuning you for my Horses; I will only desire
you will employ some one to make search for them; the marks are three bob
tail'd Geldings, of 14 handfuls height, a black Gelding of 15 handfulls. I
protest I would not take 30 l. for them; though I am certain they were of no
advantantage to your self.

I am,

SIR, Your most humble Servant Ternon O Rourke.


Sligoe, Aug. the 7th. 1691. SIR,
I Am weary of troubling you with so many Complaints; the Bearer hereof, Cavell
O Dollane, Owen Mac Laughlin, and Torlogh Cullaine, have lost all their Cows,
Horses, and Baggages they tell me that Captain Caldwel was there present. I
send them to you, that you may be pleased to surrender their things to them,
being taken in time of a Parley. I am,

SIR, Your humble Servant Edward Scot.


Sligoe, Aug. 10. 1691. SIR,
ACcording to the Encouragement you sent me, by Laughlin Githaly, I have sent a
great number of my Followers, in order to take Protections, but it unluckily
happened to them, contrary to my expectation, they were all preyed, their
Protections not regarded, but it seems rather worse for them to be Protected,
than otherwise: Forty of my Followers are not left worth a Groat, the same
Night they were Protected: Yet I am extreme sensible, that all these disorders
were committed unknown to you; this Day I have sent one of my Nurses, in order
that she should be returned of what she, and my other Forsterers lost, whom I
hope you will receive into consideration, and grant her Satisfaction, in her
insupportable loss; otherways we may have just reason to deem your Protection
superficial; both my Forsterers lost 70 Cows together, with some Horses and
Mares. I am

Your Friend and Servant Ternon O Rourke.

To the Hon. Coll. John Michelburne, Gov. of Ballyshanan.

These Letters, with many more, the Colonel has to produce, intimating the sad
Disorders and Abuses committed by those of the Militia, and others, their
Associates; and to satisfy Colonel Scott, who was very importuning for his
Horses, he sends him this following Letter.

Camp before Sligoe, Aug. 10. 1691. SIR,
I Received yours, and have used all my Endeavors to find your Horses; and
whosoever stole them, I suppose knew how to convey them away, without keeping
them in the Camp, and you, and the other Gentlemen, must rest satisfied: but
this I will promise you, when the Fort is surrendered, which is now but six Days
to come, they shall have satisfaction in Money, so far as they in reason can
expect: But as for you, and Colonel Rourke, I brought out of England five
Geldings, two of which shall be at your Service, and I do promise you shall be
satisfied for the rest, which I suppose is satisfaction enough. Believe me
Gentlemen, notwithstanding I have sent my Troops of the Militia 4 or 5 Miles
off to Grase, I can soon send for them back. I am,

Your humble Servant, John Michelburne.
Pray do me the kindness that the Drum may bring me some Paper.




Colonel Scott sends imediately this Answer.

Sligoe the 10th of Aug. 1691. SIR,
I Had yours just now, and am sorry that you should think me so mean that for
my Horses, I should break off of what I gave my Honor, for I meant the
continual oppression of your Army, on the poor near out Guards, whereby both
Parties might fall fowl one of another, but now the occasion is removed by your
Removal, and then you shall see that I am not the man you Mention, had I been,
I know very well where I might break my Faith with advantage to my Party, but I
am no such man. What made me make mention of my Horses so often, was, because I
thought 'twas easier for you to get the Horses returned to me, than to pay the
value of them you never saw. So from this hour I will say no more of them, but
leave all to your self, only to Morrow I will send you their number and color:
if there be any Paper in this Town, that I can come to, you shall have it. I am

SIR, Your most humble Servant, Edward Scott.


Lieutenant Dunbar, who was sent by the Colonel; as also an Officer from the
Garrison, with Letters to the Lord Tyrconuel and Earl of Lucan, but to be
perused first by the General; Returned back this day with a Letter from the
General (viz).

The Generals Letter from the Camp at Birr, Aug. 4th, 1691.
SIR,
I Send you back the Letters you enclosed, from the Governor of Sligoe, and
can by no means Agree to the Messengers going to Limrick to ask my Lord
Tyrconnel's consent whether he shall deliver up the place; this is more than I
granted to Galway, for they absolutely agreed to Surrender in four days, and
only were permitted to let them know it.

We are not now in a Condition to court people to do themselves a Service, for
Limrick and Sligoe are the only places that are not under their Majesty's
Obedience; if the place be forthwith delivered up into your hands I will still
make good the Conditions I promised to Sir Teige, if not he must take what
follows, for it will be too late to expect favor. I am,

SIR, Your most humble Servant, Bar de Ginkel.

To Colonel Michelburne at LBallyshanan.

Colonel Michelburns Letter to Sir Teige, on the Receipt of the Generals
Letter.
SIR,
BY the Enclosed Letter from the General you may see his positive Demand of the
Fort, and his performing the Conditions he promised you formerly, which was the
same Employment conferred on you, you now have; as also what other satisfaction
you would in reason desire. Your Original Letter I will send you to peruse if
you desire it, but I do not question but you took a Copy of it, on your first
Treaty. Your Answer to this. I am,

SIR, Your humble Servant John Michelburne.


Sir Teige's Answer.
Sligoe Aug. the 10. 1691. SIR,
I Had yours of the 9th Instant, together with the Generals Letter enclosed for
his positive demand and promise to perform the condition he offered: I know of
none he offered other than in General terms, since which time you and I came
to particulars. Whereof you have a part and I another, which was transmitted to
him to be confirmed, of which we expect soon a return, so that what you have
under my Hand and Seal already is answer enough from,

SIR, Your Most Humble Servant, Teige O Regan.


Colonel Scotts Letter.
Sligoe the 10th of Aug. 1691. SIR,
I Had yours, and that I might dispatch your Drum the sooner I writ on the back
of your Letter, and do therein send the Generals Letter. I am sorry you should
think me or any of us here so Madd or Cowardly, as to surrender such a place as
this with such precipitation. I will always do what an honest man ought to do,
no persuasion will make me do otherways, when your Major and my Brother comes
back I will willingly meet you half way, in the mean time pray be pleased to
Order the Releasement of the Priests at Ballyshanan. I send you the Number
Color and Marks of my Horses; I will assure you that I had rather have them
than sixty Pounds, if you find that I ought to get them. I leave them to your
self, who am,

SIR, Your most humble Servant, Edward Scott.


In this Affair you may see how the Militia behaved themselves, for of Twelve
Troops of Dragoons and two Companies of Foot, all forsook us but Sir Francis
Hamilton, Charles Hamilton, Captain William Stuart, and Capt. John Hamilton;
and all of the private Men, unless as many as served for a Guard for those
Gentlemen. And if Sir Francis Hamilton and the other Gentlemen could not
influence them to stay, it was impossible Colonel Michelburne should, that was
a stranger amongst them. This Discourse has been the more tedious, by reason
some malicious people of the Militia, to cover their own guilt, have
endeavored to Asperse and Villifie the Colonel, by several false Informations
given in against him to the Government.

This day being the 10th of August, Col. Michelburne drew off his Detachment on
Connaught side of Sligoe: (Occasioned by Ballderrog O Donnel's Advance to
relieve the Town) and joined them with those of Ballyshanan side, and called
his Officers together where was considred,

The strength of O Donnel's Party, which was computed to be 3000 well Armed
men, as also the Garrison consisting of near 1000.

Of our side, considering the 12 Troops of Dragoons and two Foot Companys of
the Militia that left us, we were in no way able to make a defense, meeting
with so much disincouragement; and that we were but a handful in comparison of
the Enemy. The strength we had then not exceeding four Hundred: 'twas agreed
the next morning to march back to Ballyshanan, and return with a stronger Body
than formerly, for the Malitia would no question, but be very ambitious to see
the Surrender of the Town and Fort of Sligoe. So on the 10th Instant, the
Colonel broke up Bamp, and that Night march to Ballyshanan.

This is the end of the second Expediton made against Sligoe.
Colonel Michelburne arrives at Ballyshanan the 10th of Aug. at night, and
sends a way Expresses to all the Militia near him, to be ready on the 14th
instant to join him, and got all things in a readiness, as was agreed on by the
Articles signed and Sealed between Sir Teige and him; he also sends Expresses
for 300 more of his own Foot, and this following Order to Major Tieburne and
Cornt Mead Supervizors of the Militia in Vlster.

By virtue of an Order to me Directed by the Right Honorable the Lords
Justices, for commanding the Militia of the Province of Vlster, I will and
require that you march with as many Horse and Foot as you can get together, by
Friday the 14th of this Instant, and join me with the rest of the Militia
commanded by Sir Francis Hamilton, together with the rest of the standing Army,
in order to receive the Garrison and Forts of Sligoe, and to march farther into
the Country as it shall be necessary for their Majesty's service. They are to
bring with them six days Provision of Bread, and for other Provisions there
will be care taken. Given at Ballyshanan the 11th of August 1691.

John Michelburne.

To Major Tichburne Commanding the Militia of Gavan, and Coronet Joseline Mead
Commanding at Eniskillin.
Colonel Michelburne was very desirous to know if Ballderreg O Donnell was
arrived at Sligoe with his Brigade as was reported, and therefore sends away a
Drum with some Letters from the Prisons of Londonderry, and a Letter to
Colonel Scott, giving him an account that as soon as Forward returned from
Preving the Country. Those that belonged to him should have satisfaction; that
is, they should have either their Goods returned, or else be satisfied in Money
so far as it lay in his power; but as yet he was not returned. But however he
could not forbear telling him how unkindly he took it in endeavoring to bring O
Donnell to raise his Camp, and that in a few days he would return with such a
strength that it should not lie in O Donnells power to relieve them: and that
it was not Gentiel to send a Lieutenant with a Major to General Ginkel, when it
was agreed on when the Articles were signed, that a Major should go with a
Major, to see the General Sign and Seal. He gave the Drummer Likewise half a
Guinea to be delivered to Capt. M. Sherry, who was a noted Robber and a Captain
in Colonel Terron O Rourke's Regiment in Sligoe. Colonel Michelburne had a
correspondence with the said Capt. M. Sherry, who had engaged to come off with
his whole Company, as soon as he met with a convenience.

Here follows Lieutenant Colonel M. Donnaghs Letter.
Sliegoe Aug. 11th. SIR,
IN my Colonels absence I opened yours to him, and have sent to those whose
Cattle were made a prey by Captain Forward, some of whom will wait on you; as
for our sending to O Donnell to fall upon your Camp while before Sligoe,
nothing is more false: Neither would we wish that you or yours were touched
here during our League, but you will give us leave to wish your Retireing;
after which we sent rather to prevent O Donnells coming hither, than to invite
him; and that chiefly for fear he should destroy our Cows and Provision.
However he is a Brigadeer of our Army, and he may do in that what he pleases.
You have our Governors answer as to your Generals demand, and for sending a
Lieutenant for a Major, Major Hamilton is our Witness that our Major intended
for the journey, but being taken ill, we put the matter to Major Hamilton, and
it was by his consent that Lieutenant Scott went with him, for the Major that
was not able to go, This is no matter of Substance I hope to take exceptions
at. My Colonel when he comes home will satisfy you farther, in the mean time
I am,

SIR, Your most humble Servant, Ternon M. Donnagh.

To Colonel John Michelburne Governor at Ballyshanan.

The Drumer returned with the above mentioned Letter, and withal was assured
that Ballderrog was encamped within three miles of Sligoe: a Spy the Colonel
had abroad brought this following account.

A true Account of the Forces under the Command of Ballderrog O Donnell,
Brigadeer M. K. James's Army.
Regiments of Foot. THE Lord Ballderrog O Donnell, new Arms from Limricke.
Colonel Donnell Oge O Donnel, some few Arms. Colonel Connell O Donnell,
Ballderrogs Brother indfferent well in Order. Colonel Shawn Oge M. Swine, no
Arms. Colonel Cannus O Donnel, about a 100 Matchlocks. Colonel Ternon Oge O
Roarke, good Arms.
Horse. Major D'la More, Captain of Horse, formerly in Lutterells Regiment.
Dragoons. Captain Shawn O Donnell, 1 Troop 50 Captain Torlough M. Swine, 1
Troop 50

The 13th and 14th the several Detachments from Bellurbit Cavan, Eniskillin,
and Killybeggs, of Colonel Michelburns Regiment joined at Ballyshanan, so that
he had of his own Regiment about 600, and 2 Troops of the Army.

Here you may see the great difference between Preying and doing the King
Service. This was a time if ever they would have their Country cleared they
might. But tho Sir Fran Hamilton Governor of the County did all what possiable
he could do, it could not oblige the Militia to leave their dwellings,
notwithstanding the Country paid them twelve pence a day. For of twelve Troops,
and two Companys of Militia that appeared out of one County, when they
understood they were going to get Prey; now the Kings service is to be done,
and the Town to be Surrendered, no more than 4 Troops appears, to wit, Captain
Charles Hamiltons, Capt. William Stewarts, and Captain Hamiltons of Murvough,
and one Troop commanded by Captain Erwine out of Formannagh. This day the
Colonel receives an Express from the Lords Justice. Porter as follows.

Dublin Castle, the 5th of Aug. 1691. SIR,
IN the absence of my Lord Coningsby, who is at the Camp. I received yours of
the 6th. Instant, directed to us both, wherein you give us an account that
Sligoe has capitulated, with a Copy of the Articles, which you have done well
in, to send the General to be Ratified, where my Lord Coningsby will be sure to
meet them. What you apprehend of Ballderrogs coming to relieve Sliego, you need
not give your self any further trouble or concern for, he having so Capitulated
for himself and his Party, that there is a perfect Cessation of Arms between us
and them; however since you desire assistance from the Counties of Mannoghan,
and Formannegh, I now dispatch away Orders to the Governors of those Counties
to march all the Militia, that can possible be spared out of both, toward
Sligoe, with eight days Provision of Bread to your assistance, with directions
to observe your Orders when there. Colonel Venners Regiment is marched to the
Camp, so as the remainder of your Regiment cannot be relieved by any of them as
you suppose; but I hope since Ballderrog has submitted, there will be no
occasion. You must press Horses and Cars to carry off the Cannon and Baggage,
pursuant to your capitulation; they cannot be expected hence, and my Lord
Coningsby who commands the Treasury being in the Camp, I know not how to send
you Money, but if their be occasion you must find a way to take it up from some
of the Collectors of their Majesty's Revenues nearest to you, or otherwise; and
it shall be allowed them upon their Accounts, or otherwise be Re-enbursed to
you. I am

SIR, Your very very humble Servant, Charles Porter.


The day for the Surrender was the 15th. of August. Colonel Michelburne
exactly according to the time appointed, marches the 14th. and Encamped at
Burindruse, along the River side, 4 Miles from Ballyshanon, and 16 from Sligoe,
and begins his march by break of day, the next morning; about 11, he comes
before Sligoe, but on his way, he halted at the Grange, and sent Captain
Shenbarge to Sir Teige, with this following Letter.

From the Grange, Aug. 15. 1691. SIR,
I Hope this will find my Major, and Lieutenant Scott, returned with the
Ratification of the Articles from General Ginkell, which we signed between us:
I am now on my March to Sligoe, and hope all things will answer our
Expectation. The Bearer hereof, Captain Shenbarge, I have sent to wait on you.
I am

SIR, Your humble Servant John Michelburne.

To the Hon. Sir Teige O Regan Knight, Governor of Sligoe.

Sir Teige's Answer.
SIR,
I Had yours just now, and do answer it on back of your own, that you may not
wait for an answer. Your Major, Major Hamilton, is returned, and the Officer I
sent with the Articles, not altogether confirmed by the General Ginkell:
However, I would agree to the Articles signed, but that my Ld. O Donnel, a
Brigadier of our Army, is come with a strong Brigade, who if he stands by us,
alters all Affairs, for it is a Relief, if he make it so: Therefore I think you
and he, were best to appoint a place where to meet, and discourse the Matter;
for it does not lie in my power to yield a place as this is, if he stick to me.
You will find me always fair in my dealing, who am,

SIR, Your most humble Servant Teige O Regan.

To the Honorable Coll. John Michelburne.

About three a Clock, Major Hamilton, and Lieutenant Scott, came to the Camp;
Lieutenant Scott excusing, as much as possible, the Garrison, for that Sir
Teige, and the rest, had great desire to perform the Articles, had not
Ballderrog intermedled. Here follows the General's Letter, sent by Major
Hamilton, when he returned with the Articles signed by the General.

Camp at Nenagh, Aug. 10. 1691. SIR,
I Have sent you back my Confirmation of the Articles of Sligoe, as far as I
thought fit, it not being reasonable to take those in who are not in a state of
doing any Service, as for the rest of that County, if you find they will
submit, and desire Protection, you may give them assurance they shall have it,
and I will grant it them, upon having their Names sent to me. As for any
civility you can show to the Garrison, it would be best to use it; and for any
Horses that have been taken, during the Capitulation, if they may be had, pray
restore them.

I suppose you know that Ballderrog O Donnel has submitted: I directed him to
join you, and endeavor the reducement of Sligoe, which your good Fortune has
already brought to submission: I have directed him to hold Correspondence with
you; and told him, That you shall pay him from me two hundred Guineys, which
the Pay-Master-General will return you for him; if he calls upon you before it
comes, and you have so much Money ready by to command, pray let him have it; if
not, assure him, that it shall be paid as soon as it comes down: If any of the
Garrison can be persuaded to come in, I would have you buy their Arms of them;
and such of the Officers as have a mind to serve, let them come to me, and I
will employ them; and in the mean time, for encouraging them, I desire you will
give each Captain 5 l. each Lieutenant 3 l. and each Ensign 2 l. which I will
re-pay you; and 'till they are put in Service, they shail have half Pay. I am

SIR, Your very humble Servant Bar. de Ginkell.

To Coll. Michelburne,

This Letter from the General gave great Encouragement to the Colonel,
doubting nothing now, but that Sligoe would be in our hands; in the mean time
comes a Messenger from the Lord O Donnel, desiring the Colonel to appoint a
place between the Town and the Camp: He returned an answer, He would meet his
Lordship where he pleased to appoint, and that when he was ready, he would
attend him. Soon after Ballderrog O Donnel appears, with about ten Horse; the
Colonel advanced with about the same number, and with him, Sir Francis
Hamilton, Cornet Mead, Captain Charles Hamilton, etc.

The Lord O Donnel's Speech tending to this effect.

That he did not deny but that there was a Treaty between General Ginkell and
himself; but he was not come to any Conclusion as yet, and that he expected
very good Terms, as well for his Followers, as for himself; and that as the
Garrison of Sligoe was in dispute, he thought it would be necessary that a
middle Person, meaning himself, be put in possession; and that Colonel
Michelburne should perform Articles with Sir Teige, and conduct him safe to
Lymerick; and that in ten, or fifteen days time, he would deliver up the Fort
to him, or whoever General Ginkell should appoint. The Colonel told him, He
understood that Sir Teige O Regan was capable, and of Authority sufficient to
make good the Articles that was between them; if he could not, Why was there
not a clause in the Articles? The Colonel soon perceived that the Garrison and
he were in dispute, for they absolutely denied him possession. O Donnel, and
Colonel Michelburne riding aside, the Colonel told him, That according to the
General's Letter, he understood that he was to assist him in reducing the
Garrison, if in case they proved obstinate; so that he presumed 'twas his
business to persuade them to surrender to him, and not to take possession for
himself, which did not answer at all the General's Letter, and gave O Donnel
the General's Letter to read, and that nothing should be wanting on the
General's side, wherein was mentioned the paying him two hundred Guineys, which
he should have in a day or two's time. O Donnel made answer, That he would
consult Sir Teige, and return an answer the next day in the Morning. So
returning to the rest of the Officers; the Colonel treated O Donnel with some
Sherry and Usquebath, and parted.

The next Day Colonel Michelburne met O Donnel at the place appointed, and
after some discourse they rid off. The Colonel delivered him 100 Guineys, and
promised him in a day or two's time, to pay him the remainder, according to the
General's Orders, and desired to know what he resolved upon, for that Sir Teige
was ready to surrender the Fort, if he would agree to it. His answer was, That
'till his People had conditions as well as himself, he would not at all agree
that Sir Teige should deliver up the Fort. Coll. Michhlburne wondered strange,
and told him, That he which should assist, if occasion was, to oblige them to
Surrender, was the only Man that obstructed it; he desired that he would draw
his Forces from the Town, and let him, and the Garrison, try Titles. He
answered, not at all, and if he would agree, his People would not allow it, but
take part with the Garrison; but withal told the Colonel, That as soon as he he
had made an end with Colonel Richards, he would then come and assist him to
reduce the place. So they parted, and O Donnel went to his Camp: By the discord
that was between Sir Teige O Regan and O Donnel, the Colonel was still in
hopes something might be done with Sir Teige; he therefore sends a Drumer into
Town, with Letters to this effect.

SIR,
BY your Letters, bearing date the 15th. of this Instant, which refers all to
the Lord O Donnel, Brigadier of your Army, to act for you; I wonder in all our
Treaty, when we signed and sealed Articles, he was not so much as mentioned,
and then not far from you: I understand you deny him entrance into the Town,
with any of his Men, as also possession of the Fort; so that you will do with
him, and me, no farther than to advantage your unjust dealing: I do not
understand how you can make his coming to you a Releif; you are sensible he has
made Conditions with General Ginkell, and has taken a hundred Guineys from me,
by order of the General, in part of his Pay, due to him in our Service; and if
he be in our Service, as it plainly appears, it is no -- Relief, and the
Articles are still in force.

SIR, Your humble Servant, John Michelburne.
I desire 20 Cows for my Money, for Provision for my Men, which pray order.




Sir Teige's second Letter, in Answer to Coll. Michelburnes, second Letter.
SIR,
I Had your by the Drummer: As to the leaving all to my Lord O Donnel, I do not
design any such thing; but being a Brigadier of our Army, we might expect to be
relieved by him. As to the Capitulation agreed upon, we are willing to
Surrender this place to you accordingly; but we expect that your part of it
shall be performed also, that is, to get us the Horses, and all things
mentioned in the Articles toward our Marching; together with the Horses that
have been taken from Colonel Scott, and other Officers of the Garrison: If you
have not a mind to delay, let this be done, and then you will find how we are
inclined; and without which, we will not Surrender; which we will justify
before any General: And the Prisoners you promised to Colonel Scott, and
mentioned in the Articles, are not yet set at Liberty. I have no Cows, but am
willing you should buy so many Cows for your Men, as you think necessary, and
may send any Man to buy them. I am

Your very humble Servan Tiege O Regan.

To Coll. John Michelburne.

The Colonel did not much dislike this Letter, and there fore sends his Major
into Town, to acquaint them, that all things were in a readiness; and for their
Horses that were taken from them in time of our Parley, when the Articles were
signed, he would pay for them, according to his promise; and for the Prisoners,
it is a solly for them to think that he would part with them, 'till they
perform Articles with him. The Colonel thought how he was in a fair way of
closing up all; but whilst the Major and they were discoursing, O Donnel
arrives from the Camp, and to satisfy them in their doubts, signs this
following Certificate.

I Do Certify upon my Honor, That my sole intent in Marching the Forces under
my Command to this place, was entirely to relieve the Garrison of Sligoe; and
notwithstanding whatsoever Treaty past between General Ginkell, and my self, it
was purely to delay the Affair in this Juncture, and to forward K. J. Interest:
And I do promise and engage to stick by you, against any Force General Ginkell
shall send.

Given under my Hand at Sligoe, this 18th. August, 1691. O Donnel.

This is the Contents of what was produced to me, under the hand of my Lord O
Donnel, by Coll. Scott, at Sligoe, when we parted.

Given under my Hand, this 18th August, 1691. John Hamilton.

As soon as this was done, all things were broke off, the Major returned to the
Camp, the Garrison began to be very Insolent, and sent word to remove our Camp,
or else they would beat us out of it, disdaining the smallness of our number,
they having 10 to 1. The Colonel made answer, That he would remove when he
pleased; and that in few days he would come and beat them out of the Fort.
About one a Clock he ordered the Tents to be taken down, and the Baggage to
march in the Front, and the Foot to March in the Rear of the Baggage, and about
an Hour after, the Colonel brought up the Rear, having with him four Troops of
Horse, and two Troops of Dragoons: That Night they Encamped at Mullonghmore, 10
Miles from Sligoe; and the next day came to Ballyshanan.

This is the end of the third Journey Colonel Michelburne made against Sligoe.
That Night he sends away this following Letter, by an Express to the General,
as also one to the same Effect to the Lords Justices.

SIR,
MY Major, whom I sent with the Articles to your Excellney to be signed,
returned on the 14th. The Town was to be delivered the next Morning: I sent Sir
Teige the enclosed, who answered mine on the back; and according to Sir Teige's
desire, I diseours'd Ballderrog, called amongst them my Lord O Donnel, who
signified by his Discourse, That as the Garrison was in dispute, his advice was,
That a middle Person, meaning h mself, between both, be placed in the Town and
Fort, and withal did acknowledge, that there had been some Treaty between him
and General Ginkel in behalf of Himself and Followers; and if I would
condescend, he would be put in possession of the Town and Forts, and I to
perform Articles to conduct the said Garrison to Limrick; I told him as to any
thing else, I was ready to serve his Lordship, but my business there was to
perform Articles with the Garrison, and I expected they would do the same with
me; after some discourse, I rid off with Ballderrog, and showed him your
Excellencies Letter, and presented him with one hundred Guineas of the two
hundred your Excellency ordered me to pay him, and the other hundred should be
at his Lordships Service in a day or two. His discourse was still to be in
possession of the Garrison: I told him your Letter mentioned no more than to
join me in case they were Refractory. And since there was no occasion, either
his saying he would not relieve them or drawing off his men would be
sufficient; I put it to him to know if he came there to relieve or not, and to
know whether he was our Friend or Enemy; he told me next morning he would give
me full satis faction, in every thing. I desired then there might be a
Cessation of Arms. My Lord Ballderrog went that night to the Camp; early in the
morning I sent the second Letter to Sir Teige, whose Answer is enclosed, and
finding him so inlinable, I sent my Major to compound all those little
Businesses between us, and to satisfy them fully in money, but when he came
there, unexpected he found the Lord Ballderrog who sent away the Major
immediately to me, to meet his Lordship between the two Lines, where we again
met, and after some discourses we again rid off: he told me that he was so far
engaged to K. William, that he could not with Honor break off, but however
several of his Officers expected good Terms, and as much advantage as others; I
told him that the Surrender of the Garrison to me, would be no hindrance, for
that you were easier dealt with by fair means than foul, and that I must
acquaint you that he was the only person that did obstruct the Surrender, and
appeared our open Enemy, after tasting so largly of your favors. He told me he
could not agree to the Surrender till his Officers were satisfied as well as
himself. I have sent enclosed an Instrument of Ballderrogs, without which they
would have surrendered; when the Major saw his falseness to your Excellency, and
taking money and yet acting as an open Enemy, he gave Sir Teige and Col. Scott
an account of his engagement to you, and his receiving money from me. They
blessed themselves and said he was a Knave on both sides. The Militia of this
Line are every one gone of their own accord home, and I have only these two
Troops to assiste me, in this forty miles distance. I was forced to take them
with me to Sligoe, intending to send them the nearest way to Athlone, in case
the Garrison of Sligoe had surrendered in pursueance to your Excellencies Potent.
If you would be pleased to continue them with me, they are of great service in
Scouting, comning Expresses, etc. And if your Excellency please to cause a Bill
to be returned for the hundred Guineys, I supplied Ballderrog: Or, considering
since my being here I have been at a greater charge, in my Journeys to Sligoe,
as also for Entelligence, which if your Excellency would vouchsafe to make it
up 15 l. it would do me a great kindness. I am in due Obedience.

Your Excellencies most Faithful and Obedient Servant, John Michelburne.


The Lords Justices, as also the General receiving this Account from Colonel
Michelburne of the falseness of O Donnell, sent these following Instructions.

Dublin Castle, 22. of August 1691.
SIR,
WE have this day received your Letter by Express, and are much concerned at
the Treacherous dealing of the Garrison of Sligoe, and Ballderrog O Donnell.
Whereupon we have resolved to reinforce you with a considerable Body of the
Northen Militia, from the several Companies from Londonderry, Dunigall, Tyrone,
Cavan, Mannoghan, Formanagh, Down, and Anfrime, whom we have sent to this night
to march with all possible speed under their proper Officers, and to join you
at Ballyshanan, and we have likewise ordered the Earl of Granard with another
Body of the Militia to march with all possible speed from Athlone to join you,
at such place as shall be conserted between you to be most convenient, as well
for the suppression of Ballderrogs Party, as the reducing of the Forts of
Sligoe to their Majesty's Obedience, in order whereunto you are to Obey the
commands of the said Earl of Granard, as the Commander in Chief of all the
Forces appointed for that Expedition. We are,

Your friend and Servants, Charles Porter Tho. Coningsby.

For Colonel John Michelburne at Ballyshanan.
The Colonel sent imediately an Express to Sir Francis Hamilton, desiring him
with all speed to join him at Ballyshanan. Major Touchburne, and Cornet Mead
Supervizors of the Militia, were very dilligent in forwarding those of Cavan
and Formannagh, etc.

Sir Francis Hamiltons Letter, in answer to Colonel Michelburns.
Cavan, August the 27th 1691. SIR,
I Received your Letter about Nine a clock last night, and I imediately sent to
the several Captains of the Militia to Randezvouze upon Sunday next at
Eallymafay, from whence I intend according to your Orders to march forthwith to
Ballyshanan. I just now received a Letter from the Lords Justices, with an
account of O Donnells Ravaging of Connaught, and Orders for me to be with the
Militia at Ballyshanan the 27th instant, which is this day, now it will be
impossible for the Militia to be there before Monday next; and part of them
that lies most remote I doubt will not be there so soon: I understand that my
Lord Granard is to command a Body of men into Connaught: if his Lordship comes
to Ballyshanan before I be there, be pleased to do me the favor to acquaint
him, that I am doing what I can to have the Militia in a readiness, and the
time that I expect to have them at Ballyshanan, where I shall cheerfully
observe all the Orders from his Lordship and your self, being very sincerely,

SIR, Your Affectionate, and most humble Servant, Francis Hamilton.

To the Hon. Colonel John Michelburne at Ballyshanan.

Colonel Michelburne in the interime whilst the Militia was geting together,
sends to Enskillin for some Brass gunns that were taken at Newtownbuttler from
the Irish under the Command of the Lord Mountcastle, and gets them fitted up,
as also persuant to the Lords Justices Orders, sends Expresses to Bellurbit for
Bread for the Militia; as also provides Boats from Killybeggs for sending away
Ammunition, Cannon-ball, Spades, Pitch, Axes, Provisions, etc. to be
Transported, that nothing should hinder or delay us in our March to Sligoe, and
for drawing the Guns; the Horses that were brought in for that occasion were so
small, that they were of no use; which made the Colonel, for quick expedition,
give his own Baggage Horses. The 23th. Augush, the Colonel received the
following Letter from the General.

Camp at Carick on Lysh, Aug. 19. 1691. SIR,
YOU know by this time, whether the Governor of Sligoe acted honestly, or no;
but I have very good reason to helieve, he has not, from a Letter that is
intercepted from Colonel Scott; for that reason I must desire you will be upon
your Guard, and make the Militia advance to the Frontiers, to prevent the
Enemies Incursions: If you have not paid O Donnel the 200 Guineys, pray don't,
until further Order, or that he has put Sligoe into your hands. I am

SIR, Your Most Humble Servant, Bar. de Ginkell.


Here follows the Letter that was intercepted, as follows.

Sligoe, Aug. the 13th. 1691. My Lord,
NOT hearing from you this long time, I send this Bearer to acquaint you with
our Assairs. Twelve days since one Michelburne, a Colonel of the Enemy's Army
came hither, with his own Regiment of Foot, two Troops of Dragoons of the Army,
and the rest of their Militia, to the number of about 2000. in all: He sent us
a Letter from General Ginkel, with some Proposals, and Money for Surrendering
this place, which we resused to do; but three or sour Days after we agreed to
Surrender, if we were not relieved in ten Days, which was only a project to
save about 5000 Cows we had about the Fort, and thereby got an opportunity to
send to O Donnel, into the County of Mayo; I went to him, and now he is upon
his March toward the Boil, where he is to remain until we get Provisions in
here; then you may be sure it shall never be surrendered without your Orders, or
overpowered. I saw your Letter to O Donnel, and I wondered you did not send the
least word to me: I hope the Enemy shall see, That Gallway is the only place
capable of doing such a thing as they have done: I hear of a great many young
Colonels advanced in the Army; I hope my being so remote, will not make your
Lordship forget me, whilst I shall be as mindful of my Duty, and as
serviceable in my Station, as any of them. I am

Your Lordships most assured, Humble Servant Edward Scot.

To the Right Honorable, Patrick Earl of Lucan,

By this you may see how abominable and deceitsul these Men are,
notwithstanding the Articles under Hand and Seal. This Patrick, Earl of Lucan,
was him they called Sarsfield, so noted amongst the Irish. This Letter was
intercepted by one of our Army, being a Spy, going to Lymerick, which
occasioned the General to send this following Letter to Colonel Michelburne.

About the 27th. of August, Colonel Michelburne received the following Letter,
sent to him by the Lord Granard; being a Copy of a Letter from the Lords
Justices.

Dublin, the 22th. of August, 1691. SIR,
BAllderrog O Donnel, contrary to his Agreement with the General, by which he
was to assist in reducing Sligoe, has been the only Person has prevented it
being delivered up to Colonel Michelburne, pursuant to a Treaty signed by the
Governor. We find by this Treachery of O Donnel, the adjacent Countries may be
greatly damaged; We have therefore thought it necessary to cause 1000 of the
Militia of this Town to begin their March to Morrow, toward your Lordship, and
have writ to Colonel Michelburne to observe your Lordships Commands; and to
the Governors of the several Counties underwritten, to get their Militia at
the places and times under-mentioned; of all which we desire, and appoint, your
Lordship to take the Command, and with them to march toward O Donnel, and to
use your best endeavors to kill and destroy him, and his Followers. We have
likewise sent, by Express, to the General, to order some of the Army the Forces
now in Gallway, to be sent to join your Lordship, if they can be spared: In the
mean time we must needs press your Kordship to take care, that Ballymore be not
left without a Guard. We have directed the Store-keeper at Athlone, to furnish
your Lordship with all such Ammunition as you shall send for, to supply your
self, and the rest who want. We have your Lordships of the 20th. with the
enclosed, to which we need give no other answer, than what is before.

We know your Lordship will use all imaginable care and diligence, in securing
the Country against this false Man, and hope the Forces we design, may get
together time enough, to prevent his doing much mischief.

We shall send Provisions of Bread, and some Money, to subsist the Men. We are

Your Lordships most obedeent Servants, Charles Porter, Tho. Coningsby.
We must desire your Lordship to send to Coll. Michelburne, where and when you
will have him meet you.




The Militia of the North, for the several Counties following, are appointed to
be at Ballyshanan on the several days following.

Tyron, Dunigal, and Formannagh, on Thursday the 27th. Instant.

Mannoghan and Londonderry, the 28th. Instant. Gavan, the 29th. Instant. Down
and Antrime, the 31th. Instant.
Castle-Forbasse, Aug. 21th. 1691. SIR,
BY this enclosed Copy of a Letter from the Lords Justices to me, you will
perceive what their Comman is are: I am required to keep a Correspondency with
you, and to know from you if it be convenient to join you with 1000 of the
Militia of Dublin, which are now upon their March thither: If the quiet of the
Country, which I hear is threatened by O Donnel, will necessitate our
Conjunction; I conceive Boil, or some place thereabouts, will be most
convenient for Rendezvousing all the Forces designed for that Service: I hear
various Reports of Ballderrog; some saying that he has concluded Conditions
with the General, and is upon his March to join him at Lymerick: Others, That
the Officers under his Command, will not accept of the Conditions agreed on. Be
pleased to let me hear what you know; and withal, to dispatch an Account to me,
whether the Vlster Militia be arrived at Ballyshanon. As I was writing this, a
Packet from the Army, directed to you, came to my hands, I suppose from the
General, which I hear withal send you, and desire in all these particulars,
your sudden answer.

SIR, Your most Affectionate Humble Servant, Granard.

These for Their Majesty's special Service. To Coll. John Michelburne, at
Ballyshanon, or elsewhere, have, have, To be send by the Officer Commanding at
Finna, to Belturbet; and by the Officer Commanding there, in have away to him.


Colonel Michelburns Answer.
My Lord,
I Can give you as yet but little account of the Militia, only that I received
a Letter this Afternoon from Sir Francis Hamilton, who tells me that on Sunday
next he Randezvouzes his men at Ballymafoy, and on Monday or Tuesday will be
with me at Ballyshanan, at which time I shall have the rest of the Troops from
other Counties with 500. Choice Foot of my own Regiment, which as soon as
arrived will I march straight to Sligoe, and if they of Sligoe understood your
Lordships Motion, it may be a means of their surrendering the sooner: The only
thing will be to know where O Donnel is, the last news is that but two of his
Regiments will follow him, and of the strength of his Forces I can give your
Lordship an account, but his going to the General I do not find true, if it
were, something would be in the Generals Letter, if I could know of Ballderrog,
I could march the nearest way by Sligoe, I have several Spies abroad, and will
not fail to send your Lordship an account how affairs stand. I am My Lord your
Lordships

Most humble Servant, John Michelburne.

To the Right Honorable, the Earl of Granaro at Castle-Forbus, or elsewhere.
With Speed.

From the Camp at Carick on Lysh, Aug, 23. 1691. SIR,
I Have yours from Ballyshanan of the 18th, by which I find the Trick which O
Donnell has played, so that you must be upon your Guard, and keep the two
Troops of Dragoons with you, and as much of the Militia as you can. I send upon
this account Colonel Stoyd back to Athlone, and then the Militia that is there
shall return to the North, to be posted as you Direct. After the care you used
in this Affair, I am sorry it did not succeed, however you have done your part
very well, and would make a good addition to your Services, if you would yet
find any way of Treating with Sir Teige O Regan, and getting the place. I send
you the Warrant you desire, and am

Your humble Servant, Bar de Ginkel.

To Colonel John Michelburne Commanding at Ballyshanan.

Soon after Colonel Michelburne received this following Intelligence, and sent
it Enclosed to the Lords Justices.

SIR,
ABout ten days since I left the Camp, and on Friday last I was at Ballyrobe,
where My Lord O Donnell was, and was standing by, when he signed Articles to
Colonel Richards, I saw likewise an Express from one of O Donnells Colonels,
desiring him not to come to the Camp, for there was a plot laid to take away
his Life for signing the Articles to the General and that when I arrived at
Boil, he heard that the Lord O Donnels own Regiment, his Brothers, and another
Regiment went to him, and that they were resolved to come to Ballyshanan to
join you. I am in great have in going to the County of Dunigal, otherwise I had
waited on your Honor. I am

Your humble Servant, J. L.

To Coll. John Michelburne, Governor at Ballyshanan.

About this time arrived one Mr. Wade formerly an acquaintance of Col.
Michelburns, and with him a Friar, who desired some private Discourse with the
said Colonel.

They told him that they came from the Lord O Donnel, who was encamped with Sir
Albert Coningham near to Killowny, and that his Lordship desired him to march
against Sligoe as soon as posible he could, and that Sir Albert Coningham was
encamped with him, and withal produced the Lord O Donnels Pass, a also a Pass
from Sir Teige O Regan.

The Lord O Donnels Pass.
WHereas Father Petton and Edward Wade, have submitted to King William and
Queen Mary, and their Government, and have desired this my Pass to go into the
County of Dunigal. These are therefore to require all persons not to Hinder or
Molest them, either in Body or Goods. Given at Killowny the 2d. day of
September.

O Donnel.


Sir Teige O Regans Pass.
PErmit Father James Petton, and Mr. Edward Wade to pass toward the County of
Dunigal without Hurt or Molestation, either in Body Goods, or Arms, with their
Servants. Given at Sligoe this 3d of September. 1691.

Teige O Regan.

This put the Colonel to a stand, knowing that Sir Teige O Regan and O Donnel
was at variance, and how they should get a Pass from Sligoe to come to
Ballyshanan he knew not, he asked them if they had any Letters from O Donnel or
Sir Albert, they answered none, but produced a Letter from Captain Mountgomery
to Charles Hamilton of Cavan, which made him the more suspicions of them, he
asked them how they came to get a Pass from Sir Teige, who made answer that the
Priest had a Brother in Sligoe which was Leiutenant Colonel, who procured it
from Sir Teige to pass 'm into the County of Dunigal, the Colonel being
apprehensive this was a Decoy to draw him into some inconvenience, confined
them till he heard farther from O Donnel or Sir Albert Coningham: beause the
Country lay open between Killwony and Ballyshanan, by way of Manor Hamilton,
and that in few hours they might have inteiligence from one to the other, and
not run the hazard of coming by Sligoe: but this suspicion he had of Wade and
the Priest was soon over, for about Evening came a Dragoon of Sir Alberts party
and a Gunner that deserted Sligoe, giving an account of Sir Alberts being
Routed, and some of his men being taken, which soon after was confirmed by
Letter of O Donnels, who gave this following account.

The Account given by the Gunner, and Dragoon.
THey both being sick in Killowny, soon after Day, they heard of a great
Outcry by the Women in the Town, that Ballderrog was taken prisoner, and Sir
Albart Coningham's party beaten, which made them with all speed get out of the
House, and make their Escape into a Ditch in a Garden that was near hand, they
heard some Shoutings afar off, and saw several Women coming into the Town
stripped, that belonged to Sir Albert's party; and one of these Men stole into
the Town, where he had News, that Sir Albert was killed; they immediately got
two Horses, whose they were they knew not, but supposed them to belong to the
Dragoons, and rid away to Manner-Hamilton, and so came to Ballyshannon: The
Lieutenant belonging to O Donnel, confirmed what these two said; the ill news
of Sir Albert's Death was soon Confirmed.

These following Letters are to the Lord Granard, as also to Colonel
Michelburne, to provide Bread for the Northern Forces.

Charles Porter, Tho. Coningsby.

YOU are hereby required from time to time to deliver unto such person or
persons as the Right Honorable the Earl of Granard, and Coll. Michelburne, or
either of them shall appoint to receive the same; the usual Allowance of Bread,
or Meal, according to the proportion of I pound a day for each, for such a
number of the Northern Militia, now Ordered to March to Ballyshannon, as shall
be directed by the said Earl of Granard, and Coll. John Michelburne, or either
of them, and for so doing, this with a Receipt for the same from the person or
persons so appointed, shall be your sufficient Warrant.

Given at Their Majesty's Castle of Dublin the 24th. Day of August, 1691.
To Isaac Pereira Esquire; Commissary General of the Stores of Ireland.
By the Lords Justices Command, John Davis.

Dublin-Castle, the 25th. August. 1691. My Lord,
Enclosed is a Copy of an Order to Mr. Pereira, to deliver Bread to the
Northern Militia, as shall be directed by your Lordship, or Coll. Michelburn,
which Mr. Pereira sends by this Post to the Store-keeper of Belturbet, whence
the Provisions must be had, if your Lordship, or Coll. Michelburne will please
to appoint Persons to receive the same from time to time, and to Certify the
Store-keeper what number of Militia are upon Duty. This by the Lords Justices
Command, is signified to you Lordship, by

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble Servant, John Davis


Castle Forbass, September. 13th. 1691. SIR,
I Had an Account from the Lord; Justices, that there is a proportion of Meal
arrived at Belturbit, designed for the support of your Northern Militia, you
need no Order from me since you have power to call for what you find requisite,
God willing, I intend to march the Forces from Dublin, which ar^ now at
Athlone, to Morrow being Friday through Connaugh to Boil, where I intend to be
with them the 8th. Day of this Instant without fail. I must desire you to send
me notice thither, where, and with most convenience I may join the Forces under
your Gommand, which I desire may be with all the Expedition imaginable. I am

Your Affectionate, and Humble Servant, Granard.


I desire you will bring the 980 l. with you, which you received from Jemmitte
the Collector, at Londonderry, and which is designed for the support of the Men.

Here follows an Account of the last Besieging Sligoe, with the taking of the
Town and Outworks, by the Forces under the Command of Coll. John Michelburne,
and the Surrender of the two Forts to Right Honorable the Earl of Granard, the
15th. of September. 1691.

A List of the Forces that joined Colonel Michelburne as Ballyshannon, the
8th. of September. 1691.
County of Dunigall. Dragoons. Capt. Charles Hamilton of Cavan, 50 Capt.
William Stewart, 50 Capt. Vaughan, 25 Capt. Murvough Hamilton, 50
County of Derry. Capt. Tristrim Berrisford, 50 Capt Hugh Rowly, 50 I Troop of
Dragoons of Coll. Winn, 50
County of Formannah, I Troop of Horse Commanded by Capt. Erwin, 50
County of Autrim. A Troop of Horse Commanded by Capt. Harrison, 50
County of Mannoghan. Capt. Dawson, 50
Of the Standing Army. Part of Coll. Michelburne's Regiment, 600 I Troop of
Dragoons of Sir Albert Coningham's, 50
County of Autrim. I Foot Company Commanded by Capt. Adaire, 60
County of Tyron. I Foot Company Commanded by Oliver Mac Cashlin, 60 Capt.
Patr. Hamilton, 60

For the better understanding of the following Discourse, it is to be
understood, that Coll. Michelburne had brought the Garrison of Sligoe to
Articles, which were approved on by General Ginkell, and Signed and Sealed: The
Garrison was to be delivered up to the said Colonel the 15th. of August last
past; but for the falseness of O Donnel who was then on Capitulation with
General Ginkell, and sent to Coll. Michelburne to join him, if the Garrison
should prove Obstinate, and so to reduce them by force. The General ordered
Coll. Michelburne to pay him 200 Guineas, as a Mark of his Favors, of which
accordingly he paid him 100, and the other 100 he promised to pay him in two or
three Days; but the said O Donnel, notwithstanding his Engagement with the
General, the payment of the 100 Guineas, he appeared the only person that
obstructed the Surrender, and took part with the Garrison of Sligoe to defend
them apainst Coll. Michelburne, or what other the General should send, Signing
an Instrument under his Hand, that notwithstanding any Contract made between
the General Ginkell and himself, his only design was to prolong the time; and
what he did, or acted was for King James's Interest; and promised the Garrison
of Sligoe, to join with them when there was occasion. The Lords Justices
understanding the Abuse that was committed by the said O Donnel, issued first
their Order to the Militia of most part of the Province of Vlster, to join
Coll. Michelburne the latter end of August, who, by the General's Orders, and
the Lords Justices, Commanded the Summer past at Ballyshannon, to the intent,
that when a considerable body could be got together, he was to Advance teward
Sligoe, their Lordships ordered likewise a considerable Body of the Militia
from Dublin and other parts of Lemster, to be Commanded by the Right Honorable
the Earl of Granard, with a Commissioner to Command the whole Forces of Lemster
and Vlster, to reduce O Donnel, as also the said Forts of Sligoe to Their
Majesty's Obedience; but the said O Donnel in the mean time makes his Peace
with the General, and joins his Forces with the Earl of Granard: therefore the
Lord-Justices gave Orders for a considerable quantity of Provisions to be sent
from Dublin to Bellurbit for this occasion, Whilst the Militia was drawing to
the Frontiers, Coll. Michelburne drew from Cavan, Bellurbit, Eniskillin, and
Killybegs as many of his own Regiment as he could spare out of the said
Garrisons, to join the Militia, whom he expected by the Is It. of September; but
it was the 8th. before the Militia could make any considerable Appearance; in
the mean time the said Coll. used all his Endeavors to get some Field Pieces
from Eniskillin; the 9th. he began his March with about 500 Militia Horse, two
Troops of Dragoons of the standing Army, three Militia Foot Companies, and 600
Men of his own Regiment. That Night he Encamped at Drumcleif, three Miles from
Sligoe, and 17 from Ballyshannon, from whence Capt. Vaughan, a Militia Captain,
with his own Troop, and a Detachment of ten more to secure him from the
Rapparees, was dispatched to the Earl of Granard, to acquaint his Lordship of
our Advance.

Drumcleif, the 9th. of September, 1691. My Lord,
THE backwardness of some of the Militia Troops of this Province was the
Oaccsion of my not advancing sooner, I have sent Capt. Vaughan to know your
Lordships Commands, who will give you an Account of our Advance, and what
Condition we are in. I think it not convenient to quit this side of the Town to
join, you before you come to Sligoe, by reason of the Inconveniency of drawing
our Guns. I am,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble Servant, John Michelburne.

To the Right Honorable the Earl of Granard at Boil, or elsewhere. These

The next Morning, about Seven we advanced within half a Mile of the Town, and
advantagiously posted our selves in an old Danish Fort, called by the name of
Rabacan, built in the time of Oliver Cromwell; and as soon as we were encamped,
Orders were given to repair the said Fort; the said Coll. Michelburne sends a
Drum with a Summons to Sir Teague O Regan, Govetnour of the Town and County of
Sligoe, as follows.

Colonel Michelburne's First Letter.
SIR,
I Do not question, but your Intelligence is such, that you are satisfied and
assured of what Preparation is made, which you may see by a considerable Force
under my Command, enough to bring you to Submission, but a far greater under
the Earl of Granard, and the Lord O Donnel, so that you will be surrounded on
every side, and that we are not to quit the place till reduced. However, I have
Orders from his Excellency, General Ginkell once more to treat; if with your
Convenience. You know the Hardships of a close Siege, and the ill Effects that
will happen if you continue obstinate: 'Twas very ill resented, and ill taken,
that you detained the Articles, Signed by General Ginkell, you neither returned
them, nor the Counterpart, but kept both in your Custody. I am,

SIR, Your Humble Servant, John Michelburne.
I desire your speedy Answer; my Service to Colonel Scot, and Colonel Rourke.



To the Honorable Sir Teague O Regan, Governor of Sligoe.

Sligoe, September the 11th. 1691. SIR,
I Have yours of this days date; my Intelligence is such, that I cannot give a
shroad Guess of the Preparations that are making, as you mention, to reduce
this place, if they were Ten times greater then you fancy them it is equal to
me. Neither am I ignorant, as you mention of the Effects of a close Siege,
which I am in this case resolved to try: However I thank you for your offer,
and as for not returning the Articles Signed by General Ginkell; no wonder at
it, for I have no other to show my own General for my Justification, for the
manner of my Capitulation, and of breaking off honestly with you to whom I
appeal whither or no I have not behaved my self as I ought; and who is to blame
in this matter? I suppose you have the Counterpart of the Article your self;
Coll. Seot, and Coll. Rourke defires to be remembered to you, and Sir Francis
Hamilton; so do I, who am,

SIR, Your most Humble Servant, Teague O Regan.

To Coll. John Michelbourne, Governor of Londonderry and Ballyshannon.

This day being 11th. of September, and proving very wet, was Employed in
cutting Fagots, and repairing the Fort, so that we made no Advance, till about
Nine next Morning the Coll. viewed every part of the Enemies Outwarks, where he
might take 'em at the best Advantage, they were observed about 200 of them hard
at work in Levelling an old Ditch, some distance from the Fort; we were
informed by some of the Country, that they had taken a reinforcement of two
Foot Companies, one commanded by Lieut. Coll. Edward mac Swine, the other by
Capt. Conn O Neal; we also observed great numbers of them going into the Town,
and could only discover one Company of Granadeers, lodged in a Danish Fort, to
observe our motion. The Enemy still observing our Men at work, repairing the
Danish Fort, were now altogether secure, not apprehending in the least, that we
should fall upon them that Morning, and fully assured, that nothing would be
done of our side till the Lord Granard arrived; but in less than an hour, they
found themselves in a great mistake, for about Nine that Morning, the Coll.
ordered the Company of the Granadeers, one Troop of Dragoons, and 200 Foot,
immediately to draw up under Covert of our Fort; he likewise gave Orders for
all the Horse to get ready, and mount with all speed: in the mean time all the
Fort was got ready, the Attillery harnish'd, and ready to march, the Coll.
advaneed with the Granadeers, and 200 Foot to secure the Ditches, and to beat
of the Granadeers that were lodged in a Danish Fort near the Enemies Outworks,
and at our first firing the Enemy quitted the Danish Fort, and made into their
Trenches; the Colonel thought now was the time, pursues hard after them,
enters their Trenches, the Enemy plays hard on our Horse with their Cannon,
which was rangld on the Hill, opposite to the Fort, but with little Damage. We
prosecuted our Advance, beating them from Ditch to Ditch, still gaining Ground;
the Foot were all hot engaged, but the Enemy still giving way; the Militia
Troops were very forward on all occasions, led on by Sir Francis Hamilton, Maj
Touchburne, and Cornet Mead; the first of which is Lieut. of the County of
Dunigall, the other two, Supervisors of the the Militia of Vlster: The Enemy at
last took to their Heels, our Men pursued them with repeated Huzza's; at last
the Enemy took to a strong Sodd Fort, some Hundred Yards from the great one;
and that the Enemy should have no time to consider, Coll. Michelburne Advanced
at the Head of his Granadeers on Horseback, and about 100 Foot entered into the
Fort, the Enemy on all sides jumping over the Works. Thus in an hours time we
became Masters of all their own Works, and intercepted between them and the
Town, so that the Town fell into our Hands: Likewise the Coll. sent a Lieut.
and Thirty men to guard the Bridges, that no Soldier should enter the Town to
plunder, and withal gave Orders that the Gallows should immediately be removed
into the Marketplace to hang the first Offender, which was an extraordinary
Satisfaction to those in the Fort, who expected no less than to have their
Wives and Children put to the Sword. Our resolute Commander, never dismounted
his Horse till he had gained this point, endeavoring to win this most
important place by fair means, it being unpossible, considering all
Inconveniences to get it otherwise, and to indulge them the more,
notwithstanding the great Advantage, Coll. Michelburne sends to them this
second Summons declaring it to be the last.

The Second Letter to Sir Teague.
SIR,
IN my last, I gave you to understand that the Forces under my Command, was
sufficient to Reduce you, which you see before your Eyes that ye are not able
to withstand us; These are the Men that bid Defyance to Leiutenant General
Hamilton, During the four Months Seidge at Derry, where your whole Army was
Baffled, therefore, know that I Will be Master of your Counterscarff before the
Morrow Morning, but you cannot but acknowledge my kindness in preserving of
your Familys in the Town from Ruin and Destruction, which has been practiced
when a place has been taken by Force, but instead of that I Treat you rather
as Friends then Enemies, and if now you will comply with Reasonable Offers, and
make a quick Surrender both you and your Families may be preserved, this being
the last time you may expect any Favor, for when my Lord Granard Arrives, the
power will be out of my hands, and so pray Consider it, and let me have your
speedy Answer. I am

SIR, Your Humble Servant, John Michelburne.

To the Honorable Sir Teague O Regan Governor of the Fort of Sligoe.

Sir Teague O Regan's Answer, to Colonel Michelburn's Last Summons.
Fort Sligoe 11th September, 1691. SIR,
I Had your Letter by the Drummer, and being a thing of that Importance, I
cannot Answer it before I have the Officers of the Garrisons advice, which will
be in two hours, I see your Men go on vigerously with their work, if you do not
immediately make them leave off Working, I must take what measures ought to be
taken in the Case; but I assure you that I had rather deal with you in any
thing then with others of your Party, and I desire you to believe that from

SIR, Your most Humble Servant, Teague O Regan.
Colonel Scott, and Colonel Rourk and the rest of the Officers gives you
their Humble Service.

Colonel Michelburne was very well satisfied with Sir Teagues Answer and could
not but agree to Sir Teagues Repuest, and the Hundred Pioneers which stood
ready in the view of them and some at work, he Ordered them immediately to lay
down their Working Tools, and gave Sir Teagne this following Answer.

Camp at Sligoe this 11th September, 1691. SIR,
I Had yours, and according to your desire, I allow the two Hours time you
mentioned, and for any work you mention, I shall forbear, and do expect the
like from you, and although your People are not at Work, yet they fetch burdens
of Fireing from the Gate, and all the Work that at present I have need of, is
to Remove the Gallows into the Market Place, to hinder Plunder, and to punish
the first Offender, which I believe you nor your Officers will not find fault
with having given out a Proclamation to that purpose, so that the Gentlemen in
Fort shall not be Damnifyed one Farthing, in Case they comply with my Demands,
my Service to Colonel Scott, Colonel Rourk, and the rest of the Officers. I am

SIR, Your Humble Servant, John Michelburne.


Sir Teagues Third Letter.
SIR,
I Agree to what you Write, and for those Men of the Garrison that went out
'twas unknown to me, now I send to recall them into the Fort, I am well pleased
that such good Discipline may be kept in Order to prevent Plunder. I am

SIR, Your Humble Servant, Teague O Regan.

To the Honorable Colonel John Michelburne Governor at Bellyshannen.

Soon after was brought this Fourth Letter by a Drummer.

I Am so well assured of your Worth and Honor, that I will send out Three
Field Officers, Colonel Rourk Major Conner, and Leintenant Colonel McDonnagh,
without Demanding any Hostages, so appoint Three Commissioners from your self,
and agree, what place you shall think fit to Treat in. I am

SIR, Your most Humble Servant, Teague O Regan.


The Commissioners appointed for our side were Sir Francis Hamilton, Major John
Hamilton, and Major Tichburne.

THeir Instructions were to know what proposals the Enemy would make, and to
make Objections to what Demands the Irish Commissioners should unreasonably
Propose; their Demands were these, to have the Articles that were formerly
Signed and Sealed by the General Ginkell to be put in force, and what
Reinforcements they had taken into the Fort, to be included into the same
Articles; and to have nine days time for a Surrender, their Demands being
brought to the Colonel, he absolutely denied any more then 24 Hours, during
which he would have open Hostility, excepting the time the Commissioners were
on a Treaty, and as to the Treaty he Agreed to those of the former Articles
only Scratching out the drawing of the two Pieces of Canon, for that he would
not promise any thing, but what he would perform it being Impossible to draw
Guns that time in the Year. The Commissioners going out told them that the
Colonel would not allow of any time above Twenty four hours, they then
Demanded four days and they would put one of the Forts into our hands, Colonel
Michelburne without any delay bid them return and agree to it Admitting they
would give up the big Fort; their Answer was the most part of their things was
in the Sodd Fort, but they would Surrender the Stone Fort, which he refusing,
advised them to consider of it till the next Morning, and then to send their
final Answer, in the mean time Coll. Michelburne gave Orders to post all the
Horse and Foot Guards for the Nights Service, and 100 Pioneers with their
implements all in the View of the Enemy. As soon as the Commissioners were
returned, Order was given to Salute them with our Cannon and Small-shot, which
continued most part of the Night; all which time the Fort hung out Lights for
fear we should Attack their Counterscarpe: That night the Colonel sends an
Express to the General, as also to the Lords Justic^s as follows.

Sligoe, September. 12th. 1691. My Lords,
I Have once more a Prospect of Sligoe Fort to be under Their Majesty's
Obedience: In my last I acquainted your Lordships of the backwardness of the
Militia; but however on Thursday last, being the 10th. of this Instant, I
marched with a Detatchment of 600 Foot of my own Regiment, about 400 Militia
Horse, and 100 Foot, with 2 Troops of Dragoons of the Standing Army, and that
Night Encamped at Drumcleefe, 3 Miles from Sligoe, and sent an Express with a
Detatchment of 36 Men, under the Command of Capt. Vaughan, with Orders to
Acquaint my Lord Granard of my Approach to Sligoe. Next Day he Encamped about
half a Mile from the Town, which was employed in repairing a Danish Fort, but
proving wet, we made no Advance on the Enemy till about Nine the next Morning:
The Enemy was now bolder than usual; for besides the two Regiments, they had an
Addition of two Foot Companies, one Commanded by Lieut. Coll. Mac Swine, the
other by one O Neal. About Eight I began to form my Detatchments both of Foot
and Horse, but at last I thought it necessary to employ the whole Party. At our
first approach they quitted all the Ditches, and Posted themselves on that
side, where stands their Fort, but the Tide being out, I advanced my
Granadeers, with about 150 Foot, still gaining upon them; the Enemy Attackt us
with great Fury, which caused me to order 3 Troops of Horse to Advance, which
caused the Enemy to retreat, and Man a Fort about 150 yards from the great
Fort, and that at the Advance of our Horse and Foot they quitted that likewise,
which after a short Dispute we became Masters of, and all their Outworks, as
also the Town of Sligoe, and now are encamped and lie close under their Forts.
By the next I hope to give your Lordships an Account of the Fort being entirely
in our hands. In this Action we lost but 1 Ensign, which was killed with a
Canon from the Enemy, and some 9 Men Wounded, and 1 Man of the Militia, and 4
Horses wounded. I am

My Lords, Your Lordships most Faithful and Obedient Servant, John Michelburne.


About Ten at Night we had an Account from our Out-Guards Commanded by Captain
Harrison, that between the Town and Ballisadeare-Bridge, they Discovered a
considerable Camp occasioned by their many Fires, but did not know whither they
were Friends or Enemies, it was dubious whether they were the Forces under the
Lord Granard or Sarsfield's Party, which we had an Account was marching toward
Sligoe; and to inform our selves of this most urgent Affair, the Coll. Ordered
Captain Harrison should send out immediately 20 of his Troop, of which 2 of
them to Advance within about half Musket Shot before the rest of the party,
till they were Challenged by the other, by which means they would soon discover
whither they were Friends, or Enemies, which accordingly they did, and found
them to be the Forces under the Earl of Granard; the Commander of the party was
brought to my Lord, who gave his Lordship an Account according to the former
Discourse. Next Morning the Colonel sent to them, that if they did not
immediately come to Conclusion, he must remove all the Papist Families out of
the Town, and if they pleased they might take them into the Fort.

To which Sir Teague's Answer.
SIR,
I Had yours: The Kindness as to our Women and Children I thank you for, you do
but what becomes you, and what I expected of you, and what I would have done
were I in your Station; I know of no particular Women or Children belonging to
us in Town, except Maj. Conners's Lady, Mrs. Reyly, and my Servant Maid, if you
please to admit them hither, and the rest, if there be any to guard 'em, where
else they please, I will thank you: As for your saying that I came to no
Treaty, etc. I do assure you out of the particular desire I had to deal with
you, I have strained my self to such Terms, as I would not with any other; if
you will not take hold of this Opportunity, all Circumstances considered, it is
your fault, and believe me you will repent it; you may believe I am not
ignorant of my Lord Granard's, and the Lord O Donnel's Motion, but I am really,
and so are the rest of the Gentlemen more for you than any else of your Party
and Station; and to show you my further Sincerity, I am willing that the same
Commissioners named by you and me yesterday may meet again, and compose the
matter if they can before the coming of those, with some of whom I have no
Inclination to have any Civil Dealings. I am

SIR, Your most Humble Servant, Teague O Regan.

To the Honorable Coll. John Michelburne.

To which Coll. Michelburne agreed, and Orders the same Commissioners, who were
on the Treaty the Night before, to go on in the Capitulation, and Conclude with
them.

About this time the Colonel received the Generals Letter as follows.

Camp before Lymrick, September the 7th. 1691. SIR,
I Have your Letters of the 29th of the last, from Ballyshaanon, and hope with
O Donnells help, you are by this time in Possession of Sligoe, for since his
Agreement with Colonel Richards, I make no Question but he will do the Service
to their Majesty's which he promised, and therefore, I desire you will use him
Civilly when he joins you. If possible, when you have that delivered to you, I
would have Sir Teague O Regan, and Colonel Scott. Excluded from Terms, that I
may punish those People that have so Treacherously broke their Faith; however I
would not have you stand so much upon that as to loose the Town. I am

SIR, Your most Humble Servant, Bar de Ginkell.


In the mean time the Lord Granard advanced with his Party in sight, and sent
for Coll. Michelburne, who with some other of his Officers, attended his
Lordship, and gave him an account of the progress he had made, as well in
pinning them up, who consisted of 28 Companies of Foot, in so small a compass;
as also, how all things were in a manner concluded. His Lordship was by the
Colonel, and several others, attended into Town, to the House of Sir Arthur
Goore: Soon after, Sir Francis Hamilton, Major Hamilton, and Major Tichburne,
attended his Lordship, giving him account, That all was concluded on, between
the Fort of Sligoe, and Coll. Michelburne, if it might be with his Lordship's
Approbation, except some small Additions, which Sir Teige desired the
Commissaries might report to his Lordship, who granted it. His Lordship ordered
the Colonel, and Major Hamilton, to complete the Articles, which accordingly
was done; Sir Teige desiring a further time, for as they were to Surrender at
12 on Sunday; his Lordship agreed to give them leave till 7 next Morning, being
Monday the 14th. which accordingly was done, as follows: According to
Capitulation, they were furnished with 28 Truckle Carrs, and two Horses to each
Company, for their Baggage, which took some time to bring out of the Fort,
after them marched 28 Companies, such as they were; which done, Sir Teige
delivered up the Keys to Coll. Michelburne, who immediately marched in at the
Head of a Battalion of his own Regiment; after which the Lord Granard rode in,
with a considerable number of Officers, and Gentlemen of the Country. Colonel
Michelburne, with the Keys in his hand, complimented his Lordship with them, in
the Name of Their Majesty's, King William and Queen Mary; who returned him the
Keys, and wished him joy of his new Government.

The Lord O Donnel, about this time, delivered the Colonel a Letter of old
date, which should have come to his hands about the 21th. of August, and it was
not delivered till the 14th. of September.

A Letter from Coll. Richards, bearing date from Cushin-Town, the 19 of Aug. 91.
SIR,
MY Lord O Donnel, and I, have now regulated all Matters, and will, to the
utmost of his power, do what shall most contribute to Their Majesty's Service:
I do not doubt but that you will supply him, with what necessarys you can;
after Sligoe is in your hands, my Lord, I suppose, will March toward the
General, or according to what Directions he shall receive from him; I shall
take care for his Supplies, of what we have in our Stores, when he comes to
Gallway, or any other of our places, where we have Stores. Your wants at Sligoe
may be supplied from Ballyshanan, if any there; otherwise, upon your notice,
and the General's Order, Colonel Goore, or my self, will send you by Sea, what
is to be had from us: I am satisfied my Lord O Donnel will do his best for
reducing Sligoe; and therefore it will not be amiss to consult him in
difficulties. I am

SIR, Your most humble Servant Ja. Richards.
Just now I have advice, That Sarsfield, with the Horse, is come on this side;
so that Sir Albert Coningham, has Orders to march his Dragoons to
Clare-Gallway: I expect to be this Night at Gallway; and if any thing
extraordinary happens, shall advise you.

Capt. Otway had Orders to take an account of the Stores of Ammunition and
Provision, according to the Capitulation, which follows.



A List taken the 15th day of September 1691. of the Guns Ammunition and Stores
of War in the Sodd Fort of Sligoe.
Ordinances Brass mounted on Brick and stand Carriages 12 Pounder 1 Chamber
Piece 1
Iron Ordinances Mounted on Brick, and stand Carriages Deem Coulver. 1 Minion 3
3 Pounders 10
Power 30 bar. Ball for French Fusies 6 bar. Ditto for Pistol 1 bar. Match 8
hog. per est Ball proportionable Culvering 109 Bastard Cannon 72 12 Pounders 36
9 Pounders 144 Saker 267 Minion 332 Fallcon 054
Ladles and Spunges for Demi Culvering 1 1 3 Pounders 10 10 12 Pounders 1 1
Menion 3 3
Crows of Iron 2 Syaths 18 Handbarrows 21 Wheel-barrows 30 Pitch 25 Pieces 40
Floot bars of Iron 40 Old Iron 8 C. Hand Granadas fixed 200 Ditto unfixt 328
Scales 1 Weights 5 Shovels and S pades 38
Received the day and year above mentioned, by the Order of the Right
Honorable the Earl of Granard, the Guns Ammunition and Stores of War above
mentioned. As Witness my Hand,

John Michelburne.

Sodd Fort Sligoe the 15th September 1691.
Provisions for the Mouth.
Oate-meal 24 bar. Beef 200 bar. Salt 1 bar. Meal 11 bar. Oats 150 bar. Barrly
60 bar.
Received the day and year above mentioned, by Order of the Right Honorable
the Earl of Granard the Provision and Stores above mentioned. As Witness my Hand

John Michelburne.

The account Received of the The Train of Artillery from Captain Richard Swan,
as follows.
Powder in Barrels 25 Ball in Barrels 35 Match in Bundels 15 Wheel-barrows 21
Iron Crows 3 Baskets 45 3 Pounder Balls 183 A Small parcel Killkenny Coals in a
Case Hammer Hatchits 20 Bill Hooks 24 1 A barral Kit Granadas fixed 100 Shells
unfixt 482 Handbarrows 48 Pickaxes 23 Rep-hooks 5 Syaths 2 Whetstones 4 Turn
Pikes 18 Horse Harnssing 18 Clouts 12 Shafts 2 Linchpins 12 Tar Tub 1 1 Wheel
for the big Gun 1 1 Axil-tree 1 Swingle Trees 4 Hurters and Wassers 13 1 Jack 1
8 Sand Bagg 1 12 Pounder Balls 98 1 Dark Lanthorn 1 Long Spikes in a Box 500 2
Shilling Nais 500 Of men's Harnessing 2 Riges Ropes' 2 Fadams of 2 inch Rope 10
A Goyl of Small Rope 1 Brass 12 Pounder 1 2 brass 3 Pounders 2 And all
necessaries belonging to them

An Account of Coll. Michelburne's appearing, Three several times, before the
Lords Justices, to make answer to Mr. Foward's Information, a Militia Captain,
November the 19th the 30th. and the 17th. of December, 1691.
BY the foregoing Narrative, where all things were acted, to the full
Satisfaction, as well of the Lords Justices, as the General, as by their many
Letters do appear; it is strange what grounds there could be found out for the
calling to Account this Faithful, Trusty Person, that the Queen should be
acquainted with his great Miscarriage, and after that, the King in Council; the
Order from the Queen was answered, in these Words, by the Lords Justices, in a
Letter to the Lord Nottingham; as in the Close of the Book. Sometimes since we
received Her Majesty's Command, by your Lordship, to inquire into the rerson of
Coll. Michelburne's withdrawing the Blockade of Sligo, etc.

That the General, and Lords Justices, knew of no Miscarriage, and that he
should be so vilely represented to Her Majesty; and with that secrecy and
privacy, that it cannot be known, who were the Villainous Actors of this
scandalous false Aspersion, by which the best deserving Men may, unknown, be
prejudiced, and ruined.

To go on with the Discourse; after Sligo was reduced, and the Country adjacent
in quiet Possession to Their Majesty's Government, the Coll. writes to the
Lords Justices, for leave to go to Dublin, to vindicate himself, being
advertised by several good Friends, what Affidavits, and Examinations, were
given in, to ruin him; and that he might be provided with some of the best
Gentry of the Country, before he went, he writes from Ballyshannon, to Sir
Francis Hamilton, (who, with the rest of those worthy Gentlemen, had been all
along with him, on all Actions, against Sligo, and had taken Certificates from
Coll. Michelburne, for their good Services,) as assured, when he went to
Dublin, he would be had much in Esteem, for his good Management; he now makes
it his Request, for a Certificate, from them, and the rest of the Gentlemen, to
do him that Kindness, which not long before, he did to them.

Here follows a Certificate, from the Chief Officers of the Militia, viz. Sir
Francis Hamilton, Bar. Governor of the County of Donagall. Capt. Charles
Hamilton, of Cavan. Capt. William Stewart. Capt. John Hamilton, of Murvaugh.
Capt. Henry Colwell, etc. But first, the Letter from Sir Francis Hamilton.

SIR,
THE Remoteness of these Gentlemen's Habitations, who have joined with me, must
plead my Excuse, for detaining your Messenger so long. I make no doubt but the
enclosed will answer your Expectation; and the greatest Enemy you have, who was
an Eyewitness to your Actions, cannot, in Justice, contradict one Word in it;
I gave the Lords Justices an Account, from time to time, of what passed, where
we were, and never did so without doing you right; so that, I believe, it will
be in vain to make a Repetition, of what I have formerly said, in any thing,
that may conduce to your Service, be pleased, freely to lay your Commands upon,

SIR, Your most humble Servant, Francis Hamilton.

For the Honored Coll. Michelburne, These Ballyshannon.

Here follows the Certificate.

WE do Certify, that the Honorable Coll. Michelburne, who Commanded the
Forces of Tyrone Dey Donygall, and Farmonah, marched four several times into
the Enemies Country; and that upon every Occasion, he was not only Diligent and
Careful, but also showed great Resolution and Conduct, to the good Example of
those under his Command. And whereas, some Men have informed, that Coll.
Michelburne minded his private Advantage, more than his Majesty's Service. We
do declare, that he in Person forced back many droves of Cattle, into the
Enemies Outworks, which he might have applied to his own private Use; by which
means, the Garrison thought it more convenient to Capitulate, than to suffer so
many Thousand Cattle to starve; with which, and Coll. Michelburne's Diligence,
and good Conduct, the Fort of Sligo was prevailed with to Surrender, at the
time it was delivered;

All which we Certify under our Hands, this 20th. Day of October. Fr.
Hamilton. Chapter Hamilton. Will. Stewart. John Hamilton. Henry Colwell.


Another of the same Certificates, Signed by the Officers of the Army, viz.



Mich. Cunnington. Rich. Bickerstaffe. Albert Nisbet. Will. Gunter. Sam.
Shalcrosse. John Campbell. John Bailey. John Hamilton. And. Nisbet. David
Chalmey. Hu. Caldwell. Anth. Sbemberge. John Mansell. Hermles Burleigh. Daniel.


It was about the latter end of October, the Coll. began his Journey to Dublin,
and waited on the Lords Justices, and acquainted them of the good Condition of
the Country, and in what posture he left Sligo, and the Country adjacent; and
that, withal, he was informed that some People had informed their Lordships, of
several things, that were false, that he knew not any thing he had done, but
what was altogether for Their Majesty's Service, and that all he desired was to
have Justice; and withal, desired that he might have a Copy of those
Infermations that were given in against him: Upon which, the Lord Coningsby
told him, That he would order Mr. Davis, their Secretary, that he might have a
Copy of them. Most of the Examinations were from some of Captain Forward's
Troops; alleging, That of the Prey that was taken out of the Enemies Country,
they were denied Subsistence, for which Reasons, they Deserted; some, in their
Affidavits, swore to 800. some to 1500. One Robb, a Tobacco Seller, swore to
6000. but would not stay to justify his Oath, but is posted away, by Forward,
and Vaughan, to the King, and Council, to do the Coll. a farther Prejudice.

Of all the Militia, and Army, no Body appears, but one Captain Forward, who
not long before was sent Prisoner, by the said Coll. to Lieutenant Genesis Ginkel,
(the Cause, and Reason, in their due place.)

The Coll. pressed hard that the Cause might come on, and that he might be
dismissed; and on the back of Forward's Petition, was writ as follows.

Thursday Morning, the 19th. of November, at 9 a Clock, this Business is to be
heard, before the Lords Justices, and the General.

To hinder a long Discourse of this Trial, in Forward's large Petition, and
Coll. Michelburne's Answer, (after the Chancery manner,) and the Witnesses
examined, on both sides, which would take up almost as much as the for going
Narrative; we will cut it short, and only mention the Counsels, on both sides,
and barely the Names of the Witnesses.

The Counsel for Coll. Michelburn, the first time, were Serj. Osborne, Prin.
Sergeant at Law. Counselor Wingfield, and Counselor Wright.


Capt. Forward's were, Sir John Meade. Counselor Counselor


And according to the Order of the Lords Justices, both made their Appearance,
on the 19th. of November, at 9 a Clock. Present. Sir Charles Porter, Lord
Justice, and Chancellor of Ireland. Thomas Coningsby, Esquire, Lord Justice. And
General Ginkel, Commander in Chief, of the Army.


The Petition, and Answer, was read, and some Pleadings, heardon both sides;
and Forward, the Militia Captain, failing of any material Evidence, his Counsel
Petitioned for a longer time, and had time allowed them, till the last of
November. The Colonel pleaded the great Charge he was at, in keeping several
Witnesses in Town, and these of no mean Rank, as Capt. Hugh Caldwell, Capt. of
Dragoons. Capt. Anthony Shomberge, Capt. Cunnington, Capt. Stephen Miller, etc.
Which was 40 or 50 Shillings Charge, each Day, the Lords Justices promising
that he should be allowed the Charges of his Witnesses.

The last of November, being the second time of Hearing, and Pleading, on both
sides; and when it came again to the Test, our Militia Captain, failing of his
Witnesses; his Counsel Pleading they had 100 Miles to come up to Dublin; they
again got leave, from the Lord Justice Porter, for 15 Days, which was
lengthened to 17 Days; but it was ordered that Coll. Michelburn should be
allowed Ten Guinneys, toward the Charges he was at; that Day, being the last
Days Trial, was on the 17th. Day of December.

The Trial came on, the Counsel, on both sides, present.

Counsel for the Colonel. Serj. Osborne, princ. Serj. at Law. Serj. Broderick.
Counselor Wingfield. Counselor Wright.


Forward's Council were, The Recorder of Dublin. Counselor Counselor
Hancocke. Counselor Donnelsley.


The Witnesses on Forward's side were, Capt. Vaughan. Capt. Pa. Hamilton. 2
Troopers of Forward's Troops. Forward's Boy, and Vaughan's Boy.


This Vaughan was one of Forward's Party, and Deserted the same time that he
did, and promised his Men a Barrel of Beer, when they came home.

Hamilton was in Prison, on Execution, for about 36 l. the Night before the
first hearing, and the Money was paid, or engaged for, to William Groves, Esquire;
by Forward, for his enlargement. The two Troopeas were Parties, and fled with
Forward, when he Deferted his Post, and Plundered the Country; so that of all
the worthy Gentlemen, in the North of Ireland, Forward had none that would
concern themselves, knowing his Actions to be so base and villainous.

The Witnesses, on the Collonel's side, were as follows.

Major-John Hamilton. Capt. Hugh Colwell. Capt. And. Nisbet. Capt. James
Manson. Capt. Anth. Shomberge. Capt. Mich. Cunningham. Capt. Stephen Miller.
Lieut. Ferguson. Lieut. Tho. Bennet. Doctor Magee.
Besides the Letters of Sir Fr. Hamilton, and the Certificate, which of it self
were sufficient against Forward, or those Emissaries he brought with him.

That which Forward would have endeavored to have made out, was, that he, and
his Men, wanted Provisions, which was the reason they were forced to draw off
from the Siege; when it was sufficiently proved, that of the Prey that was
brought in for the Subsistence of the Army, the Militia of Forward's Troops
killed the Sheep; and let the Carcases stink in the Field, and sold the Skins
for 2 d. a piece.

The Lords Justices made a strict inquiry what became of the 6000 Cattle, as
(they were informed) were taken and brought to Sligo.

See the Evidence made by Capt. William Stewart, by order of Coll. Michelburne.

As also, the Certificate sworn to by Capt. Bickerstaff, and Capt. Cunningham,
which is reserr'd to the Narrative.

Before half the Witnesses of the Coll. side were sworn, the Lord Chancellor
threw the Pen out of his Ear, and spoke thus: Here the Militia complains that
they were starved, and that Coll. Michelburne converted the Prey to his own
use, when we find plainly, that the Militia plundered and took all away; and so
the Court rose.

And all People were fully satisfied what a piece of Roguery, and Villainy, was
designed to ruin a worthy honest Gentleman, who all a long, during the War of
Ireland, made it his study and care to act and do what was most necessary for
Their Majesty's Service.

Here follows the Journal that was given in before the Lords Justices, the
last day of Trial.

A Journal of Coll. Michelburne's second Expedition against Sligo, from July
the 30th. to his return, August the 8th. 1691.
THE 30th. of July, Thursday,
the Colonel began his March, from Ballyshannon, which was about 3 in the
Afternoon, and arrived at Manor Hamilton, about 12, that Night, and encamped
on the South Side of the Town; from whence he dispatched an Express to Major
Hamilton, to follow him, with an 100 Firelocks, to join him, at Collowny: The
Vanguard, commanded by Sir Francis Hamilton, Bar. the Rear-Guard, commanded by
Capt. Hugh Caldwell.

Friday; The 31st. of July, about 6 that Morning, we decamped from Maunor
Hamilton, and about 12, came to Drummaleavie, being 8 miles, where the Coll.
formed his Horse, and Foot, in a complear Body, and marched in Battallion, all
the Afternoon; about 5, we discovered the out-Scouts, and Sentinels of the
Enemy; about 7, we arrived at Collowny, and were most advautagiously posted, in
a Peninsula, having the Castle, and River, of Collowny, on our lest Wing, and a
Bog, on the right.

Saturday, The 1st. of August, we began our March about 6, in the morning, the
Vanguard commanded by Capt. Hugh. Caldwell; and the Rear-Guard by Capt. Andrew
Nisbet; Sir Francis Hamilton led the Militia; about 10, the Enemies out-Guards
were beaten in by a Detachement from the Van Guard; about 11, we drew up about
a Cannon Shot from the Town of Sligo: The Enemy saluted us with 15 Shot, of 18
Pounders, from the great Fort, but did us no damage; about 1, the Col. beat a
Parley, which continued till toward evening, where it was concluded, that a
Messenger, from the Enemy, should go, with an Officer of ours, to the General,
to get leave to go to Limericke, to Tyrconnel, for Terms to Surrender Sligo;
about 7, we marched back to Collowney, and encamped on the same Ground, we did
the night before; and in out way, 8 Men of a Troop were ordered, under the
command of Captain Anthony Shonberge, to match into the Enemies Country to
bring in Provisions for his Men, and commanded them to be back that night, or
the next morning.

Sunday, The 2d. of August, about 3 in the Afternoon, Major Hamilton joined us,
with 100 Firelocks, from Belturbet; and about this time Captain Shomberge
returned, with a Prey of about 1000, some Cowes, Sheep, and some Horses, on
which we mounted the Company of Granadeers. The Colonel ordered the
Quartermasters to deliver a fat Sheep between each four of their Men, and to be
ready to march early the next morning.

Monday, The 3d. Instant, we advanced the second time against Sligo, and the
same Orders to be observed, as was on Saturday; Lieut. Ferguson, and 20 Men
more were lest to guard the Baggage, and Prey, which was ordered to march in
the Rear; about 12, we took up our former ground, against Sligo; about 3, Coll.
Michelburne divided his Men into two Divisions, leaving the Major, and Sir
Francis Hamilton, to command the Right Division, on that side; and when the
Tide served, led the Lest Division, forced the Passage, over the River, and
Besieged Sligo, on the other side; that night he dispatched away an Express to
Ballyshannon, for Ammunition and Bread.

Tuesday, The 4th. Instant, the Coll. ordered the Soldiers to build Barrackes,
and Provisions of Cowes and Sheep, were given to the Men; as much as they
pleased to have.

Wednesday, The 5th. Instant, an Express arrived at the Camp, from the Lords
Justices, to Coll. Michelburne, not to make any further attempt against Sligo,
for that the General had taken other Measures, without his Excellencies, or
their particular Order, which commands were signified to him, from their
Lordships; between 11 and 12, the Garrison beat a Parley.

Thursday morning, being the 6th. Instant, Capt. Forward, and his Troop, Capt.
Vaughan, and his Troops, with others of the Militia, deserted their Posts; the
former forces his Passage at Ballysadeare-Bridge, and plunders the Country, and
about 60 miles through the Mountains, makes to his home.

This day, about 3 in the afternoon, being the 6th. of this Instant, Articles
were concluded with the Garrison, and the Major, and Coll. Scot's Brother,
dispatched away, with the said Articles, to be signed by the General.

This evening, Capt. William Stewart was ordered to divide what Prey was left,
equal, amongst the Militia, and standing Army; and the same night, the Militia
seized on the whole, as well what belonged to the standing Army, as their own,
and entirely Deserted the Camp, leaving Coll. Michelburne, and Sir Francis
Hamilton (the River being between) in apparent peril of being cut off by the
Garrison; the said Coll. and Sir Francis Hamilton, had left them but 150 Men,
each, and a Troop of Dragoons; the Garrison of Sligo being this time 2
Regiments, Captain Vaughan prevailed with his Men to Desert, promising them a
Barrel of Beer, at Bunccanagh, the place of his Residence.

Friday, The 7th. of this Instant, the Detachement, under the Command of Sir
Francis Hamilton, and Capt. Anthony Shomberge, were ordered to cross the River,
and join the Colonel, on a certain Account of O Donnell's advance, with a Body
of Men, to beat up the Camp.

Saturday morning, being the 8th. Instant, the Forces were ordered to decamp,
and march back to Ballyshannon; the Coll. staying behind, accompanied with Sir
Francis Hamilton, Capt. Charles Hamilton, Capt. William Steward, and other
Officers of the Militia, with the two Troops of Dragoons, of the standing Army,
to observe the motion of the Enemy; but finding the Garrison not inclined to
Sally out, about 9 that morning drew off, and marched to Ballyshannon.

In which, foregoing Journal, it is discovered, that one Forward, a Militia
Captain, deserted his Post, and not only lost the taking the Town, that time,
but he had like to have been the ruin of those few Forces the Coll. had left
with him. About the latter end of August, he finds the said Capt. Forward, at
Ballyshannon, and gave order for his Confinement; and for an Example, to the
rest of the Militia, for his Cowardice and Miscemeanours, (it being the third
time he so unworthily gave the Enemy Encouragement) sent the said Capt. John
Forward Prisoner to General Ginkel, who ordered him to give in Bail, to answer
his Misdeamour: But, instead of being called to an account, he informs the
Lords Justices, by many salse Allegations, and Affidavits, against Coll.
Michelburne, and had two Months time to act his Villainy, whilst the Colonel
was reducing Sligo. And, amongst the rest, one Robb, a Tobacco-Seller, at our
Camp, and Confederate with Forward, swears to 6000 black Cattle, and
innumetable Sheep, and Horses: And as soon as the salse Affidavits were made,
before the Lords Justices, he is sent away to London, to the King and Council;
and that all things should have Success, he is sent to a Counsel as unworthy as
themselves; to enlarge on Robb's Affidavit, and on the 3d. of December, the
Petition of George Robb was read before the King and Council. And in the Prayer
of the Petition, desires that it may not be returned back into Ireland, for
that it was there already, which shows, that the Villain had no mind it should
be there, for that he was so well known. And at a Conspiracy at Londonderry,
held by Forward, and Vaughan; Vaughan declared they had laid so deep a
Foundation for the ruin of him, meaning Coll. Michelburne, that it was
impossible for him to escape. But that extraordinary Action, in taking Sligo,
he was fearful would spoil all their measures, this was told Coll. Michelburne,
by Capt. Henry Hare. It will not be amiss to give you the Prayer of his
Petition in length.

The Prayer of Robb's Petition to the King.
MAY it therefore please Your Majesty, to take the same into Your Princely
Consuleration; and that the said Coll. Michelburne, Capt. Boyd, and all others
concerned, may personally appear before Your Majesty's, to answer your
Petitioner's complaint, and that your Petitioner may not be returned into
Ireland, having already made his complaints there; and that Your Majesty will
likewise be pleased to grant an Order, to Humphty Booth, Roger Smith, and
William Nicholson of Sligo, Esquire; and to Andrew Knox, John Hamilton, of the
County of Donegall, Esquire; and Robert Delapp, of Ballyshannon, Merchant, to
examine such Witnesses as the Petitioner shall bring before them; and upon the
Return, and Reaning the Depositions, so taken, Your Majesty will be further
pleased to grant such further Order, for the Petitioner's Relief, in the
Premises, as to Your Majesty shall seem meet.

And your Petitioner, will ever Prey, etc. Chapter Mountague.

The Reference.
At the Court at White Hall, the 30th. of December, 1691. Present, The King's
most Excellent Majesty,

UPON Reading the annexed Petition of George Robb, Merchant, and several
Inhabitants of the Country of Donnegall, and Sligo, complaining of Coll.
Michelburne, Capt. Boyd, and others, under their command, for taking away
Goods, black Cattle, Sheep, and Horses, from the Petitioners. It is this day
ordered, by his Majesty in Council, That it be, and it is hereby, referred to
the Right Honorable, the Lords Justices of Ireland, to examine the Petitioners
Allegations, and to give such Orders and Directions therein, as their Lordships
shall see Cause.

Part of Robb's Affidavit, as follows, and let the Readet judge the rest.

THAT several of the Inhabitants applied themselves to the said Coll. and
particularly, Mr. Matthew Ormsby, a Protestant Inhabitant, and showed him the
said Gen: Ginkel's Protection, and that he was a Protestant, never in Arms, and
that his Cattle had been taken up by his Party. and were under his Guard.; but
the said Coll. did never give him any order nor restore him the said Cattle.
Now to prove what George Robb swore is extreme false. See the following
Certificate from Mr. Matthew Ormsby, whom he instances as a Person prejudiced.

A Certificate from the Protestant Inhabitants, in the County of Sligo.
WE the undernamed Persons, being Protestants, and Inhabitants of the Barrony
of Tirrecus, in the County of Sligo, do acknowledge to have received, by order
of Coll. Michelburne, one hundred and twenty Cowes, in full satisfaction of all
the Cowes, Horses, and Sheep, taken from us, and the rest of the Protestants,
of the said Barrony, and County, lately taken from us, by the men under the
command of the said Coll. the 16th. day of August, 1691.

Matthew Ormsby. John Shenan. Dugdall Boyd. Matthew John Boyd. Kath. Brown.
John Ormsby. Anne Griffith.


Robb's CHARACTER.
Port of Sligoe,
THESE may certify all Persons concerned, That George Robb was formerly an
Inhabitant of this place, and a Shopkeeper here for several years together; In
which Station, he, the said George Robb, proved so troublesome and litigious,
amongst his Neighbors, both in the Town and Country; That he has deservedly
fallen under a very evil fame and report, with the Inhabitants, his Neighbovrs,
of all sorts, having been very often found guilty of as great villainy and
knavery, in his dealings here, as are practiced, and perpetrated, by the most
profligate Villains, under which untoward Circumstances, and Character, the
said George Robb was forced to leave this Place, and Country; and since he did
so, we are credibly informed, from others, that he has continued his
endeavors to render his Character as notoriousty Evil, in all places, as it
was whilst he lived an Inhabitant amongst us, here; The Collectors of this Port
desiring a Character of this George Robb, we have cert^fied our Knowledge of
him, this sixth day of February, 1691.

Phil. Cox. Law. de Butts. George Croston, Provost, William Cranford. Ja.
Barret.


This from the Sheriff of the County,

I Have known George Robb, these several Years, and always knew him to have the
Character of a shifting knavish Fellow, in his Dealings, more I cannot say,
then that I am satisfied this is Truth.

William Nicholson.

So much for George Robb, Merchant.

The Charge against John Forward, a Militia Captain, sworn by the several
Persons underwritten.
Colonel Michelburne having received Orders from his Excellency, Lieut. Genesis
Ginkel, to Summons Sligo, did on the first of August, last, appear before the
Town, and delivered his message to Sir Teige O Regan, the Governor; but
finding his Advantage then appearing so great, did on Monday, following,
prosecute his Siege, which had so great Success, that he brought them to
Articles; and that the Garrison had been undoubtedly, in the Obedience of Their
Majesty's, had not Capt. Forward, as an Exampse, to the rest of the Militia,
deserted his Post, at the noon time of the day, with his whole Troop.

Stephen Miller. And. Nisbet.

That at Ballisadoe-Bridge, be forced his passage, against the Out-guards, and
went and plundered the protected Persons.

Robert Wilson. Robert Robinson.

That he wilfully, maliciously, and contrary to Order, broke the Articles that
were signed, and sealed, by the General's command, in behalf of Their sacred
Majesty's, in Order to the delivery of the Garrison, and Forts of Sligo; that
he violated the General's, and Michelburne's Protections; that he plundered,
stripped, and preyed, the protected, as well as those not protected.
notwithstanding, the Protections were produced, and that without respect of
Persons.

Samuel Ferguson.

That he drove away to the number of 800 black Cattle, besides 100 Horses, and
Mares, and loaded 38 Horses of the plunder, of several sufficient men's Houses,
with Beds, Blankets, Sheets, Ruggs, Pors, Kettles, and with all sorts of Men's
and Women's Clothes, and a great quantity of woollen and Linen Yarn,
notwithstanding, he was commanded the contrary.

Samuel Ferguson.

That when Coll. Michelburne heard of the said Capt. Forward's return, with the
Prey, so unjustly gotten, he sent Capt. Manson, with a small party of men, to
stop the said Forward, who (in a Rebellious and Mutinous manner) drew up his
Troop, in defiance of the said Colonel, and said, he cared not one F -- for
him, the said Coll. or any Authority he had.

James Manson.

That when the said Officer returned, and gave an account, to the said Coll.
Michelburne, of Capt. Forward's mutiny; he, the said Coll. was forced to send
two Troops of Dragoons after him, 13 miles, before he could be brought to
deliver back part of the Cattle, he had carried away.

John Hamilton. Andrew Nisbett.

This is the greatest part of what was alleged against him before the Lords
Justices.

All this considered, Coll. Michelburne had very good reason to send such a man
Prisoner to Lieut. Genesis Ginkel.

Boil, December the 9th. 1691.
The Lord Kingston's Letter,
THere is a Trial to be, the 15th. of this month, betwixt Coll. Michelburne,
and Capt. Forward, of the County of Donnygall, concerning a Prey, taken by the
latter, near this Town, the 6th. of August, last, my Tenants were for the most
part concerned, and all that were, had Protections, and Certificates, of
claiming the benefit of the Lords Justices Proclamation, in July. Forward was
most barbarous in the thing, and vallued no good Qualification, the People were
under then, which none, in the Kingdom, could be under better; their Submission
being as early as it could be, and their Behavior, since the War, worthy of
Justice, at least, my printed Protection from the General, in their Favor,
produced at the taking of the Prey, met equal dis-reguard; some Informations,
taken by me, on this occasion, will be found in the hands of Mr. John Brett,
now in Dublin; my request to you, is to appear, against Forward, at the Trial,
and keep him, at least, under such Circumstances, as may find the poor
oppressed Subjects earliest Justice; you shall not want sufficient Proof, to
this purpose, on your reasonable warning, at any time; and your care shall have
the Acknowledgement of,

SIR, Your Friend, Kingston.

To Mr. William Donnelly, in Dublin.
Mr. Brett will be found at Mr. Bradys, at the Black Lion, Pill Lane.

Be sure to retain a good smart Council, and let me find you omit nothing, and
that you are very active therein.

Commissioners, Sligo.




The Examination of Jasper Brett, of Brickcliffe, in the said County, taken
before the Right Honorable Lord Baron of Kingston.
THE said Examinant being duly sworn on the Holy Evangelists, and examined on
his Oath, deposes, That Capt. Forward, high sheriff, of the County of
Dunnigall, and his Militia Troops, on, or about, the Sixteenth of August, last,
preffed this Examinant, and leveral other protected Persons, in the said
County, who lived either in their dwelling Houses, or other Places, assigned
them, by Coll. Wasehearth, from whom they took Protections, and Certificates,
of submitting some Weeks before to the Lords Justices Declaration; that this
Examinant, being that day (at the time of the taking the Prey) on his return
from the Boil, to his own House, did meet the said Forward, and part of the
Prey, near Bellanafad, within three miles of the Boil, to whom this Examinant
complained of the Injustice done him; particularly therein, having Coll.
Wisehearth's Protection, and Certificate, of the twentieth of July, his
Landlord, Gilbert Ormsby, of Toberraddy, in the County of Roscomen, Esquire; his
Protection, Licensed thereunto, by his Excellency Lieutenant General Ginkle;
and one Colonel Michelburne's Protection, to whom this Examinant applied
himself, upon his first Appearance, before Sligo, and who was farther
tolerated by him, by way of Protection, in Writing, to live in his own House,
to whom the said Forward replied, That he did not value, not would regard his
Protection, but would be civil to him, as a Gentleman; that this Examinant
insisted more particularly on his Protection from Coll. Michelburne. under
whose command, the said Forward came into the County; the said Forward replied,
he would not obey it, that he thought himself as sufficient as Michelburne,
that that night he would not suffer this Examinant to stay with him, where the
Prey was kept; that this Examinant attended him the next morning, he found him
with Capt Francis King, one of the Justices of the Peace, of the said County,
and one Mr. Johnson, Servant to the Right Honorable the Lord Baron of
Kingston, pleading in favor of the protected Country, affirming their due
Subjection, to Their Majesty's Government, and offering my Lord Kingston's
Protection, from his Excellency Lieut. Genesis Ginkel, in favor of his Lordships
Tenants; all which, met disregard from the said Forward, Consenting only, at
length, to run through the Prey, and leave, as it were, a moiety, but short
thereof, as Charity to the infinite number of poor people that followed.

This Examinant further says, that the said Forward took then from him, and
his Tenants, forty two Cowes, besides Calves, and Heisers, a riding Nagg, and
Twelve Garroons, and Mares.

And farther says, That those that called at his House, when Michelburne's
Protection was produced them, tore the same, and threw it in the Dirt.

And further says, That no part of the said Prey, was nearer Ballimore, than
this Examinant's House, who was, as aforesaid, tolerated to live in his House,
about four miles distance from Ballymore.

That the rest of the said Prey, for the most part, was taken within two or
three miles of the Boil. And further says not, taken before me, December the
1st. 1691.

Kingston.

The Lords Justices Letter to the Lord Nottingham, Principal Secretary of State.
My Lord,
SOmetime since we received Her Majesty Commands, by your Lordship, to inquire
into the reason of Coll. Michelburne's withdrawing the Bloccade of Sligo,
before the delivery of it, pursuant to the first Capitulation, which we could
not do, till the Campaign was over, since then, we have examined the matter,
which at first appeared to us, as if the said Coll. had causelessly left his
Post, and that the Enemy took that Advantage to break their Artieles, and
refused to deliver up the Town. But upon hearing Witnesses, produced by those,
who charged this miscarriage upon him; and also, his Defense, and Witnesses
produced to prove the truth thereof; we do not find there was any just cause to
Charge the said Coll. Michelburne, with any neglect, or default. But it
appeared to us upon the Proof, and Examination aforesaid; that his drawing off
from thence was unavoidable, and that he could no longer continue there,
without the certain ruin of those few Forces remaining with him, which we
desire your Lordship to lay before His Majesty,

My Lords, Your Lordships most humble Servant. Gha. Porter. Tho. Conningsby.


To the Right Honorable, the Earl of Nottingham, Principal Secretary of State.

To conclude, Here, you see, is a just and true Account, of Coll Michelburne's
faithful Discharge, of his Duty both to Their Majesty's, and his Country, and
as we say, He is a good Soldier, that goes no farther than he is commanded; and
by the foregoing Discourse, he had no positive Orders for going against Sligo;
yet when they found he had so good Success, they highly applauded him, and
encouraged him to prosecute that which he had so fortunately begun. For says
the Lords Justices, You cannot do your King a greater Service, then to get that
place; says the General, I have directed O Donnel to join you, to endeavor the
Reducement of Sligo, which your good Fortune has already brought to Submission.
And in another Letter, from his Excellency, he acquaints the Coll. That he had
ordered the Militia, that lay at Athlone, to march to the North, and be posted
as he shall direct; and after the care you have used in this Affair, I am sorry
it did not succeed: However, you have done your part very well, and would make
a good Addition to your Services, if you could yet find any way for treating
with Sir Teague O Regan, and getting the place. You see that he so treated with
Sir Teague O Regan, with his drawn Sword, as to beat him out of Sligo. Nor in
the whole, can there be reasonably the least shadow of complaint, to charge
Coll. Michelburne with any Mis-behaviour through his whole Service; though,
there are not wanting, those malicious people, who not only study to render him
little, but if possible to make him incapable of serving his King or Country,
and to have him turned out of His Majesty's Service, and his Regiment broken.

Such envious Spirits, us true, are at work, and though perhaps his Martial
Education has not so entirely qualified him for a Courtier, to be ready guard,
against those secret Machinations against him: However, he thanks Heaven, that
he lives in an Age, where Virme and Honor are their own Supporters, Desert and
Fidelity stand their own Court-Friends, and their Foundation too strong to be
supplanted by Parasites or Flatterers. As some farther Testimonials of the
Collonel's Behavior. I shall only subjoin these two Certificates, one from the
City of Londonderry, and the other from Colraine.

WE the Mayor, Aldermen, and Burgesses of the City of Londonderry, do hereby
Attest and Certify, that Colonel John Michelburne, Governor of the said
City, in and since the Siege of Derry, having his Regiment, or a great part of
them, Quartered here many Months kept the said Garaison in good Order,
Discipline, and Temper, whilst his own Regiment were Quartered among us, and
paid their Quarters, and was careful of the Preservation of the Place, both
from any Insults of the Enemy, and from all Irregularities of his Soldiers, and
by all means in his power, made his Government and Interest in this Garrison,
on all Occasions easy and pleasing to us, for which Services and Civil
Deportment, he was Elected and Sworn Alderman of this City.

In Testimony whereof, We have hereunto set our Hands and Affixed the Common
Seal of this City, the Second day of February, 1690. Ger. Squire, Mayor. Samuel
Norman. Alex. Iomkins. Alex. Lecky. Tho. Moncreife Arvice. Hen. Ash Arvice.
Will. Crookshanks, Com. Rob. Shennan. Will. Morisen. John Harvey. Fran. Nevil.
Albert Hall. Alex. Coningham. Tho. Moore. Samuel Leeson. John Gilling. John
Crookshanks. John Nightingall. Geo. Gravel. John Mogridge. Will. Mackie. Rob.
Harvey.


WE the Inhabitants of the Town of Colraine, do Certify, that during the time
the Regiment belonging to the Honorable Colonel John Michelburne, Governor
of Londonderry, did Quarter and keep Garrison in this place, both Officers and
Soldiers, behaved themselves very Orderly, and Civily, to the Town and
Gountrey, paying thankfully for what they called for, all which we Certisie as
Truth, to whom it may Concern. Dated at Colraine, this third day of February,
Anno Dom. 1690.

William Godfrey, Mayor. Rich. Adams. Edm. Haward. Alex. Mac Phillip. Daniel
Brown. Richard Lynam. Thomas Lance. John Twaddel. David Wilson. John Ga' James
Oustiane. John Gardner. William Ross. Hugh Bankhead.


WE the Inhabitants of the Town of Antrim, Do hereby Certify, That during the
time the Honorable Colonel John Michelburne, Governor of Londonderry, his
Regiment did Quarter, and keep Garrison in this Place; both Officers and
Soldiers behaved themselves Civily, without Robbing, or Plundering the Town or
Conntrey, but thankfully paying for what they called for: All which we Certify
as Truth, to whom it may concern.

Given under our Hands this 28th. of Januar. 1690/1. James Shennan. William
Stewart. John Mac Master. Tho. Gredell. William Colvill. William Whitby.
Alexander Hanna. John Nabb. William Young. Rob. Weire. John Brigson. Thomas
Spencer. Robert Coningham.


FINIS.

