The merry: Discourse between two Lovers: Or the Joyful meeting betwixt John
and Betty.
John he woes Betty but Betty does mock
And tells him in his cradel he has got a knock,
But yet no denial of her he will take
Until her Life for him she will lay at a stake.
To a new Tune or Dighby's Farewell.


Man. MY dearest come hither and listen tome
I Will give t^oe a plum-cake to sit on my atnee,
Besides we will have a whole flaggon of Bear,
It shall co (...) a grok we'll be merry my Dear.
And now I Will tell thee to finish all strife,
If thou will but have me I Will make th^emy Wife,
For I have made a vow where ever I be,
To marry with none but pretty Betty.
My Mother is ancient and thus does reply
That I shall have all when so e're she does dye:
My Aunt she has promised to give me a Cow,
I prithee sweet Betty can thou love me now;
Besides I have 10 s. which they does ^o^ know,
All this on my true Love i will freely bestow,
For I have made a vow, etc.

maid Away thou fond changeling go hence hie home
And tell to thy Mother her Son is a mome
Bid her to undress thee and lap the in a clout
For the best of thy brains are newly dropped out
Do think i am a fool in thy lap for to sit
When as thou want both Money and Wit
Thy 10 s. pray keep and thy Plumb cake for why
Thou never shall embrace such a Betty as I.
Your looks they do show what pottage you love
Which makes you in my company thus to shove
Do see how thy coat it is laced down before
With drinking i will warrant thou love a whore
Thou talkest of thy manhood and of thy birthright
Yet with a puddin I know you can fight
Or a bowl full of Curds stood in but in your way,
Then I warrant you Jack Pudding he wins the day.

Man. O What is the reason that thou ^rt so coy
that thou should so fear me or thus dou reply
I ne,re gave the cause me thus to despise
But always took delight in thy pretty black eyes
Then he not so cruel my love and my joy
I Will be thy jewel to get thee a boy
I Am both young and lusty healthful and sound
I do it at the first I Will venture a pound
Then be not so scornful to him that is thy friend
Least you by some prodigal's caught in the end
Nothing but plain dealing I mean I protest
My name is John downright and that is the best
I mean the not to cozen nor the to Trappan
But if thoult be the women than i will be the man
Than lets join together if thou will agree
For none but sweet Betty my true Love shall be.

Maid. You talk much of true Love but pray you lme tell
Where it does grow or where it does dwell
For the world now adays it is come to that pass
That every snotty Nose must have a Lass
So he can but get money for to be Wed
He must have a wife and with her be bed
But what follows after he cares not a pin
Tho he has nere a house for to put his head in.
But if that all Maidens my counsel would take
These young men should woe till their hearts do ache
Except they had means or something in store
Whereby to keep the Wolf from the door
For a maid to be wedded to a man I do know
The which has but little for to take too
She is bound to Care, both sorrow and strife,
And must think to live poorly all days of her life.

Man. For that my own dearest (...) y take no care,
If I have but a mouthful yet thou shall (...)
After wealth do not linger 'twill vanish away
When true love and virtue will never decay
Therefore be contented and do not repine
Thou shall not repent it if I make thee mine
I Will maintain thee most brave and gallant to see
For none but sweet Betty my true Love shall be.
It may be my dear Honey that you may have thos^
That make suit unto thee in gallanter Clothes,
But trust me and try me and thou shall me find
I will not be wavering like to the VVindt
Nor I will be no Spend-thrift my stock to VV(...)
But home to my Honey be sure i will make have.
For I take much delight in thy company
Then grant me thy favor and true Love to be.

Maid. Your words and your speeches are very rare
And as for your carriage it is very fair,
Which makes me I cannot choose but consent
And I hope that afterward never shall repent,
And what thou have spoken I to it give way
And dearly will lovee thee by night and by day.
Tho long I denied the yet take this from me
Now pretty sweet Betty thy true Love shall be.

He took her by the hand and he gave her a kiss
And promised her more now since she was his,
For that time they parted but promised that Tide
His pretty sweet Betty she should be his Bride,
And thus all young Lovers may hear what it was
Tho Maidens seem coy on it yet they will yield at l(...)
For new John he lives most gallant to see
And does embrace his pretty Betty.
Printed for John Clark at the Bible and Harp in West Smith-field.


