AN EXACT RELATION OF All such Occurrences As have happened in the several
COUNTIES OF Donegall, Londonderry, Tyrone, and Fermanagh, in the North of
IRELAND, Since the beginning of this horrid, bloody, and unparaleld REBELLION
there, begun in October last.

In all humility presented to the Honorable House of COMMONS in ENGLAND;

By Lieutenant Colonel AVDELEY MERVYN, The Fourth of JUNE, 1642.

Published by Order of the House of COMMONS.

LONDON, Printed by Luke Norton and John Field, for Ralph Rounthwait.

Die Sabbati, 4. Iunii, 1642.
A Relation of such Occurrences as have happened in the several Counties of
Donnegale, Tyrone, Fermanagh, and Londonderry, since the beginning of the
Rebellion in Ireland in October last; presented to this House by Lieutenant
Colonel Audeley Mervyn, was this day read. And it is ordered, That he be
desired to Print it; And that no man shall Re-print it, but such as he shall
appoint, without the particular Order of this House.

H. Elsinge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

A Relation OF SVCH OCCVRRENCES as have happened in the several Counties of
Donnegall, Tyrone, Fermanagh, and Londonderry, since the beginning of the
Rebellion in Ireland, in October last; In all humility presented to the
Honorable House of Commons in England, by Lieutenant Colonel Audeley Mervyn,
June 4. 1642.
Mr. SPEAKER:
IF my wishes could prevail against the necessity of the times, or if by
hieroglyphics I could express the sense of that trust, in which by a sympathy
with my Country, and request of my friends I stand now engaged, I should be
most unwilling to salute this Sense with a Tragedy, or to present unto the
continued, yet unwearied labors of this Honorable Assembly, any out-bread
discontents, since too too many are unfortunately hatched and nourished within
your own climate; whilst the Ship sailed upon smooth waters, the Disciples
lulled their Master asleep, but when the thunder broke forth, the lightnings
flashed, waves crowded on heaps, then their fears pleaded an apology for
their want of faith and manners to awaken him.

Master Speaker, the times were when the Kingdom of Ireland sailed upon smooth
waters; Leinster and Munster never disquieted in their estates; Connagh
stretched forth it self in the happy assurance of its illegal settlement;
Vlster, though wounded and in Capite by alteration of her tenures, yet was
salved and recovered by the Royal promise for its reparation.

National grievances were ready for the ^^^kle (in which let me never forgett
the great asistance and respect our Committee received from this Honorable
house) and by a favorable digression excuse our Kingdom from a suspicious
Lethargy, that such a horrid monster, as this present Rebellion, should be
conceived among us, and yet never felt to kick in the womb, nor struggle in
the birth: Since that discontent in the Subject, which is the forerunner of
Rebellion, (...)

But now (Master Speaker) the thunder roares from the Rebels Canons, the
lightning flashes from their fireworks, the waves of innocent blood crowds up
in heaps, then pardon our just fears if they address themselves to this House
in these words, si deseris tu, perimus, only in this I must contradict the
application; you have wanted no vigilancie nor we sense thereof, nor faith
therein.

Master Speaker, The relation I shall trouble your patience withal, will be of
such particulars as are confined within the limits of the County of Tyrone, the
County of Londonderry, the County of Fermanagh, and the County of Donegall,
the greater part of the Province of Vlster; to all which, my eyes have been the
witnesses, or else balanced with equal credit: for as for such passages that
are grounded upon hear-saies, I esteem an unwarrantable discourse for the
gravity of this audience; besides all ways of intelligence from our friends
have received such obstructions by our enemies, that from the ninth of
November, until the third of May, we never received one syllable from Dublin,
in what condition those parts stood, which I doubt not, though uncertain to us
in the same Kingdom, is but stale and common in this: and by the self-same
rule I conceive the state in Ireland are as doubt full of our condition in
those parts, and not able to know where our shoe pinches us, except they can
say that it wrings the whole foot, which is too manifestly true.

Though the poison of this Rebellion was diffused through the veins of the whole
Kingdom, yet it broke the skin with its plague-tokens in the County of Tyrone
and Fermanagh first.

The suddenness of our surprisall, and the nature of it, was so unexpected,
that the Inhabitants could scarcely believe themselves prisoners, though in
their chains, and the Irish servant which overnight was undressing his Master
in duty, the next morning was stripping Master and Mistress with a too-officious
tyranny.

Here in the twinkling of an eye, the Corporations, Towns and Villages
proclaimed their Situation afar off by their fire and smoke; here you might
see hundreds of men, women, children, of all conditions and estates, that had
lived in most plentiful and secure habitations, exposed to the rock for
shelter, to the Heavens for clothing, so that many hundreds in a few days
starved upon the mountains.

Where was here any expectation of relief? the husband could not relieve the
wife, nor both, or either of them their children: the Master could not provide
for his family, neither was there any reciprocal duty or service from these to
be performed to the advantage mine stained every visage; The Landlords
Paramount title over the Tenant, was with himself out of doors, and they which
formerly were, and now should have been most beneficial to the distressed,
were most burdensome to themselves and others, as being less read, in this
hard and untutored Chapter, of personal and most necessary wants.

Who can remember without grief, the general burden of each expression Give
us bread, or else we perish? and their famishing demands only satisfied with a
comfortless Echo of the same words?

But this nakedness and famine, and their male and female issue (varletie of
diseases) were adjudged overflow executioners, of the surviving British. Then
entered the sword, destroying at the first, with the scabberd on. The Rebels
under a fair and coulerable pretense of a Convoy inviting the hidden and
scattered Protestants into a body, that so they might (as they most
perfidionsly did) make each surviving man, an Executor to the last murdered in
his presence, and so the whole live one by one extinguished, the Irish Priest
as Ordinary, administered for all.

This the Sword acted in a Fox-skinne scabberd, and then flourished in one of a
Lions skin; seeking whom it may devour, and devouring all that it sought
after; for I can confidently affirm, that out of the County of Fermanagh one
of the best planted Counties with English, I could never give an account of 20
men escaped, except (which is most improbable) they should fly to Dublin; as
for the chiefest (my own estate meeting upon the Marches of that County)
having inquired from prisoners, by name for such and such, they have informed
me they were all massacred.

The Blackwater in the County of Tyrone, a most fertile soil, and inhabited
with the English had its streams dyed in blood, there being at one time above
200. souls murdered upon the Bridge, and flung down the River. I could
instance alike in many places, but that we are to allow buried misery too
timely a resurrection.

Master Speaker, in these two last instances, I have only named the English,
not but that I please my self better in concluding both Enlish and Scotch,
under the title of British, but that there seems to be some reason; for in
the Infancy of this Rebellion, the Rebels made open Proclamations upon pain
of death that no Scotch man should be stirred in body, goods, or Lands, and
that they should to this purpose write over the Lyntels of their doors, that
they were Scotch men, and so destruction might pass over their families; nay,
I read a Letter that was sent by two of the Rebels titulary Collonells, Co^^^^^
(...), a quarter of an hour be^^^^ (...) Ballyshannon; and there slew
outright 180. of their men, without loss of one man on our side, (praised be
God) which was directed To our Honorable Friends, the Gentlemen of the never
conquered Scotch-Nation, it expressed, that they were both of one extraction in
former times, joynt-assistants, that their quarrel, if aright understood by
them, as by the best of Scotland, they would be otherwise advised, then to join
with us, and many other passages that I may seasonably forget here; I only
touch this, not as judging where there is smoke, there is some fire, but to
observe their policy, which, though to some that were suddenly surprised,
might afford security to retreat into some place of safety, yet it was
ridiculously entertained, and as resolutely scorned by the Scottish Nation.

Hitherto (with your patience) is rough drawn the general estate, and
condition of the British, who were now betaking themselves to better
resolutions, in opposition to the enemies fury.

I shall begin with the County of Fermanagh, where those that had escaped the
fire and sword of Rory Mac Guyre, the Arch-Rebell in that County, brother to
the Lord of Eniskellen, drew themselves into Eniskellen, a place fortified by
nature, under the Command of Sir William Cole, Colonel. The Inhabitants or
that County of the other side of the Loughearne, resorted to Master Cathcart,
then High Sheriff of the County, and Garrisoned in the Castle of Moneigh,
Lilgold, and Tullagh, Mac Guire having without any opposition in that Country,
wasted, burnt, killed, and pillaged, betook himself, with the united forces
thereof to beleaguer Eniskellen, which diverse times with great bodies, and
threats equal, but with fictions exceeding them both, as that Ireland was
taken, which for a great while we might all of us easily, but with grief,
believe. Howsoever it pleased God, that Col: Cole, with great resolution and
valor maintained the same, and made diverse sallies in the night, upon his
Quarter, doing very good execution, insomuch that Mac Guire thought it an
unseasonable air to Quarter so near Eniskellen, and then began to adventure his
fortunes upon the other side of the Lough, where Master Cathcart, and many
brave Scottish Cavaliers, against so great a Body, though not able to maintain
a field, by diverse resolute and discreet Sallies, chased, and slaughtered the
enemy.

One I will particularize, though not crowned with success of execution,
equal to the former, where 800 of the enemies, being drawn up into three
Bodies, before their Quarters, they sallyed out with 60 Horse, routed their
Battalions, and killed 35 of their men, further execution being prevented by a
contiguous wood.

There were two Castles called Tullagh, and Lisgold, which by (...) (...) pressed
by personal wants, delivered themselves upon composition, which taught
succeeding Garrisons to stick unto their old Creed, for after the surrender,
they were all massacred.

Master Speaker, Having no notes of remembrance, and much pressed by my friends
unto this disorderly discourse, or were it not that the reverence of the place
countenanced it, I should esteem it like a tale, beginning (Once upon a time.)
I shall a while leave the County of Fermanagh, because these are passages
precedent, to the Commission for raising its Regiment of 500 Foot, and
recollect my memory, in what posture the County of Tyrone stood; most part of
the British, of the Barony of Omagh, made their escape toward Newtown, and
Strebane, both places being of the Barony of Strebane, in the same County. The
Barony of Clogher resorted to the Agher; The remaining Barony being the Barony
of Dongarnon, were marched up by Sir Thomas Staples, and Lieutenant Colonel
Saunderson, forth of that Barony to New-Town, nigh twenty miles, through the
barbarous mountains of Monterlynny, one of the greatest fastnesses of Ireland,
to join with Sir William Stewarts forces there, where they were joyfully
entertained, and after 2 or 3 days stay there, in a very unseasonable time of
the year marched to Agher, being 600. in number, but contrary to the persuasions
of that Noble Lieutenant Colonel, and the High Sheriff, Captain Maxwell, a
Gentleman of singular forwardness, were divided by one Master William Stewart,
of Fiagh, a man of good parts, but very unfortunately applied into Dongannon,
back again, where the greatest part of them were slain by two and three,
without satisfaction of one drop of Rebels blood, in requital of theirs, and
those Gentlemen that remained with Lieutenant Colonel Saunderson, this
unfortunate division happening in the face of Sir Phelomy O Neill, encouraged
the numerous Rebel so far, that he and his Company was forced to retreat
toward the Omagh, and so to New-towne, the Town of Agher being entered by the
Rebels, and burnt immediately: Yet I must not here forget the resolute attempt,
and manfull defending of the Agher Castle by Master Archibald Erskin, Clarke,
Son and Heir to Sir James Erskin a Gentleman of 1000 pounds per annum, of
temporal estate; who being beleaguerd a few days before by 2000. men, with
the assistance of Archibald Hamilton, Esquire, and his Tenants Sallyed out with
80 Horse, and twelve Musketeers upon a body of the Rebels, being about 600
and routed them with the execution of above 100. of which some were
considerable as any in those parts, with the loss only of Captain Barkley a
young Gentleman, much lamented. Master Archibald Hamilton afterward, a zealous
Gentleman, both before and during his continuance in the Kingdom rounded with
some others of note.

About two days after, some twenty horse with Master Archibald Hamilton, a
bold Soldier, forraged into the County of Monaghan, where they encountered with
a strong party commanded by the great Mac Kenna, which they encountered very
fiercely, and at last routed the Rebel, killed one of the special Commanders
that had been a Commander in Spain, slew about 30 horsemen, and 20. foot, and
recovered many of the British cattle having received wounds, and dismounted in
the skirmish, but recovered both life and horse.

Some three days before this, Sir William Steward marched out with some foot
and horse from Newtowne, pursued the Rebel, and so marched to the Agher, and
after some stay, retired home with great store of cattle; though both he and
we could have wished (if we had the spirit of prophecy) to have kept the fields
longer: For the O Neils and Mac Gwires who were then with their forces; the
leaders of the Rebellion, discomfited by former service, sought for
protections, but animated by Master William Stewarts division, (and this
retiring march though grounded upon warrantable discipline) beleaguered the
Agher Castle, Sir Phelomy O Neill, and Collonell Rory, Mac Gwire being
personally present with 4000 men; and though they seconded their attempts by
promises of honorable quarter, reinforced it by bloody threats in case of
refusal: planted a small field piece to batter, and in a dark night storm the
gate and bawne upon all parts. Yet by the resolution of Master Erskin, and the
ready fire of Sir Henry Titchbourns old company beat them from their walls and
scaling ladders with the loss of 200 of their resolutest men.

Sir Phelemy O Neill retired his journey, burning along to Dongannon, Mac Gwire
in his retreat assaulted Aghatyan Castle, commanded by Captain Maxwell, who
upon sight of Mac Gwires drawing up, issued out some few musquetteers into the
ditches, and beat him off from any further attempt, who in his march burnt all
Fermanagh toward Eniskellen. About that time Captain Thomas Newburgh with a
few men he raised in great hazard of his own person; took in Castle Derrick,
a place of great consequence and strength, killed the men, possessed their arms:
in his absence being gone for ammunition, left the Castle to a young Gentleman
Master Durdo; when Sir Phylomy O Neill immediately besieged it with 3000 men,
but Master Durdo with great courage having only 16 men to man the Castle and
Bawne, beat him off, and slew more than 80 of his men, and 9 days after
sallyed out and killed out one prime Gentleman of the O Neils, and ten more,
and took two Colors and a Drum, with loss of three of his own men; all which
and himself afterward for want of ammunition were forced to leave the Castle
in a dark night, and every one shift for himself, where some misled upon the
mountains happened upon the enemies quarters instead of ours and were killed.
Master Durdo with great hazard lying two nights upon the mountains escaped
unto us.

Sir William Stewart understanding of a party of the O Neals in the Kirrilrs
woods, sent out Captain Balfour a deserving soldier, with 100 men, who
skirmisht with them, killed 50 Rebels, lost four of his own men, and brought
home 400 Cowes.

Some four days after Sir William Stewart desired Lieutenant Colonel
Sanderson, my self, and Sergeant Major James Galbraith to march from Newtowne
to relieve Ageer and Aghatyan, with 500 foot and 100 horse, the second night in
extremity of weather, we marched to the Agher, and quartered in Clogher, a mile
and a half distant; the enemy fell that night into one part of our quarters,
but upon the alarm of the Sentinels, the maine Guard issued out, killed some,
and chased the rest. The next morning we marched out into Fermanagh, where in
taking 500 Cowes, as many sheep, and 300 horses, we killed 70 Rebels: upon our
return we besieged Colonel Donnogh, Mac Gwires Castle, being strongly
imbattaild and flanckt, after many shot past on both sides, the wind turning
upon the forepart of the house, we fired some outhouses, in the smoke
whereof we approached the gate, set it on fire, entered the Castle, put the men
to the sword: and indeed I shall never expect to see more resolution either in
Commanders or soldiers: but I shall never insist upon that in this particular,
let their acts speak for themselves; in which march we relieved 6000 women
and children, which otherwise had perished.

In this service Ensign Long behaved himself as if he had been Bullet proof:
at hand whilst we were employed in this service, the Rebels drew down upon Sir
William Stewarts Newtowne, and the Castle played off and killed 50 of their men in
the streets, and preserved the town, except one house or two at the
furthermost end.

Master Speaker be pleased I may put you in remembrance these are the
particulars that accurred in Permanagh and Tyrone before we received any
Commissions. I shall now present unto you in the same method the occurrences of
Donegall County.

Colonel Newgent a most seditious Instrument, that married my Lord of
Eniskellens mother drew about 600 men about Ballyshannon Castle, a place of
great strength and importance, against whom my Colonel Sir Ralph Gore, and
Captain Maxwell a forward Gentleman drew out some 200 men and 60 horse, who
encountered them, routed them, killed upwards of 180 Rebels, took Colonels
Newgents horse, who left it and his boots ripped off behind him, besides many
that came down (...) which were killed by the foot, and not one man (...) upon
our side. Diverse sallies were made by Captain John Follyot, a Gentleman
deserving much commendations for his courage and discretion, as also by his
Lieutenant William Ancktill Esquire, a bold Comrade, sometime killing 20, 30.
in which Captain Follyot received a sore wound in his hand, being at the sword
entered and befit with the Rebels.

About a fortnight after their defeat at Ballyshaunon, the Rebels mustred new
forces, and with assistance of Collonell Manus O Donnell, and Collonell
Turlogh, Mac Caffrye O Donnell, they besieged my Col^^^is Castle, he being gone
over the mountains for Ammunition, the Rebels fited some outhouses, but were
beaten off with loss of twenty men, who attempted to burn the gate.

In the Barony of Boylagh about two days after the Mac Swynes, and the O
Boyles, were encountered about Kilbegge by Master Andrew Knox, a Minister, who
though very unequal in number to the Rebels held them up at push a Pike, and
killed about 80 of their men, and put the whole body to flight, and brought
home a great prey. In which skirmish the best Mac Swyne was killed.

These Master Speaker, are the Occurrences in those three Counti^^^ that were
precedent unto any Commission granted for raising of Regiments and now I shall
according to the rule I propounded unto my self, first relate the exploits of
every Regiment a part, and then of such service as was done jointly, and as I
began with Formanagh, in what was performed before any Commission, so I shall
endeavor the same in these subsequent Occurrences.

Tullagh and Lisgold Castles, being formerly surrendered upon promise of
quarters, which was performed in this manner, they stripped old and young, and
bound them, exposing them all night to the frost and snow, and next day killed
them, Moneigh Castle joined with Sir William Cole, and marched out into the
fields to Lowthers-townes where they had intelligence, they were drinking upon
their march toward Eniskilling, and surprised them unawares, and pursued them
some four miles with slaughter above 200 men, took four Colors, some
Drums, two Captains, one Mac Mahou^, another Mac Guire, with store of Arms.

After this he marched out with 400 men, and having burnt the corn and the
enemies garrisons, was met in his march homewards, by Mac Guire with 800 men,
with great violence charging his Vanne, and unexpectedly 400 more of the Mac
Mahou^^s, charged him on the (...) put them all to flight, killed up wards of a
100 men, got 60. (...), and many Pikes, he has taken all their boats upon
Long^^^^nty sunk their Cot^s, and both by land and water made (...) This is
what I can certainly (...), enough we ^^ard many other passages of much credit,
but I am certain that he is not ^^^cope when any opportunity shall require.

I shall now leave Fermanagh in this discourse, and (...) in my prayers, and
pass to Sir William (...) Regiment, and (...) Roberts Stewarts, whom though I
but now name, has given (...) brave testimonies of Commanders every way well
qualified. A^^es the unfortunate and unworthy loss of Strebane, these
Regiments garrisoned upon such frontier places, as might secure the Ba^^ony
(...) Rapho, in which the safety of the City of London-dery was (...)
concerned, as also the Barrony of Enishoen, in which (...) fighting men of the
Irish, ready then (though we conceive better of them now) to have fallen upon
our backs upon the least invitation of any defeat unto us. Sir Ralph Gores
Regiment being but 500. ^^^t, marched into the Barronies of Boylagh, and
Bannagh, and ^irh^^gh, being Ba^ronies that had been wholly wasted by the
Rebels, where for 13. weeks we had no sustenance, but what we pul^^ out of the
Rebels mouths. These two Regiments were for the most part mingled in service,
and having so great a scope as ^6. long (...) ^illes to guard in the long
winter nights, and every way passabl^ for the enemies entrance, and the charge
of so many souls there res^ding, and following their vocations as in the time
of peace; (...) the con^^^^ of thousand of pl^^^dred Pamilles, I believe in a
(...) construction it will deserve the tide of miraculous service for (...)
nights but the (...) attempted in several places with light-house to burn the
Country, which they never in the least way prevailed in, but many times
returned with a weaker master then they (...) forth. Yet Master Speaker, they
spared no labor or industry, Sir Robert Stewart marched to New-towne and
relieved it, but the Enemy saved all their heads by their heels, but six men;
afterward marched up to ^^^^^e-d^rge, burnt all the Enemies Country, and
killed div^^^, brought ^00. Cowes, then marched up over against (...), bu^^^
that Country, and killed diverse; afterward fell over in the ^^ght upon the
Rebels Quarters above Strebane, and killed about ^outhen. Sir William Stewart in
the mean time was as busy in the Ba^r^^y of (...), fiting and burning.

Captain Maxwell, and Captain George Stewart marched toward (...) with 150
men, and killed 90 of the Rebels, and brought home 1800 Cowes. Captain Basil
about the same time, being New-yeares day, marched over into the enemies
Country with 60 men and en^^^^tred 400 men, and killed 36.

(...) preserving of their own quarters, and scowring the neighboring
quarters of the enemies, that our Regiment on the other side of the mountains
at that present, having no intelligence of their continual defeats, having
marched seven days and nights upon mountains, where never horsemen rode in a
deep snow, 13. miles the least days march, where and when the best Commanders
never tasted bread, bear, wine, salt, or Aqua-vitae, and at every night fought
with the Rebels for his bed-cloathes (God be praised with strange success)
and being in the sight of the enemy, and for the most part upon the Ice
(notwithstanding the weather) stripped in our shirts; upon our marching homewards
met such a pack of them drawn out by the other two Regiments, that they beset
us in our quarter at night, which we expecting, appointed a near Fort for our
Alarm place for two Companies to draw unto, and the other two Companies into a
wood, where if by Gods mercy we should have the better of them, we were assured
they should pass, all happened accordingly; for our Sentinels giving a timely
Alarm, the two Companies took the Fort, beat them off until they fled the
right way, where the two Companies unexpectedly met them with sharp fire, and
the other two sallyed out of the Fort upon their Reares, and did very terrible
execution: Immediately after which we marched away in the night, and surprised
many in the neighboring houses; and lastly, burnt the quarters, and all the
corn in the whole march, which was out of command. And truly Sir Ralph Gore
his zeal was very earnest, for the most tempestuous nights he would always
choose to fall upon their quarters, which at last were upon every hand of our
Garrison; for he having placed for the safety of those parts one Company at
Kilbegge, another at Castle-Rabin, and one being left to maintain our own
quarters, we had but two Companies for the Field; yet at diverse times we would
march out to them, being at the least 13. Colors; and overnight having taken
the ditches with Musketeeres, drew them in with counterfeit retreats, until
we had discharged at 40. yards distance; sometimes a 100. Musketeers,
sometimes more, every Musket charged with 10. Pistol Bullets.

But M. Speaker, our good success ended with our Ammunition, for all being
spent to one Roll of Match, and sending a Letter for some supply; the Traitor
run to the Rebels, delivered my Letter, and what I had but modestly put into
the Text concerning our wants, he being a soldier in the Regiment made a large
Comment upon, which heartened the Rebels so much, that we were like to perish
for want of food, and certainly had, if Sir Robert Stewart with his Regiment,
and three of Sir William Stewarts Companies had not (...) by some loose, Files
of the Enemies shot, which he beat off, and so without much danger secured the
march of the entire Body.

But now Master Speaker, the Country being wasted by the Enemy, and our selves,
the days beginning to grow longer, we thought best to join all three
Regiments, leaving Ballyshannon, Castle of Donegall, and Castle Rahin well
manned, and as well as we could provided otherwise, and so betook our selves
with what strength we could spare unto the Fields. And now Master Speaker, if I
can borrow your patience, I presume I shall acquaint you with very good
service. In our march over the mountains of Barnesmore homewards to the Barony
of Raphe, this Barnesmore being known to every inhabitant in Ireland to be as
dangerous a place as art and nature could devise. When the Vanguard of our
Army entrod the Wood, we sent threescore loose shot upon each of our Flanks,
half Calliver shot from our Body through the Woods, where they skirmished with
the Enemy, having taken the Wood overnight, in very hot service upon both
sides. The Rebels had placed thirteen Colors in a hollow, half a mile above
us, who when they heard our shot showed themselves, thinking as they confessed to
draw us out, whilst thirteen Colors more lay hidden in another hollow, that
should suddenly fall in upon the remaining party, and had likewise placed nine
Colors below to fall in upon the baggage, which was at least three thousand
souls, which traveled below almost a mile off, in a narrow pass. We drew out
(suspecting the worst) only some commanded Musketeers skirmished and beat away
their first Body appeared, when immediately the other nine Colors fell in upon
the baggage, to which we assigned eight and forty Musketeers, who held them up
courageously in a strait pass. We that were with the main Body perceiving it,
having a Wood and Boggeunderus, drew with more haste than order (as requisite
it was) to their relief, so that we likewise put them to slight. In the mean
time the thirteen Colors in ambush all this while fell into our Rear, and all
their Forces in the twinkling of an eye fell round upon us, which we with
countermanded Musketeers opposed, and during the space of seven hours and a
half (by a watch) fought and killed four hundred of their men, besides what
fell in our march of six miles, where having conveyed our baggage between two
Divisions, were still charged in our Rear, and the extremities of Hankes that
had thick shot returned by two hundred Musketeers of ours, so that as by a
prisoner of theirs taken the next day that was present at the battle, seven
hundred was confessed to be slain, in which we lost but nine men, and some hurt.
That night we marched into our Quarters in the Barony of Rapho. This occurrence
happened about eight weeks since.

(...) of several parties both of Horse and Foot into the Enemies Country
returning home both with the prey and the slaughter of the Enemy, I shall only
trouble you with what occurences since the seventeenth of May, until the seven
and twentieth, when I left London-dorry.

Sir Philim O Neal drew down to Strebane about five thousand men besides Horse,
intending to burn Rapho, and to raise Enishoen, and we being as he absolutely
conceived defeated, to draw the other Forces on the contrary side of Logsoyle,
and to assault the Derry. Our Regiments assisted with two strong Companies of
Captain Pitts and Captain Lawsons of the City of Londonderry drew over before
day into the Rebels Country, where presently the battles were ordered upon
both sides, and so stood about a quarter of a miles distance, we drew out to
them one Battalion, and a 100 Musketeers to try how they would answer them. The
Rebels left their ground, and drew out to a Wood, which they filled with their
Musketeers, we likewise by the earnest entreaty of our Soldiers, were
contented to lose the advantage of our present embattelling, and marched over
to them beat their Musketeers out of the Wood, and to omit circumstances,
killed about five hundred of their men, and put them to their flight in which
day there was great circumspection and discipline used by the Commanders, and
as much obedience and resolution by the Soldiers, Master Cathcart Cornet to
Sir Robers Stewarts Troop, and Lieutenant Colase one of his Lieutenants, and
Lieutenant Galbraith one of our Regiment about seventeen years of age, doing
very strange service with their commanded Musketeers.

In pursuance (by Gods mercy) of this victory, though we returned weary unto
our Quarters, yet by break of day the Regiments were upon march, an unusual
way to Strebane, thinking to have beset him and his Forces which quartered
there visibly. To this purpose Horse and Foot entered the Town upon all
Quarters; but Sir Phelomy was newly departed with his Forces, only the Castle
he committed to Captain Hugh Murragh O Devyn a bloody fellow, and an hundred of
his choice Musketeers, and a hundred Pikes to guard much of his own baggage,
and my Lady Strebanes goods; but we easily forced the Castle, put the men to
the sword, only Captain O Devyns life respited, who is now in the Derry Gaol.
The Castle we left a Garrison in, commanded by Captain Wisher a discreet
Gentleman under the command of Sir William Hammilton, who though formerly a
strong rooted Papist (if any root can be in that titular Religion) has
renounced the same, and conforming himself unto the Protestant Church, judging
upon this reason (as I have heard from himself) that neither faith, civil
conversation, secure comma^^^ (...)traiterous and inhumane designs are, or
must be the propagators of it.

From Strebane we having left 500 men to guard the Bar^ony of Rapho, we marched
up on the o Canes Country on the other side of Loghfoyle, and coming over
against Derry, quartered in the fields that night, four Companies of the Derry
joining with us to relieve Lymmavaddy Castle, and Bally Castle, which had been
ten weeks before strongly beleager'd by great forces, and yet had sallyed forth
and killed many hundred of the enemies, being commanded by a resolute young
Gentleman Captain Thomas Phillips; his elder brother M. Dudly Philips in the
mean time being gone about with 3. Botes for to carry their provision from
Derry. That night we were welcome guests to the two Castles, who dispaired of
all succor; and having conducted their provision in, the next morning assisted
with very resolute Horse out of the two Castles, we advanced our march into
the Enemies Country, where at Magiligan we encountered the Enemy, the o Canes,
the Magilligans, the o Hagans, and the o Neales, being joined together for our
utter ruin, (God be praised) we killed upwards of 500 of them, and scattered
the rest.

Though we were now too far in discretion engaged from our own Quarters, yet
having received late Letters from Colrane of their miserable wants and narrow
beleagure, we continued our march up toward the mountains to find some prey,
that we might be the welcomer to almost famished Colrane; we met with 3000
Cowes, but with thrice as many men, the Rebel having strengthened himself
from the Army that bel^agured Colrane and other parts: Our Commanders cherished
the Soldier, and the Soldier the Commander; but the Rebels having that
morning (moved by the valiant preaching of a Friar) bound themselves by Oath of
their Sacrament received thereupon, to fight this Battle to the last man, and
to hunt us out of their Country, gave us a warm charge, and forced our Horse,
and commanded Musketeers to retreat upon the wings of our Battalions, yet after
our shon, yet earnest Prayers, we advanced toward them; and slanghtered above
800. of them; which being an unusual sight to them, they forgot the Friars
Doctrine, and their own application and fled; our Horse and Foot chasing them
a hundred ways with great slaughter: From thence with our prey and abundance
of Horse, etc. we marched to Dungevin Castle, one of the Kings Houses, which
was kept by Colonel Manus mac qui ballagh, Mac Richard o Cane, who (though in
this battle) had fied thither to his charge, upon parley he delivered up the
Castle, and desired the Kings (...) was aftorded; the Arms and (...) every
Regiment bestowed some upon the Town, the Soldiers at easy rates sold the
rest, but such as were delivered to the right owners.

At Castle Roe a mile from Colrane were lodged seven Colors of the Enemies to
secure the band fishing to themselves: we took the Colors, put many to the
sword, and the Town of Colrane has a Garrison there now, and enjoyes the
fishing to themselves, being the greatest Salmon fishing in Christendom.

From thence we made our speedy march home, where our Horse killed about an
hundred straglers, and found our own quarters invaded with above two thousand
men, which our remaining party had with good resolution and success kept off,
upon advertisement of our return, they deputed no longer stay.

In all these particulars (all honor to God Almighty who fought our battles)
amongst the three Regiments we lost not an hundred men since the first
Rebellion to the last hour.

We have at the present these Garrisons, Castle of Strebane, Lifford, Rapho,
Drombo Castle, Litterkenny, Ramalton, Lymavaddy, Bally Castle, Ballyshannor,
Donagall, Castle Rahin, being places of great consequence by situation and
strength.

Master Speaker, this is a brief relation of so many passages in such a tract
of time; an Epitome of that which was a large volume in our own sufferings and
the construction of our Enemies, which in duty I suppose I was bound to present
to this Honorable Assembly, in the port and haven of whose unparalled
labors we anchor our safety. You may be pleased (Master Speaker) to remember
our sudden surprisall, our wants of all manner of supplies for preservation of
our lives, much more for the defense of a Country, and such places of
importance; you may consider the resolution of men encouraged by exercise of
their Arms fleshed in the blond of their Enemies, imboldened by knowledge of
the Country, provoked by the loss of their dearest pledges, wives children,
and all; the hazard in transporting men saved, the charges in raising, levying,
shipping, demurrage upon wind, and the like prevented; the great expenses of
the Commanders amounting to above three thousand pounds for arms victuals,
cloaches, etc their offensive service without loss of an hundred men, their
defensive vigilance of so much ground, the several Garrisons of consequence
maintained, the weak instruments by which the service was effected, and the
great mercy of God by which we were protected; then we doubt not, but the
justice of this House will continue us in our Resolutions, encourage others to
attempt better; all which we shall in our humble Petition more seasonably
present.


