portrait of John Middleton Prudentia Major Fato. Vera Effigies (...) Johans.
Middleton, Philomath.


PRACTICAL ASTROLOGY.

In Two PARTS.

The First Part contains an easy Introduction to the whole Art of
Astrology, showing the Number and Nature of the Signs, Planets, and Aspects.
Together with several Names and Terms of Astrology. Also how to erect a Figure
of the Heavens, and to place the Planets therein; and how the Student ought to
proceed in the whole Art.

The Second Part shows the Resolution of all manner of Horary Questions which
concern the Life of Man, his Estate, Brethren, or short Journeys. If the
Querent shall ever have Children. Of Sicknesses, and how to find the Nature
and kind of the Disease. Also concerning Marriages, Lawsuits, Public
Enemies: Of things lost or stolen; with all other necessary Questions
whatsoever. Together with several Examples of Celestial Figures erected for
Horary Questions, and Judgments thereupon, whereby any man of an ordinary
capacity may soon attain to the whole Art thereof.

By JOHN MIDDLETON, Philomath.

LICENSED, May 4, 1678. To. L'Estrange.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Richard Preston, near Grays-Inn-gate in Holbourn,
1679.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
IT is not my present scope to prove the Antiquity of Astrology, which appears
by History to be known and practiced several hundred years before the birth of
our Savior Christ. And Josephus, that famous Antiquary, tells us, that several
of the Patriarchs were studious herein: Long after that, it was practiced by
the Chaldeans, Egyptians, and Arabians, who by their continual study for many
hundred years, did arrive to a great height of knowledge herein, being
encouraged thereunto by their Kings and Princes, who themselves would undertake
no great Enterprise, but would first consult with an Astrologer, and accounted
them the most fit men for the managing of State Affairs. And after them it was
practiced by the Indians and Greeks, who have found out many excellent Rules
which conduced to the great perfections of Astrology; and there are yet many
excellent things to be found, which are not discovered. We want the
encouragement which the Chaldeans and Arabians had, which is the reason that
Astrology is so much despised, and so slightly looked upon; for that is the
madness of many, to speak ill of what they know not; they pass their malicious
censures upon the Art, before they know what it is: For Knowledge and Learning
was always the most despised by the Ignorant; as the Fox in the Fable
dispraised the figs, because he could not reach to them. In the following
Treatise I have endeavored to make the Art as plain and easy as I could
possibly do: In the first Part, I have showed how the Student ought to proceed
herein; and first he ought to be well acquainted with the Characters of the
Signs, Planets and Aspects, and of their natural and accidental
significations; also to understand the Essential and accidental Fortitudes, and
Debilities of the Planets, the natural signification of the 12 Houses in an
Astrological figure, and how to vary the houses according to the Question
propounded.

In the second Part, I have collected and published the choice and principal
Rules which conduce to the true judging of Horary Questions, and have omitted
nothing which might be helpful to the Student herein. Also I have given
Examples in all or most of the Houses, by inserting Figures for several Horary
Questions, and showed how to give Judgment thereupon; which will be a great
advantage to the Learners, for whose profit I have undertaken the pains of
composing this Treatise; wherein if I find encouragement, I instead, by Gods
assistance, to publish several things of this nature. There has been something
published of Astrology since this was begun, and which, I living remote from
London, had not the opportunity to see; but having lately perused them, with
all respect to those Artists, I find no reason to desist from the publication
of this, hoping as to the scope intended, it may, (though less of price) be
altogether as useful as Coley's Clavis, Thasher's Jubar, or any other of our
modern Treatises; I having endeavored more plainness to weak capacities than
any that yet have written. And if this small Treatise receive your kind
acceptance, it shall be but a taste of what you may hereafter expect from

Yours, and Urania's Servant, John Middleton

In Laudem Operis.
IN this Fantastic Age, whilst every Fool
Usurps Apollo's Fortune-telling-Stool,
Offers to prate at random Peace or Wars,
And Hucksters out Twelve-penny Chops of Stars,
It Is rare a sober Artist should appear;
But such, kind Reader, thou art blessed with here.
One that Vrania's Beauties does expose,
And in plain Language all her secrets shows;
Who chides this freedom, and bids him give over,
Ashamed he thus should take up all before:
Yet the bold Lad neglectful of her Cries,
Spreads her abroad, who huggs the dear surprise;
And sporting in these Sheets, through every Page,
Begets a lusty Artist for next Age.
But I Am too Airy -- Well, in the Book each line,
I Am sure is solid, except these of mine.
H. C.

To the Ingenious Author of that useful Treatise, ENTITLED, PRACTICAL
ASTROLOGY.
THe Mind of Man is so depraved, that what
It cannot comprehend 'twill seek to blot.
ASTROLOGY, by some, has had the fate
To be refused, as Vain and Intricate.
And Planetary Orbs to have influence
On Animals, could scarce appear to Sense.
But by thy deep Conceptions useful made,
And all their secret powers here displaid:
The Planets, Houses, and Conjunctions too,
With their Effects, thou do so plainly show,
That whosoever reads, though but with half an Eye,
May by thy Book attain ASTROLOGY.
Run on, brave Soul, till by thy Works thou raise
Ne're-dying Volumes to thy lasting praise.
For who the flux of Causes knows, and Reason,
And for each Action can elect a season,
May soar in time above those Orbs, and be
Shrouded with Glory to Eternity.
Let others boast, Zopyrus-like, they can
By the Physiognomy unfold the Man,
Or tell of Gadbury or Lilly's Art,
How much they do by their great skill impart;
They Will find such obscure Problems, high-flown strains,
That cannot equal their desires or pains.
But in this little Volume naked lies
The most profound of all their Mysteries;
And what in them we may Theorick call,
Is here by thee made plain and Practical.
Johannes Woodward, ex Aula Beatae Mariae Virginis Oxoniae.

TO HIS Ingenious Friend the Author, Mr. MIDDLETON.
THe studious Tyro, whose aspiring brain
Aims at the Myst'ries of the Starry train,
Needs not Icarian wings to soar on high,
He needs no passage through the starry sky:
For you expand a safe and shorter way
To all the Secrets of URANIA.
With so much ease and singular delight,
You teach Astrophilus, (to speak the right)
You are so plain an Astrologick guide,
Great puzling Volumes will be laid aside:
For what at large they have obscurely known,
You have compacted clearly in this one;
Like him, who (if he is not by Fame belied)
Did Homer's Iliad's in a Nut-shell hide.
In fine, your skill it cannot be expressed
By man; this BOOK alone can do it best.
Mercurius Ignotus, alias Guil. Surius, (...).

A Table of the CONTENTS of the Book.
CHap. 1. The number of the Signs, Planets, and Aspects, together with their
Names and Characters. 1 Chap. 2. Of the division of the 12 signs. 6 A Table
showing the degrees Masculine and Feminine, etc. in each sign of the Zodiac. 8
Chap. 3. The Description and Signification of the 12 Signs of the Zodiac. 11
Chap. 4. Of the Description and natural Signification of the 7 Planets. 20
Chap. 5. The Description and natural Signification of the Seven Planets in any
of the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac. 31 Chap. 6. Of the Houses, Antiscions,
Friendship, and Enmity; and of the Orbs and Latitude of the Seven Planets. 52
Chap. 7. Of the Essential and Accidental dignities of the Planets. 59 A Table
showing what Member of the Body every Planet governs by being posited in any of
the Twelve Signs. 64 Of the Kingdoms and Cities under the Twelve Signs and
Seven Planets. 65
Chap. 8. Of the Terms of Art that every Student ought well to understand. 68
Chap. 9. How to erect a Figure of the Heavens for any hour of the day or night
by an Ephemeris and Table of Houses. 74 Chap. 10. How to reduce the Planets
motions to any hour of the day or night. 81 A Table of the hourly motion of the
Planets, whereby you may reduce their motions to any hour of the day. 83
Chap. 11. Of the Astrological signification of the Twelve Houses of Heaven. 84
Of the quarters of Heaven signified by the Twelve Houses. 91
Chap. 12. How to compute the Part of Fortune. ibid. A Table of the Fortitudes
and Debilities of the Part of Fortune. 93 Chap. 13. Of the Significators of the
Querent, and of the thing enquired after. 94 A general Rule to know whether a
Question be radical, or sit to be judged. 95 What Marks, Moles, or Scars the
Querent has? 97 To know if the thing demanded will be brought to perfection or
not. 99 Who shall be the furtherance or hindrance of the thing enquired after?
101 Of varying the Houses in your Judgment according to any Question
propounded. 102 Of the time of receiving a Horary Question. 104
Chap. 14. Of the Planetary hours, and how to find them either day or night.
105
The Second PART, showing the Resolution of all manner of Horary Questions.
CHap. 1. Questions appertaining to the first House. Shall the Querents life be
long or short? 111 To what part of the world may the Querent direct his course
to prosper? 113 Shall the Querent find the party at home he would speak
withal? 114 If an absent party be dead or alive? 116 Of a thing suddenly
happening, whether good or evil is signified thereby? 117 Of a ship at Sea, her
safety or destruction? 118
Chap. 2. Of the second House, and Questions thereunto belonging. Shall the
Querent be rich or poor? 122 By what means shall the Querent attain riches? 123
Shall the Querent obtain his Wages or Stipend that is due from the King or any
Nobleman, etc. 124 A Figure erected to know if the Querent should obtain his
Wages due from his Master. 126 Judgment upon the preceding Figure. ibid. Shall
the Querent obtain the Money which he lent, or the Goods pawned? 127
Chap. 3. Judgments properly belonging to the third House. (...) The
particular parts and members of the body which the Planets generally rule. 182
The particular parts of the body governed by the twelve Signs of the Zodiac.
184 Of the Diseases the Planets signify. 185 The Diseases signified by the
twelve Signs. 187 To know what part of the body is afflicted. 190 Is the
disease in the Body, or Mind, or both? 191 To know the nature and quality of
the disease. 193 Whether the Disease be Chronick or Acute? 195 Signs of life,
or that the sick party will recover of the infirmity afflicting. 198 Signs of
death, or that the party will die of the infirmity afflicting. 199 Whether a
Servant shall prove just or knavish to his Master? 200 If a Servant shall get
free from his Master? 202 Of small Cattle; shall the Querent gain by them or
not? 203 Chap. 7. Of the seventh House, and Questions thereunto belonging.
Shall the Querent marry? 204 In what time shall the Querent marry? 205 Shall
the Querent marry more than once? 206 Whether the Marriage intended shall be
effected or no? 207 What shall be the hindrance? 209 What manner of person
shall the Querent marry? 210 Who is the more noble, and which will be Master?
211 Shall they agree after marriage? 212 From what part one shall marry? 213 If
she be a maid that asks the question? 214 Shall the Querent marry? in what
time? A Figure and Judgment. 216 If marry the Woman desired? 218 Shall the
Querent or his Adversary overcome in a Lawsuit? 219 Shall two Partners agree
in their Partnership? 222 Has the Querent any public Enemies? 223 Shall a
person return safe from the Wars? 224 Shall the Town or Castle besieged be
taken? 225 Of Fugitives, Strays, Theft, etc. Whether Cattle be stolen, or
strayed of themselves? 227 Whether the Beasts lost be dead or alive? 228 Shall
Cattle sirayed be had again? 229 Whether Cattle be in Pound or not? 230 Which
way are they gone? what distance? 231 If a Fugitive shall be found, or come
again? 232 Of a Thief, and his Significator. 234 Of the age of the Thief. 235
Whether the Thief be Man or Woman? 236 Is the Thief a Stranger or Familiar?
ibid. Is the Goods far from the Owner? 238 Which way the Thief is gone? what
distance? 239 Does the Owner suspect the Thief? ibid. If the Goods stolen be
recoverable or not? 240 In what time shall the Goods be recovered? 241 If an
absent Husband were dead or alive? If alive, will he return? and in what time?
A Figure and Judgment. 243
Chap. 8. Of the eighth House, and Questions thereunto belonging. What death
the Querent may die, whether natural, or violent? 245 In what time the Querent
shall die? 246 Shall the Querent obtain his Wives Portion? 248
Chap. 9. Of the Ninth House. Of a long Journey or Sea-voyage, and the success
thereof. 249 Shall the Voyage be long or short? 250 Toward. what part of the
world is it best for the Querent to go? 252 Shall the Querent profit by the
Science intended? 253 Shall a Parson obtain the Benefice enquired after? 254
Chap. 10. Of the tenth House, and Astrological Questions thereunto belonging.
Shall the Querent obtain the place of Preferment desired? 257 Shall the Querent
continue in the Office or Employment he possesses? 258 What Profession is best
for the Querent to follow? 260 Shall the Querent obtain the place of preferment
desired? A Figure, and Judgment thereupon. 263
Chap. 11. Of the Eleventh House. Shall the Querents Friends prove faithful?
265 Shall the Querent obtain what he hopes for? 267
Chap. 12. Of the Twelfth House. Has the Querent private Enemies? 268 Who are
the Querents secret Enemies? 269 Of a Captive or Prisoner, when he shall be at
liberty? 270 A Horse lost, if he were strayed or stolen? if recoverable? 272
Chap. 13. Some short Rules for the making of Elections upon several occasions.
273 A Table showing the Longitude, Latitude, Nature, and Magnitude of several
of the fixed Stars. 282

Practical ASTROLOGY.
CHAP. 1.
The number of the Signs, Planets, and Aspects, together with their Names and
Characters.

THe Zodiac, (which is a great Circle in the Heavens) is divided into twelve
equal parts, called by Astronomers the twelve Signs;

Thus named and charactered.

Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittary,
Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces.
Every Sign is divided into 30 equal Parts, called Degrees; each Degree is
divided into 60 Minutes; each Minute, into 60 Seconds, etc.

There are seven Planets, which have a continual motion through the twelve
Signs. These are their Names and Characters:

Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury, Luna.

There are also two Nodes, or certain Points of the Heavens; named and
Charactered thus:

The Dragons Head, The Dragons Tail.

The Planets have allowed them every one (except Sol and Luna) two of these
Signs for their Houses. As, to Saturn belongs Capricornus and Aquarius: to
Jupiter belongs Sagittary and Pisces: to Mars, Aries and Scorpio: to Sol, Leo:
to Venus, the Signs Taurus and Libra: to Mercury belongs Gemini and Virgo: and
to Luna, Cancer.

The Planets by their continual motion through the twelve Signs do make
several Angles, or Aspects. I shall only speak of those which are most
forcible, which are in number five; thus named and charactered:

Conjunction, Sextile, Quadrate, The Planets Aspects
Trine, Opposition.

A Conjunction is when two Planets are in one and the same degree and minute of
a Sign; and this is either good or bad as the Planets are either Friends or
Enemies one to the other.

A Sextile Aspect is when two Planets are two signs or 60 degrees distant, as
Jupiter in 15 degrees of Aries, and Saturn in 15 degrees of Gemini. Here
Jupiter is in a Sextile Aspect to Saturn; this is an Aspect of Friendship.

A Quadrate Aspect is when two Planets are three signs or 90 degrees distant;
as Mars in 10 degrees of Taurus, and Venus in 10 degrees of Leo. Here Mars and
Venus are said to be in Quadrate Aspect, which by Artists is accounted an
Aspect of imperfect enmity; and that the persons signified thereby may at some
times have jarrs, but such as may be reconciled again.

A Trine Aspect is when any two Planets are four signs or 120 degrees distant;
as Mars in 12 degrees of Aries, and Sol in 12 degrees of Leo. Here Sol and Mars
are said to be in Trine Aspect; and this is an Aspect of perfect Love and
Friendship.

An Opposition is when two Planets are diametrically opposite; which is when
they are six signs or 180 degrees (which is one half of the Circle) asunder.
And this is an Aspect of perfect hatred.

But although an Aspect consist of so many degrees as we have mentioned, yet
Planets are said to be in aspect when they are not exactly in the same degrees,
but within the moiety of their Orbs: for which, see hereafter Chapter the 6th:
and this is called a Platick Aspect. A Partile Aspect is when two Planets are
in a perfect Aspect to the very same degree and minute.

Aspects are also termed Dexter and Sinister. Those Aspects are called Dexter,
which are contrary to the succession of Signs; as a Planet in Aries casts his
Sextile dexter to Aquarius. Sinister, is with the succession of Signs; as a
Planet in Aries casts his Sextile sinister to Gemini: as you may perceive by
the following Table.

A Table of the Planets Aspects both Dexter and Sinister.
The Radiations of the Planets. The Radiations of the Planets. Dexter.
Sinister. Dexter Sinister Dexter. Sinister. Dexter. Sinister.

By this Table you may perceive that a Planet in Aries cast his Sextile dexter
to Aquarius, and his Sextile sinister to Gemini: also he casts his Quadrate
dexter to Capricorn, and his Quadrate sinister to Cancer. Likewise a Planet in
Aries casts his Trine dexter to Sagittary, and his Trine sinister to Leo.

Understand the like in the rest. The Table is so easy, that it needs no
further explanation.

CHAP. II.
Of the division of the twelve Signs.

THe twelve Signs of the Zodiac are divided into four Triplicities, according
to the four Elements; Fire, Earth, Air, and Water.

Fi^ry Signs are hot and dry. A^ry Signs are hot and moist. Earthy Signs are
cold and dry. Watery Signs are cold and moist.
Signs are also Moveable, Fixed, and Common; as,

Moveable Signs. Fixed Signs. Common Signs.
Signs are said to be Masculine and Feminine; as,

are Masculine Signs, are Feminine Signs.
Double bodied Signs are and, and the beginning of.

Signs are also Fruitful and Barren; as,

are Fruitful Signs. are Barren Signs.
All the rest are said to be indifferent.

Signs are also termed

Mute As. Humane As.
Northern Signs Commanding. Southern Signs obeying, are.
Signs Diurnal,. Signs Nocturnal,.
Besides the Divisions of the Signs, there are also several degrees of the
Signs which are termed Masculine and Feminine, Dark, Light, Smoaky, and Void;
as are showed in the following Table.

A Table showing the degrees Masculine, Feminine, etc. in each Sign of the
Zodiac.
Signs. Degrees Mas^uline. Degrees Feminine. Degrees Light. Degrees Dark.
Degrees Smoaky. Degrees Vo^d. Degrees deep or pitted. Degrees ame or deficient.
Degrees increasing Fortune. 8. 15 9 8. 20 3 0 24 6. 11 16 0 19 30 22 29 16 30
23 29 11. 21 5. 17 7. 15 3 0 12 5 12 6 9 8 3 15 30 2 28 30 20 24 25 9 10 27 16
5. 22 4. 12 7 0 16 2. 12. 17 0 11 26 30 22 27 30 26 30 2 10 8. 12 12 14 20 18
12. 17. 23 9 10 11 1 2 3 23 30 27 28 30 26 30 12 13 4 15 14 15 5. 15 8 30 10 20
25 6. 13 15 18 27 2 5 7 30 23 22. 23. 28 28 19 12 8 8 5 22 10 8. 13 16 0 3 14
30 20 16 30 27 21 22 20 5. 20 15 ^. 18 10 0 30 1 7 0 3 15 30 27 27 21 20 30 21
4. 17 14 8 3 24 14 9. 10 22 10 7 18 30 25 22 30 20 23 27 28 20 2. 12 5 ^. 19 12
23 0 7. 2 15 1 7 8 13 20 30 24. 30 24. 2. 30 18 19 11 19 10 7. 22 15 25 7. 17.
22. 26 27 12 13 30 19 30 24 29 28 29 14 20 5. 21 5. 25 9. 21 13 4 25 1. 12. 17
18 19 7 16 27 30 30 22. 24. 29 17 29 10. 2^ 20 12. 22 6. 18 0 25 4. 9 24 0 13
20 3 28 28 30 27 28

The Use and Explanation of the Table.

IN the first Column toward the left hand, against Aries, you find 8, 15, 30;
and in the second Column, against Aries, you find 9, 22: which intimates, that
the first 8 degrees of Aries are Masculine, the 9th Feminine; from 9 to 15
Masculine, from 15 to 22 Feminine; from 22 to 30 Masculine. Understand the like
in the rest.

In the fourth Column, under Degrees Light, against Aries, you find 8, 20, 29.
And in the fifth Column, against Aries, you find 3, 16: which shows that the
first 3 degrees of Aries are dark; from 3 to 8 are light; from 8 to 16 are
dark; and from 16 to 20 are light. And so of the rest.

The eighth, ninth, and tenth Columns exhibit the degrees of the Ecliptic that
are Deep or pitted, Lame or deficient, and those degrees which Increase
Fortune, as the Title directs. The Table is so easy, that it needs no further
Explanation: The Use whereof follows.

When a Question is proposed concerning Theft, whether the Thief be Man or
Woman; of if a woman with Child, whether she be conceived of a Boy or a Girl:
When the testimonies in your Figure are equal, then consider the degrees of the
Cusps of your Houses relating to the Question, and the degrees wherein you
find the principal significators; and if the major part of them be in degrees
Masculine, it is a Male; if Feminine, a Female, etc.

If the degrees ascending in a Nativity or Question seriously propounded, be
those which are termed Light, the person signified thereby will be more clear
and fair: If those accounted Dark, or Smoaky, his complexion is more obscure
and cloudy, etc.

If the degrees ascending be those which are termed Void, it shows that the
person signified thereby is but of a mean understanding, and very defective in
his Judgment.

If the degrees ascending, or the principal significators, be in those degre^s
reputed Deep or Pitted, it shows that the Native or Querent is imperfect either
in body or mind, or both.

When you find any of those degrees (ascending, or the principal significators
posited therein) which are termed Lame or deficient, it is an argument that the
person signified thereby is defective in some part of the body, either Crooked,
Lame, or Blind, etc.

If you find the Cusp of the second House, or the Lord of the second, or the
Part of Fortune, posited in any of those degrees which are said to Increase
Fortune, it mightily augments the good promised thereby. And thus much may
serve for the use of the Table.

CHAP. III
The Description and Signification of the twelve Signs of the Zodiac.

1. Of ARIES.
Nature. ARies is a Masculine, Diurnal, Cardinal, Equinoctial, Easterly Sign,
of the fiery Triplicity, hot and dry: the day-house of Mars.

Descript. The persons signified thereby, are but of a mean Stature, lean Body,
of a long or oval Visage, the Hair curling, and oftentimes of a white or sandy
color.

Places. It signifies places where sheep or small cattle are kept: sandy
moorish grounds, hilly or unfrequented places, etc. In houses, it signifies the
upper part or covering thereof, or stables where small beasts are kept.

2. Of TAVRVS.
Nature. Taurus is a Feminine, Nocturnal, Melancholy, Domestical, Beastial, and
Furious Singne, cold and dry; the first of the earthy Triplicity.

Descript. It represents one of a short Stature, broad Forehead, great Eyes, a
large Mouth, short fat Hands, a well-set person, his Hair black, his Complexion
brown, or swarthy.

Places. It signifies Stable, Cow-houses, Cellars, and such kind of places
where furniture belonging to horses and cattle are kept. And in the Fields, it
represents Pastures, and plain Cornfieldsd.

3. Of GEMINI.
Nature. Gemini is a Masculine sign, hot and moist, Diurnal, Aereal, Humane,
double-bodied; the first of the airy Triplicity.

Descript. It personates an upright, tall, straight, well-composed body, of a
sanguine complexion, but not very clear: long Arms, the Hands and Feet short
and fleshy: the Hair black, or of a dark brown: a piercing hazle Eye; of an
ingenious fancy, and a good understanding.

Places. It signifies curious Rooms that are hung or wainscoted; Play Houses,
Halls, or Dining-rooms; Chests, Trunks, and Storehouses, and high places. In
the Fields, it signifies Hills and Mountains, etc.

4. Of CANCER.
Nature. Cancer is a Feminine, Nocturnal, Phlegmatic sign; by nature cold and
moist; of the watery Triplicity: the only house of Luna.

Descript. It denotes a person of a middle Stature, his Complexion white and
sickly, his Visage oval, his Hair of a dark brown; generally the upper part of
the body bigger than the lower.

Places. It signifies moist watery places; also the Sea, and all navigable
Rivers, Brooks, Springs, Marsh grounds. And in Houses, it signifies Sinks,
Cellars, Wash-houses, etc.

5. Of LEO.
Nature. Leo is a sign Masculine, Diurnal, Beastial, Choleric, and Barren; a
commanding Kingly sign, hot and dry; the second sign of the fiery Triplicity;
the only house of the Sun.

Descript. Persons that are born under Leo, are generally of a full large body,
courageous* and stout-hearted; their Hair of a dark flaxen, or yellowish and
curling; a great Head, with large goggle Eyes; a person of a generous
disposition, an aspiring Brain, and an active Body.

Places. Woods, Forests, and Desert places; Rocks, Castles, Forts, and all
inaccessible places; Kings Palaces. And in Houses, all such places that are
near the fire, as Ovens, Furnaces, etc.

6. Of VIRGO.
Nature. Virgo is a Feminine, Nocturnal, Melancholy, and Barren sign; and the
second of the earthy Triplicity.

Descript. It generally denotes one of a slender body, and of a middle stature,
a lovely brown Complexion, great Eyes, thick black Hair, one of an ingenious
wit, and much given to learning.

Places. It signifies Closets or Studies where Books are laid up, or other
Writings, as Maps, etc. It also denotes Cornfieldsd, Malt-houses, Dairy-houses,
and places where Corn is laid up, etc.

7. Of LIBRA.
Nature. Libra is a sign Masculine, Cardinal, Equinoctial, Diurnal, Sanguine,
and Humane; hot and moist; Western; and of the airy Triplicity.

Descript. Persons signified by this sign, are generally well composed,
comely, straight bodies of a round and beautiful Visage, the Hair of a flaxen
or yellowish color, gray Eyes, and in age they commonly have pimples in the
Face, and a very high color; both courteous and impartial, and just in all
their actions.

Places. It signifies sandy gravelly places, and where Hawking and Hunting is
used. In the House, it signifies upper Rooms, as Chambers and Garrets; also it
signifies Outhouses, Barns, etc.

8. Of SCORPIO.
Nature. Scorpio is a Feminine, Nocturnal, Cold and Phlegmatic Northern sign,
of the watery Triplicity.

Descript. It denotes a strong corpulent body, of a short stature, big limbed,
strong and active; sad brown Hair, crisping, or curling; a duskish muddy
Complexion, a Body hairy, short thick Neck. It represents one of subtle and of
reserved thoughts, naturally wilful, malicious, false, deceitful.

Places. It signifies all muddy and moorish Grounds, Orchards, Gardens,
Vineyards, and Ditches; ruinous Houses near the water; places where creeping
beasts frequent. In Houses, the lower Rooms, the Kitchins, Wash house, or Sink.

9. Of SAGITTARIVS.
Nature. Sagittarius is a sign Masculine, Choleric, and Diurnal, by nature
hot and dry, of the fiery Triplicity.

Descript. It generally denotes one of a tall, upright, straight,
well-proportioned Body; an oval Visage, a ruddy sanguine Complexion, broad
Forehead, his Hair of a brown or chestnut color, quick-sighted, and generally
good Horsemen.

Places. It signifies Stables, or places where great Cattle and Horses are
kept: It denotes high places, Hills, and Mountains. In Houses, it signifies the
upper Rooms, and places near the fire.

10. Of CAPRICORN.
Nature. Capricorn is a Feminine, Nocturnal, Melancholy, Solstitial, Moveable,
Cardinal, and Southern sign, of the earthy Triplicity.

Descript. It naturally presents one of a little Stature, a dry lean Body, of a
whitely Complexion, thin Face, long Neck, a narrow Chin, black Hair, but little
on the Beard, and many times of a good understanding.

Places. It signifies places where Cattle are put, as Cow-houses, Sheep-pens;
or where implements of husbandry are laid up; also barren, thorny, and fallow
Fields. In Houses, low Rooms near the earth.

11. Of AQVARY.
Nature. Aquary is a Masculine, Diurnal, Fixed, Sanguine, and Humane sign, of
the airy Triplicity.

Descript. It denotes one of a strong well-composed Body, not very tall, but
fleshy, the Visage oval, or something long; of a clear Skin, and sanguine
Complexion, generally sandy flaxen Hair.

Places. It signifies hilly Grounds, Mines, and Quarries of Stone, and places
lately dug up. In Houses, it signifies the upper part, as Roofs, Eaves, etc.

12. Of PISCES.
Nature. Pisces is a Feminine, Nocturnal, Phlegmatic, Northerly, double-bodied
sign, the last of the twelve, and of the watery Triplicity.

Descript. The persons signified thereby are generally of a low Stature, not
very decent, broad Face, the Complexion pale, and a fleshy Body, the Hair of a
light brown, not going very straight.

Places. It signifies watery places, Fish Ponds, Water-springs, and Water-mills,
moorish moist Grounds, Caves, or places where Hermitages have been. In Houses,
the Pumps, Wells, or any places near Water.

Of the Colors signified by the Twelve Signs.

Aries gives a white mixed with red. Taurus, white mixed with citern. Gemini,
white mixed with red. Cancer, green, or russet. Leo, red, or green. Virgo,
black speckled with blue. Libra, black, or dark crimson, or tawny color.
Scorpio, brown. Sagittary, yellow, or green. Capricorn, black, or russet.
Aquary, a sky-colour with blue. Pisces, white glistering color.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Description and natural Signification of the seven Planets.

1. Of SATVRN.
SAturn is by nature cold and dry, the author of Melancholy; Nature.
Masculine, Diurnal; the greater Infortune; and appears to our sight of a
leaden pale color: he is the highest of the seven, and therefore slow in
motion, near 30 years in finishing his circular Revolution through the twelve
Signs.

He is called Chronos, Phaenon, and Falsifer. Poetical Names.


He naturally represents one of a middle Stature, Descript.
black swarthy Complexion, little Eyes, lowering Eyebrows, flat Nose, thick
Lips, goes forward with his Head, stooping, great Ears, black or very dark
Hair, thin Beard, and sometimes none at all.

When he is well dignified, the persons signified thereby are grave and sober,
that perform all their actions with Judgment and Discretion: they have a
searching fancy, being much given to study. But when he is ill dignified, then
the Native or Querent signified thereby is malicious, envious, covetous,
jealous, lying, dissembling, thievish person, not regarding his Word or
Reputation.

Quality and Profession.
He signifies Old men, as Grandfathers, and Fathers; also all persons that dig
the Earth, Husbandmen, Day-labourers, Clowns, and Beggars, Brick-makers,
Colliers, Gardiners, Sextons, Miners, Tanners, and Curriers of Leather,
Sectarists, Monks and Jesuits.

2. Of JVPITER.
Jupiter is a Planet Masculine and Diurnal, temperate, hot and moist; Nature.
the greater Fortune; the Author of justice, temperance, and sobriety: he
appears to our sight of a clear bright Azure color, and finisheth his course
through the twelve Signs in 12 years.

He is sometimes called Jove, Phaeton, Names.
and Zous.

He represents one of a tall Stature, Descript.
of a ruddy pleasant Complexion, of an oval Visage, high Forehead, comely gray
Eyes; the Hair soft and gentle, of a light brown, much Beard, and his Body
every way handsomely composed; of a good carriage, sober and grave in his
speech, just and upright in his actions.

But when this Planet is ill dignified, he represents the person signified
thereby to be a mere Prodigal, a Hypocrite in matters of Faith and Religion, a
dissembling person, ignorant and careless, and of a dull capacity.

Qualities and Professions.
He signifies Clergymen and Civilians, Bishops, Priests; also Princes, Judges,
and Senators; young Scholars, and Students in the Law; Clothiers, and
Woollendrapers.

3. Of MARS.
Mars is a Planet Masculine and Nocturnal, by nature hot and dry, Nature.
choleric and fiery, the lesser Infortune; he appears to our sight of a fiery
red sparkling color; he is near two years in finishing his course through the
twelve Signs: he is the Author of Strife, War, Quarrels, and Contentions.

He is sometimes called mavors, Pyrois, Names.
Aris, Gradivus.

He represents a person of a middle stature, big-boned, and a strong able Body,
Descript.
of a ruddy brown Complexion, round Visage, his Hair for the most part red, or
of a sandy flaxen, often curling; a piercing sharp hazle Eye; of a bold, lofty
spirit, and a confident countenance.

When he is well dignified, the person signified by him is of a prudent
behavior, confident and bold, excellent in Warfare, challenging all honor to
himself, and a large reporter of his own acts; he is valiant, and scorns to be
overcome by any.

But when he is ill dignified, then he delights in Quarrels, Murder, Thievery,
and all evil actions; he is as wavering as the wind, a Traitor, of a rash,
inhumane, and turbulent spirit, neither fearing God nor Man.

Qualities and Professions.
He signifies Generals of Armies, Colonels and Captains, Conquerours or Usurpers
ruling by usurpation and oppression; also all Soldiers in general.

He also signifies Physicians, Apothecaries, Surgeons, Alchymists, Gunners,
Sergeants, Bailiffs, Marshals, Butchers, Smiths, Bakers, Watch-makers,
Armourers, Cutlers, Thieves, Cooks, and Carpenters.

4. Of SOL.
The Sun is a Planet Masculine and Diurnal, of nature hot and dry, Nature.
but temperate; he finisheth his circuit through the Twelve Signs of the
Zodiac in 365 days and some hours.

He is called Sol, Titan, Ilios, Phoebus, Apollo, Names.
Osyris, Diespiter.

He represents a person of a large corpulent Body; Descript.
of a large Face, and a broad high Forehead, a yellow saffron Complexion, large
goggle Eyes, sharp and piercing; the Hair yellow, or light flaxen, much hair on
the Beard; they are generally of a great Spirit, honest, humane, and courteous,
and of a healthful constitution.

When Sol is well dignified, and Significator either in a Question or Nativity,
he represents one of an incomparable judgment, very prudent, and desirous of
Rule and Sovereignty; of a very noble and majestical spirit, yet using much
gravity in his speeches: he is very faithful to his friends, and courteous to
all men, keeping his promises with much fidelity; a lover of honorable
actions, and an absolute hater of all sordid things.

But when he is ill dignified, the persons signified by him are arrogant and
proud, restless and troublesome, using neither gravity in their words, or
sobriety in their actions; spendthrifts, careless of their Families or Estates,
and often weak-sighted, or purblinde, cracking of their Pedigree, and foolish
in all their actions.

Quality and Professions.
He represents Kings, Princes, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Barons, Courtiers, and
Gentlemen of all sorts; Justices of the Peace, Mayors, etc. the principal
Officers of a City or Town. In Professions, he signifies Goldsmiths, Brasiers,
Pewterers, Minters of money, Copper-smiths, etc.

5. Of VENUS.
Venus is a Planet Feminine, and Nocturnal, temperately cold and moist; she is
called the lesser Fortune, Nature.
Author of mirth and jollity: She is a Star of a bright shining color; when
she is seen after the Sun is set, she is called the Eveningstar; when she is
seen before the Sun rise in a morning, she is then called the Morning Star. She
is near? year a finishing her revolution through the Twelve signs.

She is sometimes called Cytherea, Aphrodite, Vesperugo, Poetical Names.
Ericana.

Venus describes one of a comely middle Stature, with a round Visage, of a
white brown Complexion, Descript.
fair lovely Eyes, fair smooth Hair, often of a light brown; red Lips, and
cherry Cheeks, with little dimples in them; the Face pretty fleshy; the person
every way handsomely composed, very delightful, and exceeding well shaped,
desirous to go neatly in every part, both in clothes and person.

When she is well dignified, the persons signified thereby are of a pleasant
disposition, of an honest and good behavior, delighting in neat Apparel, often
entangled in Love-matters, zealous in their Affections; they are quiet, not
given to quarrels or wrangling, but lovers of all virtuous actions.

But when she is ill dignified, she signifies a person nothing regarding his
Reputation; he is riotous, expensive, a lover of lewd Women, a haunter of
Taverns and Alehouses, carelessly wasting his estate therein: he is a mere
Atheist, using neither Faith nor Conscience in his Conversation.

She represents Linnen-drapers, Mercers, Silkmen, Painters, Jewellers,
Qualities and Professions.
Players, Musicians, Gamesters, Embroiderers, Perfumers: She has signification
of women in general, as Virgins, Wives, and Widows, and such persons as make or
sell those commodities which adorn or beautify women.

6. Of MERCVRY.
Mercury is the least of all the Planets, Nature.
and is said to be by nature cold and dry; he is either Masculine, or Feminine,
according as he is in configuration with Planets Masculine or Feminine; he is
seldom to be seen, by reason he is always so near to Sol, never above 27
degrees distant; he appears of a duskie silver color; he finisheth his course
through the Twelve Signs in something less than twelve Months.

Poetical Names.
He is called Hermes, Stilbon, Cyllenius, Archas.

He represents a person indifferent tall and straight, of a long Visage,
Descript.
high Forehead, long Nose, brown or black Hair, much on the Head, but little on
the Beard; of a dark or swarthy Complexion, long Arms and Hands. But in
describing the person signified by him, you are carefully to consider what
Planets he is in configuration withal, and accordingly moderate your judgment.

If he be well dignified in a Question or Nativity, then the person signified
by him is of a pregnant Wit, desirous of Learning, which he will attain with
much ease; he is a searcher of occult Learning; he is an excellent Logician and
Disputant, eloquent in his speeches, ambitious of being exquisite in every
Science; he often desires Travel, and seeing foreign Countries.

When he is ill dignified, he signifies a person full of knavish inventions; a
liar, boaster, and full of many strifes and contentions; he has a troublesome
Wit, which he employs both with Tongue and Pen against all men, purposely to
cause quarrels and mischief; a conceited Fool, a very Idiot, pretending to
Learning and Knowledge, but not capable of any solid Learning; a thievish and
cheating person.

He has signification of all literate men, as Philosophers, Mathematicians,
Astrologers, Poets, Schoolmasters, Secretaries, Orators, Advocates,
Accomptants, Merchant, Attorneys, Sollicitors, Clerks, Stationers, Printers,
Tailors, Carriers, Messengers, and Footmen.

7. Of LVNA.
The Moon is a Planet Feminine and Nocturnal, by nature cold and moist;
PLACE="marg" Nature.
she finisheth her Revolution through the Twelve Signs in 28 days, wanting
some few hours.

She is called Lucina, Cynthia, Diana, Names.
Latona, Noctiluca, Proserpina.

She denotes one of a large Stature, round Face, pale or whitely colored, gray
Eyes, and oftentimes the one a little bigger than the other; the Hair of a
bright brown, and much of it both on the Head and Beard; short Hands, the whole
Body inclining to fatness.

When she is well dignified, she denotes one a lover of all ingenious and
honest Sciences; he delights in novelties, and naturally inclined to flit his
habitation, and remove from one place to another; he is a soft, tender,
well-disposed creature, yet timorous, and easily frighted.

When she is ill dignified, then she represents an idle, lazy, drunken,
sottish person, that lives carelessly and beggarly; a Vagabond, and a hater of
labor; he is of no spirit, mutable, and inconstant.

She signifies Queens, Dutchesses, Ladies, and all sorts of women in general;
PLACE="marg" Persons and Professions.
and the common inferior sorts of people; Pilgrims, Travelers, Sailors,
Fishermen, and such as travel or trade upon Water, Brewers, Vintners, Coachmen,
Letter-carriers, Messengers, Mariners, Millers, Alewives, Maltsters, Midwives,
Nurses, Hackney-men, and Water-bearers.

Of the Head and Tail of the DRAGON.

The Dragons head is by nature Masculine; he is said to be a Fortune of the
nature of Jupiter and Venus: PLACE="marg" Of
Some say that he is good when joined with good Planets, and evil when joined
with evil Planets; PLACE="marg" Christ. Astr. cap. 13. page 83.
but Mr. Lilly says, that when he is joined with evil Planets, he lessens
their malevolent signification; when joined with good, he increases the good
promised by them.

The Tail of the Dragon is Feminine, Of
of the nature of the Infortunes: Mr. Lilly says, when he is joined with evil
Planets, their evils are doubled; and when joined with good, the good promised
is much abated.

CHAP. V.
The Description and natural signification of the Seven Planets in any of the
Twelve Signs of the Zodiac.

Of Saturn in the Twelve Signs.
SAturn in Aries, represents one of a mean Stature, ruddy Complexion, but
somewhat obscure; high Forehead, great full Eyes, dark Hair, but little on the
Beard; a spare lean person, a great boaster of his actions, an ill-natured
quarrelsome contentious person.

In Taurus, he represents one of a mean Stature, a lean Body, a heavy lumpish
person, dark Hair, and no comely person; he is inclined to vicious and sordid
actions, delights in letchery, whoring, and all beastial actions.

In Gemini, he represents one of an indifferent tall Stature, an oval Visage,
the Hair black, or a sad brown, a well proportioned Body, humane, and
ingenious; but of a perverse nature.

In Cancer, he signifies one of an indifferent Stature, of a sickly
constitution of body, thin Face, sad brown Hair; sometimes the person is
crooked, ill-shaped, and ill-conditioned, inclined to malice and hatred.

In Leo, he represents one something tall, big-boned, not very much inclined to
fatness; the Hair of a light brown; his conditions are indifferent good, but
something passionate and revengeful.

In Virgo, he signifies a tall spare body, swarthy Complexion, sad brown or
black Hair; a melancholy person, something inclined to Study; malicious; and
when angry, it will be long before he be pleased again: he is inclined
sometimes to theft, and a person of reserved thoughts.

In Libra, he represents a person of a large Stature, a well-composed Body, an
oval Visage, a large Forehead; he has sad brown Hair, he is high spirited,
well conceited of his own actions, somewhat prodigal and expensive, soon moved
to anger.

In Scorpio, he signifies a person of a low Stature, broad Shoulders, sad brown
or black Hair; he is quarrelsome, and much given to debate and contentions, and
all sordid actions.

In Sagittary, he represents a well-composed person, of an indifferent large
Stature, brown Hair, courteous in his behavior to all persons, but will not
take any abuse; he is choleric, but soon reconciled.

In Capricorn, he represents one of a middle Stature, not very tall, a lean
spare person, long Visage, little Eyes, sad brown or black Hair, a duskish
Complexion; he is covetous of worldly goods, a melancholy person using but few
words; he is peevish, and will retain anger a long time.

In Aquarius, he gives a middle Stature, brown or black Hair, rather inclined
to fatness than otherwise; he is of a courteous disposition, of an ingenious
fancy; a lover of Arts, yet conceited of his own ingenuity.

In Pisces, he signifies one of a middle Stature, of a pale Complexion, sad or
black Hair, full Eyes, and a great Head; an ill-conditioned, malicious,
contentious, dissembling person.

Of Jupiter in the Twelve Signs.
Jupiter in Aries, denotes one of a middle Stature, of a ruddy Complexion, an
oval Visage, the Hair of a light brown or flaxen color, a quick piercing Eye,
a very obliging person, of a free and noble disposition, a lover of friendship,
peace and tranquillity.

In Taurus, he represents one of a mean Stature, not very decent, his
Complexion swarthy, the Hair of a sad brown; his conditions are indifferent
good; a lover of Women, yet of a good carriage, and a wise discreet person.

In Gemini, he denotes a large tall person, something above the middle stature,
brown Hair, and a well-composed Body; courteous in his behavior, and obliging
to all persons; he delights in women's company, and is a lover of Arts and
Sciences.

In Cancer, he signifies a person of a middle Stature, a pale sickly
Complexion, an oval Visage; he has dark brown or black Hair, no very pleasant
person; he has aspiring thoughts, and aiming at great things; a busie-body,
that loves to concern himself with other men's affairs, and a great lover of
women.

In Leo, he represents one of a tall stature, and of a well-composed Body,
light colored Hair, or sometimes yellow, something curling; comely Eyes, of a
ruddy Complexion, and of a very good Disposition, bold and stout-hearted,
delighting in manly valiant actions, and much desirous of honor.

In Virgo, he signifies a well-composed person, of a sad brown or black Hair;
he is much given to study several Arts and Sciences; of a choleric
disposition, and covetous; ambitious of honor, and a lover of money.

In Libra, he represents a person of a neat well-composed Body, of a pleasant
Countenance, an oval Visage, light brown or flaxen Hair, of a very good
disposition, delighting in all pleasant exercises and recreations; and by his
good behavior he is beloved of all men.

In Scorpio, he denotes one of a middle stature, something inclined to fatness,
of a duskie Complexion, the Hair of a sad brown color; he is highly conceited
of his own actions, and of an ill nature, covetous of worldly goods, and thinks
himself above his betters.

In Sagittary, he represents one of a tall stature, a ruddy Complexion, an oval
Visage, the Hair of a chesnut-colour; a very well-composed person, of a very
good behavior, just in his actions; he is a lover of Horses, and naturally a
good Horseman.

In Capricorn, he signifies one of a very little stature, of a thin Face, and
pale Complexion, sad Hair, a very weakly person, yet peevish and fickle, and
not very well natured.

In Aquarius, he signifies a person of a middle stature, and of a good
Complexion, brown Hair, and a well-set person, of a pleasant merry disposition,
delighting in good company, and very just in his actions.

In Pisces, he represents one of a mean stature, but inclined to fatness, the
Hair of a light brown; he is a lover of mirth, and musical Instruments; he is
studious in several Arts and Sciences, and very ingenious, delighting in good
company and pleasant recreations.

Of Mars in the Twelve Signs.
Mars in Aries, signifies one of a middle stature, big-boned, and a well-set
person, of a swarthy Complexion; sometimes the Hair is red, or of a light
color, and curling; a sharp hazle Eye, of a bold confident countenance,
ambitious of rule, a lover of war and contests.

In Taurus, he represents a person of a middle stature, but not tall, a dull
Complexion, a broad Face, great wide Mouth, black Hair, and no very pleasant
person; he has often a mark with some weapon on the Face; he signifies a
treacherous, false dissembling person, gluttonous, luxurious, and a lover of
lewd women's company.

In Gemini, he denotes one of a tall stature, a well-propotioned Body, his Hair
black, or of a sad brown; he signifies one of a wandering unsettled mind, of a
choleric disposition, of a rash turbulent spirit.

In Cancer, he describes a person of a short stature, an ill composition of
Body, sometimes deformed by crookedness, etc. the Hair is brown, the Complexion
is for the most part white; he signifies a sottish dull-spirited person, a
lover of Wine, and a promoter of Quarrels.

In Leo, he represents one of a tall, strong, able Body, his Hair of a dark
flaxen color, a large Face, and great Eyes; a very hasty choleric person, of
a free-hearted generous spirit, delighting in shooting, and all warlike
exercises.

In Virgo, he describes a well-proportioned person, of a middle stature, of a
swarthy Complexion, of a sad brown or black Hair; soon angry, but long before
he be pleased again; a person sufficiently ill-conditioned, and unfortunate in
most of his actions.

In Libra, he describes a person something tall, and a very well-composed Body,
an oval Visage, the Hair of a light brown; a person of a sanguine Complexion,
and a pleasant cheerful Countenance, a lover of women's company, and ambitious
of his own praise.

In Scorpio, he represents one of a middle stature, a swarthy Complexion, broad
Face, black Hair, and curling; an ungrateful, revengeful, quarrelsome person,
but yet very ingenious in several Arts and Sciences.

In Sagittarius, he describes one of a tall stature, and in every part well
proportioned, an oval Visage, brown Hair, a very good Complexion; he delights
in good merry company; he is of a choleric disposition, delighting in war and
warlike exercises.

In Crapricorn, he represents one of a mean stature, a spare lean Body, thin
Face, little Head, black Hair, but an indifferent Complexion; a person of good
spirit, ingenious, and quick-witted, and of a good disposition, and fortunate
in his actions.

In Aquarius, he represents one of a middle stature, a well-proportioned Body,
a good Complexion, the Hair red, or of a sandy flaxen; he is very quarrel-some,
and much given to act mischievous debates, which many times prove to his own
prejudice.

In Pisces, he describes one of a short stature, but fleshy, the Hair of a
light brown or flaxen color, the Body not very handsomely composed; he often
delights in the company of lewd women; he is a dissembling person, and of a
dull and stupid understanding.

Of the Sun in the Twelve Signs.
Sol in Aries represents one of a middle stature, a strong and well-composed
Body, a good Complexion, the Hair of a light flaxen or yellow color; he is of
a noble disposition, delighting in warfare, and is very ingenious therein, and
by his valor he is a terror to his Enemies.

In Taurus, he describes a well set person, of a short stature, but not very
comely; a broad Face, wide Mouth, great Nose; of a dull Complexion, brown Hair,
a bold confident person, delighting in warfare, and is often victorious.

In Gemini, he describes one of a large stature, of a sanguine Complexion,
brown Hair, and a well-composed Body; he is courteous in his actions, and of a
good disposition, yet not very fortunate in his affairs, but yet content, and
will pass by slight abuses.

In Cancer, he denotes one of a little stature, of an unhealthful disposition
of body, an ill complexion, with some defect in the Face; he has brown Hair,
and is a well natured person, of a pleasant disposition, delighting in merry
company, Sports, and Pastimes; he is a lover of women's company, and a
free-humoured jovial person.

In Leo, he represents a strong well-proportioned person; he has a full Face,
large Eyes, light or yellow Hair, a sanguine Complexion; he is faithful and
just to his friend, and courteous to all men; he performs his promises fully,
and is desirous of honor; he has sometimes a Scar in his Face; he delights in
good pleasant company.

In Virgo, he represents a well-proportioned Body, but of a very large stature,
not very fat, the Hair of a sad brown or black, and much of it; he is of a good
Complexion, and of a good Disposition; one that delights in all civil
recreations, and a very pleasant ingenious person.

In Libra, he describes one of an upright straight Body, a good Complexion, an
oval Visage, a full Eye, light-coloured Hair, yet unfortunate in his actions,
especially in warlike affairs; he loses his honor, and is exposed to much
danger.

In Scorpio, he represents one of a middle stature, a well-set person, a dull
Complexion; he has a full fleshy Face, and brown Hair, the whole body inclined
to fatness; he is of a rugged nature, but very ingenious, and desirous of
honor; he is expert in Warfare, also in Physic and Chemistry.

In Sagittary, he describes a comely, tall, well-composed person, of a sanguine
Complexion, an oval Visage, the Hair of a light brown; a high-spirited proud
person, ambitious of honor, delighting in War; he is active and pleasant, and
scorns to take abuses of any.

In Capricorn, he describes one of a little stature, of a while Complexion, a
lean spare Body, not very well-proportioned, an oval Visage, and brown Hair; he
is of a good disposition, very ingenious and victorious in War; he is of an
undaunted spirit, and delights in women's company.

In Aquarius, he represents one of a well-composed corpulent Body, of a middle
stature, of a good Complexion, of a full round Face, and light brown hair, and
desirous to bear rule over others.

In Pisces, he describes a person of a low stature, a reasonable good
Complexion, a round Face, and light brown or flaxen Hair, a corpulent Body; he
delights in merriment, and in keeping women's company; in Sports and Games; he
is expensive and prodigal.

Of Venus in the Twelve Signs.
Venus in Aries represents a slender Body, of a middle stature, of a good
Complexion, light Hair, and an indifferent well-proportioned Body, but very
unfortunate in his actions; he is sometimes a Company-keeper, and very wasteful.

In Taurus, she represents one of a middle stature, a comely well-proportioned
person, of a good Complexion, sad brown Hair, and one of a very good
Disposition, for which he is beloved of every one; he is fortunate in his
actions, and obliging to all persons.

In Gemini, she represents a slender, tall, well-proportioned person, brown
Hair, and of a good Complexion; he is loving and free-hearted, and hates all
unjust actions; he is merciful and pitiful to the poor, and honest in all his
actions.

In Cancer, she describes one of a short stature, a Body something inclined to
fatness, a pale Complexion, round Face, light-coloured Hair: he is mutable and
inconstant; he is gluttonous, idle, a lover of good fellowship and vain
recreations.

In Leo, she represents one of a moderate tall stature, and a well-proportioned
Body, of a good Complexion, a round Face, a full Eye, the Hair of a light brown
or sandy flaxen, sometimes freckles in the Face; his conditions are indifferent
good; he is passionate, but his anger is soon over; he is of a generous free
humor, something proud, and sickly.

In Virgo, she describes one moderately tall, and a well-composed Body, an
obscure duskish Complexion, an oval Visage, and a sad brown or black Hair; a
very ingenious person, but often crossed in his undertakings; he is an active
subtle person, and of a very searching fancy.

In Libra, she describes a well-proportioned, tall, upright person, a sanguine
Complexion, an oval Visage, and dimples in the Cheeks, sometimes freckles in
the Face, with comely brown Hair; a courteous, civil, respective person, who
delights in good and virtuous company.

In Scorpio, she represents one of a middle stature, and a well set person,
somewhat fat; a broad Face, sad brown or black Hair, a duskish Complexion: she
denotes a quarrelsome person, hateful, envious, a lover of contentions and
unworthy actions.

In Sagittary, she represents one of a tall stature, a clear Complexion, an
oval Visage, light brown Hair, and a well-composed person, of a good
Disposition, of a noble spirit, delighting in pleasant recreations, but a
little proud and passionate, yet he will not continue long in anger.

In Capricorn, she describes one of a middle stature, a lean spare person, of a
sickly Complexion, thin Face, sad brown or black Hair, a lover of women; he is
much given to drinking and taking his pleasure, but not very fortunate in his
actions.

In Aquarius, she describes a handsome, decent, well-composed Body, a very good
Complexion, the Hair of a light brown or flaxen color, a person of a very good
Disposition, very courteous and obliging to all men, and an hater of evil
actions; a lover of Peace and quietness, and takes delight in civil recreations.

In Pisces, she denotes a person of a middle stature, of a good Complexion, a
round Face, sometimes a dimple in the Chin, the Hair of a light brown or flaxen
color, and one of a very good disposition: he has an ingenious wit, is just
in his actions, a lover of Peace and Tranquillity.

Of Mercury in the Twelve Signs.
Mercury in Aries describes one of a short stature, a lean spare Body, an oval
Visage, no clear Complexion, light brown Hair, a quarrelsome discontented
person, given to lying, stealing, and breeding of strife and contentions.

In Taurus, he represents one of a middle stature, a well-set corpulent Body, a
swarthy Complexion, sad brown Hair; he is a great Company-keeper, and a lover
of women; he is a slothful person, and one that loves his own ease.

In Gemini, he describes a well-composed Body, reasonable tall of stature, of a
good Complexion, the Hair of a light brown; he represents a very ingenious
person, a lover of Arts and Sciences, and will easily attain them without a
teacher.

In Cancer, he represents a person of a mean stature, of an ill Complexion, a
thin Face, sharp Nose, little Eyes, sad brown Hair, a malicious, knavish,
sottish person, given to lying, stealing, and dissembling.

In Leo, he describes one of a large stature, of a swarthy Complexion, a round
Face, large Eyes, and of a light brown Hair, a choleric proud person,
delighting in quarrels and contention, and a lover of mischief.

In Virgo, he represents a tall, slender, well-compsed person, an obscure
Complexion, a long Visage, the Hair of a sad brown or black, but a person
sufficiently ingenious, delighting to go in good apparel, according to the
capacity of his birth and quality. If Mercury be not afflicted, he makes a good
Orator, etc.

In Libra, he represents one of a moderate tall stature, a well-proportioned
Body, of a sanguine Complexion, the Hair of a light brown; a wise ingenious
person, of a very good disposition, just in all his actions, and a hater of
Vices; he is a lover of learning, and a virtuous person.

In Scorpio, he describes a person of a middle stature, and a well-set, strong,
able Body, a swarthy Complexion, sad brown Hair, and curling; he is a great
Company-keeper, and a lover of women, and of an ingenious wit.

In Sagittary, he describes one of a tall stature, a ruddy Complexion, an oval
Visage, large Nose, and brown Hair; he is quarrelsome and contentious, and
thereby sometimes proves an enemy to himself.

In Capricorn, he represents one of a little stature, thin Face, a muddy
Complexion, light brown Hair, sometimes bow-legged; a sickly person, of a
peevish Disposition, and unfortunate in many of his actions.

In Aquarius, he describes a person of a middle stature, a corpulent fleshy
Body, a full Face, brown Hair, and of a good Complexion; he is very ingenious
in several Arts and Sciences, an obliging person, one that is well beloved of
his friends.

In Pisces, he represents one of a little stature, of a sickly pale Complexion,
thin Face, and brown Hair, one much given to drinking, and to women's company,
and often wastes much of his estate thereby.

Of the Moon in the Twelve Signs.

The Moon in Aries, represents one of a middle stature, reasonable fleshy, a
round Face, light brown Hair, and one of a good Complexion, of a choleric,
churlish Disposition, ambitious of Honor, but not very fortunate in his
actions.

In Taurus, she describes one of a middle stature, and a well-composed, strong,
corpulent Body, black Hair, or of a sad brown; one of a good behavior, a sober
obliging person, and just in all his actions, whereby he sometimes obtains
Preferment, and is beloved of all men.

In Gemini, she represents one tall of stature, but very well-proportioned; sad
brown Hair, and of a good Complexion; but one of an ill nature, crafty, and
deceitful; an ingenious subtle person, but not very fortunate in his affairs.

In Cancer, she describes a well-proportioned person, of a middle stature,
inclined to fatness, but of a pale Complexion, round Face, and sad brown or
black Hair, and one of a good Disposition, and of a wise and prudent behavior,
just in his actions, and fortunate in all his affairs.

In Leo, she represents a well-proportioned Body, of a large stature, a
sanguine Complexion, a full Face, and large Eyes, and light brown Hair; a proud
ambitious person, domineering over others, and hates to be under subjection to
any; he is beloved by few, and seldom proves a fortunate person.

In Virgo, she describes a person of a large stature, of an indifferent good
Complexion, an oval Visage; the Hair black, or a sad brown; a covetous,
pensive, melancholy person; ingenious, but unfortunate in his actions.

In Libra, she describes one moderately tall, and a well-composed person, a
sanguine Complexion, the Hair of a light brown, and a person of a very good
Disposition, and delighting in all pleasant recreations, as Music, Dancing,
etc. much delighting in women's company, but not very fortunate in his affairs.

In Scorpio, she represents one of a short stature, but oftentimes very fat,
and of an obscure Complexion, black Hair, or of a sad brown, and one of an ill
Disposition; a malicious, treacherous, sottish person; one that gains very
little love by his Neighbors.

In Sagittary, she describes one of a middle stature, and a well-proportioned
person, of a sanguine Complexion, an oval Visage, and light brown Hair; she
signifies one a little choleric, easily angered, but soon pleased again;
ambitious of honor, and a very obliging person.

In Capricorn, she represents one of a spare lean Body, and a little stature,
sad brown or black Hair, and often they have some defect in the Knees; one
given to drinking, and to women's company; and an idle person, delighting in no
good exercises.

In Aquarius, she represents a person of a middle stature, and a well-composed
corpulent Body, a sanguine Complexion, and brown Hair; he is of a courteous
Disposition, and of an ingenious searching fancy, delighting in moderate
recreations, and a hater of all evil actions; whereby he is beloved of all
persons.

In Pisces, she represents one of a low stature, and pale Complexion, the Body
somewhat inclined to fatness, the Hair of a bright brown; she shows an idle
person delighting in no good actions, and unfortunate in most of his under
takings. But herein you are to consider how the Planets are aspected; for if
the Moon be in a good Aspect of the Fortunes, it mitigates her evil
signification: and so also consider of the rest of the Planets in like manner.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Houses, Antiscions, Friendship, and Enmity, and of the Orbs and
Latitude of the Seven Planets.

THe Seven Planets by experience are found to delight in some of the Twelve
Signs more than in others, as being more agreeable to their nature; and
therefore they are termed their Houses, because they are more fortunately
placed therein, than in the rest of the Signs. Each of the Seven Planets,
except Sol and Luna, have two of the Signs allowed for their Houses: As to
Saturn, Capricorn and Aquarius; to Jupiter, Sagittary and Pisces; to Mars,
Aries and Scorpio; to Sol, Leo; to Venus, Taurus and Libra; to Mercury, Gemini
and Virgo; to Luna, Cancer: and in these Signs they are the best fortified.

But although all the Planets except the Luminaries have two Signs allowed
them for their Houses, yet they are found to take more delight in one of the
Houses than in the other; viz. Saturn delights most in Aquarius, Jupiter in
Sagittary, Mars delights most in Scorpio, Venus delights most in Taurus, and
Mercury delights most in Virgo. The Artist ought chiefly to understand the
Houses of the Planets, their Characters, and the Characters of the Signs,
before he proceed to any Judgment; to which I leave him, and proceed to the
Antiscions and Contranscions of the Planets.

Of the Antiscions and Contrantiscions of the Planets.
The Antiscions of the Planets are no more than when two Planets are equally
distant from the first of either of the two Tropical signs Cancer or
Capricorn: As suppose Saturn in the 10th degree of Taurus, and Jupiter in the
20th degree of Leo; here Saturn casts his Antiscion to Jupiter, they being both
equally distant from the first Punctum of Cancer: the Counterantiscions are
found by the opposite signs and degrees: the Antiscions are allowed to be of
the nature of Sextile or Trine Aspects: the Contrantiscions of the Planets are
equivalent to a Quadrate or Opposition. But that the Learner may find them
with more ease, be pleased to consider the following Table.

A Table of the Antiscions in Signs.
The Antiscions of the Planets in Signs.

Here you may see, a Planet in Cancer sends his Antiscion to Gemini; in Leo, to
Taurus, and so of the rest of the signs. A Planet in Leo sends his
Contrantiscion to Aquaries, that being the opposite sign to Leo. And to find
the degree and minute, you are to substract the degree and minute your Planet
is in from 30, and the remainder shall show the degree and minute of Antiscion:
or you may know by the following Table.

A Table showing the Antiscion in Degrees and Minutes.
Planets Antis. in degrees. The Planets Antiscion in minutes. d. d. m. m. m. m.
1 29 1 59 16 44 2 28 2 58 17 43 3 27 3 57 18 42 4 26 4 56 19 41 5 25 5 55 20 40
6 24 6 54 21 39 7 23 7 53 22 38 8 22 8 52 23 37 9 21 9 51 24 36 10 20 10 50 25
35 11 19 11 49 26 34 12 18 12 48 27 33 13 17 13 47 28 32 14 16 14 46 29 31 15
15 15 45 30 30

When you have found the Planets in Signs, enter the Degrees in the first
Column on the left hand: and in the second Column you have the Antiscions in
degrees. The like in the Table of Minutes. As for Example: if Jupiter be in 10
degrees 20 minutes of Libra, by the first Table I find his Antiscion falls in
Pisces. Then in the second Column I enter the Table with degrees, and against
10 degrees in the first Column, I find 20 degrees in the second Column. Then I
enter the Table of minutes, and against 20 I find 40 minutes; which shows that
Jupiter in 10 degrees 20 minutes of Libra, casts his Antiscion to 20 degrees 40
minutes of Pisces. And so I proceed to the Friendship and Enmity of the Planets.

A Table of the Friendship and Enmity of the Planets.
Planets. Friends. Enemies. Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury. Luna,

By this Table you may perceive that the Friends of Saturn are Jupiter, Sol,
Mercury and Luna. His Enemies are Mars and Vennus. The Table is so easy, that
it needs no farther explanation.

Of the Planets Orbs.
d. m. Saturn. Orbs are 10 0 Jupiter 12 0 Mars 7 30 Sol. 17 0 Venus 8 0 Mercury
7 0 Luna 12 30

The Use of the Table is this: When you find two Planets applying to Aspect,
yet wanting several degrees of their Partile Aspect, they are said to be in
Platick Aspect, when they are within the moiety of their Orbs. As for Example:
Suppose Saturn be in 15 degrees of Aries, and Venus in 10 degrees of Gemini,
they are in Platick Aspect; for the Orbs of Saturn (as you may perceive by the
Table) are 10 degrees; the half of which is 5 degrees: The Orbs of Venus are 8;
take half of that, which is 4, which added to half the Orbs of Saturn makes 9;
so they are within the Orbs of a Sextile Aspect when they are 9 degrees distant
from their Partile Aspect.

A Table of the Planets greatest Latitudes.
North Lat. South Lat. d. m. s. d. m. s. The greatest Latitude of Saturn is 2
48 0 is 2 49 0 Jupiter 1 38 0 1 40 0 Mars 4 31 0 6 47 0 Venus 9 2 0 9 2 0
Mercury 3 33 0 3 35 0 Luna 5 0 17 5 0 12

All the Planets except Sol are sometimes on the North-side of the Ecliptic,
sometimes on the South Side; but the Sun always moves in the Ecliptic, and so
has no Latitude.

Of the mean Motion of the Planets.
The mean Motion of Saturn is 2 minutes, 1 second. The mean motion of Jupiter
is 4 minutes 59 seconds: of Mars, 31 minutes 27 seconds: of Sol, 59 minutes and
8 seconds: of Venus, 59 minutes and 8 seconds: of Mercury, 59 minutes and 8
seconds: of the Moon, 13 degrees, 10 minutes, 36 seconds. The use which may be
made of this, is to know when a Planet is swift or slow in motion: for if a
Planet move more in 24 hours than is allowed for his mean motion, he is said to
be swift in motion; and if he move less than his mean motion, he is said to be
slow in motion.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Essential and Accidental Dignities of the Planets.

IN the next place the Artist ought to be well acquainted with the Essential
dignities of the Planets, that thereby he may know their strength or weakness.
A Planet is said to be essentially strong, when he is in his House, Exaltation,
Triplicity, or Term; which is described in the following Table.

A Table of the Essential Dignities of the Planets according to Ptolomy.
signs planets houses exaltation triplicity Terms of the Planets. The Faces of
the Planets. Detrim Fa^l di no D 19 6 14 21 26 30 10 20 30 N 3 8 15 22 26 30 10
20 30 D 3 7 14 21 25 30 10 20 30 N D 15 6 13 20 27 30 10 20 30 N D 6 13 19 25
30 10 20 30 N 15 7 13 18 24 30 10 20 30 D 21 6 11 19 24 30 10 20 30 N 6 14 21
27 30 10 20 30 D 3 8 14 19 25 30 10 20 30 N 28 6 12 19 25 30 10 20 30 D 6 12 20
25 30 10 20 30 N 27 6 14 20 26 30 10 20 30

The Explanation of the Table.

In the first Column toward the left hand, you have all the Twelve Signs. In
the second Column against, you find D, which shows that Aries is the day-house
of Mars: Against, you find N, which shows that Taurus is the night-house of
Venus, etc. In the third Column against, you find 19, which shows Sol is
exalted in 19 degrees of Aries. In the fourth Column is showed the Triplicities
of the Planets; and against, you find Di. and Noc. (and so in all the fiery
Signs) which shows that Sol rules the fiery Triplicity by day, and Jupiter by
night. In like manner, Venus rules the earthy Triplicity by day, and Luna by
night. Saturn rules the airy Triplicity by day, and Mercury by night. And Mars
rules the watery Triplicity both day and night.

In the fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth Columns, you have the Terms of
the Planets: against, you find 6, which shows the first 6 degrees of Aries are
the Terms of Jupiter; from 6 to 14, are the Terms of Venus; from 14 to 21, are
the Terms of Mercury; from 21 to 26, are the Terms of Mars; from 26 to 30, are
the Terms of Saturn, etc.

In the tenth, eleventh, and twelfth Columns is showed the Faces of the
Planets; and there you find 10, which shows the first 10 degrees of Aries is
the Face of Mars; from 10 to 20, is the Face of Sol; and from 20 to 30, is the
Face of Venus, etc.

In the eleventh Column is showed the Detriment of the Planets; and against you
find, which shows Venus has her Detriment in Aries. The last Column shows the
Falls of the Planets: where you find, which shows that Saturn has his
Detriment in Aries, etc.

When you find a Planet, being Significator, posited in his House or
Exaltation, and no ways afflicted, it shows the person signified thereby is in
a very good condition, and that he wants for nothing in this World: But if he
be afflicted, in his Detriment or Fall, the person signified thereby is in a
mean condition, etc.

Planets are also accidentally strong, as being posited in an Angle, or when
they are in Conjunction to the Fortunes; as is showed in the following Table.

A Table of the Essential and Accidental Fortitudes and Debilities of the
Planets.
Essential Dignities. Essential Debilities. In house, or reception by house 5
In Detriment 5 In exaltation, or reception thereby 4 In Fall 4 In Triplicity 3
Peregrine 5 In Term 2 In Decanat or Face 1 Accidental Fortitudes. Accidental
Debilities. In the Ascend, or 10 house 5 In the 12th house 5 In the 7, 4, and
11 houses 4 In the 8th or 6th house 4 In the 2 or 5 houses 3 Retrograde 5 In
the 9th house 2 Slow in motion 2 In the 3d house 1 Occidental 2 Direct 4 and
Oriental 2 Swift in motion 2 decreasing 2 Oriental 2 Combust of 5 or Occidental
2 Under Sol's beams 8 Free from combustion 5 Besieged of and 5 In Cazima, vel
cord Solis 5 In partile of or 4 Increasing 2 In partile of or 5 In partile
with and 5 In partile with 4 In partile to and 4 In of or 3 In partile to with
5 In Terms of or 1 In the terms of or 1 With Caput Algel 5 With Spica 5

This Table is so easy, that it needs no Explanation; and after you have
collected the Essential and Accidental Fortitudes and Debilities of the
Planets, you are to substract the lesser from the greater, and the remainder
shall show the strength or weakness of your Planet.

A Table showing what member of the Body every Planet governs by being posited
in any of the Twelve Signs.


The Use of the Table.

The Use of the Table is easily understood: for if you look at the top of the
Table, you shall find your Planet, and in the first Column on the left hand
find the Sign he is posited in; and at the common Angle of meeting, you shall
find the part of the Body which the Planet governs from his own House.

Example: Suppose Saturn be Significator of a sick person, and in Taurus; I
find at the top of the Table; and in the first Column toward the left hand, I
find; and at the Angle of meeting, I find; which tells me the party is
afflicted in his Breast, Heart, and Back. Judge the like in the rest of the
Planets; one Example is sufficient to find the Use of the Table.

Of the Kingdoms and Cities under the Twelve Signs and Seven Planets.
Aries. Under Aries and Mars, are England, France, Germany, Silesia the higher,
Polonia, Denmark, Burgundy, Basterina, Syria. Of Cities, Ancona, Capua, Naples,
Ferrara, Florence, Verona, Bergamo, Lindaw, Padua, Marcelles, Epidaure,
Crackow, Augustam, Saragosa, Wenieza.

Taurus. Under Taurus and Venus, are Russia, Polonia the great, the North part
of Swedeland, Lorain, Campania, Helvetia, Rhetia, Franconia, Parthia, Persia,
Ireland, Cyprus. Of Cities, Bononia, Panormus, Mantua, Sena, Carolstadt,
Herbipolis, Nants, Gnesna.

Gemini. Under Gemini and Mercury, are Sardinia, Lumbardy, Brabant, Flanders,
Hircania, Armenia. Of Cities, London, Corduba in Spain, Viterbium, Tourney,
Lorain, Hasford, Bruges in Flanders.

Cancer. Under Cancer and the Moon, are Scotland, Granado, Burgundy, Holland,
Zealand, Prusia, Africa, Bithynia, Calchis, Carthage. Of Cities,
Constantinople, Tunis, Venice, Lucas, Pisa, Millan, Vincentia, Berne, York, St.
Andrews in Scotland, Lubec, Wittemberg.

Leo. Under Leo and Sol, are Gallia Togata, the Alps, Italy, Sicily, Apulia,
Bohemia, part of Turkey, Sabina, Chaldea, Orchinia. Of Cities, Damasco,
Syracusa, Rome, Ravenna, Cremona, Confluente, Prague, Lintz, Crimisium.

Virgo. Under Virgo and Mercury, are Greece, Achaia, Creet, Carinthia,
Arthesina, the Dukedom of Athens, Mesopotamia, Babylon, Assyria, Gallia. Of
Cities, Jerusalem, Corinth, Rhodes, Papia, Signia, Brundusium, Novaria, Lions,
Paris, Basil.

Libra. Under Libra and Venus, are Austria, Alsatia, Livonia; Sabaudia,
Delphinat, Thusia, Seres, Caspia, Thebaida, Sundgavia. Of Cities, Lisbon,
Laudam, Suessam, Placentia, Felkirk, Spiers, Frankford at Mayn, Wimpina,
Austria, Antwerp, Landshut.

Scorpio. Under Scorpio and Mars, are Norway, Bavaria the upper, Metagony,
Cappadocia, Mauritania, Fez, Gethulia. Of Cities, Algiers, Valentia in Spain,
Vrbine, Pestorium, Tarrisum, Forum Julium, Messana, Monacum, Ghent, Frankford
upon Oder, Aichstadt.

Sagittary. Under Sagittary and Jupiter, are Spain, Dalmatia, Sclavonia,
Hungary, Moravia, Misnia. Of Cities, Toledo, Matina, Narbon, Avenion, Colonia,
Agrippina, Stutgart, Ludenburg, Buda, Gascovia.

Capricorn Under Capricorn and Saturn, are Macedonia, Illyria, Thracia, Bosnia,
Albania, Bulgaria, part of Greece, Muscovia, Ethiopia, Media. Of Cities,
Oxford, Mechlen, Juliaoum, Berga, Brandenburg, Augusta, Constans, Derthena,
Faventia.

Aquarius. Under Aquarius and Saturn, are Amazonia, Sarmatia, Tartary the
greater, Muscovia, the South-part of Swedeland, Westphalia, Mosel, Piedmont,
Oxiana, Sogdiana, Media, Of Cities, Hamburg, Bremen, Mountferat, Pisarum,
Trent, Saltzburg, Ingolstadt.

Pisces. Under Pisces and Jupiter, are Cilicia, Calabriana, Portugal, Galatia,
Normandy, Phasunia, Nasomina in Lybia, Garamentis. Of Cities, Alexandria,
Hispalis, Compostella, Parentium, Rhemes, Worms, Ratisbone.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Terms of Art that every Student ought well to understand.

THe first is the Application of the Planets; which is performed three ways.
The first is when a light Planet being direct and swift in motion, applies to a
Planet that is more ponderous and slow in motion: As Mercury in 8 degrees of
Aries, and Jupiter in 12 degrees of Gemini, and both direct; here Mercury
applies to a Sextile of Jupiter by direct application. Secondly, When they are
both Retrograde, as Mercury in 20 degrees of Aries, and Jupiter in 15 degrees
of Gemini; here Mercury the lighter Planet applies to the Sextile Aspect of
Jupiter; and this is by Retrogradation. Thirdly, When one of the Planets are
Direct, and the other Retrograde: as suppose Mercury were Retrograde in 18
degrees of Aries, and Jupiter Direct in 14 degrees of Gemini; here Mercury
applies to a Sextile of Jupiter by his Retrograde motion.

Prohibition, is when two Planets are applying either by Body, or Aspect, and
before they come to their partile Aspect another Planet meets with the Aspect
of the former, and so prohibits it: As Mars in 10 degrees of Aries, and Venus
in 6 degrees of Aries, and Mercury in 5 degrees of Aries: here Venus is
applying to a Conjunction of Mars; but before they come to their partile
Conjunction, Mercury being more swift in motion, comes to a Conjunction of Mars
before Venus, and so prohibits Venus.

Separation is when two Planets have been lately in Conjunction or Aspect, and
are separated from it: As Saturn in 10 degrees. of Libra, and Mercury in 12 degrees. of
Libra; here Mercury is separating from a Conjunction of Saturn; but they are
still in platick Conjunction, so long as they remain within their Orbs.

Translation of Light and Virtue, is when a lighter Planet separates from the
Body or Aspect of a more weighty one, and immediately applies to another
superior Planet, and so translates the light and virtue of the first Planet to
that which he applies to: As Mercury in 8 degrees of Cancer, Saturn in 6, and
Jupiter in 13; here Mercury is separated from a Conjunction of Jupiter, and so
translates the ^^^tue of Saturn to Jupiter.

Hefrenation, is when a Planet is applying to the Body or Aspect of another,
and before he comes to it he falls Retrograde, and so refrains by his
Retrograde motion: As Saturn in 10 degrees of Taurus, and Mars in 7 degrees of
Cancer; here Mars applies to a Sextile of Saturn; but before he comes to it, he
becomes Retrograde.

Combustion: a Planet is said to be Combust of Sol, when he is within 8 degrees
30 minutes of his Body, either before or after their Conjunction: but a Planet
is more afflicted when he is applying to his Body, than when he is separating
from Combustion.

Reception, is when two Planets are in each others dignities, and it may be
either by House, Exaltation, Triplicity, or Term: As Sol in Cancer, and Luna in
Leo; here they are in Reception by House: or Sol in Taurus, and Luna in Aries;
here they are in Reception by Exaltation.

Retrograde, is when a Planet moves backward from 10 degrees to 9, 8, 7, etc.
and so contrary to the succession of signs, out of Taurus into Aries, and is
noted in the Ephemeris thus,.

Frustration, is when a swift Planet applies to the Body or Aspect of a
superior Planet, and before he comes to it the superior Planet meets with the
Body or Aspect of some other Planet: as Jupiter in 15 degrees of Cancer, and
Venus in 10 degrees of the same sign, and Mars in 14 degrees of Taurus; here
Venus applies to a Conjunction of Jupiter; but before they come to their
partile Conjunction, Mars comes to a Sextile of Jupiter, and so frustrates
Venus.

Peregrine, is when a Planet is posited in a sign wherein he has no Essential
dignities.

Under the Suns Beams: a Planet is said to be under the Suns Beams until he be
removed 17 degrees from his Body.

Void of course: a Planet is said to be void of course when he is separated
from the Body or Aspect of another Planet, and does not apply to the Body or
Aspect of another Planet while he remains in that Sign.

Cazimi: a Planet is said to be in Cazimi, or the Heart of the Sun, when he is
within 16 minutes of his body in respect of Longitude and Latitude.

Besieging: a Planet is said to be Besieged, when he is between the bodies of
Saturn and Mars; as Saturn in 15 degrees of Cancer, and Jupiter in 18 degrees,
and Mars in 20; here Jupiter is besieged of Saturn and Mars.

Oriental, is when a Planet rises before the Sun, and may be seen before
Sunrising.

Occidental, is when a Planet sets after the Sun, and may be seen after Sunset.

Direct: a Planet is Direct when he moves according to the succession of
signs, and out of 5 degrees to 6, 7, and so forward.

Stationary, is when a Planet moves not at all; which they do before and after
Retrogradation.

Increasing in light, is departed from Sol, or Sol from him.

Swift of course, is when a Planet moves more in 24 hours than his mean motion;
and he is said to be slow of course when he moves less in 24 hours than his
mean motion.

Longitude of a Planet or Star, is the degree of the Ecliptic wherein he is
posited, being numbered from the first degree and minute of Aries.

Latitude, is the distance from the Ecliptic either North or South.

Declination of a Star or Planet, is his distance either North or South from
the Equinoctial.

Right Ascension, is the number of degrees and minutes of the Equinoctial,
which comes to the Meridian with any Planet or Star, numbering from the
beginning of Aries.

Oblique Ascension, is the degree of the Equinoctial that comes to the Horizon
with any Planet or Star in an oblique Sphere.

Oblique Descention, is the degree of the Equinoctial that sets in the Horizon
with the degree of Longitude of any Planet or Star in an oblique Sphere.

Ascentional Difference, is the difference between the right and oblique
Ascension of any Planet or Star reckoned in the Equator.

CHAP. IX.
How to erect a Figure of the Heavens for any hour of the Day or Night, by an
Ephemeris and Table of Houses.

THe whole Sphere or Globe of Heaven is divided into four equal parts, by the
great Circles of the Meridian and Horizon; and each of these is divided again
into three other parts by the Circles of Position which intersect the Equator
equally, and do likewise meet in the points of the Grand Meridian, and with the
Horizon; which are in all Twelve, called by Astronomers the Twelve Houses; of
which there are Four principal Angles; two of which fall equally upon the
Horizon, the other upon the Meridian: that is to say, the First, the Fourth,
the Seventh, the Tenth: the following houses are called Succedent houses, the
other Gadent houses; which we commonly draw in this manner.

A Figure of the XII HOUSES.


The Lines in the Figure do show the Cusps or entering into the Houses. But for
the erecting of an Astrological Figure, first, in your Ephemeris you are to get
the true place of the Sun; and if the min. exceed 30, you are to add one degrees.
more to the Suns place; then with those whole degrees enter the Table of Houses
in that sign which you find Sol in, and in the Column of the 10th house find
the degree of the sign; and right against it on the left hand, under the title
time from noon, you will find certain Hours, Minutes, and Seconds, which you
are to add to the hour in which you erect your Figure; and if the Sun amount
to more than 24 hours, cast away 24, and with the remainder seek in the great
Column entitled time from Noon, and right against it you shall find the
Signs, Degrees, and Minutes to be placed upon the Cusps of the 10, 11, 12, 1,
2, and 3 houses; then you are to place the opposite Signs and Degrees upon the
Cusps of the other 6 houses. The Signs are opposite in this manner:

Signs Opposite Houses 10 Opposite 4 11 5 12 6 1 7 2 8 3 9

Here you see that Aries is opposite to Libra, and Taurus to Scorpio, Gemini to
Sagittary, etc. And so in like manner the 10th House is opposite to the 4th,
the 11th to the 5th, the 12th to the 6th, etc.

In the next place, you are to take the places of the rest of your Planets in
the Ephemeris, and place them in the Signs of your Figure; always remembering,
if the degrees of the Planets places be less than the degrees of the Cusp of
your House, you must place him before the Cusp thereof; but if the degrees be
more than the Cusp of your House, you must place him behind the Cusp thereof.

But if you erect a Figure for 8 or 9 hours after noon, the Planets will
require a reduction to the hour of the day: for all Ephemerides and
Astronomical Tables are calculated from Noon to Noon; and so you are to reckon
the time: as, if you would erect a Figure for two a clock in the Morning, you
must account it at 14 hours after Noon the day preceding: but if it be only
for a Horary Question, a mental reduction of the Planets places will be
sufficient; only the Moon, by the swiftness of her motion, will require a
reduction, and by adding 30 minutes to her place for every hour after Noon, and
substracting in the Forenoon 30 minutes for each hour, you may gain her place
truly enough for all ordinary Questions. But for those that desire more
exactness, I will give you a Table in the next Chapter for the reducing the
Planets places to any hour of the day or night, and proceed to give you an
Example of erecting the Figure of Heaven.

Suppose it were required to erect a Figure the 6 day of January, 1677, at
three hours after Noon. In the Ephemeris, I find the Suns place to be 27
degrees 6 minutes of Capricorn: then I look in the Table of Houses for Sol in
Capricorn; then I guide my eye down the second Column, (marked at the top dom.
x. which is the Column of the 10th House) and near the bottom of the Table, I
find 27 degrees; and against that in the great Column on the left hand,
entitled Time from Noon, I find 19 hours, 56 min. 12 sec. which I add to 3
hours, the time of erecting my Figure, and it makes 22 hours 56 minutes 12
seconds; which number I seek in the Column entitled Time from Noon, and the
nearest number to it, is 22 h. 57 m. 24 s. Then I look in the column of the
10th House, and I find 13 degrees, and at the top for the Cusp of the 10th
house; and in the column of the 11th house I find 21 degrees. 16 min. of; and in
the column of the 12th house I find 12 degrees, 31 minutes of, And for the
Ascendent I find 14 degrees 54 minutes of. For the second House I find 4
degrees 21 minutes of. For the third house I find 21 degrees 18 minutes of.
And so you have the Cusps of the 6 Oriental Houses; and upon the other six
Houses you are to place the opposite Signs.

Then I seek in the Ephemeris for the places of the Planets, and against the
6th of January 1677, I find them thus:

The Places of the Planets.
degrees. min. degrees. min. 19 13 17 2 2 52 25 22 8 26 29 25 27 6 11 11

The is always opposite to the

Having thus found the Cusps of the Houses, and places of the Planets, I place
them as you see in the following Figure.

A Figure of the Heavens, January the 6th 1677. 3 hours P. M.
a ad vacuum Lat. 51 degrees. 32 min.



Here you see the Sign and Degrees placed upon the Cusps of the six Oriental
Houses which we formerly found in the Table of Houses, and the opposite Signs
upon the opposite Houses; and for the placing the Planets therein, first I
found Saturn as aforesaid in Taurus, which is not upon the Gusp of any House,
but intercepted between the Cusps of the 11 and 12th Houses; therefore I placed
him in the 11th House, as you may see in the Figure.

Next, I find Jupiter in 2 degrees 52 minutes of Aquarius; I find Aquarius
both upon the 9th and 8th houses; but finding the degrees of Jupiter nearest
the degrees of the 8th, therefore I placed Jupiter before the Cusp of the 8th.
Also I find Mars posited in 8 degrees. 26 min. of Gemini, which I find upon the
Cusp of the 12th; but finding the degrees of the House more than the degrees of
Mars, therefore I place Mars before the Cusp thereof; but still he shall be
accounted in the 12th, because he is within 5 degrees. of the Cusp thereof. The
rest of the Planets you may find posited in the Figure, as was before directed.

CHAP. X.
How to reduce Planets Motions to any hour of the Day or Night.

IN reducing the Planets to any hour of the Day, you are first to get their
Diurnal motion, by substracting the places of your Planets the day subsequent
from the day going before, and the remainder shall be the diurnal or daily
motion; then work by the rule of Proportion, thus: If 24 hours give so many
degrees or minutes in a Planets motion, what shall your proposed time give? But
to save you this labor, I have inserted the following Table, whereby you may
find the hourly motions of the Planets with more ease: but first you must get
the diurnal motion of the Planets, as you are before directed; and with the
diurnal motion enter the Table with degrees or minutes, and right against it
you have their hourly motion; always remembering, that if you enter with
degrees, then degrees will answer your Question; if you enter with minutes,
then minutes will answer your Question, etc. And if you cannot find it at
once, enter your Table again. Note that D. signifies degrees, M. minutes, S.
seconds. I will give you one Example from the preceding Scheme, and so conclude
with the explanation of the Table.

d. m. January the 7th the Suns place 18 7 The 6th day Sol's place at noon is
17 6 Which leaves for the Suns D. motion 1 1

One degrees, one min. or 61 minutes. And if you enter the Table with 61 min. you
shall find his hourly motion toward the right hand 2 min. 32 seconds 30
thirds.

A Table of the hourly motion of the Planets, whereby you may reduce their
motions to any hour of the day.
Diurn. mot. One hours motion. D D M S M M S T S 1 0 2 30 2 0 5 0 3 0 7 30 4 0
10 0 5 0 12 30 6 0 15 0 7 0 17 30 8 0 20 0 9 0 22 30 10 0 25 0 11 0 27 30 12 0
30 0 13 0 32 30 14 0 35 0 15 0 37 30 16 0 40 0 17 0 42 30 18 0 45 0 19 0 47 30
20 0 50 0 21 0 52 30 22 0 55 0 23 0 57 30 24 1 0 0 25 1 2 30 26 1 5 0 27 1 7 30
28 1 10 0 29 1 12 30 30 1 15 0 31 1 17 30 32 1 20 0 33 1 22 30 34 1 25 0 35 1
27 30 39 1 30 0 37 1 32 30 38 1 35 0 39 1 37 30 40 1 40 0 41 1 42 30 42 1 45 0
43 1 47 30 44 1 50 0 45 1 52 30 46 1 55 0 47 1 57 30 48 2 0 0 49 2 2 30 50 2 5
0 51 2 7 30 52 2 10 0 53 2 12 30 54 2 15 0 55 2 17 30 56 2 20 0 57 2 22 30 58 2
25 0 59 2 27 30 60 2 30 0 61 2 32 30 62 2 35 0 63 2 37 30

CHAP. XI.
Of the Astrological signification of the Twelve Houses of Heaven.

Of the First House.
THe first House is called the East-angle or Ascendant; and in a Question or
Nativity, it has signification of the life of Man, his Disposition,
Complexion, and Understanding; and of the parts of man's Body it represents the
head and face. The Consignificators of this House are Aries and Saturn; for as
this is the first House, so is Aries the first of the Signs, and Saturn the
first of the Planets. In Eclipses and great Conjunctions, and upon Sol his
ingress into Aries, it signifies the common people, and general State of the
Kingdom where the Figure was erected. This House is Masculine, and of colors
it has the white; so that if a Planet be posited herein, that has
signification of white, the complexion of the party is more white and pale.

Of the Second House.
This House has signification of the Querents Estate, Goods, Money, Riches,
and Profit, Gain or Loss by commodities; and also of Money lent, and of Wages
due; in suits of Law, it signifies a man's Friends or Assistants. Upon Sol his
ingress into Aries, or in Eclipses and great Conjunctions, it signifies the
wealth or poverty, Allies, and support of the Commonwealth. The
Consignificators of this House are Jupiter and Taurus. In Man's body, it rules
the Neck and Throat: It is a Feminine and succedent House; of colors, it
signifies green.

Of the Third House.
From the Third House, is judgment given of the Querents Brethren, Sisters,
Kindred, and Neighbors; of short or inland Journeys; of removing from one
place to another. It also signifies Messengers, Epistles, Letters, etc. In the
parts of Man's body it governs the Arms and shoulders. The Consignificators of
this House are Gemini and Mars: It is a Masculine House; and of colors it
signifies red and yellow, or sorrel color.

Of the Fourth House.
The Fourth House has signification of the Querents Father; it also signifies
Lands, Houses, Orchards, Inheritances, Tillage of the earth, and the quality
and nature of the ground enquired after: It has signification of Minerals,
hidden Treasures, etc. also of Towns, Cities, or Castles besieged, and all
ancient Houses, Gardens, etc. and the end of all things: Also from this House
is judgment given of Reports or common Rumors, whether they be true or false.
The Consignificators of this House are Cancer and Sol. It is the North Angle,
and a House Feminine. Of colors it signifies red: Of Man's body it governs
the Breast and Lungs.

Of the Fifth House.
This House has signification of Children, Ambassadors, and Messengers,
Taverns, Alehouses, Plays, Pleasures, Joys, Banquets, Gifts, Bravery, and all
manner of Delights; also the estate or riches of the Native or Querents Father,
the Ammunition of a Castle or Town besieged. The Consignificators hereof are
Leo and Venus. It is Masculine, and of the Body of man it rules the Heart and
Back. It is a succedent House; of colors it signifies black and white, or
honey-colour.

Of the Sixth House.
The Sixth House has signification of Servants, Day-labourers, and of the
lesser sort of Cattle, as Sheep, Hogs, Goats, Hares, Coneys, etc. It signifies
the Nature and Qualities of Sicknesses, Shepherds, Warreners, and such as look
after small Cattle: It signifies Uncles, or the Brethren and Sisters of the
Querents Father. It rules the Belly and the inferior parts, etc. The
Consignificators of this House are Virgo and Mercury. It is a House Feminine
and cadent; of color it signifies black.

Of the Seventh House.
This House has signification of Marriages, Wives, Sweet-hearts, etc. of
public Enemies, Lawsuits, quarrels and contentions; all men we have common
dealing with. In questions of Astrology, the Artist himself; in Physic, the
Physician. It has signification of Thieves and Thefts. In Eclipses and great
Conjunctions, and at the Sun's ingress into Aries, it signifies the public
Enemies of the Kingdom or place which the Figure was erected for. It is called
the West Angle, and is by nature Masculine. Its Consignificators are Libra and
Luna: of Man's Body it governs the Haunches and Navil to the Buttocks. Of
colors it signifies sad brown or black.

Of the Eighth House.
The Eighth House signifies the death of the Native or Querent, its nature and
quality; the Estates of men deceased, their Wills, Legacies, and Testaments,
the Portion or Dowry of the Wife: in suits of Law, the Defendants Friends: in
Duels, the Adversaries second. The Consignificators of this House are Scorpio
and Saturn. In Man's body, it governs the Privy parts. It is a Feminine and
succedent House, and of colors it signifies green and black.

Of the Ninth House.
From this House we give judgment of long Voyages, Dreams, Pilgrimages, and
Religion, and all sorts of Ecclesiastical persons and Ministers, Books,
Learning, Church Livings or Benefices, and the Brethren and Kindred of the
Querents Wife. Of man's body, it governs the Hips and Thighs. The
Consignificators of this House are Sagittary and Jupiter. Of colors it has
the green and white; it is a Masculine and cadent House.

Of the Tenth House.
The Tenth House signifies Honor, Dignities, Offices, Magistracy, Kings,
Princes, Dukes, Earls, Judges, and all Commanders in general, and all persons
in Rule and Authority. It signifies the Querents Mother, and has signification
of preferment, whether it be attainable or not; also what Profession it is best
for any one to follow. It is a Feminine House, and is called the Medium Coeli,
or Mid-heaven. The Consignificators of this House are Capricorn and Mars. Of
the Body of man, it rules the Knees and Hams; of colors red and white.

Of the Eleventh House.
This House has signification of Friends and Acquaintance, the thing hoped for
or desired, the Fidelity or Falseness of Friends. As to Kings, it represents
their Houses, Allies, Counselors; their Associates, Treasure, Ammunition and
Soldiery. The Consignificators of this House are Aquarius and Sol. Of man's
Body, it rules the Legs. It is a Masculine House; and of colors it signifies
yellow or Saffron-colour, and is a succedent House.

Of the Twelfth House.
This House has signification of secret Enemies, great Cattle, as Horses,
Oxen, etc. also of Prisons, Captivity, Witches, and evil Spirits, malicious
persons, etc. The Consignificators of this House are Pisces and Venus. Of the
parts of man, it rules the Feet. It is a Feminine and cadent House; of colors
it signifies green.

Of the quarters of Heaven signified by the Twelve Houses.
The First House is East. The Second House is N.E. by E. The Third House is N.
N. E. The Fourth House is North. The Fifth House is N. W. N. The Sixth House is
W. N. W. The Seventh House is West. The Eighth House is SW by S. The Ninth
House is S. S. W. The Tenth House is South. The Eleventh House is S.E. by S.
The Twelfth House is S. S. E.
CHAP. XII.
How to compute the Part of Fortune.

THe Part of Fortune is taken either by day or night, by substracting the place
of Sol from the place of Luna, in signs, degrees, and minutes; remembering to
add 12 signs to the Moons place, if substraction cannot be made; and to the
remainder add the sign, degrees, and minutes of the Ascendant, the sum
thereof shall be the place of the Part of Fortune, marked or charactered thus,.

Suppose it were required to find the Part of Fortune; 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
11 in the former Scheme on the 6th of January 1677, I find the place of Luna
to be Gemini 29 degrees. 25 min. which you ought to number as you see in the
Margent, accounting from the beginning of Aries to the beginning of Taurus, one
whole sign, etc. and then her Longitude is 2 signs, 29 degrees. 25 min. the place
of Sol is in Capricorn 27 degrees. 6 min. which is 9 signs, 27 degrees. 6 min. And
because the Longitude of Sol exceeds the Longitude of Luna, we must add 12
signs to the Moons place, and it makes sig. d. m. The Longitude of the Moon 14
29 25 Substract the Longitude of Sol 9 27 06 And there remains 5 02 19 Unto
which you are to add the degree and minute ascending, and 3 14 54 The sum is 8
17 13 which shows the Part of Fortune to be in Sagittary 17 degrees. 13 min. Note,
that so far as Sol is distant from Luna, so far is Part of Fortune distant from
the Ascendent: so that if you take it upon a new Moon, the Part of Fortune is
in the Ascendent; upon the first quarter, in the fourth House; upon a full
Moon, in the seventh House; upon the last quarter, in the tenth House. You may
examine the Fortitudes and Debilities of the Part of Fortune by the following
Table.

A Table of the Fortitudes and Debilities of the Part of Fortune.
Dignities. Debilities. The Part of Fortune in or 5 The Part of Fortune in 5 5
neither gets nor loses 0 3 twelfth 5 2 8th house 4 the Ascend. or 10th 5 6 h
house 4 7, 4, or 11 houses 4 with or 5 2 or 5th 3 with 3 the 9th 2 of Saturn;
of 4 the 3d 1 of or 3 not Combust 5 Terms of or 2 with or 5 with Caput algol in
in 21 d. of 4 with or 3 Combust 5 with 2 with Regulus 25 6 with Spica 19 5

CHAP. XIII.
Of the significators of the Querent, and of the thing enquired after.

THe Querent is that person (be he of what degree or quality soever) that
propounds the Question to the Astrologer; and the Ascendant, his Lord, and
Luna, are always his significators, let the Question be what it will: the
Querited, is the person enquired after, or any thing whatsoever the question is
propounded for. As for Example: Suppose Taurus ascend upon the Cusp of the
first House, then Venus Lady thereof shall be the Querents significator. In the
next place you are to consider to what house the Question properly belongs; if
it be concerning riches, and Gemini be upon the Cusp of the second, Mercury is
Lord therefore of the second House, because Gemini is one of the houses of
Mercury; so then Mercury is the significator of the Querents riches or estate.
If the Question be concerning an absent Brother, a short or inland Journey,
then you are to take the third House and Lord thereof to be the significator of
the absent Brother, etc. and so of the rest of the Houses in order, as you are
already taught, where I showed the signification of the Twelve Houses.

A general Rule to know whether a Question be radical, or fit to be judged.
Before you give Judgment upon your Figure, you ought carefully to consider
whether your Figure be Radical, or fit for Judgment, lest the Querent come
purposely to abuse you; for the discovery of which, the Ancients have left us
these following Rules.

If you find the Lord of the Ascendant and Lord of the hour of one and the
same Triplicity; or when the Lord of the hour, and the sign ascending shall be
of one Triplicity, the Question is then radical, and fit to be judged.

When the Sign ascending, and the Planets posited in the Ascendant, or Lord of
the Ascendant, does exactly describe the Querent, then the Question is fit to
be judged, and the Artist may boldly proceed.

The Lord of the Ascendant in a Sign of the same Triplicity of the Lord of the
hour; or if the Sign ascending in a Question be of the same Triplicity with
the Ascendant of the Querents Nativity or Revolutional Figure for that year, it
signifies the Question is radical, and fit to be judged.

If you find the Moles or Marks signified by your Figure do correspond with
the Moles in the Querents body, that is a very good argument that the Figure is
fit to be judged.

When the beginning of a Sign ascends upon the Cusp of the first House, or the
first or second degrees thereof ascend; or if the latter degrees of a Sign
ascend, viz. the 28, 29, or 30th, except the significators do exactly describe
the Querent, and you have the hour of the day very exactly, you are not to give
judgment, for it is an argument the matter is forged, or the Querent has been
at others about the Question.

As the Ascendant signifies the Querent, so the 7th house and his Lord
signifies the Astrologer himself: If you find the Lord of the Ascendant in
Quadrate or Opposition to the Lord of the 7th, have a care in giving judgment,
lest the Querent come to abuse you. If the Lord of the seventh be Combust, or
afflicted by the Infortunes or Dragons Tail, the Astrologer gets no credit by
his Judgment.

If you find the Moon in via Combusta, which is from the last 15 degrees. of Libra
to the first 15 degrees. of Scorpio, it is not safe for the Artist to pass
Judgment.

What Marks, Moles, or Scars the Querent has.
Herein you are to consider the sign ascending, and what part of man's Body it
signifies; for the Querent has a Mole, Mark, or Scar in that part of his body.

Observe what Sign the Lord of the Ascendant is posited in, the Querent has
another Mole, etc. in that part signified by that sign.

Consider the Sign the Moon is in, for it is probable there is another Mole in
that part of the body represented by the sign she possesses.

Also consider the Sign of the sixth, and the Sign wherein the Lord of the
sixth is posited: for the Querent has some Mark, Mole, etc. in that part of
the body represented by these Signs.

If Saturn, Mars, or Dragons Tail be in the Ascendant, the Querent commonly
has a Mole, Mark, or Scar in the Head or Face.

If Saturn be the significator of the Mole, etc. it shows it to be of a dark,
obscure, or black color. If Jupiter, a purple or bluish color. Mars
signifies Scars, Cuts, or sports of Gunpowder, etc. or red Moles, etc. The
Sun, an olive or chesnut-colour: Venus, a honey-colour: Mercury, a pale whitish
or leaden color: Luna, a whitish color; but herein you are to mix her
signification according to the Planet she is in Aspect withal.

The significators Masculine, and in Masculine signs, it signifies the Mark,
Mole, etc. is on the right side of the body; if they be Feminine Planets, and
in Feminine Signs, it shows they are on the right side of the body.

When the significators of the Moles, etc. are above the earth, the Mark, Mole,
etc. is visible to the eye, and on the forepart of the body; but if they be
under the earth, they are then on the back-part of the body: If the
significators be in few degrees of the Sign, it shows the Mark, Mole, or Scar
lies in the upper part of the member represented thereby.

To know if the thing demanded will be brought to perfection or not.
Herein you are to give the Ascendant, his Lord, and the Moon, to signify the
Querent; and that House and his Lord to which the Question appertains, to the
Quesited: then consider what application is between the Significators; if they
apply to a Conjunction, in Angles, swift in motion, in any of their Essential
Dignities, it shows the thing enquired after will be perfected with speed; if
in succedent Houses, not so soon; if in cadent Houses, with much loss of time.

When the Significators apply by Sextile or Trine from good Houses, and they in
any of their Essential Dignities, and free from the malevolent Rays of the
Infortunes, it is an argument the matter will be brought to perfection with
speed.

If the Significators apply by a Quadrate Aspect in good Houses, and they be in
their Essential Dignities, it shows the thing enquired after will be brought to
perfection, although with not so much ease, nor so good success.

Things are sometimes brought to perfection when the Significators are in
Opposition; but this happens when the Significators are in mutual reception by
Houses: but if it be brought to pass, it is with so much trouble and vexation,
that the Querent will repent he sought after it.

Matters are also brought to perfection by translation of light and virtue,
when the Signification do not behold each other, but some more lighter Planet
separateth himself from the one Significator, which he was in mutual reception
with, and then immediately applies to the other Significator before he come to
the Body or Aspect of any other Planet; and you may judge that the thing
enquired after will be brought to perfection by such a person as that Planet
signifies, which thus translates the light and virtue of the one Significator
to the other.

The is some hopes of perfecting the business enquired after, when the
Significator of the thing enquired after is posited in the Ascendant, or if the
Lord of the Ascendant be posited in the house of the Quesited: but this signle
Testimony seldom perfects the business, without some of the aforesaid arguments
happen, or the two Significators cast their several Aspects to some more
weighty Planet than themselves, of whom they are both in reception with; and
then the person signified by that Planet who collects both their lights, may
bring it to perfection.

Who shall be the furtherance or hindrance of the thing enquired after.
When you find the Significators applying to Conjunction or Aspect, and before
they come to their partile Aspect, some other Planet comes to the Conjunction
or Aspect of one of the Significators, and that Planet hinders the thing from
being brought to perfection: consider the nature of that Planet, also what
House he is Lord of; and from hence you may know what person will be the
hindrance. If it be the Lord of the third, it shows some Neighbor, or some of
the Querents Brethren: If it be the Lord of the fourth, the Querents Fathers,
etc. will be the hindrance.

Also when the Significators apply by Body, or Aspect, and before they come to
their partile Aspect one of the Significators falls Retrograde, and so hinders
the thing inquired after from being brought to perfection; if it happen that
the Lord of the Ascendant fall Retrograde, the Querent will hardly proceed any
further in the business. By these Rules, rightly understood, you may know the
furtherance or hindrance in any Question.

Of varying the Houses in your Judgment, according to any Question propounded.
In all Questions whatsoever, the Ascendant, his Lord, and the Moon, are the
Significators of the Querent; so the second House shall show his Estate; the
third House, his Brethren, etc. the fourth House, his Father; the fifth House,
his Children; the sixth House, his Servants; the seventh House, his Wife: and
so of the rest of the Houses in order, as you are already taught in the twelfth
Chapter.

If a Querent propound a Question concerning the Estate, Riches, or Money lent
or due to his Brother, the Ascendant shall signify the Querent; the third
House and Lord thereof, shall signify his Brother; the fourth and Lord
thereof, his Brother's Estate, because it is the second from the third: the
fifth shall be his third House, and signify his short Journeys; the sixth
shall be his fourth; the seventh shall be his fifth, and signify his Children;
the eighth shall be his sixth, and signify his Servants, etc. the ninth shall
be his Wifes Significator, etc.

In like manner, if a Question be made concerning a Wife or Sweetheart, the
seventh House and Lord thereof are her Significators; the eighth House, which
is the second from the seventh, shall show her Estate or Portion; the ninth,
her Brethren; the tenth shall be her fourth, and signify her Father; the
eleventh shall be her fifth; the twelfth shall be her sixth, and signify her
Sicknesses; the first House shall be her seventh, the second House shall be her
eighth, and signify her Death; the third shall be her ninth, and show her
Religion; the fourth shall be her tenth, and signify her Mother, etc. the
fifth shall be her eleventh, and signify her Friends; the sixth shall be her
twelfth, and signify her secret Enemies. And by these Rules you may vary all
the Houses upon any Question; which every Artist ought well to understand.

Of the time of receiving a Horary Question.
It is agreed upon by all Modern Authors, that we ought to take that very
moment of time in which the Querent propounds his Question to the Artist, and
desires a resolution thereof, viz. the very hour and minute, as near as we can,
and thereupon erect the Figure; or if a Letter be sent to an Artist, whereby he
is desired to resolve some doubt, but he perhaps has not an opportunity to
read it at the time of receiving it, he is to accept of that moment of time
wherein he reads the Letter, and knows the mind of the Querent, and so accept
of that time for the Basis of his Work.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Planetary Hours, and how to find them either day or night.

FOr the finding of the Planetary hours, you must understand that every
artificial day, viz. from Sunrising to Sunsetting, is divided into twelve
equal parts; each of these parts is called a Planetary hour. Also the night,
viz. from Sunsetting to Sunrising, is divided into twelve parts, making the
Planetary hours for the night. For Example: when the days are 14 hours 40 min.
long, then the length of the Planetary hour for the day is 90 min, and for the
night but 30 min. But for more readiness, behold the following Table,
calculated for the Latitude 52, but may indifferently serve any part of England
without sensible error.

Hours before Noon. Hours after Noon. Hours before Midnight. Hours after
Midnight. Pla. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 R. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 h. m.
h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. H. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. h.
m. h. m. h. m. h. m. H. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. h. m. 0 30 7 0 8 0 9 0 10
0 11 0 12 1 0 2 0 3 0 4 0 5 0 6 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 0 11 12 1 2 0 3 0 4 0 5 0
6 0 6 24 6 50 7 54 8 54 9 56 10 58 12 2 4 6 8 10 13 5 47 11 9 7 4 2 12 58 1 56
2 54 3 51 4 41 5 47 12 18 39 43 48 52 56 12 4 8 13 17 21 25 35 21 17 13 8 4 12
56 52 48 43 39 35 18 12 28 35 41 47 54 12 6 13 19 25 32 38 22 30 25 19 13 6 12
54 47 41 35 28 22 24 6 18 27 39 43 52 12 8 17 25 33 42 50 10 42 33 25 17 8 12
52 43 35 27 18 10 0 30 6 8 7 18 8 29 9 39 10 50 12 1 11 2 21 3 31 4 42 5 43 7 3
4 57 7 53 8 42 9 32 10 21 11 10 12 0 50 1 39 2 29 3 18 4 8 4 57 6 24 5 58 10 23
35 48 12 13 25 38 50 6 6 15 45 8 3 50 38 25 12 12 48 35 23 10 7 58 40 12 18 48
3 17 31 46 12 14 29 44 55 12 26 34 12 57 43 29 14 12 46 31 27 3 48 30 18 12 39
5 55 12 28 44 12 16 32 49 5 5 22 27 23 21 9 5 49 32 16 12 44 28 16 2 55 39 23
24 6 30 48 6 24 45 12 18 36 54 12 30 48 12 30 12 54 36 18 12 42 24 6 48 30 13 0
30 5 23 6 42 8 2 9 21 10 40 12 1 20 2 39 3 59 5 18 6 38 7 57 4 2 8 38 9 18 9 59
10 39 11 20 12 0 41 1 21 2 2 2 41 3 3 4 3 6 24 16 37 7 58 18 39 12 21 42 4 3 23
44 8 5 3 55 44 23 10 2 41 21 12 39 18 1 57 36 15 3 55 12 18 19 32 54 16 38 12
22 46 6 28 50 12 48 50 28 6 44 22 12 38 16 54 32 10 48 18 12 6 29 52 14 37 12
23 56 9 31 54 17 43 54 31 9 45 23 12 37 15 51 28 5 43 24 6 3 27 50 13 36 12 24
47 10 33 57 20 40 57 33 10 47 24 12 37 14 50 27 3 40 0 30 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 0 11 0
12 1 0 2 0 3 6 4 0 5 0 6 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 0 11 0 12 1 0 2 0 3 0 4 0 5 0 6 0
6 24 11 9 7 4 2 12 58 1 56 2 54 3 51 4 49 5 47 13 6 47 7 51 8 54 9 56 10 58 12
2 4 7 9 11 13 12 18 21 17 12 8 4 12 56 50 48 40 39 35 25 38 43 48 52 56 12 4 8
13 17 21 25 18 12 30 24 17 13 6 12 54 47 43 35 28 21 38 28 35 41 47 54 12 6 13
19 25 32 38 24 6 20 33 20 17 8 12 52 43 34 37 18 10 50 18 27 35 43 52 12 8 17
25 33 42 50 0 30 7 53 8 42 9 32 10 21 11 10 12 0 50 1 39 2 29 3 18 4 8 5 57 7 3
6 8 7 18 8 29 9 39 10 50 12 1 11 2 21 3 32 4 43 5 53 7 3 6 24 8 23 50 38 25 12
12 45 35 23 10 3 58 45 15 5 58 10 23 35 9 56 12 13 25 38 50 6 3 15 12 18 12 57
43 29 14 12 46 31 17 3 48 38 26 48 3 17 31 52 12 14 29 44 57 12 26 18 12 21 9 5
49 31 16 12 44 28 12 2 55 39 21 37 39 6 55 12 28 47 12 16 32 49 5 5 21 37 24 6
30 12 54 36 18 12 43 34 6 48 30 13 48 30 48 6 24 43 12 18 36 54 12 30 48 0 30 8
38 9 18 9 59 10 39 11 21 12 1 41 1 21 2 2 2 41 3 23 4 3 7 57 5 42 6 42 8 2 9 21
10 41 12 1 20 2 39 3 59 5 18 6 38 7 57 6 24 44 22 10 4 41 21 12 39 18 1 57 36
15 55 8 5 16 37 7 58 18 39 12 21 42 4 2 23 44 8 5 12 18 50 28 6 45 22 12 38 16
54 32 10 48 12 10 32 54 16 38 12 22 44 6 28 50 12 18 12 54 31 9 46 23 12 37 14
51 28 5 43 17 6 29 52 14 37 12 23 46 9 31 54 17 24 6 58 30 10 46 24 12 36 13 49
22 3 40 20 3 27 50 13 36 12 24 47 10 33 57 20

The Explanation and Use of the Table of Planetary Hours.

In the first Column on the left-handpage, you have the place of the Sun to
every six degrees through the Twelve Signs: under that you find and; and
under Aries you find 0, 6, 12, 18, 24; and under Virgo you find 30, 24, 18,
12, 6: by which you see that the Sun rises at the same hour when he is in 6
degrees. of Aries, as he does when he is in 24 degrees. of Virgo. The Planetary Hours
are noted at the top of the Table, 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. both before Noon and after
Noon. In the second Column you have the first Planetary hour after Sunrise: as,
when Sol is in 6 degrees. of Cancer, or 24 degrees. of Leo, you shall find the first
Planetary hour continues from Sunrise, till 16 min, after 5. The second
Planetary hour continues till 37 min. after 6, etc.

In the first Column on the left hand, you have the hour and minute of
Sunrising to every six degrees of the Twelve Signs. The rest of the Columns
show the Planetary hours for the Night, at the Table directs you. Then when you
find the Planetary hour, you may know what Planet governs the hour by the
following Table.

A Table showing what Planet rules every hour of the Day and Night.
The Hours of the Day. Hours of the Night. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 2 3 4 5
6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Sunday. Monday. Tuesday. Wednesday. Thursday. Friday.
Saturday.

You must understand that for every day in the Week there is assigned a several
Planet, and that Planet governs the first hour of that day, as you see in the
first Column of the Table against Sunday, which governs the first hour after
Sunrise. Then in the second you find, and 2 at the top, which shows that
Venus rules the second hour; and under 3 you find, which shows that Mercury
rules the third hour after Sunrise: And so of the rest, as the Table directs
you.

An Example of finding the Planetary Hour.

Suppose it were required to find what Planet rules on Tuesday the 31 day of
July 1677, at 3 hours after Noon: I find his place in the Ephemeris to be 18
degrees. 5 minutes of Leo: with this 18 degrees. I enter the Table, and guide my eye
right on, until I come at the Planetary hours after Noon; and in the second
Column for the Afternoon, I find 2 hours 29 min. and at the top of the Table,
I find 8, which shows that the 8th Planetary hour ends at 2 hours 29 min.
Afternoon. Then in the next Column I find 3 hours 44 min. which includes the
proposed time; and at the top of the Column I find 9, which shows that it is
the 9th Planetary hour, which has yet 44 min. to rule. Then I look in the next
Table, which shows that Planet rules every hour of the day; and I seek for
Wednesday on the left hand, and the 9th hour at the top of the Table; and in
the Angle of meeting I find, which shows that she governs that hour. And thus
much may serve for the Use and Explanation of the Tables.

The Second PART: Showing THE RESOLUTION Of all manner of HORARY QUESTIONS.
CHAP. I.
Questions appertaining to the first House.

Shall the Querents life be long or short?
IN this Question, as in all others, the Ascendant, his Lord, and the Moon, are
the Querents Significators: If therefore you find the Lord of the Ascendant
and the Moon free from Combustion of Sol, from the Conjunction, Quadrate, or
Opposition of the Lord of the eighth, sixth, twelfth, or fourth Houses, you may
judge the Querents life to be long, Signs of long life.
and of a healthful Constitution; especially if you find the aforesaid
Significators in their Essential Dignities, and in good Houses, Jupiter, Venus,
or Dragons Head in the Ascendant, well fortified, and Lords of good Houses, is
an argument of a long life. The Lord of the Ascendant in the Ascendant, or
fortunate Planets in Sextile or Trine to the Ascendant, his Lord, or the Moon,
is an argument that your Querent is of a long life.

But if you find the Moon or Lord of the Ascendant Peregrine or Combust in the
eighth, ^nes of ^ort life.
or Lord of the eighth unfortunate in the Ascendant, or in Quadrate or
Opposition to the Moon or Lord of the Ascendant, it is a very great argument of
a short life to the Querent.

If you find the Dragons Tail, Saturn, or Mars in the Ascendant, or with the
Moon or Lord of the Ascendant, Peregrine, or Retrograde, and be Lords of the
sixth or eighth Houses, or having dignities therein, you may judge the Querents
life to be short, or that some sickness or misfortune is approaching: The fixed
Stars of the nature of the Infortunes, or Lord of the eighth House in or near
the degree ascending, or with the Moon or Lord of the Ascendant, promises the
same.

To what part of the world may the Querent direct his course to prosper?
For the resolution of this Question, you must first understand that the whole
figure of the Heavens is divided into four quarters, viz. The first House is
called the East-angle; the tenth House is called the South-angle; the seventh
House is called the West-angle; and the fourth is full North.

The rest of the Houses are again divided: as, the twelfth house is East and by
South; the eleventh, South-East and by South; the ninth, South-west; the eighth
House, South-West and by South; the sixth, West-North-West; the fifth,
North-West and by North; the third, North-East; the second House, North-East
and by East.

Thus having your quarters divided and sub-divided, you are to consider in
which of the quarters you find the promising Planets, and direct your Querent
to travel to that quarter they signify.

You ought perfectly to understand what the Querent hops to attain by his
Travel. If it be for Health only, then you are to observe in what quarter you
find the Lord of the Ascendant and the Moon; if they be strong, and in good
aspect of the fortunate Planets, then direct your Querent to that part of the
world signified by the aforesaid Significators. If it be for Riches, then
behold in what quarter you find the Lord of the second, the Part of Fortune
and his dispositor. If for Honor, observe in what quarter you find Sol and
Lord of the tenth House. If for Friends, consider the Lord of the eleventh, etc.

You must carefully avoid that quarter of Heaven where you sinde Saturn,
Caution.
Mars, or Dragons Tail, if they be Lords of the twelfth, eighth, or sixth
Houses, and in Quadrate or Opposition to the Moon or Lord of the Ascendant.

Shall the Querent find the party at home he would speak withal?
Herein you are to consider whether the person enquired after be any thing
related to the Querent, and accordingly take your Significator; viz. If you are
to go to a Father, take the Lord of the fourth; if to a Mother, take the Lord
of the tenth House. If it be to one that you have familiar acquaintance withal,
and he nothing related to you, then take the Lord of the seventh, and observe
these following Rules:

If the Lord of the seventh be in any of the four Angles, you may judge the
party is at home you would speak withal. If you find the Lord of the seventh
in any of the succedent Houses, viz. the second, fifth, eighth, or eleventh,
then he is not at home, but near home.

If you find the Lord of the seventh in any of the cadent Houses, viz. the
third, sixth, ninth, or twelfth, then you may conclude the party you would
speak withal is far from home.

The Lord of the Ascendant applying to the Lord of the seventh, by Body or good
Aspect, you may conclude that you will meet the party as you go to visit him,
or hear by the way where he is.

If the Moon or any other Planet transfer the light of the Lord of the seventh
to the Lord of the Ascendant, you shall know where he is by such a person as is
signified by the Planet who transfers his light. Whether the person that will
inform you be a Man or Woman, observe the Planet that transfers the light, his
nature, the nature of the Sign he is in, and the quarter: and if the major
Testimonies be Masculine, it is a Man; Feminine, a Woman, etc.

If an absent party be dead or alive?
In resolving this Question, you are carefully to consider what relation the
Querent has to the person enquired after. If it be a Brother that is absent,
take the third House and his Lord, etc.

If the Question be in a general way, and the Querent has no relation to the
party enquired after, then take the Ascendant, his Lord, and the Moon, to be
the Significator of the absent party.

If the Lord of the Ascendant or Luna be in Conjunction with the Lord of the
eighth, in the eighth, void of all help from the Fortunes, you may conclude the
absent party is dead.

Either the Moon or Lord of the Ascendant in Opposition to the Lord of the
eighth, from the second and eighth Houses, or from the sixth and twelfth
Houses, the absent party is dead.

An evil Planet translating the light and virtue of the Lord of the Ascendant
to the Lord of the eighth; or from the Lord of the eighth to the Lord of the
Ascendant, is a great sign of Mortality. If you find the Lord of the eighth
in the Ascendant in Quadrate to Luna, or Lord of the Ascendant in the fourth,
Peregrine, Combust, or Retrograde, you may give the same Judgment.

If the Lord of the Ascendant be separated from the Lord of the eighth, the
party has been in danger of death.

If he be separated from the Lord of the 6th, you may conclude the party has
been sick, etc. Judge accordingly in the rest.

If none of these happen, but you find all the Significators essentially
strong, and well placed in the Figure, and in good Aspect of the Fortunes, the
party is then in a good condition, etc.

Of a thing suddenly happening, whether good or evil is signified thereby?
Herein you are to take the exact time when the accident happened, or when you
first heard the relation: If the Lord of the Ascendant be essentially strong,
and the Moon be also strong, and in good aspect with the Fortunes, and they
Lords of good Houses in the Figure, you may conclude no harm can ensue to the
Querent.

Fortunate Planets, or Dragons Head in the Ascendant, in good aspect with the
Lord of the Ascendant, or the Moon or their dispositors strong, and in
reception, it promises good to the Querent.

If any Planet afflict your Significator by Body or Aspect, there will some
harm come to the Querent by such a person signified by that Planet: describe
the person signified by that Planet, and you may easily know from whence the
discord will arise.

Of a Ship at Sea, her safety or destruction?
The Sign ascending, and the Moon, are the Significators of the Ship, and the
Goods contained in her; the Lord of the Ascendant is the Significator of those
that sail in her.

The parts of the Ship are divided according to the Signs of the Zodiac, in
this manner:

Signifies the Breast of the ship. Under the Breast toward the Water. The
Rudder, or Stern. The Bottom, or Floor of the ship. The Top of the ship above
the Water. The Belly of the ship. That part above the Breast in the Water.
Where the Mariners remain, or do their office. The Mariners themselves. The
Ends of the ship. The Master or Captain of the ship. The Oars.
After this Consideration being carefully observed, you may consider which of
these Twelve Signs are fortunate at the time of your Question, and which are
unfortunate, by the presence of the Infortunes; and thereby you may exactly
inform your Querent, which part of the ship is most in danger.

Those parts are best fortified, which have the Moon essentially strong, and in
good aspect of the Fortunes.

The ship is lost, or in great danger.
If you find the Lord of the eighth Peregrine in the Ascendant, or the Lord of
the Ascendant Combust in the eighth; the Moon in Opposition to the Lord of the
eighth, twelfth, sixth, or fourth Houses: these are very strong arguments that
the ship is lost, or in a dangerous condition.

If the Ascendant and the Moon be unfortunate, and the Lord of the Ascendant
fortunate, you may judge the ship is like to be drowned; but the men will be
saved.

But if all the Significators are free, and no ways afflicted, you may then
judge the ship to be in a very good condition, and all the persons belonging
unto her also.

If it be demanded what success a ship shall have upon her setting forth, and
what shall happen unto her ere she return, you must observe the Angles of the
Figure; and if you find fortunate Planets and the Moon therein, and the
unfortunate Planets Gadent, Combust, or under the Suns Beams, no ways
afflicting the Moon, or Lord of the Ascendant, then you may conclude that the
Ship and all things contained therein will go safe to the place intended.

If the Infortunes be angular, or in succedent Houses, she will meet with some
prejudice in the way, and the misfortune will fall in that part signified by
the sign where the Infortune is posited.

If Mars do afflict the Lords of the Angles, and the Dispositor of the Moon,
the Mariners will be in great fear of their Enemies, or of Pirates. If the
tenth House be infortunated by Mars, and near violent Fixed stars and Mars in
an humane sign; the Ship will be in great danger of burning either by Enemies,
or some sudden accident; and the danger shall begin in that part of the Ship
signified by the sign wherein the Infortune was placed in the Figure.

If the aforesaid Significators be quick in motion, the Ship will sail quickly,
and make a short return.

And if it happen that there be a Quadrate or Opposition betwixt the Lord of
the Ascendant and Dispositor of the Moon without reception, then will there be
much discord amongst the Sailers, and much controversy betwixt the Merchants
and them.

If the Lord of the Ascendant be stronger than the Dispositor of the Moon, then
the Seamen shall overcome: but if the Dispositor of the Moon be stronger than
the Lord of the Ascendent, then the Merchants will prevail, etc.

CHAP. II.
Of the Second House, and Questions thereunto belonging.

Shall the Querent be Rich or Poor?
THe Ascendant, his Lord, and the Moon, are the Querents Significators; the
second House, his Lord, and Part of Fortune, shall signify his Estate,
together with the Planet or Planets posited therein, and the Planets aspecting
the Significators.

If you find the Significators, viz. the Lord of the second and Part of
Fortune placed in angles, and essentially strong, it is one good argument: If
the Lord of the Ascendant or the Moon apply to the Lord of the second by Body
or good Aspect from good Houses in the Figure, it is a great argument of
attaining Riches.

The Lord of the Ascendant, or the Moon in the second, in their essential
dignities, in good aspect to Jupiter or Venus; the Moon or any other Planet
transferring the light of the Lord of the second to the Lord of the Ascendant,
the Querent then shall attain Riches, and live in good esteem according to his
capacity of birth.

If Jupiter, who is a natural significator of Riches, or Venus, or Dragons
Head, be free from the malevolent beams of the Infortunes, and be posited in
the second House, the Querent will be rich; if they be in fixed Signs, it will
continue the longer.

Saturn, Mars, Signs of poverty.
or Dragons Tail in the second House Peregrine or Retrograde, and afflicting
the Lord of the second, Jupiter, Venus, or Part of Fortune, it is a very great
argument of Poverty.

By what means shall the Querent attain Riches?
If you find in your Figure that the Querent shall attain Riches, you may know
from whence it shall come, by these following Rules.

If the Lord of the second be in the second, the Querent shall attain Riches by
his own industry. If the Lord of the second be in the Ascendant, free from
Combustion or other afflictions, the Querent shall unexpectedly attain Riches.

The Lord of the second in the third, in good aspect of the Lord of the third,
the Querent advances his Estate by his Neighbors or Kindred, or by some
Inland-Journeys.

If he be in the fourth, and fortunately placed in good aspect of the Lord of
the fourth, the Querent will attain Riches by his Father, etc.

Shall the Querent obtain his Wages or Stipend that is due from the King, or
any Nobleman? etc.
Give the Ascendant, his Lord, and the Moon, to be the Querents Significators;
the second House and his Lord, for his Estate.

The tenth House and his Lord is the Significator of the King, or Nobleman; the
eleventh House, his Substance.

If you find the Moon, or Lord of the Ascendant applying to the Lord of the
eleventh by Body or good Aspect; or to a Fortune in the eleventh, and they in
any of their Essential dignities, the Querent shall attain the Wages or Stipend
due of the King or Nobleman, without much labor or difficulty.

Or if it happen that the Moon or Lord of the Ascendant shall be joined to an
unfortunate Planet, and he receive them in some Essential dignities, the
Querent shall obtain his Wages, but not without great solicitation and loss of
time.

If there be no reception between the Lord of the Ascendant, or the Moon, and
the aforesaid Infortune, notwithstanding any application between them, yet the
Querent will rarely obtain his Money or Wages enquired after.

Shall the Querent obtain his Wages due from his Master?

D. H. M. October 6, 8, 36. A. M. 1672.

a ad



Judgment upon the preceding Figure.

At the time, and under the Face of Heaven before noted, the Querent seriously
propounded this Question unto me: Shall I obtain the Wages due unto me from my
Master? The Ascendant, his Lord, and the Moon, are the Querents Significators;
the tenth House and his Lord are his Masters Significators.

Finding the Moon applying to a Conjunction of Venus, who is Lady of his
Masters house of substance; and also because Jupiter and Mercury, who are
posited in the eleventh, cast their Sextile Aspect to the Querents second
House, very near the degree thereof, I acquainted the Querent that he should
obtain his Wages; and I directed him to go and demand it that very day: which
advice he followed, and received his Money the very same time, which he almost
despaired of.

Shall the Querent obtain the Money which he lent, or the Goods pawned?
The Ascendant, his Lord, and the Moon, shall signify the Querent; and if it
be a Friend, or one that you are conversant withal that does owe you Moneys,
and he no ways related to you, then take the seventh House and his Lord to
signify the quesited person; the eighth House, which is the second from the
seventh, shall signify his Estate: Then judge by these following Rules.

The Lord of the Ascendant or the Moon in Conjunction or good Aspect with the
Lord of the eighth, or to a Planet in the eighth essentially dignified, the
Querent shall then attain the Goods or Money enquired after.

The Lord of the eighth in the Ascendant, or in the second House, in reception
with the Lord of the second, it is a great argument that the Querent shall
attain his Money. If the aforesaid Significators apply by Quadrate or
Opposition with reception, it denotes the same, but not with so much ease, etc.

CHAP. III.
Judgments properly belonging to the third House.

FRom this House is Judgment given of the Querents Brethren, Sisters,
Neighbors, short Journeys, Reports, whether true or false, etc.

Of the condition and present estate of an absent Brother.
In the resolution of this Question, you must give the Ascendant, his Lord, and
the Moon, to signify the Querent; the third House, his Lord, and the Planets
posited therein, for the Significator of the absent Brother.

If you find the Lord of the third in the third, in Sextile or Trine to the
fortunate Planets, you may judge that he is then in health, and in a good
condition. If the Lord of the third be in the third, in Quadrate or Opposition
to the Infortunes, and they Lords of good Houses, the Querents Brother is
alive, and in health, but in sorrow and discontent in his mind: But if the
Quadrate or Opposition be with Reception, he is then in a good condition both
in body and mind.

The Lord of the third in the fourth, which is the second from the third, free
from Combustion and the malevolent Aspects of the Infortunes, and he in any of
his Essential dignities, you may predict that the absent Brother has an
intention to enrich himself in the place where he is, etc.

The Lord of the third in the fifth, in good Aspect with the Lord of the fifth,
and not afflicted by the Infortunes, he is in a splendid condition, and obtains
love and favor from his Neighbors in that Country he lives in.

The Lord of the third in the sixth House, eighth, or twelfth from the
Ascendant, (which are naturally evil) except he be fortunated by the benevolent
rays of the Fortunes, or fortunate Planets in the third, then the absent
Brother is discontented, etc.

The Lord of the third Peregrine in the seventh, the Quesited continues a
Stranger in the same Country he went into.

The Lord of the third in the tenth, which is the eighth from his Ascendant, if
he be Peregrine and Combust, or in Conjunction, Quadrate, or Opposition to the
Lord of the eighth, without Reception, and void of all helps from the Fortunes,
He is dead
the absent Brother is then dead.

If the Lord of the third shall be found in the tenth in Reception with the
Lord of the tenth, and joined by Conjunction, or in good Aspect with the
Fortunes, especially with Reception, he has then attained to some Office or
Employment, and lives in Fame and Reputation, etc.

If he be found in the eleventh, in good Aspect with the Lord of the eleventh,
and joined by Body or good Aspect with the Fortunes, he is then in a splendid
and good condition.

If he be posited in the twelfth in his Essential dignities, and in good Aspect
with the Fortunes, then the Quesited gains, or is conversant with great Cattle:
But if he be afflicted in the twelfth by the malevolent rays of the Infortunes,
or be Combust of the Sun, and the Sun happen to be Lord of the eighth, he is in
a bad Condition, if not dead.

The Lord of the third in the first House, the absent Brother obtains many
Friends in that Country if he be well aspected.

If you find him in the second, which is the twelfth from the third, and the
malevolent Planets afflict him by Quadrate or Opposition without Reception,
it is very probable he is kept in Prison, or otherwise, that he cannot come
away: If at the same time the Lord of the eighth afflict him, he will be in
danger to die there; if he be found Retrograde, he will venture his skin to
make an escape.

If a Question be asked concerning a Father that is absent, then you must take
the fourth House and his Lord to be his Significator; the fifth shall show his
Estate; the sixth, his Brethren or short Journeys; and so of the rest of the
Houses in order. If it be demanded concerning a Son or Daughter that is absent,
then take the fifth House to be the Significator, and judge of their estate or
condition as you did of an absent Brother, remembering always to vary your Rules
according to the Question.

Shall the Querent and his Brethren, Sisters, or Neighbors accord?
Herein you must give the Ascendant, his Lord, and the Moon, to be the
Significators of your Querent; the third House, and his Lord, together with the
Planets posited in the third, to signify his Brethren or Neighbors enquired
after; and then judge by the following directions.

If the Lord of the third be a benevolent Planet, and in the Ascendant, or the
Moon, or Lord of the Ascendant be in good Aspect with a fortunate Planet in the
third; or if the Lord of the third cast his Sextile or Trine to the Cusp of the
Ascendant; or if the Lord of the Ascendant, or the Moon, cast their Sextile or
Trine to the Cusp of the third; then there is great hopes of love and agreement
between the Querent and his Brethren, Sisters, or Neighbors, etc.

The Lord of the Ascendant, or the Moon, in Sextile or Trine to the Lord of the
third with mutual Reception, that is a very great argument of their love and
agreement. Those persons who have the applying Planet for their Significator,
will the most desire and seek for Friendship and Agreement, and those whose
Significators do not apply, will be the most refractory.

If you find Saturn, Mars, or Dragons Tail in the Ascendant, Combust,
Peregrine, or Retrograde, you may judge the Querent is sufficiently
evil-conditioned, and the fault to be most in him. If you find Saturn, Mars,
or Dragons Tail in the third, then the Querents Brethren or Neighbors are of
an obstinate malicious disposition, delighting in strife and contention.

When Saturn or Dragons Tail is in the third, Christ. Astr. page 188.
it signifies the Neighbors are Clowns, the Kindred covetous and sparing: if
Mars, then the Kindred are treacherous, Neighbors thievish; and most assuredly
when they are Peregrine.

If Reports or Rumors be true or false?
In the resolution of this Question, you are to observe the Lord of the
Ascendant, or the Moon, or the dispositor of the Moon; and behold if you find
any of them posited in an Angle or succedent House, and in a fixed sign, or in
good Aspect with Jupiter, Venus, or Sol, it is very probable upon such a
configuration the Rumors or Reports are true; and if Jupiter, Venus, or the Sun
have dignities in the Ascendant, and be aspected as aforesaid, the Report is
for the Querents good.

If the Moon or Lord of the Ascendant be afflicted by the presence of Saturn,
Mars, or Dragons Tail, or by the malevolent Aspects of Saturn or Mars from a
cadent House, the Reports are false.

When the Angles of the Figure are fixed Signs, and the Moon and Mercury
posited therein, and separating from the Infortunes, and applying to the
Fortunes in any of the Angles, the Report is true. If the tenth and fourth
Houses are fixed Signs, and the Moon received in either of them, it denotes
the same: Jupiter or Venus in the Ascendant, and the Moon unfortunate, the
Report is false.

If Mercury be Retrograde, or otherwise afflicted; or if the Planet to whom
Mercury or the Moon does apply shall happen to be afflicted, the Report is then
false.

If the Lord of the Ascendant or the Moon be Combust, or under the Suns beams,
the truth of the Report is kept secretly in the breasts of some Noblemen, or
men of quality.

The Moon in Quadrate or Opposition of Mercury, or if the Moon be void of
course at the time of erecting the Figure, and neither Mercury nor Luna casting
their Sextile or Trine to the Ascendant, the Rumors or Reports are false.

Of Counsel or Advice given, whether good or evil is intended thereby?
It is very observable, that when a man is in distress or a troubled condition,
a Friend or Neighbor will advise him what is best for him to do; and if you
would know whether they intend really yea or no, or whether the advice given
may prove for your good; Erect the Figure of Heaven for that very moment of
time when they first began to give you their Counsel or advice, and judge by
these following Rules.

The tenth House has signification of Advice or Counsel; therefore you are to
consider whether that House be fortunated, or otherwise afflicted: if either
Sol, Jupiter, Venus, or Dragons Head be in the tenth House; or if the Moon
apply by Body or good Aspect to the Lord of the Ascendant, you may judge the
Council or Advice is really intended for your good.

Or if either of the Fortunes so posited, shall apply to a Sextile or Trine to
the Lord of the Ascendant, it denotes the same.

But if you find Saturn, Mars, or Dragons Tail Peregrine in the tenth, then
you may conclude your Neighbor is a Knave, or your Friend a pretender of
friendship, and a deceitful liar.

If the Sign ascending be a movable Sign, and the Lord of the Ascendant and
the Moon in movable signs, you may pass the same Judgment.

Shall the Querent have good success in a short (or Inland) Journey?
The Ascendant, his Lord, and the Moon, are the Significators of the Querent;
the third House and his Lord, and the Planets posited therein, shall signify
the short Journey enquired after. If you find the aforesaid Significators
swift in motion, or in reception with each other; or if you find the Lord of
the Ascendant or Moon in Sextile or Trine to the Lord of the third, or to a
benevolent Planet in the third, you may judge the Querent shall have a pleasant
Journey.

If the Lord of the third be found in the Ascendant, or the Moon or Lord of the
Ascendant in the third House in Sextile to the Ascendant, or the Lord of the
third casting his Sextile or Trine to the Ascendant, all these are arguments of
a good Journey.

If the Lord of the Ascendant, or the Moon apply to a benevolent Planet in the
third; or the Lord of the third applying by Body or good Aspect to a benevolent
Planet in the Ascendant, portends a good Journey.

Jupiter, Venus, or Dragons Head in the third, shows the same.

Saturn, Mars, or Dragons Tail in the third; or if they afflict the Lord of the
Ascendant or Luna, it shows very ill success to the Querent in his Journey; for
Mars or Dragons Tail shows him to be in danger of Thieves or Robbers: And if
they happen to be Peregrine in an humane sign, he will be in danger to be
wounded in his Journey.

If the Lord of the Ascendant be slow in motion, he will not make so much haste
in his Journey as is expected: If he be found Retrograde, it is ten to one but
he returns back before he has been at the intended place of his Journey.

If you find the aforesaid Significators afflicted by the Lord of the sixth,
the Querent will be in danger to be sick in his Journey: If the Lord of the
eighth afflict him, and no benevolent Planet assist him, he will be in danger
of death, especially if you find violent fixed Stars in the Ascendant, or near
the Significators: if the Lord of the twelfth afflict him, he will be in danger
of private Enemies or Imprisonment, etc.

If the Querent have or shall have Brethren or Sisters?
In this Question, you must observe, if the third House, his Lord, or Luna, be
in fruitful Signs, viz. Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces; which if the major part of
them be found so, then you may judge he has or shall have Brethren or Sisters.
If the aforesaid Significators be well placed in the Figure, and in good aspect
with Jupiter or Venus, you may predict the same.

If you find that there is a possibility that the Querent has or shall have
Brethren or Sisters, behold if you find the major part of the Significators in
Masculine signs and Houses, or they of themselves Masculine Planets, or
Masculine Planets in the third House, you may judge the Querent has or shall
have a Brother or Brethren. If you find them in Feminine signs, the Querent
will have a Sister or Sisters: But if you can possibly get the Querents
Nativity, you may better resolve this question by it, than by a Horary question.

An absent Brother, if dead or alive?
D. H. M. Novem. 22.4.0. P. M. 1674.

a ad.



Judgment upon the preceding Figure.

The Ascendant, and Mercury Lord thereof, are the Significators of the Querent:
the Cusp of the third is the 22 degrees. 16 min. of Cancer, and the Moon Lady
thereof, are the Significators of the absent Brother. In the Figure of Heaven I
find Luna Lady of the third posited in the Medium Coeli or tenth House, which
is the eighth from the third House, Peregrine, separating from a Sextile of the
Sun, and applying to a Quadrate of Mars, and he both Peregrine and Retrograde
in the twelfth; from whence I concluded that the absent Brother was dead.

Which Judgment is the more confirmed by old Saturn, who is Lord of the 8th
from the third, both Peregrine, Retrograde, and in his Fall, posited in the
twelfth, casting from thence his Quadrate aspect to the very degree of the
third House, and to the Dragons Tail, which is also in the very degree of the
third House; which are very strong arguments of Mortality.

A Report or common Rumor, whether is it true or false?
D. H. M. October 17.9.30. P. M. 1674.

from void of course, ad.



Astrological Judgment upon the Figure.

In this Figure you may behold the Moon Lady of the Ascendant, intercepted in
the fourth House in Libra, a movable Sign; and also the Sign ascending is
Cancer, another movable Sign, and Dragons Tail posited therein, was one
argument that the Report was false.

Secondly, finding the Moon very lately separating from void of Course, and
within the Orbs of an Opposition of Saturn, and both of them Peregrine, and
Saturn in his Retrograde motion, in Quadrate to the Ascendant, and to the very
degree of Dragons Tail; And also finding Mercury Combust of the Sun, I told the
Querent that the Report was false, and that it would be proved false within
very few days; and so it was.

Shall the Querent have a good Journey?
D. H. M. July 26.19.15. P. M. 1674.



Judgment upon the preceding Figure.

The Ascendant, his Lord, and the Moon, are the Significators of the Querent;
the third House, his Lord, and Jupiter, who is posited therein, does signify
his intended Journey: The sign ascending, and the Planets posited in the
Ascendant; does give as exact a description of the Querents Stature and
Inclination, as any Limner in the world can draw, or any Tongue or Pen can
describe: he is moderately tall and straight, his Hair black or a dark brown,
etc. he is very much given to study several Arts and Sciences, etc.

In the Figure I find Venus Lady of the third in Conjunction of Mercury Lord
of the Ascendant, in the Ascendant, in Sextile to Jupiter, who is posited in
the third House: from hence I concluded that the Querent should have a good
Journey; and finding the Moon in Sextile to Sol, and he posited in the
eleventh, I told the Querent that he would find a Friend in his Journey, which
might do him some kindness: (which he did, as he has often related since.) And
also finding Mercury Lord of the tenth in the Ascendant, I asked the Querent if
he did not expect some Office or Preferment by his Journey? he said, that was
the principal cause of his undertaking his Journey, etc.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Fourth House, and Questions belonging thereunto.

FRom this House is Judgment given of possessions of Lands, Houses, and of
Treasure hid in the Earth, etc.

Shall the Querent buy or purchase the House or Land enquired after?
Herein you are to give the Ascendant, his Lord, and the Moon, to be the
Significators of the Querent; the fourth House, his Lord, and the Planets
posited therein, to signify the Houses, Lands, or Closes which are enquired
after.

The seventh House, his Lord, and the Planets posited therein, are the
Significators of the Seller or Owner of the Lands or Houses.

If you find the Lord of the seventh House applying to the Lord of the
Ascendant by Body or good Aspect, you may judge the Quesited has a desire to
bargain with the Querent: If you find the Lord of the eighth House Peregrine
or Combust, or with Dragons Tail, or in Conjunction, Quadrate, or Opposition to
Saturn or Mars, without reception, you may conclude that the Seller does part
with his Land for want of Money: or if you find Saturn, Mars, or Dragons-tail
Peregrine in the eighth, you may pass the same Judgment.

Testimonies affirmative.
If you find the Moon, or Lord of the Ascendant, in the fourth, or Lord of the
fourth in the Ascendant; or if the Moon or Lord of the Ascendant apply to the
Lord of the fourth by Conjunction, Sextile, or Trine: if the Lord of the fourth
apply to the Lord of the Ascendant by Body or good Aspect, and they in their
Essential dignities, or in the dignities of each other; these are very great
Arguments that the Querent shall purchase the House or Lands desired.

If the Moon or any other Planet transfer the light and virtue of the Lord of
the Ascendant to the Lord of the fourth, or from the Lord of the fourth to the
Lord of the Ascendant, the Bargain will be brought on by such a person as the
transferring Planet shall signify.

Testimonies negative.
But if you find none of the aforesaid testimonies in your figure of Heaven,
but on the contrary you find the aforesaid Significators in Quadrate or
Opposition without Reception or Translation of light and virtue, you may
conclude the Querent shall not purchase the Houses or Land desired.

Of the quality or goodness of the House or Land enquired after.
In the resolution of this Question, you are to consider the fourth House, and
Planets posited therein, and also the Lord of the fourth, his Possession and
Configuration.

If you find Saturn, Mars, or Dragons tail Peregrine in the fourth; or Lord of
the fourth Combust, Peregrine, or Retrograde, afflicted by the malevolent
Aspects of the Infortunes; the thing enquired after is in no good condition at
present, nor of long continuance.

If the fortunate Planets, viz. Jupiter, Venus, or Dragons-head, be in the
fourth House, and the Lord of the fourth strong in his Essential dignities, or
in good Aspect of the Fortunes; it shows the House or Land enquired after to be
in a very good condition, and that the Querent shall be a gainer by his
purchase.

Jupiter or Venus in Sextile or Trine to the fourth House; or the Lord of the
fourth casting his Sextile or Trine to the second House, or his Lord, or to a
Planet in the second House; it is an argument that the Querent shall be a
gainer by the House or Land enquired after.

If you find a fiery sign upon the Cusp of the fourth House, viz. Aries, Leo,
Sagittary, you may judge the Land or Closes is hilly ground, hard and dry. If
earthy signs, as Taurus, Virgo, or Capricorn, it shows good ground, and plain
level Closes. If Gemini, Libra, or Aquarius, the ground is not very plain, but
has some Hills in it. If watery signs, viz. Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces, it shows
the ground to be very good, if there be not too much Water in it, etc.

Whether is it good for the Querent to hire or take the House or Farm desired,
or not?
Herein the Ascendant, his Lord, and the Moon, are for the Querent; the
seventh, and the Lord thereof, are the Significators of the person which has
the letting of the House or Farm enquired after; the tenth House and his Lord
signifies the profit or benefit which the Querent shall attain by his
purchase; the fourth House shall signify the House or Farm enquired after.

If you find the Lord of the Ascendant posited in the 4th, or the Lord of the
Ascendant or Luna casting their Sextiles or Trines to the degree ascending; or
if you find Part of Fortune in the Ascendant free from the malevolent rays of
the Infortunes; it is an argument that the Querent will gain by his Bargain or
Farm he intends to take.

An Infortune or Dragons tail posited in the seventh, denotes the contrary.

If you find the Lord of the seventh in good aspect with the Lord of the
Ascendant, or the Lord of the Ascendant in good aspect to a Planet in the
seventh, it is an argument that the Querent shall obtain love from his
Landlord, and very fair dealing, etc.

A Fortunate Planet in the tenth House, or in Sextile or Trine to the Cusp
thereof, is an argument that the Querent shall conclude a bargain.

If an Infortune be in the tenth, or casting its malevolent Aspect thereunto,
the parties will differ about Repairs or building some new Houses, says Mr.
Lilly, Christ. Astrology, page 209.

The nature and quality of the House, Land, Closes, or Farms enquired after, is
signified by the fourth House, as is already shown in the preceding Discourse.

To find a thing that is hid, lost, or mislaid?
In this Question, you ought carefully to consider whether the thing lost be
the Querents own commodity or not. If it were his Fathers, then you are to take
the fifth House to signify the thing lost or mislaid, because the fifth is the
second from the fourth, and therefore signifies his Fathers Estate, etc. and so
of the rest of the Houses in order. If it were the Querents own Goods which
were lost, then judge after this manner.

The Lord of the second in any of the four Angles, the thing enquired after is
in the house of the Querent. If the Lord of the second be posited in the
Ascendant, or in Conjunction with the Lord of the Ascendant, the thing is hid
or mislaid in that part of the house which he himself most frequents.

If you find the Lord of the second in the tenth, it is then in the Hall or
Dining Room, if a Gentleman be the Querent: If a Tradesman ask the question, it
is in his Shop, etc.

But if you find the Lord of the second in the seventh, the goods are hid or
mislaid in that part of the house where his Wife or Maidservants are most
conversant.

The nature or quality of the place where the goods are hid or mislaid, is
known from the nature of the Signs where you find the Lord of the second, the
Moon, and Part of Fortune posited. If you find the major part of the
Significators posited in fiery signs, the goods hid or mislaid are near the
Chimney, or where Iron is laid. If in aerie signs, they are in the upper part
of the house, or above the ground. If in watery signs, it is near water; if in
earthy signs, near some pavement or floor, or it is carelessly laid upon the
Earth.

The quarter or part of the House or Ground where the thing is hid, is known
from the nature of the signs, and quarters they signify, wherein you find
the principal Significators, viz. the Lord of the second House, the Moon, the
Part of Fortune, and Lord of the fourth House; and also the signs of the
fourth and second Houses. The Signs are divided, and show the quarters in this
manner:

Aries; East. Libra; West. Taurus; South and by East. Scorp; North and by East.
Gemini; West and by South. Sagitt; East and by South. Cancer; North. Capri;
South. Leo; East and by North. Aquar; West and by North Virgo; South and by
West. Pisces; North and by West.

Thus having carefully observed the nature of the signs the Significators are
in, and the quarters the signs signify, you are to judge by the major
Testimonies, and they will exactly direct you to the quarter and nature of the
place where the thing lost or mislaid is; as I have often proved true by
experience.

Shall the Querent enjoy his Fathers estate?
In resolving this Question, you are to give the Ascendant, his Lord, and the
Moon, to be the Querents Significators; the fourth House and his Lord shall
signify his Father; the fifth House is the second from the fourth, and
therefore shall signify his Fathers Estate, together with the Lord of the
fifth, and the Planet or Planets posited therein; and then you are to judge by
the following Directions.

The Lord of the fifth applying to a Sextile or Trine with the Lord of the
second, or to a benevolent Planet in the second; or if the Lord of the second
and Lord of the fifth be in mutual reception, it is an argument that the
Querent shall enjoy the Estate of his Father.

If Jupiter or Venus be found posited in the fifth, and from thence cast their
Sextiles or Trines to a Planet in the second, or to the Lord of the second; or
if the Moon (or some other Planet) transfer the light of the Lord of the fifth
to the Lord of the second; it is an argument that the Querent shall be enriched
by his Fathers Estate.

If you find the Lord of the fifth in the Ascendant, or second House,
disposing of Part of Fortune; or if the Lord of the Ascendant or second dispose
of the Lord of the fifth, you may conclude the Querent shall attain his desire.

If the Lord of the fifth be found Retrograde, Combust, or otherwise afflicted,
you may judge the Estate of the Querents Father will waste, and therefore he
cannot attain so much of it as he does expect.

Then do but so much as consider what Planet afflicts the Lord of the fifth,
what he naturally signifies, what House he is Lord of; and the Estate of the
Querents Father will be wasted by such a person as is signified from thence,
viz. If the Lord of the sixth afflict the Lord of the fifth, you may judge some
of the Fathers Brethren or Neighbors will waste his Estate, or persuade him to
alter his intention; and so of the rest of the Houses in order. You may know by
a Penny how a Shilling is coined.

If good to remove from one house or place, or to abide where he is?
Herein you are to give the Ascendant, his Lord, and the Moon, to signify the
Querent; the seventh House, his Lord, and the Planets posited therein, shall
signify the place he intends to go to; the fourth House and his Lord, the
House or Land, etc. the tenth House and his Lord shall show the profit which he
shall attain by removing.

If you find the Lord of the Ascendant, or Lord of the fourth in the seventh,
Direct, Swift in motion, and well dignined, and of themselves Fortunate
Planets, the Querent may live very well where he is, and not remove.

If you find fortunate Planets in the Ascendant or fourth, or Stars of their
natures posited therein, and the Moon or Lord of the Ascendant in good aspect
with fortunate Planets, and they Lords of good Houses, it is best for the
Querent to abide where he is.

It is good to remove
But if, on the contrary, you find the Lord of the seventh with a good Planet,
and the Lord of the Ascendant, or Lord of the fourth, with an evil Planet, or a
malevolent Planet or Dragons-tail in the Ascendant or fourth; it is then the
best way for the Querent to remove.

If you find the malevolent Planets casting their malevolent Aspects to the
Lord of the Ascendant, or the Moon, you are to consider what House the
afflicting Planet or Planets are Lord of, and from thence you may know the
reason why the Querent will not prosper where he is.

If the Lord of the third afflict the Significators, you may judge the Querent
lives amongst malicious ill-contrived Neighbors. And so of the rest of the
Houses in order, etc.

Of Treasure hid in the Earth, is there any in the place supposed?
When a Question is propounded in a general way, whether there be Treasure hid
in the place supposed or not, and the Querent not knowing who hid the Treasure,
nor whether there be any or not in the place supposed;

You are to give the Ascendant, his Lord, and the Moon, to the Luerent; the
fourth House, his Lord, and Planets posited therein, shall show the nature of
the Treasure which is hid in the ground.

There is treasure.
If in your Figure you find Jupiter or Venus, or Dragons-head in the fourth, in
their own Essential dignities, free from the malevolent beams of the
Infortunes, you may be confident there is Treasure in the place supposed.

When you find any of the Planets in the fourth House, and he be Lord of the
fourth, and no ways afflicted, you may pass the same judgment.

The quality of the Treasure is known from the Lord of the fourth, and Planets
posited therein: Christ. Astr. page 216.
Mr. Lilly says, We ought to mix the Lord of the seventh in judging the nature
and quality of the hidden Treasure.

The nature or quality of the treasure.
If you find Sol to be the Significator of the hidden Treasure, you may
conclude there is Gold, or some Jewels: If Luna, there is Silver: If Saturn,
there is Coals, Lead, or a quarry of Stone: If Mars, there is Brass or Iron:
And if you find Luna and Mars both Significators, you may conjecture there is
Silver hid in some Iron or Brass Pot or Kettle: If Jupiter, there is Tin,
(says my Author; but I know no reason why Jupiter may not signify Silver as
well as Tin:) If Venus, there is some women's Ornaments: If Mercury, there is
Pictures or Books.

There is no treasure.
If you find Saturn, Mars, or Dragons tail in the fourth Peregrine, or Saturn
or Mars casting their Quadrate or Opposition to the fourth House; you may
conclude there is no Treasure at all.

The Moon or Lord of the fourth separating from good Planets, shows there has
been Treasure in the place, but it is gone; but if they separate ill, there was
never any Treasure hid in the place supposed.

The nature of the Ground is known from the nature of the Signs the
Significators are in, as you may find in the beginning of this Book, where I
speak of the nature and quality of the Signs.

Shall the Querent obtain the hidden Treasure?
Herein you are to consider, if the Significators of the hidden Treasure apply
by Sextile or Trine to the Lord of the Ascendant, or to a good Planet in the
Ascendant or second House, with Reception from good Houses, there is great
hopes of attaining the Treasure sought after.

If the Moon or some other Planet transfer the light and virtue of the Lord of
the fourth to the Lord of the Ascendant, it shows the same.

If there be a Quadrate or Opposition between the Significators without
Reception, the thing sought after will very hardly be found.

The Lord of the fourth applying to Conjunction with the Lord of the Ascendant
in the Ascendant or second House, is a very great argument of attaining the
Treasure sought after.

Either of the Luminaries posited in the Ascendant, gives great facility in the
work, if they be strong, and no ways impedited.

If neither of the Luminaries behold the Ascendant or his Lord, there remains
little hopes of attaining the thing sought after, says my Author.

If you find Part of Fortune in the Ascendant, and either of the Fortunes or
the Luminaries casting their good aspects thereunto from good Houses, it
promises great hopes of attaining the Treasure sought after.

If you desire to know whether the Treasure lie deep in the Earth or not, then
you are to consider, if your Significators be in the beginning of a sign, then
the Treasure is very near the upper part of the Earth: the further the
Significators are in the signs, the deeper the Treasure is in the Earth. When
you intend to begin your work, let the Significators of Treasure be posited in
the Ascendant; and if you can posibly, let the Significators apply to the Lord
of the Ascendant, or Lord of the second; or let the Moon be separating from the
Lord of the Fourth, or from a benevolent Planet in the Fourth, and applying to
the Lord of the Ascendant or Second House: but take care that the Infortunes be
not Angular, or afflict the Lord of the Ascendant.

Whether is it best for the Querent to remove, or abide in the House where he
is?
D. H. M. Novem. 3.2.0. P. M. 1672.

a ad.



Astrological Judgments upon the Figure.

In this Figure the Ascendant is Pisces 7.0. and Jupiter Lord thereof, together
with the Moon, are the Significators of the Querent.

The Seventh House and his Lord signifies the place which he intends to remove
unto; the Tenth House and his Lord shows the profit which he shall attain by
his removing.

First, I considered the Ascendant, and there I found both the Infortunes, viz.
Saturn and Mars, who are Lords of the Twelfth and Eighth Houses. Secondly, I
considered the Lord of the Ascendant and the Moon, who are both posited in the
Seventh; which intimated that the Querent had a great desire to remove: and
finding the Part of Fortune in the Tenth, I informed the Querent that it was
his best way to remove from the house he lived in, and that he would profit by
his removing. Which advice he followed within a short time, and to this day
never had any cause to repent it.

Old Saturn in the Ascendant, who is both Peregrine and Retrograde, shows that
the Querent has some secret Enemies where he lived; and from hence I advised
the Querent to remove, and from some other reasons, as you may find in the
Figure.

CHAP. V.
Of the Fifth House, and Questions thereunto belonging.

THe Fifth House gives Judgment of Children, Messengers, and Plays, etc.

Shall the Querent have Children?
Herein you are to consider, if the sign ascending, the sign of the Fifth,
and the signs wherein the Lord of the Ascendant, the Lord of the Fifth, and
the Moon, are posited in fruitful signs, viz. Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces, you may
conclude that the Querent shall have Children.

If the Lord of the Ascendant, or the Moon, be in Conjunction, Sextile, or
Trine to the Lord of the Fifth from good Houses; or if some other Planet
transfer the light of the Lord of the Ascendant to the Lord of the Fifth, these
are very strong arguments that the Querent shall have Children.

Or if you find the Lord of the 5th in the Ascendant, or the Lord of the
Ascendant or the Moon in the 5th, or in Sextile or Trine to a benevolent Planet
in the 5th, well fortified, and free from the malevolent aspects of the
Infortunes, you may safely judge the Querent shall have Children.

But if on the contrary you find the sign ascending and the sign of the 5th
barren signs, which are Leo, Virgo, and Gemini, you may conjecture the Querent
will have no Children, except some of the other testimonies affirmative happen.

If all the aforesaid Significators be posited in barren signs, it denotes
the same.

If you find Saturn, Mars, or Dragons tail in the 5th, especially in barren
signs, it denies Issue.

If you find Saturn or Mars in Quadrate or Opposition to the 5th, or to the
Lord of the 5th; or if the Lord of the 5th be Combust, you may pass the same
Judgment.

Your best and safest way in judging hereof, is to collect the testimonies of
Barrenness and Fruitfulness, and judge by the major testimonies; and you cannot
fail in your Judgment, if you keep you close to your Rules which I have
delivered.

If a Woman enquiring be with Child or not?
If a Woman propound this Question unto you whether she be with Child or not,
you are to give the Ascendant, his Lord, and the Moon, to signify the Querent;
and judge according to these Rules following.

If you find in your Figure the Lord of the Ascendant or the Moon applying to
the Lord of the 5th by Conjunction, Sextile, or Trine, from good Houses; or if
the Moon or Lord of the Ascendant be found posited in the 5th House, it is an
argument the Querent is with Child.

Or if you find the Lord of the 5th in the Ascendant in a fruitful sign, no
ways afflicted by the Infortunes, it is an argument that the Querent is with
Child.

If the Lord of the 5th behold a Planet in an Angle with Reception, it is an
argument the Querent is with Child: and if you find all the aforesaid
Significators in fruitful signs, it may the better confirm your Judgment.

If you find Jupiter, who is a natural Significator of Children, posited in
the Ascendant, 5th, 7th, or 11th Houses, free from Combustion and other
afflictions, the Querent is with Child.

But if you find the aforesaid Significators afflicted by the malevolent beams
of the Infortunes, or by the presence of Dragons Tail, you may judge the
Querent is not with Child.

Mr. Gadbury says, in his Doctrine of Nativities, page 265. If you find
Saturn, Mars, or Dragons Tail in the 5th, it shows a Non-conception: But if it
so happen, that the testimonies for her being with Child are the greater in
number, they then threaten abortion; the like when they afflict either Venus,
Luna, or the Lords of the 5th or Ascendant.

Whether a Woman enquiring be with Child of a Boy or a Girl?
When a Question is thus propounded, you are to give the Ascendant, his Lord,
and the Moon, to signify the Querent; and consider if the sign ascending, his
Lord, and the Moon, be in Masculine signs, and also the sign of the 5th, and
the sign wherein the Lord of the 5th is posited; which if they be in Masculine
signs, the Querent is with child of a Boy; if in Feminine, a Girl. You are
also to consider the nature of the Planets which are Lords of the Ascendant and
5th, whether they be Masculine or Feminine; or whether the Moon, and Lords of
the Ascendant and 5th are in Conjunction or Aspect with Masculine or Feminine
Planets; and also the nature of the signs they are posited in.

Likewise you are to consider the Planets posited in the Ascendant and 5th,
whether they be Masculine or Feminine.

Your best and safest way in judging hereof, is to collect the testimonies, and
judge by the major part, as I shall give you an Example hereafter.

Masuline Planets are and Feminine Planets are and.
Mercury is sometimes Masculine, and sometimes Feminine, according as he is
aspected by Masculine or Feminine planets.

Signs Masculine,. Feminine,.


The Houses of Heaven are Masculine and Feminine; as, the First, Third, Fifth,
Seventh, Ninth, and Eleventh, are Masculine: The Second, Fourth, Sixth, Eighth,
Tenth, and Twelfth, are said to be Feminine.

Thus by carefully observing the Rules which I have given, you cannot fail, as
I have often proved.

If she shall have Twins, or more than one Child?
Herein you are to consider the nature of the signs the Significators are in,
viz. the Ascendant, his Lord, and the Moon; the sign of the 5th, and the sign
wherein the Lord of the 5th is posited; which if they be in double-bodied
signs, the Querent is with two Children. If you find Jupiter, Venus, or
Dragons Head in a fruitful sign in the Ascendant or 5th, in their Essential
dignities, and free from afflictions, it is very probable the Querent goes with
two Children.

If you find Jupiter or Venus casting their benevolent Rays to the degree
ascending, or to the 5th House, it is an argument the Querent shall have Twins:
But herein you are not to judge upon one single testimony.

If the Ascendant be a fixed or movable sign, and the 5th House a sign of the
same nature, and the Sun and Moon be both in fixed or movable signs, and there
be no Planets in the Ascendant nor 5th House, nor in aspect thereunto, the
Woman enquiring has conceived but with one Child.

In what time will the Birth be?
In this Judgment you are to consider the time when the Lord of the 5th
removes out of one Sign into another; for that may probably prove the time of
Birth. Mr. Lilly directs us to consider how far the Lord of the 5th is removed
from the Cusp of the 5th, Christ. Atr. Page 232.
and give to every sign one month for the time of Delivery.

Also you are to consider the part of Children, and direct it by Tables of
Oblique Ascensions, etc. to the degree of the 5th House, allowing to each
degree one day, or to the Lord of the 5th, or to Jupiter, or their good
aspects: Herein judge by the major testimonies, and those that are most
probable to come nearest the time.

The part of Children is taken by day or by night, by substracting the place of
Mars from the place of Jupiter, and projected from the Ascendant.

Of a Messenger sent upon an Errand.
Let the Ascendant and his Lord signify the person that sent the Messenger;
the seventh House and Lord thereof shall signify the person to whom the
Messenger was sent; the Moon shall signify the Message, and the Lord of the
5th the Messenger, and how he will order his business.

If you find the Lord of the 5th separating from the Lord of the seventh, and
applying to the Lord of the Ascendant by any good aspect, you may judge the
Messenger has been honest in your business, and is returning home with good
tidings.

If the Messenger was sent upon an errand for Money, observe in your Figure
what Configuration or Aspect there is between the Lord of the 5th and the Lord
of the eighth: if therefore you find the Lord of the 5th separating from the
Lord of the eighth, and applying to the Lord of the Ascendant, you may judge
the Messenger brings money with him.

But herein you are to consider what person your Messenger was sent to; if to
your Brother, then you are to take the Lord of the 5th as his Significator; if
to your Father, the 4th House and Lord thereof; if it be to a Friend that you
have converse or trade withal, or one that is not related to you, then you are
to take the Lord of the seventh for his Significator: And if it be a Petition
to a King or Prince, you are to take the Lord of the tenth for his
Significator, and accordingly order your Judgment.

If you find the Lord of the fifth in good aspect to the Lord of the seventh,
or either the Lord of the 5th or Luna in Reception with the Lord of the
seventh, you may judge the Messenger is kindly received, and his Message well
accepted.

But if you find the Lord of the 5th in Quadrate or Opposition to the Lord of
the seventh without Recep^ion, you may judge your Messenger is not well
accepted, especially if Luna also be afflicted by the Lord of the seventh.

If you find the Lord of the 5th afflicted by the Lord of the third or ninth
Houses, or by an Infortune posited therein, you may judge the Messenger will
have some trouble in his Journey, or receive some prejudice by Thieves.

But if on the contrary you find the Lord of the 5th and the Moon free from
the malevolent Aspects of the Infortunes, and in good aspect to the Lord of the
Ascendant, and no ways afflicted, you may conclude your Messenger will make a
safe return with good tidings.

Whether a Petition to a Prince, Admiral, or Commander, etc. may be granted, or
not?
Herein you are to give the Ascendant and his Lord to the Petitioner; the 5th
House, and his Lord, and the Moon, shall signify the Petition; the tenth House
and his Lord, with Sol, shall signify the person to whom the Petition is
directed: and give your Judgment according to the following Rules.

If your Petition be to a King or Prince, etc. be careful in the first place
that the Ascendant or his Lord be not afflicted by an Infortune, especially by
the Lord of the tenth, or by a malevolent Planet posited therein.

If you find the Lord of the 5th posited in the tenth in his Essential
dignities, and free from the malevolent aspects of the Infortunes, or in good
aspect to the Lord of the tenth, or to the Sun, or in good aspect with a
Fortune fortunately placed in the tenth, you may from hence judge that your
Petition will be granted.

If you find the Moon posited in the tenth House in her Essential dignities,
or in good aspect to Sol, or to the Lord of the tenth, or in good aspect to a
Planet in the tenth, you may judge the same.

But if you find the Lord of the Ascendant afflicted by the Lord of the 10th,
12th, 8th, or 4th Houses, your Petition will come to no good end: If he be
afflicted by the Lord of the 12th, he is in danger of imprisonment, etc.

If the Moon, or Lord of the 5th, be afflicted as aforesaid, the Petition will
not be accepted, or was not well made, and will come to nothing. And thus much
may serve for the Judgment of this Question.

Shall the Querent gain or lose by play at Cards or Dice? etc.
In the resolution of this Question, you are to give the Lord of the Ascendant,
and the Moon, to the Querent; the 5th House and Lord thereof shall signify
your gain or loss by Play; the 7th House and his Lord, the person you play
withal.

If you find the Lord of the Ascendant in the 5th, or Lord of the 5th in the
Ascendant, in their Essential dignities, no ways afflicted by the presence of
the Infortunes, or by their malevolent rays; it is an argument the Querent may
gain by his play, etc.

Likewise if you find the Lord of the Ascendant in Conjunction, Sextile, or
Trine to the Lord of the 5th, especially if they apply to the aforesaid good
aspects in their Essential dignities; or if they be in Reception, you may pass
the same Judgment.

If you find the Lord of the 5th separating from any good aspect from the Lord
of the eighth (which is the Quesited's house of substance) to the Lord of the
Ascendant, or Lord of the second, it is an argument the Querent may win money
by his Play; or if a benevolent Planet, posited in the 5th, having Essential
dignities in the 5th, do cast his benevolent aspects to the Lord of the 5th or
Lord of the Ascendant, you may judge the same.

But if on the contrary you find the Lord of the Ascendant, or the Moon, or
Lord of the second, afflicted by the Lord of the 5th, 7th, or 8th Houses, it is
an argument the Querent will lose by his play.

Or if you find the Lord of the fifth in the seventh, or in Reception with the
Lord of the 7th, or in good aspect thereunto; or if the Lord of the fifth
separate from the Lord of the second, and apply by any good aspect to the Lord
of the 8th, it is an argument the Querent will lose money by his Play. If you
find equal testimonies in your Figure, you may judge the most potent
Significator carries the Game.

Is the Querent with Child of a Boy or a Girl?
In what time the Birth would be?

D. H. M. June 6.5.40. P. M. 1675.

a ad.



Astrological Judgment upon the Figure.

The Ascendant, and Mars Lord thereof, are the Querents Significators, whom we
find posited in Leo a Masculine sign; also the Moon in Aries another
Masculine sign, separating from a Trine of Mars Lord of the 5th, and applying
to a Trine of Jupiter in Sagittary, another Masculine sign: from hence I
concluded the Querent was with Child of a Boy, which proved true. The
Testimonies in the Figure I collected in this manner:

The Ascendant is Feminine. Lord of the Ascendant, a planet Masc. Mars you
find in, a sign Masc. The cusp of the 5 house, Masculine. The Moon in, a
sign Masc. The Moon in Trine of, a planet Masc. Jupiter in, Masculine.
Herein you may see but one Feminine Testimony, and six arguments of a
Masculine Conception.

In what time the Birth would be?
In the resolution of this Question I observed the Moon, whom you may find
separating from a Trine of Mars, Lord of the 5th, and applying to a Trine of
Jupiter, who is posited in the Ascendant; and by substracting the Longitude of
Luna from the Longitude of Jupiter, you shall find she wanted but 3 degrees. 15
min. of his Trine aspect: and because I found Luna in a movable sign, and
Jupiter Retrograde in a common sign, I allowed for every degree one Week; by
which computation I judged she would be delivered about the 27 of June
following. The truth is, she was delivered of a Son the 29 of June; but if you
please to allow two days for the odd 15 minutes, it directs us to the very day
of birth, which, as I said before, is the 29 day of the same month. I will
only give you another Example, and so conclude with the fifth House.

Shall the Querent ever have Children?
April 28th. 8h. P. M. 1674.

a ad vac.



Astrological Judgment upon the Figure.

At the time before noted, the Querent propounded this Question in a general
way, Whether she should ever have any Children? Whereupon I erected the
precedent Scheme; and finding the sign ascending, viz. Scorpio, a fruitful
sign, and Mars Lord of both the Ascendant and 5th House in Pisces, another
fruitful sign; I from hence judged the Querent should have Children. Also
finding the Moon in Trine to Saturn, and he posited in the 5th House, which did
something confirm the former judgment, together with Mars applying to a Trine
of Jupiter, who has dignities in the sign of the 5th, and he in a fruitful
sign; I told the Querent she would have Children: which has already proved
true. And so I conclude with the fifth House.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Sixth House, and Questions thereunto belonging.

FRom this House is Judgment given of Sicknesses, Servants, and small Cattle,
etc.

Of Sicknesses.
In this Judgment you ought carefully to observe the time of the party's
falling sick; not that time in which the party first had a feeling of a
sickness approaching, but that very time in which he was so extremely
oppressed, that he was enforced to take his bed; and erect your Figure upon
that very time: and herein you ought carefully to rectify the place of the
Moon; for she is a general Significatrix in this case.

But if that time cannot be obtained, then accept of the time wherein the
Patients Urine was brought to you to enquire of the Disease; or when the
Patient enquires of the Physician of the nature of the Disease, himself.

Then be pleased to consider that the Ascendant and his Lord are the
Significators of the sick party; the sixth House and his Lord, signifies the
Sickness; the seventh, his Physician; the eighth, death; the tenth, his
Physic; the fourth, the end of the Disease. And so I proceed to the parts of
men's Bodies under the Seven Planets.

The particular Parts and Members of the Body which the Planets generally rule.
Saturn rules the Spleen, the right Ear, the Bones, the Teeth, and the
retentive Faculty.

Jupiter rules the Lungs, Livers, Ribs, Sides, the Veins, the Blood, the
digestive Faculty, the natural Virtue of man.

Mars rules in the Body of man, the Gall, the left Ear, the Apprehension, and
the Taste.

Sol rules the Heart, the Back, the Arteries, the Sight, the right Eye of a
Man, the left Eye of a Woman.

Venus is the Governor of the Womb, Testicles, the Yard, and Instruments of
generation; the Throat, Reins, Kidneys; also women's Breasts, the Milk, and the
Seed.

Mercury. Under the dominion of Mercury, is the Brain, the rational part of it,
the Imagination, the Tongue, Hands and Feet, the motional part of man's Body.

Luna governs the bulk of the Brain, or Nerves, the Bowels, the Bladder, the
left Eye of a man, the right of a Woman.

The particular Parts of the Body governed by the Twelve signs of the Zodiac.
Aries governs the Head and Face, the Bones in the head, the Brain, Hair,
Beard, Eyes, Ears, Nose, Tongue, and Teeth, and every part belonging to the
Head.

Taurus rules the Neck and bones thereof, the Channel-bone, the Shoulder Blade,
the Throat, and the Voice.

Gemini rules the Shoulder-bones, the Arms, Hands and Fingers; and in one word,
every part from the shoulder to the finger-ends.

Cancer rules the Breast, Ribs, Lungs, Pleura, the Ventricle of the Stomach,
the Liver, and women's Breasts.

Leo governs the Heart, the Back, the Vertebre of the breast, the Appetite, the
Pericardium.

Virgo governs the Belly and Bowels, the Navil and Spleen, the Omentum.

Libra rules the Reins, Loins, and Kidneys.

Scorpio has dominion over the secret parts of men and women, and all vessels
dedicated to the act of generation; also the Bladder and Fundament.

Sagittary governs the Thighs, Os sacrum, the Thigh Bone, the Rump-bone, etc.

Capricorn governs the Knees and Hams.

Aquarius rules the Legs and all parts of them from the Knees to the Ancles.

Pisces rules the Ancles, the Feet, and all the bones thereunto belonging.

Of the Diseases the Planets signify.
Saturn causes Gouts, Toothache, quartan Agues, Leprosies, Rheums,
Consumptions, Palsies, black Jaundies, Trembling vain fears, Fancies,
Hemorrhoids, Dislocations, broken bones, Deafness, and all Diseases which
proceed from Melancholy, cold and dryness.

Jupiter causes all infirmities of the Liver and Veins, inflammations of the
Lungs, Plurisies, and other Imposthumes about the Breast and Ribs: all Diseases
proceeding of putrefaction of blood and wind.

Mars causes Pestilences, burning Fevers, Tertian and Quotidian Agues,
Megrim, Carbuncles, and Plague-sores, Ringworms, Blisters, burning and
scalding, Frenzy, sudden distempers in the head coming of heat, yellow
Jaundies, bloody Flux, all distempers in the Instruments of generation, the
Stone in the Reins and Bladder, Scars and Pock-holes in the face, all hurts by
Iron and Fire, all Diseases proceeding from Choler, Anger, or Passion.

The Sun causes Pimples and Burles in the Face, all afflictions of the Heart,
as heart-burning, trembling, fainting, rotten Fevers, sore Eyes, flux in the
Eyes, etc.

Venus causes all diseases of the Womb, as suffocation, precipitation,
dislocation, etc. all diseases incident to the Members of generation, the
Reins, and Navil, the French Pox, the Running of the Reins, and all diseases
that come by inordinate love or lust.

Mercury causes diseases in the Brain, as Vertigoes, Madness; also diseases in
the Lungs, Asthma, Ptysick, Apoplexies, defects of the Tongue, Stammering,
Lisping, etc. Hoarsness, Coughs, Snuffling in the Nose, defect of Memory,
stopping of the Head, Dumbness, Simplicity, Folly, all afflictions of the
Intellectual Faculty.

The Moon causes Palsies, Cholick, Belly-aches, stopping or overflowing of
the Terms in Women, Dropsies, Fluxes, all cold and rheumatick diseases,
Sciatica, Worms in the Belly, Rheums, hurts in the Eyes, Surfeit, rotten
Coughs, Convulsions, Falling-sicknesses, King's Evil, Apostumes, small Pox,
Measles, Tympanies, Dropsies, Lethargies, all diseases proceeding from Phlegm.

The Diseases signified by the Twelve Signs.
Under Aries are all pushes, whelks, pimples, freckles, and Sun-burning in the
Face, Polypus or Noli me tangere, all diseases in the Head, as Headache of all
sorts, Vertigo, Frenzy, Lethargy, Forgetfulness, Apoplexy, Dead-palsie,
Fallingsickness, Convulsions, Cramps, Madness, Melancholy, Trembling.

Under Taurus are all diseases incident to the Neck and Throat, as the
King's Evil, sore Throat, Quinsie, Wenns in the Neck, Flux in the Throat, etc.

Under Gemini are all diseases incident to the Hands, Arms, and Shoulders,
Fractures, Dislocations, also diseases that come by corruption of the blood,
and windiness in the blood.

Under Cancer are all diseases in the Breast, Stomach, or Liver, as Plurisies,
want of Digestion, want of Appetite to Victuals, coldness or over-heat of the
Stomach, Cancers in the Breast, Dropsies, Coughs, etc.

Under Leo are all diseases incident to the Heart and Back, as Qualms,
Passions, Palpitations, trembling of the Heart, violent burning Fevers, the
yellow Jaundice, all diseases proceeding from adustion of Blood, the
Pestilence, and all hurts in the Breast.

Under Virgo are all diseases incident to the Bowels, the Meseraick Veins, the
Omentum; the Diaphragma, Spleen, Worms in the belly, and Wind in the guts,
Obstructions, the Cholick and Iliack passions, hardness of the Spleen,
Hypocondriack Melancholy.

Under Libra are diseases in the Reins or Kidneys, as Ulcers, Gonorrhoea, the
Stone, Strangury, heat of the Reins in women, which often causes Abortion,
hard Labor, and sometimes death in Travel; as also the Stone or Gravel in the
Reins.

Under Scorpio are all Inflammations and Ulcers in the Bladder, the Gravel and
Stone in the Bladder, all difficulties of Urine, Fistula's, Hemorrhoids,
French Pox, Gonorrhoea, Priapismus, and all diseases belonging to the Secret
parts.

Under Sagittary are all diseases belonging to the Things and Hips, as the
Sciatica, Fistula's, Itches, pestilential Fevers, all diseases proceeding from
choler and heat, or too much exercise of the body, falls from Horses, or hurts
by them or any other kind of Cattle.

Under Capricorn are all diseases in the Knees or Hams, as Pains there,
Sprains, Fractures, and dislocation, Leprosy, Itch, Scabs, all diseases of
Melancholy, or any Rheums running in the Joints.

Under Aquarius are all diseases in the Legs and Ancles, all Melancholy,
Coagulations in the blood, Cramps, etc.

Under Pisces are all Lameness, Aches, and diseases incident to the Feet, as
Gouts, Kybes, Chilblains.

All diseases coming of Salt Phlegm, mixed humors, Scabs, Itches, Botches, and
breaking out about the body, the small Pox, and Measles, all cold and moist
diseases.

To know what part of the Body is afflicted.
Herein you are to observe the Ascendant, the sixth House, and place of Luna,
for they are the natural significators of the disease.

If you find the Ascendant afflicted by the presence of an Infortune or
Dragons Tail, the Patient is afflicted in his Head, (it being the first of the
Houses: as Aries is the first of the Signs, so the second House rules the Neck
and Throat, and so of the rest of the Houses in order.) Also observe what part
of the body the sign ascending which was so afflicted governs; for that part
of the body is also afflicted.

If you find the Moon afflicted in your Figure, consider what Planet she is
afflicted by, what Houses that Planet is Lord of, what sign he is posited in,
and you may judge that part of the body is afflicted which the afflicting
Planet governs from his own House. I have given you a Table of it in the first
part of the Book, where you may find what Planet governs in every of the
Twelve Signs from his own House.

Mars, Lord of the sixth, in Scorpio, in the fifth House, he gives an internal
pain in all parts of the body. If Mars be in Scorpio in the Ascendant, the
whole body is universally afflicted.

The Moon in the Ascendant afflicted by Saturn or Mars, bestows difficulty of
breathing, and infirmities in the Lungs.

If the Lord of the sixth House be afflicted above the Earth, and in a Diurnal
Sign, the sickness is in the right side of the body, and in the upper part of
it.

If the Lord of the sixth be afflicted in a Nocturnal Sign under the Earth,
Whether the disease be in the right or left side.
the sickness lies on the left side, and in the inferior part of the body.

If the Significators afflicting be in a Feminine Sign, the left side of the
body is afflicted; but if they be found in a Masculine Sign, the right side of
the body is afflicted.

Is the Disease in the Body, or Mind? or in both?
The Lord of the Ascendant, together with the Sun and Moon, are the
Significators of the Body: The sign ascending, the Dispositors of the Sun and
Moon, represent represent the Mind: therefore consider if you find the Lord
of the Ascendant, the Sun or Moon, afflicted by the malevolent rays of the
Infortunes, you may judge the disease lies only in the Body. But if you find
the Ascendant and the Dispositor of Sol and Luna afflicted, and the former
Significators safe, you may conclude the disease lies only in the Mind, and
not in the Body; but if all the aforesaid Significators be afflicted, you may
then judge both Body and Mind is afflicted.

If you find the party troubled in mind by the former Rules, observe what
Planet is the afflicting Planet. If Saturn be the afflicting Planet, the party
is troubled about things of the world, about losses and crosses in his Estate,
etc.

If Jupiter be the afflicting Planet as aforesaid, the party is troubled about
Religious Tenants, etc. If Venus be the afflicting Planet, he is troubled about
Love-toys, or has a lascivious desire to Women.

If Mars or Mercury afflict the aforesaid Significators, it is an argument the
party is phrenetique, or his mind is pestered with strange imaginations, or by
hard study and vexation therein.

To know the Nature and Quality of the Disease.
If you find the Significators of the sickness in fiery Signs, the disease
comes of Choler, arguing Fevers, or suchlike Diseases, etc. Earthly Signs
show the disease proceeds from melancholy humors, long and tedious Fevers,
Agues, etc.

Airy Signs show the disease proceeds from blood, and wind; as Leprosy, the
Gout, etc. Watery signs signify the diseases proceed from cold and moist
causes, as rotten Coughs, all diseases proceeding from water, and salt phlegm,
etc.

Saturn Significator of diseases, shows they are of a long continuance, as
Consumptions, Quartan Agues, Coughs, etc. If he be in Leo or Capricorn Combust,
or with Dragons Tail, or with violent fixed Stars, he produces pestilential
Fevers.

Saturn in fiery signs, shows dangerous Fevers, especially in Leo he gives a
hectic Fever: If he be in watery Signs, the disease proceeds from gross
viscous humors, occasioned by cold and moist distempers, with a continuing
flux, and cold trembling.

In movable Signs, he shows flux of humors, the Dropsy, etc. If he be in
common Signs, he gives compound diseases, such as run out of one disease into
another: If he be in fixed Signs, he signifies diseases of long continuance,
as Quartan Agues, Gouts, etc.

If Jupiter be the Significator of the disease, he afflicts the Liver, he shows
a bad digestion, the blood abounds either in quantity or quality. If Jupiter be
in a fiery sign, he signifies Fevers, but of no long continuance, the body
abounds with too much choler. If he be in airy Signs, the blood abounds in the
body. If in watery Signs, the blood is watrish, or too thin. If Jupiter be in
earthy Signs, the blood is troubled with viscous gross humors, proceeding
from Melancholy; the blood is too gross, and has no free passage through the
Veins.

If Mars be Significator of the disease, and in the fiery Triplicity, it
signifies the disease is a hot burning Fever, or the Pestilence. If Saturn
also be mixed in signification, the disease has a share of Melancholy. When
Mars is Author of the disease, and posited in a common Sign, the disease often
varies, whereby it is not easily known what it is. Always when Mars is
significator of the disease, it never continues long, but ends either one way
or another.

If Venus be Significator of the disease, it often comes by drinking, or
veneral sports. Venus in fiery Signs, sometimes produces Fevers: if Mars be
joined with her in signification, the Fever is rotten, proceeding from phlegm.

If Mercury be Significator of the disease, the sick party is afflicted in his
Head, the distemper lies in the Brain; either madness or Falling Sickness is to
be feared: If Mars be joined in signification with him, it is a Frenzy.

The Moon in Aries in the 8th House, afflicts the Head extremely; the Lord of
the 12th in the 6th, Witchcraft is to be feared, or the disease lies very
occult. And so I conclude with this Subject, and proceed to show whether the
disease be Chronick or Acute.

Whether the Disease be Chronick or Acute?
Herein you are to consider the Ascendant and his Lord, also the Sun and Moon,
and consider whether they be much or little afflicted; the Signs the
afflicting Planet is in: Saturn gives long diseases; Sol and Jupiter, short;
but Mars, shorter than either of them; Venus, indifferent; Mercury, various
according to the Planet he is joined with; the Moon gives much sickness which
often returns, as Agues, Falling Sickness, etc.

You are also to consider the Signs possessing the Ascendant, 6th House, or
place of the Moon. And consider that fixed Signs show Chronick diseases;
common Signs show diseases not very long, neither very short; movable Signs
denote the disease to end quickly either one way or another.

If an Infortune be Lord of the 6th, and in the 6th, it denotes the disease to
continue long; a Fortune, the contrary.

You are also to consider the age of the sick party; for old age brings longer
diseases than youth: also their Complexion; for a Melancholy man retains a
disease longer than a Choleric.

Also the time of the year; for Autumn and Winter bring longer diseases than
Spring or Summer.

The latter degrees of a Sign upon the Cusp of the 6th, is an argument of a
short sickness. If the Lord of the 6th be stronger than the Lord of the
Ascendant, the sickness increases, and gets strength against Nature. But if the
Lord of the Ascendant be stronger than the Lord of the 6th, Nature will recover
its strength, and the disease decreaseth.

If Luna be angular and strong, or applying to a Sextile or Trine of the Lord
of the Ascendant, the disease will quickly be cured.

The Lord of the 10th in the Ascendant in any of his Essential dignities, or in
good Aspect to the Lord of the Ascendant, shows that the party will easily be
cured by good Medicines.

If the Moon be Lady of the Ascendant, it shows that ill diet was the cause of
the distemper or perhaps Surfeiting by drinking, etc.

The Lord of the Ascendant in the 6th, or Lord of the 6th in the Ascendant,
shows a long disease; also if the Lord of the Ascendant be slow in motion, you
may pass the same Judgment.

If the Lord of the Ascendant, Sol, or Luna, be joined to the Infortunes, it
prolongs the disease.

Signs of life, or that the Sick party will recover of the infirmity
afflicting.
Herein you are to consider the Ascendant, and Lord thereof, and Luna: first
therefore, if you find Jupiter, Venus, Sol, or Luna in the Ascendant, not
afflicted by the Lord of the 8th, nor being Lord of the 8th themselves, promise
a speedy recovery.

The Moon or Lord of the Ascendant separating from a malevolent Planet, or from
the Lord of the 6th, and applying to a Fortune, fortunately placed in the
Figure, denotes the same.

If Luna be angular, well posited, free from the body or beams of Saturn or
Mars, or the Lord of death; or if the Moon be void of course at the
decumbiture, and upon a Critical day behold a good Planet or Star, it is a
sign of recovery to the sick party.

If on a Critical day the Moon be in her own House or Exaltation, though she be
void of course, it denotes recovery.

If the benevolents be stronger than the malevolents, and they behold the
Ascendant, Lord thereof, or be in good aspect to the Moon, it is an argument of
recovery.

Signs of Death, or that the Party will die of the infirmity afflicting.
In the resolution hereof, you are to consider, if the Lord of the Ascendant be
afflicted in the 8th House, or by the malevolent rays of the Lord of the 8th
without reception, it is an argument of death to the sick.

Or if at the decumbiture you find the Lord of the Ascendant combust in the
Ascendant, it denotes the same.

If the Lord of the 8th be in the tenth House, and afflict the Lord of the
Ascendant, the Physician will go near to kill by improper Physic.

The Lord of the 8th very strong in the Ascendant, or if there happen a
Conjunction between the Lord of the 8th and Lord of the Ascendant, it is a
great argument of mortality.

The Moon in the 4th, in Conjunction, Quadrate, or Opposition of Saturn or
Mars, without reception, and either of them Lord of the 8th House, it denotes
death.

If the Lord of the Ascendant fall retrograde from the Lord of the 8th, death
is to be feared upon the next Conjunction, except the Lord of the Ascendant
meet with a benevolent Aspect of the Fortunes in the mean time.

Whether a Servant shall prove just or knavish to his Master.
If the Master himself propound this Question, then let the Lord of the
Ascendant, and the Ascendant it self, and Luna, signify the Querent; the 6th
House and his Lord signify the Servant, together with the Planet posited
therein, with Mercury a general significator of Servants.

If you find the Lord of the Ascendant in good aspect to the Lord of the 6th,
or the Moon or some other Planet separating from the Lord of the 6th, and
applying to the Lord of the Ascendant, these are all arguments of fidelity in
Servants.

The Lord of the 6th in Conjunction, Sextile, or Trine to the Fortunes, or to
the Lord of the Ascendant; or if the Lord of the 6th be posited in the
Ascendant, in any of his Essential dignities, it shows the Querents Servant to
be just and honest.

If you find the Lord of the 6th in the 2d in his Essential dignities, and
free from the malevolent beams of the Infortunes, or in good aspect to the Lord
of the second, it is an argument the Servant is honest, and will prove a
profitable servant to his Master.

But if you find Saturn, Mars, or Dragons Tail in the 6th, Peregrine, it
denotes the Servant to prove both idle and knavish.

If the Lord of the 6th be in Quadrate or Opposition to the Lord of the
Ascendant or Lord of the second without Reception, or to a Planet in the
Ascendant or second House, or to the degrees ascending upon the Cusp of the
Ascendant or second House, it is an argument the Servant will prove a continual
cross and vexation to the Querent, and he will prove unjust in his actions.

The Moon in the 6th, in Quadrate to the Lord of the 6th in the second, shows
the Servant to be a Knave; or when you find Mercury in Quadrate or Opposition
to the Lord of the Ascendant or Lord of the second, you may judge the same.

If a Servant shall get free from his Master?
In the resolution of this Question, you are to give the Ascendant, his Lord,
and Luna, to signify the Servant; the 10th House and Lord thereof, together
with the Sun, are for the Master.

If the Lord of the Ascendant, or Luna, be in Conjunction, Sextile, or Trine to
the Lord of the 10th, or to Sol, these are arguments the Servant shall get free
from his Master, provided the Aspect be Partile.

If you find the Significators applying to the Aspects, you may judge by the
degrees of distance how long it will be before the Servant be freed from his
Master: if they be separating from their Aspects, he will easily be freed.

If the Lord of the Ascendant, or Luna, be in good aspect to a Planet in the
10th; or if you find a benevolent Planet in the 10th, in good aspect to a
Planet in the Ascendant, you may judge the Servant may be freed, etc.

If the Lord of the Ascendant, or the Moon, be in the Ascendant, 10th, 7th, or
4th Houses Combust, or otherwise afflicted, you may judge the Servant cannot be
at liberty.

If you find the aforesaid Significators Retrograde, it is an argument of
Freedom; but with much slowness and difficulty.

Of small Cattle: Shall the Querent gain by them, or not?
If you find the Lord of the 6th in the Ascendant, in any of his Essential
dignities, or in good aspect to the Lord of the second, or to the Part of
Fortune, or his Dispositor; all these are arguments the Querent shall gain by
small Cattle.

The Lord of the 6th in the second, in his own dignities, or in Reception with
the Lord of the second; or if you find Jupiter or Venus in the 6th, no ways
afflicted, and in Sextile or Trine to the Lord of the second, you may also
judge the Querent may gain by small Cattle.

But if you find the Lord of the 6th Combust in the Ascendant or second House,
or afflict the Lord of the Ascendant, or Lord of the second, or the Part of
Fortune or his Dispositor, you may judge the Querent cannot thrive by dealing
in small Cattle.

If you find Saturn or Mars in the 6th Peregrine or Combust, and afflict the
Lord of the Ascendant, or Lord of the second, or Luna; or if you find Dragons
Tail in the 6th, you may judge the same.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Seventh House, and Questions thereunto belonging.

FRom this House is Judgment given of Marriages, Lawsuits, public Enemies,
etc.

Shall the Querent marry?
In this Question you are to behold the position of the Lord of the Ascendant,
Venus, and the Moon. If you find the aforesaid Significators posited in
fruitful signs, it is an argument the Querent shall marry.

If you find the Lord of the Ascendant in the 7th, or Lord of the 7th in the
Ascendant, or Lord of the Ascendant in Conjunction, Sextile, or Trine to the
Lord of the 7th, you may judge the Querent shall marry.

If you find a Planet in the 7th in any of his own dignities, and applying to
the Lord of the Ascendant by any good Aspect, or the Lord of the 7th applying
to a Planet in the Ascendant, provided he be not Peregrine there, or otherwise
infortunated, it is an argument the Querent shall marry. Or if you find the
Lord of the Ascendant, or Luna, in good aspect to Venus, it denotes the same.

But if you find the aforesaid Significators of Marriage in Sterile signs,
and in Quadrate or Opposition to the Lord of the 7th without Reception, you may
judge the Querent will never marry.

In what time shall the Querent marry?
If by the former rules you find a probability that the Party shall marry, and
the Querent desire to know in what time; herein you are to consider the
aforesaid Significators; and if you find them apply to any good Aspect from an
Angle in the Figure, you may judge the Marriage will be effected in a short
time.

Also in this Judgment you are to consider whether the Planets which are
Significators be Oriental or Occidental; or if they be in the Oriental parts of
the Heavens, or if they be swift in motion, it denotes the Marriage to be
effected in a short time.

If you find the former Significators Occidental, slow in motion, or in the
Occidental parts of the Figure; or if the Significators be under the Earth,
Peregrine, or otherwise afflicted, it denotes a long time before the Marriage
be effected.

If you find the Significators of Marriage apply by any good aspect, observe
in what signs they are posited; also the degrees of distance between their
perfect Aspect, and give to every degree of distance, in fixed Signs, years or
months; in common Signs, months or weeks; in movable Signs, weeks or days.

Shall the Querent marry more than once?
When this Question is propounded, you are to consider whether the aforesaid
Significators be in Sextile or Trine to many Planets in the 7th House; or if
Venus or Luna be in good Aspect to many Planets in the 7th House, these are
arguments that the Querent shall marry more than once.

The principal Significators in Marriage in Bicorporeal signs, or many Planets
in the 7th, shows that the Querent shall marry more than once.

But if you find the aforesaid Significators in fixed signs, and in good
aspect but to one Planet, it is an argument the Querent shall marry but once.

Whether the Marriage intended shall be effected or not?
If the Querent propound this Question, Whether the Marriage shall be effected
or not, or whether he shall marry his Mistress, or no? then give the Ascendant,
his Lord, and Luna, to signify the Querent; the 7th House and Lord thereof,
together with the Planets posited therein, shall signify the Quesited. If it
be a man that asks the question, you are to take the Sun as a
Co-significator; but if a woman ask the question, you are to take Venus as a
Co-significator, and judge by the following Rules.

If the Lord of the Ascendant apply to a Sextile or Trine of the Lord of the
7th; or if the Lord of the 7th apply to the Lord of the Ascendant from good
places in the Figure, and they be in their Essential dignities, or in mutual
Reception, it is a very strong argument the Marriage will be effected.

Or if you find Luna applying to any good Aspect of Venus from good Houses
where they are Essentially strong; or if you find the Lord of the Ascendant or
the Moon in the 7th House, in any of their own dignities, or in mutual
Reception with the Lord of the 7th, it promises the same.

If the Significators so applying be in angles, the Marriage will soon be
effected; if they be in succedent Houses, the Marriage will be effected with
delay of time; but if in cadent Houses, it may be effected if the Significators
apply by good aspect, and are swift in motion, although with much delay,
vexation, and desperation.

Sometimes the Marriage is effected when the Significators apply by Quadrate or
Opposition, provided it be with mutual Reception; but oftentimes the parties
disagree after Marriage, that it were better it had never been brought to pass.

If you find Luna or some other Planet separating from the Lord of the 7th,
and applying by any good aspect to the Lord of the Ascendant, when the other
Significators do not behold each other, yet you may judge the Marriage will be
effected by such a person as the Moon, or some other Planet which transferreth
the virtue of one of the Significators to the other, shall signify.

But if you find the Significators of the Querent not beholding the
Significators of the Quesited; or if they be in Quadrate or Opposition the one
to the other, Peregrine, or afflicted by the malevolent Planets, and in cadent
Houses, without Reception, there is no hopes of effecting the Marriage.

What shall be the hindrance?
If the Lord of the 7th be in Quadrate or Opposition to the Lord of the
Ascendant from bad Houses in the Figure, without Reception, it signifies some
dislike is taken by the Quesited, or that they are averse to Marriage.

Or if you find the Significators afflicted by any Planet, consider what House
that Planet is Lord of, and say the Marriage will be frustrated by such as he
signifies.

If it be the Lord of the second, then money will be wanting in the Querents
behalf, or poverty will be objected.

If the Lord of the 3d, some Brother, Sister, or Neighbor, or going some long
Journey will hinder it. If the Lord of the 4th, the Querents Father will not
agree to it.

If the Lord of the 5th, some Child, or Children, or some scandal about having
a Bastard, or fear of Wantonness, or given to Gaming, using of Taverns, etc.

If the Lord of the 6th, some of the Fathers kindred, or the Querents being
sick will hinder it, etc. Judge the like in the rest of the Houses in order.

What manner of Person shall the Querent marry?
If a Man ask the question, consider what Planet the Moon is in aspect with: If
a Woman ask the question, consider Sol; also consider what Planet the Lord of
the Ascendant is in aspect with, or the Planet in the Ascendant, and judge by
the strongest arguments.

I mean the strongest Testimonies, and those which are in best Reception; then
consider the nature of that Planet, what sign he is in, how affected or
afflicted; and by consideration hereof, you may describe the Person, his
quality and conditions, as you are directed in the first part of this Book,
where the nature and qualities of the Planets are largely desoribed.

Who is the more Noble, and which will be Master?
Herein you are to give the Lord of the Ascendant to the Querent, the Lord of
7th to the Quesited; consider which of them is better dignified: the Lord of
the Ascendant in an angle, and Lord of the 7th in a succedent House, it shows
that the Querent is best descended.

Also consider which of the Significators is the most ponderous Planet;
although he be in a cadent House, yet if he be in good aspect with a Planet in
an angle, judge that the party signified by that Planet will be Master.

If the Lord of the Ascendant be more ponderous and strong in his Essential
dignities, although he be in a cadent House, and the Lord of the 7th be in an
angle, yet it is an argument the Querent will be Master.

Shall they agree after Marriage?
If you find the Lord of the Ascendant in Sextile or Trine to the Lord of the
7th, with mutual Reception, it is a very strong argument that the parties will
agree and love very well after Marriage.

If Venus or the Moon be in good aspect with the Lord of the 7th, or to a
Planet in the 7th, in any of his Essential dignities, it promises the same.

If you find the Lord of the 7th in Quadrate or Opposition to the Lord of the
Ascendant, or Luna, although it be with mutual Reception, yet there will be
often jarring between the parties; but if it be without Reception, very little
love or agreement can be expected between them.

If you find the Significators afflicted by the malevolent rays of Saturn or
Mars, from the Ascendant or 7th House, you may judge the same.

You may also know who will be the cause or author of the strife, by
considering which of the Houses is most unfortunated, I mean the Ascendant or
7th house. If you find Saturn or Mars Peregrine or Retrograde in the
Ascendant, or Dragons Tail there, you may judge the Querent will be the Author
of the strife: If you find the 7th House unfortunated by the presence of
Saturn, Mars, or Dragons Tail, as aforesaid, it is an argument the Quesited
will not agree with the other.

If the Moon be in Via Combusta, or the Combust way, or apply by any bad Aspect
to Saturn or Mars, it is an argument of little love or agreement.

From what part one shall Marry?
Herein you are to consider the possession of the Lord of the 7th: if you find
him posited in the 9th, or the Lord of the 9th in the 7th, or if the Lord of
the 7th be in Signs of contrary nature, it is an argument the Querent shall
marry a stranger, or one of another County or Country: And by observing what
signs the Significators are posited in, you may judge the Querent shall marry
from that part which the Sign and House he is posited in signifies. If you
find the Significators in one and the same Triplicity, or in Sextile aspect,
it denotes one not far from home: if you find the Significators in Conjunction
in an angle, it denotes one very near home: if they be in Conjunction in the
Ascendant, the Querent will marry one very near, if not in the same house. And
thus much may serve for the Judgment of this Question.

Is she a Maid that asks the Question?
In the resolution of this Question, you are to consider, if the Lord of the
Ascendant, Venus, or the Moon, be in fixed Signs, no ways afflicted by body or
aspect of the Infortunes, or infortunated by the presence of Dragons Tail, it
is an argument she is a Maid that asks the question.

If the Significators happen to be in Conjunction or aspect with Saturn or Mars
in their own dignities, or in good aspect to Sol or Jupiter with Reception, or
the Moon in good aspect to Jupiter from fixed Signs, it promises the same.

If you find the Lord of the Ascendant, the Moon, or Venus, in double-bodied
signs, or the major part of them not dignified in the Terms of Mars, it
denotes a married Woman, a corrupt Virgin, or a Widow. If the Significators be
in movable signs, Peregrine in the Terms of Mars, the woman is a Widow, or one
that has had Children, or that she is a Meritrix.

If you find the Significators in aspect of Saturn or Mars, if they be not
Lord of the 7th, it is an argument the Querent is not a Maid; also if you find
Scorpio ascending, together with the former testimonies, you may judge the same.

Shall the Querent ever marry? in what time?
April 28th, 8 h. P. M. 1674.

a ad vac.



Judgment upon the Figure.

The Ascendant, and Mars Lord thereof, fignifies the Querent, whom I found
posited in Pisces, a fruitful sign; also the Ascendant is Scorpio, another
fruitful sign, which is one argument the Querent should marry.

In the next place, I found Mercury lately separated from Venus Lady of the
7th, and from Sol, who is also posited in the 7th, and applying by his
Retrograde motion to Mars Lord of the Ascendant by a Sextile-aspect; which was
a very strong argument that the Querent should marry: which has already proved
true.

In the next place, I was asked in what time she should be married?

First, I considered that Mercury was in a fixed sign, Retrograde, and under
the Suns Beams; also I found Mars Lord of the Ascendant in a common sign, and
that Mercury wanted but three degrees of a Sextile-aspect to Mars, and Mercury
afflicted in a fixed sign: by allowing for the three degrees of distance three
years, I took half of that, which is a year and a half; and Mars being in a
common sign, which argued three months: but Mercury being afflicted, I from
hence judged she should be married about two years after, or thereabouts. The
truth is, she was married about two years and some few weeks after the time of
the Query. But this Question may be better resolved by the Querents Nativity,
if it can be attained.

If marry the Woman desired?
D. H. M. March 19.6.40. P. M. 1673/4.

a ad.



The Ascendant, and Venus Lady thereof, are for the Querent; the 7th House, and
Mars Lord thereof, are for the Quesited: Venus Lady of the Ascendant in Aries,
applying to a Sextile of Mars in Pisces, was an argument the Querent should
marry his Mistress.

Also because Mars casts his Trine Aspect very near the degrees ascending,
which does a little confirm the former Judgment.

Also finding the Sun, who is posited in the 7th, in his Exaltation, in Trine
to Mars; but finding Venus Peregrine and Combust, and before she come to the
Sextile of Mars, Jupiter comes to a Quartile of Mars; from hence I judged it
would be a great while before the (...) age could be effected: and because
Jupiter was Lord of the third, I told the Querent, that one of his Brethren was
against his Marriage, and would do his endeavor to hinder it; which he
confessed was true; but notwithstanding the Marriage was effected, although
with great loss of time, as I had predicted by the Figure.

Shall the Querent or his Adversary overcome in a Lawsuit?
The Ascendant and Lord thereof signify the Querent; the 7th House and his
Lord are for his Adversary; the 10th House and Lord thereof signifies the
Judge; and the 4th House and Lord thereof signifies the end of the Suit.

If the Lord of the Ascendant be more potent in the Figure than the Lord of the
7th, or the Ascendant better fortified than the Lord of the 7th, either by the
presence of fortunate Planets, or by their benevolent Aspects, it is an
argument the Querent will evercome in his Suit at Law.

Many Planets in the Ascendant or second House, if they be not infortunated by
the presence or malevolent rays of the Infortunes, shows the Querent will have
most Friends: If the Lord of the second be stronger than the Lord of the
eighth, the Querent has most money.

If you find the Lord of the 7th better posited, stronger in his Essential
dignities, and better aspected, it is an argument the Adversary will overcome.

If the Moon or Lord of the Ascendant be in Sextile or Trine to the Lord of the
7th from good places in the Figure, or with mutual Reception, it shows that the
parties will accord and come to agreement; and he whose Significator does
apply, will the first seek Peace.

If you find both the Significators give their virtue to one Planet, such a
person as that Planet signifies will compound all the differences between them.

If the Significators be in moveable signs, the parties have no great desire
to proceed in their Suit: If in fixed signs, then they are both resolved to
proceed in Law, and it may be long before the Suit be ended; but if in common
signs, it denotes the Suit to be often removed from Court to Court, and to be
of a long continuance.

The Lord of the Ascendant in good aspect to the Lord of the 10th; or if the
Lord of the 10th be posited in the Ascendant, or the Lord of the Ascendant in
Sextile or Trine to Sol in the 10th, it is an argument the Judge will pass his
Sentence well of the Querents side. Judge the same if you find the Lord of the
7th so posited or aspected; for it will then go well of the Adversaries part.

If the Lord of the 10th be a lighter Planet than the Lord of the 7th, and
apply to him by Sextile or Trine, the Judge will give his Judgment on the
Adversaries part. If you find him applying to the Lord of the Ascendant by the
like aspects, judge the like for the Querent. And so I conclude with this
Question.

Shall two Partners agree in their Partnership?
Give the Ascendant, his Lord, and the Moon, to the Querent; the 7th House, and
Lord thereof, to the Partner: if the Significators be in good aspect, or in
mutual Reception one to another, or if the Planets themselves are naturally
Friends, it is an argument they shall agree well.

If the Significator be so posited in fixed signs, and in mutual Reception, it
signifies they will agree long, and gain by their partnership.

But if they shall be in bad aspect from movable signs, and without Reception,
and especially if the Planets who are significators are naturally Enemies, it
shows there will be perpetual wrangling, and no agreement between them.

Saturn, Mars, or Dragons Tail in the second, or the Lord of the second
afflicting the Lord of the 8th, or the Lord of the Ascendant afflicting the
Lord of the 8th, or evil Planets in the Ascendant afflicting the Lord of the
8th, shows that the Querent is false, and does cheat and cozen his Partner; or
if the Moon in like manner afflict the Lord of the 8th, you may judge the same.

But if the Lord of the 7th afflict the Lord of the Ascendant, or Lord of the
second, in like manner as we have before described the former Significators, it
is an argument the Quesited will prove the Knave of them two.

Also consider which of the parties are signified by the more ponderous Planet,
which of them are best posited in the Figure, and which are strongest in their
Essential dignities: for the strongest Planet, I mean the person signified by
the strongest Planet, shall thrive best in the Partnership.

Has the Querent any public Enemies?
In the resolution of this Question, behold if the Lord of the Ascendant be in
Quadrate or Opposition to the Lord of the 7th; or if you find a Planet or
Planets in the 7th House in Quadrate or Opposition to the Lord of the
Ascendant, you may judge the Querent has public Enemies.

If you find many Planets in the 7th afflicting the Lord of the Ascendant or
Luna, or if you find many Planets casting their malevolent rays to the
Ascendant, or to a benevolent Planet in the Ascendant, you may judge the
Querent has many public Enemies.

Consider what House the afflicting Planet is Lord of, and from hence you may
know who are the Querents public Enemies; as, if the Lord of the third, they
are the Querents Brethren; and so of the rest of the Houses in order: you may
judge by the strongest Significators which will overcome.

Shall a person return safe from the Wars?
Consider the Lord of the Ascendant, how he is aspected or afflicted; if you
find the Lord of the Ascendant strong, and free from the malevolent Beams of
the Infortunes, it is an argument he will return safe.

If you find Jupiter, Venus, Sol, or the Dragons Head fortunate in the
Ascendant, and free from the malevolent Beams of the Infortunes, it is a very
good argument the Querent shall return safe from the Wars.

Saturn in the Ascendant, Peregrine, or afflicting the Lord of the Ascendant,
or if the Lord of the Ascendant be Peregrine or Combust, it shows that the
Querent shall very rarely return; but if he do, he will be in danger of
receiving many wounds, and he will receive little honor.

Mars unfortunate in the Ascendant, in evil aspect to the Lord thereof, or with
the Dragons Tail in the Ascendant, or the Lord of the 8th in Conjunction,
Quadrate, or Opposition to the Lord of the Ascendant, shows that the Querent
shall be wounded to death.

An Infortune in the 10th, or the Lord of the 10th afflicting the Lord of the
Ascendant, the Querent will be in danger of imprisonment or losing his honor.

If you find Mars, who is the natural Significator of Wars, well fortified,
and in good aspect with the Moon or Lord of the Ascendant, it is an argument of
good to the Querent.

Shall the Town or Castle besieged be taken?
Let the Ascendant and Lord thereof signify the Besiegers; the fourth House
the Town or Castle besieged, the Lord of the 4th their Governor, the 5th House
and Lord thereof, the Soldiery and assistance they have or can expect.

If you find the Lord of the Ascendant fortunate and strong in his Essential
dignities, in Conjunction with the Lord of the 4th in the Ascendant, or in good
aspect with Luna, or Lord of the 10th, it shows that the Besiegers shall take
the Town or Castle besieged.

Or if the unfortunate Planets or Dragons Tail be in the 4th Peregrine, and
free from the assistance of the benevolent Planets, and the Lord of the 4th
Peregrine, Combust, or afflicted by the Malevolents, and not beholding the 4th
House, it is an argument the Castle, etc. shall be taken, and the Governor
thereof exposed to much danger.

If the Lord of the 4th be in good aspect, and mutual reception with the Lord
of the Ascendant, and Lord of the 10th, and commit his virtue to them, it is an
argument the Governor upon reasonable terms, or for a sum of Money, will
surrender the Town or Castle besieged.

But if on the contrary you find the 4th House fortunate by the presence of
benevolent Planets or Dragons Head, and Lord of the 4th very strong in his
Essential dignities, and free from all manner of afflictions, it is an argument
the Town or Castle shall not be taken.

Of Fugitives, Strays, Theft, etc.
Whether Cattle be stolen, or strayed of themselves?
When this Question is propounded concerning great Cattle, as Horses, Oxen,
etc. the 12th House and Lord thereof shall be their Significators: if it be
concerning small Cattle, as Sheep, etc. then take the 6th House and Lord
thereof to signify them, together with Mercury and Luna, the natural
significators of Fugitives and Strays.

If you find a Peregrine Planet in an angle, especially the Ascendant,
afflicting the significators of the Strays, it is an argument the Cattle are
stolen; or if Luna give her virtue to the Lord of the 7th, or the Lord of the
7th to the Moon, or Lord of the Ascendant, they are stolen.

If the Dispositor of the Moon separate himself from any Planet, the Cattle are
fled of themselves, and not stolen: If some other Planet separate from him, they
are driven away.

If you find the Lord of the Ascendant of the Moon in good aspect to the Lord
of the 7th, or the significators of the Cattle retrograde, it is an argument
the Cattle are returning home of their own accords, before they go far from the
Querent.

Or if you find the significator of the Cattle apply by Sextile or Trine to
the Lord of the Ascendant with reception, it shows the same.

Whether the Beasts lost be dead or alive?
If you find the Lord of the 12th in a question of great Cattle, or Lord of
the 6th in questions of small Cattle, or Luna or her Dispositor in the 8th, or
applying to the Lord of the 8th by Conjunction, Quartile, or Opposition, I mean
the 8th from his Ascendant, it is an argument the Cattle are dead.

But if you find the Significators of the Cattle well posited in the Figure,
free from the malevolent Beams of the Infortunes, or from the presence of
Dragons Tail, it is an argument the Cattle are alive.

If you find benevolent Planets in the 12th or 6th Houses, and the Lords
thereof strong, it denotes the same. Mercury in the 12th, Essentially
dignified, and in good aspect or in Reception to Luna, or Lord of the 12th, it
shows the Cattle are alive.

Shall Cattle strayed be had again?
The Lord of the 12th applying to Sextile or Trine of the Lord of the
Ascendant, with Reception from good Houses in the Figure, denotes that the
Querent shall get his Cattle again without much labor, and in a short time.

Or if you find the Lord of the 12th in the Ascendant or second House, or Luna
or Mercury separating from the Lord of the 12th, and applying to the Lord of
the Ascendant, it denotes the same.

The Lord of the 12th in good aspect of the Fortunes, shows that the Cattle are
in the custody of honest persons that will restore them; but if they be in
aspect with Infortunes, judge the contrary.

Herein observe Luna; if she be decreasing in light, and slow in motion, they
will be quickly found; but if she be increasing in light, and swift in motion,
it will be long before they be found.

The Lord of the 12th Combust or or Cadent, afflicted by the malevolent beams
of the Infortunes, or by the presence of Dragons Tail, signifies that the goods
are lost without recovery, or that there is small hopes of attaining them again.

Most of the rules which I have delivered here concern great Cattle; but if you
judge by the Lord of the sixth, as you are directed by the Lord of the 12th,
the same rules will hold true for small Cattle.

Whether Cattle be in Pound or not?
If the Question be about great Cattle, consider if the Lord of the 12th be in
the 12th, then the Cattle are in Pound; but I rather think the Lord of the 12th
in the 11th, because it is the 12th from the 12th, which is Beasts
significator, and therefore should show their imprisonment.

Mr. Lilly says, If the Lord of the 12th be in the 9th or 10th, Christ. Astr.
p. 329.
then the Beasts are under the custody of some Officer, as Bailiff or
Constable, or are under lock, and commanded to be kept safe.

If the Lord of the 12th be afflicted in fiery signs, they are under Locks or
Fetters: If Saturn or Luna be unfortunate in the 12th or 10th, they shall be
long in Pound: The Lord of the Ascendant being Lord of the hour, it shows they
are in pound: If Mars afflict Saturn or Luna in the 12th, they will be in
danger to be killed in Pound.

If you find the Lord of the 12th strong, and fortunate in good places of the
Figure, and free from the malevolent Rays of the Infortunes, and in good aspect
of the Fortunes, it is an argument they are not in Pound.

Which way are they gone? what distance?
If you find the Significators in the 10th, they are South; in the Ascendant,
they are East; in the 4th House, they are North; if in the 7th House, they are
West. But in this Judgment you are also to consider in what signs the
Significators are in, and so collect the Testimonies, and judge by the major
part thereof.

If the Significators be in watery Signs, they are in some moist moorish
places; in earthy Signs, they are in some melancholy Desert places; in fiery
Signs, they are in some open places where ground has been lately dug up;
if they be in airy Signs, it shows they are in or near some Mountains or high
places.

If you find the Moon, What distance?
or Lord of the Twelfth within 30 degrees of the Lord of the Ascendant, or the
Ascendant it self, either by Body or Aspect, it shows that the Goods are not
far from the owner. If they be above 90 degrees asunder, they are a great
distance.

Consider the distance of the Moon from the Significator, and in movable signs
allow to every Degree two Miles: In common signs, for every Degree of distance
five Furlongs: in fixed signs, for every Degree one Furlong.

If a Fugitive shall be found, or come again?
If this Question be asked of a Fugitive or Servant, etc. if it be a Servant of
the Querents, you are to take the 6th House and his Lord to signify the
Servant: If it be a Fugitive, you are to take the 7th House and Lord thereof to
be his Significator; and judge by the following Rules.

If the Lord of the 7th apply to the Lord of the Ascendant by any good aspect,
or if he separate from the Lord of the Ascendant, and soon after fall
Retrograde, it is an argument the Fugitive either is returning, or will shortly
return home again.

If you find Luna separating from the Lord of the 7th, and applying to the
Lord of the Ascendant, the Fugitive will return, or you will shortly hear from
him.

The Lord of the 7th Combust, or afflicted by Saturn, Mars, or Dragons Tail,
shows that the Fugitive shall be found, or come again, and has endured much
misery since his departure.

If you find the Significator of the Fugitive removing out of one Sign into
another, he is then removing his quarters: The Lord of the 7th beholding an
Infortune from the 7th, the Querent may find him, and must give money before
he can have him.

If you find the Lord of the Ascendant in the 7th, or Lord of the 7th in the
Ascendant, there is great hopes that the Fugitive will return, or that you may
hear of him.

Of a Thief, and his Significator.
The Significator of the Thief, is either the Lord of the 7th, especially if he
be Peregrine in an Angle, and afflict the Lord of the second, or a Peregrine
Planet in an Angle; if he be not Lord of the 7th, if he afflict the Lord of the
second, or the Part of Fortune, let him signify the Thief.

If there be no Peregrine Planets in Angles, which afflict the Lord of the
second or the Part of Fortune, or a Planet in the second; then take the Lord of
the Hour to signify the Thief; and if he happen to be Lord of the 7th, or have
dignities in the 7th, it is more proper.

If you find many Peregrine Planets in Angles, it denotes more Thieves than
one; but take him to be the principal who has dignities in the 7th: Also
consider what Angles they are in, and prefer a Planet in the Ascendant, before
any of the other Angles, to signify the Thief; the 10th next, and the 7th next
to the 10th, and the 4th House last.

Of the age of the Thief.
Herein you are to consider, if the Significator of the Thief be Oriental, and
in the oriental quarter of the Figure, it denotes the Thief to be young; if he
be Occidental, he is more old.

Consider how many degrees there are upon the Cusp of the 7th House, and allow
to every degree two years. Mr. Lilly's Christ. Astr. page 362.

If Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, or Luna, be the Significators of the Thief, consider
the distance of them from Sol; and from the Conjunction to the first Quadrate,
signifies the age of 18 years; and from the first Quadrate to the Opposition,
shows 36 years; from the Opposition to the last Quadrate, shows 54 years; from
the last Quadrate to the Conjunction, denotes 72 years. If Venus or Mercury be
the Significator, it denotes youth; Saturn old age, etc.

Whether the Thief be Man or Woman?
In this Question observe whether the Significator of the Thief be a Planet
Masculine or Feminine; whether he be pofited in a Masculine or Feminine Sign
and House: also consider if the Sign of the 7th be Masculine or Feminine, if
the Sign wherein the Dispositor of the Lord of the 7th is be Masculine or
Feminine: if the most part of them be in Masculine signs, the Thief is a Man;
if Feminine, a Woman.

Also consider the Lord of the Hour, whether he be Masculine or Feminine, and
what sign he is in, together with the Planet to whom the Moon applies, and
what sign he is in, and judge by the greater Testimonies.

Is the Thief a Stranger or Familiar?
The Lord of the 7th in Conjunction with the Lord of the Ascendant, or the
Significator of the Thief in the Ascendant, and the Moon in Sextile or Trine to
him, denotes the Thief to be one of the Querents familiar acquaintance.

If the Luminaries behold one another, or if they behold the Ascendant, it
shows the same.

The Sun in the 7th, and the Moon in the Ascendant applying to an Opposition of
him, it signifies the Thief is known of the Querent, and will in time be
discovered.

The Significator of the Thief in good aspect of the Lord of the Ascendant, or
the Significator of the Thief in the Ascendant, shows that it is some of the
Querents house, or one that lives very near him.

If you find the Significator of the Thief posited in the 9th from his own
House, or does not aspect the Lord of the Ascendant, or the Ascendant nor the
Moon do not behold him, it is an argument the Thief is a stranger.

If the Lord of the third be significator of the Thief, it is one of the
Querents Neighbors, or one of his Brethren: The Lord of the 4th shows the
Querents Father, or some aged person frequenting the house. And so you may
judge of the rest of the Houses in order.

The Significator of the Thief in the Ascendant, is an argument the Querent is
the Thief; but although this be the opinion of the Ancients, be not too
confident herein.

Is the Goods far from the Owner?
Herein you are to consider, if you find by the former Rules that the Goods
are stolen, observe what distance is between the Lord of the Ascendant, or Lord
of the second, or the Part of Fortune, from the Significator of the Thief, and
give to every degree of distance in a movable sign, 17 Furlongs; in common
signs, for every degree five Furlongs; in movable signs, for every degree one
Furlong.

But if you find the Lord of the Ascendant with the Lord of the second, or the
Part of Fortune, you may then judge the Goods are with the Querent, or very
near him; but if you find the Significator of the Goods with the Significator
of the Thief, you may judge he has them in custody.

Which way the Thief is gone, what distance?
Consider the possession of the Significator of the Thief, what Sign he is in,
also what quarter that Sign signifies, together with what House in the Figure
he is posited; and accordingly judge, as you did for Fugitives or Strays.

If the Significator of the Thief be not lately removed out of his sign, and
in aspect to any Planet from an angle, it is an argument the Thief is still in
the Town.

If the Planet which is Significator of the Thief commit his Dispositor to
another Planet, judge the Goods are in that place signified by that Planet; and
if you find the Significator of the Thief in Reception with some other Planet,
and also in good aspect to him, it is an argument the Thief has either sold or
pawned the Goods, or some part of them.

Does the Owner suspect the Thief?
If you find the Lord of the Ascendant in Conjunction, Quadrate, or Opposition
to the Significator of the Thief; or if the Luminaries afflict the Significator
of the Thief in like manner, it shows the Thief is suspected of the Owner.

The Lord of the Ascendant, or the Moon, in Reception with the Lord of the 7th,
or the Significator of the Thief, and applying from his aspect, is an argument
that the Thief is suspected by the Owner.

But if you find the Significator of the Thief in Sextile or Trine to the Lord
of the Ascendant, or the Moon; or if he be posited in the Ascendant, in
Reception with the Lord of the Ascendant, or Luna, it denotes the Thief to be
one of the Querents familiar acquaintance, and one that the Querent does not
suspect.

If the Goods stolen be recoverable or not?
If you find the benevolent Planets in the Ascendant, in Sextile or Trine to
the Lord of the Ascendant, or Lord of the second, or Part of Fortune, or his
Dispositor, it is a good argument of the recovery of the Goods.

The Lord of the second in the Ascendant, in good aspect with the Lord of the
Ascendant, or if you find Jupiter or Venus in the Ascendant, having dignities
in the second, it is an argument of recovery.

If you find the Moon in the second, in good aspect to the Lord of the second,
or the Part of Fortune; or the Moon in the 10th in Trine to a Planet in the
Ascendant or second, it promises the same.

The Lord of the second, Luna, or the Part of Fortune, or his Dispositor, in
the 8th, is an argument the Goods cannot be recovered.

If the second House, or Lord thereof, or the Part of Fortune, be afflicted by
the presence of the Infortunes, or by their malevolent rays, or Dragons Tail in
the second, or Lord of the second Combust, or afflicted in the 8th, or in
Quadrate or Opposition to the Lord of the 8th; these are arguments the Goods
shall not be recovered.

In what time shall the Goods be recovered?
Finding a probability of recovery, observe the application of the
Significators: If they apply by good aspect from movable sgnes, allow to every
degree of distance a week; if in common signs, give months, or weeks; in
fixed signs, months or years.

The meaning whereof is this: If the Significators be in common Signs, swift
in motion, posited in an Angle, it shows for so many degrees of distance so
many weeks; if they be slow in motion, and in cadent Houses, allow to each
degree of distance a month.

If an absent Husband were dead or alive?
If alive, will he return? and in what time?
D. H. M. May 9.7.48. P. M. 1674.

a ad.



Astrological Judgments upon the Figure.

The Ascendant, and Moon posited therein, together with the Lord of the
Ascendant in Pisces, denotes the Querent to be of a short stature, broad fleshy
Face, the Hair of a light brown, occasioned by Mars in Pisces, the whole Body
much inclined to fatness.

The Quesited is signified by the Lord of the 7th in Gemini, and the 7th House
it self; finding Taurus descending upon the Cusp of the 7th, and Sol posited
therein, I judged the Quesited to be a man of a middle stature, a strong and
well-composed Body, the Hair black, or of a dark brown; which was confessed.

Finding Venus Lady of the 7th no ways afflicted by the Lord of the 8th, I
judged he was alive; and because she was Peregrine in Gemini, I judged he
continued a stranger, and had very little acquaintance in the place where he
was.

In the next place, I found Venus applying to a Quadrate of Mars Lord of the
Ascendant, and also Luna applying to an Opposition of Sol in the 7th: I told
the Querent her Husband would come home again.

Also I considered the time when Mars and Venus came to their Quadrate aspect,
which happened about the 30th day of the same month: I judged about that time
he would come home; but little love could be expected in their meeting, because
the Significators apply by Quadrate aspect.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Eighth House, and Questions thereunto belonging.

What death the Querent may die? whether natural or violent?
THe Lord of the Ascendant, or Luna in good aspect to the Lords of the 8th or
4th Houses, is an argument of a natural death.

Jupiter or Venus in the 8th, or if they happen to be Lords of the 8th, in good
aspect with the Lord of the Ascendant or Luna, or with stars of their nature,
judge the same.

A fortunate Planet in the 8th, in good aspect to the Lord of the Ascendant,
denotes the Querent to die a natural death.

But if you find the Luminaries posited in violent signs, not beholding each
other, it denotes a violent death, especially if they be with violent fixed
stars, which are, the Head of Medusa, the Bulls Eye, Orion, Serpentarius,
Hydra, and Cor Scorpii. If you find Saturn or Mars being either of them Lords
of the 8th, or having dignities in the 8th, and afflict the Luminaries or Lord
of the Ascendant, these are all arguments of a violent death.

The Lord of the 8th in the Ascendant, in his Detriment or Fall, in violent
signs, or afflicted by the malevolent Planets, either by Body or Aspect, it
signifies a violent death. But this Question were better resolved from the
Querents Nativity, if it can be obtained.

Fiery signs show the death to come from Fire, Gunshot, etc. Watery signs,
death by Water. The Significator of death in Gemini, Leo, or the latter part of
Sagittary, denotes danger by a fall from a Horse.

In what time the Querent shall die?
Give the Ascendant, his Lord, and Luna, to signify the Querent; the 8th
House, and Lord thereof, and the Planets posited therein, to signify the death
of the Querent.

If you find the Lord of the Ascendant free from the malevolent beams of the
Infortunes, and from the Lord of the 8th, or good Planets in the Ascendant in
good aspect to the Lord of the Ascendant, it is an argument the Querent is of
an indifferent long life.

But if you find the Lord of the 8th in the Ascendant or Dragons Tail, or the
Lord of the Ascendant in the 8th, in Quadrate or Opposition to the Lord of the
8th; or the Lord of the Ascendant, or Luna, afflicted by the Lord of the 8th,
4th, 6th, or 12th Houses, it is an argument the Querents life will not be very
long.

The Lord of the Ascendant Combust of Sol, and if Sol happen to be Lord of the
8th, and they posited in the 8th, 4th, 12th, or 6th Houses, the degrees of
distance between the Sun and Lord of the Ascendant shall show the time of the
Querents death; otherwise you are to consider the degrees of distance between
the Lord of the Ascendant and the Lord of the 8th House, either by Conjunction,
Quadrate, or Opposition, which of these aspects shall first happen, and allow
to every degree in a fixed sign one Year. Common signs show Months, movable
signs Weeks or days. But if the Nativity of the Querent can possibly be had,
judge by it.

Shall the Querent obtain his wives Portion?
The Ascendant, his Lord, and Luna, signify the Querent; the 7th House and
Lord thereof, his Wife; the 8th House and Lord thereof, her Portion.

The Lord of the Ascendant in Sextile or Trine to the Lord of the 8th or the
Lord of the second, or the Moon in good aspect to the Lord of the 8th,
especially if it be with Reception, it is an argument the Querent will receive
his Wives Portion or Dowry without much difficulty.

The Lord of the Ascendant in the 8th, or the Moon or Lord of the second in the
8th, or Lord of the 8th in the Ascendant or second House, no ways afflicted,
shows the same.

Fortunate Planets or Dragons Head in the 8th, in good aspect to the Lord of
the Ascendant, it is an argument the Querent shall obtain the Portion. If none
of the former Rules happen, but on the contrary you find the Significators in
Quadrate or Opposition without Reception, or the Lord of the 8th Combust or
Retrograde, it shows the Querent will not attain his Wives Portion.

The malevolent Planets in the 8th Peregrine, and in no good aspect of the Lord
of the Ascendant, or Lord of the second, and also without Reception, it is an
argument the Querent shall not obtain the Portion; but if he do obtain part of
it, it will be with much trouble and difficulty.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Ninth House.

Of a long Journey, or Sea-Voyage, and the success thereof.
THe Lord of the Ascendant in Conjunction, Sextile, or Trine to the Lord of the
9th, especially if the Significators be strong, or in Reception, it is an
argument the Querents Journey shall be attended with good success, and shows a
happy return.

If you find the Lord of the Ascendant in the 9th, in any of his own
dignities, or the Dragons Head there, or the Lord of the 9th in the Ascendant,
free from the malevolent rays of the Infortunes, it denotes a good Voyage, etc.

The Lord of the Ascendant, or Luna, in good aspect of fortunate Planets in the
10th, shows a good Journey, and that the Querent shall profit much by his
Journey, etc.

But if unfortunate Planets, or Dragons Tail, be in the 9th, or if Mars afflict
the Lord of the 9th, it is an argument they shall be in danger of Thieves or
Pirates, etc.

The Lord of the Ascendant, or Luna, afflicted by the Lord of the 9th, or a
Planet in the 9th in Quadrate or Opposition to the Lord of the Ascendant,
without Reception, it shows an ill Journey.

The Lord of the Ascendant Peregrine or Combust in the 9th, or afflicted by the
presence of Dragons Tail, or by the Quadrate or Opposition of the Infortunes,
it denotes a bad Voyage, or that the Querent shall fall sick in his Journey.

Shall the Voyage be long or short?
The Lord of the Ascendant, and Lord of the 9th, posited in movable Signs; if
they be in common Signs, it shows his return will not be in so short a time:
If in fixed Signs, it shows a long Journey. Also consider whether the
Significators be swift or slow in motion: or if they be Oriental, it shows the
Voyage to be short; if Occidental, it denotes a long Voyage.

If you find the Lord of the Ascendant, or the Moon, applying to any good
aspect of the Lord of the 9th, or the Lord of the 9th applying to any good
aspect of the Lord of the Ascendant, or to a benevolent Planet in the
Ascendant, it is a very good argument of a short Voyage, and a safe return.

The Lord of the Ascendant, or Luna, applying to a Retrograde Planet; or if the
Lord of the Ascendant be Retrograde, especially in a movable sign, it denotes
a short Voyage, and sometimes they return before they come to the place
intended.

The Lord of the Ascendant, or Lord of the 9th, or Luna, in fixed signs, shows
a very tedious Voyage, considering the length thereof.

Toward what part of the World is it best for the Querent to go?
In the resolution of this Question, you are to consider in what quarters of
the Heavens you find the benevolent Planets, also in what Signs they are
posited; consider what quarter these Signs and Houses signify, and direct the
Querent to that quarter signified by them.

If it be a Seaman that propounds this Question, consider in what quarter you
find the Lord of the second, the Part of Fortune, or his Dispositor, and
direct him to go that way.

Be careful to avoid the place wherein you find Saturn, Mars, or Dragons Tail
posited, especially if they be Peregrine or Combust; or if Saturn or Mars be
Lords of the 6th, 8th, or 12th Houses, and afflict the Lord of the Ascendant:
for the Querent will be in danger never to return.

Shall the Querent profit by the Science intended?
The Ascendant, and his Lord, and Luna, are the Significators of the Querent;
the 9th House, and his Lord, and the Planets posited therein, shall signify
the Science enquired after.

If you find the Lord of the Ascendant, or the Moon, applying to a Sextile or
Trine of the Lord of the 9th, with mutual Reception, or from good Houses in the
Figure, it is an argument he shall gain by the Art or Science intended. Or if
you find the Lord of the 9th in the Ascendant, no ways afflicted, in good
aspect to the Lord of the second, it denotes the same.

Jupiter or Venus in the 9th, in good aspect to the Lord of the Ascendant, or
Luna in the 9th, in any of her own Essential dignities, and in Sextile or Trine
to the Lord of the Ascendant; these are all arguments the Querent shall gain by
the Art or Science enquired after.

The Lord of the 9th in Quadrate or Opposition to the Lord of the Ascendant or
Luna, without Reception, it denotes the Querent shall not profit by his
intended Art or Science.

If you find Dragons Tail in the 9th, or the unfortunate Planets in the 9th,
afflicting the Lord of the Ascendant, or Luna; or if Saturn or Mars be
Peregrine in the Ascendant, and afflict the Lord of the ninth, you may judge
the same.

Shall a Parson obtain the Benefice enquired after?
In this Question, as in the last, you are to give the Ascendant, the Lord
thereof, and the Moon, to signify the Querent; the 9th House and Lord thereof,
to signify the Parsonage or Benefice enquired after.

If you find the Lord of the Ascendant, or Luna, applying to the Lord of the
9th by Conjunction, Sextile, or Trine, from good Houses, and free from the
malevolent rays of the Infortunes: Or if you find the Lord of the Ascendant,
or Luna, posited in the 9th, in any of their own dignities, or in Reception
with the Lord of the 9th, it is an argument the Querent shall obtain the
Benefice, etc. enquired after.

The Moon, or Lord of the Ascendant, in Sextile or Trine to Sol or Jupiter, and
either of them posited in the 9th, in any of their own dignities, it denotes
the Parson or Minister shall obtain the Benefice or Parsonage desired.

If the Moon or some other Planet separate from the Lord of the Ascendant by
body or good aspect, and apply to the Lord of the 9th, or to a fortunate Planet
in the 9th, it shows the Parsonage or Benefice will be obtained by the person
signified by the Planet that thus transfers the virtue of the one Significator
to the other.

But if on the contrary you find the unfortunate Planets in the 9th,
afflicting the Lord of the Ascendant or Luna, or afflicting the Lord of the
9th, or Dragons Tail posited in the 9th, it shows the Benefice will not be
obtained.

The Lord of the Ascendant Retrograde, or Combust, or afflicted by the Dragons
Tail, and in Quadrate or Opposition to the Lord of the 9th without Reception,
and void of all helps from the Fortunes, it is a certain argument the Minister
or Querent shall not obtain the Parsonage or Benefice desired or sought after.

If they enquire what shall be the reason, or what shall be their hindrance?
observe in your Figure what Planet afflicts the Lord of the Ascendant, what
House he is Lord of, and from hence you may know what person will be the
occasion of not obtaining the Benefice or Parsonage sought after. If no Planet
afflict the Lord of the Ascendant, observe what Planet afflicts the Moon; then
behold what House he is Lord of, and what the afflicting Planet of himself
naturally signifies: If it be the Lord of the third that afflicts the Querents
Significator, you may judge it is some Neighbor, or some of the Querents
Brethren that hinders the effecting of the business, etc. And so of the rest of
the Houses in order. And so I conclude with the 9th House.

CHAP. X.
Of the Tenth House, and Astrological Questions thereunto belonging.

Shall the Querent obtain the place of preferment desired?
THe Ascendant, his Lord, and the Moon, are the Significators of the Querent;
the 10th House, and his Lord, and Sol, the natural Significator of honor,
shall show the Office, Honor, or Preferment desired.

The Moon, or Lord of the Ascendant in the 10th, in any of their own dignities,
free from the malevolent rays of the Infortunes, is an argument the Querent
shall obtain the preferment desired.

If you find the Lord of the 10th in the Ascendant, or Lord of the Ascendant
in Sextile or Trine to Sol, or to a benevolent Planet in the 10th, it denotes
the same. Or if you find the Lord of the Ascendant, or the Moon, applying to a
Sextile or Trine of the Lord of the 10th, is a very good argument the Querent
shall obtain the preferment desired.

The Moon, or any fortunate Planet, separating from the Lord of the 10th, and
applying to the Lord of the Ascendant, either by body or good aspect, it
denotes the same.

When the Significators do not behold each other but by Quadrate or Opposition
without Reception, it shows the preferment sought after will not be obtained.

Saturn or Mars in the 10th, afflicting the Lord of the Ascendant or the Moon;
or if Dragons Tail be in the 10th, it denotes very little hopes to the Querent
of obtaining the office, dignity, or preferment desired.

Shall the Querent continue in the Office or Employment he possesses?
The Lord of the Ascendant, or the Moon, in the 10th, in any of their Essential
dignities, free from Combustion, or from the malevolent rays of the Infortunes,
it shows the Querent shall continue in the Office or Employment which he
possesses.

If the Moon, or Lord of the Ascendant, be applying to a Sextile or Trine of
the Lord of the 10th; or the Lord of the 10th applying to Conjunction, Sextile,
or Trine of the Lord of the Ascendant, especially if it be with Reception, you
may be confident the Querent will continue in his Place or Office, etc.

Sol, Jupiter, or Venus in the 10th, in any of their Essential dignities, and
free from the malevolent rays of the Infortunes, and in good aspect to the Lord
of the Ascendant, or Luna, or to a Planet in the Ascendant, signifies the same.

But if you find the Lord of the Ascendant, or Luna, in Quadrate or Opposition
of the Lord of the 10th, without Reception, you may judge the Querent will lose
his Office, etc. And if at the same time you find some other Planet applying
to a Sextile or Trine of the Lord of the 10th, it is an argument that such a
person signified by that Planet, is endeavoring his prejudice in the business,
and will probably get his Office, or place of Preferment from him.

If you find the Lord of the Ascendant, or the Moon, Combust, or separating
from a good aspect of the Lord of the 10th, or from Sol, and soon after
applying to a Quadrate or Opposition of the Infortunes, it signifies the
Querent shall lose his place or Office, etc.

What Profession is best for the Querent to follow?
When this Question is thus propounded, you are to give the Ascendant, his
Lord, and Luna, to signify the Querent; and take the Lord of the 10th,
together with Mars and Venus, to signify the Trade or Profession the Querent
is capable to undertake.

Then consider what Signs you find the Significators posited in, or the
greater part of them: If they be posited in fiery Signs, it is an argument the
Querent may do well in any profession relating to the Fire, according to the
capacity of Birth and quality. If he be able, he may undertake the profession
of a Chemist, Physician, Goldsmith, Silversmith, Jeweller, or Apothecary; but
if he be of mean parentage, he may make a good Armourer, Smith, Cutler, etc.

If the Significators be posited in aereal Signs, the Querent will make a good
Lawyer, Geometrician, Arithmetician, Surveyor, Scrivener, Clerk, or Astronomer,
etc. but if he be of a mean condition, he will be fit for a Millener, a
Painter, Draper, or the like.

If you find the aforesaid Significators posited in earthly Signs, it is an
argument the Querent may make a good Country-Farmer, Husbandman, Grasier,
Gardener, Carpenter, Collier, Carter, Brick-maker, Butcher, Shoemaker,
Shepherd, Day-labourer, etc.

When you find the Significators in watery Signs, it is most proper for the
Querent to trade in things belonging to the Water, or to be a Beer-brewer,
Vintner, Fishmonger, or Sailor, Water-man, etc.

If you find the Lord of the Ascendant in good aspect with the Lord of the
10th, or the Moon or Lord of the Ascendant in Sextile or Trine to Mars or
Venus, it is an argument the Querent shall profit and do well in the Trade or
Profession he shall follow.

The Lord of the Ascendant, or Luna, in the 10th, in Reception with the Lord of
the 10th; or if you find fortunate Planets in the 10th, in good aspect to the
Lord of the Ascendant, or Luna, it denotes the same.

But if on the contrary you find the aforesaid Significators in Quadrate or
Opposition with the Lord of the Ascendant or Luna, or either of them Combust,
or otherwise afflicted, it signifies the Querent shall not gain by the
Profession intended.

Shall the Querent obtain the place of preferment desired?
d vac. ad. 1674.



Resolution of this Figure.

The Querent propounded this question to me; Shall I obtain the place of
Preferment desired? whereupon I erected the Figure, and finding Mercury Lord of
the 10th posited in the Ascendant, in Virgo his own House, and Mercury no ways
afflicted, I told the Querent he should attain the preferment desired in a very
short time, and without much difficulty.

Also finding Mercury so near the Sextile of Jupiter, I told the Querent, that
a person signified by Jupiter, who he was well acquainted with, would be his
friend in that business. I described Jupiter, what person he signified, whom he
knew very well, who went along with him within two days after, and he obtained
his desire at the same time.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Eleventh House, and Questions thereunto belonging.

Shall the Querents Friend prove faithful?
GIve the Ascendant, his Lord, and the Moon, to signify the Querent; the 11th
House and Lord thereof, are the Significators of the Friend enquired after: But
if it be one of the Querents Relations, you are to take the House which shall
signify him; as, if it be a Brother, the third House, and so of the rest: But
if it be a Friend that is not related to him, consider the application of the
Lord of the 11th. If therefore you find the Lord of the 11th in Sextile or
Trine to the Lord of the Ascendant, it is an argument the Querents Friend will
prove faithful.

The Lord of the Ascendant in the 11th, no ways afflicted, or the Moon in good
aspect to the Lord of the 11th, it shows his Friend will prove faithful and
honest.

Fortunate Planets in the 11th, in good aspect to Luna or Lord of the
Ascendant; or if there be a mutual Reception between the Lord of the Ascendant
and Lord of the 11th, it denotes the same.

The Lord of the 11th in the Ascendant, no ways afflicted, but strong in his
Essential dignities, it is an argument the Querents Friend will prove just and
faithful to him.

The Lord of the 11th, in Quadrate or Opposition to the Lord of the Ascendant
without Reception, shows that he will prove false and knavish.

The Lord of the 11th Peregrine or Combust, and in Quadrate or Opposition to
the Moon; or if the Infortunes be in the 11th, and afflict the Lord of the
Ascendant, or the Moon, or Dragons Tail in the 11th, it signifies the Querents
friend will not prove faithful.

The Lord of the 11th in Quadrate or Opposition to fortunate Planets in the
Ascendant, denotes the same.

Shall the Querent obtain what he hopes for?
When this question is propounded in a general way without declaring what it is
he hopes for, then let the Ascendant, the Lord thereof, and the Moon, be the
Querents Significators; the 11th House, and Lord thereof, and the Planets
posited therein, signify the thing hoped for.

If you find the Lord of the Ascendant, or Luna, applying to a Sextile or
Trine of the Lord of the 11th, you may conclude the Querent shall obtain what
he hops for.

The Lord of the Ascendant, or Luna, in the 11th, no ways afflicted, but in
Reception with the Lord of the 11th, it shows the same.

Fortunate Planets in the 11th, in good aspect to the Lord of the Ascendant,
shows the Querent shall obtain what he hops for.

The Lord of the 11th in Quadrate or Opposition to the Lord of the Ascendant,
or Luna, without Reception, the Querent will not obtain the thing hoped for: Or
if you find the Dragons Tail in the Eleventh, or Lord of the Eleventh
Peregrine, Retrograde, or Combust, or afflicted by the Infortunes, or
unfortunate Planets in the 11th, casting their malevolent rays to the Lord of
the Ascendant, it denotes the same.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Twelfth House.

Has the Querent private Enemies?
IF you find the Lord of the 12th in Quartile or Opposition to the Lord of the
Ascendant, without Reception, it is an argument the Querent has private
Enemies.

The Lord of the Ascendant in the 12th, afflicted by the Infortunes, or by the
presence of Dragons Tail, it shows the same. If the Significators of the secret
Enemies be superior Planets, the evils signified by them are the greater; if
they be inferior Planets, they will do the less mischief.

Mr. Gadbury says, in his Doctrine of Horary Questions, If the Lord of any
other House besides the 12th, be in Quadrate or Opposition to the Lord of the
Ascendant, or Luna, or to the Ascendant it self, from obscure places in the
Figure, the Querent has private Enemies.

But if on the contrary you find the Lord of the Ascendant, Luna, and the
Ascendant it self, free from the presence of the Infortunes, or from their
malevolent rays, and the Lord of the Ascendant and Luna strong in their
Essential dignities, and in good Houses in the Figure, it shows the Querent
has no secret Enemies.

Who are the Querents secret Enemies?
When you find by the former Rules that the Querent has secret Enemies, then
by the following Rules you may know who they are: If the Lord of the 12th
afflict the Lord of the Ascendant from the third, and the Lord of the third
also afflict the Lord of the Ascendant in like manner, you may judge it is some
Neighbor, Brother, Kinsman, etc.

If he be posited in the 4th, it signifies the Querents Father; if in the 5th,
a Fellowgamester, Alehouse-keeper, or some of the Querents Children, if he have
any, are his enemies. If from the 6th House, an Uncle, or some of the Querents
Servants: if the Lord of the 12th afflict the Significators of the Querent, an
over-thwart Neighbor, the Querents Wife, and one that in time will make
himself public; and so of the rest of the Houses in order. And so I conclude
with the resolution of this Question.

Of a Captive or Prisoner, when he shall be at liberty?
In the resolution of this Question, observe, if you find the Lord of the
Ascendant, or Luna, swift in motion, and in good aspect to the Lord of the
third or ninth Houses, or to a benevolent Planet posited therein, this is an
argument the Querent shall be released in a short time.

The Lord of the Ascendant, or the Moon, separating from the Lord of the 12th
either by Body or Aspect, and applying to a Sextile or Trine of the fortunate
Planets with Reception, or in their own Essential dignities, it promises a
speedy release to the Prisoner, etc.

If you find the Lord of the Ascendant, or the Moon, separating from the Lord
of the 12th, and applying to a fortunate Planet, as aforesaid, first consider
what signs they are posited in; if they be in movable signs, allow to every
degree of distance between the Conjunction or Aspect, for so many degrees as
they want, so many weeks or days; in common signs, so many weeks or months; in
fixed signs, so many months or years.

The Lord of the Ascendant, or Luna, Combust, Retrograde, or otherwise
afflicted by the Quadrate or Opposition of the Infortunes, in the 4th, 6th,
8th, or 12th Houses, it will be a long time before the Querent can be at
liberty; and if either of the Infortunes be Lord of the 8th, and afflict the
Significators as aforesaid, he will be in danger to die in Prison.

The Lord of the Ascendant posited in an angle, especially the 4th House, it
denotes long imprisonment; or if a fixed sign ascend, and the Lord of the
first Combust, or applying to a Planet in an angle, it denotes long
imprisonment.

A Horse lost, if he were strayed or stolen? if recoverable?
D. H. M. June 30.6.40. A. M. 1676.

a ad.



Judgment upon the Figure.

The Ascendant and Lord thereof are the Significators of the Querent: The 12th
House, and Luna Lady thereof, are the Significators of the Horse; whom I find
posited in the 11th, separating from a Sextile of Venus, and applying to a
Sextile of Mars in the 10th, and Mars in Sextile to Sol Lord of the Ascendant,
this was an argument the Horse should be got again.

Finding the Moon very little afflicted, but by the Opposition of Jupiter, I
concluded the Horse was not stolen, but strayed of himself; and also because the
Moon is within the Orbs of a Conjunction of Sol Lord of the Ascendant, in
Cancer a movable Sign, I told the Querent he should get his Horse again in a
very short time; which proved exactly true. And so I conclude with the
Judgment of the Twelve Houses.

CHAP. XIII.
Some short Rules for the making of Elections upon several occasions.

AN Election, is the choosing of a fit and proper time for the obtaining a thing
promised, or for the beginning of any Enterprise. In the performance of which,
we ought to consider the party's Nativity, if it can possibly be obtained: For
without it (as Mr. Coley says, in his Clavis Astrologiae Elimata, page 276) it
is in vain for any person to constitute an Election; for in an ill Geniture
there can no good Election be expected: for if the House from which the
Election is required in the persons Nativity, be infortunated by the malevolent
Planets, or the Lord thereof be afflicted, although the Significators of the
Figure in the Election be well posited, yet there is little hopes of good
success in that Election.

As for Example: We see that two persons setting forward in a long Journey, or
Sea-voyage, both at one and the same time, and so under the same face of
Heaven; and yet the one has good success, and a happy Journey or Voyage; the
other person has an unfortunate Journey or Voyage, or perhaps dies by the way.
This must certainly be predicted from their Nativities, and not from the
elected time of the undertaking their Voyages. These things being considered, I
proceed to that which I intend to write of Elections.

In the beginning of any Enterprise, be sure you fortify the Moon, and that
Planet which was Lord of the Ascendant; and, if possible, let either the Moon,
or Lord of the Ascendant, be posited in the Ascendant, in your Figure of
Election. That is accounted a good Election, when that Sign ascends which was
posited in the Cusp of the Ascendant in the persons Nativity; provided it be
not infortunated by the presence of malevolent Planets, or Stars of their
nature, or by Dragons Tail. If you would elect a time for any thing of long
continuance, place a fixed Sign upon the Ascendant, provided that it was not
afflicted in the persons Nativity, nor upon the Cusp of the Eighth or Twelfth
Houses: be careful that you place not fixed Stars of a malevolent nature upon
the Cusp of that House from which you intend to make your Election.

2. When you make an Election for receiving of Money, or any thing relating to
the Second House, fortify that Planet which was Lord of the Ascendant in the
Nativity, and also Jupiter who is a natural Significator of Riches, etc. and,
if possible, let either of them be placed in the Second, or in a good place of
the Figure, free from Combustion or other afflictions, and in good aspect to
the Fortunes that beheld the Second House, or Lord thereof, by any good aspect
in the Nativity.

3. In all things relating to the Third House, especially for short Journeys,
fortify the Ascendant and his Lord, and the Moon and her Dispositor; and also
the Part of Fortune, and the Third House, and the Lord thereof; and let Planets
be placed in the Third which were fortunate in the Nativity, or in good aspect
to the Lord of the Third in the Radix; and be careful that you place not those
Planets in the Third which were Lords of the Twelfth, Eighth, or Sixth Houses
in the party's Nativity: Then you ought to consider what the Journey is
intended for, whether to receive Money, to seek for some place of preferment,
etc. and fortify that House and Lord thereof which is the Significator of the
business you go about.

When you make an Election concerning friendship between Brethren, Kindred, or
Neighbors, etc. let the Lord of the Ascendant in the Nativity be well
fortified in the Election; and if you can, let him apply to some good Aspect of
the Lord of the Third; or if the Lord of the Ascendant and Lord of the Third be
in Reception and well posited, it shows a good Election.

4. In Elections belonging to the Fourth House, as concerning the buying or
taking of a House, Lands, or Tenements, etc. you are to fortify that Planet
which was Lord of the Fourth in the Geniture, and also the Fourth House it
self, together with the Moon, and let her apply to a good aspect of the
Significators.

If you constitute an Election concerning hidden Treasure, you ought first to
view the party's Nativity, and consider if there be any probability that the
Native shall be fortunate in finding hidden Treasure; and if you find the Lord
of the Ascendant and the Lord of the Fourth well posited in the Radix, and in
good aspect one to the other, it is an argument the Native will be fortunate in
finding hidden Treasure; and when you intend to search for it, fortify the
Lord of the Ascendant and the Moon, and the Fourth House and Lord thereof, and
let them apply to some benevolent aspect; also let the Infortunes be cadent,
and the benevolent Planets posited in Angles.

5. In Elections appertaining to the Fifth House, viz. Gaming, etc. you are to
fortify the Lord of the Fifth in the Radix, and, if you can, place the sign
of the Fifth in the Nativity, upon the Cusp of the Second in the Election; let
Jupiter or Venus behold the Cusp thereof, or be posited therein: be careful
that the Ascendant and his Lord be no ways afflicted; and debilitate the
Seventh House and his Lord so much as you can.

6. In making Elections for taking of Servants, fortify the Moon, and let her
be free from all manner of afflictions, and let the Lord of the Ascendant, or
Lord of the Second in the Radix, be in good aspect to the Lord of the Sixth; or
let the fortunate Planets be posited in the Sixth, provided they were Lords of
good Houses in the Geniture, or in good aspect to the Lord of the Ascendant;
and let the Moon be posited in Taurus, Gemini, or Virgo.

7. In making Elections for Marriages, fortify the Ascendant, the Lord
thereof, and the Moon and her Dispositor; and if you can, let any fixed sign
ascend except Scorpio; place the Moon in a fixed sign, and let her be in good
aspect to Sol; but beware that the Moon be not afflicted by Saturn or Mars, for
that shows there will be but little love between them. If the Moon be in a
fruitful sign, it is an argument of many Children; but in all Marriages, let
the Moon be increasing in light, and free from Combustion.

8. In Elections for receiving your Wives Portion, fortify the Ascendant and
Lord thereof, and let the Lord of the Eighth apply to any good aspect of the
Lord of the Ascendant, or Lord of the Second; and if they do not behold each
other, let them be in mutual Reception. But for settling an Estate, or making
of Wills and Testaments that they may continue long, let the Moon be increasing
in light, and slow in motion, and let the Lord of the Ascendant and the Moon
apply to a Sextile or Trine of Saturn.

9. In Elections for taking long Journeys, consider if the 9th House or Lord
thereof were not afflicted in the Radix; and let him be well fortified in the
Election, and free from the malevolent beams of the Infortunes; and let the
Lord of the Ninth be in good aspect to the Lord of the Ascendant, or posited in
the Ascendant in good aspect of the Fortunes.

10. In Elections appertaining to the Tenth House, for setting up any Trade or
Profession, let the Cusp of the Tenth House in the Nativity be the Ascendant in
the Election; fortify the Lord of the Ascendant and the Moon, and be careful
that they be not afflicted by the Infortunes.

11. In Elections appertaining to the Eleventh House, in entering into Leagues
of Friendship, let the Lord of the Eleventh in the Radix be well posited in the
Figure of Election, and free from all afflictions; also fortify the Moon, let
her be strong in her Essential dignities, and in good aspect to the Fortunes.

12. In Elections for buying Horses, or great Cattle, let the Lord of the
Ascendant, and Luna, be free from afflictions, and in some of the Essential
dignities, and in good aspect to the Lord of the Twelfth in the Radix; also let
him be fortified and free from afflictions. And so I conclude with Elections:
these Rules being but rightly understood, the ingenious Artist may from hence
constitute an Election upon any occasion, and by these short Rules find out a
great many more.

In several places of this Book, I have mentioned the fixed Stars; so I thought
good to present you with a Table, showing the Longitude, Latitude, Magnitude,
and Nature of several of the fixed Stars; as you see by the Table.

A Table showing the Longitude, Latitude, Nature, and Magnitude of several of
the fixed Stars.
Names of Stars. Longit. Lat. Not. m Last Star in the Band of 23 0 7 56 S 4
First in the horn of 28 39 7 8 N 3 Last in the horn of 29 26 8 29 N 3 Last star
in the tail of 18 15 3 36 N 4 Caput Algol 21 37 22 22 N 2 Bright star of the
Pleiades 24 51 4 11 N 5 The lowest of the Hyades 1 12 56 46 S 3 South-eye of
the Bull 5 16 5 30 S 3 North-eye of the Bull 3 49 2 56 S 3 In the left knee of
Pollux 10 27 2 6 S 3 In the left arm of Castor 10 55 7 43 N 4 North- Asellus 3
5 3 8 N 4 South- Asellus 3 50 0 4 N 4 In the right knee of the Lion 10 1 0 16 N
5 The Lions Heart 25 18 0 26 N 1 In the Virgins south wing 21 32 0 43 N 3 Under
the girdle of the right side of 6 56 8 14 N 3 Last of the 4 in the left wing of
13 39 1 45 N 4 Virgins Spike 19 15 1 59 S 1 Bright star of the North-balance 14
49 8 35 N 2 Latter of the two in South-balance 17 16 2 58 N 4 Middlemost of
three in the front of 27 56 1 54 S 3 Southermost in the body of 28 35 1 42 N 3
Northermost in the body of 28 49 0 14 N 4 In the left foot of Ophicus 3 4 0 45
N 4 The Scorpions heart 5 14 4 27 S 2 In the right leg of Ophicus 15 15 2 20 N
3 The first of the three in the head of 8 57 1 44 N 4 Middlemost behind the
head of 11 44 1 31 N 4 The right knee of the Goat 2 48 6 58 S 4 In the flank of
17 15 2 16 S 3 Last in the back of 19 1 2 29 S 4 Northermost in the right leg
of 4 6 5 37 S 4 Southermost in the right leg of 4 22 8 10 S 3 Foremost in the
belly of the Fishes 18 22 4 27 N 4 Lattermost in the belly of 22 6 3 23 N 4

FINIS.

