A MERRY DIALOGUE BETWEEN Band, Cuff, and Ruff. Done by an excellent WIT. AND
Lately acted in a Show in the famous University of Cambridge.

London, Printed for F. K. and are to be sold at the John Fletchers Head, on
the backside of St. Clements, 1661.

A Merry DIALOGUE BETWEEN BAND, CUFF, and RUFF.
ACTORS, Band, Cuff, and Ruff.
Enter BAND and CUFF. Band. CUff, where art thou?


Cuff. Here at hand.


Band. Where is this Cuff?


Cuff. Almost at your Elbow.


Enter RUFF. OH Band* art thou there? I thought thou had been worn out of
date by this time, or shrunk in the wetting at least.


Band. What? Do you think I am afraid of your great words? no, you shall know
that there be men of fashion in place, as well as your self.


Cuff. Good Band, do not fret so.


Band. A scurvie shag-rag Gentleman, new come out of the North, a Puny, a
Freshman, come up hither to learn Fashions, and seek to expel me?


Cuff. Nay: if you be so broad with him, Band, we shall have a fray presently.


Ruff. Sir, I Will pull down your Collar from you. He justles B. and C. stays him.


Cuff. It was fit time for me to stay you up, for I am sure you were a falling
Band.


Ruff. Well, Band, for all you are so stiff, I Will make you limber enough before
I have done with you.


Band. No, Hodg Peak, its more then you can do.


Ruff. Sfoot, let me come to him: well, Band, let me catch you in another
place, and I will make cut-work of you.


Band. There Is never a Spanish Ruff of you all can do it.


Cuff. Sfoot, if these two should go together by the ears and hurt one another,
Ruff would be in a fine plight: would he not?


Ruff. Well, Band, look to thy self, for if I meet thee, I will lace thee
roundly.


Band. Lace me? thou would be laced thy self, Ruff, for this is the very
truth, thou art a plain Knave.


Cuff. If they talk of lacing, I were best look about my self.


Ruff. Dare thou meet me in the field?


Band. In the field? wh? thou art but an effeminate fellow, Ruff; for all thou
art so well set: but at what weapon?


Ruff. Nay, I will give thee that advantage, bring thou what weapons thou will,
I scorn to make any thing of thee, Band, but needle work.


Band. Sfoot, thou shall know, a Gentleman and a Soldier scorns thy proffer.


Ruff. A Soldier?


Cuff. Did you not hear of the great Bands went over of late?


Ruff. Where did you serve? in the Low Countries?


Cuff. It may be so; for I am sure he is a Holland Band.


Band. Where I have served, it is no matter, but I am sure I have been pressed
often.


Cuff. Truly, his Landress will bear him witness thereof.


Ruff. Press me no pressings, I Will make you know that Ruff is steeled to the
back, if I had my stick here, you should feel it.


Band. Nay bragger, it is not your great words can carry it away so; give Band
but a hemme, and he will be for you at any time, name the place, the time and
hour of our meeting.


Ruff. The place, the Paper mills, where I will tear thee into rags, before I
have done with thee: the time, to morrow in the afternoon about one: but do
you hear? We will fight single, you shall not be double, Band.


Cuff. Now I perceive, the Spaniard and the Hollander will to it roundly.


Ruff. But do you hear? Once more do not say at our next meeting you forgot the
time.


Cuff. No, I dare warrant you, there is no man more careful of the time then
he: for I am sure he has always at the least a dozen Clocks about him.


Ruff. Farewell then.


Band Then farewell.


Cuff. Nay you shall not part so, you will go into the fields, and know not
what fighting means: a couple of white livered fellows, your Landress will make
you both a white as a clout if she list; If you lack beating, she will beat you
I Will warrant you, she will so clap your sides together, that they shall be beaten
out in once or twice handling; why, I have known her leave her mark behind her
a whole week after, she will quickly beat you Black and Blew, for I am sure she will
scarce wash white before she starch.


Band. Well, remember the time and place, Ruff.


Cuff. Well, remember your selves and Misteris Stichwel, one to whom you have
been both beholding in your days.


Band. Who? Mistress Stichwel, by this light I know her not.


Cuff No, nor you neither.


Ruff. Nor I, I swear by all the Gum and Blew starch in Christendom.


Cuff. I thought so, why its the Semster, one that both you had been undone had
it not been for her, but what talk you of undoing? I say Misteris Stichwel the
Semster was the very maker of you both, yet thus little do you regard her, but
it is the common custom of you all, when you come to be so great as you are;
you forget from what house you come.


Ruff. Sfoot Ruff cares not a pin for her.


Band Nor Band a button.


Cuff. Well Band and Ruff, you were best both of you to take heed of her, you
know she set you both in the Stocks once before, and if she catch you again, is
is a hundred to one, if she hang you not both up, for she has got strings
already,


Ruff. Meet me, if thou dare?


Band. The place the Paper-mils, the hour to morrow at one.


Cuff. Since you will go, go; but hear me, if you go, look at me well; as
little a fellow as I am, I will come and Cuff you both out of the fields; if I
do not, say, Cuff is no man of his hands.


Ruff. Alas poor shrimp, thou art nothing in my hands.


Cuff. If you go, yon shall never say that Cuff came of a sleeveless errand,
I Will bind your hand (I warrant you) for striking.


Band. Say and hold.


Ruff. Remember the Paper-mils.


Cuff. And you be so chollerick, I Will even pin you both in, as soon as I come
home: can you not decide the quarrel between your selves without a field? I had
thought you had been a little more mild, Ruff. You were a horrible Puritan the
other day, a very precise Ruff.


Ruff. Hang him, base Rascal: would he not make any man mad, to see such a -- I
durst not scarce peep out before Collar came to Town, now to swagger thus.


Cuff. Come, you shall be friends, Band.


Band. Friends with him? such a base Rascal? he is a very threadbare fellow, I
scorn, but my man Collar should go as well as he every day in the week, and be
friends with him.


Ruff. Thy man Collar? Thy Master, thou would have said, I am sure he is thy
up-holder.


Cuff. Nay, surely he is his Master, at least his Master: for Bands, make rags;
rags make Paper; paper makes Past-board; and Past-board makes Collar; and I
think that this is a stiff argument that he is his Master.


Ruff. Well, be he what he will, if I catch his Collar, I Will cut him in jags, let
me but clasp him, and I Will make him for stirring.


Cuff. But you shall not fight: have you not Friends and Neighbors enough to
end this controversy, but you must go into the fields, and there cut the
thread of your lives? we will have none of that, come choose you an Umpire, Band,
for it shall be so.


Band. Since you will force me to it, if Ruff be content, I am willing.


Cuff. Ruff, you shall be content.


Ruff. If I shall then, I must, let him name him.


Band. If I may choose, I Will have Master Handkerchiefe.


Cuff. Nay, stay there, he is a most filthy Sniveling fellow, and he will wipe
your Nose of al, if you put the case to him, but what say you to Shir?


Ruff. He is a shifting knave, and one, to whom Band, a little before has been
much beholding, they were joined along time together in friendship.


Cuff. Why, then go to Master Cap, the headman of the town.


Band. No, I deny that, he is a very bad Justice you may have him wrought on
any side for money.


Ruff. I Will tell you what, then we will go to my Lord Corpus himself.


Band. He is not in Town.


Ruff. He is, for I saw Sock, his chief Footman in Town.


Cuff. Here Is a-do with you, and may Lord Corpus, indeed I would you were both
hanged about his neck for me, but I see, this strife will never be ended, till
I be Arbitrator my self, you know, I am equally allied to you both: shall I be
Moderator between you?


Band and Ruff. Content.


Cuff Well then, Ruff shall be most accounted of amongst the Clergy, for he is
the grave Fellow (although I know, the Puritans will not greatly care for him,
he has such a deal of setting, and they love standing very well.) As for you,
Band, you shall be most made of amongst the young Gallants, although sometimes
they shall use Ruff, for a fashion, but not otherwise; however, you need not
regard the giddy headed multitude, let them do as they list, sometimes
respecting one, sometimes the other: but when you come to the Counsailor, and
men of Law, which know right from wrong, acknowledging Master Worths to be
equal, they shall prefer neither, but use the kindness of you both, wearing
both a Band and a Ruff; how say you, are you both content?


Band and Ruff, We are.


Cuff. Then go before me to the next town, and I Will follow after with a Band of
your friendship drawn, which I hope, these Gentlemen will seal with their hands.


Exeunt Band and Ruff. Cuff Claw me, and I Will claw thee, the proverb goes,
Let it be true in that our Muse here shoes,
Cuff graceth hand, Cuffes debtors hands remain,
Let hands clap me, and I Will Cuff them again.

FINIS.

