A Merry new Dialogue, BETWEEN A Courteous young Knight, and a gallant
Milk-Maid.
Expressing in a discourse of their happy meeting, and the words the Milk-Maid
answered the Knight, and how at last the Knight married the Milk Maid and of
the portion her father the Blacksmith gave her to the admiration of all other
Black-smiths.

You merry Milk-Maids that dabbles in the dew
Between the Knight and's Milk-Maid pray you view
And here you will find there discourse was very rare
Which may a patt^rn be to Virgins fair.
To the Tune called Adams fall, or Jocky and Jenny, or where are thou going my
pretty Maid.
AS I walked forth one Summers day
By a green Meadow I took my way,
I met with a bonny lass fresh and gay,
with a fa la la la la le to,
This bonny Lass was of a handsome glee
I asked her questions above two or thry,
Word for word she answered me,
with a fa etc.
Where art thou going my pretty Maid
A milking good sir she said
Shall I go with thee my pretty Maid
with a fa, etc.
What will you do with me sir she said
Talk of old stories my pretty Maid
You Are kindly welcome sir she said,
But what if I kiss thee my pretty Maid
I hope you will not hurt me sir she said
I of a man yet never was afraid,
with a fa, etc.
How if I get thee with child my pretty Maid
I Will give you the bearing on it sir she said
Thou art to be commended my pretty Maid,
with a fa, etc.
But what if I unto the wars do go
My prity Maiden then what will thou do
I Will put on Armor and travel with you
with a fa, etc.
Alas pretty Maiden that must not be
The bloody wars is not fitting for thee
Yet I commend thee for thy constancy,
with a fa, etc.
The Second Part
to the same Tune.


Have thou any Parents my pretty Maid
Yes I have some good sir she said,
My fathers a Blacksmith by his Trade,
with a fa la la la la le to,
Has he any means or Lands by the year
Or what portion can he give thee my dear
My portion good sir in my forehead I bear
with a fa la etc.
But what if I marry thee my pretty Maid
What ^^u will good sir she said,
Thy wit and thy beauty my heart has betrayed
with a fa etc.
I'^^ make thee a Lady of high degree,
If thou my love and my wife will be
Lo yonder is fine Bower is mine thou do see
with a fa etc.
Then let us walk to it my dearest quoth he
Nay pray you stay sir that must not be
My father and Mother first let us go see
with a fa etc.
But when they came there this courteous young Knight
The old coupl in him did take such delight
They made him so welcome he tarried all night
with a fa etc.
And in their discourse the Knight was so kind
Unto this old couple he told his mind
Where he much love and respect did find
with a fa etc.
The old man replied sir Knight quoth he
My ^aughters not fitting-your bride to be
Yet the wait of her in Gold i will give to thee
with a fa etc.
Then wed her and bed her and take her away
And if you can love her by night and by day
Three thousand more i will be bound you to pay
with a fa etc.
The courteous Knight then strait he replied
Your pretty Milk-Maid shall be my Bride,
She'st never carry pale more what e're betide
with a fa, etc.
The blacksmith his daughter he clothed in Go^^
The Knight was most rich and brave to behold
Shey seem like two saints cut out of one mould
with a fa, etc.
Thus unto the church they strait took their wa^
And joined both their loves in one night and da^
where he made this Milk-Maid a Lady so ga^
with a fa, etc.
So fairwel to Mary, to Peg, and to Sue
And all pretty Maidens that dabbles in the dew,
See that in your Loves you ever prove true,
with a fa, etc.
No credit you will get if scornful you be
For this pretty Milk-Maid did humble ye^ see
Which made this young Knight and her to agr^^
with a fa la la la la le to.
Printed for W. Thackeray at the Golden Sugar Loaf in Duck-lane.


