A Merry Dialogue between a Maid and her Master, OR, All Covet all Loose.
All you that list to hear a jest,
Give ear to what shall be expressed,
And you shall know what words were said,
Between a Master and a Maid.
After they had a bargain made,
This Couple drove a subtle trade,
If you will be plea^'d to stay a while,
I Am sure this Jest will make you smile.
To a delightful new Tune, called, Fill her belly full, full.




Master.
(...) ^ave a house trimmed up most galiant and brave
and a good servant maid my desire is to have,
(...) give her what wages so ever she will crave,
^^d I Will fill her belly full, full,
^^e shall have her belly full, full.
Maid.
(...) ^m a poor Maiden, and fain would do well,
(...) find a good Master, if I could but tell,
that I might have meat, and drink at my will
^^d go with my belly, etc.
Master.
(...) Maid, if thou a servant wilt be,
(...) art minded for to dwell with me,
that I may enjoy thy company,
^^ou shall have thy belly, etc.
Maid.
Maidens of our Town lo beth good cheer,
(...) pudings and sweet-breads all the whole year
(...) care not though bread-corn be never so dear
they may have their belly, etc.
Master.
Why then fair Maid, thou must have a regard,
To hold out thy labor, be it never so hard,
And for thy endeavors I will thee reward:
I Will give thee thy, etc.
Maid.
Your hushould work Master, I me willing to do
And any thing I am desired by you;
I Will make your bed soft, and do the other thing too,
So that I may have my, etc.
Master.
Fair Maid, I see thou art proper and tall,
Yet sometimes the weakest do go to the wall,
But methinks a Woman shows the comliest of all
When she goes with her, etc.
Maid.
I like of your kindness and proffers to me,
And your frindship to me in every degree,
But the puddings and sweet-breads I long for to see,
That I may have my belly full, full,
That I might have my belly full, full.
The second part,
to the same Tune.




Master.
Then first thou must get ye butchers good will
to save all ye sweet-breads when oxen they kill
That is the best way, and I Will use my best skill,
Cause thou shall have thy belly full, full,
Cause thou shall have thy belly full, full.
Maid.
What wages kind Mr. pray will you give me,
That I for my labor may look to receive;
Pray tell me the truth, that I may you believe
When I go with my belly, etc.
Master.
I Will buy heee new clothing, made fit for thy back
And thou shall each morning drink sugar and sack
And i will give thee a toy some pretty Maids lack,
And I Will fill etc.
When he had thus speked, they jointly agreed,
And twelve pence in earnest he gave her with speed
And after concluded to do her a good deed;
T was to fi^l up her, etc.
For the very same night the bargin was made,
The Master himself went to bed with his Maid,
No doubt but her wages he twice over paid,
For she had her belly filled, etc.
He gave her a breakfast, as she did it call,
He gave her a pudding, but that was but small;
She told him that she must have sweetbread and all
For to fill up, etc.
But after this merriment, sorrow befell,
The pudding he gave her, made her for to swell
Which caused her with tears, this sad story to tell,
He had filled up her belly too full, etc.
Her Master grew angery with her therefore,
And called her lewd strumpet, false quee^ and base whore
and therewithal he turned her out of door.
Her belly being wondrous full, etc.
Let all other Maidens that hear this new Song
take heed how they deal with a false hearted man
In trusting her Master, she did her self wrong,
For he filled her belly too full, etc.
There Is choice of fine junkets for Maidens to eat,
The which may be had at a very cheap rate;
But puddings and sweet-breads are dangerous, mrat,
If you fill your bellies too full, full,
If you fill your bellies too full, full.
FINIS.
London, Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, and J. Wright.


