Die Mercurii 29. November. 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that Mr.
Stephens do return thanks to Mr. Mewe for the great pains he took in the
Sermon he preached this day at St. Margarets in Westminster at the entreaty of
the House of Commons, being the day of public Humiliation. And it is Ordered
his said Sermon be printed.

H. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I Authorize Christopher Meredith or his Assigns to print my Sermon.

WILLIAM MEVVE.

THE ROBBING AND SPOILING OF JACOB and ISRAEL: Considered and bewailed, in A
SERMON Preached at Westminster before the Honorable House of Commons, at the
late solemn Fast, Nov. 29. 1643. BY WILLIAM MEVVE B. D. Rector of Eastington in
the County of Gloucester and one of the Members of this present Assembly of
DIVINES. Published by Order of that House.

ECCLES. 4. 1. I considered all the oppressions that are done under the Sun,
and behold the tears of such as were oppressed, and they had no Comforter, and
on the side of the oppressors there was power, but they had no Comforter.

2. Therefore I praised the dead which are already dead, more then the living
which are yet alive.

Printed at London for CHRISTOPHER MEREDITH dwelling at the Crane in Paul's
Churchyard. 1643.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS, now assembled in Parliament.
YOur reverend attention during the length of this service, together with a
deportment suitable to the duty of the day, and matter in hand, gave me to
conceive that your hearts were kindly warmed by a better spirit then yours or
mine; and because you command a farther impression of this work, I ^^amfther
instructed to conceive; 1. that besides the hearing ear, Prove. 20. 12.
there is (you know) to be employed A seeing eye, both which are the gift of
the Lord; 2. that having bought the truth as tried gold, the filings are not to
be be lost; 3. that upon your trial (what ever some say) you are willing the
wise should judge whether you are taken with sounding brass, or any thing
rather then Crown gold.

These reasons (besides your command) are pressing arguments with me to make
this Sermon public to the whole (as well as to the representative) body of
our Commonalty, and now I leave it to Gods blessing and your patronage, which I
may the rather expect, because I have prayed for the former, and the latter is
employed in your command, to which I owe (and will yield) this kind of obedience
though I were sure to be made a Sacrifice.

Upon your summons (Noble Senators) I appeared, knowing that God and his
Vicegerents can make use of mean Instruments for high employments, whereof had
I not been convinced, I should have fled (with Jonah to my Country goord, Amos
7. 14.
with the hazard of a storm; or (with Amos) disavowed my function, rather then
speak (so freely as I did) in the heard-mans language, and tell this (my)
mother City, that for three great oversights, and for four, (to say no worse
nor more) God has a few things against her, which I complained of in this sad
message.

As first, though she professes to hate the works of the Malignants, yet there
are those (if not in her bosom, yet) on her skirts, that say they are true to
Church and State, but are indeed of another Synagogue, and by their blasphemy
proclaim it loud enough, that either they went out from us, or were never of
us; and when the wine has lightened their brains, they make light of our
Parents nakedness, discover it without shame or sorrow in the streets at
noonday; where the sad spoils and robberies of our Nation, are made matter
either of sporting Pamphlets, or merry discourse; to meet with these, I made it
my first work to tell you in sadness, that the plundering and spoiling of a
people was a sad and shameful penalty.

Secondly, (though she own not the doctrine of Baal) yet she harbors such
Doctors as Baalam, that peep, and mutter, and would amuse the Land with tales
from the stars, and old-wives-fables, Esaias 8. 19.
as if the Planets had met in a Counsel of war, and (by an Arbitrary power of
their own) condemned our present State to a fatal desolation; to meet with
these, I was to give you Information from the Judge of all the world (speaking
to the case, and concluding) that what was done he did it, and did us but right
in it.

Thirdly, though she have many golden heads, that appear active in subtle
contrivances, she has more leaden hearts, and (setting aside the great
Council) has too few of those that consider her case aright, and lay it to
heart: to meet with these, the last part of my message was to put home Christ's
counsel to that Church of Sardis that had a foot in the grave, yet a step
there was betwixt death and us, if we timely took her cordial (viz.) to
remember what we have heard and received. This (if any thing) would quicken us
to give the Lord a meeting, and thereby prevent the wrath to come.

These things (worthy Patriots) you have heard, and that you might the better
reform them, and know how to behave your selves in Gods method, beginning with
his own house, you have chosen an Assembly of such Counselors as you and all
may conside in: (To whom I should have thought it honor enough for me to have
been a doorkeeper) their peaceable conflicts and pious debates want nothing
but his Majesty's ears to make them hear well throughout the Land, being indeed
a precious reserve, (such as the Lord promises to leave for hot service in the
most conflicting times, Zeph. 3. 12. who doubtless will come up in the Rear,
and do worthily in Ephrata.

Former times have made a great noise about the Church or place of Gods
worship, but these later (with Gods blessing upon your endeavors) may produce
the power and purity of it. I shall pray that our Dread Sovereign may live to
see and say of Gods house (as that Emperor did of Room, Invenit lateritiam
and reliquit marmoream) he found it thacht and over-topt with Lauds, Wrens,
Cousens, etc. but will leave it adorned and paved with Whitakers, Prestons, and
Sibses, cum multis aliis -- The work is great indeed, but there is a great God
that has a great hand in it, and (as you have been told by a good providence
more then once) will send Auxiliaries from heaven, proportionable, at least, to
the strongest oppositions. To this purpose the God of the heaven return an
answer to your prayers, for the peaceable return of our Sovereign, which is or
should be the daily suit of those that wish well to our public welfare, and
resolve to live or die in the pursuit of this blessing; Amongst whom you have
to command, the end avours, and prayers of

Chancery Lane this 19. of December. 1643. Your humble servant in Christ's work,
WILLIAM MEVVE.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE late Fast before the Honorable House of Commons.
ISAIAH 42. 24, 25. Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers? Did
not the Lord, he, against whom we have sinned? For they would not walk in his
ways, neither were they obedient unto his Law.

Therefore he has powered upon him the fury of his anger, and the strength of
battle: and it has set him on fire round about, and he knew not; and it
burned him, yet he laid it not to heart.


WHich words (as you may perceive Honorable and beloved) are a text so sadly
opened to our hand, a Prophesy so clearly fulfilled in our eyes, that he which
runs may read it, as an Handwriting upon our walls, Dan. 5 5.
foretelling the ruin and period even of our Israel also, unless it please
the Lord graciously to step in betwixt us and the wrath to come.

I shall not need therefore by way of clearing a passage to the words, to say
much, more then what our Savior did in opening a Prophesy in this book, which
(after reading the words) he closed up again and told them, This day is this
Scripture fulfilled in your ears, Luke 4 18.
and they all bare him witness. Nor shall I need by way of preface, to say
more then the Prophet here does immediately before the Text, to quicken up your
attention, Who amongst you will give ear to this, who will hearken and hear for
the time to come? where he lifts up his voice like a Trumpet to make way, and
then follows the Lords Declaration in the words which I have read. Who gave
Jacob for a spoil, etc.

Briefly (to come in upon them with the best speed I may) this whole Sermon of
the Prophet (beginning at the first v. of this chapter, and ending at the 13.
verse of the next) is a Prophecy so strangely interwoven with threats and
promises, that it appears as so much Checker-work of Judgments and mercies;
hear a little of the one, then as much of the other, with line upon line,
judgment upon mercy, very suitable to his hearers, which we may conceive to
have been a mixed number, for it is well known, that the sinners in Sion, and
mourners in Sion in those days were so blended and mixed together that there
needed a Divine hand to mark the one from the other. Ez^k 9. 4.


In the former part of this chapter we have the Lord Jesus exhibited to us as
one most eminently set off with all the gracious endowments that might win upon
the hearts of the worst of men; to this purpose the Prophet tells us ^ ver. 12.
Negatively, what by his office he was not; and then Positively, what he was;
1rst no quarreller or striker, so far from that unpleasing work, that he was
not to cry, nor, lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the streets, v. 2.
so far from raising uproars or tumults, that he appears not in the strong wind,
or Earthquake, or fire, but in a still voice, 1 King. 19 12.
which should neither break the bruised Reed, Mat. 10. 34.
or quench the smoking Flax, v. 3. That sword which he brought into the world
with him, Zach. 9. 10.
was not to be drawn, if peace spoken to the heathen might prevail: his
meaning is, he would not by force of arms drag or drive his conquered number
into obedience, this was not his office; but 2ly the course of his office,
positively, was to find eyes and feet for his followers, or at least to knock
off the bolts and chains that they might be at liberty to follow him freely
and faithfully, v. 7. Now if (notwithstanding all this) there should be a
perverse party amongst them of the sons of Beliall, that would refuse his
gentle yoke, and break his bands asunder, close up their eyes against the light
and fight it out in the dark, the Lord will see the quarrel of his son, (or as
he calls him, ver. 1. his servant) revenged to the full upon that people, ver.
13, 14. If the Prince of peace were silent, the Lord of Hosts would speak in
his cause, yea and fight too, very severely; not only cry and roar, but
destroy and devour at once; yea, the longer he held his peace, the louder he
would be when he comes to complain; the farther he drew back his hand, the
deeper would be the wound when he comes to strike.

Which (by the way) may serve as a warning caution to that Nation or people
(suppose it be ours) that have had more of Christ's company then they care for,
more of his proffered Grace then they are willing to accept or acknowledge;
when God comes to reckon for this, though that Nation were as near and dear to
him as Jacob, or Israel, of whom he speaks with honorable mention, Hos. 12,
45. one that was excellent at the duty wherein we are now employed, could weep
and make supplication, and by his strength had power with God; Yet if the
prevailing party amongst them were strong enough, to trample down those
Honorable Laws, ver. 21.
which he had magnified on purpose for the advantage of his people; when he is
thus provoked by a lawless number, he professes openly he will have an holy
(though an heavy) hand in the ruin and spoil of that people; and when he has
done, leaves it with the world to judge, whether there were not all the reason
in the world for what he did, when he gave Jacob to the spoil, and Israel to
the robbers, etc. and thus we are come through the context to the words.

Which being very clear and plain, I conceive it would be time impertinently
spent to give account what Interpreters say of the words, or dash their
judgments one against the other; this (I take it) were but to strike fire and
light up a candle at noonday, to seek for that which is neither hid nor lost,
this is no time or place to be luxuriant in Criticismes; and as for parts, if I
had not learned that [Aeque confusa est divisio nimia ac nulla] I would spare
divisions, were it not to prevent confusion? briefly therefore to help our
memories you may cast up the full sum of the words into these three general
parts.

1. A penalty inflicted; Jacob, and Israel, given to the plunder, and spoil;
the robbers and spoylers have it in Commission under Gods hand to plunder him;
this is the penalty, and (as we shall see) a very sad and shameful one.

2. The cause alleged, together with the vindictive party that appears in it,
let me put them both together for better expedition and satisfaction, in case
it be demanded, Is this legal? shall not the Judge of all the world do right?
will the King of Kings leave such a precedent upon record to his vicegerents to
plunder their own subjects? to which he answers, there was a cause, and there
was this cause, upon which he avouches the fact under his hand, (in words at
length, and not in figures) Did not the Lord? which with the Hebrew Emphasis
doubles the Answer (^q. d.) I did it, and will justify it.

3. The acknowledgement required with the most serious consideration that may
be, as appears partly by the quickening preface, wherein the Prophet summons all
those that have ears to hear, or hearts to consider, that they would have a
care of this duty: Partly by way of exprobration, charging home the neglect as
a great delinquency, Yet he knew it not, Yet he laid it not to heart.

The parts thus set, and the words clear enough, those that are wise and
judicious may read Gods meaning in them (as good Textmen can the original)
without points, but this being not every ones gift, I shall ta^e leave to
condescend to the capacities of the meanest, and point out the full scope of
the Prophet in these 3. conclusions.

1. The robbing and spoiling of a Nation is a very sad and shameful penalty.
2. The Lord seldom or never inflicts this but upon great and weighty
considerations. 3. He takes it very ill if these be not rightly weighed and
well considered.
This first Truth will appear by that time we have observed it, Doct. 1.
to be Gods usual course (when he means his rods shall smart to the quick) to
brine them in shame; Suffu^dere mavult sanguinem quam effunde^e. Tertul. Apolog.
and if shame will serve turn and spare blood, he stays there and proceeds no
farther. As indulgent parents deal with ingenuous children that blush to hear
of the Rod, it is thought enough to show it or shake it, (...) Chry. in Genesis
Hom. 22.
or at most to stick it at their girdles; Look how the Father pitieth his
children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him, Psalm. 103. 13. Yet rather
then fail of Reformation, he makes them (when occasion serves) blush, and bleed
at once. Thus he dealt with those that dealt falsely with him in the Covenant,
he threatens to make them greatly ashamed, verse 17. meaning he would strip
them naked when he strikes them, their penalty was to be aggravated with
infamy; to this purpose we find them pointed at, as the ignominious captives
of wanton conquerers, that gloried as much in their vassallage as in their
ransom, verse 22.
verse 22. This is a people snared in holes, etc. their friends were either
ashamed or afraid to come at them; They are for a prey, (says the Prophet) and
none delivers, for a spoil, and none says, Restore; an hard case, when
friends shall not own each other, when a common calamity sets them at such a
shameful distance.

Now when the Lord deals thus with a people, he would have you know by that
token, that he is angry indeed; and expects that in their humiliations, besides
their sighs and tears, they should express a shame that accompanies their
punishment as well as their sin, which they were wont in such case to
acknowledge, Ier. 3. 24, 25. Shame has devoured the labors of our fathers, we
lie down in our shame, and our confusion covers us; or in case they did not
speak out, their Ministers were to do it for them: As Ezra very feelingly, Cap.
9. 6. -- I blush and am ashamed to lift up mine eyes to thee, O my God, -- Why?
it follows; beside the sin acknowledged, there was a shame treading upon the
heels of it, verse 7. We are delivered up to the sword, to captivity, and to a
spoil, and to confusion of face, as it is this day: As their sin was
shameful, and deserved a shameful punishment; so it was a burning shame (he
thought) that Gods Inheritance should be robbed, and spoiled, cowed, and
conquered, by his and their enemies; and it must needs be so if we examine the
grounds, Grounds.
and to that purpose consider first the parties, secondly the penalty.

Parties.
whether patients, or agents, spoiled, or spoiling, God clothes them both with
shame; and if Gods anger be the rule and measure of the shame, (as will appear)
it will be hard to say for the present, which of the two are worst to pass;
for whilst Gods anger is smoking, and both under the fury thereof, it is not
easily discerned whether he be more angry with the rods of his fury, which are
his enemies, or the people of his wrath, which may be his own; Indeed when he
has done striking, it is well known, but not before, as we find in the 10.
Chap. of this Prophecy, comparing the 5. verse with the 12. At the first, Gods
anger seems strongest toward his people, but when he has done with them, then
he faces about, and gives fire upon his enemies, verse 16. So that look how far
Gods anger smoaks upon a Nation in general, or any person in particular, so
far they may hang the head for shame, as the Lord himself intimates in the
case of Miriam, Numb. 12. 14. If her father had but spit in her face, should
she not be ashamed seven days? let her be shut out from the camp seven days.
Surely thus has the Lord dealt with the daughter of his people amongst us; he
has not only spit in our face, but cast the excrements of our Nation, the
robbers, and spoilers, over the surface, of our Land; In which case we may take
up the Prophets complaint, Ier. 14. 1, 2, 3. Our land mourns, the gates thereof
languish, and are black to the ground, their Nobles were ashamed and
confounded, and covered their heads; The truth is, both noble, ignoble, agents,
patients, amongst us may well be ashamed, the one for being so weak as not to
maintain their own right, the other for being so powerful to do the other
wrong, Psalm. 52. 1. That tyrant did but glory in his shame, that boasted how
mighty he was to do a mischief. The oppressed may be ashamed to deserve it so
justly, the oppressor for doing it so injustly; Divine justice frowns on both:
now the frowns of a King are the shame of the subject, whether he be a
favorite, or malefactor, especially when he is known to have been both; In
the mean time God is righteous, and will not foul his hands with the sin of
either, but glorifies himself in the just-deserved shame of both: The wanto^
spoiler drives, and drags his captive in triumph with bloody face, and bare
feet, nothing to cover his shame, but his eyelids closed up, and his head hung
down, to think that no less penalty would answer his deserts, as that good
Emperor Mauritius, Calvi^ in locum.
overpowered and villanously abused by his servant and successor Phocas,
sighs out his shame in the words of the Psalmist, Iustus es Domine, etc.
Righteous art thou O Lord, etc. But that excused not the ungrateful Tyrant,
Indignus ille qui faceret, he might be ashamed to deal so barbarously with one
that deserved it not of him; as the one was ashamed to know he had deserved no
less, so might the other to do so much. In the mean time Gods anger soots them
both, and their faces gather blackness, Joel 2. 6.
so that the parties, whether agents, or patients, whilst they are in the
smother of his displeasure, have a sad and shameful time of it.

Penalty.
and then the truth will further appear; To be made a prey, and spoil, is the
doom of the beast; therefore when the Apostle would shame certain graceless
men to the full, he calls or compares the^ to brute beasts made to be destroyed,
(...) Ch^ysost. Hom. in asce^. D^m.
2. Pet 2. 12. And of all men, none more sensible of this then holy men;
Sapiens miser est plus miser, etc. such as have been in honor with God, and
such honor have all his Saints. Mark therefore how sadly they complain in this
case, Psalm. 79. 1, 2, 3. It was much that their dead bodies should be beasts
meat, and their blood run down the chanells; but that which they felt most in
this misery was the shame of this penalty, verse 4. We are become a reproach to
our neighbors, a shame and scorn to those about us; and had it been in their
choice, would rather have fallen under thunder-stroaks, or plague-stroaks, any
judgment from heaven would have been more welcome then to lie at the mercy of
men, vilder then the earth, whose tongues, hands, and hearts were set on fire
from hell. No plague like that of a plundering enemy, that delights in war;
so David thought that knew them of old, and in his choice prefers the plague
before them, 2. Sam. 24. 14. He could never think of them without an
imprecation, Psalm. 78. 30. Rebuke, O Lord, the multitude of spearmen, together
with the bulls and calves of the people, -- Scatter thou them that delight in
war; When God gathered these rods and bundled them together, he suspected the
fury of his anger, and strength of battle; and if God will honor him with the
choice of penalties, he will not consult so much shame to himself and family,
as to fall into their hands. It grieves not an ingenuous child so much to be
scourged immediately by the Parent, as to be turned off at the second hand to a
base and merciless groom; the plague-stroak comes from Gods hand, and here we
commonly cry, Lord have mercy on us. But who can find in his heart, upon his
knees, to ask his life and liberty at the hands of a merciless plunderer? or
if he do, who can be sure to speed, that knows he shall lose his suit and
breath together? since God and their consciences give them no quarter how can
we expect that from them, which they have not received?

But of all spoiling penalties none like that of a Civil war: if a
malefactor must die, better by any hand then his own; and if a Nation must
needs bleed to death, better any do it, then they of their own blood and
bowels, for there is much of Gods anger, and consequently much more shame in
such a misery. God was too angry with the Israelites to let them die by the
strength of battle, and therefore expresses his fury more, in consecrating
their brethrens swords to do execution upon them as so many condemned
malefactors, Exodus 32. 29. To have a mother sentenced to death by the wanton
cruelty of her own children, is such a shame and misery, as goes beyond the
penalty in the Text; and yet this being our case, it will be worth our labor
to pause upon it a while, and make the truth our own by way of application.

This being so, Use 1. Information.
that the robbing and spoiling of a Nation is actively a sin, and passively a
shame, this will concern us all, before we pass forward, to consider what we
have to do or suffer in this case: To this purpose it will be worth the while to
take notice of this penalty, and consider these robbers, and spoilers, as they
fall under a twofold cognizance; for they may be viewed as a double-faced piece;
look one way, and you see a beautiful face, on the other side a deformed
monster: So if we consider them efficienter, you may see more of God then man
in them, but if you view them instrumentaliter, you shall see more of the
devil then either; and both these ways we shall do well to view them for our
better information.

Efficienter.
which are ever high and holy, viz. his own glory, and his Churches good: here
we may call them (as David does) the men of Gods hand, Psalm. 148. 8.
Psalm. 17. 14. Nec operis sunt conscii, ^^rn. de great. and lib. arbitr.
for though their will be their own, and that be bad enough, yet their power is
Gods, and therefore good; so that if he commands us to kiss these rods, no
child of wisdom will refuse it; if he command us to spare and forgive these,
it may, it must be done; David was wise that did it; even whilst he smarted
under the shame, he looks upon the Act as Gods doing, 2 Samuel 16. 10. Who then
shall say, Wherefore have thou done so? Here we have nothing to say, much less
to do, but something to suffer, as we shall see in the next point, when we
come to view these rods in Gods hand.

In the mean time we shall consider them as unlucky Instrumentaliter.
and such as have gone beyond their Commission; as an axe or edge-tool falling
from a shelfe, I^s^ctantur vos and in vobis Deum^ Salvian. de Pr^vi. li. 8 c 4.
has weight and sharpness enough in it to do a mischief without a guiding
arm; so it is certain, that though these rods can do nothing beyond permission,
yet beyond their commission they may; and so much the Lord himself observes of
them, Esaias 10. 5. You shall find that God had given a large Commission to the
Assyrian, the rod of his fury, to plunder and spoil this people very severely,
but yet with a purpose to leave in the midst of them a poor and afflicted
people that should trust in the name of the Lord; Zeph. 3. 12. Zach. 1. 15.
Prove. 11. 27. Psalm. 37. 12, 13. Es^. 41. 11. 12. Zach. 12. 2. Ibid. 3. Zach.
12. 6. Genesis 34. 2. 2 Samuel 13. 19. Judges 19. 29.
God has some merciful purposes to reserve a number, and to let the proud
Conqueror know that his Commission was limited under pain of his displeasure.
Howbeit (as God observes of him, ver. 7.) he thinks not so -- but it is in his
heart to destroy, and on he goes with this resolution to the 15. ver. where the
Lord takes him up with indignation, Shall the Axe boast it self, or the rod
shake it self against him that lifts it up? In doing thus God leaves them to
be dealt withal as those that have gone beyond Commission, Esaias 47. 6. If they
be such as show no mercy, we may be sure by that token they are beyond
commission, and we have leave in this case, to say and do something too, and
are to blame if we do not; we are not in this case to conceal our rapes and
wrongs as Dina, but to complain as Thamar, and (though it be with blushing) to
let our Father know what folly (or fury rather) has been committed in Israel;
yea, to send out hue and cry after them as the Levite did the quarters of his
Concubine thorough all the Tribes, and make out for right against them, or at
least for a just hearing of our complaints.

This then being an hearing day, Use 2. Oth^^^^liatio^
I shall make it my next work to move you all that have ears to hear, and
hearts to consider, and tongues to complain, to join with me in this duty of
the day, to join our humble complaints, and order them so, that God may know we
are sensible of our sufferings, and sins that caused them; and in special
manner it concerns you (Honorable Senators) that have a double interest in
this duty, as you are Gods (...) Psalm. 758. Psalm 8^7.
deputies that must hear our c^mplaints with an endeavor to help us; and as
you must die like men, and may come to suffer with us, suffer your remembrancer
to do his office, and mind you of our spoils, and robberies; and tell you that
we have been robbed of our God, and King, Justice, and Mercies; of all that made
our Nation glorious, have we been robbed, and spoiled, and it is a standing
Miracle that in these dreadful losses we have a nail in the holy place* a
little reviving in our miseries: Ezra 9. ^.
A privilege which God vouchafes his own in evil times, Mala. 3. 16.
to speak often to each other, which we shall do well to improve, that God may
hearken and hear, and a book of remembrance may b^ written of what the enemy
has done and we have suffered, for God records both when he affords days for
the gathering his Jewels together, that they may speak often to each other, and
all join to put up their complaints (as we shall do) and tell him --

Robbed of our God.
there be those up in arms at this day, that have cast it as a common reproach
upon the towns and houses they have robbed and spoiled, Psalm. 42 10.
Where is now your God? as if they meant to rid us of him with a word and a
blow, Down with them -- even to the ground, and then the word was, Where is now
your God? An old blasphemy newly revived, and yet had we as much cause to
believe it as the Prophet that first spoke it. For our enemies proved it with
as strong arguments as his did, Our Tabernacles they defiled; we could not call
them Sanctuaries, for there was no safety, or protection in them, either for
Minister or people that take them for their lives, the Shepherds being
smitten, the sheep have been scattered, the lamps being drowned in their own
oil, the lights hid under their own bushels, Ministers and others in their own
Churches where they preached and heard Christ freely, these profane insolences
gave the people to suspect they should be robbed of their God as well as of
their goods. Briefly (to omit those shameful reproaches, wherewith they
clothed them from head to foot that did but set their faces heavenward) Pious
people were fain privately to steal that communion with their God, whereof they
were publicly robbed and spoiled, these times of hostility; and men of blood
having been such backfriends to all pious and public duties.

Next to him we have been robbed of our Commander Robbed of our King.
one that was valued (in David's time) at many regiments of the vulgar, 2 Samuel
18. 13.
Ten thousands of others, one whom the Scripture calls the breath of our
nostrils, 2 Samuel 21. 17.
and shall not the body struggle for life when this is stopped? we might as well
call him the light of our eyes, and shall we then suffer that Ignominy (which
Naash would have put upon the men of Iab^sh Gilead) to have our right eye
thrust out? which if we do, 1 Samuel 11. 2.
it is to be feared, the other will go out for anguish, and then farewell
government, and in stead thereof, enter confusion. To be sure, he is called the
light of Israel, Lam. 4. 20.
alluding to the Sun in the firmament at least, (to go no higher) let us take
him so, and surely our loss has been great, our case sad, like those
shipwrackt persons we read of in Paul's dangerous^ voyage, where the Sun was
not seen in diverse days together, Acts 27 20.
and withal no small tempest lying upon us. If this Sun of ours had been only
eclipsed for a while, keeping his Chamber without his Bride, we could have held
our peace, Esther 7. 4.
though we might have said as Esther, the Enemy could not countervaile the
Kings damage: Or if he had but stood still, Ios. 10. 13.
(...), indifferent between East and West, whilst the enemies of Church and
State were in chase, and the great quarrel disputing betwixt truth and
appearance, our loss doubtless had been less: Or if he could have been
brought back by those degrees from whence he was declined from us, 2 King. 20.
10.
our sick State might hope for long life, and sudden recovery by that good
token. However I beseech you, let him not set in a cloud, (if our prayers and
tears can help it) let him not be turned into blood or darkness, A^ts 2. 20.
for that boads a terrible day indeed. Lose him, lose all; In this case who can
justly upbraid our passions? If any churlish trooper of Dan shall demand what
ailes us, as they did of Michah when they had robbed him, may not we answer our
plunderers, Judges 18. 24.
as he did his, Judges 18. 24. Have ye robbed us of our God, and King, and do
ye ask what ailes us? mock our humiliations? have ye robbed us of our bread,
and then scoff at our fasting? well, losers will have leave to speak, and if
earth hear us not, heaven will.

Rob^d of our Justice.
so the wise man valued it in his account; that it was both Columna and corona
R^ipub: the pillar that supports, the Crown that adorns the Church and State:
upon these terms we find he commends it to us, Prove. 16. 12. Prove. 6. 12.
The throne is established by justice; yea and advances it too, 14. 34.
Prove. 14. 34. Justice exalts a nation, but (mark the antithesis, for it comes
up close to the point in hand) sin is a shame; What sin does he mean?
doubtless oppression, the sin most opposite to justice: this sin is a shame to
any people, so that when the soldier shall cut the girdle of authority, Jo^
12. 17. 18.
(as God threatens, solvit cingula regum) the loins and strength of that State
must needs be loose and infeebled: There Is no argument more certain to evidence
a sad and decrepit State, then to have the watercourse of justice stopped, A^^os
5. 24.
or the waters so troubled and embitter'd, that the thirst and the taste are of
the same danger. (...). Plut. ad praef. Ind^ct.
This has been our sad case for many a day, and month, and quarter sessions
together, where in most places we have had none (or some as good as none) in
the place of Judicature, either for sentence, or assistance, Iudex injustus
lat^o cum privil^gio, est sicut medicus imperitus homicida. Co^um. lib. 1.
in so much that the insolences of the oppressor, and injuries of the
oppressed, have been unsufferable, and the cries have been so many and loud,
that if there were an unjust Judge in heaven, yet the sad importunities of his
plaintiffs cannot but awaken him at length; in the mean time we have been robbed
and spoiled of that which should right us in our spoils and robberies.

We have been robbed of our mercies too; Those Robbed of our Mercies.
which were left us as so many golden Legacies ^y that Mother in our Israel, of
ever blessed memory, upon whose Tomb you may find them engraven, in these
golden particulars; Religion reformed, peace well grounded, (...) Arist. Laert.
honor at sea restored, rebellion extinguished, England long and well governed,
Scotland freed from the French, Ireland pacified, the Netherlands supported,
and Spain awed: So that our National mercies then concurred with our justice to
exalt our Nation, Prince and people then having but one heart and mind,
contested in nothing more then to outvie each other in their mutual offices
of love on the one side, and obedience on the other; a friendly part indeed.
That was the time when the shepherd could drive, and fold his sheep, the
Clothiers carry their woven fleeces for the common good and their private gain,
without fear of Troopers; then might Ministers preach the word with boldness,
and study the truth without interruption, that have of late been fain to hide
themselves and their books, and glad to escape so; then might the Husbandman
plant and plow, sow and reap, and grow honestly rich without danger, whereas
now it is guilt enough to have any goods found in their houses; glad they have
been to fling the plough into the hedge, and think it well to part with their
horse and harness upon condition they may be favored so far as not to drive
and draw away their own goods. O sirs! To be robbed and spoiled of such mercies,
(as it is our shameful misery, so) a just requital of their abuse, which God
has threatened to a people in our case, 2 Chro. 15. 6. 7
2 Chronicles. 15. verse. 6. 7. In those times there was no peace to him that went
out, or to him that came in, but great vexations were upon all the inhabitants
of the Countries, and Nation was destroyed of Nation, and City of City, for God
did vex them with all adversity. Who can say, Blessed are the people that are
in such a case? Or if any should be so far a Laodicean, as in this nakedn^sse
and misery to think so, who (that has his senses) could believe his report?

Robbed of the Remedy.
we have no redress for the present on this side heaven, when Authority has
been solicited with tears, and prayers, Answers have been returned that have
begotten more tears. Froward children will cry when they draw more blood then
milk, yet hard to say, which suffers or sorrows most, the nurse or suckling.
This sad Assembly has heard with both ears the common voice of our complaint,
That the summer is ended, Jer. ^, 20.
the harvest past, and we are not saved: to which answers have been returned
that savor of sorrow rather then anger; 2 King. 5 7.
Not like that of the King of Israel in Naamans case, rending his clothes, and
suspecting a quarrel, but when he put forth a better passion and more suitable
to the plaintiffs case, ^ King. 6. 27.
that moved him for justice in the siege of Samaria, (at what time they made
eating of children by first and second courses) this wrought upon him rather
sadness then wrath, and accordingly he answers, If the Lord help thee not, how
can I help thee out of the barne-floor, Genesis 21. 19.
or the wine press? But the while what shall we say next? It is pity to draw
too violently at a sore breast, our next work must be to lie as quiet as we
may, until the Lord open the eyes of our State to see a fountain, (which we
are to hope is a^ hand) though we see it not; In the mean time we should do
well to pity those tender breasts that have been drawn out to the full for our
sakes, and to give in our discharge, as far as in us lies, (what concerns the
great account is above us) but for our parts we may, and must give up a free
and humble discharge, as Saint Paul to the Church at Corinth, 2 Cor. 7. 11. The
self same thing that you sorrowed after a godly sort, 2 Cor. 7. 11.
what carfulness it wrought in you, y^a what clearing of your selves; etc. In
all these things you have approved your selves clear in this matter.

Briefly to close up this point, That which concerns all, both Prince and
people, Magistrate and Minister, is to consider what we have to do, and suffer
in our several capacities. That we have been robbed and spoiled, is granted on
all sides, and the calamity being common, the mischief of plundering is made
matter of merry discourse. But I beseech ye, let us be better advised by the
Prophet, Isai. Cap. 8. 11, 13. Esaias 8. 11.
not to say as some say, or to do as others do, but to sanctify the Lord in
our hearts, and make him our fear; which if we did, we shall then be ashamed
of this National sin, and penalty of ours. When a captive or malefactor,
come to caper in his chains, and play with them, he gives his Keepers occasion
to double the weight of them. I beseech ye, let these we have, keep us low, and
lower yet at the throne of grace; and as we have sent some hue and cry after
these robbers, and spoilers, so let us send up as many sighs and tears, to
think that no less penalty would serve our turns, then to be made the scorn
of our enemies, and the pity of all good men. And surely the Wiseman wanted not
for wisdom, and pity, when he speaks of a case directly like ours, E^cles. 4.
1, 2, 3
and prefers death before it, Eccles. 4. 1, 2, 3. So I returned and considered
the oppressions, and beheld the tears of the oppressed, that had no comforter,
etc. And hard case, when the distressed soul shall cry for more weight, that
he may be rid of his life and burden at once. This shall suffice for the
penalty, which we see is very sad, Penalties, distinguished into
and shameful.

Ordin^ry.
and the point thence arising is this:

The Lord seldom or never inflicts these but upon great and weighty
considerations. 2 Doctrine.


To conceive aright of these, we must know* there are some ordinary penalties,
whereof (as man makes not, so) God gives not any special account; these we may
call, Mala quotidianae incursionis, penalties of course, but not causeless;
Our just God inflicts them, Prove. 24. 16.
and the just man may fall into them seven times a day, Psalm. 12. 5.
(like gold into the furnace seven times tried) and arise with advantage. These
come and go de facto, without any other remarkable note upon them, beside the
general rule, and end of all, (viz.) Gods glory. Of this kind our Savior
speaks, Joh. Ioh. 9. 3.
9. 3. when his Disciples took it for granted, that the blind man, or his
parents, were extraordinary delinquents, to which Christ answers, nay, as
elsewhere in the case of the Galileans, Luke 13. 1.
Luke 13. 1. Giving them and us to know that it is not safe to make any sour
or severe comment upon the dark passages of his providence, unless he please
with his own finger to point at them; his interpretation being only safe and
sound: and where he denies, Eccles. 7. 14.
and does not distinguish, we are to rest in the wise man's rule, Eccles. 9. 1,
2. 7. 14,

2. There are extraordinary penalties, wherein God Extraordinary.
and takes occasion to open and expound some kind of sins with suitable
judgment, and then expects we should read our sin in our punishment; (...),*
prae. cent. 5. Mi. ^9.
this I take to be his meaning, when he commands to hear the rod and who has
appointed it; and that neither of these should be questioned here, he gives a
clear and a full account of both; I. if being blind (as he complains they were,
v. 18. 19.) he does not baffle them in their blindness, Psa. 107. 43.
give the blow and start aside, Jer. 9. 12.
but if they ask who smote them? La^. 3. 40.
he tells them plainly, it was the Lords doing, Fid^^ verbis ve^be^a faciunt
Gr^g. in Exa^. 37.
expressed with the Hebrew emphasis, which by way of demand doubles the answer
(q. d.) I did it and will justify it.

2. Jo^ 10. 2.
If they would know why? he stands not upon his royal p^^rogative, (...)
p^ccto^em se non s^^tentiat, cogn^sct pro qu^ specialiter culp^ perc^ti^ur,
(...) (...) ^rvi, G^eg* Mo^ lib 9 cap. 34.
(which is sovereign reason) but gives them satisfying reason suitable to their
own principles, wherein he refers himself to their consciences, if there were
not all kind of reason for what he did, and they suffered, there was a cause
and there was this cause; I^^ their sin in gross (crowded into the b^llance by
the lump) was the common cause; and then 2ly certain provoking sins in
particular (most intrinsecally cross to the covenant) were the special cause,
so that both put together and so solemnly charged upon this people, clear the
truth propounded, That when God inflicts such extraordinary penalties (as they
then, and we now groan under) he is very willing we should (not guess at
adventure, Jer. 5 7.
but) know for certain that he is necessitated to to do this; and so he tells
them, Ier. 5. 7. How shall I pardon thee for this? (q. d.) Set me in a way how
it may be done with the safety of mine honor, and command me, (...). Chrysoft.
Tom. 6. Se^m. 87.
if not, excuse me if I strike home for this. Now by that time this is seen and
acknowledged, we are past the hardest propositions of agreement; and he calls us
to a Treaty upon these terms, Amos 4. Tells his people there what he had done,
and they had suffered, v. 10, 11. He was fain to deal with them as Absalon with
Ioab, ^ Sam. 14. 30.
that could not get speech with him, till he fired his corn: so he dealt also
with these in the text, fired them round about: the cause was apostasy and
obstinacy. They had started off from their God, and would not return upon
summons, therefore he wills them to consider where the difference lay, and mind
it, or he would proceed from one penalty to another, until they give him a
meeting to the purpose: something he had done, Quid sit facturus tacet ut
poe^itentiam aga^t ne inferat quae minatur. Hier. Use 1. Information.
ver. 10, 11. but that was not all. Some more dreadful penalty there was
behind, which he leaves a blank for, in the 12. ver. This I will do -- he
says not what, but let them suspect the worst, if they prepare not to meet the
Lord.

This being so, there is yet hope in Israel concerning this, Ez. 10. 2. there
is yet some life in our case, a step at least betwixt us and death, there is
space enough for mercy to come and warn, if grace foresee and prevent the wrath
to come, so that before we come to the last and great duty of consideration, we
have by way of inference a twofold Information; which I shall commend to you in
a twofold co^sectary, viz.

Consectary.
nor yet for every cause.

2. He is willing we should consider what sins of all others are the robbing
and spoiling sins.

For the first, know for certain, that neither Jacob or God smites not without
cause.
nor England or Ireland now, are robbed and spoiled by fatal necessity, by any
malignant influence of the stars, or conjunction of the planets; (as some that
have nothing else to say, or do, would amuse the world withal) No verily,
Sapiens dominabitur astris. Es. 27. 4,
our Church and State have those stars within them, (and O that we were so wise
to get above them) those stars, I say, that have fought in their order against
us, Deus bonus de suo, saevus de nostro. Tertul. de Resur.
and without which God uses not to fight with us; the Sun shines naturally, but
is eclipsed accidentally, so God loves his own freely, out of his gracious
inclination, but his frowns are forced, Jer. 7. 19. (...). Gr. Naz. Ora. 6.
and his strokes are constrained, (like fire out of the flint) not without
provocations, nothing can anger him but sin that fights against his will, nor
any thing please him again till he has his will of it, to this purpose he must
and will smite, that is certain, but never without a cause.

2. Nor yet for every cause: He is not so hot in the Nor for every cause.
(...). Basil, Sell. Hom. 11.
that every sinful unkindnesse should kindle him into a flaming passion, and
make him pour out the fury of his anger, and strength of battle upon a people.
No, no, it is granted on all hands (not only by us who are here humbled under
his mighty hand, Jer. ^0. 14.
but even by those that are blaspheming his name in the camp) that God has
cause enough to be angry; Lam. 3. 40,
or if it were denied, this great Assembly, this grand Jury of our kingdom,
has bills enough upon the file to testify against us; so many that it is
thought they will not all be found and charged home until the Judge of all the
world come to right himself. In the mean time we are here this day before the
Lord, to do him right in two particulars, viz. 1. Acknowledge the cause. 2.
Accept the penalty. In each of these let us be free and faithful I beseech you.

Acknowledge the cause.
I hope there are none here so well conceited of our Nation in general, or
themselves in particular, to say or think, that God might have better spared
this blood that has been spilt amongst us; or that it might have been shed
more justly elsewhere. If any of those that stand in the gap this day (to pray,
and plead for his people, or to judge betwixt him and his) harbor any such
thoughts, let me bespeak you in the words of the Lord, Jer. 4. 14.
O wash thine heart from this great wickedness, that thou may be spared,
and let not these vain thoughts lodge within thee. Indeed time was when we
might have pleaded pity, upon better appearance of reason then now we can. For
instance; ^ in the time of our Marian persecutions, about 90. years since, our
Nation then was in the first heats of its love, and it was pity then, that
Christ's Lambs (that fell into so hard a time) should be so butchered, and
Bonnered as they were, weltring in their blood: that was a time of love, and
for the elects sake those bloody days were shortened. So again 2 in the year 88.
Our Nation was unanimously agreed, Prince and people both, upon a course of
reformation, to purge out the Romish poison from the Church, and work the
Spanish leaven out of the State, and then it was thought pity that those
Pirates, and robbers (that brought a floating Island by Sea, to overpower ours
by land) should have their will of us; that design was blasted, and we in pity
spared for that time. So again, in the beginning of our late Sovereigns days,
both King and Parliament were not only strongly united in themselves, but were
upon the work of uniting three kingdoms into one, to make a threefold cord not
easily broken, and it was pity then the Powder Plot should burn those bands at
the first tying, all this while though there were cause enough, yet there was
not this cause, but now our sins coming to those bounds where God bids stand,
and like the raging sea dashes against those white rocks of our kingdom, which
are set to keep it off, it is now at that high tide, and so out of measure
overswoln, that it is too much for the Land to bear it, or God to forbear it;
so that the least we can do is to take unto us words and acknowledge the
cause. Dan. 9. 7, 8.

Not only so, but accept the Penalty too, Levit. 26. 41. Accept the penalty.
or we have but dallied in all our humiliations, it is in vain to pretend
sackcloth and ashes, Lev. 26. 41.
if we cloth not our selves with shame, Jer. ^0. 19.
lay our hands upon out mouths, and our mouths in the dust, and sigh our
condition in the Churches words, Mich. 7. 9, 10.
Micha 7. 9. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned
against him; Now by that time this is done feelingly, and faithfully, then we
shall have leave to throw off our mourning garments, and cast them upon the
back of the the scarlet whore, as is intimated in the next ver. 9. Then she
that is mine enemy shall see it, and shame shall cover her which said unto me,
Where is now the Lord thy God? mine eyes shall behold her, when she shall be
trodden down like the mire in the streets. In the mean time, it is a sad case I
confess to be robbed and spoiled. But is it not a heavy case to rob our God?
Who began first? God acknowledges plainly what he has done in the case, and
why he has done it, yet the proud sinner being charged in this case, boldly
denies, Mal. 3. 8. and when convinced, yet argues the case, ver. 13. thinks he
has hard measure: God forbid there should be any of that temper amongst us,
that shall deny or distinguish: we are come to acquit the Lord, and to accept
with all humility this just deserved penalty. It is a shame to be stripped naked,
but it is worse to deserve it; It is a sad case to have such as Job speaks of,
such striplings as we would have been loath to set with the dogs of the flock;
Job 30. 1, 2. 3, 4, 5. 8.
(for they were useful creatures, but these the burden of the earth, and viler
then the earth, ver. 7, 8.) that such as these should not only quarter, but
wholly Lord it in our houses, command what they please at bed and board whilst
they stay, and take away the rest at parting; it is an hard case (we think) to
hear and bear the lashes of such rods, but what is it to provoke that God to
wrath, that might justly turn us out of our houses into hell the same hour;
well, it is his mercy we are on this side of it, though for the present likely
to be overwhelmed with miseries, yet must our uncircumcised hearts relent,
accept of the punishment, and acknowledge there is a cause.

Consectary. What are those robbing and spoiling sins.
and see and say, There is this cause for it, so that now we are come to the
second branch of Information, to take notice of those robbing and spoiling
sins, which we shall find coucht in the words, and refer to those that are
specified in the context, and complained of in this Prophecy as sins most
intrinsecally cross to the Covenant; these must be singled our, or we shall
not know where to begin or where to end in the duty of humiliation. Briefly
therefore (because generals work not so well in public acknowledgements) we
are to enquire what special sins the Lord points at as robbing and spoiling
sins, Genera nihil agunt.
which if they be not looked to in time, will not only lengthen out that misery
under which we groan, but make way for a worse thing that may befall us; Ezekiel.
(...). 22. 24, 25, 26.
Now, though it were fitting that these should be discovered to the full, yet
being in have I can but show them at a running view (as he that paints out an
Army of enemies at a distance, Deuteronomy. 32, 47.
thinks it enough to show the heads of some Commanders in the Van, together
with the tops of their colors, and points of their spears) so this that I
shall say concerning these must suffice to conjecture of the rest that you may
meet with in the conflict.

For the general, take in our Gospel sins that fight against Gopel sins
and lay a people open to wrath without a covering, Romans 13. ult.
Io 15. 22. Now have they (says Christ) no covering for their sin, having
refused to put him on, who was the white-rayment, which he counseled them to
buy for that purpose, Re. 3. 19. When a people are so high-mounted in the seat
of the scorners, Psalm. 1. 1.
that the most precious treasures of the gospel, and the dreadfullest terrors
of the law, are belcht out of their mouths into cuostomary oaths and
imprecations (viz.) As they hope to be saved, or Dammy if they do not that
which they never intended; when men make no better account of faith, then to
swear by it, and of Repenpentance, then to scoff at it as a thing hidden from
their eyes, when these graces of the new Covenant are trampled under feet, Heb
6. 10.
and blood of the Covenant accounted as an unholy thing, when they crucify to
themselves the Lord of life; if Grace and Salvation it self be thus abused and
turned into wantonness, who or what shall save them from the wrath to come?
This we find to be the generall^ complaint of this Prophet against this people
in his time, a warning given them 60. years before the robbers and spoilers
were fully let in upon them; given indeed, but not taken, till they had scoft
away their God and Covenant, their liberties and lives, and came to lie under
the fury of his anger and strength of battle.

Next to these were the sins of those, whether Priests or S. S^n^turay sins.
which were by their office nearest to God, and should have been farthest from
provoking him. When it came to pass that the sins of these (setting aside
their personal aggravations) were the same for number and nature with the
basest of the people, the same pride and profaneness, the same cruelty, Jer.
23. 11.
and covetousness, the same excess, Esaias 56. 11.
and uncleanness, etc. and by these means so strengthened the hands of the
wicked, Ez^k. 34. 4.
that they came forth in a full strength to make a Covenant with death and
hell, Jer. 23. 1^.
and to break all Bonds and Covenants with God; it was then high time for God
to look to his honor, being (in good earnest) driven from the place where his
honor dwelt, which ^e was resolved to visit with a vengeance, the first place
he began withal, Ezekiel. 9. 6. Mal. 3. 3. It were too large to bring in the
several complaints put up against these Sanctuary sinners by those of their
own Tribes; Wolves and Mastives may be alike in hair and color, but differ
much in their respects to the fold, the one watches over it for good, the other
for a mischief; this the Lord saw, and therefore as there was no remedy when
the bad people abused the good Prophets, 2 Chronicles. 36. so when the bad Prophets
abused the good people, there was no remedy but ruin, God calls in all the
robbers and spoilers round about, to make a prey of Priest and People in this
case, Es. 56. 9. 19. 11, 12.

Epidemicall sins.
to make a faction of hell strong enough to overpower both the word and sword,
when it comes to this pass that Magistrates and Ministers (Gods faithful
witnesses) are not able to make a considerable party to deal with these, then
no remedy, but this penalty: thus was it with them, (and how much better of
late with us) when those Priests were the only men of worship that could
silence their brethren in a Lordly tone, and courtly scoff. As Amaziah did,
Amos 7. 11. O thou man of God -- Fly thy way, etc. when these could by an
Arbitrary power of their own, dispense with the power of godliness, and the
honor of Gods days; and in their rare and solemn Sermons discourse the people
into a dream of wine and strong drink, Mich. 2. 11. (as ours did into
whitson-Ales-Lords-day sports) and this so pleased the people that they were
resolved (as most of ours are) to engage their lives, liberties, to maintain
these pleasing devotions; this the Lord saw, then (and we may see now) to be an
horrible thing, vid. Ier. 5. ult. An horrible thing, etc. shall I not visit
says God for these things, etc. Yes, doubtless in this very way that he now
goes in, to let in the robbers and spoilers, and tells what they shall do, v.
17. eat up thy harvest, thy flocks and herds, etc.

More particularly, the despising of Gods word and Word despising sins.
dared the Lord to spoil them. David could do no less in point of honor, 2 Samuel 10. 4.
then pour out the fury of his anger and strength of battle upon the
Ammonites, 2 Chr. 36. 16.
when his gracious message and messengers were so shamefully entreated; and
what remedy but ruin to that people that shall deal thus with their God? This
spoiled al, and brought in the final plunder upon that state 2 Chronicles. 36. 16.
and so doubtless it will upon ours, if not prevented; when a people shall so
far under-value the word and Ministers, that either they are not heard at all,
or (which comes all to one) for mere coustome, the auditories either thin or
thronged, according as times and persons are pleased; when we shall make a mere
thorow-fare of divine ordinances, and take them in the way to our profits and
pleasures, Feasts and Fairs, as the Lord intimates with complaint, Es. 33. 31,
32. when men shall come with the same affections to the Temple as to a tavern,
call for what they please, and like naught but what they call for! Thus did
these, as this Prophet complains, Es. 30. 9, 10, 11. Prophecy to us pleasing
things: which when the good Prophets could not in conscience do, but told them
of their sour grapes and bitter clusters, they flung these reports into their
faces with indignation, and added this above all, to thrust them into corners,
v. 20. it was time for the Lord to pay them in their own coin, Iumentorum est
eos calce ^orsuque app^tere, a quibus eorum vulnera curanda contra^^antur. A^g.
Ep. 10.
and deal with them as they dealt with his servants, and let them see how good
it was to be snared in holes, and prison houses, v. 22. how they liked bolts
and chains, slanders and scoffs; this had they done to men of the most noted
ability and fidelity in Gods work, and this such a provoking and spoiling sin,
that God reads their doom in the Prophets curse, Ier. 18. 20, 21, 22. the very
judgment in the text.

Self-deceiving sins.
so God would value their service at their own rate; they could talk of
thousands of Rams, and ten thousand rivers of oil, but if God had took them at
their word, and told them that he required these things at their hands, he
should have been charged as an hard Task-master, imposing impossible services:
But when (in stead of these vain thoughts, which he could not think of with
patience, Ier. 4. 14.) he requires real duties, Micah 6. 8.
to do justly, love mercy, and walk lowly with their God, here they started off
like broken bows drawn beyond their strength; their fastings and prayers,
services and sacrifices, were such noisome formalties, that the Lord starts off
from them as so many dead and rotten carcasses, that had neither life nor soul
in them, professes his loathing detestation, Es. 1. from 12. to 21. And whereas
against this they pleaded, that God did them not right, in not regarding and
rewarding his own ordinances, Es. 58. 4. he there turns them inside outside
to the world, and lets them know, they were not the services he disavowed, but
the hypocritical and superstitious additions, the formal performances, for
which he threatens not only to loath them, but his own sanctuary which was
polluted by them, Ier. 7. 12. 14. and resolves to destroy all their wise
contrivances, whereby they deceived themselves, abused the world, and provoked
him to wrath, Esai. 29. 14. Mark what a plundering youth, what a merciless
robber and spoiler he sends in upon them, for this very sin, Esaias 10. 5. O
Assyria, the rod of my fury, I will send them against an hypocritical nation,
a people of my wrath.

Lastly, that which sealed up the Ephah, was their Apostasy, God-deser^ing
and from the pretended heats of their first love; A sin so often mentioned
and threatened, that the Prophets were as weary of speakiug, as the people of
hearing Gods complaints in this case, therefore the Lord in pity to his
Prophets, and displeasure to this people, gives them a discharge, either of
praying for them, Ierem. 14. 10, 11. or preaching to them, Hos. 4. 17. Let them
alone, says God, (q. d.) they are joined to their idols, wedded to their
ways, and it is in vain to forbid the bains between them and their new-chosen
deities; let them take their course, I shall reckon with them once for all. The
thing that grieved him, was their forwardness to strike Covenants, and their
readiness to break them. In the times of their reforming Magistrates, (when
Piety was in fashion at Court) then they will wade through blood to get to the
Temple, their canceled covenants shall be renewed, and new covenants sealed and
subscribed, yea heaven and earth shall be called to witness, what fast friends
they were to God and their guides; hands, and seals, and oaths, and all that
could be said and done to make sure work, and all this lasted very hot, (how
long?) for a slaying time, whilst the sword was at their throats, the
pestilence in their houses, the famine in the fields, so long, and not much
longer, vide Psalm. 87. 34, 35. When he slew them, they sought him, etc. This
provoked the Lord exceedingly, as it does a workman to have his work seem to
fadge, and then to fail him; or a suitor to have his beloved accept of a ring,
and break a piece of gold, and then to deceive trust; this gauls worse then if
there had been a churlish refusal at the first profer. The first and sudden
dislike of a man is imputed to strangeness, but a dislike upon knowledge
charges the party repudiated with unworthiness; in this case, all kinds of
revolts are grievous, but those that are reiterated are insufferable. So to
know Gods Name, Psalm. 9. 10.
and not to trust him, is a deserting with a witness, which he takes so
unkindly, that if the whole flaming Army of his wrath can express the fury of
his anger and jealousy, the provoking party in this case must look for it. It
was for this that the Lord discovers so much passion by his Prophets, and tells
them, their desolation should be so great, that other Nations should raise the
wonder, and say. Wherefore has the Lord done thus, to this great City? Why,
what had he done? vide Ier. 22. 7. Prepared destroyers (not weaponlesse, but)
well armed, able and resolved, not only to abridge them of their fuel, (which
we now find to be a great strait) but to make fuiell of their farest houses,
and then to give satisfying reason for what was done, v^^. Because they have
forsaken the Covenant of the Lord their God. Jer. 22. 7. 8 9.


To these might be added many more, but these enough to let us know that when
God gives up a people to robbing and spoiling, they would but look inwards, and
if they find not these sins making way for this judgment under which we
suffer, let them argue the case with the Judge of all the world, and plead with
him, that he works not by president; but if they find these fore-running
sins, and this judgment (of robbing, and spoiling) following at the heels of
them, they need no more wonder in this case, then to see the Sun rising in the
East, and putting forward like a Giant in his wonted course, Quid miramur si
paria perpetimur qu^ paria perpetram us? Bern. de consid. lib. 2.
until he sets in the West, which being ordinary, is not ordinarily regarded:
But those amongst us that are wise, and would be glad to know (what is a clock
by our Dial) how our time goes, it is fitting they should observe it, and to
this duty we are called in the last place, being now come to the consideration
required, partly by way of a serious acclamation in the scope of the Text and
preface, partly by a severe objurgation, charging it as the great delinquency
in Jacob and Israel, who though he were set upon by robbers, and spoilers, yet
he was not gagged: yea they came not like thieves in the night, preventing all
complaints and succors, but coming with such warning as they did, the wonder
is, that God hears not of them either by outcries, or at least by sighs and
groans; this moves the Lord by his Prophet here, to express himself with this
wonder in the preface, and complaint in the closure of the words, Yet he knew
it not, yet he laid it not to heart.

And was not this strange? to be robbed, and spoiled, and not to know it? Hos.
7. ^.
The Prophet (Hos. 7. 9.) thought it strange, That gray hairs should be here
and there upon them, and ^hey not know it; that there should be any symptoms,
or evidences of a declining State, and they not foresee it, but to have the
death-stroaks, and tokens of Gods wrath upon them, and not to mind it; to be
fired round about and scorcht, and to be insensible of all this? If there were
any thing left of the man, or the beast, in this people, it could not be but
they must feel it as beasts, and know it as men; and doubtless so they did,
the Prophet Hos. 5. 13. Hos. 5. 13.
bears them witness they did, Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah saw his
sin. They did so, but how? confusedly they did, but composedly they did not;
they knew what ayled them well enough, what their sin was, and what their
suffering was, in sensu diviso, but to put these together, in sensu composito,
as the cause and effect, and to lay them so to heart as God required, this they
did not.

And this sealed up their misery, and lays them before us, as the sad
patterns, and presidents of Gods wrath upon a brutish people, that only knows
he is angry, but not why; This he takes to heart, because they did not, and
gives us to know, that

God takes it ill, 3. Doctrine.
when sins and sufferings are not rightly put together, and his meaning known.

Briefly, these things were written for our admonition; so much the Prophet
implies in the preface, where he lifts up his voice to this purpose, that
posterity may hear him, verse 23. Who will hearken and hear for the time to
come? Or if that reaches not home to us, the Apostle takes it from him, and
stretches it even to our days, and beyond, 1 Cor. 10. 6, 10. Now these things
were our ensamples, and are written for our instruction and admonition, upon
whom the ends of the world are come: So that unless we mean to be made pillars
of salt, to season succeeding generations, unless we mean to be made examples
to others, let us take examples by others, and be made wise at the best hand,
and cheapest rate we can; to this purpose give me leave to put home the serious
consideration of these things premised, and lay them to heart, as a gracious
duty which the Lord calls for at our hands, The duty of laying to heart opened
in five Acts. viz.
and has set apart this day to put forth the acts of it, being indeed such a
work of the day, as will employ all the powers and faculties of the soul, and
is to be expressed in some especial acts, which I shall briefly open to you, for
the clearing of the truth, and so fasten it upon your hearts by way of
application: As first it implies,

An act of the Judgment, An Act of the j^dgement.
commonly called the minding of a thing, when the understanding is seen in its
office, to weigh things aright in the balance of the Sanctuary, (...). Pro.
^4. 15.
and judges of them not according to appearance, but with righteous judgment,
lays the sin in one scale, and the judgment in another, and never gives over
until it has the just weight of what God has done, and we have suffered.
Thus David, that at first had no more leisure but to cast his sin into the
scale in the gross, 2 Samuel 12. 13. I have sinned, comes at better leisure to
weigh it more distinctly, Psalm. 51. 3. I know mine iniquity, etc. (q. d.) now I
know what I have done, and what I deserve to suffer. This the Scripture calls
The returning of a man to himself, as Christ expresses it in the case of the
prodigal, that had lost himself, by not considering his ways in his heart,
Luke 15. 17.
did at length return to himself. No doubt but before his return he knew what
his folly was, and felt his misery, and hunger, (and so did the swine he fed)
but when he laid these together, and considered what his father was, and minded
his return, then was he uncharm'd from his swinish disposition, changed in the
renewing of his mind; Romans ^2. 3.
and he that is brought to this, may be said, to lay things to heart.

2. An ^ct of the will, which is the first chosen principle, (My son give me
thy heart) and the first choosing principle, An Act of the will.
whereby we choose what to do, or suffer in a strait, commonly called, a
resolution upon a debate, when in evils we choose the least, and in good
things the best. Thus David in the Choice of three evils of penalty, chooses
the least; and Paul in a strait between two good things, chooses the best,
(...). Epci^ar apud st^b. c. 1 Jer. 8 8. 9.
and in this deliberation, may be said to lay it to heart: According to the
Wisemans advise, (Prove. 4. 25, 26.) after the pondering of our paths, to look
upon the right way, and pitch there. Thus did not these do, and therefore were
rather wilful then wife; as the Lord upbraids them by the brute creatures.
Jer. 8. 6. 8.
They stand not to deliberate whether they were best sin on and suffer, or
return and be saved, but there they lie like so many blocks, under a two-handed
Saw, (the robbers, and spoilers) if God will snatch them like so many
firebrarnds out of the fire, well and good; if not, there they lie ready to be
sawen and cleft out for the fire, smoke and smother out in a careless neglect:
Contrary to this, is a fair warning willingly chosen; and resolved on, to flee
from the wrath to come.

An Act of the affections.
An act of the affections, as sorrow, grief, care, etc. whereby sad and
passionate men are said to lay things to heart, as we find it expressed to the
life, in Zach. 12. 10, 11, 12. where they take themselves apart, every family
apart, and person apart, and look upon him whom they had pierced, as one that
had little deserved this cruelty at their hands, and fix their eyes upon that
sad spectacle of their injustice; and at the sight of this they pour out their
tears and passions, as the parent that weeps for his own child, or as he that
is in bitterness for his firstborn.

An Act of the conscience.
An act of the conscience, which we commonly call the pricking of the heart,
when the judgment rightly enlightened, reflects upon it self, and upon cle^^
evidence of the fact, takes Gods part against it self, accuses, judges,
condemns, and executes sentence upon it self, smites upon the thigh: As God
observes it in Ephraims case, when he heard him complaining of his own foul
misdemeanors; Jer. 31. 18, 15.
Ah, I was an untamed heifer, therefore ashamed and confounded to think of his
youthful miscariages. This the Lord takes as laying his case to heart, and
finding what carfulness it wrought in him, what clearing of his God, and
condemning of himself; what indignation, what fear, what vehement desire, yea
what zeal, and what revenge, the Lord pronounces him clear in this matter, and
gives in his discharge, and absolution in the next words; No longer a beast
now, but his dear son, and pleasant child, ver. 20. So that when the soul is
brought to this temper, that the sin works upon the conscience, more then the
suffering does upon the outward man, and can freely acquit God in his righteous
proceedings, as Ezra did, in the behalf of this people, that after all that
these robbers, and spoilers had done to them could say, verse 13. After all
that is come upon us for our evil deeds, Ezra 9. 13.
and our great trespass; Thou O God, have punished us less then our sins
deserve; so when our conscience is rightly informed, by laying our sin and
sufferings together, that God has done us nothing but right; and in weighing
the case do so determine it, that passion gets not the upper hand of our
reason, to say, O how severe has God been! But, O how rude and ignorant was I,
and in that point a beast! Psalm. 73. When judgment is thus brought to victory,
that Gods proceedings are clearly discerned, and our deserts faithfully
acknowledged, and the right use made of all, then are these things rightly laid
to heart.

5. An act of the memory, whereby we recall things An A^t of the memory.
and well-nigh lost, in the tumults and confusions or dangers and fears, (which
are no friends to the memory) but when we can return into our fixed thoughts
without any longer roving and wandering, and gather them close together to make
a good result of them, then the heart takes fire, as David expresses, Psalm. 39.
3. He was fain to bring many scattered and confused thoughts together, before
he could work the right consideration of his case upon his heart; As he that
fetches fire from the Sun with a burning-glasse, gathers the scattered beams
into a narrow compass, and there must hold them fixed, before the matter will
take fire; so there must be good skill and pains taken to recollect mercies of
old on Gods part, and as many forgotten injuries on our parts, and when these
are brought together by a faithful act of the memory, then the duty works
kindly: This David calls the examining our heart upon our beds, Psalm. 4. 4. the
Prophet Zeph. 2. 12. Zach. 2. 12. (...)
calls sifting and searching over and again, (so the words would be read)
Excutite vos, iterumque excutite; Let us sift and search our ways, says
Jeremy, Lam. 3. 40. A duty which the Lord seriously looks for of all those that
enter covenant with him of better obedidence, and promises that he will bestow
it upon his own, one of the first graces he gives in the new covenant, as we
find Ezekiel. 36. 31. Then shall you remember your own evil ways, and doings,
that were not good, etc. And loath your selves in your own eyes for all your
iniquities, etc. Lay these things together, and we may be said to lay them to
heart, more then this God requires not, and less will not serve the turn.
Therefore charges home the neglect of this as one of the main causes why he
proceeds on in the severity of his purposes, as we find, Ier. 12. 12. The
spoilers are come in and made the Land desolate, he grants that the Land
mourns, and yet concludes they laid it not to heart. v. 11.

Briefly therefore let this be my warrant from God to charge home this duty,
Use. For Trial.
as ever we look to be (...) of robbers and spoilers; or see an end of the fury
of his anger which is not yet turned away, Es, 10 ult.
but his hand stretched out still; Surely then we may know by that sad token the
duty is not yet done which the Lord will have done by us before he has done
with us; J^r. 12. 11.
he grants the Land may mourn to him, and yet no man lay it to heart; so that
there is something more to be done then has been done yet, which we shall do
well to enquire after; and to that purpose give leave to your unworthy
reme^brancer in Gods name to demand, Is it done? or is it not done? lay your
hands on your hearts, and feel and answer whether these sins premised; and
this duty required have been laid to heart, do you know what God has done and
our land has suffered since this great breach has let in the robbers and
spoilers upon us? Demand.


What a strange question (you will say) is this to be put to knowing men? Reply.
are the heads of our tribes such strangers in Israel, as not to hear and know
that which makes the ears and hearts of our State to glow and tingle? do not
they know what multitudes of men and sums of money have been lavisht and lost
amongst robbers and spoilers? what hopeful plants of our Gentry, and Nobility
too, have been either cankred or cropped off in the bud? what deadly fewds are
daily increased betwixt family and family, as if lineage and language were to be
confounded at once? Can other Nations ring of this, and ours not know it? Can
the threats of the sons of violence and the cries of the oppressed scatter the
noise of this like so much tempest and thunder, and we not hear of it?

True, Answ.
this is to hear of it by the ear, (and perhaps at an uncertain sound) as many
do that having taken reports upon trust, make it matter of discourse, others
of gain, and some make it matter of wit and sport, as if fools were seasonab^^
in a Tragedy, and might have leave to throw darts, Prove. 26. 19.
and say, Am I not in sport? Shall I praise them that do this, or those
amongst us that like and suffer this? I praise you not. Are National robberies
such light matters, that National Mercuries may have leave to jest upon them?
It was not the Apostles mind, but the Corinthians Levity, 2 Co^. 11. 19.
to suffer fools gladly. It satisfies not to say, that the Court set the
kingdom or city on work; and that the fool must be answered according to his
folly; Prove. 26. 5.
It were safer far to let that folly rest in the bosom where it first began,
and not to suffer those (that should be wiser) to fight with the Devil at his
own weapons, when doubtless he will have the ods and the last blow: I hope a
word in this will be enough to the wise that know this is not the way to lay
these things to the heart, by tickling the ear with them; nay, grant we heard
these things with the right ear, yet is not that enough to work home this duty,
for the ear may hear more then the eye sees, and what the eye sees not (we say)
the heart rues not.

Yea, Reply. Plus valet oculatus Test is quam auriti december.
but some of us (you may say) are more then ear witnesses of these things, we
have seen with our eyes enough to make our heartsake, we have seen whole Troops
and Regiments of as brave and daring men as the earth bears any (such as would
have made our common adversary tremble to see their courage (or fury rather)
acted in other kingdoms;) These have we seen to butcher each other in their
own countries, soyling their land with their own blood, as if they meant to
make a plentiful harvest for the great destroyer, we have seen goodly
Lordships plundered and fired upon no greater quarrel, but because their
owners could not defend them; Yea, we have seen whole towns (upon the like
quarrel) stormed and surprised and fired, because the Inhabitants durst not,
or could not be at cost and charges to keep themselves safe within their own
walls, these are things we have not taken upon bare report, but our eyes (the
trustiest sense of all the rest) have seen these things and can speak them
feelingly; as those that have heard with our ears, and our eyes have seen them.

It may be so too, Answ.
and yet for all this these things may not be laid to the heart; it is true
indeed, the seeing eye and hearing ear are both the gift of the Lord, Prove.
20. 12. but this implies what is said else where, that there is an eye that
sees not, and ear that hears not, and yet both wide open, and such as can take
in sounds and sights very readily; and what if there should be such amongst us
too, that have heard, seen as much as can be spoken or heard, and are hereby
ennbled to write stories, and furnish tables with the sad relations of these
things? O Sirs, as eating is not health, and drinking is not strength, but the
means to procure both, so the hearing and seeing of these things is not
properly the laying of them to heart, but the way and means, with Gods
blessing, to do it; the Priest and Levite that past by the wounded traveller
in the Gospel, may be supposed not only to see the bleeding spectacle, but to
hear his languishing groans, but it was the good Samaritan that properly laid
his case to heart, that laid him upon his beast, poured oil and wine into his
wounds, and left him not before some hopes of recovery.

And has not our State done this too as far as in them lies? Reply.
have not they took full information of our common calamities? sat out many a
sad day and night, month, and some years, to consult upon these things, and are
able for a need to give the world an account from what quarters this dreadful
storm was first blown in upon us; what unhappy constellations and conjunctions
are ghest to be the second causes, what damage it has done by Sea and Land?
Yea, they can tell what goodly grounds this Land-flood has spoiled, and on the
other side what durty dit^^es it has filled, good for nothing but to breed toads
and Efts: In a word they can guess who have been gainers and losers by this
sorry bargain.

And truly this is worth the knowing, Ans^w.
the blessing of him that dwelt in the bush be their cloud by day and p^llar of
fire by night, Esaias 4. 4.
that their Assemblies may be directed and protected till judgment be brought
to victory. It is good learning to know Gods ways in the whirlewind, the
outgoing of his displeasure in the effects; and happy they that can make good
advantage of them so, but happier they that know them in the right causes: they
are wise that know how and where these sad distractions began, but they are
wiser that know where they will end, and put forth all within them to be
serviceable in that work. It is good that these things be laid to the head, and
that there are so many able heads to whom they are now entrusted; But when they
are brought from the heads to the hearts of our State, then God has his end,
and if his ends and ours meet, we shall be happy for all this; though this be
the day of Jacobs troubles, Jer. 14. 8.
yet the hope of Israel, and Savior thereof in the time of trouble, will
remember Jacob and all his troubles.

To this purpose I am to bespeak you all (Honorable and beloved) according to
the several ranks and files wherein you stand, Use. 2. Direction.
to express and improve some acts of this duty required, that the Lord may see
and say there is many an hearty and affectionate soul amongst us, willing to
give him a meeting, as Jacob did, and not let him go without a blessing; to
this purpose let me but briefly name When these things are laid to heart.
1, when it is done; 2. how it may be done; 3. what if it be not; 4. what if it
be; and I shall have done for my part, and pray that the Lord would do his and
yours for you, and so conclude.

A Sympathy.
1. a sympathy; that we can hear of these afflictions of Joseph as if they were
our own, though for the present most of us are under safe roofs, many of us
under our own, and as yet enjoy as much of our former satisfactions in wives
and children; Families and goods, etc. as the course of these times can
lawfully afford, if we can bring our selves to look upon these as if not
considerable (as Phinehas wife upon her Ichabod) and set our selves as near as
may be in the case of the distressed families in our Kingdom, that are fain to
fast upon other terms then we do, because the robbers and spoilers have taken
away their childrens bread, if we now feeling a little hunger could be more
pincht with the thought of theirs, or beholding the sad countenances of each
other, could bewail the rufull sight of theirs sitting in sad or forlorn
postures, either in their own houses or (which comes all to one) under the dark
roof of hungry and dismal prisons; Psalm, 119. 119, 120.
O it were a brave spirit indeed that could in this case un-Lord or un-Knight
himself in his heart for a while, David though not of that crew was affected.
as good Nehemiah did, who had wine and oil enough to make a glad heart and
smooth countenauce, yea and (that which is more then the best He amongst us can
boast of for the present) he had the Kings favor to maintain and increase
this; yet as if all this were nothing, Ira securae quoquae borrenda m^nti.
all was black and dark with him whilst the sepulchers of his fathers lay
wast; surely it would become us well to look upon our land as a Golgotha rather
then Bethel, of sepulchers rather then houses, a place that may be called after
the na^ue of Isaacs wels, Genesis 2. 6.
Esek and Sitnah, strife and hatred, where there has been great pains taken to
dig and keep open the fountain of Justice, Soli filii irae iram non sentiunt,
nec tristantur in tristibus Bern. Ep 256.
and as much strife and hatred expressed to trouble the waters; if there were no
more but this, it might make our hearts bleed and symp^thize with our State.
This were enough, to see this representative body of our State, the glory of
our Nation, to be accounted as a Traitor with the head upon the block, and the
hand of many a bloody executioner lifted up to part the head from the body:
What living member can choose but sympathize in this case, and by fear and
trembling show, he lays it to heart?

When we can sentence our selves, A self-^udging.
to have as deep a to our Sovereign, I have been so to his Sovereign, Lord of
lords, and King of Kings, one that has made me, not his creature only, but
his favorite, doubled many a blessing upon me, belonging both to life and
godliness; and so much mercy streaming from the fountain of grace, might break
my heart if it were not Adamant: They that can say, and do this, feelingly and
faithfully, may be said to lay this to heart.

How to do this.
Briefly thus, by putting forth, and stirring up some acts of natural
affection, which the Lord commands, Consider what ours suffer.
and commends in his own, and charges the contrary as an heathenish vice: Could
we to this purpose consider but these two things, viz. 1. How miserable our
friends have been made; and 2. that our false and uneven reckonings with our
God have made them so: When we hear of such a County, or Town, once the
pleasing seat of our habitation, now made a Stage of watres, or cage of unclean
birds, where the Ziim, Si ^rateres, compater^ fratri pro te patienti; si
membrum, commorere capiti pro te ^^orienti^si ^on, doles, luge^, pla^gis;
deliras, desipis, belluam sapis. Ber. in Ps. 90.
Iim, and wild Satyrs play; When some of us may say, There have I left my
flock, whereof I was once a Minister, or my family, whereof I was once a
Master, (not as the Estridge does her eggs in the sand, but) as the mourning
Turtle, scared from her nest and mate, sits groaning at a distance, to see or
hear some bird, or beast of prey, to seize upon the nest and young, and spoil
all. If this be not the ^ad case of some of us, it is doubtless of many in our
Kingdom, and of some very near in relation to us, and if we could but think,
what prayers and tears they have, and do put up for us, and others as yet in
safety, that we may be kept from their condition, our hearts would melt into
tears to do as much for them. And this is a means to set this passion a work.

Consid.
to see his fellow bleed under correction, for the same fault, wherein he knows
himself to be (not an accessory only, Quid tam perditi luctus, etc. quid
amentius quam in malis esse, etc. lugent cuncta; tu laetus es, etc. Salvian. de
provid. lib. 6. c. 12.
but) a principal agent. Doubtless there are none of those wasting sins
formerly mentioned, whereof this Congregation can freely wash their hands; and
shall the Lord be visiting our sins upon our country, and kindred, fire our
Nation round about, and we not lay it to heart? Cursed be that opinion of the
Antinomists; whoever either maintains it in his thoughts, or takes occasion to
start it in so unseasonable a time, is doubtless a great factour for hell, and
puts poison into our wounds, Da^^. 10. 2. 3.
that they may not heal; Are they greater, or better then our father Jacob?
Eccles. 9. 8.
It is recorded of him, that he wept, Neh. 1. 4.
and made supplication; doubtless then his own and others sins were laid to
heart, Cap. 2. 2.
Hos. 12. And if they think God sees not any iniquity in his own, for which he
is angry with them, they may do well to read over this Text once more, and I
should think that if there were not one more besides this in the Scriptures,
this alone were enough to let them know that he has just cause to be angry,
not only with the sins, but even the persons, and prayers of his people, and
when he is so, takes it very ill, if they take it not to heart: A truth so
clear, that I am persuaded, there are few or none amongst us Antinomians in
judgment, and open profession; but certainly, every remorselesse, careless
sinner amongst us is such an one in his practice; Est. 4. 14. (...).
and to such as these I have no more to say but this, as Mordecai to Esther,
And do you think to escape better then the rest of the Kings loyal subjects?
Have you any Charter to secure you, Menand. apud Plut.
and yours from the common calamities? and to ensure you, that neither you, nor
yours have any sins to be prayed out of the sealed Ephah? nor any hand in
raising this storm? Well sirs, Jonah 1.
do not venture to sleep under hatches, whilst others are sweating, and
tugging to get the vessel to shore; It will be in vain for us to work at the
pump, if such as these stop not the leaks, and all of us with one heart and
mind, Quum a^^orum peccata Deus in aliis videtur ulcisci, ostenditur hoc
quanta sit connexio universitatis in populo, tanquam unius corporis membra sunt
universi. Aug. in Josh. quast. 8.
confess and bewail our guilt and interest in these common calamities. I
beseech ye therefore; without any more ado, as many of us as mean well to our
own souls, and love our Nation, let us yield up our selves to justice, and
accept of this punishment; For if our uncircumcised hearts relent not, to think
what others suffer, and what we have contributed to their sufferings, we have
not reached the main duty in the Text, for which the dreadful spectacle of Gods
anger is set up, even like a pillar of fire, either to lead us (if it may be)
to repentance, never to be repented of; or if that may not be, it will make us
examples to posterity, and it will be written of us, as of these, That the
robbers and spoilers were sent amongst them, as the avengers of the quarrel of
the Covenant: but there were a generation amongst them, would not believe that
God had any such quarrel against them; yea they themselves were some of them
scorcht with the flames, yet they gave not glory to God, by acknowledging, and
bewailing the guilt, and accepting the punishment; therefore the Lord poured
upon them the fury of his anger, and the strength of battle, etc.

What if not?
what if we cannot do this? it is not every man's gift, to put the finger in the
eye for every sin, or to have tears at the fingers end; the task is too harsh
for some men's complexions, Wipe ^hy mouth, (if not thine eyes) and read, vid.
and therefore the Physicians of Church, and State may do well to indulge to
some men's tempers, that think this remedy as harsh as the disease; as good (say
they) have our houses afire about us, 1 Samuel 4. 3, 4.
as our consciences within us; 2 Samuel 11. 11.
and it is pity to over-presse soul and body at once; Esaias 5. 11, 14. and 22.
12. 14.
if God take away our states, we have the less to reckon for, and there is an
end of their care.

Say ye so? but what if God will not have it so? he expects the work he is now
about should work a carfulness in you, and a clearing of your selves: but the
truth is, it is with many of us, as with Bankrupts, (that had rather be in the
Counter then their Counting-houses) So we, as soon enter into hell as into our
hearts, to examine what is amiss there, therefore are resolved to let it
alone, until God come to reckon once for all: But this will be a sad
reckoning, and so we shall see and say, if we come to be judged of the Lord,
and condemned with the world at once; it will be a terrible plea, when God
shall charge it upon any of us, that he spared our lives and liberties, bodies,
and goods on purpose that we should make use of these forfeited mercies, for
his glory, and the public good, that we should run into the gap upon these
days of public humiliation, and upon our bended knees, say as Ezra 9. 8, 9,
10. that we should bring forth that which has escaped the fire, and give it up
to his disposing, not reserving any thing of our selves, which he would have us
deny for his sake. The misery of our times has taught us in our common
discourse to say, We can call nothing our own; Let us learn to speak this in
good earnest.

Nay then (will some say) let him take our lives also, we shall never live
merry day more, if we come to yoke our selves to the strict courses of
covenanting, and reforming, as good be robbed, and spoiled by our enemies, as be
hampered, and fettered by such precise, and religions yoaks as are likely to be
laid upon us, which neither we, nor our forefathers were able to bear.

To which I answer; first, Better so, then be suffered to run wild and loose
into hell. But secondly, there is no such matter intended, this is the cavil
only of the sons of Beliall, that had rather take sanctuary at Rome, then in a
reformed Church: Assuredly God intends no bands for us, Amantibus facile,
amentibus difficile. Ambr. in locu^.
but what will be golden, and glorious, even the easy yoke of Christ, hard to
none that have their sound minds: It was a yoke to the young Prodigal, that
his portion should be in his fathers keeping, but by that time it fell out of
his own into the Harlots keeping, and nothing left of it to keep him, he was
brought to think, that the yoke of his fathers servants was far better then his
miserable freedom: So doubtless, by that time our Nation finds (as it is now
in a fair way for it) what it is to waste the public stock in riotous living,
and come at length to be beneath the hopes of borrowing, and no remedy but we
must hire out our selves to those that may feed us with husks; it is likely we
may be brought at length to think our fathers house and home worth looking
after, where it is likely he will provide something beyond the bashful modesty
of those that think our former commons good enough if they may be got again;
but if the Lord provide better, and we thrust off our mercy with a pretended
humility, it is possible we may meet with that check which Ahaz had for his
modesty, when it was construed infidelity and impiety, Es. 7. 8. 9, 10.

What if we do?
if the Lord warning us by a burning shame, has brought us to that temper,
that it appears to him and the world, that his proceedings are laid to heart;
there is more comfort belongs to such, then the heart is able to bear, without
breaking forth into tears of joy. As it was with Joseph and his brethren, by
that time he hears them lay the fact to heart, Genesis 42. 21.
and say, Verily we are guilty, etc. he can hold no longer, but must make known
he was a brother; So by that time the Lord Jesus hears this Church of ours,
(which doubtless is as dear to him, as any in the Christian world) when he is
once satisfied, Esaias 16. 5.
that we have laid the quarrel of his Covenant to heart, Esaias 21. 14, 15
that we express it in our whole course, Heb. 2. 11.
1 mending our old ways, 2 resolving upon better, Acts 9.
3 bewailing what is done, 4 taking the Lords part and quarrel against our
selves, certainly he can, and will hold no longer from expressing as much
mercy, as can be expected from the Captain of our salvation, that is
consecrated to our sufferings, that he might be as merciful, as he is
powerful and mighty to save. It is as much as ever he can do to hold his hands
from striking, and his voice from crying outright against those that are
mounted (as Saul was) with Commissions, to make havoc of the Church; These
rods of his fury shall be made passively such, by that time they have done his
work.

In the mean time, he cannot hold, neither from whispering in that comfort
which does belong to the reformed number of Israel, even in the next words to
the Text, Cap. 43. 1. Fear not, I am with thee, when thou passest through the
fire, ver. 5. This does he speak home to the Party in our Israel, whose heart
is engaged to be true to him, and right set in the work of humiliation and
reformation. Doubtless, the robbing and spoiling by the sons of violence,
shall but lay us in the way for the good Samaritan; the poor traveller in the
Gospel lost nothing upon the matter but the Priests blessing, (as good lost as
found) by that time he was once revived and recovered, he knew his friends from
his foes, and so I hope shall we, when the Lord Jesus has bound up our
bleeding wounds, and shows himself good in his office to that purpose, Esai.
61. 1, 2, 3. Then shall we be able to say, It was good for us, that we have
pledged our German Brethren in that cup which has gone round in most of the
reformed parts of Christendom, whereof if we had not tasted, we might have
questioned the Fatherly course and ^are of reclaiming his wanton children,
whereof we have now a pledge, and withal an encouragement the Prophet Hos.
gives in this case, Cap. 6. 2. 3. After two days he will revive us, etc. Then
shall we know, if we proceed on to know the Lord, that his going forth is
prepared as the morning, and he will come as the former and latter rain upon
the earth.

FINIS.

