TWO SPEECHES; The One spoken by Sir Audley Mervin, SPEAKER Of the Honorable
House of Commons, Upon the Reception and Return of JAMES, Duke of ORMOND,
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, July 27. 1662.

The Other, At his Graces Entrance into the Castle of Dublin, By Mr. NORRIS
IEPHSON.

Published by Authority.

LONDON: Printed for Samuel Speed, at the Rainbow in Fleet Street, near the
Inner Temple-Gate. 1662.

Sir AUDLEY MERVIN'S SPEECH.
May it please your Grace:
IT was truly said, In Numero, Pondere, and Mensura creavit Deus Omnia. His
Majesty, Gods Vicegerent, intending a new Creation to this poor Kingdom (for
who knows not the Chaos we have been ^^^olved in:) has assembled these
honorable Persons that now attend your Grace, in Numero, representing the
Commons of this Kingdom; in Pondere, qualified with Judgment and Experience
to treat and advise about the weighty Affairs thereof; in Mensura, according to
their Mite, offering to his Majesty Measure pressed down, and running over. This
Assembly has Commanded me, (O that I could wave this word Command, my own
Inclination leading me to the ready performance of this Duty! but I must not) I
have received their Command, a strict one; they have left me no Discretionary
Latitude; they have entrusted me with a rich Jewel to present your Grace, and
only recommended the modelling the Case of it unto me: and this under a
Limitation too; for they know that Logic sits at the Forge and Hammer,
Rhetoric at the File and Polishing: and this in favor of the Laws, they have
forbid me; knowing I ought not to practice in that Mystery wherein I have not
served out my time. And though this be Vna, it is not Vnica ratio; for Truth,
and such a Truth as must be stamped by the Authority of the House, they judge
according to the Rules of Heraldry, it must be emblazoned in a plain Coat.
Next, Sir, the House in this Address follows not the track of common
Principles; for that Beauty of the Universe we behold, arises out of jarring
Elements: Discors Concordia foetibus apt^ est; the most ravishing Harmony is
composed of Discords. But when this House raises a Structure, the noise of a
Hammer must not be heard in the Building: when they set a Lesson, it must be
perfected out of unisons. Nemine contradicente, is the Key for our Descants;
and by a Nemine contradicente, I am commanded this Day to publish to your
Grace, a Dicite Io Paean, and Io bis dicite Paean.

Welcome, welcome, welcome, great Duke, is the Anthem appointed by the House of
Commons, for this great Festival: This is Multum in parvo; and according to
that Rule, Veritatis syllabas oportet esse breves: This is above the Task of a
single Tongue; Non mihi si centum Linguas, centum Oraque -- No, so many Faces
as attend your Grace, are the Volumes in which this Record of Welcome is
enrolled: Flesh must be the Parchment, and Blood the Rubric to Register this
Day; without Errata, or any Index Expurgatorius.

Our Prayers were, You might come; our Enquiries were, When will He come? our
Joys must be complete to welcome you, now you are come. The Laconism of
Caesar's Letter I have heard admired; who wrote, Veni, Vidi, Vici: but, Sir,
you may write much shorter, and much truer, Vici, only: for so forcible an
Operation has your Virtues, that many worthy Persons this Day, of whom you
could not write either Veni or Vidi, have entertained an honorable Contest,
who should first Resign the Devotion of their Services to your Commands. So
that I may say, Hoc, Coelo commune tibi est, Dux magne, Deisque
Distantem influxa posse ferire tuo.


I remember I thrice repeated your Graces Welcome: there is more of Logic then
Rhetoric in it; for there are three Estates concerned in it: The Lords
Spiritual have welcomed you to the Bosom of the Church: the Lords Temporal
have welcomed you into the bed of Honor: the Commons do welcome you into the
Recesses of their Hearts, perfumed with Loyalty to his Majesty, and with
submissive Affection to your Person. What hinders then, but that it be Enacted.
But here I want expression, when I consider the divided Passions of our
Sovereign in giving the Royal Assent. May it please your Majesty, you must
either deny your Self, or deny us; and you have rather denied your Self, then
you would deny us: you are contented (though under some Impatience) to want his
Grace, rather then we should want him under Despair. Then since we have the
Royal Assent, let your Graces Welcome be Enacted, not by a temporary Act, but
to continue to us and our Posterity. But what a crowd of Ingredients compound
the present Consistencie of our Joys! and even these have their just
advantages. The Sun breaking forth from an imprisoning cloud, returns with a
coveted light; and we are taught many times to inhanse the value of former
Enjoyments by their absence: this weakness of our Judgment, being recompensed
with an improvement of our Affection. Thus when we consider you exiled from
whatsoever might have yielded you a Sublunary satisfaction; when we consider
you divorced from your Lady, whom Grace and Nature had fitted to transmit your
Name and Honors to future Ages in an Issue like to you both; when we consider
you ravished from those large Hereditary Territories conveyed through the
Channels of ancient, pure and noble Blood; and not only thus divorced from
Rachel, but espoused to Leah, to a blear-eyed Condition; and for what Crimes?
your Virtues were your Crimes: this is the imprisoning Cloud. But now to behold
you breaking forth with Rays, Rays reflected from the Solar Aspect of his
Majesty; Rays that awaken and call up the sleeping Virtue in the Roots of the
several Interests in this Kingdom; Rays that gild the Church, Rays that we
doubt not but will segregare Heterogenea, burn up Schisms, Heresies; and
congregare Homogenea, wed Doctrine and Discipline: Rays that warm the Civil
Government; Rays not contracted to the Cedars of Lebanon, but proportionably
influencing the lowest Shrubs. What fitter Return for such general benefits,
then the general Acknowledgement of all the Commons in this Kingdom?

But Sir, in the Van of Particulars, your Care of that Religion professed in
your Mother Church, opens our Arms, and encircles you in Embraces as fast and
durable as those with which you embraced it: that Religion of which you use to
say, Illa meos, primum quae me sibi junxit, amores
Abstulit, illa habeat secum servatque Sepulchro.


And had we no other Instances of his Majesty's tenderness to this Kingdom, nor
other Evidences of his religious Soul; this, even this single Act were enough
to confirm our Affections and Loyalty, and to regulate our Imitation. We may
well judge his Majesty expects us to write in a Canonical Hand, by sending us
over such an Orthodox Copy.

Black-mouthed Detraction, thou that feedest upon the Consciences of Kings, and
gnawest the breasts of great Ministers of State, hide thy mouth in the dust;
this day thy Tragedy bears date: behold him placed over us by our Sovereign,
upon whom Temptations in the Wilderness, in foreign parts, after many days
Fasting in a Necessitated condition, left no other impression then their Foam
and Malice. And Ireland, hearken not unto unwarrantable Fears (if any such be:)
behold him, that in his single person dared the French Cardinals power and
rage, in rescuing that Illustrious Prince, of fresh and glorious Memory, the
Duke of Gloucester, from the Snares laid for his tender years. What may thou
not now expect from him, armed with Power, fenced with Laws, and both designed
by the most Religious of Kings!

Nil desperandum tali Duce, and auspice tali. Thus, Sir, you arrived to us
Commissioned from God: for, they that honor him, he will honor them.

Religion has an unseparable Companion, Loyalty: these are like Ruth and
Naomi; Wheresoever thou go, I will go: and God having joined them in your
Grace, I dare not separate them. This was Ariadne's Clue, that led you through
all the Labyrinths and Vicissitudes of your life: this has returned you to us
with the same countenance and complexion, sic oculos, sic ora ferebat, as when
you left us. I wonder at those that wonder at it: for how should the face
alter, when the heart and noble parts retain their primitive healthful temper?
how can Consumptive impressions seize that body, that keeps within it self a
Feast, a Feast (with reverence I say it) dressed by Gods own hand: for your good
Conscience was a continual feast. God preserved you, and reserved you for this
day; therefore your eye must not grow dim, or your natural heat decay.
Impregnable Castles, and Walls of Brass, are but Emblemes of this single Virtue.

The Poets feigned that Jupiter, the better to compass his Rapes, transformed
himself into several Shapes: Fit Taurus, Cygnus, Satyrus, Aurumque ob aniorem.

Let the Fable go; but the Moral holds, That the usurped Powers at Home, and
confederated Powers Abroad, run all those Methamorphoses for the Triumph of a
single Rape upon your Allegiance; and all in vain. If we listen to the
Syrene-Air of their Promises and Invitations, they are Swans: if we consider
the merit and weight of them, they are showers of Gold: they learnt the
plausible Dialect from their Father, All this will I give you, if you will fall
down and worship. If we reflect on their Menaces, and (which is more) their
Practices, they appear in shapes more fierce and antic then Bulls and Satyrs.
But your Grace made good by Practice, what deserves the praise of a Speculative
Fancy: be pleased to attend it; it is the Epistle appointed by the House for
this present day.

Iustum and tenacem propositi virum
Non Civium ardor prava jubentium,
Non vultus instantis Tyranni
Mente quatit solida: -- Si fractus
Illabatur Orbis, impavidum
Ferient ruinae.
Your Grace knew you were a Star of the first Magnitude in the Guards of
Charles his Wain; and those must not be Erratick, but Fixed. Thus you are
Commissioned from the King unto us; and then what shall be said, nay what must
be done to the man whom the King intends to honor?

Now be pleased to give us leave to lay aside these general Topics of Religion
and Loyalty, and to recreate our selves with the Remembrance of those Benefits
we enjoyed under your Graces Government.

It was not still Music, or Bonfires lighted for Triumph, that ushered your
Grace into your Government: No, it was the Warlike noise of Trumpets, sounding
of Drums, neighing of barbed Steeds, and the screeches of the half-slain, that
proclaimed your entrance upon a Stage of Blood. And when you were thus but a
Graduate in your Government, you were put upon terms of Disadvantage and
Necessity to dispute with the Doctors of the Chair: for your Enemies wanted
neither Dolus, or Virtus. And if we, who in a direct line partake of the
prudence of your Counsels, and the success of your Sword, should be silent;
even England, that is but collaterally interested, might, nay would upbraid our
Ingratitude, since the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament there,
pregnant with the sense of your merits, were humble Suitors to his late
Majesty of ever-glorious memory, as an earnest of his farther favors, to
confer on you the Honor and Dignity of a Marquess: and that the rise of that
Honor might survive to be at the instance of the Parliament in England, they
presented your Grace with a Jewel to be worn upon your breast, the better to
direct the esteem of men to the inward Jewel, by the richness of the Case.

Thus we enjoyed, in the heat of War, the shades of Peace, until fatal
Divisions among our selves (and a divided Kingdom cannot stand) rent your Grace
from us: and then, when the Shepherd was smote, how miserably were the Sheep
scattered?

But when your Grace saw this Royal Vessel sinking, you leapt not into the
Longboat, to make provision for your own Safety: no, you made honorable and
secure Articles for those that had imbarqued upon your account.

Many that stand here this day, that owe a lasting Sacrifice to your Piety,
whose age, wants, family-dependencies, or the like, only accompanying your
Grace with their Prayers, under the Lee of those Articles, in the continued
violence of those Storms, embarked themselves and their Fortunes.

And yet when the flagging Sayls carried you unwillingly from this Coast, when
you lost the sight, yet you retained the sense of this Land. Length of time, or
distance of place, could not abate the Intensiveness of your Spirits for this
Kingdoms good. It is said, that upon the dissection of Queen Mary, in order to
her Embalming, Callis was found written on her heart. I shall not dispute the
truth: but sure this is, Ireland at your Graces departure was ultimum moriens,
and upon your return primum vivens.

I shall pass by that Familiar Reception your Grace afforded to the
Commissioners of the General Convention of Ireland: (for the name of it, I can
only say, Aliquisque malo fuit usus in illo) neither shall I mention your
frequent and steadable Advices, your constant Readiness upon all occasions to
bring them into his Majesty's presence. I forbear your Graces passionate and
repeated Questions, How little Benjamin did? How all things were in Ireland?
Whether the old man were living? How our Fundamental Laws were administered? And
in the conclusion of all, how careful you were to return us with our moneys in
our sacks mouths, with his Majesty's gracious Declaration and Instructions: so
that the Addresses from this Kingdom, went out like the bow of Jonathan, that
never returned empty. Witness the Address from this House by their
Commissioners to his sacred Majesty, in reference (amongst other things) to
that great Bill of Settlement, (for that adopted title it retains.)

Sir, I am not this day speaking of his Majesty: we still premise, Rex nobis
haec otia fecit; of him we say, Omnium domus illius vigilia defendit, omnium
otium illius labor, omnium delitias illius industria, omnium vacationem illius
occupatio. His Majesty is the Spirit that moves the Wheels, and we are now upon
one of the Master-Wheels: and happy is the Kingdom, when the Wheels move as
the Spirit moves. His Majesty is the Waters of Healing; and we applaud a
Tutelar Angel that stirred the Waters, and helped in this Paralytical Kingdom,
in the crowd of Patients.

And here give me leave to remember the fivefold mess of your time that you
afforded Benjamin. Did the morning require your Graces attending in Parliament?
Ireland must be first served. Did afternoon-Committees pray in aid to your
advice? Ireland must be first served. Were there particular Causes designed for
hearing at the Council Board? you have successfully employed your Mediation
that Ireland might be first served. When Clauses and Provisoes were offered to
be inserted in that great Bill, your first care was to see if they were
Declaration-touch; and held them up before it, as the Eagle, to try the
legitimation of her brood, dares their eyes with the Sunbeams. And in the
throng of such Addresses, I have observed your Grace in Civility to hear all
persons, but in Justice to see none. And if upon pretensions of profit, any
intrenchments upon the Declaration had been offered, your Grace knowing the
nature of your great Masters Standard, wherein a C^ of Honor out-weighed
pounds of Profit, you endeavored to transmit the Bill as a seamless Coat.

And now, Sir, I need not have recourse to any Rhetorical Figure to make that
great Bill to speak. Your Grace may take notice, that as many days you waited
upon it, so it has to this day waited upon your Grace. It remembers how often
when it was in the Cradle and Swadling-bands you visited it. It remembers when
it was in the state of its Minority, and under a Committee of the
Council Board, how faithful and tender a Guardian you were to it. It remembers
how powerfully instrumental you were to give it a Body, and now waits until
your Grace by the Royal Assent breathe a Soul into it.

It is now time to take in my Sayls, and make ready an Anchor, especially since
methinks I see a Cloud rising upon your brow. I know your Graces Temper, That
you place your Reward, as well as your Recreation, in doing good, and not in
hearing of it being done. But be pleased to remember, it is the Commons of this
Kingdom speak; and then Vox populi, nay more, Vox populi Dei, is Vox Dei. As
they are the great Enquest to present Criminals, so they are the great Records
to preserve Virtue and Merits. Could your Grace have been contented to have
acted less, my Commission would have been to have said less: but it is fit we
give your Grace an Essay of that Obedience that so unanimously we devote to
your Commands; and therefore I shall only add, That as this House most
submissively acknowledges the repeated Obligations from his Majesty; so they
look upon this as the Fermentation of them all, That he has put those Laws and
Estates he has graciously bestowed on us, under your Graces Government and
Protection: And that while it shall seem expedient to his Majesty to continue
us in a Parliamentary way, his Majesty shall find the Effects of his great
Wisdom and Goodness, in giving your Grace unto us, a Governor after our own
hearts. That so, as we have been happy in your Grace, your Grace may be happy
in us; and the union of both those, center in the ever-prayed-for Happiness of
his Majesty and his other Kingdoms.

30 JULY.
ORdered, (nemine contradicente) that the SPEECH delivered by Mr. Speaker
yesterday, to his Grace JAMES Duke of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of this Kingdom,
(being so fully agreeable to the sense of this House) be forthwith Printed and
Published.


