A General DISCOURSE OF SIMONY.

BY JA. METFORD, Rector of Bassingham in Lincolnshire.

Vbi aurum placet, ibi and vitium.

Greg. l. 9. ep. 40. Isicio Epd. Hieros. LONDON, Printed for JOSEPH LAWSON, in
the Bail of Lincoln, Bookseller; and sold by R. CHISWEL, at the Rose and Crown
in St. Paul's- Churchyard, and T. SAWBRIDGE at the three Flowerde-luces in
Little-Brittain. 1682.

TO The Right Reverend Father in God THOMAS Lord Bishop of Lincoln.
My Lord,
YOur incessant pains, and sincere endeavors both by Counsel and Elaborate
Tractates, do sufficiently discover you a true English Prelate, and able Patron
of the Protestant Cause. And your great vigilance and integrity in your high
and holy Calling, has given you a just esteem in the hearts of good men; and
wrought a belief in your Diocese, that things are well done if they gain your
approbation. Which forces me to give you the trouble of hearing, that about a
month before the death of the Learned and truly Reverend Dr. Michael Honywood
late Dean, and now the just grief of the Church of Lincoln; he was pleased to
inform me with some Resentment of the too great Progress of Simony in this
Nation; bewailing the fatal Consequences of it to the Church, and commanding me
to say something (if possible) to stop its growth. To which I answered, but
with two sad assurance of truth, that I had travailed less in the search of
that Subject than in most others that a Divine is obliged to know. And besides
was so valetudinary, that in few days time I used to hear some soft Footsteps
of approaching Mortality: which (though he knew to be true) yet his warm heart
would not retreat, but permitted me only to be a little shorter. Two days
after, I was advised to travail about sixty miles, to a Spaw for health; which
I did: and at my return, was saluted with the most unwelcome News of the Deans
death: so that I was forced to share in the common sorrow. Though (not to
dissemble) 'twas some ease to me, that I was delivered from my promise to him.
But about five weeks since, a common Friend, conscious to my Obligation,
demanded an account of Simony; as promised to the Deceased: I answered, that
death had cut the Band of that Promise: He replied, that the Deans life or
death was no condition of it; and the reason of performing, was the same now as
before. I submitted; and do now humbly present these weak Lines to your
Lordships view; desiring (if they are thought of any use) they may pass your
Diocese under your Protection. I know the design is useful, though the ill
handling may offend. If your Lordship think them useless, be pleased to receive
them to that sure Sanctuary of Secresy and Silence; which will be most safe for

Bass. Dec. 2d. 1681. Your Lordships most dutiful Petitioner and Servant, Ja.
Metford.

A General DISCOURSE OF SIMONY.
COnsidering the smart Reflections, lately made by a very worthy Gentleman on a
Practice but too common in this degenerate age, of giving Bonds to Patrons for
the Resignation of a Benefice at their pleasure: and noting some Commotion in
his mind, I assured my self, so strong and sound a judgment, could not be rapt
away by his well-commanded passions; but upon the sharpest Spur of Provocation:
and therefore suspected some secret venom, in that which seemed to once
thinking men, a harmless practice. The deeper I did dig into it, the stronger
and ranker the stench sum'd up; which at length convinced me, that no less than
a bottomless Pit of Mischief lay under it; which I hope to discover, by showing
both the nature of Simony in general, and what share these Bonds for
Resignation bear, in that weighty guilt.

Simony is so called from Simon Magus, that famous Samaritan born at Gitton,
mentioned in Acts 8, who came to Rome in the Reign of Claudius Caesar says
Eusebius) where he was worshipped in an Image (says Just. Martyr) between the
two Bridges of Tyber, Hist. l. 2. c. 12. apology. 1. (...). L. 1. adv. har. 10.
Ephiph. adv. haer. to. 2. l. 1. haer. 1. and Aug. ad Quod. haer. 1.
with this Inscription, Simoni Sancto Deo; yea the Samaritans and many others
also, adored him says Irenaeus. The occasion of his giving the name to Simony,
is set down Act. 8.20. A Petro Spiritus Sancti gratiam mereari volebat, unde
vitio nomen dedit, (says Aquinas) and many others. Not but that the crime had
got footing in the World long before, and was known to the Jews by the name
(...), and by the Arabians (...) Talm, says Schindler; and both from (...)
fraudavit expilavit. The Greeks knew it by the Name (...). And the Latins by
the word Ambitus. Which I note, to show it is a moral evil, and was troublesome
to all Nations and Religions. But this bold Chapmans offer, purchased not the
grace of God, but disgrace of turning his name into sin, by which he will be
justly infamous to the last gasp of time.

The nature of this sin is well discovered, by them that call it Studiosam
voluntatem, Panorm. and nemo extra Aquinas Sa. etc.
nundinandi aliquid spirituale, aut spirituali annexum; for it is a desire, and
endeavor to make Merchandise of things sacred. Some add insecuto opere, but
the purpose of the heart is Simony, though we cannot accomplish it, as Simon
could not. And it is the heart Peter blames. Thy heart is not right in the sight
of God. Acts 8.21. And again, v. 22. if perhaps the thought of thine heart may
be forgiven thee. It Is true, in foro soli, some overt Act must appear; but in
foro poli, the design though frustrate, is the crime. Luke. 3.2.
It Is a crime that Stella charges, for the teeming womb of infinite Evils, that
follow; contrived by Herod, to render the Jewish Church contemptible, making
the Priesthood annual; as Joh. 11.49. shows, that Caiaphas was High Priest for
that year only: and An^as soon after, as Acts 4.6. evidently discovers. Which,
says he, forced the High Priest to oppress the People, for the raising such
Simoniacal Sums. And unworthy men, thereby get into the greatest trusts in the
Church; which made the times, Calamitosa and Miseranda, as also it does ours.

But for the better displaying this growing sin, we shall consider 1. Its
species, buying and selling things sacred. 2. The things bought and sold. 3.
The means by which it is done.

1. The Species, buying and selling, which being Relative Acts, will in their
own nature, be alike lawful or unlawful: though accidental circumstances, may
make them more evil to one than another. Like Judas selling, and the Jews
purchasing the Son of God. The Scotch selling, and the Rumpers buying Charles
the first. Or Didius Julianus buying and the Pretorian Cohorts selling, the
sacred Roman Empire. Or Herod's selling and Caiaphas buying the holy Order of
the Jewish High Priest. It Is hard to say which is most tainted with the
corruption of Avarice, since both their breaths smell so exceeding earthy. It Is
but Cretensis cum Aegineta, two Knaves well met: poisoning each other, as the
Toad does the Spider. They both labor under the same disease of greedy desire;
having Souls black as Hell by those deeds of darkness. Like Attabus and
Numeneus, that puzl'd Apollo himself to determine which was worst: being both
Loaves of the same sour Batch: Viols in unison, wound up by the dexterity of
the Devil. He that thinks himself best, is but the greater Deceiver, and the
weaker head. They broke both the same laws of God and Man, from the same
principles of sordid covetousness; to the same end to enrich themselves on the
Spoils of Religion. Averring both the same damnable positions, Quasi nulium sit
peccatum majus quam nummis carere. Espenc. in Tit. c. 1. Credidit ingens
pauperiem vitium. Hor. sermon. 2. sat 3. nunc sit barbaries grandis habere nihil.
Latro est qui aurum ex religione sectatur. Hieron.
* that Money is the necessary qualification for the Ministry. And that Poverty
is the best evidence of a scandalous and insufficient Minister. They may differ
in their Coat, but wear both the same Cloak of Secresy to cover their Knavery.

Can a greedy Patron (shall I call him, or Latron) excuse himself from
Sacrilege, whilst he fills his bottomless Bag out of the Church Revenue? Can he
fancy himself not perfidious, that being but a Deposita pietatis, says Crig.
2r. 31 in Math. Tert apolog. c. 39.
Trustee for the Churches Portion, treacherously converts it to its own use.
What did Ananias do more, than retain part of what was devoted to Gods service?
O the divine charms of Money, that can so far blind men, as not to discover
sins of the greatest size! Can they hope to avoid the shame and punishment of
thie very, that so audaciously rob God? Mat. 3.8. Or can their witty guilt find
out any fair gloss to elude the teeth of the Text from biting them. Must God be
sorc't to pay tribute to their Covetous Deities? Will men take Heaven to
satisfy their unsatiable appetites? It Is strangely saucy to lick their fingers
in God's Broth. Major Nummi quam Numinis ardor. They show more devotion to the
Golden Calf, than the God of Israel. It seems they are of Vespasian's mind,
that Gold smells well, though picked out of Gods pocket. Can Custom prescribe
against honesty? Can wrong by Quicquid multis peccatur multum est. Lucan. l. 5.
multitudes of sinners be bound to right? Is Robbery the more lawful, because
committed on the Church? Nihil ad extenuationem delicti numerus impudens valere
consuevit. Cyp l. 1. ep. 26. sed pudor and modestia (...).
Or the less criminal, because many practice it? Can they guess themselves good
men that will not do their duty without Bribery? If it be not the Churches Right,
why do they give them any? If it be, why do they detain any? He that invades
some part of the Church Revenues, would all, but for shame of the World; having
as true a right to all, as to any part of it. What defense will it be at the
last day, to say we are Gentlemen, and have robbed none but God; and defrauded
none but the Church; nor been dishonest to any but the Ministry? God will
reward them, for giving his Prophets a Cup of cold Water: bur so will he too,
for cheating them of half their maintenance. And certainly, Cicero is right,
that those men are the greatest plagues of the Commonwealth, Li^. de off. 1.1.
that doing evil, Id agunt, ut boni viri esse videantur. They expect to be
esteemed honest in the fowlest Acts.

Now for the Buyer; we have the less to say against him, because his Act is
partly involuntary: yet there could be no Sellers, were there no Buyers, for
both are necessary to make up a Market. At best, he does evil, that good may
come of it; and sticks not at bribery, to make way for a Benefice, quocunque
modo rem. He plucks the Devils Office out of his hand, and turns Tempter of his
Patron; and prefers the call of Gold, before the call of God. He declares
himself without merits, seeing his money is to answer all things, and seems
better purchaser than Preacher. If (with Chrysostom) he has not a golden
Mouth, he has a golden Hand. If he cannot enter as Simon Peter, yet can like
Simon Magus, with Letters Testimonial in Golden Characters: and then says one,
He is in the Church, permissione non voluntate Dei; Stell. In Luc. 12.
by permission, but against the will of God. And by this he discovers his aim,
to be more at the benefice, than office of a Divine; which may be had in a more
populous, and less profitable place, at a much lower Rate. Non constituit
Dominus, sed ipsi se constituerunt, says he. It Is not the Saints Bell of divine
Invitation, rings them in, as Bees are courted to their Hives; but it is the
tinkling of their Silver: which shows they go in their own errand, not Gods.
And how can men choose but suspect them, for bad Servants; that are forced to
hire their Services. Nay they are rather Slaves than Servants in the house of
God; that Enter and continue shackled in Manacles and Chains of Bonds,
Contracts, Covenants, Limitations, and a thousand other Inventions of darkness.
These Links of Iron gall them at every nod of the Patrons displeasure; which
they allways fear, more than the saddest presages of a guilty conscience.

That the Purchaser may know his condition, Cornelius vim passus est ut
Episcopatum coactus exciperet. Cyp. to. 1. Ep. 52. St. Aug. wept when elected
to the Bishopric of Hippo. Possidon. in vita August. Greg. Thaumaturgus fled
into the Wilderness to avoid a Bishopric. v. Nyssen in vita Ireg.
let him read his Indictment before the great and dreadful Assizes come: that
he may the better fit himself for his Answer. He stands indicted for filthy
Avarice, the ground of his sacrilegious purchase. For desperate audaciousness,
in thinking himself worthy the weightiest trust in the Church. While St. Hierom
calls it, Onus Angelicis humeris formidandum. Jonah in a great fright fled from
it. Jer. 1.6. Cried out, ah Lord I am a, Child, I cannot speak. And many of the
primitive Fathers, had almost the skin of their Modesty plucked over their ears,
before they could be induced to come near the holy Vestments. Nor are his
Treasons less, conspiring with his Patron, against the liberty of God's Church,
and pawning his Living on it, to preach what heresy his Patron shall require.
He commits Burglary on the Church of God, breaking open her door with a Golden
Cramp; and forces the holy Spouse of Christ against her will; and values the
inestimable grace of God at the rate of worldly pelf. Good God! what Adamant is
his heart made of? how obdurate is his conscience, that groans not under these
heavy weights of sin? Venturing boldly on that villainy, that all good men's
hearts, in former ages, trembled at. I must leave him to prepare his answer at
that great Tribunal; or else for slighting this timely notice.

2. Let us consider the things bought and sold; which to show them to be
Simony, must be the gifts of the holy Ghost; both ordinary, and extraordinary,
real or so accepted. Whatsoever is sacrilege to take away from the Church, is
Simony to buy or sell in the Church. But we may reduce them (though scarcely
numerable) to the ensuing heads. 1. Buying and Selling, the instituted means,
by which the holy Spirit is attained; as Prayers, whose Evangelical worth
cannot be valued, and if purchased are worth nothing. It Is the worst kind of
Usury to take ten per Cent. for our Prayers, or else not to let them out; I
confess I know no Church that hires out Prayers, or Masses at 12 d. a piece,
but the Church of Rome; which excells in this kind of Alchimy, turning all
Materials into Gold. In our Church it is decreed by Edmund Archbishop of
Canterbury, in a Provincial Synod, holden about the year 1250, That no Masses
be sold, nor any thing given or taken, for Annalia or Tricennalia Missarum,
Prove. vetu sl. tit. 2. cap. praeterea venal.
as Lindwood shows us: which were Masses for a year, or 30 Masses, if the word
be rightly written, and not triennalia as some suspect; which would be Masses
for three years. So too, for Sacraments largely or strictly taken: since they
were the Golden Vessels; in which grace was conveyed; the Church ever held them
invaluable: knowing that it would have beggered all the Angels of Heaven fully
to compensate for any one of them. Hence Stephen Langton, in the first Council
of Oxford, Anno Christi 1222 decreed, Provin. ib. cap. firmiter Inhibemus.
That nothing be required for Baptism, Chrisme, vel aliquod Ecclesiasticum
Sacramentum. And so is the Legantine Constitution of Otho, A. D. 1236. tit. 4.
cap. auditu horribili, etc. concerning Confession or Penance, as they call it,
which is again confirmed, by Othobon another Legate, A. D. 1268, with stricter
Injunctions; as appears tit. 2. cap. Quoniam caeca potest as etc, where he
speaks not of Confession, and Chrisme only, but adds, Et qui alia quaelibet
Sacramenta, interventu Pecuniae conferunt, sitales invenerint (sc.
Archidiaconi) eos tanquam Simoniacos puniant.

2. To Buy or Sell the Offices of the Church, instituted by the holy Ghost,
which (it is very probable) was the design of Simon Magus: to have been an
Apostle, or at least a Bishop in the Church. For

1. By Apostles, or Apostolical men only, was the power of miracles conferred
on others: and therefore it must be their authority that he would purchase: and
it is the authority denominates the person.

2. He desires to do it by laying on of hands, which was an act of Office
power, in Ordination, Confirmation, and such like.

3. It seems by St. Peter's answer, he so understood him: for he says, Thou
have neither part nor lot in this matter, or in this word, (...). Act. 8.21. As
if he had told him, Thou have no share in the Apostleship, nor Call to be in
the Clergy: or to publish this word of God, which is confirmed with these
miracles.

4. The pouring out these gifts upon men, was but an extraordinary Ordination
to the Ministry. Which appears, 1. In that it was not given to all that were
baptized; for then Simon had shared without Money. 2. Nor can men give any
Reason, for these gifts of tongue, unless they were to be used in the Ministry.
Since the faith might be confirmed, as well to their own minds, internally by
the Testimony of the holy Ghost. 3. Nor were these gifts given to any Woman
that we read of, and therefore were not necessary to confirmation of the faith,
nor sanctification in the faith internally: for that they needed as well as
men; but that Sex was forbidden the Ministry. Nor do we want concurrent
judgments in this point, both ancient and modern; but that is beside my design
to prosecute. Only I observe Cornel. a Lapide so very particular, as to affirm,
that he desired the Bishopric of Samaria: A Lap. in loc. l. 4. de notis eccl.
c. 13.
And Bellarmine is very certain, he offered Money for the Episcopal authority.
Constat Simon Episcopalem authoritatem ambivisse, and dura pecunia emere
voluisse.

That the buying or selling any office, instituted by the holy Ghost, in the
Church, was adjudged Symony, appears by Stratford, who decrees Anno Domini 1342
(as Sharrock affirms out of a Mss. in Bodley's Library) nec decet episcopum
manus impositionem vendere: nec ministrum, calamum venundare: And accordingly
it is determined in the Council, that from thence-forward, the whole charges of
every distinct Ordination, and Letters of Orders sealed in England, should cost
the Ordained but 6 d. and all instruments, for settling the Clerk in his
benefice, but 12 d. vid. Lindwood, l. 3. tit. 22. de censibus. Cap. Saeva and
miserabilis, etc. And if the Candidate for Orders, proved Simoniacal, ad
quoscunque Ordines ne praesumat accedere, says Walter Reynold Arch. Cant. in
the second Council at Oxford, A. D. 1322. And if he could get into Orders
undiscovered, yet is he declared by Edmund Arch. Cant. Irregular; and he
compares him with Homicides, Incendiaries; and forbid to dispense divine
Mysteries till he have made full satisfaction to the Church. Prove. Vet. l. 1.
tit. 4. de Ordinandis.
Thus too, it was managed under Pope Greg. M. in the reign of Mauritius, who
following the sacred Rules of his Predecessors, decreed, nihil unquam de
ordinationibus accipiendum: no nor for the Pall, nor any Papers: and gives this
reason for it, Greg in Synodo Romans
Quia non decet aut Episcopos suam manum, aut Ministros, vel Notarios, suam
vocem vel calamum vendere. And indeed it looks a little uncouth, that a man
should purchase leave to serve God; and hire the preferment of being Christ's
Messenger. And that the Ordainer should sell the Spirit, as Judas did the Son;
and the Ordained like cursed Jews, should be the Buyers. Midas Fable is but too
sinfully verified in such men, since their Touch turns all to Gold. Doubtless
they would not give the droppings of their Nose, whose very breath cost men so
dear. But we may well desist, this Crime being more rare, than Wolves in
England, since the Reformation: and seems to be a native plant of Italy:
flourishing no where so well, as where the Pope has set his foot. Of which the
select Cardinals make a most sad Complaint to Paul 3 d. saying, they discovered
in Eligentibus caecitatem, in Electis insulsitatem, in utrisque Simoniacam
perversitatem. The scrutiny at Rome who is fit for Orders, is made in the
Pocket, not in the Pate: nor do they examine his Conversation, but his
Compensation: it is no matter if he be no able Scholar, so he be an able man.
Nay a Child will serve the turn, for the best Bishopric in France, if he send
a golden Orator to procure it. The Pope once told his Cardinals upon preferring
a mean man: if the King of England had desired his Horse to be made a Bishop,
he would not have refused him; for the King had commended him, not in a long
Testimonial, but in a round Sum, which with them is the Total of all
perfection.

The Centum Gravamina, complains, indoctis, agasonibus, stabulariis, dantur
beneficia. Hostlers and Grooms were well enough letered, if well enough lined.
Picus Count Mirandula tells Pope Leo 10th to his face and his Council in
Lateran, That they gave Church Livings, lenonibus, and Catamitis, to Pimps and
Panders, Ganymedes, and what not for Money? Yea, the very Apostolical Legates
(as they fanatically Cant) in the Council of Trent, confess men were ordained
into the Church, that had nothing Canonical but their Copes and Cassocks. What
Nauclerus confesses of Boniface 9th time, Curiam Romanam labe Simoniaca infamem
esse; was true long before, Genesis 49.
and it may serve for their Character ever since. Let the Engglish Clergy
rejoice that they live out of the reach of these Tarpeian Harpies: which made
our Predecessors purses tremble at every screich of the impure Bird.

3. And to buy and sell the Mansions of the holy Ghost. Here the Pastors and
Teachers, are set over the Church by the holy Ghost; the Church is the Temple
of Christ, and the whole matter spiritual. Now in buying and selling these,
Gods people are bought and sold like Slaves, in this profane Market. The Souls
of Men, once valued so high, as to be the purchase of our Saviors precious
blood, are now sold for a sacrilegious Bribe. O unheard of impudence! That
makes those invaluable Jewels, the matter of vain Men's traffic. Epiph.
This was so hateful to the ancient of piety, that they judged the very opinion
of its lawfulness, a haeresy: Aug. ad quod vult d. de haer. in principio. Greg.
l. 3. ep. 13. and passim.
and so does Epiphanius, St. Augustine, Greg. Mag. and so de Langius, and
Schaffnaburgensis, in their Chronicles all along. Yea so hateful has it been
to the whole Christian Community, that an Oath has been administered against it
for many ages. And for England in particular, it is decreed in Conc. primo Oxon.
under the said Archbishop, Stephen Langton, That all Bishops should impose an
Oath on any suspected person: that nec promiserit, Lib. 2 tit. 6. de jureju.
nec dederit aliquod praesentanti; nec aliquam propter hoc inierit pactionem. I
confess this Oath is very large, but it shows the piety of those times, would
not endure any kind of bargain about these things. And so watchful was this
Council over the Bishops, that they decreed in Collation of a Praebend,
Commendum or the like, the Bishop should receive nothing for Institution or
Mission; no nor vel charta super hoc facienda. Nor might he suffer his
Officials or Archdeacons, to extort any thing: because (says the gloss) 'twas
adjudged Simony so to do. V. l. 3. tit. 6. cap. Quia juxta.
St. Edmund goes farther with his Council, and degrees; nulli liceat Ecclesiam
nomine dotalitatis ad aliquem transfer, vel pro praesentatione alicujus
personae, Pecuniam, vel aliquod aliud emolumentum, pacto interveniente
recipere, etc. In English thus, Let it be lawful for none to transfer a Church
to any man, in the name of a Dowry (which is commonly called Smock Simony) or
to receive any Money for the presentation of any person; or to bargain for any
other profit. Which if any shall do, and be convict in Law, or shall confess
it; we decree him as well by royal as our own authority, to be deprived of the
Patronage of that Church for ever. This Canon being the chiefest against
Simoniacal Patrons, is by Sharrock's Edition of the Provincial reckoned to St.
Edmund; but that is a mistake, for it is placed upon Richard Wethershead, in the
old Books, who was St. Edmund's Predecessor: and so it is in the Syllabus of
this election; and so it is reckoned by other good Authors: and accordingly it
bears date, A. D. 1229, which was two years before Edmund came to the sea of
Canterbury. And for the royal authority mentioned in it, I conceive it depends
upon a former Canon, made under Richard Archbishop of Canterbury, in the reign
of Henry the 2 d, in his Synod held at London, A. D. 1175. Which decreed, that
every Patron taking reward for any presentation, should lose his Patronage for
ever. As Hoved. notes, in Vita Hen. 2 d, at which decree, Henry the 2 d and
Richard the First were present, and consented. But because both these,
transferred and forfeited a temporal right, which the Law (it seems would not
allow a Canon to do) they both proved ineffectual. It Is pretty to observe, what
pains the Glossator on this Canon takes, to explain Perpetuum, to be during the
life of that Patron: being loath such horrid breaches of trust, should be too
severely punished: when it is plain, that the King and Church, did by that means
declare the trust forfeited for ever; by the abuse of it. But the Canon being
rejected, the Lords portion is become his Daughters; the Patrons children are
enabled to live by Sacrilege; and yet himself declared unfit to bear any Trust
in the Church affairs. And the very Clouds labor with the weight of Curses
that hang over his head. Cursed be the Deceiver says Malachi 1.14; and he is
no small one, that deceives God, in what is entrusted to him: and Mal. 3.9. Ye
are cursed with a Curse, for ye have robbed me. Remigius Altissiodor renders
Anathema by alienatio, and says, Com. in Zack 14. Bibl. pa tom. 1.
it is in rebut, quas homines vota facientes, templo affigebant, and a se
alienas faciebant, and in truth, (...), is put by good Authors, for donarium
Deo consecratum, any thing devoted to God, and (...) for Exitio desttinatus,
one devoted to perdition, and both from (...) to set apart; as believing the
curse of God and Man is entailed on him that takes to himself, what is devoted
to God. So that our Patrons Panegyric is spoken from Mount Ebat; Genesis 27.12.
and by these acts, as Jacob told his Mother, he rather brings a curse then a
blessing on his Family. And this was Justin Martyr's sense of Anathema too; V.
quaest. 121.
yea their own fathers, in their dedications, did themselves load them, that
abridge or pervert their free Donations, with most Darius curse. Ezra. 6.1. The
common form is venientibus contra haec and destruentibus ed, occurrat deos in
gladio iro and furoris and viadictae and maledictionis aeternaev. Apostolatus
Benedict. in Aug. Append. sido f. 60.
direful Imprecations: and why may they not fear the effects? as Hiel the
Bethelite many years after did feel the curse that Joshua many ages before,
Joshua 6.26, had laid upon him that should rebuild Jericho: for Hiel to please
profane Ahab, and to show how gallantly he could delude those ancient curses,
built on; though he had lost his Firstborn Son Abiram, till all his Children
perished, one after the other. So that the Gates (which were the last thing
done), were erected in the death of his youngest Son Segub. Thus was the City
built, but no Heir left to inherit it. 1 King, 16.34. Yea the whole English
Nation, have by joint Votes and Statutes, commanded the Bishops of each
Diocese, Stat. 25. Edw. 1. Anno Christi. 1297.
twice every year, solemnly to excommunicate all Persons whatsoever, that shall
violate the great Charter, in any clause of it. The first of which confirms the
Rights and Freedoms of the Church, which these men so boldly violate.

Nor has the dire effect been less visible in this Kingdom, than any other
Look what curses overthrew Necuchadnezzar; the same or like, extirpated our
William the Conqueror and Henry the Eighth: De non temereccles. in pref. p. 24.
and that (as Spelman observes out of several Authors) at the same period: all
their Names and Blood being rooted out of the earth, in the sixty eighth year
after their violations.

As for Henry the 8th, he married Wives enough and on purpose to prevent the
defect of issue; and enervate the foreboadings of his Adversaries. And left
children enough to have possessed the Royal Throne to many Generation; had he
not left a sacrilegious Phthisis amongst them, which the piety of his Children
could not atone.

And for the Conqueror, it is observed by all sorts of Historians, how eagarly
vengeance pursued him; after he had turned thirty six Parish Churches in
Hampshire, with all their Revenues, to his own use, for a Forest. He did it in
the Eighteenth year of his Reign, and Anno 19, his Son Richard was there goared
by a Stag, Speed, fol. 429.
says Speed. Ib. Cambd. Brit. p. 259.
But Mr. Cambden says, by a pestilent Air breaking out of the Earth. The next
year, his Horse affrighted with the flames of the City of Maunts, (which he
burnt with the Church of St. Mary's and two Anchorites) yarkt so unexpectedly,
Math. Par. fol. 13.
as to break his Riders Belly, of which he died. His Grandchild Henry, Son of
Robert Duke of Normandy, Speed ib.
hunting in this Forest, is struck through the Jaws with a Bough of a Tree,
and so ends his days. Math. Paris. f. 71.
His other Brother William, made Earl of Flanders, was slain by his Uncle Henry
the 1st. Robert Duke of Normandy, the Conquerors eldest Son, had his eyes put
out, Ib. f. 73.
by his younger Brother Henry the 1st, and is starved to death after twenty six
years imprisonment, by his Brothers Order in Caerdiff Castle in Wales. His Son
William Rufus, was slain by a slant rebound of an Arrow shot at a Dear by Sir
Walter Tyrrel, in the said Forest, Anno Regni, 13, whilst himself gave the
profane command, Trahe Diabole, Math. Par. f. 54.
Shoot you Devil. Henry the 1st, was the Conqueror's fourth Son, Ib. Fol. 69.
Speed. 459.
and succeeded Rufus in the Throne; whose two Sons William and Richard, and his
Daughter Mary, were all drowned together in a calm day, nigh the English Shore.
And the King himself dies of a surfeit of Lampreys. Here is blood touching
blood, vengeance upon vengeance. And so concludes this sacrilegious Conquerors
Race: his name being quite put out.

But Judgment is often swifter than sixty eight years, Act. 5.
for Annanias and Saphira died presently. And William Marshal Earl of Pembroke,
that robbed the Bishop of Furnes, of two Manors belonging to his Bishopric in
Ireland: was assured by the Bishop, that in the next generation, his name
should be extinct: and the King was told by him, that he should live to see it.
Yet 'twas unlikely enough, Math. Paris. f. 687.
for he had five Sons, lively and valiant men; but alas, all died Earls of
Pembroke successively, within twenty five years, and his name and family
utterly blotted out of the World.

Cardinal Woolsey, seemed the Darling of his Prince and Country for many
years: but he ventures on sacrilege, Anno Hen. 8.17, and is in a praemunire,
Goodwin. fol. 104.
Anno Reg. 21, and despoiled of all, even to the want of Bread. And the next
year he is forced to take a Purge say some, Mart. 304.
Poison say others, to get rid of his hated life. Nor did any one of his five
Friends, miss of divine Vengeance, that he employed in his Sacrilege, as is
manifested by Goodwin at large. Goodw. f. 67.


There is a Family in the County of Lincoln, of a Noble Stock, to whom Fortune
had never been unkind, till they dispeopled the Parish where they were seated
by Enclosure; and impounded the Parish Church within their own yard, and took
all the profits to their own use. Since which, a brisk and smart Providence
has so closely pursued them, that five Lords successively Possessors, and
about nine or ten Heirs Male, have perished in the space of twenty years. A
mere stranger to their blood is now in possession of the scantling left; and
there remains but one feeble Female to support it.

Stanislaus Socolovius takes the Turks succesful inrodes into Hungary, Orat.
Stanis. Socolov. Gul. Tyrius de bello sacro. 17.
to be a judgment on that Nation, for seizing Churches Revenues. And William
Bishop of Tire, imputes the dismal blow given to the Knights Templars, to the
heavy displeasure of God upon them, for detaining the Lands and Tithes given to
the Church, to their own use.

Instances in this kind are almost infinite; and humane experience is nigh
cloyed with evidences of the smart Reflections providence has made upon
Sacrilege. Whoever desires to be further satisfied in this matter, may be
sufficiently furnished in Bredenbachius, and several other Authors, Bredenb. de
sacrileg. vind. and paene.
that handle it at large. And therefore with great reason, did that noble
General Monk Duke of Albemarle rejoice, that in all his ample Revenues, he had
not one foot of Church Lands.

Nor is it from our purpose to observe, how exuberantly the blessings of Heaven
have distilled on their heads, that have been careful to augment, rather than
detract from the Lords Portion. God blessed the house of Obed-Edom, for
protecting the Ark, but smote all the Philistines that imprisoned it,
wheresoever it came: so that Ashdod, Gath and Ekron cried out, 1 Samuel 5.11.
Let it go again to its own place, that it slay us not, and our People: for
there was a deadly destruction throughout all the City; the hand of God was
very heavy there. Who was greater than Moses, that made Collections for the
service of God? Or who was more successful than David that rejoiced at the free
oblations of the People? Instead of detracting, he made large provision for the
worship of God; 1 Chronicles. 29.3, 4, 5, 9.
offering vast treasures; Even 3000 talents of the Gold of Ophir, and 7000
talents of refined Silver, besides Vessels of Gold and precious Stones. And
this course too, steered that magnisicent Prince Solomon the Wise. What vast
Treasures did Constantine the Great, (a Prince unparalleled for Wisdom, Piety,
and Puissance) power out upon the Church, to the provoking the envious Devil to
cry out in his hollow shreiks in the air, Hodie venenum infusum est in
Ecclesiam. Thus Charles the Great made it his chief study to increase the
maintenance of Religion: and God blessed them accordingly. While a
sacrilegious Henry the, 8th, is ever in straights.

Hieron. de Cevallos says, If the Spanish Territories be surveighed, it will
appear, the Ecclesiastics have full as much as the Seculars: which occasioned
Boterus to say; That for the Reverence and Wealth this Nation bestowed upon the
Church, Relat. Universe, l. 1 p. 4.
God gave them Potozzi, Megalupae and the rest of the Indian Mines.

And indeed we have the best security the World affords to expect such success;
for God himself passes his word for it. Malach. Mal. 3.10.
3.10. Bring you all the Tithes into the Storehouse, that there may be meat in
mine house, and prove me now herewith, says the Lord of Hosts, if I will not
open you the Windows of Heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall
not be room enough to receive it, and ver. 11. I will rebuke the Devourer for
your sakes, and he shall not destroy the fruits of your ground, neither shall
your Vine cast her Fruit.

St. Aug. affirms, Aug. sermon. 210, de temp.
Decimae ex debilo requiruntur; and brings in God, challenging the whole
prosits, as Lord of the world; then dividing it thus, Reserva Tibi Nonas, da
Mihi Decimam etc. Keep your Nine parts to your selves, give me the Tenth: If
you will not give me the Tenth, I will take away your Nine: Walafrid. Srabo
dereb. eccl. c. 27.29.
if you give it, I will multiply your Nine. So that men may assure themselves
to thrive well if they tyth well. And that it is the best security to our own
estate, to be just to God. He that cannot trust God on his Word and Promise,
whom can he trust? Nor can he be other than an Infidel, that promises himself
Prosperity, whilst he strives to starve Religion.

It Is very probable, that the glory and honor which the Kings of the Earth
were to bring to the Christian Church, Rev. 21.24, were Riches and Reverence.
And so it is said of whole Nations to Rev. 21.26. And they shall bring the glory
and honor of the Nations into it. And in truth want without a power of
miracles, will expose the Church to contempt: for it will depress men's spirits,
and and cool their zeal. If the Preacher live at the Patron or Parishioners
Trencher, he must be civil to their crimes. A Church must be so refulgent as to
awe huffing Atheists, in Scarlet or Buff, from affronting it. Alexander the
Great, reverences Jaddus the High Priest of Jerusalem, but not without his
Pontificalia. Eccles 9.15.
The Poor man's Wisdom will be despised. A dull and blockish Irreverence will
assault a poor Divine from a stupid Plough-boy. The common Farmer will loath
heavenly Manna out of a Beggars hands. Majesty it self without its Crown and
Scepter, its Pomp and State, would soon be slighted, Nor does any thing hold
off the trembling multitude from trampling on the Judge, more than his Trumpet,
Robes and Grandeur. So that to impair the Churches Revenue is to attempt its
ruin, and must needs draw the heavy vengeance of its Founder after it: Whilst
to increase it, is to act for and with God; and so ensures the blessing to us
and our Posterity.

4. Lastly, in a word, all things essentially belonging to the Ministerial
calling, admit of Simony: whether Antecedent as Election, when suffrages are
bought and sold; Presentation, in contracting for the Church: Ordination,
agreeing its price with the Bishop or his Officers, Institution, or Induction.
2. Or Concomitant, as making Merchandise of the Word and Sacraments. 3. Or
consequent, as taking Bribes, to conceal presentable crimes. Or binding men in
Church censures, not to reform ill manners, but to be paid for loosing them. Or
to pay Archidiaconal procurations, that they may not personally visit their
Churches, which is declared by Othobon the Legates constitution, sapere
Simoniacam pravitatem. V. tit. 19. c. Deus omni.
Nor is any Church far from intentional Symony, That makes Canons, not to
direct their peoples practice, but to be dispensed with for their Money. They
are well called Retia, in the Church of Rome: being more profitable than St.
Peter's Nets: and deserve execution by the Besome of Destruction, rather than
to be executed.

3. The means by which Simony is effected, and they are either generally, by
Bargaining, or particularly by the things Bargained for.

1. Generally by Bargaining, which in this case is utterly unlawful, because
the subject matter is so. It is no more lawful to treat of it, than of the
conditions and Rates of Rebellion, Murder, Whoredom, and such like. In which to
endeavor to persuade, is to woe a man's consent to evil; and to get him to
promise, what is a sin to perform, and consequently it is to oblige him to sin.
Whereas that work, becomes none better than the Devil: since it is but to
undertake the office of a Tempter. I the more wonder any tongue can be so base,
as to accept the employ. Men must first reckon him a mercenary wretch, whom
they send in this Errand. The Casuists reckon them amongst the Contract us
illiciti; and the Canons condemn the bargaining. Ames defines Simonie; de Cons.
15. c. 42. f. 12.
quocunque modo commutare, rem sacram vel spiritualem, pro temporali. He
matters not what is exchanged, so it be a bartering of a temporal for a
spiritual, and gives a double reason for it; because sacred things are
profaned and polluted, and handled as worldly things: when they are brought
into bargaining, and valued by worldly things. 2. Because it is unjust to sell,
what ought freely to be given. And in truth, the very debates (as means) do
partake of the nature of, and are desecrated by the end.

But let us hear them treat. The Patrons Agent is fain to Lapwing conscience,
while he negotiates; propounding an old Horse to sale: or tacking a crakt
Abigail, at the tail (...) the Presentation. Or in honest words desiring him to
be obliged to be cosened, in part of his Glebes or Tithes saying, the Patron
desires a peaceable Man, that should not be severe with himself or Tenants, and
to that end demands a Bond, for Resignation at pleasure, or when his Son or
Friend comes to be sit. This halter's Horses consciences, without bogling. He
cannot say, the Patron has a living to sell: the word Sell would affront
conscience, and proclaims an open lie: for the Patron presents a Minister, not
a Proctor, to the Church; not Parsonage Barn; to the cure of Souls not of
Tithes: and accordingly the Bishop institutes. The Parsonage is but a
consequent, provided by charitable Laws, to support him in his Office; and was
never in the Patron. For as the Digests affirm, in their barbarous; style; v. l
1. tit. 8.
(...). Sacred things are of Divine Right, and are holden of no Lord. The truth
of which, in our Law, will be considered hereafter. The Patron presents to the
Church real, rather than Metonymical; that is, to the Christians living in such
a Parish, to whom the Archdeacon, by the Bishops mandate, opens a Temple for
public worship.

Can the Agent say, the party treated deserves not the whole profits? this were
to affront him: and to shame his Matter that made so ill a choice. Does he say,
the Patron deserves a gratuity? but then it must be free, and may be done
after, without bargain. Yet the very attempt to bargain, shows the Patron
unworthy; by striving to betray his trust, and to daub himself with the
defilement of Simony and Sacrilege; and to introduce a Priest by Perjury.

But what can the poor Priest reply to abate these high demands? Is two hundred
pound too much, to purchase the Office of Christ's Ambassador? that were to
vilify his Master and Calling. Are not the souls of the people worth half the
money? What need is there then of any Pastor. Is it a mean Office to be Priest
of the most high God? and a Savior of himself, and them that hear him? what
then is great? O unfortunate Market! where neither Buyer nor Seller can speak
sense.

But you will say, the Minister will transact this part by a friend; true but
this is to defile two conscience instead of one. 2. The Clerick is the more
guilty, for doing by another, what his own conscience is ashamed of. 3. And the
guilt no less, for Proximus cujusque est quisque; he knows well enough, Qui
facit per alium facit per se. David was not excused for Uriah's Murder, though
slain by the Children of Ammon. Nor Ahab o^ Naboths Murder, though he lent not:
stone. Nor St. Paul of devout Stephen Martyrdom, though he lifted not singer
against him. Nay if done with out the Incumbents privily, he is; a Simonist in
Law; as will appear a non. And an after discovery obliges him to grief: as not
called of Christ, who calls none by sin. As a Thief that came over the Wall; as
one that has long lived upon the wages of unrighteousness. And is bound to
Resignation, as Henry the 8th, was to separation, if the marriage were
incestuous, though not discovered till twenty years after. It Is no good Title
to a stolen Horse that the Thief gave it to him, though ignorant of the
Thievery. Accordingly, the Novel Constitutions outed him. Phot. Nom. Tit. 1.
cap. 24. Schol.
(...).

And the Transactor (whom the imperial Law, as well as the Canon calls (...)
and (...)) etc, L. 3 Basil. tit. 1. c. 9. and Phot. Nom. tit. 1. c. 24. Schol.
and the Latins call Interventorem, Proxenctam, etc. is within the reach of
justice too, and punished in double the sum contracted for: (...): and if he
were a Clerick, it was Degradation, but to midwife this impure birth into the
Church.

2. Particularly, the things Contracted for. Which are as various, as the
subtle Serpents windings; to elude the Laws, and cousen the consciences of men:
which never appear long in any one shape. So that the Schoolmen are fain to
say, Simony is committed not only by giving Money, sed versatur in iis omnibus,
quae vel pecuniae aut pretio possunt aestimari, and contains all valuable
Conditions in order to a promotion, to any spritual preferment. Calv. Inst. l.
4. c. 5. s. 6.
Calvin distinguishes them as many others before and since have done, into
munus a manu, munus a lingua, and munus ab obsequio; which different ages have
differently explained.

1. That a Manu, intimates money or moneys worth: whether Goods Cattle, Bonds,
Covenants, Leases, or glebes or tithes at half rates, or to debar tithes, in
some particular grounds; or to perfect injurious practices, ripening them into
Customs but who can reckon all the strange turnings of this crooked Serpent? It
would affright an innocent conscience but to peep into these dark Cavern of
iniquity.

2. That a Lingua, is commonly understood to lie in flatteries: but may extend
to giving verbal Promises, to offer intimations of willingness, to renounce the
Churches known rights or to acknowledge feigned Debts, to be due to the Patron,
before such Negotiation. Or to give leave to sel^ the Timber of the Glebes,
etc. but who can account, for the sacrilegious prodigality of the tongue?

3. That ab obsequio, when a man shall wait on the Patron gratis, or submit to
pay some of his debts: or become his Steward, or Bailiff for nothing, or to
entertain himself or Servants, as often as they come thither: or to be Domestic
Chaplain: or to teach his children gratis. Which is to pervert Gods Minister,
from the Altar, to attend the Patrons drugery. And to build up his own house
with Gods Revenues.

Having considered the means, let us now view, 1. the greatness of this sin in
general. 2. The sad consequences that attend it. 3. The severity of the Laws
made against it. 4. That of Bond Simony in particular.

1. We may consider the greatness of this sin; 1. In its original cause, which
is Avarice. It Is the viperous Spawn of that root of all evil: and therefore is
not only equal to, but identical with Idolatry. Ephesians. 5.5. Since the Selling of
God in his gifts for Money; declares we value money above all. The Pharisees
thought Gold greater than the Altar: but the Simonist (worse than the vilest
Pharisee) thinks it greater than the Temple, and its owner too. Covetous Midas
turned his food; but this the bread of life into Gold. The Golden Number with
them, is much before the Dominical Letter. Both Buyer and Seller concluding,
that Money is a valuable consideration, for all things concerning Religion.
They would be thought fine Gentlemen, whom God brands with this mark of filthy
lucre. What will they answer, when at the Judgment seat, God shall deride them,
in the scornful words of the Prophet; a goodly price that I was prized at of
them. Zech. 11.13.
It seems then, Judas is not the only men that sells, nor the Jews the only men
that buy their God. And the great Iharasius says, Tolerabilior est Macedonii
haeresis; that made the Spirit a Slave to God; than the Simonist that makes him
the Merchandise of men: Dec. 1. q. 1. cos qui, etc.
for when we sell him as our beast, or our Slaves, we declare him our Slave;
and that we have dominion over him. No doubt, these earthly souls, count gain
the greatest Godliness: and with King John, would sell their faith, as well as
Churches, upon good Consideration. Thus have we restored, the Buyers and
Sellers into the Temple, whom Christ whipped out. Per nummularios (says St.
Hierom) are meant, beneficii ecclesiastici venditores, Math. 21.12. Joh. 2.16.
qui domum Dei faciunt speluncam latronum. And Greg. Mag. explains, L. 7. ep.
110.
Columbas vendere, est de Spiritu Sancto, quem sibi Deus per impositionem
manuum hominibus tribuit, commodum temporale percipere. Upon this account, the
Church has been often branded, for preferring Lucratinas arts loco Theologiae,
as Alliaco notes. In. ep. lib. de emendat. eccles.
And the Germans sadly complain, that their greatest Churches, ob pecuniam,
infimis hominibus conferri; V. 100. Grav. Germ.
were conferred on the dregs of men, for their Muck. And the flattering
Canonists, to ease the Popes and Cardinals Consciences, in selling of
benefices, V. extra. de ofsicii Judicis Deleg. ex part N. inglos.
cunningly distinguished, between Simoniaca jure divino, and jure positivo;
making the buying and selling Sacraments (a thing seldom done, and of little
profit) to be Simony by divine Law: and selling benefices (the greatest, as
well as wickedest trade driven in the Church) to be Simony; only by positive
Law: quo laxiores in peccando reddant conscientias, says one. And another of
their own; In aureo speculo, cries out, O Peter, Peter, what Troops of Souls
has this superstitious and damned Distinction sent, and yet does send headlong
to hell. It is the occasion (says he) and opens the way to their everlasting
damnation. Let greedy Patrons (if they can) show any one title of divine Right,
or humane Law, that favors so vile Oppression. Or else let their Consciences
acknowledge, with the fathers: Avaritiam Simoniae Matrem, that it has no other
Womb but that of Avarice. And then let them remember that old Verse, Si vites
mortem vites saligia mortis.

2. From the villainy it discovers; that we have a very slight esteem of God and
Religion. What could discover the profaneness of Esau's mind, Genesis 25.33.34.
more than to sell his Fathers Blessing and Birthright which carried the
Priesthood with it. The Scripture says, when he had sold it, Thus Esau
despised his Birthright. And thus was Jeroboam convicted of a false heart
toward God, in that he consecrated, whosoever would purchase it, to be a
Priest to the Lord; 1 King. 13.33.
even of the lowest of the people. What is this, but setting our Religion to
sale? And what can more evidence, a carnal and worldly mind? such a one is
eased of all farther trouble of examining his heart, and may take St. Peter's
word for it (as a case already judged) that he is in the gall of bitterness,
Act. 8.23.
and bond of iniquity. Does not he deal barbarously with God, that will not let
him have a Priest to serve at his Altar; but at so dear a rate? Had these
Patrons lived in the time of Christ, would they not have attempted to force a
Fine from him for his high Priests Office? Is not this making God a Merchant,
and retailing his Blessings for Money? Had not Gehazi a sordid opinion of God's
gift to Naaman, that would value it at the rate of a Talent of Silver? 2 King.
5.20.
How strangely would it look in Christ, had he turned Stones into Bread, and
then set up a Bakers shop, and sold Loaves for pence? Or to have turned Water
into Wine, and then have retail'd it by Quarts, for Money? Or to cure the Sick,
Blind or Lame, and then called for his Fee? Or to catch Fish by miracle, and
then furnish the Shambles for Money? By so doing, he had showed, 'twas Earth
not Heaven; 'twas Gold not God that he valued. Hoc enim est sub pretio redigere
gratiam, Can. siquis episc. d. quest.
quae vendi non potest. Says the Canon, to set a rate upon grace that cannot be
sold. Apol. c. 39.
For as Tert. well notes, Neque enim pretio ulla res Dei constat, nothing of
God is saleable. So that, if the people sinfully pinch on the Parsons side, the
Patrons do more profanely pinch on Gods side; yea they sell their own
Reputation for honesty, and allow as many as know the contract, the liberty to
esteem them sacrilegious Atheists.

3. From the inexcusableness of the Crime; it being much more honest to die for
want, than live by robbery and sacrilege. F. de offic. praetor. L. Barba^^^
colum. 2.
See what pains the fawning Canonists are at, to excuse the Pope, in this
wicked practice. Baldus holds, he cannot be a Simoniack, though he take Money
for Benefices; and so says Bartol. and Theodoric speaking of the schism between
Urban and L. 1 c. 32.
Clement, gives the reason. Quia Simonia excusatur per authoritatem ejus; that
is, he is supreme, and none can judge him for it: but sure every Patron, swells
not to this Papal height. The Summa Angelica says, that Simony is de jure
positivo, and the Pope cannot be bound by his own constitutions; De offic.
judicie deleg. ex part N.
but sure the Laws against Simony are not the constitutions of private Patrons.
Felinus excuses him out of charity; because of the Popes great profit. Nam
cessante tali redditu qui maximus est, seeds apostolica contemneretur. As if
'twere lawful to live by unlawful means; and cause enough to justify thievery
that we are poor: and that actions were then justifiable when profitable, and
the greatest Offenders were the least Criminals. It Is strangely bold, to rob
God to uphold our pomp and train. But the Archdeacon of Florence, argues much
better, Papa est Dominus rerum temporalium, by his Charter Tibi dabo claves;
and therefore may do what he will with his own. But will our Patrons pretend to
any such Dominion; could all the wits of Rome have found any better excuses;
the Pope had not wanted them: yet after all this ado, several of them stand
infamed for this odious crime. Langius charges Boniface the 9th with horrid
Simonies: Chr. ad an. 2404.
and Plutina many more: Calvin cannot excuse one in a hundred: and Marlarat
condemns them all: vix in toto Papatu reperiatur sacerdos, qui non palam sit
simoniacus: and so says their own gloss Roma est caput avaritiae, In Act. 8.
ideo omnia ibi venduntur. And 'twas grown into a Proverb; De modo celeb. Conc.
Tr. 20.
Omnia Romae vaenalia. Yea, so common says Durand, as if it were indeed no
sin. Insomuch that every School boy can tell us.

Vendit Alexander cruces, altaria, Christum.
Vendere jure potest, emerat illi prius.
But why do we travel beyond sea, to find what too frequently occurs at home?
Many seeming Protestants, having made this piece of Popery their own; and
reduced it into daily practice: yet have less to say for it than those abroad.
Our Laws suppose the Patron a Defender; it is strange they should find him a
Defrauder. I wish they find not the Old saying true, Proditores sunt sui
Perditores, for commonly such Traitors end in tortures if not of body yet of
mind: the Worm of sacrilege gnawing on their Liver.

4. From the abhorrency good men in all ages have had of it. Dr. Tailor thinks,
Duct. Dub. l. 2. c. 3. r. 3. n. 4.
there needed no law against Simony; for all men had light enough to detest it
without a Law; and holds it sufficiently condemned by St. Paul's (...); though
not the same crime with Simon Magus, because it is like it. But if it be true,
that Magus attempted to purchase a part in the Apostles Ministry, as we have
proved before; and St. Peter's answer imports, I see not how the learned Doctor
will clear it, from being the same crime; and so justly wears his name and
reproach. The Canon calls it Crimen Capitale: Qui studet. 1. q. 1.
and the chapter Sicut 6. affirms, nullum atrocius peccatum, no viler sin can
be committed. That zealous man Isidor Pelusiota, writing to Leontius, calls the
Simonists (...), Lib. 1. op. 315.
as the true murderers of Christ: and indeed they break open the door upon him,
with their Golden Wedges, and force him to accept their service and violently
ravish his Spouse the Church: Or at least force her to marry them or none;
deposing their Savior beneath the golden calf, and selling him to any Caiaphas
for Money. How brisk and keen the Fathers are upon this crime; In Matthew. 12.
may be seen in Hierom, and St. Augustine in his 37th Sermon to the Brethren in
the desert, in Isidore Pelusiota and Greg. L. 5. ep. 276.
the Great, every where, but especially in his 4th Book and 50 Ep. to Virgil
Bishop of Arles: So is Tharasius Patriarch of Constantinople, in his Synodical
Epistle to Pope Adrian: and Gelasius zeal may be seen in his Decretal Epistle,
Dec. 2^.2. q. 1. c. quos constiterit.
where he determines, dantem pariter accipientemque damnatio Simonis, quam
sacra lectio testatur, involvit. Neither giver nor taker can be saved; but are
both involved in the same condemnation with Simon Magus. And Echbert says, they
that strive to enter by Money, a deo maledicuntur: and if they prevail, it is
donum irascentis Dei: they have it not by the grace, but indignation of God; ut
tanto damnabiliores fiant, that they may be more the children of Hell than
ever. And when the Simoniacks answer, that they neither buy nor sell spiritual,
but temporal things, as Tithes, Glebes, etc. he replies, Nam quisquis horum
alterum vendit etc. Eikbert advi. Catharos sermon. 10. in Bibl. patrum.
He that sells one thing, without which the other cannot be had, sells both, and
he that buys, buys both: as he that sells a Mill, sells also the water with it;
though it be a daily renewing blessing of God. And thus he affirms, Pope
Paschasius determined the matter. In a word, to make it the more odious, they
appropriated a certain word to it, called (...) filthy lucre. conc. chal. can.
2. tit. 1. c. 24.
And the fathers in Conc. Chalc. pronounces an anathema on such as are guilty:
which so affrighted that great Patriarch Photius's Conscience, that in his
Scholia on the Nomocanons, he falls to his Prayers saying, (...): adding if God
should be pleased to mark their transgressions, who may abide it? yea so bitter
was the whole body of Christians against it, that whereas the Canons had
disabled many ranks of men from witnessing against the Clergy; as Jews.
Heretics, L. si quenq. 31. d. ult.
Infamous, Stage Players etc. Yet here as in treason, all mankind were allowed
accusers. Hear Ivo Carnot. Praeterea secundum consuetudinem etc. Furthermore
according to the custom of the Roman Church, Ep. 27. ad Eudonem.
they act otherwise against Simoniacks and the heresy of the Neophites, than
against other crimes for whereas in other accusations, the honesty of the
Accusers, and Witnesses is considered; to convict these even infamous persons
are admitted: and it is probable the reason was, that none but infamous persons
would be privy to such infamous actions.

Having viewed the greatness o^ the crime, let us consider,

2. Its miserable attendencies. 1. In unhappy events. Baronius tells us our
(...) of Desideratus, Annal. ad an. 1047.
that Pope Leo the 9th having suspended a Bishop of France from his Office, a
Presbyter with a good sum to the Chancellor, procured his Absolution: which Leo
understanding, said to the Presbyter, The Money perish with thee; at which he
fell out of his wits; and could never do business more. So Malmsbury and Math.
Westminster. tell us, that Hen. 2d. Emperor, was three days fearfully haunted by the
Devil, for being guilty of this scandalous sin: and Pete^ Damiani tells us of a
Priest, Ep. 15. c. 2.
that could never say the Doxology after his Simony: but seemed choakt at those
words: and to the holy Ghost. Gehazi's leprosy is not unknown to any that have
read the Scripture, for taking money for the gift of healing. Jason a bold
Simonist, purchased the Priesthood of Antiochus Epiphanes at the price of 360
talents, and a Pension of 80 talents: 2 Maccab. 4, 8.
but Menelaus outbid him by 300 talents: and got the high Priests office from
him: but both came to fearful ends; for Jason was accused before Aretas King of
Arabia: fled from place to place, 2 Maccab. 5.8.
pursued of all men, hated as a forsaker of the Law, and had in abomination by
his Country, having none to mourn for him, nor any solemn Funerals nor Grave
with his Fathers. And Menelaus was judged a wicked Wretch, the cause of all
mischief, and was put to death by Antiochus at Baraea pounded, up with Ashes in
a Tower rather than a Mortar of fifty Cubits high, not having so much as
burial: and that justly (says the Author) because he had committed many sins
about the Altar, 2 Mac. 13.5.8.
whose fire and ashes were holy: therefore he received his death in ashes. If a
man escape public vengeance, yet so many Curses cannot but lie fretting and
burning him at heart; so as to deprive him of his sacrilegious pleasures. As to
the Seller his horrid end is scarcely unknown to any man.

2. The Buyer and Seller both come to a very bad Market for both lose. Eman.
Saaphor in v. Simonia.
The Buyer gets nothing is plain by that known Maxim of the Casuists, Collatio
beneficii Simoniaca nulla est; and by the Bull of Pius the 5th, he is inhabilis
ad alia, incapable of any other Benefice, and that we shall show is true
hereafter by the Canon Law. Navar confesses him incapable in Law, V. Consi. 34.
de sem.
but might be capable in conscience, and who doubts that upon true repentance,
not otherwise; but even that would not make him capable in Law any more: so
that he is a mere Intruder and plain Usurper both of his Office and Benefice.
Ib. v. Th. Aq. l. c. art. 6. ad 3. c. de Sim.
And accordingly qui Simoniaci, beneficium accepit, in foro conscientiae
tenetur beneficium relinquere. He is bound in conscience to leave what is
Symoniacally gotten. The reason is, the Law forbids any thing to pass by such
an Act. And so is the Novel too, as cited by Joh. Antioch, Nomoc. tit. 11. out
of 6 Nov. c. 1. v. 9. And such was the Apostolical Canon, and that Cohal Con.
c. 2. (...). Let him that is advanced by Merchandising in holy things gain
nothing by it; but be a stranger to that our or dignity he has got by Money.
So that the Simonist is no Pastor, has no title, nor did he ever enter de jure
but de facto only. The Patron also has lost his presentation for ever by
Canon: pro hac vice, by the Statute; besides the penalty superadded.

3. Both are excommunicated, so it be real and not mental Simony; to wit,
Navar. l.c. number. 111.
that it is not a mere Intention to give but a real performance or obligation;
and that neither party are ignorant of it: for the rule is, Simoniacus realis
est ipso jure excommunicatus. And the Extravagant affirms the same against the
Procurers and Agents, C. l. cap 2. cap. 52.
as well as principal. And indeed as Hincmarus Rhemensis cites the Apostles
Canon, ei qui pecunia dignitatis ecclesiasticae compotes facti fuerint
deponuntur and consortio fidelium pelluntur. They that get ecclesiastical
preferment by Money, let them be deposed, and excluded the Communion of the
faithful. The words are in Alexius Aristinus his Synopsis added at the end,
Can. ap. 25 aliis 29.
(...). Simonis magi instar in perpetuum excommunicetur. A Sentence now
slighted, but once, yea many ages together, the most tremenduous punishment on
this side Hell; and the greatest that Christ designed in this world against
impenitent sinners. It being futuri judicii prejudicium as a Father calls it:
and a serious and grave judgment of the wisest and most conscientious men and
best Laws; that the Excommunicate is (without repentance) in a state of
damnation: which a truly tender conscience would tremble to hear; but Fools
make a mock of sin, and of all spiritual judgments that attend it. They fear
hanging not damning. A good man would dread being bound in these ecclesiastical
chains: or to hear his damnation proclaimed at the mouth of these venerable
Canons; whose reverend gray Hairs have been consecrated by the submission of
all the Christian world to them.

4. Restitution is on both sides to be made Facinus quos inquinat aequat.
Lucan. l. 5.
One receives the unrighteous Mammon, the other the wages of unrighteousness:
both live on what is none of their own. Cyp. ep. 68.
Et dum junguntur in culpa fic nec in paena separantur: they are united in
sinning, and cannot be divided in suffering. For as Gunther observes, consensu
culpae meruit consortia paenae; agreement in sin, calls for agreement in
punishment; accordingly the proemium on one side, and the profits on the other
are to be delivered to some charitable use as Goods unjustly gotten. L. 2. col.
15. Cov. l. c. n. 6.
Jure divino Simoniaca pecunia restituenda est; say Soto and Covarrun, and many
others. This Law of Restitution, is no invention of Schoolmen or Canonists, nor
one of the Popish traditions or unwritten verities; but came from the holy
Ghost by the Pen of Moses. Lev. 6.4. He shall restore what he took violently
away; which will refer to Patrons that force Money out of their Presentees, Or
the thing he has deceitfully gotten. That relates to both Patron and
Presentee, both having agreed to deceive the Law, the Church and Religion too.
But many choose to go to Hell with a full purse, rather than to Heaven with a
clear conscience. Hence it is so few vomit the surfeits of their Sacrilege; yet
'twas well practiced by a true convert in the Gospel; If I have taken any thing
from any man I restore him fourfold. But more of this anon.

5. The people in Communion are many ways injured by it. For 1. The Patron
chooses not the best man for their use; but the richest for his own. If he can
but purchase, it is no matter whether he can perform his duty or not. If his
pockets be but full, it is no matter how empty his Scull: for the Patron is to
edify his own purse, not his peoples souls; and therefore like Judas will sell
though to accursed Caiaphas. Hence the Princes complain they were disposed to
such, ^ent. grav.
Qui ad mulos magis quam ad homines pascendos and regendos essent idonei; as
were fitter to fodder beast, ^on^. delect. (...) ad ^ant. 3.
than feed men. The Cardinals call them homines imperitissimos, vilissimos
malis moribus praeditos: Indiscreet base, and evil men were brought into Church
preferment. They were (as the Emperor Frederick calls them) Non tam
praedicatores quam praedatores, non orbis Reparatores, says he to Pope Adrian,
quam auri Corrasores. And here by William of Wickams leave, it is Money not
Manners makes the man; but it marrs both Religion and Learning.

2. Hospitality and charity to the Poor must needs be abated: For it is morally
impossible the wide drains of Simony should leave the Purse as full as it would
be otherwise. Nor can a Living maintain both Parson and Patron, as well as it
would maintain the Parson only. The fuller the Patrons purse, the emptier the
poors belly: and the more he gets the less the Parishioners can expect. So that
the Patrons gripe, pinches not only the Parson, but the Parishioners and Poor
at once.

3. It makes the Incumbent the more exacting: Petrus Fullo purchased the Chair
at Antioch by bribing Apollinarius's faction; and then used it so ill, that
John Bishop of Cyrus deposed him, and Zeno banished him, says the Synodical
Book, Anno 482. The Palls of Mentz Coloigne and Saltzburg advanced from 10000
Ducats, to 24000 apiece, make the people groan, who are always fleac'd to pay
it. James Archbishop of Mentz dying soon after he was preferred, was not
troubled at his death, but that his poor Subjects should so soon again be
compelled to pay a grievous exaction for the Pall. Which Maximilian the Emperor
calls palliatum Simoni-amactoak, for Simony in his Letters to Adrian the 6th.
These payments like Excise imposed on Ale by Frederick Duke of Saxony, Chro. ad
an. 1486.
made the Sellers mensuram minuere non absque grandi scandalo and murmr
Communitatis, says Langius. And so will these payments give men occasion to
abate their care of the peoples safety, and to be very strict for their dues.
Coming to it as to a Farm rather than a Church. And as our Statute 21. Car. 2,
imposing 9 d. per Barrel on Ale, indemnified the Sellers as to rate or price.
So must the Patron be quiet and permit his fluxt Presentee to reimburse himself
though by very oppressive means. Plut. in polit. preceptis.
Plutarch says, you may not enter some Temples till you have laid down your
Gold; because 'twas counted a heinous crime to bring it in: but many in England
cannot come into the Temples without it: though persons cry, In Sancto quid
facit aurum?

What Concord between Christ and Mercurius, the Temple and the Market? yet
these two things that agree no more, says Dr. Tailor, than Contemplation and a
Cart-rope, met in Jerusalem: and are no Strangers in England but to the public
calamity. For the Patrons great purge makes the Priest bite sharp to supply his
empty Bowels.

4. And the Presentee is made by it incapable of his Office; for how should the
people believe a perjured man? Qui culpas debet emendare committit, says
Gregory. He that should correct, commits the faults. Lib. 7. ep. 113.
How can he condemn indirect ways in others, that practices them himself? Can
he press self denial, that has ventured his conscience and credit both for
self Interest? Can the Patron reverence him at the Altar, whom he knows
forsworn at the Consistory. And how can the people honor him as a Divine, whom
they know to be a worldling? What guide will he prove, that missed his way at
the very entrance? How can he join in Communion with them, whilst his
conscience is not cleansed by Repentance? And what Repentance can there be
without Renunciation and Restitution: but of this more hereafter.

5. His peace and safety depends on the silence of the Patron, Procurer and
Agents: which makes him a Slave to wicked and covetous men; so that he dare not
rebuke with any authority: greater servitude his Enemies cannot wish him. They
can blow him away with the breath of their mouth, he stands so tickle. If they
confess and amend, he is ruined. It Is a kind of treason against God, of which
he must fear the discovery: nor can he sleep more soundly than the Thief; that
fears some of his Accomplices may betray him. The neck of his Incumbency is in
their Halter: and they may sniffle him when they please. Eusebius Bishop of
Nicomedia that famous Arian, hired a Queen to swear that holy Eustathius got
the child in her arms: and so got him banished. But after being sick, she
confessed what sum the Arians gave her to swear against her: and said, 'twas
one Eustathius Aerarius got the child; which turned to the ruin of the
Contrivers. In Christo Justell. tom. 2.
v. lib. Synodalem. He is no safer than the unchaste wife, that dares not deny
her paramour any thing, for fear he tell: and looks pale (like Faux and his
Conspirators) lest the truth should come to light. O unhappy Preacher! that
fears light more than darkness.

6. Lastly their Incumbent is all good men's scorn if known; Joh. 2.16.
our Savior never showed a brisker zeal, than against the Bank and Marketting
in the Temple. 1 King 5.27.
How sharply does Elisha proceed against his Servant Gehazi, for this crime;
clapping the disease of Naaman incurably upon him and his seed for ever. Numb.
22.7, 8.
The Angel with a drawn sword resolves Balaam's ruin, for going to sell his
blessing. St. Peter shows the occasion of his displeasure; 2 Pet. 2.15. that he
loved the wages of unrighteousness: and so we may take that place, Jude 11.
that the Gnostick Teachers ran after Balaam's error to sell their prophesy and
blessings for reward: by this Balaam kindled the wrath of God against him.
Numb. 22.22.
After this crime, old Isaac would not bless his Son Esan, though he sought it
with tears. Heb. 12.17. That subtle Magician Hildebrand, knowing how hateful
this sin was to all good men, blackned Henry the 4th. Emperor with it; in hope
to draw all men's affections from him. Plat. in vit. Greg. 7.
Though it is most evident, that Prince deposed Hereman the Bishop of
Babenburgh; for entering Simoniacally. And he sat in the Church of Babenberg, to
present to the rich Abbey of Fulda, and had great offers for it: but he was
ashamed of them; and called out an humble Monk of Helvord, named Reucelinus,
whom he preferred to that dignity. So again in a great strife of bribes for the
Lorissan Abbey; V. Lamb. Schassmaburg. Chron.
he rejected all, and presented one that never thought of it: and commended
Severus's way of rejecting Obtruders, and accepting the most modest as most
fitting. But above all instances, see St. Peter's zeal against Magus, Pereat
tecum Pecunia tua. When he would have purchased the Bishopric of Samaria, or
an Apostleship (as has been formerly showed) and as Urban 2d. seems to
believe, in his Decretal Epistle to Lucius Provost of St. Juventius, Anno 1099;
where he argues that to buy Church livings was Simony: because Magus did not
desire the holy Ghost of whom he was unworthy, but the power to give it to
others, as the Apostles did: upon which in just indignation, the Apostle stooke
him, Epist. 237.
voce tonitrus says St. Bernard, with that thundering sentence: knowing 'twas
the profit of bestowing those gifts he looked after. For he considered how
cheerfully fathers would deposite great sums to procure the gifts of Tongues
to their children, without the harsh and tedious Padagogy of Schoolmasters.
And how ready rich men would be, to purchase wisdom and gifts of prophecy, and
to understand all mysteries: if they could be had in a moment; so that they
were the res Ecclesiasticae, the profits of Religion he aimed at; and therefore
that is the first notion of Simony. And against it that great Apostle is so
hot. What favor the Fathers had for it, has been showed in part, and may be
easily conjectured by the sharp Canons made against it. We will conclude this
part with the zeal of that mirror of Learning and all goodness. Dr. Michael
Honywood late Dean of Lincoln: who was wont to protest, he would no more
converse with a Simoniacal Clergy man, of what rank so ever, than with a Felon
burnt in the hand, or branded on the Forehead.

Yet as hateful as this crime has been to all good Christians; former ages
have not been so happy, as to be free from this accursed practice: no not the
hither side of the Primitive times. For Peter Patriarch of Alexandria, and
immediate Successor to the great Athanasius, sadly complains of Lucian the
Arian, his Simoniacal invading of that See. That he did it not (...),
Theodorit. lib. 4. c. 20.
as Theodorit reports it: and it is not to be wondered at, if a usurping Bishop,
and monstrous Heretic, enter by Goldsmiths Row, into that famous City of
Alexandria. Isidore Pelusiota gives Cyril the Patriarch an account, of
Martinianus a Presbyters robbing the Church of Pelusium, Isidor. Pelus ep. ad
Cyril.
for money to buy Votes at Alexandria, for his Election: upon which the holy
Patriarch threatens him with Excommunication, unless he forbear. It seems,
'twas too commonly practiced at Constantinople in those early days: for
Evagrius tells us, Evagr. l. 2. c. 2
that Chrysaphius a Commander of Theodosius Guards, demanded of Flavian
Patriarch of Constantinople, satisfaction for his advancement to that See. But
to shame him for so base a demand: Flavian sent him the Communion Plate of the
Church. To revenge which indignity, Chrysaphius and Dioscorus together procured
him to be kicked or trod to death, in the Eutychian Council.

Dioscorus of Alexandria, was also promoted by the same Simonist Chrysaphius:
yet was not fully convicted, so as to be excommunicated for it till after his
death; the subtle Merchants having cloaked the Simony, Evagr. l. 2. c. 4.
under the dress of some civil power, that he had purchased: (...): yet
Eusebius Bishop of Dorilaeum, so far detected him, in the great Council of
Chalcedon, that the second Canon was voted (upon that occasion) against Simony.

We read also of an accusation, brought before St. Chrysostom, by six Asian
Bishops, against Antoninus Metropolitan of Ephesus; as, for other things, so
particularly, for taking Money for Ordination. Palladius in vita Chrysostom.
It seems it was so common to buy it, that the Ordained pleaded a custom so to
do, and if that they sinned it was ignorantly. But St. Chrysostom degraded them:
and Antonine being dead, he enabled them to recover on his Heirs, their Money
got from them by fraud and Simony. Pope Simplicius tells us, of his deposing
Gaudentius Bishop of Aufin, Simplic. epist. 3.
and all ordained by him; being convicted of Simony. And to prevent it,
Justinian decrees, that the Electors who sign the Instrument of choice, Novel
123.
should take an Oath, that they named them not for Money, or promise, or any
other thing but the real worth of the Elect. The methods also of Elections,
were often altered to prevent this insinuating wickedness. Sometimes the Clergy
and People chose three, Novel ib. Anno 541.
and the Metropolitan and Bishops of that Province picked out one. Sometimes
again the Metropolitan and Bishops propounded three; Conc. Arelat.^ Can. 54.
and the Clergy and People chose out one: as was decreed in the Council of
Aries. Zeno the Emperor shut up the great Church doors of Constantinople, left
a fair Paper on the Altar, gave the Key to an Eunuch, ordered fasting, Niceph.
l. 16. c. 18.
and Prayers forty days; that God would order them a Bishop. Flavit as borrowed
Money of the Bankers, bribed the Eunuch, his name is inscribed, and accepted as
a Patriarch divinely called: but the Bankers tell where the Money was borrowed,
and he rejected.

Thus every age has applied some remedy, to this growing disease, which is not
yet extirpated. Greg. Mag. held a Council at Rome to obviate it: where it
appeared, that money was taken in the name of Fees to Clerks and Notaries.
Greg. Decr. in Conc. Romans can.
Therefore they decree that thenceforth no Fee should be given for Clerks
labor, Instruments, Paper, Wax, Pall, or any other thing whatsoever. Yet they
left it to the Parties discretion, to give some small gratuity, at pleasure.

It would tire a well breathed Reader to repeat all that Charles the Great's
Capitulars, and later Councils have determined in this matter. I shall only
observe, that hitherto, this crime has been too hard for humane, wisdom:
Averruncet Deus.

3. We are now to consider, the severity of the Laws made against it: which we
will consider 1. as Canonical, 2. Civil, 3. Statute, and 4. Common Law: we
shall begin with the Canon Law.

1. The Canon Law, Greg. Magn. observes to Theodorick and Theobert Kings of
France; that Simony was of the Devils plantation: Et in ipso ortu suo, zelo
apostolicae ultionis percussa, damnata est: Greg. l. 7. ep. 114.
that it was blasted by St. Peter's Thunder in its first budding. And from
thence the Church held Simony to be a haerely: now we may reasonably guess,
they intended not the practice to be so; but the opinion of its lawfulness,
against the Apostles and all succeeding Councils judgment. The Apostles Canon
declares (as in Johannes Antiochenus collection; Can. 29.
tit. 11.) (...) etc. If any Bishop, Presbyter or Deacon has attained his
dignity by Money, let him be deposed, and him that ordained him: and let him be
altogether cut off from the Church; or Communion, as the Latin version has
it; Alexius Aristinus in his Synopsis places it Can. 25. and it differs a
little in words rather than in sense. The next is the second Canon of the
Council of Chalcedon; (...) etc. If any Bishop shall cause Ordination for
Money, and bring unsaleable grace to sale, and ordain a Bishop or Presbyter or
Deacon, Codex Can. ecclesiae universalis has (...) between Bishop and
Presbyter.
or any one that is numbered in the Clergy for Money; or shall advance any
Steward, Advocate or Mansionary for Money: or any at all of the Canons for his
own filthy lucre. He that is convicted to have attempted it; let his own degree
be endangered. And he that is Ordained, let him be nothing profited by his
Ordination or promotion got by Merchandising: but let him be without his
dignity or cure which he gets by Money. (...).
And if any shall appear an Agent in this base and unlawful gain; if he be a
Clerk, let him fall from his own degree: but if a Laick or Monk, let him be
Anathema. There are several other Canons to this purpose made by later
Councils; as Can. 22, and 23. Conc. 6th, and Can. 4, 5, 19. of the 2d Nicene
Council; Tit. 1. c. 24.
and many others reckoned up by Photius in his Nomocanon: and Antiochenus, not
needful here to recite. But by these it is manifest what care the Church of God
ever took to suppress this growing mischief.

2. We now come to the Civil Law. The holy Emperors found that the Crosier was
insufficient to beat it down, unless their Sword were joined with it: and
therefore Novel. Constable. 130. cap. 19. Decrees, Vide Joh. Antioch. Nomocan. tit.
11. (...). V. Just. Nov. 6. and 123. and 56.
(...); both giver and taker and deprived of the Priesthood. And Novel 6. c. 1.
v. 9. says, the Receiver shall restore the Money, as well as be outed; and he
that gives, shall lose any former preferment he had. And there is an Oath
required of the Ordained in order to a detection of the crime. And again. L. l.
1. tit. 3. Constable. 30, 31; it is decreed that none shall give ought, but the
Clergy of the great Church of Constantinople; and they that give, are bounded
to a single Diary of one year only. V. Phot. Nomocan. tit. 1. c. ^. ex l. ^.
Basil. tit. 1. c. 9. (...).
And it is farther provided, that (...), all gifts or promises shall be
confiscate to the Church for which they were given. But concerning this last,
the Canonists and Casuists are much divided. For some think if the Receiver
repent before sentence juridical; it is to be restored to the party from whom he
had it. If after, some think it belongs to the Church, others to the Poor; but
most think it is forfeited to the Pope. Vide Navar. Convar. Soto etc. in Sa's
Aphorisimes. But this Constitution, was left out of the Basilicks, and
therefore is deemed void: but then Justin. Novel. 123. cap. 2. is much the
same, and is in 3. lib. Basil. tit. 1. c. 9. only there it is alike dangerous to
give Money to any other Person. V. Phot. Nomocan. tit. 3. c. 24. Sch.
And further adds, (...): so that the Agent or Contriver if a Layman, was to
pay double the sum received to the Church, or next Successor say some. See
also the Collection of Balsamon, ex lib. 1. cod. tit. 3. number. 30. (...) etc.
Where it is decreed that to give or receive Money to be ordained or chosen a
Bishop, shall be deposition, and he shall be branded with perpetual Infamy. So
scandalous was this crime in the eyes of all Christian Princes.

3. Nor does this practice meet with better usage in this Nation, where the Law
is as fierce against it, as the practice is for it. The Statute has drawn its
sword against it, and forfeits the benefice so bought and sold, to the King:
against both Patron and Incumbent. As appears at large: 31. Eliz. c. 6. Where
it is provided, If any Person or Persons, bodies politic or corporate, shall or
do, for any Sum of Money, reward, gift, profit or benefit whatsoever, directly
or indirectly, present or collate, any person to any Benefice with cure of
Souls, dignity, Prebend, or living Ecclesiastical: or give or bestow the same
for or in respect of any such corrupt cause or consideration; that then every
such Presentation to be utterly void: and every Institution, Admission,
Induction, to be of none effect in Law. And that it shall and may be lawful,
for the Queen, her Heirs and Successors, to present, bestow every such Benefice
for one turn only. But this is not all; for it is farther provided, that every
person that shall give or take any Money -- or give or take any bond or promise
-- shall forfeit (for their corrupt dealing) the double value of one years
profit, of every such benefice, to the Queen and Informer. And the Person so
corruptly taking, or accepting any such benefice; shall thenceforth be adjudged
a disabled person in Law, to have or enjoy the same benefice. The like
forfeiture is made, if any person give or take any thing above the usual Fees
for Institution, Installation or Induction. So likewise if any corruptly resign
or exchange any Benefice for any Pension, sum of Money or benefit whatsoever.
The giver and taker both shall lose the double value of the sum so taken, to
the Queen and Informer. And it is provided, this Statute shall not extend to
restrain, or abate any Ecclesiastical Censures or penalties against this crime:
but the same shall remain in force, and may be put in due execution. So that
the Statute is but accumulative not derogative to the spiritual power. The
three Estates of the Kingdom joining all their force with the King and Church
to pull down this rampant Oppression.

There is a farther Clause; that the giver and taker of Money for Ordination,
or License to preach or serve a Cure, above the usual Fees, shall forfeit, the
Give 10 l. and the Receiver 40 l. a piece for so doing; and the Giver be
incapable of any Living for seven years after such corrupt purchase. Thus it is
in the book of Statutes: why the Abridger should make the penalty 10 l. a
piece; or Sir Simon Degge should willingly say, the Receiver was punished in
forty Shillings, is hard to guess. He bid his Parson note, that the Statute is
more severe upon the Clergy man then the Officer: Degg. p. 1. cap. 1. p. 57.
for the Officer only forfeits forty Shillings, but the Clergy forfeits ten
Pounds; which is irreconcilable with the Statute.

Having showed the substance of the Statute, we may view the practice as the
Lawyers have reported it. They say Trin. Jac. 8. all the Justices agreed, That
a Presentation is void, if for Money, though the Presentee know nothing of it:
and the King may present. If so then, the Presentee is a Simonist in Law not in
conscience. And here Sa's Caution is necessary, that the Presentation fail not;
Cok. 12. Rep. f. 74.
Si quis tuo nomine ut beneficium perderes pecuniam dedit pro eo. For the
Report (as Coke sets it down) relating not to them that give to prevent, but to
procure you the Living. Others show that Simony may be committed, neither
Patron nor Incumbent being Privy to it: for the forfeiture is made by the
Simony, whoever be the Agents in it: as if the Presentees friend bribe a
Courtier, and he prevail with his Prince for the preferment. They that desire
to know more in this point, may consult Crokes 1st. part fol. 331, Bawdcrokes
Case. Cokes Inst. l. 3. fol. 153, being an Exposition of this Statute. Noyes
Rep. f. 22. in Pascals case, which (besides many other Considerations) are
enough to evidence, Habrep. f. 165.
that our Government is clear in this matter: Nor Church nor State favoring
this unhappy practice: yet we may say of the vice as the Historian does of the
Chaldeans, they were always banished from Rome yet always there.

But because there is a doubt amongst men, what contracts are lawful, and what
not, we will endeavor to give some satisfaction. 1. By showing what cases are
justifiable. 2. What are not.

1. In what cases it may be lawful to use Money or Moneys worth: and sure it is
lawful to give money to purchase our peace, when we meet with litigious men,
that pretend a title to our Living but have none. But then the Presentee must
have jus certum and indubitatum in his own judgment; and he must give (not to
make a title) but in vexationis injustae redemptionem. This point does Amesius
determine: L. 5. de consc. c. 42. n. 18.
Peace we may buy though not benefices, as well our daily bread. But here let
us remember the Casuists Caution, In istis cavendus est dolus, and species mali
fugienda. Eman. Sa Aphor. in v. Sim. n. ^.
And so do Sa's Confessors rules determine, in case any inique impediat
electionem vel possessionem, unjustly hinder his Election or possession.

2. It Is also lawful for the Incumbent to take, and people to give what is
judged convenient, for the time he spends, and labor he is at, in ministering
to the Congregation: for that is acknowledging his employment, rather than
rewarding the desert, which is spiritual and invaluable: rather requiting
labor, than paying for Doctrine or Sacraments. And if Ministers be to ride
far, to administer either Sacrament, it would be no Simony to reward the
journey: our Savior having assured us the Labourer is worthy of his Hire. And
the Apostle affirms, they that serve at the Altar may live by it. (...).
And all Christians poor and rich, are commanded, Gal. 6.6. If they are taught
in the word, to communicate to him that teaches in all his Goods. Labor in
study and teaching is no supernatural thing: nor necessarily of a spiritual
nature, and therefore may be purchased. Hence too, a Chaplain may take pay for
his service, because his time and attendance are valuable.

3. To purchase an Advowson in Fee simple is lawful, when the Church is full:
Provided you design not to present your self, Hob. 165. Says' Case.
nor purchase it to present any other Party by name. Not for your self, for
that is plain mental and Intentional Simony; and differs nothing from actual
Simony; but in mere circumstances, about the manner of presenting, and in
respect of time sooner or later. Mores Rep. 877.
Nor for any Party named or present, for if he be named in the Grant; 'twas
adjudged legal Simony in Puliston and Winscombs Case 14. Jac. V. Freeman, and
English case. Mich. 3. Jac.
So 'twas in Smiths and Shelborn's case, and many others cited by Mr. Hughes in
his Parsons Law, c. 18. If an Advowson be purchased pro hac vice, and the Party
be merely present when it is done, though not named, His Presentation is
Simoniacal at Law: as the Learned and Pious Sir Simon Degge affirms in that
honest and useful treatise, P. 1. c. 5.
The Parsons Counceller. And it seems by Hutton 'twas judged Simony in Law to
purchase the next Advowson, lb.
the Incumbent being sick as Degge informs us from Sheldon and Bretts Case. We
may doubt it is malum in se to purchase an Advowson, for one turn, under what
circumstances soever; and the Law was so as we shall show hereafter; though
practice makes it at present seem otherwise. For what difference is there to a
conscientious man, between buying an Advowson that one may be presented, or a
Presentation to that end. This is but a Grammar Periphrasis, to express the
same thing, and used to avoid the Law, rather than to avoid the sin.

4. It Is Lawful to resign a Living in favorem alterius, for the kindness we
have to any worthy unpreferred Priest. Provided we believe upon best
consideration, that he is more likely to profit the People than our selves; and
that we make no corrupt bargain, nor reserve no pension; for that would make
the Resignation unlawful both in Law and Conscience; as the Canonists generally
conclude. And so do our Lawyers and the Statute too.

5. Nor could first fruits and Tenths be excused from Simony; both in Prince
and Priest: but as they are reckoned a legal Contribution, to support the Civil
Government: which the Church is to contribute to, as well as the State: seeing
they equally share with others in common peace and protection. For otherwise,
what right could any man pretend, to what is given to God and his Church. How
came the Sovereign to have more Right to it than the Subject? If Tithes be
reserved by the Divine Law to spiritual uses; how came Princes or Parliaments
to annul it? Can time, Custom or Usurpation, prescribe against God? Kings might
reserve Rents or Service, out of Manors of their own Donation; because they
may give as much or as little as they please of their own: but with what
conscience can they demand the first Fruits and Tenths, of what is given by a
Decree of Heaven? Or by the Testament of other men? Is it meet for them to
destroy Property? then Government is useless: for its chief, if not its only
end, is to preserve it.

This device was hatched in the Conclave of Rome; Lang. In Chro. Citizensi ad
an. 1404. Platin. in vit. Bonif. 9. Theod. a Niem. schisc. mate. 12. c. 7.
muttered by John 22d, but brought forth by Boniface the 9th, says Langius and
Platina; about the tenth year of his Popedom. says Theod. a Niem. And that so
rigorously prosecuted, that he made them pay a years profit, whether they could
get the Church or not, before they went to it. And often wished they might
never get it.

But yet this charged only Cathedrals, Abbeys, Tract. de pension q. 25. number. 2.
Priories and Pensions above twelve Ducats per annum in the Popes Books; says
Hieron. Gig as. But this was farther advanced in after times, as the Parliament
of Paris Remonstrates to Lewis the 11th. act. 77. Marsil. Patav. 2. part. def.
pacis, c. 24.
So that Marsilius of Padua makes a sad complaint about it. And the Bishop of
Menda charges it before the Council of Vienna for haeresy and Simony, and urges
its Reformation. Durant. in tract. de mod. celeb. conc. Genesis part. 3. tit. 20.
Cusan. conc. cath. l. 2. c. 30. Clemang. de ruina and repar. ecclesiae.
And Nicolas Cusanus charges it for Sacrilege and Simony, in the Council of
Basil: and vehemently persuades its Reformation. Clemangius says, they had so
far improved the Law in his time; that whatsoever Ecclesiastical Person died or
exchanged; the Popes Chamber should receive all the Fruits, for the first year
next ensuing. Guynnerin in his gloss on the Pragmatick sanction, calls them the
Buyers and Sellers, that Christ cast out of the Temple, for requiring first
Fruits and Annates.

Theodor. a Nihem says, many great Divines hold it for Heresy, to affirm such
payments can be required, Niem in notis ad tract. de privil. and jur. imp.
or such Laws made without the guilt of mortal sin: and concludes they spring
from no other Counsel, but the suggestion of the Devil.

It Is certain the Emperors used not these oppressions, when they gave
Investitures: for though they often took the profits of the Temporalities, during
the vacancy; and many times by their Bailiffs, invaded the Goods of the
deceased Bishops; upon a pretense of Regality; Lib. de l' Egl. Gall. c. 16.
art. 4. V. Trosle can. 14. Nemaus can. 5. Tholous. can. 4. Goldastus.
which the Bishop of Mascon, in the name of his Dean and Chapter acknowledged
the King of France might do: though many Councils had condemned it: and many
Kings and Princes had renounced that Right. And in particular Frederick 2d to
Pope Innoc. 4th, and our Edw. 1. to the Dean and Chapter of Bordeaux etc. yet
they never required any Rents, after the Incumbent was invested. And if there
be any one instance of it, it was esteemed a violent Usurpation. Only Popes
have pretended right to it, and thence as the best evidence, these parts have
believed it lawful. So easily can the Waters of Seine, Thames and Tyber, mix,
when profit persuades: otherwise it had sunk with other Papal tyrannies, over
this Church and State, in the reign of Henry 8th, who too readily adopted the
Papal oppressions, into his own family; even to the continuing scandalous
Impropriations, against the common sense of Mankind; but the utter ruin of his
Name and Family.

Greg. of Haymbourgh a German Lawyer, Greg. Haymb. conf. Primat. Pap.
in the time of the Council of Basil, makes sad complaints, how much Rome had
surcharged Bishoprics and Livings with Annates and other Simoniacal Exactions.
Great struggling there was in the Council of Constance to have laid these
burdens aside: Sess. 40.
but it could not be done, till the 21 Session of the Council of Basil: and
there the Fathers condemned all Annates, First Fruits, Money for Ordinations;
Institutions, Installations etc. forbidding any thing to be exacted in the
Court of Rome, or elsewhere, for any promotion in the Church whatsoever. And
from thence it was received into the Pragmatick Sanction. And an Ordinance at
Orleans, was made against it: in the second Article of which, all Annates etc.
are forbidden: but the Capitolian Geese charm all France again, so that Jan.
10, 1562, the King recalls the Ordinance, and the great Leviathan is let loose,
to sport himself in the great Ocean of that Nations treasure.

But for England, 60000 Marcarum puri reditus Matthew. Par. in vit. Hen. 3.
It represented to Pope Innocent the Fourth, the insatiable Covetousness of
that See; that it drained more Money yearly from hence, than the Kings whole
Revenue amounted to. Yet the exaction is continued; though condemned by all
sound Divines, for Simony in the Popes. Yea, though the Cardinals themselves,
elected to that purpose, assure Pope Paul the third, that it was utterly
unlawful, Conc. delect. Card. An. 1538. quod extat in Tom. Conc.
after they were sworn, to give him sound and sincere advice. And how weakly
it is excused by the flattering Canonists, that strive to harden men's
consciences into Impenitency, by disguising their Guilt, may be seen elsewhere:
yet our zealous covetousness swallowed it, without asking any Question for
Conscience sake. But so as to declare it a Revenue or Tax, to support the
Crown, which though it be very unequal to charge one sort of men, and Lands
more than all the rest; and not abating them a Penny, in any other Tax or
Subsidy for it; and therefore must needs lie heavy, and be thought a severe
dealing toward a Church, that vies Piety and Loyalty, with any other in the
world: yet will it not be Simony.

We shall now consider what actions are unlawful; and 1. It Is unlawful to
attempt, to obtain any spiritual promotion by Money, or any other corrupt
consideration. This was Simon Magus crime, he showed Studiosam voluntatem, an
earnest desire, but failed in his purpose. This the Casuists call mental or
intentional Simony. It seems by Hughes, the Law lays hold of these attempts:
for says he, Simony is so odious in the eye of the Law, Hughs Pars, Law. c. 18.
that (the Church being void) if a man seeks for money to be presented:
although afterward the Patron present him gratis; it was Lord chief Baron
Tanfield's opinion, in his argument, in Calvin and Kitchin's Case in the
Exchequer: that for the Simoniacal attempt only, he is disabled to take the
same Benefice. It Is the intention St. Peter so severely sentenced, charging
him, Act. 8.21.
That his heart was not right in the sight of God. And again, repent therefore,
if peradventure the thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee. Yet this thought
could make none guilty in foro humano without some overt act to discover it.
And thus go the Decretals, If he be detected, I. q. 1.
quodvis praemium obtulisse, ex eodem tempore, noverit se esse anathematis
opprobrio condemnatum, He was anathematized for offering a gift. And Gratian
affirms from Greg. Nazian. Qui studet donum Dei pretio mercari, etc. if he cast
about to do it, it is a Capital crime, and Simoniacal heresy. Christ whipped the
Buyers and Sellers for offering to sale and cheapening. And Gregory tells
Siagrius. Qui ultro ambit vel importune se ingerit, est procul dubio
repellendus: for says he, men should not enter the Church suffragio venditorum,
but judicio Dei: not by the Mercenary Votes of Men, but by the judgment of God:
which appears only when men's judgments are not corrupted with testations.

2. It Is an unlawful promotion by Simoniacal means, though the Incumbent be not
privy to it: no nor Patron neither. For he is (as the Canons distinguish)
Simoniace promotus, though he be not Simoniacus. In conscience he has no call
from God; C. 17. Number. 16.
and in Law, the Benefice is void: yet here as Navar observes, the Incumbent
falls not under Excommunication. It was never thought fit, men should be
promoted in the Church by sin, though none of their own. Degg shows in a case
of Bath and Potter, 17 Jac. in the King's Bench, that neither Patron nor
Incumbent were Privees, yet the Church was void by Simony.

3. To contract with a Father, or any other, for a Living, in consideration of
a marriage, as soon as it shall fall void is unlawful. That this is Simony by
the Canon is proved before, Nulli liceat Ecclesiam nomine dotalitatis ad
aliquem transfer. And the Act, 31 Eliz. 6. comprises it, in those geral
words. If any Person for any profit, directly or indirectly, shall present,
etc. A benefit it is, for it goes in lieu of a Portion in whole or part. And
(under favor) it is beneath the gravity and learning of a Judge, to say the
Covenant is good, if the words (in consideration of a Marriage) be not there:
for that were to submit honesty to subtilty: and to make the best Laws a tie to
none but Fools, and to trammel Justice with Letters and Syllables. Yea, it is to
make Justice punish words rather than things; since the fact will be declared
innocent, if it be not ill worded. The Crime is in truth, that the Patron robs
the Church for his Child's portion; and chooses to be sacrilegious rather than
his Daughter shall want a Husband. If the Incumbent will appeal to his own
conscience, he might as well have paid 200 l. for it; unless he be a man of
very despicable parts and fortunes.

4. It Is unlawful to persuade others to give or promise any Pension or reward
to procure a Living. This is the (...) or (...) of the ancient Canons, and
Civil Law, that they so heavily anathematize: Nomoc. tit. 1. c. 5. Schol.
this is the (...) and (...) of Photius. And so does our Law condemn it too;
else how came the Incumbent then in the University and knowing nothing of the
bargain to be outed for Simony, which he never meddled in, as in Baker and
Rogers Case? Cro. Eliz 788.
And in Fowler and Lapthorn's Case 17. Jac. in the Kings Bench. So that such
Setters mend not the matter, but make it worse, and are often instruments of
discovery and witnesses of truth. Arsenius the Monk, makes them all as guilty
as Simon Mugus: Synopsis Can. c. 49.
not only Presenter and Presentee: but (...), which he proves by the
Apostolical and Chalcedon Canons, though he mistake the 22d for the 2d. And
they are likewise condemned by the 6th and 7th Synod, by Tharasius Epistle, and
St. Basil's 85 Canon, and Gennadius the Patriarchs Epistle: which is evidence
enough of the Churches judgment in this case.

5. It Is not lawful to give any Bonds or Covenants, that may hinder the
Incumbent, from the full enjoyment of the Church, and all its profits during
life. As is plain by all the Canons, but is more particularly declared against
in that of Photius, Nomoc. tit. 1. c. 5. Schol.
where he tells us, not only Money giving is condemned, but (...) etc. all
Securities of what kind soever: all Bonds by Sureties, and all Pledges etc.
which are there decreed to be void; which Decrees he takes out of the Canons,
and civil Law. And our Canons forbid the Patron to take aliquod emolumentum
pacto interveniente. And elsewhere, nullam pactionem inierit, he shall make no
bargain at all. And the Constitutions of Othobon the Legate made Anno Domini
1268, Lind. l. 5. tit. 3. c. nulli liceat. Constable Othob. tit. 33. c. quia
plerunque.
universas promissiones and pactiones penitus revocat; all Bonds, Contracts,
Bargains, are void of what kind soever, made in consideration of a
Presentation. Nor is the Statute much short, that provides, If any Person by
reason of any Bond -- for any Benefit, whatsoever directly shall Present, etc.
the Presentation is void. Will not the word any Bond contain charitable Bonds?
nor Bonds for Resignation? It Is believed Patrons would not trouble themselves
about Bonds for no benefit whatsoever. Hence Justice Foster is suspected of too
little reason or honesty, Noy. 142.
that was so earnest in Baker and Mountford's case, to declare a Bond taken by
the Patron from the Presentee to pay 10 l. per annum to his Predecessors Son,
in the University, whilst unpreferred, a good Bond: though he offered a
precedent for it, in the Earl of Sussex case; where he said, a like Bond for
payment of 5 l. per annum, to his Predecessors Widow, was held lawful: for both
are alike unreasonable, as will appear upon these ensuing considerations.

1. That the Patron has no right to all, or any part of the profits: and
therefore can no more dispose them, than of any other man's estate. The Ordinary
has the profits tempore vacationis: the Parson has the Freehold: and the
Fee-simple is in nubibus, in abeiance, in gremio legis, says Sir Edw. Cook.
There are some that hold the Fee-simple in the Parson: but none ever thought it
in the Patron. Cap. 23.
You may see this point well discussed by Mr. Hughes of Grayes Inn, in his
Parsons Law: where he gives the reason of the Laws policy, to be, to avoid
alienations and disseisins to be made by the Church or any other. And in truth
the right of Patronage, Cowell in v. Patronus.
is jus praesentandi Clericum ad ecclesiam vacantem ex part ei concessum: qui
consentiente Episcopo, vel instruxit, vel dot avit ecclesiam. It Is a right to
present a Clark to a vacant Church, granted to him in part, who (with the
Bishops consent) either built or endowed the Church. And much to the same
purpose is it described by the Gloss in the Provinciale vetus, saying, L. 2.
tit. 2. cap. circumspecti agatis.
Jus Patronatus est honorificum jus, onerosum and utile, competens alicui in
ecclesia, pro eo quod Diaecesani autoritate illam fundavit, dotavit vel
construxit ipse: vel is a quo justam causam habet. It Is an honorable
burdensome and useful right in a Church, accruing to any one, for that he
founded, endowed or built it, by the authority of the Diocesan; either himself;
or some other from whom he claims. So that (says the gloss) non respicit
oblationes vel decimas. It relates not to Offerings and Tithes, but would
remain if they were taken away. Nor will that which we call an Advowson, give
him better right, to convert the profits, to any other use than the Parsons:
for Cook's Instit. L. 4. p. 240.
1. fol. 17. out of Bracton, calls it a power to present to a Church in his own
name, not in another: still it relates to the Church, not to its profits;
which Law and Custom kept out of his fingers. But whoever shall consider the
tremenduous circumstances, with which the Instruments of Foundation, Endowment
or both, were offered upon the Altar; to divest and disseise, themselves and
their heirs, of the building Gleabes and profits: and to put all into the right
and possession of Almighty God, and his Church, with the dreadful Imprecations,
upon all that should attempt, to alter, or diminish it, would wonder any
after-ages would venture to touch the Anathema, and thereby entitle themselves
to their fathers Curses: but of this before: Patrons are Advocates; it is
strange they should prove Adversaries: Patroni a patrocinio not a latrocinio.
Their duty is to find out a good Shepherd for the flock: not a Simoniack for
his Purse.

How early this Right of Patronage came into the Church, may be discovered by
Justinians Law contained in the Novels: where he provides, Novell. 57. c. 2.
That if any built a Church and endowed it: he might present a Clark to it: but
the Patriarch might refuse to ordain him, if he judged him not fit for the
service. And by another Law he provides, Novell. 123. c. 18.
as a suppliment to the former, That if the Patron nominated an unworthy Person
to the Church so built and endowed; the Bishop might both refuse him, and
prefer whom he judged worthy: that so Patrons might present worthy men or lose
their Right. Both these Laws imply, that the Right accrues from the foundation
of the Church: yet was it never so absolute, but the Bishop had a Negative
voice, upon the Patron*

Some think the Peoples rights of Election, were swallowed up by this
Advancement of Patrons. But it is very plain by all the debates of this matter,
that though many things are produced or producible out of Antiquity, about the
Peoples Rights in choosing of Bishops; yet there is no footstep of any such
Right to choose Presbyters, or Parochial or Congregational Ministers: which yet
is the point in issue, between the Church of England and their Adversaries. And
it is pity it is no more minded by the Litigants on both sides. For whatsoever
Canon gives people any Right, gives it in conjunction with the Clergy: but what
Clergy are there to choose in a single Congregation? And if there were, what
need they choose another to make a Pastoral Relation? must there be Pastors
upon Pastors in Infinitum? Has not the Church of Virginia authority to send a
Pastor among the Indians, to feed them with the word and, doctrine; and baptize
them upon that command, Go teach all nations and baptize them: without the
peoples choice? Will any affirm, he can preach no otherwise than as a gifted
Brother among them? This New England fancy, has hindered the salvation of the
Indians amongst them: And had the Apostles and Elders believed it, had hindered
the salvation of the world.

Men should consider, that in the Primitive times, there were no Parishes to
choose; nor did the People pay the Presbyters but the Bishop. Nor were they so
fixed in any place, Pallad. in vita Chrysostom.
as not to be moveable at the discretion of the Bishop Chrysostom maintained
many Presbyters (whom he sent to preach in Phaenicia) at his own charge. Nor
did the world know any other distinction, but of City and Regionary Presbyters.
They were bred up in the Church, from Lectors, Acolytes, Exorcists,
Subdeacons, Deacons, Priests, in all which offices they usually staid some
time; and were advanced at the discretion of the Bishop, without the People.
Nor were they permitted to convert any offering, made in the Country, to their
own use, but accounted for it at the City Altar.

Nor do we hear any Complaints of the people, against the usurpations of these
Patrons, now newly erected: which we may reasonably believe they would have
done, had they found any Law of God broken, or custom of the Church altered, or
Rights of the People invaded, or Ministers obtruded against the usual practice.
These things considered, an unprejudiced mind will be satisfied, the people
never had nor used any right, in choosing Congregational guides: whatever they
might do in Electing Bishops: whom they owned as complete Pastors, for worship
and censures too: and from whom they received their Presbyters, and to whom
they made their Offerings.

Nor are the Patrons Antichristian (as some are pleased to call them) whilst
they conscientiously manage, their Right of Praesentation: without these
sacrilegious practices: but are lovers of their Nation and Religion in building
them Synagogues. And might have expected prayers and thanks from any but these
murmurers; that defame what they cannot imitate.

A good Author tells us, Dugd. View of our troubles. c. 35. p. 411.
that some in Praise-God Barebones Parliament, Dec. 13, 1653, were earnestly
voting down Patrons: but others urged, that this was an attempt to destroy the
Subjects Property; and that ended the debate. Our dissenting Brethren so far
favor that Anabaptistical fury, in complaining of Patrons invading the peoples
Rights, as if they meant to espouse their folly. Questionless Patrons are
apprehensive enough, that Dissenters Principles cannot take place, but by their
ruin; and therefore will keep a watchful Eye upon them. But I return, and am
only to dissuade them from the ill use of that Spiritual Trust that is in their
hands.

If the Patron will be charitable, L. 7. ep. 110.
he ought also to be just: and not to rob for a Burnt offering. Gregory the
Great, has vehemently lashed this wickedness; telling men they were more
laden by their Sacrilege, than eased by their Charity. That 'twas one thing to
give Alms to purge our sins: and another to sin that we may give Alms. He says
the rule is, Prove. 3.9.
honor the Lord with thy substance, not with other men's. Did not Justice
Foster know, that the sacrifice of the wicked, was an abomination to the Lord.
Is not this to rob the Spouse of Christ for an offering to her Husband? to
sacrifice the Priest for atoning of the Deity: or like Judas to relieve the
Poor with our Saviors ointment; O blind hypocrisy, that expects Grapes from
Thorns: and to receive good for doing evil.

2. These charitable Bonds, are a very compendious way to starve Religion out
of the world. For if the Patron may give 5 l. to the Widow, why not 10 l. to
the Daughter; and 20 l. more to the use of the Poor: and as much more to repair
Highways, etc. and require Bonds for all these: And Justice Foster declare
them good. It Is easy to cut large Cantals out of another man's Loaf. And the
Logicians will tell him, a quatenus ad omne valet argumentum; If one be lawful,
all of the same kind are. We may presume all honest Lawyers ashamed of the
Decision.

3. Should these charitable Bonds be judged good, corrupt Patrons might by this
color avoid all Convictions of Simony. For what is more easy than to take
Bonds in others names, for our own advantage? Can men ever want pretenses for
Charity? are poor such rare and scarce Commodities? Is it meet for Courts of
Judicature to assist such avaricious Earthworms, to baffle the wisdom of the
whole Nation at once. And render their just and holy Laws ridiculous? In the
Act against Simony; England has showed its love to Learning and Religion, as
well as to Justice and Equity: and is it not sad, if a false hearted Bond,
disguised under a cloak of charity, should render all vain? All the wine of
Consolation to Learning and Piety, may be drawn out at this one Tap of feigned
charity. Should the Lawyers declare the Law in favor of these Bonds, they
would but encourage Sacrilege, and help forward these Patrons damnation: and
stain the Reverend Scarlet, by sharing in the sin; and suppress the Law to
support the Malefactor. But let the Simonist remember, if he escape this Bar,
there is another; at which the conscience will tell the whole Story: and then
the Sentence will be, Thy Money perish with thee. O voice of Thunder! but a
stony heart cannot hear it.

6. It Is Simony to give Bonds for Resignation at the Patrons pleasure, though
upon pretense of a Son to be preferred when fit. It Is true at first blush, this
Plea seems reasonable: Crook. p. 2. 248.
and found favor 8. Jac. in Jones and Lawrences case, as Sir Geeorge Crook
reports it. And so did another 5 Car. 1. in the Kings Bench, Crook. Car. 1.180.
between Babington and Wood, reported by the same Author: where was no pretense
of a Son. But it is said, that in neither of these cases, was any Simoniacal
contract averred: otherwise it might have been doubtful: Pars Couns. part 1. c.
5.
whether the Bonds would have been found good or not, says Sir Simon Degge. Nor
was it likely the Incumbent should allege a Simoniacal Contract, for then the
Living was void, and himself outed. Noy 22.
Yet this Gentleman mentions a case in Noy between Clerk and Paschal Trin. 15.
Jac. in C. B. where the Bond for Resignation at pleasure was sued, and judged
Simoniacal: but then the Church is declared void by such judgment, the
Incumbent carrying the cause, but losing his Benefice; and is incapable of it
for ever, though the King should pardon the Simony, and present him afresh.

But to clear this matter, let us consider, 1. That all the Arguments against
charitable Bonds conclude as strongly against these: but would be tedious to
repeat.

2. That if they should not prove Simony in Law, yet would be so in conscience;
and likewise in the Canon Law: which forbids all contracts whatsoever.

3. Patrons by these Bonds, act a most insolent and arbitrary power: against
the Liberties of the Church, and all the Subjects of this Kingdom beside. The
Church in Magna Charta made at Westminster, 10 Feb. Anno 9. Hen. 3. Anno Domini
1224, is the first Subject of Liberty; in the first Chapter. Where the King
grants to God: and for him and his Heirs confirms, That the Church of
England shall be free, and have all her Rights and Liberties inviolable. One of
which was to enter upon her Cures without Compacts and Bargains with Patrons;
as appears by the Canons made at London in the reign of Henry the 2d, and his
Son then crowned King: and by those of Stephen Langton made but two years
before; as also by the Canons of the four first general Councels, Hist.
ecclesiae Angl. l. 4. c. 7.
which were received in England says Bid long before, and are so still, says
the Statute Eliz. 1. cap. 3. To impose Oaths, Bonds, Contracts upon Justices,
Sheriffs, Knights and Burgesses in Parliament, Constables, Churchwardens,
Overseers, more than the Law imposes, would be thought arbitrary and tyrannical
Oppression; and can it be less to impose such obligations on the Rectors or
Vicars of the Churches? Must they enter the Church as Felons, their trials with
Gives and Fetters? Must they preach to the Patrons as St. Paul to Agrippa in
Chains? May not an Angel of the Church be trusted, till bound to his good
behavior? Who ever laid Shackles on any Ambassadors but these of Christ? the
Shepherd is used like a Dog; the Patron having put a Rope about his Neck to
pull him up or out at his pleasure. O vain name of Liberty whose sense is
bondage!

4. These Bonds may endanger the Protestant Religion; for if Patrons be Popish,
how dare men in these Obligations, reprove it, or confirm their people against
it? May not Papists have Sons to prefer as well as Protestants? Or have that
Sect only no patronages in their hands? The Dog must come over at his call that
holds the string, whether into Popery or Fanaticisme. When King and Parliament
cannot silence some bastard Teachers; these Patrons can at a word silence the
most Orthodox Divine: if any such enter their Bonds.

5. These Bonds include a greater Heresy, then any yet, this fruitful age and
Nation has brought forth. For it presumes the Ministerial calling to be for
term of years: that God's people may be leased out to a Governor. That he is
but a Hireling and Curatus pro tempore, whose own the Sheep are not, but the
Sons. That Priests may be laid aside for no cause but the Patrons pleasure,
which tends directly to make him careless, to follow the world, and make Hay
while the Sun shines. Not to consider the people as his charge, nor to think of
living and dying with them; nor of making any account for them. Nor to plant on
the Gleab, nor to repair the Houses or Chancels: but to grasp what he can,
because his time may be short. But seriously, do these men think Aaron's Patent
was during pleasure? Was Christ less than a Priest for ever? Was it not a sad
corruption in the Jewish Church, when Annas and Caiaphas were high Priests for
years? Can they think it fit to remove a Minister when he best understands his
people; and bring in an ignorant Novice, because called my son? Are they fit
for the Kingdom of God, that look back when they have put their hand to the
Plough? The Laborers in Christ's Vineyard, came in at several hours, but went
out altogether, when the dark covering of death shut up their day. Our Canons
forbid any Priests to relinquish their calling, Can. 3. Jac. can. 76.
or to use themselves afterward as Laymen upon pain of Excommunication. Ames
propounds this Question, Ames. l. 4. c. 25. n. 32.
An vocatio ad Ministerium institui possit ad certos annos; and answers,
Repugnat plane ministerii naturae, and gives these reasons for it. 1. God has
not allowed it. 2. It abates affection between Priest and People. 3. It makes
the dignity of the calling seem mercenary. 4. Ministers and People may part to
both their prejudice. N. 35.
And again tells us what causes may justify a parting from ones calling. Si
tamen causa talis intercedat quae vel ineptum aliquem reddat ad ministerium
exercendum, vel exercitium ejus impossible reddit, velpeccandi necessitatem
adfert exercenti, turn nutu divino solvi videtur. It Is certain Athanasius,
Nazianzen, Chrysostom, etc. were removed from their Churches, but by
Persecutors, not Patrons. And many others for Heresy or Schism; but then 'twas
by sentence of the Church, or State, or both: but never by single Patrons. They
so ruffle all Laws Divine and Humane, that the Lawyers can scarce resolve where
the Freehold is, when the Incumbent is a Farmer at pleasure. These men make
havoc of Christ's Institutions, and put Barnacles on the Nose of Religion as
they list. They make Priests as summer Insects to be mere Ephemerists. If the
Incumbent say with St. Paul, We be to me if I preach not the Gospel: these
Gold-suckers tell him, you shall then preach with Bid to the Quarries, or with
Orpheus to the Trees; for we will remove you to make way for our Sons. Thus is
Christ's, Steward turned out of his House, without leave or privity of the
Master.

6. The care to prefer Sons seems natural, but was never judged spiritual. Old
Eli was ruined for honoring his Sons before God. 1 Samuel 2.29. And the
Decretals treating of Ecclesiastical profits, 16. q. 7. pervenit.
complain of the ill bestowing them to unfitting persons, vel quod gravius* est
etiam Consanguineis; as if giving them to Kinsmen were the greatest crime of
all. And the rules were, est honestum officium siliam dotare non tamen ex bonis
ecclesiasticis. And cognatosi juvare ut decenter vivant: but not to prostitute
the Church to them, as Soto Cajetan Bannes etc. affirm. And care was taken in
the Election of Bishops, as Balsamon's Collections show, Tit. 3. n. 41. ex lib.
1. cod.
that they should be (...), that they should have no Sons or Nephews, lest they
should act naturally, and prefer them to the prejudice of Religion. The Law
confined Priests to one tribe, but these like the Heathenish superstition,
would confine it to one family. As the Pinarii only could be Priests of
Hercules; and the Eumolpidae of Athens, the only Sacrificers to Ceres. It seems
a kind of disherison, to the Patrons Sons, if Churches be not kept without
Pastors, by hirelings, till they be fit. Though they may never live to it, nor
receive any internal Call: nor affect the employment; nor be grave or learned
enough for it. One would think both Patron and Judges believed Sons put
Apprentice to learn the Trade of Priesthood, and would be out of their time at
a certain day, and the Churches were but Shops kept open for them to set up in.
They may well forgive us, if we think the Atheists that deal thus rudely with
Religion. Cokes Jnst. 3. c. 71. f. 154.
Sir Edward Coke produces an old Epigram by Which we may see what kindness the
Church has had for these Kinsmen.

Quatuor Ecclesias Portis intratur in omnes
Caesaris and Simonis, Sanguinis atque Dei.
Prima patet Magnis; Nummo patet altera; Charis
Tertia; sed paucis Quarta patere solet.
By twice two Gates all Churches entered be,
Caesar's, and Simons, Kindred, and Deity.
Nobles the first; the second Rich men take.
Our Kin the third; the fourth most forsake.
7. This Cloak will serve to cover all Simony whatsoever; for though some have
no sons, they may have Daughters, which would make Sons-in-Law; they may have
Grand-sons, Nephews, Cousins, etc. and is it in no degree natural to keep open
Livings for them? Does not nature tie us to provide for Relations sooner than
Strangers? 'Twas never known the Pope wanted a Nephew for a preferment. One
would think Churches were founded not so much to serve God as these Patrons:
whose Family must be supported though on the ruins of Religion. But stay, how
can men escape the edge of the Statute by these Bonds? since it declares, all
Bonds given in consideration of a Presentation, do make that Presentation void;
if they are of any profit or benefit whatsoever. Now can any man satisfy his
conscience, that he which takes the Bond is in no better condition, than if he
had none. Do not all men believe, he can make Money of it, if he will? Is there
no Market in which such a Bond would sell? Does not the account of Patron and
Incumbent both reckon it at 300 or 400 l. Cannot the Patron demand 10, or 20 l.
from the Incumbent every year? and dares he deny him, and so be outed of his
usefulness and livelihood together. The weakest eye can look through this thin
Cobweb, and much more the strong judgment of the Reverend Bench.

But let us contemplate a while, what dangerous Tools these Bonds are to the
Commonwealth. Men marry their Daughters to Incumbents, in hope of a
comfortable subsistence. At length these Bonds put forth their horns, and toss
the Fathers hopes into the pit of despair. Or peradventure the Patron wants an
Oath, which if the Incumbent will not lend him, this close Cur is slipped upon
him, and worries him out of a thousand Marks. To have offered him Money, had
been subornation, though but five pounds but to sue these Bonds, find favor in
the Court. May not the Patron thus force an unpleasant Kinswoman, whom he
cannot love, and so ruin two at once? May he not force him to relinquish the
justest suit against a Parishioner by trumping up this Bond against him? May he
not by these cursed ways, rob any Parish of the most painful and edifying
Minister, whom their souls most dearly affect? and tie the Incumbent to
destructive Compositions? yea (which is worse) to wink at their Patrons sins;
and prostitute the holy Sacraments, to a Soul more unclean than the common
Shoars. This poor man must find a 100 l. to buy pins for the Patrons Miss, if
he require it. Nay the honest Neighbors that lend the Incumbent Money for
necessary use: having an eye to his Parsonage to encourage their credit: if
these Bonds prevail, are trapan'd out of their Money. Blessed God! what a
lernae malorum is here? It Is not to be doubted, but a true Patriot will never
endure these private Daggers, that serve to murder public safety.

Lastly, These Bonds are injurious to every man in England, besides the
Patrons: for they, their Sons or Relations, are capable (upon due
qualification) to be presented to these Livings: and ought by all Laws divine
and humane, to enjoy the whole profits for their lives, that the Laws of the
Kingdom, and the charity of well disposed persons have settled upon them. These
profits are not the Patrons inheritance, that they should suck profit from
them; but the peoples that can qualify themselves for them. Nor have Patrons
Sons any advantage above other people that way; since a vacant Church must be
disposed in six months or lapsed, be their Sons ready or unready. If it be a
crime to invade the rights of any one; much more it is to usurp upon all. So
that this practice is not only (...) but (...): it robs whole Nations at once.
Accordingly, we ought to run to suppress it as a Common fire, that threatens
destruction to the whole Neighborhood, and to treat them that usurp as Beasts
of prey.

I have met with one instance of this corrupted practice, older than one
hundred years. And that was of Romanus a Patrician, advanced to the Empire of
Constantinople, about the year 923, who (the better to secure the Sovereignty
to himself and Family) made his two eldest Sons, Stephen and Constantine
Caesar's; and resolved to create his younger Son Theophylact Patriarch (if
possible) of the Royal City. To that end, he was put into the Clergy at Eleven
years of age: Curopal. Zonar.
and was made Patriarch say some at sixteen; he should have been, but that he
was a Minor say others; Niceph.
and so could not receive it in that vacancy. Upon which Romanus promoted
Tryphon the Monk, to the Patriarchal Chair; but under Covenants to resign to
his Son Theophylact, when he should attain the of age twenty five years. At
which period Tryphon refused to resign, averring the Bonds extorted and
unlawful. To judge which, the Emperor called a Synod of Neighboring Bishops,
who were ashamed of the Fact, and would not justify the Contract, nor condemn
the Patriarch, for refusing to recede, as a thing horridly scandalous. But
admitted an accusation against him, as an illiterate man, and therefore
unworthy the Chair. One under pretense of kindness, went to him, and informed
him of the accusation, desiring him to write his Name and Titles upon a Paper,
which he would show the Synod, to the utter confutation of his Adversaries.
Which when the poor Patriarch had done, a Resignation of the Patriarchate, was
written, above his name and delivered to the Synod. Upon which, they
inaugurated young Theophylact into the Chair of Constantinople, Anno Domini
944. Others I confess say Tryphon was but his Substitute till he came to that
age. This young Patriarch suited well his entrance; living but twelve years,
and that in all kind of Luxury and Riot; minding Dogs and Horses, more than
Churches, and the Souls of men. And leaving nothing remarkable, but that
(instead of feeding Christ's Sheep) he fed 2000 Horses with the profits of his
Bishopric. Cedrenus.
And better could not be expected, from such an Entrance. He died, 956.

7. As we have showed it no Simony to purchase an Advowson in Fee; so it is as
plain Simony to purchase the next Presentation: especially if the Church be
empty, or the Incumbent sick or aged. This is malum in se, though happily not
malum prohibitum. For here it is presumed the intention is Simoniacal. And in
truth the right of Patronage is not salable at all, if it be a spiritual thing
only: but in England it is accounted by some a mere temporal thing. But by the
most and best, it is reckoned partly temporal, V. Glos. 1. q. 1. quod autem.
and partly spiritual: and so it will prove, for as Lindwood de jurejurando
well notes, consider it as descendable to heirs, and purchasable in Fee; and so
it is temporal, but jus patronatus, and praesentatio, dicuntur spiritualia
respectu rei ad quam praesentatur: quae spiritualis est. Consider it as it is a
presentation to a Church, and to exercise divine offices, and so it is
spiritual. And all the profits of a Church are spiritual as devoted to God and
his Service. And so is the Parson presented too. Extra. de judic. c. quanto:
ubi de hoc.
Accordingly the Canons determine their actions, to be managed in foro
ecclesiastico; but the custom of England is otherwise. Now how much Patrons
scrape out of these sales of Advowsons is not easy to imagine. Were the Church
their Freehold, they could scarcely make more; and get the cure served. Horn
in his Speculum Justitiariorum tells us, the Advowson of a Church is so much in
the spirituality, that there can be no alienation thereof but in Fee-simple.
Cap. 2. s. 27. sub Titulo Contracts.
If this were the law under Edw. 1, and Edw. 2, in whose reign, this Reverend
Judge is said to live: how came it to be altered? and Contracts, pro hac vice
now thought lawful. Do the Lawyers change the Law at their pleasure, as
Sectaries do Religion? then is both Religion and Law ambulatory, and may both
leave the Kingdom at length. We may yet hope a right English Parliament, will
find time to retrench these Enormities, and new lopp this overgrown Tree of
Avarice. In the mean time let Patrons know, that if Law allow it, conscience
cannot: for in them it is rapine, sacrilege, betraying of trust, living on what
is none of their own; and enriching themselves with Church-Revenues. Com. In
Luc. 4. multi leprosi.
I wish they would hear St. Ambrose, Male quaesita mercede non tam patrimonium
facultatum: quam the saurum criminum congregarunt: aeterno supplicio and brevi
fructu. By ill got Goods, we increase our treasure of sins, rather than of
Money, little benefit, but everlasting punishment. And again in his Book de
dignitate Sacerdotali, he says Caro suscepit dignitatem, and anima perdidit
honestatem: they receive Money into their pockets, and lose honesty out of
their hearts. Our law does so detest this avaricious course, that it has made
it punishable but to Elect a Scholar or Fellow etc. 31 Eliz. 6.
into any College for Money: which is a small thing, compared with presenting
a Priest to a Church.

4. Having laid down what is Simony in Law and Conscience, as far as we could
judge, and occasion offered; we must now consider what respect the Common Law
has for it; by which we shall discover the true old English spirit: that
disdained avarice and falsehood, and scorned to do a contumelious action. The
Abridger of our Statutes, says in the Preface; the whole Senate have bestowed
at least half their time and industry, in hacking at part of the Branches,
Boughs, Sprouts, Roots or Leaves of that monstrous ugly, and hideous Tree
Avaritia. -- Yet it still sprouted again like a Hydraes head in another form
and different shape. But the Common Law, has had the same bent and design.
Simony is odious in the eye of the Common Law, Inst. 3. c. 71. f. 153.
says Coke its greatest Oracle: where he gives a double instance of it. A
Gardein in Socage, may not present to a Living, because he cannot account to
the heir for it: as being of no value nor benefit to him. And therefore the
Heir shall present, though he be under age. And also if an heir of Tenent in
Capite, have Livery cum exitibus, yet shall the heir not present to an
Advowson, V. Com. in stat. 31. Eliz. 6.
because no issues nor profits can be taken thereof. He farthera ffirms, 'twas
the more odious because always accompanied with perjury. Again in another
place, he tells us, the Common Law so much detested Simony, that before the
Statute of Westminster. the 2d, no damages could be recovered upon a Quare Impedit,
lest (says he), any profit the Patron should take, should savor of Simony. And
this seems to me reasonable enough yet still: for if the Patron have costs, why
should he have damage of that which never could be profit to him, Inst. 2.
Westminster 2. c. 5. f. 362.
had he had it; and could be no diminution of his Revenue, had he lost it: but
we must acquiesce in public judgment. Yet he says, it is so with the King
still. For he can have no damage upon his Quare impedit; because he could not
recover any by the Common Law before; and that Statute helps him not, though it
do the Subject

And the same Author seems very certain, Bonds for resignation could not be
sued at Common Law; till the Statute of Westminster the 2d, for that the Incumbent
once instituted and settled, the Patron could have no Writ to remove him, ^b.
fol. 357.
though wrongfully presented; and gives these reasons for it. 1. Because having
Curam animarum a great charge, he might the more effectually and peaceably
attend it. 2. Because he came in by a Judicial Act from the Bishop, to the
Church: who is supposed in Law to act Scrutatis Archivis. And the form of
Institution implies no less: for the Te instituo ad tale beneficium, and habere
curam animarum. Et accipe curam tuam and meam; Accept thine and my Cure,
signifies that the Bishop gives him his own Cure: which also shows what Cowell
meant by jus patronatus ex part Concessum: for the Bishop had still a share in
that Right. Now while the Bishop institutes, and the Archdeacon inducts for
life; It would be strange that the Patron should have power to limit him,
against both at his pleasure only.

From hence we may see, how much the English Conscience, formerly nauseated
this rank poison: which our degenerate age, so greedily devours. Let them
never talk of tender consciences, that can so glibly swallow this accursed
thing. It Is a blessed sight to behold this Nation shining in her integrity;
when all others had blackt themselves with this Sacred Villainy. Photius that
famous Patriarch, says of the Greek Church; whether any Layman becomes
Procurator of any holy place, Nomoc. tit. 1. c. 24. sch. in fine.
or receives any ecclesiastical Ministry: (...), and so falls on his Knees for
pardon. And for the German and French Churches, Gregory the Great says, in
Galliarum vel Germaniae partibus, nullus ad sacrum ordinem, sine commodi
datione perveniat. Lib. 4. ep. 51.
And for the Roman Church, we have observed something of their guilt before:
and shall farther note their Simoniacal Laws. That men must concordare cum
Camera Apostolica, In Syntag. tractatuum.
which is flat Simony. Theodoricus a Niem; and the Decretals say, Pallium nisi
dato commodo non dabatur. Dest. 99. c. 1. Novit.
No Money no Pall, the price must be first agreed. They come open mouthed with
Judas, quid dabitis? what will you give? Simony is a great part of the Pope's
Revenue. Humphred attempts in his Puritano-Papismus against Campian to
enumerate the several ways. Nummos corradunt pro licentiis -- They scrape up
Money for Licenses, Dispensations, Absolutions, Commutations, from Fornicators,
Whores, Jews, ill-promoted Bigamists, Homicides, Simoniacks: from such as eat
Milk-Meats, (sc. in fasting days) and from them that officiate to the Greeks in
Greek; to the Latins in Latin: so many Processes a Rota, Reservations,
Graces, Indulgences, Preventions, Provisions, tradings of Dataries, Masters of
the Ceremonies, Porters, Officials, Protonotaries, Advocates, Masters of the
Lead, Keepers of the Iron Gates; of the Privy Garden of the Popes and
Cardinals: that Benedict the 12th does jocularly tell us: another world must be
created, to supply all their covetous desires. Bold Probus calls them all
Romuleos vultures: Probus episcopus Tullensis in Avent. Annal. 1380.
and Honorius 4th in particular, a Gold-Sucker. Rome once said of England,
'twas puteus inexhaustibilis; and England of Rome, they had Sitim inexplebilem.
These greedy Simonists occasioned this Distich, nigh 300 years since.

Intus quis? Tu quis? Ego sum. Quid quaeris? Vt intrem.
Fers aliquid? Non. Sta foris. En fero. Quid? Satis, intra.
Knock, Knock; who is there? it is I. What seek'st? to enter:
Bring'st ought? No. Stand. I bring. What? Well: come venture.
An Ass laden with Gold, may be sure of a Pall, at Rome: when a Seraphin (if
poor) returns naked. But for this Church, few or none but Campian had ever
impudence enough to charge this crime upon her; till of late, That honor and
Religion both were banished out of the heart, into the purse. Till our own
blood was dearer to us than our Savior's, and our Nephews nigher of kin to us
than our God. 'Twas gallant in our Richard the 1st, that he refused to see the
Pope, though in the mouth of Tyber, and earnestly desired by Octavian then
Bishop of Hostia, in disdain of his Simony, having taken 700 marks of the
Bishop of Mains; 1500 Marks for William Bishop of Ely's Legantine authority,
and infinite of the Archbishop of Bordeaux as Math. Paris and others note.

I shall now show to Patron and Incumbent apart, The sad consequences that
attend this vile practice, and so draw to a conclusion. We will prefer the
Patron and desire him to consider himself, as

1. A hearty Opposer of Learning and Religion, the two best things in the
World, and so as a third Conspirator, walks hand in hand with the Turk and the
Devil. Gregor. Magnus, observed long since to Theodoric and Theobert Kings, of
France: That if we suffer men to get livings by Money, Non vitam corrigere, non
mores componere studeant: Lib. 7. ep. 114.
sed divitias quibus honor sacer emitur, satagunt congregare. Men will not
strive to commend themselves to preferments, by a good life and correct
manners, which prevail nothing but to get money which commands all. And so
destructive is this course to Learning, Defen. Pacis. Part. 2. c. 20.
that Marsilius of Padua says, because covetous men get away their temporal
means, the Clergy were generally insufficient: and nigh four hundred of them in
his knowledge could not speak Latin. Nor is it likely ingenious men, should
take much pains to advance themselves to a halter, and to become Patrons
Bondslaves: or their Curates, till their Sons come at age. A younger Brother
from the Baudy-house rotten in wickedness is their best Chapman. Or a thick
scull'd son of a Farmer, that has learned to drink in the Country; and to tell
the Colleges names in the University; at his Fathers charges receives the next
preferment. But this is to debauch both Church and State: to eclypse the true
glory of a Nation: and to render serious Piety, the most useless and despicable
thing in the world: In Epist. ad Hospit.
and to split the Church into infinite Sects. I wish these Patrons would rather
take that famous Sorbonist Claudius Espencaes advice.

-- Secum ipse diu multumque requirat,
Ecquis apud Cives tanto sit dignus honor?
Nec precibus, pretiove locum det; equisque citatis.
More sed antiquo lecti proscribat aperte
Pontificis nomen --
Let Patrons long and much inquire,
Which of the Learned fits the Choire.
Nor prefer Letters, price, or speed.
But publish names of Priests decreed
To choose them as in ancient meed.
2. As a Betrayer of the most sacred trust, devouring the Pupil-Church
committed to his protection. A thing so base, he is fain to hide it in
darkness; as Thieves do robberies; and Cutthroats murders. And so ungentile,
that none but fordid Spirits, can be got to transact it, and they are fain when
asked, to cover it with a Lie; and blush at the sudden appearance of any
Stranger among them. The meanest wretches, think it something disgraceful to be
actors in it. It Is carried on as Whoredom, by signs and half words: rather
than openly discoursed; though between the Parties alone. It Is a Bastard that
none cares to own. It being no less dishonor to these men, to purloine, than
it was glory in their fathers to endow.

3. As an Excluder of the best men, from entering any Church, where he has to
do; had Patrons been anciently in power, our Savior himself, and all his
Apostles had been excluded: and Annas and Caiaphas admitted. Men of conscience
cannot, and men of parts, will not stoop to these sinful Conditions. Calv.
Inst. l. 4. c. 5. sect. 6.
Nor is it (as Calvin notes) the benefit of the Church, but of the Presentee;
that these men look after; as also their own; non ut ecclesiis fit prospectum
(says he) sediis qui accipiunt; and hence (as he goes on) they call it not
Ministerium but Beneficium: not service but benefice, that they present to.
Yea, these men would have excluded the whole 630 fathers, in that famous
Council of Chalcedon, because they were all against Contracts at Entrance, as
appears by their 2d Canon. Pious and humble men, refuse to enter by this Golden
Gate, where our Savior would not. It seldom proves a kind Match, where
Joyntures, and Jewels, are the only way of wooing: but extreme bad, where Money
is made the only call, and title to affection, between the Priest and People.
Were St. Peter a Patron, and one should offer him Money, his answer would be,
Thy money perish with thee, because thou think the gift of God may be
purchased, with money. Arnobius notes, that the first Christians saw so much
evil in Trade, Arnob. l. 2. mihi 86.
they were nigh condemning it: but they have sufficiently condemned this
already. How base must the house of God look? when pious and learned, the only
vessels of Gold and Silver, are all excluded? How coarse the Ecclesiastical
Batch, when all the flower is bolted out, and nothing used but Bran. A sad
Garden, where the Flowers are all cast out, and nothing left but Weeds. Dant
veniam Corvis and Let in all the Crows, and exclude the Doves. The scandals of
the Church, lie much at the door of these Patrons; who by promoting less
fitting men, have advanced the Separations. It Is a bold affront to Christ; to
let him have no Ambassadors, but men of no Conscience. Had there been more
Maecenas's the Church had had more Maro's: but Homer himself must be packing,
if he have no pay.

4. As the sole Reteiner of this Sin, in the World. God may be eased from this
Sin: and Nations freed from the Scourge, that attends, would Patrons give
leave. Our Kings, Parliaments, Laws, Crook,
and all (but one Judges Reports) are against it. The People cry it down. The
Sectaries decry Patrons and Patronages (for their avaritious choice and
impositions) as Antichristian. The Clergy must needs be against it, both in
Conscience and Interest; for what they do in this kind, must be the effect of
moral force. If therefore Patrons please, God may have lest dishonor, the
Church less scandal, the Kingdom less danger, and men's consciences less
trouble, by their laying aside this crying sin; and the world will have one
species of sin less than it had. If this may not be granted, we may reasonably
desire with the Sicilian (when Scipio the Praetor, appointed him a fool for his
Patron) that we may have none at all: but that he would appoint him to his
Adversaries. But why may we not prevail with them, to ease God of this trouble?
do they not value? nor can never need his favor? Have they no souls to be
saved? no Heaven to look after? no Hell to beware? no judgment day to dread? no
account to take care of? Is it all one, whether he please or displease? O then
we may fear the gingling of the Silver, makes them forget themselves: and as
St. Ambrose speaks, Ambr. In Lucam. c. 19.
Religiosarum audientiam Scripturarum tinnitus aeris excludit; and drowned the
voice of the holy Scriptures, yes, and of their consciences too.

5. Let him see his danger to himself and Family. Did not Gehezi take Money,
and with it a disease to him and his Heirs for ever? St. Ambrose observed upon
it, facta. authoris sucoessio damnatur haeredis. In Luc. c. 4. and multi
leprosi etc.
The father eat the sour grapes, and set all his Families teeth on edge. He
contracted that curse that eat up all his posterity. Did not Esau take Money
for his Birthright and blessing, and was made a spurious offspring of Isaac
for ever? (...) and very deservedly (says Greg. Nazi.) for how should he come
by salvation, that had sold his Savior? Who suffered the lashes of Christ, but
the Buyers and Sellers in the Temple? the rest were sent civilly away. Nor can
any bring them in, whom Christ whipped out. Nor can they be temples of the holy
Ghost, whom Christ ejected.

Every Author can furnish you with instances of the miserable devastations that
Sacrilege has made in the world: and Sacrilege (without doubt) it is, to usurp
to your own use, what is appropriate to divine Service: and Simony it is as a
Merchandise of spiritual things. Sacrilege, as it respects the profits: and
Simony, as it is a violation of the Spiritual calling. You are not the first
that have done it; nor the first that have been ruined by it. Josephus tells us
Theodectes was struck blind for mixing Scriptures with his Tragedies: but what
may we expect, that mix God's treasure with our estate? The Phocians had
ploughed away but a little of God's ground, and were sentenced for it in a good
sum, by that general Council of Greece the Amphictions, which being refused,
they were utterly routed out. Our Fathers devoted our Church-maintainance to
God, by their solemn vows at the Altar: Ananias and Saphira did no more: yet
when they withdrew part, nothing but their ruin could expiate the crime, both
dying away strangely, Act. 5.1. Your families may grow fat, but not healthful
by eating Church Revenues. In ancient time, none desired or attempted any such
thing, but indigent wretches, Cic. Bruto in reliqiis Attici ep. ult.
as Cicero observes to Brutus: Templis Deorum immortalium imminet hominum
egentium and perditorum spes. And few in our Age are guilty of it, but very
griping or very sharking families. And certainly the ways these proud and
beggarly men propound for their rise, will prove their ruin, since nothing can
be more dangerous, than to build our Houses so near the Flames of the Alrar.
And foolish to expect God should bless them in, and advance them upon the Ruin
of Religion, De non temerandis eccles.
and Property. 'Twere well, if the Gentry would often read the Collections of
that learned and pious Gentleman, Sir Henry Spelman, and they would soon
discover the lingering poison men swallow, whilst they greedily devour
Church-Morsels. A thousand Families have done it in our times; and a thousand
Families have perished by it.

Lastly, Let the Patron consider the Restitution he is bound to make, if he be
worth it; or undergo the punishment of his Iniquity for ever. For the saddest
Lamentations, humblest Confessions, deepest Humiliations, sharpest Contritions,
loudest Ejulations, and most heavenly supplications, will do no good, while we
continue our crimes. Let St. Aug. be the Casuist, and he resolves you: Ad
Macedon. ep. 54.
Si enim res aliena cum reddi potest, non redditur: non agitur paenitentia sed
fingitur. If we restore not what we sinned in taking, when we can; we do not act
repentance, but feign it. Huic paenitendi medicina non omnino prodest, this
medicine of Repentance, neither cures his guilt, nor discharges his punishment.
His prayers and tears are abomination to the Lord, because he remains in a
State of Simony and injustice. This the Heathens understood as well as
Christians: Cic. l. 2. de legibus.
for Cicero says, 'twas a chief Law amongst them, Impius ne, audeto placare
donis iram deorum: sante vota reddunto. Let not a wicked man attempt to pacify
God with gifts; but religiously observe his vows. Thus Hesiod directs (...) to
pay all services to God, Epv. (...) l. a.
chastely and purely cleared from guilt. If the mind be turned: the unjust gain
must be returned. Because what defiled us, when we got it, will defile us while
we keep it. Every days Deteiner is as every days fresh Robbery. Like a Thorn in
the Flesh, it ceases not to ranckle and prick, till it be drawn out. So that we
must part with our unjust gain, or our juft God, With Spoil or Heaven, for both
we cannot hold. We must leave our Gift unoffered, Math. 5.23.
till our Brother be satisfied for his wrongs. The Law is Ezech. 33.15. If the
wicked restore the Pledge, give again that he has robbed, walk in the Statutes
of life, without committing iniquity, he shall surely live: he shall not die.
And not only things unjustly gotten, but unjustly destroyed, require
satisfaction: as a Beast destroyed in a Neighbors pit. Exodus 21.33. Or a stack
of Corn set on fire. Exodus 22.6. Or standing Corn. Yea all things got by
plunder, or by cheating, he shall restore again. Lev. 5.4, 5. and if there were
none alive to receive satisfaction, he was bound to recompense it to the Lord.
Numb. 5.8. even to the Priest says the Text; who is the Lord's appointed
Receiver. But a Patron in the Casuists judgment, is bound to restore, if he had
but permitted others to wrong the Church: for Restituere tenetur, qui damnum
non impedit cum ex officio deberet. He is bound to restore the damage he
hinders not in case he be obliged to defend. Navar. l. c. 21. and mult. alios.
Hence it is the definition calls Patronage jus onerosum: for the Patron is
bound to protect. And the word Advowson supposes him an Advocate, as Lessius
notes: L. 2. c. 7. d^e. 22. q. 62. art. 4.
yes (says Aquinas) though he use no fraud to the Owner or the Law. And yet in
this case is a moral force on the Presentee, and a fraud upon the whole Law.
Nor is it any great credit, by Quirks to baffle the design of a righteous Law.

Let me upon the whole matter request these corrupt Patrons, in the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to consider themselves lying on their deathbed, their Souls
hovering upon their lips, ready to take its flight into another world: yet
afraid to go off, because of the just judgment of God at hand: not knowing how
to make Restitution, and less what to answer for the robberies committed on the
Church by Simony. To restore, will weaken his Estate, and abate his Childrens
portions. Not to restore, leaves him to die impenitent, and to appear at that
Tribunal besmeared all over with guilt. He could happily die for his Children;
but to be damned for them to Eternity, he thinks hard, his Soul shrinks at it:
and now counts it a sad bargain, to lose heaven and glory for these trifles. He
now wishes he had never known Patronages nor Presentations, Bonds nor
Obligations. And at length in desperation, casts down (with Judas) the gains of
iniquity, crying out, I have sinned in betraying the Church of God; and so
expires his last breath in flaming discontent. O horrid spectacle! fit only for
Devils to behold, and Furies to attend: fit to draw tears of blood from his
Childrens eyes: and groans from his Pastors Loins, and sorrowful Lamentations,
from all his Acquaintance; as too sad an Evidence of an unhappy bargain in
gaining the whole world, and losing his own soul.

2. The next address is to the Presentee; who (I know will tell me as St.
Ambrose Bishop did him, Ambr. de dignitate Sacerd. c. 5.
in the like case: Melius est mihi, aurum de sacello invehere, quam tantum
sacerdotium perdere: quos amem solidos (si vivo) recepturum me illico non
diffido. I do it unwillingly, but it is better for me to draw Gold out of my
Purse, than lose so great a Bishopric. I doubt not but to get my money back
again, if I live. But pray consider,

1. You carry about you a very earthy mind, your care will be to gain Shillings
not Souls: your mind is more at the Barn than the Church. This is to be that
hateful thing to God and man, a secular Priest. This is not to be the Preacher,
but Fool of the Gospel: Luc. 12.
that will rejoice in his Goods laid up for many days. Satan proffered Christ
all the Kingdoms of the world which he refused: but you would have taken. Is
this to be a Minister of Christ or of Judas? you will bid your people leave the
world, that you may take it: and advise them to secure Heaven that you may
secure Earth. They must set their affections on things above, that you may
grasp all below. Thus your Patron may commend you to the people; but your
conscience will condemn you to God; and then Caro dominatur populis (as the
same Father speaks) anima servit Daemoni; Ambr. ib.
your flesh governs the people, and your Spirit is governed by the Devil. You
enter Christ's harvest, tanquam ad auream messem, as if 'twere a harvest of Gold
not grace. Your care will be more to serve your Purse, than save your People.
It Is well if they be rich in says, but you are resolved to be rich in money,
which looks like serving the Bag rather than the Altar. In this Bargain says
the same Father, Ib.
quod dedit aurum fuit, quod perdidit anima fuit. He parted with his Gold and
lost his Soul; but got nothing: for says he, aurum dans perdidisli and gratiam
sanctam non acquisivisti. But why would you enter by sin? could not God find a
way for your subsistence without it? sides famem non formidat, says St. Hierom;
faith fears not hunger, and without faith you cannot be saved. It Is lawful to
contrive ways of living, but not ways of sinning.

The ancients called it gratiam spiritus, the favor of the holy Ghost, by
which men are called into the Ministry: and every Minister may write himself
Gratia Dei Pastor M. N. Hence this great Bishop argues, you ought to give
nothing for it: because Pro eo quod gratis datur, ideo gratia vocitatur. Ambr.
ib.
It Is called grace in regard it comes gratis. And it is true what he says
elsewhere, Id. In Luc. c. 4.
non enim pretio taxatur gratia Dei. Gods grace is not to be rated by money.
Will you read the judgment of that pious Bishop Jer. Tailor concerning your
Entrance. Ductor dub. l. 1. c. 2. r. 5. n. 17.
His intentions says he cannot be right, who by any indirect arts does enter:
for that which does not begin at God cannot be for God. Non enim ambitione vel
pretio, sed probatae vitae and disciplinarum testimonio, ad honoris and
sacerdotis insignia oportet promoveri, said the Emperor Theodosius. He
therefore who Simoniacally enters, fixes his Eye and heart upon that which he
values, to be worth Money: not on the spiritual employment -- he that comes
into the Field with an Elephant cannot be supposed to to hunt a Hare. The true
reason why such a one turned Priest, was because he could reach no more
profitable employment.

2. The Incumbent has a very tickle hold that thus enters: for (as was
suggested before) if any will discover he is both out and undone. In regard the
Statute, not only makes the Church void: and so he loses all his charges of
Institution, Induction, First Fruits, etc. but amerces him as also the Patron,
in the double value of one years profit, of the Living thus enterd. Which it is
probable may be more than he is worth. For the valuation is not to be according
to the Kings Book, but what it can be let for, as Sir Edward Coke in his
Exposition on the Statute affirms: 31 Eliz. 6.
and so do all other Law Books that I have seen. Add to this, that the
Incumbent is for ever disabled to hold that Living. And by the Canon Law is
incapacitated to obtain any other preferment whatsoever in the Church. These
Incumbents are the worst sort of Bandogs: and must be at every conscious
Persons whistle. And suppose them compelled in against him as Witnesses, he
must bribe deep to make them forswear themselves, for his security. This State
is so uneasy, that I knew one to droop and die away with discontent, at the
insolency and chargeableness of an Intermedler. May all men consider they
purchase slavery rather than preferment; and ruin their worldly as well as
heavenly joy by these courses. And the Parishioner may lawfully deny his
Tithes, if he can prove the Simony: as it was resolved in Sir John House and
Wrights Case in Easter Term, Hob. 467.168.177.
Jac. so dangerous a thing is it, for such an Incumbent to sue for his profits.

3. He is to consider, he has an Oath to swallow, and his Conscience is very
large if he can get it down. The substance of it was decreed in the first
Council at Oxford under Stephen Langton, Anno Domini 1222, in these words, Quod
propter praesentationem illam, nec promiserit, nec dederit aliquid
praesentanti; nec aliquam propter hoc inierit pactionem. That he gave nor
promised not only no Money, but nothing at all, nor entered into no Bargain; so
that all Bonds and Contracts were to be sworn against as well as Money. But the
Oath that is now administered is in the 40th Canon of those published by the
Convocation at London, 1. Jac. Anno Dommini 1603, in these words, I. M. N. do
swear, that I have made no Simoniacal payment, Contract, or Promise, directly
or indirectly, by my self or by any other to my knowledge, or with my consent
to any Person or Persons whatsoever; for or concerning the procuring and
obtaining of this ecclesiastical dignity, place, preferment office or Living:
nor will at any time hereafter, perform, or satisfy, any kind of payment,
contract, or promise made by any other, without my knowledge or consent: so
help me God through Jesus Christ. And is a Bond for Resignation no Contract?
and does it not carry the force of a promise? And though it name no Money, yet
does it not indirectly imply a Resolution, to content the Patron, in what he
shall demand? or be undone. And is there any other reason of these Bonds, but
to commit legal Simony? and to perjure without trouble of conscience? This can
be no less Simony, than if the Bond had been for Money: since the Patron might
refuse to call for that if he pleased: and so may here too. But then, if he do
call for it, all the world will conclude, (to use Sir Simon Degg's own words)
That the Incumbent must pay what the Patron will demand: Degg. p. 1. c. 5.
or else forfeit the Bond, or lose the Living: and so be undone, Officiperda.
and a Jack -- out of Office. I know nothing therefore, can excuse such a man
from perjury, but the mystery of Jesuitisme. The Incumbent should also mind,
that the words (Simoniacal payment, Contract or promise) are not strictly to be
reduced, to the Statute-sense. For these kind of Oaths, are elder than the
Statute by many ages: and the words of Canons, are to be understood canonically
and ecclesiastical Convocations, speak in ecclesiastical sense: and therefore
they are to be taken largely, for such compact as the Canons determine to be
Symoniacal. And the Canons exclude aliquam propter hoc pactionem; any kind of
Contract whatsoever in consideration of a Presentation: so that Bonds for
Residence; or for not holding two Livings, might be Simony within the Canon,
and consequently within this Oath: though they are good designs, and correspond
with our good Laws, and bind men to nothing but what was their duty before. And
yet supposing those Bonds lawful, they will no more justify Bonds for
Resignations, than a Bond for good behavior, can justify a Bond to set the
Town on fire: there being no Law nor honesty in Bonds for profane Resignation,
but enough to require our good a bearing: which is sufficient to evince, that
Sir Simon Degge did ill couple Bonds for preferment of a Son: with Bonds to
avoid Pluralities, or non-Residence, which were forbidden by the Canon, and the
Laws of this Land. However I assure my self, that Patrons which are for Bonds
of Resignation, will never be for Bonds against Non-Residence or Pluralities:
since Non-Residents and Pluralists are their usual Customers.

4. Such Incumbent may consider himself of little use to the Church in which he
is: for we have already showed the Patron and all others, that are conscious of
his Simony must despise him as a perjured wretch. How can he bless (says a
Father) that is accursed? or sanctify others that is himself unholy? or
communicate Christ's body, that is not of his body? Did. 81. c. Maximianus.
So says the law Qui sancti non sunt, sancta tractare non possunt. He cannot
reprove their vices, lest they should thereby be provoked to tell the truth,
and out the Reprover. And he must be of the Patrons Religion, against the 39
Articles, or any part of them as they require. Nor can he stand for the honor
and freedom of any Church, that is thus entangled. But two things render his
condition yet worse, 1. He is not in the Church as a Guide or Ruler, for his
Presentation, Institution, Induction, are all void. Simony enervates the virtue
of all Seals. Non suscepisti (says St. Ambrose) quia gratuito eam non
recepisti. Amb de dig. sacerd. c. 5.
And again, Quod dedit pecunia fuit, quod accepit lepra fuit. He gave Money and
received Leprosy: that is, nothing but the guilt of sin. For it is a Maxim,
Nulli ex culpa lucrum; none may be a gainer by his crimes. In Ordination Leo
observes, we get not the Spirit of God, but a Lying Spirit. Si spiritus
veritatis gratis accipitur, proculdubio spiritus mendacii esse convincitur, qui
non gratis accipitur. 1. q. 1. gratia.
Nay they are not Priests, nor is any thing conveyed: and so says Greg. Mag.
Quicundque studet per dationem sacrum ordinem accipere, Ib. Idem.
sacerdos non est. And again, Presbyter, si per pecuniam ecclesiam obtinuerit,
Ib. Idem.
non solum ecclesia privetur, sed etiam sacerdotii honor spolietur: so that
this Church is void, and he ceases to be a Priest. Nor would they acknowledge
his offerings or service to be acceptable or pure. Hier. In Mat. c. 1. v. 11.
So says St. Hierom, Panem pollutum offerunt quantum ad se, qui ad altar
indigne accedunt; quique dato munere sacerdotium praesumunt. As to themselves,
they offer polluted bread. Thus the Council of Roan; Dec. 7. q. 1. Sanctitum.
if any enter turpis lucri gratia dejiciatur a clero and alienus existat a
regula. He is outed as irregular, and his Priestly acts are such Quae fieri non
debent, sed fact a valent; good to others not to himself.

To conclude, all the Canons and imperial Constitutions go the same way, making
all things void, such a Simonist can do: at least as to himself. Hence the
Casuists rule, Sa aphor. Sim. n. 10.
Collatio beneficii Simoniaca nulla est, it is a mere nullity to present by
Simony. We must say of him, as Peter of Simon Magus, Thou have no part, nor lot
in this matter, Act. 8. He is a Usurper of that holy office by his Criminal
Entry.

2. He stands ipso facto Excommunicate, Navar. l. c. n. 111.
both from his Orders, his Living and the Catholic Church. In ecclesia Dei eos
consortium habere non posse, qui sancti Spiritus gratiam nundinentur, says
Ambrose, Amb. in Luc. 19.
they cannot hold Church Communion that trade with the grace of God's Spirit. He
that gets any Benefice or Ministry, by reward, Dec. 1. q. 1. Reperimur.
Ex eodem tempore se noverit anathematis opprobrio condemnatum, atque a
participatione corporis and sanguinis domini alienum. And what comfort can he
take in his Calling that is thus entangled with Nullities and Curses; and
prejudiced by his sins?

1. That the Primitive Church made no Canons against Patrons, was because in
that age there was no such thing: but Election and Ordination brought the
Clergy into their Churches, Offices and Profits. And hence the Canons militate
against Ordainers and Ordained, Electors and Elected; but the Reason is the
same. The Patron being the sole Elector, and shares with the Bishop in filling
the Church; and here money qualifies for the Ministry, the spiritual Office is
purchased, and the grace of God is bought and sold, as then.

5. Since Christians are not Stoics, to think all sin equal; the Incumbent
will do well to consider, in what rank, the most pious Christians placed
Simony. Ambr. de dig. Sacerd. c. 5.
St. Ambrose calls it mortale vitiositatis is virus, the deadly poison of
vitiousness. Pope Paschal calls them primos and praecipuos haereticos, ab
omnibus sidelibus respuendos; the first and chiefest heretics, to be rejected
by all the faithful -- again all crimes compared to Simoniacal heresy, Dec. 1.
q. 7. pater.
quasi pro nihilo reputantur, are accounted nothing. Tharasius said the
Macedonian heresy was more tolerable: for that made the holy Ghost Gods
servant, but this makes him man's Slave, or his Beast to be bought or sold at
his pleasure. Ep. Synod.
Yea, he thinks it equal to the sin against the holy Ghost. Aequaliter
peccantes his qui blasphemaverint, dicentes; Christum in Beelzebub ejicere
daemonia; and adds, that it is like the crime of the Traitor Judas, that sold
his Christ to the Jews, his Murderers. Perpetua mulctatur damnatione says
Gregory, and Nazi. says (as Gratian recites him) Nam Spiritus sancti donum
pretio comparari, quid aliud est quam Capitale crimen? And St. Ambrose again,
Illum constat execrabile Christo perpetrasse flagitium, it is a wickedness
execrable to Christ. And hence again those pious men in the Council of Meaux in
most fervent manner cry out, Cavendum est and summopere studendum etc. We must
beware and endeavor by all might and main. And by the merits of Christ's blood
must forbid, to all Bishops and Kings, and all higher powers, and all
Cherishers, Electors, Great. 1. q. 7. Et mox.
Consenters and Ordainers to any Ecclesiastical dignity; that none may attain
any place by Simoniacal heresy, by himself or any Promoter, with any Service,
Craft, Promise, Commodity or Gift whatsoever. By which we may see the zeal of
godly men, to extirminate that crime, we contrive to bring in. It Is
perverseness in our judgments, if we reckon that a small thing, which they
esteemed heavier than a Millstone, and St. Peter so severely condemned, and for
a taste of our own Church, she has closed with the Primitive in her
resentments of it; for she calls it, the detestable Sin of Simony; and says
buying and selling Spiritual and Eccesiastical Functions, Can. 1. Jac. 1603.
can. 40.
Offices, Promotions, Dignities and Livings, is execrable before God; I am
afraid, he will prove a Bastard Son, that thinks otherwise. Nor is there any
Sect, that espouses the Simoniacal cause among the many bad causes owned in the
world.

6 This Incumbent's condition is very miserable in the world; 1. Tim. 3.7.
for 1. He is under a very illname. It Is his duty to endeavor a good report of
those that are without, but he has a bad one amongst those that are within. If
Solomon be right, that a good name is better than great Riches; Prove. 22.1.
he makes a bad bargain, that parts with his Money for a bad one. Crudelis est
qui famam negligit, says St. Aug. but what is he that famam destruit? ruins
his good name? To have a good Conscience is most necessary to his salvation,
but to have a good name is most necessary to his vocation. It Is no good
Character of a Divine, to be reputed shameless. Contemptu famae contemnuntur
and virtutes, (says one) Fame cannot be despised but virtue is cast off with it,
and by so doing, men fit themselves for farther villainies.

Liberius peccant, cum pudor omnis abest. A blushful countenance is a kind of
trash to an over fleet Villain. A grave Philosopher asures us, (...) etc. they
have very impure souls that desire to be much spoken of for their great
wickedness, rather than (...), than abstaining from evil to live obscurely. He
must expect to be esteemed of no reputation, that has no other instruction for
the Ministry, but a Bag of Money under his arm. 2. His Bonds given (as his best
qualification) are suable at Law; so that he must quit his Living, compound
with his Patron, or pay it with charges. Inst. 3. f. 154.
This was adjudged says Coke in the Common pleas Pasche Eliz. 40. rot. 1745, in
Gregory and Oldbury's case. The Statute made nine years before, does not vacate
the Bond unless he plead a Simoniacal Contract; which is a very husbandly way
to vacate the Living; but doubtful whether it would void the Bond at last. 3.
It will blast his fortunes in marriage, for who will bestow any thing better
than an Abigail, on him that is but Tenent by courtesy; and is blown away by
one breath of the Patrons mouth out of all he has. If the Incumbent conceals
it when asked, he cheats the Father-in-Law; if he confess it, the bargain is
broken. Nor is his credit better, for who will lend him any considerable sum
(how importunate soever his necessities be) that knows him indebted in a
thousand Marks, or out of his Living? So that this kind of Simony is a (...)
utter undoing. Is his Purse so big as to talk of a Purchase? but first (says
the Patron) let him discharge my Bond: and the fuller he is thought to be, the
greater is the Demand; so that he has the pains, and the Patron the profit of
his good husbandry. And who will marry such an Incumbents Daughter, whose
Father may soon appear scandalous and so shame him; and out of all, and so lie
upon him? Our gentle Mother Academia blushes to see her Sons so bad Logicians,
as not to find this fallacy, or distinguish themselves out of these Bonds. But
is it not better to have a Living in this manner, Obj.
than none at all?

It Is better be idle than rob or steal, Sol.
and to follow no trade than a sinful one; but much better with Marlorat to
work with a Spade in a Town-Ditch than either. 2. It Is better to provide for
the public safety of the Church of Christ than our own. Christ left Heaven to
do it service, and why cannot we a Living? All refusing these Simoniacal
Contracts, the Condition of all is bettered by it. 3. You will lose nothing by
it, but appear the more conscientious and fitting man for the Ministry. 4. The
Money paid to enter by sin, would maintain you till an entrance be offered
without sin. 5. It Is better to have a bad Living with a good conscience, than a
good Living with a bad one. It Is more reasonable to believe the Lord has no
need of us, than to intrude without a call. Dec. de Sim. ^. q. 6.
Greg. Mag. tells Siagrius, Is qui invitatus renuet, quaesitus refugit; sacris
altaribus est admovendus: Qui ultro ambit, vel importune se ingerit, est
proculdubio repellendus, This was the Primitive modesty, some feigning
themselves Fools, some denying themselves to be Christians. Others refusing to
be baptized. Others hiding themselves to avoid their Elections. Greg. Nazianzen
after he was chosen Patriarch of Constantinople (equal then to the best
preferment in the world) by an Ecumenical Council; observing some few Egyptian
Bishops against him, Hist. eccl. l. 7. c. 7.
refused the Patriarchate (as Sozomen and many others affirm.) Prisci viri
sanctique homines difficilius ad Pontificatum vocabantur, quam nunc ex alio
amoventur, Ae^. Sylv. ep. 25. Cyp. to. 1. ep. 52.
says Aeneas Sylvius. And Holy Cyprian assures us, Cornelius vim passus est, ut
episcopatum coactus exciperet, Cornelius was forced into the Popedom by plain
violence. Eusebius Emissenus that great light of the Church, was earnestly
solicited to accept the Patriarchate of Alexandria, by the Synod of Antioch; or
at least by Eusebius Patriarch of Constantinople; Socrat. hist. l. 2. c. 6.
but he refused it: as he had fled before to Alexandria from Antioch to avoid
that Patriarchal See. Pontius shows with what unwillingness holy Cyprian was
called forth to the Primacy of Carthage. Pontius in vit. Cypr.
Synesius that acute Divine and Philosopher, declared in a Letter to his
Brother, that he believed not the Resurrection, on purpose to avoid the
Bishopric of Cyrene, which yet could not defend him. Evagrius however took him
at his word, and has left him on Record as an Infidel to the Resurrection,
(...): Evagrius l. 1. c. 15.
being (in his opinion) not so much as willing to seem to believe it. So
Eusebius Pamphili, urged by the Common shout of the City of Antioch, and
solicited by Constantine's Letters, upon the request of the Synod at Antioch:
yet constantly refused the Patriarchal See. The Emperor hearing him allege,
that it was against the Decree of the Fathers to remove from a less to a
greater or other Diocese, commended his self-denial; Sozom. l. 2. c. 18.
(...). Nyssen gives us a fair account of that man of wonders Gregorius
Thaumaturgus, Nyssen in vit. Greg. Thaumat.
his flight into the Wilderness to escape the Chair of Naeo-Caesarea; yet at
length was strangely brought back to it by the prayers and contrivance of
Phedimus. Greg. Turon. l. 10. c. 1. Jo. Diac. l. 1. c. 39, 40.
So Gregory the great, after he was chosen by the Clergy and People of Rome to
the Papal dignity, wrote earnestly to Mauricius then Emperor to refuse his
Confirmation, of what the Electors had done, that he might escape so weighty a
charge; as Gregory Turonensis and Joh. Diaconus report it.

The Rule then was Quaeratur Cogendus; Epiph. ep. ad. Joh. Hieros.
his Neighbor Bishops often caught, ordained, and restored several Presbyters
that fled from him, to escape cape holy Orders. And this was the Imperial
Decree, that whoever was ambitious of holy Orders, Col. l. 1. tit. 3. de epis.
and cler. c. 31.
should not be received. This Sentence executed, would abate the number of
Simonists, and make a thin Church amongst Conformists and Non-conformists too:
however, it may serve to raise a shameful blush on the face of such as purchase
their way of Entry. 6. The world will conclude, there is no merit where the
entrance is attempted by Money. 7. By such a Preferment you are more entangled
than advanced; and in a year or two (when the Patrons will and pleasure is) may
be as far to seek as ever. 8. By the Canons of the Church, Simoniacal Entrance
makes you incapable of any Ecclesiastical promotion for ever. Pius the 5th his
Bull speaks not so much, the sense of the Roman as the Catholic Church. The
Canons, Civil Law, and Decretals, all affirming deposition. Cum omni fiducia
clamo, Qui per Simoniam ordinatus est alienus est a sacerdotio: adding this
reason, 1. q. 7. Si quis omnem. 1. q. 2. Si quis dator.
neque enim venalis est gratia spiritius: you get no more than Simon Magus by
it, who was extirminated for ever. Perpetua mulctetur damnatione, says Greg.
And because Simony vacates all Seals, and conveys no right, the Casuists affirm
you are bound in conscience to resign whatever is so gotten, and to make
Restitution of what profits you have received. If you think these Canons void
in Law, yet they are not in Conscience: nor in Law neither, as it seems by the
Statute made 25 Hen. 8. c. 19. which affirms all Canons not contrariant, nor
repugnant to the Laws, Statutes and Customs of the Realm; nor to the damage or
hurt of the King's Prerogative Royal, shall be now still executed. This is the
Statute of the submission of the Clergy, and was the rule they were to walk by.
Nor is the matter altered in this Statute of Simony, 31 Eliz. 6, for the fourth
Paragraph provides, that the Act should not restrain any censures
Ecclesiastical, but that the Ordinary might execute them; as before the making
of the said Act, upon which Degge delivers his opinion, that corrupt Patrons,
Parsons Coun. p. 2. c. 5.
who take Bonds for Resignation, without any reasonable cause apparent, may be
called to account before the Ordinary, etc. and censured if occasion be: and
doubtless so may the Incumbent too. Some say the Statute of 25 Hen. 8. c. 19,
is expired as temporary; and indeed so it was designed, provided a body of
Canons had been picked our of the ancient Councils, to have been ratified by
some subsequent act, but that was not done, and probably never will; and
therefore (under correction) we may say, it is in force still.

Lastly, such an Incumbent ought to consider, he is self-called, and not called
of God. Christ the first Priest of the Christian Church, would not stir till
his father had sent him. Nor did any Apostle enter the office but as Christ
sent them. John 20.21. As my Father sent me, so send I you. Nor is there any in
that office that takes this honor to himself, but he that is called of God,
as Aaron was; Heb. 5.4. He that acts without a warrant, will not be born out in
what he does. To engage without command has received punishment, in successful
fights. If we will act without Commission, we must do it without comfort too,
expecting (as well we may) to hear that reproachful Nippe, who required these
things at thy hand? We forge the Broad Seal of Heaven, if we enter upon our
Savior's Embassy without his Order. The Church is bid to pray the Lord of the
Harvest, to send forth able Laborers into his Harvest. Matthew. 9.38. And how
can we expect wages except he sets us on work? But these hire themselves, and
bear witness to themselves of their own worth; artificial Pastors made by their
own contrivance. Like Bastards they are Sons of their own fortunes; true Terrae
filii that no body else will father. And thus to enter (says Amesius) is plane
Diabolicum, Cas. Conse. l. 4. c. 25. n. 20.
a mere promotion of the Devil; for (as he adds) officium curae animarum est
spirituale Dei donum -- and proinde idem in genere and ex natura rei est, illud
officium emere; cum eo quod fecit Simon, Act. Ib. n. 21.
8. It Is not doubted, but the right of calling is principally in Christ, but by
way of Delegation in the Bishop, acting in the behalf of Christ by virtue of
the Commission granted to him, Joh. 20.21. and in the Patron to whom the people
must be supposed, to have delegated their power of electing, or rather
consenting; which (when the dust of contention that blinds men's eyes is laid)
will appear as lawful as any Churches can elect Representatives to appear for
them in Synods: but then to purchase this delegated consent of the Patron, is
the fowlest of all corruptions. We then enter injussi and non vocati, (...). p.
227.
and therefore ipsos diaboli nuntios efficaciter convinci posse; says Hunnius
from Luther, and show our selves to be the Devils Messengers. Luther tells us
himself, he that hears one uncalled, does hear Diabolum corporaliter loquentem,
a Devil incarnate preaching. In. Luc. 12.42.
This Simoniack Call, is from Pluto the God of Hell and Wealth; and his
Ambassadors they are. Hear how honest Stella derides them, on those words, Quem
constituit dominus super familiam. O quanti sunt Praelati (says he) quos non
constituit dominus sed ipsi se constituerunt sua ambitione, favoribus aut
pecuniis; and thinks God permits them only for the peoples sins, as a plague
and curse to their Congregations. Then (says he) thou art called of God, Exodus
4.13. Jer. 1.6. Is. 6.5. Jon. 1.
Quando sine Tua solicita diligentia, dignitas Tibi offertur; and wonders any
would be so bold as to purchase, what Moses, Jeremiah and Isaiah refused and
bewailed, and Jonah fled from. A man may satisfy his conscience that he is
called of God, when his own strong and constant inclinations shall lead him to
the Ministry: and his Friends not only consent but devote him that way, and his
own abilities are not only sufficient, but are better for that way than any
other. And then that he be invited in by some Church or Patron, which is a
Churches Representative, and approved, ordained and instituted by the Bishop,
whom Christ Commissioned to that purpose. But (says Stella) the Church ever
pronounced him unworthy that thought himself worthy.

Let us now conclude with this hearty Obtestation, to both Patrons and
Presentees; to remember, that selfdenial is a Gospel grace, self-seeking is a
Gospel disgrace: by the first we can do no hurt, by the second we seldom do
good. In this danger Alcibiades will tell you, it is better (...) to fly the
danger, than escape at Trial. A good conscience cannot easily close with
suspected wickedness, but much less when it is detected. I know your hearts are
hardened by the deceitfulness of sin, and you are hired by your profit to turn
a deaf ear; yet I would be loath to make my Addresses to you, as the Cynick did
to a dead Statue, only to learn to bear a Repulse. I think I may confidently
say, if this Doctrine be hid, it is hid to them that perish; whom the God of
this world has blinded. If therefore you desire to escape the Crime and Curse
of Magus, if you have any regard to the honor of God, any care for the
Edification of the Church, any desire for the safety and glory of your
Country, any pity for your own souls, any tenderness for your families, any
aim at your own peace within, or at a good name from abroad, if you have any
love for Learning, or Reward for virtue, or kindness for Modesty, abhor these
vile practices. The Jews were thought to worship Bacchus, because they had a
Golden Vine in their Temple; and will not men think you worship Plutus? that have
brought the Bank thither. Silver shrines may very well become Diana's Temple,
but more pure souls the Temple of Christ. Let the Priest have leave to purchase
the Ministration, when the Deity is a Golden Calf. But to give or take Money to
worship the pure Jesus, is more absurd, than to offer Wine to the Nymphs and
Water to Bacchus; than to throw Bones to the Horses, and Hay to the Dogs.

Is it not more gallant in Peter and Elisha, to disdain earthy men's proffers,
than in poor-spirited Gehezi to run after them? Do holy men boast, Silver and
Gold have we none; and are we such ignoble minds, as to think we cannot be saved
without them? That Princes amass treasures, is a sign they are unhappy: Angels
and glorified Spirits that enjoy perfect bliss refuse it. Pots of Ointment, and
rich Washes are the purchase of the deformed: a native beauty needs no paints
nor fairdings. 'Twas a biting conceit of the Poets, that the Carcass of the
Sheep that wore the Golden Fleece, Did. 88. c. Negotiatorem.
was good for nothing. And hence peradventure came St. Hierom's advice,
Negotiatorem Clericum -- quasi quandam pestem fuge. Leo in his Epistle to
Bishop Anatholius assures him, Virum Catholicum and praecipue Domini
Sacerdotem, sicut nullo errore implicari, ita nulla opum cupiditate violari
oportet. Tert. reports that Enoch delivered it as his judgment, Lib. De cultu
faemin.
that Silver and Gold were ab angelis malis inventa. Had he said the Simoniacal
use of them had been from the instigation of the Devil, good men would have
closed with the opinion. Athenagoras, Leg. pro Christianis.
as a man of the old Christian make, calls these covetous souls, (...), as less
worth than their treasures. De Relig. c. 1.
The best Lactantius can say of them is, Quibus rebus nemo melior, nemo justior
fieri potest. No man was ever made more just or more upright by them. Hence he
observes the most virtuous Heathens, abjecerunt omnia -- ut solam nudamque
virtutem, nudi expeditius sequerentur; rejected all their pelf, to render
themselves more sleet in the pursuit of virtue. It seems the Philosophers had a
clearer apprehension of them than our drossy souls, too deep immersed in
matter; for they held them to be (...) as voluminous Gowns that hinder our
walk; and so do (...) as Demophilus speaks. V. Gal. edit. opuscula. p. 3.
It Is strange that a Christian should damn himself, to gain what these brave
Heathens slight. 'Twas beyond my expectation, to hear Acosta say, Quizacoalt
the God of Riches was the most honored Idol amongst the Cholutecas; yea in all
America: Acost l. 5. c. 30.
but he confines it to the Merchants. Our Simonists being of the same trade,
are not unlikely to join with them; yet it is an unaccountable madness, that a
man should run such infinite hazards, for what can do him so little service.
Could he buy Heaven and Glory, the pardon of his sins, the favor of God, the
blood of Christ, or ransom his ruined soul by it, 'twere the more excusable.
But when it will not purchase him an hours piece of conscience, nor a minutes
continuance in this vale of misery, when his time is come; but that with Judas
he must cast his unjust gain away in fearful desperation, and shut up his days
in the blackest Clouds of vengeance. Since his head must ache, though incircled
with a Golden Diadem; his Foot rage with the Gout, though in a Golden Slipper;
his heavy Heart must sigh, bibit licet Gemmas, though he drink Cordials of
Pearl; and cannot sleep though he sinks in Down; Cypr. l. 1. ep 2.
as the eloquent Primate of Carthage has it: who can excuse them from acting
worse than children, that beat out their strength in pursuing Butterflies?
since children lose but their labor: but these lose Christ, Heaven, Glory,
Soul, Body and all Comfort eternally by it. To be poor at worst, is but an
afflicting state; but to be Simoniacal is a damning State. By such luckless
Acquests, men add more guilt to their consciences, than Gold to their Purses.
How literally do these unhappy souls construe and apply the Satyrist's ironical
advice

Vende animam lucro -- Pers. Sat. 6.
but why may he not sell his soul, that thinks it lawful to sell his God? and
yet sure, he makes but a bad Title, for the Purchaser never gets him.

But stay, we are slipped into an Ocean of discourse, by following the strong
stream of Simony, into the bottomless Sea of Avarice: and in truth there it
begins, and there it ends. The Root of all evil is the Root of this too; and
'twill be hard to destroy these profane branches, without plucking up the Root.
For (as Polydor Virgil observed) reckoning up the punishment of Simony;
privatur Sacerdotio, De Invent. lib. 8. c. 3. in fino.
dignitate ac praefectura dejicitur, infamis habetur, multisque aliis afficitur
probris; at length adds, Tanti criminis sola est avaritia parens. Timon
observes, that covetous that covetous desires are the Elements out of which men
may spell all sorts of evil: and have composed this fowl Monster. Whoever can
make the best assault upon Avarice, will be the most fortunate man, in the
suppression of this most insolent crime. It has hitherto been too hard for all
the moral attaques of God and Man; of the Old Testament and the New, of
Prophets and Apostles, of Councils and Parliaments, of Canons and Statutes, of
Conformists and Non-Conformists. As diseased Bodies have lost their true Gusto,
so have these Covetous Souls lost the sense of true praise, and are as
difficult to be reclaimed, as men perfectly stupid, are to be taught. But we
may well pity them, Sen. ep. ad Lucil. 168.
for as Seneca often notes, In nullum Avarus bonus est, in se pessimus, he is
kind to none, but most unkind to himself; loading his Soul with sins, his Name
with scandal, and his heart with cares. Yet since he is also a shame to his
Church and Country, we will rise up, and call that Senate blessed, that shall
consider this sin as the Nations great Grievance, Religions scandal, the
Churches damage, and every private man's injury, who himself, his Children or
Relations may hereafter be qualified for Church-preferments: and shall
accordingly endeavor to perfect blessed Elizabeth's design, by making all
Presentations void and forfeited, that shall be clogged with any gifts,
payments, promises, Bonds of any sort, Covenants, or other Instruments
whatsoever.

Since the Patrons duty is no more than to search out, and his right to no more
than to present a learned and pious Guide to the People, to lead them the
straight way to Heaven. The Laws of the Land are, or may be made sufficient to
curb all Exorbitancies of an Incumbent, without the Patrons Bylaws; which are
and will always be made to his private, against the public benefit. May they
also farther provide (according to the ancient Law) that no sales of Advowsons
may be good, unless they are made in Feesimple. By which, these subtle Traders
will be forced upon a new strain of Invention to cheat the world; and a poor
conscientious, modest and grave Divine, may stand as fair for preferment as a
Golden Ass. Worldly souls fear men more than God, and Laws more than Gospel:
being led by sense rather than faith. Luc. 16.14.
The Scriptures show that the careless neglected, but the Covetous derided
Christ; and much more will they the clearest products of Reason and Religion:
and therefore we call for the scourge of Laws, which are most proper for the
Fools backs, that cannot be persuaded by the strongest Arguments: to which
therefore I leave them.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
APologies are never excusable, but where there are errors real or believed;
and here they are too visible to need an Asteric: the Authors distance from the
Press has given security to some Erratas to pass uncontrouled; and many
Marginal Citations stand awry, sometimes advanced too high, and at other times
depressed too low, which will need the ingenuity of a kind Reader to rectify:
to whom the Author will hold himself a Debtor for his pains, and impose no
farther trouble on him, but to add these few words to Page 84. The right of the
Crown to the first Fruits and Tenths in England, accrues from a joint consent
of the whole Church, by an Instrument passed in full Convocation in the reign
of Hen. 8. A. D. 1534, Godwin. Hist. of Hen. 8.
to transfer the same; which were resigned to the Church again, after twenty
years possession by Queen Mary, Godw. in vit. Mar.
A. D. 1554, as judged unlawful for her to hold: yet the emptiness of her
Exchequer caused her to reseize them not long after, for supply of present
wants. Since which time they have continued in the Crown without interruption;
wants being as easy to be pretended now as ever, and can never fail to a
Covetous mind.


