THE Ex-Ale-tation OF ALE.

written by a Learned Pen.

LONDON, Printed by J. R. 1671.

THE Ex-Ale-tation OF ALE.
NOt drunken, nor sober, but neighbor to both,
I met with a Friend in Ales-bury Vale
He saw by my face, that I was in the Case
To speak no great harm of a Pot of good Ale.
Then did he me greet, and said, since we meet,
(And he put me in mind of the name of the Dale)
For Ales-bury's sake some pains I would take,
And not bury the praise of a pot of good Ale.
The more to procure me, then he did adjure me
If the Ale I drank last were nappy and stale,
To do it its right, and stir up my sprite,
And fall to commend a pot, etc.
Quoth I, To commend it I dare not begin,
Lest therein my Credit might happen to fail:
For, many men now do count it a sin,
But once to look toward a pot, etc.
Yet I care not a pin, For I see no such sin,
Nor any thing else my courage to quail:
For, this we do find, that take it in kind,
Much vertlie there is in a pot, etc.
And I mean not to taste, though thereby much geac't,
Nor the Merry-go-down without pull or hale,
Perfuming the throat, when the stomack's afloat,
With the Fragrant sweet scent of a pot, etc.
Nor yet the delight that comes to the Sight
To see how it flowers and mantles in graile,
As green as a Leeke with a smile in the cheek.
The true orient color of a pot, etc.
But I mean the Mind, and the good it does find;
Not only the Body so feeble and frail:
For, Body and and Soul may blessed the black bowl,
Since both are beholden to a pot, etc.
For, when heaviness the mind does oppress,
And sorrow and grief the heart do assail,
No remedy quicker than to take off your Liquor,
And to wash away cares with a pot, etc.
The Widow that buried her Husband of late,
Will soon have forgotten to weep and to wail,
And think every day twain till she marry again,
If she read the contents of a pot, etc.
It is like a belly-blast to a cold heart,
And warms and engenders the spirits vitale,
To keep them, from damage, all spirits owe their homage
To the Sp'rite of the butiery a pot, etc.
And down to the legs the virtue does go,
And to a bad Footman is as good as a sail;
When it fills the Veins, and makes light the Brains.
No Lackey so nimble as a pot, etc.
The naked complains for want of a coat,
Nor on the cold weather will once turn his tail:
All the way as he goes, he cuts the wind with his Nose,
If he be but well wrapped in a pot, etc.
The hungry man takes no thought for his meat,
Though his stomach would brook a ten-penny nail;
He quite fogets hunger, thinks on i^ no longer,
If he touch but the sparks of a pot, etc.
The poor man will praise it, so has he good cause.
That all the year eats neither Partridg nor Quailt,
But sets up his rest, and makes up his Feast
With a crust of brown bread, and a pot, etc.
The Shepherd, the Sower, the Thresher, the Mower,
The one with his Scythe, the other with his Flaile,
Take them out by the poll, on the peril of my soll,
All will hold up their hands to a pot, etc.
The Black smith whose bellows all Summer do blow,
With the Fire in his Face still, without e're a veil.
Though his throat be full dry, he will tell you no lie,
But where you may be sure of a pot, etc.
Who ever denies it, the Prisoners will praise it,
That beg at Grate, and lie in the Goal:
For, even in their Fetters, they think themselves better,
May they get but a two-penny black pot of Ale.
The Beggar whose portion is always his prayers,
Not having a tatter to hang on his tail,
Is as rich in his rags, as the churl in his bags,
If he once but shakes hands with a pot, etc.
It drives his poverty clean out of mind,
Forgetting his brown bread, his wallet and maile;
He walks in the house like a six footed Louse,
If he once be enriched with a pot, etc.
And he that does dig in the ditches all day,
And wearies himself quite at the plough-tail.
Will speak no less things than of Queens and of Kings,
If he touch but the top of a pot, etc.
It Is like a VVhetstone to a blunt wit,
And makes a supply where Nature does fail:
The dullest wit soon will look quite through the Moon,
If his temples be wet with a pot, etc.
Then DICK to his Dearling, full boldly dares speak,
Though, before (silly fellow) his courage did quail,
He gives her the smouch, with his hand on his pouch,
If he meet by the way with a etc.
And it makes the Carter a Courtier straightway,
With Rhetorical terms he will tell his tale,
With Courtesies great store, and his Cap up before,
Being schooled but a little with a etc.
The Old man, whose tongue wags faster then his teeth,
(For old age by nature does drivel and drale)
Will frig and will sting, like a dog in a string,
If he warm his cold blood with a etc.
And the good Old Clark, whose sight waxes dark,
And ever he thinks the print is too small,
He will see every letter, and say Service better,
If he glaze but his eyes with a etc.
The Cheeks and the Jaws to commend it have cause;
For where they were late but even wan and pale,
They will get them a color, no Crimson is fuller,
By the true die and tincture of a pot, etc.
Mark her Enemies, though they think themselves wise,
How meager they look, with how low a wail,
How their cheeks do fall, without spirits at all,
That alien their minds from a pot, etc.
And now that the grains do work in my brains,
Me thinks I were able to give by retaile
Commodities store, a dozen and more,
That flow to Mankind from a pot, etc.
The MUSES would muse any should it misuse:
For it makes them to sing like a Nightingale,
With a lofty trim note, having washed their throat
With the Caballine Spring of a pot, etc.
And the Musician of any condition,
It will make him reach to the top of the Scale:
It will clear his pipes, and moisten his lights,
If he drink alternatim a pot, etc.
The Poet Divine, that cannot reach wine,
Because that his money does many times fail,
Will hit on the vein to make a good strain,
If he be but inspired with a pot, etc.
For Ballads ELDERTON never had Peer,
How went his wit in them, with how merry a Gale,
And with all the Sails up, had he been at the Cup,
And washed his beard with a pot, etc.
And the power of it shows, no whit less in Prose,
It will file one's phrase, and set forth his Tale
Fill him but a Bowl, it will make his Tongue troul,
For flowing speech flows from a pot, etc.
And Master Philosopher, if he drink his part,
Will not trisle his time in the husk or the shale,
But to go to the kernel by the depth of his Art,
To be found in the bottom of a pot, etc.
Give a Scholar of OXFORD a pot of Sixteen.
And put him to prove that an Ape has no tail,
And sixteen times better his wit will be seen,
If you fetch him from Batley a pot, etc.
Thus it helps speech and wit, and it hurts not a whit,
But rather does further the Virtues Morale.
Then thinks it not much if a little I touch
The good moral parts of a pot, etc.
To the Church and Religion it is a good Friend,
Or else our Forefathers their wisdom did fail,
That at every mile, next to the Church style,
Sot a consecrate house to a pot, etc.
But now, as they say, Beer bears it away;
The more is the pity if right might prevail:
For, with this same Beer, came up Heresy here,
The old Catholic drink is a pot, etc.
The Churches much ow, as we all do know;
For when they be drooping and ready to fall,
By a Whitson or Church Ale, up again they shall go,
And owe their repairing to a etc.
Truth will do it right, it brings Truth to light,
And many bad matters it helps to reveal:
For, they that will drink, will speak what they think;
TOM Tell-troth lies hid in a etc.
It is Justices friend, she will it commend:
For, all is here served by Measure and tale:
Now, true-tale, and good measure, are Justices treasure,
And much to the praise of a etc.
And next I allege, it is Fortitudes edge:
For, a very Cow-heard, that shrinks like a Snail,
Will swear and will swagger, and out goes his Dagger,
If he be but armed with a etc.
Yea, ALE has her Knights and Squires of degree,
That never wore Corslet, nor yet shirt of mail,
But have fought their fights all, t'wixt the pot and the wall
When once they were dubbed with a etc.
And (sure) it will make a man suddenly Wise,
Er'e-while was scarce able to tell a right tale:
It will open his jaw, he will tell you the Law,
As made a right Bencher of a pot, etc.
Or he that will make a bargain to gain,
In buying or setting his goods forth to sale,
Must not plod in the mire, but sit by the fire,
And seal up his Match with a pot, etc.
But for Soberness needs, must I confess,
The matter goes hard; and few do prevail
Not to go too deep, but temper to keep,
Such is the Attractive of a pot, etc.
But here is an amends, which will make all Friends,
And ever does tend to the best avail;
If you take it too deep it will make you but sleep;
So comes no great harm of a pot, etc.
If (reeling) they happen to fall to the ground,
The fall is not great, they may hold by the Rail:
If into the water, they cannot be drowned.
For that gift is given to a pot, etc.
If drinking about they chance to fall our,
Fear not that Alarm, though flesh be but frail,
It will prove but some blows, or at most a bloody nose,
And friends again straight with a pot, etc.
And Physic will favor ALE as it is bound,
And be against Beer both tooth and nail;
They send up and down all over the town
To get for their Patients a pot, etc.
Their Ale-berries, cawdels and posset; each one,
And Syllabubs made at the Milking-pale,
Although they be many, Beer comes not in any,
But all are composed with a pot, etc.
And in very deed the Hop's but a weed
Brought over against Law, and here set to sale:
Would the Law were renewed, and no more Beer brewed
But all men betake them to a pot, etc.
The Law that will take it under his wing.
For, at every Lax-day, or Moot of the hale,
One is sworn to serve our Sovereign the King,
In the ancient Office of a Conner of Ale.
There Is never a Lord of Manor or of a Town,
By strand or by Land by hill or by dale,
But thinks it a Franchise, and a Flower of the Crown,
To hold the Assize of a pot, etc.
And though there lie Writs, from the Courts Paramount,
To stay the proceedings of the Courts Paravaile;
Law favors it so, you may come, you may go,
There lies no Prohibition to a pot, etc.
They talk much of State both early and late,
But if Gascoign and Spain their wine should but fail,
No remedy then, with us Englishmen,
But the State it must stand by a pot, etc.
And they that sit by it ware good men and quiet,
No dangerous Plotters in the Commonweal
Of Treason and Murder: For they never go further
Then to call for, and pay for a pot, etc.
To the praise of Gambrivius that good British King
That devised for his Nation (by the Welshmen's tale)
Seventeen hundred years before Christ did spring,
The happy invention of a pot, etc.
The North they will praise it, and praise it with passion,
Where every River gives name to a Dale:
There men are ^^t yet living that are of the old fashion,
No Nectar they know but a pot, etc.
The Picts and the Scots for Ale were at lots,
So high was the skill, and so kept under scale:
The Picts were undone, slain each mothers son,
For not teaching the Scots to make Hether-Eale*
But hither or thither, it skills not much whether:
For Drink must be had, men live not by Keale.
Not by Havor-bannocks, nor by Havor-jannocks
The thing the Scots live on is a pot, etc.
Now, if ye will say it, I will not deny it,
That many a man it brings to his bale:
Yet, what fairer end, can one wish to his friend,
Then to die by the part of a etc.
Yet, let not the innocent bear any blame
It is their own doings* to break over the pale:
And neither the Malt, nor the good Wise in fault,
If any be potted with a etc.
They tell whom it kills, but say not a word,
How many a man lives both sound and hale.
Though he drink no Beer, any day in the year,
By the Radical humor of a etc.
But to speak of Killing, that am I not willing;
For that in a manner, were but to rail:
But BEER has its name, cause it brings to the Biere,
Therefore welfare say I, to a etc.
Too many (I wis) with their deaths, proved this*
And therefore (if ancient Records do not fail)
He that first brewed the Hop, was rewarded with a rope,
And found his Beer far more bitter then ALE.
O ALE ab alendo; thou Liquor of LIFE!
That had but a Mouth as big as a whale;
For mine is too little to touch the least tittle
That belongs to the praise of a etc.
Thus (I trow) some Virtues I have marked you out,
And never a Vice in all this long traile,
But that after the Pot there comes a Shot,
And that is the only blot of a pot, etc.
With that my Friend said, that blot will I bear,
You have done very well, it is time to strike sail,
We Will have six pots more, though I die on the score,
To make all this good of a Pot of good ALE.
FINIS

