the transforming windmill and its female victims

THE MERRY Dutch Miller: AND New Invented Windmill.

Wherewith the undertaketh to grind all Sorts of Women, as the Old, Decreped,
Wrinkled, Blear-eyed, Long-Nosed, Blind, Lame, Scolds, Jealous, Angry, Poor,
Drunkerds Whores, Sluts; or all others whatsoever. They shall come out of his
Mill Young, Active, Pleasant, Handsome, Wise, Loving, Virtuous and Rich;
Without any Deformity, and just suitable to their Husbands Humors.

The Rich for Money, and the Poor for nothing.

Composed Dialogue wise, for the Recreation of all those that are Inclined to
be merry, and may serve to pass away an hour in a cold winter night (without
any great offense) by a good fire side.

The Miller and the Mill you see,
How thronged with Customers they be:
Then bring your Wives unto the Mill,
And Young for Old you shall have still.
London, Printed by E. Crowch, for F. Coals, T. Ver^, and I. Wright. 1672*

THE MERRY Dutch Miller: AND New Invented Windmill.
The Millers Prologue,
YOu Gentlemen and good People all, of this Famous English Nation, know yt I am
no Mountebank, but a down right Miller, newly come from beyond the Seas,
whereto my lasting praise I have proved my self to be an Artist beyond compare:
for with this my new Invented Windmill I have done rare Feats, in Grinding all
sorts of Women, whether old, or young, in City or Country, from the Lady to
the Beggar, if they be Deformed, Wrinkled, Blearey'd, long Nosed, Blind, Lame,
Jealous, Angry, or whatsoever, nay though she were as old as Charing Cross, or
as crooked as Mother Shipton, or the arrantest Scold that ever came from
Billings-gate, I will Engage to make them Young, Active, Pleasant, Handsome,
Modest loveing kind and Rich, and just Suitable to their Husbands humors. As I
have often experienced in other Countries where I have made practice of my Art.
Therefore if there be any persons whatsoever, whose Wives are troubled with any
of these infermities, or any other, let them bring them to my Mill and they
shall have Young for Old, Rich for Poor, Sound for Lame, etc. And have present
remedy, in less then an hours space. But let this suffice that I have already
said, for now the wind blows fresh, and I perceive my Customers flocks in a
pace therefore I must make use of time, while time serves, and the first that I
shall encounter with, is Will the Weaver,who bringns his Wife upon his Back,
then pray let us hear what he will say.

Miller. Good morrow honest Will: I prithee what wind has blown thee hither
this morning, that thou comes laden with such a heavy burden upon thy Back.


Will. Truly Master Miller, if you knew all you would say she were a heavy
burden indeed, and yet it is a burden that I have been troubled with many
years to my sorrow, But now I hope I shall be eased of it, for I hear by some
of our neighbors that you have excellent Skill in curing Women's infirmities and
that is the reason I brought her.


Mill. I must confess that my Mill will cure her of all Distempers; but I
prithee tell what are the chiefest troubles, that I may be satisfied therein?


Will. To spaak the truth she is so old, that she cannot hear her self Fart;
nay more then that, she has never a good condition, nor never had; and to
speak all in a word, she is stark-naught; therefore I am resolved to carry her
up stairs and put her into the Hopper whilst it is empty, for fear any other
should be before me.


Miller. I prithee do so honest Will: for now the wind blows merrily, and
whiles the wise is a Grinding I will have a little talk with Jack Doo-Little,
who comes here, wheeling his Wife in a Wheel-Barrow,

Welcome Jack Doo-little, welcome to my Mill, methinks you take a great deal of
pains this morning.


Jack: O help a little, good Gaffer Miller help me, for I am so over tired with
crowding of an old piece of Mortallity hither, that I had better a thrown her
to the Dogs then ever been troubled with her, but now I have got her thus
far* hope the worst is past.


Mil. Why: who is it thou have got in thy Barrow that thou do so exclaim
upon her.


Jack. Who is it, it is my old Wife, a Murrain take her, would I had never seen
the eyes of her, for she never did me a good deed in her life, and yet she has
cost me many a pound to keep her old rotten Carkase from sinking into the
Grave, but now I am resolved to have her Ground as small as ever was any gun
Powder.


Miller. Take no care for the shall be Ground according to thy hearts desire,
and I do promise the thou, shall have a young Bedfellow instead of thy old
morterpeice, But stay who comes next; what a whole Boat full at a time, I hope
my trade will prove a great deal better then many think for, welcome honest
Water-man I see you bring them in by wholesale, what would you have done to
these Girls, they seem to be young and serviceable.


Wat. In Troth you are very much mistaken for they are neither young nor
serviceable, do but wash of their Paint and you will see that they are both old
and ill thriven, and have as many diseases as an old Horse, for by their light
heel'd trade all their life time, and being so underlaid they have made their
Bodies mere Hospitalls of Diseases, therefore if you be not very careful in
throwing them into your Hopper, you will have them drop in pieces about your
ears, they are so rotten.


Miller. Say you so, then I am something afraid they should clogg my Mill and
spoil it; but I prithee tell me where have these Ladies led their lives before
you brought them hither.


Wat. Why, they have been about their occasions sometimes in Whetstones Park
and Le^te^^^^s-lane, and sometimes a^ perboyling in the Lock in Southwark; from
whence I just now brought them in my Boat accounting them to be a very light
freight.


Miller. But what would thou have done to them, you know it is an old
saying, that once a Whore and always a Whore, yet for all that, if the wind
prove good I do not fear but to make them as honest, and as healthful as they
were, when they were but ten years of Age.


Wat. I thought you could Grind one of them quickly till she were both ha^some
and wholesome, I would stay a little perhaps she might let me have a cast of
her office for a cast of mine.


Mil. How can that be, did not I tell thee I would Grind them till they were
honest.


Wat. What if you do Grind them till they are honest, may they not turn Whores
again as soon as they please.


Mill. I cannot spare time now to contend with thee betwixt wind and water, but
I tell thee i will Grind them as they should be Ground and then no question but
they will be right again, Believe it if the Wind blow fair. I Will make thy
freight, prove Market Ware.

But who is that comes hauling his Wise, by the middle? who, Kit, the Cooper, O
brave Kit I see thou brings thy Wife to my Mill as round as a Hoop, what is the
matter.


Cooper. What Is the matter: nay you will say it is an ill Wind that blows no body
profit, I have such a matter in hand, as would make a man mad to understand it,
here is my old Wife, Joan, that has been a vexation to me this twenty years,
and one of the least of her faults is, that she cannot hold har Water, and for
my part I have used the best skill that belongs to my Trade, for I have hoop'd
her, till all the Neighbors have come in and called me Knave, and yet all that
ever I can do will not stop her old Leak.


Mill. Pish man that is the least fault of a thousand to be cured.


Cooper. Marry so it had need, for I think she has a thousand worse then that,
but now I have her here I will have her cured of them all or else it shall cost
me a fall.


Mil. Take no care, for I will Grind her as never old horse was ground, I will
make her old bones rattle in her skin like a Barrel of egg shells, but here
comes Martin Marrall I must either speak to him or else all the Fat will be in
the fire. how now Martin; have a care you do not mar all, by dragging your
Wife so by one foot.


Mar. It is not a Pin matter how I drag her, for she has dragged me by the hair
of my head, many a time and often, and I Will warrant you for all this, let her
but take breath, and she shall start up and call me as many Rogues as can stand
betwixt this, and Amsterdam, for she is a Rotter-damnable Scold, nay her very
voice is enough to Sour all the Ale in the Town, worse then either a clap of
thunder, or the Sound of the great Bell at Lincoln.


Mil. O good Martin let me not hear her open, for hear is Wind enough already,
and a little more might chance to over set my Mill, for to tell you the truth
no Woman is to make use of her tongue in this place, for as soon as the Mag-Pye
begins to chatter I turn her over into the Hopper, and away she goes.


Mar. But I think I had best have her Ground after the new fashion, that is, to
come out again without a tongue, for I have been so tormented with it, that I
shall be afraid ever to venture on a Woman with a Tongue so long as I have ears
to hear.


Miller. As you please for that, I Will warrant you she shall be ground just as
you would have her, and that is as much as the honestest Miller in the Land can
say* But what railing noise is this that I hear? what a whole Coachfull of
Ladies? I perceive my fame rings through Court, City, and Country, I would
scarce leave this Trade to turn Usurer, welcome honest Coachman, what have you
brought me here, I here this will be a lucky jobb, for by their fine Feathers
they should have well lined purses.


Coach What have I brought you; Marry I have brought you them that were not
able to bring th^ms^lves, such a parcel of old decayed Maddams, or what you
please to call them as I think old Nick would not be troubled with, for they
have been so over ridden wi^h all sorts of Gallants, that they are not now fit
for a Broom man, And now so sooth they have a mind to be young again, for their
hearts are good though their heels will not up as formerly they have done.


Mil. I can do no less then give them a little respect for what they have been,
and I will promise to Grind them like Persons of Quallity for they shall be
sure of a clean Hopper and other things which I am sure they love well. I do
not question but you are well paid for bringing them.


Coach. I, you may swear it, for because they were old I held them to hard
meat, or else perhaps a little 'th tone with the other might have served my turn,
but I pray you do your work well, and it may be I may help you to more
Customers, for I know a great many more that stands in need of Grinding.


Miller. Never fear but I will do my work well, for so soon as ever my things
are in order they shall be the first that I will go about; and I do not doubt
but to give them content.

For he that does, Old Ladies Grind,
Had need to have, a very merry Wind.
But who comes next? Peter the Piper: I hope he will make us all merry. Welcom^
Peter, you are a man that deals in Wind a^ well as my self, therefore be sure
if you have any thing to do, I will befrind you.


Piper. O good Brother Wind-baggs, stand t^ your Pan-pudding, and help me up
stairs with the most untoward, cross piece of carrion, that ev^^ poor Piper was
troubled withal, for as I was crowding her along, she let such a Fart, that I
believe it would have blown your Mill-sails about; and if it had not come out
at that end, and then no doubt but she had raised a Tempest, that would not a
been laid again in have; but of all the faults she has, none torments me so
much as her jealousy, for you know I must Play at Feasts and Weddings, and if
I do but chance to kiss a Maid, she is horn-mad.


Miller. Never trouble your self, if that be all, I Will make her patient enough,
nay more then that, after I have done with her, she shall be so pleasant and
merry, that she shall never hear you play, but shall dance, and I Am sure that
will please you, and make fine sport.


Piper. I must confess that will please me, for if she be in such a dancing
humor, I will make her dance about the house with my Pipe, as often as ever
she made me dance about with a Broom-staff, and that has been (as I may say)
too often.


Miller. Well, she shall serve you so no more I Will promise you, therefore Tune
up your Pipes, and play The worst is past, and in the mean time I will Grind
her as small as small Coals, whilst I sing this Song.

MY Mill it goes merrily round;
My Mill it goes merrily round,
The Pipers Wife I Will venture my life,
She shall be very well Ground, Ground,
O she shall be very well Ground.
But who comes here! Oh, my old Friend honest Ned, with his Wife Bette (the
Parsons Daughter in a Dung-cart, I will do him all all the courtesy I can.


Ned. Oh! help, help good Miller, or I am utterly undone, I have here in my
Dungcart the most abominablest load of Foul-stuff that ever man laid Leg over,
she is fit for nothing, except it were to make a Christmas-Log off, and then
she would make such a damnable stinck (in the burning) that she will spoil all
the Plumb-pottage and Roast-beef in Town: If you do not Grind her, I must e'ne
take a Halter and hang my self? for I have endured a worst Bondage with her
(for this twelve years) than ever the Children of Israel did in Eygipt.


Miller. Prithee Ned tell me her faults, and I Will Grind her to what perfection
you will have her.


Ned. Her Faults? She has so many that it is impossible to rickon them all up
in the longest Summers day: Oh that Parsons had never been suffered to marry,
then we had never been so tormented with their wicked Daughters.


Mill. You had best take my Rope and fasten it about her midddle, and we will
Crane her up into the Hopper, for she is so Fat and Foggey, that we shall never
get her up else.

From all Parsons Daughters, that so filthy be
I beseech the good Lord to deliver me.
But now by this time I think I have done a good days work, therefore I desire
that all my loving Customers, would come and tell me if I have given you
content, and then I shall be well satisfied and draw to a conclusion for this
day.


Customers. O we are all very well pleased to our hearts content, for our Wives
are now suitable to our humor, therefore we wish you good fortune wherever
you go*


Mil. I told you I would give you content, and I am glad I have performed my
promise, I must confess I have had good Trading here in England and I entend
when I remove to go amongst the Frenchcified Ladies; for they may be a means to
bring good Grists to my Mill: And so for the present I bid you farewell.

If there be any have a mind,
To bring more Women, for to Grind,
I pray be quick, make no delay,
But to my Mill, come all away
And if I have a merry wind,
I Will please you all, as you shall find.

FINIS.

