A merry and pleasant Discourse Betwixt Simple-wit, the Tennant, And Mr.
Money-love, the Landlord.
To to Tune of, I am in Love, and cannot tell with whom.




Tennant.
WHen I do call to mind my former life,
considering now the worlds uncertainty
And the true goodness of a loving Wife,
constant unto a man in misery:
When truly on these things I contemplate,
the vainness of this World I hate,
VVishing this comfort for my hearts content
Good loving sir you would not raise my rent.
Landlord.
Thou do not take a course whereby to live,
if thou do think to do as thou have done,
Therefore warning unto thee I do give,
against next Quarter pay or else be gone,
Think not with fair words I can be content,
at Quarter-day I do expect my Rent:
It Is not for poor men to take foolish ways,
I tell thee fellow I thy Rent must raise.
Tennant
If you my rent should raise I were undone
having a charge of pretty Children small
Pity my case, and be your Fathers Son,
who was not loving unto one but all,
The poor be pittyed, giving them relief,
they still were sure of Bread, Beer, and Bief,
And few unserved from his Gates they went
Oh, then good Landlord, do not raise my Rent.
Landlord.
Fellow why do thou tell me of these things,
the world thou know is come to that pass,
Pride to maintain, great cost and charges brings
then so to prate, thou art an Ass,
When my Gran-father lived, housekeeping then
was in request amongst the gentlemen
But it is not now as it was in former days;
then I tell thee fellow, I thy Rent must raise.
Tennant.
Your Fathers Tennant, I was twenty years
and my Fore-father lived upon that Land,
When your good aged Granfix living were;
as by my writings I do understand,
My father served your father, were his cloth,
My Tenement to loose I would be loath,
to part from it my sorrows would augment
Oh then good Lanlord, do not raise my Rent.
Landlord.
All this may be, but what is that to me,
as times do alter so men's minds do change:
This is no time for Hospitality,
men love their pleasures and abroad to range,
For to prate so thou art a saucy knavs,
I do intend six Horses for to have,
My Coach to draw to gain immortal praise
then I tell thee fellow, I thy Rent must raze.
Tennant.
Your VVor^hips pleasure sir fulfilled may be,
you have enough the same for to maintain,
Left by your Ancessers of good Degree:
but my old Landlord loved for to go plain;
Your Fathers father, that same good old man
to live as he did, happy's he that can;
In good housekeeping still's means he spent
Oh then good Lanlord, do not raise my rent.
Landlord.
I smile to hear thee talk so like a Gull,
to tell me of these things that former were
For in those days all things were plentiful,
yet now thou see that every thing is dear
And though my Granfix went in habbit plain
should I do so it would my credit stain;
I must the Taverns haunt, and see new Plays:
then I tell thee fellow, I thy Rent must raise.
Tennant.
Sweet sir, why should you not your pleasure take
for your delight being you are so young.
Yet howso'ere sir, me so happy make,
renewing of my Lease to make it strong,
That after my decease my Children may
the same enough as I do at this day,
My land though small which lying is in Kent
kind loving Landlord do not raise my Rent.
Landlord.
Brave Naggs, and Geldings, chiefest can be had
to run in Hide Park, and on Bansted downs,
I mean to keep, my heart for to make glad,
whose fleetness may regain me many crowns
Such must I have, my pleasure it is so,
to maintain this I would have the know,
Great charge requires to keep them in these days,
then I tell thee fellow, I thy Rent must raise.
Tennant.
Heavens bless your worship, wheresoever you go,
let me obtain this favor at your band,
Kind courtecus sir, to safe my heart of VVoe,
that I and mine sir may enjoy that Land
According to the Rent which formerly
my Father pai'd, good sir do not deny,
But that I may enjoy my Tenement;
and I Will be careful still to pay your Rent.
Landlord.
Well see thou do, but if with me thou break
or fail in ought thou here have promised me,
Believe me in a word what I do speak,
henceforth no more I ere will credit thee,
But learn of those, do their estates devour,
so pity no man be he nere so poor,
Since for thy faults that thou art penitent,
thy Land enjoy, I Will never raise thy Rent.
London, Printed for W. Thacery, and W. Whitwood.


