Vera Effigies Tho: Midletoni Gent.


TWO NEW PLAYS.

VIZ. More DISSEMBLERS besides WOMEN.

VIZ. WOMEN beware WOMEN.

WRITTEN By Tho. Middleton, Gent.



London, Printed for Humphrey Moseley and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1657.

MORE DISSEMBLERS BESIDES WOMEN.

A COMEDY, BY Tho. Middleton, Gent.



LONDON: Printed for Humphrey Moseley, 1657:

TO THE READER.
WHen these amongst others of Mr. Thomas Middleton's Excellent Poems, came to
my hands, I was not a little confident but that his name would prove as great
an Inducement for thee to Read, as me to Print them: Since those Issues of his
Brain that have already seen the Sun, have by their worth gained themselves a
free entertainment amongst all that are ingenious: And I am most certain, that
these will no way lessen his Reputation, nor hinder his Admission to any Noble
and Recreative Spirits. All that I require at thy hands, is to continue the
Author in his deserved Esteem, and to accept of my Endeavors which have ever
been to please thee.

Farewell.

UPON The Tragedy of My Familiar Acquaintance, THO. MIDDLETON.
WOmen beware Women; it is a true Text
Never to be forgot: Drabs of State vexed,
Have Plots, Poisons, Mischeifs that seldom miss,
To murder Virtue with a venom kiss.
Witness this worthy Tragedy, expressed
By him that well deserved among the best
Of Poets in his time: He knew the rage,
Madness of Women crossed; and for the Stage
Fitted their humors, Hell-bred Malice, Strife
Acted in State, presented to the life.
I that have seen't, can say, having just cause,
Never came Tragedy off with more applause.
Nath. Richards.

The Actors Names.
LOrd Cardinal of Milan. Lactantio, his Nephew. Andrugio, General of Milan.
Father to Aurelia. Lords of Milan. Governor of the Fort, Servant to Aurelia.
Crotchet, a Singing Master. Sinquapace, a Dancing Master. Usher to Sinquapace.
Dondolo, Servant to Lactantio.
Duchess of Milan. Celia, her Waiting-Gentlewoman. Aurelia, Mistress to
Andrugio and Lactantio.
Page, Lactantio's old Sweetheart disguised. Servants.
Scaen Milan.

MORE DISSEMBLERS BESIDES WOMEN.
The First Part.
Act. 1.
Scaen. 1.
Enter Lactantio, and Aurelia, and Servant. Music. SONG.
TO be chaste, is Woman's glory,
It Is her fame and honors story.
Here sits she in Funeral weeds*
Only bright in virtuous deeds.
Come and read her life and praise,
That singing weeps, and sighing plays.

Lact. WElcome Souls Music: I have
been listening here
To melancholy strains from
the Duchess lodgings.
That strange great Widow,
that has vowed so stiffly
Never to know loves heat in a second Husband:
And she has kept the Fort most valiantly
(To the wonder of her Sex) this seven years day;
And that is no sorry trial. A months constancy
Is held a virtue in a City-widow,
And are they excelled by so much more i'ch' Court?
'My faith a rare example for our Wives.
Heavens blessing of her heart for it poor Soul,
Sh'ad need have somewhat to comfort her.
What would thou do? Faith now
If I were dead, suppose I wear thy Husband,
(As shortly I will be, and that is as good)
Speak freely, and thou love me.

Aur. Alas Sir,
I should not have the leisure to make Vows,
For dying presently, I should be dead
Before you were laid out.

Lact. Now fie upon thee for a hasty dier,
Would thou not see me buried?

Aur. Talk not on it Sir,
These many years, unless you take delight
To see me swoun, or make a ghost of me.

Lact. Alas poor Soul, i will kiss thee into color,
Can thou paint pale so quickly, I perceive then
Thou Would go beyond the Duchess in her vow,
Thou Would die indeed: What Is he?

Aur. Be settled Sir,
Spend neither doubt, nor fear upon that fellow,
Health cannot be more trusty to man's life,
Then he to my necessities in love.

Lact. I take him of thy word, and praise his face,
Though he look scurvily, I will think hereafter
That honesty may walk with fire in's Nose,
As well as brave desert in broken clothes:
But for thy further safety, I Have provided
A shape, that at first sight will start thy modesty,
And make thee blush perhaps; but 'twill away
After a qualm or two. Virginity
Has been put often to those shifts before thee
Upon extremities; a little boldness
Cannot be called immodesty, especially
When there is no means without it, for our safeties;
Thou know my Uncle the Lord Cardinal
Wears so severe an eye, so strict and holy,
It not endures the sight of Woman-kinde
About his Lodgings;
Hardly a Matron of Four-score's admitted,
Though she be worn to gums, she comes not there,
To mumble Mattens, all his admiration
Is placed upon the Duchess; he likes her,
Because she keeps her vow, and likes not any;
So does he love that man, above his Book,
That loves no woman, for my Fortunes sake then,
For I am like to be his only Heir.
I must dissemble and appear as fair
To his opinion, as the brow of Piety;
As void of all impureness as an Altar,
Thine ear -- that, and we are safe.

Aur. You make me blush Sir.


Lact. It Is but a star shot from a beauteous cheek,
It blazes Beauties bounty, and hurts nothing.

Aur. The power of Love commands me.


Lact. I shall wither in comforts, till I see thee.


Exeunt. Scaen. 2.
Enter L. Cardinal in his Closet, and two or three Lords. L. Card. My Lords, I
have work for you, when you have hours
Free from the cares of State, bestow your eyes
Upon those abstracts of the Duchess virtues,
My studies ornaments. I make her Constancy
The holy Mistress of my contemplation,
Whole volumes have I writ in zealous praise
Of her eternal vow: I have no power
To suffer Virtue to go thinly clad,
I that have ever been in youth, an old man
To pleasures and to women, and could never love, but pity 'em,
And all their momentary frantic follies.
Here I stand up in admiration,
And bow to the chaste health of our great Duchess,
Kissing her constant name, O my fair Lords,
When we find grace confirmed, especially
In a creature that is so doubtful as a woman,
We'are spirit ravished, men of our probation
Feel the Spears, Music playing in their Souls
So long, unto the eternizing of her sex.
She Has kept her vow so strictly, and as chaste
As everlasting life is kept for Virtue.
Even from the sight of men, to make her oath
As incorrupt as th'honor of a Virgin
That must be strict in thought, or else that title,
Like one of Frailties ruins, shrinks to dust.
No longer she is a Virgin, then she is just.

1. Lord. Chaste Sir, the Truth and Justice of her Vow
To her deceased Lord's able to make poor
Man's treasury of praises. But methinks
She that has no temptation set before her,
Her Virtue has no conquest; then would her constancy
Shine in the brightest goodness of her glory*
If she would give admittance, see, and be seen;
And yet resist, and conquer. There were argument
For Angels, 't would out-reach the life of praise,
Set in Mortalities shortness. I speak this
Not for Religion, but for love of her,
Whom I wish less religious, and more loving:
But I fear she is too constant, that is her fault,
But it is so rare, few of her sex are took with it,
And that makes some amends.

L. Card. You have put my zeal into a way, my Lord.
I shall not be at peace, till I make perfect;
I Will make her victory harder, it is my crown
When I bring grace to great'st perfection;
And I dare trust that daughter with a world,
None but her vow and she. I know she wea^s
A constancy, will not deceive my praises,
A Faith so noble; she that once knows Heaven,
Need put in no security for her truth;
I dare believe her face, use all the art,
Temptation, witcheries, sleights, and subtleties,
You Temporal Lords, and all your means can practice.

2. Lord. My Lord, not any we*


L. Card. Her resolute goodness
Shall as a Rock stand firm, and send the sin
That beat against it, into the bosom of the owners, weeping.

3. Lord. We with her virtues so.


L. Card. O give me pardon,
I have lost my self in her, upon my friends.
Your charitable censures I beseech,
So dear her white fame is to my souls love*
It Is an affliction; but to hear it questioned,
She Is my religious triumph.
If you desire a belief rightly to her,
Think she can never waver then you are sure.
She has a fixed heart, it cannot err;
He kills my hopes of woman, that doubts her.

1. Lord. No more, my Lord, it is fixed.


L. Card. Believe my Judgment,
I never praise in vain, nor ever spent
Opinion idly, or lost hopes of any,
Where I once placed it; welcome as my joys.
Now you all part believers of her Virtue.

All L. We are the same most firmly*


L. Card. Good opinion
In others reward you, and all your actions.
Who Is near us?

Enter a Servant. Serve. My Lord*


L. Card. Call our Nephew: There Is a work too
That for bloods sake I labor to make perfect,
And it comes on with joy; he is but a youth
To speak of years, yet I dare venture him
To old men's goodnesses and gravities,
For his strict manners, and win glory by him;
And for the chastness of his continence
(Which is a rare grace in the spring of man)
He does excel the youth of all our time,
Which gift of his more then affinity,
Draws my affection in great plenty to him.
The company of a woman is as fearful to him,
As death to guilty men: I'have seen him blush,
When but a Maid was named; I Am proud of him,
Heaven be not angry for it: He Is near of kin
In disposition to me. I shall do much for him
In life time, but in death I shall do all;
There he will find my love. He Is yet too young
In years to rise in state, but his good parts
Will bring him in the sooner: Here he comes.
Enter Lactantio with a Book. What at thy Meditation? half in Heaven.


Lact. The better half my Lord, my minde's there still.
And when the heart's above, the body walks here
But like an idle Serving-man below,
Gaping and waiting for his Masters coming.

L. Card. What man in age, could bring forth graver thoughts?


Lact. He that lives Fourscore years, is but like one
That stays here for a Friend; when death comes, then
Away he goes, and is never seen again.
I wonder at the yongmen of our days,
That they can dote on pleasure, or what it is
They give that title too, unless in mockage.
There Is nothing I can find upon the Earth,
Worthy the name of pleasure, unless 't be
To laugh at folly; which indeed good Charity
Should rather pity: But of all the frenzies
That follow flesh and blood (O reverend Uncle)
The most ridiculous is to fawn on women;
There Is no excuse for that, it is such a madness,
There is no cure set down for it, no Physician
Ever spent hour about it, for they ghest
'Twas all in vain, when they first loved themselves,
And never since durst practice, cry Heu mihi,
That Is all the help they have for it. I had rather meet
A Witch far North, then a fine Fool in love,
The sight would less afflict me, but for modesty;
And your grave presence, that learns men respect,
I should fall foul in words upon fond man
That can forget his excellence and honor,
His serious Meditations being the end
Of his Creation, to learn well to die,
And live a prisoner to a woman's eye.
Can there be greater thraldom, greater folly?

L. Card. In making him my heir, I make good works,
And they give wealth a blessing, where on the contrary,
What curses does he heap upon his soul
That leaves his riches to a riotous young man,
To be consumed on Surfeits, Pride, and Harlets,
Peace be upon that spirit, whose life provides
A quiet rest for mine.

Enter Page with a Letter. Lact. How now, the news?


Page. A Letter Sir, brought by a Gentleman
That lately came from Rome.

Lact. That Is she, she is come:
I fear not to admit her in his presence;
There is the like already. I Am writ chaste
In my grave Uncles thoughts, and honest meanings
Think all men's like their own -- Thou look so pale,
What ail'st thou here a' late.

Page. I doubt I have cause Sir.


Lact. Why, what is the news?


Page. I fear Sir I Am with child:


Lact. With child; peace, peace, speak low:


Page. 'Twill prove I fear so.


Lact. Beshrew my heart for that -- Desire the Gentleman
To walk a turn or two.

L. Card. What Gentleman?


Lact. One lately come from Rome, my Lord, in credit,
With L. Vincentio; so the Letter speaks him.

L. Card. Admit him, my kind Boy; the prettiest Servant
That ever man was blessed with; it is so meek,
So good and gentle, 'twas the best almsdeed
That ere you did, to keep him. I have often took him
Weeping alone (poor Boy) at the remembrance
Of his lost friends; which as he says, the Sea
Swallowed with all their substance.

Lact. It Is a truth Sir,
Has cost the poor Boy many a feeling tear,
And me some too, for company. In such pity,
I always spend my part: Here comes the Gentleman.

Enter Aurelia like a Gentleman. L. Card. Welcome to Milan Sir, how is the
health
Of L. Vincentio.

Aur. May it please your Grace,
I left it well and happy, and I hope
The same: Blessed Fortune keeps it:

L. Card. I hear your near him.


Aur. One of his Chamber, my Lord.


Lact. I Would near wish one of her condition nearer,
Then to be one of mine.

L. Card. Your news is pleasing;
Whilst you remain in Milan, I request you,
To know the welcome of no house but ours.

Aur. Thanks to your Grace.


L. Card. I Will leave you to confer;
I Will to the Duchess, and labor her perfection.

Exit Cardinal. Lact. Then thus begins our conference, I arrest thee
In Cupids name, deliver up your weapon,
It is not for your wearing, Venus knows it.
Here Is a fit thing indeed, nay, Hangers and all,
Away with 'em, out upon 'em, things of trouble,
And out of use with you: Now you are my prisoner,
And till you swear you love me, all, and only
You, part not from mine arms.

Aur. I swear it willingly.


Lact. And that you do renounce the Generals love
That heretofore laid claim to you.

Aur. My heart bids me
You need not teach me, that my eye never knew
A perfect choice, till it stood blessed with you.
There Is yet a rival, whom you little dream of,
Tax me with him, and I Will swear too, I hate him.
I Will thrust 'em both together in one Oath,
And send'em to some pair of waiting-women,
To solder up their credits.

Lact. Prithee what is he
Another yet, for laughter sake discover him.

Aur. The Governor of the Fort:


Lact. That old dried Neat's tongue.


Aur. A Gentleman after my Fathers relish.


Enter Father and Governor. Father. By your kind favors Gentlemen:


Aur. O my Father,
We are both betrayed.

Lact. Peace, you may prove too fearful.
To whom your business Sir.

Fath. To the Lord Cardinal,
If it would please your self, or that young Gentleman,
To grace me with admittance.

Lact. I will see Sir,
The Gentleman's a stranger, new come over.
He understands you not -- Loff tro veen, Tantumbro, Hoff Tufftee
Locumber shaw.

Aur. Quisquimken, sapadlaman, Fool-urchin old Astrata.


Father. Nay, and that be the Language, we can speak't too: Strumpettikin,
Bold Harlottum Queaninisma, Whoremongeria.
Shame to thy Sex, and sorrow to thy Father.
Is this a shape for reputation?
And modesty to mask in? Thou too cunning
For credulous goodness.
Did not a reverent respect and honor
That Is due unto the Sanctimonious peace
Of this Lords house, restrain my voice and anger,
And teach it soft Humility: I would lift
Both your disgraces to the height of grief
That you have raised in me; but to shame you
I will not cast a blemish upon Virtue.
Call that your happiness, and the dearest too.
That such a bold attempt could ever boast off.
We'll see if a strong Fort can hold you now,
Take her Sir to you.

Gover. How have I deserved
The strangeness of this hour?

Father. Talk not so tamely,
For you Sir, thank the reverence of this place,
Or your Hypocrisy I had put out of grace,
I had 'ifaith, if ever I can fit you,
Expect to hear from me.

Exeunt: Lact. I thank you Sir,
The Cough of the Lungs requite you: I could curse him
Into diseases by whole dozens now.
But one's enough to beggar him, if he light
Upon a wise Physician. It Is a labor
To keep those little wits I have about me.
Still did I dream that Villain would betray her.
I Will never trust slave with a parboiled nose again.
I must devise some trick to excuse her absence
Now to my Uncle too; there is no mischief
But brings one Villain or other still
Even close at heels on it. I Am pained at heart:
If ever there were hope of me to die
For love, it is now, I never felt such gripings*
If I can escape this Climacterical year,
Women never trust me, though you hear me swear.
Kept with him in the Fort, why there is no hope
Of ever meeting now; my ways not thither,
Love bless us with some means to get together,
And I Will pay all the old rock'nings.

Exit. Scaen. 3.
Enter Duchess, above, and Celia. Dutch. What a contented rest rewards my mind
For faithfulness; I give it Constancy,
And it returns me Peace: How happily
Might woman live, methinks, confined within
The knowledge of one Husband?
What comes of more, rather proclaims Desire
Prince of affections, then religious love;
Brings frailty and our weakness into question;
Amongst our Male enemies* makes Widows tears,
Rather the cup of laughter then of pity?
What credit can our sorrows have with men,
When in some months space, they turn light again;
Feast, dance, and go in colors? If my vow
Were yet to make, I would not sleep without it,
Or make a Faith as perfect to my self
In resolution, as a vow would come to;
And do as much right so to Constancy,
As strictness could require: For it is our goodness,
And not our strength that does it. I am armed now
Against all deserts in man, be it Valor, Wisdom,
Courtesy, Comeliness, nay, Truth it self,
Which seldom keeps him company. I commend
The Virtues highly, as I do an Instrument
When the Case hangs by th'Wall; but man himself
Never comes near my heart.

Enter Lord Cardinal. L. Card. The blessing of Perfection to your thoughts,
Lady,
For I Am resolved they are good ones,

Dutch. Honor of greatness,
Friend to my vow, and Father to my fame,
Welcome, as Peace to Temples.

L. Card. I bring War.


Dutch How Sir?


L. Card. A harder fight: If now you conquer,
You crown my praises double.

Dutch. What Is your aim Sir?


L. Card. To astonish sin, and all her tempting evils,
And make your goodness shine more glorious,
When your fair noble vow showed you the way
To excellence in virtue, to keep back
The fears that might discourage you at first,
Pitying your strength, it showed you not the worst.
It Is not enough for Tapers to burn bright,
But to be seen, so to lend others light,
Yet not impair themselves, their flame as pure,
As when it shined in secret, so to abide
Temptations, is the Souls flame truly tried.
I have an ambition, but a virtuous one,
I would have nothing want to your Perfection.

Dutch. Is there a doubt found yet, is it so hard
For woman to recover, with all diligence,
And a true fasting faith from sensual pleasure,
What many of her sex has so long lost:
Can you believe that any sight of man,
Held he the worth of Millions in one spirit,
Had power to alter me

L. Card: No, there is my bope,
My credit, and my triumph.

Dutch* I Will no more,
Keep strictly private, since the glory on it
Is but a virtue questioned; I Will come forth
And show my self to all, the world shall witness,
That like the Sun, my Constancy can look
On Earth's corruptions, and shine clear it self.

L. Card. Hold conquest now, and I have all my wishes.


Cornets: And a shout within Dutch. The meaning of that sudden shout, my Lord.


L. Card. Seignior Andrugio, General of the Field;
Successful in his Fortunes, is ariv'd,
And met by all the gallant hopes of Milan.
Welcomed with Laurel wreaths, and Hymns of praises.
Vouchsafe but you, to give him the first grace Madam,
Of your so long hid presence, he has then
All honors that can bless victorious man.

Dutch. You shall prevail grave Sir.


Enter Andrugio, attended with the Nobility and State, like a Victor. Music.
SONG.
LAurel is a Victors due,
I give it you,
I give it you.
Thy name with praise,
Thy brow with bays;
We circle round.
All men rejoice
With cheerful voice,
To see thee like a Conqueror crowned.
A Cupid discending, sings this.
I am a little Conqueror too
For wreaths of bay^,
There Is Arms of cross,
And that is my due.
I give the flaming heart,
It is my crest.
And by the Mothers side,
The weeping eye,
The sighing breast.
It is not power in you, fair beauties,
If I command Love, it is your duties.

Ascend. During these Songs, Andrugio peruses a Letter delivered him by a Lord,
and then closes with this Song below. Welcome, Welcome, Son of Fame,
Honor triumphs in thy Name.

Exeunt in State. Lord. Alas poor Gentleman! I brought him news
That like a Cloud spread over all his glories,
When he mist her, whom his eye greedily sought for;
His welcome seemed so poor, he took no joy in it:
But when he found her, by her Father forced
To the old Governors love, and kept so strictly,
A coldness struck his heart; there is no State
So firmly happy, but feels Envies might.
I know Lactantio, Nephew to the Cardinal,
Hates him as deeply as a Richman death;
And yet his welcome showed as fair and friendly,
As his that wore the truest love to him.
When in his wishes he could drink his blood,
And make his heart the sweetness of his food.

Exit. Celia. Madam, Madam.


Dutch. Beshrew thy heart, do thou not see me busy:
You show your manners.

Celia. In the name of Goodness,
What ails my Lady?

Dutch. I confess I Am mortal,
There Is no defending on it, it is cruel flattery
To make a Lady believe otherways.
Is not this flesh? Can you drive heat from fire?
So may you love from this; for Love and Death
Are Brothers in this Kingdom, only Death
Comes by the Mothers side, and that is the surest.
That General is wondrous fortunate,
Has won another field since, and a victory
That credits all the rest: He may more boast on it,
Then of a thousand conquests. I am lost,
Utterly lost, where are my Women now,
Alas what help's in them, what strength have they?
I call to a weak guard, when I call them,
In rescuing me, they'ld be themselves o'er-come,
When I that professed war, am overthrown.
What hope's in them then, that never stirred from home?
My Faith is gone for ever, my Reputation with the Cardinal,
My Fame, my Praise, my Liberty, my Peace,
Changed for a restless Passion: Oh hard spite
To lose my seven years victory at one sight.

Exit. Scaen. 4.
Enter Dondolo, and the Page with a Shirt. Page. I prithee Dondolo, take this
shirt, and air it a little against my Master rises, I'had rather do any thing
then do it in faith.


Dond. O monstrous, horrible, terrible, intolerable! Are not you big enough to
air a shirt; were it a smock now, you liquorish Page, you would be hanged, ere
you would part from't. If thou do not prove as arrant a smell-smock, as any the
Town affords, in a Term time, I Will lose my judgment in Wenching.


Page. Pish; here Dondolo, prithee take it.


Dond. It Is no more but up and ride with you then? All my generation were
Bedles and Officers: and do you think I Am so easily entreated? you shall find
a harder piece of work (Boy) then you imagine, to get any thing from my hands;
I will not disgenerate so much from the nature of my kindred; you must bribe me
one way or other, if you look to have any thing done, or else you may do it your
self. 'Twas just my Fathers humor when he bore office: you know my mind Page,
The Song, the Song; I must either have the Song, you sung to my Master last
night, when he went to Bed, or I Will not do a stitch of service for you, from
one weeks end to the other. As I am a Gentleman, you shall brush Cloaks, make
clean Spurs, nay, pull of strait Boots, although in the tugging, you chance to
fall and hazard the breaking of your little Buttocks: I Will take no more pity of
your Maribones, then a Butchers Dog of a Rump of Beef; nay, ka me, ka thee, If
you will ease the Melancholy of my mind with singing, I will deliver you from
the calamity of Bootshaling.


Page. Alas you know I cannot sing.


Dond. Take heed, you may speak at such an hour, that your voice may be clean
taken away from you: I have known many a good Gentlewoman say so much as you
say now, and have presently gone to Bed, and lay speechless: It Is not good to
jest, as old Chaucer was wont to say, that broad famous English Poet. Cannot
you sing say you? Oh that a Boy should so keep cut with his Mother, and be
given to dissembling.


Page. Faith to your knowledge in it, ill may seem well;
But as I hope in comforts, I Have no skill.

Dond. A pox of skill, give me plain simple cunning: Why should not singing be
as well got without skill, as the getting of children; you shall have the
arrant'st Fool do as much there, as the wisest Coxcomb of 'em all, let 'em have
all the help of Doctors put to 'em; both the directions of Physicians, and the
erections of Pothecaries; you shall have a plain Hobnail'd Countrey-Fellow,
marrying some Dairy-wench, tumble out two of a year, and sometimes three,
By'rlady, as the crop falls out; and your nice paling Physicking-Gentlefolks,
some one in nine years, and hardly then a whole one, as it should be; the
wanting of so me Apricock, or something, looses a member on him, or quite
spoils it. Come will you sing, that I may warm the shirt; by this light, he
shall put it on cold for me else.


Page. A Song or two I learnt, with hearing Gentlewomen practice themselves.


Dond. Come, you are so modest now, it is pity that thou was it ever bred to be
thrust through a pair of Canions; thou would have made a pretty foolish
Waiting Woman, but for one thing. Wil't' sing?


Page. As well as I can Dondolo.


Dond. Give me the shirt then, I Will warm't as well I can too.
Why look you Whoreson Cockscomb, this is a smock.

Page. No it is my Masters shirt.


Dond. Why that is true too,
Who knows not that; why it is the fashion Fool,
All your young Gallants here of late wear smocks;
Those without Beards especially.

Page. Why what is the reason Sir.


Dond. Marry very great reason in it: A young gallant lying a Bed with his Wench,
if the Constable should chance to come up and search, being both in smocks,
they would be taken for Sisters; and I hope a Constable dare go no further: And as
for the knowing of their Heads, that is well enough too; for I know many young
Gentlemen, wear longer hair then their Mistresses.


Page. It Is a hot world the whilst:


Dond Nay, that is most certain,

And a most witty age of a bald one; for all Languages you have many daughters so
well brought up, they speak French naturally at fifteen, and they are turned to
the Spanish and Italian half a year after.


Page. That Is like learning the Grammar first, and the Accidence after;
They go backward so.

Dond. The fitter for the Italian; thou'st no wit Boy,
Had had a Tutor, he would have taught thee that.
Come, come, that I may be gone Boy?

Music. Page: SONG.
CUpid is Venus only joy,
But he is a wanton Boy:
A very, very wanton Boy.
He shoots at Ladies naked Breasts;
He is the cause of most men's Crests;
I mean upon the Forehead,
Invisible, but horrid.
Of the short Velvet Mask, he was deviser,
That wives may kiss, the husband's never the wiser.
'Twas he first thought upon the way,
To keep a Ladies Lips in play.

Dond. Oh rich, ravishing, rare, and enticing: Well, go thy ways, for as sweet
a Brested Page, as ever lay at his Masters feet in a Truckle-bed.


Page. You Will hie you in straight Dondolo?


Exit. Dond. I Will not miss you.
This smockified shirt, or shirted smock,
I will go toste; let me see what is a clock,
I must to th'Castle straight to see his love,
Either by hook or crook: My Master storming
Sent me last night, but I Will be gone this morning.

Exit. Act. 2.
Scaen. 1.
Enter Duchess and Celia. Dutch. SEek out the lightest colors can be got;
The youthful'st dressings; Tauny is too sad.
I am not thirty yet, I have wronged my time,
To go so long in black, like a Petitioner.
See that the Powder that I use about me,
Be rich in Cassia.

Cel. Here Is a sudden change.


Dutch. Oh I Am undone in Faith: Stay, art thou certain
Lactantio, Nephew to the Cardinal,
Was present in the late entertainment of the General?

Cel. Upon my reputation with your Excellence,
These eyes beheld him: He came foremost, Madam,
'Twas he in black and yellow.

Dutch. Nay, it is no matter, either for himself
Or for the affectation of his colors,
So you be sure he was there.

Cel. As sure as sight
Can discern man from man, Madam.

Exit. Dutch. It suffices.
Oh an ill cause had need of many helps,
Much art, and many friends, I, and those mighty,
Or else it sets in shame. A Faith once lost,
Requires great cunning, er't be entertained
Into the Breast of a belief again.
There Is no condition so unfortunate,
Poor, miserable, to any Creature given,
As hers that breaks in vow, she breaks with Heaven:

Enter Lord Cardinal. L. Card. Increase of health, and a redoubled courage
To Chasteties great Soldier: what so sad Madam?
The memory of her seven years deceased Lord
Springs yet into her eyes, as fresh and full
As at the seventh hour after his departure:
What a perpetual Fountain is her virtue?
Too much to afflict your self with ancient sorrow
Is not so strictly for your strength requird:
Your vow is charge enough, believe me it is Madam,
You need no waightier task.

Dutch. Religious Sir,
You heard the last words of my dying Lord.

L. Card. Which I shall never forget.


Dutch. May I entreat
Your goodness but to speake'em over to me
As near as memory can be friend your utterance,
That I may think a while I stand in presence
Of my departing Husband.

L. Card. What Is your meaning?
In this most virtuous Madam?

Dutch. It Is a courtesy
I stand in need of Sir, at this time specially,
Urge it no further yet; as it proves to me,
You shall hear from me, only I desire it
Effectually from you Sir, that is my request.

L. Card. I wonder, yet I Will spare to question farther.
You shall have your desire.

Dutch. I thank you Sir.
A blessing come along with it.

L. Card. You see my Lords, what all Earths glory is
Rightly defined in me, uncertain breath;
A dream of threescore years to the long sleeper,
To most not half the time. Beware Ambition,
Heaven is not reached with Pride, but with submission.
And you Lord Gardinal labor to perfect
Good purposes begun, be what you seem,
Steadfast, and incorrupt, your actions noble,
Your goodness simple, without gain or art,
And not in vesture hollier then in heart.
But it is a pain, more then the pangs of death,
To think that we must part, Fellows of life,
Thou richness of my joys, kind and deer Princess.
Death had no sting, but for our separation,
It Would come more calm then an ev'nings peace,
That brings on rest to labors: Thou art so precious,
I should depart in everlasting envy
Unto the man, that ever should enjoy thee:
Oh a new torment strikes his force into me,
When I but think on it, I am racked and torn,
Pity me in thy virtues.

Dutch. My loved Lord,
Let you confirmed opinion of my life,
My love, my faithful love, seal an assurance
Of quiet to your spirit, that no forgetfulness
Can cast a sleep so deadly on my Senses,
To draw my affections to a second liking.

L. Card. 'Tas ever been the promise, and the spring
Of my great love to thee. For once to marry
Is honorable in woman, and her ignorance
Stands for a virtue, coming new and fresh;
But second marriage shows desires in flesh:
Thence lust, and heat, and common custom grows,
But she is part Virgin, who but one man knows.
I here expect a work of thy great Faith,
At my last parting, I can crave no more,
And with thy vow, I rest my self for ever,
My soul and it shall fly to Heaven together:
Seal to my spirit, that quiet satisfaction,
And I go hence in Peace.

Dutch. Then here I vow, never.


L. Card Why Madam?


Dutch. I can go no further.


L. Card. What have you forgot your vow?


Dutch. I have, too certainly.


L. Card. Your vow? that cannot be; it follows now,
Just where I left.

Dutch. My frailty gets before it,
Nothing prevails but ill.

L. Card. What ail you Madam?


Dutch. Sir, I Am in love.


L. Card. Oh all you powers of Chastity,
Look to this woman, let her not faint now
For honor of your selves: If she be lost,
I know not where to seek my hope in woman.
Madam, Oh Madam.

Dutch. My desires are sickned
Beyond recovery of good counsel Sir.

L. Card. What mischief owed a malice to the Sex,
To work this spightful ill; better the man
Had never known Creation, then to live
Th'unlucky ruin of so fair a Temple;
Yet think upon your vow, revive in Faith,
Those are eternal things. What are all pleasures,
Flatteries of men, and Follies upon Earth
To your most excellent goodness? Oh she is dead,
Stark cold to any virtuous claim within her.
What now is heat, is sins. Have I approved
Your constancy for this, called your Faith noble,
Writ volumes of your victories and virtues?
I have undone my judgment, lost my praises,
Blemished the truth of my opinion.
Give me the man, that I may pour him out
To all contempt and curses.

Dutch. The man's innocent,
Full of desert and grace, his name Lactantio.

L. Card. How?


Dutch. Your Nephew.


L. Card. My Nephew!


Dutch. Beshrew the sight of him; he lives not Sir,
That could have conquered me, himself excepted.

L. Card. He that I loved so dearly, does he wear
Such killing poison in his eye to sanctity?
He has undone himself for ever by it,
Has lost a friend of me, and a more sure one.
Farewell all natural pity, though my affection
Could hardly spare him from my sight an hour,
I Will lose him now eternally, and strive
To live without him; he shall straight to Rome.

Dutch. Not if you love my health, or life, my Lord.


L. Card. This day he shall set forth:


Dutch. Dispatch me rather.


L. Card. I Will send him far enough.


Dutch. Send me to death first.


L. Card. No Basilisk that strikes dead pure affection
With venomous eye, lives under my protection.

Exit. Dutch. Now my conditions worse then ever 'twas yet,
My cunning takes not with him: Has broke through
The Net, that with all art was set for him,
And left the snarer here herself entangled
With her own toils. Oh what are we poor souls,
When our dissembling fails us? Surely Creatures
As full of want, as any Nation can be
That scarce have food to keep bare life about 'em:
Had this but took effect, what a fair way
Had I made for my love to the General,
And cut of all suspect, all reprehension?
My hopes are killed in the blossom.

Exit. Scaen. 3.
Enter L. Cardinal. L. Card. Let me think upon it,
Set holy anger by a while, there is time
Allowed for natural argument: It Is she
That loves my Nephew, she that loves, loves first;
What cause have I to lay a blame on him then?
He Is in no fault in this; say 'twas his fortune
At the free entertainment of the General,
Amongst others the deserts and hopes of Milan,
To come into her sight, where is the offense yet?
What sin was that in him? man's sight and presence
Are free to public view: She might as well
Have fixed her hearts love then upon some other,
I would t'had lighted any where but there,
Yet I may err to wished, since it appears
The hand of Heaven, that only picked him out
To reward virtue in him by this Fortune,
And through affection I Am half conquered now,
I love his good, as dearly as her vow,
Yet there my credit lives in works and praises:
I never found a harder fight within me,
Since zeal first taught me war, say I should labor
To quench this love, and so quench life and all;
As by all likelihood it would prove her death:
For it must needs be granted, she affects him
As dearly, as the power of love can force,
Since her vow aws her not, that was her Saint.
What right could that be to Religion
To be her end, and disposes my Kinsman;
No I will bear in pity to her heart,
The rest commend to Fortune, and my Art.

Exit. Scaen. 4.
Enter Father, Governor, Aurelia, and Andrugio disguised. Gover. I like him
passing well:


Fath. He Is a tall fellow.


Andr. A couple of tall wits: I have seen some service Sir.


Gover. Nay so it seems by thy discourse goodfellow.


Andr. Good Fellow, calls me theif familiarly:
I could show many marks of resolution,
But modesty could wish'em rather hidden:
I fetched home three and twenty wounds together
In one set battle, where I was defeated
At the same time of the third part of my Nose,
But meeting with a skilful Surgeon;
Took order for my snuffling.

Gover. And a Nose
Well healed, is counted a good cure in these days,
It saves many a man's honesty, which else
Is quickly drawn into suspicion.
This night shall bring you acquainted with your charge;
In the mean time you and your valors welcome.
Would we had more store of you, although they come
With fewer marks about 'em.

Fath. So wish I Sir.


Exeunt Father and Governor. Andr. I was about to call her; and she stays
Of her own gift, as if she knew my mind;
Certain she knows me not, not possible.

Aur. What if I left my token, and my Letter
With this strange fellow, so to be conveyed
Without suspicion to Lactantio's servant:
Not so, I Will trust no fresh-man with such secrets;
His ignorance may mistake, and giv't to one
That may belong to th'General; for I know
He sets some spies about me, but all he gets
Shall not be worth his pains. I would Lactantio
Would seek some means to free me from this place,
It Is prisonment enough to be a Maid;
But to be mewed up too, that case is hard,
As if a Toy were kept, by a double guard.

Andr. Away she steals again, not minding me.
'Twas not at me she offered: Hark you Gentletwoman.

Aur. With me Sir?


Andr. I could call you by your name;
But Gentle's the best attribute to woman.

Aur. Andrugio, Oh as welcome to my Lips,
As morning Dew to Roses: My first love.

Andr. Why have you more then?


Aur. What a word was there?
More then thy self, what woman could desire
If reason had a part of her Creation?
For loving you, you see Sir I Am a prisoner;
There Is all the cause they have against me Sir.
A happy persecution, I so count on it.
If any thing be done to me for your sake,
It Is pleasing to me.

Andr. Are you not abused,
Either through force, or by your own consent;
Hold you your honor perfect and unstained;
Are you the same still, that at my departure,
My honest thoughts maintained you to my heart?

Aur. The same most just.


Andr. Swear 't.


Aur. By my hope of fruitfulness,
Love, and agreement, the three joys of marriage:

Andr. I am confirmed, and in requital on it,
Ere long expect your freedom.

Aur. Oh you flatter me,
It is a wrong to make a wretch too happy,
So suddenly upon affliction.
Beshrew me, if I be not sick upon it;
It Is like a surfeit after a great feast.
My freedom said you?

Andr. Do o'rcome you so?


Aur. Temptation never overcame a sinner
More pleasingly, then this sweet news my heart.
Here Is secret joy can witness, I am proud on it.

Andr. Violence I will not use, I come a friend,
'Twere madness to force that, which wit can end:

Aur. Most virtuously delivered:


Andr. Thou art in raptures:


Aur. My love, my love.


Andr. Most virtuously delivered,
Spoke like the sister of a Puritan Midwife:
Will you embrace the means that I have thought on,
With all the speed you can?

Aur. Sir any thing.
You cannot name't too dangerous, or too homely.

Andr. Fie, you over-act your happiness,
You drive slight things to wonders.

Aur. Blame me not Sir,
You know not my affection:

Andr. Will you hear me,
There are a sect of pilfring juggling people,
The vulgar tongue call Gipseys.

Aur. True, the same Sir.
I saw the like this morning: Say no more Sir;
I apprehend you fully:

Andr. What, you do not?


Aur. No: Hark you Sir.


Andr. Now by this light it is true:
Sure if you prove as quick as your conceit,
You Will be an exc'lent breeder.

Aur. I should do reason by the Mothers side Sir,
If Fortune do her part, in a good Getter.

Andr. That Is not to do now (sweet) the man stands near thee.

Aur. Long may he stand most fortunately Sir,
Whom her kind goodness has appointed for me

Andr. A while I Will take my leave to avoid suspicion:


Aur. I do commend your course; good Sir forget me not.


Andr. All comforts sooner.


Aur. Liberty is sweet, Sir.


Andr. I know there is nothing sweeter, next to love,
But health it self, which is the Prince of life.

Aur. Your knowledge raise you Sir.


Andr. Farewell till evening.


Exit Andrugio. Aur. And after that, farewell sweet Sir for ever.
A good kind Gentleman to serve our turn with,
But not for lasting: I have chose a Stuff
Will wear out two of him, and one finer too:
I like not him that has two Mistresses;
War, and his sweetheart, he can never please both:
And War's a soaker, she is no friend to us,
Turns a man home sometimes to his Mistress,
Some forty ounces poorer then he went.
All his discourse out of the Book of Surgery,
Seer-cloth, and Salve, and lies you, all in Tents,
Like your Camp-Victlers: Out upon it, I smile
To think how I have fitted him with an office;
His love takes pains to bring our loves together,
Much like your man that labors to get treasure,
To keep his wife high for another pleasure.

Exit. Act. 3.
Scaen. 1.
Enter Lactantio, and Page. Page. THink of your shame and mine.


Lact. I prithee peace,
Thou art th'unfortunat'st piece of taking business,
That ever man repented, when day peeped;
I Will never keep such a piece of Touch-wood again,
And I we re rid of thee once. Welfare those
That never shamed their Master, I have had such,
And I may live to see the time again;
I do not doubt on it:

Page. If my too much kindness
Receive your anger only for reward,
The harder is my fortune, I must tell you Sir,
To stir your care up to prevention,
(Misfortunes must be told as well as blessings)
When I left all my friends in Mantua,
For your loves sake alone, then with strange oaths
You promised present marriage.

Lact. With strange oaths quoth' a,
They Are not so strange to me, I have sworn the same things,
I am sure forty times over; not so little.
I may be perfect in 'em, for my standing.

Page. You see it is high time now Sir.


Lact. Yes, yes, yes,
Marriage is nothing with you; a toy till death.
If I should marry all those I have promised,
'Twould make one Vicar hoarse, ere he could dispatch us:
I must devise some shift, when she grows big,
Those Masculine Hose will shortly prove too little:
What if she were conveyed to Nurses house;
A good sure old Wench; and she'ld love the child well,
Because she suckl'd the Father: No ill course
By my Mortality, I may hit worse.
Enter Dondolo. Now Dondolo, the news.


Dond. The news:


Lact. How does she.


Dond. Soft, soft Sir, you think it is nothing to get news out of the Castle;
I was there.

Lact. Well Sir.


Dond. As you know a merry fellow may pass any where.


Lact. So Sir.


Dond Never in better fooling in my life.


Lact. What Is this to the purpose?


Dond. Nay 'twas nothing to the purpose, that is certain.


Lact. How Wretched this slave makes me! Did not see her?


Dond. I saw her.


Lact. Well, what said she then?


Dond. Not a word Sir.


Lact. How, not a word?


Dond. Proves her the better Maid;
For Virgins should be seen more then they are heard.

Lact. Exceeding good Sir; you are no sweet villain.


Dond. No Faith Sir; for you keep me in foul Linen.


Lact. Turned scurvy rimer are you?


Dond. Not scurvy neither,
Though I be somewhat itchy in the profession;
If you could hear me out with patience, I know her mind
As well as if I were in her belly:

Lact. Thou said even now, she never spoke a word:


Dond. But she gave certain signs, and that is as good.


Lact. Can thou conceive by signs?


Dond. Oh passing well Sir,
Even from an Infant; did you never know that?
I was the happiest child in all our Country,
I was born of a dumb woman.

Lact. How?


Dond. Stark dumb Sir: My Father had a rare bargain of her, a rich peniworth;
there would have been but too much money given for her. A Justice of Peace was
about her, but my Father being then Constable, carried her before him.


Lact. Well since we are entered into these dumb shows,
What were the signs she gave you?

Dond. Many and good, Sir.
Imprimis, she first gaped, but that I ghess'd
Was done for want of air, cause she is kept close;
But had she been abroad, and gapt as much,
T'had been another case; then cast she up
Her pretty eye, and wink't; the word me thought was then
Come not till twitter light: Next, thus her fingers went,
As who should say, I Would fain have a hole broke to 'scape away.
Then looked upon her watch, and twice she nodded,
As who should say, The hour will come Sweetheart
That I shall make two Noddies of my Keepers.

Lact. A third of thee. Is this your Mother tongue?
My hopes are much the wiser for this Language,
There is no such curse in love to an arrant Ass.

Dond O yes, Sir, yes, an arrant whore's far worse* You never lin railing on
me, from one weeks end to another: But you can keep a little Tit-mouse Page
there, that is good for nothing, but to carry Toothpicks, put up your Pipe or
so, that is all he is good for: he cannot make him ready as he should do, I am
fain to truss his points every morning. Yet the proud scornful Ape, when all
the lodgings were taken up with strangers the other night, he would not suffer
me to come to Bed to him, but kicked and pricked, and pinched me, like an Urchin;
there is no good quality in him. Oh my Conscience* I think he scarce knows how
to stride a Horse; I saw him with a little hunting Nag, but thus high the other
day, and he was fain to lead him to a high rail, and get up like a
Butter-wench; there is no good Fellowship in this Dandiprat, this Dive-dapper,
as is in other Pages; they would go a swimming with no familiarly in the heat of
Summer, and clap what you call 'ems: But I could never get that little Monkey
yet to put off his Breeches. A tender, puling, nice, chitty faced Squal 'cis.


Lact. Is this the good you do me? his love's wretched,
And most distressed, that must make use of Fools.

Dond. Fool to my face still! that is unreasonable;
I will be a knave one day for this trick,
Or it shall cost me a fall, though it be from a Gibbet,
It has been many a proper man's last leap.
Nay sure I Will be quite out of the precincts of a Fool, if I live but two days
to an end: I will turn Gipsey presently, and that is the highway to the
dantiest knave that ever Mothers Son took journey too. Oh those dear Gipseys,
they live the merriest lives, eat sweet stolen Hens, plucked over Pales or Hedges
by a twitch; they are never without a plump and lovely Goose, or beautiful
Sow-pig; those things I saw with mine own eyes to day; they call those
vanities, and triffing pilfries: But if a privy search were made amongst 'em,
they should find other manner of ware about 'em; Cups, Rings, and Silver
Spoons, by'r Lady, Bracelets, Pearl Neck-laces, and Chains of Gold sometimes;
they are the wittiest thieves: I Will stay no longer, but even go look what I can
steal, now presently, and so begin to bring my self acquainted with 'em.


Exit. Lact. Nothing I fear so much, as in this time
Of my dull absence, her first love, the General
Will wind himself into her affection,
By secret gifts and Letters; there is the mischief;
I have no enemy like him, though my policy
Dissembled him a welcome, no man's hate
Can stick more close unto a loathed disease,
Then mine to him.

Enter Lord Cardinal. L. Card. What ails this pretty Boy to weep so often?
Tell me the cause child; how his eyes stand full!
Beshrew you Nephew, you're too bitter to him;
He is so soft, th'unkindness of a word
Melts him into a woman; 'lass poor Boy,
Thou shall not serve him longer; 'twere great pity
That thou should wait upon an angry Master.
I have promised thee to one will make much of thee,
And hold thy weak youth in most deer respect.

Page. Oh I beseech your Grace, that I may serve
No Master else.

L. Card. Thou shall not: Mine Is a Mistress,
The greatest Mistress in all Milan, Boy;
The Duchess self.

Page. Nor her, nor any:


L. Card. Cease Boy,
Thou know not thine own happiness, through fondness,
And therefore must be learned; go dry thine eyes.

Page. This rather is the way to make 'em moister.


Exit Page. L. Card. Now Nephew, Nephew.


Lact. Oh you have snatched my spirit Sir*
From the divinest Meditation
That ever made Soul happy.

L. Card. I am afraid
I shall have as much toil to bring him on now,
As I had pains to keep her off from him*
I have thought it fit Nephew, considering
The present barrenness of our name and house,
(The only Famine of succeeding honor)
To move the ripeness of your time to marriage.

Lact. How Sir, to marriage?


L. Card. Yes, to a fruitful life;
We must not all be strict so generation
Would lose her right; you are young, it is my desire
To see thee bestowed happily in my life time.

Lact. Does your Grace well remember who I am,
When you speak this?

L. Card. Yes, very perfectly;
You Are a young man, full in the grace of life,
And made to do love credit; proper, handsome,
And for affection, pregnant.

Lact. I beseech you Sir,
Take off your praises, rather then bestow 'em
Upon so frail a use, alas you know Sir,
I know not what love is, or what you speak of;
If woman be amongst it, I shall swoun; take her away
For contemplation's sake; most serious Uncle,
Name no such thing to me.

L. Card. Come, come you are fond:
Prove but so strict and obstinate in age,
And you are well to pass. There Is honest love
Allowed you now for recreation;
The years will come when all delights must leave you.
Stick close to Virtue then; in the mean time
There Is honorable joys to keep youth company;
And if death take you there, dying no adulterer,
You Are out of his eternal reach, defy him.
List hither, come to me, and with great thankfulness,
Welcome thy Fortunes; it is the Duchess loves thee.

Lact. The Duchess!


L. Card. Dotes on thee: Will die for thee,
Unless she may enjoy thee.

Lact. She must die then.


L. Card. How?


Lact. Alas, do you think she ever means to do it Sir?
I Will sooner believe all a woman speaks,
Then that she will die for love: She has a vow my Lord,
That will keep life in her.

L. Card. Believe me then,
That should have bounteous interest in thy Faith,
She Is thine, and not her vows, the more my sorrow,
My toil, and my destruction.

Lact. My blood dances.


L. Card. And though that bashful Maiden virtue in thee,
That never held familiar league with woman,
Binds fast all pity to her heart that loves thee.
Let me prevail, my counsel stands up to thee;
Embrace it as the fullness of thy Fortunes,
As if all blessings upon Earth were closed
Within one happiness; for such an other
Whole life could never meet with; go and present
Your service, and your love, but on your hopes
Do it religiously: What need I doubt him,
Whom Chastity locks up?

Lact. Oh Envy, had thou no other means to come by virtue,
But by such treachery! The Duchess love!
Thou would be sure to aim it high enough,
Thou knew'st full well 'twas no prevailing else.
Sir, what your will commands, mine shall fulfill:
I Will teach my heart in all to obey your will.

Enter Lords. L. Card. A thing you shall not lose by. Here come the Lords,
Go follow you the course that I advised you;
The comfort of thy presence is expected;
Away with speed to Court, she languishes
For one deer sight of thee. For life's sake haste,
You lose my favor if you let her perish.

Lact. And art thou come brave Fortune, the reward
Of neat hypocrisy, that ever book't it,
Or turned up transitory white of the eye
After the Feminine rapture: Duchess and I
Were a fit match, can be denied of no man;
The best dissembler lights on the best woman;
'Twere sin to part us.

Exit: L. Card. You Lights of State, Truths Friends, much honored Lords,
Faithful admirers of our Duchess virtues,
And firm Believers; it appears as plain
As knowledge to the eyes of industry,
That neither private motion, which holds counsel
Often with woman's frailty, and her blood,
Nor public sight, the lightning of temptations,
Which from the eye strikes sparks into the bosom,
And sets whole hearts on fire, has power to raise
A heat in her 'bove that which feeds chaste life,
And gives that cherishing means; she is the same still,
And seems so seriously employed in soul,
As if she could not tend to cast an eye
Upon deserts so low as those in man.
It merits famous memory I confess;
Yet many times when I behold her youth,
And think upon the lost hopes of posterity,
Succession, and the royal fruits of Beauty,
All by the rashness of one vow made desperate,
It goes so near my heart, I feel it painful,
And wakes me into pity oftentimes,
When others sleep unmoved.

1 Lord. I speak it faithfully,
For it is poor fame to boast of a disease,
Your Grace has not endu ed that pain alone;
T'has been a grief of mine, but where is the remedy?

L. Card. True, there your Lordship spoke enough in little;
There Is nothing to be hoped for but repulses;
She Is not to seek for armor against love,
That has bid battle to his powers so long;
He that should try her now, had need come strong,
And with more force then his own Arguments,
Or he may part disgraced, being put to flight;
That Soldier's tough, has been in seven ^ars fight,
Her vow's invincible; for you must grant this,
If those desires trained up in flesh and blood
To war continually against good intents,
Prove all too weak for her, having advantage
Both of her sex, and her unskilfulness
At a Spiritual weapon, wanting knowledge
To manage resolution, and yet win;
What force can a poor Argument bring in?
The Books that I have published in her praise,
Commend her constancy, and that is Fame-worthy;
But if you read me o'r with eyes of enemies,
You cannot justly, and with honor tax me,
That I dissuade her life from marriage there:
Now Heaven, and fruitfulness forbid, not I:
She may be constant there, and the hard war
Of Chastity, is held a virtuous strife,
As rare in marriage, as in single life;
Nay, by some writers rarer: hear their reasons,
And you will approve 'em fairly. She that is single,
Either in Maid or Widow, oftentimes
The fear of shame, more then the fear of Heaven,
Keeps chaste, and constant; when the tempest comes
She knows she has no shelter for her sin,
It must endure the weathers of all censure:
Nothing but Sea and Air, that poor Bark feels,
When she in wedlock is like a safe vessel
That lies at anchor; come what weathers can,
She has her Harbor: At her great unlading*
Much may be stolen, and little waste; the Master
Thinks himself rich enough with what he has,
And holds content by that. How think you now Lords*
If she that might offend safe, does not err,
What Is chaste in others, is most rare in her.

2 Lord. What wisdom but approves it?


1 Lord. But my Lord,
This should be told to her it concerns most;
Pity such good things should be spoke and lost.

L. Card. That were the way to lose 'em utterly,
You quite forget her vow; yet now I think on it,
What is that vow? 'Twas but a thing enforced,
Was it not Lords?

1 Lord. Merely compelled indeed.


L. Card. Only to please the Duke, and forced virtue
Fails in her merit, there is no crown prepared for it:
What have we done, my Lords? I fear we have sinned
In too much strictness to uphold her in it,
In cherishing her will; for woman's goodness
Takes counsel of that first, and then determines.
She cannot truly be called constant now,
If she persever; rather obstinate,
The Vow appearing forced, as it proves,
Tried by our purer thoughts: The grace and triumph
Of all her victories, are but idle glories;
She wilful, and we enemies to succession.
I will not take rest, till I tell her soul
As freely as I talk to those I keep.

Lords. And we'll all second you, my Lord.


L. Card. Agreed.
We'll knit such knots of Arguments so fast,
All wit in her shall not undo in have.

2 Lord. Nay sure, I think all we shall be too hard for her,
Else she is a huge wild Creature.

1 Lord. If we win,
And she yield marriage, then will I strike in.

Exeunt: Scaen. 2.
Enter Duchess and Celia. Dutch. Thou tell me happy things, if they be
certain,
To bring my wishes about wondrous strangely.
Lactantio Nephew to the Cardinal,
The Generals secret enemy?

Cel. Most true Madam,
I had it from a Gentleman, my Kinsman,
That knows the best part of Lactantio's bosom.

Dutch. It happens passing fortunately, to save
Employment in another; he will 'come now
A necessary property; he may thank
The need and use we have of him for his welcome.
Now who is that knocks?

Knocks within. Cel. Madam, it is he, with speed.
I thought he had brought his horse to the Chamber door,
He made such haste and noise.

Dutch. Admit him prithee,
And have a care your heart be true and secret:

Cel. Take life away from't, when it fails you Madam.


Exit. Enter Lactantio. Dutch. Enough; I know thee wise.
He comes with haste indeed: Are you come now Sir?
You should have staid yet longer, and have found me
Dead, to requite your haste.

Lact. Love bless you better Madam.


Dutch. Must I bid welcome to the man undoes me,
The cause of my vows breach, my honor's enemy;
One that does all the mischief to my fame,
And mocks my seven years conquest with his name?
This is a force of Love was never felt;
But I Will not grudge at Fortune, I will take
Captivity cheerfully: Here, seize upon me,
And if thy heart can be so pitiless
To chain me up for ever in those arms,
I Will take it mildly, I, and thank my Stars,
For we are all subject to the chance of wars.

Lact. We are so, yet take comfort vanquished Duchess,
I Will use you like an honorable prisoner,
You shall be entreated; day shall be
Free for all sports to you, the night for me;
That Is all I challenge, all the rest is thine;
And for your fare 't' shall be no worse then mine.

Dutch. Nay then I Am heartily pleasant, and as merry
As one that ows no malice, and that is well Sir;
You cannot say so much for your part, can you?

Lact. Faith all that I ow, is to one man, Madam,
And so can few men say: Marry that malice
Wears no dead flesh about it, it is a stinger.

Dutch. What is he that shall dare to be your enemy,
Having our friendship, if he be a servant
And subject to our Law?

Lact. Yes, trust me Madam,
Of a vilde fellow, I hold him a true subject;
There Is many arrant knaves, that are good subjects,
Some for their livings sakes, some for their lives,
That will unseen, eat men, and drink their wives.

Dutch. They are as much in fault that know such people,
And yet conceal 'em from the whips of Justice.
For love's sake give me in your foe betimes,
Before he vex you further; I will order him
To your hearts wishes, load him with disgraces,
That your revenge shall rather pity him,
Then wish more weight upon him.

Lact. Say you so Madam!
Here Is a blessed hour, that feeds both love and hate;
Then take thy time brave malice: Virtuous Princess,
The only enemy that my vengeance points to,
Lives in Andrugio.

Dutch. What the General?


Lact. That Is the man, Madam.


Dutch. Are you serious Sir?


Lact. As at my prayers.


Dutch. We meet happily then
In both our wishes; he is the only man
My will has had a longing to disgrace,
For diverse capital contempts; my memory
Shall call 'em all together now; nay Sir,
I Will bring his faith in War, now into question,
And his late conference with the enemy.

Lact. By'r Lady a shrewd business, and a dangerous.
Seignior, your neck's a cracking.

Dutch. Stay, stay Sir, take Pen and Ink.


Lact. Here Is both, and Paper, Madam.


Dutch. I Will take him in a fine trap.


Lact. That were exc'llent.


Dutch. A Letter so writ, would abuse him strangely.


Lact. Good Madam, let me understand your mind,
And then take you no care for his abusing,
I serve for nothing else. I can write fast and fair
Most true Orthography, and observe my stops.

Dutch. Stay, stay a while,
You do not know his hand.

Lact. A bastard Roman,
Much like mine own I could go near it Madam.

Dutch. Marry and shall.


Lact. We were once great together,
And writ Spanish Epistles one to another,
To exercise the Language.

Dutch. Did you so?
It shall be a bold Letter of temptation
With his name to it, as writ, and sent to me.

Lact. Can be no better Lady; stick there Madam,
Ank never seek further.

Dutch. Begin thus: Fair Duchess, say:
We must use flattery, if we imitate man,
'Twill never be thought his Pen else.

Lact. Most fair Duchess.


Dutch. What need you have put in most, yet since it is in,
Let 't even go on, few women would find fault with it;
We all love to be best, but seldom mend:
Go on Sir.

Lact Most fair Duchess! Here Is an admiration point.


Dutch. The report of your vow shall not fear me.


Lact. Fear me: Two stops at fear me.


Dutch. I know you are but a woman.


Lact. But a woman; a comma at woman.


Dutch. And what a woman is, a wiseman knows.


Lact. Wiseman knows: A Full-prick there.


Dutch. Perhaps my condition may seem blunt to you.


Lact. Blunt to you: A comma here again.


Dutch. But no man's love can be more sharp set.


Lact. Sharp set, there a colon; for colon is sharp set oftentimes.


Dutch. And I know desires in both sexes have skill at that weapon.


Lact. Skill at that weapon: A Full-prick here, at weapon.


Dutch. So, that will be enough: Subscribe it thus now.
One that vows service to your affections: Seignior such a one.

Lact. Seignior Andrugio: G. that stands for General.


Dutch. And you shall stand for Goose cap: Give me that,
Betake you to your business; speedily Sir,
We give you full authority from our person,
In right of Reputation, Truth, and Honor,
To take a strong Guard, and attach his body.
That done, to bring him presently before us,
Then we know what to do.

Lact. My hate finds wings,
Man's spirit flies swift to all revengeful things.

Exit. Dutch. Why here is the happiness of my desires,
The means safe, unsuspected, far from thought;
His state is like the world's condition right,
Greedy of gain, either by fraud or stealth;
And whilst one toils, another gets the wealth.

Exit. Act. 4.
Scaen. 1.
Enter Andrugio. Andr. NOw Fortune show thy self the Friend of Love,
Make her way plain, and safe; cast all their eyes
That guard the Castle, into a thicker blindness then thine own,
Darker then Ignorance or Idolatry,
That in that shape, my love may pass unknown,
And by her freedom, set my comforts free.
This is the place appointed for our meeting,
Yet comes she, I am coveteous of her sight;
That Gipsey habit alters her so far
From knowledge that our purpose cannot err;
She might have been here now, by this time largely
And much to spare: I would not miss her now
In this plight, for the loss of a years joy.
She Is ignorant of this house, nor knows she where,
Or which way to bestow her self through fear.

Enter Lactantio with a Guard. Lact. Close with him Gentlemen. In the Duchess
name
We do attach your body.

Andr. How, my body!
What means this rudeness?

Lact. You add to your offenses,
Calling that rudeness, that is fair command,
Immaculate Justice, and the Duchess pleasure.*

Andr. Seignior Lactantio, Oh are you the Speaker?


Lact. I am what I am made.


Andr. Show me my crime.


Lact. I fear you will have too many shown you Sir.


Andr. The Father of untruths possesses thy spirit,
As he commands thy tongue: I defy fear,
But in my love, it only settles there.

Lact. Bring him along.


Andr. Let Laws severest browe
Bend at my deeds, my innocence shall rise
A shame to thee, and all my enemies:

Lact. You Are much the happier man.


Andr. Oh my hard crosses;
Grant me the third part of one hours stay.

Lact. Sir, not a minute.


Andr. Oh she is lost.


Lact. Away.


Exeunt: Scaen. 2.
Enter Aurelia like a Gipsey. Aur. I Am happily escaped, not one pursues me,
This shape's too cunning for 'em; all the sport was
The Porter would needs know his fortune of me
As I past by him: 'Twas such a plunge to me,
I knew not how to bear my self; at last
I did resolve of somewhat, looked in's hand,
Then shook my head, bad him make much on's eyes,
He would lose his sight clean, long before he dies,
And so away went I, he lost the sight of me quickly.
I told him his fortune truer for nothing, then some
Of my Complexion, that would have cozened him of his money.
This is the place of meeting; where is this man now,
That has took all this care and pains for nothing?
The use of him is at the last cast now,
Shall only bring me to my former face again,
And see me somewhat cleanlier at his cost,
And then farewell Andrugio; when I am handsome
I Am for another straight: I wonder troth
That he would miss me thus, I could have took
Many occasions besides this, to have left him,
I Am not in want, he need not give me any;
A woman's will has still enough to spare
To help her friends, and need be: What, not yet?
What will become of me in this shape then?
If I know where to go, I Am no dissembler;
And I Will not lose my part in one woman so,
For such a triffle, to forswear my self*
But comes he not indeed?

Enter Dondolo. Dond* Oh ex'lent, by this light here is one of them. I thank my
Stars: I learnt that phrase in the Half Moon Tavern. By your leave good Gipsey,
I pray how far off is your company?


Aur. Oh happiness! This is the merry Fellow
My love Seignior Lactantio takes delight in;
I Will send him away speedily, with the news
Of my so strange and fortunate escape,
And he will provide my safety at an instant.
My friend, thou serv'st Seignior Lactantio.

Dond. Who I serve? Gipsey, I scorn your motion; and if the rest of your
company give me no better words, I will hinder 'em the stealing of more Pully
then fifty Poulterers were ever worth, and prove a heavier enemy to all their
Pig-booties; they shall travel like Jews, that hate Swines flesh, and never get
a Sow by th'ear all their life time. I serve Lactantio? I scorn to serve any
Body, I am more Gipsey-minded then so; though my face look of a Christian
color, if my belly were ripped up, you shall find my heart as black as any
patch about you. The truth is, I am as arrant a theif, as the proudest of your
company, I Will except none: I am run away from my Master in the state of a Fool,
and till I be a perfect knave, I never mean to return again.


Aur. I Am never the happier for this Fortune now,
It did but mock me.

Dond. Here they come: Here they come.


Enter a company of Gipseys, Men and Women, with Booties of Hens, and Ducks,
etc. singing. Music. SONG.
Cap. Come my dainty Doxes,
My Dells, my Dells most deer.
We have neither House nor Land,
Yet never want good cheer.

All. We never want good cheer*


Cap. We take no care for Candle, Rents,

2: We lie.

3. We snort.

Cap. We sport in Tents.
Then rouse betimes, and steal our dinners.
Our store is never taken
Without Pigs, Hens, or Bacon,
And that is good meat for sinners*
At Wakes and Fairs we cozen,
Poor Country folks by dozen*
If one have money, be disburses,
Whilst some tell fortunes, some pick purses*
Rather then be out of use
We'll steal Garters, Hose, or Shoes,
Boots, or Spurs with gingling Rowels,
Shirts or Napkins, Smocks or Towels.
Come live with us, come live with us,
All you that love your eases;
He that is a Gipsey,
May be drunk or tipsey,
At what hour he pleases.

All. We laugh, we quaff, we roar, we scuffle.
We cheat, we drab, we filtch, we shuffle.

Dond. Oh sweet! they deserve to be hanged for ravishing of me.


Aur. What will become of me, if I seem fearful now,
Or offer sudden flight? then I betray my self;
I must do neither.

Cap. Gips. Ousabel, camcheteroon, puscatelion, hows-drows.

2. Rumbos stragadelion
Alla piskitch in Sows-clows.
Oh, Oh!

Dond. Piskitch in howse-clout.

I shall never keep a good tongue in my head, till I get this Language.


Cap. Umbra fill kevolliden, magro-pye.


Dond. He calls her Magot of pie.


Aur. I love your Language well, but understand it not.


Cap. Hah.


Aur. I am but lately turned to your profession,
Yet from my youth, I ever loved it deerly,
But never could attain to it: Steal I can;
It was a thing I ever was brought up to,
My Father was a Miller, and my Mother
A Tailors widow.

Dond. She Is a theif on both sides.


Cap. Give me thy hand, thou art no Bastard born,
We have not a more true bred theif amongst us.

All. Not any Captain.


Dond. I pray take me into some grace amongst you too, for though I claim no
goodness from my parents to help me forward into your Society, I had two Uncles
that were both hanged for robberies, if that will serve your turn, and a brave
cutpurse to my Cozen-german: If kindred will be taken, I am as near a kin to a
theif as any of you that had Fathers and Mothers.


Cap. What is it thou requirest, noble Cozen?


Dond. Cozen! nay, and we be so near a kin already, now we are sober, we shall
be sworn Brothers when we are drunk: The naked truth is Sir, I would be made a
Gipsey as fast as you could devise.


Cap. A Gipsey!


Dond. I with all the speed you can Sir; the very sight of those stolen Hens,
eggs me forward horribly


Cap. Here Is dainty Ducks too Boy.


Dond. I see 'em but too well; I would they were all rotten roasted, and stuffed
with Onions.


Cap. Love thou the common food of Eygpt, Onions?


Dond. I, and Garlic too: I have smelt out many a Knave by it; but I could
never smell mine own breath yet, and that is many a man's fault; he can smell out
a Knave in another sometimes three yards off, yet his Nose standing so nigh his
mouth, he can never smell out himself.


Cap. A pregnant Gipsey.


All. A most witty sinner.


Cap. Stretch forth thy hand Coz; art thou fortunate?


Dond. How? fortunate! nay, I cannot tell that my self; wherefore do I come to
you but to learn that? I have sometimes found money in old shoes, but if I had
not stolen more then I have found, I had had but a scurvy thin-cheek'd fortune
on it.


Cap. Here Is a fair Table.


Dond. I, so has many a man, that has given over housekeeping, a fair Table,
when there is neither cloth, nor meat upon it.


Cap. What a brave line of life's here, look you Gipseys.


Dond. I have known as brave a live end in a halter.


Cap. But thou art born to precious fortune.


Dond. The Devil I am.


Cap. Bette, Bucketto.


Dond. How, to beat Bucks?


Cap. Stealee Bacono.


Dond. Oh, to steal Bacon, that is the better fortune of the two indeed.


Cap. Thou will be shortly Captain of the Gipseys.


Dond. I would you would make me Corporal in the mean time;
Or Standard Bearer to the Women's Regiment.

Cap. Much may be done for love.


Dond. Nay here is some money: I know an Office comes not all for love; a Pox of
your Limetwigs, you hav't all already.


Gap. It lies but here in cash for thine own use Boy.


Dond. Nay an't lie there once, I shall hardly come to the fingring on it in
haste; yet make me an apt Scholar, and I care not: Teach me but so much
Gipsey, to steal as much more from another, and the Devil do you good of that.


Cap. Thou shall have all thy heart requires:
First, here is a Girl for thy desires,
This Doxey fresh, this new come Dell
Shall lie by thy sweet side and swell:
Get me Gipseys brave and tauny;
With Cheek full plump, and Hip full brauny.
Look you prove industrious dealers
To serve the Commonwealth with stealers,
That th'unhous'd race of Fortune Tellers
May never fail to cheat Town-dwellers;
Or to our universal grief,
Leave Country Fairs without a Theif.
This is all you have to do,
Save every hour a filch or two,
Be it money, cloth or pullen,
When the ev'nings browe looks sullen.
Loose no time, for then it is precious,
Let your sleights be fine, facetious;
Which hoping you will observe, to try thee
With rusty Bacon, thus I Gipsifie thee.

Dond. Do you use to do it with Bacon.


Cap. Evermore:


Dond. By this light, the Rats will take me now for some Hogs Cheek, and eat up
my face when I am asleep; I shall have never a bit left by to morrow morning;
and lying open mouthed as I use to do, I shall look for all the world like a
Mouse-trap baited with Bacon.


Cap. Why here is a face like thine, so done,
Only grained in by the Sun, and this, and these.

Dond. Faith, then there is a company of Bacon faces of you, and I am one now to
make up the number: We are a kind of conscionable people, and 'twere well
thought upon for to steal Bacon, and black our faces with it; It Is like one that
commits sin, and writes his faults in his forehead.


Cap. Wit whether will thou?


Dond. Marry to the next pocket I can come at; and if it be a Gentleman's, I
wish a whole quarters rent in it: Is this my in dock, out nettle. What Is Gipsey
for her?


Cap. Your doxey she.


Dond. Oh right, are you my doxey sir.


Aur. I Will be thy doxey, and thy dell.
With thee I Will live, for thee I Will steal:
From Fair to Fair, from Wake to Wake,
I Will ramble still for thy sweet sake.

Dond. Oh dainty fine doxey; she speaks the Language as familiarly already, as
if sh'ad been begot of a Canter. I pray Captain, what is gipsey for the hind
quarter of a Woman?


Cap. Nosario.


Dond* Nosario: Why what is gipsey for my Nose then?


Cap. Why Arsinio.


Dond. Arsinio? Faith 'me thinks you might have devised a sweeter word for it.


Enter Father and Governor. Cap. Stop, stop, fresh booties, Gentle folks,
Seignioroes,
Calavario, Fulkadelio.

2 Gip. La gnambrol a tumbrel.


Dond. How: Give me one word amongst you, that I may be doing too.


Aur. Yonder they are again, Oh guiltiness,
Thou put'st more trembling fear into a Maid
Then the first wedding night. Take courage wench
Thy face cannot betray thee with a blush now.

Fath. Which way she took her flight Sir, none can ghess,
Or how she escaped:

Govern. Out at some Window certainly.


Fath. Oh it is a bold daring Baggage.


Govern. See good fortune Sir,
The Gipseys, they are the cunningst people living.

Fath. They cunning? what a confidence have you Sir,
No wiseman's faith was ever set in fortunes.

Govern. You are the wilfulst man against all learning still:
I will be hanged now, if I hear not news of her amongst this company.

Fath. You are a Gentleman of the flatt'ring'st hopes
That ever lost woman yet.

Govern. Come hither Gipsey.


Aur. Luck now, or I Am undone, -- What says my Master,
Bless me with a silver cross,
And I will tell you all your loss.

Govern. Lo you there Sir, all my loss, at first word too,
There is no cunning in these Gipseys now.

Fath Sure I Will hear more of this.


Govern. Here Is silver for you.


Aur. Now attend your fortunes story,
You loved a Maid.

Govern. Right.


Aur. She never loved you.
You shall find my words are true.

Govern. 'Mass I am afraid so.


Aur. You were about
To keep her in, but could not do it.
Alas the while she would not stay
The cough of the Lungs blew her away;
And which is worse, you will be so crossed,
You Will never find the thing that is lost;
Yet oftentimes your sight will fear her,
She Will be near you, and yet you never the nearer.
Let her go, and be the gladder;
She'ld but shame you, if you had her.
Ten Counselors could never school her,
She'is so wild, you could not rule her.

Govern. In troth I am of thy mind, yet Il'ld fain find her.


Aur. Soonest then, when you least mind her;
But if you mean to take her tripping,
Make but haste, she is now a shipping.

Govern. I ever dreamed so much.


Fath. Hie to the Key,
We'll mar your voyage, you shall brook no Sea.

Exit Father and Governor. Cap. Cheteroon: High Gulleroon*


Dond. Filcheroon, pursse-fulleroon: I can say somewhat too.


All. Excellent Gipsey, witty rare Doxey:


Dond. I would not change my Dell for a dozen of black Bell-weathers.


Cap. Our wealth swells high my Boys.


Dond. Our wealth swells high my Boys.


Cap. Let every Gipsey
Dance with his Doxey,
And then drink, drink for joy.

Dond. Let every Gipsey
Dance with his Doxey,
And then drink, drink for joy:

All. And then drink, drink for joy.


Exit with a strange wild fashioned dance to the Hoboys or Cornets. Scaen 3.
Enter Duchess, Lord Cardinal, and other Lords, Celia. L. Card. That which is
merely called a will in woman,
I cannot always title it with a virtue.

Dutch. Oh good Sir spare me.


L. Card. Spare your self, good Madam.
Extremest Justice is not so severe
To great offenders, as your own forced strictness
To beauty, youth and time; you will answer for it.

Dutch. Sir settle your own peace, let me make mine.


L. Card. But here is a heart must pity it, when it thinks on it,
I find compassion, though the smart be yours.

1 Lord. None here but does the like.


2 Lord. Believe it Madam,
You have much wronged your time.

1 Lord. Nay, let your Grace
But think upon the barrenness of succession.

2 Lord. Nay more, a Vow enforced.


Dutch. What do you all
Forsake me then, and take part with you man;
Not one friend have I left I do they all fight
Under th'inglorious banner of his censure,
Serve under his opinion?

L. Card. So will all Madam,
Whose judgments can but taste a rightful cause,
I look for more force yet; nay, your own women
Will shortly rise against you, when they know
The war to be so just and honorable
As marriage is: You cannot name that woman,
Will not come ready armed for such a cause:
Can Chastity be any whit impaired
By that which makes it perfect? Answer Madam,
Do you profess constancy, and yet live alone?
How can that hold! you are constant then to none.
That Is a dead virtue, goodness must have practice,
Or else it ceases; then is woman said
To be love chaste, knowing but one man's bed:
A mighty virtue; beside, fruitfulness
Is part of the salvation of your sex;
And the true use of Wedlocks time and space,
Is woman's exercise for Faith and Grace.

Dutch. Oh what have you done my Lord?


L. Card. Laid the way plain
To knowledge of your self and your Creation,
Unbound a forced Vow, that was but knit
By the strange jealousy of your dying Lord,
Sinful in the fastening.

Dutch. All the powers of Constancy
Will curse you for this deed.

L. Card. You speak in pain Madam,
And so I take your words, like one in sickness
That rails at his best friend: I know a change
Of disposition has a violent working
In all of us; it is fit it should have time
And council with it self: May you be fruitful Madam
In all the blessings of an honored love.

1 Lord. In all your wishes fortunate, and I
The chief of 'em my self.

L. Card. Peace be at your heart Lady.


1 Lord. And love, say I.


L. Card. We'll leave good thoughts now, to bring in themselves.


Exit Lords. Dutch. O there is no art like a religious cunning,
It carries away all things smooth before it.
How subtly has his wit dealt with the Lords
To fetch in their persuasions, to a business
That stands in need of none, yields of it self
As most we women do, when we seem farthest?
But little thinks the Cardinal he is requited
After the same proportion of deceit
As he sets down for others.
Enter Page. Oh here is the pretty Boy, he preferred to me,
I never saw a meeker, gentler youth
Yet made for man's beginning: How unfit
Was that poor fool, to be Lactantio's Page,
He would have spoiled him quite, in one year utterly,
There had been no hope of him. Come hither child,
I have forgot thy name.

Page. Antonio, Madam.


Dutch. Antonio! so thou toldst me; I must chide thee,
Why did thou weep, when thou came first to serve me?

Page. At the distrust of mine own merits Madam,
Knowing I was not born to those deserts
To please so great a Mistress.

Dutch. Alas poor Boy,
That Is nothing in thee, but thy modest fear
Which makes amends faster then thou can err:
It shall be my care to have him well brought up
As a youth apt for good things. Celia --

Cel. Madam.


Dutch. Has he bestowed his hour to day for Music?


Cel Yes, he has Madam.


Dutch. How do you find his voice?


Cel. A pretty womanish faint sprawling voice Madam,
But 'twill grow strong in time, if he take care
To keep it when he has it from fond exercises.

Dutch. Give order to the dancing Schoolmaster,
Observe an hour with him:

Cel. It shall be done Lady;
He is well made for dancing, thick in the Chest Madam,
He will turn long and strongly.

Dutch. He shall not be behind a quality,
That aptness in him or our cost can purchase,
And see he lose no time.

Cel. I Will take that order Madam.


Page. Singing and dancing! alas my case is worse,
I rather need a Midwife, and a Nurse.

Exit Celia and Page. Dutch. Lactantio, my procurer not returned yet?
His malice, I have fitted with an office,
Which he takes pleasure to discharge with rigor:
He comes, and with him, my hearts Conqueror,
My pleasing thraldom's near.

Enter General, Lactantio and the Guard. Andr. Not know the cause?


Lact. Yes, you shall soon do that now, to the ruin
Of your neck-part, or some nine years imprisonment,
You meet with mercy, and you escape with that;
Beside your Lands all begged and seized upon;
That Is admirable favor. Here Is the Duchess.

Dutch. Oh Sir you are welcome.


Lact. Marry bless me still
From such a welcome.

Dutch. You are hard to come by,
It seems Sir by the guilt of your long stay.

Andr. My guilt good Madam.


Dutch. Sure you had much a do
To take him, had you not? speak truth Lactantio,
And leave all favor, were you not in danger?

Lact. Faith something near it Madam: He grew headstrong,
Furious and fierce; but it is not my condition
To speak the worst things of mine enemy Madam,
Therein I hold mine honor: But had fury
Burst into all the violent storms that ever
Played over anger in tempestuous man.
I would have brought him to your Graces presence,
Dead or alive.

Dutch. You would not Sir?


Andr. What pride
Of pampered blood has mounted up to this puckfoist?
If any way uncounsel'd of my judgment,
My ignorance has stepped into some error,
(Which I could heart'ly curse) and so brought on me
Your great displeasure, let me feel my sin
In the full weight of Justice, virtuous Madam,
And let it wake me thoroughly. But chaste Lady,
Out of the bounty of your Grace, permit not
This perfumed parcel of curled powdered hair
To cast me in the poor relish of his censure.

Dutch. It shall not need good Sir; we are our self
Of power sufficient to judge you, never doubt it Sir.
Withdraw Lactantio; carefully place your Guard
In The next Room.

Lact. You Will but fare the worse;
You see your niceness spoils you; you will go nigh now
To feel your sin indeed.

Exit Lactantio and Guard: Andr. Hell-mouth be with thee.
Was ever malice seen yet to gape wider
For man's misfortunes?

Dutch. First Sir, I should think
You could not be so impudent to deny,
What your own knowledge proves to you.

Andr. That were a sin Madam,
More gross then flattery spent upon a villain.

Dutch. Your own confession dooms you Sir.


Andr. Why Madam.


Dutch. Do not you know I made a serious vow
At my Lords death, never to marry more?

Andr. That Is a truth Madam, I Am a witness to.


Dutch. Is It so Sir? you will be taken presently,
This man needs no accuser. Knowing so much,
How durst you then attempt so bold a business
As to solicit me (so strictly settled)
With tempting Letters, and loose lines of love?

Andr. Who I do it Madam?


Dutch. Sure the man will shortly
Deny he lives, although he walks and breath.

Andr. Better destruction snatch me quick from sight
Of humane eyes, then I should sin so boldly.

Dutch. 'Twas well I kept it then from rage or fire,
For my truths credit: Look you Sir, read out,
You know the hand and name:

Andr. Andrugio!


Dutch. And if such things be fit, the world shall judge!


Andr. Madam.


Dutch. Pish; that is not so; it begins otherwise
Pray look again Sir; how you would slight your knowledge.

Andr. By all the reputation I late won.


Dutch. Nay, and you dare not read Sir, I am gone.


Andr. Read? most fair Duchess.


Dutch. Oh, have you found it now?
There Is a sweet flattering phrase for a beginning,
You thought belike, that would o'rcome me.

Andr. I Madam?


Dutch. Nay on Sir, you are slothful*


Andr. The report of your Vow shall not fear me.


Dutch. No? are you so resolute? It Is well for you Sir:


Andr. I know you are but a woman.


Dutch. Well, what then Sir?


Andr. And what a woman is, a wiseman knows.


Dutch. Let him know what he can, he is glad to get us.


Andr. Perhaps my condition may seem blunt to you.


Dutch: Well; we find no fault with your bluntness.


Andr. But no man's love can be more sharp set.


Dutch. I there is good stuff now.


Andr. And I know desires in both sexes have skill at that weapon.


Dutch. Weapon! You begin like a Flatterer, and end like a Fencer.
Are these fit lines now to be sent to us?

Andr. Now by the honor of a man, his truth Madam,
My name's abused.

Dutch. Fie, fie, deny your hand!
I will not deny mine; here take it freely Sir,
And with it my true constant heart for ever.
I never disgraced man that sought my favor.

Andr. What mean you Madam?


Dutch. To requite you Sir
By courtesy, I hold my reputation,
And you shall taste it: Sir, in as plain truth
As the old time walked in, when love was simple
And knew no art, nor guile, I affect you;
My heart has made her choice. I love you Sir
Above my vow; the frown that met you first,
Wore not the livery of anger Sir,
But of deep policy: I made your enemy
The Instrument for all; there you may praise me,
And 'twill not be ill given.

Andr. Here Is a strange Language!
The constancy of love bless me from learning on it,
Although ambition would soon teach it others.
Madam, the service of whole life is yours. But --

Dutch. Enough; you are mine for ever. Within there.


Enter Lactantio, and the Guard. Lact. Madam.


Dutch. Lay hands upon him, bear him hence,
See he be kept close prisoner in our Palace,
The time's not yet ripe for our Nuptial Sollace.

Exit. Lact. This you could clear your self.


Andr. There Is a voice that wearies me
More then mine own distractions.

Lact. You are innocent?


Andr. I have not a time idle enough from passion,
To give this Devil an answer: Oh she is lost!
Cursed be that love, by which a better's crossed.
There my heart's settled.

Lact. How is he disgraced,
And I advanced in love? Faith he that can
Wish more to his enemy, is a spightful man,
And worthy to be punished.

Exeunt. Act. 5.
Scaen. 1.
Enter Page, Celia, and Crotchet. Cel. SIr I Am of that opinion, being kept hard
to it, In troth I think he will take his prick-song well.


Crotch. G, sol, re ut; you ghess not right y'saith.
Mistress, you will find you are in an error straight:
Come on Sir, lay the Books down; you shall see now.

Page. Would I Would an honest Caudle next my heart,
Let whose would Sol Fa, I Would give them my part.
In troth methinks I have a great longing in me
To bite a piece of the Musicians Nose off;
But I Will rather lose my longing, then spoil the poor man's
Singing; the very tip will serve my turn, methinks if I
Could get it, that he might well spare; his Nose is of
The longest -- Oh my back.

Crotch. You shall hear that; rehearse your Gamot Boy:


Page. Who'ld be thus toild for love, and want the joy?


Crotch. Why when? begin Sir: I must stay your leisure.


Page. Gamot, a re, b me, etc.


Crotch. Ee la: Aloft, above the clouds my Boy.


Page. It must be a better note then Ela Sir,
That brings Musicians thither; they are too hasty,
The most part of 'em, to take such a journey,
And must needs fall by the way.

Crotch. How many Cliffs be there?


Page. One Cliff Sir.


Crotch. Oh intolerable heretic
To voice and music! Do you know but one Cliff?

Page. No more; indeed I Sir, and at this time,
I know too much of that.

Crotch. How many Notes be there?


Page. Eight Sir, I fear me I shall find nine shortly,
To my great shame and sorrow: -- Oh my stomach!

Crotch. Will you repeat your notes then? I must Sol Fa you, why when Sir?


Page. A large, a long, a brief, a semibrief, a minom, a crotchet,
A quaver, a semiquaver:

Crotch. Oh, have you found the way?


Page. Never trust me
If I have not lost my wind with naming of 'em.

Crotch. Come Boy, your minds upon some other thing now:
Set to your Song.

Page. Was ever Wench so punished?


Crotch. Ut. Come begin.


Page. Ut me re fa sol la.


Crotch. Keep time you foolish Boy -- (Here they sing Pricksong)
How like you this Madova?

Celia. Pretty,
He will do well in time being kept under.

Crotch. I Will make his ears sore, and his knuckles ache else.


Cel. And that is the way to bring a Boy to goodness Sir.


Crotch. There Is many now waxt proper Gentlemen.
Whom I have nipt i'ch' ear Wench, that is my comfort.
Come sing me over the last song I taught you:
You Are perfect in that sure, look you keep time well,
Or here I Will notch your faults up. Sol, Sol, begin Boy.

Music, Song. Cel. So you have done well Sir.
Here comes the dancing Master now, you are discharged.

Enter Sinquapace the Dancer. Sinq. Oh Seignior Crotchet, Oh.


Crotch. A minom rest, two cliffs, and a semibrief. In the name
Of Alamire, what is the matter Sir?

Sinq. The horriblest disaster that ever disgraced the lofty cunning of a
dancer.


Crotch. Be fa beme: Heaven forbid man.


Sinq. Oh -- oo -- the most cruel Fortune!


Crotch. That smiquaver is no friend to you,
That I must tell you; it is not for a Dancer
To put his voice so hard to it, every workman
Must use his own tools Sir, de fa sol man, dilate
The matter to me.

Sinq. Faith riding upon my Foot-cloth, as I use to do, coming through a crowd
by chance, I let fall my Fiddle.


Crotch. De sol re. Your Fiddle Sir?


Sinq. Oh that such an instrument should be made to betray a poor Gentleman!
nay, which is more lamentable, whose luck should it be to take up this
unfortunate Fiddle, but a Barbers Prentice, who cried out presently, according
to his nature; You trim Gentleman on Horsback, you have lost your Fiddle, your
worships Fiddle; seeing me upon my Footcloth, the mannerly Cockscomb could say
no less. But away rid I Sir, put my horse to a caranto pace, and left my Fiddle
behind me:


Crotch. De la sol re.


Sinq. I, was it not a strange fortune, an excellent Treble-vial, by my Troth
'twas my Masters, when I was but a pumper, that is a puller on of Gentlemen's
Pumps.


Crotch. C, c, sol fa: I knew you then Sir.


Sinq. But I make no question, but I shall hear on it shortly at one Brokers or
another, for I know the Barber will scourse it away for some old Cittron.


Crotch. Ela me, my life for yours on that Sir; I must to my other
Scholars, my hour calls me away: I leave you to your
Practice, Fa sol la. Fare you well Sir:

Exit. Sinq. The Lavolto's of a merry heart be with you Sir; and a merry heart
makes a good singing man; a man may love to hear himself talk, when he carries
pith in's mouth -- Metereza Celia.


Cel. Seignior Sinquapace, the welcom'st Gentleman alive of
A Dancer. This is the youth, he can do little yet;
It Is Pricksong very poorly; he is one
Must have it put into him; somewhat dull Sir.

Sinq. As you are all at first. You know 'twas long
Ere you could learn your doubles*

Cel. I that is true Sir,
But I can tickl't now. Fa, la, la, etc.
Lo you, how like you me now Sir?

Sinq. Marry pray for the Founder, here he stands; long may he live to receive
quartridges, go brave, and pay his Mercer wondrous duly, I, and his jealous
Laundress, that for the love she bears him starches yellow, poor Soul; my own
flesh knows I wrong her not. Come Metereza, once more shake your great hips,
and your little heels, since you begin to fall in of your self, and dance over
the end of the caranto I taught you last night.


Cel. The tune's clear out of my head Sir.


Sinq. A Pox of my little Usher, how long he stays too with the second part of
the former Fiddle! Come, I Will Sol fa it, in the mean time, Fa, la, la, la, etc.
perfectly excellent. I will make you fit to dance with the best Christian
Gentleman in Europe, and keep time with him for his heart, ere I give you over.


Cel. Nay, I know I shall do well Sir, and I am somewhat proud on it,
But 'twas my Mothers fault, when she danced with the Duke of Florence.

Sinq. Why you will never dance well, while you live, if you be not proud. I know
that by my self; I may teach my heart out, if you have not the grace to follow
me.


Cel. I warrant you for that Sir:


Sinq. Gentlewomen that are good Scholars Will come as near their Masters, as
they can; I have known some lie with 'em for their better understanding, I
speak not this to draw you on forsooth; use your pleasure, if you come you are
welcome, you shall see a fine lodging, a dish of Comfits, Music, and sweet
Linen.


Cel. And trust me Sir, no woman can wish more in this world,
Unless it be ten pound in the Chamber window,
Laid ready in good gold against she rises.

Sinq. Those things are got in a morning Wench with me.


Cel. Indeed, I hold the morning the best time of getting;
So says my Sister; she is a Lawyers wife Sir,
And should know what belongs to cases best:
A fitter time for this; I must not talk
Too long of women's matters before Boys.
He Is very raw, you must take pains with him,
It is the Duchess mind it should be so; she loves him
Well I tell you --

Exit. Sinq. How, love him? he is too little for any woman's love in the Town, by
three handfuls: I wonder of a great woman, sh' as no more wit in faith; one of
my pitch were somewhat tolerable.

Enter Usher. Oh are you come! who would be thus plagued with a Dandiprat
Usher! how many kicks do you deserve in conscience?


Usher. Your Horse is safe Sir.


Sinq. Now I talked of kicking, 'twas well remembered, is not the Footcloth
stolen yet?


Usher. More by good hap then any cunning Sir: Would any Gentleman but you, get
a Tailors son to walk his Horse, in this dear time of black Velvet?


Sinq. Troth thou say true; thy care has got thy pardon; I Will venture so no
more. Come my young Scholar, I am ready for you now.


Page. Alas 'twill kill me,
I Am even as full of qualms as heart can bear:
How shall I do to hold up? Alas Sir
I can dance nothing but ill-favor'dly,
A strain or two of Passa-Measures Galliard.

Sinq. Marry you are forwarder then I conceived you,
A toward Stripling; enter him Nicholao,
For the fool's bashful, as they are all at first
Till they be once well entered.

Usher. Passa-Measures Sir?


Sinq. I Sir, I hope you hear me; mark him now Boy. (Dance.)
Ha well done, exc'llent Boys -- Dainty fine Springals;
The glory of Dancers Hall, if they had any;
And of all Professions, they had most need of one
For room to practice in, yet they have none.
O times! O manners! you have very little.
Why should the leaden heel'd Plumber have his Hall,
And the light-footed Dancer none at all?
But Fortune de la guardo, things must be:
W're born to teach in Back-houses and Nooks,
Garrets sometimes, where't rains upon our Books.
Come on Sir, are you ready? first your honor.

Page. I Will wish no fo, a greater cross upon her:


Sinq. Curtsey, heiday! Run to him Nicholao, by this light he will shame me; he
makes curtsey like a Chambermaid.


Usher. Why what do you mean Page! are you mad? did you ever see a Boy begin a
Dance, and make curtsey like a Wench before?


Page. Troth I was thinking of another thing; And quite forgot my self, I pray
forgive me Sir.


Sinq. Come make amends then now with a good leg, and dance it sprightly: What
a beastly leg has he made there now, 'twould vex ones heart out: Now begin Boy,
Oh, oh, oh, oh, etc. open thy Knees, wider, wider, wider, wider; did you ever
see a Boy dance clencht up, he needs a pick-lock; out upon thee for an arrant
Ass, an arrant Ass, I shall lose my credit by thee, a pest'lence on thee. Here
Boy hold the Vial, let me come to him, I shall get more disgrace by this little
Monkey now, then by all the Ladies that ever I taught. Come on Sir now; cast
thy leg out from thee, lift it up aloft Boy; a Pox, his knees are soader'd
together, they are sowed together; can not stride? Oh I could eat thee up, I
could eat thee up, and begin upon thy hinder quarter, thy hinder quarter: I
shall never teach this Boy without a skrew, his knees must be opened with a
Vice, or there is no good to be done upon him -- Who taught you to dance Boy?


Page. It is but little Sir that I can do.


Sinq. No; I Will be sworn for you.


Page. And that Seignior Laurentio taught me Sir:


Sinq* Seignior Laurentio was an arrant Cockscomb,
And fit to teach none but White-bakers children
To knead their knees together. You can turn above ground Boy?

Page. Not I Sir; my turns rather underground.


Sinq. We'll see what you can do, I love to try
What Is in my Scholars, the first hour I teach them:
Show him a close trick now Nicholao.
Ha, dainty Stripling! come Boy.

Page. 'Lass not I Sir,
I am not for losty tricks, indeed I am not Sir:

Sinq. How; such another word, down goes your Hose Boy.


Page. Alas it is time for me to do any thing then.


Sinq. Heyday he is down; is this your lofty trick Boy?


Usher. O Master, the Boy swoons; he is dead I fear me.


Sinq. Dead! I never knew one die with a lofty trick before.
Up Sirrah, up.

Page. A Midwife, run for a Midwife.


Sinq. A Midwife! By this light the Boy's with child.
A miracle! Some Woman is the Father.
The World's turned upside down, sure if Men breed,
Women must get, one never could do both yet.
No marv'l you danced close-knee'd the Sinquapace:
Put up my Fiddle, here is a stranger case --

Exeunt Sinquapace and Page. Usher. That it is I Will swear; 'twill make the
Duchess wonder.
I fear me 'twill bring dancing out of request,
And hinder our profession for a time:
Your Women that are closely got with child,
Will put themselves clean out of exercise,
And will not venture now for fear of meeting
Their shames in a Caranto, specially
If they be near their time: Well in my knowledge,
If that should happen, we are sure to lose
Many a good Waiting Woman, that is now over shoes.
Alas the while --

Exit. Scaen. 2.
Enter the Duchess and Celia. Dutch. Thou tell me things are enemies to
reason,
I cannot get my Faith to entertain 'em,
And I hope never shall.

Cel. It Is too true Madam.


Dutch. I say it is false: 'Twere better thou had been dumb,
Then spoke a truth s'unpleasing; thou shall get
But little praise by it: He whom we affect
To place his love upon so base a Creature!

Cel. Nay ugliness it self, you would say so Madam,
If you but saw her once, a strowling Gipsey,
No Christian that is born a Hind could love her,
She Is the Suns Masterpiece for tawniness;
Yet have I seen Andrugio's arms about her,
Perceived his hollow whisprings in her ear,
His joys at meeting her.

Dutch. What joy could that be?


Cel. Such Madam, I have seldom seen it equaled;
He kissed her with that greediness of affection,
As if his lips had been as red as yours.
I looked still when he would be black in mouth,
Like Boys with eating Hedg-berries: Nay, more Madam,
He bribed one of his Keepers with ten Ducats
To find her out amongst a flight of Gipseys.

Dutch. I Will have that Keeper hanged, and you for malice,
She cannot be so bad as you report,
Whom he so firmly loves, you're false in much,
And I will have you tried; go fetch her to us: Exit Celia.
He cannot be himself, and appear guilty
Of such gross folly, has an eye of judgment,
And that will overlook him: This Wench fails
In understanding service; she must home,
Live at her house in the Country, she decays
In beauty and discretion: Who has't brought there?

Enter Celia and Aurelia. Cel. This is she Madam.


Dutch. Youth and whiteness bless me,
It is not possible: He talked sensibly
Within this hour, this cannot be: How does he?
I fear me my restraint has made him mad.

Cel. His health is perfect, Madam.


Dutch. You are perfect
In falsehood still, he is certainly distracted:
Though I Would be loath to foul my words upon her,
She looks so beastly, yet I Will ask the question,
Are you beloved (sweet face) of Andrugio?

Aur. Yes showr'ly Mistress, he done love me
'Bove all the Girls that shine above me.
Full often has he sweetly kissed me,
And wept as often when he mist me:
Swore he was to marry none,
But me alone.

Dutch. Out on thee; marry thee? away with her.
Clear mine eyes of her: Exit Aurelia.
A Curat that has got his place by Simony,
Is not half black enough to marry thee.
Surely the man's far spent, how ere he carries it,
He Is without question mad; but I never knew
Man bear it better before company.
The love of Woman wears so thick a blindness,
It sees no fault, but only man's unkindness;
And that is so gross, it may be felt: Here Celia
Take this; with speed command Andrugio to us,
And his guard from him.

Cel It shall strait be done Madam.


Exit. Dutch. I Will look into his carriage more judiciously,
When I next get him. A wrong done to Beauty,
Is greater then an injury done to Love,
And we'll less pardon it; for had it been
A creature whose perfection had out-shin'd me,
It had been honorable judgment in him,
And to my peace a noble satisfaction:
But as it is, it is monstrous above folly!
Look he be mad indeed, and thoroughly gone,
Or he pays deerly for it: It Is not
The ordinary madness of a Gentleman,
That shall excuse him here; 'had better lose
His wits eternally, then lose my Grace:
So strange is the condition of his fall,
He Is safe in nothing, but in loss of all.
Enter Andrugio. He comes: Now by the Fruits of all my hopes,
A man that has his wits, cannot look better;
It likes me well enough, there is life in's eye,
And civil health in's Cheek; he stands with judgment,
And bears his body well: What ails this man?
Sure I durst venture him amongst a thousand Ladies.
Let 'em shoot all their scoffs, which makes none laugh
But their own Waiting-women, and they dare do no otherwise.
Come nearer Sir: I pray keep further off,
Now I remember you.

Andr. What new trick's in this now?


Dutch. How long have you been mad Sir?


Andr. Mad! a great time Lady;
Since I first knew I should not sin* yet sinned;
That Is now some thirty years; By'r Lady upwards.

Dutch This man speaks reason, wondrous feelingly,
Enough to teach the rudest Soul good manners.
You cannot be excused with lightness now,
Or frantic fits; y're able to instruct Sir,
And be a light to men. If you have errors,
They be not ignorant in you, but wilful,
And in that state I seize on 'em. Did I
Bring thee acquainted lately with my heart!
And when thou thought a storm of anger took thee,
It in a moment cleared up all to love,
To the abusing of thy spiteful enemy
That sought to fix his malice upon thee,
And could thou so requite me?

Andr. How! good Madam.


Dutch. To wrong all worth in man, to deal so basely
Upon contempt it self, disdain and loathsomness;
A thing whose face through ugliness frights children;
A straggling Gipsey!

Andr. See how you may err, Madam,
Through wrongful information; by my hopes
Of truth and mercy, there is no such love
Bestowed upon a creature so unworthy.

Dutch No, then you cannot fly me; fetch her back:
And though the sight of her displease mine eye
Worse then th'offensiv'st object, Earth and Nature
Can present to us; yet for truths probation,
We will endur't contentfully: What now
Art thou returned without her?

Enter Celia and Aurelia. Andr. No Madam: This is she my peace dwells in,
If here be either baseness of descent,
Rudeness of manners or deformity
In face or fashion, I have lost, I Will yield it;
Tax me severely Madam.

Dutch. How thou standst,
As dumb as the Salt-pillar; where is this Gipsey?
What no? I cannot blame thee then for silence.
Now I Am confounded too, and take part with thee.

Aur. Your pardon, and your pity, virtuous Madam.
Cruel restraint joined with the power of love,
Taught me that art, in that disguise I'scap'd
The hardness of my Fortunes; you that see
What loves force is, good Madam pity me.

Andr. Your Grace has ever been the friend of truth;
And here it is set before you.

Dutch. I confess
I have no wrong at all; she is younger, fairer.
He has not now dishonored me in choice,
I much commend his noble care and judgment.
'Twas a just cross led in by a temptation,
For offering but to part from my dear Vow,
And I Will embrace it cheerfully: Rise both,
The joys of faithful marriage bless your souls,
I will not part you.

Andr. Virtues crown be yours Madam.


Enter Lactantio. Aur. Oh there appears the life of all my wishes;
Is your Grace pleased out of your bounteous goodness
To a poor Virgins comforts, I shall freely
Enjoy whom my heart loves.

Dutch. Our word is past,
Enjoy without disturbance.

Aur. There Lactantio
Spread thy arms open wide, to welcome her
That has wrought all this means to rest in thee.

Andr. Death of my joys; how is this?


Lact. Prithee away fond Fool, hast' no shame in thee,
Thou Art bold and ignorant, what ere thou art.

Aur. What ere I am, do not you know me then?


Lact. Yes for some Waiting-vessel, but the times
Are changed with me, if you had the grace to know 'em.
I looked for more respect, I am not spoke withal
After this rate I tell you; learn hereafter
To know what belongs to me, you shall see
All the Court teach you shortly. Farewell Manners.

Dutch. I Will mark the event of this.


Aur. I'have undone my self two ways at once; lost a great deal of time,
And now I am like to lose more. O my fortune!
I was nineteen yesterday, and partly vowed
To have a child by twenty, if not twain:
To see how Maids are crossed! but I Am plagued justly:
And she that makes a fool of her first love,
Let her never look to prosper, Sir.

Andr. Oh falsehood!


Aur. Have you forgiveness in you? There Is more hope of me
Then of a Maid that never yet offended.

Andr. Make me your property?


Aur. I Will promise you,
I Will never make you worse: And Sir you know
There are worse things for women to make men.
But by my hope of children, (and all lawful)
I Will be as true for ever to your Bed
As she, in thought or deed, that never erred:

Andr. I Will once believe a woman, be it but to strengthen
Weak faith in other men: I have a love
That covers all thy faults.

Enter Lord Cardinal and the Lords. L. Card. Nephew, prepare thy self
With meekness and thanksgiving to receive
Thy reverend fortune: Amongst all the Lords,
Her close affection now makes choice of thee:

Lact. Alas I Am not to learn to know that now.
Where could she make choice here, if I were missing?
'Twould trouble the whole State, and puzzle 'em all
To find out such another.

L. Card. It Is high time Madam,
If your Grace please, to make election now.
Behold, they are all assembled!

Dutch. What election?
You speak things strange to me Sir.

L. Card. How! good Madam.


Dutch. Give me your meaning plainly like a Father.
You are too religious Sir to deal in Riddles.

L. Card. Is there a plainer way then leads to marriage, Madam,
And the man set before you?

Dutch. O Blasphemy
To Sanctimonious Faith! comes it from you Sir!
An ill example; know you what you speak,
Or who you are? Is not my Vow in place?
How dare you be so bold Sir? Say a woman
Were tempt with a temptation, must you presently
Take all the advantage on it?

L. Card. Is this in earnest, Madam?


Dutch. Heaven pardon you; if you do not think so Sir,
You Have much to answer for: But I will leave you;
Return I humbly now from whence I fell.
All you blessed powers that Register the Vows
Of Virgins and chaste Matrons, look on me
With eyes of mercy; seal forgiveness to me
By signs of inward peace; and to be surer,
That I will never fail your good hopes of me,
I bind my self more strictly. All my riches
I Will speedily commend to holy uses;
This Temple unto some religious Sanctuary,
Where all my time to come I will allow
For fruitful thoughts; so knit I up my Vow.

Lactant. This is to hawk at Eagles: Pox of pride,
It lays a man in the mire still, like a Jade
That has too many tricks, and never a good one.
I must gape high, I Am in a sweet case now,
I was sure of one, and now I have lost her too.

Dutch. I know, my Lord, all that great studious care
Is for your Kinsman; he is provided for
According to his merits.

L. Card. How Is that! good Madam?


Dutch. Upon the firmness of my Faith it is true Sir;
See here is the Gentlewoman; the match was made
Near forty weeks ago: He knows the time Sir,
Better then I can tell him, and the poor Gentlewoman
Better then he: But being Religious Sir, and fearing you,
He durst not own her for his wife till now,
Only contracted with her in man's apparel,
For the more modesty, because he was bashful,
And never could endure the sight of woman,
For fear that you should see her: This was he
Chose for my love; this Page preferred to me.

Lact. I Am paid with mine own money.


L. Card. Dare hypocrisy,
For fear of vengeance, sit so close to Virtue.
Steal'st thou a holy vestment from Religion,
To cloth forbidden Lust with? the open villainy
Goes before thee to mercy, and his Penitency
Is blessed with a more sweet and quick return.
I utterly disclaim all blood in thee.
I Will sooner make a Parracide my heir,
Then such a monster. O forgive me Madam!
Th'apprehension of the wrong to you
Has a sins wait at it. I forget all Charity,
When I but think upon him.

Dutch. Nay, my Lord,
At our request, since we are pleased to pardon,
And send remission to all former errors,
Which conscionable Justice now sets right,
From you we expect patience; h'as had punishment
Enough in his false hopes; trust me he has Sir;
They have requited his dissembling largely.
And to erect your falling-goodness to him,
We'll begin first our self: Ten thousand Ducats
The Gentlewoman shall bring out of our Treasure,
To make her dowry.

L. Card. None has the true way
Of overcoming anger with meek virtue,
Like your compassionate Grace.

Lact. Curse of this fortune*
This it is to meddle with taking stuff, whose Belly
cannot be confined in a Waste-band: Pray what have
you done with the Breeches, we shall have need of
'em shortly; and we get children so fast, they are too
good to be cast away. My Son and Heir need not
scorn to wear what his Mother has left off: I had
my fortune told me by a Gipsey seven years ago, she
said then I should be the spoil of many a Maid, and
at seven years end marry a Queen for my labor;
which falls out wicked and true.

Dutch. We all have faults; look not so much on his.
Who lives in the world that never did amiss?
For you Aurelia, I commend your choice,
You Have one after our heart: And though your Father
Be not in presence, we'll assure his voice;
Doubt not his liking, his o'r* joying rather:
You Sir embrace your own, it is your full due;
No Page serves me more, that once dwells with you.
Oh they that search out man's intents, shall find
There Is more Dissemblers then of Women kind.

Exeunt. FINIS.
WOMEN BEWARE WOMEN.

A TRAGEDY, BY Tho, Middleton, Gent.



LONDON: Printed for Humphrey Moseley, 1657.

DUke of Florence. Lord Cardinal, Brother to the Duke. Two Cardinals more. A
Lord. Fabritio, Father to Isabella. Hippolito, Brother to Fabritio. Guardiano,
Uncle to the Foolish Ward. The Ward, a rich young Heir. Leantio, a Factor,
Husband to Brancha. Sordido, the Wards Man. Livia, Sister to Fabritio.
Isabella, Niece to Livia. Brancha, Leantio's Wife. Widow, his Mother. States of
Florence. Citizens. A Prentice. Boys. Messenger. Servants.
The Scaen. FLORENCE.

WOMEN BEWARE WOMEN.
Act. 1.
Scaen. 1.
Enter Leantio with Brancha, and Mother. Mother. THy sight was never yet more
precious to me;
Welcome with all the affection of a Mother,
That comfort can express from natural love:
Since thy birth-joy, a Mothers chiefest gladness.
After she has undergone her curse of sorrows,
Thou was it not more dear to me, then this hour
Presents thee to my heart. Welcome again.

Leant. Alas poor affectionate Soul, how her joys speak to me!
I have observed it often, and I know it is
The fortune commonly of knavish Children
To have the lovingst Mothers.

Moth. What Is this Gentlewoman?


Leant: Speak low sweet Mother; you are able to spoil as many
As come within the hearing: If it be not
Your fortune to mar all, I have much marvel.
I pray do not you teach her to rebel,
When she is in a good way to obedience,
To rise with other women in commotion
Against their husbands, for six Gowns a year,
And so maintain their cause, when they are once up,
In all things else that require cost enough.
They are all of 'em a kind of spirits soon raised,
But not so soon laid (Mother) As for example,
A woman's belly is got up in a trice,
A simple charge ere it be laid down again:
So ever in all their quarrels, and their courses,
And I Am a proud man, I hear nothing of 'em,
They Are very still, I thank my happiness,
And sound asleep; pray let not your tongue wake 'em.
If you can but rest quiet, she is contented
With all conditions, that my fortunes bring her to;
To keep close as a wise that loves her husband;
To go after the rate of my ability,
Not the licentious swindg of her own will,
Like some of her old school-fellows, she intends
To take out other works in a new Sampler,
And frame the fashion of an honest love,
Which knows no wants; but mocking poverty
Brings forth more children, to make rich men wonder
At divine Providence, that feeds mouths of Infants,
And sends them none to feed, but stuffs their rooms
With fruitful bags, their beds with barren wombs.
Good Mother, make not you things worse then they are,
Out of your too much openness; pray take heed on it;
Nor imitate the envy of old people,
That strive to mar good sport, because they are perfect.
I would have you^ more pitiful to youth,
Especially to your own flesh and blood.
I Will prove an excellent husband, here is my hand,
Lay in provision, follow my business roundly,
And make you a Grandmother in forty weeks.
Go, pray salute her, bid her welcome cheerfully.

Moth. Gentlewoman, thus much is a debt of courtesy
Which fashionable strangers pay each other
At a kind meeting; then there is more then one
Due to the knowledge I have of your neerness:
I am bold to come again, and now salute you
By th'name of daughter, which may challenge more
Then ordinary respect.

Leant. Why this is well now,
And I think few Mothers of threescore will mend it.

Moth. What I can bid you welcome to, is mean;
But make it all your own; we are full of wants,
And cannot welcome worth.

Leant. Now this is scurvy,
And spoke as if a woman lacked her teeth.
These old folks talk of nothing but defects,
Because they grow so full of 'em themselves.

Branc. Kind Mother, there is nothing can be wanting
To her that does enjoy all her desires.
Heaven send a quiet peace with this man's love,
And I am as rich, as Virtue can be poor;
Which were enough after the rate of mind,
To erect Temples for content placed here;
I have forsook Friends, Fortunes, and my Country,
And hourly I rejoice in it. Here Is my Friends,
And few is the good number; thy successes
How ere they look, I will still name my fortunes,
Hopeful or spightful, they shall all be welcome:
Who invites many guests, has of all sorts,
As he that trafficks much, drinks of all fortunes,
Yet they must all be welcome, and used well.
I Will call this place the place of my birth now,
And rightly too; for here my love was born,
And that is the birthday of a woman's joys.
You have not bid me welcome since I came.

Leant. That I did questionless.


Branc. No sure, how was it?
I have quite forgot it.

Leant. Thus.


Branc. Oh Sir, it is true;
Now I remember well: I have done thee wrong,
Pray take it again Sir.

Leant. How many of these wrongs
Could I put up in an hour? and turn up the Glass
For twice as many more.

Moth. Wilt please you to walk in daughter?


Branc. Thanks sweet Mother;
The voice of her that bare me, is not more pleasing.

Exeunt. Leant. Though my own care, and my rich Masters trust,
Lay their commands both on my Factorship,
This day and night, I Will know no other business
But her and her dear welcome. It Is a bitterness
To think upon to morrow, that I must leave her
Still to the sweet hopes of the weeks end,
That pleasure should be so restrained and curbed
After the course of a rich Work-master,
That never pays till Saturday night.
Marry it comes together in a round sum then,
And does more good you will say: Oh fair eyed Florence!
Did thou but know, what a most matchless Jewel
Thou now art Mistress of, a pride would take thee,
Able to shoot destruction through the bloods
Of all thy youthful Sons; but it is great policy
To keep choice treasures in obscurest places:
Should we show Thieves our wealth, 'twould make 'em bolder;
Temptation is a Devil will not stick
To fasten upon a Saint; take heed of that;
The Jewel is cased up from all men's eyes.
Who could imagine now a Gem were kept,
Of that great value under this plain roof?
But how in times of absence? what assurance
Of this restraint then; yes, yes? there is one with her.
Old Mothers know the world; and such as these,
When Sons lock Chests, are good to look to Keys.

Exit. Scaen. 2.
Enter Guardiano, Fabritio, and Livia. Guard. What has your daughter seen him
yet? know you that?


Fab. No matter, she shall love him.


Guard. Nay let us have fair play,
He has been now my Ward some fifteen year,
And it is my purpose (as time calls upon me)
By custom seconded, and such moral virtues,
To tender him a wife; now Sir, this wife
I Would fain elect out of a daughter of yours.
You see my meaning's fair; if now this daughter
So tendered (let me come to your own phrase Sir)
Should offer to refuse him, I were hansell'd.
Thus am I fain to calculate all my words,
For the Meridian of a foolish old man,
To take his understanding: What do you answer Sir?

Fab. I say still she shall love him.


Guard. Yet again?
And shall she have no reason for this love?

Fab. Why do you think that women love with reason?


Guard. I perceive Fools are not at all hours foolish,
No more then wisemen wise.

Fab. I had a wife,
She ran mad for me; she had no reason for it,
For ought I could perceive: What think you Lady Sister?

Guard. 'Twas a fit match that,
Being both out of their wits: A loving wife, it seemed
She strove to come as near you as she could.

Fab. And if her daughter prove not mad for love too,
She takes not after her, nor after me;
If she prefer reason before my pleasure,
Your an experienced widow. Lady Sister,
I pray let your opinion come amongst us.

Live. I must offend you then, if truth will do it,
And take my Neeces part, and called injustice
To force her love to one she never saw.
Maids should both see, and like; all little enough;
If they love truly after that, it is well.
Connting the time, she takes one man till death,
That Is hard task, I tell you; but one may
Enquire at three years end, amongst young wives,
And mark how the game goes.

Fab. Why, is not man
Tide to the same observance, Lady Sister,
And in one woman?

Live. It Is enough for him;
Besides he tastes of many sundry dishes
That we poor wretches never lay our lips to;
As Obedience forsooth, Subjection, Duty, and such Kickshaws,
All of our making, but served in to them;
And if we lick a finger, then sometimes
We are not too blame: Your best Cooks use it*

Fab. Thou Art a sweet Lady, Sister, and a witty --


Live. A witty! Oh the bud of commendation
Fit for a Girl of sixteen; I am blown man,
I should be wise by this time; and for instance,
I have buried my two husbands in good fashion,
And never mean more to marry.

Guard. No, why so Lady?


Live. Because the third shall never bury me:
I think I am more then witty; how think you Sir?

Fab. I have paid often fees to a Counselor
Has had a weaker brain.

Live. Then I must tell you,
Your money was soon parted.

Guard. Light her now Brother.


Live. Where is my Niece? let her be sent for straight.
If you have any hope, 'twill prove a wedding;
It Is fit in faith she should have one sight of him,
And stop upon it, and not be joined in haste,
As if they went to stock a new found Land.

Fab. Look out her Uncle, and you are sure of her,
Those two are never asunder, they have been heard
In Argument at midnight, Moonshine nights
Are Noon days with them; they walk out their sleeps;
Or rather at those hours, appear like those
That walk in 'em, for so they did to me.
Look you, I told you truth; they are like a chain,
Draw but one link, all follows.

Enter Hippolito, and Isabella the Niece. Guard. Oh affinity,
What piece of excellent workmanship art thou?
It Is work clean wrought, for there is no lust, but love in it,
And that abundantly: when in stranger things,
There is no love at all, but what lust brings.

Fab. On with your Mask, for it is your part to see now,
And not be seen: Go too, make use of your time;
See what you mean to like; nay, and I charge you,
Like what you see: Do you hear me? there is no dallying:
The Gentleman's almost twenty, and it is time
He were getting lawful heirs, and you a breeding on 'em.

Niece. Good Father!


Fab. Tell not me of tongues and rumors.
You Will say the Gentleman is somewhat simple,
The better for a husband, were you wise;
For those that marry fools, live Ladies lives.
On with the Mask, I Will hear no more, he is rich;
The fool's hid under Bushels.

Live. Not so hid neither;
But here is a foul great piece of him methinks;
What will he be, when he comes altogether?

Enter the Ward with a Trap-stick and Sordido his man. Ward. Beat him?
I beat him out of the field with his own Cat-stick,
Yet gave him the first hand.

Sord. Oh strange!


Ward. I did it,
Then he set Jacks on me.

Sord. What, my Ladies Tailor?


Ward. I, and I beat him too.


Sord. Nay that is no wonder,
He Is used to beating.

Ward. Nay, I tickel'd him
When I came once to my tippings.

Sord. Now you talk on 'em;

There was a Poulterers wife made a great complaint of you last night to your
Gardianer, that you struck a bump in her childs head, as big as an Egg.


Ward An Egg may prove a Chicken then in time; the Poulterers wife will get
by it. When I am in game, I am furious; came my Mothers eyes in my way, I would
not lose a fair end: No, were she alive, but with one tooth in her head, I
should venture the striking out of that. I think of no body, when I am in play.
I am so earnest. Coads-me, my Gardianer! Prithee lay up my Cat and Cat-stick
safe.


Sord. Where Sir, in the Chimney-corner?


Ward. Chimney Corner!


Sord. Yes Sir, your Cats are always safe in the Chimney Corner,
Unless they burn their Coats.

Ward. Marry, that I am afraid on*


Sord. Why, then I will bestow your Cat in the Gutter,
And there she is safe I am sure.

Ward If I but live
To keep a house, I Will make thee a great man,
If meat and drink can do it. I can stoop gallantly,
And pitch out when I list: I Am dog at a hole,
I mar'l my Guardianer does not seek a wife for me;
I protest I Will have a bout with the Maids else,
Or contract my self at midnight to the Larder-woman,
In presence of a Fool, or a Sack-posset.

Guard. Ward.


Ward. I feel my self after any exercise
Horribly prone: Let me but ride, I Am lusty,
A Cock-horse straight in faith.

Guard. Why Ward. I say.


Ward. I Will forswear eating Eggs in Moonshine nights;
There Is never a one I eat, but turns into a Cock
In four and twenty hours, if my hot blood
Be not took down in time, sure 'twill crow shortly.

Guard. Do you hear Sir? follow me, I must new School you.


Ward. School me? I scorn that now, I am past schooling.
I am not so base to learn to write and read;
I was born to better fortunes in my Cradle.

Exit. Fab. How do you like him Girl? this is your husband.
Like him, or like him not wench, you shall have him,
And you shall love him.

Live. Oh soft there Brother! though you be a Justice,
Your Warrant cannot be served out of your liberty,
You may compel out of the power of Father,
Things merely harsh to a Maids flesh and blood;
But when you come to love, there the soil alters;
You Are in an other Country, where your Laws
Are no more set by, then the cacklings
Of Geese in Romes great Capitol.

Fab. Marry him she shall then.
Let her agree upon love afterward.

Exit. Live. You speak now Brother like an honest mortal
That walks upon the earth with a staff;
You were up in the Clouds before, you would command love,
And so do most old folks that go without it.
My best and dearest Brother, I could dwell here;
There is not such another seat on earth,
Where all good parts better express themselves.

Hip. You Will make me blush anon.


Live. It Is but like saying grace before a Feast then,
And that is most comely; thou art all a Feast,
And she that has thee, a most happy guest.
Prithee cheer up that Niece with special Counsel*

Hip. I would 'twere fit to speak to her what I would; but
'Twas not a thing ordained, Heaven has forbid it,
And it is most meet, that I should rather perish
Then the Decree Divine receive least blemish:
Feed inward you my sorrows, make no noise,
Consume me silent, let me be stark dead
Ere the world know I Am sick. You see my honesty,
If you befriend me, so.

Niece. Marry a Fool!
Can there be greater misery to a woman
That means to keep her days true to her husband,
And know no other man! so virtue wills it.
Why; how can I obey and honor him,
But I must needs commit Idolatry?
A Fool is but the Image of a man,
And that but ill made neither: Oh the heart-breakings
Of miserable Maids, where love's enforced!
The best condition is but bad enough;
When women have their choices, commonly
They do but buy their thraldoms, and bring great portions
To men to keep 'em in subjection,
As if a fearful prisoner should bribe
The Keeper to be good to him, yet lies in still,
And glad of a good usage, a good look
Sometimes by'r Lady; no misery surmounts a woman's.
Men buy their slaves, but women buy their masters;
Yet honesty and love makes all this happy,
And next to Angels, the most blessed estate.
That Providence, that h'as made every poison
Good for some use, and sets four warring Elements
At peace in man, can make a harmony
In things that are most strange to humane reason.
Oh but this marriage! What are you sad too Uncle?
Faith then there is a whole household down together:
Where shall I go to seek my comfort now
When my best friend's distressed? what is it afflicts you Sir?

Hip. Faith nothing but one grief that will not leave me,
And now it is welcome; every man has something
To bring him to his end, and this will serve
Joined with your fathers cruelty to you,
That helps it forward.

Niece. Oh be cheered sweet Uncle!
How long has't been upon you, I never spied it:
What a dull sight have I, how long I pray Sir?

Hip. Since I first saw you Niece, and left Bologna


Niece. And could you deal so unkindly with my heart,
To keep it up so long hid from my pity?
Alas, how shall I trust your love hereafter?
Have we past through so many arguments,
And missed of that still, the most needful one?
Walked out whole nights together in discourses,
And the main point forgot? We are too blame both;
This is an obstinate wilful forgetfulness,
And faulty on both parts: Let Us lose no time now,
Begin good Uncle, you that feel't; what is it?

Hip. You of all creatures Niece must never hear on it,
It Is not a thing ordained for you to know.

Niece. Not I Sir! all my joys that word cuts off;
You made profession once you loved me best;
'Twas but profession!

Hip. Yes, I do it too truly,
And fear I shall be chid for it: Know the worst then:
I love thee dearlier then an Uncle can.

Niece. Why so you ever said, and I believed it.


Hip. So simple is the goodness of her thoughts,
They understand not yet th'unhallowed language
Of a near sinner: I must yet be forced
(Though blushes be my venture) to come nearer.
As a man love's his wife, so love I thee.

Niece. What Is that?
Methought I heard ill news come toward me,
Which commonly we understand too soon,
Then over-quick at hearing, I Will prevent it,
Though my joys fare the harder; welcome it:
It shall never come so near mine ear again.
Farewell all friendly solaces and discourses,
I Will learn to live without ye, for your dangers
Are greater then your comforts; what is become
Of truth in love, if such we cannot trust,
When blood that should be love, is mixed with lust.

Exit. Hip. The worst can be but death, and let it come,
He that lives joyless, every day's his doom.

Exit. Scaen. 3.
Enter Leantio alone. Lean. Methinks I Am even as dull now at departure,
As men observe great Gallants the next day
After a Revels; you shall see 'em look
Much of my fashion, if you mark 'em well.
It Is even a second Hell to part from pleasure,
When man has got a smack on it: As many holidays
Coming together makes your poor heads idle
A great while after, and are said to stick
Fast in their fingers ends; even so does game
In a new married couple for the time,
It spoils all thrift, and indeed lies a Bed
To invent all the new ways for great expenses. -- Brancha and Mother above.
See, and she be not got on purpose now
Into the Window to look after me
I have no power to go now, and I should be hanged:
Farewell all business, I desire no more
Then I see yonder; let the goods at Key
Look to themselves; why should I toil my youth out?
It is but begging two or three year sooner,
And stay with her continually; is it a match?
O fie, what a Religion have I leaped into!
Get out again for shame, the man loves best
When his care's most, that shows his zeal to love.
Fondness is but the Idiot to Affection,
That plays at Hot-cockles with rich Merchants wives;
Good to make sport withal when the Chest's full,
And the long Ware house cracks. It Is time of day
For us to be more wise; it is early with us,
And if they lose the morning of their affairs,
They commonly lose the best part of the day,
Those that are wealthy, and have got enough:
It Is after Sunset with 'em, they may rest,
Grow fat with ease, banquet, and toy and play,
When such as I enter the heat of the day,
And I Will do it cheerfully.

Bran. I perceive Sir
You Are not gone yet, I have good hope you will stay now.

Lean. Farewell, I must not.


Bran. Come, come, pray return
To morrow; adding but a little care more,
Will dispatch all as well; believe me 'twill Sir.

Lean. I could well wish my self where you would have me;
But love that is wanton, must be ruled a while
By that that is careful, or all goes to ruin,
As fitting is a Government in Love,
As in a Kingdom; where it is all mere Lust,
It Is like an insurrection in the people
That raised in Self-wil, wars against all Reason:
But Love that is respective for increase,
Is like a good King, that keeps all in peace.
Once more farewell.

Bran. But this one night I prithee.


Lean. Alas I Am in for twenty, if I stay,
And then for forty more, I have such luck to flesh:
I never bought a horse, but he bore double*
If I stay any longer, I shall turn
An everlasting spend-thrift; as you love
To be maintained well, do not call me again,
For then I shall not care which end goes forward:
Again farewell to thee.

Exit. Bran. Since it must, farewell too.


Moth. 'Faith daughter, you are too blame, you take the course
To make him an ill husband, troth you do,
And that disease is catching, I can tell you,
^, and soon taken by a yongmans blood,
And that with little urging: Nay fie, see now,
What cause have you to weep? would I had no more,
That have lived threescore years; there were a cause
And 'twere well thought on; trust me you are too blame,
His absence cannot last five days at utmost.
Why should those tears be fetched forth? cannot love
Be even as well expressed in a good look,
But it must see her face still in a Fountain,
It shows like a Country Maid dressing her head
By a dish of water: Come it is an old custom
To weep for love.

Enter two or three Boys, and a Citizen or two, with an Apprentice. Boys Now
they come, now they come.


2. The Duke.


3. The State.


Cit. How near Boy?


1 Boy. In The next street Sir, hard at hand.


Cit. You sir, get a standing for your Mistress,
The best in all the City.

Apprent. I hav't for her Sir,
'Twas a thing I provided for her over night,
It Is ready at her pleasure.

Cit. Fetch her to it then, away Sir.


Bran. What Is the meaning of this hurry,
Can you tell Mother.

Moth. What a memory
Have I! I see by that years come upon me.
Why it is a yearly custom and solemnity,
Religiously observed by th'Duke and State
To St. Marks Temple, the fifteenth of April.
See if my dull brains had not quite forgot it,
'Twas happily questioned of thee, I had gone down else,
Sat like a drone below, and never thought on it.
I would not to be ten years younger again,
That you had lost the sight; now you shall see
Our Duke, a goodly Gentleman of his years.

Bran. Is he old then?


Moth. About some fifty five.


Bran. That Is no great age in man, he is then at best
For wisdom, and for judgment.

Moth. The Lord Cardinal
His noble Brother, there is a comely Gentleman,
And greater in devotion then in blood.

Bran. He Is worthy to be marked.


Moth. You shall behold
All our chief states of Florence, you came fortunately
Against this solemn day.

Bran. I hope so always:


Music. Moth. I hear 'em near us now, do you stand easily?


Bran. Exceeding well, good Mother.


Moth. Take this stool.


Bran. I need it not I thank you.


Moth. Use your will then.


Enter in great solemnity six Knights bare-headed, then two Cardinals, and then
the Lord Cardinal, then the Duke; after him the States of Florence by two and
two, with varity of Music and Song. Exit. Moth. How like you Daughter?


Bran. It Is a Noble State.
Methinks my soul could dwell upon the reverence
Of such a solemn and most worthy custom.
Did not the Duke look up? me-thought he saw us.

Moth. That Is every one's conceit that sees a Duke,
If he look steadfastly, he looks strait at them,
When he perhaps, good careful Gentleman,
Never minds any; but the look he casts,
Is at his own intentions, and his object
Only the public good.

Bran. Most likely so.


Moth. Come, come, we'll end this Argument below.


Exeunt. Act. 2.
Scaen. 1.
Enter Hippolito, and Lady Livia the Widow. Live. A Strange affection (Brother)
when I think on it!
I wonder how thou came by it.

Hip. Even as easily,
As man comes by destruction, which oft-times
He wears in his own bosom.

Live. Is the world
So populous in Women, and Creation,
So prodigal in Beauty, and so various?
Yet does love turn thy point to thine own blood?
It Is somewhat too unkindly; must thy eye
Dwell evilly on the fairness of thy kindred,
And seek not where it should? it is confined
Now in a narrower prison then was made for it?
It is allowed a stranger, and where bounty
Is made the great man's honor, it is ill husbandry
To spare, and servants shall have small thanks for it.
So he Heavens bounty seems to scorn and mock,
That spares free means, and spends of his own stock.

Hip. Never was man's misery so soon sowed up,
Counting how truly.

Live. Nay, I love you so,
That I shall venture much to keep a change from you
So fearful as this grief will bring upon you.
Faith it even kills me, when I see you faint
Under a reprehension, and I Will leave it,
Though I know nothing can be better for you:
Prithee (sweet Brother) let not passion waste
The goodness of thy time, and of thy fortune:
Thou keep'st the treasure of that life I love,
As dearly as mine own; and if you think
My former words too bitter, which were ministered
By truth and zeal; it is but a hazarding
Of grace and virtue, and I can bring forth
As pleasant Fruits, as Sensuality wishes
In all her teeming longings: This I can do.

Hip. Oh nothing that can make my wishes perfect!


Live. I would that love of yours were pawned to it Brother,
And as soon lost that way, as I could win.
Sir I could give as shreud a lift to Chastity,
As any she that wears a tongue in Florence.
Sh'ad need be a good horse-woman, and sit fast,
Whom my strong argument could not fling at last.
Prithee take courage man; though I should counsel
Another to despair, yet I am pitiful
To thy afflictions, and will venture hard;
I will not name for what, it is not handsome;
Find you the proof, and praise me.

Hip. Then I fear me,
I shall not praise you in haste.

Live. This is the comfort,
You are not the first (Brother) has attempted
Things more forbidden, then this seems to be:
I Will minister all Cordials now to you,
Because I Will cheer you up Sir.

Hip. I am past hope.


Live. Love, thou shall see me do a strange cure then,
As ever was wrought on a disease so mortal,
And near akin to shame; when shall you see her?

Hip. Never in comfort more.


Live. You Are so impatient too.


Hip. Will you believe death, sh'has forsworn my company,
And sealed it with a blush.

Live. So, I perceive
All lies upon my hands then; well, the more glory
When theworks finished -- How now Sir, the news!

Enter Servant. Serve. Madam, your Niece, the virtuous Isabela,
Is lighted now to see you.

Live. That Is great fortune
Sir, your Stars bless; you simple, lead her in.

Exit Servant. Hip. What Is this to me?


Live. Your absence gentle Brother,
I must bestir my wits for you.

Hip. I, to great purpose.


Exit Hippolito. Live. Beshrew you, would I loved you not so well:
I Will go to Bed, and leave this deed undone:
I am the fondest where I once affect;
The carefull'st of their healths, and of their ease forsooth,
That I look still but slenderly to mine own.
I take a course to pity him so much now,
That I have none left for modesty and my self.
This it is to grow so liberal; you have few sisters
That love their Brothers ease 'bove their own honesties:
But if you question my affections,
That will be found my fault. Niece, your love's welcome.
Alas what draws that paleness to thy cheeks,
This enforced marriage toward?

Enter Isabella the Niece. Isab. It helps good Aunt
Amongst some other griefs; but those I Will keep
Locked up in modest silence; for they are sorrows
Would shame the Tongue, more then they grieve the thought:

Live. Indeed the Ward is simple.


Isab. Simple! that were well:
Why one might make good shift with such a husband.
But he is a fool entailed, he halts downright in it:

Live. And knowing this, I hope it is at your choice
To take or refuse Niece.

Isab. You see it is not.
I loath him more then beauty can hate death
Or age her spightful neighbor.

Live. Let Us appear then.


Isab. How can I being born with that obedience,
That must submit unto a fathers will?
If he command, I must of force consent.

Live. Alas poor soul! be not offended prithee,
If I set by the name of Niece a while,
And bring in pity in a stranger fashion:
It lies here in this Breast, would cross this match.

Isab. How, cross it Aunt?


Live. I, and give thee more liberty
Then thou have reason yet to apprehend.

Isab. Sweet Aunt, in goodness keep not hid from me
What may befriend my life.

Live. Yes, yes, I must,
When I return to reputation,
And think upon the solemn Vow I made
To your dead Mother, my most loving Sister;
As long as I have her memory 'twixt mine eye lids,
Look for no pity now.

Isab. Kind, sweet, dear Aunt.


Live. No, 'twas a secret, I have took special care of,
Delivered by your Mother on her death bed,
That Is nine years now, and I Will not part from't yet,
Though never was fitter time, nor greater cause for it.

Isab. As you desire the praises of a Virgin:


Live. Good sorrow! I would do thee any kindness,
Not wronging Secrecy, or Reputation.

Isab. Neither of which (as I have hope of fruitness)
Shall receive wrong from me.

Live. Nay 'twould be your own wrong,
As much as any's, should it come to that once.

Isab. I need no better means to work persuasion then.


Live. Let it suffice, you may refuse this fool,
Or you may take him, as you see occasion
For your advantage; the best wits will do it;
You Have liberty enough in your own will,
You cannot be enforced; there grows the flower
If you could pick it out, makes whole life sweet to you.
That which you call your Fathers command's nothing;
Then your obedience must needs be as little.
If you can make shift here to taste your happiness,
Or pick out ought that likes you, much good do you:
You see your cheer, I Will make you no set dinner.

Isab. And trust me, I may starve for all the good
I can find yet in this: Sweet Aunt, deal plainlier.

Live. Say I should trust you now upon an oath,
And give you in a secret that would start you,
How am I sure of you, in faith and silence?

Isab. Equal assurance may I find in mercy,
As you for that in me.

Live. It shall suffice.
Then know, how ever custom h'as made good
For reputations sake, the names of Niece
And Aunt, 'twixt you and I, we are nothing less.

Isab. How Is that?


Live. I told you I should start your blood.
You are no more allied to any of us,
Save what the courtesy of opinion casts
Upon your Mothers memory, and your name,
Then the meer'st stranger is, or one begot
At Naples, when the husband lies at Rome;
There Is so much odds betwixt us. Since your knowledge
Wished more instruction, and I have your oath
In pledge for silence; it makes me talk the freelier.
Did never the report of that famed Spaniard,
Marquess of Coria, since your time was ripe
For understanding, fill your ear with wonder?

Isab. Yes, what of him? I have heard his deeds of honor
Often related when we lived in Naples.

Live. You heard the praises of your Father then.


Isab. My Father!


Live. That was he: But all the business
So carefully and so discreetly carried,
That Fame received no spot by it, not a blemish;
Your Mother was so wary to her end,
None knew it, but her Conscience, and her friend,
Till penitent confession made it mine,
And now my pity, yours: It had been long else,
And I hope care and love alike in you,
Made good by oath, will see it take no wrong now:
How weak his commands now, whom you call Father?
How vain all his inforcements, your obedience?
And what a largeness in your will and liberty,
To take, or to reject, or to do both?
For fools will serve to father wisemens children:
All this you have time to think on. O my Wench!
Nothing o'rthrows our Sex but indiscretion,
We might do well else of a brittle people,
As any under the great Canopy:
I pray forget not but to call me Aunt still;
Take heed of that, it may be marked in time else,
But keep your thoughts to your self, from all the world,
Kindred, or dearest friend, nay, I entreat you,
From him that all this while you have called Uncle;
And though you love him dearly, as I know
His deserts claim as much even from a stranger,
Yet let not him know this, I prithee do not,
As ever thou have hope of second pity,
If thou should stand in need on it, do not do it.

Isab. Believe my oath, I will not.


Live. Why well said:
Who shows more craft t'undo a Maidenhead,
I Will resign my part to her; she is thine own, go.

Exit. Enter Hippolito. Hip. Alas, fair flattery cannot cure my sorrows:


Isab. Have I past so much time in ignorance,
And never had the means to know my self
Till this blessed hour? Thanks to her virtuous pity
That brought it now to light; would I had known it
But one day sooner, he had then received
In favors, what (poor Gentleman) he took
In bitter words; a slight and ha^^^ reward
For one of his deserts.

Hip. There seems to me now
More anger and distraction in her looks.
I Am gone, I Will not endure a second storm;
The memory of the first, is not past yet.

Isab. Are you returned, you comforts of my life?
In this man's presence, I will keep you fast now,
And sooner part eternally from the world,
Then my good joys in you: Pret he forgive me,
I did but chide in jest; the best loves use it
Sometimes, it sets an edge upon affection.
When we invite our best friends to a feast,
It Is not all sweetmeats that we set before them,
There Is somewhat sharp and salt, both to whet Appetite,
And make 'em taste their Wine well: So me thinks
After a friendly, sharp and favory chiding,
A kiss tastes wondrous well; and full of the Grape.
How think thou, do not?

Hip. It Is so excellent,
I know not how to praise it, what to say to it:

Isab. This marriage shall go forward.


Hip. With the Ward,
Are you in earnest?

Isab. 'Twould be ill for us else


Hip. For us? how means she that?


Isab. Troth I begin
To be so well me thinks, within this hour,
For all this match able to kill ones heart.
Nothing can pull me down now; should my Father
Provide a worse fool yet (which I should think
Were a hard thing to compass) I Would have him either;
The worse the better, none can come amiss now,
If he want wit enough: So Discretion love me,
Desert and Judgment, I have content sufficient.
She that comes once to be a housekeeper,
Must not look every day to fare well Sir,
Like a young waiting Gentlewoman in service,
For she feeds commonly as her Lady does;
No good bit passes her, but she gets a taste on it;
But when she comes to keep house for her self,
She Is glad of some choice Cates then once a week,
Or twice at most, and glad if she can get 'em:
So must Affection learn to fare with thankfulness.
Pray make your Love no stranger Sir; that is all,
Though you be, one your self, and know not on it,
And I have sworn you must not.

Exit. Hip. This is beyond me!
Never came joys so unexpectedly
To meet desires in man; how came she thus?
What has she done to her can any tell?
It Is beyond Sorcery this, Drugs, or Love-powders;
Some Art that has no name sure, strange to me
Of all the wonders I ere met withal
Throughout my ten years travels, but I Am thankful for it.
This marriage now must of necessity forward;
It is the only vail Wit can devise
To keep our acts hid from sin-peircing eyes.

Exit. Scaen. 2.
Enter Guardiano and Livia. Live. How Sir, a Gentlewoman, so young, so fair,
As you set forth, spied from the Widows window!

Guard. She!


Live. Our Sunday-dinner woman?


Guard. And thursday Supper-woman, the same still.
I know not how she came by her, but I Will swear
She Is the prime gallant for a face, in Florence;
And no doubt other parts follow their Leader:
The Duke himself first spied her at the window;
Then in a rapture, as if admiration
Were poor when it were single, beck'ned me,
And pointed to the wonder warily,
As one that feared she would draw in her splendour
Too soon, if too much gazed at: I never knew him
So infinitely taken with a woman,
Nor can I blame his Appetite, or tax
His Raptures of slight folly; she is a Creature
Able to draw a State from serious business,
And make it their best piece to do her service:
What course shall we devise? h'as spoke twice now.

Live: Twice?


Guard. It Is beyond your apprehension.
How strangly that one look has caught his heart!
'Twould prove but too much worth in wealth and savor
To those should work his peace.

Live. And if I do it not,
Or at least come as near it, (if your Art
Will take a little pains, and second me)
As any wench in Florence of my standing.
I Will quite give o'r, and shut up shop in cunning.

Guard: It Is for the Duke, and if I fail your purpose,
All means to come, by riches or advancement,
Miss me, and skip me over.

Live: Let the old woman then
Be sent for with all speed, then I Will begin.

Guard. A good conclusion follow, and a sweet one
After this stale beginning with old ware. Within there!

Enter Servant. Serve. Sir, do you call?


Guard. Come near, list hither.


Live. I long my self to see this absolute Creature.
That wins the heart of love, and praise so much.

Guard. Go Sir, make haste.


Live. Say I entreat her company;
Do you hear Sir?

Serve. Yes Madam.


Exit. Live. That brings her quickly.


Guard. I would 'twere done, the Duke waits the good hour,
And I wait the good Fortune that may spring form't.
I have had a lucky hand these fifteen year
At such Court Passage with theee Dice in a Dish. Seignior Fabritio!

Enter Fabritio. Fab. Oh Sir, I bring an alteration in my mouth now.


Guard. An alteration! no wise Speech I hope;
He means not to talk wisely, does he trow?
Good! what is the change I pray Sir?

Fab. A new change.


Guard. Another yet! faith there is enough already.


Fab. My daughter loves him now.


Guard. What does she Sir?


Fab. Affects him beyond thought, who but the Ward forsooth!
No talk but of the Ward; she would have him
To choose 'bove all the men she ever saw.
My Will goes not so fast, as her consent now;
Her duty gets before my command still.

Guard: Why then Sir, if you will have me speak my thoughts,
I smell 'twill be a match.

Fab. I, and a sweet young couple,
If I have any judgment.

Guard. Faith that is little:
Let her be sent to morrow before noon,
And handsomely tricked up; for 'bout that time
I mean to bring her in, and tender her to him.

Fab. I warrant you for handsome, I will see
Her things laid ready, every one in order,
And have some part of her tricked up to night.

Guard. Why well said.


Fab. 'Twas a use her Mother had,
When she was invited to an early wedding;
She'ld dress her head o'r night, sponge up her self,
And give her neck three lathers.

Guard. Never a halter?


Fab. On with her chain of Pearl, her ruby Bracelets,
Lay ready all her tricks, and Jiggam-bobs.

Guard So must your daughter.


Fab. I Will about it straight Sir.


Exit Fabritio. Live. How he sweats in the foolish zeal of Fatherhood,
After six ounces an hour, and seems
To toil as much as if his cares were wise ones!

Guard. You Have let his folly blood in the right vein, Lady.


Live. And here comes his sweet Son-in-law that shall be;
They Are both allied in wit before the marriage;
What will they be hereafter, when they are nearer?
Yet they can go no further then the Fool:
There Is the worlds end in both of 'em.

Enter Ward and Sordido, one with a Shittlecock the other a Battledoor. Guard.
Now young heir!


Ward. What Is the next business after Shittlecock now?


Guard. To morrow you shall see the Gentlewoman
Must be your wife.

Ward. There Is even an other thing too
Must be kept up with a pair of Battledoors.
My wife! what can she do?

Guard. Nay that is a question you should ask your self, Ward,
When you are alone together.

Ward. That Is as I list.

A wife's to be ask anywhere I hope;

I Will ask her in a Congregation, if I have a mind to it, and so save a License:
My Guardiner has no more wit then an Herb-woman that sells away all her sweet
Herbs and Nose-gays, and keeps a stinking breath for her own Pottage:


Sord. Let me be at the choosing of your beloved,
If you desire a woman of good parts.

Ward. Thou shall sweet Sordido.


Sord. I have a plaguey ghess, let me alone to see what she is; if I but look
upon her -- way, I know all the faults to a hair, that you may refuse her for.


Ward. Do thou! I prithee let me hear 'em Sordido:


Sord. Well, mark 'em then; I have 'em all in rhyme.
The wife your Guardiner ought to tender,
Should be pretty, straight and slender;
Heir hair not short, her foot not long,
Her hand not huge, nor too too loud her tongue:
No pearl in eye, nor ruby in her nose,
No burn or cut, but what the Catalogue shows.
She must have teeth, and that no black ones,
And kiss most sweet when she does smack once:
Her skin must be both white and plump,
Her body straight, not hopper rumpt,
Or wriggle side-ways like a Crab;
She must be neither Slut nor Drab,
Nor go too splay-foot with her shoes,
To make her Smock lick up the dews.
And two things more, which I forgot to tell ye
She neither must have bump in back, nor belly:
These are the faults that will not make her pass.

Ward. And if I spy not these, I am a rank Ass.


Sord. Nay more; by right Sir, you should see her naked,
For that is the ancient order.

Ward. See her naked?
That were good sport in faith: I Will have the Books turned over;
And if I find her naked on Record,
She shall not have a rag on: But stay, stay,
How if she should desire to see me so too,
I were in a sweet case then, such a fowl skin:

Sord. But you have a clean shirt, and that makes amends Sir.


Ward. I will not see her naked for that trick though.


Exit. Sord. Then take her with all faults, with her clothes on!
And they may hide a number with a bum-roll.
Faith choosing of a Wench in a huge Farthingale,
Is like the buying of ware under a great Pent-house,
What with the deceit of one,
And the false light of the other, mark my Speeches,
He may have a diseased Wench in's Bed,
And rotten stuff in's Breeches.

Exit. Guard. It may take handsomely:


Live. I see small hind'rance:
How now, so soon returned?

Enter Mother. Guard. She Is come.


Live. That Is well.
Widow, come, come, I have a great quarrel to you,
Faith I must chide you, that you must be sent for!
You make your self so strange, never come at us;
And yet so near a neighbor, and so unkind;
Troth you are too blame, you cannot be more welcome
To any house in Florence, that I Will tell you.

Moth. My thanks must needs acknowledge so much Madam:


Live. How can you be so strange then? I sit here
Sometime whole days together without company,
When business draws this Gentleman from home,
And should be happy in society,
Which I so well affect, as that of yours.
I know you are alone too; why should not we
Like two kind neighbors, then supply the wants
Of one another, having tongue discourse,
Experience in the world, and such kind helps
To laugh down time, and meet age merely?

Moth. Age (Madam) you speak mirth; it is at my door,
But a long journey from your Ladyship yet.

Live. My faith I Am nine and thirty, every stroke Wench,
And it is a general observation
Among Knights, Wives, or Widows, we account
Our selves then old, when young men's eyes leave looking at's:
It Is a true rule amongst us, and never failed yet
In any but in one, that I remember;
Indeed she had a friend at nine and forty;
Marry she paid well for him, and in the end
He kept a Queen or two with her own money,
That robbed her of her plate, and cut her throat.

Moth. She had her punishment in this world (Madam)
And a fair warning to all other women,
That they live chaste at fifty.

Live. I, or never Wench:
Come, now I have thy company I Will not part with it
Till after supper.

Moth. Yes, I must crave pardon (Madam)


Live. I swear you shall stay supper; we have no strangers, woman,
None but my sojourners and I; this Gentleman
And the young heir his Ward; you know our company.

Moth. Some other time, I will make bold with you Madam.


Guard. Nay pray stay Widow,


Live. 'Faith, she shall not go;
Do you think I Will be forsworn?

Table and -- Chess. Moth. It Is a great while
Till supper time; I Will take my leave then now (Madam)
And come again in the evening! since your Ladyship
Will have it so.

Live. In The evening by my troth Wench,
I Will keep you while I have you; you have great business sure,
To sit alone at home; I wonder strangely
What pleasure you take in it! were it to me now
I should be ever at one Neighbors house
Or other all day long; having no charge.
Or none to chide you, if you go, or stay,
Who may live merrier, I, or more at hearts-ease?
Come, we'll to Chess, or Draughts; there are an hundred tricks
To drive out time till Supper, never fear't Wench.

Moth. I Will but make one step home, and return straight (Madam)


Live. Come, I Will not trust you; you use more excuses
To your kind friends then ever I knew any.
What business can you have, if you be sure
You Have locked the doors? and that being all you have
I know you are careful on it: one afternoon
So much to spend here! say I should entreat you now
To lie a night or two, or a week with me,
Or leave your own house for a month together,
It were a kindness that long Neighborhood
And friendship might well hope to prevail in:
Would you deny such a request? in faith,
Speak truth, and freely:

Moth. I were then uncivil Madam.


Live. Go too then, set your men; we'll have whole nights
Of mirth together, ere we be much older, Wench*

Moth. As good now tell her then, for she will know it;
I have always found her a most friendly Lady.

Live. Why Widow, where is your mind?


Moth. Troth even at home Madam.
To tell you truth, I left a Gentlewoman
Even sitting all alone, which is uncomfortable,
Especially to young bloods.

Live. Another excuse!


Moth. No, as I hope for health, Madam, that is a truth;
Please you to send and see:

Live. What Gentlewoman? pish.


Moth. Wife to my son indeed, but not known (Madam)
To any but yourself.

Live. Now I beshrew you;
Could you be so unkind to her and me,
To come and not bring her? Faith it is not friendly.

Moth. I feared to be too bold.


Live. Too bold? Oh what is become
Of the true hearty love was wont to be
Amongst Neighbors in old time?

Moth. And she is a stranger (Madam).


Live. The more should be her welcome; when is courtesy
In better practice, then when it is employed
In entertaining strangers? I could chide In Faith.
Leave her behind, poor Gentlewoman, alone too!
Make some amends, and send for her betimes, go.

Moth. Please you command one of your Servants Madam.


Live. Within there.


Enter Servant. Serve. Madam.


Live. Attend the Gentlewoman.


Moth. It must be carried wondrous privately
From my Sons knowledge, he will break out in storms else.
Hark you Sir.

Live. Now comes in the heat of your part.


Guard. True, I know it (Lady) and if I be out,
May the Duke banish me from all employments,
Wanton, or serious.

Live. So, have you sent Widow?


Moth. Yes (Madam) he is almost at home by this.


Live. And 'faith let me entreat you, that hence forward,
All such unkind faults may be swept from friendship,
Which does but dim the luster; and think thus much
It is a wrong to me, that have ability
To bid friends welcome, when you keep 'em from me,
You cannot set greater dishonor near me;
For Bounty is the credit and the glory
Of those that have enough: I see you are sorry,
And the good mends is made by it.

Moth. Here she is Madam:


Enter Brancha, and Servant. Bran: I wonder how she comes to send for me now?


Live. Gentlewoman, you are most welcome, trust me you are,
As courtesy can make one, or respect
Due to the presence of you.

Bran. I give you thanks, Lady.


Live. I heard you were alone, and 't had appeared
An ill condition in me, though I knew you not,
Nor ever saw you, (yet humanity
Thinks every case her own) to have kept your company
Here from you, and left you all solitary:
I rather ventured upon boldness then
As the least fault, and wished your presence here;
A thing most happily motion'd of that Gentleman,
Whom I request you, for his care and pity
To honor and reward with your acquaintance,
A Gentleman that Ladies rights stands for,
That Is his profession.

Bran. It Is a noble one, and honors my acquaintance.


Guard. All my intentions are servants to such Mistresses.


Bran It Is your modesty
It seems, that makes your deserts speak so low Sir.

Live. Come Widow, look you Lady, here is our business;
Are we not well employed think you! an old quarrel
Between us, that will never be at an end.

Bran. No, and methinks there is men enough to part you (Lady):


Live. Ho! but they set us on, let us come off
As well as we can, poor souls, men care no farther.
I pray sit down forfooth, if you have the patience
To look upon two weak and tedious Gamesters.

Guard. Faith Madam, set these by till evening,
You Will have enough on it then; the Gentlewoman
Being a stranger, would take more delight
To see your rooms and pictures:

Live. Marry, good Sir,
And well remembered, I beseech you show 'em her;
That will beguile time well; pray heartily do Sir,
I Will do as much for you; here take these keys,
Show her the Monument too, and that is a thing
Every one sees not; you can witness that Widow.

Moth. And that is worth sight indeed, Madam.


Bran. Kind Lady,
I fear I came to be a trouble to you.

Live. Oh nothing less forsooth.


Bran. And to this courteous Gentleman,
That wears a kindness in his Breast so noble
And bounteous to the welcome of a stranger.

Guard. If you but give acceptance to my service,
You do the greatest grace and honor to me
That courtesy can merit.

Bran. I were too blame else,
And out of fashion much. I pray you lead Sir.

Live. After a game or two, we are for you Gentle folks:


Guard. We wish no better seconds in Society
Then your discourses, Madam, and your partners there.

Moth. I thank your praise, I listened to you Sir;
Though when you spoke, there came a paltry Rook
Full in my way, and choaks up all my game:

Exit Guardiano and Brancha. Live. Alas poor Widow, I shall be too hard for thee.


Moth. You Are cunning at the game, I Will be sworn (Madam).


Live. It will be found so, ere I give you over:
She that can place her man well,

Moth. As you do (Madam):


Live. As I shall (Wench) can never lose her game;
Nay, nay, the black King's mine.

Moth. Cry you mercy (Madam).


Live. And this my Queen.


Moth. I see it now.


Live. Here Is a Duke
Will strike a sure stroke for the game anon;
Your pawn cannot come back to relieve it self.

Moth. I know that (Madam.)


Live. You play well the whilst;
How she belies her skill* I hold two ducats,
I give you Check and Mate to your white King:
Simplicity it self, your Saintish King there.

Moth. Well, ere now Lady
I have seen the fall of Subtilty: Jest on.

Live. I but Simplicity receives two for one.


Moth. What remedy but patience!


Enter above Guardiano and Brancha. Bran. Trust me Sir,
Mine eye never met with fairer Ornaments.

Guard. Nay, livelier, I Am persuaded, neither Florence
Nor Venice can produce.

Bran. Sir, my opinion
Takes your part highly.

Guard. There Is a better piece
Yet then all these:

-- Duke above Bran. Not possible Sir!


Guard. Believe it
You Will say so when you see it: Turn but your eye now
You Are upon it presently.

Exit. Bran. Oh Sir.


Duke. He Is gone Beauty!
Pish, look not after him: He Is but a vapor,
That when the Sun appears, is seen no more.

Bran. Oh treachery to honor!


Duke. Prithee tremble not;
I feel thy breast shake like a Turtle panting
Under a loving hand that makes much on it;
Why art so fearful? as I Am friend to brightness,
There Is nothing but respect and honor near thee:
You know me, you have seen me; here is a heart
Can witness I have seen thee:

Bran. The more's my danger.


Duke. The more's thy happiness: Pish strive not Sweet;
This strength were excellent employed in love now,
But here is it is spent amiss; strive not to seek
Thy liberty, and keep me still in prison.
'Y faith you shall not out, till I Am releast now;
We'll be both freed together, or stay still by it;
So is captivity pleasant.

Bran. Oh my Lord.


Duke. I am not here in vain; have but the leisure
To think on that, and thou wilt be soon resolved:
The lifting of thy voice, is but like one
That does exalt his enemy, who proving high,
Lays all the plots to confound him that raised him.
Take warning I beseech thee; thou seem to me
A creature so composed of gentleness,
And delicate meekness; such as bless the faces
Of figures that are drawn for Goddesses,
And makes Art proud to look upon her work:
I should be sorry the least force should lay
An unkind touch upon thee.

Bran. Oh my extremity!
My Lord, what seek you?

Duke. Love.


Bran. It Is gone already,
I have a husband.

Duke. That Is a single comfort,
Take a friend to him.

Bran. That Is a double mischief,
Or else there is no Religion.

Duke. Do not tremble
At fears of thine own making.

Bran. Nor great Lord,
Make me not bold with death and deeds of ruin
Because they fear not you; me they must fright;
Then am I best in health: Should thunder speak,
And none regard it, it had lost the name,
And were as good be still* I Am not like those
That take their soundest sleeps in greatest tempests,
Then wake I most, the weather fearfullest,
And call for strength to virtue.

Duke. Sure I think
Thou know the way to please me. I affect
A passionate pleading, 'bove an easy yiedling,
But never pitied any, they deserve none
That will not pity me: I can command,
Think upon that; yet if thou truly knew
The infinite pleasure my affection takes
In gentle, fair entreatings, when loves businesses
Are carried courteously 'twixt heart and heart,
You Would make more haste to please me.

Bran. Why should you seek Sir,
To take away that you can never give?

Duke. But I give better in exchange; wealth, honor:
She that is fortunate in a Dukes favor,
Lights on a Tree that bears all women's wishes:
If your own Mother saw you pluck fruit there,
She would commend your wit, and praise the time
Of your Nativity, take hold of glory.
Do not I know you have cast away your life
Upon necessities, means merely doubtful
To keep you in indifferent health and fashion.
(A thing I heard too lately, and soon pitied)
And can you be so much your Beauties enemy,
To kiss away a month or two in wedlock,
And weep whole years in wants for ever after?
Come play the wife wench, and provide for ever;
Let storms come when they list, they find thee sheltered:
Should any doubt arise, let nothing trouble thee;
Put trust in our love for the managing
Of all to thy hearts peace. We'll walk together,
And show a thankful joy for both our fortunes.

Exit above. Live. Did not I say my Duke would fetch you over (Widow)?


Moth. I think you spoke in earnest when you said it (Madam).


Live. And my black King makes all the haste he can too.


Moth. Well (Madam) we may meet with him in time yet.


Live. I have given thee blind mate twice.


Moth. You may see (Madam)
My eyes begin to fail.

Live. I Will swear they do, Wench.


Enter Guardiano. Guard. I can but smile as often as I think on it,
How prettily the poor fool was beguild:
How unexpectedly; it is a witty age,
Never were finer snares for women's honesties
Then are devised in these days; no Spiders web
Made of a daintier thread, then are now practiced
To catch loves flesh-flie by the silver wing:
Yet to prepare her stomach by degrees
To Cupids feast, because I saw 'twas quezy,
I showed her naked pictures by the way;
A bit to stay the appetite. Well, Advancement!
I venture hard to find thee; if thou come
With a greater title set upon thy Crest,
I Will take that first cross patiently, and wait
Until some other comes greater then that.
I Will endure all.

Live. The game's even at the best now; you may see Widow
How all things draw to an end.

Moth. Even so do I Madam.


Live. I pray take some of your neighbors along with you.


Moth. They must be those are almost twice your years then,
If they be chose fit matches for my time, Madam.

Live. Has not my Duke bestir'd himself?


Moth. Yes faith Madam; h'as done me all the mischief in this Game.


Live. H'as showed himself in's kind.


Moth. In's kind, call you it?
I may swear that.

Live. Yes faith, and keep your oath.


Guard. Hark, list, there is some body coming down; it is she.


Enter Brancha. Bran. Now bless me from a blasting; I saw that now,
Fearful for any woman's eye to look on:
Infectious mists, and mill-dews hang at's eyes:
The weather of a doomsday dwells upon him.
Yet since mine honors Leprous, who should I
Preserve that fair that caused the Leprosy?
Come poison all at once: Thou in whose baseness
The bane of Virtue broods, I Am bound in Soul
Eternally to curse thy smooth brow'd treachery,
That wore the fair vail of a friendly welcome,
And I a stranger; think upon it, it is worth it.
Murders pil'd up upon a guilty spirit,
At his last breath will not lie heavier
Then this betraying Act upon thy Conscience:
Beware of offering the first fruits to sin;
His weight is deadly, who commits with strumpets,
After they have been abas'd, and made for use;
If they offend to th'death, as wise men know,
How much more they then that first make 'em so?
I give thee that to feed on; I Am made bold now,
I thank thy treachery; sin and I Am acquainted,
No couple greater; and I Am like that great one,
Who making politic use of a base villain,
He likes the Treason well, but hates the Traitor;
So I hate thee slave.

Guard. Well, so the Duke love me,
I fare not much amiss then; two great Feasts
Do seldom come together in one day;
We must not look for 'em.

Bran. What at it still Mother?


Moth. You see we sit by it; are you so soon returned?


Live. So lively, and so cheerful, a good sign that.


Moth. You have not seen all since sure?


Bran. That have I Mother,
The Monument and all: I Am so beholding
To this kind, honest, courteous Gentleman,
You Would little think it (Mother) showed me all,
Had me from place to place, so fashionably;
The kindness of some people, how't exceeds?
'Faith, I have seen that I little thought to see,
In The morning when I rose.

Moth. Nay, so I told you
Before you saw't, it would prove worth your sight.
I give you great thanks for my daughter Sir,
And all your kindness toward her.

Guard. O good Widow!
Much good may do her; forty weeks hence, in faith.

Enter Servant. Live. Now Sir.


Serve. May't please you Madam to walk in,
Supper's upon the Table?

Live. Yes, we come;
Wilt please you Gentlewoman?

Bran. Thanks virtuous Lady,
(You Are a damned Baud) I Will follow you forsooth,
Pray take my Mother in, an old Ass go with you;
This Gentleman and I vow not to part.

Live. Then get you both before.


Bran. There lies his art.


Exeunt. Live. Widow I Will follow you; is it so, Damned Baud?
Are you so bitter? It Is but want of use;
Her tender modesty is Sea-sick a little,
Being not accustomed to the breaking billow
Of Woman's wavering Faith, blown with temptations.
It Is but a qualm of honor, 'twill away,
A little bitter for the time, but lasts not.
Sin tastes at the first draught like Wormwood Water,
But drunk again, it is Nectar ever after.

Exit. Act. 3.
Scaen. 1.
Enter Mother. Moth. I Would my Son would either keep at home,
Or I were in my grave; she was but one day abroad, but ever since
She Is grown so cutted, there is no speaking to her:
Whether the sight of great cheer at my Ladies,
And such mean fare at home, work discontent in her,
I know not; but I Am sure she is strangely altered.
I Will never keep daughter-in-law in the house with me
Again, if I had an hundred: When read I of any
That agreed long together, but she and her mother
Fell out in the first quarter! nay, sometime
A grudging of a scolding the first week by'r Lady;
So takes the new disease methinks in my house;
I Am weary of my part, there is nothing likes her;
I know not how to please her, here a-late;
And here she comes.

Enter Brancha: Bran: This is the strangest house
For all defects, as ever Gentlewoman
Made shift withal, to pass away her love in*
Why is there not a Cushion-cloth of Drawn work,
Or some fair Cut-work pined up in my Bedchamber*
A silver and gilt-casting Bottle hung by it?
Nay, since I am content to be so kind to you,
To spare you for a silver Basin and Ewre,
Which one of my fashion looks for of duty;
She Is never offered under, where she sleeps:

Moth. She talks of things here my whole state's not worth.


Bran. Never a green silk quilt is there in the house Mother,
To cast upon my Bed?

Moth. No by troth is there,
Nor orange tawny neither.

Bran. Here Is a house
For a young Gentlewoman to be got with child in.

Moth. Yes, simple though you make it, there has been three
Got in a year in it, since you move me to it;
And all as sweet faced children, and as lovely,
As you will be Mother of; I will not spare you*
What cannot children be begot think you,
Without gilt casting Bottles? Yes, and as sweet ones.
The Millers daughter brings forth as white boys,
As she that bathes her self with Milk and Bean flower.
It Is an old saying, One may keep gook cheer
In a mean house; so may true love affect
After the rate of Princes in a Cottage.

Bran. Troth you speak wondrous well for your old house here;
'Twill shortly fall down at your feet to thank you,
Or stoop when you go to Bed, like a good child
To ask you blessing. Must I live in want,
Because my fortune matched me with your Son?
Wives do not give away themselves to husbands,
To the end to be quite cast away; they look
To be the better used, and tendered rather,
Highlier respected, and maintained the richer;
They Are well rewarded else for the free gift
Of their whole life to a husband. I ask less now
Then what I had at home when I was a Maid,
And at my Fathers house, kept short of that
Which a wife knows she must have, nay, and will;
Will Mother, if she be not a fool born;
And report went of me, that I could wrangle
For what I wanted when I was two hours old,
And by that copy, this Land still I hold.
You hear me Mother.

Exit. Moth. I too plain methinks;
And were I somewhat deafer when you spoke,
'Twere never awhit the worse for my quietness:
It Is the most sudden'st, strangest alteration,
And the most subtilest that ever wit at threescore
Was puzzled to find out: I know no cause for it; but
She Is no more like the Gentlewoman at first,
Then I am like her that never lay with man yet,
And she is a very young thing where ere she be;
When she first lighted here, I told her then
How mean she should find all things; she was pleased forsooth,
None better: I laid open all defects to her,
She was contented still; but the Devil's in her,
Nothing contents her now: To night my Son
Promisd to be at home, would he were come once,
For I Am weary of my charge, and life too:
She'ld be served all in silver by her good will,
By night and day; she hates the name of Pewterer,
More then sickmen the noise, or diseased bones
That quake at fall of the Hammer, seeming to have
A fellow-feeling with it at every blow:
What course shall I think on? she frets me so.

Enter Leantio. Lean. How near am I now to a happiness,
That Earth exceeds not? not another like it;
The treasures of the deep are not so precious,
As are the concealed comforts of a man,
Locked up in woman's love. I sent the air
Of Blessings when I come but near the house;
What a delicious breath Marriage sends forth!
The Violet-beds not sweeter. Honest wedlock
Is like a Banqueting House built in a Garden,
On which the Springs chaste flowers take delight
To cast their modest odors; when base Lust
With all her powders, paintings, and best pride,
Is but a fair house built by a Ditch side.
When I behold a glorious dangerous Strumpet,
Sparkling in Beauty and Destruction too,
Both at a twinkling, I do liken straight
Her beautified body to a goodly Temple
That Is built on Vaults where Carcasses lie rotting,
And so by little and little I shrink back again,
And quench desire with a cool Meditation,
And I Am as well methinks: Now for a welcome
Able to draw men's envies upon man:
A kiss now that will hang upon my lip,
As sweet as morning dew upon a Rose,
And full as long; after a five days fast
She Will be so greedy now, and cling about me;
I take care how I shall be rid of her,
And here't begins.

Bran. Oh Sir, you are welcome home.


Moth. Oh is he come, I am glad on it.


Lean, Is that all?
Why this? as dreadful now as sudden death
To some rich man, that flatters all his sins
With promise of Repentance, when he is old,
And dies in the midway before he comes to it.
Sure you are not well, Brancha! How do prithee?

Bran. I have been better then I am at this time.


Lean. Alas, I thought so.


Bran. Nay, I have been worse too,
Then now you see me Sir.

Lean. I Am glad thou mendst yet,
I feel my heart mend too: How came it to thee?
Has any thing disliked thee in my absence?

Bran. No certain, I have had the best content
That Florence can afford.

Lean. Thou make the best on it,
Speak Mother, what is the cause? you must needs know.

Moth. Troth I know none Son, let her speak her self;
Unless it be the same 'gave Lucifer a tumbling cast; that is pride.

Bran. Methinks this house stands nothing to my mind;
I Would have some pleasant lodging in the high street Sir,
Or if 'twere near the Court Sir, that were much better;
It Is a sweet recreation for a Gentlewoman,
To stand in a Bay-window, and see gallants.

Lean. Now I have another temper, a mere stranger
To that of yours, it seems; I should delight
To see none but your self.

Bran. I praise not that:
Too fond is as unseemly as too churlish;
I would not have a husband of that proneness,
To kiss me before company, for a world:
Beside it is tedious to see one thing still (Sir)
Be it the best that ever heart affected;
Nay, were your self, whose love had power you know
To bring me from my friends, I would not stand thus,
And gaze upon you always: Troth I could not Sir;
As good be blind, and have no use of sight
As look on one thing still: What Is the eyes treasure,
But change of objects? You are learned Sir,
And know I speak not ill; 'till full as virtuous
For woman's eye to look on several men,
As for her heart (Sir) to be fixed on one.

Lean. Now thou come home to me; a kiss for that word.


Bran. No matter for a kiss Sir, let it pass,
It Is but a toy, we'll not so much as mind it,
Let Us talk of other business, and forget it.
What news now of the Pirates, any stirring?
Prithee discourse a little:

Moth. I am glad he is here yet
To see her tricks himself; I had lied monst'rously,
If I had told 'em first.

Lean. Speak what is the humor (Sweet)
You make your lip so strange? this was not wont.

Bran. Is there no kindness betwixt man and wife,
Unless they make a Pigeon-house of friendship,
And be still billing; it is the idlest fondness.
That ever was invented, and it is pity
Its grown a fashion for poor Gentlewomen;
There Is many a disease kissed in a year by it,
And a French cursie made to it: Alas Sir,
Think of the world, how we shall live, grow serious;
We have been married a whole fortnight now.

Lean. How? a whole fortnight! why is that so long?


Bran. It Is time to leave off dalliance; it is a doctrine
Of your own teaching, if you be remembered,
And I was bound to obey it.

Moth. Here Is one fits him;
This was well caught in faith Son, like a fellow
That rids another Country of a Plague,
And brings it home with him to his own house Knock within.
Who knocks?

Lean. Who Is there now? withdraw you Brancha,
Thou art a Jem no strangers eye must see,
How ever thou pleased now to look dull on me. Exit. Enter Messenger.
You Are welcome Sir; to whom your business, pray?

Mess. To one I see not here now.


Lean. Who should that be Sir?


Mess. A young Gentlewoman, I was sent to.


Lean. A young Gentlewoman?


Mess. I Sir, about sixteen; why look you wildly Sir?


Lean. At your strange error: You Have mistook the house Sir.
There Is none such here, I assure you.

Mess. I assure you too.
The man that sent me, cannot be mistook.

Lean. Why, who is it sent you Sir?


Mess. The Duke.


Lean. The Duke?


Mess. Yes, he entreates her company at a Banquet
At Lady Livia's house.

Lean. Troth shall I tell you Sir,
It is the most erroneous business
That ere your honest pains was abused with;
I pray forgive me, if I smile a little,
I cannot choose in faith Sir, at an error
So Comical as this (I mean no harm though)
His grace has been most wondrous ill informed,
Pray so return it (Sir). What should her name be?

Mess. That I shall tell you straight too, Brancha Capella.


Lean. How Sir, Brancha? What do you call the other.


Mess. Capella; Sir, it seems you know no such then?


Lean. Who should this be? I never heard of the name.


Mess. Then it is a sure mistake.


Lean. What if you inquired
In the next street Sir? I saw Gallants there
In the new houses that are built of late.
Ten to one, there you find her.

Mess. Nay no matter,
I will return the mistake, and seek no further.

Lean. Use your own will and pleasure Sir, you are welcome.

Exit Messenger. What shall I think of first? Come forth Brancha,
Thou art betrayed I fear me.

Enter Brancha. Bran. Betrayed, how Sir?


Lean. The Duke knows thee*


Bran. Knows me! how know you that Sir?


Lean. Has got thy name.


Bran. I, and my good name too,
That Is worse of the twain.

Lean. How comes this work about?


Bran. How should the Duke know me? can you ghess Mother?


Moth. Not I with all my wits, sure we kept house close.


Lean. Kept close! not all the Locks in Italy
Can keep you women so; you have been gadding,
And ventured out at twilight, to the Court-green yonder,
And met the gallant Bowlers coming home;
Without your Masks too, both of you, I Will be hanged else;
Thou have been seen Brancha by some stranger;
Never excuse it.

Bran. I Will not seek the way Sir;
Do you think you have married me to mew me up
Not to be seen; what would you make of me?

Lean. A good wife, nothing else:


Bran. Why, so are some
That are seen every day, else the Devil take 'em.

Lean. No more then I believe all virtuous in thee,
Without an argument; 'twas but thy hard chance
To be seen somewhere, there lies all the mischief;
But I have devised a rid dance.

Moth. Now I can tell you Son,
The time and place.

Lean. When, where?


Moth. What wits have I?
When you last took your leave, if you remember,
You left us both at Window.

Lean. Right, I know that.


Moth. And not the third part of an hour after,
The Duke past by in a great solemnity,
To St. Marks Temple, and to my apprehension
He looked up twice to the Window.

Lean. Oh there quick'ned
The mischief of this hour!

Bran. If you called mischief,
It is a thing I fear I am conceived with:

Lean. Looked he up twice, and could you take no warning!


Moth. Why once may do as much harm Son, as a thousand;
Do not you know one spark has fired an house,
As well as a whole Furnace?

Lean. My heart flames for it,
Yet let us be wise, and keep all smothered closely;
I have bethought a means; is the door fast?

Moth. I locked it my self after him.


Lean. You know Mother,
At the end of the dark Parlor there is a place
So artificially contrived for a Conveyance,
No search could ever find it: When my Father
Kept in for manslaughter, it was his Sanctuary;
There will I lock my life's best treasure up.
Brancha?

Bran. Would you keep me closer yet?
Have you the conscience? you are best even choke me up Sir?
You make me fearful of your health and wits,
You cleave to such wild courses, what is the matter?

Lean. Why, are you so insensible of your danger
To ask that now? the Duke himself has sent for you
To Lady Livia's, to a Banquet forsooth.

Bran. Now I beshrew you heartily, has he so!
And you the man would never yet vouchsafe
To tell me on it till now: You show your loyalty
And honesty at once, and so farewell Sir.

Lean. Brancha, whether now?


Bran. Why to the Duke Sir.
You say he sent for me.

Lean. But thou do not mean to go, I hope.


Bran. No? I shall prove unmannerly,
Rude, and uncivil, mad, and imitate you.
Come Mother come, follow his humor no longer,
We shall be all executed for treason shortly.

Moth. Not I in faith; I Will first obey the Duke,
And taste of a good Banquet, I Am of thy mind.
I Will step but up, and fetch two Handerchiefs
To pocket up some Sweetmeats, and o'r take thee;

Exit. Bran. Why here is an old Wench would trot into a Baud now,
For some dry Sucket, or a Colt in March-pain.

Exit. Lean. Oh thou the ripe time of man's misery, wedlock;
When all his thoughts like over laden Trees,
Crack with the Fruits they bear, in cares, in jealousies.
Oh that is a fruit that ripens hastily,
After it is knit to marriage; it begins
As soon as the Sun shines upon the Bride
A little to show color. Blessed Powers!
Whence comes this alteration! the distractions,
The fears and doubts it brings are numberless,
And yet the cause I know not: What a peace
Has he that never marries! if he knew
The benefit he enjoyed, or had the fortune
To come and speak with me, he should know then
The infinite wealth he had, and discern rightly
The greatness of his treasure by my loss:
Nay, what a quietness has he 'bove mine,
That wears his youth out in a strumpets arms,
And never spends more care upon a woman,
Then at the time of Lust; but walks away,
And if he find her dead at his return,
His pity is soon done, he breaks a sigh
In many parts, and gives her but a piece on it!
But all the fears, shames, jealousies, costs and troubles,
And still renewed cares of a marriage Bed,
Live in the issue, when the wife is dead.

Enter Messenger. Mess. A good perfection to your thoughts.


Lean. The news Sir?


Mess. Though you were pleased of late to pin an error on me,
You must not shift another in your stead too:
The Duke has sent me for you.

Lean. How for me Sir?
I see then it is my theft; we are both betrayed:
Well, I Am not the first h'as stolen away a Maid,
My Countrymen have used it: I Will along with you Sir.

Exeunt. Scaen 2.
A Banquet prepared: Enter Guardiano and Ward. Guard. Take you especial note of
such a Gentlewoman,
She Is here on purpose, I have invited her,
Her Father, and her Uncle, to this Banquet;
Mark her behavior well, it does concern you;
And what her good parts are, as far as time
And place can modestly require a knowledge of,
Shall be laid open to your understanding.
You know I Am both your Guardian, and your Uncle,
My care of you is double, Ward and Nephew,
And I Will express it here.

Ward. Faith, I should know her
Now by her mark among a thousand women:
A lettle pretty deft and tidy thing you say:

Guard. Right.


Ward. With a lusty sprouting sprig in her hair.


Guard: Thou go the right way still; take one mark more,
Thou shall never find her hand out of her Uncles,
Or else his out of hers, if she be near him:
The love of kindred, never yet stuck closer
Then their's to one another; he that weds her,
Marries her Uncles heart too.

Cornets. Ward. Say you so Sir,
Then I Will be asked in the Church to both of them:

Guard. Fall back, here comes the Duke.


Ward. He brings a Gentlewoman,
I should fall forward rather.

Enter Duke, Brancha, Fabritio, Hippolito, Livia* Mother, Isabella, and
Attendants. Duke. Come Brancha,
Of purpose sent into the world to show
Perfection once in woman; I Will believe
Hence forward they have every one a Soul too
Against all the uncurteous opinions
That man's uncivil rudeness ever held of 'em:
Glory of Florence light into mine arms!

Enter Leantio. Bran. Yon comes a grudging man will chide you Sir;
The storm is now in's heart, and would get nearer,
And fall here if it durst, it powers down yonder,

Duke. If that be he, the weather shall soon clear.
List, and I Will tell thee how.

Lean. A kissing too?
I see it is plain Lust now; Adultery boldned;
What will it prove anon, when it is stufft full
Of Wine and Sweetmeats, being so impudent Fasting?

Duke. We have heard of your good parts Sir, which we honor
With our embrace and love; is not the Captainship
Of Rouans Citadel, since the late deceased,
Suppli' by any yet?

Gentlem. By none my Lord.


Duke. Take it, the place is yours then, and as faithfulness
And desert grows, our favor shall grow with it:
Rise now the Captain of our Fort at Rouans.

Lean. The service of whole life give your Grace thanks.


Duke. Come sit Brancha.


Lean. This is some good yet,
And more then ever I looked for, a fine bit
To stay a Cuckolds stomach: All preferment
That springs from sin and lust, it shoots up quickly,
As Gardiners crops do in the rotten'st grounds;
So is all means raised from base prostitution,
Even like a Sallet growing upon a dunghill:
I Am like a thing that never was yet heard of,
Half merry, and half mad, much like a fellow
That eats his meat with a good appetite,
And wears a plague sore that would fright a Country;
Or rather like the barren hardened Ass,
That feeds on Thistles till he bleeds again;
And such is the condition of my misery.

Live. Is that your Son widow?


Moth. Yes, did your Ladyship never know that till now?


Live. No trust me did I,
Nor ever truly felt the power of love,
And pity to a man, till now I knew him;
I have enough to buy me my desires,
And yet to spare; that is one good comfort. Hark you?
Pray let me speak with you Sir, before you go.

Lean. With me Lady? you shall, I am at your service:
What will she say now trow, more goodness yet?

Ward. I see her now I Am sure; the Ape's so little,
I shall scarce feel her; I have seen almost
As tall as she, sold in the Fair for ten pence.
See how she simpers it, as if Marmalad
Would not melt in her mouth; she might have the kindness in faith
To send me a gilded Bull from her own Trencher,
A Ram, a Goat, or somewhat to be nibling*
These women when they come to sweet things once,
They forget all their friends, they grow so greedy;
Nay, oftentimes their husbands.

Duke. Here Is a health now Gallants,
To the best beauty at this day in Florence.

Bran. Who ere she be, she shall not go unpledg'd Sir.


Duke. Nay, your excused for this.


Bran. Who I my Lord?


Duke. Yes by the Law of Bacchus; plead your benefit,
You are not bound to pledge your own health Lady.

Bran. That Is a good way my Lord to keep me dry.


Duke. Nay, then I will not offend Venus so much,
Let Bacchus seek his mends in another Court,
Here Is to thy self Brancha.

Bran. Nothing comes
More welcome to that name then your Grace.

Lean. So, so;
Here stands the poor theif now that stole the treasure,
And he is not thought on, ours is near kin now
To a twin-misery born into the world.
First the hard conscienc'd*worldling, he hoords wealth up,
Then comes the next, and he feasts all upon it;
One's damned for getting, the other for spending on it.
Oh equal Justice, thou has't met my sin
With a full weight, I Am rightly now oppressed,
All her friends heavy hearts lie in my Breast.

Duke. Methinks there is no spirit amongst us Gallants,
But what divinely sparkles from the eyes
Of bright Brancha; we sat all in darkness,
But for that Splendour: Who was it told us lately
Of a match making right, a marriage tender?

Guard. 'Twas I my Lord.


Duke. 'Twas you indeed: Where is she?


Guard. This is the Gentlewoman.


Fab: My Lord, my Daughter.


Duke. Why here is some stirring yet.


Fab. She Is a dear child to me.


Duke. That must needs be; you say she is your Daughter.


Fab. Nay, my good Lord, dear to my purse I mean
Beside my person, I never reckoned that.
She has the full qualities of a Gentlewoman;
I have brought her up to Music, Dancing, what not,
That may commend her Sex, and stir her husband?

Duke. And which is he now?


Guard. This young Heir, my Lord.


Duke. What is he brought up too?


Hip. To Cat and Trap.


Guard. My Lord, he is a great Ward, wealthy, but simple;
His parts consist in Acres.

Duke. Oh Wise-acres.


Guard. You Have spoke him in a word Sir:


Bran. 'Lass poor Gentlewoman,
She Is ill bestead, unless she has dealt the wiselier,
And laid in more provision for her youth*
Fools will not keep in Summer.

Lean. No, nor such wives
From whores in winter.

Duke. Yea, the voice too Sir!


Fab. I, and a sweet Breast too my Lord, I hope,
Or I have cast away my money wisely;
She took her pricksong earlier, my Lord,
Then any of her kindred ever did:
A rare child, though I say it, but I Would not have
The Baggage hear so much, 'twould make her swell straight:
And Maids of all things must not be puffed up.

Duke. Let Us turn us to a better Banquet then,
For Music bids the soul of a man to a Feast,
And that is indeed, a noble entertainment,
Worthy Brancha's self; you shall perceive Beauty,
Our Florentine Damsels are not brought up idly.

Bran. They'are wiser of themselves, it seems my Lord,
And can take gifts, when goodness offers 'em.

Music. Lean. True, and damnation has taught you that wisdom,
You can take gifts too. Oh that Music mocks me!

Live. I am as dumb to any language now*
But Loves, as one that never learned to speak:
I am not yet so old, but he may think of me;
My own fault, I have been idle a long time;
But I Will begin the week, and paint to morrow,
So follow my true labor day by day.
I never thrived so well, as when I used it.

SONG.
WHat harder chance can fall to woman,
Who was born to cleave to someman*
Then to bestow her time, youth, beauty,
Life's observance, honor, duty,
On a thing for no use good,
But to make Physic work, or blood force fresh
In an old Ladies cheek, she that would be
Mother of fools, let her compound with me*

Ward. Here Is a tune indeed; Pish I had rather hear one Ballad sung in the Nose
now, of the lamentable drowning of fat Sheep and Oxen, then all these simpering
tunes played upon Cats-guts, and sung by little Kitlings.


Fab. How like you her Breast now my Lord?


Bran. Her Breast?
He talks as if his daughter had given suck
Before she were married, as her betters have;
The next he praises sure, will be her Nipples.

Duke. Methinks now, such a voice to such a husband,
Is like a Jewel of unvalued worth,
Hung at a Fools ear

Fab. May it please your Grace
To give her leave to show another Quality.

Duke. Marry as many good ones as you will Sir,
The more the better welcome.

Lean. But the less
The better practiced: That soul's black indeed
That cannot commend Virtue; but who keeps it!
The Extortioner will say to a sick beggar,
Heaven comfort thee, though he give none himself:
This good is common.

Fab. Will it please you now Sir,
To entreat your Ward to take her by the hand,
And lead her in a dance before the Duke?

Guard. That will I Sir, it is needful; hark you Nephew*


Fab. Nay, you shall see young heir, what you have for your money,
Without fraud or imposture.

Ward. Dance with her!
Not I sweet Gardener, do not urge my heart to it,
It Is clean against my Blood; dance with a stranger!
Let who is will do it, I Will not begin first with her.

Hip. No fear't not fool, she has took a better order.


Guard. Why who shall take her then?


Ward. Some other Gentleman;
Look, there is her Uncle, a fine timber'd Reveller,
Perhaps he knows the manner of her dancing too,
I Will have him do it before me, I have sworn Gardener,
Then may I learn the better.

Guard. Thou Wilt be an ass still.


Ward. I, all that Uncle, shall not fool me out.
Pish, I stick closer to my self then so.

Guard. I must entreat you Sir, to take your Niece
And dance with her; my Ward's a little wilful,
He would have you show him the way.

Hip. Me Sir?
He shall command it at all hours, pray tell him so.

Guard. I thank you for him, he has not wit himself Sir.


Hip. Come my life's peace, I have a strange office on it here,
It Is some man's luck to keep the joys he likes
Concealed for his own bosom; but my fortune
To set 'em out now, for another liking,
Like the mad misery of necessitous man,
That parts from his good horse with many praises,
And goes on foot himself; need must be obeyed
In every action, it mars man and maid.

Music* A dance, making Honors to the D. and cursie to themselves, both before
and after. Duke. Signior Fabritio, you are a happy Father,
Your cares and pains are fortunate you see,
Your cost bears noble fruits. Hippolito thanks.

Fab. Here Is some amends for all my charges yet. She wins both prick and
praise, where ere she comes.


Duke. How like Brancha?


Bran. All things well, my Lord:
But this poor Gentlewomans fortune, that is the worst.

Duke. There is no doubt Brancha, she will find leisure
To make that good enough; he is rich and simple.

Bran. She has the better hope of the upper hand indeed,
Which women strive for most.

Guard. Do It when I bid you Sir.


Ward. I Will venture but a Horn-pipe with her Gardener,
Or some such married man's dance.

Guard. We'll venture something Sir.


Ward. I have time for what I do.


Guard. But little reason, I think.


Ward. Plain men dance the Measures, the Sinquapace, the Gay:
Cuckolds dance the Horn-pipe; and Farmers dance the Hay:
Your Soldiers dance the Round, and Maidens that grow big:
You Drunkards, the Canaries; you Whore and Baud, the Jigg.
Here Is your eight kind of Dancers, he that finds the nineth, let him
Pay the Minstrels.

Duke. Oh here he appears once in his own person;
I thought he would have married her by Attorney,
And lain with her so too.

Bran. Nay, my kind Lord,
There Is very seldom any found so foolish
To give away his part there.

Lean. Bitter scoff;
Yet I must do it; with what a cruel pride! Music
The glory of her sin strikes by my afflictions.

Ward and Isabella dance, he ridiculously imitates Hippolito. Duke. This thing
will make shift (Sirs) to make a husband,
For ought I see in him; how thinks't Brancha?

Bran. 'Faith an ill-favored shift my Lord, methinks;
If he would take some voyage when he is married,
Dangerous, or long enough, and scarce be seen
Once in nine year together, a wife then
Might make indifferent shift to be content with him.

Duke. A kiss; that wit deserves to be made much on:
Come, our Caroch.

Guard. Stands ready for your Grace.


Duke. My thanks to all your loves: Come fair Brancha,
We have took special care of you, and provided
Your lodging near us now.

Bran. Your love is great, my Lord.


Duke. Once more our thanks to all.


Omnes* All blessed Honors guard you.


Exe. all but Leantio and Livia; Cornets flourish. Lean* Oh have thou left me
then Brancha, utterly!
Brancha! now I miss thee; Oh return!
And save the faith of woman; I never felt
The loss of thee till now; it is an affliction
Of greater weight, then youth was made to bear;
As if a punishment of after-life
Were fallen upon man here; so new it is
To flesh and blood, so strange, so insupportable
A torment, even mistook, as if a body
Whose death were drowning, must needs therefore suffer it in scalding oil.

Live. Sweet Sir!


Lean. As long as mine eye saw thee,
I half enjoyed thee.

Live* Sir?


Lean Can thou forget
The dear pains my love took, how it has watch't
Whole nights together, in all weathers for thee,
Yet stood in heart more merry then the tempests
That sung about mine ears, like dangerous flatterers
That can set all their mischief to sweet tunes;
And then received thee from thy fathers window,
Into these arms at midnight, when we embraced
As if we had been Statues only made for it,
To show arts life, so silent were our comforts,
And kissed as if our lips had grown together!

Live. This makes me madder to enjoy him now.


Lean. Can thou forget all this? And better joys
That we met after this, which then new kisses
Took pride to praise.

Live. I shall grow madder yet, Sir:


Lean. This cannot be but of some close Bauds working:
Cry mercy Lady. What would you say to me?
My sorrow makes me so unmannerly,
So comfort bless me, I had quite forgot you.

Live. Nothing but even in pity too, that passion
Would give your grief good counsel.

Lean. Marry, and welcome Lady,
It never could come better.

Live. Then first Sir,
To make away all your good thoughts at once of her,
Know most assuredly, she is a strumpet.

Lean. Ha: Most assuredly! Speak not a thing
So vilde so certainly, leave it more doubtful.

Live. Then I must leave all truth, and spare my knowledge,
A sin which I too lately found and wept for.

Lean. Found you it?


Live. I with wet eyes.


Lean. Oh perjurious friendship!


Live. You missed your fortunes when you met with her Sir.
Young Gentlemen, that only love for beauty,
They love not wisely; such a marriage rather
Proves the destruction of affection;
It brings on want, and want's the Key of whoredom.
I think you had small means with her.

Lean. Oh not any Lady.


Live. Alas poor Gentleman, what meant'st thou Sir,
Quite to undo thy self with thine own kind heart?
Thou art too good and pitiful to woman:
Marry Sir, thank thy Stars for this blessed fortune
That rids the Summer of thy youth so well
From many Beggars that had lain a sunning
In thy beams only else, till thou had wasted
The whole days of thy life in heat and labor.
What would you say now to a Creature found
As pitiful to you, and as it were
Even sent on purpose from the whole Sex general,
To requite all that kindness you have shown to it?

Lean. What Is that Madam?


Live. Nay, a Gentlewoman, and one able
To reward good things, I, and bears a conscience to it;
Could thou love such a one, that (blow all fortunes)
Would never see thee want?
Nay more, maintain thee to thine enemies envy,
And shall not spend a care for it, stir a thought,
Nor break a sleep, unless loves music waked thee;
No storm of fortune should look upon me,
And know that woman:

Lean. Oh my life's wealth Brancha!


Live. Still with her name? will nothing wear it out?
That deep sigh went but for a strumpet Sir.

Lean. It can go for no other that loves me.


Live. He Is vexed in mind; I came too soon to him;
Where Is my discretion now, my skill, my judgment?
I Am cunning in all arts but my own, love:
It Is as unseasonable to tempt him now
So soon, as a widow to be courted
Following her husbands coarse, or to make bargain
By the grave side, and take a young man there:
Her strange departure stands like a hearse yet
Before his eyes; which time will take down shortly:

Exit. Lean. Is she my wife till death? yet no more mine;
That Is a hard measure; then what is marriage good for?
Me thinks by right, I should not now be living,
And then 'twere all well: What a happiness
Had I been made of, had I never seen her;
For nothing makes man's loss grievous to him,
But knowledge of the worth of what he loses;
For what he never had, he never misses:
She Is gone for ever; utterly there is
As much redemption of a soul from Hell,
As a fair woman's body from his palace.
Why should my love last longer then her truth?
What is there good in woman to be loved,
When only that which makes her so, has left her?
I cannot love her now, but I must like
Her sin, and my own shame too, and be guilty
Of Laws breach with her, and mine own abusing;
All which were monstrous: Then my safest course
For health of mind and body, is to turn
My heart, and hate her, most extremely hate her;
I have no other way: Those virtuous powers
Which were chaste witnesses of both our troths,
Can witness she breaks first, and I Am rewarded
With Captainship of the Fort; a place of credit
I must confess, but poor; my Factorship
Shall not exchange means with it: He that di'd last in it,
He was no drunkard, yet he di'd a beggar
For all his thrift; besides the place not fits me;
It suits my resolution, not my breeding:

Enter Livia. Live. I have tried all ways I can, and have not power*
To keep from sight of him: How are you now Sir?

Lean. I feel a better ease Madam.


Live. Thanks to blessedness.
You will do well I warrant you, fear it not Sir;
Join but your own good will to it; he is not wise
That loves his pain or sickness, or grows fond
Of a disease, whose property is to vex him,
And spightfully drink his blood up: Out upon it Sir,
Youth knows no greater loss; I pray let us walk Sir.
You never saw the beauty of my house yet,
Nor how abundantfy Fortune has blessed me
In worldly treasure; trust me I have enough Sir
To make my friend a rich man in my life,
A great man at my death; your self will say so
If you want any thing, and spare to speak,
Troth I Will condemn you for a wilful man Sir.

Lean. Why sure this can be but the flattery of some dream.


Live. Now by this kiss, my love, my soul and riches,
It Is all true substance.
Come you shall see my wealth, take what you list,
The gallanter you go, the more you please me:
I will allow you too, your Page and Footman,
Your race horses, or any various pleasure
Exercised youth delights in; but to me
Only Sir wear your heart of constant stuff:
Do but you love enough, I Will give enough.

Lean. Troth then, I Will love enough, and take enough.


Live. Then we are both pleased enough.


Exeunt. Scaen 3.
Enter Guardiano and Isabella at one door, and the Ward and Sordido at another
Guard. Now Nephew, here is the Gentlewoman again.


Ward. Mass here she is come again; mark her now Sordido.


Guard. This is the Maid, my love and care has chose
Out for your wife, and so I tender her to you;
Your self has been eye witness of some qualities
That speak a courtly breeding, and are costly.
I bring you both to talk together now,
It Is time you grew familiar in your tongues;
To morrow you join hands, and one Ring ties you,
And one Bed holds you (if you like the choice)
Her Father and her friends are in the next room,
And stay to see the contract ere they part;
Therefore dispatch good Ward, be sweet and short;
Like her, or like her not, there is but two ways;
And one your body, the other your purse pays.

Ward. I warrant you Gardener, I Will not stand all day thruming,
But quickly shoot my bolt at your next coming.

Guard. Well said: Good fortune to your birding then.


Ward. I never missed mark yet.


Sord. Troth I think Master, if the truth were known,
You never shot at any but the Kitchin-wench,
And that was a she-woodcock, a mere innocent,
That was often lost, and cried at eight and twenty.

Ward. No more of that meat Sordido, here is Eggs of the spit now,
We must turn gingerly, draw out the Catalogue
Of all the faults of women.

Sord. How, all the faults! have you so little reason to think so much Paper
will lie in my breeches? why ten carts will not carry it, if you set down but
the Bauds; all the faults? pray let us be content with a few of 'em; and if they
were less, you would find 'em enough I warrant you: Look you Sir.


Isab. But that I have the advantage of the fool,
As much as woman's heart can wish and joy at,
What an infernal torment 'twere to be
Thus bought and sold, and turned and pri'd into; when alas
The worst bit is too good for him? and the comfort is
H'as but a Caters place on it, and provides
All for another table; yet how curious
The Ass is, like some nice professor on it,
That buys up all the daintiest food in the Markets,
And seldom licks his lips after a taste on it!

Sord. Now to her, now you have scand all her parts over.


Ward. But at end shall I begin now Sordido?


Sord. Oh ever at a woman's lip, while you live Sir, do you ask that question?


Ward. Methinks Sordido, she has but a crabbed face to begin with.


Sord. A crabbed face? that will save money.


Ward. How! save money Sordido?


Sord. I Sir: For having a crabbed face of her own, she will eat the less
Verjuyce with her Mutton; 'twill save Verjuyce at years end Sir.


Ward. Nay and your jests begin to be saucy once,
I Will make you eat your meat without Mustard.

Sord. And that in some kind is a punishment.


Ward. Gentlewoman, they say it is your pleasure to be my wife, and you shall
know shortly whether it be mine or no, to be your husband; and thereupon thus I
first enter upon you. Oh most delicious scent! Methinks it tasted as if a man
had stepped into a Comfit-makers shop to let a Cart go by; all the while I kissed
her: It is reported Gentlewoman you will run mad for me, if you have me not.


Isab. I should be in great danger of my wits Sir,
For being so forward, should this Ass kick backward now.

Ward. Alas poor Soul! And is that hair your own?


Isab. Mine own, yes sure Sir, I ow nothing for it.


Ward. It Is a good hearing, I shall have the less to pay when I have married
you: Look, does her eyes stand well.


Sord. They cannot stand better
Then in her head, I think, where would you have them?
And for her Nose, it is of a very good last.

Ward. I have known as good as that has not lasted a year though.


Sord. That Is in the using of a thing; will not any strong bridge fall down in
time, if we do nothing but beat at the bottom: A Nose of Buff would not last
always Sir, especially if it came in to th'Camp once.


Ward. But Sordido, how shall we do to make her laugh, that I may see what
Teeth she has; for I Will not bate her a tooth, nor take a black one into the
bargain:


Sord. Why do but you fall in talk with her, you cannot choose but one time or
other, make her laugh Sir.


Ward. It shall go hard, but I will: Pray what qualities have you beside
singing and dancing, can you play at Shittlecock forsooth?


Isab. I, and at Stool-ball too Sir; I have great luck at it:


Ward. Why can you catch a Ball well?


Isab. I have caught two in my lap at one game.


Ward. What have you woman? I must have you learn
To play at trap too, then you are full and whole:

Isab. Any thing that you please to bring me up too,
I shall take pains to practice.

Ward. 'Twill not do Sordido, we shall never get her mouth opened wide enough.


Sord. No Sir; that is strange! then here is a trick for your learning. He yawns.
Look now, look now; quick, quick there.

Ward. Pox of that scurvy mannerly trick with Handkercheif,
It hindered me a little, but I am satisfied.
When a fair woman gapes, and stops her mouth so,
It shows like a Cloth-stopple in a Cream-pot,
I have fair hope of her Teeth now Sordido.

Sord. Why then you have all well Sir, for ought I see
She Is right and straight enough, now as she stands;
They Will commonly lie crooked, that is no matter: Wise Gamesters
Never find fault with that, let 'em lie still so.

Ward. I Would fain mark how she goes, and then I have all: For of all creatures I
cannot abide a splayfooted Woman, she is an unlucky thing to meet in a morning;
her heels keep together so, as if she were beginning an Irish dance still; and
he wrigling of her Bum, playing the tune to it: But I have bethought a cleanly
shift to find it; dab down as you see me, and peep of one side, when her
back's toward you; I Will show you the way.


Sord. And you shall find me apt enough to peeping,
I have been one of them has seen mad sights
Under your Scaffolds.

Ward. Will it please you walk forsooth,
A turn or two by your self? you are so pleasing to me,
I take delight to view you on both sides.

Isab. I shall be glad to fetch a walk to your love Sir;
'Twill get Affection, a good stomach Sir,
Which I had need have, to fall to such course victuals.

Ward. Now go thy ways for a clean treading Wench,
As ever man in modesty peep't under:

Sord. I see the sweetest sight to please my Master.
Never went Frenchman righter upon ropes
Then she on Florentine rushes.

Ward. It Is enough forsooth.


Isab. And how do you like me now Sir?


Ward. Faith so well, I never mean to part with thee Sweetheart,
Under some sixteen children, and all Boys.

Isab. You Will be at simple pains, if you prove kind,
And breed 'em all in your teeth.

Ward. Nay by my Faith, what serves your belly for? 'twould make my cheeks look
like blown Bagpipes.


Enter Guardiano* Guard. How now Ward and Nephew,
Gentlewoman and Niece! speak, is it so or not?

Ward. It Is so, we are both agreed Sir.


Guard: Into your kindred then;
There Is friends, and Wine, and Music waits to welcome you.

Ward. Then I Will be drunk for joy.


Sord. And I for company,
I cannot break my Nose in a better action.

Exeunt. Act. 4.
Scaen. 1.
Enter Brancha attended by two Ladies. Bran. HOw go^^* your Watches Ladies?
what is a clock now?


1 Lady. By mine full nine.


2 Lady. By mine a quarter past:


1 Lady. I set mine by St. Marks.


2 Lady. St. Anthonies they say goes truer.


1 Lady. That Is but your opinion Madam,
Because you love a Gentleman of the name.

2 Lady. He Is a true Gentleman then.


1 Lady. So may he be
That comes to me to night, for ought you know:

Bran. I Will end this strife straight: I set mine by the Sun,
I love to set by the best, one shall not then
Be troubled to set often:

2 Lady You do wisely in it.


Bran. If I should set my Watch as some Girls do
By every clock in the Town, 'twould never go true;
And too much turning of the Dials point,
Or tampring with the Spring, might in small time
Spoil the whole work too, here it wants of nine now.

1 Lady. It does indeed forsooth; mine is nearest truth yet.


2 Lady. Yet I have found her lying with an Advocate, which showed
Like two false clocks together in one Parish.

Bran. So now I thank you Ladies, I desire
A while to be alone.

1 Lady. And I am no body,
Methinks, unless I have one or other with me.
Faith my desire and hers, will never be sisters.

Exit Ladies Bran. How strangely woman's fortune comes about,
This was the farthest way to come to me,
All would have judged, that knew me born in Venice
And there with many jealous eyes brought up,
That never thought they had me sure enough;
But when they were upon me, yet my hap
To meet it here, so far off from my birthplace,
My friends, or kindred, it is not good in sadness,
To keep a maid so strict in her young days,
Restraint breeds wandering thoughts, as many fasting days
A great desire to see flesh stirring again:
I Will never use any Girl of mine so strictly,
How ever they are kept, their fortunes find 'em out,
I see it in me, if they be got in Court,
I Will never forbid 'em the Country, nor the Court,
Though they be born i'ch' Country, they will come to it,
And fetch their falls a thousand mile about,
Where one would little think on it.

Enter Leantio. Lean. I long to see how my despiser looks,
Now she is come here to Court; these are her lodgings,
She Is simply now advanced: I took her out
Of no such window, I remember first,
That was a great deal lower, and less carved.

Bran. How now? What Silk worm's this, i'ch' name of pride,
What, is it he?

Lean. A bow in the ham to your greatness;
You must have now three legs, I take it, must you not?

Bran. Then I must take another, I shall want else
The service I should have; you have but two there.

Lean. You Are richly placed.


Bran. Methinks you are wondrous brave Sir.


Lean. A sumptuous lodging.


Bran. You Have an excellent Suit there.


Lean. A Chair of Velvet.


Bran. Is your cloak lined through Sir.


Lean. You Are very stately here.


Bran. Faith something proud Sir.


Lean. Stay, stay, let us see your Cloth of silver Slippers?


Bran. Who Is your Shoemaker, h'as made you a neat Boot.


Lean. Will you have a pair,
The Duke will lend you Spurs.

Bran. Yes, when I ride.


Lean. It Is a brave life you lead.


Bran. I could never see you
In such good clothes in my time.

Lean. In your time?


Bran. Sure I think Sir
We both thrive best asunder.

Lean. You Are a whore.


Bran. Fear nothing Sir.


Lean. An impudent spightful strumpet.


Bran. Oh Sir, you give me thanks for your Captainship;
I thought you had forgot all your good manners.

Lean. And to spite thee as much, look there, there read,
Vex, gnaw, thou shall find there I am not lovestarv'd.
The world was never yet so cold, or pitiless,
But there was ever still more charity found out,
Then at one proud fools door; and 'twere hard 'faith,
If I could not pass that: Read to thy shame there;
A cheerful and a beauteous Benefactor too,
As ever erected the good works of love.

Bran. Lady Livia!
Is It possible? Her worship was my Pandress,
She dote, and send and give, and all to him!
Why here is a Baud plagued home; you are simply happy Sir,
Yet I Will not envy you.

Lean. No Court-Saint, not thou!
You keep some friend of a new fashion;
There Is no harm in your Devil, he is a suckling,
But he will breed teeth shortly, will he not?

Bran. Take heed you play not then too long with him.


Lean. Yes, and the great one too: I shall find time
To play a hot religious bout with some of you,
And perhaps drive you and your course of sins
To their eternal Kennels; I speak softly now,
It Is manners in a noble Woman's lodgings,
And I well knew all my degrees of duty.
But come I to your everlasting parting once,
Thunder shall seem soft music to that tempest.

Bran 'Twas said last week there would be change of weather,
When the Moon hung so, and belike you heard it?

Lean. Why here is sin made, and never a conscience put to it;
A Monster with all Forehead, and no Eyes.
Why do I talk to thee of Sense or Virtue,
That art as dark as death? and as much madness
To set light before thee, as to lead blind folks
To see the Monuments, which they may smell as soon
As they behold; Marry oft-times their heads
For want of light, may feel the hardness of 'em.
So shall thy blind pride my revenge and anger,
That can not see it now; and it may fall
At such an hour, when thou least see of all;
So to an ignorance darker then thy womb,
I leave thy perjured soul: A plague will come.

Exit: Bran. Get you gone first, and then I fear no greater,
Nor thee will I fear long; I Will have this sauciness
Soon banished from these lodgings, and the rooms
Perfumed well after the corrupt air it leaves:
His breath has made me almost sick in troth,
A poor base start up! Life! because has got
Fair clothes by foul means, comes to rail, and show 'em.

Enter the Duke: Duke. Who Is that?


Bran. Cry you mercy Sir.


Duke. Prithee who is that?


Bran. The former thing my Lord, to whom you gave
The Captainship; he eats his meat with grudging still.

Duke. Still!


Bran. He comes vaunting here of his new love,
And the new clothes she gave him; Lady Livia.
Who but she now his Mistress?

Duke. Lady Livia?
Be sure of what you say.

Bran. He showed me her name Sir,
In perfumed Paper, her Vows, her Letter,
With an intent to spite me; so his heart said,
And his threats made it good; they were as spightful
As ever malice uttered, and as dangerous,
Should his hand follow the copy.

Duke. But that must not;
Do not you vex your mind, prithee to Bed, go
All shall be well and quiet.

Bran. I love peace Sir.


Exit. Duke. And so do all that love; take you no care for it,
It shall be still provided to your hand: Who Is near us there.

Enter Messenger. Mess. My Lord.


Duke. Seek out Hippolito,
Brother to Lady Livia, with all speed.

Mess. He was the last man I saw, my Lord.


Exit. Duke. Make haste.
He is a blood soon stirred, and as he is quick
To apprehend a wrong, he is bold, and sudden
In bringing forth a ruin: I know likewise
The reputation of his Sisters honor:
As dear to him as lifeblood to his heart;
Beside I Will flatter him with a goodness to her,
Which I now thought on, but never meant to practice.
(Because I know her base) and that wind drives him.
The ulcerous reputation feels the poyse,
If lightest wrongs, as sores are vexed with flies:
He comes, Hippolito welcome.

Enter Hippolito. Hip. My loved Lord.


Duke. How does that lusty Widow, thy kind Sister*;
Is she not sped yet of a second husband?
A bedfellow she has, I ask not that,
I know she is sped of him.

Hip. Of him my Lord:


Duke. Yes of a bedfellow; is the news so strange to you?


Hip. I hope it is so to all.


Duke. I wish it were Sir;
But it is confessed too fast, her ignorant pleasures
Only by Lust instructed, have received
Into their services, an impudent Boaster,
One that does raise his glory from her shame,
And tells the midday Sun, what is done in darkness;
Yet blinded with her appetite, wastes her wealth,
Buys her disgraces at a dearer rate,
Then bounteous housekeepers purchase their honor.
Nothing sads me so much, as that in love
To thee, and to thy blood, I had picked out*
A worthy match for her, the great Vincentio,
High in our favor, and in all men's thoughts.

Hip. Oh thou destruction of all happy fortunes,
Unsated blood! know you the name my Lord
Of her abuser?

Duke. One Leantio.


Hip. He Is a Factor.


Duke. He never made so brave a voyage by his own talk.


Hip. The poor old widows son;
I humbly take my leave.

Duke. I see it is done:
Give her good counsel, make her see her error,
I know she will hearken to you.

Hip. Yes my Lord,
I make no doubt, as I shall take the course,
Which she shall never know till it be acted;
And when she wakes to honor, then she will thank me for it.
I Will imitate the pities of old Surgeons.
To this lost limb, who ere they show their art,
Cast one asleep, then cut the diseased part.
So out of love to her I pity most,
She shall not feel him going till he is lost,
Then she will commend the cure.

Exit. Duke. The great cure's past;
I count this done already; his wrath's sure,
And speaks an injury deep; farewell Leantio.
This place will never hear thee murmur more.
Our noble Brother welcome!

Enter Lord Cardinal attended. Card. Set those lights down:
Depart till you be called.

Duke. There Is serious business
Fixed in his look, nay, it enclines a little
To the dark color of a coffeehouse.
Brother, what is it commands your eye so powerfully?
Speak, you seem lost.

Card. The thing I look on seems so
To my eyes lost for ever.

Duke. You look on me.


Card. What a grief it is to a religious feeling,
To think a man should have a friend so goodly,
So wise, so noble, nay, a Duke, a Brother,
And all this certainly damned?

Duke. How!


Card. It Is no wonder,
If your great sin can do it; dare you look up
For thinking of a vengeance? dare you sleep
For fear of never waking, but to death,
And dedicate unto a strumpets love
The strength of your affections, zeal and health?
Here you stand now; can you assure your pleasures,
You shall once more enjoy her, but once more?
Alas you cannot; what a misery it is then
To be more certain of eternal death,
Then of a next embrace? nay, shall I show you
How more unfortunate you stand in sin,
Then the love private man; all his offenses,
Like enclosed grounds, keep but about himself,
And seldom stretch beyond his own souls bounds;
And when a man grows miserable, it is some comfort
When he is no further charged, then with himself;
It Is a sweet ease to wretchedness: But great man,
Every sin thou commit'st, shows like a flame
Upon a Mountain, it is seen far about,
And with a big wind made of popular breath,
The sparkles fly through Cities: Here one takes,
Another catches there, and in short time
Waste all to cinders: But remember still
What burnt the Valleys first, came from the Hill;
Every offense draws his particular pain,
But it is example proves the great man's bane.
The sins of mean men, lie like scattered parcels
Of an unperfect bill; but when such fall,
Then comes example, and that sums up all:
And this your reason grants, if men of good lives,
Who by their virtuous actions stir up others
To noble and religious imitation,
Receive the greater glory after death,
As sin must needs confess; what may they feel
In height of torments, and in weight of vengeance,
Not only they themselves, not doing well,
But sets a light up to show men to Hell?

Duke. If you have done, I have, no more sweet Brother.


Card. I know time spent in goodness, is too tedious;
This had not been a moments space in Lust now;
How dare you venture on eternal pain,
That cannot bear a minutes reprehension?
Methinks you should endure to hear that talked of
Which you so strive to suffer. Oh my Brother!
What were you, if you were taken now,
My heart weeps blood to think on it, it is a work
Of infinite mercy, (you can never merit)
That yet you are not death-struck, no not yet:
I dare not stay you long, for fear you should not
Have time enough allowed you to repent in.
There Is but this Wall betwixt you and destruction,
When you are at strongest, and but poor thin clay.
Think upon it Brother, can you come so near it,
For a fair strumpets love, and fall into
A torment that knows neither end nor bottom
For beauty; but the deepness of a skin,
And that not of their own neither: Is she a thing
Whom sickness dare not visit, or age look on,
Or death resist, does the worm shun her grave?
If not (as your soul knows it) why should Lust
Bring man to lasting pain, for rotten dust?

Duke. Brother of spotless honor, let me weep
The first of my repentance in thy bosom,
And show the blessed fruits of a thankful spirit;
And if I ere keep woman more unlawfully,
May I want penitence, at my greatest need.
And wisemen know there is no barren place,
Threatens more famine, then a dearth in grace.

Card. Why here is a conversion, is at this time Brother
Sung for a Himn in Heaven; and at this instant
The powers of darkness groan, makes all Hell sorry.
First, I praise Heaven, then in my work I glory.
Who Is there attends without?

Enter Servants. Serve. My Lord:


Card. Take up those lights; there was a thicker darkness,
When they came first: The peace of a fair Soul
Keep with my noble Brother.

Exit Cardinal, etc. Duke. Joys be with you Sir:
She lies alone to night for it, and must still,
Though it be hard to conquer, but I have vowed
Never to know her as a strumpet more,
And I must save my oath; if Fury fail not,
Her husband dies to night, or at the most,
Lives not to see the morning spent to morrow;
Then will I make her lawfully mine own,
Without this sin and horror. Now I Am chidden,
For what I shall enjoy then unforbidden,
And I Will not freeze in Stoves; it is but a while,
Live like a hopeful Bridegroom, chaste from flesh;
And pleasure then will seem new, fair and fresh.

Exit. Scaen 2.
Enter Hippolito. Hip: The morning so far wasted, yet his baseness
So impudent? See if the very Sun do not blush at him!
Dare he do thus much, and know me alive!
Put case one must be vicious, as I know my self
Monstrously guilty, there is a blind time made for it,
He might use only that, 'twere conscionable:
Art, silence, closeness, subtlety, and darkness,
Are fit for such a business; but there is no pity
To be bestowed on an apparent sinner,
An impudent daylight Leacher; the great zeal
I bear to her advancement in this match
With Lord Vincentio, as the Duke has wrought it,
To the perpetual honor of our house,
Puts fire into my blood, to purge the air
Of this corruption, fear it spread too far,
And poison the whole hopes of this fair fortune.
I love her good so dearly, that no Brother
Shall venture farther for a Sisters glory,
Then I for her preferment.

Enter Leantio, and a Page. Lean. Once again
I Will see that glistring Whore, shines like a Serpent,
Now the Court Sun's upon her: Page!

Page. Anon Sir!
I Will go in state too; see the Coach be ready.

Lean. I Will hurry away presently.


Hip. Yes you shall hurry,
And the Devil after you; take that at setting forth.
Now, and you will draw, we are upon equal terms Sir.
Thou took'st advantage of my name in honor,
Upon my Sister* I never saw the stroke
Come, till I found my reputation bleeding;
And therefore count it I no sin to valor
To serve thy lust so: Now we are of even hand,
Take your best course against me. You must die.

Lean. How close sticks Envy to man's happiness?
When I was poor, and little cared for life,
I had no such means offered me to die,
No man's wrath minded me: Slave, I turn this to thee,
To call thee to account, for a wound lately
Of a base stamp upon me.

Hip. 'T was most fit
For a base mettle. Come and fetch one now
More noble then, for I will use thee sairer
Then thou have done thine soul, or our honor;
And there I think it is for thee.

Within. Help, help, Oh part 'em.


Lean. False wife! I feel now thou have praid heartily for me;
Rise Strumpet by my fall, thy Lust may reign now;
My heart-string, and the marriage knot that tied thee,
Breaks both together.

Hip. There I heard the sound on it,
And never like'd string better.

Enter Guardiano, Livia, Isabella, Ward, and Sordido: Live. It Is my Brother,
Are you hurt Sir?

Hip. Not any thing.


Live. Blessed fortune,
Shift for thy self; what is he thou have killed?

Hip. Our honors enemy.


Guard. Know you this man Lady?


Live. Leantio? My loves joy? wounds stick upon thee
As deadly as thy sins; art thou not hurt?
The Devil take that fortune, and he dead,
Drop plagues into thy bowels without voice,
Secret, and fearful: Run for Officers,
Let him be apprehended with all speed,
For fear he escape away; lay hands on him.
We cannot be too sure, it is wilful murder;
You do Heavens vengeance, and the Law just service.
You know him not as I do, he is a villain,
As monstrous as a prodigy, and as dreadful:

Hip. Will you but entertain a noble patience,
Till you but hear the reason worthy Sister!

Live. The reason! that is a jest Hell falls a laughing at:
Is there a reason found for the destruction
Of our more lawful loves? and was there none
To kill the black Lust twixt thy Niece and thee,
That has kept close so long?

Guard. How Is that good Madam?


Live. Too true Sir, there she stands, let her deny't;
The deed cries shortly in the Midwifes arms,
Unless the parents sins strike it still-born;
And if you be not deaf, and ignorant,
You Will hear strange notes ere long: Look upon me Wench!
'Twas I betrayed thy honor subtly to him
Under a false tale; it lights upon me now;
His arm has paid me home upon thy breast,
My sweet beloved Leantio!

Guard. Was my judgment
And care in choice, so dev'llishly abused,
So beyond shamefully -- All the world will grin at me.

Ward. Oh Sordido, Sordido, I Am damned, I Am damned!


Sord. Damned, why Sir!


Ward. One of the wicked; do not see it, a Cuckold, a plain rebrobate Cuckold.


Sord. Nay; and you be damned for that! be of good cheer Sir,
You Have gallant company of all professions; I Will have a wife
Next Sunday too, because I Will along with you my self.

Ward. That will be some comfort yet.


Live. You Sir, that bear your load of injuries,
As I of sorrows, lend me your grieved strength
To this sad burden; who in life wore actions,
Flames were not nimbler: We will talk of things*
May have the luck to break our hearts together.

Guard. I Will list to nothing, but revenge and anger,
Whose counsels I will follow.

Exeunt Livia and Guardiano. Sord. A wife quoth'a!
Here Is a sweet Plumb-tree of your Gardiner's graffing!

Ward. Nay there is a worse name belongs to this fruit yet, and you could hit
on it, a more open one: For he that marries a whore, looks like a fellow bound
all his life time to a Medler-tree, and that is good stuff; it is no sooner ripe,
but it looks rotten; and so do some Queans at nineteen. A pox on it, I thought
there was some knavery a broach, for something stirred in her belly, the first
night I lay with her.


Sord. What, what Sir!


Ward. This is she brought up so courtly, can sing, and dance, and tumble too,
methinks, I Will never marry wife again, that has so many qualities.


Sord. Indeed they are seldom good Master; for likely when they are taught so
many, they will have one trick more of their own finding out. Well, give me a
wench but with one good quality, to lie with none but her husband, and that is
bringing up enough for any woman breathing.


Ward. This was the fault, when she was tend'red to me; you never looked to
this.


Sord. Alas, how would you have me see through a great Farthingal Sir! I cannot
peep through a Millstone, or in the going, to see what is done in the bottom.


Ward. Her father praised her Breast, sh'ad the voice forsooth;
I marvell'd she sung so small indeed, being no Maid.
Now I perceive there is a young Querister in her Belly:
This breeds a singing in my head I Am sure.

Sord. It Is but the tune of your wives Sinquapace, Danced in a Fetherbed;
Faith, go lie down Master -- but take heed your Horns do not make holes in the
Pillowbers. -- I would not batter brows with him for a Hogshead of Angels, he
would prick my skull as full of holes as a Scriveners Sand-Box.


Exeunt Ward and Sordido. Isab. Was ever Maid so cruelly beguiled
To the confusion of life, soul, and honor,
All of one woman's murdering! I Would fain bring
Her name no nearer to my blood. then woman,
And it is too much of that; Oh shame and horror!
In that small distance from you man to me,
Lies sin enough to make a whole world perish.
It Is time we parted Sir, and left the sight
Of one another, nothing can be worse
To hurt repentance; for our very eyes
Are far more poisonous to Religion,
Then Basilisks to them; if any goodness
Rest in you, hope of comforts, fear of judgments,
My request is, I never may see you more;
And so I turn me from you everlastingly,
So is my hope to miss you; but for her,
That durst so dally with a sin so dangerous,
And lay a snare so spightfully for my youth,
If the least means but favor my revenge,
That I may practice the like cruel cunning
Upon her life, as she has on mine honor,
I Will act it without pity.

Hip. Here Is a care
Of reputation, and a Sisters fortune
Sweetly rewarded by her: Would a silence,
As great as that which keeps among the graves,
Had everlastingly chained up her tongue;
My love to her has made mine miserable.

Enter Guardiano and Livia. Guard. If you can but dissemble your hearts griefs
now,
Be but a woman so far.

Live. Peace! I Will strive Sir:


Guard. As I can wear my injuries in a smile;
Here Is an occasion offered, that gives anger
Both liberty and safety to perform
Things worth the fire it holds, without the fear
Of danger, or of Law; for mischief's acted
Under the privilege of a marriage-triumph
At the Dukes hasty Nuptial's, will be thought
Things merely accidental; all is by chance,
Not got of their own natures.

Live. I conceive you Sir,
Even to a longing for performance on it;
And here behold some fruits. Forgive me both,
What I am now returned to Sense and Judgment.
Is not the same Rage and distraction
Presented lately to you? that rude form
Is gone for ever. I am now my self,
That speaks all peace, and friendship; and these tears
Are the true springs of hearty penitent sorrow*
For those foul wrongs, which my forgetful fury
Sland'red your virtues with: This Gentleman
Is well resolved now.

Guard. I was never otherways,
I knew (alas) 'twas but your anger spoke it,
And I never thought on it more.

Hip. Pray rise good Sister.


Isab. Here Is even as sweet amends made for a wrong now,
As one that gives a wound, and pays the Surgeon;
All the smart's nothing, the great loss of blood,
Or time of hind'rance: Well, I had a Mother,
I can dissemble too: What wrongs have slipped
Through angers ignorance (Aunt) my heart forgives.

Guard. Why thus tuneful now!


Hip. And what I did Sister,
Was all for honors cause, which time to come
Will approve to you.

Live. Being awaked to goodness,
I understand so much Sir, and praise now
The fortune of your arm, and of your safety;
For by his death you have rid me of a sin
As costly as ever woman doted on:
T'has pleased the Duke so well too, that (behold Sir)
Has sent you here your pardon, which I kissed
With most affectionate comfort; when 'twas brought,
Then was my fit just past, it came so well me thought
To glad my heart.

Hip. I see his Grace thinks on me.


Live. There Is no talk now but of the preparation
For the great marriage.

Hip. Does he marry her then?


Live. With all speed, suddenly, as fast as cost
Can be laid on with many thousand hands.
This Gentleman and I, had once a purpose
To have honored the first marriage of the Duke
With an invention of his own; 'twas ready
The pains well past, most of the charge bestowed on it;
Then came the death of your good Mother (Niece)
And turned the glory of it all to black:
It Is a device would fit these times so well too,
Art's treasury not better; if you will join
It shall be done, the cost shall all be mine:

Hip. You Have my voice first, 'twill well approve my thankfulness
For the Dukes love and favor.

Live. What say you Niece?


Isab. I am content to make one.


Guard. The plot's full then;
Your pages Madam, will make shift for Cupids.

Live. That will they Sir.


Guard. You Will play your old part still.


Live. What, is it good? troth I have even forgot it.


Guard. Why Juno Pronuba, the Marriage-Goddess.


Live. It Is right indeed.


Guard. And you shall play the Nymph,
That offers sacrifice to appease her wrath.

Isab. Sacrifice good Sir?


Live. Must I be appeased then?


Guard. That Is as you list your self, as you see cause.


Live. Methinks 'twould show the more state in her diety,
To be Incenst*

Isab. 'Twould, but my Sacrifice
Shall take a course to appease you, or I Will fail in it,
And teach a sinful Baud to play a Goddess.

Guard. For our parts, we'll not be ambitious Sir;
Please you walk in, and see the project drawn,
Then take your choice.

Hip. I weigh not, so I have one.


Exit. Live. How much ado have I to restrain fury
From breaking into curses! Oh how painful it is
To keep great sorrow smothered! sure I think
It Is harder to dissemble Grief, then Love:
Leantio, here the weight of thy loss lies,
Which nothing but destruction can suffice.

Exeunt. Hoboys. Scaen 3.
Enter in great state the Duke and Brancha, richly attired, with Lords,
Cardinals, Ladies, and other Attendants, they pass solemnly over: Enter L
Cardinal in a rage, seeming to break off the Ceremony. L. Card. Cease, cease;
Religious Honors done to sin,
Disparage Virtues reverence, and will pull
Heavens thunder upon Florence; holy Ceremonies
Were made for sacred uses, not for sinful.
Are these the fruits of your Repentance Brother?
Better it had been you had never sorrow'd,
Then to abuse the benefit, and return
To worse then where sin left you.
Vowed you then never to keep Strumpet more,
And are you now so swift in your desires,
To knit your honors, and your life fast to her!
Is not sin sure enough to wretched man,
But he must bind himself in chains to it? Worse!
Must marriage, that immaculate robe of honor,
That renders Virtue glorious, fair, and fruitful
To her great Master, be now made the Garment
Of Leprousie and Foulness? is this Penitence
To sanctify hot Lust? what is it otherways
Then worship done to Devils? is this the best
Amends that sin can make after her riots?
As if a Drunkard, to appease Heavens wrath,
Should offer up his surfeit for a Sacrifice:
If that be comely, then Lust's offerings are
On Wedlocks sacred Altar.

Duke. Here you are bitter
Without cause Brother: what I vowed I keep,
As safe as you your Conscience, and this needs not;
I taste more wrath in it, then I do Religion;
And envy more then goodness; the path now
I tread, is honest, leads to lawful love,
Which virtue in her strictness would not check:
I vowed no more to keep a sensual woman:
It Is done, I mean to make a lawful wife of her.

L. Card. He that taught you that craft,
Call him not Master long, he will undo you.
Grow not too cunning for your soul good Brother,
Is it enough to use adulterous thefts,
And then take sanctuary in marriage?
I grant, so long as an offender keeps
Close in a privileged Temple, his life's safe;
But if he ever venture to come out,
And so be taken, then he surely dies for it:
So now you are safe; but when you leave this body,
Man's only priviledg'd Temple upon Earth,
In which the guilty soul takes sanctuary,
Then you will perceive what wrongs chaste vows endure,
When Lust usurps the Bed that should be pure.

Bran. Sir, I have read you over all this while
In silence, and I find great knowledge in you,
And severe learning, yet amongst all your virtues
I see not charity written, which some call
The firstborn of Religion, and I wonder
I cannot see it in yours* Believe it Sir,
There is no virtue can be sooner missed,
Or later welcomed; it begins the rest,
And sets 'em all in order; Heaven and Angels
Take great delight in a converted sinner.
Why should you then a Servant and Professor,
Differ so much from them? If every woman
That commits evil, should be therefore kept
Back in desires of goodness, how should virtue
Be known and honored? From a man that is blind,
To take a burning Taper, it is no wrong,
He never misses it: But to take light
From one that see's, that is injury and spite.
Pray whether is Religion better served,
When lives that are licentious are made honest,
Then when they still run through a sinful blood.
It Is nothing Virtues Temples to deface;
But build the ruins, there is a work of Grace.

Duke. I kiss thee for that spirit; thou have praised thy wit
A modest way: On, on there.

Hoboys. L. Card. Lust is bold,
And will have vengeance speak, er't be controld.

Exeunt. Act. 5.
Scaen. 1.
Enter Guardiano and Ward. Guard. SPeak, have thou any sense of thy abuse?
Do thou know what wrong's done thee?

Ward. I wear an Ass else.
I cannot wash my face, but I am feeling on it.

Guard. Here take this Galtrop, then convey it secretly
Into the place I showed you; look you Sir,
This is the trap-door to it.

Ward. I know it of old Uncle, since the last triumph; here rose up a Devil with
one eye I remember, with a company of fireworks at's tail.


Guard. Prithee leave squibbing now, mark me, and fail not; but when thou
hear'st me give a stamp, down with it: The villain's caught then.


Ward. If I miss you, hang me; I love to catch a villain, and your stamp shall
go current I warrant you: But how shall I rise up, and let him down too? All at
one hole! that will be a horrible puzzle. You know I have a part in it, I play
Slander.


Guard. True, but never make you ready for it.


Ward. No, my clothes are bought and all, and a foul Fiends head with a long
contumelious tongue in the chaps on it, a very fit shape for Slander in the
out-parishes.


Guard. It shall not come so far, thou understandst it not.


Ward Oh, oh!


Guard. He shall lie deep enough ere that time,
And stick first upon those*

Ward. Now I conceive you Gardener.


Guard. Away, list to the privy stamp, that is all thy part:


Ward. Stamp my Horns in a Mortar if I miss you, and give the powder in
White Wind to sick Cuckolds, a very present remedy for the headache.


Exit Ward. Guard. If this should any way miscarry now,
As if the fool be nimble enough, it is certain,
The Pages that present the swift winged Cupids,
Are taught to hit him with their shafts of love,
Fitting his part, which I have cunningly poisoned;
He cannot 'scape my fury; and those ills
Will be laid all on Fortune, not our Wills,
That Is all the sport on it; for who will imagine,
That at the celebration of this night
Any mischance that hap's, can flow from spite?

Exit. Flourish: Scaen 2.
Enter above, Duke* Brancha, L. Cardinal, Fabritio, and other Cardinals, Lords
and Ladies in State. Duke. Now our fair Duchess, your delight shall witness,
How you are beloved and honored; all the glories
Bestowed upon the gladness of this night,
Are done for your bright sake.

Bran. I am the more
In debt my Lord, to loves and courtesies,
That offer up themselves so bounteously
To do me honored Grace, without my merit.

Duke. A goodness set in greatness; how it sparkles
Afar off like pure Diamonds set in Gold!
How perfect my desires were, might I witness
But a fair noble peace, 'twixt your two spirits!
The reconcilement would be more sweet to me,
Then longer life to him that fears to die.
Good Sir!

L. Card. I profess Peace, and am content:


Duke. I Will see the Seal upon it, and then it is firm.


L. Card. You shall have all you wish.


Duke. I have all indeed now.


Bran. But I have made surer work; this shall not blind me;
He that begins so early to reprove,
Quickly rid him, or look for little love;
Beware a Brothers envy, he is next heir too*
Cardinal you die this night, the plot's laid surely:
In time of sports Death may steal in securely; then it is least thought on*
For he that is most religious, holy Friend,
Does not at all hours think upon his end;
He has his times of frailty, and his thoughts
Their transportations too, through flesh and blood,
For all his zeal, his learning, and his light,
As well as we, poor soul, that sin by night.

Duke. What Is this Fabritio?


Fab. Marry, my Lord, the model
Of what is presented.

Duke. Oh we thank their loves;
Sweet Duchess take your seat, list to the Argument. Reads.
THere is a Nymph that haunts the Woods and Springs,
In love with two at once, and they with her;
Equal it runs; but to decide these things,
The cause to mighty Juno they refer,
She being the Marriage-Goddess; the two Lovers
They offer sighs, the Nymph a Sacrifice,
All to please Juno, who by signs discovers,
How the event shall be, so that strife dies:
Then springs a second; for the man refused
Grows discontent, and out of love abused,
He raises Slander up, like a black Fiend,
To disgrace the other, which pays him in the end.

Bran. In troth, my Lord, a pretty pleasing Argument,
And fits the occasion well; Envy and Slander
Are things soon raised against two faithful Lovers;
But comfort is, they are not long unrewarded.

Music. Duke. This music shows they are upon entrance now.


Bran. Then enter all my wishes:


Enter Hymen in Yellow, Ganymed in a Blue robe powdered with Stars, and Hebe in
a White robe with golden Stars, with covered Cups in their hands: They dance a
short dance, then bowing to the Duke, etc. Hymen speaks. Him. To thee fair
Bride Hymen offers up
Of nuptial joys this the Celestial Cup.
Taste it, and thou shall ever find
Love in thy Bed, peace in thy mind.

Bran. We'll taste you sure, 'twere pity to disgrace
So pretty a beginning.

Duke. 'Twas spoke nobly.


Began. Two Cups of Nectar have we begged from Jove;
Hebe give that to Innocence, I this to love.
Take heed of stumbling more, look to your way;
Remember still the Via Lactea.

Hebe. Well Ganymed, you have more faults, though not so known;
I spil'd one Cup, but you have filtch'd many a one.

Him. No more, forbear for Hymen's sake;
In love we met, and so let us part*

Exeunt. Duke. But soft! here is no such persons in the Argument,
As these three, Hymen, Hebe, Ganymed.
The Actors that this model here discovers,
Are only four, Juno, a Nymph, two Lovers.

Bran. This is some Antemask belike, my Lord,
To entertain time; now my peace is perfect.
Let sports come on a pace, now is their time, my Lord. Music.
Hark you, you hear from 'em!

Duke. The Nymph indeed.


Enter two dressed like Nymphs, bearing two Tapers lighted; then Isabella dressed
with flowers and Garlands, bearing a Censor with fire in it; they set the
Censor and Tapers on Juno's Altar with much reverence; this Ditty being sung in
parts. Ditty.
Juno Nuptial-Goddess, thou that rul'st o'r coupled bodies,
Ty'st man to woman, never to forsake her, thou only powerful marriage-maker,
Pity this amazed affection; I love both, and both love me,
Nor know I where to give rejection, my heart likes so equally,
Till thou set'st right my Peace of life,
And with thy power conclude this strife.

Isab. Now with my thanks depart you to the Springs;
I to these Wells of Love: Thou sacred Goddess,
And Queen of Nuptials, Daughter to great Saturn,
Sister and Wife to Jove, Imperial Juno,
Pity this passionate conflict in my Breast,
This tedious War, 'twixt two Affections;
Crown me with victory, and my heart's at peace.

Enter Hippolito and Guardiano, like Shepherds. Hip. Make me that happy man,
thou mighty Goddess.


Guard. But I live most in hope, if truest love
Merit the greatest comfort.

Isab. I love both
With such an even and fair affection,
I know not which to speak for, which to wish for,
Till thou great Arbitress, 'twixt lovers hearts,
By thy auspicious Grace, design the man;
Which pity I implore.

Both. We all implore it.


Isab. And after sighs, contritions, truest odors, Livia descends like Juno.
I offer to thy powerful Deity,
This precious Incense, may it ascend peacefully;
And if it keep true touch, my good Aunt Juno,
'Twill try your immortality er't belong:
I fear you will never get so nigh Heaven again,
When you're once down.

Live. Though you and your affections
Seem all as dark to our illustrious brightness
As nights inheritance Hell, we pity you,
And your requests are granted: You ask signs;
They shall be given you, we'll be gracious to you.
He of those twain which we determine for you,
Loves Arrows shall wound twice, the later wound
Betokens love in age; for so are all
Whose love continues firmly all their life time,
Twice wounded at their marriage; else affection
Dies when youth ends: This favor overcomes me.
Now for a sign of wealth and golden days,
Bright-ey'd Prosperity, which all couples love,
I, and makes love take that: Our Brother Jove
Never denies us of his burning treasure,
T'express bounty.

Duke. She falls down upon it,
Whas's the conceit of that?

Fab. As overjoyed be like:
Too much prosperity overjoyes us all,
And she has her lapful, it seems my Lord.

Duke. This swerves a little from the Argument though: Look you my Lords.


Guard. All Is fast; now comes my part to toll him hither;
Then with a stamp given, he is dispatched as cunningly.

Hip. Stark dead: Oh treachery! cruelly made away! how is that?


Fab. Look, there is one of the Lovers dropped away too.


Duke. Why sure this plot's drawn false, here is no such thing.


Live. Oh I am sick to the death, let me down quickly;
This fume is deadly: Oh 't'has poisoned me!
My subtilty is sped, her art h'as quitted me;
My own ambition pulls me down to ruin.

Hip. Nay, then I kiss thy cold lips, and applaud
This thy revenge in death.

Fab. Look, Juno's down too: Cupids shoot:
What makes she there? her pride should keep aloft.
She was wont to scorn the Earth in other shows:
Methinks her Peacocks Feathers are much pulled:

Hip. Oh death runs through my blood; in a wild flame too:
Plague of those Cupids; some lay hold on 'em.
Let 'em not 'scape, they have spoiled me; the shaft's deadly.

Duke. I have lost my self in this quite.


Hip. My great Lords, we are all confounded.


Duke. How?


Hip. Dead; and I worse.


Fab. Dead? my Girl dead? I hope
My Sister Juno has not served me so.

Hip. Lust, and forgetfulness has been amongst us,
And we are brought to nothing: Some blessed Charity
Lend me the speeding Pity of his Sword
To quench this fire in blood. Leantio's death
Has brought all this upon us; now I taste it,
And made us lay plots to confound each other;
The event so proves it, and man's understanding
Is riper at his fall, then all his life time.
She in a madness for her lovers death,
Revealed a fearful Lust in our near bloods,
For which I am punished dreadfully and unlooked for;
Proved her own ruin too, Vengeance met Vengeance,
Like a set match; as if the plague of sin
Had been agreed to meet here altogether.
But how her fawning partner fell, I reach not,
Unless caught by some spring of his own setting:
(For on my pain, he never dreamed of dying)
The plot was all his own, and he had cunning
Enough to save himself; but it is the property
Of guilty deeds to draw your wisemen downward.
Therefore the wonder ceases. -- Oh this torment!

Duke. Our Guard below there!


Enter a Lord with a Guard. Lord. My Lord*


Hip. Run and meet death then,
And cut off time and pain.

Lord. Behold my Lord, h'as run his Breast upon a weapons point.


Duke. Upon the first night of our nuptial honors,
Destruction play her triumph, and great mischiefs
Mask in expected pleasures, it is prodigious!
They Are things most fearfully ominous: I like 'em not.
Remove these ruined bodies from our eyes.

Bran. Not yet, no change? when falls he to the Earth?


Lord. Please but your Excellence to peruse that Paper,
Which is a brief confession from the heart
Of him that fell first, ere his soul departed;
And there the darkness of these deeds speaks plainly.
It Is the full scope, the manner, and intent;
His Ward, that ignorantly let him down,
Fear put to present flight at the voice of him.

Bran. Nor yet?


Duke. Read, read; for I am lost in sight and strength.


L. Card. My noble Brother!


Bran. Oh the curse of wretchedness!
My deadly hand is saln upon my Lord:
Destruction take me to thee, give me way;
The pains and plagues of a lost soul upon him,
That hinders me a moment.

Duke. My heart swells bigger yet; help here, break't open,
My breast flies open next.

Bran. Oh with the poison,
That was prepared for thee, thee, Cardinal!
'Twas meant for thee.

L. Card. Poor Prince!


Bran. Accursed Error!
Give me thy last breath, thou infected bosom,
And wrap two spirits, in one poisoned vapor.
Thus, thus, reward thy murderer, and turn death
Into a parting kiss: My soul stands ready at my lips,
Even vexed to stay one minute after thee.

L. Card. The greatest sorrow and astonishment
That ever struck the general peace of Florence;
Dwells in this hour.

Bran. So my desires are satisfied,
I feel deaths power within me.
Thou have prevailed in something (cursed poison)
Though thy chief force was spent in my Lords bosom;
But my deformity in spirit's more foul;
A blemished face best fits a leprous soul.
What make I here? these are all strangers to me,
Not known but by their malice; now thou art gone;
Nor do I seek their pities.

Card. O restrain
Her ignorant wilful hand!

Bran. Now do; it is done.


Leantio. Now I feel the breach of marriage
At my heartbreaking: Oh the deadly snares
That Women set for Women, without pity
Either to soul or honor! Learn by me
To know your foes: In this belief I die;
Like our own Sex, we have no Enemy, no Enemy!

Lord. See my Lord
What shift she has made to be her own destruction.

Bran. Pride, Greatness, Honors, Beauty, Youth, Ambition,
You must all down together, there is no help for it:
Yet this my gladness is, that I remove,
Tasting the same death in a cup of love.

L. Card. Sin, what thou art, these ruins show too piteously.
Two Kings on one Throne cannot sit together,
But one must needs down, for his Titles wrong;
So where lust raigns, that Prince cannot reign long.

Exeunt. FINIS.
Courteous Reader, these Books following are printed for Humphrey Moseley, at
the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard.
Various Histories, with curious Discourses in humane Learning, etc.
1 Historical relations of the united Provinces of Flanders, by Cardinal
Bentivoglio: Englished by the Right Honorable Henry Earl of Monmouth. Fol.

2. The History of the Wars of Flanders, written in Italian by that learned
and famous Cardinal Bentivoglio, Englished by the Right Honorable Henry E. of
Monmouth. The whole work Illustrated with a Map of the 17. Provinces, and
above 20 Figures of the chief Personages mentioned in this History. Fol.

3. The History of the Wars of the Emperor Justinian, with the Persians,
Goths, and Vandalls, written in Greek by Procopius of Caesaria in eight Books,
translated into English by Sir Henry Holcroft. Knight. Fol.

4. De Bello Belgico, the History of the Low Country Wars, written in Latin
by Famianus Strada, in English by Sir Robert Stapylton, Illustrated with diverse
Figures. Fol.

5. The use of passions, written by I. F. Senalt, and put into English by
Henry, Earl of Monmouth 8o.

6. Judicious and Select Essaies and observations by the Renowned and learned
Knight, Sir Walter Raleigh, with his Apology for his Voyage to Guiana. Fol.

7. The Complete Horseman and Expert Farrier in two books, by Thomas De Gray
Esquire, newly printed with additions. in 4o 1656.

8. Unheard Of curiosities concerning the Talismanicall Sculpture of the
Persians. The Horoscope of the Patriarchs, and the judgment of the Stars, by
J. Gaffarel, Englished by Edmund Chilmead, Chapter Chapter Oxon.

9. The History of the Inquisition, composed by R. F. Servita, the compiler of
the History of the Council (...)

39. Paradoxes, Problems, Characters, etc. by Dr: Donn Dean of St Paul's, to
which is added a book of Epigrams, written in Latin by the same Author,
translated by Jasper Main. D. D. 12o.

40. Ignatius his conclave, a Satyr written by Dr. Done Deane of St. Paul's.
12o.

41. A Discovery of subterraneall Treasure, viz. of all manner of Mines and
Minerals, from the Gold, to the Coal, with plain directions and rules for the
finding of them in all Kingdoms, and Countries, written by Gabriel Platt. 4o.

42. Richardi Gardener, ex Aede Christi Oxon. specimen Oratorium. 8o.

43. The Sovereignty of the British Seas, written by that learned Knight Sir
John Burroughes Keeper of the Records in the Tower. 12o.

44. Grammatica Burlesa, or a new English Grammar made plain and easy for
Teacher and Scholar, composed by Edward Burles Master of Arts.

45. Artificial Arithmetic containing the Quintessence of the Golden Rule,
the true valuation of all Annuities, also to find the distance at one station;
An Art never till now published, useful for Merchants, Gunners, Seamen, and
Surveyors, by Robert Iager of Sandwich in Kent Gent.

46. Natural and Divine Contemplations of the Passions and Faculties of the
Soul of Man in three books, written by Nicholas Moseley Esquire. 8o.

Several Sermons, with other exeellent Tracts in Divinity, written by some
most eminent and learned Bishops, and Orthodox Divines.
47. A Manual of private Devotions and Meditations sor every day in the week,
by the right reverend Father in God, Lancelot Andrews late Lord Bishop of
Winchester, in 24o.

48. A Manual of Directions for the Sick, with many sweet Meditations and
Devotions, by the right reverend Father in God, Lancelot Andrews, late Lord
Bishop of Winchester, in 24o.

49. Ten Sermons upon several occasions, preached at St. Paul's Cross, and
elsewhere, by the Right reverend Father in God, Arthur Lake, late Lord Bishop
of Bath and Wells. in 4o.

50. Six Sermons upon several occasions, preached at Court before the Kings
Majesty, and elsewhere, by that late learned and reverend Divine, John Done,
Dr. in Divinity, and Dean of St. Paul's London, in 4o.

51. Private Devotions in six Letanies, with directions and Prayers for the
days of the week and Sacrament, for the hour of Death, and the day of
judgment, and two daily prayers, for the Morning and Evening, written by Dr.
Henry Valentine, 24o.

52. A Key to the Key of Scripture, or an exposition with notes upon the
Epistle to the Romans, the three first chapters, by William Sclater, Dr. in
Divinity and Minister of the word of God at Pitmister in Somersetshire, in 4o.

53. Sarah and Hagar, or the sixteenth Chapter of Genefis opened in ninteen
Sermons, being the first legitimate Essay of the pious labors of that learned,
Orthodox, and indefatigable Preacher of the Gospel, Mr. Josias Shute. B. D.
and above 33 years Rector of St Mary Woolnoth in Lombardstreet, in Folio.

54. Christ's Tears with his love and affection toward Jerusalem, delivered in
sundry Sermons upon Luke 19. v. 41, 42. by Richard Maden, B. D. late of
Magdalen College in Came. in. 4o.

55, Three Sermons viz. The benefit of contentation, The Affinity of the
faithful, and The lost sheep found, by Mr. Henry Smith. 4o.

56. Ten Sermons preached upon several Sundays, (...) Parable Pieces written
by Sr. John Sucklin Knight, 8o.

80. Poems, Songs, Sonnets, Elegies, and Letters by John Done, with Elegies on
the Authors death, to which is added diverse Copies under his own hand, never
before in print. 8o.

81. Juvenalls 16. Satyrs translated by Sir Robert Stapylton, wherein is
contained a Survey of the manners and actions of Mankind, with Annotations, 8o.

82. Musaeus on the loves of Hero and Leander, with Leander's letter to Hero,
and her answer, taken out of Ovid, with Annotations by Sir Robert Staplyton, in
12o.

83. Poems, etc. written by Mr. Edward Waller of Beconsfield, Esquire. 8o.

84. Pastor Fido, the faithful Shepherd, a Pastoral, newly translated out of
the Original, by Mr. Richard Fanshaw, Esquire 4o.

85. Poems, with a discovery of the Civil Wars of Rome, by Mr. Richard
Fanshaw, Esquire in 4o.

86. Europa, Cupid crucified, Venus Vigils, with Annotations, by Thomas
Stanley, Esquire 8o.

87. Coopers Hill, a Poem written by Mr, John Denham Esquire, the 2d Edition with
Additions, 4o.

88. Medea, a Tragedy written in Latin by Lucius Annaeus Seneca, Englished by
Mr. Edward Sherburn Esquire with Annotations, 8o.

89. Seneca's answer to Lucilius his Quaere, why good men suffer misfortunes,
seeing there is a Divine providence, Englished by Mr. Edward Sherburn, Esquire 8o.

90. Madagascar with other Poems, by Sr. W. Davenant.

91. Poems with a Masque by Thomas Carew Esquire. Gentleman of the Privy Chamber
to his late Majesty, revived and enlarged with Aditions, 8o.

92. Poems of Mr. John Milton, with a Masque presented at Ludlow Castle before
the Earl of Bridgewater, then President of Wales, 8o.

93. Poems, etc. with a Masque called The Triumph of Beauty, by James Shirley,
Gent. 8o.

94. The Mistress, or several Copies of love-verses, written by Mr. Abraham
Cowley. 80.

95. Stepps to the Temple, sacred Poems with the delights of the Moses upon
several occasions by Richard Crashaw of Cambridge. 12o.

96. Divine Poems written by Francis Quarles 8o.

97. Clarastella, with other occasional Poems, Elegies, Epigrams, Satyrs,
written by R. Heath. Esquire:

98. Poems written by Mr. William Shakspeare.

99. Arnalte and Lucenda, or the melancholy Knight, a Poem translated by L.
Laurence. 4o.

100. The Odes of Casimire, translated, by Mr. George Hills of Newark. 12o.

101. Alarm to Poets by I. L. 4o.

102. Fragmenta Poetica or Miscellanies of Poetical Musings, by Nich. Murford
Gent. 12o.

103. Hymnus Tabaci, Authore Raphaele Thorio. 8o.

104. Hymnus Tabaci, a Poem in Honor of Tobacco Heroically composed by Raphael
Thorius, made English by Peter Hausted Mr. of Arts, Camb. 8o.

105. Olor Iscanus, a Collection of some select Poems, and Translations,
written by Mr. Henry Vaughan

106. Argalus and Parthenia by Francis Quarles.

107. The Academy of Complements wherein Ladies, Gentlewomen, Scholars and
strangers may accommodate their Courtly practice with gentile Ceremonies,
complementall, amorous, high expressions and forms of speaking, or writing of
Letters, most in fashion, with Additions of many witty Poems and pleasant New
songs. 12o.

Poems lately Printed.
107. POems and Translations, the complete works of Thomas Stanley Esquire 8o.

105. Choice Poems with Comedies and Tragedies by Mr. William Cartwright late
student of Chapter Chapter in Oxford, and Proctor of the University. The Aires and
songs set by Mr. Henry Laws, servant to his late Majesty in his public and
private Music

108. Herodian of Alexandria, his Imperial History of twenty Roman Caesar's,
and Emperors of his time, first written in Greek, and now converted into an
Heroic Poem by C. Stapleton. 4o.

109. The Card of Courtship or the Language of love fitted to the humors of
all degrees, sexes and Conditions.

Incomparable Comedies and Tragedies written by several Ingenious Authors.
110. COmedies and Tragedies written by Francis Beaumont, and John Fletcher,
never printed before, and now published by the Authors Originals Copies,
containing 34 plays, and a Masque, Fol.

111. The Elder Brother by Francis Beaumont. and John Fletcher.

112. The Scornful Lady by Francis Beaumont. and John Fletcher.

113. The Woman Hater by Francis Beaumont. and John Fletcher.

114. Thierry and Theodoret by Francis Beaumont. and John Fletcher.

115. Cupids Revenge by Francis Beaumont. and John Fletcher.

116. Monsieur Thomas by Francis Beaumont. and John Fletcher.

117. The two Noble kinsmen by Francis Beaumont. and John Fletcher.

118. The Country Captain and the Variety, two Comedies written by a person of
Honor. 12o.

119. The Sophy, a Tragedy written by Mr. John Denham Esquire, Fol.

120. Brennoralt, or the discontented Colonel, a Tragedy written by Sir John
Suckling Knight. 4o.

121. The deserving Favorite by Mr. Lod. Carlel.

122. Albovine King of Lombardy by Sir William Davenant.

123. The Just Italian by Sir William Davenant.

124. The Cruel Brother by Sir William Davenant.

125. The Unfortunate Lovers by Sir William Davenant.

126. Love and Honor by Sir William Davenant.

127. The Sophister by Dr. Z.

128. Revenge of Bussy D Ambois George Chapman

129. Byrons Conspiracy George Chapman

130. Byrons Tragedy. George Chapman

131. Contention for Honor and riches J. Shirley

132. Triumph of Peace in 4 J. Shirley

133. The Duchess of Malfy by John Webster.

134. The Northern lass by Richard Broom.

135. The Cid, a Tragicomedy translated out of French by Joseph Rutter Gent.
12o.

136. The Wild Goose Chase a Comedy written by Fr. Beaumont and John Fletcher.
Fol.

137. The Widow, a Comedy by Ben: Johnson, John Fletcher, and T: Middleton.

138. The Changling by T Middleton and Rowley. 4o.

239. Six new plays. 1. The Brothers. 2. The Sisters. 3. The Doubtful Heir.
4. The Imposture. 5. The Cardinal. 6. The Court-Secret, by I. Shirley.

140. Five new plays. 1. A mad couple well matched. 2. The Novella. 3. The
Court Beggar. 4. The City Wit. 5. The Damoiselle, by Richard Broom

141. The Tragedy of Alphonsus Emperor of Germany, by George Chapman 4o.

142. Two Tragedies. viz: Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, and Agrippina Empress of
Rome, by Thomas May Esquire.

Plays lately Printed.
143. THe Gentleman of Venice, A Tragi-Comedy by James Shirley.

144. The Politician, a Tragedy by James Shirley.

145. The Passionate Lovers in two parts, by Mr. Lodowick Carlel

146. Mirza, A Tragedy, really acted in Perfia with Annotations by Robert
Barren Esquire.

147. Three new plays, viz. 1 The Bashful Lover. 2 The Guardian. 3 The very
woman, by Phillip Massenger, Gent.

New and Excellent Romances.
148. CAssandra the Famed Romance, the whole work in five parts, written in
French, and now Elegantly rendered into English by a person of quality, Fol.

149. Ibrahim or the Illustrious Bassa, an excellent new Romance, the whole
work in four parts, written in French by Monsieur de Scudery, and now
Englished by Henry Cogan Gent. Fol.

150. Artamenes, or the Grand Cyrus, an excellent new Romance, written by that
famous wit of France, Monsieur de Scudery Governor of Nostre-dame, and now
Englished by F. G. Esquire. Fol.

151. The continuation of Artamenes, or the Grand Cyrus, that excellent new
Romance, being the third and fourth parts, written by that Famous wit of
France, Monsieur de Scudery Governor of Nostre-dame, and now Englished by F.
G. Esquire. Fol.

152. The third Volume of Artamenes or the Grand Cyrus, that excellent new
Romance, being the fifth and fixed parts, written by that famous wit of France,
Monsieur de Scudery Governor of Nostre-dame, and now Englished by F. G. Esquire.
Fol.

153. The fourth Volume of Artamenes, or the Grand Cyrus, that Excellent new
Romance, being the seventh and eighth parts, written by that famous Wit of
France, Monsieur de Scudery Governor of Nostre-dame, and now englished by F.
G. Esquire. Fol.

154. The History of Polexander, a Romance, Englished by William Brown Gent.
Fol.

155. The History of the Banished Virgin, a Romance translated by I. H. Esquire.
Fol.

156. Casandra the famed Romance, the three first books, Elegantly rendered into
English by the Right Honorable the Lord George Digby. 8o.

157. The History of Philoxipes and Policrite, a Romance, made English by an
honorable person. 8o.

158. The History of Don Fenise, a new Romance, written in Spanish by Francisco
de las Coveras, Englished by a Person of Honor. 8o.

159. Aurora Ismenia, and the Prince, with Oronta the Cyprian Virgin,
translated by Thomas Stanley Esquire.

160. Cleopatra, a new Romance, Englished by a Gent. of the Inner Temple, in 8o.

161. La Stratonica or the unfortunate Qeene, a new Romance, translated into
English.

162. Choice Novels, and Amorous Tales written by the most refined wits of
Italy, newly translated into English by a person of quality. in 8o.

163. Nissena, a new Romance, Englished by an Honorable person, in 8o.

164. Dianea, a new Romance, written in Italian by Gio Francisco Loredano, a
Noble Venetian, Englished by Sir Aston Cockaine, in 8o.

Books lately printed for Humphrey Mojeley.
165. A German Diet, or the Balance of Europe, wherein the power and
weakness, glory, and reproach, Virtues and Vices, Plenty and Wants, Advantages
and Defects, Antiquity and Modernes of all the Kingdoms and states of
Christendom are Impartially poised by James Howel Esquire. Fol.

166. Renatus des Cartes', excellent compendium of Music with necessary and
juditious Animadversions thereupon, by a person of Honor, Illustrated with
diverse figures in 4o.

167. The Scarlet Gown, or the History of the lives of all the present
Cardinals of Rome, written in Italian and Englished by Henry Cogan, Gent. 8o.

168. A discourse of constancy, by Justus Lipsius, faithfully Englished by R.
G. sometimes of Chapter Chapter Oxon. containing many sweet consolations for all that
are afflicted in body, or in mind. 12o.

169. Le Chemin abrege, or a compendious Method for the attaining of Sciences
in a short time, with the Statutes of the Academy of Cardinal Richelieu,
Englished by R. G. Gent.

170. The Academy of Eloquence, containing a complete English Rhethorick, with
common places and forms to speak and write fluently according to the present
mode, together with letters amorous and moral, by Thomas Blunt. Gent. 12o.

171. The Secretary in fashion, or a compendious and refined way of expression
in all manner of letters, with instructions how to write letters of all sorts,
composed in French by P. St de la Serre, in 8o.

172. Curia Politiae, or the Apologies of several Princes justifying to the
World their most eminent actions by the strength of Reason, and the most exact
rules of Policy, by the acurate pen of Monsieur de Scudery, Governer of
Nostre-dame, and now Englished with the figures of many Emperors and Kings.

173. (...), or observations on the present manners of the English, briefly
anatomizing the living by the dead, with an useful detection of the
Mountebanks of both sexes by Richard Whitlock M. D. late fellow of all Souls
College in Oxon 8o.

174. Scholae Wintoniensis Phrases Latinae The Latin Phrases of Winchester
School, corrected and much augmented with Poeticalls added, and four Tracts. 1.
Of words not to be used by elegant Latinists. 2. The difference of words like
one another in sound or signification. 3. Some words governing a subjunctive
mood not mentioned in Lillies Grammar. 4. Concerning (...) and (...) for
entering children upon making of Themes, by H. Robinson D. D. sometimes
schoolmaster of Winchester College, published for the common use and benefit
of Grammar schools.

175. Atheismus Vapulans, or a Treatise against Atheism rationally confuting
the Atheists of these times by William Towers, late student of Chapter Chapter Oxon.

176. De Juramenti Obligatione promissorij Praelectiones Septem. Of the
Obligation of Promissory Oaths, seven Lectures read in the Divinity Schools at
Oxford by Robert Sanderson D. D. and englished by his late Majesty's
appointment. 8o.

177. Politic Maxims and observations written by the most learned Hugo
Grotius, translated for the ease and benefit of the English statesmen by H. C.
S. T. B.

178. The perfect Horseman or the experienced secrets of Mr. Markhams fifty
years practice, showing how a man may come to be a General Horse -- man by
the knowledge of these seven Offices, Viz. The Breeder Feeder Ambler Rider
Keeper Buyer Farrier. Published with some Additions by Lancelor Thetford
Practitioner in the same Art. 4o. years.

179. Divine Poems written by Tho. Washborn. B. D.

180. Buxtorf's Epitome of his Hebrew Grammar, Englished by John Davis Mr. of
Arts.

181. Fasciculus Poematum and Epigrammatum Miscelaneorum Authore Iohanne Done.
D. D.

182. Poemata Graeca and Latina, a Gulielmo Cartwright, C. C. Oxon.

183. The Marrow of Complements, containing Amorous Epistles, complementall
entertainments, Dialogues, songs, and Sonnets, presentations of gifts,
instructions for Woers, with other pleasant passages.

Books newly Printed for Humphrey Moseley.
184. THe fifth Volume of Artamenes, or the Grand Cyrus, that excellent new
Romance; being the ninth and tenth Parts: Written by that famous wit of France,
Monsieur de Scudery, Governor of Nostredame and now englished by F. G. Esquire.

185 Elise, or, Innocence guilty; a new Romance, translated into English by
John Jennings Gent.

186 Clelia, an excellent new Romance, written in French, by the exquisite pen
of Monsieur de Scudery, Governor of Nostredame de la Guard.

187 Coralbo, a new Romance in three Books; written in Italian by Cavalier Gio
Francesco Biondi, and now faithfully rendered into English.

188 The Lusiad, or, Portugalls Historical Poem; translated into English by
Richard Fanshaw, Esquire.

189 The History of Philosophy, the first Part; by Tho. Stanley, Esquire.

190 The History of the Kingdom of Naples, with the lives of all their Kings;
written by that famous Antiquary, Scipio Mazzella, with an Addition of what
happened during the Rebellion of Massaniello; and continued to this present
year, by I. H. Esquire.

191 Mr. Howel's fourth Volume of familiar Letters, never published before.

192 Manziny, his most exquisite Academicall Discourses upon several choice
Subjects; turned into French by that famous Wit, Monsieur de Scudery, and into
English by an Honorable Lady.

193 The English Treasury of Wit and Language, digested into common places, by
IohnCotg rave, Gent.

194 Lusus Serius, a Philosophical Discourse, of the superiority of the
Creatures, by Michael Mayerus.

195 The Aphorisms of Hippocrates, with a short Comment on them; taken out of
Galen, Heurnius, Fuchsius, etc.

196 Euphrates, or, the waters of the East, by Eugenius Philalethes.

197. Hermeticall Physic, or the way to preserve and restore health, by Henry
Nollius Chemist, and Englished by Henry Vaughan, Gent.

198 Dr Valentine's private Devotions in Welsh.

199 Mantuan's Eclogues, Englished by Tho. Harvey.

200 Medici Catholicon; or, a Catholic Medicine for the Diseases of Charity;
by John Collop, Dr. of Physic.

201 Poesis Rediviva, or, Poetry revived, by John Collop, M. D.

202 The Saints Expectation and Reward; A Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Thomas
Wiborow, by Michael Thomas Minister of Stockden in Shropshire.

203 A Sermon against Murder, occasioned by the Massacre of the Protestants in
the Dukedom of Savoy; by William Towers B. D.

Books Printed this Term.
204. RAgguagli di Parnasso; or, Advertisements from Parnassus: Written in
Italian by that Faous Roman Trajano Bocalini, and put into English by the right
Honorable, Henry Earl of Monmouth.

205 A complete History of the Lives and Reigns of Mary Queen of Scotland, and
of her Son and Successor, James the Sixth, King of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland, by William Sanderson.

206 The Destruction of Troy, an Essay upon the second Book of Virgil's Aeneis,
by John Denham, Esquire.

207 Poems, viz. 1 Miscellanies. 2. The Mistress, or Love-Verses. 3.
Pin^arique Odes: 4. Davideis, or, a sacred Poem of the Troubles of David; by A.
Cowley.

208 God Incarnate, showing that Jesus Christ is the Only, and the most high
God. In four Books, containing Animadversions on Dr. Lushingtons Comentary
upon the Epistle to the Hebrews, by Edmund Porter, late of St. John's Coll.
Camb. Prebend of Norwich.

209 Ducis Buckinghami in Ream Insulam Expeditio: Authore Edovardo Domino
Herbert, Barone de Cherbury. Quam publici Juris fecit Timotheus Balduinus, L.
L. Doctor e Coll. Omn. Anim. apud Oxonienses Socius.

210. The Siege of Antwerp, written in Latin by Famianus Strada, Englished by
Tho. Lancaster, Gent.

211 The History of Philosophy, the second Part, by Tho. Stanley Esquire.

212 Clelia, an excellent new Romance, the second Volume: Written in French by
the exquisite Pen of Monsieur de Scudery, Governor of Nostredame.

213 Argalus and Parthenia, written by Francis Quarles, and Illustrated with 30
Figures, cut in Copper relating to the Story.

214 Practical Arithmetic, in whole Numbers, Fractions, and Decimals; fitted
to the several uses of Gentlemen, Merchants, or Tradesmen; by Richard
Rawlins, Professor thereof, in Great Yarmouth.

These Books are now in the Press.
215. GLossographia, or a Dictionary interpreting all such hard words, whether
Hebrew, Greek, Latin, Italian, Spanish, French, etc. as are now used in our
Refined English tongue: Also the Terms of Divinity, Law, Physic,
Mathematics, Heraldry, Anatomy, War, Music, Architecture, explained by Thomas
Blount of the Inner Temple, Barrester.

216. Astrea, A Romance written in French by Messire Honor D'Vrfe, and now
Translated into English.

217. An Introduction into the Greek Tongue most plainly delivering the
principal matters of the Grammar thereof, composed for their sakes which
understand not Latin; and yet are desirous to have competent Knowledge in that
language, by Edmund Reeve. B. D. Instructor of all the Original Tongues.

218 The Rules of the Latin Grammar construed, which were omitted in the Book
called Lillies Rules, and the Syntaxis construed by Edmund Reeve. B. D.
Instructor in all the Original Tongues.

219. Politic Discourses written in Italian by Paul Peruta, Gent. of Venice,
Englished by the Right Honorable Henry Earl of Monmouth.

221. Of the Passion of the Soul, and contentment of mind, by Peter du Moulin,
the Son. D. D.

These Books I do purpose to Print very speedtly.
222 HEsperides, or The Muses Garden, stored with variety of the choicest
flowers of Language and Learning, wherein grave and serious minds may be
refreshed with the sollid fruits of Philosophy, History, and Cosmography,
intermixed with the sweets of Poetry; And the ceremonious Courtier, The
Passionate Amorist, with his admired Lady, may gather Rarities Suitable to
their Fancies, by John Evans, Gent.

223. Mosaicall Philosophy, written in Latin by Robert Fludd, Esquire and Dr in
Physic, and by himself afterward translated into English.

224. Disquisitions upon the Nativity of our Savior Jesus Christ, by the
Honorable Sir Isaac Wake.

225 The Expedition of the Duke of Buckingham into the Isle of Ree, written in
Latin by the Right Honorable Edward Lord Herbert of Cherbury, etc. and now
rendered into English.

226. The Life of A Satyricall Puppy, Called Nim, who worrieth all those
Satyrists he knows, and barks at the rest by W. D.

227. The Anatomy of Profane Love, written in Italian, and Englished by I. S.

228. Nicholas Flammell his Exposition of his Hyeroglyphicall Figures, with the
secret Book of Artephius and the Epistle of John Pontanus concernig the
Philosophers Stone. With an Addition upon the same Subject written by Synetius
that most Learned and Famous Grecian Abbot, never Printed before.

229. Brittain's Ida written by that Renowned Poet Edmund Spencer.

230. A Discovery of the Hollanders trade of Fishing, and their Circumventing
us therein, with the means how to make profit of the fishing, by which they
have made and yet do reap so great a benifit, by Sir W. Munson Knight sometimes
Vice Admiral of England.

231. Sir, Charles Cornwallis his Negotiation as Leiger Ambassador for Spain.

232. A Discovery of the State of Christendom, containing many secret passages
and hidden Mysteries of the times both past and present with Historical and
Political Observations thereon by a person of Honor.

233. A Grammar Lecture with Elegies, written by Francis Beaumont Gent.

234. A Discourse touching peace with Spain and retaining the Netherlands in
Protection written by Sir Walter Raleigh Knight; presetned to his Majesty.

235. A Discourse of the War of Germany with the Lord Chancellor Bacon's
Petition and Submission to the House of Peers.

236. Andrea Palladio his four Books of Architecture treating of private
Buildings, Highwayes, Piazzas exercising places and Temples, Translated out of
Italion, by, H. L. Esquire

237: The Distresses. By Sir W. Davenant

238. The fair Favorite. By Sir W. Davenant

239. News from Plymouth. By Sir W. Davenant

240. The Seige. By Sir W. Davenant

241. The Spartan Ladies. By Lodowick Carlell Gent.

242. The Discreet Lover or the Fool would be a Favorite By Lodowick Carlell
Gent.

243. Osman the Great Turk or the Noble Servant. By Lodowick Carlell Gent.

244. More Dissemblers then Women. By Tho. Midleton, Gent.

245. Women beware Women. By Tho. Midleton, Gent.

246. No Wit Help like a Woman's. By Tho. Midleton, Gent.


