ANY THING FOR A QUIET LIFE.

A COMEDY, Formerly Acted at Blackfriars, by His late Majesty's Servants.

Never before Printed.

Written by Tho. Middleton, Gent.

LONDON: Printed by Tho. Johnson for Francis Kirkman, and Henry Marsh, and are
to be sold at the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane. 1662.

Drammatis Personae.
The Scene LONDON.

LOrd Beaufort. Sir Francis Cressingham, an Alchymist. Old Franklin, a Country
Gentleman. George Cressingham, son to Sir Francis. Franklin a Sea-Captain, son
to old Franklin, and Companion to George Cressingham. Mr. Water Chamlet a
Citizen Knaves-bee a Lawyer, and Pandor to his Wife* Selenger, Page to the Lord
Beaufort. Saunder, Steward to Sir Francis. George and Ralph, two Prentices to
Water Chamlet. A Surveyor. Sweetball, a Barber. Barbers boy. Flesh-hook and
Counter-buff, a Sergeant and a Yeoman. Two Children of Sir Francis
Cressinghams, nursed by Water Chamlet. Lady Cressingham, wife to Sir Francis.
Rachel, wife to Water Chamlet. Sib, Knaves-bee's wife, Margarita, a French
Bawd.
PROLOGUE.
HOw ere th'intents and appetites of men
Are different as their faces, how and when
T'employ their actions, yet all without strife
Meet in this point, Any thing for a Quiet Life.
Nor is there one I think that is hither come
For his delight, but would find Peace at home
On any terms. The Lawyer does not cease
To talk himself into a sweat with pain,
And so his Fees buy Quiet, it is his gain:
The poor man does endure the scorching Sun,
And feels no weariness his day-labor done,
So his Wife entertain him with a smile,
And thank his travail, though she slept the while:
This being in men of all conditions true,
Does give our Play a Name; and if to you
It yield Content, and usual Delight,
For our parts we shall sleep secure to night.
Any thing for a Quiet Life.
ACTUS I.
Enter the Lord Beaufort, and Sir Francis Cressingham. Beau. AWay, I am ashamed
of your proceedings, and seriously you have in this one act overthrown the
reputation the world held of your wisdom.


Cress. Why Sir?


Beau. Can you not see your error? that having buried so good a wife not a
month since; one that, to speak the truth, had all those excellencies which
our books have only feigned to make a complete Wife, most exactly in her in
practice, and to marry a Girl of fifteen; one bred up in the Court, that by all
consonancy of reason, is like to cross your estate: why, one new Gown of hers
when it is paid for, will eat you out the keeping of a bountiful Christmas. I am
ashamed of you, for you shall make too dear a proof of it, I fear; that in the
election of a Wife, as in a project of War, to err but once, is to be undone
for ever.


Cress. Good my Lord, I do beseech you let your better judgment go along with
your reprehension.


Beau. So it does, and can find naught to extenuate your fault, but your
dotage: you are a man well sunck in years, and to graft such a young blossom
into your Stock, is the next way to make every carnal eye bespeak your injury.
Troth I pity her too, she was not made to wither and go out by painted fires,
that yields her no more heat, then to be lodged in some bleak Banqueting House
in the dead of Winter, and what follows then? your shame, and the ruin of your
children, and there is the end of a rash bargain.


Cress. With your pardon, that she is young is true; but that Discretion has
gone beyond her years* and overtane those of maturer age, does more improve her
goodness. I confess she was bred at Court, but so retiredly, that (as still the
best in some place is to be learnt there) so her life did rectify it self more
by the Court Chapel, then by the Office of the Revels: best of all virtues are
to be found at Court, and where you meet with writings contrary to this known
truth, they are framed by men that never were so happy to be planted there to
know it: for the difference between her youth and mine, if you will read a
Matrons sober staidness in her eye, and all the other grave demeanor fitting
the Governess of a House, you will then confess there is no disparity between us.


Beau. Come, come, you read Enter Mr. Water Chamlet what you would have her to
be, not what she is. Oh Mr. Water Chamlet, you are welcome.


Cham. I thank your Lordship.


Beau. And what news stirring in Cheapside?


Cham. Nothing new there my Lord, but the Standard.


Beau. Oh that is a Monument your wives take great delight in; I do hear you are
grown a mighty Purchaser, I hope shortly to find you a continual resident upon
the North Isle of the Exchange.


Cham. Where? with the Scotch-men?


Beau. No Sir, with the Aldermen.


Cham. Believe it, I am a poor Commoner.


Cress. Come, you are warm, and blessed with a fair Wife.


Cham. There Is it, her going brave, has the only virtue to improve my credit
in the Subsidy-book.


Beau. But I pray, how thrives your New Plantation of Silkworms, those I saw
last Summer at your garden?


Cham. They are removed sir.


Beau. Whether?


Cham. This winter my wife has removed them home to a fair Chamber, where
diverse Courtiers use to come and see them, and my wife carries them up; I think
shortly, what with the store of Visitants, they will prove as chargeable to me as
the morrow after Simon and Jude, only excepting the taking down and setting up
again of my Glass-windows.


Beau. That a man of your estate should be so gripple-minded, and repining at
his wives bounty!


Cress. There are no such ridiculous things in the world, as those love money
better then themselves; for though they have understanding to know riches, and
a mind to seek them, and a wit to find them, and policy to keep them, and
long life to possess them; yet commonly they have withal such a false sight,
such bleard-eyes, all their wealth when it lies before them, does seem poverty,
and such a one are you.


Cham. Good sir Francis, you have had sore eyes too, you have been a Gamester,
but you have given it over, and to redeem the vice belonged to it, now you
entertain certain farcels of silenced Ministers, which I think will equally
undo you* yet should these waste you but lenatively, your devising new
Water-mill for recovery of drowned Land, and certain dreams you have in Alchimy
to find the Philosophers-Stone, will certainly draw you to the bottom: I speak
freely sir, and would not have you angry, for I love you.


Cress. I am deeply in your Books for furnishing my late Wedding; have you
brought a Note of the particulars?


Cham. No sir, at more leisure.


Cress. What comes the sum to?


Cham. For Tissue, Cloth of Gold, Velvets and Silks, about fifteen hundred
pounds.


Cress. Your money is ready.


Cham. Sir, I thank you.


Cress. And how does my two young children, whom I have put to board with you?


Beau. Have you put forth two of your children already?


Cress. It Was my wifes discretion to have it so.


Beau. Come, it is the first principle in a Mother-in-law's Chop-Logick, to
divide the Family, to remove from forth your sight the Object, that her cunning
knows would dull her insinuation: had you been a kind father, it would have
been your practice every day to have preached to these two young ones carefully,
your late Wifes Funeral Sermon. L'as poor souls, are they turned so soon a
grasing?


Enter George Cressingham and Franklin. Cham. My Lord, they are placed where
they shall be respected as mine own.


Beau. I make no question of it, good Mr. Chamlet. See here your eldest son,
Franck Cressingham!


Cress. You have displeased and grieved your Mother in Law, and till you have
made submission and procured her pardon, I Will not know you for my son.


George Cress. I have wrought her no offense sir, the difference grew about
certain Jewels which my Mother (by your consent) lying upon her Deathbed,
bequeathed to her three Children; these I demanded, and being denied these,
thought this sin of hers to violate so gentle a Request of her Predecessor, was
an ill foregoing of a Mother in Laws harsh nature.


Cress. Sir, understand my will moved in her denial: You have Jewels to pawn,
or sell them! Sirrah, I will have you as obedient to this woman as to my self,
till then you are none of mine.


Cham. Oh Mr. George, be ruled, do any thing for a quiet Life, your Fathers
peace of Life moves in it too. I have a Wife, when she is in the Sullens, like
a Cooks dog that you see turn a wheel, she will be sure to go and hide her self
out of the way Dinner and Supper: and in these Fits Bowe-bell is a still Organ
to her, when we were married first, I well remember, her railing did appear but
a vision, till certain scratches on my hand and face, assured me it was
substantial. She Is a creature uses to way lay my faults, and more desires to
find them out, then to have them amended: She has a Book, which I may truly
nominate her Blackbook, for she remembers in it in short Items all my
misdemeanors: As, Item such a day I was got fox'd with foolish Metheglin, in
the company of certain Welsh Chapmen. Item, such a day being at the
Artillery-Garden, one of my neighbors in courtesy to salute me with his
Musket, set a fire my Fustian and Apes Breeches. Such a day I lost fifty pound
in hugger mugger, at Dice at the Quest-house. Item I lent money to a
Sea-Captain, on his bare Confound-him he would pay me again the next morning,
and such like; for which she railed upon me when I should sleep, and that is,
you know, intolerable; for indeed 'twill tame an Elephant.


George Cress. It Is a shrewd vexation, but your discretion sir, does bear it out
with a months sufferance.


Cham. Yes, and I would wish you to follow mine example.


Franklin. Here Is small comfort George from your Father. Here Is a Lord whom I
have long depended upon for employment, I will see if my suit will thrive
better. Please your Lordship, you know I am a younger brother, and my Fate
throwing me upon the late ill-starr'd Voyage to Guiana; failing of our golden
hopes, I and my Ship addressed our selves to serve the Duke of Florence.


Beau. Yes, I understood so.


Franklin. Who gave me both Encouragement and Means, to do him some small
service against the Turk; being settled there both in his Pay and Trust, your
Lordship minding to rigg forth a Ship to trade for the East Indies, sent for
me, and what your promise was, if I would leave so great a fortune to become
your servant, your Letters yet can witness.


Beau. Yes, what follows?


Franklin. That for ought I perceive, your former purpose is quite forgotten; I
have stayed here two months, and find your intended Voyage but a Dream, and
the Ship you talk of as imaginary, as that the Astronomers point at in the
clouds. I have spent two thousand Ducats since my arrival; men that have
command, my Lord, at Sea, cannot live a shore without money.


Beau. Know sir, a late Purchase which cost me a great sum, has diverted me
from my former purpose, besides Suits in Law do every Term so trouble me by
Land, I have forgot going by Water. If you please to rank your self among my
followers, you shall be welcome, and I Will make your means better than any
Gentleman's I keep.


Franklin. Some twenty Mark a year! will that maintain Scarlet and Gold-lace,
play at th* Ordinary, and Beavers at the Tavern?


Beau. I had thought to prefer you to have been Captain of a Ship that is bound
for the Red Sea.


Frank. What hinders it?


Beau. Why certainly the Merchants are possessed you have been a Pyrate.


Frank. Say I were one still, if I were past the Line once, why methinks I
should do them better service.


Enter Knaves-bee. Beau. Pray forbear: here is a Gentleman whose business must
ingross me wholly.


George Cress. What Is he, do thou know him?


Frank. A pox upon him, a very knave and rascal, that goes a hunting with the
penal Statutes; and good for naught but to persuade their Lords to rack their
Rents, and give over Housekeeping; such Caterpillars may hang at their Lords
ears, when better men are neglected.


George Cress. What Is his name?


Frank. Knaves-bee.


George Cress. Knaves-bee!


Frank. One that deals in a tenth share about Projections: he and his partners
when they have got a Suit once past the Seal, will so wrangle about partition,
and sometimes they fall to the ears about it, like your Fencers, that cudgel
one another by Patent; you shall see him so terribly bedasht in a Michaelmas
Term coming from Westminster, that you would swear he were lighted from a
Horse-race: Hang him, hang him, he is a scurvey Informer, has more couzenage in
him, then is in five traveling Lotteries. To feed a Kite with the carrion of
this Knave when he is dead, and reclaim her, oh she would prove an excellent
Hawk for tallon: has a fair Creature to his Wife too, and a witty rogue it is,
and some men think this knave will wink at small faults; but honest George,
what shall become of us now?


George Cress. 'Faith I am resolved to set up my rest for the Low Countries.


Frank. To serve there?


G. Cress. Yes certain.


Frank. There Is thin commons, besides they have added one day more to the Week
then was in the Creation; Art thou valiant? Art thou valiant, George?


Geo. Cress. I may be, and I be put to it.


Frank. O never fear that, thou can not live two hours after thy Landing
without a quarrel. Thou must resolve to fight, or like a Sumner, thou wilt be
bastanado'd at every Towns end. You shall have Gallants there as ragged as the
Fall o'th Leaf, that live in Holland, where the finest Linnen's made, and yet
wear never a Shirt: These will not only quarrel with a new-commer when they
are drunk, but they will quarrel with any man has means to be drunk before them:
Follow my council, George, thou shall not go over, we will live here in the City.


Ceo. Cress. But how?


Frank. How? why, as other Gallants do that feed high, and play copiously, yet
brag they have but nine pound a year to live on: these have wit to turn rich
Fools and Gulls into Quarter-days, that bring them in certain payment. I have a
Project reflects upon y'on Mercer, Mr. Chamlet, shall put us into money.


George Cress. What is it?


Frank. Nay, I will not stale it aforehand, it is a new one: Nor cheating
amongst Gallants may seem strange, Why a reaching Wit goes current on
The Exchange.

Exeunt George Cressingham and Franklin.
Knaves-bee. O my Lord, I remember you and I were Students together at
Cambridge; but believe me you went far beyond me.


Beau. When I studied there, I had so fantastical a brain, that like a
Phelphare, frighted in winter by a Birding-piece, I could setle no where; here
and there a little of every several Art, and away.


Knaves-bee. Now my wit, though it were more dull, yet I went slowly on, and as
diverse others, when I could not prove an excellent Scholar by a plodding
patience, I attained to be a Petty Lawyer; and I thank my dullness for it, you
may stamp in Lead any figure, but in Oil or Quicksilver nothing can be
imprinted, for they keep no certain station.


Beau. O, you tax me well of irresolution; but say worthy friend, how thrives
my weighty Suit which I have trusted to your friendly bosom? is there any hope
to make me happy?


Knaves-bee. It Is yet questionable, for I have not broke the ice to her; an hour
hence come to my house, and if it lie in man, be sure, as the Law Phrase says,
I will create you Lord Paramount of your wishes.


Beau. O my best friend, and one that takes the hardest course in the world, to
make himself so. Sir, now I Will take my leave.


Cress. Nay good my Lord, my Wife is coming down.

Enter Lady Cressingham and Saunder.
Beau. Pray pardon me, I have business so importunes me o'th sudden, I cannot
stay; deliver mine excuse, and in your ear this. Let not a fair woman make you
forget your children.


La. Cress. What? are you taking leave too?


Cham. Yes, good Madam.


La. Cress. The rich Stuff which my Husband bought of you, the works of them
are too common: I have got a Dutch Painter to draw Patterns, which I Will have
sent to your Factors; as in Italy, at Florence and Ragusa, where these Stuffs
are woven, to have pieces made for mine own wearing of a new invention.


Cham. You may Lady, but 'twill be somewhat chargeable.


La. Cress. Chargeable! what of that? if I live another year, I Will have my
Agents shall lie for me at Paris, and at Venice, and at Validolet in Spain, for
intelligence of all new Fashions.


Cress. Do Sweetest, thou deserve to be exquisite in all things.


Cham. The two Children to which you are Mother in Law, would be repaired too,
it is time they had new clothing.


La. Cress. I pray fir, do not trouble me with them; they have a Father
indulgent and careful of them.


Cress. I am sorry you made the motion to her.


Cham. I have done: He has run himself
Into a pretty dotage, Madam, with your leave;
He Is tied to a new Law, and a new Wife,
Yet to my old Proverb, Any thing for a quiet Life.
Exit Chamlet.
La. Cress. Good friend, I have a suit to you.


Cress. Dearest Self* you most powerfully sway me.


La. Cress. That you would give over this fruitless, if I may not say this
idle, Study of Alchimy; why half your house looks like a Glass-house.


Saunder. And the smoke you make is a worse enemy to good Housekeeping, then
Tobacco.


La. Cress. Should one of your glasses break, it might bring you to a Dead
Palsy.


Saunder. My Lord, your Quicksilver has made all your more solid gold and
silver fly in fume.


Cress. I Will be ruled by you in any thing.


La. Cress. Go Saunder, break all the Glasses.


Saunder. I fly to it.

Exit Saunder.
La. Cress. Why noble friend, would you find the true Philosophers-stone
indeed, my good Houswifry should do it. You understand I was bred up with a
great Courtly Lady, do not think all women mind gay clothes and riot, there
are some Widows living have improved both their own fortunes and their
childrens: would you take my counsel, I Would advise you to sell your Land.


Cress. My Land!


La. Cress. Yes, and the Manor House up n't, it is rotten: Oh the new fashioned
Buildings brought from the Hague! it is stately. I have intelligence of a
Purchase, and the Title sound, will for half the money you may sell yours for,
bring you in more Rent then yours now yields you.


Cress. If it be so good a pennyworth, I need not sell my Land to purchase it,
I Will procure money to do it.


La. Cress. Where sir?


Cress. Why, I Will take it up at Interest.


La Cress. Never did any man thrive that purchased with use-mony.


Cress. How come you to know these thrifty Principles?


La. Cress. How? Why my Father was a Lawyer, and died in the Commission, and
may not I by a natural instinct, have a reaching that way: there are on mine
own knowledge some Divines daughters infinitely affected with reading
Controversies, and that some think has been a means to bring so many Suits into
the Spiritual Court. Pray be advised, sell your Land, and purchase more: I knew
a Pedlar by being Merchant this way, is become Lord of many Manors: we should
look to lengthen our Estates Ent. Saunder. as we do our Lives; and though I am
young, yet I am confident your able constitution of body when you are past
fourscore, shall keep you fresh till I arrive at the neglected year that I am
past Childe-bearing, and yet ever there quickening our faint heats in a soft
embrace, and kindling divine flames in fervent prayers, we may both go out
together, and one Tomb quit our Executors the rites of two.


Cress. Oh you are so wise, and so good in every thing, I move by your
direction.


Saunder. She has caught him!

Exeunt.
ACTUS. II.
Enter Knaves-bee and his Wife. Table. Kna. HAve you drunk the Eggs and
Muskadine I sent you?


Wife. No, they are too fulsom.


Kna. Away, you are a fool, how shall I begin to break the matter to her? I do
long, wife.


Wife. Long, sir!


Kna. Long infinitely. Sit down, there is a penitential motion in me, which if
thou will but second, I shall be one of the happiest men in Europe.


Wife. What might that be?


Kna. I had last night one of the strangest Dreams; me thought I was thy
Confessor, thou mine, and we revealed between us privately how often we had
wronged each others Bed since we were married.


Wife. Came you drunk to bed? there was a Dream with a witness.


Kna. No, no witness; I dreamt no body heard it but we two. This Dream wife, do
I long to put in act, let us confess each other, and I vow what ever thou have
done with that sweet corpse in the way of natural frailty, I protest most freely
I will pardon.


Wife. Go sleep again; was there ever such a motion?


Kna. Nay sweet woman, and thou will not have me run mad with my desire, be
persuaded to it.


Wife. Well, be it your pleasure.


Kna. But to answer truly.


Wife. O most sincerely.


Kna. Begin then; examine me first.


Wife. Why, I know not what to ask you.


Kna. Let me see, your father was a Captain; Demand of me how many dead Pays I
am to answer for in the Muster-book of Wedlock, by the martial fault of
borrowing from my neighbors?


Wife. Troth I can ask no such foolish questions


Kna. Why then open Consession I hope dear wife, will merit freer pardon: I
sinned twice with my Laundress, and last Circuit there was at Banbury a
She-chamberlain that had a spice of purity, but at last I prevailed over her.


Wife. O, you are an ungracious husband.


Kna. I have made a vow never to ride abroad but in thy company; Oh a little
drink makes me clamber like a Monkey: now sweet wife, you have been an out-lyer
too, which is best feed in the Forest, or in the Purlewes?


Wife. A foolish mind of you in this.


Kna. Nay sweet Love, confess freely, I have given you the example.


Wife. Why you know I went last year to Sturbidge-Fair.


Kna. Yes.


Wife. And being in Cambridge, a handsome Scholar, one of Emanuel College, fell
in love with me.


Kna. O you sweet-breathed Monkey.


Wife. Go hang, you are so boisterous.


Kna. But did this Scholar show thee his Chamber?


Wife. Yes.


Kna. And did thou like him?


Wife. Like him! oh he had the most enticingst straw-colour'd Beard, a woman
with black eyes would have loved him like Jeat: he was the finest man with a
formal wit; and he had a fine dog that sure was whelpt in the College, for he
understood Latin.


Kna. Pue wawe, this is nothing, till I know what he did in's Chamber.


Wife. He burnt Wormwood in it, to kill the Fleas in the Rushes.


Kna. But what did he to thee there?


Wife. Some five and twenty years hence I may chance tell you. Fie upon you,
what tricks? what crotchets are these? have you placed any body behind the
Arras to hear my Confession? I heard one in England got a Divorce from's wife
by such a trick; were I disposed now, I would make you as mad. You shall see me
play the Changling.


Kna. No, no wife, you shall see me play the Changling: had thou confessed,
this other Suit I Will now prefer to thee, would have been dispatched in a trice.


Wife. And what is that sir?


Kna. Thou will wonder at it four and twenty years longer then nine days.


Wife. I would very fain hear it.


Kna. There is a Lord o'th Court, upon my credit a most dear, honorable Friend
of mine, that mustlye with thee. Do you laugh? it is not come to that, you will
laugh when you know who it is.


Wife. Are you stark mad?


Kna. On my Religion I have past my word for it, it is the Lord Beaufort, thou
art made happy for ever, the generous and bountiful Lord Beaufort: you being
both so excellent, 'twere pity if such rare Pieces should not be conferred, and
sampled together.


Wife. Do you mean seriously?


Kna. As I hope for preferment.


Wife. And can you loose me thus?


Kna. Loose you! I shall love you the better: why, what is the viewing any
Wardrobe, or Jewel-house, without a companion to confer their likings? yet now
I view thee well, methinks thou art a rare Monopoly, and great pity one man
should enjoy thee.


Wife. This is pretty.


Kna. Let Us divorce our selves so long, or think I am gone to'th' Indies, or
lie with him when I am asleep, for some Familists of Amsterdam will tell you
may be done with a safe conscience: Come you wanton, what hurt can this do to
you? I protest nothing so much as to keep company with an old woman has sore
eyes: no more wrong then I do my Beaver when I try it thus. Look, this is all;
smooth, and keeps fashion still.


Wife. You are one of the basest fellows.


Kna. I looked for chiding, I do make this a kind of fortitude the Romans never
dreamt of, and 'twere known, I should be spoke and writ of when I am rotten,
for it is beyond example.


Wife. But I pray resolve me: suppose this done, could you ever love me after?


Kna. I protest I never thought so well of thee, till I knew he took a fancy to
thee; like one that has variety of choice meat before him, yet has no stomach
to 't until he hear another praise: Hark, my Lord is coming.

knock within.
Wife. Possible.


Kna. And my preferment comes along with him; be wise, mind your good, and to
confute all reason in the world which thou can urge against it when it is
done, we will be married again wife, which some say is the only Supersedeas
about Limehouse, to remove Cuckoldry.

Enter Beaufort.
Beau. Come, are you ready to attend me to the Court?


Kna. Yes my Lord.


Beau. Is this fair one, your wife?


Kna. At your Lordships service; I will look up some Writings, and return
presently.

Exit Knaves-bee.
Wife. To see and the base fellow do not leave's alone too!


Beau. It Is an excellent habit this, where were you born, Sweet?


Wife. I am a Suffolk woman, my Lord.


Beau. Believe it, every Country you breath on, is the sweeter for you: Let me
see your hand. The Case is loath to part with the Jewel: Fairest one, I have
skill in Palmestry.


Wife. Good my Lord, what do you find there?


Beau. In good earnest I do find written here, all my good fortune lies in
your hand.


Wife. You Will keep a very bad House then, you may see by the smalness of the
Table.


Beau. Who is your Sweetheart?


Wife. Sweetheart!


Beau. Yes, come, I must sift you to know it.


Wife. I am a Sieve too course for your Lordships Manchet.


Beau. Nay, pray you tell me, for I see your husband is an unhandsom fellow.


Wife. Oh my Lord, I took him by weight, not fashion: Goldsmiths Wives taught
me that way of bargain, and some Ladies swerve not to follow the example.


Beau. But will you not tell me who is your private friend?


Wife. Yes, and you will tell me who is yours.


Beau. Shall I show you her?


Wife. Yes, when will you?


Beau. Instantly, look you there you may see her.


Wife. I Will break the glass, it is now worth nothing.


Beau. Why?


Wife. You have made it a flattering one.


Beau. I have a Summer House for you; a fine place to flatter solitariness:
will you come and lie there?


Wife. No my Lord.


Beau. Your husband has promised me: will you not?


Wife. I must wink I tell you, or say nothing.


Beau. So, I Will kiss you and wink too,

Ent. Knaves-bee. Midnight is Cupids Holyday.


Kna. By this time it is concluded: Will you go my Lord?


Beau. I leave with you my best wishes till I see you.


Kna. This now (if I may borrow our Lawyers phrase) is my Wifes Imparlance, at
her next appearance she must answer your Declaration.


Beau. You follow it well, sir.

Ex. Beaufort and Knaves-bee
Wife. Did I not know my Husband of so base contemptible nature, I should think
'twere but a trick to try me; but it seems they are both in wicked earnest; and
methinks upon the sudden I have a great mind to loath this scurvy unhandsome
way my Lord has taken to compass me: why it is for all the world as if he should
come to steal some Apricocks my Husband kept for's own Tooth, and climb up upon
his head and shoulders. I Will go to him, he will put me into brave Clothes, and
rich Jewels; 'twere a very ill part in me not to go, his Mercer and his
Goldsmith else might curse me; and what I Will do there, a my troth yet I know
not; Women though puzzel'd with these subtle deeds, May, as in the Spring, pick
Physic out of weeds.

Exit Lady.
Enter (a Shop being discovered) Walter Chamlet, his Wife Rachel, two
Prentices, George and Ralph. George. What is it you lack, you lack, you lack?
Stuffs for the Belly, or the Back?
Silk-Grograns, Sattins, Velvet fine,
The Rosy-colored Carnadine;
Your Nutmeg hue, or Gingerline,
Cloth of Tissue, or Tobine,
That like beaten Gold will shine
In your Amarous Ladies eyne,
Whilst you their softer Silks do twine: Enter Rachel.
What is it you lack, you lack, you lack?

Rach. I do lack Content Sir, Content I lack: have you or your worshipful
Master here, any Content to sell?


George. If Content be a Stuff to be sold by the Yard, you may have content at
home, and never go abroad for it.


Rach. Do, cut me three yards, I Will pay for 'em.


George. There Is all we have in the Shop; we must know what you will give for 'em
first.


Cham. Why Rachel, sweet Rachel, my bosom Rachel, how did thou get forth?
thou were here sweet Rac. within this hour, even in my very heart.


Rach. Away, or stay still, I Will away from thee, one Bed shall never hold us
both again, nor one roof cover us: did thou bring home


George. What is it you lack, you lack, you lack?


Rach. Peace Bandog, Bandog, give me leave to speak, or I Will


George. Shall I not follow my Trade? I Am bound to it, and my Master bound to
bring me up in it.


Cham. Peace, good George, give her anger leave, thy Mistress will be quiet
presently.


Rach. Quiet! I defy thee and quiet too: Quiet thy Bastards thou have brought
home.


George and Ralph. What is it you lack, you lack? etc.


Rach. Death, give me an Ell, has one bawling Cur raised up another? two dogs
upon me, and the old Bear-ward will not succor me, I Will stave 'em off my self:
give me an Ell, I say.


George. Give her not an Inch, Master, she will take two Else if you do.


Cham. Peace George and Ralph, no more words I charge you; and Rachel, sweet
Wife, be more temperate, I know your tongue speaks not by the rule and guidance
of your heart, when you proclaim the pretty children of my virtuous and noble
Kinswoman, whom in life you knew above my praises reach, to be my bastards;
this is not well, although your Anger did it, pray chide your Anger for it.


Rach. Sir, sir, your gloss of Kinswoman cannot serve turn, it is stale, and
smells too rank, though your shop wares you vent with your deceiving lights,
yet your Chamber Stuff shall not pass so with me; I say, and I will prove.


George. What is it you lack?

Enter two children
Cham. Why George, I say.


Rach. Letcher I say, I Will be divorc't from thee, I Will prove 'em thy bastards,
and thou insufficient.

Exit Rachel.
Mar. What said my angry Cousin to you sir? that we were bastards?


Ed. I hope she meant not us.


Cham. No, no, my pretty Cousins, she meant George and Ralph; rage will speak
any thing, but they are never the worse.


George. Yes indeed forsooth she spoke to us, but chiefly to Ralph, because she
knows he has but one stone.


Ralph. No more of that if you love me, George, this is not the way to keep a
quiet house.


Mar. Truly Sir, I would not for more treasure then ever I saw yet, be in your
house a cause of discord.


Ed. And do you think I would, Sister?


Mar. No indeed, Ned.

Ent. Frank. and young Cress. disguised
Ed. Why did you not speak for me with you then, and said we could not have
done so?


Cham. No more sweet Cousins now: Speak George, Customers approach.


Young Cress. Is the Barber prepared?


Frank. With ignorance enough to go through with it, so near I am to him, we
must call Cousins, would thou were as sure to hit the Tailor.


Young Cress. If I do not steal away handsomely, let me never play the Tailor
again.


George. What is it you lack? etc.


Frank. Good Sattins sir.


George. The best in Europe, sir; here is a piece worth a Piece every yard of
him, the King of Naples wears no better Silk; mark his gloss, he dazles the eye
to look upon him.


Frank. Is he not gum'd?


George. Gum'd! he has neither mouth nor tooth, how can he be gum'd?


Frank. Very pretty.


Cham. An especial good piece of Silk, the Worm never spun a finer thread,
believe it, sir.


Frank. Gascoyn, you have some skill in it.


Cham. Your Tailor, sir?


Frank. Yes sir.


Young Cress. A good piece, sir; but let us see more choice.


Ralph. Tailor, drive through, you know your bribes.


Young Cress. Mum: he bestows forty pounds, if I say the word.


Ralph. Strike through, there is poundage for you then.


Frank. I marry! I like this better, what say thou, Gascoyn?


Young Cress. A good piece indeed, sir.


George. The Great Turk has worse Satin at's elbow, then this sir.


Frank. The price?


Cham. Look on the mark, George.


George. O. Souse and P, by my facks, sir.


Cham. The best sort then, sixteen a yard, nothing to be bated.


Frank. Fie sir, fifteen's too high, yet so, for how many yards will serve for
my Suit, sirrah?


Young Cress. Nine yards, you can have no less, Sir Andrew.


Frank. But I can sir, if you please to steal less; I had but eight in my last
Suit.


Young Cress. You pinch us too near in faith, Sir Andrew.


Frank. Yet can you pinch out a false pair of Sleeves to a Freezado Dublet.


George. No sir, some Purses and Pin-pillows perhaps: A Tailor pays for his
kissing that ways.


Frank. Well sir, eight yards, eight fifteens I give, and cut it.


Cham. I cannot truly, sir.


George. My Master must be no Subsidy-man sir, if he take such fifteens.


Frank. I am at highest sir, if you can take money.


Cham. Well sir, I Will give you the buying once, I hope to gain it in your
custom: want you nothing else, sir?


Frank. Not at this time, sir.


Young Cress. Indeed but you do, Sir Andrew, I must needs deliver my Ladies
Message to you, she enjoined me by Oath to do it, she commanded me to move you
for a New Gown.


Frank. Sirrah, I Will break your head, if you motion it again.


Young Cress. I must endanger my self for my Lady, sir: you know she is to go to
my Lady Trenchmores Wedding, and to be seen there without a New Gown, she will
have never an eye to be seen there, for her fingers in 'em: Nay by my fack,
sir, I do not think she will go, and then the cause known, what a discredit 't
will be to you!


Frank. Not a word more, Goodman Snip-snapper for your ears: What comes this
to, sir?


Cham. Six pound, sir.


Frank. There Is your money: will you take this, and be gone, and about your
business presently?


Young Cress. Troth Sir, I Will see some Stuffs for my Lady first, I Will tell her at
least I did my good will; a fair piece of Cloth of Silver, pray you now.


George. Or Cloth of Gold if you please sir, as rich as ever the Sophy wore.


Frank. You are the arrantest villain of a Tailor, that ever sat cross-leg'd:
what do you think a Gown of this Stuff will come to?


Young Cress. Why say it be forty pound sir: what is that to you? three thousand
a year I hope will maintain it.


Frank. It will sir, very good, you were best be my Overseer: say I be not
furnished with money, how then?


Young Cress. A very fine excuse in you, which place of ten now will you send me
for a hundred pound, to bring it presently?


Cham. Sir, sir, your Tailor persuades you well, it is for your credit, and the
great content of your Lady.


Frank. It Is for your content sir, and my charges: Never think Goodman
False-stitch to come to the Mercers with me again; pray will you see if my
Cousin Sweetball the Barber (he is nearest hand) be furnished, and bring me word
instantly.


Young Cress. I fly, sir.

Exit Cress.
Frank. You may fly sir, you have clipped some bodies wings for it to piece out
your own; An arrant thief you are.


Cham. Indeed he speaks honestly and justly, sir.


Frank. You expect some gain sir, there is your cause of love.


Cham. Surely I do a little, sir.


Frank. And what might be the price of this?


Cham. This is thirty a yard; but if you will go to forty, here is a Non pareile.


Frank. So, there is a matter of forty pound for a Gown Cloth.


Cham. Thereabouts, sir; why sir, there are far short of your means that wear
the like.


Frank. Do you know my means, sir?


George. By over-hearing your Tailor, sir, three thousand a year: but if you would
have a Petticoat for your Lady, here is a stuff.


Frank. Are you another Tailor, Sirrah? here is a knave, what are you?


George. You are such another Gentleman; but for the Stuff Sir, it is L. SS. and
K; for the turn stripped a purpose, a yard and a quarter broad too, which is the
just depth of a woman's Petticoat.


Frank. And why stripped for a Petticoat?


George. Because if they abuse their Petticoats, there are abuses stripped, then
it is taking them up, and they may be stripped and whipped too.


Frank. Very ingenious.


George. Then it is likewise stripped standing, between which is discovered the
open part, which is now called the Placket.


Frank. Why, was it ever called otherwise?


George. Yes: while the word remained pure in his original, the Latin tongue,
who have no Ks, it was called the Placet, a Placendo, A thing, or place, to
please.

Enter young Cressingham.
Frank. Better and worse still: Now sir, you come in haste, what says my Cousin?


Young Cress. Protest sir, he is half angry, that either you should think him
unfurnisht, or not furnished for your use, there is a hundred pound ready for
you; he desires you to pardon his coming, his folks are busy, and his wife
trimming a Gentleman, but at your first approach the money wants but telling.


Frank. He would not trust you with it: I con him thanks, for that he knows
what Trade you are of: well sir, pray cut him patterns, he may in the mean time
know my Ladies liking, let your man take the Pieces whole, with the lowest
prices, and walk with me to my Cousins.


Cham. With all my heart, sir: Ralph, your Cloak, and go with the Gentleman,
look you give good measure.


Young Cress. Look you carry a good yard with you.


Ralph. The best in the shop sir, yet we have none bad: you will have the Stuff for
the Petticoat too?


Frank. No sir, the Gown only.


Young Cress. By all means sir: Not the Petticoat? that were Holy Day upon
Working-day in faith.


Frank. You are so forward for a knave, sir.


Young Cress. It Is for your credit and my Ladies both, I do it sir.


Frank. Your man is trusty sir?


Cham. O sir, we keep none but those we dare trust sir. Ralph, have a care of
light gold.


Ralph. I warrant you sir, I Will take none.


Frank. Come sirrah: Fare you well sir.


Cham. Pray know my shop another time, sir.


Frank. That I shall sir, from all the shops in the Town; it is the Lamb in
Lomberd-street.

Exeunt Frank. Cress. Ralph.
George. A good mornings work, sir; if this Custom would but last long, you
might shut up your shop and live privately.


Cham. O George. But here is a grief that takes away all the gains and joy of
all my thrift.


George. What Is that, sir?


Cham. Thy Mistress, George: her frowardness sowres all my comfort.


George. Alas sir, they are but Squibs and Crackers, they will soon die; you know
her flashes of old.


Cham. But they fly so near me, that they burn me; George they are as ill as
Muskets charged with Bullets.


George. She has discharged her self now sir, you need not fear her.


Cham. No man can love without his affliction, George.


George. As you cannot without my Mistress.


Cham. Right, right, there is harmony in Discords: this Lamp of Love while any
Oil is left, can never be extinct, it may (like a snuff) wink and seem to die,
but up he will again and show his head; I cannot be quiet George, without my
wife at home.


George. And when she is at home, you're never quiet I Am sure, a fine life you
have on it: well sir, I Will do my best to find her, and bring her back if I can.


Cham. Do honest George, at Knaves-bee's house, that Varlots, there is her haunt
and harbor, who enforces a Kinsman on her, and calls him Cousin:

Restore her George, to ease this heart that is vexed,

The best new Suit that e're thou wore'st is next.


George I thank you aforehand sir.

Exeunt.
Enter Franklin, young Cress. as before, Ralph, Barber, Boy. Barb. Were it of
greater moment then you speak of (noble Sir) I hope you think me sufficient,
and it shall be effectually performed.


Frank. I could wish your wife did not know it, Cuz. Women's tongues are not
always tuneable, I may many ways requite it.


Barb. Believe me, she shall not sir, which will be the hardest thing of all.


Frank. Pray you dispatch him then.


Barb. With the celerity a man tells Gold to him.


Frank. He hits a good comparison! give my Waste-good your Stuffs, and go with
my Cousin sir, he will presently dispatch you.


Ralph. Yes Sir.


Barb. Come with me youth, I am ready for you in my more private chamber.

Exeunt Barber and Ralph.
Frank. Sirrah go you show your Lady the Stuffs, and let her choose her color,
away, you know whether: Boy, prithee lend me a Brush in the mean time: Do you
tarry all day now.


Young Cress. That I will sir, and all night too, e're I come again.


Exit young Cressingham. Boy. Here Is a Brush sir.


Frank. A good child.


Barber within. What Toby.


Boy. Anon sir.


Barber within. Why when, goodman Picklock?


Boy. I must attend my Master, sir: I come.

Exit boy.
Frank. Do pretty Lad: so, take water at Cole-harbor, An easy Mercer, and an
innocent Barber.

Exit Franklin.
Enter Barber, Ralph, Boy. Barb. So friend, I Will now dispatch you presently:
Boy, reach me my Dis-membring Instrument, and let my Cauterize be ready; and
hark you Snipsnap.


Boy. I Sir.


Barb. See if my Luxinium, my Fomentation be provided first, and get my
Rowlers, Bolsters, and Pleggets armed.


Ralph. Nay good sir dispatch my business first; I should not stay from my shop.


Barb. You must have a little patience sir, when you are a Patient; if
Prepusium be not too much perished, you shall loose but little by it, believe my
Art for that.


Ralph. What Is that sir?


Barb. Marry if there be exulceration between Prepusium and Glannce, by my
faith the whole Penis may be endangered as far as Os pubes.


Ralph. What Is this you talk on, sir?


Barb. If they be gangrened once, Testiculi, Vesica, and all may run to
mortification.


Ralph. What a pox does this Barber talk on?


Barb. O fie youth, Pox is no word of Art, Morbus Gallicus, or Neopolitanus had
bin well: Come friend, you must not be nice; open your griefs freely to me.


Ralph. Why sir, I open my grief to you, I want my money.


Barb. Take you no care for that, your worthy Cousin has given me part in hand,
and the rest I know he will upon your recovery, and I dare take his word.


Ralph. 's Death, where is my Ware?


Barb. Ware! that was well, the word is cleanly, though not artful; your Ware
it is that I must see.


Ralph. My Tobine, and Cloth of Tissue?


Barb. You will neither have Tissue nor Issue, if you linger in your malady:
better a Member cut off, then endanger the whole Microcosm.


Ralph. Barber, you are not mad?


Barb. I do begin to fear you are subject to Subeth, unkindly sleeps, which
have bred opilations in your brain; take heed, the Simptoma will follow, and
this may come to Frenzy: begin with the first cause, which is the pain of
your Member.


Ralph. Do you see my Yard, Barber?


Barb. Now you come to the purpose, it is that I must see indeed.


Ralph. You shall feel it sir: Death, give me my fifty pounds, or my Ware again,
or I Will measure out your Anatomy by the yard.


Barb. Boy, my Cauterizing-Iron red hot.

Exit boy.
Boy. It Is here, sir.


Barb. If you go further, I take my Dis-membring Knife.


Ralph. Where Is the Knight your Cousin? the Thief, and the Tailor with my Cloth
of Gold and Tissue?


Boy. The Gentleman that sent away his man with the Stuffs, is gone a pretty
while since, he has carried away our new Brush.


Barb. O that Brush hurts my hearts side: Cheated! cheated! he told me that
your Virga had a Burning-feaver.


Ralph. Pox on your Virga, Barber.


Barb. And that you would be bashful, and ashamed to show your head.


Ralph. I shall so hereafter, but here it is, you see yet my head, my hair, and
my wit, and here are my heels that I must show to my Master, if the Cheaters be
not found; and Barber, provide thee Plasters, I will break thy head with every
Basin under the Pole.

Exit Ralph.
Barb. Cool the Luxinium, and quench the Cauterizer,
I am partly out of my wits, and partly mad:
My Razor's at my heart: these storms will make
My Sweet-balls stink, my harmless Basins shake.
Exeunt.
ACTUS III.
Enter Selenger, Mris. Knaves-bee. Sell. YOu're welcome Mistress (as I may speak
it) but my Lord will give it a sweeter Emphasis: I Will give him knowledge of you.

Exiturus.
Mris. Knavesb. Good sir stay, methinks it sounds sweetest upon your tongue,
I Will wish you to go no further for my welcome.


Sell. Mine! it seems you never heard good Music, that commend a Bag-pipe: hear
his harmony.


Mris. Kna. Nay good now, let me borrow of your patience, I Will pay you again
before I rise to morrow, if it please you.


Sell. What would you forsooth?


Mris. Kna. Your company sir.


Sell. My attendance you should have Mistress, but that my Lord expects it, and
it is his due.


Mris Kna. And must be paid upon the hour! that is too strict, any time of the
day will serve.


Sell. Alas it is due every minute, and paid, it is due again, or else I forfeit my
recognizance, the Cloth I wear of his.


Mris Kna. Come, come, pay it double at another time, and 'twil be quitted, I
have a little use of you.


Sell. Of me, forsooth, small use can be made of me: if you have suit to my
Lord, none can speak-better for you then you may your self.


Mris Kna. Oh, but I am bashful.


Sell. So am I in troth, Mistress.


Mris Kna. Now I remember me, I have a toy to deliver your Lord that is yet
unfinisht, and you may further me, pray you your hands, while I unwinde this
Skain of Gold from you, 'twill not detain you long.


Sell. You wind me into your service prettily; with all the haste you can, I
beseech you.


Mris Kna. If it tangle not, I shall soon have done.


Sell. No, it shall not tangle if I can help it, forsooth.


Mris Kna. If it do I can help it, fear not, this thing of long length you
shall see I can bring you to a bottom.


Sell. I think so too, if it be not bottomless, this length will reach it


Mris Kna. It becomes you finely, but I forewarn you, and remember it your
enemy gain not this advantage of you, you are his prisoner then; for look you,
you are mine now, my captive manacled, I have your hands in bondage.

grasps the skain between his hands.
Sell. It Is a good Lesson, Mistress, and I am perfect in it, another time I Will
take out this, and learn another, pray you release me now.


Mris Kna. I could kiss you now spite of your teeth, if it please me.


Sell. But you could not, for I could bite you with the spite of my teeth, if it
pleases me.


Mris Kna. Well, I Will not tempt you so far, I show it but for rudiment.


Sell. When I go a wooing, I Will think on it again.


Mris Kna. In such an hour I learnt it, say I should (in recompense of your
hands courtesy) make you a fine Wristfavor of this Gold, with all the letters
of your Name imbost on a soft Tress of Hair, which I shall cut from mine own
Fillet, whose ends should meet and close in a fast True-love-knot, would you
wear it for my sake, sir?


Sell. I think not, truly Mistress, my Wrists have enough of this Gold already,
would they were rid on it yet: pray yuo have done, in troth I Am weary.


Mris Kna. And what a virtue is here expressed in you, which had layn hid but for
this trial; weary of Gold, sir! Oh that the close Engrossers of this Treasure
could be so free to put it off of hand, what a new mended world would here be!
It shows a generous condition in you, in sooth I think I shall love you dearly
for it.


Sell. But if they were in prison, as I am, they would be glad to buy their
freedom with it.


Mris Kna. Surely no, there are that rather then release this dear companion,
do lie in prison with it, yes, and will die in prison too.


Enter Beausort. Sell. 'Twere pity but the hangman did enfranchise both.


Beau. Selenger, where are you?


Sell. Eene here, my Lord. Mistress, pray you my liberty, you hinder my duty to
my Lord.


Beau. Nay sir, one courtesy shall serve us both at this time; you are busy I
perceive, when your leisure next serves you I would employ you.

Beaufort puts off his Hat.
Sell. You must pardon me, my Lord, you see I am entangled here: Mistress I
protest I Will break prison, if you free me not, take you no notice?


Mris Kna. Oh cry your Honor mercy, you are now at liberty, sir.


Sell. And I Am glad on it, I Will never give both my hands at once again to a woman's
command, I Will put one finger in a hole rather.


Beau. Leave us.


Sell. Free leave have you, my Lord, so I think you may have: filthy Beauty,
what a white witch thou art!

Exit Selenger.
Beau. Lady, you are welcome.


Mris Kna. I did believe it from your Page, my Lord. Beau. Your husband sent
you to me.


Mris Kna. He did my Lord, with duty and commends unto your Honor, beseeching
you to use me very kindly, by the same token your Lordship gave him grant of a
New Lease of Threescore pounds a year, which he and his should forty years
enjoy.


Beau. The token's true, and for your sake Lady, it is likely to be bettered,
not alone the Lease, but the Fee-simple may be his and yours.


Mris Kna. I have a suit unto your Lordship too, only my self concerns.


Beau. 'T will be granted sure, though it out-value thy husbands.


Mris Kna. Nay, it is small charge, only your good will, and good word, my Lord.


Beau. The first is thine confirmed, the second then cannot stay long behind.


Mris Kna. I love your Page, sir.


Beau. Love him! for what?


Mris Kna. Oh, the great wisdoms that our Grandsires had! do you ask me reason
for it? I love him, because I like him, sir.


Beau. My Page!


Mris Kna. In mine eye, he is a most delicate youth, but in my heart a thing
that it would bleed for.


Beau. Either your eye is blinded, or your remembrance broken: call to mind
wherefore you came hither, Lady.


Mris Kna. I do my Lord, for love, and I am in profoundly.


Beau You trifle sure, do you long for unripe fruit? 'twill breed diseases in
you.


Mris Kna. Nothing but worms in my belly, and there is a Seed to expel them; in
mellow falling fruit I find no relish.


Beau. It Is true, the youngest Vines yields the most Clusters, but the old ever
the sweetest Grapes.


Mris Kna. I can taste of both sir; but with the old I am the soonest cloid:
the green keep still an edge on appetite.


Beau. Sure you are a common creature.


Mris Kna. Did you doubt it, wherefore came I hither else? Did you think that
honesty only had bin immured for you, and I should bring it as an Offertorie
unto your shrine of Lust? As it was, my Lord, 'twas meant to you, had not the
slippery Wheel of Fancy turned when I beheld your Page; nay had I seen another
before him in mine eyes better grace, he had bin fore-stal'd; but as it is,
(all my strength cannot help) beseech you your good will, and good word, my
Lord, you may command him, sir; if not affection, yet his body, and I desire
but that, do it, and I Will command my self your prostitute.


Beau. You Are a base strumpet, I succeed my Page!


Mris Kna. Oh that is no wonder, my Lord, the servant often tastes to his Master
of the daintiest Dish he brings to him; beseech you, my Lord.


Beau. You Are a bold Mischief, and to make me your Spokes-man; your procurer to
my Servant.


Mris Kna. Do you shrink at that? why, you have done worse without the sense of
ill, with a full free conscience of a Libertine: Judge your own sin, was it not
worse with a damned Broking-fee to a corrupt Husband, state him a Pandor to his
own wife, by virtue of a Lease made to him and your Bastard issue, could you
get 'em: what a degree of baseness call you this? It Is a poor Sheep-steal
provoked by want, compared unto a Capital Traitor; the Master to his servant
may be recompenc't, but the husband to his wife never.


Beau. Your husband shall smart for this.

Exit Beaufort.
Mris Kna. Hang him, do, you have brought him to deserve it, bring him to the
punishment, there I Will join with you: I loath him to the Gallows, hang your
Page too, one Mourning-Gown shall serve for both of them: This trick has kept
mine honesty secure, best Soldiers use policy, the Lions skin Becomes not the
body when it is too great, But then the Foxes may sit close, and neat.

Exit.
Enter Flesh-hook, Counter-buff, and Sweetball the Barber. Barb. Now
Flesh-hook, use thy talon, set upon his right shoulder; thy Sergeant
Counter-buff at the left, grasp in his Jugulars, and then let me alone to
tickle his Diaphragma.


Flesh. You are sure he has no protection, sir?


Barb. A protection to cheat and cozen! there was never any granted to that
purpose.


Flesh. I grant you that too, sir, but that use has hin made of 'em.


Counterb. Marry has there sir, how could else so many broken Bankrupts play up
and down by their Creditors noses, and we dare not touch 'em?


Barb. That Is another Case, Counter buff, there is privilege to cozen; but here
cozenage went before, and there is no privilege for that; to him boldly, I will
spend all the Sizzars in my shop, but I Will have him snapt.


Counterb. Well sir, if he come within the length of large Mace once, we will
teach him to cozen.


Barb. Marry hang him, teach him no more cozenage, he is too perfect in it
already; go gingerly about it, lay your Mace on gingerly, and spice him soundly.


Counterb. He Is at the Tavern, you say?


Barb. At the Man in the Moon, above stairs, so soon as he comes down, and the
Bush left at his back, Ralph is the dog behind him: he watches to give us
notice, be ready then my dear Bloodhounds, you shall deliver him to Newgate,
from thence to the Hangman; his body I will beg of the Sheriffs, for at the
next Lecture I am likely to be the Master of my Anatomy, then will I vex every
vein about him, I will find where his Disease of Cozenage lay, whether in the
Vertebrae, or in Oscox*Index, but I guess I shall find it descend from Humore,
through the Thoric, and lie just at his fingers ends.

Enter Ralph.
Ralph. Be in readiness, for he is coming this way, alone too; stand to it like
Gentleman and Yeoman, so soon as he is in sight, I Will go fetch my Master.


Barb. I have had a Conquassition in my Cerebrum ever since the disaster, and
now it takes me again, if it turn to a Megrum, I shall hardly abide the sight of
him.


Ralph. My Action of Defamation shall be clapped on him too, I will make him
appear to it in the shape of a white Sheet all embroidered over with Peccavi's:
look about, I Will go fetch my Master.


Enter Franklin. Counterb. I Arrest you, sir.


Frank. Ha qui va la, que penses vous fair Messieurs, me voles vous derober,
ie nay point d'argent: Je suis un pouure Gentilhomme Francois.


Barb. Whoop! pray you sir speak English you did when you bought Cloth of Gold
at six Nihils a yard, when Ralphs Preputium was exulcerated.


Frank. Que voules vous, me voules vous tuer; Le Francois ne sont point enemis:
voila ma bource, que voles vous d'avantage.


Counterb. Is not your name Franklin, sir?


Frank. Je na'y point de Joiaux que cestui ci; et cest a Monsieur L'ambasadeur,
il m'en voie a ces afaires et vous enpaiches mon service.

Enter Chamlet and Ralph hastily.
Counterb. Sir, we are mistaken for ought I perceive.


Cham. So, so, you have caught him, that is well: how do you sir?


Frank. Vous sembles estre un homme courtois, Je vous pry entendes mes
affairs: il y a ici deux ou erois Quenailles qui m'ont asseige un pouure
estranger, qui ne leur ay fait null mal, ny donner mauuaisse parrolle, ny tirer
mon espet; l'un me prend par vne espaule, et me frape deux Liver peisant;
L'autre me tire par le bras, il par le ie ne scay quoy: Je leur ay done ma
bource, et si ne me veuleut point Laiser aller; que feray ie Monsieur?


Cham. This is a Frenchman it seems, sirs.


Counterb. We can find no other in him, sir, and what that is we know not.


Cham. He Is very like the man we seek for, else my lights go false.


Barb. In your shop they may sir, but here they go true: this is he.


Ralph. The very same sir, as sure as I am Ralph, this is the Rascal.


Counterb. Sir, unless you will absolutely challenge him the man, we dare not
proceed further.

Enter Margarita a French Bawd.
Flesh. I fear we are too far already.


Cham. I know not what to say to it.


Marga. Bon iour, bon iour, Gentilhommes.


Barb. How now! more News from France?


Frank. Ceste femme ici est de mon pais, Madame ie vous pry Leur dire mon
pais, il mont retarge Je ne scay pour quoy.


Marga. Estes vous de France Monsieur?


Frank. Madame vay est, que ie les ay trompes, et suis areste, et n'ay null
moien de chaper quan chansant mon Language* aides moy en cest affair: Je vous
cognois bien, ou vous tenes un Bordeau; vous et les vostre en seres de mieulx.


Marga. Laises fair a moy; Este vous de Lion dites vous.


Frank. De Lion, ma chere Damme.


Marga. Ma Cousin! Je suis bien aise de vous voire en bonne disposition?

Embrace and complement.
Frank. Man Cousin!


Cham. This is a Frenchman sure.


Barb. If he be, it is the likest an Englishman that ever I saw, all his
dimensions, proportions! had I but the dissecting of his heart, in capsula
cordis, could I find it now; for a French-mans heart is more quassitive and
subject to tremor, then an English-mans.


Cham. Stay, we will further enquire of this Gentlewoman. Mistress, if you have
so much English to help us with (as I think you have, for I have long seen you
about London) pray tell us, and truly tell us, Is this Gentleman a natural
Frenchman, or no?


Marga. Ey begar, de Frenchman, borne a Lion, my Cousin.


Cham. Your Cousin? if he be not your Cousin, he is my Cousin, sure.


Marga. Ey konoshe his Pere, what you call his Fadre? he sell Poisons.


Barb. Sell poisons, his father was a Potycarry then.


Marg. No, no, Poisons, what you call, Fish, fish?


Barb. Oh, he was a Fishmonger.


Marga. Ouy, ouy.


Cham. Well, well, we are mistaken I see, pray you so tell him, and request him
not to be offended; an honest man may look like a knave, and be never the worse
for it, the error was in our eyes, and now we find it in his tongue.


Marga. Je saieray encore vne fois Monsieur Cousin, pour vostre sauuete, ales
vous en; vostre Liberte est sufisant: Je gaineray le rest pour mon devoir, et
vous aures vostre part a mon Escole: J'ay vne fillie qui parle un peu Francois,
elle conversera avec vous a la Fleur de Lice en Turnbull-street: Mon Cousin aies
soin de vous mesme, et trompes ces Ignorans.


Frank. Cousin pour L'amour de vous, et principallement pour moy, ie suis
content de m'en aller, Je trouueray vostre Escole, et si voz Escoliers me sont
agreeable, ie tireray a L'espe' seule, et si d'auenture ie le rompe, Je paiera
diz souls et pour ce vieulx Foll, ee ce deux Quenailles, ce Poullens Snip snap,
et L'autre bonnet rond, Je les voiray pendre premier que ie les voie.

Ex. Frank.
Cham. So, so, she has got him off; but I perceive much anger in his
countenance still: and what says he, Madam?


Marga. Moosh, moosh anger, but ey conosh here Lodging, shall cool him very
well, Dear is a Kinse-womans can moosh allay here heat and here spleen, she
shall do for my saka, and he no trobla you.


Cham. Look, there is earnest, but thy reward's behind: Come to my shop, the
Holy Lamb in Lombard Street, thou have one friend more then e're thou had.


Marga. Tanck u Monsieur, shall visit u: ey make all pacisie: a vostre service
treshumbement, tree, four, five fool of u.

Ex. Marg.
Cham. What Is to be done now?


Counterb. To pay us for our pains sir, and better reward us, that we may be
provided against further danger that may come upon's for false imprisonment.


Cham. All goes false I think: what do you neighbor Sweetball?


Barb. I must Phlebotomize sir, but my Almanac says the Sign is in Taurus; I
dare not cut my own throat, but if I find any president that ever Barber
hanged himself, I Will be the second example.


Ralph. This was your ill Luxinium, Barber, to cause all to be cheated.


Counterb. What say you to us, sir?


Cham. Good friends, come to me at a calmer hour, my sorrows lie in heaps upon
me now; what you have, keep, if further trouble follow I Will take it on me; I
would be pressed to death.


Counterb. Well sir, for this time we will leave you.


Barb. I will go with you, Officers, I will walk with you in the open street
though it be a scandal to me; for now I have no care of my credit, a Cacokenny
is run all over me.

Exeunt.
Cham. What shall we do now, Ralph?

Enter George.
Ralph. Faith I know not, sir: here comes George, it may be he can tell you.


Cham. And there I look for more disaster still, yet George appears in a
smiling countenance. Ralph, home to the shop, leave George and I together.


Ralph. I am gone, sir.

Exit Ralph.
Cham. Now George, what better News Eastward? all goes ill to'ther way.


George. I bring you the best news that ever came about your ears in your life,
sir.


Cham. Thou putst me in good comfort, George.


George. My Mistress, your wife, will never trouble you more.


Cham. Ha? never trouble me more: of this, George, may be made a sad
construction, that phrase we sometimes use when death makes the separation, I
hope it is not so with her, George?


George. No sir, but she vows she 'l never come home again to you, so you shall
live quietly, and this I took to be very good news, sir.


Cham. The worst that could be this, candid poison; I love her, George, and I
am bound to do so, the tongues bitterness must not separate the united souls:
'twere base and cowardly for all to yield to the small Tongues assault: the
whole building must not be taken down, for the repairing of a broken window.


George. I but this is a Principal, sir: the truth is, she will be divorc't,
she says, and is laboring with her Cousin Knave (what do you call him?) I have
forgotten the latter end of his name.


Cham. Knaves-bee, George.


George. I Knave, or Knaves-bee, one I took it to be.


Cham. Why neither rage, nor envy, can make a cause, George.


George. Yes sir, not only at your person, but she shoots at your shop too,
she says you vent Ware that is not warrantable, brayded Ware, and that you give
not London measure: women you know look for more then a bare yard: and then you
keep children in the name of your own, which she suspects came not in at the
right door


Cham. She may as well suspect immaculate Truth to be cursed Falsehood.


George. I but if she will, she will, she is a woman sir.


Cham. It Is most true, George: well, that shall be redrest, my Cousin
Cressingham must yield me pardon, the children shall home again, and thou shall
conduct 'em, George.


George. That done, I Will be bold to venture once more for her recovery, since you
cannot live at liberty; but because you are a rich Citizen, you will have your
Chain about your neck; I think I have a device will bring you together bi'th
years again, and then look to 'em as well as you can.


Cham. Oh George, amongst all my heavy Troubles, this is the groaning weight;
but restore my Wife.


George. Although you never lead hour of quiet life.


Cham. I will endeavor't George, I Will lend her Will A power and rule to keep
all hushed and still; Eat we all Sweetmeats we are soonest rotten.


George. A Sentence! pity 't should have bin forgotten. Exeunt.


ACTUS IV.
Enter Sir Francis Cressingham, and a Surveyor. Sur. Where Is Mr. Steward?


Cress. Within: what are you, sir?


Sur. A Surveyor, sir.


Cress. And an Almanack-maker, I take it: Can you tell me what foul weather is
toward?


Sur. Marry the fowlest weather is, that your Land is flying away.

Exit Surveyor.
Cress. A most terrible prognostication! All the resort, all the business to my
house is to my Lady and Mr. Steward; whilst Sir Francis stands for a Cipher: I
have made away my self and my power, as if I had done it by Deed of Gift: here
comes the Comptroller of the Game.

Enter Saunder.
Saunder. What, are you yet resolved to translate this unnecessary Land into
ready money?


Cress. Translate it?


Saun. The Conveyances are drawn, and the money ready: my Lady sent me to you,
to know directly if you meant to go through in the Sale; if not, she resolves
of another course.


Cress. Thou speak this cheerfully methinks, whereas faithful servants were
wont to mourn when they beheld the Lord that fed and cherisht them, is by cursed
enchantment removed into another blood. Cressingham of Cressingham has
continued many years, and must the Name sink now?


Saun. All this is nothing to my Ladies resolution, it must be done, or she will
not stay in England: she would know whether your son be sent for, that must
likewise set his hand t'oth' Sale; for otherwise the Lawyers say there cannot
be a sure Conveyance made to the Buyer.


Cress. Yes, I have sent for him: but I pray thee think what a hard task 't
will be for a Father to persuade his son and heir to make away his inheritance.


Saun. Nay for that, use your own Logic: I have heard you talk at the Sessions
terribly against Deer-stealers, and that kept you from being put out of the
Commission.

Exit Saunder.
Enter young Cressingham. Cress. I do live to see two miseries, one to be
commanded by my Wife, the other to be censured by my slave.


Young Cress. That which I have wanted long, and has bin cause of my irregular
courses, I beseech you let raise me from the ground


Cress. Rise George, there is a hundred pounds for you, and my Blessing, with
these, your mothers favor: but I here your studies are become too licentious of
late.


Young Cress. H'as heard of my cozenage.


Cress. What Is that you are writing?


Young Cress. Sir, not any thing.


Cress. Come, I hear there is something coming forth of yours, will be your
undoing.


Young Cress. Of mine?


Cress. Yes of your writing; somewhat you should write, will be dangerous to
you. I have a suit to you.


Young Cress. Sir, my obedience makes you commander in all things.


Cress. I pray suppose I had committed some fault, for which my Life and sole
Estate were forfeit to the Law, and that some great Man near the King should
labor to get my pardon, on condition he might enjoy my Lordship, could you
prize your Fathers Life above the grievous loss of your inheritance?


Young Cress. Yes, and my own Life at stake too.


Cress. You promise fair, I come now to make trial of it: You know I have
married one whom I hold so dear, that my whole life is nothing but a mere
estate depending upon her will, and her affections to me: she deserves so well,
I cannot longer merit then durante been placita, it is her pleasure, and (her
wisdom moves in it too) of which I Will give you ample satisfaction hereafter, that
I sell the Land my Father left me: You change color! I have promised her to
do it, and should I fail, I must expect the remainder of my life as full of
trouble and vexation, as the Suit for a Divorce; it lies in you by setting of
your hand unto the Sale, to add length to his life that gave you yours.


Young Cress. Sir, I do now ingeniously perceive why you said lately, somewhat I
should write would be my undoing, meaning (as I take it) setting my hand to
this Assurance: Oh good Sir, shall I pass away my Birthright? Oh remember
there is a malediction denounc't against it in Holy Writ: will you for her
pleasure, the Inheritance of Desolation leave to your posterity? think how
compassionate the creatures of the field that only live on the wild benefits
of Nature, are unto their young ones; think likewise you may have more children
by this woman, and by this act you undo them too: it is a strange president
this, to see an obedient son laboring good counsel to the father! But know Sir,
that the spirits of my Great-Grandfather and your Father moves at this present
in me, and what they bequeathed you, on your Deathbed they charge you not to
give away in the dalliance of a woman's bed: Good Sir, let it not be thought
presumption in me, that I have continued my speech unto this length, the cause
sir, is urgent, and believe it you shall find her Beauty as malevolent unto
you, as a red morning that does still foretell a foul day to follow: Oh Sir,
keep your Land, keep that to keep your Name immortal, and you shall see All
that her Malice and proud Will procures,

Shall show her ugly heart, but hurt not yours.


Cress. Oh I am distracted, and my very soul sends blushes into my cheeks.

Enter George with the two Children.
Young Cress. See here an Object to beget more compassion.


George. O Sir Francis, we have a most lamentable house at home, nothing to be
heard in it but Separation and Divorces, and such a noise of the Spiritual
Court, as if it were a Tenement upon London Bridge, and built upon the Arches.


Cress. What Is the matter?


George. All about Boarding your children, my Mistress is departed. Cress. Dead?


George. In a sort she is, and laid out too, for she is run away from my Master.


Cress. Whither?


George. Seven miles off, into Essex, she vowed never to leave Barking while she
lived, till these were brought home again.


Cress. Oh they shall not offend her. I am sorry for it.


1 Child. I am glad we are come home sir, for we lived in the unquietest house!


2 Child. The angry woman me thought grutcht us our victuals: our new Mother
is a good Soul, and loves us, and does not frown so like a Vixen as she does.


1 Child. I am at home now, and in heaven me thinks: what a comfort it is to be
under your wing!


2 Child. Indeed my mother was wont to call me your Nestlecock, and I love you
as well as she did.

Enter Saunder, Knaves-bee, and Surveyor.
Cress. You are my pretty souls.


Young Cress. Does not the prattle of these move you?


Saun. Look you Sir, here is the Conveyance and my Ladies Solicitor, pray
resolve what to do, my Lady is coming down. How now George, how does thy
Mistress that sits in a Wainscot Gown, like a Citizens Lure to draw in
Customers? oh she is a pretty Moustrap!


George. She Is ill baited though to take a Welch-man, she cannot away with
Cheese.


Cress. And what must I do now?


Kna. Acknowledge a Fine and Recovery of the Land, then for possession the
course is common.


Cress. Carry back the Writings sir, my mind is changed.


Saun. Changed! do not you mean to seal?

Enter Lady Cressingham.
Cress. No Sir, the Tide's turned.


Saun. You must temper him like wax, or he will not seal.


Lady. Are you come back again? How now, have you done?


1 Child. How do you, Lady Mother?


Lady. You are good children; bid my woman give them some Sweetmeats.


1 Child. Indeed I thank you: Is not this a kind Mother?


Young Cress. Poor fools, you know not how dear you shall pay for this Sugar.


Lady. What, have not you dispatched?


Cress. No Sweetest, I am dissuaded by my son from the Sale o'th Land.


Lady. Dissuaded by your son!


Cress. I cannot get his hand to it.


Lady. Where Is our Steward? cause presently that all my Beds and Hangings be
taken down; provide Carts, pack them up, I Will to my House in the Country, have I
studied the way to your preferment and your childrens, and do you cool in the
upshot?


Young Cress. With your pardon, I cannot understand this course a way to any
preferment, rather a direct path to our ruin.


Lady. Oh sir, you are young sighted: show them the project of the Land I mean
to buy in Ireland, that shall out-value yours three thousand in a year.


Kna. Look you sir, here is Clangibbon, a fruitful country, and well wooded.


Cress. What Is this, Marsh ground?


Kna. No, these are Boggs, but a little Cost will drain them. This upper part (
Map* that runs by the black water, is the Cossacks Land, a spacious country,
and yields excellent profit by the Salmon, and fishing for Herring: here runs
the Kernes-dale, admirable feed for cattle, and here about is St. Patrick's
Purgatory.


Young Cress. Purgatory! shall we purchase that too?


Lady. Come, come, will you dispatch the other business, we may go through with
this?


Cress. My son's unwilling.


Lady. Upon my soul sir, I Will never bed with you till you have sealed.


Cress. Thou hear'st her: on thy blessing follow me to'th' Court, and seal.


Young Cress. Sir, were it my death, were to'th' loss of my estate, I vow to
obey you in all things; yet with it remember there are two young ones living
that may curse you: I pray dispose part of the money, on their generous
Educations.


Lady. Fear no you sir: The Caroche there, when you have dispatched, you shall
find me at the Scriveners where I shall receive the money.


Young Cress. She Will devour that mass too.


Lady. How likest thou my power over him?


Saun. Excellent.


Lady. This is the height of a great Ladies sway,

When her night service makes her rule in the day.

Exeunt. manet Knaves-bee.
Enter Knaves bee's Wife. Kna. Not yet Sib? my Lord keeps thee so long, thou art
welcome I see then, and pays sweetly too: a good wench Sib thou art, to obey thy
husband. She Is come: a hundred mark a year, how fine and easy it comes into
mine arms now! Welcome home, what says my Lord, Sib?


Wife. My Lord says you are a Cuckold.


Kna. Ha, ha, ha, ha, I thank him for that Bob in faith, I Will afford it him again
at the same price a month hence, and let the comodity grow as scarce as it
will. Cuckold says his Lordship! ha, ha, I shall burst my sides with laughing
that is the worst, name not a hundred year, for then I burst. It smarts not so
much as a fillip on the forehead by five parts: what has his dalliance taken
from thy lips? it is as sweet as ere 'twas, let me try else: buss me Sugar Candy.


Wife. Forbear, you presume to a Lords pleasure!


Kna. How Is that! not I Sib?


Wife. Never touch me more, I Will keep the noble Stamp upon my lip, no under
baseness shall deface it now; you taught me the way, now I am in, I Will keep it,
I have kissed Ambition, and I love it, I loath the memory of every touch my lip
has tasted from thee.


Kna. Nay but sweet Sib, you do forget your self.


Wife. I will forget all that I ever was, and nourish new sirrah, I am a Lady.


Kna. Lord bless us Madam.


Wife. I have enjoyed a Lord, that is real possession, and daily shall, the
which all Ladies have not with their Lords.


Kna. But with your patience Madam, who was it that preferred you to this
Ladyship?


Wife. It Is all I am beholding to thee for, thou have brought me out of ignorance
into light, simple as I was, I thought thee a man till I found the difference
by a man: thou art a beast, a horned beast, an Ox.


Kna. Are these Ladies terms?


Wife. For thy Pandors Fee it shall be laid under the Candlestick, look for it,
I Will leave it for thee.


Kna. A little lower, good your Ladyship, my Cousin Chamlet is in the house,
let these things go no further.


Wife. It Is for mine own credit if I forbear, not thine, thou bugle-browd beast
thou.

Enter George with Rolls of Paper.
George. Bidden, bidden, bidden, bidden; so, all these are past: but here is as
large a walk to come, if I do not get it up at the feast, I shall be leaner for
bidding the Guests I Am sure.


Kna. How now! who is this?


George. Doctor Glister, et; what word's this? fuxor, oh Uxor, the Doctor and
his wife: Mr. Body et uxor of Bow-lane, Mr. Knaves-bee et uxor.


Kna. Ha, we are in, what soever the matter is.


George. Here Is forty couple more in this quarter; but there the Provision
bringing in, that puzzels me most: One Ox, that will hardly serve for Beef too;
five Muttons, ten Lambs, poor innocents, they will be devoured too; three gross of
Capons.


Kna. Mercy upon us! what a Slaughterhouse is here!


George. Two bushels of small Birds, Plovers, Snipes, Woodcocks, Partridge,
Larks; then for Bak'd-meats.


Kna. George, George, what Feast is this? it is not for St. George's day?


George. Cry you mercy sir, you and your wife are in my Roll: my Master invites
you his Guests to morrow dinner.


Kna. Dinner say thou? he means to feast a month sure.


George. Nay sir, you make up but a hundred couple.


Kna. Why, what Ship has brought an India home to him, that he is so bountiful?
or what friend dead (unknown to us) has so much left to him of arrable Land,
that he means to turn to pasture thus?


George. Nay, it is a vessel sir, a good estate comes all in one bottom to him,
and it is a question whether ever he find the bottom or no; a thousand a year,
that is the uppermost.


Kna. A thousand a year!


George. To go no further about the Bush sir, now the Bird is caught; my Master
is to morrow to be married, and amongst the rest invites you a Guest, at his
Wedding-Dinner the second.


Kna. Married!


George. There is no other remedy for flesh and blood, that will have leave to
play whether we will or no, or wander into forbidden pastures.


Kna. Married! why he is married, man; his wife is in my house now, thy
Mistress is alive, George.


George. She that was, it may be sir, but dead to him, she played a little too
rough with him, and he has discarded her, he is divorced sir.


Kna. He divorced! then is her labor saved; for she was laboring a Divorce from
him.


George. They are well parted then sir.


Kna. But will thou not speak with her? 'ifaith invite her to 't.


George. It Is not in my Commission, I dare not, fare you well sir, I have much
business in hand, and the time is short.


Kna. Nay but George, I prithee stay, may I report this to her for a certain
truth?


George. Wherefore am I employed in this Invitation sir?


Kna. Prithee what is she, his second Choice?


George. Truly a goodly presence, likely to bear great children, and great
store, she never saw five and thirty Summers together in her life by her
appearance, and comes in her French-hood, by my fecks a great Match it is like
to be; I am sorry for my old Mistress but cannot help it: pray you excuse me
now sir, for all the business goes through my hands, none employed but my self.

Exit George.
Kna. Why here is news that no man will believe, but he that sees.


Kna. Wife. This, and your Cuckoldry, will be digestion throughout the City
dinners and suppers, for a month together, there will need no Cheese.

Enter Mris Chamlet.
Kna. No more of that Sib: I Will call my Cousin Chamlet, and make her partaker of
this sport; she is come already. Cousin, take it at once, you are a free woman,
your late husband's to be married to morrow.


Mris. Cham. Married! to whom?


Kna. To a French-hood birlakins, as I understand, great cheer prepared, and
great Guests invited, so far I know.


Mris. Cham. What a cursed wretch was I to pare my Nails to day, a Friday too; I
looked for some mischief.


Kna. Why, I did think this had accorded with your best liking, you sought for
him what he has songht for you, a Separation, and by Divorce too.


Mris. Cham. I Will Divorce 'em? Is he to be married to a French-hood? I Will dress
it the English fashion; never a Coach to be had with six horses to strike fire
in the streets as we go?


Kna. Will you go home then?


Mris. Cham. Good Cousin, help me to whet one of my knives, while I sharp the
the other, give me a sour apple to set my teeth an edge, I would give five pound
for the paring of my nails again: have you ere a Bird-spit in the house, I Will
dress one dish to the wedding.


Kna. This violence hurts your self the most.


Mris Cham. I care not who I hurt; oh my heart, how it beats a both sides; will
you run with me for a wager into Lombard Street now?


Kna. I Will walk with you Cousin a sufficient pace; Sib. shall come softly
after, I Will bring you thorough Bearbinder-lane.


Mris Cham. Bearbinder-lane cannot hold me, I Will the nearest way over St.
Mildreds Church, if I meet any French-hoods by the way, I Will make black patches
enough for the rhume.

Exeunt.
Kna. wife. So it is to my wish, Master Knavesbee,
Help to make peace abroad, here you will find wars,
I Will have a divorce too, with locks and bars.
Exit.
Enter George, Margarita. George. Madam, but stay here a little, my Master
comes instantly, I heard him say he did ow you a good turn, and now is the time
to take it, I Will warrant you a sound reward e're you go.

Enter Chamlet.
Mar. Ey Tank u de bon cour Monsieur.


George. Look he is here already, now would a skilful Navigator take in his
Sails, for sure there is a storm toward.

Exit George.
Cham. Oh Madam I perceive in your countenance (I am beholding to you) All is
peace? Mar. All quiet, goor frendsheep, ey mooch a do, ey strive wid him: give
goor worda for you; no more speak a de matra, all es undonne u no more trobla.


Enter Mris. Chamlet, and Knavesbee. Cham. Look, there is the price of a fair
pair of Gloves, and wear 'em for my sake.


Mris Cham. Oh, oh, oh, my hearts broke out of my ribs.


Kna. Nay a little patience.


Marg. Ey tank u artely, shall no bestow en gloves, shall put moosh more to
dees, an bestow your shop; Regard dees stofa my pettycote u no soosh anodre;
shall deal wid u for moosh; take in your hand.


Cham. I see it Mistress, it is good stuff indeed, it is a Silk rash, I can
pattern it.


Mris Cham. Shall he take up her coats before my face? Oh beastly creature;
French-hood, Frenchhood, I will make your hair grow thorough.


Cham. My wife returned! oh welcome home, sweet Rachel.


Mris Cham. I forbid the Banes, Letcher and strumpet, thou shall bear children
without noses.


Marg. O pardonne moy, by my trat ey mean u no hurta: wat u meant by dees?


Mris Cham. I will have thine eyes out, and thy Bastards shall be as blind as
Puppies.


Cham. Sweet Rachel, good Cousin help to pacify.


Mris Cham. I forbid the Banes, Adulterer.


Cham. What means she by that sir?


Kna. Good Cousin forbid your rage a while, unless you hear, by what sense will
you receive satisfaction?


Mris Cham By my hands and my teeth sir, give me leave, will you bind me
whiles mine enemy kills me?


Cham. Here all are your friends sweet wife.


Mris Cham. Will It have two wives? Do and by hanged Fornicator, I forbid the
Banes; give me the French-hood, I Will tread it under feet in a pair of
Pantophles.


Marg. Begar shall save hood head and all; shall come no more here, ey warran u.

Exit Margarita.
Kna. Sir, the truth is, Report spoke it for truth, you were to morrow to be
married.


Mris Cham. I forbid the Banes.


Cham. Mercy deliver me, if my grave embrace me in the bed of death, I would to
Church with willing ceremony; but for my wedlock-fellow, here she is the first
and last that ere my thoughts looked on.


Kna. Why law you Cousin, this was naught but error or an assault of mischief.


Cham. Whose report was it?


Kna. Your man Georges, who invited me to the wedding.


Enter George. Cham. George? And was he sober? Good sir call him.


George. It needs not sir, I am here already.


Cham. Did you report this George?


George. Yes sir I did.


Cham. And wherefore did you so?


George. For a new suit that you promised me sir, if I could bring home my
Mistress, and I think she is come with a mischief.


Mris Cham. Give me that villains ears.


George. I would give ear, if I could hear you talk wisely.


Mris Cham. Let me cut off his ears.


George. I shall hear worse of you hereafter then, limb for limb, one of my
ears, for one of your tongues, and I Will lay out for my Master.


Cham. 'Twas knavery with a good purpose in it, sweet Rachel, this was even
Georges meaning, a second marriage 'twixt thy self and me, and now I woo the
to it, a quiet night will make the Sun like a fresh Bridegroom rise, and kiss
the chaste echeek of the rosy morn which we will imitate, and like him creat
Fresh buds of love, fresh spreading arms, fresh fruit, Fresh wedding robes, and
Georges fresh new suit.


Mris Cham. This is fine stuff, have you much on it to sell?


George. A remnant of a yard.


Cham. Come, come, all is well, sir, you must sup, instead of to morrows dinner.

Exeunt.
Kna. I follow you; no: it is another way,
My Lords reward calls me to better cheer
Many good meals a hundred marks a year;
my wifes transformed a Lady, tush, she will come to her shape again,
my Lord rides the circuit,
If I rid along with him, what need I grutch
I can as easy sit, and speed as much.
Exit Knaves-bee.
ACTUS. V.
Enter old Francklin in mourning: young Cressingham with young Francklin
disguised like an old Serving-man. Yo. Cress. SIr, your sons death which has
apparrel'd you in this darker wearing, is a loss wherein I have ample share; he
was my friend.


Old Fran. He was my nearest and dearest enemy, and the perpetual fear of a
worse end had he continued his former dissolute course, makes me weigh his
death the lighter.


Young Cress. Yet sir, with your pardon, if you value him every way as he
deserved, it will appear your scanting of his means, and the Lord Beauforts
most un-lordly breach of promise to him, made him fall upon some courses, to
which his nature and mine own, (made desperate likewise by the cruelty of a
Mother in Law) would else have bin as strange, as insolent greatness is to
distressed virtue.


Old Frank. Yes, I have heard of that too; your defeat made upon a Mercer, I
style't modestly, the Law intends it plain cozenage.


Young Cress. 'Twas no less, but my penitence and restitution, may come fairly
off from't; it was no Impeachment to the Glory won at Agencourts great Battle,
that the Atchiever of it in his youth had bin a Purse-taker, this with all
reverence to the great Example. Now to my business, wherein you have made such
noble trial of your worth, that in a world so dull as this, where faith is
almost grown to be a miracle, I have found a friend so worthy as your self, to
purchase all the Land my Father sold at the persuasion of a riotous woman, and
charitable to reserve it for his use, and the good of his three children; this
I say, is such a deed shall style you our Preserver, and ow the memory of your
worth, and pay it to all posterity.


Old Frank. Sir, what I have done, looks to the end of the good deed it self,
no other way in the world.


Young Cress. But would you please out of a friendly reprehension, to make him
sensible of the weighty wrong he has done his children, yet I would not have it
too bitter, for he undergoes already such torment in a woman's naughty pride,
too harsh reproof would kill him.


Old Frank. Leave you that to my discretion: I have made my self my sons
Executor, and am come up on purpose to collect his Creditors, and where I find
his pennyworth conscionable, I Will make them in part satisfaction:

Enter George. Oh this fellow was born near me, and his trading here in the City
may bring me to the knowledge of the men my son ought money to.


George. Your Worship's welcome to London, and I pray how does all our good
friends in the Country?


Old Frank. They are well, George: how thou art shot up since I saw thee? what,
I think thou art almost out of thy Time?


George. I am out of my wits sir, I have lived in a kind of Bedlam these four
years, how can I be mine own man then?


Old Frank. Why, what is the matter?


George. I may turn Soap-boyler, I have a loose body: I am turned away from my
Master.


Old Frank. How! turned away! Indenture.


George. I am gone sir, not in drink, and yet you may behold my Indentures: Oh
the wicked wit of woman, for the good turn I did bringing her home, she never
left sucking my Masters breath, like a Cat, kissing him I mean, till I was
turned away!


Old Frank. I have heard she is a terrible woman.


George. Yes, and the miserablest! her sparing in Housekeeping has cost him
somewhat, the Dagger-pyes can testify: she has stood in's light most
miserably, like your Fasting-days before Red letters in the Almanac: saying,
the pinching of our bellies would be a mean to make him wear Scarlet the
sooner. She had once persuaded him to have bought Spectacles for all his
servants, that they might have worn 'em dinner and supper.


Old Frank. To what purpose?


George. Marry, to have made our Victuals seem bigger than 't was: she shows
from whence she came, that my Winde-collick can witness.


Old Frank. Why, whence came she?


George. Marry from a Courtier, and an Officer too, that was up and down I know
not how often.


Old. Fra. Had he any great place?


George. Yes, and a very high one, but he got little by it; he was one that
blew the Organ in the Court Chapel, our Puritans, especially your Puritans in
Scotland, could never away with him.


Old. Fran. Is she one of the Sect?


George. Faith I think not, for I am certain, she denies her husband the
supremacy.


Old Frank. Well George, your difference may be reconciled. I am now to use
your help in a business that concerns me: here is a Note of men's names here
in the City, unto whom my son ought money, but I do not know their dwelling?


Geor. Let me see sir: fifty pound taken up at use of Mr. Water Thin the Brewer.


Old Frank. What Is he?


Geor. An obstinat fellow, and one that denied payment of the groats, till he
lay by'th' heels for it; I know him: Item, fourscore pair of provant
Breeches'ath' new fashion, to Pinch buttock a Hosier in Burchen-lane, so much.


Old Frank. What the devil did he with so many pair of breeches?


Yo. Fran. Supply a Captain sir, a friend of his went over to the Palatinate.


Geor. Item, to my Tailor Mr. Wetherwise, by St. Clements-church.


Yo. Cress. Who should that be? it may be it is the new Prophet, the
Astrological Tailor.


Yo. Frank. No, no, no sir, we have nothing to do with him.


George. Well, I Will read no further, leave the note to my discretion, do not
fear but I Will enquire them all.


Old Frank. Why, I thank thee.


George. Sir, rest assured I shall in all your business be faithful to you, and
at better leisure find time to imprint deeply in your father, the wrong he has
done you,

Exeunt. Old Franklin, George, and Young Francklin.
Yo. Cress. You are worthy in all things?

Enter Saunder. Is my father stirring?


Saund. Yes, sir, my Lady wonders you are thus chargeable to your father, and
will not direct your self unto some gainful study, may quit him of your
dependence.


Yo. Cress. What study?


Saund. Why the Law, that Law that takes up most 'ath' wits in the kingdom, not
for most good, but most gain, or Divinity; I have heard you talk well, and I do
not think but you would prove a singular fine Churchman.


Yo. Cress. I should prove a plural better, if I could attain to fine benifices.


Saund. My Lady now she has money, is studying to do good works, she talked
last night what a goodly act it was, of a Countess ( Northamptonshire breed
belike, or thereabouts) that to make Coventry a Corporation, rode through the
City naked, and by day light.


Yo. Cress. I do not think, but you have Ladies living would discover as much
in private, to advance but some member of a Corporation.

Enter Sir Fran. Cressingham.
Saund. Well sir, your wit is still goaring at my Ladies projects: here is your
father.


Old Cress. Thou comst to chide me, hearing how like a ward I am handled, since
the sale of my Land.


Yo. Cress. No sir, but to turn your eyes into your own bosom.


Old Cress. Why, I am become my wives pensioner; am confined to a hundred mark
a year, the one suit, and one man to attend me.


Saund. And is not that enough for a private Gentleman?


Old Cress. Peace sirrah, there is nothing but knave speaks in thee, and my
two poor children must be put forth to prentice.


Yo. Cress. Ha! to prentice: sir, I do not come to grieve you, but to show how
wretched your estate was that you could not come to see order, until foul
disorder pointed the way to it, so inconsiderate, yet so fruitful still is dotage
to beget its own destruction.


Old Cress. Surely I am nothing, and desire to be so, pray thee fellow entreat
her only to be quiet, I have given her all my estate on that condition.


Saund. Yes sir, her Coffers are well lined believe me.


Old Cress. And yet she is not contented; we observe the Moon is never so
pleasant, and so clear as when she is at the full.


Yo. Cress. You did not use my mother with this observance, you are like the
Frogs, who weary of their quiet King, consented to the election of the Stork,
who in the end devoured them.


Old Cress. You may see how apt man is to forfeit all his judgment upon the
instant of his fall.


Yo. Cress. Look up sir.


Old Cress. O my hearts broke; weighty are injuries that come from an enemy,
but those are deadly that come from a friend, for Enter the Lady Cressingham.
we see commonly those are taken most to heart: she comes.


Yo. Cress. What a terrible eye she darts on us.


Old Cress. Oh most natural, for lightning to go before the thunder.


Lady. What? Are you in council? are ye levying faction against us.


Old Cress. Good friend.


Lady. Sir, sir, pray come hither, there is winter in your looks, a latter
winter, do you complain to your kindred? I Will make you fear extremely, to show
you have any cause to fear: Are the bonds sealed for the six thousand pounds I
put forth to use?


Saund. Yes Madam.


Lady. The bonds were made in my unckles name.


Saund. Yes.


Lady. It Is well.


Old Cress. It Is strange though.


Lady. Nothing strange, you will think the allowance I have put you to as strange,
but your judgment cannot reach the aim I have in it: you were pricked last year
to be High Sheriff, and what it would have cost you I understand now, all this
charge and the other by the sale of your Land, and the money at my dispose, and
your pension so small, will settle you in quiet, make you Master of a retired
life, and our great ones may think you a politic man, and that you are aiming
at some strange business, having made all over.


Old Cress. I must leave you, man is never truly awake till he be dead.

Extent old Cress. and Saund.
Yo. Cress. What a dream have you made of my father?


Lady. Let him be so, and keep the proper place of dreams; his bed, until I
raise him.


Yo. Cress. Raise! him not unlikely, it is you have ruined him.


Lady. You do not come to quarrel?


Yo. Cress. No certain, but to persuade you to a thing, that in the virtue of
it, nobly carries its own commendation, and you shall gain much honor by it,
which is the recompense of all virtuous actions, to use my father kindly.


Lady. Why? does he complain to you sir?


Yo. Cress. Complain: why should a King complain for any thing, but for his
sins to heaven, the prerogative of husband is like to his, over his wife.


Lady. I am full of business sir, and will not mind you.


Yo. Cress. I must not leave you thus; I tell you mother it is dangerous to a
woman, when her mind raises her to such height, it makes her only capable of
her own merit; nothing of duty! oh, 'twas a strange unfortunate o're-prising
your beauty, brought him, (otherwise discreet) into the fatal neglect of his
poor children: what will you give us of the late sum you received?


Lady. Not a penny; away, you are troublesome and saucy.


Yo. Cress. You are too cruel: denials even from Princes who may do what they
list, should be supplied with a gracious verbal usage, that though they do not
cure the sore, they may abate the sense often; the wealth you seem to command
over, is his, and he I hope will dispose often to our use.


Lady. When he can command my will?


Yo. Cress. Have you made him so miserable, that he must take a Law from his
wife?


Lady. Have you not had some Lawyers forced to groan under the burden?


Yo. Cress. Oh! but the greater the women, the more visible are their vices.


Lady. So sir, you have been so bold; by all can bind an oath, and I Will not
break it, I will not be the woman to you hereafter you expected.


Yo. Cress. Be not; be not your self, be not my fathers wife, be not my Lady
Cressingham, and then I Will thus speak to you, but you must not answer in your
own person.


Lady. A fine Puppet play!


Yo. Cress. Good Madam, please you pity the distress of a poor Gentleman, that
is undone by a cruel Mother in Law, you do not know her, nor does she deserve
the knowledge of any good one, for she does not know her self, you would sigh
for her that ere she took you sex, if you but heard her qualities.


Lady. This is a fine Crotchet.


Yo. Cress. Envy and Pride, flow in her painted breasts, she gives no other
suck; all her attendants do not belong to her husband, his money is hers, marry
his debts are his own, she bears such sway, she will not suffer his Religion be
his own, but what she please to turn it to.


Lady. And all this while, I am the woman you libel against.


Yo. Cress. I remember e're the Land was sold, you talked of going to Ireland,
but should you touch there, you would die presently.


Lady. Why Man?


Yo. Cress. The country brooks no poison: go, You Will find how difficult a
thing it is, to make a settled or assured Estate of things ill gotten: when my
father's dead, the curse of Lust and Riot follow you, marry some young gallant
that may rifle you; yet add one blessing to your needy age, that you may die
full of repentance.


Lady. Ha, Ha, Ha.


Is. Cress. Oh! she is lost to any kind of goodness.

Exeunt.
Enter Lord Beaufort, and Knaves-bee. Beau. Sirrah, be gone, you are base.


Kna. Base, my good Lord? it is a ground part in Music, trebles, means, all his
but sidling, your Honor bore a part as my wife says, my Lord.


Beau. Your wifes a Strumpet.


Kna. Ah ha, is she so? I am glad to hear it, open confession, open payment,
the wagers mine then, a hundred a year my Lord, I said so before, and staked my
head against it, thus after darksome night, the day is come, my Lord.


Beau. Hence, hide thy branded head, let no day see thee, nor thou any but thy
execution day.


Kna. That Is the day after washing day, once a week, I see it at home my Lord.


Beau. Go home and see thy prostituted wife (for sure it is so) now folded in a
Boys adultery, my Page; on whom the hot-rain'd harlot doats, this night he has
been her attendant, my house he is fled from, and must no more return, go, and
make haste sir, lest your reward be lost for want of looking to.


Kna. My reward lost; is there nothing due for what is past, my Lord?


Beau. Yes Pander, Wittoll, Macrio, basest of knaves, thou Boulster-bawd to
thine own infamy! go, I have no more about me at this time, when I am better
stored thou shall have more where e're I meet thee.


Kna. Pander, Wittoll, Macrio, base knave, boulster bawd; here is but five mark
toward a hundred a year: this is poor payment, if Lords may be trusted no
better then thus! I will go home and cut my Wifes Nose off, I will turn over a
new Leaf, and hang up the Page; lastly I will put on a large pair of Wetleather
Boots and drown my self, I will sink at Queen-hive, and rise again at
Charing Cross contrary to the Statute in Edwardo primo.

Exit
Enter Old Franklin; his son as before, George, three or four Citizens,
Creditors. Old Frank. Good health to your Lordship.


Beau. Mr. Franklin, I heard of your arrival, and the cause of this your sad
appearance.


Old Frank. And it is no more then as your Honor says, indeed appearance, it has
more form then feeling sorrow Sir, I must confess, there is none of these
Gentlemen (though Aliens in blood) but have as large cause of grief as I.


1 Cred. No, by your favor sir, we are well satisfied; there was in his life a
greater hope, but less assurance.


2 Cred. Sir, I wish all my debts of no better promise to pay me thus, fifty in
the hundred comes fairly homewards.


Young Frank. Considering hard Bargains and dead Commodities, sir.


2 Cred. Thou say true, friend, and from a dead Debtor too.


Beau. And so you have compounded and agreed all your sons riotous Debts?


Old Frank. There Is behind but one cause of worse condition, that done, he may
sleep quietly.


1 Cred. Yes sure my Lord, this Gentleman is come a wonder to us all, that so
fairly with half a loss could satisfy those debts were dead, even with his
son, and from whom we could have nothing claimed.


Old Frank. I showed my reason; I would have a good name live after him,
because he bore my Name.


2 Cred. May his tongue perish first (and that will spoil his trade) that first
gives him a syllable of ill.

Enter Chamlet.
Beau. Why this is friendly.


Cham. My Lord!


Beau. Mr. Chamlet! very welcome.


Cham. Mr. Franklin, I take it, these Gentlemen I know well: good Mr.
Pennystone, Mr. Phillip, Mr. Cheyney! I am glad I shall take my leave of so
many of my good friends at once; your hand first, my Lord, fare you well sir,
nay I must have all your hands to my Pass.


George. Will you have mine too sir?


Cham. Yes, thy two hands George, and I think two honest hands of a Tradesman,
George, as any between Cornhil and Lombard Street.


George. Take heed what you say sir, there is Birchen-lane between 'em.


Beau. But what is the cause of this, Mr. Chamlet?


Cham. I have the cause in handling, now my Lord; George, honest George is the
cause, yet no cause of Georges, George is turned away one way, and I must go
another.


Beau. And whither is your way sir?


Cham. E'ne to seek out a Quiet Life, my Lord: I do hear of a fine peaceable
Island.


Beau. Why it is the same you live in.


Cham. No, it is so famed, but we the inhabitants find it not so; the place I
speak of has bin kept with thunder, with frightful lightnings, amazing Noises,
but now (th'inchantment broke) it is the Land of Peace, where Hogs and Tobacco
yield fair increase.


Beau. This is a little wild methinks.


Cham. Gentlemen, fare you well, I am for the Bermudas.


Beau. Nay, good sir stay, and is that your only cause, the loss of George?


Cham. The loss of George, my Lord! make you that no cause? why but examine,
would it not break the stout heart of a Nobleman to loose his George, much more
the tender bosom of a Citizen.


Beau. Fie, fie, I Am sorry your gravity should run back to lightness thus: you
go to the Bermothes!


Old Frank. Better to Ireland Sir.


Cham. The Land of Ire, that is too near home, my wife will be heard from
Hellbree to Divellin.


Old Frank. Sir, I must of necessity a while detain you: I must acquaint you
with a benefit that is coming toward you. You were cheated of some goods of
late, come, I Am a Cunning-man, and will help you to the most part again, or
some reasonable satisfaction.


Enter Mris Chamlet. Cham. That Is another cause of my unquiet Life, sir; can
you do that, I may chance stay another Tide or two: My wife! (I must speak more
private with you) by forty foot pain of death, I dare not reach her: No words
of me sweet Gentlemen.

Slips behind the Arras.
George. I had need hide too.


Mris Cham. Oh, my Lord, I have scarce tongue enough yet to tell you; my
husband, my husband's gone from me, your warrant good my Lord, I never had such
need of your warrant; my husband's gone from me.


Beau. Going he is, it is true; has taken his leave of me, and all these
Gentlemen, and it is your sharp tongue that whips him forwards.


Mris. Cham. A warrant, good my Lord.


Beau. You turn away his servants, such on whom his estate depends he says, who
know his books, his debts, his customers; the form and order of all his affairs
you make orderless, chiefly his George you have banished from him.


Mris. Cham. My Lord, I will call George again.


George within. Call George again.


Beau. Why hark you, how high voic'd you are, that raise an Echo from my
Selleridge which we with modest loudness cannot.


Mris. Cham. My Lord, do you think I speak too loud?


George within. Too loud.


Beau. Why hark, your own tongue answers you, and reverberates your words into
your teeth.


Mris. Cham. I will speak lower all the days of my life: I never found the
fault in my self till now, your warrant good my Lord, to stay my husband.


Beau. Well, well, it shall overtake him, ere he pass Gravesend, provided that
he meet his quietness at home, else he is gone again.


Old Frank. And withal to call George again.


Mris Cham. I will call George again.


George. Call George again.


Beau. See, you are raised again, the Echo tells you.


Mris Cham. I did forget my self indeed, my Lord: this is my last fault, I will
go make a silent enquiry after George, I will whisper half a score Porters in
the ear, that shall run softly up and down the City to seek him. Bewy ye my
Lord, buoy all Gentlemen. Exit


Beau. George, your way lies before you now, cross the street, and come into
her eyes, your Masters Journey will be staid.


George. I Will warrant you bring it to better subjection yet.


Beau. These are fine flashes: how now Mr. Chamlet?


Cham. I had one ear lent to you-ward, my Lord, and this o'th to'ther side,
both sounded sweetly: I have whole recovered my late losses sir, the one half
paid, the to'ther is forgiven.


Beau. Then your Journey is staid?

Enter Barb. and Knavesbee.
Cham. Alas my Lord, that was a trick of age, for I had left never a trick of
youth like it, to succor me.


Beau. How now? what new Object's here!


Barb. The next man we meet shall judge us.


Kna. Content, though he be but a Common-Council-man.


Beau. The one's a knave, I could know him at twelve score distance.


Old Frank. And to'ther 's a Barber-Surgeon, my Lord.


Kna. I Will go no further, here is the honorable Lord, that I know will grant my
request; My Lord --


Barb. Peace, I will make it plain to his Lordship: My Lord, a Covenant by Jus
Jurandum is between us, he is to suffocate my Respiration by his Capistrum, and
I to make incission so far as mortification by his Jugulars.


Beau. This is not altogether so plain neither, sir.


Barb. I can speak no plainer my Lord, unless I wrong mine art.


Kna. I can my Lord, I know some part of the Law, I am to take him in this
place where I find him, and lead him from hence to the place of Execution, and
there to hang him till he dies; he in equal courtesy is to cut my throat with
his Razor, and there is an end of both on's.


Barb. There is the end my Lord, but we want the beginning: I stand upon it to
be strangled first, before I touch either his Gula or Ceruix.


Kna. I am against it, for how shall I be sure to have my Throat cut after he is
hanged.


Beau. Is this a Condition betwixt you?


Kna. A firm Covenant, signed and sealed by oath and handfast, and wants
nothing but Agreement.


Beau. A little pause: what might be the cause on either part?


Barb. My passions are grown to putrefaction, and my griefs are gangrened; Mr.
Chamlet has scarified me all over, besides the loss of my new Brush.


Kna. I am kept out of mine own Castle, my Wife keeps the Hold against me: your
Page my Lord, is her Champion; I summoned a Parle at the window, was answered
with Defiance: they confess they have layen together, but what they have done
else I know not.


Beau. Thou can have no wrong that deserves pity, thou art thy self so bad.


Kna. I thank your Honor for that, let me have my throat cut then.

Enter Selenger as a woman, and Mris Knavesbee.
Cham. Sir, I can give you a better remedy then his Capistrum; your ear a
little.


Mris Kna. I come with a bold innocence to answer the best and worst that can
accuse me here.


Beau. Your husband.


Mris Kna. He Is the worst, I dare his worst.


Kna. Your Page, your Page.


Mris Kna. We lay together in bed, it is confessed; you, and your ends of Law
makes worser of it, I did it for reward.


Beau. I Will hear no more of this, come Gentlemen will you walk?

Enter Young Cressingham.
Young Cress. My Lord, a little stay; you will see a sight that neighbor amity
will be much pleased with, it is come already, my Father sir.


Enter Old Cressingham. Beau. There must be cause certain for this good change:
Sir, you are bravely met, this is at the best I ever saw you.


Cress. My Lord, I am amazement to my self; I slept in poverty, and am awake
into this wonder; how I can thus brave, my dreams did not so much as tell me
of; I am of my kind sons new making up, it exceeds the pension much, that
yesternight allowed me, and my pockets centupled, but I am my sons child, sir,
he knows of me more then I do my self.


Young Cress. Sir, you yet have but earnest of your happiness, a Pinace
fore-riding a goodly vessel, by this near Anchor-bulkt like a Castle, and with
Jewels fraught, (Joys above Jewels sir,) from deck to keel, make way for the
receipt, empty your bosom of all griefs and troubles, leave not a sigh to beat
her back again, she is so stored ye'ad need have room enough, to take her
lading.


Cress. If one Comodity be wanting now, all this is nothing.


Young Cress. Tush, that must out too, there must be no remembrance, not the
thought that ever youth in woman did abuse you, that e're your children had a
stepmother, that you sold Lands to please your punishment, that you were
circumscribed and taken in, abridg'd the large extendure of your grounds, and
put into the pinfold that belonged to it, that your son did cheat for want of
maintenance; that he did beg, you shall remember only, for I have begged off
all these troubles from you.


Enter Lady Cress. in civil habit, Saund. and children very gallant. Beau. This
was a good weeks labor.


Young Cress. Not an hours my Lord, but 'twas a happy one; see sir, a new day
shines on you.


La. Cress. Oh sir, your son has robbed me.


Cress. Ha! that way I instructed?


Yo Cress. Nay, hear her sir.


La. Cress. Of my good purpose sir, he has forced out of me, what lay
concealed, ripened my pity with his dews of duty, forgive me sir, and but keep
the number of every grief that I have pained you with, I Will ten-fold pay with
fresh obedience.


Cham. Oh, that my wife were here to learn this lesson.


Lady Cress. Your state is not abated, what was yours, is still your own, and
take the cause withal of my harsh seeming usage; it was to reclaim faults in
your self, the swift consumption of many large revenues, Gaiming, that of not
much less speed, burning up house and land, not casual but cunning fire, which
though it keeps the Chymney, and outward shows like Hospitality, is only
devourer on it, Consuming Chemistry; there I have made you a flat banquet-out;
all your Stillatories and laboring Minerals are demolished, that part of Hell
in your house is extinct, put out your desire with them, and then these feet
shall level with my hands, until you raise my stooped humility to higher
grace, to warm these lips with love, and duty do to every silver hair, each one
shall be a Senator to my obedience.


Cress. All this I know before, who ever of you that had but one ill thought of
this good woman, you owe a knee to her, and she is merciful if she forgive you.

Enter George, and Mris Chamlet.
Beau. That shall be private penance sir, we will all joy in public with you.


George. On the conditions I tell you, not else.


Mris Cham. Sweet George, dear George, any conditions.


Cham. My wife!


Old Frank. Peace, George is bringing her to conditions.


Cham. Good ones, good George.


George. You shall never talk your voice above the key, sol, sol, sol.


Mris Cham. Sol, sol, sol, I George.


George. Say welcome home honest George, in that pitch.


Mris Cham. Welcome home honest George.


George. Why this is well now.


Cham. That Is well indeed, George.


George. Rogue, nor Rascal must never come out of your mouth.


Mris Cham. They shall never come in, honest George.


George. Nor I will not have you call my Master plain husband, that is too
course, but as your Gentlewomen in the Country use, and your persons wives in
the Town, it is comely, and shall be customed in the City, call him Master Chamlet
at every word.


Mris Cham. At every word, honest George.


George. Look you, there he is, salute him then.


Mris Cham. Welcome home, good Mr. Chamlet.


Cham. Thanks, and a thousand sweet Wife; I may say honest George.


George. Yes sir, or Bird, or Chuck, or Hearts ease, or plain Rachel, but call
her Rac no more, so long as she is quiet.


Cham. God-a-mercy, shall have thy new suit a Sunday George.


Mris Cham. George shall have two new suits, Mr. Chamlet.


Cham. God-a-mercy, in faith Chuck.


Bar. Mr. Chamlet, you and I are friends, all even betwixt us?


Cham. I do acquit thee, neighbor Sweetbal.


Bar. I will not be hanged then, Knares-bee do thy worst; nor I will not cut
thy throat.


Kna. I must do it my self.


Bar. If thou come to my shop, and usurp'st my chair of maintenance, I will
go as near as I can, but I will not do it.


Young Cress. No, it is I must cut Knaves-bees throat, for slandering a modest
Gentlewoman, and my wife in shape of your Page, my Lord, in her own I durst not
place her so near your Lordship.


Beau. No more of that sir, if your ends have acquired their own events, crown
'em with your own Joy.


Yo. Cress. Down a your knees Knaves-bee, to your wife, she is too honest for
you.


Bar. Down, down, before you are hanged, 'twilbe to late afterward, and long
thou can not escape it.

Knaves-bee kneels.
Mris Kna. You Will play the Pandor no more, will you?


Kna. Oh, that is an inch into my throat.


Mris Kna. And let out your wife for her?


Kna. Oh sweet wife, go no deeper.


Mris. Kna. Dare any be bail for your better behavior?


Beau. Yes, yes I dare, he will mend one day.


Mris Kna. And be worse the next.


Kna. Hang me the third then, dear merciful wife,
I will do Any thing for a quiet Life.

Beau. All then is reconciled?


Barb. Only my brush is lost, my dear new brush.


Old Frank. I will help you to satisfaction for that too sir.


Barb. Oh, Sperma Caete, I feel it heal already.


Old Frank. Gentlemen, I have fully satisfied my dead sons debts?


Omnes. All pleased, all paid sir.


Old Frank. Then once more here I bring him back to life, from my servant to my
son, nay, wonder not; I have not dealt by fallacy with any, my son was dead, who
e're out lives his virtues is a dead man, for when you hear of spirits that
walk in real bodies, to the amaze and cold astonishment of such as meet 'em,
and all would shun; those are men of vices, who nothing have but what is
visible, and so by consequence they have no souls, but if the soul return but
if the Soul return he lives again,

Created newly; such my Son appears
By my blessing rooted, growing by his tears.

Omnes. You have beguiled us honestly sir.


Frank. And you shall have your brush again.


Barber. My basins shall all ring for joy


Beaufort. Why this deserves a Triumph, and my cost shall begin a feast to it,
to which I do envite you all; such happy reconcilements must not be past
without a health of joy,

Discorded friends atton'd, men and their wives
This hope proclaims your after quiet Lives.
Exeunt.
FINIS.
EPILOGUE
I Am sent to enquire your Censure, and to know
How you stand affected? whither we do owe
Our service to your Favors, or must strike
Our Sails (though full of hope) to your dislike:
How e're be pleased to think we purposed well,
And from my fellows thus much I must tell,
Instruct us but in what we went astray,
And to redeem it, we will take any way.

