A FALSE FAITH not Justified by Care for the POOR.

PROVED in a SERMON PREACHED at St. PAUL's Church August 28th School.

By LVKE MILBOVRNE a Presbyter of the Church of ENGLAND.

(...).

Julianus ad Arsacium. LONDON: Printed by R. R. for W. Kettelby and B. Aylmer:
At the Bishop's-Head in St. Paul's Churchyard; and at the Three Pigeons
against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. MDCXCVIII.

Mr. MILBOVRNE's SERMON AT St. Paul's Church, August 28. School.

EDWIN Mayor.
Martis viii. die Septembris School, Annoque RRs. Will. tertii Angliae, etc.
decimo.
THis Court does desire Mr. Milbourne to Print his Sermon Preached at the
Cathedral Church of St. Paul on Sunday the 28th. of August last, before the
Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this City.

GOODFELLOW.

1 COR. XIII. 3. And though I bestow all my goods to feed the Poor, and have
not Charity, -- it profits me nothing.


A Close Union in Faith and Practice between the Members of Christ, that there
may be no Schism in the Body; but that they may, by Faith, hold to their One
Eternal Head, and, by Love, have the same Care one for another, is the Glory
and Security of his Church. Other Spiritual Gifts may Beautify and Adorn it;
These (with their Companion Hope) give it Substance and Vigor, make Faithful
Christians fix their Thoughts above, break through a thousand difficulties
below, and imitate the prodigious Love of their Master to miserable Sinners, by
a diffusive tenderness for one another. These then are the certain Test of a
sound Christian. A Man, set off with all the Charms of irresistible Eloquence,
may be followed and admired; the ravished World may hang Eternally on his Lips,
who speaks with Power and Demonstration, and who, with clear Sense and proper
Expressions, makes the obscurest things plain and intelligible; and who would
not be his Captive, who, by a great number of indisputable and unaccountable
Miracles, commands Submission? But for a Man to condescend to the Necessities
of the Poor; to look upon himself as sent into the World to relieve the
Indigent; to be the Father and Guardian of those who are generally despised by
a careless and uncompassionate World, and to be so fond of supposed Truth, as
to seal it with his Blood; These are such Demonstrations of a sincere Goodness,
as might, one would think, stop the Mouths of captious Inquirers, and make the
Eloquent Preacher and the Worker of Miracles pass for a complete Saint. The
concurrence of such Qualifications must needs glitter wonderfully before the
Common World, and prejudice them very far in favor of their glaring Luster;
yet these may possibly meet, where true justifying Faith and unfailing Hope are
wanting, and the most extensive Bounty may be without Charity. Where it is so,
however foolish Men may applaud them, their Eloquence makes them no better than
sounding Brass, or tinkling Cymbals. Their Knowledge and Miracles make them
just nothing, and their Zeal and Liberality can profit them nothing. These
three alide indeed, Faith, Hope, and Charity; but the greatest of these is
Charity. Love or Charity is the certain Evidence, the natural Consequence, the
inseparable Companion, and the Crowning Perfection of the other Two. There Is no
such Love, as the Text requires, but where there is sound Faith and vigorous
Hope; and there is no such Hope, or such Faith, but it will always work by Love.
This Charity therefore and Almsgiving, or Care for the Poor, are very different
things; they are excellent Companions indeed, but they may be parted, and where
they are so, though I beslow all my Goods to feed, or to provide all
Necessaries for the Poor, (for Feeding, in the Text, imports that general Care)
it profits me nothing.

The Assertion shows, that among the Corinthians there were some in the
Apostles times, who had wonderfully high thoughts of Mercy to the Poor, and
believed, with that Tobit. 4.10. Hujusmodi Axiomata ab Haereticis
frequentissime producuntur. Hinc Apelles, authore Rhodone Tatiani Discipulo
apud Eusebium.
Apocryphal Writer, That Alms deliver from Death, and suffer not to come into
darkness, without any Addition whatsoever. As if Beneficence, or conferring
outward good on those in want, and providing for their Bodily necessities only,
were enough to procure Eternal Salvation, without either a right Faith, or a
just Hope, or true Christian Love or Charity. St. Paul corrects this Error;
puts himself in the place of such a bountiful Man (for none can be more
Bountiful than he who gives his All to the Poor) and lets them know, that, tho
he should do this, yet if he had not Divine Charity, (which could not be
without Faith and Hope, since they subsist or abide together) it would all
stand him in no stead, it would profit him nothing. (...) Hist. Eccles. l. 5.
c. 13.


This Love or Charity mentioned here, as the Perfection of all other
Excellencies, is of a vast and undefinable extent; on which reason the Apostle,
who recommends it every where, gives no particular Definition of it any where,
but endeavors to imprint a right Notion of it in our minds by recounting its
several Negative and Positive Qualifications, all which justify that
difference between it and Almsgiving, or care for the Poor, which we commonly,
but improperly call Charity. For,

This Charity suffers long: -- The Christian endued with exercises the utmost
Patience under the greatest Injuries. Rage against him who wrongs him; much
less will he meditate Revenge; he leaves that to God; and as his Heavenly
Father is gracious both to the Good and Bad, his Servants and his Enemies, so
this Man of Love will be kind to All, particularly to those who have used him
worst. But the Man who gives Alms in abundance may be waspish, malicious,
revengeful, barbarous.

Charity, or true Christian Love envieth not: -- The true Christian sees his
Enemy thrive with Joy: He Is pleased with every good Action which proceeds from
him, and with every Reward which he receives. He looks on the Learning, Virtue,
Piety of all Men with satisfaction; and when they grow Great, Powerful, Rich by
such means, or have a mighty Interest among good Men, he is pleased to see his
Father's Honor promoted; and can quietly let others get a greater Reputation,
even in those things in which himself is most ambitious to excel. The Man of
Alms may grudge every thing that slips his own hands, and in the Care for the
Poor, foolishly strive to engross the sole Management, and the entire
Reputation.

Charity vaunteth not it self -- is not puffed up -- He who is blessed with this
Grace is not loud when he gives his Alms, nor stunns every Company with the
noise of his Industry and Beneficence. The deepest waters slide with the
greatest silence, and the most merciful Men love to be kind in secret; They
would not have their left hands know what their right hands give. It Is a Reward
which God only bestows which they seek, and there is no need of proclaiming it
in the Ears of Men: But he then, who is God's chosen Instrument to be a common
Benefactor, will be the Humblest Man in the World. Some who have been Careful
for the Poor have been very defective in this Grace, and have loved as well to
be taken notice of for it, as to do it.

Charity does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily
provoked, thinks no Evil. -- i. e. The Man of true Goodness or Charity, shows
no Impudence either in his Language, or his Carriage; He Will vindicate himself,
but he will asperse none, raise no Scandals, spread no false News, or Lies, be
modest among his Superiors, and affront none, much less his Maker. He studies
the Public Good chiefly; and, that as it is Public, and not merely as suiting
to his own Genius or Inclination. He Will be so far from Spite or Inveteracy,
that, to the utmost of his power, he will conquer the sudden. Eruptions of his
Passions; and neither the Mismanagement, or supposed Ingratitude of others,
shall force Him beyond the Bounds of Reason. He has no jealous thoughts of
others, as if they intended ill, when they did not; He means no such thing
himself, and measures the Innocence of others by his own: A Man may be very
kind to the Poor, and yet, be rude and ill-manner'd; study his own Humor only,
be mad for Trifles, and jealous of every Body, without a Contradiction.

Charity rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the Truth. The sincere
Christian takes no pleasure to see Innocence condemned, or Merit unrewarded.
He Is not pleased when Falsehood finds Favor, though his own Interests may be
advanced by it; nor can he love Confusion, though troubled Waters might be best
for himself to Fish in. He laughs not to see good Men disappointed of their
just Hopes; but when Truth, and Honesty, and real Worth is advanced, he is glad
for the Public, though his own Honor should be clouded by it: But it is
possible a large Almsgiver may be very defective in these respects.

Charity bears all things, believes all things, hops all things, endures
all things. -- The Man of Charity is the great Pillar on whom all Public
Assairs may safely rest; He adds Strength to a Cause and Efficacy, to a good
Design. He Will never divulge his Neighbor's Crimes, much less Calumniate him;
but if he can, with the veil of Love and Pity, he will cover the Multitude of his
Errors. He Is ready to believe every thing that is good of him; and to suppose
his Truth and Integrity, where it is not plainly obnoxious, in his general
Conversation. He Will live in hopes to see the Man, who is Vicious and
Extravagant at present, mend; and he will add his Counsel, and his Prayers, to
his favorable Expectations. He knows great Sinners have found Mercy by
Repentance; and why should he conclude that Man desperate, to whom God still
assords the means of Grace? For Himself, he fears no Calumny, he starts at no
Danger, but is ready to be a Confessor or Martyr, rather than to renounce that
Sweetness of Temper which Christianity introduces; or that Doctrine of Faith
which his Master has bequeathed to him. He Is not a Bigot for Errors, nor a
Patron of Blasphemies; Heaven's his aim, and Truth's his way; his Redeemer is
the great Master of it, and the Treasure of it is opened to him in his Divine
Revelations: A Man very forward to relieve the Poor may be an open Calumniator,
credulous of every spiteful Reflection, doubt of his Brother's Reformation,
when he is in a safer Course than himself, and prove a mere Ecebolius in his
Religion when he is in Danger of being called to Martyrdom.

We have seen then the Essentiating Characters of a truly good Christian, if he
have not this Grace of Charity, he is nothing; He Is no more capable of Heaven or
Happiness, than an Adulterer or a Murderer. This Love or Charity cannot subsist
where sound Faith and well-grounded Hope are wanting. A Man may give all his
Goods to Feed the Poor, and yet be without these; therefore a Man may give all
his Goods to feed the Poor, he may have every place filled with the Memorials
of his Beneficence, and yet for want of them be damned, eternally damned at
last.

But Bounty to the Poor being an inseparable Attendant on true Evangelical
Charity; and there being a certain Blessing promised to him who provides for
the Sick and Needy (if we Translate that passage rightly) for the Lord will
deliver him in the time of Trouble; Psalm. 41.1.
By what Marks shall we know when the liberal Giver wants this sanctifying
consummating Charity?

A Man gives all his Goods to support the Poor without this Charity, when He
does so, without any sound Principles plainly and necessarily moving him to
such Liberality. A Man of a naturally buisy and active temper, employing it in
a good and plausible, rather than in a destructive way to that Society in which
he lives, acts prudently; for by that means he keeps himself out of harm's way;
he gets Reputation among the Neighborhood, and makes his Life easy and
delightful; for every Man, even a professed Atheist, on such Considerations,
will be apt to do good to others; because their Blessings are, at least, safer
than their Curses. But the Reasons of this Bounty may cease; the natural
Constitution may flag; Wealth and Greatness may make a Man scorn his former
Fears, slight the Vulgar, and divert his Liberality. Again, A Man may have
little particular Designs to carry on, Kindness to the Poor may advance them;
but, when they are accomplished, nothing but Gratitude, a Virtue soon laid by,
can oblige him to continue it. These then, and such like, are insufficient
Principles, and will not make Almsgiving so much as the first Step to future
Happiness. Only true Faith, where it has possession of the Soul, is the
unfailing Principle of universal Goodness. Faith without Works is dead, Jam
2.17. Romans c. 3. c. 4.
for it is but a pretended Faith. Works without Faith are useless, for all Men's
Works are imperfect, and therefore in themselves unacceptable; If a Heathen Man
cloathe he Naked, feed the Hunry, and do such other like Works; yet because he
does them not in Faith, for the Honor and Love of God, they are but dead,
vain, and fruitless Works to him. Homil. 1. Of Good Works
Faith lays hold on a Savior, who, having purchased Pardon for us by his own
Immense Merits, gives it freely to our impersect Works. St. Paul, and St. James
are not at such odds as some imagine in this Doctrine. St. Paul's Controversy
was with those who were great Boasters of their own good Works; who, it may be,
Pharisee like, gave Tyths of all which they possessed, by which the Poor, as well
as God's Ministers, were plentifully provided for; and he lets them know, That
it was only Faith which could justisy both them and their Works, and Evidence
that they proceeded from a Divine Spirit; and that neither the Jews, by their
Ceremonial Rites, nor the Gentiles by their Moral Virtues, could be justified;
since Salvation could be attained only by Faith in that Jesus, whom the Jews
denied, and the Gentiles, till preached to, were ignorant of. Now Abraham
believed in this Savior, by Faith he saw his Day and rejoiced, John 8.56.
and therefore his Works, without regard to Circumcision or Uncircumcision were
accepted. St James's Dispute is against those who talked mightily of their
Faith, and pretended much to Orthodoxy in that, but in the mean time lived in
Sin, trespassed upon Laws, omitted Duties, and brought a Scandal upon their
Profession, i. e. They knew what was propounded to the Church to be believed,
but the substance of that Faith had made no Impression on their hearts; from
such therefore, Works were more particularly required to justify that Faith
which they pretended to, it being of the Essence of true Faith to be Operative;
if they did not work, 'twas certain that neither did they believe. Abraham
believed in the Messiah to come, and he believed in that God who had promised
him; but had he not offered to Sacrifice his Son at God's undoubted Command, he
had by that Refusal renounced his Faith; For how could he believe in God who
would not obey him? i. e. How could Faith be true without Works? Thus Faith and
Works, which are acceptable to God indeed, are inseparable one from another.
Works coming from an unpurg'd mind are of no value; But the Apostles always
teach us, Apostoli docent Fidem aptam esse ut nos purpet; purgatis d^^i
Spiritum sinctum, and sic Pidem sieri efficacem per Dilectionem, Gal. 5.6. ac
proinde Dilectionem, quae ex Fide and Spe eam comitante exurgat, plus valere
and Fide and Spe. 1 Cor. 13.13. Grot. ^^sac. 2.14.
That Faith purges us, That the Spirit of God is given to such as are purged,
and so Faith is made effectual by Love, and therefore, says he, Love which
rises from Faith and Hope together, is more valuable than Faith or Hope by
themselves are.

Again, Eternal Life, says Grotius, is the End at which Faith aims, Effectus ad
quem tendit Pides est vit^ aeterna, sed ita demum Effectum consequitur, si
adfit Purgatio a vitlis, Dilectio, and Dilectionis opera. Idem in v. 1^. Ego
Fidem meam non jactitans, sed perpetuam dans operam Modestiae, Patientiae,
Dilectioni, f^cile cuivis persuadebo, etiam tacens, esse in me veram Fidem; Nam
perpetua illa Sanctitas, and in malis Constantia qualis illo saeculo apparebat,
causam aliam, quam veram Fidem, ^^bere non poterat. Idem in v. 18.


and Faith obtains its end, when it is attended with Purity from Vice and Love,
and the Effects of Love. Again, these words, -- I will show thee my Faith by my
Works. -- He illustrates thus, -- I not boasting of my Faith, but always
exercising my self in Modesty, Patience and Love, will easily convince others
that I have true Faith, though I am silent; for that Universal Holiness and
Constancy in Sufferings which appeared in the Apostolical Age, could have no
other Original but true Faith: True sound Faith then, in his Sense, was the
necessary Parent of acceptable good Works. And this is plain too, from the
Parable of the Samaritan; A Lawyer asked our Savior, What he should do to
inherit Eternal Life? Luke 10.25, etc
Our Savior asks him again, What he read in the Law? He answers, Thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all
thy strength, and with all thy mind; and thy Neighbor as thy self. The first
was the Work of Faith, the second of Love. Our Lord agrees with him
immediately, Thou have answered right, this do and thou shall live. Now here
was no Question about the Necessity of Faith, or the Object of it; The Lawyer
asked not who is that God whom I should love so? Nor is the Question about the
Necessity of Love to others, that was agreed on too; but it was about the
Object of that Love, And who is my Neighbor? To which Christ answers in the
Parable, A Man went from Jerusalem to Jericho; he is robbed, wounded, and left in
the way. A Priest and a Levite, whose Country, whose common Faith, whose
Offices obliged them to compassion, passed him by; but a Samaritan, no
Heretic, but an Apostate, says Grotius, one of a Nation perpetually at feud
with the Jews, Samaritas Judaei ut (...) capitaliori quam ullovalios odio,
prosequebantur, Grot. in L^^ c. 10.33. Non proponitur hoc ut Samaritanos cum
Haereticis conferamus. L. Socinus, de H^ret puniendis. P. 24. S. 6.
sees him, pities him, relieves him at present, and takes care of him for the
future; and this man, the Lawyer confesses, was the wounded Man's Neighbor,
because he acted like one indeed: The Inference is, Go and do thou likewise; i
e. Lay aside all Animosities whatsoever when thou see a proper Object of
Mercy, and show Mercy wheresoever it is needful. But this setting the Samaritan
before the Lawyer for an Example, in a Parable, no more proves that a Man of a
false or no Faith may be saved by his Works of Mercy, than that the Ox or Ass,
in the Prophet, or the Ant, in the Wiseman, might be saved, because the
Sluggard and Rebel against God, are sent to learn Industry and Obedience from
them. Nor does it prove doing Good to those in want, Sermon on Mr. Firmin, p.
104. Act. c. 6.
to be of a more common and general Influence, and therefore more pleasing to
God, than a right Faith, or true knowledge, any more than, That the Seven
appointed to serve Tables, in the beginnings of the Church, were on That
Account, preferable to the Apostles, who were authorized to teach or make
Disciples of all Nations. The Inference from the Parable is clear; If a professed
Enemy could be so kind to his Enemy, what should a Child of God do, who is no
Man's Enemy? Christianus nullius est Hostis. Tertul. ad Scap.
how should he not be ashamed to be outdone in any work of Kindness or
Benignity?

But if this Bounty to the Poor be enough to save a Man whether his Faith be
right or wrong, (...), Laertius lib. 8. S. 73.
Empedocles, who threw himself into Aetna, that he might be reputed a God, had
a better right to that Honor, when out of his own Estate, not from the
Contributions of others, he gave Portions to promote the Marriages of many poor
Maids at Agrigentum, as Laertius tells us, which was a very noble kind of
Bounty. V. Menagii Observationes in Laertium, p. 363.
And the Pythagoreans, who had all things common, could not have mist of it;
particularly Clinias the Tarentine, who, when he heard that Prorus the Cyrenean
had lost his All in a public Calamity, and was by that means reduced to
Extremity, went a long Voyage to find him out, tho wholly a stranger, and made
his Condition as good as ever, out of his own Moneys. But these were the better
sort of Heathens, and for such some, it may be for their own sakes, have a
great deal of Charity. The Pharisees, however, if our Savior mistook them not,
were very ill Men; yet Josephus tells us, They were a very merciful Sect,
(...). Joseph. Ant. l. 13 c. 18. (...). Idem. c. 24.
on which reason King Alexander persuaded his Wife to make use of them in
State-matters after his own Decease, which Counsel when she followed, they made
good the Character, for they made it their business to recall the Banished, and
to set free the Prisoners. What shall we say of Judas? Had his Faith been
sound, certainly he would never have betrayed his Master; yet his Care for the
Poor was very great; when the odorous Spikenard was spent on his Lord's Feet,
Joh. 12.5.
he zealously cried, Why was not this Ointment sold for three hundred Pence,
and given to the Poor? But the Reflection of St. John on his action is severe,
and shows how wicked a wretch a pretense of caring for the Poor may cover. This
he said, not that he cared for the Poor, but because he was a Thief and had the
Bag, Joh. 12.6.
and bare what was put therein.

(...). Julian. fragm. Epist. p. 530. Edit. Petavianae.
But never did any Man speak higher or do greater things in this way of Bounty
to the Poor than Julian the Apostate: A general care and tenderness for all
Mankind is to be endeavored after, says he, The Consequences of it are many
and happy, but none happier than this, That it makes us acceptable to the Gods;
For the Divine Nature loving Mankind so much, must needs love them who
endeavor to imitate their Goodness. Again, Who ever was impoverished by his
Bounty to the Poor? (...). Id. Ibid.
I have often relieved those in want my self, and I have received my own again
from the Gods with mighty Interest; of which he subjoins a remarkable Instance.
(...). --
Nay, Julian persuades Men, not only to relieve the Good or Poor in general,
but he adds further, That it argues real Piety to feed and cloth our very
Enemies, those who are at Wars with us. Nay, Who, says he, (...). --
can think he worships Hospitable Jove according to duty, who sees the Needy,
and will not relieve them with one Farthing? The same Prince writing to Arsacius a
Pagan Priest, owns that Christianity flourished, because Christians were so
good to strangers, took such care to bury the Dead, (...).
and made so fair a show of Holiness; and declares, He knew no way of
conquering Christianity, but by the Endeavors of his own Party to excel the
Christians in those and other popular Virtues; (...).
and therefore he tells Arsacius and his Brethren, that He had ordered them a
vast Quantity of Corn and Wine at his own charge to enable them the better to
relieve the Poor and Strangers. (...). Ibid. p. 533. 4. V. Epist. 49. ad
Arsacium. p. 202.
Now if the Sermon on Mr. Firmin, p. 114.
Men of all Faiths shall receive sentence on the foot of their Deeds of Charity
or Beneficence, without any respect to their Opinions, as some would persuade
us, I know no reason why Empedocles or Clinias, why the Hypocritical Pharisees,
the Traitor Judas, or the Apostate Julian should not stand among the Sheep at
the great Day; Julian, Mr. Firmin's Epitaph, p. 89.
especially, having been zealous in every good Work beyond the Example of any
in our Age, cannot reasonably be reproached for that Faith which brought forth
such plenty of good Fruits.

But the Sheep, at that great Day, shall be Sentenced only by their Works of
Mercy, and the Goats by their neglect of them; True! for Men and Angels, the
whole rational World at least, shall be Witnesses of the Sentence, and
understand the Reason of it. The Judge, who knows all things, knows their
Hearts, and consequently the Sincerity and Rectitude of their Faith, but these
things are invisible to the Multitude. But for their Works, they have seen, and
known, and can judge of them, therefore their Works only are mentioned; and if
they be truly good, their goodness justifies that Faith to the Witnesses, not
as indifferent, but as sound and good, from which such good Works could
proceed; therefore Grotius observes well, Inter varias virtutes eminet
Misericordia, ideo hane pro omnibus ponens Christus, exemplis depingit maxim
notis and conspicuis; Opera autem ipsa potius nominat quam Animi affectum, ut
Humani Judicii Figura magis exprimeretur. Grot. in Mat. 25. v. 35.
That Mercy is of all Virtues the most visible, therefore Christ instances in
that instead of all the rest, and deciphers it by its fairest Marks, and he
names Works rather than Faith, or the Affections of the Mind, that the form of
Human Tribunals (where all things pass as matters are alleged and proved)
might be the more exactly expressed. Idem in v. 32.
And, if the same Grotius's Notion of the Sheep and Goats be right, That they
represent only sincere and false Christians, his Judgment is the plainer, That
the soundness or unsoundness of their Faith is that which moves the Judges
breast; though the outward appearance or the Truth and reality of their Works
be insisted on for the satisfaction of the Standers by. This is the true Import
of that Parable, and none but Ill men will endeavor to Interpret Scripture so
as to destroy it.

A Man gives all his Goods to feed the Poor, and yet has no Love or Charity,
when all his Beneficence springs from Vainglory, or is levelled at any mean or
mistaken end. That man had need to stand very well on his Guard against
temptation, who can avoid this insinuating Mischief. Honor and Reputation are
gaudy things, and Men are apt to have an Eye to them, even in those matters
wherein God's honor, and the acknowledgment of our Debt to him, ought to be
the great Inducement to, and the ultimate End of all our Actions. But, in such
a Case, all my Liberality can profit me nothing; Nor can Millions of hearty
Prayers sent up by those poor perishing Creatures, whom I have relieved, carry
me up one small degree toward Heaven; unless they prevail with God to bring me
to my self, to give me the Grace of Self-denial and Humility, that I may
ascribe all that good I Am an Instrument in, not to my self, but to the Grace of
God in me. Are not these the Hospitals which I have built? The Poor whom I have
fed? The Naked whom I have clothed? The Prisoners whom I have discharged, out
of my own or other Men's Estates, and to satisfy my own Compassionate Temper?
are as dangerous Questions; as, Is not this great Babylon which I have built,
Dan 4 30.
for the House of my Kingdom, by the Might of my Power, and for the Honor of
my Majesty? In such Cases a Man does what he does, not out of Gratitude to God,
or as a Faithful Steward of his Treasures; not out of real tenderness for the
Distressed; or because he cannot bear their Wants while himself lives in Plenty;
but he does it, to impose upon the unobserving World, to be Talked of, to be
Praised, and to have flattering Memorials and Monuments raised to him after
Death, which may serve to encourage Atheism and Hypocrisy, and make the Friends
of Libertinism believe, That it is no Matter what their Faith is, if they be but
free Disposers of their own, or Industrious Distributers of other Men's Bounty.

Men of this Humor are easily known; They Will not wait modestly for the
Commendations of others, but every where, and on every occasion proclaim their
own Good Deeds. None need to take care to spread their Glories, and few of
their commendable Actions shall be done in a Corner. This was the Pharisaic
way, they did all their Good Works to be seen of Men, and with respect to that
Way our Savior gives that admirable Caution, Mat. 6.1, 2.
Take heed that ye do not your Alms before Men to be seen of them, otherwise ye
have no Reward of your Father which is in Heaven. Therefore, when thou do
thine Alms, do not sound a Trumpet before thee, as the Hypocrites do, in the
Synagogues, and in the Streets, that they may have Glory of Men: Docet hic
Christus exemplo Beneficentiae, non posse Deo probari, quae ideo fiant, ut aut
Laus captetur aut Gratia. Grot. in loc.
Here, says Grotius, Christ instancing in Almsgiving, declares, That God cannot
approve those things which are done to curry Favor or to purchase Praise. Not
but that Public Occasions will require Public Liberality, and, according to a
Man's Station, a good Example may be of excellent use; but even in such cases a
wise or humble man, will rather give others leisure to applaud his Bounty, than
begin the Work himself. Philo, (...). Philo de Cherub. p. 128. E.
of old, had a just Notion of this way. If, says he, you examine all things
strictly, you will see that Men cried up for their Liberality, rather sell than
bestow their Bounties; and those, whom we think Alms-Men, are really Purchasers
of what they get; for when those who pretend to give, hunt on the other hand
for Honor and Fame, expecting a Reward for their Bounty, they sham us with a
gaudy name, and really strike a Bargain; for none but Sellers take a Price for
what they part with; Aben. Ezra apud Grotium in Matt. 6.^.
and R. Aben Ezra gives this for a Rule, If any Man gives Alms to the Poor, let
him not do it to get Honor, or that he may boast of it to others; for he who
does so shows, That he values the Praise of Men more than the favor of God.
Indeed our Savior assures us, that even such Men have their reward; but it is
only what they aim at, empty Breath and fleeting Air; while the modest
Christian, sound in Faith, and acting upon that Principle, obtains the End of
his Hope, the Salvation of his Immortal Soul.

Above all then; he mistakes who thinks Almsgiving is that Charity which shall
cover a multitude of Sins. He, who has that Charity, will, according as God has
blessed him, give Alms; but the Cause and the Effects of that Cause are very
different things. Alms are frequently enjoined, and he who sees his Brother
have, Joh. 3.1.7.
need, You shall find many who have not the Fruit of true Faith; who are not of
the Flock of Christ; and yet, as it appears, they flourish in good Works of
Mercy; you shall find them full of Pity, Compassion, and given to Justice, and
yet for all that they have no Fruit of their Works, because the chief Work
lacks. Hom. 1. Of Good Works.
and shuts up his bowels of compassion from Him, how dwells the love of God
in him? is a severe Question, but infers what we have been asserting all this
while, That Bounty to the Poor unless it proceeds from Faith and Love (for they
are inseparable) can do the Giver no service, whatever advantage the Receiver
may have by it. The Reward of Mercy is great, if it rise from a sound and
sincere Faith, or at least from a ductile Mind willing to be instructed, (...)
Constit. l. 8. c. 13.
and to embrace it with all humility and readiness. Thus in Clement's
Constitutions, we have that advice, If you have wherewith, give Alms with your
own hands for the Expiation of your sins, for by Alms and Faith sins are taken
away; Thus they go hand in hand, and these things which God has joined together
no Man ought to put asunder.

A Man may give all his Goods to feed the Poor without Charity; if he does so,
to support and bring Reputation to Heresy, and so to propagate Disorders and
Confusions in the Church of Christ; As if only such a Faith as the Giver owns
could be the Parent of such Works. We have observed already how Julian, by this
means, hoped to have undermined Christianity, and restored Paganism; Marianae
Rerum Hisp. l. 4. c. 14.
and 'twas thus Lucilla made use of her great Wealth and Interests to encourage
the Donatists. And indeed it is but reasonable, that those who call themselves
Christians, and are none, but have a design to break the Unity of the Church of
Christ, should have, or at least put on some very Popular qualities, whereby to
render their Heretical designs the less suspected. For if I have once
entertaind a great Opinion of a Man and his Conversation, I shall be very
unwilling to believe he intends ill, or that his Opinions can be damning, whose
Person is so acceptable. But when we talk of Heresy and Heretics, we are at a
loss. The Apostles, sure by some mistake, forewarn Christians often of
Sacrilege, Schism, and Heresy, as very great Sins; The two former, some, who
are touched too near, have endeavored to lose in a Mist, and would make us
believe there are none guilty of such sins now adays; And for the last,
others, who cry up one another for mighty Critics, reject the common Notion
which the World has hitherto had of Heresy and it is Friends. They tell us; it is
not the Falsehood of any Opinion that makes it to be a Heresy, and the Person
that holds it to be a Heretic, Sermon on Mr. Firmin, p. 110.
but it is the Clamor and Bustle made about it, which makes both the first and
the last. If then, according to their sense, a Priscillianist sit still, or
only slily and silently endeavors to seduce Souls, and a zealous good
Christian stands up vigorously in Defense of Truth, the Christian's a Heretic,
and Christianity Heresy, and the Priscillianist, for all his hellish Opinions,
a very Innocent Person, and by no means to be rejected. But if their Assertion
be true, according to common Sense, those who advance it are the greatest
Heretics of our Age; for they join both false Doctrines, and an extraordinary
Bustle and dangerous Warmth together. Errare possum, Haereticus esse nolo.
Haereses sunt Placit^ veh^mentius defensa.
It may be they will take shelter under St. Austin's, I may be in an Error, but I
will be no Heretic, who means he would not be Obstinate, for Obstinacy, not an
involuntary Mistake, makes the Heretic; But this will not help them. Their own
Critic calls Opinions too eagerly defended, Heresies; here again, since none
ever more scurrilously, impudently, or furiously defended their distinguishing
Opinions than these Men, by their own acknowledgment they are notorious
Heretics. Nor will their absurd pretended Syncretism with the Church of
England, as a sound part of the Catholic Church, (a sham offered only to
impose on Children) clear them of the Title.

Heresy indeed is a Word of an indifferent Signification in many Ancient
Authors; but, though both Grotius and Ravanellus think otherwise, it is no where
so in the New Testament. The Heresy or Sect of the Sadducees, Acts 5.17. Acts
15.5. Acts 4.
in St. Luke, is a Brand on them, and so it was on the Pharisees, when St. Paul
and Barnabas used it. Tertullus calls Christians, the Sect or Heresy of the
Nazarenes, by way of Reproach; and St. Paul understood the Jews meaning well
enough, when they called that way Heresy in which he worshipped the God of his
Fathers; v. 14.
Nor was their sense questionable who tell him, Acts 28.16. Acts 26.5.
that as for that Heresy, which he preached, they knew that it was every where
spoken against: and even where the same Apostle calls Pharisaism, the strictest
Heresy of the Jewish Nation, he declares against it. All other Texts, where
Heresy or Heretics are mentioned have such Characters or Epithets annexed, as
render their meaning indisputable. In Scripture then it is used always in an ill
sense, and, in it, the Heresy and Heretic are both condemned. But when St.
Peter forewarns us, 2 Pet. 2.1.
That there should be false Teachers among Christians, who should privily bring
in damnable Heresies. i. e. should spread Hellish Opinions, but as far as
possible conceal the Names of their Authors, he instances in One contrary to
that Faith which himself and the rest of the Apostles taught. They taught that
God had redeemed his Flock with his own Blood; These would deny the Lord who
bought them; and make him not God but a Creature, and consequently incapable of
Redeeming them. Such as these were Heretics in the Apostles days, and
afterward; and such are Heretics, and their Opinions damnable Heresies in
ours; and God knows, there are too many who follow their pernicious ways, by
reason of whom the way of Truth is evil spoken of. From all this we learn that
Heresy, in a Scripture and Ecclesiastical sense, is not Factiousness Civil,
but an opposition made to the Church and her Doctrines drawn from the Word of
God, and generally received from the Beginning, See a Sermon of the Necessity
of Heresies Printed 1688. Haeresis est quiddam Spirituale L. Socinus de Haeret.
puniendis. p. 106. Vide Lucii Lexicon Novi Testam. in verbo (...). Haereticos
statuimus omnes quicunque communis nostrae Fidei decretum aliquod secus
accipiunt, quam sacra Scriptura determinatum est, and in errore sic habitant ut
omnino se non sinant ab illo removeri. Nec illud in hoc genere spectandum est,
utrum aliquis ipse sibi Erroris fuerit Author, an illum aliunde acceptum ipse
sequatur and defendat. Reformatio legum Ecclesiast. Sect. 2. c. 1.
under pretense of their falsehood and deficiency, and out of Ostentation of a
purer and more perfect knowledge; and an Heretic is one, who chooses, embraces,
cherishes and obstinately defends Opinions contrary to true and sound Doctrine.
If this Account be right, we cannot be far to seek, to whom both the Title and
the Opinions belong; and such, even they themselves confess, are to be
rejected. Haereticus est qui Ambitione ductus, vel alicujus temporalis commodi
gratia, sub Religionis praetextu falsas ac novas Opiniones, vel gignit vel
sequitur, and sectantium turmas parat. Ex Augustino, citata haec a L. Socino.
Hic vero, asserente eodem Socino, est Factiosus Haereticus.
Haeretici simpliciter, seditiones volentes non excitant, sed pacate ac
placide, dissentientes, nemini vim inferunt, sententiam suam defendunt ac
docent, rectumque esse autumantes, etiam mordicus retinent, adeo ut, a Diabolo
decepti igne quoque cremari constantissime perferant. L. Socinus, de Haeret,
puniend. p. 87.6. Ergo simplex Haeresis, consentiente ipso Socino
Haereticissimo, in falsitate opinionum earumque ^criori defensione consistit.


Well, but him who is weak in the Faith we are to receive, therefore certainly
not to reject. But if those whom we have to do with are weak, and will own it,
whom shall we call strong? The Fathers of our Church, who are most admired for
Piety or Learning: The inferior Presbyters, who have labored hardest in the
Word and Doctrine, are all but Children, mere Pigmies in the hands of these
Defyers of the Armies of the living God: They are treated with all that scorn
and contempt, which Opinionative Critics, for they are all such, can throw upon
them. They Are confuted with nauseous Repetitions of bafled Arguments, and
abundance of scurrilous Humor, and Papanish Buffoonery. Yet God will accept of
them, they say. But we think, that if they keep now no better than themselves
and their own Writers, we need not wish, that an angry Judge, after Death,
would condemn them to worse Company. Beneficence designed to promote such
Heresies, and to make such Men better thought of, cannot be accompanied with
that Charity which our Text recommends.

For that Charity always tries to heal, not to tear open the Churches Wounds:
It neither invents nor favors New Opinions in Religion, but labors to
preserve the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace, and in Righteousness of
Life. That Heavenly Charity looks above the Flatteries of vain and foolish Men;
owns the insufficiency of the best humane Works; and knows it can never
discharge that vast Debt it owes to Divine Goodness, by the most profuse Bounty
to the Necessities of Men. The Son of this Love, values one spark of such
Charity more than a thousand senseless Criticisms, which serve only to derogate
from the Truth and Wisdom of his Maker. He believes in God the Father, God the
Son, and God the Holy Ghost, according to those Revelations they have made of
themselves in Scripture; and would rather believe the Prophets and Apostles
honest Men than quibbling Sophisters. His pure unspotted Love, with respect to
God, must always believe in him, depend on, admire and adore him; and when he
remembers his own distance from God by Sin, and God's Condescension to purchase
Pardon and Grace for him by his own most precious Blood, though in that state
of Enmity, That Faith which he has in him, that Love which he has to him, must
make him always tender, compassionate and merciful with respect to Men. We need
to run to no false Opinions to excite us to Beneficence, Wise Men wont pretend
to gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles; This is a faithful saying, and
these things we of the Church of England affirm constantly, That those who have
believed in God might be careful to maintain good Works; these things are good
and profitable to Men.

We would then have the Poor provided for, we would encourage a just care for
them; we pretend in vain to be Christians if we forget our poor Brethren; for
we were poorer by far, when our merciful Savior made himself poor on our
Accounts, and extended his Compassion toward us. If any one will give all his
Goods to feed the Poor, provided he wrongs none else by that Liberality, and
the Love of God constrains him, may his Heavenly Father, who sees in secret,
reward him openly! He who gives to the Poor should give without Constraint,
without Grudging, and with Pleasure, for God loves a cheerful Giver. He ought
to give proportionably to what God has blessed him with; He who voluntarily
devotes the Tenths of all he has to the support of the Poor, does no more, and
none ever suffered yet by a Bounty so proportioned. What he gives ought to be
his own, i. e. not gotten by Address and Craft, or by Violence; for he who
wrongs one to feed or cloth another, gives Nothing, and by such Sacrifices,
never pleases but offends his Maker. But if the Rich in this world be sound in
the Faith, if they do good, if they be Rich in Good Works, ready to distribute,
willing to Communicate, they lay up in store for themselves a good foundation,
that they may lay hold on eternal Life. Here Is Love! here is Charity indeed!
enough to sanctify their Alms, and to make the Prayers of the Poor a Treasure
of Eternal Blessings to them.

But since the Rich and Willing cannot perhaps tell readily where to bestow
their Bounty without the Hands and Eyes of others, V. Vitringam de Nominibus
Ministrorum Ecclesiae and Synagogae. c.5.
surely we cannot in our own Church, among Christians, want some Man or Men of
Honest report, full of the Holy Ghost and Wisdom, (who therefore will neither
deny his Being, nor reduce him to the meanness of a Creature, nor divert the
treasures of the Poor, to encourage such as by their Writings and Discourses do
both) who may be appointed over this Business. Ill Men are commonly of the most
active and stirring Tempers, they know the least neglect ruins their Affairs;
Good Men suppose their Cause will manage and secure it self; but though it will
do so, their Industry is not a whit the less required; and while the activity
of Ill Men destroys them, we have an infallible Assurance, That it is good to be
zealously affected always in a good Cause. Men sound in the Faith, would not
only be Faithful Stewards with regard to the Bodies of those in Want, but
they would be Pious Guardians of their Souls too; They Would instill the Principles of
sound Religion into them, as well as relieve their outward Necessities; and a
Love to Men's Bodies must certainly yield to a tenderness for their Souls. A
Lazarus, full of sores and starving, may be carried by Angels into Abraham 's
Bosom; but without Faith its impossible to please God; and by Grace, both Poor
and Rich must be saved, and that not of themselves, it is the gift of God. Ephesians.
2.8. 1 These. 1.3.
The Work of Faith, the Labor of Love, and the Patience of Hope, will always
be favorably remembered both by God and Men. I Will never confide in that Man,
who will not believe his God, and must suspect Him to be full of Trick and
Design, who represents his Maker as guily of Artifice and Chicanery in his
Revelations of himself to the Children of Men. But he who is right and sincere
in his Faith toward God, I Am sure will be trusty to his Neighbor. He Will be
kind to both the Bodies and Souls of the Poorest. He Will visit the Fatherless
and Widows in their Afflictions, and keep himself unspotted from the World. By
such a Hand I Will give what I can to feed the Poor, I Will live by Faith, I Will
wait in Hope, and act with Charity, and never fear losing my Everlasting Reward.

Collect on Quinquages.
O God who have taught us that all our Doings without Charity are nothing
worth; send thy Holy Ghost, and pour into our Hearts that most excellent Gift
of Charity, the very bond of Peace and of all Virtues, without which whosoever
lives is counted dead before Thee. Grant this for thine only Son Jesus
Christ's sake. Amen.

Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, Three Persons, but
One Infinite and Eternal God, be given, as is most due, all Honor, Glory,
Praise, Power, Might, Majesty and Dominion, now, henceforth and for evermore.
Amen and Amen.

FINIS.
MYsteries in Religion Vindicated: Or the Filiation, Deity, and Satisfaction of
our Savior Asserted, against Socinians and others. With Occasional Reflections
on several late Pamphlets. By Luke Milbourne, a Presbyter of the Church of
England.

The Doctrine of the Glorious Trinity not Explained but Asserted by several
Texts as they are Expounded by the Ancient Fathers and Later Divines, for the
Satisfaction of such as doubt, the Conviction of such as deny, the Confirmation
of such as believe this Mysterious Article of the Christian Faith. By Francis
Gregory D. D. and Rector of Hambleden in the County of Bucks.

An Answer to an Heretical Book called, The Naked Gospel, which was Condemned
and ordered to be Publicly Burnt by the Convocation of the University of
Oxford, Aug. 19. 1690. With some Reflections on Dr. Bury's New Edition of that
Book. To which is added, A Short History of Socinianism. By William Nichols, M.
A. Fellow of Merton College in Oxford, and Chaplain to the Right Honorable
Ralph Earl of Montague.

All Three Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop 's. Head in St. Paul 's
Chuch-Yard.

BOOKS Printed for Brab. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in Cornhil.
SERMONS concerning the Divinity and Incarnation of our Blessed Savior,
Preached in the Church of Sr. Lawrence Jewry. By John late Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury. 8 vo.

Certain Propositions, by which the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, is so
explained, according to the ancient Fathers, as to speak it not Contradictory
to Natural Reason, together with a Defense of them; in answer to the Objections
of a Socinian Writer, in his newly Printed Consideration on the Explications of
the Doctrine of the Trinity. Occasioned by these Propositions among other
Discourses, 4to. Price 6 d.

A Second Defense of the Propositions, by which the Doctrine of the Holy
Trinity is so explained, according to the Ancient Fathers, as to speak it not
Contradictory to Natural Reason; In Answer to a Socinian Manuscript, in a
Letter to a Friend. Together with a third Defense of those Propositions, in
Answer to the newly Published Reflections contained in a Pamphlet, Entitled, A
Letter to the Reverend Clergy of Both Universities. in 4to. Price 1 s. Both by
the Right Reverend Father in God, Edward Lord Bishop of Gloucester.

A Defense of the Blessed Trinity. By Isaac Barrow, D. D. late Master of
Trinity College in Cambridge. Never before Printed in 8vo. Price 12 d.

A Seasonable Vindication of the Blessed Trinity. Being an Answer to this
Question, Why do you believe the Doctrine of the Trinity? Collected from the
Works of the most Reverend Dr. John Tillotson, late Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the Right Reverend Dr. Edward Stillingfleet, now Lord Bishop of
Worcester. In 8vo. Price 12 d.


