A DISCOURSE Showing In what state THE THREE KINGDOMS Are in At this present.



Printed in the year, 1641.

In what State the three Kingdoms are at this present.
SIR,

AS the faces of all Britane show their hearts and inclinations, so if their
hearts were glazed with a Crystal, they would appear fearful of the
future: were not the representative body of the State careful to cure the
present malady, purge the distempered humors and save the much gangrend body,
by cutting some rotten and putrifide members off; which infect, infest and
invade the republique; this makes me cheerful to discover the conceptions of
the wise, and not as an Orator, but relate their opinion as their auditor: I
hope it will take away from me ostentation, and trouble from the reader even to
give ease of discourse.

Their profound sighs and earnest prayers might quicken my ingenie, better
then the sound of excellent instruments can revive the spirit; to present this
with all obedience to my Sovereign, and faith to the Country, and declare what
is convenient to be done at this time, submitting my self modestly to head and
body.

Now if those stream of tears and sweet perfumes, make not my pen fruitful
and odoriferous, pardon my rudeness, and consider the state we are now in.

When our miserable condition perceived (before the access of the universal
body) by the wrinckles, put on the brow of ruined affairs, council weakened,
and reputation of State blasted, that the people cry out against such
instruments; what miserable condition are we brought to? Oh God! suffer not
ill Counselors to be as a bad spleen, to swell so big as to make lean the
Commonwealth, that our empty purses be not filled with blood, though with
tears: wherefore I humbly beseech the head to produce such effect, as the
Sun on moist and cold grounds, to reduce the general capacity to such an
influence of Justice, Peace, Religion and liberty; and that in lieu thereof,
the people may make him a rich and potent King.

As all Rivers return to the Ocean, so shall the Laborinth we are in, be by
the help of wise Ariadnes escaped, and the golden fleece, continuance of
Gospel, Justice, Peace and downy tranquillity, with help of those godly
Medeas, be preserved and procured: Therefore not as a Lawyer, give me leave as
a welwisher to the State, to put the case by way of supposition.

If the fundamental Laws be quite overthrown, Religion altered, the
Nobility taken away by counsels of war (as the Lord Mount Noris should have
been) the meaner sort used as Pryn, Burton and Bastwick; the propriety of
goods taken away from the subject; an Army force an Arbitrary way of
government, and justice bought and sold; what misery will follow? when the
Judges shall affirm it legal, the Clergy wrongfully in their Pulpits teach
it, and the Cabinet Council authorize the convenience for matter of State;
therefore to have our Laws established, Religion maintained, the pride of
Prelates abased, Justice administered, Liberty settled, and Peace continued for
after times: It is necessary the King Lords and Commons, join in a most severe
punishment, that none in the Postea, dare to enterprise the surprise and ruin
of the common good, for it is an infallible maxim, the King is richer in the
hearts, then in the treasures of his Subjects.

Surely there was never a fitter time, nor a more convenient occasion then now,
when three Kingdoms unite for their own safety; when the Scot has an army on
foot for this purpose, and the King has promised they shall not be
interrupted in their Counsels, and God requires it for his glory.

Especially when Ministers of State have begun to act this fatal Tragedy, the
guiltiness by so many lively testimonies proved, and the treason by presidents
and weighty authority assured, by Law maintained, and by all the Commons house
adjudged, who have power by 25. Ed. 3. and when it is brought to so good a
pass by the Lords, who both have Legislative power, why should not Lords and
Commons bring it to perfection; that the King sign; that who shall dare to
alter Religion, innovate Law, or take away liberty of the Subject, be condignly
punished, and for the future, cause an express Law to be made on purpose, to
attaint blood, forfeit life, lands and goods, if any shall assay such crying
exorbitances.

If by the Law it be high treason to kill a Commissioner of Oyer and Terminer,
in fear of justice; a majore to confound the whole body, when a Commissioner
is but one poor member of the body politic.

2. To make a Law, none be capable of any place of government, that has or
shall give such counsel, and leave the rest to the trienniall Parliament, and
not graspe too much, lest all the harpies fly away.

Likewise it is necessary to make a remonstrance of the necessity of giving
300000. to the Scots, to give satisfaction to future ages, that it was no
pusilanimity, but upon mature deliberation; because the evident necessity and
inevitable dangers cast upon us by ill counsel, justly caused it.

To the purpose, the house of Commons has done wisely, to endeavor to clip
the wings of the Clergy, that they may fly into no temporal place, whose pens
and tongues have uttered such poison against the common good, and in their
pride would willingly adhere to Rome, as by many superstitions it plainly
appears; they have introduced some Babilonian ceremonies, and made a bridge
unto the Church by the Arminian opinion, to pass over to Popery.

The State of Venice jealous of any their members, confederating with enemies
cause them to bestrangled and hanged up between Columns, confiscate their
goods and estates, bannish their children and make them incapable of
government: if for jealousy, much more for so foul acts committed, ought they
dye, by the Law of God and man.

Among the Athenians, Lacedaemonians and Romans; whosoever should go about to
alter the form of government, or Laws without public consent, has been
ever accounted the highest Traitor; witness their Ostracisme, and many such
exemplary punishments, used to such wretches.

If destroying the head be high treason, then ruining the state of the body
must be; for if it be suffocated with gross spirits the head will not only
ache, but be Apoplecticall or Lethargicall, such a sympathy or rather relation
is betwixt head and members, that no Rhetorique or eloquence can take it away:
In this case it is no pity, but convenient to destroy the brood of such
vipers, and by our Law the intention makes it treason. But how many ways the
Lord of Strafford has perpetrated this intention, has been often proved.

In 18. and 21. Iacobi, The whole house adjudged it treason, to alien the
hearts of the Subjects from the Sovereign, which has been done by his
Counselors. His imprisoning without Law, was high Treason, in Sir Haukin Hanby
25. E. 3. Art. 61. who was drawn, hanged and quartered.

Judge Thorpe for giving such an oath contrary to Law, was high Treason; and is
not his?

The reason Rich. 2. was deposed (plainly manifested) was because he suffered
diverse malefactors to escape, (condemned by Parliament) which caused the
oppression of the Subject and ruin of the Kingdom.

In all ages a Lethargy in Kings has caused their ruin: witness Ed. 2. Rich.
2. and H. 6. (I humbly desire God to bless his Majesty.) But consider we,
that the three Kingdoms will not be satisfied unless the wrong received be
expiated with the oblation of some, have caused a heretic condition.

The Lord of Strafford has had counsel in case of treason, when none has had
the like since the Conquest.

So the whole world may see with what temper, gravity and patience they proceed.

Ed. Earl of Northumberland, in the 8. of Rich. 2. (because his Deputy let the
Scots take Barwicke Castle) was condemned of high Treason, and yet he never
consented thereunto, for it was done without his privity: but the Lord of
Strafford writ to the Major of Newcastle to let in the Scots, and caused the
Arms to be taken away from the four adjacent Counties, making them incapable
of defense.

Wherefore it is visible as the sun, he is guilty, besides his other crimes;
now his delay of punishment has kindled such a fire, as all the Subjects of
the three Kingdoms are on a flame, and will not be satisfied: Ex parvis magna
Crescunt.

I pray God divert the evil, and give us true repentance.

FINIS.

