A Brief HISTORY OF MOSCOVIA: AND Of other less-known Countries lying eastward
of Russia as far as Cathay.

Gathered from the Writings of several Eyewitnesses.

By JOHN MILTON.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for Brabazon Aylmer at the Three Pigeons
against the Royal Exchange. 1682.

The Author's PREFACE.
THE study of Geography is both profitable and delightful; but the Writers
thereof, though some of them exact enough in setting down Longitudes and
Latitudes, yet in those other relations of Manners, Religion, Government and
such like, accounted Geographical, have for the most part missed their
proportions. Some too brief and deficient satisfy not; others too voluminous
and impertinent cloy and weary out the Reader; while they tell long Stories of
absurd Superstitions, Ceremonies, quaint Habits, and other petty Circumstances
little to the purpose. Whereby that which is useful, and only worth
observation, in such a wood of words, is either overslip't, or soon forgotten:
which perhaps brought into the mind of some men, more learned and judicious,
who had not the leisure or purpose to write an entire Geography, yet at least
to assay something in the description of one or two Countries, which might be
as a Pattern or Example, to render others more cautious hereafter, who intended
the whole work. And this perhaps induced Paulus Jovius to describe only
Muscovy and Britain. Some such thoughts, many years since, led me at a vacant
time to attempt the like argument; and I began with Muscovy, as being the most
northern Region of Europe reputed civil; and the more northern Parts thereof,
first discovered by English Voiages. Wherein I saw I had by much the advantage
of Jovius. What was scattered in many Volumes, and observed at several times by
Eyewitnesses, with no cursory pains I laid together, to save the Reader a far
longer travail of wandering through so many desert Authors; who yet with some
delight drew me after them, from the eastern Bounds of Russia, to the Walls of
Cathay, in several late Iourneys made thither overland by Russians, who
describe the Countries in their way far otherwise than our common Geographers.
From proceeding further other occasions diverted me. This Essay, such as it is,
was thought by some, who knew of it, not amiss to be published; that so many
things remarkable, dispersed before, now brought under one view, might not
hazard to be otherwise lost, nor the labor lost of collecting them.

J. M.
ADVERTISEMENT.
This Book was writ by the Author's own hand, before he lost his sight. And
sometime before his death disposed of it to be printed. But it being small, the
Bookseller hoped to have procured some other suitable Piece of the same
Author's to have joined with it, or else it had been published 'ere now.

MOSCOVIA: OR, Relations of Moscovia, As far as has been discovered by English
VOYAGES;
Gathered from the Writings of several Eyewitnesses: And of other less-known
Countries lying Eastward of Russia as far as Cathay, lately discovered at
several times by Russians.
CHAP. I.
A brief Description.
THE Empire of Moscovia, or as others call it, Russia, is bounded on the North
with Lapland and the Ocean; Southward by the Crim Tartar; on the West by
Lituania, Livonia and Poland; on the East by the River Ob, or Oby, and the
Nagayan Tartars on the Volga, as far as Astracan.

The north parts of this Country are so barren, The North and East, Hack. 251.
that the Inhabitants fetch their Corn a 1000 miles, and so cold in Winter that
the very Sap of their Wood-fewel burning on the fire, freezes at the Brands end
where it drops. The Mariners which were left a shipboard in the first English
Voyage thither, Hack. vo. 1.
in going up only from their Cabins to the Hatches, 248.
had their breath so congealed by the cold, that they fell down as it were
stifled. The Bay of Saint Nicholas, Saint Nicholas,
where they first put in, lies in 64 degrees; Hack. 376.
called so from the Abbey there built of Wood; wherein are 20 Monks; unlearned,
as then they found them, and great Drunkards: their Church is fair, full of
Images, and Tapers. There are besides but 6 Houses, whereof one built by the
English. In the Bay over against the Abbey is Rose Island, Rose Island*
full of damask and red Roses, Hack. 365.
Violets, and wild Rosemary; the Isle is in circuit 7 or 8 miles: about the
midst of May the snow there is cleared, having two months been melting; then
the ground in 14 days is dry, and Grass knee-deep within a month: after
September Frost returns, and Snow a yard high: it has a House built by the
English near to a fresh fair Spring North-east of the Abbey on the other side of
Duina is the Castle of Archangel; Archangel.
where the English have another House. The River Duina Duina.
beginning about 700 miles within the Country, having first received Pinega
Pinega.
falls here into the Sea, very large and swift, but shallow. It runs
pleasantly between Hills on either side; beset like a Wilderness with high
Fur, and other Trees: their Boats of Timber without any Iron in them, are
either to sail, or to be drawn up with Ropes against the stream.

North-east beyond Archangel stands Lampas, Lampas, 284.
where twice a year is kept a great Fair of Russes, Tartars and Samoeds: and to
the Land-ward Mezen, and Slobotca two Towns of traffic between the River
Pechora, or Petzora, and Duina; To Seaward lies the Cape of Candinos, Candinos,
Colgoieve, Pur. par. 3. 533.
and the Island of Colgoieve about 30 leagues from the Bar of Pechora in 69
degrees.

The River Pechora or Petzora holding his course through Siberia, how far, the
Russians thereabouts know not, runs into the Sea at 72. mouths, full of Ice:
abounding with Swans, Ducks, Geese and Partridge, which they take in July, sell
the Feathers, and salt the Bodies for Winter Provision. On this River spreading
to a Lake stands the Town of Pustozera Pustozera, ibid. Purc.
in 68 degrees, having some 80, or 100 Houses, where certain Merchants of Hull
wintered in the year 1611. The Town Pechora small and poor has 3 Churches.
They traded there up the River 4 days journey to Oustzilma a small Town of 60
Houses. Purc. 549.
The Russians that have travailed, say that this River springs out of the
Mountains of Iougoria and runs through Permia. Not far from the Mouth thereof
are the Straits of Vaigats, of which hereafter: more eastward is the Point of
Naramzy, 545. 551.
and next to that, the River Ob. Beyond which, the Muscovites have extended
lately their dominion. Touching the Riphaean Riphaean Mountains.
Mountains whence Tanais was anciently thought to spring, our men could hear
nothing; but rather that the whole Country is Champain, and in the northmost
part huge and desert Woods of Fur, abounding with Black Wolves, Bears, Buffs,
and another Beast called Rossomakka, whose Female brings forth by passing
through some narrow place, as between two Stakes; and so presses her Womb to a
disburthening. Travailing southward they found the Country more pleasant, From
Saint Nicholas to Mosco.
fair and better inhabited, Corn, Pasture, Meadows and huge Woods. Arkania,
546, 542.
Arkania (if it be not the same with Archangel) is a place of English trade,
from whence a days journey distant, but from Saint Nicholas a 100 versts,
Colmogro Colmogro,
stands on the Duina: Hack. 376.
a great Town not walled, but scattered. The English have here Lands of their
own, given them by the Emperor, and fair Houses; not far beyond, Pinega
running between Rocks of Alabaster and great Woods, meets with Duina. From
Colmogro to Vstiug Vstiug.
are 500 versts or little miles, an ancient City upon the Confluence of Iuga,
Hack. 312.
and Sucana into Duina which there first receives his name. Thence continuing
by water to Wologda; Wologda.
a great City so named of the River which passes through the midst; it has a
Castle walled about with Brick and Stone, and many wooden Churches, two for
every Parish, the one in Winter to be heated, the other used in Summer; this is
a Town of much Traffic a 1000 miles from Saint Nicholas. All this way by water
no lodging is to be had but under open Sky by the River side, and other
provision only what they bring with them. From Wologda by Sled they go to
Yeraslave Yeraslave.
on the Volga, whose breadth is there at least a mile over; and thence runs
2700 versts to the Caspian Sea, Hack. 377.
having his head Spring out of Bealozera, which is a Lake, 248.
amidst whereof is built a strong Tower wherein the Kings of Moscovy reserve
their Treasure in time of War. From this Town to Rostove, then to Pereslave a
great Town situate on a fair Lake; thence to Mosco.

Between Yeraslave and Mosco which is 200 miles, the Country is so fertile, so
populous and full of Villages, that in a forenoon 7 or 800 Sleds are usually
seen coming with Salt Fish, 251.
or laden back with Corn. 335.


Mosco Mosco.
the chief City, lying in 55 degrees, distant from Saint Nicholas 1500 miles,
is reputed to be greater than London with the Suburbs, 313.
but rudely built, their Houses and Churches most of Timber, few of Stone,
their Streets unpav'd; it has a fair Castle apiece, upon a Hill, two
miles about, with Brick Walls very high, and some say 18 foot thick, 16 Gates,
and as many Bulwarks; in the Castle are kept the chief Markets, and in Winter
on the River being then firm Ice. This River Moscua on the south-west side
encloses the Castle, wherein are nine fair Churches with round gilded Towers,
and the Emperor's Palace; which neither within, nor without is equal for state
to the King's Houses in England but rather like our Buildings of old fashion
with small Windows, some of Glass, some with Latices, or Iron Bars.

They who travail from Mosco to the Caspian, South-east.
go by Water down the Moscua to the River Occa; Hack. 325.
then by certain Castles to Rezan, a famous City now ruinate; the 10 th day to
Nysnovogrod where Occa falls into Volga, which the Tartars call Edel. From
thence the 11 th day to Cazan a Tartan City of great wealth heretofore, now
under the Russian; walled at first with Timber and Earth, but since by the
Emperor Vasiliwich with free Stone. From Cazan to the River Cama falling into
Volga from the Province of Permia, the People dwelling on the left side are
Gentiles, and live in Woods without Houses: 334.
beyond them to Astracan, Tartars of Mangat, and Nagay; on the right side those
of Crimme. From Mosco to Astracan is about 600 leagues. The Town is situate in
an Island on a Hill-side walled with Earth, but the Castle with Earth and
Timber; the Houses except that of the Governor's, and some few others, poor
and simple; the Ground utterly barren, and without Wood: they live there on
Fish, and Sturgeon especially; which hanging up to dry in the Streets and
Houses brings whole swarms of Flies, and infection to the Air, and often great
Pestilence. This Island in length 12 leagues, 3 in breadth is the Russian limit
toward the Caspian, which he keeps with a strong Garrison; being 20 leagues
from that Sea into which Volga falls at 70 mouths. From Saint Nicholas, or from
Mosco to the Caspian they pass in 46 days and nights, most part by Water.

Westward West.
from Saint Nicholas 1200 miles, Novogrod. 365.
is the City Novogrod 58 degrees, the greatest Mart-town of all this Dominion,
and in bigness not inferior to Mosco. The way thither is through the western
bottom of Saint Nicholas Bay, and so along the Shore full of dangerous Rocks to
the Monastery Solofky, wherein are at least 200 Monks; the People thereabout in
a manner Savages, yet Tenants to those Monks. Thence to the dangerous River
Owiga, wherein are Waterfalls as steep as from a Mountain, and by the violence
of their descent kept from freezing; so that the Boats are to be carried there
a mile over land: which the Tenants of that Abbey did by command, and were
guides to the Merchants without taking any reward. Thence to the Town Povensa
standing within a mile of the famous Lake Onega 320 miles long; and in some
places 70, at narrowest 25 broad, and of great depth. Thence by some
Monasteries to the River Swire; then into the Lake Ladiscay much longer than
Onega: after which into the River Volhusky which through the midst of Novogrod
runs into this Lake, and this Lake into the Baltic sound by Narv and Revel.
Their other Cities toward the western bound are Plesco, Smolensko on Vobsco.

The Emperor exercises absolute power: Governm.
if any man die without male issue, Hac. 240.
his Land returns to the Emperor. Any rich man who through age, or other
impotence is unable to serve the Public, being informed of, is turned out of
his Estate, and forced with his Family to live on a small Pension, while some
other more deserving, is by the Duke's authority put into possession. The
manner of informing the Duke is thus. Your Grace, says one, has such a
Subject, abounding with Riches, but for service of the State unmeet, and you
have others poor and in want, but well able to do their Country good service.
Immediately the Duke sends forth to enquire, and calling the Rich man before
him, Friend, says he, you have too much Living, and are unserviceable to your
Prince; less will serve you, and the rest maintain others who deserve more. The
man thus called to impart his Wealth, repines not, but humbly answers, that all
he has is God's, and the Duke's: as if he made restitution of what more justly
was another, than parted with his own. Every Gentleman has rule and justice
over his own Tenants: if the Tenants of two Gentlemen agree not, they seek to
compose it, if they cannot, each brings his Tenant before the high Judge of
that Country. They have no Lawyers, but every man pleads his own Cause, or else
by Bill or Answer in writing delivers it with his own hands to the Duke: yet
Justice by corruption of inferior Officers is much perverted. Where other
proof is wanting, they may try the matter by personal combat, or by champion.
If a Debtor be poor, he becomes bondsman to the Duke, who lets out his labor
till it pay the dept; till then he remains in bondage: Hac. 309.
another trial they have by lots.

The Revenues Revenues.
of the Emperor are what he list, and what his Subjects are able; and he omits
not the coursest means to raise them: for in every good Town there is a drunken
Tavern, called a Cursemay, which the Emperor either lets out to farm, Hac. 314.
or bestows on some Duke, or Gentleman in reward of his Service; who for that
time is Lord of the whole Town, robbing and spoiling at his pleasure; till
being well enricht, he is sent at his own charge to the Wars, and there
squeezed of his ill got wealth; by which means the waging of war is to the
Emperor little or nothing chargeable.

The Russian armeth not less in time of war than 300 thousand men; Forces.
half of whom he takes with him into the Field, Hac. 1239.
250.
the rest bestows in Garrisons on the Borders. He presses no Husbandman or
Merchant, but the Youth of the Realm. He uses no Foot, but such as are
Pioners, or Gunners, of both which sort 30 thousand. The rest being Horsemen,
are all Archers, and ride with a short Stirrup after the Turkish. Their Armor
is a Coat of Plate, and a Skull on their Heads. Some of their Coats are covered
with Velvet, or cloth of Gold; for they desire to be gorgeous in Arms, but the
Duke himself above measure: his Pavilion covered with cloth of Gold, or Silver,
set with precious Stones. They use little Drums at the Saddle bow instead of
Spurs; for at sound thereof the Horses run more swiftly.

They fight without order; Hac. 314. 250.
nor willingly give battle but by stealth or ambush; 250.
of cold and hard Diet marvelously patient; for when the Ground is covered with
Snow froz'n a yard thick, the common Soldier will lie in the Field two months
together without Tent, or covering over head; only hangs up his Mantle against
that part from whence the Weather drives, and kindling a little fire, lies him
down before it, with his Back under the Wind: his Drink, the cold Stream
mingled with Oat-meal, and the same all his Food: his Horse fed with Green Wood
and Bark, stands all this while in the open Field, yet does his service. The
Emperor gives no pay at all, but to Strangers; yet repaies good deserts in war
with certain Lands during life; and they who oftenest are sent to the wars,
think themselves most favored, Hac. 316.
though serving without Wages. On the 12 th of December yearly the Emperor
rides into the Field which is without the City, with all his Nobility on
Jennets and Turkey Horses in great state: before him 5000 Harquebusiers, who
shoot at a bank of Ice till they beat it down, the Ordnance, which they have
very fair of all sorts, they plant against two wooden Houses filled with earth
at least 30 foot thick, and beginning with the smallest, shoot them all off
thrice over, having beat those two Houses flat. Above the rest 6 great Cannon
they have, whose Bullet is a yard high, so that a man may see it flying; then
out of Morter-pieces they shoot wildfire into the Air. Thus the Emperor
having seen what his Gunners can do, returns home in the same order.

They follow the Greek Church, Religion.
but with excess of Superstitions; Hac. 253.
their Service is in the Russian Tongue. They hold the Ten Commandments not to
concern them, saying that God gave them under the Law, which Christ by his
death on the Cross has abrogated: the Eucharist they receive in both kinds;
they observe 4 Lents, 242. 321.
have Service in their Churches daily, from two hours before dawn to Evening;
yet for Whordom, Drunkenness and Extortion none worse than the Clergy.

They have many great and rich Monasteries, 320.
where they keep great hospitality. That of Trojetes has in it 700 Friars, and
is walled about with Brick very strongly, having many Pieces of Brass Ordnance
on the Walls; most of the Lands, Towns and Villages within 40 miles belong to
those Monks, who are also as great Merchants as any in the Land. During Easter
Holy Days when two Friends meet they take each other by the hand; one of them
saying, the Lord is risen; the other answering, 318.
it is so of a truth; and then they kiss, whether Men or Women. The Emperor
esteems the Metropolitan next to God, after our Lady, and Saint Nicholas, as
being his spiritual Officer, himself but his temporal. 320, 254.
But the Muscovites that border on Tartaria are yet Pagans.

When there is love between two, Marriages.
the Man among other trifling Gifts, Hac. 322.
sends to the Woman a Whip, to signify, if she offend, what the must expect;
and it is a Rule among them, that if the Wife be not beaten once a week, she
thinks her self not beloved, and is the worse; yet are they very obedient, and
stir not forth, but at some Seasons. Upon utter dislike, the Husband divorces;
314.
which Liberty no doubt they received first with their Religion from the Greek
Church, and the Imperial Laws.

Their Dead they bury with new Shoes on their Feet, Burial.
as to a long Journey; 242, 254, 323.
and put Letters testimonial in their Hands to Saint Nicholas, or Saint Peter,
that this was a Russe of Russes and died in the true Faith; which, as they
believe, Saint Peter having read, forthwith admits him into Heaven.

They have no Learning, Manners.
nor will suffer to be among them; 241, 314.
their greatest friendship is in drinking; they are great Talkers, Liars,
Flatterers and Dissemblers. They delight in gross Meats and noysom Fish; their
Drink is better, being sundry sorts of Mead; the best made with Juice of a
sweet and crimson Berry called Maliena, growing also in France; 323.
other sorts with Black-cherry, or diverse other Berries: another Drink they use
in the Spring drawn from the Birch-tree Root, whose Sap after June dries up.
But there is no People that live so miserably as the Poor of Russia; if they
have Straw and Water they make shift to live; for Straw dried and stamped in
Winter time is their Bread; in Summer Grass and Roots; at all times Bark of
Trees is good Meat with them; yet many of them die in the Street for hunger,
none relieving, or regarding them.

When they are sent into Foreign Countries, Habit.
or that Strangers come thither, 239.
they are very sumptuous in apparel, else the Duke himself goes but meanly.

In Winter they travail Travailing.
only upon Sleds, 314.
the Ways being hard, and smooth with Snow, the Rivers all froz'n: one Horse
with a Sled will draw a man 400 miles in 3 days; in Summer the way is deep,
and travailing ill. The Russe of better sort goes not out in Winter, but on his
Sled; in Summer on his Horse: in his Sled he sits on a Carpet, or a white Bears
Skin; the Sled drawn with a Horse well decked, with many Fox or Wolve Tails
about his Neck, guided by a Boy on his Back, other Servants riding on the tail
of the Sled.

The Russian Sea breeds a certain Beast Beasts.
which they call a Morse; 252.
who seeks his Food on the Rocks, climing up with help of his Teeth; whereof
they make as great account, as we of the Elephant's Tooth.

CHAP. II.
Of Samoedia, Siberia, and other Countries north-east subject to the Muscovites.
NOrth-east of Russia lies Samoedia by the River Ob. This Country was first
discovered by Oneke a Russian; who first trading privately among them in rich
Furrs got great Wealth, and the knowledge of their Country; then revealed his
discovery to Boris Protector to Pheodor, showing how beneficial that Country
gained, would be to the Empire. Who sending Ambassadors among them gallantly
attired, by fair means won their subjection to the Empire; every Head paying
yearly two Skins of richest Sables. Those Messengers travailing also 200
leagues beyond Ob eastward, made report of pleasant Countries, abounding with
Woods and Fountains, and People riding on Elks and Loshes, others drawn on
Sleds by Rain-deer, others by Dogs as swift as Deer. The Somoeds that came
along with those Messengers returning to Mosco admired the stateliness of that
City, and were as much admired for excellent Shooters, hitting every time the
breadth of a penny, as far distant as hardly could be discerned.

The River Ob is reported by the Russes to be in breadth the sailing of a
Summer's day: Purch. part. 3.
but full of Islands and Shoals, 543, 540. Molgomsay.
having neither Woods, nor, till of late, Inhabitants. Out of Ob they turn into
the River Tawze. The Russians have here, since the Samoeds yielded them
subjection, two Governors with 3 or 400 Gunners; have built Villages and some
small Castles; all which Place they call Mongozey, or Molgomzay, Further
up-land they have also built other Cities of Wood, 524.
consisting chiefly of Poles, Tartars and Russes, fugitive or condemned men; as
Vergateria, Siber, whence the whole Country is named, 526.
Tinna, thence Tobolsca on this side Ob, on the Rivers Irtis, and Tobol, chief
Seat of the Russian Governor; above that, Zergolta in an Island of Ob, where
they have a Custom house, beyond that on the other side Ob, Narim, and Tooina
now a great City. 526, 527.
Certain Churches also are erected in those Parts; but no man forced to
Religion; beyond Narim eastward on the River Telta is built the Castle of
Comgoscoi, and all this Plantation began since the year 1590. with many other
Towns like these. And these are the Countries from whence come all the Sables
and rich Furrs.

The Samoeds have no Towns, Manners of the Samoeds.
or certain place of abode, 522, 555.
but up and down where they find Moss for their Deer; they live in companies
peaceably, and are governed by some of the Ancientest amongst them, but are
Idolaters. They shoot wondrous cunningly; their Arrow heads are sharpened
Stones, or Fishbones, which latter serve them also for Needles, their Thread
being the Sinews of certain small Beasts, wherewith they sow the Furrs which
cloth them; the furry side in Summer outward, in Winter inward. They have many
Wives, and their Daughters they sell to him who bids most; which, if they be
not liked, are turned back to their Friends, the Husband allowing only to the
Father what the marriage Feast stood him in. Wives are brought to bed there by
their Husbands, and the next day go about as before. They till not the Ground;
but live on the Flesh of those Wild Beasts which they hunt. They are the only
Guides to such as travail Iougoria, Siberia, 548.
or any of those north-east parts in Winter; being drawn on Sleds with Bucks,
riding post day and night, if it be Moonlight; and lodge on the Snow under
Tents of Deer Skins in whatever place they find enough of white Moss to feed
their Sled Staggs, turning them loose to dig it up themselves out of the deep
Snow: another Samoede stepping to the next Wood, brings in store of Firing;
round about which they lodge within their Tents, leaving the top open to vent
Smoke; in which manner they are as warm as the Stoves in Russia. They carry
Provision of Meat with them, and partake besides of what Foul or Venison the
Samoede kills with shooting by the way; their Drink is melted Snow. Two Deer
being yoked to a Sled riding post will draw 200 miles in 24 hours without
resting, and laden with their Stuff will draw it 30 miles in 12.

CHAP. III.
Of Tingoesia, and the Countries adjoining eastward, as far as Cathay.
BEyond Narim and Comgoscoi the Soldiers of those Garrisons travailing by
appointment of the Russian Governor in the year 1605. Pur. par. 3.
found many goodly Countries not inhabited; 527.
many vast Deserts, and Rivers, till at the end of ten weeks they spied certain
Cottages, and Herds, or companies of People, which came to them with reverent
behavior, and signified to the Samoeds and Tartars, which were Guides to the
Russian Soldiers, that they were called Tingoesi; that their dwelling was on
the great River Ienissey. Ienissey.
This River is said to be far bigger than Ob; 527.
distant from the Mouth thereof 4 days and nights sailing; 551.
and likewise falls into the Sea of Naramzie; it has high Mountains on the
East, 546.
some of which cast out Fire, to the West a plain and fertile Country, which in
the Spring time it overflowes about 70 leagues; 527.
all that time the Inhabitants keep them in the Mountains, Manners.
and then return with their Cattle to the Plain. The Tingoesi are a very gentle
Nation, they have great swollen Throats like those in Italy that live under the
Alps; Ibid.
at persuasion of the Samoeds they forthwith submitted to the Russian
Government; and at their request travailing the next year to discover still
eastward, they came at length to a River, which the Savages of that place
called Pisida, somewhat less than Ienissey; 528.
beyond which hearing ofttimes the towling of Brazen Bells, and sometimes the
noise of Men and Horses, they durst not pass over; they saw there certain
Sails afar off, square, and therefore supposed to be like Indian or China
Sails, and the rather for that they report that great Guns have been heard
shot off from those Vessels. In April, and May they were much delighted with
the fair prospect of that Country, replenish't with many rare Trees, Plants and
Flowers, Beasts and Foul. Some think here to be the Borders of Tangut in the
north of Cathay. 543.
Some of those Samoeds about the Year 1610. travailed so far till they came in
view of a White City; and heard a great din of Bells, 546.
and report there came to them Men all armed in Iron from head to foot. And in
the Year 1611. diverse out of Cathay, and others from Alteen Czar who styles
himself the golden King, came and traded at Zergolta, or Surgoot on the River
Ob, bringing with them Plates of Silver. Whereupon Michael Pheodorowick the
Russian Emperor in the Year 1619. sent certain of his People from Tooma to
Alteen, and Cathay, who returned with Ambassadors from those Princes. These
relate, 797.
that from Tooma in ten days and a half, three days whereof over a Lake,
where Rubies and Saphirs grow, they came to the Alteen King, or King of Alty;
through his Land in five weeks they passed into the Country of Sheromugaly or
Mugalla, where reigned a Queen called Manchika; whence in four days they came
to the Borders of Cathay, fenc't with a stone Wall, 15 fathom high; along the
side of which, having on the other hand many pretty Towns belonging to Queen
Manchika, they travailed ten days without seeing any on the Wall till they
came to the Gate. Where they saw very great Ordnance lying, and 3000 men in
watch. They traffic with other Nations at the Gate, and very few at once are
suffered to enter. They were travailing from Tooma to this Gate 12 weeks; and
from thence to the great City of Cathay ten days. Where being conducted to the
House of Ambassadors, within a few days there came a Secretary from King
Tambur with 200 Men well apparelled, and riding on Asses, to feast them with
diverse sorts of Wine, and to demand their Message; but having brought no
Presents with them, they could not be admitted to his sight; only with his
Letter to the Emperor they returned as is aforesaid, to Tobolsca. They report
that the Land of Mugalla reaches from Boghar to the north Sea, 799.
and has many Castles built of Stone apiece, with Towers at the Corners
covered with glazed Tiles; and on the Gates Alarum-Bells or Watch-Bells twenty
pound weight of Metal; their Houses built also of Stone, the Seelings cunningly
painted with Flowers of all Colors. The People are Idolaters; the Country
exceeding fruitful. They have Asses and Mules, but no Horses. The People of
Cathay say that this great Wall stretches from Boghar to the north Sea four
months journey with continual Towers a flight-shot distant from each other, and
Beacons on every Tower; and that this Wall is the bound between Mugalla and
Cathay. In which are but five Gates; those narrow, and so low, that a Horseman
sitting upright cannot ride in. Next to the Wall is the City Shirokalga; it
has a Castle well furnished with short Ordnance, and small Shot, which they
who keep watch on the Gates, Towers and Walls, duly at Sun set and rising
discharge thrice over. The City abounds with rich Merchandise, Velvets,
Damasks, Cloth of Gold and Tissue, with many sorts of Sugars. Like to this is
the City Tara, their Markets smell odoriferously with Spices, and Tayth more
rich than that. Shirooan yet more magnificent, half a day's journey through,
and exceeding populous. From hence to Cathaia the imperial City is two days
journey, built of White-stone apiece, in circuit four days going,
cornered with four White Towers, very high and great, and others very fair
along the Wall, white intermingl'd with blew, and Loop-holes furnished with
Ordnance. In midst of this White City stands a Castle built of Magnet, where
the King dwells, in a sumptuous Palace, the top whereof is overlaid with Gold.
The City stands on even ground encompassed with the River Youga, 7 days
journey from the Sea. The People are very fair, but not warlike, delighting
most in rich Traffic. These Relations are referred hither, because we have
them from Russians; who report also, 806.
that there is a Sea beyond Ob so warm that all kind of Sea-Fowl live
thereabout as well in Winter as in Summer. Thus much briefly of the Sea and
Lands between Russia, and Cathay.

CHAP. IV.
The Succession of Moscovia Dukes and Emperors taken out of their Chronicles
by a Polack with some later Additions. Hac. vol. 1.
221.

THE great Dukes of Muscovy derive their Pedigree, though without ground, from
Augustus Caesar: whom they fable to have sent certain of his Kindred to be
Governors over many remote Provinces; and among them, Prussus over Prussia;
him to have had his Seat on the eastern Baltic Shore by the River Wixel; of
whom Rurek, Sinaus, and Truuor descended by the Fourth Generation, were by the
Russians living then without Civil Government sent for in the Year 573. 573.
to bear rule over them; at the persuasion of Gostomislius chief Citizen of
Novogrod. They therefore taking with them Olechus their Kinsman divided those
Countries among themselves, and each in his Province taught them Civil
Government.

Ivorson of Rurek, the rest dying without Issue, became Successor to them all;
being left in nonage under the protection of Olechus. He took to wife Olha
Daughter to a Citizen of Plesco; of whom he begat Stoslaus; but after that,
being slain by his Enemies, Olha his Wife went to Constantinople, and was there
baptized Helena.

Stoslaus fought many Battails with his Enemies; but was at length by them
slain, who made a Cup of his Scull engrav'n with this Sentence in Gold; Seeking
after other Men's he lost his own His Sons were Teropolchus, Olega and Volodimir.

Volodimir having slain the other two, made himself sole Lord of Russia; yet
after that fact enclining to Christian Religion, had to wife Anna Sister of
Basilius and Constantine Greek Emperors; and with all his People in the Year
988. 988.
was baptized, and called Basilius. Howbeit Zonaras reports that before that
time Basilius the Greek Emperor sent a Bishop to them; at whose preaching they
not being moved, but requiring a Miracle, he, after devout Prayers, taking the
Book of Gospel into his hands, threw it before them all into the Fire: which
remaining there unconsum'd, they were converted.

Volodimir had eleven Sons among whom he divided his Kingdom; Boristus and
Glebus for their holy Life registered Saints; and their Feast kept every year
in November with great solemnity. The rest through contention to have the sole
Government, ruined each other; leaving only Iaroslaus inheritour of all.

Volodimir Son of Iaroslaus kept his Residence in the ancient City Kiow upon
the River Boristenes. And after many conflicts with the Sons of his Uncles; and
having subdued all was called Monomachus. He made war with Constantine the
Greek Emperor, wasted Thracia, and returning home with great spoils to prepare
new war, was appeased by Constantine, who sent Neophytus Bishop of Ephesus, and
Eustathius Abbot of Jerusalem, to present him with part of our Savior's Cross,
and other rich Gifts, and to salute him by the name of Czar, or Caesar: with
whom he thenceforth entered into league and amity.

After him in order of descent Vuszevolodus, George, Demetrius.

Then George, his Son, who in the Year 1237. 1237.
was slain in battle by the Tartar Prince Bathy, who subdued Muscovia and made
it tributary. From that time the Tartarians made such Dukes of Russia, as they
thought would be most pliable to their ends; of whom they required, as often as
Ambassadors came to him out of Tartary, to go out and meet them; and in his
own Court to stand bare-headed, while they sat and delivered their Message. At
which time the Tartars wasted also Polonia, Silesia, and Hungaria, till Pope
Innocent the Fourth obtained peace of them for 5 years. This Bathy, say the
Russians, was the Father of Tamerlan, whom they call Temirkutla.

Then succeeded Iaroslaus the Brother of George, then Alexander his Son.

Daniel the Son of Alexander was he who first made the City of Mosco his Royal
Seat, builded the Castle, and took on him the Title of great Duke.

John the Son of Daniel was surnamed Kaleta, that word signifying a Scrip, out
of which, continually carried about with him, he was wont to deal his Alms.

His Son Simeon dying without Issue left the Kingdom to John his next Brother;
and he to his Son Demetrius, who left two Sons, Basilius and George.

Basilius reigning had a Son of his own name, but doubting lest not of his own
Body, through the suspicion he had of his Wife's Chastity, him he disinherits,
and gives the Dukedom to his Brother George.

George putting his Nephew Basilius in prison, reigns; yet at his death, either
through remorse, or other cause surrenders him the Dukedom.

Basilius unexpectedly thus attaining his supposed right, enjoyed it not long
in quiet; for Andrew and Demetrius the two Sons of George counting it injury
not to succeed their Father, made war upon him, and surprising him on a
sudden, put out his Eyes. Notwithstanding which, the Boiarens, or Nobles kept
their allegiance to the Duke though blind, whom therefore they called Cziemnox.

John Vasiliwich his Son was the first who brought the Russian Name out of
obscurity into renown. To secure his own Estate he put to death as many of his
kindred as were likely to pretend; and styled himself great Duke of
Wolodimiria, Muscovia, Novogardia, Czar of all Russia. He won Plesco the only
walled City in all Muscovy, and Novogrod the richest, from the Lituanians, to
whom they had been subject 50 years before; and from the latter carried home
300 Wagons laden with Treasure. He had war with Alexander King of Poland, and
with the Livonians; with him, on pretense of withdrawing his Daughter Helena,
whom he had to wife, from the Greek Church to the Romish; with the Livonians
for no other cause, but to enlarge his Bounds: though he were often foiled by
Plettebergius great Master of the Prussian Knights. His Wife was Daughter to
the Duke of Tyversky; of her he begat John, and to him resigned his Dukedom;
giving him to wife the Daughter of Steven, Palatine of Moldavia; by whom he had
Issue Demetrius, and deceased soon after. Vasiliwich therefore reassuming the
Dukedom married a second Wife Sophia Daughter to Thomas Palaeologus: who is
said to have received her Dowry out of the Pope's Treasury, upon promise of the
Duke to become Romish.

This Princess of a haughty mind, often complaining that she was married to the
Tartars Vassal, at length by continual persuasions, and by a wile found means
to ease her Husband, and his Country of that Yoke. For whereas till then the
Tartar had his Procurators, who dwelt in the very Castle of Mosco, to oversee
State Affairs, she feigned that from Heaven she had been warned, to build a
Temple to Saint Nicholas on the same place where the Tartar Agents had their
House. Being therefore delivered of a Son, she made it her request to the
Prince of Tartary, whom she had invited to the baptizing, that he would give
her that House; which obtaining she razed to the ground; and removed those
Overseers out of the Castle: and so by degrees dispossessed them of all, which
they held in Russia. She prevailed also with her Husband to transfer the
Dukedom from Demetrius the Son of John deceased, to Gabriel his eldest by her.

Gabriel no sooner Duke, but changed his name to Basilius, and set his mind to
do nobly; he recovered great part of Muscovy* from Vitoldus Duke of Lituania;
and on the Boristhenes won Smolensko and many other Cities in the Year 1514.
1514.
He divorced his first Wife, and of Helena Daughter to Duke Glinsky begat Iuan
Vasiliwich.

Iuan Vasiliwich being left a Child was committed to George his Uncle and
Protector; at 25 years of age he vanquished the Tartars of Cazan and Astracan,
bringing home with him their Princes captive; made cruel war in Livonia
pretending right of inheritance. He seemed exceedingly devout, and whereas the
Russians in their Churches use out of zeal and reverence to knock their Heads
against the ground, his Forehead was seldom free of swellings and bruzes, and
very often seen to bleed. The cause of his rigor in government, he alleged to
be the malice and treachery of his Subjects. But some of the Nobles incited by
his cruelty, Horsey's Observations.
called in the Crim Tartar who in the Year 1571. 1571.
broke into Russia, burnt Mosco to the ground: he reigned 54 years; had three
Sons, of which the eldest being struck on a time by his Father, with grief
thereof died; his other Sons were Pheodor and Demetrius: in the time of Iuan
Vasiliwich the English came first by Sea into the north parts of Russia.

Pheodor Iuanowick being under age was left to the protection of Boris Brother
to the young Empress, 1584.
and third Son by adoption in the Emperor's Will. Hac. vol. 1.
After 40 days of mourning, 466. Horsey.
the appointed time of Coronation being come, the Emperor issuing out of his
Palace, the whole Clergy before him, entered with his Nobility the Church of
Blaueshina or blessedness; whence after Service to the Church of Michael, then
to our Lady Church being the Cathedral. In midst whereof a Chair of Majesty was
placed, and most unvaluable Garments put upon him: there also was the imperial
Crown set on his Head by the Metropolitan, who out of a small Book in his hand
read Exhortations to the Emperor, of justice and peaceable government. After
this rising from his Chair he was invested with an upper Robe, so thick with
Orient Pearls and Stones as weighed 200 pounds, the Train born up by 6 Dukes;
his Staff imperial was of a Unicorn's Horn three foot and a half long, beset
with rich Stones: his Globe, and six Crowns carried before him by Princes of
the Blood: his Horse at the Church door stood ready with a Covering of
imbroidered Pearl, Saddle and all suitable to the value of 300 thousand Marks.
There was a kind of Bridge made three ways, 150 fathom long, three foot high,
two fathom broad, whereon the Emperor with his Train went from one Church to
another above the infinite throng of People making loud Acclamations; At the
Emperor's returning from those Churches they were spread under-foot, with
Cloth of Gold, the Porches with Red Velvet, the Bridges with Scarlet and
Stammel-cloth, all which, as the Emperor passed by, were cut and snatched by
them that stood next; besides new minted Coins of Gold and Silver cast among
the People. The Empress in her Palace was placed before a great open Window in
rich and shining Robes, among her Ladies. After this the Emperor came into
Parliament, where he had a Banquet served by his Nobles in princely order; two
standing on either side his Chair with Battelaxes of Gold; three of the next
Rooms great and large being set round with Plate of Gold and Silver, from the
ground up to the roof. This Triumph lasted a week, wherein many royal Pastimes
were seen: after which, election was made of the Nobles to new Offices and
Dignities. The conclusion of all was a Peal of 170 Brass Ordnance two miles
without the City, and 20000 Harquebuzes twice over: and so the Emperor with at
least 50 thousand Horse returned through the City to his Palace: where all the
Nobility, Officers, and Merchants brought him rich Presents. Shortly after, the
Emperor by direction of Boris conquered the large Country of Siberia, and took
Prisoner the King thereof: he removed also corrupt Officers and former Taxes.
In sum, a great alteration in the Government followed, yet all quietly, and
without tumult. These things reported abroad struck such awe into the neighbor
Kings, that the Crim Tartar with his Wives also and many Nobles valiant and
personable men came to visit the Russian. There came also 12 hundred Polish
Gentlemen, many Circassians, and People of other Nations to offer service;
Ambassadors from the Turk, the Persian, Georgian, and other Tartar Princes;
from Almany, Poland, Sweden, Denmark. But this glory lasted not long through
the treachery of Boris, who procured the death first of Demetrius, then of the
Emperor himself, whereby the imperial Race after the succession of 300 years
was quite extinguish't.

Boris, adopted, as before was said, third Son to Iuan Vasiliwich without
impeachment now ascended the Throne; but neither did he enjoy long, what he had
so wickedly compassed; 1604.
Divine revenge raising up against him a Counterfeit of that Demetrius whom he
had caused to be murdered at Ouglets. Pur. par. 3.
750.
This Upstart strength'd with many Poles and Cossacks appears in arms to claim
his right out of the hands of Boris, who sent against him an Army of 200
thousand Men; many of whom revolted to this Demetrius: Peter Basman the General
returning to Mosco with the empty Triumph of a reported Victory. But the Enemy
still advancing, Boris one day, after a plentiful Meal finding himself heavy
and pained in his Stomach laid him down on his Bed; but 'ere his Doctors, who
made great haste, came to him, was found speechless, and soon after died, with
grief, as is supposed, of his ill success against Demetrius. Before his death,
though it were speedy, he would be shorn, and new christn'd. He had but one
Son, whom he loved so fondly, as not to suffer him out of sight; using to say
he was Lord and Father of his Son, and yet his Servant, yea his Slave. To gain
the Peoples love, which he had lost by his ill getting the Empire, he used two
Policies; first he caused Mosco to be fired in four places, that in the
quenching thereof he might show his great care and tenderness of the People;
among whom he likewise distributed so much of his Bounty, as both new-built
their Houses, and repaired their Losses. At another time the People murmuring,
that the great Pestilence which had then swept away a third part of the Nation,
was the punishment of their electing him, a Murderer, to reign over them, he
built Galleries round about the utmost Wall of Mosco; and there appointed for
one whole month 20 thousand pound to be given to the Poor; which well nigh
stopped their Mouths. After the death of Boris, Peter Basman their only hope and
refuge, though a Young man, was sent again to the Wars, with him many English,
Scots, French and Dutch; who all with the other General Goleeche sell off to
the new Demetrius; whose Messengers coming now to the Suburbs of Mosco, were
brought by the Multitude to that spacious Field before the Castle Gate; within
which the Council were then sitting; many of whom were by the Peoples
threatening called out and constrained to hear the Letters of Demetrius openly
read: which, long 'ere the end, wrought so with the Multitude, that furiously
they broke into the Castle, laying violence on all they met; when strait
appeared coming toward them two Messengers of Demetrius formerly sent,
pitifully whipped and roasted, which added to their rage. Then was the whole
City in an uproar, all the great Counselours Houses ransack't, especially of
the Godonova's the Kindred and Family of Boris. Such of the Nobles that were
best beloved, by entreaty prevailed at length to put an end to this Tumult. The
Empress flying to a safer place had her Collar of Pearl pulled from her Neck;
and by the next Message command was given to secure her with her Son and
Daughter. Whereupon Demetrius by general consent was proclaimed Emperor. The
Empress now seeing all lost, counseled the Prince her Son to follow his
Father's example; who, it seems, had dispatched himself by Poison; and with a
desperate courage beginning the deadly Health, was pledged effectually by her
Son; but the Daughter only sipping, escaped. Others ascribe this deed to the
secret Command of Demetrius, and Self-murder imputed to them, to avoid the
envy of such a Command.

Demetrius Evanowich, Pur. par. 3.
for so he called himself, 764.
who succeeded, was credibly reported the Son of Gregory Peupoloy a Russe
Gentleman, and in his younger years to have been shorn a Friar; but escaping
from the Monastery, to have travailed Germany and other Countries, but chiefly
Poland: where he attained to good sufficiency in Arms and other Experience;
which raised in him such high thoughts, as grounding on a common belief among
the Russians, that the young Demetrius was not dead, but conveyed away, and
their hatred against Boris, on this foundation with some other circumstances,
to build his hopes no lower than an Empire; which on his first discovery found
acceptance so generally, as planted him at length on the Royal Seat; but not
so firmly as the fair beginning promised; for in a short while the Russians
finding themselves abused by an Impostor, on the sixth day after his marriage*
observing when his Guard of Poles were most secure, rushing into the Palace
before break of day, dragged him out of his Bed, and when he had confes'd the
fraud, pulled him to pieces; with him Peter Basman was also slain, and both
their dead Bodies laid open in the Marketplace. He was of no presence, but
otherwise of a princely disposition; too bountiful, which occasioned some
exactions; in other matters a great lover of justice, not unworthy the Empire
which he had gotten, and lost only through greatness of mind, neglecting the
Conspiracy, which he knew the Russians were plotting. Some say their hatred
grew, for that they saw him alienated from the Russian Manners and Religion,
having made Buchinskoy a learned Protestant his Secretary. Some report from
Gilbert's relation, who was a Scot, and Captain, of his Guard, that lying on
his Bed awake, not long before the Conspiracy, he saw the appearance of an aged
man coming toward him; at which he rose, and called to them that watched; but
they denied to have seen any such pass by them. He returning to his Bed, and
within an hour after troubled again with the same Apparition, sent for
Buchinskoy, telling him he had now twice the same night seen an aged man, who
at his second coming told him, that though he were a good Prince of himself,
yet for the injustice and oppression of his inferior Ministers, his Empire
should be taken from him. The Secretary counseled him to embrace true
Religion, affirming that for lack thereof, his Officers were so corrupt. The
Emperor seemed to be much moved, and to intend what was persuaded him. But a
few days after, the other Secretary, a Russian, came to him with a drawn
Sword; of which the Emperor made slight at first; but he after bold words
assaulted him, strait seconded by other Conspiratours crying liberty. Gilbert
with many of the Guard oversuddenly surprised retreated to Coluga a Town which
they fortified; most of the other Strangers were massacr'd, except the English,
whose mediation saved also Buchinskoy. Shusky who succeeded him reports in a
Letter to King James otherwise of him; that his right name was Gryshca the Son
of Boughdan; that to escape punishment for Villainies done, he turned Friar, and
fell at last to the Black art; and fearing that the Metropolitan intended
therefore to imprison him, fled into Lettow; where by counsel of Sigismund the
Poland King, he began to call himself Demetry of Ouglitts; and by many Libels
and Spies privily sent into Mosco, gave out the same; that many Letters and
Messengers thereupon were sent from Boris into Poland, and from the Patriarch,
to acquaint them who the Runnagate was; but the Polanders, giving them no
credit, furnished him the more with Arms and Money, notwithstanding the League;
and sent the Palatine Sandamersko and other Lords to accompany him into Russia,
gaining also a Prince of the Crim Tartars to his aid; that the Army of Boris
hearing of his sudden death, yielded to this Gryshca, who taking to wife the
Daughter of Sandamersko, attempted to root out the Russian Clergy, and to bring
in the Romish Religion, for which purpose many Jesuits came along with him.
Whereupon Shusky with the Nobles and Metropolitans conspiring against him, in
half a year gathered all the Forces of Moscovia, and surprising him found in
writing under his own hand all these his Intentions; Letters also from the Pope
and Cardinals to the same effect, not only to set up the Religion of Rome, but
to force it upon all, with death to them that refused.

Vasily Evanowich Shusky after the slaughter of Demetry or Gryshca was elected
Emperor; 1606.
having not long before been at the Block for reporting to have seen the true
Demetrius dead and buried; but Gryshca not only recalled him, but advanced
him, to be the instrument of his own ruin. He was then about the age of 50;
nobly descended, never married, of great wisdom reputed, a favourer of the
English; for he saved them from ritling in the former Tumults. Some say he
modestly refused the Crown, Purch.
till by lot four times together it fell to him; part. 3.
yet after that, 769, etc.
growing jealous of his Title, removed by Poison, and other means all the
Nobles that were like to stand his Rivals; and is said to have consulted with
Witches of the Samoeds, Lappians and Tartarians, about the same fears; and
being warned of one Michalowich, to have put to death three of that name; yet a
fourth was reserved by fate to succeed him; being then a Youth attendant in the
Court, one of those that held the golden Axes, and least suspected. But before
that time he also was supplanted by another reviving Demetrius brought in by
the Poles; whose counterfeited Hand, and strange relating of privatest
Circumstances had almost deceived Gilbert himself; had not their persons been
utterly unlike; but Gryshca's Wife so far believed him for her Husband, as to
receive him to her Bed. Shusky besieged in his Castle of Mosco, was
adventrously supplied with some Powder and Ammunition by the English; and with
2000 French, English and Scots, with other Forces from Charles King of Sweden.
The English after many miseries of cold, 1609.
and hunger and assaults by the way, deserted by the French, yielded most of
them to the Pole, near Smolensko, and served him against the Russ. Mean while
this second Demetrius being now rejected by the Poles, 779.
with those Russians that sided with him laid siege to Mosco: Zolkiewsky for
Sigismund King of Poland Beleaguers on the other side with forty thousand Men;
whereof 1500 English, Scotch, and French. Shusky despairing success betakes him
to a Monastery; but with the City is yielded to the Pole; who turns now his
force against the Counterfeit Demetrius; he seeking to fly is by a Tartar slain
in his Camp. Smolensko held out a siege of two years, then surrendered. Shusky
the Emperor carried away into Poland, there ended miserably in prison. But
before his departure out of Muscovy the Polanders in his name sending for the
chief Nobility as to a last farewell, cause them to be entertained in a secret
place, and there dispatched: by this means the easier to subdue the People. Yet
the Poles were starved at length out of those Places in Mosco which they had
fortified. Wherein the Russians who besieged them, found, as is reported, 60
Barrels of Man's Flesh powdered, being the Bodies of such as died among them,
or were slain in fight.

After which the Empire of Russia broke to pieces, 1612.
the prey of such as could catch, every one naming himself, and striving to be
accounted that Demetrius of Ouglitts. Some chose Vladislaus King Sigismund's
Son, but he not accepting, they fell to a popular Government; killing all the
Nobles under pretense of favoring the Poles. Some overtures of receiving them
were made, as some say, to King James, and Sir John Meric, and Sir William
Russel employed therein. Thus Russia remaining in this confusion, it happened
that a mean Man, a Butcher dwelling in the North about Duina, Purch.
inveying against the baseness of their Nobility, part. 3.
and the corruption of Officers, 790.
uttered words, that if they would but choose a faithful Treasurer to pay well
the Soldiers, and a good General (naming one Pozarsky a poor Gentleman, who
after good service done lived not far off retired and neglected;) that then he
doubted not to drive out the Poles. The People assent, and choose that General;
the Butcher they make their Treasurer who both so well discharged their Places,
that with an Army soon gathered they raise the siege of Mosco, which the
Polanders had renewed; and with Boris Licin another great Soldier of that
Country fall into consultation about the choice of an Emperor, and chose at
last Michalowich, or Michael Pheodorowich, the fatal Youth, whose name Shusky
so feared.

Michael Pheodorowich thus elected by the valor of Pozarsky and Boris Licin,
1613.
made them both Generals of his Forces, joining with them another great
Commander of the Cossacks whose aid had much befriended him; the Butcher also
was made a Counselour of State. Finally a Peace was made up between the
Russians and the Poles; and that partly by the mediation of King James.

CHAP. V.
The first discovery of Russia by the North-east, 1553 with the English
Embassies, and Entertainments at that Court, until the Year 1604.
THE discovery of Russia by the northern Ocean, Hac. vol. 1.
made first, 243. 234.
of any Nation that we know, by English men, might have seemed an enterprise
almost heroic; if any higher end than the excessive love of Gain and Traffic,
had animated the design. Nevertheless that in regard that many things not
unprofitable to the knowledge of Nature, and other Observations are hereby come
to light, as good events ofttimes arise from evil occasions, it will not be the
worst labor to relate briefly the beginning, and prosecution of this
adventurous Voyage; until it became at last a familiar Passage.

When our Merchants perceived the Commodities of England to be in small request
abroad, and foreign Merchandise to grow higher in esteem and value than before,
they began to think with themselves how this might be remedied. And seeing how
the Spaniards and Portugals had increased their Wealth by discovery of new
Trades and Countries, they resolved upon some new and strange Navigation. At
the same time Sebastian Chabota, a man for the knowledge of Sea-affairs much
renowned in those days, happened to be in London. With him first they consult;
and by his advice conclude to furnish out three Ships for the search and
discovery of the northern parts. And having heard that a certain Worm is bred
in that Ocean, which many times eats through the strongest Oak, they contrive
to cover some part of the Keel of those Ships with thin sheets of Lead; and
victual them for 18 months; allowing equally to their journey their stay, and
their return. Arms also they provide and store of Munition, with sufficient
Captains and Governors for so great an enterprise. To which among many, and
some void of experience that offered themselves, Sir Hugh Willowby a valiant
Gentleman earnestly requested to have the charge. Of whom before all others
both for his goodly personage, and singular skill in the services of War, they
made choice to be Admiral; and of Richard Chancellor, a man greatly esteemed for
his skill, to be chief Pilot. This man was brought up by Mr. Henry Sidney,
afterward Deputy of Ireland, who coming where the Adventurers were gathered
together; though then a young man, with a grave and eloquent Speech commended
Chancellor unto them.

After this, they omitted no enquiry after any person that might inform them
concerning those north-easterly parts to which the Voyage tended; and two
Tartarians then of the King's Stable were sent for; but they were able to
answer nothing to purpose. So after much debate it was concluded that by the 20
th of May the Ships should depart. Being come near Greenwich where the Court
then lay, presently the Courtiers came running out, the Privy Council at the
Windows, the rest on the Towers and Battlements. The Mariners all apparelled in
Watchet, or sky-colored Cloth, discharge their Ordnance; the noise whereof,
and of the People shouting is answered from the Hills and Waters with as loud
an Echo. Only the good King Edward then sick beheld not this sight, but died
soon after. From hence putting into Harwich, they staid long and lost much
time. At length passing by Shetland, they kenn'd a far off Aegelands, being an
innumerable sort of Islands called Roast Islands in 66 degrees. Thence to Lofoot
in 68. to Seinam in 70 degrees; these Islands belong all to the Crown of
Denmark. Whence departing Sir Hugh Willowby set out his Flag by which he called
together the chief men of his other Ships to counsel; where they conclude, in
case they happened to be scattered by Tempest, that Wardhouse a noted Haven in
Finmark be the appointed place of their meeting. The very same day after noon
so great a Tempest arose, that the Ships were some driven one way, some another
in great peril. The General with his loudest voice called to Chancellor not to
be far from him; but in vain, for the admiral sailing much better than his
Ship, and bearing all her Sails was carried with great swiftness soon out of
sight; but before that, the Ship-boat striking against her Ship was overwhelmed
in view of the Bonaventure whereof Chancellor was Captain. Hac. 235.
The third Ship also in the same Storm was lost. But Sir Hugh Willowby escaping
that Storm, and wandering on those desolate Seas till the 18 th of September put
into a Haven where they had Weather as in the depth of Winter; and there
determining to abide till Spring, sent out three men southwest to find
Inhabitants; who journy'd three days but found none; then other three went
westward four days journey, and lastly three southeast three days; but they
all returning without news of People, or any sign of Habitation, Sir Hugh with
the company of his two Ships abode there till January, as appears by a Will
since found in one of the Ships; but then perished all with cold. This River or
Haven was Arzina in Lapland near to Kegor, Hac. 464.
where they were found dead the year after by certain Russian Fishermen.
Whereof the English Agent at Mosco having notice, sent and recovered the Ships
with the dead Bodies and most of the Goods, and sent them for England; but the
Ships being unstanch, as is supposed, by their two years wintring in Lapland,
sunk by the way with their Dead, and them also that brought them. But now
Chancellor with his Ship and Company thus left, shaped his course to Wardhouse,
the place agreed on to expect the rest; where having staid 7 days without
tidings of them, he resolves at length to hold on his Voyage; and sailed so far
till he found no night, but continual day and Sun clearly shining on that huge
and vast Sea for certain days. At length they enter into a great Bay, named,
as they knew after, from Saint Nicholas; and spying a Fisherboat, made after
him to know what People they were. The Fishermen amazed with the greatness of
his Ship, to them a strange and new sight, sought to fly; but overtak'n, in
great fear they prostrate themselves, and offer to kiss his Feet; but he
raising them up with all signs and gestures of courtesy, sought to win their
friendship. They no sooner dismissed, but spread abroad the arrival of a strange
Nation, whose humanity they spoke of with great affection; whereupon the People
running together, with like return of all courteous usage receive them;
offering them Victuals freely; nor refusing to traffic, but for a loyal Custom
which bound them from that, without first the consent had of their King. After
mutual demands of each other's Nation they found themselves to be in Russia
where Iuan Vasiliwich at that time reigned Emperor. To whom privily the
Governor of that place sending notice of the strange Guests that were arrived,
held in the mean while our Men in what suspense he could. The Emperor well
pleased with so unexpected a Message, invites them to his Court, offering them
Posthorses at his own charge, or if the journey seemed overlong, that they
might freely traffic where they were. But 'ere this Messenger could return,
having lost his way, the Muscovites themselves, loath that our men should
depart which they made show to do, furnished them with Guides and other
Conveniences to bring them to their King's presence. Chancellor had now gone more
than half his journey, when the Sled man sent to Court meets him on the way;
delivers him the Emperor's Letters; which when the Russes understood, so
willing they were to obey the Contents thereof, that they quarreled and strove
who should have the preferment to put his Horses to the Sled. So after a long
and troublesome journey of 1500 miles he arrived at Mosco. After he had
remained in the City about 12 days, a Messenger was sent to bring them to the
King's House. Being entered within the Court Gates, and brought into an outward
Chamber, they beheld there a very honorable company to the number of a
hundred sitting all apparelled in Cloth of gold down to their Ancles: next
conducted to the Chamber of presence, there sat the Emperor on a lofty and
very royal Throne; on his Head a Diadem of gold, his Robe all of Goldsmiths
work, in his Hand a crystal Scepter garnished and beset with precious Stones;
no less was his Countenance full of majesty. Beside him stood his chief
Secretary; on his other side the great Commander of silence, both in Cloth of
gold; then sat his Council of 150 round about on high Seats, clad all as
richly. Chancellor nothing abashed made his obeisance to the Emperor after the
English manner. The Emperor having taken, and read his Letters, after some
enquiry of King Edward's Health, invited them to dinner, and till then
dismissed them. But before dismission the Secretary presented their Present
bareheaded; till which time they were all covered; and before admittance our
men had charge not to speak, but when the Emperor demanded ought. Having sat
two hours in the Secretary's Chamber, they were at length called in to dinner;
where the Emperor was set at Table, now in a Robe of silver, and another Crown
on his Head. This place was called the golden Palace, but without cause, for
the English men had seen many fairer; round about the room, but at distance,
were other long Tables; in the midst a Cupboard of huge and massy goblets, and
other Vessels of gold and silver; among the rest four great Flagons nigh two
yards high, wrought in the top with devices of Towers and Dragons heads. The
Guests ascended to their Tables by three steps; all apparelled in Linen, and
that lined with rich Furrs. The Messes came in without order, but all in
Chargers of gold, both to the Emperor, and to the rest that dined there, which
were two hundred persons; on every Board also were set Cups of gold without
number. The Servitors one hundred and forty were likewise arrayed in gold, and
waited with Caps on their heads. They that are in high favor sit on the same
Bench with the Emperor, but far off. Before Meat came in, according to the
custom of their Kings, he sent to every Guest a slice of Bread; whom the
Officer naming says thus, John Basiliwich Emperor of Russ, etc. does reward
thee with Bread, at which words all men stand up. Then were Swans in several
pieces served in, each piece in a several Dish, which the great Duke sends
about as the Bread, and so likewise the Drink. In dinner time he twice changed
his Crown, his Waiters thrice their Apparel; to whom the Emperor in like
manner gives both Bread and Drink with his own hands; which they say is done to
the intent that he may perfectly know his own Household; and indeed when dinner
was done, he called his Nobles every one before him by name; and by this time
Candles were brought in, for it grew dark; and the English departed to their
Lodgings from dinner, an hour within night.

In the Year 1555. Hac. 258.
263. 465.
Chancellor made another voyage to this Place with Letters from Queen Mary; had
a House in Mosco, and Diet appointed him; and was soon admitted to the
Emperor's presence in a large room spread with Carpets; at his entering and
salutation all stood up, the Emperor only sitting, except when the Queen's
name was read, or spoken; for then he himself would rise: at dinner he sat
bareheaded; his Crown and rich Cap standing on a Pinnacle by. 286.
Chancellor returning for England, Osep Napea Governor of Wologda came in his
Ship Ambassador from the Russe; but suffering shipwreck in Pettislego a Bay in
Scotland, Chancellor who took more care to save the Ambassador than himself was
drowned, the Ship rifled, and most of her lading made booty by the People
thereabout.

In the Year 1557. Osep Napea returned into his Country with Antony Ienkinson
who had the command of four tall Ships. 310, etc.
He reports of a Whirlpool between the Roast Islands and Lofoot called
Malestrand; which from half ebb till half flood is heard to make so terrible a
noise, as shakes the Door-rings of Houses in those Islands ten mile off; Whales
that come within the Current thereof make a pitiful cry; Trees carried in and
cast out again have the ends and boughs of them so beaten, as they seem like
the stalks of bruized Hemp. About Zeinam they saw many Whales very monstrous
hard by their Ships; whereof some by estimation sixty foot long; they roard
hideously, it being then the time of their engendring. At Wardhouse, he says,
the Cattle are fed with Fish. Coming to Mosco, he found the Emperor sitting
aloft in a Chair of state, richly crowned, a Staff of gold in his hand wrought
with costly stone. Distant from him sat his Brother, and a Youth the
Emperor's Son of Casan whom the Russ had conquered; there dined with him
diverse Ambassadors, Christian and Heathen, diversely apparelled; his Brother
with some of the chief Nobles sat with him at Table: the Guests were in all
six hundred. In dinner time came in six Musicians; and standing in the midst,
sung three several times, but with little or no delight to our men; there dined
at the same time in other Halls two thousand Tartars who came to serve the Duke
in his Wars. The English were set at a small Table by themselves direct before
the Emperor; who sent them diverse Bowls of Wine and Mead and many Dishes
from his own hand: the Messes were but mean, but the change of Wines and
several Meaths were wonderful. As often as they dined with the Emperor, he sent
for them in the Morning, and invited them with his own mouth. On Christmas day
being invited, 317.
they had for other provision as before; but for store of gold and silver Plate
excessive; among which were twelve Barrels of silver, hoop'd with fine gold
containing twelve gallons apiece.

1560. Was the first English traffic to the Narve in Livonia, till then
concealed by Danskers and Lubeckers.

1561. The same Antony Ienkinson made another voyage to Mosco; and arrived
while the Emperor was celebrating his marriage with a Circassian Lady; during
which time the City Gates for three days were kept shut; and all men
whatsoever straightly commanded to keep within their Houses; except some of his
Household; the cause whereof is not known.

1566. He made again the same voyage; 311.
which now men usually made in a month from London to Saint Nicholas with good
Winds, being seven hundred and fifty leagues.

1568. Thomas Randolf, Esquire went Ambassador to Muscovy, 373.
from Queen Elizabeth; and in his passage by Sea met nothing remarkable save
great store of Whales, whom they might see engendring together, and the
Sperma-ceti swimming on the Water. At Colmogro he was met by a Gentleman from
the Emperor, at whose charge he was conducted to Mosco: but met there by no
man; not so much as the English; lodged in a fair House built for Ambassadors;
but there confined upon some suspicion which the Emperor had conceav'd; sent
for at length after seventeen weeks delay, was fain to ride thither on a
borrowed Horse, his men on foot. In a Chamber before the presence were sitting
about three hundred Persons, all in rich Robes taken out of the Emperor's
Wardrobe for that day; they sat on three ranks of Benches, rather for show
than that the Persons were of honor; being Merchants, and other mean
Inhabitants. The Ambassador saluted them, but by them unsaluted passed on with
his Head covered. At the Presence door being received by two which had been his
Guardians, and brought into the midst, he was there willed to stand still, and
speak his message from the Queen; at whose name the Emperor stood up, and
demanded her health: then giving the Ambassador his Hand to kiss fell to many
questions. The Present being delivered, which was a great silver Bowl
curiously grav'n, the Emperor told him, he dined not that day openly because
of great Affairs; but, says he, I will send thee my Dinner, and augment thy
Allowance. And so dismissing him, sent a Duke richly apparelled soon after to
his Lodging with fifty Persons each of them carrying Meat in silver Dishes
covered; which himself delivered into the Ambassadour's own hands tasting first
of every Dish, and every sort of Drink; that done, set him down with his
Company, took part, and went not thence unrewarded. The Emperor sent back with
this Ambassador another of his own called Andrew Savin.

1571. Ienkinson made a third voyage; but was staid long at Colmogro by reason
of the Plague in those Parts; at length had audience where the Court then was,
near to Pereslave; to which place the Emperor was returned from his Swedish
War with ill success: and Mosco the same year had been wholly burnt by the
Crim; in it the English House, and diverse English were smothered in the
Sellars, multitudes of People in the City perished, all that were young led
captive with exceeding spoil.

1583. Hac. vol. 1.
Iuan Basiliwich having the year before sent his Ambassador Pheodor Andrewich
about matters of Commerce, 458.
the Queen made choice of Sir Ierom Bows, one of her household, to go into
Russia; who being attended with more than forty persons, and accompanied with
the Russe returning home, arrived at St. Nicolas. The Dutch by this time had
intruded into the Muscovy-Trade; which by privilege long before had been
granted solely to the English; and had corrupted to their side Shalkan the
Chancellor, with others of the great ones; who so wrought, that a creature of
their own was sent to meet Sir Ierom at Colmogro, and to offer him occasions of
dislike: Until at Vologda he was received by another from the Emperor; and at
Yeraslave by a Duke well accompanied, who presented him with a Coach and ten
Geldings. Two miles from Mosco met him four Gentlemen with Two hundred Horse,
who after short salutation, told him what they had to say from the Emperor,
willing him to alight, which the Ambassador soon refused, unless they also
lighted; whereon they stood long debating; at length agreed, great dispute
followed, whose foot should first touch the ground. Their Message delivered,
and then embracing, they conducted the Ambassador to a house at Mosco, built
for him purposely. At his going to Court he and his followers honorably
mounted and apparelled, the Emperor's Guard were set on either side all the
way about 6000 shot. At the Court-gate met him four Noblemen in Cloth of Gold,
and rich Furr-Caps, embroidered with Pearl and Stone; then four others of
greater degree, in which passage there stood along the Walls, and sat on
Benches seven or eight hundred men in colored Sattins and Gold. At the
Presence-dore met him the chief Herald, and with him all the great Officers of
Court, who brought him where the Emperor sat: there were set by him three
Crowns of Muscovy, Cazan and Astracan; on each side stood two young Noblemen,
costly apparelled in White; each of them had a broad Axe on his shoulder; on
the Benches round sat above a hundred Noblemen. Having given the Ambassador
his hand to kiss, and inquired of the Queens Health, he willed him to go sit in
the place provided for him, nigh ten paces distant; from thence to send him the
Queens Letters and Present. Which the Ambassador thinking not reasonable,
stepped forward; but the Chancellor meeting him, would have taken his Letters;
to whom the Ambassador said, that the Queen had directed no Letters to him;
and so went on and delivered them to the Emperor's own hands; and after a
short withdrawing into the Council Chamger, where he had Conference with some
of the Council, he was called in to dinner: about the midst whereof, the
Emperor standing up, drank a deep Carouse to the Queens Health, and sent to
the Ambassador a great Bowl of Rhenish-Wine to pledge him. But at several
times being called for to treat about Affairs, and not yielding ought beyond
his Commission, the Emperor not wont to be gain-say'd, one day especially
broke into passion, and with a stern countenance told him, he did not reckon
the Queen to be his fellow; for there are, quoth he, her betters. The
Ambassador not holding it his part, whatever danger might ensue, to hear any
derogate from the Majesty of his Prince, with like courage and countenance told
him, that the Queen was equal to any in Christendom who thought himself
greatest; and wanted not means to offend her Enemies whomsoever. Yea, quoth he,
what say thou of the French and Spanish Kings? I hold her, quoth the
Ambassador, equal to either. Then what to the German Emperor? Her Father,
quoth he, had the Emperor in his pay. This answer mislik'd the Duke so far, as
that he told him, were he not an Ambassador, he would throw him out of doors.
You may, said the Ambassador, do your will, for I am now fast in your
Country; but the Queen I doubt not will know how to be revenged of any injury
offered to her Ambassador. Whereat the Emperor in great sudden bid him get
home; and he with no more reverence than such usage required, saluted the
Emperor, and went his way. Notwithstanding this, the Muscovite, soon as his
mood left him, spoke to them that stood by, many praises of the Ambassador,
wishing he had such a Servant, and presently after sent his chief Secretary to
tell him that whatever had passed in words, yet for his great respect to the
Queen, he would shortly after dispatch him with honor and full contentment,
and in the mean while he much enlarged his entertainment. He also desired that
the Points of our Religion might be set down, and caused them to be read to his
Nobility with much approbation. And as the year before he had sought in
marriage the Lady Mary Hastings, which took not effect, the Lady and her
Friends excusing it, he now again renu'd the motion to take to wife some one of
the Queen's Kinswomen either by sending an Embassage, or going himself with his
Treasure into England. Now happy was that Nobleman whom Sir Ierom Bows in
public favored; unhappy they who had opposed him: for the Emperor, had
beaten Shalkan the Chancelour very grievously for that cause, and threatened not
to leave one of his race alive. But the Emperor dying soon after of a Surfeit,
Shalkan to whom then almost the whole Government was committed, caused the
Ambassador to remain close Prisoner in his House nine weeks. Being sent for at
length to have his dispatch, and slightly enough conducted to the Council
Chamber, he was told by Shalkan that this Emperor would condescend to no other
agreements than were between his Father and the Queen before his coming: and so
disarming both him and his Company, brought them to the Emperor with many
affronts in their passage, for which there was no help but patience. The
Emperor saying but over what the Chancelour had said before, offered him a
Letter for the Queen: which the Ambassador, knowing it contained nothing to
the purpose of his Embassy, refused, till he saw his danger grow too great; nor
was he suffered to reply, or have his Interpreter. Shalkan sent him word that
now the English Emperor was dead; and hastened his departure, but with so many
disgraces put upon him, as made him fear some mischief in his journey to the
Sea; having only one mean Gentleman sent with him to be his Convoy; he
commanded the English Merchants in the Queen's name to accompany him, but such
was his danger, that they durst not. So arming himself and his Followers in the
best wise he could, against any outrage, he at length recovered the Shore of
Saint Nicholas. Where he now resolved to send them back by his Conduct some of
the affronts which he had received. Ready therefore to take Ship, he causes
three or four of his valientest and discreetest men to take the Emperor's
Letter, and disgraceful Present, and to deliver it, or leave it at the Lodging
of his Convoy, which they safely did; though followed with a great Tumult of
such as would have forced them to take it back.

1584. At the Coronation of Pheodor the Emperor* Ierom Horsey being then Agent
in Russia, and called for to court with one John de Wale a Merchant of the
Netherlands and a Subject of Spain, some of the Nobles would have preferred the
Fleming before the English. But to that our Agent would in no case agree,
saying he would rather have his Legs cut off by the Knees, then bring his
present in course after a Subject of Spain. The Emperor and Prince Boris
perceiving the controversy, gave order to admit Horsey first: who was dismissed
with large Promises, and seventy Messes with three Carts of several Mead sent
after him.

1588. Dr. Giles Fletcher went Ambassador from the Queen to Pheodor then
Emperor; whose Relations being judicious and exact are best red entirely by
themselves. 508.
This Emperor upon report of the great learning of John Dee the Mathematician
invited him to Mosco with offer of two thousand pound a year, and from Prince
Boris one thousand Marks; to have his Provision from the Emperor's Table, to
be honorably received, and accounted as one of the chief men in the Land. All
which Dee accepted not.

1604. Sir Thomas Smith was sent Ambassador from King James to Boris then
Emperor; and staid some days at a place five miles from Mosco till he was
honorably received into the City; met on horseback by many thousands of
Gentlemen and Nobles on both sides the way; where the Ambassador alighting
from his Coach and mounted on his Horse, rode with his Trumpets sounding before
him; till a Gentleman of the Emperor's Stable brought him a Gennet gorgeously
trapt with gold, pearl and stone, especially with a great Chain of plated gold
about his Neck, and Horses richly adorned for his Followrs. Then came three
great Noblemen with an Interpreter offering a Speech; but the Ambassador
deeming it to be ceremony, with a brief Complement found means to put it by.
Thus alighting all, they saluted, and gave hands mutually. Those three after a
tedious preamble of the Emperor's Title thrice repeated brought a several
Complement of three words apiece, as namely, the first, to know how the King
did, the next, how the Ambassador, the third, that there was a fair House
provided him. Then on they went on either hand of the Ambassador, and about
six thousand Gallants behind them; still met within the City by more of greater
quality to the very Gate of his lodging: where fifty Gunners were his daily
Guard both at home and abroad. The Prestaves or Gentlemen assigned to have the
care of his entertainment, were earnest to have had the Ambassadour's Speech
and Message given them in writing, that the Interpreter, as they pretended,
might the better translate it; but he admonished them of their foolish demand.
On the day of his audience other Gennets were sent him and his Attendants to
ride on, and two white Palfreys to draw a rich Chariot, which was parcel of the
Present; the rest whereof was carried by his Followers through a lane of the
Emperor's Guard; many Messengers posting up and down the while, till they came
through the great Castle, to the uttermost Court gate. There met by a great
Duke they were brought up stairs through a Stone-gallery, where stood on each
hand many in fair Coats of Persian Stuff, Velvet and Damask. The Ambassador by
two other Counselours being led into the presence, after his obeisance done,
was to stay and hear again the long Title repeated; then the particular
Presents; and so delivered as much of his Embassage as was then requisite.
After which the Emperor arising from his Throne demands of the King's
health; so did the young Prince. The Ambassador then delivered his Letters
into the Emperor's own hand, though the Chancelour offered to have taken them.
He bore the Majesty of a mighty Emperor; his Crown and Scepter of pure gold, a
Collar of Pearls about his Neck, his Garment of crimson Velvet embroidered with
precious stone and gold. On his right Side stood a fair Globe of beaten gold on
a Pyramid with a Cross upon it ^ to which, before he spoke, turning a little he
crossed himself. Not much less in splendor on another Throne sat the Prince. By
the Emperor stood two Noblemen in Cloth of silver, high Caps of black Furr,
and Chains of gold hanging to their Feet; on their Shoulders two Poleaxes of
gold; and two of silver by the Prince; the ground was all covered with Arras or
Tapistry-Dismist, and brought in again to dinner they saw the Emperor and his
Son seated in state, ready to dine; each with a Skull of Pearl on their bare
Heads, their Vestments changed. In the midst of this Hall seemed to stand a
Pillar heaped round to a great height with massy Plate curiously wrought with
Beasts, Fishes and Fowl. The Emperor's Table was served with two hundred
Noblemen in Coats of gold; the Princes Table with young Dukes of Casan,
Astracan, Siberia, Tartaria and Circassia. The Emperor sent from his Table to
the Ambassador, thirty Dishes of Meat, to each a Loaf of extraordinary fine
Bread. Then followed a number more of strange and rare Dishes ^il'd up by half
dozens, with boiled, roast and baked, most part of them besawc'd with Garlic
and Onions. In midst of dinner calling the Ambassador up to him he drank the
King's health, who receiving it from his hand, returned to his place, and in
the same Cup being of fair Crystal pledged it with all his Company. After
dinner they were called up to drink of excellent and strong Mead from the
Emperor's hand; of which when many did but sip, he urged it not; saying he was
best pleased with what was most for their health. Yet after that, the same day
he sent a great and glorious Duke, one of them that held the golden Poleax,
with his Retinue, and sundry sorts of Mead to drink merrily with the
Ambassador, which some of the English did, until the Duke and his Followers
lightheaded, but well rewarded with thirty yards of Cloth of gold, and two
standing Cups, departed. At second audience the Ambassador had like reception
as before: and being dismissed had dinner sent after him with three hundred
several Dishes of Fish, it being Lent, of such strangeness, greatness and
goodness as scarce would be credible to report. The Ambassador departing was
brought a mile out of the City with like honor as he was first met; where
lighting from the Emperor's Sled, he took him to his Coach, made fast upon a
Sled; the rest to their Sleds an easy and pleasant passage.

Names of the Authors from whence these Relations have been taken; being all
either Eyewitnesses, or immediate Relaters from such as were.
THE Iournal of Sir Hugh Willowby. Discourse of Richard Chancellor. Another of
Clement Adams taken from the mouth of Chancellor. Notes of Richard Johnson.
Servant to Chancellor. The Protonotaries Register. Two Letters of Mr. Hen. Lane.
The several Voiages of Jenkinson. Southam and Sparks. The Iournal of Randolf
the Embass. Another of Sir Jerome Bows. The Coronation of Pheodor written by
Jerome Horsey. Gourdon of Hull 's Voyage to Pechora. The Voyage of William
Pursglove, to Pechora. Of Josias Logan. Hessel Gerardus, out of Purchase, part
3. l. 3. Russian Relations in Purch. 797. ibid. 806. ibid. The Embassage of Sir
Thomas Smith. Papers of Mr. Hackluit. Jansonius.
The End.

