A SERMON PREACHED AT THE FUNERAL of that Reverend Divine Mr ROBERT COLLARD,
Batchlour in Divinity and Pastor of Chilton-Folliat in the County of Wilts
fifty years, on the 9 of November 1648.

By JOHN MILLET Master of Arts, and Minister of Alborne in the same County.

PROVE. 10.7. The memorial of the Just shall be blessed. PSALM. 73.24. Thou
shall guide me with thy counsel: and afterward receive me to glory. OXFORD,
Printed, by Henry Hall, Anno Dom: 1652.

TO THE VIRTUOUS, AND TRULY RELIGIOUS GENTLEwoman Mistress IOANE COLLARD, Grace,
Comfort, and Peace here, and evrelasting happpinesse hereafter.
DEAR COUSIN,
I Know there are diverse that will wonder at me, yea those that know me best,
that after many years spent in the Lords harvest, I should bring a few
scattered ears, in such a plentiful crop of all kind of fruitful books, that
are daily brought into the Lords barn, I question not, but I must undergo
some censures of some that will say, they that are most learned are most loath
to be seen in print, but the lawyers position shall be my apollogy that those
actions that proceed from the passion of love, are not liable to law, at least
pardonable in respects, It was love to the reverend Divine deceased, that
induced me to publish these meditations, for yours and mine, and others
preparation to our desolution: that through the weaknesses we feel in our
bodies, and the examples of mortality before us continually, we may study Moses
Arithmeticke to number our days, that we may apply our hearts to wisdom.
Psalm. 90.12.
True it is, the flesh is enclosed with many fears, forced to so many helps,
so perplexed with its own frailty, as the numbering of our days to be so
short, is not so difficult, being so unable whether, we gaze abroad, or look
at home, to promise our selves any long immunity, either from the decays, or
desolution of our mortal constitution, but to number our days as we should is
a very hard work, seeing the flesh is ensnared with such idle hopes of longer
life, being blinded with wanton shows, busied with deep designs, benumbed with
false delights, that for the most part of us we consume our time, and consider
it not, we heap up sin and fear it not, lie chayned in death and wrestle not
against the sting of it, slip into the grave, and perceive it not, wherefore if
the Lord here do cast his cloudy countenance upon us, it is that we should
watch against the weakness of our flesh, which is then rediest to sleep when
temptation is nearest, yet if the stream of temptation carry us into sin, the
Lord in his compassion cures us, and yet in his love corrects us, if at any
time he mingle our bread with care, and lodge us in the bed of discomfort, yet
being driven to any strait, or exigent in this world, rather then we shall want
heavenly consolations it shall rain Manna, and rather then ove shall thirst,
the rocks shall yield water, and our afflictions are but to weane us from the
fleshpots of Egypt, and to advance in the way to Canaan: what though the
wicked be like the bramble, who in confidence of their shadow dare challenge to
be Kings over the trees of the forest, and our selves like sheep, are either
fleeced of the shearer when we are grown in wool, or snatched up by the
butcher when we are grown in flesh, yet when death has made us both even
with the earth, the grave shall be to us a fold till our great shepherd shall
appear, but to them a shambles, till the destroyer of their souls shall have
received an endless commission to torment them: what cause then have we, to
shut our gates against the gaspes of death, or like trembling leaves to
entertain the gale or blast of Sickness, which does but prune our feathers,
the more easily to fly toward our abiding city. These thoughts of death to a
mind mortified, and seasoned with the fear, and seated in the favor off God,
cannot choose but be welcome, though to the covetous and carnal wretch, Mar.
5.17.
that has all his desires like the mole scraping in the earth, they shall fare
as Christ did among the Gadarens to depart from them, when he was but coming
near them.

I have therefore presumed, dear Cousin, from whom I have received so many
volumes of books, thus far to entrench upon your modesty, as having most
right unto the same, to entreat you that this papery monument of your deceased
Husband which still lives in your heart, that it may be shadowed with your
allowance, and accepted of me as a thankful acknowledgement of the worth I
knew in him being such a masterpiece for imitation that this carping, and iron
age, that frowneth most on them that are freest from profanesse, could not but
approve him, to be zealous of the truth of God, painful in his calling,
careful of his flock, peaceable and blameless in his life, and comfortable
and constant in his death.

Now that God which has begun, and wrought many good things in you be pleased
to direct you still in every saving grace, that so in the end of your days you
may receive the end of your faith even the salvation of your soul, which is
the earnest prayer of

Your affectionate cousin, and servant in the Lord, JOHN MILLEY.

A SERMON PREACHED AT the funeral of that Reverend Divine Mr ROBERT COLLARD.
PHILIPP: 1.23. For I am on a strait on both sides, having a desire to be
loosed, and to be with Christ, which is best of all.
THe nature of man at the first was full of grace the immediate way to glory,
yea wanting nothing, having the earth for his garden, the sea for his fishpond,
the heavens for his Canopy, Angels for his associates, the creatures for his
willing Servants, the enjoyment of Gods love, and comfortable influences of his
favor for his continual recreations: which happy condition by his wilful
disobedience he deprived himself, and all his posterity of, and by infringing
Gods commandment he incurred his deserved indignation, who there upon cast him
and all his issue into that fatal praemunire, dust thou art, Genesis 3.19.
and into dust thou shall return. The experimental effect of which doomefull
sentence, so long ago presaged in Paradise; all the sons, and daughters of
Adam have, and shall endure none excepted (save those that shall be alive at
the glorious coming of Christ who shall be rapt up into the heavens and ever be
with the Lord) else none excused, neither high nor low, noble, nor ignoble,
learned, nor unlearned, rich nor poor, young nor old, male nor female, when
death comes an affidavit will not serve the turn, a return of a non est
inventus will not be admitted, no common bail will be taken, no excuses will
be accepted, as he has other business, and cannot harken to this pursuivant,
no sureties, or entreaties of friends will prevent deaths unavoydable stroke,
but yet the elect whose life is hid with Christ in God, are so far from being
afraid of his terrible message, Col. 3.3
that with Simeon they wish for a departure, Luc. 2.29.
and with Paul here, they desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.

The blessed Apostle having been in perils of the waters, in perils of
robbers in perils of his own nation, 2 Cor. 11.26.
in perils among the Gentiles, in perils in the city, in perils in the
wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils amoung false brethren, besides
his stoning, his scourging, his bonds, his nakedness, and watchfulness, no
marvel if after all these, and other his sufferings he desire to be loosed, and
to be with Christ,

In the words, are five parts.
1 a deliberation full of perplexity, I am in a strait betwixt two. 2 a
resolution full of pity, having a desire. 3 a reason if death be his choice,
its but Analysis, a loosing. 4 his assurance, he shall be with Christ. 5 an
Epiphonema, or conclusion determining his doubt, its best of all to be with
Christ.
Pet. 1.
I am in a strait. The Apostle imitates Moses who sets before Israel life and
death, so Paul to himself, he knew if he lived he lived in Christ, Deuteronomy. 30.19.
if he died, death would be his advantage, yet he is on a strait on both sides,
on the one side he sets the service of God, the spreading of the Gospel, the
conversion of souls to Christ, on the other side he sets the salvation of his
soul, he knew he should be saved though he died not presently, and the longer
he lived, the more glory he should bring to God, and be more profitable to his
people, which makes him say in the next verse its expedient I abide in the
flesh in respect of you, verse. 24.
howsoever he is in a strait. observe the choycest servants of God while they
are here are subject to many distractions, David, though a precious man after
Gods own heart, yet after his numbering the people, says he, when the Prophet
brought him his choice of three plagues, 2 Samuel 24.14. Esaias. 38.2.
I am in a wounderfull strait* so Hezekiah as soon as the Prophet Esaiah comes
with an heavy message, that he must set his house in order, and die, and not
live, he turns his face to the wall and weeps.

Our Savior Christ, shall I say, he was perplexed, nay he was in an agony
distracted on both sides: on the one side man's redemption by his death should
be effected; on the other side if he died not, then the combat with Satan, and
flesh, and death should not be broken off, nor they vanquished: on the one side
he looked if he suffered death, his own innocence not deserving it, together
with ignominious manner of dying, shamefully on the cross; on the other side
if he died not, he saw the Scriptures could not be fulfilled, nor the law
satisfied, nor his fathers wrath toward the elect pacified, yet
notwithstanding these straits he resolves it shall be not as he, but as his
father will.

Because distraction of mind at extraordinary matters befalls both

Seconly, the best are distracted in respect of man's woeful estate for
himself if he do but with an impartial view contemplate his own natural
condition, look into his mind there is abundance of ignorance, and impotency
to receive knowledge, with an approbation of error rather then truth; look
into his conscience it is polluted, accusing him, yea raging and falling mad
with unbridled fury: Descend we to the affections, they are prone to rebellion,
either ready to be inflamed with all the allurements of the world, or else
their motions toward goodness are altogether irregular, like a palsy-mans
motion which is always inconstant, if he look to his sins they are for
quantity innumerable, for quality abominable, the least of them being against
an infinite God, deserving hell fire: if he examine his whole life, what is it
but an impious progress, considering his infancy, youth, middle age, old age,
prosperity, adversity, at home or abroad, his sins of infirmity, presumption,
weakness, or wilfulness, of omission, or commission, against law, against
Gospel, against vows, aginst covenants, cannot choose but distract him. 2 In
respect of God he may find how he stands affected against sinners: 1 they are
banished paradise, 2 the earth is cursed to them: 3 the devil has strong
holds within them, and is entrenched in sinners souls: 4 their bodies are
subject to a thousand deformities, infirmities, and diseases: 5 they are liable
to public plagues, as wars, famines, pestilence etc. 6 God disrespects them
while they are sinners, no marvel then they are in straights.

Paul's panoply to encounter them, Ephesians. 6.11.12.

Reproof of those that are in a spiritual slumber, that are sensible of Amos
6* 1
and convulsions as the breeding Woman is, they that are barren in grace feel
not those straits, as they that have the image of Jesus Christ bred in them,
the Apostles pains was indefatigable this way, saying, my little children of
whom I travail in birth again till Christ be formed in you. Gal: 4.19.
It Is recorded by Mr Lattimer the Martyr in his Sermons on the Lords prayer,
that coming to a Gentleman's house demanded of him, what straits he had bin put
unto all his life long, what afflictions he had endured: answered none;
whereupon the goodman turns to his servant, saying, Abeamus, Deus non est hic,
let us be gone, for God is not here. It being a positive truth, that we must
through many tribulatons enter into the kingdom of God. Act. 12.22


2 To teach us to pray with David, saying, Turn thy face unto me, Psalm. 25.16.
the sorrows of my heart are enlarged, O bring me out of my troubles, look
upon my affliction and my travail, and forgive me all my sins: and to embrace
the same Prophets method, when my spirit was in perplexity within me, and mine
heart within me was amazed, then do I remember the time past, I meditate in
all the works of thy hands, Psalm. 143.4.5.

To be sensible of our natural corruption which casts us into miserable
Psalmist, they have so compassed me, and taken such hold of me, Psalm. 38.4.
that I am not able to look up; mine iniquities are gone over my head, and as
a weighty burden they are too heavy for me.

To teach us if we see our Brethren in straights any manner of way, Job. 16.2.
which proved miserable comforters, and Physicians of noe value, it was a
command in the Leviticall law, that a Kid ought not to be sod in its mothers
milk, which Philo Judaeus expounds thus, Amos 6.6
Thou shall not add affliction to him that has enough already, few remember
the affliction of Gods Joseph's, to whom that of the Church may justly be
retorted. Have you no regard all you that pass by, behold, Lam 1.12.
and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, O
then pass no evil censure on Gods afflicted ones! but pray for them, that in
all their troubles they may be more then Conquerours.

I desire. David, like as the Heart desires the water brooks, so longs my
soul after thee O God: Psalm. 42.1.
so Simeon, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy
word, Luc. 2.29.





Cura non ipsa in morte relinquunt. But none of these can induce the godly to
desire death, for they being wrapped up in an ecstasy at the contemplation of the
joys of a better life, desire after them, but yet they stay the Lords leisure,
subordinating their will to the Lords will, I honor Paul for his resolution,
but more for staying the Lords pleasure.

of that condition, wherein we still provoke the Lord, and to be where we
shall anger him noe more.

Because this life is a pilgrimage in which is uncertainty, Genesis 47.9. Isay.
40.7. It is a smoke in which is vanity, Psalm. 102.3. it is a Weavers shuttle
in which is volubility Job. 7.6. it is a Shepherds tent in which is variety
Isay. 38.12. It is as a ship on the sea, still passing away, a vapor: Jam.
4.14.

Lastly, because then they are freed from evils to come, Isay. 57.1. Josiah he
will take him away, that he should not see the calamities that should come upon
Israel 2 Kings 22.20.

For reproof of those which tremble and quake with Faelix, if they Hezekiah
mourned when he should die, and David says: let my soul live and it shall
praise thee, and Christ says, let this cup pass from me: I answer, Hezekiah
did so, because at this time he had not received the promised issue to succeed
him: David because he was in a great temptation, and if he had then died, his
enemies had triumphed: And Christ because he should die the shameful death of
the cross, as Divines suppose these did so.

For information: since the wicked love this life, and fear death totum
cumpositum as some thought, or that it made men inse^sible, who would fear
that which one cannot feel, therefore this fear of death in the wicked, does
presage some strange torment to those men, whereof they have a taste already
before they die, like Saules spirit which vexed him before his death.

To desire death but with these limitations 1 To resign our will to

Ob: Is it not lawful to desire death to avoid miseries here? else why did
Jonah desire to die, and Moses to be razed out of Gods book, and Job, and
Eliah: what avails it me to live? Sol. In Jonah it was a note of impatience,
yet I think these desires are not simply unlawful if they submit themselves
to the will of God, thus, I am troubled with a lingering disease, or I am in
prison, I would be freed by death if the Lord saw it fit, I suffer many
troubles here, I would feign go to heaven, if the Lord would send his
Ambassador for me, thus Job, Elias, others did.

Christ yet, as Paul did, for no man estemes this life, when he relisheth the
other to any purpose. For then the love of this world falls from him, as Elias
mantle when he went up to heaven: Paul indeed had seen many good things in his
days, and was never satisfied, being willing to die, he thirsted still, but no
water could quench his thirst, but the water of life: riches, honors,
pleasures; do not make the elect willing to die, but their desires breed; in
them an unrest until they be loosed: which is my third part

To be loosed. Death has among the ancients many descriptions, it is called
the privation of natural life, The Philosophers styled it an eternal sleep,
as they foolishly dreamed, some o^ them called it the fear of rich men, the
desire of poor men, an inevitable event, an uncertain pilgrimage, the robber
of mankind, a common fate, the passage of life, the departure of the living;
but Pa^ here calls it, a dissolution; for as life is nothing but an union or
combination of the soul to the body, so death is a parting between them*
observe that death to the elect is nothing but a loosing. Solomon Eccles. 12.7.
the body returns to the dust, and the spirit to God th^^ gave it: thus Paul
says, we know that if our earthly tabernacle be disolved, we have a building
made without hands eternal in the heaven*

1 Because our bodies here are earthly houses, whose foundation^ (...)

society with them that are upon the earth, he shall no more come to his house,
neither shall his place know him any more, for the soul, it is, loosed from the
body till the day of resurrection, then like old acquaintance they rejoice
together for ever, yea death to the godly may be called a loosing or disolution
in four regards.

1 Because the elect then are loosed from all their strong tempests, and
crosses, and labors here they meet with, blessed are the dead which dye in the
Lord, for then they rest from their labors Rev. 14.13.

2 Because the day of their loosing, is the day of receiving their wages, Job
7.2.
not of merit, but of mercy, then God will pay to every godly man his penny:
does not the hirling long to receive his wages for his days work.

3 Because the day of their disolution is their birth day, their day of
freedom and coronation: a birth day, because it is the beginning of their
everlasting joy: therefore it is miscalled when we say, it is our last day:
besides it is our day of coronation, when we shall have Paul's incorruptible
crown, and Peter's crown that never fades away put upon us; it is our day of
freedom, for then the soul is loosed out of a dungeon, for the body in this
life is but a loathsome prison of restraint, wherein the soul cannot be free to
the exercise of it self, either in natural or supernatural things: for the
body so domineers by senses, and so fiercely caries by appeties the same, that
the soul is compelled too often to satisfy bodily lusts: yea the body is a
dark prison shutting up the light of the soul, as a dark cloud does the
light of the sun, or as the interposition of the earth makes it night: which
made Paul cry out, Romans 27.
O wrethed man that I am who shall deliver me from this body of sin: now death
does but as a strong wind dissolve this cloud, that the Sun of Christ's image in
the Soul may shine clearly, nay it pulls down the walls of this stinking
bodily prison, that the soul may receive some fresh air in the open light of
glory, or else the liberty of the soul may appear thus, this world is a sea,
our lives are like so many galleys tossed with continnuall storms, our bodies
like Gally-slaves put to hard service by the great Turk the devil, who
tyrannically does command hard things now the soul like the heart of some
gally-slave may be free so as to loath that bondage, and inwardly to detest
that tyrant, but so long as it is fettered to the body, it cannot get away, now
death comes like an unresistable Giant, and carries the galleys to the shore,
and disolves them, and lets the souls the prisoners loose from their bodies.
Thirdly, death as it is the dissolution of the body, so it is the absolution of
the soul, and in this respect it is their solemn funeral day, for death is
the funeral of all their vices, sins, and imperfections, and the resplendent,
and orient spring time of all their virtues, death was the daughter of sin, and
in death shall be fullfilled: the daughter shall destroy the mother, we shall
never more then be infected with sin, nor troubled with frantic humors, nor
molested with passionate jelousies, and discontents, nor puffed up with the
ulcerous tumors of pride, death shall cure us perfectly of all maladies
anguishes from which it is imposible to be cured in this transitory life; yea
then shall be a glorious resurrection of our graces, our knowledge shall be
perfect, our love complete, but our faith and hope shall vanish away, because
then we shall receive the end of our faith even the salvation of our souls.

Rev. 9.6.
an end without an end, a defect without a defect; for their death shall
allwaies live, their end shall alwais begin, and their defects shall never
fail, it will little avail the man out of Christ to cry on his death bed, O
lamentable state of mine! now I am going to ^ place where my eyes shall see but
lamentable spectacles, mine ear shall hear nothing but woe woe, woe without
end, it shall be no-purpose for them then desperately to say, O earth why
did thou not swallow me! O mountains why did you not hide me from the
presence of that Judge whose Gospel I have conte^ned, whose Ministers I have
reviled, whose Sabbaths I have profaned, whose patience I have abused! O you
bewitching pleasures, how have you brought me to the torments of hell, whence I
shall never be freed, where the worm never dies, and the fire never goes out.

Ob. Wicked will say they have known many bad men die like Lambs, and good
men have died unquietly.

Mar. 9.44.
Sol. What do wicked die like Lambs? Nay rather Naball-like as slaves, as they
lived a sottish and senseless life, so a senseless death they died; and what
though, the godly went by the gates of hell to the kingdom of heaven? by reason
of the extremity of their desease fuminng up into their brain, they might
speak they knew not what, but man's changeable tongue cannot alter Gods
unchangeable decree, touching the salvation of his, peradventure the
apprehension of Gods verity against sin might make them say, my God my God why
have thou forsaken me: but know this, he never dies ill that lives well, we
must judge men by their lives, and not any by their behavior at their deaths.

To groan within our selves and to wait for the adoption of our change our
vile bodies, Phil: 3.20
and make them like his glorious body.

Ob: How shall I be prepared for my loosing? first, in your life time take away
the sting of death, which is sin: secondly, think nothing more certain then
death, though nothing more uncertain for place, time, and manner: fourthly
learn to die by little and little, that so when the Lord calls, you may
sweetly, and comfortably depart this life; saying, Lord I am not afraid to die,
nor ashamed to live: In my life thou have protected me, in my death thou will
receive me.

Ob: Must I in my youth, and strength learn to die? will it not be time enough
to have such thoughts when I am old? But I demand, will you wound your self
to try the Chyrurgions skill? Will you sin in your youth? that you may repent
in your old age: Shall the devil have the flowers of your time? and the Lord
the weeds: Shall the devil have the wine? and God the dregs: as the fashion of
many is, when as some say, a man cannot repent too late, I am sure a man cannot
repent too soon; and woeful experience witnesses late repenance is seldom
true.

Here Is a three fold comfort to the elect, concerning their loosing:

First, it is putting of their old clothes, it s but to remove out of an old
house, it is but as seed cast into the ground: For the first, in this life, we
are clothed with rotten soul-garments, which death does slip us off, and cloth
us with the garments of salvation, more sumptuous then Solomon's rich attire: to
desire to go to heaven, and not to be disolved, ^s to desire to put on new
clothes, without putting of our old, Secondly the Apostle compares our bodies
to old mudwalled houses, to a rotten tent, and our heavenly estate, to a most
glorious, 2 Cor. 5.1.
and Princely Palace, made by the most curious workman that ever was; it is
such an edifice that will never be out of repair. Now for a godly man to die,
is but to remove from an old rotten house ready to fall, to a stately Palace,
Does that Landlord offer his tenant any hard measure, that will fetch him out
of his base cottage, and bestow upon him his own manor house? Noe other thing
does God to us, when by death he removes us out of our earthly tabernacles to
settle us in his everlasting habitation. Thirdly our boddies are as seed, a man
which had never seen the experience of it, perhaps would have thought, that the
seed cast into the ground had been spoiled: but nature having showed the
return of the grain with advantage, a man can easily be cured of this folly,
the bodies of the Saints are Gods choicest seed, and what does death more, then
cast it into the earth: We may be assured as the grain, so our bodies shall
rise more flourishing, and beautiful then before: For six things shall befall
them; 1 incorruptiblenesse; 2 immortality; 3 spiritualnesse; 4 splendour; 5
immunity from weakness; 6 enjoyment of happiness in every member: In all
these respects, Psalm. 116.15.
we may then say with David, precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of
his Saints; their death is no death, but a loosing, a dissolution: for
immediately upon the separation of the soul from the body, they are with Christ.

Pat. 4.
To be with Christ: a Christian cannot choose but by faith be assured, that
death being a dissolution, will open a gapp for him, to come into the sweet
embracements of Jesus Christ; Paul knew that immediately upon his departure, his
soul should be transported into Christ's arms.

Here observe that the Godly immediately after their departure are with Jesus
Christ: thus Job in significant terms could prognosticate, saying, I know that
my Redeemer lives; and that lie shall stand the last day upon the earth, Job.
19.25.26.
and though worms devour my flesh, yet I shall see God in my flesh, not with
other, but with my own eyes. What donative could Christ better bestow upon the
penitent Theife, then, this day thou shall be with me in Paradise: what thing
of mony-price could Steven desire to have? Luc. 23.43
then to behold Christ sitting at the right hand of his Father; what better
promise of mercy, could Christ at his departure give unto his perplexed
servants? then, I go to prepare a place for you, Joh. 14.2, 3.
and if I go to prepare a place for you I will receive you unto my self,
thatwhere I am, you may be also.

Christ prayed it might be so, and Christ's prayer must needs have a gracious
hearing, and acceptance in his Fathers presence; for what thing did Christ with
more earnestness of Spirit beg of his Father? when he was about to leave the
world, then this, saying, Father I will that they also which thou have given
me, Joh: 17.24, 25.
be with me where I am, that they may behold the glory, that thou have given
me, and that the love wherewith thou have loved them may be in them, and I in
them.

Because the faith of the Elect, still beats upon this their being with
Christ, for unless we ascend up to him, as he descended down to us; his
descending was in vain, because he came down to us, that we might ascend up to
him; he descended to take our flesh, that we might ascend to take possession of
his kingdom, he descended to be crucified, we ascend to be glorified; he
descended to this world, which is an hell in respect of his heavenly
habitation, we ascend to heaven, to joy, to our Father, our Savior, to Angels,
to Saints; we see Paul had good cause to desire to be disolved and to be with
Christ.

This is the happy end after all our sorrows to be with Christ; I was, says
Paul, thrice beaten with rods I suffered thrice shipwreck etc. 2 Cor. 11.24.
no marvel then though Paul desire to be with Christ, since this is the
happiness Christians after they have sailed over the troublesome waves of this
life, then Christ will receive them into his comfortable harbor, and refresh
them with the joy of his countenance; I dare say if Christ and his Children
were in hell, hell would would be no hell, nay which is more, heaven would be
no heaven, were it not for the amiable reflections of love, which proceed from
Christ to his beloved ones: O if Peter at the transfiguration of Christ, having
but a glimpse of his glory, cried out, Master it is good to be here, Luc: 9.33.
how much more would he be ravished, when he saw his heavenly glory?

Because the dissolution of the soul from the body, Christ, which made the
Apostle confident in this, that the godly, had rather be absent from the body,
2 Cor. 5.7 8.
and so present with the Lord, then to be present in the body and absent from
the Lord.

Because Christ has by his death perfumed the grave to his, Christ has
overcome the devil, that his Children might do so; even overcome him, Heb:
2.14.
that had the power of death, even the devil: Christ subdued that strong man,
that his might conquer him; this being so, the godly whose life is hid with
Christ in God, need not be appaled at the message of death, Col. 3.3. Hos.
13.14.
but may in a triumphant manner say, O death I will be thy death, O grave where
is thy destruction! for Christ has delivered us from the hurt, and sting of
death.

Reproof of the Papist-purgatory, which it seems was not found Paul's, but you
must know your purgatory, is like your pianted sepulchers, framed more for the
living, then the dead, seeing the Locusts of Rome live by trentals, and dirges,
and masses for the dead, as the Silver-smith of Ephesus lived by Images; the
Papists are loath the purgatory-fire should be quenched, for it is the gainfulst
lie in all popery, which has brought most of the goods of Europe to the Popes
Coffers, to be rid as they dreamed out of purgatory, after so many years, by
masses and supererogate works of others; as if the Scripture had never said,
the just shall live by his own faith, and that he that beleiveth shall not go
into judgment, Joh. 5.24.
but shall pass from death to life; and that they that dye in the Lord shall
rest from their labors. How do they rest if they stay at purgatory? Job. 5.24.
which fantastical fiction the Papists themselves cannot agree about the
situation of it, for some say it is in the air, some say it is placed in the
earth, some say it is a little above hell, some say it is in the middle region,
whereas it is a mere Chymara, an Individuum vagum, that which has no essence
or existence at all.

Christ; in two respects: First against the troubles of this life, we may say
with Paul, Romans 8.33.34. to the end of the Cap. Secondly against the terrible
day of judgment, they may expostulate with their own souls, as soon as I dye
I shall be with Christ, for all my hope, and affiance is in his love, his
passion is my payment, his blood my purgation, his sacrifice my satisfaction,
his death my life, he is my wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption 1 Cor. 1 30.

Christ here, then we shall be like him hence, not to follow him in the acts of
his Divinity as the Papist fondly imagine, but in suffering with him, if we be
like him in his humiliation, we shall be like him in his exaltations; our
imitation of him must be analogically not properly in patience, humility, love,
willing resignation of our selves into his Fathers hands, thus doing, he will
not refuse us when we dye, when we shall not only see him as he is, but shall
reign with him in glory, which is best of all: which is my last part.

Which is best of all; this is Paul's verdict, or sentence, upon his
deliberation concerning life and death, this is the upshot of all his private
disputation between his flesh, and his spirit, between nature, and grace,
between his doing good in his ministry, and his receiving his wages: it is
best of all to be with Christ. Note hence that a Christians best content is to
be in heaven. Thus David, O God my heart longs after thee, as a barren and
dry land where no water is: Psalm. 63.1.
again, how excellant is thy mercy? O God! therefore the children of men do
trust under the shadow of thy wings, they shall be satisfied with the fatness
of thy house, and thou shall give them drink out of the rivers of thy
pleasures; the reason is, for with thee is the well of life, and in thy light
shall we see light Psalm. 36.7.8.9.

Because there is Gods presence, There is fulness of joy, and in his presence
says, Blessed are the pure in heart, Mat 5.8.
for they shall see God: and David was ravished with this meditation, blessed
are they that dwell in thy house Psalm. 84.6.

Because this is absolutely the best good, otherthings are good as they best of
all, quia omne bonum terminatur in hoc bonum, Bern.
quod est amabile supra omnia bona: other things are good, (...), some
respects, but this (...) without any exception, this is the one thing only
necessary.

It Is best of all; Because there is no intermixtion of dolorous effects,

Because the soul shall then shine most gloriously, which here in the body is
obscured, the luster whereof I will adumbrate by this comparison; as a candle
while it is in the Lantern it gives a good light and enlightneth the Lantern
it self, and if it be taken out though the Lantern be left dark, yet the
candle shines more clearly then it did before; so while the soul is in the
body, Lactantius
it is the light and governer thereof, and when by death it bids the body
adieu, although the body be left dead, and insensible, yet then the soul
enjoyes her proper vigor and brightness; then the Image of God shines
perfectly in it, for then the understanding is replenished with the knowledge
of God, which is immediately revealed unto it; then the will also perfectly
obeys God and all the affections are so purified, that there is a sweet
melodious harmony between the faculties of the soul to praise the Lord for
evermore.

It Is best of all; in respect of the variety, and perpetuity of the Elects joy,
which they shall have with Christ, which neither eye has the eye has not seen
it, because it is noe color; the ear has not heard it, 1 Cor 2.9.
for it is no sound; the heart cannot comprehend it, because it must comprehend
the heart; it cannot be fully apprehended by faith, nor attained by charity,
because it transcendeth our desires.

To condemn us of foolishness, which think here in this life to find
contentment; O noe this life is a wilderness, where be Serpents

To wait with Job all our appointed time till our change shall come: O let us
sigh, and long to be carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom, Saints,
Patriarchs, Job. 14.14
and Prophets, and Martyrs, and to Jesus Christ the Mediator of the new
Testament, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things then that
of Abell: Heb. 12.24.
you will say this is best of all, when you enjoy your inheritance immortal,
and undefiled, which fades not, which is reserved for you, when you rest from
your labors, and behold the glory of God; all the Arithmeticians in the world
are not able to number the joys of the Elect, all the Rhetoricians are not
able in fitting terms to express them, when you shall be arrayed in white,
having Crowns on your heads, and Palms in your hands, when all tears shall
be wiped from your eyes, and all sorrows removed from your hearts, when you
shall serve him at his table, and eat in his kingdom, and with the four and
twenty Elders say, blessing, and glory, and honor, and power, and might, be
given to him that sits upon the Throne for evermore.

I have done with the words, now a few words, of this sad occaon, and then you
shall be eased of me.

Touching now this Revered Genteleman even now interred before us, he was borne
in Somersetshire, and had his first education in the then famous School of
Taunton-deane whereby Gods blessing, having made a commendable progress in
learning proportionable to his age to the best there, he was by God's good
providence translated to Lincoln College in Oxford, where being Master of
Arts, and being known to be exquisitly learned, was chosen Greek Reader to the
Uuniversity, and not long after proceeded Batchelour in Divinity. From Oxford
by God's providence he was disposed to be Rector of this Church, where he has
continued this fifty years, how he has lived here, clouds of witnesses can
testify, very painful in his Ministry, very pious in his family, it being a
little Church, wherein he constantly called his people to prayer twice a day,
besides his own private devotions; besides his times which he observed duly
in his study, he had an excellent faculty, which with great labor, and delight
he took in breeding up many young Gentelmen in his house, in good literature,
all his time; how many Scholars has he of his own cost, first bred-them up in
his house, afterward help to maintain them in the University, and incurrage
them, for and in the Ministry, my self who have known his life and
conversation, for above forty years, must thankefully acknowledge, and bless
God for him, besides many other Ministers borne not far from this place, that
have reaped the fruits of his love, in this kind; it could have been wished
that this last service to him, might have been performed, by some more able and
eminent Person then my self: But tennitatem ingenii mallem declarare, quam
officium percharissimo maecenati detrahere, it being the last charge he gave me
a little before his loosing. What shall I say now to you of his charge? as we
of the Ministry have lost a worthy Oracle for learning and piety, so you have
lost a loving Pastor, his dear Wife a tender Husband, his Children a provident
Father, the poor a great Benefactor, the godly-disposed here, have lost a good
helper that way, but certainly say, praetiosissimum monite perdidimus yet he is
not lost whom. Christ has found, praemititur non amittitur, while he lived,
all his desires was the Curch might thrive; It Is true his judgment was for
Bishops, but yet before these times he would to his friends bewail their
abuses, and usurpations upon the Church, and his frequent option was, that the
Church might thrive O that Sion might fl^urish, a great lover of lectures he
was by his presence while he was able, and drawing his Neighbors along wtih
him as well as his family, and by his practice, having borne a part in
Marleborough lecture for above thirty years, a great peacemaker too, not only
in his own parish, but in the country, yea he often, paid money out of his
own purse to prevent suits in law, and to make men be friends, such an
ingenious mildness he was endued with his gravity that he was honored of the
best, and feared of the worst, but loved of all.

For you my loving friends of Chilton I hope, and fear; I hope though this
body be dead, his memory shall live with you, yea his preaching shall live in
you; yea his example, and good works shall live in you; But I fear you, and
the poor among you, and the perplexed consciences among you, will miss him
more seven yerars hence, then yet you do; But I see the floud-gates are open,
and the sight of your affecttionate tears, moving my sluices too, cause me to
retrahere vela orationis, to contract my speech, (though I can never speak
enough of this subject of our imitation) I shall therefore speak a few more
words, to whom this loss more spcially concerns, These. 4.13
and then I have done, not to be sorry as those that have noe hope for them that
sleep in Christ, I do not forbid you to mourn for the dead, for it s the
sign of a reprobate, to be without natural affection, but beseech you to
afford your selves the comforts of faith, and take heed of immoderate greiving
which is forbidden in nature, which teaches all things, in reason which
teaches all men, in Religion, which teaches all Christians; in nature; for
the eye is (as Anatomist observe) full of twice as many dry skins, like sluices
to damme up the course of tears, as it has moist chrystiline humorus like
channels to let them forth, for if all the eye were all a moist humor, Prove.
27.
there would be no seeing. Secondly in reason for every too much is a fault:
First it is not good, says Solomon to eat too much honey, sure then it is not
good to eat to much gall, for what is grief imoderate but gall, Prove. 17.22.
and wormwood? Thirdly in Religion for true sorrow dries up the bones, for why
does God give the holy spirit which is the only comforter, a good conscience,
which is a continual feast, the holy Scripture which is a second paradise, a
lively faith whereby we have peace with God, but to infer that they have no
spirit, no conscience, no Scripture, no faith in them that pierce their hearts
with too much grief; I must not forget, neither can you, with what Job like
patience he endured his sickness, nor what excellent counsels he gave to all
that were about him, how willing he was to resign himself into his redeemers
hand, its the unfayned desire of my heart when the Lord shall call me, that I
may dye the death of this righteous one, and that my latter end may be like to
his. You have hard what I have said, and the Lord give you understanding in all
things.

LAVS DEO.
FINIS.

