THE Military Discipline Wherein is Martially shown the order for Driling the
Musket and Pike.

Set forth in postures with ye words of coma^nd, and brief instructions for the
right use of the same.

Sold by Tho: Jenner at the foot of the Exchange in london 1642.

decorative border including depictions of pikeman and musketeer

The Exercise of the English, in the Militia of the Kingdom of ENGLAND.
The Exercise of a Foot-Company.
FIrst, both Pikes and Muskets are ordered into files of 6.8. or 10. deep. The
Musketeers are sometime placed before, sometime in flank, sometimes in the
rear of the Pikes.

To exercise the motions; there are two distances to be observed.

The first is, when every one is distant from his fellow 6 foot square, that is
in file and rank 6.

The second is, when every Soldier is 3 foot distant one from the other, as
well in File as in Rank.

And because the measure of such distances cannot be taken so justly by the
eye, the distance of 6 foot betwixt the files is measured, when the Soldiers
stretching out their Arms do touch one another hands: and betwixt the Ranks,
when the ends of their Pikes come well-nigh to the heels of them that march
before. And the measure of 3 foot betwixt the files is, when their elbows touch
one another; betwixt the Ranks, when they come to touch the ends of one
another Rapiers.

For to march in the field, the distance of 3 foot from file to file is kept,
and of 6 foot from Rank to Rank.

To order themselves in Battle, as also to go toward the enemy, the distance
of 3 foot in File, and Rank is observed; and likewise to conversion or wheeling.

The Musketeers also going for to fire by Ranks keep the same distance of 3
foot, but going to skirmish they go ala Disbanda de, which is out of order.

There is yet another sort of distance, which is not used, but for to receive
the enemy with a firm stand, and serves for the Pikes only, (for the
Musketeers cannot be so close in Files, because they must have their arm at
liberty) and that is, when every one is distant from file to file, a foot and a
half, and 3 foot from Rank to Rank. And this last distance is thus commanded,
Close your selves thoroughly. But it is not to be taught the soldiers, for
that, when necessity shall require it, they will close themselves but too much
of their own accord, without command.

What the Soldier ought to know by the Drum.

1. A Call. 2. A March. 3. A Troop. 4. A Charge. 5. A Retreat. 6. A Battalia,
7. A Battery. 8. A Relief.
To begin therefore to do the Exercises, the Company is set in the first
distance to wit, of 6 foot in File, and Rank, and thus is said.

Steighten your Files, Even your Ranks, Silence.
These are the general words of Command, which are often to be used.

To the right hand. As you were. To the left hand. As you were. To the right
hand about. To the left hand as you were. To the left hand about. To the right
hand as you were. To the right double your ranks. Ranks as you were. To the
left double your ranks. Ranks, as you were.
You must note, that when they are commanded to be as they were, they must
return thither, from whence they parted; and if they turned to the right hand,
they must return to the left, and so in Countermarch.

To the right hand double your files. Files as you were. To the left hand
double your files. Files as you were. With half files to the right hand double
your Ranks. Half files as you were. With half files to the left hand double
your Ranks. Half files as you were. Files to the right hand countermarch. Files
to the left hand countermarch. To the right hand, or left, at discretion, as
you were. Ranks to the right hand countermarch. Ranks to the left hand
countermarch. To the right or left hand as you were. Close your Files to 3 foot
distance. Close your Ranks to 3 foot distance.
Understand that in Closing from the outsides to the middle, the Soldier is to
stand in his distance of 3 foot in file, and not closer.

To the right hand wheel. To the left hand wheel.

Open your Ranks backwards in your double distance, to wit, at 12 foot, and
this for a single Company. Ranks as you were, sc. at the first.

In opening Ranks or Files, you must keep them closed until the second Rank or
File, beginning from the outsides, have taken their distances, and so shall the
rest remain close until every Rank or File have taken their distances in order.

Open your Files, to wit, to the first distance of 6. foot.

If you will command to close Files to the right hand or left hand, the outmost
File stands still, and the rest close to that File.

For the Pike with a firm stand.
Advance your Pikes. Order your Pikes. Cheek your Pikes. Port Pikes. Charge
your Pikes. Trail your Pikes.
More for the Pikes, first with a firm stand, and then marching.
Charge your Pikes. To the right hand charge your Pikes. To the left hand
charge your Pikes. Charge your Pikes to the Rear. Order your Pikes.
This must be observed charging your Pikes with a firm stand, to set the right
foot behind, and charging the Pikes marching, to set the left foot before.

For the Musket.
THe Postures in his Excellencies Book are to be observed; but in exercising
you must only use these three terms of direction. Make ready. Present. Give
fire.


Your Musketeers must observe in all their motions to turn to the right hand,
and that they carry the mouth of their pieces high, as well when they are
shouldered, as in priming, and also when they hold their pans guarded, and come
up to give fire.

In advancing toward an Enemy, when they do not skirmish loose and disbanded,
they must give fire by Ranks after this manner.

Two Ranks must always make ready together, and advance ten paces forward
before the body, at which distance, a Sergeant (or when the body is great, some
other Officer) must stand, to whom the Musketeers are to come up before they
present, and give fire, first, the first Rank. And whilst the first gives
fire, the second Rank keep their Muskets close to their Rests, and their pans
guarded, and as soon as the first are fallen away, the second presently present,
and give fire, and fall after them.

Now as soon as the first two Ranks do move from their places in the front: The
two Ranks next them must unshoulder their Muskets, and make ready, so as they
may advance forward ten paces as before, as soon as ever the two first Ranks are
fallen away; and are to do in all points as the former. And all the other Ranks
through the whole division must do the same by two's, one after another.

A manner there is to give fire retyring from an enemy, and is performed after
this sort.
As the Troop marches, the hindermost rank of all, keeping still with the
Troop, is to make ready, and being ready, the Soldiers in that rank turn all
together to the right hand and give fire, marching presently away a good round
pace to the front, and there place themselves in rank together just before the
front: As soon as the first rank turns to give fire, the rank next makes ready,
and does as the former, and so the rest.

We give fire by the flanks thus. The uppermost file next the Enemy must be
commanded to make ready, marching still along with the body, till such time, as
they be ready, and then they turn to the right, or left hand (according to the
sight of their enemies either upon the right, or left flank) and give fire all
together. When they have discharged, the bringer up leads away, and at twice
firing over he reduces them. Now as soon as the foresaid file does turn to
give fire, the uttermost next it makes ready, always keeping along with the
body till the Bringer up be past a little beyond the Leader of that file, that
gave fire last; and then the whole sile must turn, and give fire, and do in all
points as the first did, and so the rest one after the other. A Sergeant, or if
the body be great, some other better qualified Officer must stand at the head
of the first file, and as soon as the second file has given fire, and has
charged, he is to lead forward the first file up to the second file, and so to
the rest one after another, till he has gathered up again the whole wing, and
then he is to join them again in equal front with the pikes.

Last of all, the Body or whole wing of Musketeers makes ready all together,
and the first rank without advancing gives fire in the place they stand in, and
speedily, as may be, yet orderly falls away, all the ranks doing the same
successively one after another.

Thus much of the Arms and exercise of the foot. The horse ensue.
The order and Discipline holden in the Horse-troops, or in the Cavalry.
The Cavalry has for his Chief the General, the Lieutenant General, and the
Commissary general.

To the Cavalry there is a Quartermaster general, and a Provost general
belonging; the Justice resorteth to the Council general of war of the Army.

The Gavalry is of two sorts: Harquebusiers and Curassiers.

The first have for defensive Arms, the Curace pistol proof, and a light head
piece. For offensive, the Carbine of 3. foot, 3. inches length, and the bore of
20 bullets in the pound; and Pistols like unto the Curassiers.

The Curassiers have for defensive Arms a complete Armor, the Curace Pistol
proof. For offensive, two Pistols having the barrel of 26. inches in length,
and the bore of 36. bullets in the pound.

For the order in Regiments, the 40. Compantes entertained by the States do
make 11. Regiments.

The Regiment of the General has always the Vantguard, the others
alternatively and by turns, and he that has it this day, the next day after
has the Reere, the rest following in the same sort.

Those which command the Regiments are called Coronels. The Regiments are
compounded of 3. or 4. Companies (of 3 at the least) and the Coronels Company
marches always on the left wing of the Regiment.

The Captains receive orders from their Coronels, as these from the Commissary
General.

All the Companies are divided in 3 equal parts, which are called Squadrons,
and distributed to the 3 chief Officers; Captain, Cornet and Lieutenant, having
each of them adjoined an old Soldier, which they do know to be of more desert,
called a Corporal.

Marching in the field, every Officer marches at the head of his Squadron, the
Lieutenant excepted, which marches behind with the Quartermaster; and the
third Corporal at the head of the Lieutenants Squadron.

The Companies are divided by files, and ranks, the file 5 deep, and no more,
how strong soever the Company be.

They observe that in marching in battle they must be close together, and to
do the Motions there must be 6 foot distance from one Horseman to another.

The Companies being in battle, there must be 25. paces distance left between
every Company, and 50 betwixt every Regiment at the least.

The exercise of Arms for the Cavalry.
To open the Squadron, you must first open the ranks, and after the files.

To close the Squadron, you must first close the files, and after the ranks.

There be two sorts of distances betwixt the files, the one close, and the
other open.

In the close there must be no distance or intervals betwixt the files, to the
open there must be 6 foot betwixt every file.

Likewise there must be two sorts of distances betwixt the ranks; the Close,
which must be without intervall or street; and the Open, which must be six foot
distance.

In a march it must be understood, that the ranks must never be more opened,
than the open distance of 6 foot.

And to the end that the Troop may march in good order, and observe well their
distance betwixt the ranks, without that the last may be forced to run or go
too fast, there must be heed taken, that so soon as the first ranks begin to
march, all the Troop and the Rear also march.

The words of Command, are
Open your Ranks. Open your Files. Stand right in your Ranks. Stand right in
your Files. To the right hand. As you were. To the left hand. As you were. To
the right hand about. To the left hand as you were. To the left hand about. To
the right hand as you were. Files to the right hand countermarch. Files to the
left hand countermarch. To the right or left hand as you were. Ranks to the
right hand countermarch. Ranks to the left hand countermarch. Close your Files.
Close your Ranks. To the right hand wheel. To the left hand wheel.
One days Exercise.
HAving brought your Company into a place convenient, where you intend to
exercise them; if you have time enough, you may cause the file-leaders,
Corporals or Serieants, to instruct them in the Postures and true using of
their Arms. Wherein having spent some time, to the benefit of the Company; upon
the first summons of the Drum, each file-leader with his file, is to march into
his place. The Captain (or other Commander) being at the head of his Company,
commands them to even their Ranks, and to straiten their Pikes, and stand in
their order both in rank and file. If your Ensign be not already in the field,
but in some place near at hand; then cause your two innermost files of pikes to
advance: commanding a Serieant with a Drum, to troop them along to the place of
Rendezvous, there to fetch their Colors. If the place be not nigh at hand,
take as many files of Musketeers. Having brought the Ensign to the head of
the Pikes, each file returns into his place; the Officers likewise, withdrawing
their several stations. Silence being commanded, the Captain (or other
Commander) begins first to instruct the Soldiers in the several distances,
betwixt rank and file, with the ways to open and close to them. And if he
think fit, to instruct them in the several uses of each distance.

Next after distance, they are to be instructed in the facings, then in the
doublings; next, in the Coontermarches; and lastly, in the wheeling. In each of
which they are to be instructed, according to the opportunity of the time and
place: but, especially is the capacity of the Soldier to be observed. Wherein,
the Captain may do very well, in each of the motion; to lay down some special
rules and observations; by which the Soldier may the better understand what he
is to do, and how (the best way) to perform it.

After the motions ended, let them prepare for skirmish. And first you may
cause them to give fire with for lorne files, marching forth 20. paces (or
thereabouts) before the front. Having all fired over that way, they may give
fire once over, by advancing two ranks together, ten paces before the front.
Then let them give fire, even with the front, and then with the half-files: the
Pikes porting or charging, according to discretion. The Pikes being advanced,
and the Musketeers marched up, even with their front; you may either face
about, wheel about, or countermarch, and so give fire in the reere. Your Pikes
then being shouldered, and your Mu, ketiers having fired over in the reere, you
may (if you please) wheel your flanks into the front, and so charge Pikes to
the reere. Which done, wheel your front into the midst; pass into your place,
and face them to you. Then (if you will) you may pass your Musketeers, of the
left flank, through between the ranks of Pikes, and place them next to the
right flank of Pikes, opening the right flank of Musketeers, to give them way.
Then let the Pikes shoulder, and Musketeers give fire to the right, upon a
march: their leaders leading them up between the Pikes and their own divisions
of Musketeers. Having fired once over, in this way, let them continue their
firing to the right, each leader leading up his file on the outside of the left
flank of Pikes. Then let the Pikes advance, even whilst the last file is
giving of fire: and so soon as the Pikes are clear of the Musketeers, let them
face all to the right, and charge. Having advanced your Pikes, and faced your
body again to the left, you may then wheel your Battle about to the right, and
then facing the whole body to the left, the Musketeers will be all in front.
Then let your Musketeers give fire, and either wheel all off to the right,
thereby making an Intervalle for the left flank, or else let them wheel off by
division, placing themselves in the reere of their own divisions of Musketeers.
Having given fire once (or oftener) over that way, let them give fire again, and
wheel off by division: ranking even with their Pikes. That being done, cause
the Pikes to charge: the Musketeers giving fire once over, on that Figure. The
Pikes being advanced, face the whole body to the right: and cause the
Musketeers to stand, and the Pikes to open to the right and left, and so to
make the hollow square. Then you may (if you please) command the Ensign to
display his Colors in the midst of the hollow; in sign of triumph: the body,
either standing or marching. After which, command the Pikes to close their
divisions: Which being performed, command the recre division of Musketeers, to
double their front of Pikes, by division: and then they will stand in form of
Captain Wallers Triple firing: Let them give fire upon that Figure, and fall
off again, according to the directions upon that Figure. Which being performed,
and the Pikes charged, and re-advanced: the body will be absolutely reduced, as
at the first it was before you began your firings.

FINIS.

