BRIEF NOTES Upon a late SERMON, TITL'D, The Fear of God and the King; Preachd,
and since Publishd, By MATTHEW GRIFFITH, D.D. And Chaplain to the late KING.

Wherein many Notorious Wrestings of Scripture, and other Falsities are observd
by I.M.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1660.

Brief NOTES upon a late SERMON, Titl'd, The Fear of God and the King, etc.
I Affirmd in the Preface of a late discourse, Entitled, The ready way to
establish a free Commonwealth, and the dangers of readmitting Kingship in this
Nation, that the humor of returning to our old bondage, was instilld of late by
some deceivers; and to make good, that what I then affirmd, was not without
just ground, one of those deceivers I present here to the people: and if I
prove him not such, refuse not to be so accounted in his stead.

He begins in his Epistle to the General; and moves cunningly for a license to
be admitted Physician both to Church and State; then sets out his practice in
Physical terms, an wholesome Electuary to be taken every morning next our hearts:
tells of the opposition which he met with from the College of
State-Physitians, then lays before you his drugs and ingredients; Strong
purgatives in the Pulpit, contemperd of the myrrh of mortification, the aloes
of confession and contrition, the rubarb of restitution and satisfaction; a
pretty fantastic dos of Divinity from a PulpitMountibanck, not unlike the Fox,
that turning Peddler, opend his pack of ware before the Kid; though he now would
seem to personate the good Samaritan, undertaking to describe the rise and
progress of our national malady, and to prescribe the only remedy: which how
he performs, we shall quickly see.

First, he would suborn Saint Luke as his spokesman to the General, presuming,
it seems, to have had as perfect understanding of things from the very first,
as the Evangelist had of his Gospel; that the General who has so eminently
born his part in the whole action, might know the certainty of those things
better from him a partial Sequesterd enemy: for so he presently appears, though
covertly and like the tempter, commencing his address with an impudent calumny
and affront to his Excellence, that he would be pleased to carry on what he had
so happily begun in the name and cause not of God only, which we doubt not,
but of his anointed, meaning the late Kings son: which is to charge him most
audaciously and falsely with the renouncing of his own public promises and
declarations both to the Parliament and the Army, and we trust his actions ere
long will deterr such insinuating slanderers from thus approaching him for the
future. But the General may well excuse him; for the Comforter himself scapes
not his presumption, avouchd as falsely, to have impowrd to those designs him
and him only, who has solemnly declared the contrary. What Phanatique against
whom he so often inveighs, could more presumptuously affirm whom the Comforter
has impowrd, then this Antifanatic, as he would be thought?

The Text.

Prove. 24. 21. My son, fear God and the King, and meddle not with them that be
seditious, or desirous of change, etc.

Letting pass matters not in controversy, I come to the main drift of your
Sermon, the King; which word here is either to signify any supreme Magistrate,
or else your latter object of fear is not universal, belongs not at all to many
parts of Christendom, that have no King; and in particular, not to us. That we
have no King since the putting down of Kingship in this Commonwealth, is
manifest by this last Parliament, who to the time of their dissolving not only
made no address at all to any King, but summond this next to come by the Writ
formerly appointed of a free Commonwealth, without restitution or the least
mention of any Kingly right or power; which could not be, if there were at
present any King of England. The main part therefore of your Sermon, if it mean
a King in the usual sense, is either impertinent and absurd, exhorting your
auditory to fear that which is not, or if King here be, as it is, understood
for any supreme Magistrate, by your own exhortation they are in the first place
not to meddle with you, as being your self most of all the seditious meant
here, and the desirous of change, in stirring them up to fear a King, whom the
present Government takes no notice of.

You begin with a vain vision, God and the King at the first blush (which will
not be your last blush) seeming to stand in your text like those two Cherubims
on the mercy-seat, looking on each other. By this similitude, your conceited
Sanctuary, worse then the Altar of Ahaz, patternd from Damascus, degrades God
to a Cherub, and raises your King to be his collateral in place,
notwithstanding the other differences you put: which well agrees with the
Court-letters, lately publishd from this Lord to the other Lord, that cry him up
for no less then Angelical and Celestial.

Your first observation, page 8. is. That God and the King are coupl'd in the
text, and what the Holy Ghost has thus firmly combined, we may not, we must
not dare to put asunder; and your self is the first man who puts them asunder
by the first proof of your doctrine immediately following, Judge. 7. 20. which
couples the sword of the Lord and Gideon, a man who not only was no King, but
refused to be a King or Monarch, when it was offered him, in the very next
chapter, verse. 22, 23. I will not rule over you, neither shall my son rule over
you; the Lord shall rule over you. Here we see that this worthy heroic
deliverer of his Country thought it best governd, if the Lord governd it in
that form of a free Commonwealth, which they then enjoid without a single
person. And this is your first Scripture, abused and most impertinently cited,
nay against your self, to prove that Kings at their Coronation have a sword
given them, which you interpret the Militia, the power of life and death put
into their hands, against the declared judgment of our Parlaments, nay of all
our Laws, which reserve to themselves only the power of life and death, and
render you in their just resentment of this boldness, another Doctor Manwaring.

Your next proof is as false and frivolous, The King, say you, is Gods
sword bearer; true, but not the King only, for Gideon by whom you seek to prove
this, neither was, nor would be a King; and as you your self confess, page 40.
there he diverse forms of government. He bears not the sword in vain, Romans 13.
4. this also is as true of any lawful rulers, especially supreme, so that
rulers, verse. 3. and therefore this present government, without whose authority
you excite the people to a King, bear the sword as well as Kings, and as little
in vain. They fight against God, who resist his Ordinance, and go about to
wrest the sword out of the hands of his Anointed? This is likewise granted: but
who is his Anointed? not every King, but they only who were anointed or made
Kings by his special command; as Saul, David, and his race, which ended in the
Messiah, (from whom no Kings at this day can derive their title) Iehu, Cyrus,
and if any other were by name appointed by him to some particular service: as
for the rest of Kings, all other supreme Magistrates are as much the Lords
anointed as they; and our obedience commanded equally to them all; For there is
no power but of God, Romans 13. 1. and we are exhorted in the Gospel to obey
Kings, as other Magistrates, not that they are called any where the Lord's
anointed, but as they are the ordinance of man, 1. Pet. ^. 13. You therefore and
other such false Doctors, preaching Kings to your auditory, as the Lord's only
anointed, to withdraw people from the present Government, by your own text are
self condemnd, and not to be followd, not to be medl'd with, but to be noted,
as most of all others the seditious and desirous of change.

Your third proof is no less against your self. Psalm. 105. 15. touch not mine
anointed. For this is not spoken in behalf of Kings, but spoken to reprove
Kings, that they should not touch his anointed Saints and Servants, the seed of
Abraham, as the very next before might have taught you: he reproved Kings for
their sakes; saying, touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm;
according to that 2 Cor. 1. 21. He who has anointed us, is God. But how well
you confirm one wrested Scripture with another; 1 Samuel 8. 7. They have not
rejected thee, but me: grossly misapplying these words, which were not spoken to
any who had resisted orrejected a King, but to them who much against the will
of God had sought a King, and rejected a Commonwealth, wherein they might have
livd happily under the Reign of God only, their King. Let the words interpret
themselves: v. 6. 7. But the thing displeased Samuel, when they said, give us a
King to judge us: and Samuel prayed unto the Lord. And the Lord said unto
Samuel, hearken unto the voice of the people in all that they say unto thee;
for they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not
reign over them. Hence you conclude, so in dissoluble is the Conjunction of God
and the King. O notorious abuse of Scripture! whenas you should have concluded,
So unwilling was God to give them a King, So wide was the disjunction of God
from a King. Is this the doctrine you boast of to be so clear in it self, and
like a Mathematical principle, that needs no farther demonstration. Bad Logic,
bad Mathematics (for principles can have no demonstration at all) but wors
Divinity. O people of an implicit faith no better then Romish, if these be thy
prime teachers, who to their credulous audience dare thus jugle with Scripture,
to allege those places for the proof of their doctrine, which are the plane
refutation: and this is all the Scripture which he brings to confirm his point.

The rest of his preachment is mere groundless chat, save here and there a few
granes of corn scatterd to entice the silly fowl into his net, interlac't here
and there with some human reading; though slight, and notwithout Geographical
and Historical mistakes* as page 29, Suevia the German dukedom, for Suecia the
Northern Kingdom: Philip of Macedon, who is generally understood of the great
Alexanders father only, made contemporanie, page 31, with T. Quintus the Roman
commander, instead of T. Quintius and the latter Philip: and page 44, Tully
cited in his third oration against Verres, to say of him, that he was a wicked
Consul, who never was a Consul: nor Trojan sedition ever portraid by that verse
of Virgil, which you cite page 47, as that of Troy: school-boyes could have
told you, that there is nothing of Troy in that whole portraiture, as you call
it, of sedition. These gross mistakes may justly bring in doubt your other loos
citations; and that you take them up somwhere at the second or third hand
rashly and without due considering.

Nor are you happier in the relating or the moralizing your fable. The frogs (
being once a free Nation says the fable) petitioned Jupiter for a King: he
tambl'd among them a log. They found it insensible: they petitioned then for a
King that should be active: he sent them a Crane (a Stork says the fable)
which straight fell to pecking them up. This you apply to the reproof of them
who desire change: whereas indeed the true moral shows rather the folly of
those, who being free seek a King; which for the most part either as a log lies
heavy on his Subjects, without doing aught worthy of his dignity and the
charge to maintain him, or as a Stork is ever pecking them up and devouring
them.

But by our fundamental Laws, the King is the highest power, page 40. If we
must hear mooting and lawlectures from the Pulpit, what shame is it for a Dr.
of Divinity, not first to consider, that no law can be fundamental, but that
which is grounded on the light of nature or right reason, commonly called moral
law: which no form of Government was ever counted; but arbitrarie, and at all
times in the choice of every free people, or their representers. This choice of
Government is so essential to their freedom, that longer then they have it, they
are not free. In this land not only the late King and his posterity, but
kingship it self has bin abrogated by a law; which involves with as good
reason the posterity of a King forfeited to the people, as that Law heretofore
of Treason against the King, attainted the children with the father. This Law
against both King and Kingship they who most question, do no less question all
enacted without the King and his Antiparlament at Oxford, though called
Mungrell by himself. If no Law must be held good, but what passes in full
Parliament, then surely in exactness of legalitie, no member must be missing:
for look how many are missing, so many Counties or Cities that sent them, want
their representers. But if being once chosen, they serve for the whole Nation,
then any number which is sufficient, is full, and most of all in times of
discord, necessity and danger. The King himself was bound by the old Mode of
Parlaments, not to be absent, but in case of sickness; or some extraordinary
occasion, and then to leave his substitute; much less might any member be
allowd to absent himself. If the King then and many of the members with him,
without leaving any in his stead, forsook the Parliament upon a mere panic fear,
as was at that time judged by most men, and to leavie War against them that
sat, should they who were left sitting, break up, or not dare enact aught of
nearest and presentest concernment to public safety, for the punctilio wanting
of a full number, which no Law book in such extraordinary cases has determind?
Certainly if it were lawful for them to fly from their charge upon pretense of
private safety, it was much more lawful for these to sit and act in their trust
what was necessary for public. By a Law therefore of Parliament, and of a
Parliament that conquered both Ireland, Scotland, and all their enemies in
England, defended their friends, were generally acknowledgd for a Parliament both
at home and abroad, kingship was abolishd: this Law now of late has bin
negatively repeald; yet Kingship not positively restored; and I suppose never
was establishd by any certain Law in this Land, nor possibly could be: for how
could our forefathers bind us to any certain form of Government, more then we
can bind our posterity? If a people be put to war with their King for his
misgovernment, and overcome him, the power is then undoubtedly in their own
hands how they will be governd. The war was granted just by the King himself
at the beginning of his last treaty; and still maintaind to be so by this last
Parliament, as appears by the qualification prescribed to the members of this
next ensuing, That none shall be elected, who have born arms against the
Parliament since 1641. If the war were just, the conquest was also just by the
Law of Nations. And he who was the chief enemy, in all right ceasd to be the
King, especially after captivity, by the deciding verdit of war; and royalty
with all her Laws and pretentions, yet remains in the victors power, together
with the choice of our future Government. Free Commonwealths have bin ever
counted firtest and properest for civil, virtuous and industrious Nations,
abounding with prudent men worthy to govern: monarchy fittest to curb
degenerate, corrupt, idle, proud, luxurious people. If we desire to be of the
former, nothing better for us, nothing nobler then a free Commonwealth: if we
will needs condemn our selves to be of the latter, desparing of our own virtue,
industry and the number of our able men, we may then, conscious of our own
unworthiness to be governd better, sadly betake us to our befitting thraldom:
yet choosing out of our own number one who has best aided the people, and best
merited against tyranny, the space of a reign or two we may chance to live
happily anough, or tolerably. But that a victorious people should give up
themselves again to the vanquishd, was never yet heard of; seems rather void of
all reason and good policy, and will in all probability subject the subduers
to the subdued, will expose to revenge, to beggarie, to ruin and perpetual
bondage the victors under the vanquishd: then which what can be more unworthie?

From misinterpreting our Law, you return to do again the same with Scripture;
and would prove the supremacy of English Kings from 1 Pet. 2. 13. as if that
were the Apostles work: wherein if he says that the king is supreme, he speaks
so of him but as an ordinance of man, and in respect of those Governors that
are sent by him, not in respect of Parlaments, which by the Law of this Land
are his bridle; in vain his bridle, if not also his rider: and therefore has
not only coordination with him, which you falsely call seditious, but has
superiority above him, and that neither against religion, nor right reason: no
nor against Common Law; for our Kings reignd only by Law: but the Parliament is
above all positive Law, whether civil or common, makes or unmakes them both,
and still the latter Parliament above the former, above all the former
Lawgivers, then certainly above all precedent Laws, entaild the Crown on whom
it pleased; and, as a great Lawyer says, is so transcendent and absolute, that
it cannot be consigned either for causes or persons, within any bounds. But your
cry is, no Parliament without a King. If this be so, we have never had lawful
Kings, who have all bin created Kings either by such Parlaments, or by
conquest: if by such Parlaments, they are in your allowance none: if by
conquest, that conquest We have now conquered. So that as well by your own
assertion as by ours, there can at present be no King. And how could that
person be absolutely supreme, who reignd, not under Law only, but under oath of
his good demeanor given to the people at his coronation, ere the people gave
him his Crown? and his principal oath was to maintain those Laws which the
people should choose? If then the Law it self, much more he who was but the
keeper and minister of Law, was in their choice; and both he subordinat to the
performance of his duty sworn, and our sworn allegiance in order only to his
performance.

You fall next on the Consistorian Schismatics; for so you call Presbyterians,
page 40; and judge them to have enervated the Kings Supremacy by their opinions
and practice, differing in many things only in terms from Popery; though some
of those principles which you there cite concerning Kingship, are to be read in
Aristotle's Politics, long ere Popery was thought on. The Presbyterians therefore
it concerns to be well forewarnd of you betimes; and to them I leave you.

As for your examples of seditious men, page 54, etc. Cora, Absalom, Zimri,
Sheba, to these you might with much more reason have added your own name, who
blow the Trumpet of sedition from your Pulpit against the present Government:
in reward whereof they have sent you by this time, as I hear, to your own place,
for preching open sedition, while you would seem to preach against it.

As for your appendix annexed of the Samaritan revived, finding it so foul a
libell against all the wellaffected of this land, since the very time of
Ship Money, against the whole Parliament, both Lords and Commons, except those
that fled to Oxford, against the whole reformed Church, not only in England and
Scotland, but all over Europ (in comparison whereof you and your Prelatical
party are more truly schismatics and sectarians, nay more properly fanatics in
your fanes and gilded temples, then those whom you revile by those names) and
meeting with no more Scripture or solid reason in your Samaritane wine and
oil, then has already bin found sophisticated and adulterate, I leave your
malignant narrative, as needing no other confutation, then the just censure
already passed upon you by the Council of State.


