Samaritanism Revived.

A SERMON Preached at the PARISH CHURCH OF Great Yarmouth, Upon the Ninth of
September; BEING THE DAY Appointed for a Solemn THANKSGIVING FOR THE Discovery
of the late Horrid PLOT, against His Majesty's Person and Government.

By LVKE MILBOVRNE.

LONDON, Printed by Samuel Roycroft, for Walter Kettilby at the Bishops-Head in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1683.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM EARL OF Yarmouth, BARON PASTON of PASTON, HIGH
STEWARD OF HIS MAJESTY'S BURGH OF GREAT YARMOVTH.
MY LORD,
THe Innocence of the Clergy of our Church, as by Law Established, whatever
their Pretenses are to the Contrary, is indeed the greatest Scandal and most
real Offense to the several Dissenting Parties.

While the Vices of a Clergyman are Notorious, Hypocrites have somewhat to
amuse the Vulgar with, when they live within the Rules of the Church, those of
the Contrary Parties are consequently ashamed, as having no Evil thing to say
of them.

But that Shame soon breaks out into a Malicious Rage, and where the wished for
Crimes are not to be found, some employ themselves, under the Prince of Hell,
to forge Lies, and affix them boldly, sewing up Men in the Skins of Bears and
Wolves, and then exposing them to be torn in Pieces by Dogs.

The Blessed Jesus met with this Dealing from Obdurate and Hypocritical Jews,
the Christians of the First and Purest Ages, from Pagans, and the Lawful Clergy
to this day, and in our Reformed Church meet with it from pretendedly Pure and
Moderate, but really Apostate Protestants.

That Veneration with I, upon the most unprejudiced and deliberate Study, have
entertained for the Church of England, has made me too a Sharer in that Glory
of suffering by the Words and Actions of Ill-Men, whose greatest Pique against
me is, That Bad as I am, I am not yet Bad enough to Associate with them.

Ill Will therefore employs all its Care to trace my Errors, and besides the
Dull and Bashful Scurrility of Senseless Libels, and the utmost force of
Belinsgate Rhetoric, it has betrayed it self so far, as to declare, that
nothing but the Fear of Humane Laws secured my Life.

This is indeed a very odd Method of Refining upon Religion, and persuading any
that Men of such Warm Tempers have attained to Extraordinary Degrees of
Spirituality; there was so little of this in the Practice of our Savior and
his Apostles, and the best Christians in all Ages, that for my part, I count it
a real Breach of Charity and an Affront to the Gospel, to reckon such among the
Proselytes of Christianity.

I have to the utmost of my Power endeavored to advance such Principles as
were most necessary to make Men Truly Good in their several Relations, Devout
and Pious toward God, Obedient and Submissive to their Lawful Superiors,
Uniform and Reverend in their Public Church Services, and Charitable and
Peaceable one among another.

Others have done this better, having carried on that Great Work with Greater
Abilities, but none with Greater Sincerity or under Greater Discouragements
than my self.

Had these Doctrines been Universally entertained, we should have heard of no
Separatists or Fanatics, no Plotters, no Traitors, no Rebels.

My Lord, He deserves not the Name of a Minister of the Gospel, who is afraid
to speak in the Cause of his God and of his King. Never was any Prince the
Subject of so many Miracles, as Ours; and were not the Sons of Separation Mad
as well as Blind, He, whom God has so often and wonderfully preserved, might at
length be free from the Plots of Traitors, and among the most desperate
Villains be believed Invulnerable.

The Preachers of Loyalty might prosecute their Great Masters Work in Peace;
and if the Affection of the Dumb Son of Croesus was to be loved and admired,
for setting his Tongue free to save his Royal Fathers Life, the meanest Gospel
Minister might expect some Favor for speaking Plain, when the Cruel and
Barbarous Hands of Traitorous Hypocrites are lifted up against the Dear and
Sacred Life of his Sovereign.

Such an Occasion gave Being to this Discourse which now puts it self under
your Honors Protection, and that which bears so Great a Name in its Front,
must be by All concluded Loyal: The Author owns the Weakness of the
Undertaking, and therefore the Boldness of the Address; but is so well
acquainted with your Goodness, that he dares not doubt of Pardon for

My Lord, Your Honors most Obliged, Most Faithful and Obedient Servant, LVKE
MILBOVRNE.

EZRA IV. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Now when the Adversaries of Judah and Benjamin heard
that the Children of the Captivity builded the Temple unto the Lord God of
Israel,

Then they came to Zerubbabel, and to the chief of the Fathers, and said unto
them, Let us build with you, for we seek your God as ye do, and we do sacrifice
unto him, since the days of Esarhaddon King of Assure, which brought us up
hither.

But Zerubbabel and Jeshua, and the rest of the chief of the Fathers of Israel
said unto them, You have nothing to do with us to build an House unto our God;
but we our selves will build together unto the Lord God of Israel, as King
Cyrus the King of Persia has commanded us.

Then the People of the Land weakened the hands of the People of Judah, and
troubled them in Building.

And hired Counselors against them to frustrate their purpose.


SOLOMON tells us, that there is no new thing under the Sun, Eccles. 1.9.
for the thing that has been it is that which shall be, and that which is done
is that which shall be done; which may give us a good reason of what he
instructs us in elsewhere, Say not thou, Eccles. 7.10.
What is the cause that the former days were better than these, for thou do
not enquire wisely concerning this. Which may serve as a Check to those who are
always complaining of the Times, whereas did they but prudently examine the
Records of past Ages, they would find the same Evils prevailing in some places
heretofore, which they now wonder at as such new and unheard of things.

The Word of God it self, as it gives us Examples of the greatest Piety and
Holiness, so it gives us Instances of the most horrid Sins, such as may seem
impossible to be exceeded by the most reprobate Villains under Heaven; and it is
our unhappiness, that the Patterns of the first kind are generally past by and
slighted; but even those who make some slight pretenses to goodness, are very
solicitous lest by their Predecessors they should be outdone in Wickedness. So
miserably is the intent of all Records Sacred and Profane perverted, for they
are both written for our Examples, to teach us, that we should not lust after
evil things, as we sind some in story have done, and that we should look upon
such History as written for our Admonition upon whom the Ends of the World are
come, 1 Cor. 10.6.
as the Apostle advises.

Among the several Sins Copied out from those Enemies of Religion who lived in
former Ages, we find none more exactly imitated than those of Malice, Falsehood
and Treachery under the Vail of Zeal and Piety.

Pretended Religion, in its strongest pangs of Zeal, has so incorporated those
Sins into it self, that if Men truly wise and pious watch not the more
carefully against the Stratagems of Hell, they may in time be so far imposed
upon as to believe it, at least possible, for Religion and the most abominable
Villainies to meet together easily in one Subject; and others to the Scandal of
Christianity may be ready to imagine Deceit and Baseness the very
Characteristical Notes of it, and so that all the Ill practices charged upon
that Profession by the Heathens of Old, were indeed but plain and undeniable
Truths. Such a Reputation did the Scribes and Pharisees, those Monopolizers of
Piety among the Jews, bring to their Profession, allowing none but the
followers of their blessed Examples a portion in the future World, Matthew. 2 3.
whilst our Savior so largely discovers what prodigious Impieties their gay
Profession was attended with.

If we go further backward we may take notice of these Adversaries of Judah and
Benjamin, the Subjects of the Text, whose Memory and whose Practices we see
surviving to this day in our own Nation, which that we may do the better, I
shall in my discourse upon these words follow this plain and easy Method.

1. I shall explain the History of the Text. 2. I shall make Observations from
it. 3. I shall apply all to our own present Case.
First, For the Explication of the History of the Text, I shall,

1. Tell you who these Adversaries of Judah and Benjamin were, with their
Conditions, so far as Scripture or other History has informed me.

After Salman^ssar King of Assyria had carried the Inhabitants of Israel into
Captivity, that the Country might not ly wholly desolate, he placed in it
several Colonies, drawn from other places of his Empire, viz. from Babylon, 2
Kings 17.24.
and from Cutha, and from Ava, and from Hamath, and from Sepharvaim. From
Babylon, the Capital City of his Empire, came the Babylonians, from Cutha the
Cuthaeans, so called from the Region of Chut, of which name also, according to
Josephus, Joseph. Antiq. lib. 9 c. 14. Seldom. Synt. 2. c. and. Bochart. Phal.
lib. 3. c. 5.
there is a River in Persia: These Cuthaeans, as Bochart asserts, are the same
with the Cissii of Ptolomy, the Inhabitants of the Province of Susa, formerly
called Susiana, now Chusistan on the East of Babylon. Those from Ava, called
here the Avites, the same who are elsewhere called Avims, dwelling in Hazerim,
Deuteronomy. 2.23.
from whence being driven by the Caphtorims or those who came out of Caphtor,
long before the Israelites entered Canaan, Bochart. Phal. lib. 4. c. 36.
they past the Euphrates, where they found a Seat till this time, when some of
them were transplanted from thence into the former Territories of the Ten
Tribes. The next named are the Men of Hamath, of whom it may be doubted whether
they came from the Ancient Riblah, Amos 6.2.
called by Amos Hamath the Great, out of the Ruins of which the famous City of
Antioch was afterward raised; Heylin's Cosm. lib. 3. Syria. Zach. 9.2.
or which is the more probable from Epiphania, called also Hamath a City of
Syria, not far from the Land of Palestine, from whence a Colony might be more
conveniently sent; it was seated according to Ptolomy about 80 Miles from the
greater Hamath, Ptol. Geogr. lib. 5. c. 15. Bochart. Phal. lib. 4. c. 36.
Ferrarius in voce Epiphania.
and as much from Damascus; both of them stood on the River Orontes, Epiphania
near Larissa in the Province of Cassiotis, and was afterward the Seat of a
Christian Bishop under the Patriarch of Antioch. The last mentioned in the Text
are the Men of Sepharvaim, of whom I doubt not but they came from the Sipphara
of Ptolomy, Ptol. Geogr. lib. 5. c. 18.
situate on the Euphrates between Naarda and Seleucia, where it divides, into
two branches, sometime before it meets with the Tygris, and so not far from
Babylon it self: And so much may serve to inform us whence they came.

For their Religion, by which their temper may be very well guest at, it was
various according to the Custom of those places from whence they came;
Scripture informs us that The men of Babylon made Succoth Benoth, 2 Kings
17.30, 31.
the men of Cuth made Nergal, and the men of Hamath made Ashima, and the Avites
made Nibchaz and Tartak, and the Sepharvites burnt their Children in Fire to
Adrammelek and Anammelek, the Gods of Sepharvaim. What these Idols of theirs
were may be worth our enquiry.

The Men of Babylon made Succoth Benoth, that is, they erected Fanes or
Chapels to Venus Urania, as Seldom informs us, Seldom. Synt. 2. c. 7. Beyerus
in additamentis ad cap. 7. p. 314.
to which Beyerus adds what Seldom before had rejected, out of the Jewish
Writers, that they worshipped a Hen and Chickens, by which they figured the
Pleiades, and they were (as he tells us) the Ancient Symbol of the very same
Venus Urania; which fancy of theirs he supposes taken from that passage of the
Spirits moving upon the face of the Waters, as we translate it; but (...) which
we render Moved is a Metaphorical word, taken from the female Bird covering her
Eggs and Young ones gently with her Wings, (...) Buxtorf. in voce.
whereby she secures them and nourishes them: so the Spirit of God covered the
Terraqueous Mass, and by that gentle incubation made the whole Mass prolifick,
and nourisht and fomented those Beings which were then in production; and so
the female Bird makes the Eggs by her incubation fruitful, and afterward by
the same guards and cherishes her Young ones.

The Men of Cuth made Nergal, by the same Authors concluded to be Fire, the
worship of which sacred and ever burning Fire was notorious among the Persians
from whose Country the Cuthaeans came; Seldom. Synt. 2. c. 8. and Beyerus in
addit.
a kind of Idolatry it was which those People were so addicted to, that it was
no uncommon thing for their principal Devoto's to cast themselves into the same
Fire there to be consumed, as an extraordinary and very pleasing Sacrifice.

The Men of Hamath made Ashima, by which the Jewish Rabbis commonly understand
an He-Goat. Synt. 2. c. 9.
Seldom rejects that Notion of theirs, but declares his own Ignorance what it
was. Elias Levita, as cited by Beyerus, supposes Ashima to have been an Ass or
Monkey, to which he adds the Custom of some Egyptians and Arabians to worship
that Creature; an Idolatrous practice, as some say, Beyerus in add. p. 319. and
Linschoten ibi citatus cum aliis.
still followed in the Kingdoms of Pegu and Bengala in the East Indies. But
most probably it was the figure of Pan, horned, hairy, and cloven footed, and
so not very unlike an Hee-Goat. This Idol was worshipped by the Egyptians in the
same manner as among the Grecians, Chartanus de Antiq. Deorum Imaginibus, p. 96.
and was by some adored as the Symbol of the Sun, a common Deity.

The Avites made Nibchaz and Tartak, Gods very obscure. The Jewish Writers make
Nibchaz to be a Dog, a Creature worshipped by the Egyptians in their Anubis,
Seldom Synt. 2. c. 9. and Beyerus in add.
to whom though they give a humane Body they assign the head of an Hound. By
Tartak they understand an Ass, of which we meet with no worshipper in those
Ages unless the same Egyptians, who did Tot Portenta colere, might rank it
among their Deities. In after times indeed we find Caecilius in Minutius Felix
charging the Christians with worshipping the head of an Ass; Minut. Felicis
Octavius.
a Slander raised against them from the Doctrine of the Gnostics, of whom
Epiphanius tells us, that giving the name of (...) to one of their Celestial
principalities, (...). Epiphanius adv. Haer. Gnost. p. 91.
some of them described him under the figure of an Ass, and some under that of
an Hog, either of them Deities suitable to the Doctrine and Practices of those
Pseudo-Christians; but for their monstrous Crimes, the true Christians (such
was the injustice of their Pagan Adversaries) were forced to suffer.

The last are the Sepharvaites, made Adrammelech and Anammelech, which again
the Jewish Writers, that they may the better expose the Samaritans, tell us
were an Horse and a Mule, others a Peacock and a Quail. Synt. 1. c. 6.
Seldom takes them to be but two Names for one things, and both to be the same
with Moloch the Abomination of the Ammonites, under which name the Phoenicians
worshipped Saturn. Concerning the Humane Sacrifices to which Idol there are
different Conjectures, for some from the stories of Ahaz, 2 Kings 16.3. Chapter
17.17. RR. Salom. Jac. D. Kimchi. Moses Mikotzi apud Seldenum.
and others making their Sons and their Daughters pass through the Fire,
conclude that the sacrificing their Children, was only a Consecration of them
to that Idol's service by such a lustration. But others, amongst whom Seldom
himself truly agree, That they burnt their Children to Moloch in good earnest,
and with that the Israelites are charged, that they sacrificed their Sons and
their Daughters unto Devils, Psalm. 106.37.
and shed innocent blood, even the Blood of their Sons and of their Daughters,
whom they sacrificed unto the Idols of Canaan; and in the Book of Wisdom, the
Reasons being sum'd up why God had driven out the Ancient Possessors and
settled the Israelites in Canaan, among the rest it is added, They were
merciless murderers of Children, devourers of Man's flesh and feasts of Blood;
Wisdom of Sol. Chapter 12. v. 6, 7.
The Priests out of the midst of their Idolatrous Crew, and the Parents killed
with their own hands, Souls destitute of help. Such a sacrifice as this the
King of Moab offered in his extremity, 2 Kings 3.27.
he offered his eldest Son who should have reigned after him for a burnt
Offering upon the Wall. Other Relations we have of the Brazen Image of Moloch
with its seven Cells, wherein the fine Flower, the Turtle Doves, Seldom ubi
supr.
the Sheep, the Ram, the Calf, the Ox and the Child were severally put, and all
consumed together by a Fire kindled underneath. But so much may serve to
confirm us, that all these Nations after their settlement in the Region of
Samaria, were abominable Idolaters; from the place they were now settled in,
they took the general Name of Samaritans, by which they were known in the
stories of succeeding Times.

These, the next Neighbors, lived in continual Enmity with the Jews,
pretending indeed Relation and Friendship to them when in prosperity, but
expressing the greatest hatred to them when misfortunes fell upon them, Joseph.
Antiq. lib. 9. c. 14.
as Josephus informs us. On whose side the quarrel began may be dubious; but it
was grown to a great height in our Saviors time, when the Woman wondered at
our Saviors asking water of her, John 4.9.
since the Jews had then no dealing with the Samaritans. The Jews themselves
derive it from this very time to which the Text relates, and it may be that
very opposition which they made to the building of the Temple, might be the
Cause of it; for they tell us, that When Esdras and Nehemias had assembled the
People in Gods Temple, and had convocated 300 Priests, who brought with them
300 Trumpets, and as many Copies of the Law, the Levites sounding out aloud the
fatal form, they cursed the Samaritans with every kind of Excommunication, by
the secret and ineffable name of God, by the Law of the two Tables, and by the
Excommunication of the upper and lower Courts of Judgment (i. e. the Curse of
God and Man;) so that no Israelite should dare to eat Bread with a Samaritan,
it being a Crime unpardonable as eating Swines flesh, Drus. de 3. Sectis lib.
3. c. 11.
no Samaritan should be admitted to Proselytism in their Church, nor have any
part in the Resurrection of the dead; if this were true, it was no wonder there
should ever be a mortal Enmity and an irreconcilable feud between them.

2. We must note the forwardness of these People to assist in building the
Temple of God, to join with the declared People of God in that great Work; the
Jews themselves were scarcely more early or forward than they, so soon as they
once heard that the Children of the Captivity builded the Temple unto the Lord
God of Israel, Ver. 1, 2.
they came to Zerubbabel and the chief of the Fathers, and said unto them, Let
us build with you; and questionless this might appear to some a great Evidence
of devout minds. Nothing could seem more reasonable, than that the House where
Gods Honor dwelt should be raised apace, no help sure could come amiss to
hasten that; And how much more suitable undertakers of such a work, might that
People be, who had lived in peace in their Country for many years, and so were
likely to abound in all things, than a Company of poor Exiles, driven many
years since from their Native Land by a victorious Tyrant, and who now when
they returned home, had no Fields to reap, no Revenues to receive, no Houses to
hide their heads in, but lay open and defenseless to all the Storms and
Tempests that might be expected from the Rage and Malice of their Idolatrous
Neighbors.

This offer of the Samaritans looks yet more generous in that it seems to tend
more to the Honor of the Jews, than their own, the Temple being to be built at
Jerusalem, and likely to add much of splendour to that City when rebuilt, but
sit only to give themselves many tedious Journeys to come up thither to
worship; so that the whole design had at first view no appearance but of
Religion for Religions sake, an eager and a pious forwardness to dedicate
somewhat of that Abundance he had blessed them with to the Honor and Service of
God; And yet further they proceed very Regularly in their Motion, they court
not the Mobile, the poor unthinking Vulgar, who perhaps might easily have been
imposed upon, they looking more at gaudy outsides than at inward Sincerity;
this would have looked like unfair dealing, as if they had designed to put a
slur upon the Jewish Chiefs by raising a faction against them, but they very
fairly make their application to Zerubbabel their Leader, and the Chief of
their Fathers, and there make their Offers, and such as very probably in a time
of need would have been accepted. Which Offers of theirs looks yet better, if
we consider,

3. Their Plea for admittance to this work, For we seek your God as ye do, and
we do sacrifice unto him since the days of Esar Haddon King of Assure, V^^. 2.
who brought us up hither. Unity in Religion certainly recommends Men to one
another above all other Relations whatsoever, and what could bring more comfort
to a Company of poor restored Exiles, than to meet with Neighbors worshipping
the same God, offering the same Sacrifices, and instructed in the same Divinity
with themselves, tendering withal their friendly Assistance to carry on the most
weighty and most Religious Work? And it may be further observed this Profession
of theirs was not altogether false.

For, though we are told of the several Idols these People had made to
themselves, yet in the same Chapter we find, That in the beginning of their
dwelling there, 2 Kings 17.25.
they feared not the Lord; therefore the Lord sent Lions among them, which slew
some of them, the reason of which being supposed to be because they knew not
the manner of the God of the Land, the King of Assyria at their request sent
them one of the Priests that had been brought from thence, who came to them
accordingly and dwelt in Bethel, and taught them how they should fear the Lord;
and it follows, Ver. 32, 33, 41.
So they feared the Lord God of Israel. Epiph. adv. Haer. l. 1. p. 22.
Of which Epiphanius gives us a larger account, very remarkable, but full of
miserable Anachronismes, of which Scaliger takes some notice: Scal. Animad. in
Eusebius. Chron. p. 74.
Thus Gods Judgments made them learn something of Righteousness, and by the
process of the Story we may conclude, that upon this account, of the fearing
him, God removed that Judgment of the Lions from them.

But their Plea was nevertheless deceitful, they name what was good in
themselves, but take no notice of the Crimes the Text Charges them with, Ver.
33, 41.
That in the service of God, they made themselves Priests of the High Places of
the Lowest of the People, which sacrificed for them in the Houses of the High
places, which was one of Jeroboams great sins, and for which Wrath came upon
Israel; 1 Kings 13.33, 34.
they take no notice, that as they feared the Lord, so they served their own
Gods, their Graven Images, their Children, and their Childrens Children unto
this day. A Passage doubtless added after the Return of the Jews from their
Captivity. Thus their Religion was of a Mongrel kind (however it might be
refined afterward) part Jewish, part Heathenish, and consequently of no real
Value.

The Jews, out of that inveterate Hatred they have against these Samaritans,
load them still with all the Crimes imaginable, and their Priesthood with all
the Contempt possible, but not altogether truly, they were as Eusebius calls
them, Aemulatores Legis Judaeae, Eusebii Chro. p. 26.
Imitators of the Jewish Model; that little Instruction they had from their
single Priest brought them to entertain the Books of Moses, of which indeed
they were more exact and faithful Preservers, Voss. Is. de 70 Interpr. c. 29.
both as to Words and Letters, than the Jews themselves were. Out of Envy for
this, the Jews brand them for Calf-worshippers; to clear them from which, I
must put in my own Conjecture concerning a Passage of the Nubian Geographer,
observed by Scaliger and Seldom: The Geographer tells us, That, among many
others, there is one Isle in the Red Sea called Samerei, inhabited by
Samaritans, descended from Sameri the Framer of the Golden Calf in the time of
Moses, Seldom Synt. 1. c. 4.
on whom be Peace, Scaliger translates it, It is inhabited by Samaritans, the
Associates of the Calfworship in the time of Moses, etc. About which Passage
whilst they dispute, the Geographers Mistake is not observed, Samaria was so
called from Shemer, of whom Omri King of Israel bought the Hill upon which
Samaria, as he called it, 1 Kings 16.24.
was built; and this was that Sameri named as living in the time of Moses, by a
vast Anachronism of which this seems to have been the Occasion.

The Jews reported the Samaritans for Calf-Worshippers, they ground their
Report upon that Priests settling himself at Bethel, who first instructed them,
Where Jeroboam had set up a Golden Calf for Worship, as a Representative of the
True God, one of whose Worshippers this Priest had formerly been. Jeroboams
Calf unquestionably took its Original from that made by Aaron in the time of
Moses, which former Calf being the more notorious, the Geographer jumbles the
two Stories together, and to make the Samaritans Calf-Worshippers ind^ed, being
ignorant of the Latter, reduces them to the Ages of Moses.

This Conjecture I am the more satisfied with from that Tradition I meet with
in the Itinerary of Rabbi Benjamin the Jew, Nubien. ^lor. ann. 1151. Tudelensis
morann. 1173. Ferrarius.
who was contemporary with the Nubian Geographer, and which being the common
boast of the then surviving Cuthaeans or Samaritans, it might be equally known
to both. Rabbi Benj. giving the Site of Neapolis, anciently called Sichem, adds
this; There live about 100 Cuthaeans Observers only of the Law of Moses, (...)
Rabbi Benj. Tud. Itin.
the same whom they call Samaritans; they have Priests of the stock of Aaron
the Priest, who rests in Peace: and these they call by a peculiar Name
Aaronaeans, who marry not among the rest of the Samaritans, but with those of
the same Sacerdotal Line, to prevent confounding their own with the Common Race
yet they are the Priests of their Law, and prepare Victims and offer
Burnt-offerings in their Congregation, and that upon the Mountain Gerizim. This
Pretense of theirs to the Stock of Aaron, might easily lead the Nubian into
that Error. And here we may observe, that though our Author afterward adds
many things to the disgrace of these Samaritans, and those spiteful enough, yet
he makes no mention of any Calf then, or formerly worshipped by them.

4. We may take notice of the Answer given to these Samaritans by the Jewish
Rulers, Zerubbabel and the rest of the Chief of the Fathers of Israel said unto
them, You have nothing to do with us to build an House unto our God, but we our
selves together will build unto the Lord God of Israel, as King Cyrus the King
of Persia has commanded us. The Chiefs knew very well the Fallacy of that
Assertion of theirs, they knew they feared the God of Israel, but not as
themselves did. The Jews were commanded not to intermingle themselves with any
of their Neighbors for fear of Idolatry, much more were they to avoid
complying in Worship. They had the Form of theirs prescribed by God himself,
which could no way admit of those Errors the Priests of an Idolatrous Kingdom
had introduced. The Samaritans might fear the same God and offer Sacrifices to
him, but so long as they did it not according to the Order prescribed, and
followed by the whole Jewish Nation as United in one Ecclesiastical Body, so
long they were not to be received as Partuers in so Sacred a Work, as the
Building Gods Temple was. For if Intermarrying with Idolaters was of dangerous
Consequence, Deuteronomy. 7.3, 4 5, 6. Deuteronomy. 12.29, 30. Exodus 34.12. -- 16.
no doubt but Communion with them in the most solemn parts of Divine Worship,
which was the thing the Samaritans aimed at, would be much more pernicious; so
that in rejecting this offer of theirs, they exactly followed Gods Law, and
withal expressed a punctual and due Submission to the Decree of their then Lawful
Prince. We are to build it together, say they, according to the Command of
Cyrus King of Persia: Ver. 3.
You have no Commission to join with us; the Predecessors of the Samaritans had
no Hand in raising the former Temple, they were not of the Seed of Jacob, and
therefore had no right to build a Temple to the God of Israel; Cyrus had chosen
these Exiles to perform what God had commanded, Ezr. 1.3, 4
and it became not those who were Subjects to the same Prince to Cross his
Design, or to stretch his Commands beyond their first Intention.

It was then acknowledged by the Jews to be their own proper Work, and they had
the Prophets of God to excite them to diligence in that Work, Ezr. 6.14.
and they were to build together united among themselves, with one Heart, and
with one Mind, if they resolved to admit of no Fellow Undertakers, their own
whole Strength was but little enough to perform so vast a Work; a few of the
other Tribes had joined themselves with those of Judah and Benjamin, such as
set their Hearts to seek the Lord God of Israel, 2 Chronicles. 11.13, -- 16.
and those were but few, the whole remnant of the twelve Tribes, but
inconsiderable, to what they had been heretofore, and their Enemies ready to
take all Advantages against them: Upon which account, as also to show their
Gratitude to that Prince who had restored them to their Native Country, and
their Zeal for the Glory of that God, who as he had punished them for their
Sins, so had told them before by his Prophets of this Happy Change upon their
sincere Repentance, it was incumbent upon them altogether, as one Man, to begin
and to carry on this Work of God, and so the Adversaries themselves might be
convinced, That the Temple of the True God might be built according to Command,
without their Help.

5. In the Text we are to observe the Behavior of the Samaritans upon the
Answer given them, They weakened the Hands of the People of Judah, Ver. 4, 5.
they troubled them in building, and hired Counselors against them. They
weakened their Hands by endeavoring to create Jealousies and Suspicions one of
another among them, they were newly recovered out of a Miserable Captivity, and
the present Openness and Defencelesness of their Condition made every Idle
Rumor terrible to them. One while they try to entrap the Governor; Neh. 6.2.
then they charge the Jews with a Design of Rebellion, Ver. 6.10.
and hire Prophets to discourage the People in the Work; but, as the last
Effect of their Malice, they write their Letter to the Persian King, Fur.
4.9.21, 23.
to inform him of the danger of the Jews fortifying themselves, and so procure
a Stop to be put to their further Procedure; Where observe further the Policy
of these Adversaries of Judah and Benjamin, They owed Revenge to the Jews for
refusing their Help to build the Temple, the Building of which they resolve to
Hinder. But in their Letter to Artaxerxes they take no notice of that, lest
perhaps, Cyrus his late Decree being found, their Design should have been
defeated; but they complain of former Rebellions, and they fear they would be
renewed, if the Jews had leave to build their City Walls, and here the Persian
Records might pinch them. And by this Art they gained their End, they having a
General Command, Ezr. 4.21, 22.
to see that no Damage might grow to the King; took it in the largest sense,
and caused the building of the Temple as well as the re-edifying their City to
cease, and thus the Poor Builders, who had so lately felt the Smart of a severe
Captivity, were afraid of opposing their Malicious Neighbors, lest an Ill
Interpretation should have been made of it.

To make their Malice the more Effectual, they hired Counselors against the
Jews, such subtle Persons who knew all the Tricks and Quirks of Law, and so
could fright the poor Jews into a Belief that they incurred great Penalties,
when indeed they had broken no Laws, and these could point to the Jews Enemies
the most certain and secure ways of taking Advantage against this poor Helpless
People; or the Counselors they hired might be such great Persons as attended
the King of Persia, whom they, as a wealthy sort of People, Bribed largely to
assist them with their Interest at Court, while the Jews, who had no Stock to
carry on such Designs, went by the worst, And to this we in some measure may
attribute the Success of the Letter to Artaxerxes, for had the Jews retained a
Friend at Court, who could have put the King in mind of his Father Decree in
Favor of them and the reason of that Decree, that it was in Obedience to the
Commands of the Most High God, it is very probable the Penners of that
Mischievous Epistle had lost their labors. And so much may serve for
Explication of the Text.

The Text being thus explained, the Observations I shall reduce from it, are
these.

That every Deliverance from great and general Calamities ought to be
celebrated with a Restoration of Gods Obs. 1.^
Public, Ancient, and Solemn Worship. There can be no end put to Public
Calamities but by the Hand of God; we may seek for remedies elsewhere, but to
no purpose, to him therefore the first of our Praises ought to be returned. It
was here the Jews work; no sooner were they resettled in the Land of their
Fathers, but they apply themselves to build again the Temple of God that had
been formerly burnt; and when they afterward neglected that pious Work, God by
his Prophet checks them severely: Is it time for you, ^^gg 1. (...)
Oye, to dwell in ceiled houses, and this House lie waste? Now therefore thus
says the Lord of Hosts, Consider your ways, ye have sown much and bring in
little; ye ear, but ye have not enough; ye drink, but ye are not filled with
drink; ye cloth you, but there is none warm, and he that earneth wages,
earneth wages to put it into a Bag with holes. Thus says the Lord of Hosts,
Consider your ways, Go up to the Mountain, and bring Wood and build the House,
and I will take pleasure in it, and I will be glorified, says the Lord. That
whole Book indeed is nothing but a reproof for N^glect, a command to Industry,
and a promise of Blessings upon their Care and Industry in building the Temple
of God. The Author of those Golden Verses, commonly ascribed to Pythagoras,
advises well, To honor and adore the Gods in the first place, (...). Pythag.
Aurea Carm. Carm. 1.
for all other lawful undertakings can prosper only when that foundation is
laid. This was well apprehended by Numa Pompilius the second King of Rome;
(...) S^^^ and C^^r^monias omn^^^que (...) immortalium docuit. (...) Populum
redegit, ut quod vi (...) injuria occupaverat impe^^^^ (...) atque Justitia
guberna^^^. ^^or. in Numa. (...) multitudi^^^ (...) and (...) seculis rudem
(...) Deorum m^tum injicien^^^ (...) est. Live. l. 1.


It was not the valor and conduct of Romulus, nor the sturdiness of a few
rough and ill-tutor'd Shepherds that could secure an Infant State; therefore he
first inrroduced Religion among them, taught them to worship the Gods, and gave
them a stated Form and Method for the performance of all Divine Offices; and it
was a Remark^ble Custom among the Romans, that when they set down to besiege
any City, they first tried to anon the supposed Tutelar Deity of the place,
endeavoring, with many Ceremonies, to call him out of the beleagued places,
with promises of better entertainment among themselves; so necessary did they
conclude Heavens Blessing to make all their designs successful. Macrob.
Sa^^u^n. l. 3. c. 9.


But if in the first beginning of affairs this Religion be so necessary,
Devotion in Extremities is so too, and much more thankfulness for Deliverances.
The same Romans, when Hannibal approacht their Gates, used means extraordinary
to reconcile their false Gods to them, Undique Matronae in publicum effusae
circa D^um delubra dis^urrunt, Crinibus passis aras verrentes n^^a g^^^bus
supinas manus ad c^^um tenden^e^, orantesque ut Urb^m Roman e manibus Hostitum
eriperent, matresque Romanas and liberos parvos inviolatos servarent. Live. l.
36.
that they might divest that terrible En^my, and in the time of War, though all
things were yet in suspense, the whole Senate, at the Generals request,
repaired to their Temples to supplicate Heaven for a Victory, and always in
gratitude consecrated some of the Spoils gotten in the Field to their Gods;
Rosm. Ant. Romans l. 10 c 2^.
nor was this the practice only of Heathens, though by their Actions we may
learn what Nature teaches; but Almighty God himself prescribes it to his own
People by his Prophet. And afterward, Blow the Trumpet in Zion, sanctify a
Fast, call a solemn Assembly, gather the People, sanctify the Congregation,
Joel c. 1.
assemble the Elders, gather the Children and those that suck the Breasts; let
the Bridegroom go forth of his Chamber, and the Bride of her Closet; Let the
Priests the Ministers of the Lord weep between the Porch and the Altar, and let
them say, Spare thy People, O Lord, and give not thine Heritage to reproach,
Joel 2.15.^^.17.
that the Heathen should rule over them; wherefore should they say among the
People, where is their God?

This extraordinary earnestness of the Devotions of those that are in distress,
is a strong evidence of that extraordinary gratitude due to that God, who on
such occasion hears and answers our Prayers; and he that minds but what Vows
Calamitous persons always make on condition of Heavens assistance, may learn
from thence, that Thankfulness for deliverances received, is a principle
Originally so sixth in the Heart of Man, that the most careless and stupid of
Mankind know not how to elude it. It Is certain, that coldness in the exercise
of Religion is the grand Excitative of Divine Anger, the ultimate cause of
those Punishments which the hand of God inflicts upon us; for though
Profaneness, Drunkenness, Whoring, Covetousness, Theft, Murder, Malice,
Treachery, Disobedience, Rebellion, and the like, are all Crying Sins, and of
themselves merit Vengeance, yet they are always accompanied with some
considerable defect, in the outward Solemnities of Religion: so that let men
suffer by us what way soever, God will be sure to have a share in the
dishonor. An Hypocrite I know may go far, but one way or other, even in
outward performances he must fail; for those Scruples, that nicety he must
necessarily pretend to for the Credit of that he calls his Conscience, and to
persuade Men of his exactness in Religious matters, those very Scruples will
betray him into that Sin of dishonouring God in his Public Worship; for in
that he will either not be constant, or not early, or not be have himself
reverently or devoutly in it; or not Regularly, according to what is prescribed
by Lawful Authority in the Church; or he will evidence and avow his greater
respect to some peculiar Fancies and Enthusiasms of his own, than to what is
prescribed. Every one of which it is impossible for the subtilest Hypocrite to
avoid, and every one of which is looked upon with another Eye by Almighty God,
than ordinarily it is by us: And all, or any of these, as adding perfection to
Sin, at the same time aggravate Gods displeasure, and bring down the heaviest
of his Judgments upon Men.

But where Vice in General overflows a Nation or Country, there Gods Worship
must as generally be disrespected, all Form and Order in it be destroyed. He
that is unjust to Man will be unjust to God. 1 John 4.20.
S. John's Argument holds good here, He that loves not his Brother whom he has
seen, how shall he love God whom he has not seen; and where that lurking Vice
resides that puts on Scrupulous Religion for a Cloak, there above all, that
Beauty, Decency and Order that ought to be in Gods Service is contemned and
subvert^d, and his House esteemed no more than the Commonest or the vilest
Place. This Truth the Scribes and Pharisees in our Saviors times give
testimony to; none cried out louder of the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of
the Lord, and none abused that Temple more; they profaned it so far as to make
the meek Jesus severely to tell them, My House should be called the House of
Prayer, Matt. 21.13.
but ye have made it a Den of Thieves. In such cases, if God be angry who can
wonder? If God confound that People who labor to cloud his Glory, and to
render his Service sordid and nauseous, he must then be justified when he
speaks, though in anger, and clear when he is judged.

That Public and Solemn Worship of God, the Contempt of which has such
dreadful effects, ought first to be regarded when the Almighty sheaths his
Sword again, and restores Peace and Prosperity to a People. So soon as the
Israelites were freed from the Egyptian Bondage, and but yet on their way to
the Promised Land, they were called upon by God himself to build a Tabernacle
and Ark with all their Furniture, before which they might offer their daily
Sacrifices. David, when he fled from Absalom, Exodus 25.
was careful lest this Ark should suffer by being carried with him in his
flight; Carry it back, says he, into the City, if I shall find favor in the
sight of the Lord, 2 Samuel 15.25.
he will bring me again, and show me both it and his habitation. When he
returned indeed, he presently was for raising a Temple to the God of Israel his
Redeemer; and since God permitted him not to build it, he provided Treasure for
his Son to build it with; He prescribed the method of Divine Service, 1 Chronicles.
Chapters 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, etc.
and fixed Orders for its exact performance in that Temple. As for the Temple it
self, where this cost was to be bestowed, and these Orders observed, David
declares, The House that is to be builded for the Lord must be exceeding
magnifical, of fame and of glory throughout all Countries; 1 Chronicles. 22.5.
and the Reason he gives is remarkable, The work is great, 1 Chronicles. 29.1.
for the Palace is not for Man, but for the Lord God. And this care of David's
was so just and ^ffectual, that in Hezekiah's time we find the Priests and
Levites obeying the past Commands of David, using the Instruments of David, 2 Chronicles. 29.25, -- 30.
and praising God in the Words of David; and he that shall but read profane
Story, Multa and epulenta ibi Regum populorumque visuntur munera quaeque
magnificentia sua reddentium vota gratam voluntatem and Decrum responsa
manifestant. Justinus de templo Delphico. Lib. 24. c. 8.
and see what large Donaria all Countries appropriated to their Sacred Temples,
upon Dangers escaped or Victories obtained, or the Sacred History, and view the
prodigious Liberalities of David, Solomon, and the Nobles of Israel to the
Temple of God, must needs conclude, the Service of God was by that means
rendered glorious and beautiful, the gratitude of Men to God very commendable,
and that those who left us those great Examples were not all of them either
Madmen or Fools.

And indeed Men may pretend what they will, they will never persuade any in their
senses to believe them thankful to God for removing Common Judgments, who do
not repair the decays of Divine Worship, and endeavor to restore its pristine
exactness and splendour, and an Uniform celebration of Gods Praises is the best
proof of an agreeing sense of his infinite Goodness. And thus the Christians of
old in each Distinct respectively were United in the same Forms of Worship, and
the Universal Church Concordant in the same matter, and the whole World
convinced of the Beauty and Harmony of that Religion, whose Professors addressed
themselves to God, so Vnitedly for Matter, and with so little disparity in
Words and Methods, even that disparity confirming the truth of Christianity,
the greatness of the true God, and the Divinity of the Man Christ Jesus, whom,
though Crucified, the Christian World with the greatest fervor and devotion
adored and invocated.

It Is easy to Object, That though great thankfulness is really due to God
after great Deliverances, yet it is indifferent in what place, by what person,
in what order Gods praise in his Worship is declared. It Is true, a Man may be
heard with Job from a Dunghill, with Jonah from the Oceans bottom, with Jeremiah
from the miry Dungeon, or with Daniel from the Lions Den; but scarce any wise
Man would choose those places for his Devotions, if he were at Liberty: And my
Groom or Scullion may be heard in their Prayers as soon as I; but it would show
little respect to Gods Service, should I call them to officiate in the Head of
my Family in a Scullery or Stable, with their Horse or Kitchen Habiliments
about them. Days of deliverance are days of Joy and Feasting, and the garments
of Gladness ought then to be worn, and our gratitude to put on the fairest face
of Order, Loveliness and Beauty; those Sins for which we suffer should be
forsaken, our thankful Resentments of Gods Goodness should be exposed to the
Worlds view, and that so, that Religion for its deformity may not be made a
Scar-crow, nor Slovenliness the measure of Divine Worship, nor Enthusiasm the
Essence of Devotion.

From the practice of the Samaritans in the Text we may Observe, Observe. 2.
That the Enemies of Religion always apply themselves to hinder the
Restoration of Gods Solemn and Public Worship. The Charms of pure and
undefiled Religion, and the Worship attending it, are terrible and odious to
the Prince of Darkness, he renders it a Mormo or Bugbear to his wretched
Slaves, and cannot endure its allurements should reach the Souls of thinking
persons; and therefore as by his Wiles and Policies he endeavors to put a slur
upon Piety, to render it ugly and ridiculous in the sight of Men, that so it
may crouch to growing Impieties: So when men formerly mad after Sin, begin to
return to their almost lost Wits again, he tries all ways to hinder the good
Effects of Repentance, that so professed Penitents may return with the Dog to his
Vomit, and with the Sow that is washed to her wallowing in the mire. That Sin
should abound, and that Vengeance should once more deluge the World is his aim,
and therefore he studies to obstruct whatsoever tends to Reformation in those
things that are really amiss. Whatsoever mischief the Devil designs, his busy
Agents here on Earth, who think scorn to be damned alone, carry on with the
greatest vigor, and labor to engage all whom possibly they can pervert into
the same Service: so the People of Israel of old, when God had scourged them
frequently for their Sins, and by his punishments reduced them to Reason,
though their Vows and Resolutions were never so many of reforming themselves to
the Pattern God had prescribed them, their Resolutions all vanished into Air,
and easy Temptations drew them to dangerous relapses, as we read in the Book
of Judges.

Manasseh King of Judah was eminent in wickedness, as his Father Hezekiah had
been in piety; He did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, like to the
Abominations of the Heathen whom the Lord had cast out before the Children of
Israel; nay, he made Judah and all the Inhabitants of Jerusalem to err worse
than the Heathen whom the Lord had destroyed; for which God delivered him a
Captive to the King of Babylon; where, when he humbled himself, God was
entreated of him, and returned him to his Kingdom. This Mercy made him know
that the Lord only was God; but though he endeavored afterward in Gratitude
to his Deliverer, to clear Gods Temple, to repair his Altar, and to reduce the
Temple Service to its Ancient Glory, it was but in vain; His Son, the Heir of
his Crown, the Witness of his Repentance and the Reasons of it, was upon his
Death too easily seduced, and instead of perfecting the good work begun by his
Father, he only outstript him in Sin, He sacrificed to all the Carved Images
which Manasses in his folly had made, 2. Chron. 23.2, 9, 13, 16, 22.
but humbled not himself as Manasses had done, but trespassed more and more.

If we examine the Case of these returned Exiles, we shall see, that
notwithstanding Gods and the Kings Favor to them, the excellent Examples of
Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, and the other Chiefs, and the Divine Excitatives
of Haggai and Zechariah; notwithstanding the forward Zeal they showed at first
to repair the sacred Ruins of the Temple, they were so unhappy, that even some
of their own Nobles, for whom, as well as the rest, God had done such great
things, held Correspondence with the Enemies of their Church, ^^hem. 5.17, 18,
19.
to the notorious hazard of their Religion; but when all these obstacles were
past over, when the House of God was built, the Ancient forms of Worship were
reestablish'd, and their complete Joy outwardly expressed by that Care, for that
the Lord had made them joyful, E^^ ^.16, (...) 22.
and turned the Heart of the King of Assyria to them, to strengthen their hands
in the work of the House of God, the God of Israel. But, alas! Wickedness too
too soon prevailed again, and the profaneness and contempt of Gods Service, grew
intolerable; on which account God made the Kings of Syria their Scourge, that
Temple, their Pride and Glory, was defiled by their Enemies, as it had been by
themselves, and Judas Maccabeus once more compelled to a Reformation; but still
Wicked men were busy and active. And when our Savior came into the World to
rectify the Errors of mistaken Mankind, the opposition he found was so strong
as seemed, and was indeed to Humane powers irremediable. And Lastly, Let us
view those Laws and Rules prescribed by the Apostles themselves, for the
settling Unity and Uniformity in the Church of Christ, and we shall see so many
Schisms and Heresies raised by the Devil and wicked Men to pervert and disannul
them, that nothing less than an Omnipotent Power could have preserved them to
this day.

And yet that due and regular Veneration of the Divine Majesty, is so naturally
fixed in the minds of Men, that the most resolved Enemies of Goodness are
frequently balkt themselves, and downright Opposition to Public, Solemn and
Decent Worship, oft-times disgusts both themselves and others; Hell, in this
case, drives them to the other Extreme, and makes them overdo what God and the
Circumstances of his Public Worship require, as if there could be no Mean
between the sluttery and nastiness of a Common prostitute and the garish
Extravagance of a gentile Harlot. And thus did Ill Men prevail formerly upon
the Jewish Church, and taught them by this means to preach for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men; and thus the Christian Worship in the Church of Rome was
perverted, where so many things, not only unnecessary but inconvenient, not
only superfluous but ridiculous, have been introduced, that Paganism in its
greatest Wildness could not outvy them; and by this means the very Substance of
true Sacred Worship has been exposed to contempt, and some have been so far
bewitched with an empty show, as to rest in that without examining the real
weight of things.

These have been the sad Effects of that Opposition which the Enemies of Piety
have made to the resettling Gods Worship in a Public solemn Way; and that they
should not always study for and effect thus much, there can be no reason given
but from the infinite Divisions among these very Adversaries themselves, from
whence it is hoped that, according to our Saviors expression, the Kingdom of
Satan divided against it self cannot stand. Matt. 12.26.


It Is true, were Piety once totally banished the World, those intestine Feuds
among the Slaves of Hell would soon grow irreconcilable; Sin would make them,
like those who sprung from the Dragons Teeth sown by Cadmus, to draw their
Swords in an immmediate War, till they had ruined one another. But alas! the
Case is nothing so happy here, while God has any Servants, though their
Quarrels are never so great among themselves, they unite but too too close in
persecuting and afflicting them: So these Samaritans, though of so many
different Countries, and engaged in such disagreeing Idolatries, yet could all
join to hinder the building the Temple of the true God; for though wicked Men
of all kinds are at never so great a distance among themselves, yet Truth being
equally an Enemy to them all, it moves their Hatred so much against it self,
that other Di^gusts and Broyls are soon forgotten: Matthew. 16.1. Chapter 22.16.
So the Pharisees, Sadduces, and Herodians, labored at all times to undermine
each other, but readily combined together to destroy our Savior. The more
vigorous and bright Truth's Luster is, the more violent will the assaults of
its Opposers be: So it proved in the Primitive Church, many and absurd
Haeresies sprung up in it, the Breaches between the different Heretics were
irreparable, and yet they lived almost in a constant Conspiracy against the
true Catholic Church of Christ, and he that examines Church History will find,
that when Peace gave the greatest Ornaments to Christianity, the Mushroom
Heresies and Schisms grew up the fastest; as on the contrary, when Religion
grew indifferent, and the Professors of it Lukewarm, Heretics and
Schismatics seemed to lay down their Weapons, as if Hell had then no more
employment for them.

But when those who adored the true God, to maintain his Honor, judged no Cost
too great to adorn his Temples, and the Devil found it impossible to eradicate
that Principle out of Men's minds which taught them to do so; he tried another
way, and resolved himself not to be inferior to his Sovereign, no Temples
should be raised more magnificent, no Vtensils more costly, no Sacrifices more
expensive to the Supreme Deity than those he assumed to himself, and the worst
of Men, in this respect, seemed aemulous of their Bounty who expended most for
the Ornature of a Christian Oratory; a thing which observed, but not well
understood by many, made them afraid of even a decent Beauty and Magnificence
in the House of God, as if approaching too near Paganism or Superstition; as if
because some Heathen Tyrants had formerly asserted to themselves Divine
Honors, therefore now no Honor at all ought to be given to Christian Kings
and Princes; or as if because some Usurper formerly had lived in a Royal
Palace, therefore a Lawful Prince must settle his Throne no higher than a
Dunghill. But he who truly loves God will reverence his Sanctuary, and he who
loves a neat Service and Attendance in his own House, will never endure
meanness or slovenliness in the House of God; and he who can be content to
dwell himself in cieled Palaces, will not be willing the Ark of God should
remain among Curtains, whilst the Samaritan strives to overthrow it, and when
once overthrown to keep it down.

That the Enemies of Religion find no surer way of obstructing the grateful
Restoration of Gods Service, Obser. 3.
than an Hypocritical Pretense to join in the Work: The Devil is never so truly
Dreadful as when he puts on the Shape of an Angel of Light, otherwise every one
stands upon his Guard, but then the Subtle Serpent insinuates himself into the
Bosoms of those who least suspect his Poisonous Nature. And wicked Men can
never possibly do such mischief, as when they put on the Visor of Piety; the
Servants of God avoid them when they appear like themselves, but when the
Sheeps Clothing has invested the Wolf, even He may pass for a very Innocent
Creature: This therefore is the last Result of Hellish Policy, That roaring
Lion, who walks about continually seeking whom he may devour, makes use
frequently of the Foxes, the little Foxes, to ruin Gods Church; to that end
the Samaritans here desire to build Gods Temple with the Jews, they declare
their Reverence to the same God, their offering the same Sacrifices, a very
fair Conformity, as they pretend, and which undoubredly in a short time would
have purchased for them the Title of The Church of the Jews.

It is not to be questioned, but that the acknowledgment of the True God, and
the offering due Sacrifices to him as God, is the main Foundation of true
Religion, but a bare Foundation without a Superstructure is of no worth, for
upon these Principles, plainly and evidently depend a great Number of other
things, which, if not observed, prove that the Foundation was never truly
owned: For if a Man believe indeed that there is a God, and by offering
Sacrifices acknowledges there is a Duty owing to that God, nothing can be
commanded by that God, nothing forbidd^n, but the Man, if he hopes for
Salvation, must sincerely, and to the utmost of his Power obey it; in which
point the Samaritans failed foully. St. Paul's words were true of them, Romans
1.21.
When they knew God, they glorified him not as God, but became vain in their
Imaginations, and their foolish Heart was darkened; they feared God, but
worshipped their own graven Images: Upon account of which though it be said
that they feared the Lord, 2 Kings 17.33. Ver. 34.
yet it is asserted again, Unto this day they do after the former manners, they
fear not the Lord, neither do they after their Statutes or after their
Ordinances, or after the Law and Commandments which the Lord commanded the
Children of Jacob; inferring plainly the same from their Practice, which I
would do, that though for fear they acknowledged God, yet so long as they
obeyed not the Injunctions of that God, their Profession was but False and
Vain. And it is to be noted, That all the Commands of God must be punctually
obeyed; Smiths disc. p 346.
Men may not cull out this or another according to their own Fancies, and as
the Jews themselves have practiced since, the Rule being infallibly Authentic,
That whosoever shall keep the whole Law and yet offend in one point, Jam. 2.10.
he is guilty of All; the Reason is because he breaks that very Foundation he
builds upon, the Confession of a God, and our Duty to him. The Apostle makes
the Inference, For he that said, Do not commit Adultery, said also, Ver. 11.
do not Kill; now if thou commit no Adultery, yet if thou Kill, thou art become
a Transgressor of the Law: So then, if any man pretend, out of a sense of his
Duty to God, to do one or more things, and yet minds not some other things
which God has commanded as well as those, his whole Obedience is nothing, and
his whole pretense a Lie, he really, with the Fool, says in his Heart, Psalm.
53.1.
there is no God.

Nor will Cavils or Excuses be admitted here, or the Obscurity of our Duty in
any Part be a sufficient Plea; for every Christian is bound, as far as
possible, to enquire into the Word of God as left written for his Instruction,
and to do of himself what he finds expressed as his Duty there: and further, I Will
grant him, that where there is no Law, there can be no Transgression; where men
cannot know of any more to be done by them, they shall not be condemned for not
doing more. But since God has appointed persons lawfully called to study the
Scriptures, and to instruct the People in his Church, what those Persons so
appointed learn and deduce truly from Scripture is to be attended to; and
whereas all Divine Commands have a certain Connection one with another, so that
there can be no clashing or contradiction between them, though such things be
not in terminis commanded, yet if they be found so concordant to the explicit
and plain Rules, such things are to be Universally submitted to and obeyed: And
hence it was that since among the Jews the Priests Lips were to preserve
knowledge, Mal. 2.7. Deuteronomy. 17.8, 13.
and the People were to address themselves to them for information in the more
doubtful parts of their Duties; These Samaritans were to have applied
themselves to those Priests, and to have conformed in all things to their
Prescriptions, if they intended really to become Partners with them in one
Common Church Society.

And it is Folly to believe that God gave greater Power or Privileges in these
Cases to the Jewish, than to the Christian Teachers; for whereas among the
Jews, the Prince and the Priest were joined together in the Maintenance of Gods
True Religion, so wheresoever the Prince and People profess Christianity, their
Work is the same, the Prince defends, and with the Priest declares the true
Catholic Faith. And upon this account it is, that the Burden that lies upon
the Teachers of the Church is the greater, where the Preacher delivers apparent
Falsehoods and the People are seduced by him, the Fault is divided between the
Instructor and the Instructed, it being his work to preach the Truth sincerely,
and the Peoples to search the Scriptures daily to see whether these things be
so; but in Obscurer cases if the people be seduced, it is wholly their Teachers
Fault, he being more knowing than they, and being bound not to teach others at
random, but what he knows certainly and necessarily true; and for such Errors,
not the People, but the Preacher, shall be condemned at last.

This Universal Obedience being so indispensibly necessary to make a really
Pious Man and a Good Christian, and those who submit not to it, being
consequently no Christians, whatever they call themselves, but downright Pagans
and Infidels; nothing can be more plain, than that such can desire an Interest
or Concern in the Church with no other Design but to Ruin it: It Is no hard
matter to blind the Eyes of Men, so that ordinarily they may suspect no harm,
but it is not so easy for Men to forsake their own Natures, or to design the
Conservation of those Laws they never design to submit to. The Samaritans had
they been entertained by the Jews, would have pried into their most retired
privacies and intendments, Sacred or Civil, that they might so have
counterpois'd their Counsels and have betrayed their Designs to their Enemies,
and others who fear the Lord, and yet follow their own base and lewd
Imaginations, being so many Pensioners of Hell, i. e. assisted by the Devil for
their faithful Adherence to his Designs, so far as his Interest goes in this
World; those Persons would by all means get admission to Employment in the
Church, that so they may Cross the great Design of Vndeceiving and Reforming
Mankind; and by introducing, abetting and encouraging Atheism, Profaneness,
Schism and Disobedience, under a show of Zeal for Trifles, may betray it to all
its most dangerous Enemies: So Men of Factious and Discontented Spirits, by
eager pretenses to Loyalty, labor hard to be trusted with Arms, that with them
in their Hands they may at once ingratiate themselves with Rebels, and assist
them. Which Mischief, that it may be the better avoided, we must proceed to

Obs. 4. That the true Servants of God can never without danger, Obser. 4.
and therefore in prudence never will admit such Persons at their request to
join with them in restoring Gods Service and Worship, seeing their design must
be so fatal to the Church it self. This we learn from the wise behavior of the
Jewish Chiefs in the Text, who would not upon any account receive assistance
from the Samaritans in building Gods Temple; You have nothing to do with us,
say they, but we only will build together. I readily yield, that the Governors
of Gods true Church ought to make and admit as many Converts to the Truths of
the Gospel as they can, and to reduce as many Heretics and Schismatics as may
be to Catholic Communion; but to admit them further than bare Church
Membership, without long trial of their sincerity, would be little else than
madness. A Heretic, a Schismatic, though they profess Christianity, are no
more Christians indeed than Pagans; as he is no more my Friend who engages
himself in my acquaintance to ruin me, or who endeavors it after my
acquaintance, than he who every where publishes himself my Enemy. Our Savior
determines it so when he tells us, He that is not with me, that is, Matthew. 12.30
he that is not sincerely and wholly on my side is against me. Now that such
Persons who are not true Christians should be concerned in edifying or
defending the Church of Christ, is extremely unreasonable, this were to make
the Wolf the Shepherd of the Sheep, and would soon render the Church of God
sentinam malignantium, the very Sink or Common Sewer of all the Ill the World
contains, and the Scoff which Julian the Apostate, by the Mouth of Constantius,
puts upon the Christian Doctrine would be a real Truth, Whosoever is an
Adulterer or Sodomite, (...). Jul. Caes.
whosoever is a Murderer, whosoever is polluted or under the greatest Curse,
let him come boldly; for washed once with this Water, (meaning that of Baptism,)
I Will present him instantly pure and clean from all his Crimes: nay, should he
again relapse into his former guilty state, let him but beat his Breast, and
knock his Head, and he shall presently be holy again. So easy would an
admittance into the Church be, none could possibly be found so bad, but he
would be received into one Society or another; and this would be the effect of
that which some persons seem so eager for, and that is Indulgence or Toleration.

Toleration, known sometimes by the names of Liberty of Conscience and
Indulgence, the thing which in effect these Samaritans desired, seems to have
been very odious to those who some Years since held the Pulpit in our English
Congregations, as appears by the united Votes of a consid^rable number of them;
We are struck with horror and astonishment, say they, at the endeavors of many
for it, A Toleration would be putting a Sword into a mad man's hand, a Cup of
Poys^n in the hand of a Child, a letting loose of mad Men with Firebrands in
their hands, an appointing a City of Refuge in men's Consciences for the Devil
to fly to, a laying a stumbling Block before the blind, a proclaiming liberty
to the Wolves to come into Christ's Fold to prey upon his Lambs, a Toleration of
Soul Murder (the greatest Murder of all other,) and for the establishing
whereof damned Souls in Hell would accurse men on Earth; Neither would it be to
provide for tender Consciences, but to take away all Conscience; if Evil be
suffered, it will not suffer Good; if Error be not forcibly kept under it will
be Superior, which we here the rather speak of to undeceive those weak Ones,
who under the specious pretext of Liberty of Conscience (being indeed liberty
of Error, Scandal, Schism, Heresy, Dishonouring God, Opposing the Truth,
hindering Reformation and seducing Others) are charmed by Satan into a better
liking of an unconscientious Teleration. We dread to think what horrid
Blasphemies would be belched out against God, what vile abominations would be
committed; how the Duties of nearest Relations would be violated; what
differences and divisions there would be in Families and Congregations; what
heart-burnings would be caused; what disobedience to the Civil Magistrate, that
might be palliated over with a pretense of Conscience, as well as other
Opinions and Practices; what disturbance of the Civil Peace and dissolution of
all Humane Society and of all Government in the Church and Commonwealth, if
once liberty were given by a Law for men to profess and practice what Opinions
they pleased, etc. Harmonious consent of Lancashire Ministers with those of
London, p. 12, 13. printed 1648.
it looks as if men could not sin fast enough unless they were bidden, as if
God were not already enough dishonored, except the Throne of Iniquity were set
up framing Mischief by a Law; or as if men were afraid Error (a goodly Plant to
be cherisht) would not grow fast enough except it were made much of. We have
searched the Sacred Records, and yet we cannot find that ever such a thing was
practiced with approbation from God, from the time of Adams Creation to the
sealing up that Sacred Volume, and the ceasing of Visions and all new Divine
Revelations. And again, It would be no part of Englands Thankfulness, after so
many Deliverances and Mercies received from God, to grant men Liberty openly to
blaspheme him, at their pleasure to wrest the Scripture to their own
destruction; to trample upon his Holy Ordinances, slight and contemn all
Ministry, despise his Messengers, commit all manner of abominations, and for
every one to go a whoring after their own Inventions, Harm. cons. p. 10, 11.
which yet would be the Effects of a lawless Toleration. This was subscribed by
the Ministers of a whole County. If then it be (as they truly assert) a thing
so extremely ill to indulge persons of different Persuasions at all; much more
is it so, to let them be engaged in the greatest and noblest work the Church of
Christ undertakes. Schism and Heresy are Crimes of so bewitching a Nature, as
we find by Experience, that those Leaders of either kind, who happen to
renounce their Errors, are unable to reduce those unhappy Souls they had
formerly led astray; and it is but too common, that such Converts relapse
themselves into those very Errors they had abjured, and then having by
pretended Repentance insinuated themselves into the Churches bosom, they have
the better opportunity to scatter their Poison every where.

Those who plead for this Liberty of Conscience, for the better stopping of
Men's mouths, are generally wont to distinguish between Errors tolerable and
intolerable; but which are so, or which are not, who shall be judge? The Answer
is presently by themselves returned, To the Law and to the Testimony. Isa. 8.20.
Let Gods Word decide the Controversy, and this is indeed a certain way. And
yet Experience tells us, that almost every Party pretend the Scripture is on
their side, and allege it in defense of their own Opinions, when yet it is
impossible it should he for them All, and every one acknowledges that
impossibility. What then is to be determined in this case? must every one be
indulged in their own way? That is indeed to give them leave to damn themselves
without control, and is so contrary to Christian Charity, that no Party when
in power was ever yet bad enough to agree to it, and when in their deprest
Condition they cry out loudest for Toleration, they are then active and busy
to draw men over to their different Parties out of tenderness, as they allege,
to their Souls; Therefore the exactest Rules of all true Policy, whether
Ecclesiastical or Civil, forbids all kind of Indulgence, even to those Errors
that seem in themselves the most tolerable; the Church and State are so united
in their Interests in this Case, that what ruins the one must certainly
confound the other: The Word of God is a Rule to Princes as well as others; and
Princes, if inquisitive, having better opportunities for Instruction, and Souls
more vast and capable than other Men, may soon understand what Principles have
a due agreement with the Tenor of Holy Writ, and what have not, That Chain of
Principles which leads men through all the Actions of Life without opposition
to any Dictates there, is that to which a Christian Prince is obliged to bring
men for Gods and for his own sake, with all that power God has entrusted him
with. And unprejudiced Men by consulting this Word of God, and by applying to
it the practice of the Prophets and Apostles and the whole primitive Christian
Church, as upon Record, may easily find out these saving Principles; Thousands,
whose Souls are now at rest, have done it before us: And it is a most
infallible Truth, that wheresoever a Principle disagreeing to the general scope
of Scripture is entertained, that very Principle will rend the Church, and have
an unhappy influence in due time upon the State, nor will the honest intention
of the Person advancing such a Principle be any security either to the one or
the other.

That one Maxim, That the foundation of Power is originally in the People,
seems at first very little to concern Religion, yet it is directly opposite to
that assertion of Gods eternal Wisdom, Prove. 8.15.
By me Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice; Romans 13.1.
and to that of S. Paul, that there is no power but of God, and the powers that
be are ordained of God; and this Tenet, as proper for their turn, Schismatics
in general own. Now, though I doubt not but many Persons of very sober and
innocent tempers have entertained that Notion, and d^ed in the Belief of it;
yet there is no Rebellion or Insurrection carried on by Man pro^^ssing
Christianity, but has been grounded upon and asserted from that Principle; and
indeed Crowns are very insecure things if that be true. But every one knows,
that by how much the more Innocent the first Movers or the great Promoters of
such Doctrines are, so much the greater is the Danger, and the weakness of
careless and uninquisitive Persons the more easily imposed upon.

Again, That Opinion that denies any Power in Church Governors to impose
indifferent things upon those under their Charge, seems to hold forth a great
deal of Charity, and yet it is directly contrary to the Practice of the
Apostles, who made Indifferent Things, Acts 15.29,
viz. Abstinence from things offered to Idols, from things strangled, and from
Blood, absolutely necessary by their Command. But certainly every truly
compassionate Heart must bleed to see what miserable Fractures and Divisions
this has made in the Church, how it has been the Common Plea of Sectaries, and
has almost vacated all the Laws of God and Man; For whilst men oppose their
immediate Church Governors, if Princes who are to be nursing Fathers and
nursing Mothers to the Church interpose, as their Power and Duty engage them,
Ignorant Zeal presently breaks out into a raging Fire, and creates Tumults and
Disorders for Conscience sake, and every one who dies in so cursed a Cause,
looks upon himself, and is esteemed by too many, as a Martyr suffering for the
Common and dearly purchased Liberty of Christians.

The Government of the Church by a mixed Body of Clergy and Lay Elders, though
it be Novel and Absurd, must needs be very plausible to the vulgar, when every
Cobbler in the Parish may hope in time to mate his Landlord or the proudest of
his Superiors, and yet Popery has nothing in it more fatal to the Thrones of
Princes, than this. Those of the Church of Rome suppose the Bishop of Rome
Infallible, and from that Supposition laid as a Foundation, they rightly enough
conclude, he may depose the Highest Magistrates: For if the Bishop of Rome be
indeed Infallible, he cannot charge a Prince with any other than a real Sin; He
cannot be mistaken in his Judgment, and of necessity he must be Superior to
the greatest Kings and Emperors under Heaven; in opposition to all this,
confute but their primary Erroneous Hypothesis, and the Blindest Romanist will
be sensible that all his Conclusions are foolish and unwarrantable. But with
those who are for the Other Government the Case is very different, They
declare, No one Man, Assemb. adv. concerning Conf. of Faith, (...) 1. par. 4.
No Body of Men whatsoever to be Infallible, and yet though they acknowledge
they may err and be mistaken in their Apprehensions and Decisions of things,
they are resolved to maintain their Superiority to all Powers whatsoever; It Is
a standing Rule with them, To Discipline must all the Estates in a Kingdom be
Subject, 1 Book of Discipline c. 7. ^ Book c. 13.
as well the Rulers, as they that are Ruled: And this, Princes and Magistrates
not being exempted from Discipline, A third Means whereby they have ^verted our
People, has been the range and damnable Positions, such as, that Subjects do of
their own Heads, (...) much better, than what they do in Obedience to
Authority. The Parliament can make no Law at all concerning the Church, but
only Ratify what the Church decrees. It is lawful for Sub^^cts to make a
Covenant without the King, and to enter into a Bond of mu^ual Defense against
the King and all Persons whatsoever. An Assembly may ^brogate Acts of
Parliament if they reflect upon Church Government. The Protestation of Subjects
against Laws established, frees them from all Obligation of Obedience to those
Laws. Kings Declar. Annals of Chapter 1. p. 760.
and those that are placed in the Ecclesiastical Estate, rightly ruling and
governing, God shall be glorified: So that though we convince them of never so
many Errors and Corruptions, and prove their Judgments never so much mistaken,
there is no Remedy, they are in the Chair, and Right or Wrong they will Govern.
Now where such fallible Persons can Excommunicate the Supreme Magistrate, and
warrant the Disobedience of Subjects, it is in vain to teach Submission to Civil
Authority, ev^ry one looking upon himself at such a time as dispensed with for
all Vows and Oaths whatsoever.

I need not instance in any thing more of this Nature, these to unprejudiced
Persons are enough to convince them of the danger of Indulgence. Could it have
had a good Influence upon Piety, Julian the Apostate, that subtle and
inveterate Enemy to Christianity, would never have granted it; Dissidentes
Christianorum Anti^^^^ cum plebe disci^^^ pal^^^^ intro^^^^es me^^bat, ut
Civilibus discordiis C^nsopit^s ^uisque nullo vetante Religioni sue serviret
intrepidus. Quod agebat ^d^o obstinate, ut dissensiones augente licentia, non
timeret unanimantem postea plebem: Null^s (...) bes^ias, ut sunt sibi fera^es
plerique Christianorum expertus Amnian. Marcell Lib. 22. cap 5.
nay his own Historian assures us, That be recalled those Christian Bishops
from Exile who had been banished by his Uncle Constantius, advised them to live
peaceably, and every one else to exercise their Religion freely, hoping that
the Christians by that Indulgence, being animated one against another, that
Heathenism which he designed to restore, would meet with the less Opposition;
And the same is confirmed by the Church Historian in his Account of Julians
Revocation of the banished Bishops. (...). Sozomeni Lib. 5. c. 5. Denique tunc
^^ddidit Basileias Haereti^is quando Templa Daemoniis, eo medo putan
Christianum nomen posse perire de t^rris si unitati Ecclesiae, de qua lapsus
fuerat, invideret and sacrilegas dissensiones liberas esse permitteret. August.
Epist. 166.


And whereas the Donatists as well as others had their Share in Julians Liberty
of Conscience, St. Augustine tells them, That Julian opened Temples to
Heretics and Devils at the same time, hoping by that means so far to encourage
and foment Dissensions in it, as thereby at last totally to ruin the Church of
Christ. And whereas we find Themistius applauding Jovian the Christian
Successor of Impious Julian, for his Gentleness in permitting every one to
serve God according to his own Conscience, a Policy very necessary in that
sudden Revolution of Affairs upon the Apostates Death. A Learned Man of our own
observes, That when the Gentiles were under Hatches, Caves Eccles. 2 vol
Introd. See. 4. p. 51, 52.
they knew no Means so effectual for the keeping Paganism alive, as frequent
Intercessions for a Toleration.

But supposing it fit an Indulgence should be granted to all persons of what
Profession soever, I would fain know why the Extravagancies of Morality as well
as Divinity should not be allowed, why should not Vice be publicly and legally
allowed and protected? Every one, I know, will exclaim against that, and yet
more may be said for that, than the other. In Relation to the Church Vicious
Men are scandalous, yet they never quarrel about Circumstances, or study to set
people together by the Ears. If they give Offense in participation of Divine
Ordinances, let them but alone, and they will never trouble you; they have, as
Vicious, no Piques against the Pastors of the Church for doing their Duties;
nor do they trouble themselves in controverted Doctrines whose Arguments are
the strongest, so that in the Church, if tolerated, they create no Disturbance
nor begin any Heresy or Schism. In relation to the State, Let but the
Adulterer enjoy his Whores, the Drunkard his Cups, the Covetous Man his
Tre^^^sures. etc. and, as such a one, he will never engage himself in Plots:
^g^^^^st the Established Government, nor pry too busily into the Miscarriages
of Superiors: But indeed when Men of these Trades, to cloak their Vices,
espouse the Interests of a Religious Party, then they grow dangerous; for since
nothing but their furious Zeal for a Faction, hinders the World from making
Remarks upon their Shameful Debaucheries, it is their greatest Policy to show
enough of that; by this means, after their firm Closure with Malcontents and
Schismatics, how many soft and gentle Words are found out to extenuate their
Crimes! So that He that is loaded with all the Wickedness Hell can furnish for
him, while he Heads a Party, shall be accounted, though a frail and frequently
tempted, yet a very sincere and well-meaning Brother.

But if at last we look into the Word of God, we shall find that as he has
commanded us to abstain from all Immoralities, even from whatsoever has the
least appearance of Evil; so he has by the Apostle enjoyed us To mark, to set a
Brand of Infamy upon those which cause Divisions and Offenses contrary to the
Doctrine we have learned, 1 These. ^5.22.
and to avoid them, for they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ,
but their own Belly, and by good Words and fair Speeches deceive the hearts of
the simple. Rom 16.17, 18.
It is not the openness of a Sin that makes it comparatively the greater;
Malice is as bad as Theft, yet it lies close concealed within the dark Recesses
of the Soul: Witchcraft, is an obscure Sin, few know what it is, yet every one
believes it worse than Drunkenness, Adultery, Covetousness, etc. And Treason,
though it hates the Light, is as bad as Profaneness: To curse the King in our
Hearts, though never so secretly, is a damnable Sin, and it is the same to
contrive Tumults and Rebellion in the State; but these last admit of one
particular Aggravation beyond all bare Immoralities whatsoever: and it is this,
Every one who pretends to Conscience acknowledges his Duty to abjure all
Immoralities, while many pretend to be active in the other only for Conscience
sake, and when Sin is once abetted by that which Men call Conscience, the
mischievous Effects of it know no Bounds.

Let us then suppose these Samaritans had been so far entertained and indulged
by the Jews, as to have built the Temple with them, to have set up their
Synagogues, gathered their Congregations, and preached their own Doctrines
among them without Control, what must have been the event, would not Gods Law
have soon been thrust out of doors? Truth indeed is the most Ancient, but
Novelty is the most pleasing to Itching Ears, and therefore those Jews who
would have been frequent Spectators of the Samaritan Rites, would too easily
have been drawn to approve and practice what they had seen; the Jews had proved
this before to their Smart, when a bare permission of some of the Old
Canaanites to live among them, drew themselves, the Lords peculiar Inheritance
to Abominable Idolatries. But since their Law gave no such Liberty to the Jews,
we may assure our selves our Savior came not to purchase any such Liberty for
us; a Redemption from the slavery of Sin God shadowed out in the Mosaic
dispensation; and our Savior with his own most precious Blood purchased for us
Christians a freedom from Sin, but no Toleration to do what we please, or to
Worship God according to our own Fancies. I doubt not but God has permitted
pretenses to Liberty of Conscience to end generally in Insurrections and
Rebellions, to render the pretenders to it odious to all considerable persons,
and to compel Civil Magistrates, if not for Gods, yet for their own sakes to
suppress them. I shall conclude this Observation with the words of the Assembly
of Divines; They who upon pretense of Christian Liberty, shall oppose any
lawful Power, or the Lawful Exercise of it, whether it be Civil or
Ecclesiastical, resist the Ordinance of God; and for their publishing such
Opinions, and maintaining such practices as are contrary to the light of
Nature, or the known Principles of Christianity, whether concerning Faith,
Worship, Conversation, or the power of Godliness, or such erroneous Opinions or
Practices, as either in their own Nature, or in the manner of publishing and
maintaining them are destructive to the External Peace and Order, Assembl. adv.
about Confession of Faith, c. 20. par. 4.
which Christ has established in the Church, they may lawfully be called to
Account, and proceeded against by the Censures of the Church, and by the power
of the Civil Magistrate, and therefore not to be indulged.

That a Refusal of the Assistance exasperates the Churches Enemies, and puts
them upon all, Observe. 5.
even the most desperate Courses to hinder that good work which by other means
they could not. This we learn from the practice of the Samaritans here in the
Text, Because their Offer was rejected, they weakened the hands of the People,
and troubled them in building, and hired Counselors against them. And here the
Hypocrite shows himself, he cannot bear a Repulse, especially such a one as
entrenches upon his high flying Piety, without a Revengeful mind. Matthew. 15.21,
-- 28.
The poor Syrophoenician Woman in the Gospel could endure it from our Savior,
and very severe Language with it, and yet would not leave him till she obtained
her Request, and it was because she was sincere and honest in her heart: But
some pretending Disciples of our Savior, who thought highly of themselves,
when they heard but one hard Saying, and that spoken that every one might be
able to distinguish between those that believed, John 6.64, 66.
and those that believed not, they took Snuff at it, went back and walked no
more with him. Hypocrisy always flies out upon the least suspicion into
extravagance, 'its too tender to endure a severe touch, and it yet wants no
Impudence on its part; for take persons guilty of it in a declining state,
nothing concerns them then but the great and general decay of true Piety (to
which yet they themselves above all others contribute) the impending ruin of
Religion, the Coldness, the Formality, the Superstition of Professors; and who
would not think at such a time that their tongues were touched with a Coal from
the sacred Altar? who would not be ready at first to believe such Persons
rather rejected for their Innocence and out of Envy, than for any just or real
Cause? Thus does Hypocrisy rise high in the Vogue of the People, and the worst
of men pass for the most zealous Christians; and thus do State Politicians
thrown from the management of public Affairs for their Ill deserts, as if yet
all depended upon their concern in the Government, make their loud Complaints
among such as are willing to be deceived, of Tyranny, Oppression, Arbitrary and
Illegal Impositions, as if none but themselves had been the true Patriots and
Assertors of their Countries Liberties.

Put the same Persons into another state and presently they run into another
strein, let them have the Power and down go all their Opponents right or wrong;
what, are they not sure they are in the Right way to Heaven? are not all things
among them formed according to the pattern in the Mount? And can they to whom
God has committed the management of Affairs see Men running headlong into the
Methods of Error and Eternal ruin without Compassion, or without endeavoring
to compel Men to come in and be saved? And must not the multitude of Dissenters
in Religious matters weaken the hands of the People of God, hinder the
Exaltation of Christ upon his Throne, and expose that Commonwealth to
innumerable hazards, whereof Providence has made them the Fathers and the
Governors? None but Atheists certainly can deny this, or Men of their own
temper, when by driving Phaeton like they have precipitated themselves from
their abused Command, for then, perhaps, they begin to relent, to acknowledge
themselves to have been but men, and so by reason of their carnal mindedness to
have miscarried foully in these things; but still they plead that others ought
not to follow their unhappy Examples, but the rather to insist in the Methods
of Charity and Moderation.

Thus the wretched Hypocrites twist and wind themselves every way, yet by all
their struggling do but entangle themselves the more; and yet by such thin and
silly Arts as these they creep into the Affections of the rash and
inconsiderate, by these means they manage Parties in Religion and Policy, and
in the midst of Divisions reign Triumphant; by these means they find
opportunities to instill Fears and Jealousies into the minds of Men, and by the
numbers of their Admirers to terrify the builders of Gods Church: thus
Religion it self is by degrees destroyed, and the designs and endeavors of
Gods most faithful Servants frustrated. These Enemies of Truth know well, that
fear is a betrayer of all Counsels, and makes men unfit for any work; the
Samaritans tried the Experiment, Nehemiah was told concerning them, Nehem. 4.12.
From all places whence ye shall return to us, They will be upon you; They set
a Prophet to persuade Nehemiah to fly into the Temple for his security, whose
fear would have discouraged all the rest, and plied him with Ill news and
scandalous stories. He gives the reason of their acting thus, For they All made
us afraid, saying, Nehem. 6.9.
Their hands shall be weakened from the work that it be not done.

Were but Men so good as they should be, the Artifices of Gods Enemies could
not have such mischievous effects upon them, they would not be afraid of any
evil Tidings, Psalm. 102.7.
their hearts standing fast in the Lord. This great defect makes every Idle
rumor, every vain fancy terrible, so that the most steady, the most deliberate
and rational Methods of Honoring God may by malicious Men be traduced, and
they by careless persons believed; and so those come to be charged with
Innovating Humors, who above all oppose Innovations; and those who cannot
relinquish that Religion they have taken up upon infallible grounds, are styled
Apostates, Fear representing every object contrary to what indeed it is, and
bringing us within danger of their Curse who call evil good and good evil; it is
counted Madness for a man to kill himself for fear of dying, such a Madness
those fall into who lose their Religion for fear of losing it, who are
sollicitous about it till they forget what it really consists in, and then
engage in endless quarrels about Circumstances, as if the Shadow were of any
value, when the Body, or when the solid Substance is gone.

Those Men yet who are pure Politicians, who aim at their own profit or
grandeur, without respect to Religion or the Honor of God, prove excellent
Instruments to carry on their designs who study to disturb Gods Church. If
those Enemies be few and inconsiderable, they may perhaps let them alone; but
if they be many and persons of Interest or Wealth, the appearing in the head of
them, and whispering stories on their behalf in the Ears of Princes engages the
whole Party on their side, who trouble not themselves so much about Faith as
about Practice, and therefore believe the greatest Atheist that is but on their
side to be a Child of Light though walking in Darkness: And indeed the only
certain means for Capital Debauchees to get any Reputation for goodness, is to
close with disaffected and malicious Hypocrites, which (if many persons are not
in a very gross Error) does, like that true Christian Charity recommended to us
by the Apostle, Jam. 5.20.
cover a multitude of Sins.

And it is remarkable, that when Princes out of Zeal for Religion make the best
provision for its defense that Humane Providence can reach to, some are so
curiously subtle, as to endeavor at least, to make their Laws like Spiders
Webs, so tender, that every daring Spirit may, without danger, break through
them; and sometimes they try to turn their edge from those they were designed
against, to those in whose favor they were made, and many more Devices are
daily found out to the terror of Well-doers, (...). Hesiod^ (...), lib. 1.
but to the praise of them that do evil; such shall never want employment; for
those who when they are angry at Heaven, would go to Hell it self to prosecute
their Revenge, will never miss any help they can find on Earth. But while
wicked Men enraged at their disappointments turn every way to work mischief,
they fall upon the Poets Truth, They draw the greatest mischiefs upon their own
heads, by their own contrivances, and ruin themselves with their own Arts; for
those who move in an higher Sphere, though wicked as themselves, regard their
Faction but as Steps to mount by, which may afterward be burnt, and therefore
those Leaders thrust them upon all desperate Actions, till from Malice,
Murmuring and Sedition, they rise to Riots and Rebellions, trying so to wrest
that by force out of the hands of their Superiors, which by subtle Flatteries
they cannot attain to; wherein if they succeed, though they make themselves
perfect Slaves by the bargain, yet the Church, the great Object of their
Spleen, must be sure to suffer, and while their Leaders triumph, the Temples
building must cease, and Jerusalem continue but an heap of Stones.

Having laid down these Observations, Applic.
I shall at last for Application show the unhappy Parallelism between the
Jewish and the English Church, in respect of the Practices of the Samaritans
against theirs of the Dissenters of all sorts against our Peace, and the
Restoration of Gods ancient, solemn, and public Worship among us: To this end

Let us look back to the first Reformation of Religion in this Kingdom, when it
was laid for a sure foundation, That we should forsake the Church of Rome only
so far as that had forsaken the Rule of Gods Word. And it is notoriously
evident, That whosoever out of one pretense or other should go further, must
instead of opposing real Popery close with it, running himself upon the same
Crime of bidding defiance to, and superseding the Gospel of Jesus Christ. When
God of his infinite mercy was pleased after that long and dismal Night of
Popish Ignorance and Superstition to give us a Prince who favored the pure and
undisguis'd Truth, those whose Hearts God had touched, set earnestly upon that
great work of Gratitude, the restoring Gods sacred Temple, or the settling God,
Worship within these Kingdoms; not according to the Pattern of other Reformers,
but that of the truly Ancient, Catholic and Apostolic Church of Christ, which
they had a greater advantage of doing than others, for that the lawful Supreme
Authority of the Kingdom concurred with and encouraged them in their endeavors.
And they proceeded in their work with such care, that Dr. Tailor, a Martyr in
Queen Mary's days, declares of the Church Service as then reformed, that it was
so fully perfected according to the Rules of our Christian Religion in every
behalf, Acts and Men, Tom. 3. p. 131.
that no Christian Conscience could be offended with any thing contained
therein.

When a new Cloud of Popery raised by a bigot Queen was by Gods goodness
dispelled, and Queen Elizabeth peaceably settled upon the Throne, the
Purification of Divine Worship from those foul Accretions which had fastened on
it in her Sisters days, was one of the first things they set upon; and whereas
K. Edward 's Act of Uniformity had been by Q. Mary repealed to the great decay
of the true Honor of God, Act of Uniformity, 1 Eliz.
and discomfort to the Professors of the truth of Christ's Religion. She again
by Act of Parliament resettled that almost lost form of Worship, Calv. Cecillio
Anglo.
and to this very work Calvin himself excites, as he tells Sir W. Cecill
afterward Lord Burghly, whom by an Epistle he persuades to advance the same
Work with all his power; and he that shall compare that Epistle of his to the
Duke of Somerset when Protector, with this, will find him a strong approver of
that very Method our English Prelates insisted in in their Reformation: The
maintaining of Gods Worship so settled has been the work of succeeding Princes,
wherein CHARLES the Martyr of Glorious Memory was Inferior to none.

More Black, more Bloody and terrible yet was that gloomy Night of Confusion
and Rebellion that ensued; but it pleased God, the great worker of Miracles, to
produce Light once again out of horrid Darkness, to restore our Sovereign to
his Throne, and our Bishops and Curates to the Church as at first. A task they
had no less hard than that of Judas Maccabeus of old, 1 Mace. 4.36. -- 61.
to purify those Temples once dedicated to Gods Honor; but then miserably
profaned by the impure devotions of timeserving Enthusiasts and Rebels, then
was the Nations Gratitude to God for that never to be forgotten Mercy, duly
expressed by renewing the Uniformity of Common Prayer and Service in the Church,
Act of Uniformity, 14 Car. 2.
and Administration of the Sacraments, for the better securing divine Blessings
to us for the future: And this Order is now settled among us by so good Laws,
confirmed by so irrefragable Authority, secured by such excellent Rules and
Canons, Corbets and Okeys Speeches in the Account of their Deaths, p 54* 56.
See Burnet's Hist. of Ref. v. 2. Preface, p. 16, 17.
that even by the Confession of our greatest Enemies, our Church and Nation is
the Envy of our Neighbors, the Bulwark and glory of the Reformation. And the
Regular and Instituted Clergy, are generally so faithful to the Interest of the
true Religion as established among us by Law, and so well able to assert it
against all Gainsayers, that while any regard is had by the People to them we
need not run out of our Wits for fear of Innovations.

In three Revolutions then our case has been parallel with that of the Jews; we
have been Captives to our insulting Enemies as well as they, and every return
from Captivity has been celebrated with the Restoration of Gods truly Ancient
Worship and Service. But we have had Samaritans too, Persons who have by all
the Methods of Subtilty and Violence opposed that Glorious Work; That the
Zealots of the Church of Rome should espouse her Interest, and endeavor to
reenslave these Churches to Superstition and Idolatry, is no wonder; but that
Persons who pretend the greatest Hatred to that Religion should join with its
Favorers, should promote and extend its Doctrines, should imitate its worst
and most Unchristian Practices, was very strange! But again, to abate of that
wonder, it was impossible that those Persons who concluded every thing unlawful
and execrable that had been used in the time of Popery, and consequently to be
rejected, should have any real good will to the Reformation; Reason tells us,
That the abuse of a thing, though never so gross, cannot alter its first or
Original nature. Our Savior himself submitted to the Jewish Rites that he
might fulfill all righteousness; though Moses's Law had been as much adulterated
among the Jews, Matthew. 3.15.
as that of Christ among Papists: And the Apostles did not reject every
Ceremony or Circumstance that had been abused by the Heathens. All which may
inform us, that those who use such Arguments against Constitutions lawful in
themselves, as their former abuse, can aim at nothing by so doing, but only a
general Disorder and Confusion.

It was indeed the Masterpiece of Roman Policy, to scatter the Seeds of
Division and Separation among us, and to bring men into conceit against all
public Order and Uniformity; and they began this Practice betimes, some few
there were that from prejudices contracted by foreign Conversation opposed
some appointments of the Church in K. Edward the 6ths days; but their Scruples
were of little concern, and the Effects of their opposition were prevented by
Qu. Mary's Persecution: But it was an ill Omen of what might follow, that the
English Exiles at Frankford should quarrel about the form of Gods Worship, and
Knox, the Head of the Schismatical party, be so early and yet justly accused of
Treason against the German Emperor: When those who had created disturbance
there returned home in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, they brought so
much of a pervicacious humor along with them, that though they fell not
themselves into direct separation from the established Church of England, yet
they laid the cursed foundations of those fatal differences we have ever since
groaned under; the Parties were but few in those days, but that prudent Queen
was so well convinced of the Influence their Novel and disorderly conceits then
vented, must have upon the State, that no persuasions (though from her greatest
Favorites) could reconcile her to them; and yet the Dissenters, their
Successors, in these days, proclaim her no friend to Popery. He that reads the
Authentic story of Faithful Commin the Romish Priest, the great Patron of
Phanaticism in those days, Foxes and Firebrands by Nalson. Camdens Ann. Eliz.
1588.
and of Heath the Jesuit afterward, with the Principles they acted upon, and
observes the practices of Hacket, Coppinger, Arthington and others, with the
boldness of Barrow, Penry, and other furious Factors for Puritanism in that
age, will be easily convinced, that a well regulated Monarchy can never prosper
where such Incendiaries are indulged; Incendiaries I may well call them, for in
the Reign of CHARLES the First their seditious Opinions and Practices,
propagated to their Posterity, prevailed so far as to set Three flourishing
Kingdoms in a flame, to the ruin of Law, Liberty, Religion, and whatsoever
could be dear to Men or Christians.

The several Plots and Conspiracies, the Pretenders to tender Consciences in
former days were engaged in, received their Consummation at last in that great
and tragical Rebellion; and it was no wonder that Rebellion should follow upon
that Doctrine, That Princes were accountable for their miscarriages to their
own Subjects; Dangerous Positions, p. 14.
That their Subjects in case of their Neglect might reform Religion, without
and in opposition to them; and that the Church of England was then so miserably
corrupted both in Doctrine and Discipline, that a Reformation was absolutely
necessary. Doctrines which the Apostles and Primitive Christians were
absolutely unacquainted with, and which the wisest Men saw no necessity of,
which Doctrines were all of them confirmed in that cursed Covenant The Covenant
was received by Papists with infinite Joy, as hoping that now the time was come
in which both we and our Successors might be brought to abhor and detest that
Religion, whose professed Zealots had been the Authors of such an unsufferable
Covenant, which could not consist with Monarchy, which appeared to us most
evidently by the Advertisements sent up to us by some of our Council of
Scotland, that the sudden and frequent arrival of Priests and Jesuits from
Doway, and other Seminaries beyond the Seas, was so great in hope of their
welcome to us, because of this Seditions Covenant, etc. With Protestants abroad
it was received with most offensive scandal and infinite grief, which appeared
to us by advertisement from some of our Public Ministers abroad, who certifi'd
us that both the Ministers and others of their Consistory at Charenton, and of
other refom'd Churches in France, as also the Professors, Ministers and
Consistory at Geneva, and of other neighboring reformed Churches in those
Parts, were so scandalized with this prodigious Covenant, as that they were
afraid of nothing more than this, That it would bring an indelible Scandal upon
the reformed Churches, and alienate the Minds of all the Princes of Christendom
from ever entertaining a good thought of their Religion. His Majesty's
Narrative of Scotch Tumults, 1683.
, scandalous to all persons of all Religions, and the Effect of such Doctrines
laid open to the astonished World. Then it was that Indulgence indeed
prevailed, and the Papists in those Days with reason enough pleaded for
themselves, That all Persecution for Religion was clearly repugnant to those
Principles of Freedom so often and solemuly declared by the Parliament and
Army, Christ. Modern. par. 2. p. 2.7.
and Universally received by all the moderate and well tempered People in the
Nation; and then it was propounded to the remnant of the Commons at
Westminster, That all such as profess Faith in God by Jesus Christ, however
differing in Judgment from the Doctrine, Ess^^'s Watchmens Watchword, p. 8.
Worship and Discipline publicly held forth, should not be restrained from,
but protected in the profession of their Faith, and exercise of their Religion
according to their Conscience; according to which Proposition all kind of
Heresies were to be maintained and defended by Public Authority. And thus Gods
solemn Worship was overturned, and the Liturgy of the Church of England laid
aside; about which I may use our Churches words, By what undue means, and for
what mischievous purposes the use of that Liturgy (though enjoined by the Laws
of the Land, Preface to Common Prayer.
and those Laws unrepeal'd) came during the late unhappy Confusions to be
discontinued, is too well known to the World, and we are not willing to
remember; But when upon his Majesty's happy Restoration it seemed probable,
that among other things the use of the Liturgy also would return of Course (the
same having never been legally abolished) unless some timely means were used to
prevent it; those Men who, under the late usurped Powers, had made it a great
part of their business to render the People disaffected thereunto, saw
themselves in point of Reputation and Interest, concerned with their utmost
endeavors to hinder its restitution. Hence it came that the Pamphlets of
former days, were seconded by Petitions for Peace, Necessity of Reformation,
etc. Our public Forms of Worship exposed to contempt with all the Scurrility
and Satirical Virulency imaginable; their Books of Prodigies, parallel to the
Romish Golden Legends, stuffed with Lies prodigious as the Stories related, and
all printed but to make the Vulgar run mad; and all other insinuating Arts were
made use of, that even the great Council of the Nations might be made Abettors
of an Infamous and multiform Faction, and those Laws, whereby the true Religion
is secured to us, be repealed.

While those Devices have sailed, they have tried another way; and as if the
Nation had nothing to fear but Popery, they have declaimed loudly against that:
and as if the Legal Clergy were too weak to cope with the Goliaths of Rome,
they forsooth, have been very forward to lend their helping Hand, where indeed
they could only prove, as Rabshaketh told Hezekiah the King of Egypt would do,
A mere staff of a bruised Reed, ^. Kings 1^.21.
on which if a man leaned, it would go into his hand and pierce it; or as the
Samaritans to the Jews, Betrayers, not Assistants. To prove which in its
largest sense, I shall only give you the Character of the Presbyterians, one
principal Party among the Adversaries of the Church of England as by Law
established, drawn by a Prophet of the Dissenting Tribe, Treason, says he,
never walks so secure as under the Cloak of Religion, hence it is that the Pope
makes use of those Reverend Foxes the Jesuits to disguise and agitate his
Affairs: But what a misery is it that the Jesuits, spued out of other Nations,
seem to have taken Sanctuary in ours, walking up and down with the Garb and
Title of Protestant Ministers? For the carrying on their Traitorous Designs
they have far outstripp'd the Jesuits both in Practice and Project, they have
not only tampered with men's Consciences in private, but they preach open
Rebellion and Treason with a full Mouth in the Pulpit; they hold Correspondence
with the Enemies abroad and with Associates of their own Humor and Faction at
home, acting their Conspiracies in the form and authority of a Body Politic,
presuming to Commissionate Agents, give out Instructions, treat with the
Public Enemy, raise Money to carry on the Confederacy, to which end they have
their private Consults Easts, and Contributions, which in case of Discovery,
they say were intended for the Good of the Nation and for Charitable Uses.
This, though written 30 years since, looks like the History of Separatists at
this time: but he adds further; The manner of breeding up their Proselites is
far more serpentine and subtle than that of the Jesuits for qualifying their
Novices; For 1. They initiate them with Fastings, solemn Vows and Promises,
Sermons and Sacraments, and so all the Ordinances of God are prostituted with
the greater Reverence to enchant and bind their Confederates. 2. They are
instructed in the most refined Mysteries of Equivocating and Mental
Reservation. 3dly. They are taught never to Confess when Examined, or to elude
their Confession; which Principles being allowed, it is impossible for any
Commonwealth to be secure, Mercurius Politicus, June 19. 1651.
or that Justice can have its Course against Conspirators and Traitors; Thus
far that Author, a Prophet indeed. He that shall compare this with Oates's
Narrative and The Peaceable Design Renewed, must needs conclude these would be
excellent Champions against Popery; And whosoever will take the pains to read
his late Majesty's Narrative of the Scotch Tumults, Paragr. 1.35, 43.
and the Scotch Protestation against Marquess Hamilton his Majesty's
Commissioner, will find that is the business of the leading Dissenters, not to
beat down but to confirm and aggravate the grossest Errors in Popery, as I
intimated before. To confirm which, I shall add that Monstrous Position laid
down in the forenamed Protestation about Oaths, viz. That the swearer is
neither bound to the meaning of him that exacts the Oath, nor to his own
meaning who takes the Oath, but to the reality of the thing sworn, as it shall
be afterward at any time explicated by the Competent Judge: which Position
once granted, Annals of King Charles p. 726.
it is impossible for any one to know what he swears to in the most Solemn Oath
he takes.

So unfit are these Persons to be admitted to build with us the Church of God,
Yet the Dissenters of all Sorts plead their Agreement with us in Religion: It Is
often urged by their Agents, that their Religion is the same in Substance with
ours, they receive our Articles, own our Doctrines, receive Gods Word, etc. And
College, the late Protestant Martyr, as he is esteemed by some, expresses
himself very like the Samaritans in the Text, I have been a Lover of the Church
of England, Trial of Coll. p. 79.
says he, and of all the Fundamental Points of Doctrine believed in it, I own
the same God, the same Savior, the same Faith, the same Gospel. But Pleas of
this Nature would not serve turn, Our Sovereign and the Fathers of our Church
could not in prudence admit of such Petitions for Peace, as were indeed the
loud Alarms to War, nor receive those whose hands had been so deep in the Blood
of the late Wars, to join in the Restoring Gods Holy Worship without such an
Abjuration of their former Errors, as might give the World some reasonable
satisfaction, which they knew not how to submit to: They foresaw their Fanatic
Design well enough, and that all the World might see it too, since our
Sovereigns Miraculous Restoration, themselves have laid it open enough.

They have since that Time made it their Business to instill the forementioned
Principles into the Minds of Men, and have added others of the same dangerous
Nature: No Popery, no Slavery, has been the Common Cry, they acting therein
like those Subtle Villains, who when they have killed a Man themselves, are
the most busy to find out the Murderers. Numberless have the Pamphlets
Invective against the established Government both in Church and State been; The
King, his Council, the Clergy have been continually exposed to the hatred and
scorn of the People; and some have ventured boldly to charge their
Representatives in Parliament to turn all things Vpside-down: Vox Pat^iae.
Addresses to the new chosen Members. Colleges Trial p. 82.
Nor have Seditious Satyrs against the present Government sufficed, but the
late Horrid Rebellion has been justified, and Plots and Conspiracies for a new
Rebellion formed.

Presently after the Restoration of his Sacred Majesty before things were
sully settled, Tongue, Phillips, Stubs, Hind, Sallers, Gibbs, all Men pretending
to tender Consciences were executed at Tyburn Dec. 22. -- 62. for no meaner a
Design, than Cutting off Root and Branch, Kings, Queens, Dukes, Bishops, all
were to go one way; That there should be no Running beyond Sea, or Parle is
there, but a Total Destruction of Kings, Lords, Bishops and Gentry; the Plot
when effected, to be Charged upon the Papists, and the People to be excited to
rise in Arms under pretense of a Popish Massacre, See the Trials printed 1662.
Narr. p. last. Trial p. 12.
and that by means of a Seditious Letter designed to be dispersed in the
Country, the Copy of which was then produced in Court; and it is remarkable that
all Interests, Fifth-Monarchy-Men, Fighting Quakers, Anabaptists, Independents,
were easily agreed in this Glorious Attempt, and the Grime was confessed by them
all at the Place of Execution. But the Godly Party were not so to be frighted,
the Year following they were plotting again in the Northern Parts, to carry on
the same Work their Brethren had failed in before, of which Treasonable Plot
his Majesty tells the two Houses, That it was of a large Extent and very near
Execution, Kings Speech March. 21. 1663. 4.
had not He by Gods Goodness come to the Knowledge of the principal Contrivers,
and so secured them from doing their intended Mischief. But still the Evil
Spirit was not quite laid, in the year 1666 the several Parties ventured once
more upon a Plot, to murder his Majesty, Overthrow the Government, surprise
the Tower, kill the Lord General, and to Fire the City of London; which Plot
was to have been executed September the 3d of that year; Money was distributed
to the Conspirators, and a Council of the Heads settled at London for the
management of Affairs; for which Hellish Plot Rathbone, Saunders, Tucker,
Flint, Evans, Miles, London Gazet, Apr. 26. 1666.
Wescot and Cole, were Arraigned, Condemned and Executed. And though so many
suffered, one part of the Plot was unhappily effected in that dreadful
Conflagration wherein the great Metropolis of the Kingdom was laid in Ashes.
This disappointed, the Devil of Sedition flew into Scotland, where in the same
Year the Old Covenanters broke out into a Rebellion at Pentland Hills, Ravill.
red. p. 3.
but were soon happily disperss'd by his Majesty's Forces; soon after James
Mitchel, a Covenanting Minister, attempted the Assassination of Dr. Sharp, the
most Reverend Archbishop of St. Andrews, and in the attempt mortally wounded
the Bishop of Orkney, p. 33.
for which Fact confessed and proved he was deservedly Executed Jan. 18. 1677.
But the poor Archbishop escaped not so, implacable Fanaticism pursued till he
was effectually Murdered by some of the Crew with the most inexpressible
Barbarity, May 3. 1679. The same Month a new Rebellion under the Banner of the
Covenant broke out at Bothwell Bridge, where their Powers were crushed once
again; from which blow God grant they may never more recover: But all these Ill
successes have not yet it seems so ram'd our numerous Sectaries and their
Favorers; but that Religious Treason has once more made its Entry among us,
The King himself, the Duke, the great Officers of State, the Loyal Magistrates
of the City of London, all doomed to Slaughter, and the Government both in
Church and State to Ruin. I may use the Words of his MAJESTY's Declaration in
the case, Kings Declar. p. ^.
It Is hard to imagine how men of so different Interests and Opinions could join
in any Enterprise; but it is certain they readily concurred in the Resolution
of taking Arms to destroy the Government, even before they had agreed what to
set up in the place of it. But the Samaritans in the Text would serve for a
Pattern, who though Idolaters of very different kinds, could all agree in the
design to ruin the restored Jews.

Now if we reflect upon those desires of admittance to public Preaching in the
Church of England, which being rejected produced these violent effects, though
they more basely than the Samaritans, Courted the meanest of the of the People,
endeavoring to inveigle them into their Party; yet if we remember, that the
Fathers of our Church had lived in a long Banishment from their Charges, or
under the Cruel influences of rampant Rebellion and Hypocrisy, whilst these
false Prophets, these ravening Wolves had enjoyed the fat of our Land, and had
engrossed to themselves the Estates of other men, it seems as if they were in
the Samaritans condition, more fit to manage the Chargeable design of
reinthroning God in his Church than these poor and necessitous Exiles; they
offered largely for liberty to confound us once again, and to enjoy their
lawless Usurpations, no less than 500000 l. at once to an empty Treasury,
Mystery of Nonconformity, p. 5^
with which Sum, since 'twas not accepted, they might easily hire Counselors
of all kinds against the Church of England, to obstruct its settlement; all
which failing, Arms and Treason were the last means left, of which, as I have
showed you, they have made frequent Trials.

See here then the Result of tender Consciences, as they are styled, and a
Jesuitical pretense to Moderation; I have heard it objected by Dissenters, That
the Persons concerned in the present Plot were all Churchmen, but the Plot it
self confutes the Fancy, it being to destroy the Church, as now settled, as
well as the State. But I know many pretend to the Church, frequent Prayers,
receive Sacraments, who yet can readily Vote, That the Execution of Penal Laws
against Schismatics is a grievance, Kings Declar. Apr. 8. 1681. p. 5.
and lay a good foundation for a future Schismatical Plot, by resolving, That
if His Majesty should come by any violent Death, it should be revenged upon the
Papists. That Assertion of Colledge's looks very odly, That the last Parliament
at Westminster -- in -- 81, was of the same Opinion with that in -- 40:
Colleges Trial, p. 81, 82.
Some tell us, that the Members of that Parliament were all Churchmen too: but
what they were their Horrid Actions declared, and their Mortal Hatred to the
Government of the Church evidences the falsehood of that Opinion, Such Churchmen
the true Church of England will always disown, as only fit Associates for
Conspirators and Rebels.

Thanks be to God the Snare is now broken, and we are thus far delivered; God
has watched over us when we were too secure, and by his Providence has laid
open the Mystery of that Hypocrisy which has so long imposed upon us. Would
not any sober Dissenter, when he sees those who are of his own Persuasion run
into such Scandalous Crimes, begin to question the Principles he himself acts
upon? Is this the True Protestancy some have boasted so much of? or are all
Popishly affected who declare an Hearty abhorrence of all such Devilish
Principles and Practices? May we all bear that reproachful Character, rather
than for a Popular Title run headlong to the Devil; Let us never be gulled into
a persuasion, that such Persons are fit to build up our Church against the
Assaults of Ignorance, Idolatry, Profaneness or Superstition; but rather let us
unite closely among our selves. Let all Persons who profess Loyalty to their
Sovereign, be truly Loyal to that God who is the great Preserver of Princes;
Let the World be convinced, that even those seeming Virtues which render
Schismatics plausible, are solid and real in all those who maintain Gods
Ancient, Solemn and Regular Worship; Let us Fear God, and Honor and Trust our
Sovereign; Let no subtle Emissaries of Faction make us Suspicious of our
Superiors or of one another; That so we preserving the Unity of the Spirit in
the bond of peace and righteousness of life, the work of God may prosper in our
hand; That all Plots and Treasons may for ever be execrated, and all England
may hear and fear, and no such Wickedness may be heard of among us any more.

Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, be rendered as is
most due, all Honor, Glory, Praise, Power, Majesty and Dominion, from
henceforth and for evermore. AMEN.

FINIS.

