AN APPENDIX TO THE HISTORY OF The Church of Scotland.

AN APPENDIX TO THE HISTORY OF The Church of Scotland; CONTAINING The
Succession of the ARCHBISHOPS and BISHOPS in their several Sees, from the
Reformation of Religion, until the year 1676. AS ALSO The several Orders of
MONKS and FRIARS, etc. in Scotland, before the Reformation: WITH The Foundation
of the UNIVERSITIES and COLLEGES, their Benefactours, Principals, Professors
of Divinity, and present Masters: AND An Account of the GOVERNMENT, LAWS and
CONSTITVTION of the Kingdom.

LONDON, Printed by E. Flesher, for R. Royston, Bookseller to the KING's most
Sacred MAJESTY, Anno Domini MDCLXXVII.

THE PREFACE.
I May be justly ashamed to appear in print near so great an Author, whose
Work is received and entertained with such universal Applause, that it comes to
be reckoned among the Patterns of History. But many do still complain of one
Defect, that his History being written chiefly for his own Country, those
things that relate to the Constitution and Government there, are rather hinted,
and supposed to be understood, then fully opened.

This has made many desire a clear Account of those things; and the Humor of
writing the present State of Kingdoms being now common to most Nations, many
have wished to see the present State of Scotland. Therefore the quick Sale of
this excellent History encouraging the Bookseller to give the World a Fourth
Edition of it, he was earnest with me, to write such an Appendix to it as might
add somewhat to its value and sale.

He was importunate to find out one who would write a Continuation to it: but I
knew well, that both my Abilities in writing and my Informations were too
defective to adventure on such a Work. And the Bookseller receiving a full
satisfaction to his design in the Memoires of the Duke of Hamilton, (from
which, though it be not a full History of all that passed, yet it is hoped the
World will receive more light about the late Troubles then has been yet
published,) there remained nothing to be done, but to give the Succession of
the Bishops from the time where the former History ends, with the Account of
Religious Orders and Houses, the Foundations of the Universities, and the
Learned Men that flourished in them, together with the true State of that
Kingdom in its Government, Laws, and Supreme Courts. Which I have endeavored
to do as fully as seemed needful. I did not adventure on so hardy a Work
without communicating it to Learned and knowing Persons, by whose directions I
have now finished these Sheets.

I have long searched into those things, and have used all the endeavors that
were possible, to get any Mistakes that might have crept in with such a variety
of Informations rectified: so that I am very confident there are no
considerable Errors in matters of fact in the Account that follows.

I once intended to have published a Collection I have made of the Noble
Families in Scotland: But hearing there was a Person of Quality engaged in it,
who intends to write from very authentical grounds an Account of the Nobility
and Gentry of Scotland, I have stifled that part of my Collection.

If my Style or way of writing be not according to what the Reader expects; as
I need great Allowances for my Defects, so I know upon what Disadvantages I
appear after such a Grave and Masculine Writer. So that, as when one comes out
of a very lightsom place, where his Eyes were filled with Brightness, into a
darker Room, it appears quite dark unto him; I have no reason to wonder, if
after so clear a Light, all my Informations look like Night and Darkness.

THOMAS MIDDLETON.

I May be justly ashamed to appear in print near so great an Author, whose
Work is received and entertained with such universal Applause, that it comes to
be reckoned among the Patterns of History. But many do still complain of one
Defect, that his History being written chiefly for his own Country, those
things that relate to the Constitution and Government there, are rather hinted,
and supposed to be understood, then fully opened.

This has made many desire a clear Account of those things; and the Humor of
writing the present State of Kingdoms being now common to most Nations, many
have wished to see the present State of Scotland. Therefore the quick Sale of
this excellent History encouraging the Bookseller to give the World a Fourth
Edition of it, he was earnest with me, to write such an Appendix to it as might
add somewhat to its value and sale.

He was importunate to find out one who would write a Continuation to it: but I
knew well, that both my Abilities in writing and my Informations were too
defective to adventure on such a Work: therefore all that I could undertake was
only to give the Succession of the Bishops from the time where the former
History ends, with the Account of Religious Orders and Houses, the Foundations
of the Universities, and the Learned Men that flourished in them, together with
the true State of that Kingdom in its Government, Laws, and Supreme Courts.
Which I have endeavored to do as fully as seemed needful. I did not
adventure on so hardy a Work without communicating it to Learned and knowing
Persons, by whose directions I have now finished these Sheets.

I have long searched into those things, and have used all the endeavors that
were possible, to get any Mistakes that might have crept in with such a variety
of Informations rectified: so that I am very confident there are no
considerable Errors in matters of fact in the Account that follows.

If my Style or way of writing be not according to what the Reader expects; as
I need great Allowances for my Defects, so I know upon what disadvantages I
appear after such a grave and Masculine Writer. So that, as when one comes out
of a very lightsome place, where his Eyes were filled with Brightness, into a
darker Room, it appears quite dark unto him; I have no reason to wonder, if
after so clear a Light, all my Informations look like Night and Darkness.

THE CONTENTS.
A List of the KINGS NOBILITY ARCHBISHOPS and BISHOPS
of Scotland. The First CHAPTER Contains The Succession of the Archbishops
and Bishops, in their several Sees, from the Reformation of Religion, to the
year 1676. The Second CHAPTER Contains The several Orders of Monks and Friars
and other Religious persons that were in SCOTLAND, with a Catalogue of their
Convents and Founders. The Third CHAPTER Contains The Erection of
Universities, the Foundation of Colleges, with a Catalogue of the
Benefactours, Principals, Professors of Divinity, present Masters and
Professors therein, and Learned Writers. The Fourth CHAPTER Contains An
Account of the Government, Laws and Constitution of the Kingdom; with a
Catalogue of the Peers, Shires, Buroughs, Lords of His Majesty's Privy
Council, Senators of the College of Justice, Officers of State, etc.
Whereunto is added A Catalogue of the Lord Chancellours of the Kingdom, Writers
of the Scottish History, and High Commissioners. With A complete Catalogue of
all the Archbishops and Bishops.
AN APPENDIX TO THE HISTORY OF THE Church of Scotland.
CHAP. I. Containing the Succession of the BISHOPS, in their several SEES, from
the Reformation of Religion, to the year 1676.
Archbishops of SAINT ANDREWS.
AFTER that Cardinal David Beaton was murdered in his Castle of Saint Andrews
by Normand Leslie and his Accomplices, James Hamilton, An. Christi 1546.
Duke of Chattelrault, Governor of the Realm, did nominate his base Brother
John Hamilton, Abbot of Pasley, to the place; who thereupon was elected by the
Canons, and soon after confirmed by Pope Paul the Third: who, fearing that
Scotland would follow the example of England, in casting off the Yoke of the
Roman See, was glad to gratify the Governor in that particular.

About this time, the Estimation of the Clergy began to decrease, 1556.
because of their corrupt Lives and gross Ignorance; which induced diverse of
that number to relinquish their Order, and to make open profession of the
Truth: multitudes also of Monks and Friars, leaving their Cloisters, began to
exhort the people to renounce the Romish Fopperies and Superstitions, and to
submit to the Doctrine of Christ, everywhere crying out against the
Corruptions of the Church. The Prelates, in stead of composing matters calmly,
took the contrary course, exercising great Severity against them, and cruelly
burning such of the New Religion (as they termed it) as fell into their hands:
those who fled they prosecuted with the highest Censures of the Church, Burning
them in Effigy, and Cursing them by Book, Bell, and Candle. But all this
Cruelty served to no purpose; for the death of Walter Mill (who was the last
Martyr that suffered for Religion) was the very bane of Popery in Scotland;
men's minds being now wholly alienated from the Clergy, 1558.
and their Consciences convinced, that the Doctrine of Jesus Christ did neither
allow such cruel Principles, nor countenance such bloody Practices.

To return then to Archbishop John Hamilton, who was attainted of Treason under
the Government of the Earl of Murray: He lurked a while amongst his Friends in
the West of Scotland; but finding little security there, he betook himself to
the strong Castle of Dumbarton, whereof the Lord Fleming was then Governor.
But this Fort being negligently kept, was afterward surprised by three
Companies of Foot sent thither by the Earl of Lennox, then Regent, commanded by
three Captains, Ramsay, Crawford, and Hume; who seizing upon the Prisoners,
sent them to sundry places, and the Archbishop with a strong Guard to
Striveling, where he was publicly hanged on a Gibbet erected for that purpose,
1570. He was the only Bishop that suffered by form of Justice in this Kingdom.

1571.
At this time the Rents of this Bishopric were by the Regent conferred upon the
Earl of Morton for some years, as a recompense of his great charges in his
Embassy to England. That Earl, that he might enjoy them legally, made choice of
John Douglas, Provost of the New College of Saint Andrews, (before a Carmelite
Friar, and Chaplain to the Earl of Argile,) to be Titular Bishop; who was, with
much opposition of the Presbytery, (for at that time there was no Chapter,)
admitted and installed, 1572. This Bishop sat little above two years, and died
at Saint Andrews, 1575.

After his death, the Earl of Morton, then Regent, did prefer Patrick Adamson,
his Chaplain, to the Bishopric of Saint Andrews. This Bishop was sorely vexed
by those of the Kirk-party, who prosecuted him with the highest Censures of
their Church, and excommunicated him (very informally) for not submitting to
their Judicatory: but the business was afterward compounded, and the Bishop
relaxed. He was a man of great Learning, but an ill Administratour of the
Church's Patrimony. He sat fifteen years, and died at Saint Andrews, 1591.

Hereupon the Sea continued void, and the Profits thereof were by King James
the Sixth bestowed on the Duke of Lennox, till the Parliament 1606. wherein the
Temporalties of Bishoprics (in former times annexed to the Crown) were
restored; the want of which had rendered the Bishops of unserviceable both to
Church and State. About this time, George Gladstanes, Bishop of Cathnes, was
translated to Saint Andrews; a man of ready utterance, and of great invention,
but of an easy nature, as appears by his being induced so easily to lease out
his Benefice for so many Ages to come, to the great detriment of his
Successors. But in this he was not singular, for the rest of the Clergy, both
Papists and Protestants, did let Leases of their Benefices, to their Friends
and others, for Hundreds of years, and that for a pitiful pittance. Which
Extravagancy was afterward restrained by the wisdom of King James, when he
was of age: for he enacted, That Bishops should let Leases for nineteen years,
Rectours, etc. for their Lifetime and three years, and other Beneficed persons
for their Lifetime and three years, with consent of their Patrons. Bishop
Gladstanes governed the Sea ten years, and dying at Saint Andrews 1615. was
interred in the South-East Isle of the Parish Church.

Upon his death, John Spotiswood, Archbishop of Glasgow, was translated to
Saint Andrews; who procured to this See (whose Rents were almost wholly
alienated by his Predecessors) the Revenues of the Priory of Saint Andrews,
then in Lay-hands, as also the restoration of three hundred pounds of English
money per Annum, of a long time swallowed up in the Crown-rents. The Office of
the Chancellary in the State, conferred upon him by that Glorious Martyr King
CHARLES the First, he discharged to the satisfaction of his Royal Master, and
the Church's advantage. He was a person of rare Endowments, and in all things
completely qualified for his employment. Yet did he not escape the hard measure
which other Loyal Subjects afterward tasted of; for by the Covenanters he was
forced to retire into England, where he met with entertainment more suitable to
his worth. He ended his days in a good old age, and was honorably interred in
Westminster-Abby, Anno 1639. after he had governed the Sea twenty four years.

1637.
About this time our long Peace, and the Plenty which did accompany it, made us
wanton, our Prosperity puffed us up with Pride, we were Enemies to our own
welfare, weary of our present estate, too much desirous of Revolutions, and
greedy of Novelties. Our private Discontents begat Jealousies and Animosities,
which (since they could be no longer smothered) must needs burst out into a
flame. We were afraid of we knew not what; nothing but the Preservation of
Religion must be the Pretext, and the Cloak to cover the Knavery which was
afterward acted: and notwithstanding the Satisfaction given unto us by the
Best of Kings, in laying aside the Book of Common Prayer, Book of Canons, and
High Commission; yet still we continued dissatisfied. All the Favors conferred
upon us by the Best of Princes could not engage us to continue in our Duty and
Allegiance to Him. All the good fruit we brought forth was, our engaging in a
most desperate and horrible Rebellion, such as former Ages could hardly
parallel. Like Aesop's envious Dog, we would neither be at rest our selves, nor
suffer our Neighbors, and such who continued firm in their Allegiance to His
Majesty, to be at quiet, and live in Peace. Alas! we metamorphosed our
plough-shares into swords; the Son rose up against the Father, Brother against
Brother; Parishes were divided, Shires went into Factions; yea, the whole
Kingdom was divided against it self, sheathing the Sword in its own bowels.
Which way soever we looked, we saw nothing but that which might consume our
eyes, and grieve our hearts. If toward the Church, 'twas rent by Schism; the
Bishops, and many of the Reverend Clergy, were thrust out, imprisoned,
plundered, and banished; the House of Prayer made (in the most literal sense) a
Den of Thieves. If toward the State, we saw the Anointed of the Lord
imprisoned, arraigned, and, under color of Justice, most barbarously
murdered, by those who slew him, like the Heir in the Gospel, that they might
seize on his Inheritance. Alas! when Church and State were come to this pass,
the case of the poor Land must needs be deplorable. We saw the Loyal Subjects,
under the names of Malignants, Traitors, and Rebels, imprisoned, banished, and
miserably butchered; their Estates and Lands forfeited and sold; their Houses
garrisoned, plundered, and burnt; and their Posterity almost reduced to poverty
and misery. Alas! how quickly did our after-games of Loyalty vanish through our
own Divisions? Was there any possibility of prospering, so long as we continued
Traitors to our selves? When we had almost ruined our selves by our own
intestine Divisions, we became a Prey to a Tyrannical Crew of Usurpers: and to
complete our Miseries, our Estates, our Friends, yea our very Consciences
groaned under the grievous burden of that insupportable Yoke, which our own
Sins had prepared, and other men's Sins had put on. Nine years did we groan
under the Tyranny of these Usurpers; till it pleased Almighty God to remember
us in mercy, and to free us from the House of bondage, blessing us, after so
many Calamities and Miseries, with Peace, by the miraculous Restoration of our
most Sacred Sovereign to the Throne of His Ancestors; whom God long preserve,
for the Good of this Church and Kingdom.

Now the face of Affairs began to change, and His Majesty, 1660
that He might settle the Kingdom, summoned his First Parliament to meet at
Edinburgh, January the first 1661. giving a Commission under the Great Seal to
John Earl of Middleton, to represent His Person therein. In the First Session,
the Solemn League and Covenant was condemned, as an unlawful and wicked Oath,
imposed on the Subjects by a prevailing Faction, contrary to Authority; the
pretended Triennial Parliaments from 1640. to 1649. with the Assembly of
Glasgow 1638, etc. were annulled; the unjust Transactions at Newcastle 1646.
and 1647. condemned; Duke Hamilton's Engagement 1648. approved; the pretended
Forfeitures of the Marquesses of Huntly and Montross, the Earl of Forth, Barons
of Glengarey, Haddo, Dunerub, Delgaty, Harthill, and others, who had suffered
for their Loyalty, and all Acts made in prejudice of Lawful Authority, were
rescinded.

In the Second Session, the Hierarchy was restored, which had suffered an
Eclipse for twenty four years. Dr. James Sharp, Professor of Divinity at Saint
Andrews, 1662
(who had been Professor of Philosophy in Saint Leonard's College,) was
preferred Archbishop of Saint Andrews, Primate and Metropolitan of Scotland,
who now governs the Sea.

The present Chapter of Saint Andrews (the old one being dissolved with the
Priory in the time of the Reformation) had its beginning Anno 1606. by Act of
Parliament, and consists of the persons following: The Prior of Portmollock,
Dean; The Archdeacon of Saint Andrews; The Vicar of Saint Andrews; Couper;
Craill; Dysert; Kircaldy; Pittenweem; Lewchars; Kinkell; Dearsie; Fordun;
Kennoway; Merkinch; Abercromby; Forgund; Fowlis; Rossie; Balmerino; Longforgund;
The Vicar of Eglisgreig; and others, to the number of twenty four.


The Cathedral, which was an ancient and magnificent Fabric, was demolished
with the Priory; since which time the Parish Church serves for one.

The Diocese of Saint Andrews contains the whole Country of Fife, part of
Perthshire, and part of Angus and Mernis.

The Coat of Arms belonging to the Archiepiscopal See of Saint Andrews, is
Saphir, a Saltier (being the Cross of Saint Andrew the Apostle) Pearl.

Bishops of EDINBVRGH.
THE Bishopric of Edinburgh was founded by King CHARLES the First of glorious
Memory, about the year 1633. and by him amply endowed.

The first Bishop thereof was William Forbes, Doctor of Divinity, one of the
Preachers in Edinburgh, (before, Principal of the Marischal College of
Aberdene,) a very worthy Person. His Works show him to have been a man of vast
Learning and sound Judgment. He sat but a little while, and died at Edinburgh
about the year 1634.

Upon his death, David Lindsay, Bishop of Brichen, was translated to Edinburgh.
The Fury of the rude Multitude fell heavy upon this Bishop, even to the
manifest danger and hazard of his Life, upon the first reading of the Book of
Common Prayer in Edinburgh, July 1637. He was thrust out, with the rest of the
Bishops, by the Covenanters, 1638.

George Wishart, Doctor of Divinity, was, upon the Restitution of the
Hierarchy, Anno 1662. promoted to the Bishopric of Edinburgh. This worthy man
was 1638. Preacher at Leith, and for his Loyalty had very hard measure from the
Covenanters, being thrice plundered of all that he had, and thrice imprisoned
in a filthy stinking Gaol. But being delivered from thence, he went beyond Sea
with the Marquess of Montross 1646. He was a person of great integrity, and
well seen in History. Having in his time seen many Changes and Alterations,
from better to worse, and from worse to better, he had his Nunc dimittis in
peace, at Edinburgh, Anno 1670.

Upon his death, Alexander Young, Archdeacon of Saint Andrews, was preferred to
the Bishopric of Edinburgh, who now governs the Sea.

The Cathedral-Church is that of Saint Giles, (of old a Collegiate Church,) a
vast and magnificent Structure. It is at present divided into four Partitions,
three whereof are allotted to God's public Worship.

The Diocese of Edinburgh contains the Shires of Edinburgh, Linlithgow, and
Berwick, the Constabulary of Haddington, and Bailiary of Lawderdail.

Bishops of DVNKELD.
AFter the death of Bishop Robert Creighton, James Patton was preferred Bishop
of Dunkeld, Anno 1572. How long he sat I know not. After whose death, the
Bishopric had one or two Titulars, Laymen; but I cannot recover their Names.

About the year 1606. James Nicolson, Parson of Meigle, was preferred to the Sea.

To whom succeeded Alexander Lindsay, (Brother to the Baron of Evelick,)
Rectour of Saint Madoe. This Bishop being threatened with the Censures of the
Assembly of Glasgow, did abjure Episcopacy, and submitted to Presbyterian
Government, 1639, and betook himself to the charge of a particular Parish.

Anno 1662. George Halyburton, Preacher at Perth, was preferred to the Sea; a
very worthy person: he sat little above two years.

Upon his death, Henry Guthry, Rectour of -- was promoted to the Bishopric of
Dunkeld, who died in the year 1676.

The Chapter of Dunkeld consists of the persons following: The Rectour of
Kinelevin, Dean; Tibbermure, Cantor; Couper, Archdeacon; Lethindy, Chancellor;
Dunkeld, Thesaurer;
The Parson of Rattray, Subdean; The Rectour of Fungart; The Parson of Ruffill;
Kepit-mack in Athol;
The Rectour of Inch-mack-grannoch; Logy-Alachie;
The Parson of Moneidy; The Rectour of Blair in Athol; Eliot;
The Prebendary of Fearn; Menmure; Aberdaigy.



I can give no account of the Cathedral-Church, in what condition it stands at
present, seeing I never saw it, nor had any information concerning it.

The Diocese of Dunkeld contains the most part of Perthshire, part of Angus,
and part of West-Lothian.

Bishops of ABERDENE.
THE Bishopric of Aberdene suffered very much by Bishop William Gordon; for he
alienated the Profits thereof, and in a short time brought the Revenues of that
See almost to nothing. And indeed this Benefice was at his death scarce worth
the accepting. About the year 1579. David Cunninghame, Parson of Saint Nicolas,
was preferred to the Sea. This Bishop was a grave, learned, and wise man;
employed by King James the Sixth in an Embassy to the King of Denmark, and the
Princes of Germany, wherein the Bishop did faithfully discharge his trust, to
his great commendation. He died about the year 1603.

Unto him succeeded Peter Blackburn, Rectour of Saint Nicolas, who governed the Sea about twelve years, and dying Anno 1615. was buried in Saint Nicolas Church
in New Aberdene.

Upon whose death, Alexander Forbes, (of the House of Ardmurdo,) Bishop of
Cathnes, was translated to Aberdene. He sat little above three years, and
dying Anno 1618. was buried in the Cathedral-Church.

To him succeeded, upon King James's Nomination, and the Chapter's Election,
Patrick Forbes of Corse. This worthy man, at the earnest importunity of the
Bishops of Aberdene and Murray, did enter into Orders in the forty eighth year
of his age, An. 1612. and was preferred to the Benefice of Keath in Strath-Yla;
in which station he continued six years: and after the death of Bishop
Alexander Forbes, at the importunity both of the Clergy and Laiety, he did
accept of the Bishopric of Aberdene. He was in great esteem and favor with
King James and King Charles, being Privy Counselor to both Kings. In his old
age he was much troubled with the Palsy. Seventeen years did he faithfully and
wisely govern the Sea, and died in his house in Old Aberdene 1635. in the
seventy first year of his age, being interred in the South Isle of the
Cathedral-Church, near the Sepulcher of Bishop Gawan Dumbar. His Commentary
upon the Revelations, and a Discourse of the Ministerial Office, do show his
Learning and Judgment.

Upon his death, Adam Bannatyn, Bishop of Dumblane, was translated to Aberdene,
who being thrust out by the Covenanters, retired into England, where he died
shortly after. His house in Old Aberdene, for magnificence in all things like a
Palace, was plundered by a Regiment of the Covenanters, and afterward quite
demolished by the English Usurpers.

Several Learned and Worthy men, in the Diocese of Aberdene, were at this time
thrust out of their Livings. The most considerable were, John Forbes of Corse,
Doctor and Professor of Divinity in the King's College of Aberdene; Robert
Baron, Doctor and Professor of Divinity in the Marischal College of
Aberdene; William Leslie, Doctor of Divinity, Principal or Warden of the
King's College of Aberdene; Alexander Scroggie, Doctor of Divinity, Minister
in Old Aberdene; Patrick Dune, Doctor of Physic, Principal of the Marischal
College of Aberdene; Alexander Ross, Doctor of Divinity, Parson of Saint
Nicolas; James Sibbald, Doctor of Divinity, Minister in Aberdene; John Forbes,
Parson of Auchterless; Andrew Logie, Parson of Rain; John Ross, Parson of
Birse; John Gregory, Rectour of Drummaok; John Logie, Rectour of Raphan; Thomas
Thoires, Minister at Vdny.


After the Restoration of the Hierarchy, His most Sacred Majesty, King CHARLES
the Second, preferred David Mitchel (one of the Prebendaries of Westminster) to
the Bishopric of Aberdene. This worthy man was Anno 1638. one of the Preachers
of Edinburgh; and being thrust out by the Assembly of Glasgow, retired into
England. He lived not a whole year after his Consecration: he died in Old
Aberdene, and was interred in the South Isle of the Cathedral-Church, 1663.

To him succeeded Alexander Burnet, Rectour of -- in the County of Kent; who
sat little above a year, being translated to Glasgow, which was then void by
the death of Archbishop Fairfoul.

Upon this Translation, Anno 1664. the Reverend Patrick Scougal, Parson of
Salton, was promoted to the Bishopric of Aberdene; who is yet alive, and
governs the Sea wisely and piously.

The Chapter of Aberdene consists of the persons following:

Since the Rectory of Saint Machar was annexed to the King's College, the
Principal thereof is Dean; The Parson of Auchterless, Cantor; Rain,
Archdeacon; Birse, Chancellor; Daviot, Thesaurer;
The Rectour of Saint Peter's, Subcantor; The Parson of Kinkell, who is the
Patron of seven Churches, Kinkell, Drumblait, Monkeigie, Kintor, Kemnay,
Kinnellar, and Dyce; The Parson of Morthlick; The Rectour of Monimusk;
Kincairden of Neill;
The Rectour of Turreff; Belbelvies; Banchory-Devoneif; Logie-Buchan;
The Parson of Clatt; Methlick; Innernochty;
The Rectour of Coldstane; The Parson of Oyn; Crowdan; Tillinessill; Forbes;
Phillorth; Lonmay;
The Prebendary of Deir; Ellen.



The Cathedral of Aberdene, dedicated to Saint Macbar, was founded by Bishop
Kinninmouth, who died before the work was raised six cubits high, Anno 1370,
Bishop Leighton, 1430, built Saint John's Isle, laid the foundation of the
great Steeple, and of the two lesser Steeples, and advanced the Fabric
mightily. The Roof was laid on, and the Floor paved with freestone, by Bishop
Lindsay, Anno 1445. Bishop Spence adorned the Chancel with many brave Ornaments
1460. Bishop Elphingston did perfect the great Steeple, (which was a mark for
Sailours in those days,) and furnished it with costly and tunable Bells, 1489.
Bishop Dumbar did perfect the two lesser Steeples, cieled the Church, and built
the South-Isle, 1522. And his Successor, Bishop Stewart, built the
Consistory-house Anno 1539. This glorious Structure (being near ninescore years
in building) did not remain twenty years in its integrity, when it was almost
ruined by a Crew of sacrilegious Church-robbers: for Anno 1560. the Barons of
Mernis, accompanied with some of the Townsmen of Aberdene, having demolished
the Monasteries of the Black and Gray Friars, fell to rob the Cathedral, which
they spoiled of all its costly Ornaments and Jewels, and demolished the
Chancel. Having shipped the Lead, Bells, and other Utensils, intending to
expose them to sale in Holland, all this ill-gotten Wealth sunk (by the just
Judgment of God upon Sacrilege) not far from the Gridle-Ness. The body of the
Cathedral was preserved from utter ruin by the Earl of Huntly. Afterward, An.
1607. the Church was repaired, and covered with Slate, at the charge of the
Parish, and so continues yet in pretty good repair.

The Diocese of Aberdene contains the Shire of Aberdene, most part of
Bamff-shire, and part of Mernis.

Bishops of MVRRAY.
AFter the death of Bishop Patrick Hepburn, this Benefice was conferred upon
Alexander Lindsay, Lord Spinie, who possessed it many years; so that the Sea
continued vacant till about the year 1606, at which time Alexander Douglas,
Parson of Elgin, was promoted to the Bishopric. How long he sat, I cannot
learn.

His Successor was John Guthry, one of the Preachers in Edinburgh; in whose
time fell out our second Reformation. Most of the Bishops left their
Bishoprics, having wisely withdrawn themselves into England, to avoid the
Storm which threatened them; whereas this Bishop stayed at home till his
Bishopric left him. Being thrust from his Benefice by the Covenanters, he
retired to his ancient Inheritance of Guthry in Angus, where he lived very
contentedly and hospitably, exercising his Charity amongst the Poor. He died
much lamented, during our Civil Wars.

Anno 1662. Murdo Mackenzie, Rectour of Elgin, was preferred Bishop of Murray,
who now governs the Sea.

The Cathedral-Church of Elgin, founded by Andrew Bishop of Murray, 1230. was
one of the rarest Monuments that this Kingdom afforded, equal almost to Saint
Paul's in London (as I am informed) in length, but surpassing it in breadth. It
was demolished at the Reformation, yet some of the stately Ruins are still to
be seen and admired.

The Parish Church, dedicated to Saint Peter, was (as I am informed) founded by
George the second Earl of Huntly, about the year 1490.

The Diocese of Murray contains the Shires of Elgin, Nairn, and part of
Innernes and Bamff-Shires.

Bishops of BRICHEN.
BIshop Sinclair's Successor in the Sea of Brichen was one Campbell, Cousin to
the Earl of Argile, about the year 1567. How long he sat, I cannot learn.

Anno 16 -- Andrew Lamb, Rectour of Burnt-Island, was preferred to the Sea, and
afterward translated to Galloway, then void by the death of Bishop William
Cowper.

Upon this Translation, Anno 1619. David Lindsay, Parson of Dundee, was
promoted to the Bishopric of Brichen: he was translated to Edinburgh 1634.

Unto whom succeeded Walter Whitfurd, (of the House of Milnton,) Rectour of --
who was outed by the Covenanters 1639. and his house plundered.

Anno 1662. David Straughan, Parson of Fettercairn, was preferred Bishop of
Brichen, He sat nine years, and dying 1671. was buried in the Cathedral-Church.

His Successor was Robert Lowry, Dean of Edinburgh, who now governs the Sea.

The Cathedral-Church of Brichen is a pretty handsome Fabric: it has on the
Southside a small Steeple, not unlike the Monument on Fish-street-hill, London,
save that it is broader at the top then at the bottom; by whom built, I cannot
learn. The Chancel was demolished by our first Reformers.

The Diocese of Brichen contains part of Angus and Mernis.

Bishops of DVMBLANE.
ABout the year 1572. Andrew Grhame, Uncle to the Earl of Montross, was
preferred Bishop of Dumblane.

-- and translated to Orkney 1615.

To whom succeeded Adam Bannatyn of Kilconqhuar, Rectour of Fawkirk, who
governed the Sea till Anno 1635. at which time he was translated to Aberdene,
then void by the death of Bishop Patrick Forbes.

His Successor was James Wedderburn, Professor of Divinity in Saint Andrews,
who was thrust out by the Covenanters 1639.

Anno 1662. Robert Leighton, Principal of the College of Edinburgh, was
promoted to the Bishopric of Dumblane. He was a man of singular and wonderful
Piety, of great Learning; and in him most of the eminent Virtues we admire in
the Primitive Bishops seemed to be revived. His Life was most exemplary and
severe, he preached constantly, and seemed like one in heaven when he preached:
his Humility was astonishing; his Meekness and Charity were extraordinary; his
expense on himself very small, but all he had he laid out on the poor: he was
very tender of all the concerns of his Clergy, and by his excellent deportment,
and heavenly discourses, did much edify and instruct them all: and he studied
by the most gentle methods possible to overcome the peevishness of the
Schismatics; but all was in vain, for they became more insolent and stubborn.
He was translated to Glasgow 1670.

Upon which Translation, James Ramsay, Dean of Glasgow, was preferred to the Sea, now living 1676.

The Bishop of Dumblane is always Dean of the King's Chapel Royal.

The Diocese of Dumblane contains part of Perth and Striveling-shires.

Bishops of ROSS.
JOhn Leslie, Doctor of the Canon Law, and one of the Senators of the
College of Justice, (before Canonist in the King's College, and Official of
Aberdene,) was, upon the death of Bishop Sinclair, preferred to the Bishopric
of Ross 1564. He was a person of great Integrity, and a faithful servant to
Queen Mary in the time of her Troubles. He wrote the History of his Nation,
together with a Description of the Kingdom. He died at Bruxels in Flanders 1596.

To him succeeded Anno 1599. David Lindsay, (of the House of Edyell,) Preacher
at Leith, a worthy, pious, and learned Prelate. He sat -- years, and dying 161
-- was buried in the Parish Church of Leith.

After his death, Patrick Lindsay, Parson of Saint Vigens in Angus, was
preferred to the Sea, who being translated to Glasgow, Anno 1635. left for his
Successor

John Maxwell, one of the Preachers of Edinburgh, a very Learned man, a great
Preacher, and of excellent parts; but was generally censured for meddling too
much in Civil affairs, and for being too violent, which was thought a great
occasion of the Troubles that followed. He was thrust out by the Covenanters
Anno 1639. and afterward much prosecuted by them as an Incendiary.

Anno 1662. John Paterson, Preacher in Aberdene, was promoted to the Bishopric
of Ross, who now governs the Sea.

The Cathedral of Chanonry (where the Bishop of Ross his Seat is) was
demolished by our first Reformers; some part whereof (as I am informed) is
lately rebuilt.

The Diocese of Ross has under its Jurisdiction the Shires of Tayn, Cromarty,
and the greatest part of Innernes-shire.

Bishops of CATHNES.
AFter the death of Bishop Robert Stewart 1586. the Sea continued vacant till
the year 1599. at which time George Gladstanes, Preacher in Saint Andrews, was
preferred Bishop of Cathnes. He was translated to Saint Andrews about the year
1606.

Unto whom succeeded Alexander Forbes, Rectour of Fettercairn in Mernis, who
was translated to Aberdene, then void by the death of Bishop Peter Blackburn,
1615.

Upon this Translation, John Abernethy was promoted to the Sea, a Learned and
worthy Prelat, thrust out by the Covenanters 1639.

Upon the Restitution of Hierarchy, 1662. Patrick Forbes was preferred to the Sea, now living, 1676.

The Diocese of Cathnes (whereof Dornoch in Sutherland is the Bishop's Seat)
contains the Shires of Cathnes and Sutherland.

I can give no account of the Cathedral, having neither seen it, nor received
any information concerning it.

Bishops of ORKNEY.
ABout the year 1565. Adam Bothwell was preferred to the Bishopric of Orkney,
and deposed 1568. for marrying Queen Mary to the Earl of Bothwell, but was the
year after restored. He exchanged his Bishopric of Orkney (with Robert
Stewart, one of the base Sons of King James the Fifth,) for the Abbey of
Holy-rood-house; by which means he became a Senator of the College of
Justice, and a Temporal Lord, being the Ancestour of the Lord Holy-rood-house.

Upon this Exchange, Robert Stewart became Bishop of Orkney, and afterward
(upon the Forfeiture of James Hepburn Earl of Bothwell, and the obtaining of
these Isles for a Temporal Estate,) sole Lord of the Country, being created
Earl of Orkney 1581.

About the year 1606. James Law was Bishop of Orkney, and translated to Glasgow
1615.

To Bishop Law succeeded Andrew Grahame, Bishop of Dumblane. How long he sat,
I cannot learn.

George Grahame was after him preferred Bishop of Orkney. This Bishop being
terrified with the Censures of the Assembly of Glasgow, did abjure Episcopacy,
and submitted to Presbyterian Government, betaking himself to the charge of a
particular Parish, 1638.

Hereupon King Charles the First did promote Robert Baron, Doctor and
Professor of Divinity in the Marischal College of Aberdene, to the
Bishopric. This Learned and worthy man having incensed the Covenanters, by
expressing his Loyalty so publicly in the Disputes between the Doctors of
Aberdene, and Mr. Henderson, Mr. Dickson, and Mr. Cant, the three great
Champions for the Covenant, was forced to flee to Berwick, where he died
shortly after, before his Consecration.

Anno 1662. Thomas Sydserfe, Bishop of Galloway, the only Bishop then alive of
all those who had been outed by the Covenanters, was translated to Orkney. He
sat but a few years, and died Anno 1663.

Unto whom succeeded Andrew Honniman, a learned and pious man, and a good
Preacher. This Bishop accompanying the Archbishop of Saint Andrews at
Edinburgh, received a wound in the Arm by Pistol-shot, aimed at the Archbishop
by an obscure fellow, 1668. He died Anno 1676. and was buried at Kirkwall in
the Cathedral-Church.

The Diocese of Orkney has under its Jurisdiction all the Northern Isles of
Orkney and Schetland.

Archbishops of GLASGOW.
UPon the death of Archbishop Gawin Dumbar, Anno 1552. James Beaton, of the
House of Balfour in Fife, was preferred to the Sea. This Prelat, being
attainted of Treason, went into France, carrying with him all the Ornaments,
Plate and Writings of the Church of Glasgow, which he put into the hands of the
Carthusians in Paris, to be restored when Scotland became Popish again.

Anno 1572. James Boyd, of Trochrig, was promoted to the Bishopric; a wise,
worthy and Religious Prelat. He died 1578. and was interred in the sepulcher of
Bishop Dumbar.

Unto whom succeeded Robert Montgomery, Preacher at Striveling; who being much
vexed by the Kirk-men, was glad, for peace sake, to betake himself to the
Charge of a particular Parish in Kile, 1587. resigning his Bishopric in favor
of

William Erskine, Parson of Campsey, who enjoyed it but a short time: For

Archbishop Beaton was by King James the Sixth restored. He was a person
honorably disposed, faithful to Queen Mary, while she lived, and to King
James, whose Ambassador he was, a Lover of his Country, and liberal, according
to his means, to all his Countrymen. He died 1603. a full Jubilee of years
from his Consecration.

After his death, John Spotiswood, Parson of Calder, was preferred Archbishop
of Glasgow. He sat twelve years, and was translated to Saint Andrews, 1615.

Hereupon James Law, Bishop of Orkney, was translated to Glasgow, who dying
Anno 1635.

Patrick Lindsay, Bishop of Ross, was preferred to the Sea, and outed by the
Covenanters Anno 1638.

The first Archbishop after the Restitution of the Hierarchy was Andrew
Fairfoul, Preacher in Dunce, who sat little above a year.

Upon whose death, Anno 1664. Alexander Burnet, Bishop of Aberdene, was
translated to Glasgow, and outed 1669. and

Robert Leighton, Bishop of Dumblane, preferred to the Sea, who resigning Anno
1674.

Archbishop Burnet was restored, and now governs the Sea.

The Cathedral of Glasgow, a very magnificent Structure, was built by Bishop
John Achtian 1135. It owes thanks to the memory of King James the Sixth for
its preservation from utter ruin. For the Ministers of Glasgow persuaded the
Magistrates to pull it down, and to build two or three Churches with the
materials thereof: the Magistrates condescending, a day is appointed, and
workmen ready to demolish it. The Crafts or Tradesmen, having notice given them
of this design, convene in Arms, and oppose the Magistrates, threatening to bury
the workmen under the ruins of that ancient Building. Whereupon the matter is
referred to the King and Council, who decided the Controversy in the
Tradesmens favors, reproving the Magistrates very sharply.

The Diocese of Glasgow contains the Counties or Shires of Dumbarton, Ranfrew,
Air, Lanerick, part of the Shires of Roxburgh, Dumfreis, Peeblis and Selkirk.

Bishops of GALLOWAY.
ABout the year 1606. Gawin Hamilton was Bishop of Galloway, a very worthy
person. His Successor, Anno 1614. was William Cowper, Preacher at Perth, a
Learned and pious Prelat: he died 1619. of whom see the former History, page
540.

Upon whose death, Andrew Lamb, Bishop of Brichen, was translated to Galloway.
How long he sat, I cannot learn.

After him, Thomas Sydserfe was preferred to the Sea, a learned and worthy
Prelate: he was outed by the Covenanters 1638. and upon the Restitution of the
Episcopal Estate, Anno 1662. translated to Orkney.

About which time James Hamilton, Rectour of Cambusnethan, was promoted to the
Bishopric.

Unto whom succeeded Anno 1674. John Paterson, Dean of Edinburgh, who now
governs the Sea.

The Diocese of Galloway has under its Jurisdiction the Shire of Wigton,
Stewartry of Kirkubright, Regality of Glenluce, and part of Dumfreis-shire.

Bishops of ARGILE.
AFter George Lord of Balcomie, (who is the last Bishop of Argile mentioned by
our Reverend Author in his Second Book,) I meet with some who have been
Bishops before the Reformation.

The first was Robert Montgomery, one of the Sons of Hugh the first Earl of
Eglington.

Then, one Campbell, who spoiled the Benefice, about the time of the
Reformation.

After the Reformation, there was one Kerswell Bishop of Argile: how long he
governed the Sea, I cannot learn.

To him succeeded -- Boyd. [ See the Addenda.]

To whom succeeded James Fairley, who was thrust out by the Covenanters 1638.
and afterward renounced his Bishopric, and accepted a private Charge.

Anno 1662. -- Fletcher, Rectour of -- was preferred to the Sea; who dying Anno
1665.

William Scrowgie, Parson of Rapban in Aberdene-shire, was preferred to the
place. He governed the Sea nine years, and died at Dumbritton Anno 1675.

Unto him succeeded Arthur Ross, Parson of Glasgow, who now governs the Sea.

The Diocese of Argile contains the Countries of Argile, Lorn, Kintire, and
Lochabyr, with some of the West Isles, such as Lismore, etc.

Bishops of the ISLES.
ABout the year 1606, Andrew Knox, Rectour of Pasley, was preferred to the Sea.

How long he sat, I know not.

His Successor was John Knox, Rectour of -- How long he governed the Sea, I
cannot learn.

Anno 162 -- John Leslie was Bishop of the Isles, and after translated to the
Bishopric of Rapbo, in the Province of Armagh in Ireland.

To him succeeded Anno 162 -- Neil Campbell, Rectour of -- who was thrust out
by the Covenanters 1638.

Since the Restoration of Bishops, Robert Wallace, Rectour of Barnwell in the
Sheriffdom of Air, was made Bishop of this See. He governed it seven years, and
died An. 1669. and the Sea has been void ever since.

EVery Bishop has under him an Official or Commissary, who is Judge of the
Spiritual Court within his Diocese. Unto this Court are referred matters of
Testaments, Bastardy, Divorce, Tithes, Perjury, etc. and many Civil cases. It
sits in the Months of November, December, January, February, June, and July.

Commissaries of Scotland.
Sir David Falconer of Glenfarqbuar, Henry Fowlis, James Aikenbeid, John
Wishart,
Commissaries of Edinburgh. John Lindsay, Official of Saint Andrews. Sir
William Fleeming, Official of Glasgow. John Stewart, Commissary of Dunkeld.
John Scougall, Commissary of Aberdene. Alexander Mackenzie, Official of Murray.
George Paterson, Commissary of Ross. James Straughan, Commissary of Brichen.
James Innes, Official of Cathnes. -- Monro, Commissary of -- William Scrougie,
Commissary of Argile. The Officials of Dumblane. Galloway. Orkney. The Isles.

HAving given an account of the Succession of the Bishops in their several
Sees, let us take a short view of the several Courts, subordinate to them,
wherein is exercised Ecclesiastical Discipline.

The First and Lowest (which is in every Parish) is called the Session. It
consists of the chief and most grave men of the Parish, who are termed Elders
and Deacons. In this small Court (whereof the Minister is President) all
Fornicatours, Adulterers, Blasphemers, Swearers, Prophaners of the Lord's Day,
etc. are convented, and put to make public Confessions of their Sins, and
Professions of their Repentance, according to the degree or hainousness of
them. For Fornication, they make public Confession in the Church three several
Lord's-days; in the last of which they receive Absolution. For an Adultery,
they make their Profession of Repentance, for half a year, every Lord's Day;
and for six Lord's-days they stand in sackcloath at the Church-door half an
hour before Morning-prayers: and then in the end receive Absolution. And for
other Faults, they do penance according to their several degrees. The Deacon's
Office is, to collect the Money for the use of the Poor, to delate Delinquents,
etc. And that of the Elder is, to be careful of the Fabric of the Church, to
assist in the censuring scandalous persons, and to wait on the Minister at the
Celebration of the Lord's Supper, etc. This Court sits once a week.

The number of the Parishes in Scotland is uncertain: I conjecture them to be
about a Thousand.

The Next Court is called the Presbytery, consisting of twelve or twenty
Ministers, more or less. That sits once in two or three weeks. The Moderatour
or President thereof is chosen by the Bishop. In this Court are discussed
Appeals from Sessions, and other difficult cases. Here are convented all those
who refuse to submit to Church Discipline, and all such as apostatize to Popery
or Quakerism; who, if they remain obstinate, are prosecuted with the Censures
of the Church. Here also all such as enter into Holy Orders are examined, and
an account taken of their Learning, and other Qualifications, in a course of
many several Trialls; as making Homilies, Sermons, and Common-places; which
hold two or three months: and then they are returned to the Bishop well
qualified, who upon that proceeds to ordain them.

Presbyteries of SCOTLAND.
The Presbyteries of Dunce, Chirnside, Kelso, Ersilton, Jedburgh, Melross
Dumbar, Haddington, Dalkeith, Edinburgh, Peeblis, Linlithgow, Perth, Dunkeld,
Auchterardor, Striveling, Dumblane, Dumfreis, Penpont, Lochmabane, Middlebie,
Wigton, Kirkubright, Stranraver, Air, Irwing, Pasley Dumbarton, Glasgow,
Hamilton, Lanerick, Biggar, Dunnune, Kinloch, Inneraray, Kilmoir, Sky, Saint
Andrews, Kirkaldy, Cowper, Dumfermling, Meegle, Dundee, Arbroath, Forfair,
Brichen, Mernis, Aberdene, Kincairden, Alford, Gareoch, Deir, Turreff, Fordyce,
Ellon, Strathbogy, Abernethie, Elgin, Forress, Aberlower, Chanrie, Tayne,
Dingwell, Dornoch, Week, Thirso, Kirkwall, Scalloway, Colmkill.



A Third Court (whereof the Bishop is President) is the Provincial Assembly, or
Synod. In this Court are discussed all Appeals from Presbyteries, and all other
difficult cases. From hence are issued Warrants for visiting of Churches. Here
also the Lives of Scandalous Ministers are tried, who, if found guilty of
crimes laid to their charge, are either deposed, suspended, or excommunicated.

The Sentence of Excommunication cannot be pronounced against an obstinate
person but after a long Process of near a years continuance, and many
Citations, and much pains to bring the Scandalous person (against whom only it
is denounced) to a due sense of his Sins, and a willingness to submit to the
Censures of the Church: and then it must be ratified and approved by the
Bishop. The Provincial Synod meets twice in the year, in April, and October.

The Highest Ecclesiastical Court is the General Assembly; which, as its
Constitution and Authority was settled in King James's Minority, was made up of
two Ministers Commissioners from every Presbytery, and one Lay-Elder, a
Commissioner from every Royal Borough, one from every University, and one from
the King. These had the Supreme Authority about all Church Matters; and how
much trouble they bred King James, 3. Sess. 1. Par. Car. 2.
the former History has fully discovered. A shadow of this still remains: for
the Supreme Ecclesiastical Court is declared to be a National Synod made up of
Bishops and Deans, and two Members from every Presbytery, one of whom is of the
Bishops nomination, and a Commissioner from every University. But nothing is to
be proposed but by the King or His Commissioner: nor can any thing that they
do be of any force, till it be ratified by the King. But as the calling of
this Synod is wholly in the Crown, so there is little need of it, since the
King's Supremacy is so large, that He needs not their concurrence, to add
their Authority to any thing that He shall think fit to do about
Church Affairs.

The Bishops of Scotland take their places thus: Saint Andrews, Glasgow,
Edinburgh, Galloway; the rest according to the Seniority of their Consecrations.

CHAP. II. Containing a short account of the several ORDERS of RELIGIOUS
PERSONS in SCOTLAND, together with a Catalogue of their Convents, suppressed at
the Reformation.
IN the Infancy of Christianity, when Persecution was grown so hot, that most
Cities and populous Places were visited therewith, many Godly men fled into
Deserts, there to live with more safety, and serve God with less disturbance.
These were called MONKS. from (...), solus, because living alone by themselves.

Their Houses were either Caves, Grots, or little Cells; what would Hide and
Heat, Cover and Keep warm, served them for Clothes; Herbs and Roots were their
Diet, and Water their Drink. In these Solitary places they spent their lives
constantly in Prayer, Reading, Meditating, and such like pious employments.
They vowed no Poverty, Chastity, or Obedience. Thus continued they during the
heat of Persecution; and when Peace was restored, they returned to their former
Dwellings, resuming their Callings, which they had not left off, but for a time
laid aside.

Afterward there sprung up another sort of Monks leading a solitary life, when
no Persecution forced them thereunto. These considering the inconstancy of
humane affairs, that though they had Prosperity for the present, it might be
soon changed into a contrary condition, if either the restless endeavors of
Satan took effect, or sinful Christians were rewarded according to their
deserts, and prompted also thereunto by their own Melancholic dispositions,
chose a lone life, and lived in Deserts. Afterward they were gathered together
to live under one Roof, because their Company would be cheerful in Health, and
needful in Sickness one to another. They sustained themselves by their Labor,
(for every one had a Calling whereby to gain his Livelihood,) and relieved
others by their Charity; and very strict were they in their Lives and
Conversations. But afterward, Monks having sufficiency turned lazy, then
getting waxed wanton, and at last endowed with superfluity became notoriously
vicious; and so they continued till they were finally extirpated.

Thus much concerning their Original: proceed we next to their several Orders.

The first are the Benedictines or Black Monks, so called from Saint Benedict
or Bennet, an Italian, (who flourished about the year 500). first Father and
Founder of that Order. The Benedictines and Augustinians came into Scotland
about one time.

Their Convents.
1. The Abbey of Icolmkill, in the Isle Jona, founded by Saint Columba, about
the year 590. 2. The Abbey of Dumfermling, in Fife, founded by Saint David the
First, King of Scotland, about the year 1130. The Church whereof was built by
King Malcolm the Third, and was, for several hundreds of years, the Sepulcher
of the Scottish Kings. This Abbey was, at the Reformation, annexed to the Crown.
3. The Abbey of Saint Colme, in Inch-Colme in the River Forth, founded by King
Alexander the First, about the year 1120. 4. The Abbey of Aberbrothock or
Arbroath, in Angus, founded by King William, 1178. This was the richest of our
Scottish Abbeys. At the Reformation it was conferred upon James, Duke of
Chattelrault and Earl of Arran, who gave it to his second Son Lord John
Hamilton. At this day it is in the possession of the Earl of Panmure, and the
stately ruins thereof are yet to be seen. 5. The Priory of Vrqhuart, in
Murray, founded by King Alexander the Third, 126 -- A Cell belonging to
Dumfermling. 6. The Priory of Coldinghame, in the Mers, founded by Edgar King
of Scots, 1106. A Cell belonging to Durham in England. 7. The Monastery of
South-Berwick, founded by King David the First. 8. The Monastery of Three
wells, or Trefontana, in Lamermoor on the Borders of Lothian, founded by the
Countess of March. A Cell belonging to South-Berwick. 9. The Monastery of
Kilconqhuar, in Galloway, founded by Ethred (or rather Fergus) Lord of
Galloway.
The Cluniacks are Benedictines sifted through a finer fearce, with some
additionals invented and imposed upon them by Odo Abbot of Clugny or Cluni in
Burgundy, who flourished Anno 913.

Their Convents.
1. The Abbey of Pasley, in Ranfrew-shire, founded by Alexander the great
Steward of Scotland, 12 --. The Monks whereof wrote a History of the Nation. At
the Reformation it was bestowed upon Claud Hamilton, third Son to the Duke of
Chattelrault. 2. The Abbey of Rewls-Cross, or Corsraguel, in Carrict, founded
by Thomas Earl of Carrict, 126 --.
The Cistercians are so called from Robert Abbot of Cisteaux in Burgundy, who
Anno 1088. did the second time refine the drossie Benedictines.

Their Convents.
1. The Abbey of Sanudell, in Kintyre, founded by Saint Coule Milicora. What
this Founder was, I know not. 2. The Abbey of Souls-Seat, Seeds Animarum, in
Galloway, was founded by Fergus Lord of Galloway. 3. The Abbey of Dundrennan,
in Galloway, was founded by Fergus Lord of Galloway. 4. The Abbey of Melross,
in Teviotdail, founded by King David the First. 5. The Abbey of Newbottle, in
Lothian, founded by King David the First. 6. The Abbey of Culross, in
Clackmannan-shire, founded by Malcolm Mackduff, Earl of Fife. 7. The Abbey of
Glenluce, in Galloway, founded by Rolland Lord of Galloway. 8. The Abbey of
Sweetheart, Dulcis Cordis, or New Abbey, in Galloway, founded by Dornogilla,
Daughter of Alan Lord of Galloway, and Wife to John Balliol. 9. The Abbey of
Balmerino, in Fife, founded by Emergards, Wife to King William. 10. The Abbey
of Deir, in Buchan, founded by William Cummin Earl of Buchan, 1218. 11. The
Abbey of Cowper, in Angus, founded by King David the First. 12. The Abbey of
Kelso, in Teviotdail, founded by King David the First. 13. The Priory of
Machlein, in Kile. A Cell belonging to the Abbey of Melross. 14. The Monastery
of Elcho, in Strath-Jern, founded by David Lindsay, Ancestour to the Earls of
Crawfurd.
The Monks of the Order of the Valley of Reeds, Vallis Caulium, are a Branch of
the Reformed Cistercians, whose Institutions, both in Habit, Diet, Divine
Offices, etc. they punctually observe; but with greater strictness, confining
themselves to much narrower Bills. They possess very mean Revenues, being
wholly intent upon their Devotions; and may not go without the bounds of the
Monastery, it being only lawful for the Prior and one of the Order to go
abroad upon necessary occasions, and to visit the Monasteries under their
charge. They are daily employed in dressing the Gardens of Fruits and Herbs,
which are within the bounds of the Monastery, and improved for the use of it.

This Order had four Convents in Scotland.
1. The Priory of Ardehattan, in Lorn, founded by Duncan Mackowle of Lorn. 2.
The Priory of Lismehago, in Clidisdail, founded by Fergus Lord of Galloway. 3.
The Priory of Bewley, in Ross, founded by John Lord Bisset. 4. The Priory of
Pluscardy, in Murray, founded by King Alexander the Second: the Monks whereof
did write a Scottish Chronicle. It was afterward turned into a Convent of Black
Monks.
The Augustinians are older in Europe then the Benedictines. These do observe
the Institutions of Saint Augustine Bishop of Hippo, who was Saint Bennet's
Senior by sixty years. The Augustinians are also called Regular Canons.

Their Convents in Scotland were,
1. The Abbey of Jedburgh, in Teviotdail, founded by King David the First. 2.
The Abbey of Holy-rood-house, in Lothian, adjoining to the Canon-gate in
Edinburgh, founded by King David the First. This Abbey is now one of the King's
Palaces. 3. The Abbey of Cambuskeneth, in Striveling-shire, founded by King
David the First. 4. The Abbey of Inchassray, in Strath-Jern, founded by Gilbert
Earl of Strath-Jern. 5. The Abbey of Scoon, in Gowry, founded by Alexander the
First, King of Scotland. 6. The Priory of Crusa, in the West Isles, founded by
Saint Columba. 7. The Priory of Omistai, in the West Isles, founded by Saint
Columba. 8. The Priory of Holy-Cross, at Peeblis in Tweedail, founded by Fergus
Lord of Galloway. 9. The Priory of Saint Mary Isle, in Galloway. A Cell
pertaining to the Abbey of Holy-rood-house. 10. The Priory of Saint Colonor's
Isle, in Menteith, founded by Edgar King of Scotland. 11. The Priory of Saint
Andrews, in Fife, founded by King Alexander the First, 1122. It is annexed to
the Archbishopric of Saint Andrews. 12. The Priory of May, in the Mouth of
Forth. A Cell belonging to Saint Andrews. 13. The Priory of Pittenweem, in
Fife. A Cell belonging to Saint Andrews. 14. The Priory of Monimusk, in Mar. A
Cell belonging to the Priory of Saint Andrews. 15. The Priory of Restennot, in
Angus. A Cell belonging to the Abbey of Jedburgh. 16. The Priory of
Straphillan, in Athol, founded by King Robert the First, 132 --. 17. The Priory
of Blantyre, in Clidisdail. A Cell belonging to the Abbey of Jedburgh. 18. The
Priory of Port-Mollock, in Loch-Leiven in Fife. A Cell belonging to the Priory
of Saint Andrews. It is annexed to Saint Leonard's College. 19. The Priory of
Loch-Tay, in Broad Albain.
The Order of the Praemonstratenses was founded by Norbert, born at Colein, and
afterward, as is said, Archbishop of Memberg. He is said to have done it at
the Command of the Blessed Virgin, who appeared to him; whereupon with some
Companions he retired into a desolate place called Praemonstratum, (thence
comes the Title of the Order;) where they settled their Society, Anno 1120.
They are under the Rule of Saint Augustine, which they tell us Norbert in a
Vision immediately received at the hand of Saint Augustine himself.

The Habit of their Order is a White Garment, and over that a White Cloak or
Mantle, with a Cowl upon their head of the same Color.

The Monks of this Order had five Convents in Scotland.
1. The Abbey of Tungland, in Galloway, founded by Alan Lord of Galloway. 2.
The Abbey of Holy-wood, in Nithisdail. 3. The Abbey of Dryburgh, in Teviotdail,
founded by Hugh Morvil, High Constable of Scotland. 4. The Abbey of Fern, in
Ross, founded by Ferqbuard Earl of Ross. This Abbey is annexed to the
Bishopric of Ross. 5. The Priory of Whiteborn, in Galloway, founded by Fergus
Lord of Galloway.
The Tironenses (as I conceive) are not a distinct Order of Monks, but rather
young Novices, or fresh water Monks. In a Catalogue of the Religious Houses in
Scotland, which I have by me, I find some styled or termed Ordinis Tironensis;
which if it were written Turonensis, it would relate to Tours in France; and
the rather, because there is in France a Conventus Turonensis of Augustinian
Monks: but wherein, or whether they differed from others, I know not. But
leaving that to the Reader's farther inquiry, let us take a view of

Their Convents.
1. The Abbey of Kilwining, in Cunninghame, founded by Hugh Morvil, Constable
of Scotland. 2. The Abbey of Lindoris, in Fife, founded by David Earl of
Huntington, Brother to King William. 3. The Priory of Fyvie, in Forumarten. A
Seminary belonging to the Abbey of Arbroath.
We proceed next to the Monks of the Order of Saint Antony, whose Original was
from Saint Antony an Egyptian, who about the time of the later Persecutions,
not long after Decius, retired into the Deserts, where he lived the best part
of an hundred years, and became the Father of an Eremitick life, wherein he
educated all those Disciples that resorted to him. After whose Example other
Orders were set up. About the time of the Wars in Palestine, his Body was
translated from Constantinople to Mota, (now called Saint Antony) a Town in the
Province of Viennoys in France, where it was honorably laid up in a Church
built to his memory, and became famous for miraculous Cures. Among which,
Gasto, a Nobleman of that Province, and his Son Girond, being healed of a
mortal Plague, dedicated themselves and all that they had to Saint Antony,
wholly devoting themselves to the curing and attending of the Sick that came
thither. To whom shortly after eight more joined themselves, who combined into
a Society. This was about the year 1121. Their Order was confirmed by several
Popes, especially* Boniface the Eighth, Anno 1297. who prescribed unto them
Rules, and conferred upon them their Privileges. They observe the Rule of Saint
Augustine's Order, and as the peculiar and distinguishing Badge of their Order,
wear about their Necks the letter T in Gold or Silver hanging upon their
Breasts, and carry a little Bell about with them.

The Monks of this Order had only one Convent in Scotland, at Leith, but who
was the Founder thereof, I cannot learn.

The Carthusians were instituted by Saint Bruno, a Native of Colein, who being
a Parisian Doctor of Divinity, and a Canon of Rheims, abandoned the World, and
with six Associats began his austere Eremitical course of life on the
Carthusian Mountains, in the Diocese of Gratianopolis, with the License of Hugh
then Bishop thereof. This Bruno flourished under Pope Urban the Second, and
died Anno Christi 1101. King James the First did bring the Carthusians into
Scotland, and built them a Convent in Perth, (known afterward by the name of
Charter House,) about the year 1430.

FRom Monks we proceed to FRIARS. These were differenced from Monks, in that
Monks were confined to their Cloisters; whilst more liberty was allowed to
Friars to go about, and preach in neighboring Parishes: as also Monks had
nothing in propriety, but all in common; Friars had nothing in propriety nor in
common but being Mendicants, begged all their subsistence from the Charity of
others. But they met with very bountiful Benefactours; and in Scotland, when
their Nests were pulled down, were too rich to profess Poverty.

The Dominicans, or Black Friars, called also Praedicatores, Preaching Friars,
were instituted by Saint Dominick, a Spaniard, Anno 1206. and confirmed by Pope
Honorius the Third, Anno Christi 1216.

The Dominicans had their Convents At
1. Wigton, 2. Air, 3. Glasgow, 4. Edinburgh, 5. Perth, 6. Dundee, 7.
Striveling, 8. Monross, 9. Cowper of Fife, 10. Aberdene, 11. Elgin, 12.
Innerness, 13. Saint Andrews, 14. Haddington, 15. Jedburgh, 16. Dumfreis, 17.
Cowper of Angus, 18. Innerkeithing, 19. Dysert, 20. Linlithgow, 21. Kinghorn,
22. Forres, 23. Selkirk.


The Franciscans, or Gray Friars, called also Minorits, were instituted by
Saint Francis, an Italian, about the year of our Lord 1198. and confirmed by
Pope Innocent the Third. His Rule prescribed Chastity, Obedience, Poverty, much
Fasting, and other Austerities, to all that should be admitted of that Order.
The Franciscans are, Minores tam Observantes, quam Conventuales.

The Conventuals had their Houses At
1. Ronburgh, 2. Dumfreis, 3. Haddington, 4. Innerkeithing, 5. Lanerick, 6.
Dundee.


The Friars Observant had their Monasteries At
1. Edinburgh, 2. Striveling, 3. Air, 4. Glasgow, 5. Saint Andrews, 6. Perth,
7. Aberdene, 8. Elgin,


The Carmelite Friars had their beginning at, and name from, Mount Carmel in
Syria, being instituted by Almerieus Patriarch of Antioch, Anno 1122. They are
also called White Friars, and had their Convents At 1. Dumbar, 2. Linlithgow,
3. Tillilume, 4. Queens-ferry, 5. Aberdene, 6. Irwing, 7. Bamff.


The Trinity Friars, or Mathurins, follow. These were also called Robertines,
and De Redemptione Captivorum, whose work was to beg money of well-disposed
people for Ransoming of Christian Captives from the Slavery of the Turks.

These Friars had their Houses At
1. Fall, 2. Houstoun, 3. Dornoch, 4. Cromarty, 5. Scotland-well, 6. Aberdene,
7. Peeblis.


I can give no account concerning the several Orders of NVNS in Scotland.

Their Convents were,
1. The Priory of North-Berwick, in Lothian, founded by Duncan Earl of Fife. 2.
The Priory of Haddington, in Lothian, founded by Ada Countess of
Northumberland, Wife to Prince Henry, only Son of King David the First. 3. The
Priory of Saint Bothans, in Lammer-moor, founded by Christiana Countess of
March. 4. The Priory of Manuel, in Lothian, founded by King Malcolme the
Fourth. 5. The Priory of Coldstream, in Mers, founded by the Countess of March.
6. The Priory of Ecclis, in Mers, founded by King David the First.
The Gray Sisters had their Houses At 1. Dundee, 2. Aberdene, 3. Sheens near
Edinburgh.


What kind of Monks were in the following Monasteries, I have not as yet
learned.

1. The Monastery of Abernethy, in Strath-Jerne, founded by Caranachus, the --
King of the Picts.

2. The Monastery of Saint Andrew de beugh, founded by King Constantine the
Second.

3. The Abbey of Soutre, in Lothian, founded by King Malcolm the Fourth.

4. The Priory of Cannabie, in Eskdail.

5. The Priory of Star-inch, in Lewis, founded by Maclewid Baron of Lewis.

6. The Priory of Rowadill in Harrigh, founded by Maclewid Baron of Harrigh.

7. The Priory of Inchmahomo, in Perth-shire.

8. The Monastery of Elbottle, a Cell belonging to South Berwick.

9. The Priory of Gulane, in Lothian, a Cell belonging to South Berwick,
founded by King David the First.

10. The Priory of Aberdowr, in Fife.

Thus much concerning Monks and Friars.

BEsides the Convents of Regulars, there were Colleges erected for SECVLAR
PRIESTS, and amply endowed with Revenues. The chief person of the College of
Secular Canons was called the Provost, and the College it self the Provostry.
Let us take a view of them.

1. The College of Bothwell, in Clidisdail, founded by Archbald the First,
Earl of Douglas. It was before a Cloister of Nuns.

2. The College of Linclowden, in Nithisdail, founded by the same Archbald.

3. The College of Bothans, in Lothian, founded by William Hay Baron of Yester.

4. The Provostry of Minniboll, in Carrict, founded by Sir Gilbert Kennedy
Knight.

5. The College of Dumbar, in Lothian, founded by George, Earl of March.

6. The College of Carnwath, in Clidisdail, founded by Thomas Lord Summervile.

7. The College of Methuen, in Strath-Jerne, founded by Walter Stewart Earl of
Athol.

8. The Provostry of Dalkeith, in Lothian, founded by James Douglas, the second
Earl of Morton.

9. The Provostry of Fowlis, in Angus, founded by Andrew Gray of Fowlis.

10. The College of Kilmund, in Cowal, founded by Sir Duncan Campbell Knight.

11. The Provostry of Dirlton, in Lothian, founded by Sir Walter Haliburton of
Dirlton.

12. The College of Rosseline, in Lothian, founded by William Sinclair Earl of
Orkney.

13. The Provostry of Dunglas, in Mers, founded by Alexander Hume Lord Hume.

14. The King's College of Striveling, founded by King James the Third.

15. Trinity College in Edinburgh, founded by Mary, Widow of King James the
Second.

16. The Provostry of Restalrig, in Lothian, founded by King James the Fourth.

17. The Provostry of Seaton, in Lothian, founded by the Lord Seaton.

18. The Provostry of Costorphine, in Lothian founded by the Baron of
Costorphine Forrester.

19. The College of Creighton, in Lothian, founded by the Earl of Bothwell
Hepburn,

20. The Provostry of Sempill, in Ranfrew-shire, founded by the Lord Sempill.

21. The College of Kilmawers, in Cunninghame, founded by the Earl of Glencarn.

22. The College of Hamilton, in Clidisdail, founded by the Lord Hamilton.

23. The College of Dumbarton, in Lennox, founded by one of the Countesses of
Lennox.

24. The Provostry of Tillibarden, in Strath-Jerne, founded by the Baron of
Tillibarden Murray.

25. The Provostry of Tayne, in Ross, founded by King James the Fourth.

26. The Provostry of Abernethie, in Strath-Jerne, founded by one of the Earls
of Douglas.

The chief Church in great Towns was a Collegiate-Church; as Saint Giles in
Edinburgh, etc.

LAST of all follow the KNIGHTS TEMPLARS.

This Order was instituted by Pope Gelasius, about the year of our Lord 1120.
Their Office and Vow was, to defend the Temple and the Holy Sepulcher at
Jerusalem, to entertain Christian Strangers that came thither for Devotion, and
to guard them in safety when they went to visit the places of the Holy Land.
Their Habit was a White Cloak, with a Red Cross, and a Sword girt about them.
They were suppressed by Pope Clemens the Fifth, about the year 1310. and their
Lands were (by a General Council held at Vienna) conferred on the Knights of
the Order of Saint John of Jerusalem, called also Joannites, and after Knights
of the Rhodes, and lastly of Malta, where they live at this day.

The Templars and their Successors (spoken of before) had only one House in
Scotland, which was the Hospital of Saint Germans in Lothian. This House was
dissolved Anno 1494. and the greatest part of its Revenues by King James the
Fourth conferred upon the King's College of Aberdene, then newly founded by
Bishop William Elphingston.

Though I cannot give an account in what year every particular Monastery in
Scotland was founded, yet their general Dissolution was about the year 1560.

There was also a Convent of Red Friars at the mouth of Teviot near Kelso; but
by whom built, I cannot learn.

CHAP. III. The UNIVERSITIES of SCOTLAND.
THere are four Universities in Scotland, SAINT ANDREWS, GLASGOW, ABERDENE,
EDINBVRGH.


The University of SAINT ANDREWS
WAS founded by Bishop Henry Wardlaw, Anno Christi 1412. It is endowed with
very ample Privileges.

The Archbishops of Saint Andrews are perpetual Chancellours thereof.

The Rectour is chosen yearly, and by the Statutes of the Universitie he ought
to be one of the three Principals. His Power is the same with that of the
Vice Chancellor of Oxford or Cambridge.

There are in this Universitie three Colleges; viz. SAINT SALVATOR'S, SAINT
LEONARD'S, NEW COLLEGE.

SAINT SALVATOR'S College.
James Kennedy, Bishop of Saint Andrews, founded this College, built the
Edifice, furnished it with costly Ornaments, and provided sufficient Revenues
for the maintenance of the Masters and Professors.

Persons endowed at the Foundation were, A Doctor A Bachelour A Licenciate
of Divinity; Four Professors of Philosophy, who are called Regents; Eight
poor Scholars, called Bursars.


Benefactours.
I can give little or no account of the Benefactours.

The Earl of Cassils has founded a Professor of Humanity to teach the Latin
tongue.

George Martyn cieled the great Hall.

Present Professors.
George Weemis, Doctor of Divinity, Provost. James Rymer, Professors of
Philosophy. George Thomson, Professors of Philosophy. Edward Thomson,
Professors of Philosophy. James Strachan, Professors of Philosophy.
The Arms of Saint Salvator's College are the Globe and Saint Salvator's Cross.

SAINT LEONARD'S College
Was founded by John Hepburn, Prior of Saint Andrews, Anno 152 --.

Persons endowed are,
A Principal or Warden, Four Professors of Philosophy, Eight poor Scholars.
Benefactours.
Of these I can give no account.

The Priory of Portmuck is annexed to this College.

And lately, the Parsonage of Kinkell in Aberdeneshire.

Present Professors.
James Weemis, Doctor of Divinity, and Dean of Saint Andrews, Principal.
William Sanders, Professors of Philosophy. Alexander Skene, Professors of
Philosophy. Alexander Grant, Professors of Philosophy.
NEW COLLEGE
Was founded by James Beaton, Archbishop, Anno 153 --.

The Professors and Scholars endowed are of Divinity; for no Philosophy is
taught in this College.

Present Professors.
Walter Comrie, Doctor and Professor of Divinity, Principal. David Faulconar,
Professor of Divinity.
There was lately founded in the Universitie of Saint Andrews a Professor of
Mathematics.

The present Rectour of the Universitie is Andrew Bruce, Doctor of Divinity,
Archdeacon of Saint Andrews.

The short and bad Account which I have given of this Universitie proceeds
merely from want of Information.

Learned men and Writers.
John Mayor, Provost of Saint Salvator's, a person, according to the Learning
of those Times, very famous. His History of the Scottish Nation is not so much
esteemed, being very short, and in the style and way of writing Scholastical
and Quodlibetical. He wrote also on the Master of the Sentences: but see his
Character page 68. He flourished about the year 1520. Andrew Melvill,
Professor of Divinity in the New College, a man well seen in the Hebrew
Language and the Rabbinical writings. He was the first who kindled the great
Combustions in this Church, by introducing the Discipline of Geneva amongst us,
as may be more fully seen in the foregoing History. John Baron, Doctor and
Professor of Divinity in the New College, was a person of great Worth and
Learning, and of great Candor. He died in the time of our late Combustions.
Sir John Wedderburn was a Professor of Philosophy in this Universitie; but
that was too narrow a place for so great a Person, who became since so
celebrated for his great Learning and skill in Physic: and though his
infirmities and great age forced him to retire from public practice and
business, yet his fame attracts all the Nation to him, and his noble
Hospitality and kindness to all men that are learned and virtuous makes his
Conversation no less loved then his Advice is desired. Samuel Rutherfurd,
Professor of Divinity in the New College, was very famous in those Times,
for quickness and subtilty in disputing and writing. He was judged to be very
devout: he wrote Exercitationes de Gratia, and Disputationes de Providentia: he
was a wonderful Assertour of the Supralapsarian Hypothesis: he wrote also many
Books in English; some Controversial, as the Divine right of Presbytery, others
pieces of Devotion and Sermons: he wrote also a Seditious Book, condemned by
Law, about the Power of the King, and the Privileges of the People, called Lex
Rex. He died 1661. Alexander Colvill, Doctor and Professor of Divinity in
the New College: he was before Professor at Sedan. He was learned in the
Hebrew, and was a great Textuary, and well seen in Divinity. He died about the
year 1664. James Wood, Professor of Divinity, and Provost of Saint
Salvator's, was a person both judicious and wise, as also of considerable
Learning: he wrote a Book against Independency: he died about the year 1664.
John Johnston, Professor of Divinity in the New College, wrote a Paraphrase
of the Psalms, and other most excellent Poems, and for his skill in the Latin
tongue and Poesy was second to none in his time: he flourished about the year
1610. David Calderwood, a man of great reading and study, but very unhappy in
his way of expressing himself, both which appeared in his Altar Damascenum. He
was at first very factious, and banished the Kingdom by King James; yet was
afterward much neglected by that violent Party, who judged him too moderate,
though from his Book none would imagine him guilty of it. James Durham, a
Gentleman of a good Family and learned, was bred in this famous University: he
wrote a judicious Book of Scandal, with good Learning in it: there are also
Expositions of his upon the Revelation, and on the Song of Solomon, and the Ten
Commandments, all published since his death. George Gillespie was also bred
here, who was a very pregnant young man, had great freedom of expression and
much boldness, which raised him to make a very considerable figure among the
Covenanters. He had some good Learning, but was very factious: he wrote against
the Ceremonies, and many pieces against the Erastians. He died An. 1649. James
Gregory, Professor of the Mathematics in this University, was a person of
most extraordinary Learning in those Sciences. He had a strange faculty of
resolving the hardest Problems, and seems to have found a Non plus ultra in
Geometry. He was Fellow of the Royal Society, and much admired both in England,
France and Italy, where he traveled; but lost both his eyes, and soon after
died, 1674.
In this Universitie many of the chief Nobility are bred, among whom none has
done greater honor to Saint Leonard's College, where he was bred, then his
Grace the Duke of Lauderdail: to whom as Learning seemed entailed, (his Family
for four Descents having been most famed for Learning of any of their Quality;)
so he received those impressions in this Universitie, that, being since much
improved, have rendered him so eminent for Learning; of which only my Subject
leading me to speak, I shall say nothing of his other extraordinary Qualities.

Archbald Lord Napier of Merchiston was a profound Scholar, and of great worth.
His Logarithms have rendered him famous throughout the whole world: he wrote
also an Exposition on the Revelation. He died 162 --.

Sir Robert Murray, a great Promoter and Fellow of the Royal Society, was a
person of wonderful abilities, vast apprehensions, great depth of Judgment,
and universally knowing in every thing, but more particularly in the
Mathematics. He was a great Ornament to the Age he lived in, and an honor to
his Country. He died Anno 1674.

The University of GLASGOW
WAS founded Auspiciis, Pietate and Benignitate Eximii Principis, Jacobi
Secundi, Scotorum Regis Serenissimi; indulgentiam faciente, and jus ac
facultatem Studii Generalis sanciente, Nicolao Quinto, Pontifice Romano; ejus
Erectionem and Constitutionem magno labor and sumptibus procurante Reverendo
Antistite Gulielmo Turnbullo, Episcopo Glasguensi.

The words of the Bull are, Vt Studium Generale vigeat tam in Theologia ac Jure
Canonico and Civili, quam Artibus and qualibet alia Facultate; quodque Doctores
and Magistri ibidem omnibus and singulis Privilegiis, Libertatibus, Honoribus,
Immunitatibus, Exemptionibus, per Sedem Apostolicam vel alios quomodolibet
Magistris, Doctoribus and Studentibus, in Studio nostrae Civitatis Cononiensis
concessis, gaudeant and utantur.

The Persons founded were, a Rectour, a Dean of Faculty, a Principal or
Warden, who was to teach Theology, three Professors to teach Philosophy.
Afterward some Clergymen professed the Laws here, being invited to that
Profession rather by the commodity of a Collegiate life, and the Immunities of
the Universitie, then by any considerable Salary. King James the Sixth, Anno
1577. did establish Twelve persons in the College* viz. a Principal, three
Professors of Philosophy called Regents, four Scholars called Bursars, an
OEconomus or Provisor, who furnishes the Table with provisions, the
Principal's servant, a Janitor, and a Cook.

Benefactours.
The Kings of Scotland have been great Benefactours to this Universitie. King
James the Second, the Founder of it, did bestow considerable Revenues, and
endue it with many Privileges and Immunities. The words of the Letter under the
Great Seal 12. Kal. Maii 1453. are, Omnes and singulos Rectores qui pro tempore
fuerint, Facultatum Decanos, Procuratores Nationum, Regentes, Magistros and
Scholares in hac Vniversitate students, sub nostra firma pace and custodia,
defensione and manutenentia suscipimus; eosdemque Rectores, etc. ab omnibus
tributis, exactionibus, taxationibus, collectis, vigiliis, custodiis, eximimus,
and postea eximendos statuimus. The same Privileges were confirmed by King
James the Third, Anno 1472. by King James the Fourth, 1509. by King James the
Fifth, 1522. and by Queen Mary, 1547. About the time of the Reformation, the
Universitie was almost brought to desolation, and had been ruined, had not King
James the Sixth, in his Minority, restored it by his Royal Bounty and
munificence. He confirmed all its Privileges, and bestowed upon it the Tithes
of the Church of Govan, Anno 1577. Afterward he ratified all the former Acts
made in favor of the Universitie, and made some new Donations, Anno 1617. King
Charles the First did ratify all the old Privileges, and bestowed money for
repairing the Fabric. King Charles the Second, by the advice of the Estates of
Parliament, gave also money for the same purpose. Bishop William Turnbull, by
whose procurement the Pope's Bull was obtained, was very liberal to the
College, bestowing upon it both Lands and Revenues; and so were several of the
Bishops and Archbishops who succeeded him. The City of Glasgow were also
Benefactours to the College. The Ground on which the College stands, with a
Field adjacent thereunto, was the donation of James Lord Hamilton. Since the
Reformation, sundry private men have given considerable sums of money toward
the maintenance of poor Scholars or Bursars; as William Struthers, Zachary
Boyd, Thomas Crawford, Ministers. Others have bestowed money for repairing the
Fabric, as Alexander Boyd, Matthew Wilson, Ministers. James Law, Archbishop of
Glasgow, was very bountiful to the College; for he much augmented the
Revenues thereof, and bestowed many choice Books, which are in the Library.
William Earl of Dundonald, Anno 1672. gave about 1000 pounds sterling toward
the maintenance of Bursars. John Snell has of late bestowed 6000 Marks Scottish
for enriching the Library, and adorning the Fabric.
The Archbishops of Glasgow are perpetual Chancellours of the Universitie. The
Rectour is chosen once every year. David Cadyow, Canon of Glasgow, was the
first Rectour; and William Elphingston, Official of Glasgow, afterward Bishop
of Aberdene, was the first Dean of Faculty.

Principals.
1454. David Bineb first Principal.
His Successors are not known, because the old Records and Registers of the
College were either destroyed or taken away at the Reformation.

1577. Andrew Melvin. 1580. Thomas Smeton. 1600. Patrick Sharp. 1615. Robert
Boyd of Trochrig. 1622. John Cameron. 1626. John Strange, Doctor of Divinity.
1650. Robert Ramsay: he lived but a month after his Instalment. 1653. Patrick
Gillespie. 1660. Robert Bailie. 1662. Edward Wright, present Principal.
Professors of Divinity.
The Principals taught Theology till Anno 1640. at which time there was a
Salarie settled for maintenance of a Professor of Divinity.

1640. David Dickson. 1649. Robert Bailie. 1660. John Young. 1668. Gilbert
Burnet. 1674. David Liddell, present Professor of Divinity.
There is not a Coat of Arms peculiar to this Universitie, but they use the
Arms of the City of Glasgow.

Present Professors.
Sir William Fleming of Ferm, Rectour. Doctor Matthew Brisban, Dean of
Faculty. Edward Wright, Principal or Warden. David Liddell, Professor of
Theology. William Blair, Thomas Nicolson, John Tran, John Boyd,
Professors of Philosophy.
Learned men and Writers.
John Sharp, Doctor and Professor of Divinity, a man well learned, and a
good Textuary. John Cameron, Principal, of whom I need say no more, but that he
was the Great Cameron so well known to the World by his excellent Prelections
on the New Testament. He acquired so much fame in France, where he was
Professor of Divinity in Saumur, that King James brought him to Scotland,
hoping that his Learning and Worth would have had some effects on the Puritans:
but he finding them untractable, went back to France, where he lived and died
in great esteem. Robert Boyd, Principal, was a very excellent Person, and of
considerable Learning: he wrote a large Commentary on the Ephesians. John
Strange, Doctor of Divinity, Principal, a man of great Parts, extraordinary
Subtilty, and of a most solid Reason, as appears by his excellent Books De
voluntate Dei in actibus humanis, and De Scriptura Sacra. David Dickson,
Professor of Divinity, a man wonderfully esteemed and reverenced for his
Piety by the Covenanters, not unlearned: he wrote a Commentary on S. Matthew's
Gospel, on the Psalms, and the Epistles to the Romans and Hebrews; also a Book
of Practical Divinity, called Therapeutica Sacra, which he wrote in Latin.
Robert Bailie, Professor of Divinity, and afterward Principal, a learned and
modest man: though he published some very violent Writings, yet those flowed
rather from the instigation of other persons, then his own inclinations. He has
left a great evidence of his Diligence and Learning in his Opus Chronologicum.
Alexander Nubet and James Ferguson, two Ministers much esteemed, were bred in
this University: they wrote each of them Commentaries on some of the Epistles.
George Hutchinson was also bred here, who was accounted one of the greatest
Preachers of the Presbyterian party, and was a Learned man: he wrote on the
Twelve Minor Prophets, on Job, and on the Gospel of Saint John. He died Anno
1674. George Buchanan was a person that deserves a higher Character then I can
give him: but it is done to such advantage in the foregoing History, that I
must refer the Reader to it, page 325.
The University of ABERDENE.
IN the Reign of King Alexander the Second, Anno 121 -- there was a Studium
Generale in Collegio Canonicorum, where there were Professors and Doctors of
Divinity, and of the Canon and Civil Laws, and many Learned men have
flourished therein.

King James the Fourth, and William Elphingston, Bishop of Aberdene, procured
from Pope Alexander the Sixth the Privilege of an Universitie in Aberdene, Anno
Christi 1494. It is endowed with as ample Privileges as any Universitie in
Christendom; and particularly the Foundation relates to the Privileges of Paris
and Bononia, but has no reference to Oxford or Cambridge, because of the Wars
between Scotland and England at that time. The Privileges were afterward
confirmed by Pope Julius the Second, Clement the Seventh, Leo the Tenth, and
Paul the Second; and by the Successors of King James the Fourth.

The Bishop of Aberdene is perpetual Chancellor of this Universitie, and has
power to visit in his own person and to reform Abuses: and although he be not a
Doctor of Divinity, yet the Foundation gives him power of conferring that
Degree.

The Office of Vicechancellour resides in the Official or Commissary of
Aberdene.

The Rectour, who is chosen yearly, with the assistence of his four Assessours
is to take notice of Abuses, etc. in the Universitie, and to make a return
thereof to the Chancellor. If one of the Masters happen to be Rectour, then is
his power devolved upon the Vice Chancellor.

The College was founded by Bishop William Elphingston, Anno 1500. and was
called the King's College, because King James the Fourth took upon him and his
Successors the special Protection of it.

Persons endowed were,
A Doctor of Theology, who was Principal; the Canon Law; the Civil Law;
Physic;
A Professor of Humanity to teach Grammar; A Subprincipal to teach Philosophy;
A Cantor; A Sacrist; Six Students of Divinity; Three Students of the Laws;
Thirteen Students of Philosophy; An Organist; Five Singing-boys, who were
Students of Humanity.
Benefactours.
Bishop William Elphingston, the Founder, built most part of the Fabric,
furnished the great Steeple with ten Bells, gave many costly Ornaments, as
Hangings, Books, etc. King James the Fourth bestowed upon the College the
Rents of the Hospital of Saint Germans in Lothian, whereof the Tithes of the
Parishes of Aberluthnot in Mernis, of Glenmuik and Glengairden in Mar, are a
part; as also the Tithes of the Parishes of Slanes and Furvie in Buchan. King
James the Sixth bestowed upon it the Rents of the Carmelite Friars of Bamff,
the Chaplainries of Westhall and Fallowroull. King Charles the First gave to
the College two parts of the Revenues of the Bishopric of Aberdene, so long
as the Sea should remain vacant, Anno 1641. Upon which Donation, eight Bursars
more were endowed, and the Universitie was called the Caroline Universitie.
King Charles the Second, by the advice of the Estates of Parliament, did bestow
upon it, Anno 1672. the Stipends of all those Churches which should happen to
be vacant within the Dioceses of Aberdene, Murray, Ross, and Cathnes, and that
for seven years following the date of the Act. Gawin Dumbar, Bishop of
Aberdene, built the South-quarter of the College, and the houses belonging to
the Prebendaries, and did perfect whatsoever Bishop Elphingston left
unfinished. William Stewart, Bishop of Aberdene, built the Library,
Chapter House, Vestry-house, a School, and Chambers for the Chaplains. Duncan
Sberar, Parson of Clat, gave certain Lands toward the maintenance of Bursars.
Nicolaus Hay, Professor of the Civil Law, and Official of Aberdene, gave
maintenance to Bursars. Robert Maitland, Dean of Aberdene, procured the
annexation of the Deanery to the College, 1579. Walter Stewart, Principal,
procured the annexation of his Rectory of Methlick to the College. Sir Thomas
Burnet of Leyis endowed three Bursars. James Wat, Rectour of Snaith in
Yorkshire, gave certain Lands toward the maintenance of a Student of
Divinity. Alexander Reid, Doctor of Physic, left in legacy to the College
two hundred pounds of English money: he also left his Books to the Library.
John Forbes, Doctor and Professor of Divinity, did purchase two houses, and
left the one for the accommodation of his Successors Professors of Divinity,
and the other for the use of the Cantor.
The following persons left their Books to the Library. Andrew Strachan,
Doctor and Professor of Divinity. George Clerk, a Minister. Thomas Garden.
George Anderson. Sir Francis Gordon. Alexander Blackball, Student of Divinity,
resident at London. Thomas Mercer, Burgess of Aberdene.


Principals.
150 --. Hector Boeth, or Boys, (descended from the Boeths of Panbride in
Angus,) born in Dundee, and bred up in Letters in the Universitie of Paris, was
the first Principal. Besides his History of the Scots, he wrote the Lives of
the Bishops of Aberdene.

153 --. William Hay, Subprincipal, was his Successor.

1552. John Bissait continued six years, and resigned his place (because of his
infirmity proceeding from long sickness) to

1558. Alexander Anderson, Subprincipal, who was also Parson of Tyrie, and
Vicar of Kinkell. This man was a great Scholar, and a subtle Disputant, but no
great friend to the College. For the hatred he bare to the Reformed Religion,
he alienated some of the Colledge-Revenues, destroyed many of its Writings and
Evidences, whereby many Lands and other Rents belonging to Saint Germans are
quite lost; sold the Ornaments, Books, and other Furniture belonging to the
College. Commendable he was in one thing; for when some of the Reformers would
have taken away the Lead and Bells, repulit vim ferro. He was afterward turned
out, and the Place conferred upon

1569. Alexander Arbuthnot, (Brother to the Baron of Arbuthnot,) Parson of
Arbuthnot and Logy Buchan, a modest, learned, and pious Divine.

1584. Walter Stewart, Subprincipal, was his Successor, a very hopeful
person, taken away in the thirty-sixth year of his age.

1593. Upon his death, David Rait, (of the House of Halgreen in the Mernis,)
Subprincipal, was preferred to the place. He continued Principal forty two
years.

1634. To him succeeded William Leslie Doctor of Divinity, Subprincipal, a
man of great Learning. In his time, Anno 1634. a storm of wind beat down the
top of the great Steeple, which afterward was built more stately, consisting
of four Arches supporting a Crown with a Globe and Cross. Principal Leslie was
for his Loyalty thrust out by the Covenanters, and in his room was elected

1640. William Guild, Doctor of Divinity, Minister in Aberdene and one of the
Chaplains to King Charles the First; a Learned and worthy person. He built the
Tradesmens Hospital in Aberdene, left considerable Legacies to the Poor, and
bequeathed his Books to the Library of Saint Andrews.

Anno 1649. the General Assembly gave a Commission to some Ministers and
Lay Elders to reform the College, and to expel the Malignants.

Persons thrust out.
Doctor William Guild, Principal; Alexander Middleton, Subprincipal; Patrick
Gordon, George Middleton,
Professors of Philosophy.
Persons put in.
The Commissioners at that time did not unanimously agree whom to put in; and
considering (Winter drawing near) that the College could not be well governed,
unless there were a Principal or Subprincipal, therefore they ordered the
Subprincipal to continue, till his place were supplied by another. Shortly
after, the Masters restored the Principal (in despite of all opposition) to his
place. But Anno 1651. General Monk, sent five Colonels to reform the Coledge;
Colonel Fenwick, Moseley, Owen, Disborough, and Smith. At this Reformation both
Principal and Subprincipal were again turned out: Gilbert Rewle was substituted
in the room of the latter, and the place of the former was conferred upon

1652. John Row, an Independent Minister in Aberdene, a person well seen in the
Latin and Greek Languages, and not ill in the Hebrew. In his time, Anno 1657.
was laid the foundation of the New work in the North-East corner of the
College, of six stories high, consisting of twenty four Chambers with Chimneys
and Conveniences, a School, and a Bulliard-house. The Money that built it was
given by the Masters, and other well-disposed persons, whose Names are written
in a Register called Album amicorum Collegii Regii Aberdonensis. Mr. Row
continued Principal till Anno 1661.

At which time William Rait, Minister at Brichen, was preferred to the place.
He stayed only a year, and returned to Brichen.

1662. Alexander Middleton, Minister in Old Aberdene, and Subprincipal, of whom
before, succeeded him.

Professors of Divinity.
The Professor of Divinity was founded by the Bishop, Synod, and College of
Aberdene, Anno 162 --. The first Professor was

162 --. John Forbes, Doctor of Divinity, a most pious, peaceable and learned
Divine. He continued till the year 163 --. and being by the Magistrates of
Aberdene chosen to be one of the Ministers of the Town, left for his Successor

1634. Andrew Strachan, Doctor of Divinity, who lived little above a year
after his Instalment.

1635. Doctor Forbes was chosen Professor again, and continued till for his
Loyalty he was thrust out by the Covenanters, Anno 1639. Shortly after he went
over into Holland, where he published his Instructiones Historico-Theologicae,
and returning home died in his house of Corse, Anno 165 --.

164 --. William Douglas, Minister at Forgue, succeeded Doctor Forbes. He died
Anno 1665.

1673. Henry Scongal, Parson of Achterless, was after some years Vacancy
preferred to the place.

The Election of the Rectour, Dean of Faculty, Professor of the Oriental
Languages, Professors of Philosophy, Janitor, etc. is by the major part of the
Masters: but the Principal and the rest of the Prebendaries are chosen not
only by the major part, but also by four Procuratores Nationum. In all the
Elections the Foundation gives the Principal one great Privilege: Volumus enim
ut in omnibus hisce Electionibus, Principalis habeat vocem Nominativam,
Electivam, and Conclusivam: which seems to be a Negative voice inherent in him.

If a Place be vacant, a Bursar ( Alumnus) is to be preferred before any other,
if he be sufficiently qualified.

If a vacant Place be not filled within one month, then it falls to the
Chancellor Jure devoluto, who presents one for that time.

The Procuratores Nationum their having a voice in the Elections, imports the
like to be in the Scholars, from whom they derive their power of voting. The
Scholars are divided into four Classes, according to the number of the Dioceses
or Provinces wherein they live. The Provinces are these.

1. Provincia Aberdonensis contains the Shires of Aberdene and Bamff.

2. Provincia Moraviensis includes all those Countries that lie on the North
side of the River Spey.

3. Provincia Angusiensis contains Angus and Mernis.

4. Provincia Landoniensis comprehends (besides Lothian) all the rest of
Scotland.

The Students of each Province do choose a Procuratour to give up their Vote in
the Election.

Every Michaelmas, the Masters convene after ending of the ten weeks Vacation,
and a Problem is affixed on the Colledge-Gates, inviting young Scholars to
come and dispute for a Burse, (which is their maintenance at the College.) To
these are prescribed Exercises or Themes to make, then Latin Authors in Prose
and Verse to expound: and the first four (for so many Burses are void at every
Commencement) who are reckoned to be the best Scholars, are preferred.

In October the Students begin to convene. They wear a Red or Scarlet Gown with
hanging Sleeves; but those who are Bursars, a Black Gown with a Girdle. Their
time of continuance at the Universitie is four years. They are ranked into four
Classes.

To those of the first Class is taught the Greek Language.

The Students of the second Class do learn Logicks and Metaphysics.

Those of the third Class (who at the year's end are Bachelours of Arts) do
learn Ethics and General Physics.

The fourth and highest Class do complete their Course with Special Physics
and Mathematics.

The time of the Commencement of Masters of Arts is in July; the manner thus.

Before the day appointed, those who are to receive their Degree do publish
their Theses, inviting all Learned men and Scholars to come and dispute.

At the day appointed, great preparation is made, the Candidati are apparelled
in Black, with Black Gowns, and at ten of the clock all go into the public
School, where the Professor of Philosophy or Regent, who is to confer the
Degree, makes a long Speech (beginning with a Prayer) to the Auditors: which
being ended, the Disputes begin, and continue till four or five of the clock.
Then they take a little refreshment, and so return to the Graduation,
(Laureation.)

The Regent does tender to the Candidati the following Oath: Ego, A.B. coram
Omniscio and Omnipotenti Deo, Religionem and Fidem, unicam and solam
Orthodoxam, in Ecclesia Scoticana palam propositam, professurum me, and ab
omnibus Pontificiorum and aliorum quorumcunque Haeresibus long abhorrentem,
spondeo, voveo, juro. Insuper, Universitati buie, almae Parenti, cui banc
Ingenii culturam debeo, liberaliter relaturum me nutritiam quam potero, eadem
fide solenniter promitto. Quod si fidem sciens and volens fefellero, arcanorum
cordis recessuum Scrutstarem Deum, ultarem and vindicem non recuso. Ita me
adjuvet Deus.

After the Oath one of the Candidati ascends the Desk, and the Regent taking
into his hand a Hat or Cap, with these following words does give him his
Degree. Ego eadem authoritate, quam Summi ac Potentissimi Principes Almae buic
Vniversitati amplissimam indulsere, te A.B. in Artibus Liberalibus, and
Disciplinis Philosophicis, Magistrum creo, proclamo, constituo, renuncio:
tibique potestatem do, Legendi, Scribendi omniaque id genus alia committendi,
quae bic, aut ubivis Gentium, Artium Magistris concedi solet. Et in signum
manumissionis tuae, Caput tuum hoc Pileo ( putting the Cap on the Scholar's
Head) adorno: quod ut tibi felix faustumque sit, Deum Optimum Maximum precor.
Insuper, Librum hunc tibi apertum trado: ut Ingenii tui aliquod specimen coram
celebri hoc coetu edas, rogo.

Then the Graduate has a short Speech to the Auditors, and so the Ceremony is
ended with clapping of hands, founding of Trumpets, shouting, etc. Thus are all
the Candidati graduated one after another. The same way almost is used in all
the Universities of Scotland.

Concerning the Graduation of Bachelours and Doctors of Divinity, Law, and
Physic, I can give no account.

Present Masters and Professors.
John Menzeis, Professor of Divinity in the Marischal College of Aberdene,
Rectour. Doctor Lewis Gordon, Dean of Faculty. Alexander Middleton, Dean of
Aberdene, Principal. Henry Scougal, Professor of Divinity. George Nicolson,
Professor of the Laws. Patrick Vrqhuart, Doctor and Professor of Physic.
Andrew Massy, Subprincipal. Patrick Gordon, Professor of Humanity, and of
the Oriental Languages. Robert Forbes, George Middleton, John Buchan,
Professors of Philosophy.
There are also

A Student of Divinity, Fifteen Bursars of Philosophy, A Cantor, who is Master
of the Musick-School in the Town, An OEconomus, A Janitor, A Cook, A Gardener,
and other inferior Servants.
Learned men and Writers.
Hector Boeth, Principal according to the Learning of the Times he lived in,
was very considerable: for whose Character see Page 68. in the foregoing
History.

John Leslie, Canonist in the King's College, and Official of Aberdene, was a
very worthy person, and of great Learning in those days he lived in: he
suffered much for his Loyalty to his Princess Queen Mary.

John Forbes, Doctor and Professor of Divinity. All I shall say to this great
man is, that he was one of the best Scholars that ever our Kingdom bred, as
will apppear to all that ever read his Instructiones Historico-Theologicae,
which these unhappy Times suffered him not to finish, to the great regret of
all Learned men. His Irenicum does also show both his Learning and Moderation.
But his Piety and Devotion was so signal, that his Name will be always
remembered there with great honor.

William Guild, Doctor of Divinity, Principal. He wrote Commentaries on
several Books of the Old Testament, a Systeme of Divinity, and many Treatises
against the Papists. He had a fair Estate, which he left wholly to pious uses.

Arthur Johnston, Doctor of Physic, and Rectour of the Universitie, was an
excellent Poet.

William Douglas, Professor of Divinity, a man of great Industry: he wrote
some little Treatises.

There were also three Brothers descended from a Noble Family, Duncan, Thomas,
and Gilbert Burnet, who were bred here, and were in great esteem. The first was
a Doctor of Physic, and practiced in Norwich: he was a learned, holy, and
good man. The second was of the same Profession, and likewise in great esteem
in Braintrey, where he practiced Physic. The third was a Professor of
Philosophy, first at Basil, then at Montaubon; and was in such esteem there,
that a National Synod of the Protestants in France appointed his Philosophical
Writings to be printed at the expense of the Clergy. But he dying before his
Manuscripts were put in order, only his Book of Ethics was printed. They all
three flourished about the year 1630.

George Middleton, Doctor of Physic, was once a Professor of Philosophy
here; a man of considerable Parts, of good Learning, and well skilled in the
practice of Physic. He died very lately.

William Gordon, Doctor and Professor of Physic here, was a very worthy
person, of great Judgment, and well seen in that Science. He died Anno 164 --.

James Sandilands, Doctor and Professor of the Laws here, and Official of
Aberdene, was a Learned man, and a great Civilian. He died Anno 164 --.

Many other Learned men have been Professors here, besides those who have had
their Education in this College.

THE MARISCHAL College of Aberdene was founded by George Keith Earl Marischal,
Anno 1593.

Persons endowed were,
A Principal, Three Professors of Philosophy.
Since that time there have been added,

A Professor of Divinity Mathematics,
A fourth Professor of Philosophy. Twenty four poor Scholars,
Benefactours,
George Earl Mariscbal, Founder, gave toward the maintenance of the
Professors certain Lands lying near Aberdene, and at Bervie in Mernis.

The Town of Aberdene built most part of the Edifice.

Thomas Reid left an annual Salary to a Library Keeper.

Bernard Cargill gave a considerable sum of money toward the maintenance of
a Professor of Divinity.

Duncan Liddell, Doctor of Physic, left a considerable sum of money toward
the maintenance of a Professor of Mathematics.

Sir Alexander Irwing of Drum left in Legacy toward the maintenance of poor
Scholars, or Bursars, of Philosophy and Divinity, a thousand pounds Sterling
money.

King Charles the First bestowed on the College the third part of the Rents of
the Bishopric of Aberdene, so long as the Sea should continue vacant, Anno
1641.

Alexander Reid, Doctor of Physic, left in Legacy to the College and
Grammar School two hundred pounds of English money.

Alexander Ross, Doctor of Divinity, Minister in Aberdene,

William Guild, Doctor of Divinity, Minister in Aberdene,

Patrick Dune, Doctor of Physic,

Each of them gave money to maintain Bursars.

Several of the Benefactours left their Books to the Library.

Principals.
1593. Robert Howy, first Principal. 159 --. Gilbert Gray. 160 --. Andrew
Aidie. 161 --. William Forbes, Doctor of Divinity, afterward Bishop of
Edinburgh. 162 --. Patrick Dune, Doctor of Physic. 1639. William Moir. 1663.
James Leslie, Doctor of Physic.
Professors of Divinity.
162 --. Robert Baron, Doctor and Professor of Divinity afterward Bishop
Elect of Orkney. 164 --. John Menzeis.
Present Professors.
George Meldrum, Minister in Aberdene, Rectour. James Leslie, Doctor of
Physic, Principal. John Menzeis, Professor of Divinity. Duncan Liddell,
Professor of Mathematics. Robert Paterson, George Peacock, John Farqbuar,
John Paton,
Professors of Philosophy. The Earl Marischal is the only Patron of this
College.
Learned men and Writers.
William Forbes, Doctor of Divinity, Principal, was a person of rare
Endowments, vast Learning, and a celebrated Preacher. He was the first Bishop
of Edinburgh, and indeed a most holy person, of whom all that ever knew him
give this Character, that they never saw him but they thought his heart was in
heaven. He was indeed a fit pattern to all that should come after him.

Robert Baron, Doctor and Professor of Divinity, was a person of incomparable
worth and Learning. He had a clear apprehension of things, and a rare faculty
of making the hardest things to be easily understood. He is well known by his
Book De objecto formali Fidei, and his Metaphysics and other small Treatises:
there are many other excellent Manuscripts of his that are not yet published:
and he bare the greatest share of that famous Debate Anno 1638. between the
Doctors of Aberdene and the Covenanters.

Alexander Reid, Doctor of Physic, was bred here: he grew very famous in
London, and left a great part of his Estate to pious uses in and about the
places of his Education.

Duncan Liddell, Doctor of Physic, was a person much esteemed for his learned
Writings, as his Book De Febribus, and several other Books which he wrote.

But since I have named some Physicians educated in Aberdene, I must not pass
over Sir Alexander Fraser, His Majesties's First Physician, whose great
Learning and happy Practice of Physic, as they have raised him to such esteem
and dignity, so his constant Loyalty and high Generosity do answer that Noble
race of the Frasers from whom he is descended.

The University of EDINBVRGH
WAS founded by King James the Sixth of blessed memory; for Anno 1580. upon the
Magistrates of that Citie's Supplication and Address to him for that effect, he
granted to them a Charter under the Great Seal, allowing them the full Liberty
and Privilege of an University within their Town. But the Foundation was not
perfected till Anno 1582.

The Privileges of this University are the same with those of any other
University in the Kingdom.

The Dignity of Chancellor and Vice Chancellor does reside in the Magistrates
and Town-Council of Edinburgh, who are the only Patrons. I do not find that
ever the Dignity was conferred upon any single person.

The Persons founded were,
A Principal or Warden,

A Professor of Divinity,

Four Masters or Regents (for so they are called) of Philosophy,

A Professor or Regent of Humanity ( Humanarum literarum and Philologie.

Since the first Foundation, the Town has added a Professor of Hebrew, Anno
1640. and Doctor Conradus Otto, a Learned Jew, was the first Professor:

And a Professor of Mathematics, preferring James Gregory, Fellow of the
Royal Society, to the place, Anno 1674.

Benefactours.
King James the Sixth, Founder.

The College was built, and the Masters and Bursars are maintained, by the
public and private Benevolence of the Citizens of Edinburgh.

Some Donations have been by others, but not considerable.

All the Benefactours Names are inserted in the Books of the Town-Council, and
in the Register of the Library; and are also drawn in Gold Letters upon several
places on the Walls of the Library, together with their several Donations; and
also at the time of the public Commencement (which is once every year) they
are recited ( viva voce) in the hearing of all.

The Library was founded by Clement Little, one of the Officials or Commissaries
of Edinburgh, Anno 1635. since which time it is much increased, both by
Donatives from the Citizens, as also from the Scholars, who are more in number
here then in any other College in the Kingdom.

Principals.
1583. Robert Rollock, one of the Ministers of the City, who was likewise
Professor of Divinity, (for all the Principals here are Primarii Professores
Theology,) was the first Principal, and Rectour of the Universitie. 1600.
Henry Charters. 1620. Patrick Sands. 1622. Robert Boyd. 1625. John Adamson.
1653. Robert Leighton, who was afterward preferred to be Bishop of Dumblane.
1662. William Colvil. 1675. Andrew Cant.
Professors of Divinity.
162 --. Andrew Ramsay. 1630. John Sharp, Doctor of Divinity. 1650. David
Dickson, 1664. William Keith, Doctor of Divinity. 1675. Lawrence Charters.
Present Professors.
Andrew Cant, Principal. Lawrence Charters, Professor of Divinity. Alexander
Dickson, Hebrew Professor. James Pillan, John Wishart, John Wood, William
Paterson,
Professors of Philosophy. Gilbert Mackmurdo, Professor of Humanity. William
Henderson, Library Keeper. No Professor of Mathematics since Mr. Gregorie's
death.
There is no Coat of Arms peculiar to this Universitie; but the Magistrates
allow them to use the Arms of the City.

Learned men and Writers.
Robert Rollock, Principal a person of great worth and Learning. He wrote
Commentaries on the Psalms and some of the Prophets: some Sermons and Pieces of
Devotion were also published by him: but of him see the former History, Page
454.

Henry Charters, Principal, a person of great modesty and humility, and well
seen in Theological Learning.

Patrick Sands, Doctor of Divinity, Principal, a man very learned in the
Mathematics.

John Adamson, Principal, a man of great Learning, and of very quick Parts.

Alexander Henderson, Rectour of the Universitie, and one of the Ministers in
the City, the greatest Ringleader of the Covenanters, and often employed by
them in the affairs of Church and State, both in Scotland and England, was a
person of great gravity and composedness, and of considerable Learning. That
Debate between His late Majesty and him at Newcastle 1646. about
Church Government, and the occasion he then had of knowing that Blessed Martyr,
wrought much upon him, so that he went bak to Scotland much changed in his
Principles; and it was believed, that if he had lived, he would have been very
instrumental in the King's service; but he died soon after, and was much
lamented, being the most universally-esteemed man of all the Party.

William Colvil, Principal, a man of very moderate temper. He was deposed by
the Covenanters, and yet he would never accept Preferment, though diverse
Bishoprics were proffered to him. He wrote diverse Pieces, which are printed, in
English, and Ethica Christians in Latin.

William Keith, Doctor and Professor of Divinity, a man of great Learning,
who had diligently studied both the Fathers and Schoolmen, and was a great
Master of Languages, being very well skilled in the Hebrew and Rabbinical
Learning. He was wholly mortified and denied to the world, and led a most
severe and ascetical kind of life. He died Anno 1674.

I forbear to mention those Learned Professors in the Four Universities who
are yet alive; and therefore I leave it to those who shall follow, to celebrate
their fame to posterity.

CHAP. 4. Of the GOVERNMENT and LAWS of SCOTLAND
THE Kingdom of Scotland has been governed by Kings in as long a Succession as
any Nation in the world. The King is an absolute and unaccountable Monarch, and
(as the Law calls him) a Free Prince, of a Sovereign Power; 15. Par. Jac. 5. c.
25.
having as great Liberties and Prerogatives by the Laws of this Realm, and
Privilege of His Crown and Diadem, as any other King, Prince or Potentate
whatsoever. So that it is delivered as a Maxim in the Heads of our Law, Title
8. by Sir John Skeen.
That all Jurisdiction stands and consists in the King's Person, by reason of
His Royal Authority and Crown, and is competent to no Subject, but flows and
proceeds from the King having Supreme Jurisdiction, and is given and committed
by Him to such Subjects as He pleases.

The Crown of Scotland descends by Inheritance, the Heir female not being
excluded; and the undoubted Right to it has been for above three hundred years
in the Family of the Stewarts, and is now in the Person of King CHARLES the
Second, whom God long preserve.

Upon the death of a King, the next Heir is presently King and the Coronation
is only a solemn Instalment in that which was his Right before. All the
difference between our Kings before and after their Coronation is, that they
hold only Conventions of Estates, but no Parliaments, before they are Crowned:
of the distinction of which an account shall be given afterward.

When a King is Crowned, he swears the Oath appointed to be taken at the
Coronation, which before the Reformation was no other then the Oath set down in
the Roman Pontifical to be sworn by Kings; for there is no Provision made about
it in our Laws: 1. Parl. Jac. 6. c. 8. Anno 1567.
but at the Reformation it was enacted, That all Kings at the time of their
Coronation should make their faithful Promise by Oath, etc. which Oath is to
be found in that Act, and to it the Reader is referred.

The Prerogatives of the Crown are great; the Power of Peace and War, the Power
of raising and arming the Subjects, the Power of the Mint, the Nomination of
all Officers, both of the State, and of War and Justice, (except some Sheriffs
that are such by Inheritance,) the Power of Calling, Adjourning, (Prorogation
is not in our Law) and Dissolving of Parliaments, the giving the Votes of
Parliament the Authority of Laws, the executing of the Law, and the pardoning
of Offenses, are clearly and only in the Crown.

But to these, other great Additions have been made in the two Parliaments held
since His MAJESTY'S Restoration. For whereas the Supremacy in Ecclesiastical
affairs was always in the Crown since the Reformation; yet in the Reign of King
James the Sixth the Power of the General Assembly was raised very high by Law,
which was the chief foundation of the late Troubles; it being pretended, that
it was contrary to Law for the King to introduce any thing into the Church
without the consent of a General Assembly. It was therefore enacted in
Parliament, Act 1.2. Par. held by the Duke of Lauderdail.
That the External Government and Polity of the Church was wholly in the King's
power; and that his Orders sent to the Privy Council, and published by them,
about all Ecclesiastical matters, Meetings and Persons, were to be obeyed by
the Subjects, any Law or Practice to the contrary notwithstanding. So that in
all matters that relate to the Chuch-Government the King's Power is absolute.

The Second Point is about the Militia. By the ancient Laws of Scotland, The
Laws of Alex. 2.1. Par. Jac. 1. cap 4. 13. Par. Jac. 2. cap. 57.
all the King's Subjects were to assist him in his Wars. Upon which a great
enlargement of the King's Prerogative was grafted of late by two 1. Parl. Car.
2. third Session, Act 25. 2. Par. Car. 2. Act 2.
Acts of Parliament; the Kingdom of Scotland offering to the King, to raise and
arm Twenty thoussand Foot and Two thousand Horse, and to furnish them with
forty days Provision, to march into any of His Majesty's Dominions of
Scotland, England or Ireland, for suppressing any Foreign Invasion, Intestine
Trouble or Insurrection, or for any other Service wherein His Majesty's
Honor, Authority or Greatness may be concerned. And these Forces, by another
Act, are to give due Obedience to all such Directions as they shall receive
from His Majesty's Privy Council.

A Third Point is the Ordering and disposing of Trade with Foreign Nations, 1.
Parl. Car. 2. third Session, Act 26.
and the laying of Restraints and Impositions upon Foreign imported Commodities;
which is declared a Prerogative of the Crown.

With these Sacred Rights is the Crown of Scotland clothed.

The King's Revenue consisted anciently most in the Crown Lands which could not
be alienated but by Act of Parliament, and in the Wards and Marriages of the
Vassals of the Crown. But most of these have been of late years given away, and
most of the Tenures of Lands are changed, although there has been no general
Law for taking away the Wards. The Revenue is now raised out of the Customs
and the Excise. The last is given to this King for life, but the former is in
the Crown for ever. The rest is raised out of what remains of the Crown Lands
and the Wards.

The Persons nearest in blood to the King are, first, all the Issue of King
James and King Charles; which are so well known to every one, that they need
not be repeated. Next to them are all that are descended from the Daughter of
King James the Second, (since whom, till the Queen of Bohemia, no Collateral
Branch sprung from the Royal Family of whom any Issue remains,) who was married
to James Lord Hamilton, and had issue, first, James, created Earl of Arran,
whose Son was the Duke of Chastelberault, from whom by two Sons and two
Daughters are descended the Families of Hamilton and Abercorn, and the Families
of Huntly and Launderdail. And by an Act of Parliament, signed by all the Three
Estates, (the Original whereof is yet extant,) in the Reign of Queen Mary, the
Duke of Chastelberault's Family is declared, next the Queen and her Issue, the
rightful Heir of the Crown. The Sister of King James the Third bare likewise
to the Lord Hamilton a Daughter, married to the Earl of Lennox, from whom
descended the Family of Lennox. There is no other Branch of the Royal Family,
since it was in the Line of the Stewarts, except the Earl of Cassils his
Family, whose Ancestour, the Lord Kennedy, married King James the First's
Sister, from which Marriage that Family is descended. And so much of the Royal
Family.

The Chief and Supreme Court is the High Court of Parliament, which is made up
of Three Estates. The First is the Ecclesiastical, that of old consisted of the
Bishops and Mitered Abbots, but since the Reformation consists only of
Archbishops and Bishops. The Second Estate is the Nobility, who were anciently
divided into the Greater Barons and the Lesser, (for every man that holds Lands
of the Crown with a Privilege of holding a Court, much like the Lord of a
Manor in England, is called a Baron,) and all were obliged to appear
personally in Parliament, (for Proxies were never allowed by the Law of
Scotland,) and give the King Counsel. This proved a very heavy burden to the
small Barons, upon which they desired to be excused from their attendance in
Parliament: Parl. 7. c. 101.
and this was granted to them as a favor in King James the First's reign. And
though by that Act they might have sent two or three, or more, to represent
them from every Shire; Parl. 11. Jac. 6. c. 113.
yet they made no use of that for above 150 years: but King James the Sixth, to
balance the Nobility, got them restored to that Right; so that ever since there
are two sent from every Shire, who are Commissioners for the Shires. The Third
Estate is the Buroughs, every one of which chooses one Commissioner; only the
City of Edinburgh, as the Metropolis, chooses two. The Parliament is summoned
by Proclamation made at the Head-Burrough of every Shire 40 days before they
meet; upon which the Shires and Buroughs meet about their Elections. Every man
that holds Lands of the Crown, that in the Rolls of the Taxation (the ancient
Name of Subsidies or Assessments) are valued at 40 shillings Scottish money of
Taxation to the King, which will be in real value about Ten pounds Sterling a
year, is an Electour, and may be Elected, so he be rightly vested in the Land,
or (according to the Scottish terms) infeoft and seized, and be not at the
King's Horn, (that is, under an Outlawry.) The Electours subscribe the
Commissions they give, and so their Commissioner is returned: and if there be
cross Elections, the Parliament is the only Judge. In the Buroughs the
Common Council of the Town makes the Election.

When the day comes in which the Parliament is to be held, the Regalia, the
Crown, Scepter, and the Sword of State, which are kept in the Castle of
Edinburgh, are brought down in State to the King's Palace, and are to be
carried by three of the ancientest Earls that are upon the place, bare-headed,
before the King or His Commissioner. In the great Court before the King's
Palace all the Members of Parliament do mount on Horseback with Footcloaths,
etc. The Burgesses ride first, the Commissioners of the Shires next; then the
Lords, Viscounts, and Earls, in their Robes, the last of whom do carry the
Regalia, the Lion Herald, with some Heralds and Pursevants riding before the
Honors; last of all, when the King is present in person, rides the Lord
Chancellor, bearing the Great Seal: but this is not done before a
Commissioner. After these rides the King or His Commissioner, with the High
Constable (who is by Inheritance the Earl of Arroll) on his right hand, with a
white Batton on his hand; and the great Marischal (who is also by Inheritance
the Earl Marischal) on his left hand, with a silver Batton in his hand. If the
King be present in person, the Marquesses and Dukes ride after the Earls; but
if His Commissioner only be there, they follow him at some distance. At the
outward Gate of the Parliament House they all alight off their horses, and the
Earl Marischal receives and conducts the King to the inner Gate, where he is
received by the High Constable, and led into the House where the Parliament is
held. The Throne is raised six steps high, with a State over it; and there the
King, or the Commissioner in His absence, sits. And in the first step under
him, on a Bench, sits the Lord Chancellor, with other Officers of State on
both hands of him. In the next step under these sit the Lords of Session, or
Judges. On the right hand of the Throne is the Bishops Bench, that rises up
three steps and rows of Benches. On the highest the two Archbishops sit, and in
the lower steps sit the Bishops according to the dignity of their Sees. On the
left hand of the Throne there is another great Bench of three steps and rows of
Benches, on which sit the Nobility according to their precedence. In the middle
of the Floor there are two Tables; on the one of them the Regalia are laid, and
in two great Chairs by them sit the Constable and the Marischal: at the other
Table sits the Lord Clerk of Registers with his Deputy-Clerks, who are the
Clerks of the Parliament. There are also Fourms placed on the floor: those on
the right side are for the Commissioners of the Shires, and those on the left
hand are for the Commissioners of the Buroughs.

When all are placed, the Parliament is fenced (as the phrase is) in the King's
Name. Then the King speaks to them, (if He be present,) sitting in His Robes,
with the Crown on His Head, all standing up bare-headed: but when a
Commissioner represents Him, he is in an ordinary Suit, and stands and speaks
also bare-headed, (nor is the Commissioner covered but when there is pleading
at the Bar, but continues bare-headed, as all the Members are,) and tells them
the reason for which they are called together; which is enlarged upon by the
Lord Chancellor. Then they go about the choosing of the Lords of the Articles,
who are Eight for every State, who have been chosen in different ways.
Sometimes the Bishops did choose the eight Lords of the Nobility, and the
Nobility eight for the Bishops; at other times the Bishops did choose their own
eight, and the Nobility their eight: but now it is settled by an Act of
Parliament, that the King or His Commissioner names eight of the Bishops, the
Lords choose eight for themselves: and those sixteen do choose eight
Commissioners for the Shires, and as many Commissioners for the Buroughs.
These Thirty two are the Committee of Parliament to prepare Matters. When a
Bill is drawn by them, it is brought into the Parliament. And anciently all
these Bills were brought in the last day of Parliament, on which the Members
ride in the same State as they do the first day: and the Bills being read, they
were put to the Vote of Parliament, and either were approved, or not: and then
being approved, were presented to the King, who by touching them with the
Scepter gave His Assent to them, which also is done by His Commissioner in His
absence; if he refused to touch them, they were of no force. But of late times
matters have been at full length and freely debated in Parliament. They sit all
in one House, and every one answers distinctly to his Name, and gives his Vote,
which is in these Terms, I approve, or not: only those who are not satisfied
one way or another. say, Non liquet; which is a great ease to those who are
conscientious, and a common refuge to the cunning Politician: the major Vote
carries it. No Dissents or Protests are allowed in public Acts, but are
accounted treasonable; but in private Acts, that relate to men's Properties and
Rights, any one may protest for his Interest. After all business is ended, the
King or His Commissioner makes a Speech to them, and dissolves them.

A Convention of Estates is made up of the same Members that constitute a
Parliament, but can make no Laws; only that can lay Impositions on the
Subjects: they do not sit in state, and have been most used before the Kings
were Crowned. The Lord Chancellor is President in both these Courts, and the
Votes are taken and numbered by the Clerk of Registers. And whatever Acts are
passed in Parliament or Convention, are to be proclaimed soon after their
Dissolution at the public Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, by the Lion Herald, (who
is at present Sir Charles Erskin of Cambo,) with a great deal of state and
Ceremony; Par. 8. Jac. 6 cap. 130
after which they are obligatory on the Subjects. And so much for the
Parlaiment and the Three Estates, whose Authority is supreme: and it is
Enacted, that none of the Lieges shall presume to impugn the Dignity and
Authority of the Three Estates, or to seek or procure the Innovation or
Diminution of the Power and Authority of the same Three Estates, or any of
them, in time coming, under the pain of Treason.

The Government of the Kingdom being wholly in the Crown, the King administers
it by His Officers of State and Privy Council.

The Officers of State are Eight.
The First is the Lord Chancellor, who is Keeper of the Great Seal, and
President in all Courts wherever he is, except in the Exchequer. This Office
is now in the person of the Right Honorable John Leslie Earl of Rothes. The
Second Officer is the Lord High Treasurer, who governs the Revenue, and
presides in the Exchequer. This Office is now in Commission. The Third Officer
is the Lord Privy Seal, who is at present the Marquess of Athol. These three
take place of all the Nobility. The Fourth Officer is the Lord Secretary, who
keeps the Signet, and is a Lord by his Office, and takes place of all of his
rank. The Office of Secretary is executed by his Grace the Duke of Lauderdail.
The Fifth Officer is the Lord Clerk of Registers, who has the charge of all the
public Records, Rolls and Registers, and names all the Clerks of Parliament
and Session, and the Keepers of public Registers. The Sixth Officer is the
King's Advocate, who is also called the Lord Advocate. He is commonly a Judge,
except in Causes in which the King is concerned; and in those he pleads in the
King's Name. The present Advocate is Sir John Nubet of Dirlton. The Seventh
Officer is the Lord Treasurer Deputy, who is assistent to the Lord High
Treasurer, and is a Check upon him, and presides in the Exchequer in his
absence. This Office is executed by Sir Charles Maitland of Hatton. The Eighth
Officer is the Lord Justice Clerk, who assists the Lord Justice general in
Criminal causes. The present Justice Clerk is Sir Thomas Wallace of Craigie.
All these have the Title of Lord, and the precedence of all under Noblemen and
their eldest Sons.

The Privy Council is chiefly employed about public Affairs, and judges of
Riots and any Disturbance given to the Peace of the Kingdom. Anciently the
Lords of the Session were the King's Council, and so are still called the Lords
of Council and Session: but the Power of the Privy Council has been most raised
since King James got the Crown of England, that by reason of the King's
necessary absence from Scotland, the King has lodged much of His Power with
the Privy Council. Lawyers do plead the causes of Riots before them; and when
Sentence is given, every Privy Counselor gives his Vote, and the major Vote
carries it.

Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council.
John Earl of Rothes, Chancellor of the Kingdom, Lord President of the Privy
Council. James Lord Archbishop of Saint Andrews his Grace. John Duke of
Lauderdail his Grace. Alexander Lord Archbishop of Glasgow his Grace. William
Marquess of Douglas. John Marquess of Athol. Archbald Earl of Argile. John Earl
of Errol. George Earl Marischal. William Earl of Morton. Alexander Earl of
Murray. Charles Earl of Mar. -- Earl of Linlithgow. John Earl of Wigton.
Patrick Earl of Kinghorn. Alexander Earl of Kelley. David Earl of Weemis. James
Earl of Airley. William Earl of Dundonald. George Lord Ross. Sir Charles
Maitland of Hatton. Sir James Dalrymple of Stair. Sir John Nisbet of Dirleton.
Sir Thomas Wallace of Craigie. Sir James Fowlis of Collington. Sir William
Sharp of Stainibill. Sir William Scot of Ardross. Sir George Kinnaird of
Rossie. Sir John Wachop of Nidrie. Sir Gerge Monro of Culkairn. Lieutenant
General Thomas Dalyell.
The Supreme Court of Judicature about the Property of the Subject is called
the College of Justice, or the Session; which was anciently an ambulatory
Court, but was settled as it now is by King James the Fifth, Anno Christi 1532.
to consist of fourteen, who are called Senators of the College of Justice, or
Lords of Council and Session, and a President; to whom are added the Lord
Chancellor, and four extraordinary Lords, who are of the chief Nobility. The
extraordinary Lords have no Salary, and are not obliged to attendance; but when
they come, they have a Vote. This Court sits from the first of June till the
last of July, and from the first of November till Christmas-Eve, and from the
first of January till the last of February: they sit from 9 a clock in the
Morning till 12, all the days of the Week except Sunday and Monday. There is an
Outer House, and an Inner. In the Outer there is a Bench, where one of the
Senators sits a Week, (and all of them except the President have their turns
in it,) who hears all Causes originally; and where the Case is clear, he gives
Sentence: But if it be difficult, or if either party desires it, he reports it
to the rest of the Senators; who either send out their Answer by him, or if it
be very intricate, and the parties or either of them desire it, do appoint it
to be heard before themselves. This is a Court of great dispatch. But besides
the Judge on the Bench, there is a Side-Bar, to which one of the Judges comes
out weekly by turns, as in the former, and receives and answers all Petitions
and Bills. The Inner House, where all the rest of the Senators sit, is a Court
of great State and Order. The Senators sit in a semicircle in Robes: under
them sit their Clerks, who write the most material heads of all that is pleaded
at the Bar, where the Pleadings are long and very learned. When the Senators
have (after all the parties are removed) reconsidered their Arguments, they
give their Sentence, and the major Vote carries it. Their final Sentence
determines the business, there lying no Appeal from them, (only the
Parliament, as the Supreme Court, may review and repeal their Sentence:) and
they are called Decreets, from the Latin Decreta.

Senators of the College of Justice.
Sir James Dalrymple of Stair, President. Sir John Nubet of Dirleton. Sir
Thomas Wallace of Craigie. Sir Charles Maitland of Hatton. Sir James Fowlis of
Collington. Sir Robert Nairn of Strathurd. Sir David Nevoy of Nevoy. Sir Peter
Wederburn of Gosfurd. Sir John Baird of Newbyth. Sir John Lockart of
Castlehill. Sir Richard Maitland of Pitrichie. Sir David Balfour of Forret. Sir
Thomas Murray. Sir James Fowlis of -- Sir David Falconar of Newton.
The Law of Scotland is made up of the Municipal and Civil Laws. The Municipal
consists either of Acts of Parliaments, or of the Customs and Practicks of the
College of Justice, which are held of no less force then Acts of Parliament:
and where neither of these contradicts the Civil Law, the Roman Law is of
force. This makes our Lawyers generally great Civilians; for they go either to
Leiden, Poictiers, or Bourges, and study the Civil Law, in which some are
learned to a high degree.

The Law of Scotland is easy and regular, by reason of our Registers, which
are so full, that Titles are much more easily cleared here then can be done
where those Registers are not: which may appear from the following Instances.

No man can have a Right to any Estate but by his being seized of it, which is
done by the delivery of Earth and Stone; upon which an Instrument is formed
called a Sasine, and this must be registered within 60 days, otherwise it is of
no force: by which means all secret Conveyances are cut off: for if no Sasine
be passed upon them, or if these be not put in the public Registers, (which
every one may search,) the Conveyance is of no force.

All Bonds have a Clause in them for inserting them in the public Registers;
and they being registered, without any farther action, by a charge of six days
the Debtor must make payment, otherwise Writs called Letters of Horning,
Caption and Poynding, are given out: by the first of which the party is under
Outlawry and Rebellion, and forfeits to the King his personal Estate; and if he
continues a year under it, the Life-rent of his real Estate: in which the
Creditor is to be preferred for his interest, the rest goes into the Exchequer.
By the Letters of Caption the party is seized on, and put in prison: nor is his
House a place of security, but may be searched for him. By the Letters of
Poynding the Debitor's Goods may be distrained, wherever they can be found.

A third Instance, to which I shall add no more, is, that any Creditor may
serve a Writ on his Debtor, called Letters of Inhibition, by which he can make
no Disposition of his Goods or Estate, till the party be satisfied; and all is
null that he does after that, if these Letters be returned and registered within
21 days after they are served, otherwise they have no force.

The next Supreme Court is the Justice Court, where all Criminals are tried. It
consisted anciently of a Lord Justice General, and a Lord Justice Clerk, who
was his Assistent. The Earls of Argile had this Office by Inheritance: but King
Charles the First agreed with the Earl of Argile, and gave him the hereditary
Justiciarship in the High-lands, for which he laid down his Pretensions to the
other. The Justice General is not bound to serve in person, but might do it by
Deputies, and he commonly named two: but the Parliament changed this Anno 1669.
and appointed four of the Judges to sit in this Court with the Lord Justice
General and the Lord Justice Clerk. All Trials for Life are in this Court,
which sits every Friday in the time of Session in the afternoon. Here all the
Subjects, Peers as well as Commons, are tried: nor is there any difference
between the Trial of a Peer and of a Commoner, but that the greater part of the
Peers Jury (called by the Scottish Law an Assize) must be Peers. Fifteen make a
Jury. The Foreman, who is called the Chancellor of the Assize, gathers and
reports their Votes: the major Vote determines the matter. The present Justice
General is the Earl of Murray.

The next Supreme Court is the Exchequer. That consists of the Lord Treasurer,
(or the Commissioners of the Treasury, when it is in Commission,) the Lord
Treasurer Deputy, and some Assistents, called the Lords of Exchequer, who have
little power, the Lord Treasurer and the Lord Treasurer Deputy carrying all
matters in it as they please. Here all the King's Grants, Pensions, Gifts of
Wards, Letters Patents, and such like, are to be passed.

And these are the Supreme Civil Courts.

The Seat of those Courts is Edinburgh, which has been long the chief Seat of
the Government: and though the making of Circuits for giving Justice has been
often begun; yet the charge it puts the Country to is found a greater
inconvenience, then the bringing up all their Affairs to Edinburgh.

Next to these Supreme Courts there are other inferior Courts. And,

First, there are many Regalities in the Kingdom, where the Lord of the
Regality has a Royal Jurisdiction within his grounds, and power of Life and
death, besides many other great Immunities and Privileges. This began chiefly
in Church Lands; for all the Bishops and most of the Abbots had these
Regalities granted them: some of the ancient and great Peers likewise got the
same power bestowed on them, but many more have lately got their Lands erected
into Regalities.

The Judge is called the Bailif of the Regality, who sits as often as there is
cause. Most of the Bailifs of the Bishops are so by Inheritance; for these were
given by the King, since a Churchman cannot give a Commission in Causa
Sanguinis.

There are also in all the Shires of Scotland Sheriffs, who are the Judges in
all matters of Meum and Tuum, in Thefts, and in all lesser Crimes, as likewise
in Murders, if the Murderer be taken in hot blood, as they call it, when the
person is newly slain. But though there lies no Appeal in any Court in this
Kingdom, yet there is somewhat equivalent to it; for the Supreme Courts by a
Writ called an Advocation may take any Cause out of the hands of inferior
Judges, and order it to be brought before themselves.

Most of the Sheriffs were anciently such by Inheritance: and it being in this
Kingdom no matter of charge, but of profit, it gave the Hereditary Sheriffs so
great a power in their Shires, that our Kings of late have thought sit to agree
with many of those Sheriffs for their Rights, by which it comes to pass that
diverse of them are now in the King's gift. The Sheriffs may either sit and give
Judgment themselves, or do it by a Deputy; which they most commonly do,
except in some greater cases.

SHIRES or COUNTIES of SCOTLAND, and their SHERIFFS.
SHIRES. SHERIFFS. The Shire of Edinburgh contains Middle Lothian. Sir
Charles Maitland of Hatton. The Shire of Berwick contains Mers. The Earl of
Hume. The Shire of Peeblis contains Tweeddail. The Earl of Tweeddail. The
Shire of Selkirk contains the Forest of Etterick. The Shire of Roxburgh
contains Teviotdail, Lidisdail, Eskdail, Ewsdail, etc. Duke of Buckleugh. The
Shire of Dumfreis contains Nithisdail, and Annandail. Earl of Queensbury. The
Shire of Wigton contains the West part of Galloway. Sir Patrick Agnew of
Lochnaw. The Shire of Air contains Kyle, Carrict, and Cunninghame. Earl of
Dumfreis. The Shire of Renfrew contains the Barony of Renfrew. Earl of
Eglington. The Shire of Lanerick contains Clidsdail. Duke of Hamilton. The
Shire of Dumbritton contains Lennox. Duke of Lennox. The Shire of Bute
contains the Isles of Bute and Arran, etc. Sir James Stewart of -- The Shire
of Innerara contains Argile, Lorn, Kintyre, the most part of the West Isles,
as Ila, Jura, Mull, Wyist, Terife, Coll, Lismore, etc. Earl of Argile. The
Shire of Perth contains Athol, Goury, Glenshee, Strath-Ardel, Braid Albain,
Rainach, Balwhidder, Glenurqhuay, Stormont, Menteith, and Strath-Jern. Marquis
of Athol. The Shire of Striveling lies on both sides of the River Forth. Earl
of Mar. The Shire of Linlithgow contains West Lothian. Earl of Calendar. The
Shire of Clackmannan contains a small part of Fife lying on the River Forth
toward Striveling. Sir David Bruce of Clackmannan. The Shire of Kinross
contains so much of Fife as lies between Loch-Leiven and the Ochell Hills.
Earl of Morton. The Shire of Cowper contains the rest of Fife. Earl of
Rothes. The Shire of Forfar contains Angus with its pertinents, as Glen-Ila,
Glen-Esk, Glen-Prossin, etc. Earl of South-Esk. The Shire of Kincairden
contains Mernis. Earl Marischal. The Shire of Aberdene contains Mar with
its pertinents, as Birse, Glen-Taner, Glen-Muik, Strath-Dee, Strath-Don, Bray
of Mar and Cromar, most part of Buchan, Forumarten, Gareoch, and
Strathbogie-land. Earl of Dunfermline. The Shire of Bamff contains a small
part of Buchan, Strath-Dovern, Boyn, Enzie, Strath-Awin and Balveny. Sir James
Baird of Auchmedden. The Shire of Elgin contains the Eastern part of Murray.
Robert Dumbar of -- The Shire of Nairne contains the West part of Murray. The
Shire of Innerness contains Badenoch, Lochabyr, and the South part of Ross.
Earl of Murray. The Shire of Cromarty contains a small part of Ross lying on
the South side of Cromarty Firth. Sir John Vrqhuart of Cromarty. The Shire of
Taine contains the rest of Ross, with the Isles of Sky, Jews, and Harrigh.
Earl of Seaforth. The Shire of Dornoch contains Sutherland, and
Strath-Navern. Earl of Sutherland. The Shire of Weik contains Cathnes. Earl
of Cathnes. The Shire of Orkney contains all the Isles of Orkney and
Schetland. The Constabularie of Hadington contains East Lothian, and
Lauderdail. Duke of Lauderdail. STEWARTRIES. STEWARDS. Strath-Jern, Earl of
Perth. Menteith, Earl of Menteith. Annandail. Earl of Annandail. Kirkubright
contains the East part of Galloway. Earl of Nithisdail. BAILIARIES. BAILIFFS.
Kile. Carrict. Earl of Cassils. Cunninghame. Earl of Eglington.

Besides these, every man that holds a Barony of the King has a Baron-Court, in
which lesser matters are also judged, and they may Fine and Distrain. Anciently
these Baron-Courts might judge of Life and death; but that is now out of use.

For all the other particulars that relate to the Regalities, Superiorities,
and other things of the Law of Scotland, such as are curious may find full
satisfaction in that most learned Work of Craigs de Jure Fendali, written in
Latin, and Printed at Edinburgh in Folio.

The Military Government in Scotland of every County is not lodged in one
person, but the Regiments of Foot are commanded by Colonels, and the Troops of
Horse by Captains, named by the King, without any dependence upon one Lord
Lieutenant: nor are there Deputy Lieutenants, but the Lieutenant-Colonels and
other Officers are named by the King, as is usual in an Army.

The Court of Admiralty sits in Leith, the chief Seaport of this Kingdom; but
has not much business, except in times of War to judge of Prizes. The present
High Admiral is His Royal Highness, James Duke of York.

The Buroughs of Scotland are of three sorts; either Royal Burghs, Burghs of
Regality, or Burghs of Barony. The former have Commissioners in Parliament, and
besides are a State apart, for they meet yearly in a Convention called the
Convention of Buroughs, to which a Commissioner comes from every one of them.
There they make Laws for themselves about Trade, and other things relating to
their Corporations. They hold these Meetings in a Circuit around the chief, or,
as they call them, the Head Burghs: and at the end of one Convention, they name
the time and place for the next.

In these Burghs there is a Provost, who has the chief Power; and there are
four Bailiffs that are next to him in the Government: there is also a Dean of
Gild, who is the chief Judge among the Merchants, likewise a Treasurer, and a
Common Council; the one half of which is chosen yearly by the Merchants, the
other half by the Tradesmen; who have likewise a Court of their own, in which
there is one from every Trade, who is called the Deacon of the Trade, and a
Deacon Conveener, who is their President, and calls a Meeting of them when he
pleases. Those Deacons are chosen yearly by all the Freemen of their Trade, and
have a little Jurisdiction over them. There are in most Burghs great
Animosities and Factions between the Merchants and Tradesmen.

The Burghs of Regality are the Towns where these Lords hold their Courts. The
chief Magistrates are named by the Lord, the rest they choose themselves. They
have also great Freedoms, little inferior to the Royal Burghs; only they have
no Commissioners in Parliament.

The Burghs of Barony are Mercat-Towns, where the Lord of the Barony names some
of their Magistrates, and the Corporation chooses the rest. In all these Burghs
the Magistracy is no matter of burden nor charge, but of Power and Advantage;
from whence arise great Factions almost in them all.

A Catalogue of the Free CORPORATIONS or Royal BVRGHS in SCOTLAND.
Edinburgh, in Lothian. Linlithgow, in Lothian. Hadington, in Lothian.
North-Berwick, in Lothian. Dumbar, in Lothian. Saint Andrews, in Fife. Cowper,
in Fipe. Dunfermlin, in Fipe. Kirkaldy, in Fipe. Craill in Fipe. Anstruther, in
Fipe. Pittenweem, in Fipe. Dysert, in Fipe. Earles-ferry, in Fipe. Kinghorn, in
Fipe. Burnt-Island, in Fipe. Culross, in Fipe. Clackmannan, in Fipe.
Queens-ferry, in Fipe. Dundee, in Augus. Montross, in Augus. Forfar, in Augus.
Brichen, in Augus. Arbroath, in Augus. Kirkubright, in Galloway. Wigton, in
Galloway. Whithorn, in Galloway. Stranraver, in Galloway. Glasgow, in
Clidisdail. Lanerick, in Clidisdail. Elgin, in Murray. Nairn, in Murray.
Forres, in Murray. Ranfrew, in Ranfrewshire. Pasley, in Ranfrewshire. Ruglen,
in Ranfrewshire. Aberdene, in Mar. Kintor, in Mar. Bamff, in Boyn. Cullen, in
Boyn. Innerness, in Ross. Tayne, in Ross. Air, in Kyle. Irwing, in Cunninghame.
Rothsay, in Bute. Dumbarton, in Lennox. Innerara, in Argile. Jedburgh, in
Teviotdail. Peeblis, in Tweeddail. Selkirk, in Forrestshire. Striveling, upon
Forth. Dumblane, in Menteith. Innerkeithing, in Fife. Dornoch, in Sutherland.
Annand, in Annandail. Dumfreis, in Nithisdail. Sanqbuar, in Nithisdail. Bervie,
in Mernis. Innerowrie, in Gareoch.
The People of Scotland are naturally candid and honest, stout and resolute,
which makes them so much valued beyond the Seas, the only School of War to
them since the happy Conjunction of this Island under one King. They naturally
love their King.

The Nobility have great Power, chiefly in the High-lands, where their Families
(commonly called Clannes) depend absolutely upon the head of the Name, whom
they commonly call their Chief. But the great Power of the Nobility of late
years is much abated, yet they are still very considerable.

The Property of the Subject is fully secured by Law: and though the King has
great Prerogatives, yet the People have also great Liberties and Freedoms.

The COMMISSIONERS that have represented our KINGS since K. JAMES was settled
on the Throne of England were as follows.
KING JAMES the VI. John Grabame, Earl of Montross, Commissioner, 1604. George
Hume, Earl of Dumbar, Commissioner, 1606. George Keith, Earl Marischal,
Commissioner, 1609. Alexander Seaton, Earl of Dunfermlin, Commissioner, 1612.
James Hamilton, Marquess of Hamilton, Commissioner, 1621.
Anno 1625. KING CHARLES the I. Crowned Anno 1633. James Hamilton, Marquess of
Hamilton, Commissioner, 1638. John Stewart, Earl of Traquair, Commissioner,
1639. James Grahame, Marquess of Montross, Governor, 1644.
Anno 1649. KING CHARLES the II. Crowned Anno 1651. John Middleton, Earl of
Middleton, Commissioner, 1660. John Leslie, Earl of Rothes, Commissioner, 1663.
John Maitland, Duke of Lauderdail, Commisioner, 1669.

A Catalogue of the CHANCELLOVRS of the Kingdom, since the year 1198. collected
out of Histories.
1198. William Malvoisin, Bishop of Glasgow. 1220. William de Boseo, Bishop of
Dumblane. 1226. Matthew Kinninmouth, Bishop of Aberdene. 1239. William
Babington, Bishop of Glasgow. 1247. -- Abbot of -- 1248. Richard of
Innerkeithing, Bishop of Dumblane. 1259. Gamelinus, Bishop of Saint Andrews.
1273. William Wishart, Bishop of Glasgow. 1280. William Fraser, Bishop of Saint
Andrews. 1298. Maurice, Bishop of the Isles. 1363. Adam, Bishop of Brichen.
1372. Patrick, Bishop of Brichen. 1380. John Lion, Lord Glammes. 1390. Gilbert
Grimlaw, Bishop of Aberdene. 1409. William Lawder, Bishop of Glasgow. 1434.
John, Bishop of Brichen. 1436. Sir William Creighton of Creighton. 1444. James
Bruce, Bishop of Dunkeld. 1448. Patrick Lion, Lord Glammes. 1453. William
Sinclare, Earl of Orkney. 1463. George Shorswood, Bishop of Brichen. 1474. John
Lang, Bishop of Glasgow. 1476. Andrew Stewart, Lord Evendail. 1484. William
Elphingston, Bishop of Aberdene. 1494. Archbald Douglas, Earl of Angus. 1497.
George Gordon, Earl of Huntlie. 1502. James Stewart, Archbishop of Saint
Andrews. 1512. Alexander Stewart, Archbishop of Saint Andrews. 1518. James
Beaton, Archbishop of Glasgow. 1526. Gawin Dumbar, Archbishop of Glasgow. 1534.
William Stewart, Bishop of Aberdene. 1539. Cardinal David Beaton, Archbishop of
Saint Andrews. 1561. George Gordon, Earl of Huntlie. 1563. James Douglas, Earl
of Morton. 1567. George Gordon, Earl of Huntlie. 1570. James Douglas, Earl of
Morton again. 1572. Archbald Campbell, Earl of Argile. 1575. John Lion, Lord
Glammes. 1578. John Stewart, Earl of Athol. 1579. Coline Campbell, Earl of
Argile. 1584. James Stewart, Earl of Arran. 1591. John Maitland, Lord of
Thirlstane. 1598. John Grahame, Earl of Montross. 1604. Alexander Seaton, Earl
of Dunfermlin. 1622. George Hay, Earl of Hinnoule. 1635. John Spotiswood,
Archbishop of Saint Andrews. 1641. John Campbell, Earl of Lowdoun. 1660.
William Cunnighame, Earl of Glencairn. 1665. John Leslie, Earl of Rothes,
present Lord High Chancellor of Scotland, 1676.
Writers of the Scottish History.
Cornelius Hibernicus. Veremundus, a Spaniard, Archdeacon of Saint Andrews,
wrote the History of the Nation from its original till the reign of King
Malcolm the Third. Joannes a Campo Bello, or Campbell. Turgot, Prior of Durham,
and Bishop of Saint Andrews, wrote the Lives of King Malcolm Canmoir and of his
Queen Margaret. Liber Sconae, a Chronicle written by the Monks of Scoon. Liber
Pasletensis, the Black Book of Paislay, a Chronicle written by the Monks of
Paislay. Liber Pluscartensis, a Chronicle wriiten by the Monks of Pluscardy.
One Blind Henry wrote the History of Sir William Wallace in Scottish Meeter.
John Harbor, Archdeacon of Aberdene, did write the Life of King Robert Bruce
in Scottish Meeter. John Major, Provost of Saint Salvator's College in Saint
Andrews, wrote the History of the Nation. William Elphingston, Bishop of
Aberdene, wrote a Treatise of the Scottish Antiquities. Hector Boeth, or Boys,
Principal of the King's College of Aberdene, wrote the History of the Nation
till the Reign of King James the First; continued till the Reign of King James
the Sixth by John Ferrerius a Piemontoise, a Monk of Pluscardy. John Balenden,
Archdeacon of Murray, did translate Boys History into English. George
Buchanan, Schoolmaster to King James the Sixth, wrote the History of the Nation
till the year 1572. Robert Johnston wrote a continuation of the Scottish History
from the year 1572. to the year 1628. in Latin, Folio. John Leslie, Bishop of
Ross, wrote the History of the Nation till the year 158 --. Raphael Holinshed,
wrote the History of the Nation till the Reign of King James the Sixth,
centinued by Francis Thin. William Cambden wrote a Description of the Kingdom.
John Dempster wrote an Introduction to the Scottish History. David Chalmer wrote
a Treatise of the Scottish Saints. David Hume of Godscroft did write the History
of the Earls of Douglas and Angus. William Drummond of Hawthornden, did write
the Lives of the Five King Jameses. William Sanderson wrote the Lives of Queen
Mary, King James the Sixth, and King Charles the First. John Spotiswood,
Archbishop of Saint Andrews, did write the History of the Church of Scotland,
from the first Plantation of the Christian Faith therein, till the death of
King James. George Wishart, Doctor of Divinity, did write the Actions of James
Marquess of Montross. Robert Gordon of Stralogh did write the Theatrum Scotiae,
being a Description of the whole Kingdom, with the Maps of every particular
Country, Printed by John Janson Bleaw at Amsterdam; a very excellent Work. The
Mercenary Printer did him a double injury. First, in printing with his Book,
Buchanan's Seditious Pamphlet de Jure Regni apud Scotos; it being sufficiently
known that the Author was of no such Principals, but always loyal. Then, in
Dedicating that Work to the Usurper O. Cromwell; whereas the Author sent over
to the Printer, a Dedication of his Book to His most Sacred Majesty, at that
time Prince of Wales: and the Copy of that Dedication, written with his own
hand, is yet in the custody of his Son, the Reverend James Gordon, Parson of
Rothinay. Thus much I thought fit to say in vindication of that worthy
Gentleman, who was one of the most learned persons of the Age he lived it.
Dempster, in his Apparatus to the Scottish History, has promised a great many
things to the World which he never performed: some have thought, that he only
amused people by the undertaking he mentions in that Book: Others believe that
he knew of a great many Scottish Manuscripts beyond the Seas, which were carried
thither by Monks and Friars at the Reformation. In most Religious houses there
was a Chronicle written of the times, diverse of which I have seen, that yet
remain in Scotland, some written in rithme, English and Latin, some in prose:
but there cannot be much made out of them, they being full of Legends and Idle
stories. There are besides, very considerable Manuscripts in Scotland, that
relate to private Families; but give an account of several public
Transactions: as, the History of the Families of the Drummonds, the Gordons,
etc. But for a public History of the Kingdom, there is little more to be
expected of past times, then what has been already published: for as when
Edward the First conquered Scotland, he carried the Records and Registers of
that Kingdom with him to London, so in the late Invasion, Cromwell thought it a
very valuable pledge of the Scottish Nation to send up to the Tower of London,
all the public Records, Rolls, and Registers of the Kingdom, which lay there
till His MAJESTY's happy Restoration: after which, by the KING's Orders, they
were sent down by Sea, to be laid up in the Castle of Edinburgh; but the Ship
that was loaded with them was cast away near the Holy Island. So they were all
irrecoverably sunk and lost: Therefore we must rely upon the credit of our
ancient Historians, since there are no means left to correct them by.
A complete Catalogue of the BISHOPS and ARCHBISHOPS succeeding each other in
their several SEES.
Bishops in SCOTLAND before its division into Dioceses.
277. 1. Amphibalus 370. 2. Regulus 450. 3. Ninian 460. 4. Palladius 490. 5.
Hildebert 606. 6. Columba 520. 7. Servanus 650. 8. Colman 669. 9. Adamannus
689. 10. Wiro 681. 11. Plechelmus 700. 12. Bonifacius 700. 13. Macharius 700.
14. Glacianus 700. 15. Gervadius 496. 16. Trevanus. 600. Thomianus Chromonus
Dagamus Bathanus
Bishop
Bishops and Archbishops of SAINT ANDREWS.
840. 1. Adrian 872. 2. Kellach 896. 3. Malifius 904. 4. Kellach 2d. 939. 5.
Malmore 6. Malifius 2d. 7. Alwinus 8. Maldwin 970. 9. Tuthaldus 10. Fothadus
1010. 11. Gregorius 12. Edmundus 1063. 13. Turgot 1098. 14. Godricus 1110. 15.
Eadmerus 1114. 16. Robert 1159. 17. Arnold 1161. 18. Richard 1178. 19. Hugo
1188. 20. Roger * 1202. 21. William Malvoisin, Lord Chancellor. 1231. 22.
David Benham 1251. 23. Abel 1253. 24. Gamelinus, Lord Chancellor. 1274. 25.
William Wishart 1280. 26. William Fraser, Lord Chancell. 1300. 27. William
Lamberton 1328. 28. James Bane 1332. 29. William Landels 1385. 30. Stephen
1386. 31. Walter Trail 1401. Vacat Seeds annis. 13. 1409. 32. Henry Wardlaw
1444. 33. James Kennedy * 1466. 34. Patrick Grhame, first Archbishop *. 1478.
35. William Sbevez 1497. 36. James Stewart * 1503. 37. Alexander Stewart *
1513. 38. Andrew Forman 1522. 39. James Beaton, Lord Chancell. 1539. 40. David
Beaton, Chardinal and Lord Chancellor. 1545. 41. John Hamilton 1572. 42. John
Douglas 1575. 43. Patrick Adamson 1591. Vacat Seeds annis 15. 1606. 44. George
Gladstanes 1615. 45. John Spotiswood, Lord Chanc, 1639. Vacat Seeds annis 23.
1662. 46. James Sharp.
Bishops of DVNKELD.
1130. 1. Gregorius 1172. 2. Richard 1176. 3. Cormacus 1180. 4. Walder de
Bidden 1186. 5. John Scot 1206. 6. Richard Provand 1213. 7. John Leicester *
1217. 8. Hugo de Sigillo 1226. 9. Matthem, Lord Chancellor. 1236. 10. Galfride
Liverance 1249. 11. Richard 1250. 12. Richard of Jennerkething, Lord
Chancellor. 1272. 13. Robert Sutevile 1300. 14. Matthew 1312. 15. William
Sinclare 1338. 16. Duncan 1364. 17. Michael of Monimusk. 1376. 18. John Peeblis
1396. 19. Robert Carden 1436. 20. Donald Macknaugtan 1437. 21. James Kennedy *
1439. 22. Alexander Lawder 1441. 23. James Bruce, Lord Chancellor. 1447. 24.
John Ralston 1450. 25. Thomas Lawder 1476. 26. James Levington 1484. 27. George
Brown 1514. 28. Gawan Douglas * 1522. 29. George Creighton 1572. 31. Robert
Creighton 1572. 31. James Patton 1603. 32. Peter. 1607. 33. James Nicolson 34.
Alexander Lindsay 1662. 35. George Haliburton 1665. 36. Henry Guthry
Bishops of ABERDENE.
1010. 1. Beanus 1040. 2. Bornotius 1082. 3. Cormachus 1121. 4. Nectanus 1154.
5. Edward 1163. 6. Matthew Kinninmouth. 1197. 7. John 1206. 8. Adam 1227. 9.
Matthew, Lord Chancellor. 1228. 10. Gilbert Striveling 1239. 11. Radolph 1246.
12. Peter Ramsay 1256. 13. Richard Pottock 1269. 14. Hugh Benham 1281. 15.
Henry Cheen * 1329. 16. Alexander Kinninmouth 1341. 17. William Deyn 1351. 18.
John Rait 1357. 19. Alexander Kinninmouth 1380. 20. Adam Cunninghame 1390. 21.
Gilbert Greinlaw, Lord Chancellor. 1424. 22. Henry Leighton 1441. 23. Ingram
Lindsay 1457. 24. Thomas Spence 1480. 25. Robert Blaceader 1484. 26. William
Elphingston, Lord Chancellor. 1514. 27. Alexander Gordon 1518. 28. Gawan
Dumbar 1532. 29. William Stewart, Lord Chan. 1546. 30. William Gordon 1579. 31.
David Cunninghame 1603. 32. Peter Blackburn 1615. 33. Alexander Forbes 1618.
34. Patrick Forbes 1635. 35. Adam Ballanden 1662. 36. David Mitchel 1663. 37.
Alexander Burnet 1664. 38. Patrick Scougal
Bishops of MVRRAY.
1150. 1. William 1171. 2. Simon 1184. 3. Richard 1203. 4. Brieius 1227. 5.
Andrew 1247. 6. Simon 1256. 7. Archbald 1303. 8. David Murray 1330. 9. John
Pilmore 1367. 10. Alexander Bar 1397. 11. William Spinie 1406. 12. John Innes
1414. 13. Henry Leighton 1424. 14. Columba Dumbar 1434. 15. John Winchester
1448. 16. James Stewart 1450. 17. David Stewart 1464. 18. William Tulloch 1469.
19. Andrew Stewart * 1488. 20. Andrew Forman 1513. 21. James Hepburn 1528. 22.
Robert Schaw 1530. 23. Alexander Stewart * 1537. 24. Patrick Hepburn 1573.
Vacat Seeds annis 33. 1606. 25. Alexander Douglas 26. John Guthry. 1662. 27.
Murdo Machenzie.
Bishops of BRICHEN.
1260. 1. Edward 2. Turpinius 3. Rodolphus 4. Hugo 5. Gregorius 1275. 6.
William 1311. 7. John 1363. 8. Adam, Lord Chancellor. 1372. 9. Patrick, Lord
Chancellor. 1384. 10. Stephen 1414. 11. Walter Forrester 1434. 12. John, Lord
Chancellor. 1463. 13. George Shoreswood, Lord Chancellor. 1483. 14. John
1500. 15. Walter Meldrum 1542. 16. John Hepburn 1556. 17. Henry Sinclare 1567.
18. -- Campbell 1606. 19. Andrew Lamb 1619. 20. David Lindsay 1634. 21. Walter
Whitfurd 1662. 22. David Straughan 1671. 23. Robert Lowry
Bishops of DVMBLANE.
1160. 1. Jonathus 1203. 2. Simon 1210. 3. Abraham 1218. 4. William de Boseo,
Lord Chan. 5. Osbert 1233. 6. Clement 1256. 7. Robert 8. Alpin 9. Nicolaus 10.
Maurice 11. William 1363. 12. Walter Cambuslang 1400. 13. Finlaw 1419. 14.
William Stephen 15. Michael Ochiltrie 16. Robert Lawder 1471. 17. John Hepburn
1508. 18. James Chisholme 1534. 19. William Chisholme 1572. 20. Anhrew Grhame *
1615. 21. Adam Ballanden 1635. 22. James Wedderburn 1662. 23. Robert Leighton
1671. 24. James Ramsay
Bishops of ROSS.
1132. 1. Gregorius 2. Reynaldus 1213. 3. Andrew Murray 4. Robert 1274. 5.
Matthew 6. Thomas Dundie 7. Roger 8. Alexander 9. Thomas Vrqhuart 10. Alexander
Kilbuines 11. William Bullock 12. Thomas Tulloch 13. Henry Cockburn 14. James
Woodman 15. Thomas Hay * 16. John Guthry 17. John Fraser * 18. Robert Cockburn
19. William Elphingston 1481. 20. James Hay * 1534. 21. Robert Carncross 1544.
22. David Panter 1550. 23. Henry Sinclare 1564. 24. John Leslie 1597. 25. David
Lindsay 1614. 26. Patrick Lindsay 27. John Maxwell 1662. 28. John Paterson
Bishops of CAITHNES.
1066. 1. S. Darrus 1110. 2. Andrew 3. John 4. Adam 1223. 5. S. Gilbert Murray
1245. 6. William 1261. 7. Walter 1271. 8. Archbald 1288. 9. Andrew 1301. 10.
Ferqbuard 1328. 11. David 1348. 12. Thomas Fingask 1360. 13. Alexander 1404.
14. Malcolm 1421. 15. Robert Strabock 1440. 16. John Innes 1448. 17. William
Mudie 1460. Vacat Seeds annis 24. 1484. 18. Andrew Stewart 1517. 19. Andrew
Stewart * 1542. 20. Robert Stewart * 1586. Vacat Seeds annis 13. 1599. 21.
George Gladstanes P606. 22. Alexander Forbes 1617. 23. John Abernethy 1662. 24.
Patrick Forbes
Bishops of ORKNEY.
1390. 1. William 1450. 2. William Tulloch 1468. 3. William 4. Andrew 1498. 5.
Edward 1530. 6. Robert Maxwell 1546. 7. Robert Reid 1559. 8. Adam Bothwell
1569. 9. Robert Stewart * 1606. 10. James Law 1615. 11. Andrew Grhame * 12.
George Grhame 1639. 13. Robert Barron Elect. 1662. 14. Thomas Sydserfe 1665.
15. Andrew Honniman
Bishops of EDINBVRGH.
1633. 1. William Forbes 1634. 2. David Lindsay 1662. 3. George Wishart 1671.
4. Alexander Young
Bishops and Archbishops of GLASGOW.
599. 1. S. Mungo 1129. 2. John Achaian 1146. 3. John 4. Herbert 5. Angelramus,
Lord Chancel. 6. Joceline 7. Eugenius 8. Hugo, Lord Chancellor. 9. William
Malvoisin 1200. 10. Florentius * 1207. 11. Walter 1234. 12. William Babington,
Lord Chan. 1261. 13. John de Chyan 1268. 14. Nicolas Mossat 1270. 15. William
Wishart, Lord Chancel. 1274. 16. Robert Wishart 1316. 17. John Lindsay 1325.
18. Stephen Dundie 19. John Wishart 20. William Rae 1367. 21. Walter Wardlaw,
Cardinal. 1387. 22. Matthew Glendunning 1408. 23. William Lawder, Lord Chanc.
24. John Cameron 1446. 25. James Bruce 26. William Turnbull 27. Andrew
Moorehead 28. John Lang, Lord Chancellor. 1481. 29. Robert Blaccader, first
Archbish. 1500. 30. James Beaton 1522. 31. Gawan Dumbar, Lord Chanc. 1552. 32.
James Beaton 1572. 33. James Boyd 1581. 34. Robert Montgomery 1587. 35. William
Erskine Vacat Seeds James Beaton restored 1603. 36. John Spotiswood 1615. 37.
James Law 1634. 38. Patrick Lindsay 1662. 39. Andrew Fairfoul 1664. 40.
Alexander Burnet 1670. 41. Robert Leighton 1674. Alexander Burnet restored
Bishops of GALLOWAY.
450. 1. S. Ninian 681. 2. Pleehelmus 740. 3. Frithwaldus 768. 4. Pethumus 778.
5. Ethelbert 6. Radulpbus 7. John 1440. 8. Thomas Spence 9. David 10. Alexander
11. Henry 12. George 1550. 13. Andrew Dury 1557. 14. Alexander Gordon 15. Gawan
Hamilton 1615. 16. William Cowper 1619. 17. Andrew Lamb 18. Thomas Sydserfe
1662. 19. James Hamilton 1974. 20. John Paterson
Bishops of ARGILE.
1200. 1. Evaldus 2. William 1240. 3. William 1350. 4. David 1425. 5. Finlaw 6.
George Learmouth 7. Robert Montgomery 8. -- Boyd 9. -- Campbell 10. -- Kerswell
1636. 11. James Fairlis 1662. 12. David Fletcher 1666. 13. William Scrowgie
1675. 14. Arthur Ross
Bishops of the ISLES.
277. 1. Amphibalus 518. 2. Macilla 3. Michael 1203. 4. Nicolas 1217. 5.
Reginald 1257. 6. Richard 1289. 7. Onacus 8. Mauricius 9. Marcus, Lord
Chancellor. 1606. 10. Andrew Knox 11. John Knox 1630. 12. John Leslie 13. Neil
Campbell 1662. 14. Robert Wallace Vacat Seeds.

Those Bishops who have been the Sons of Kings, etc. or Noblemen, are marked
with an Asterisk *.

ADDENDA.
Page 4. after the Bishops of Edinburgh, add,

The Arms of the Sea of Edinburgh are, Azure, a Saltier Argent, in Chief a
Miter of the Second, garnished Or.

Page 8. after the Bishops of Ross, add,

The Arms of the Bishopric of Ross are, Argent, a Bishop standing on the
Sinister, habited in a long Robe close girt, Purpure, Mitred and holding in his
left hand a Crosier Or, and pointing with the right to S. Boniface on the
Dexter side, clothed, and both his Hands placed on his Breast, Proper.

Page 10. after the Bishops of Galloway, add,

The Coat Armorial belonging to the Sea of Galloway is, Argent, S. Ninian
standing full-faced Proper, clothed with a Pontifical Robe Purpure, on his
head a Miter, and in his Dexter hand a Crosier, Or.

Ibid. in the Bishops of Argile, add,

Then was -- Boyd promoted to this See, An. 162 -- who, as he was descended
from one of the Noblest families in the Kingdom, being Brother to the Lord
Boyd, so he was a very Extraordinary person: he found his See full of Ignorance
and Barbarity, scarce any Churches or Schools in it; and in many places the
very Name of Christ was not known: he set himself wholly to the Work of the
Gospel, and planted many Churches: he resided constantly in his Diocese. and
was a great Example of Piety and Virtue. And for all the prejudices that are in
these parts against that Order, yet he is never named among them to this day
but with great honor as an Apostolical person.

Ibid. after the Bishops of Argile, add,

The Arms of the Sea of Argile are, Azure, two Crosiers disposed in Saltier,
and in Chief a Miter, Or.

THE END.
A Catalogue of some Books Reprinted, and of other New Books printed since the
Fire, and sold by R. Royston, viz.
(...).
THe WORKS of KING CHARLES I. Defender of the Faith. With the History of His
Life: as also of His Trial and Martyrdom.
Books written by H. Hammond, D.D.
A Paraphrase and Annotations upon all the Books of the New Testament in Folio.
Fourt Edition. The Works of the said Reverend and Learned Author, containing a
Collection of Discourses chiefly Practical, with many Additions and Corrections
from the Author's own hand; together with the Life of the Author, enlarged by
the Reverend Doctor Fell, Dean of Christ-Church, in Oxford. In large Folio.
Books written by Jer. Tailor, D.D. and late Lord Bishop of Down and Connor.
Ductor Dubitantium, or, The Rule of Conscience, in Five Books, in Fol. The
Great Exemplar, or, The Life and Death of the Holy Jesus, in Fol. with Figures
suitable to every Story, ingrav'd in Copper: Whereunto is added, The Lives and
Martyrdoms of the Apostles, by Will. Cave, D.D. (...) or, A Collection of
Polemical Discourses addressed against the Enemies of the Church of England,
both Papists and Fanatics, in large Folio. Third Edition. The Rules and
Exercises of Holy Living and Holy Dying. The Eleventh Edition, newly printed,
in Octavo.
Books written by the Reverend Dr. Patrick.
The Christian Sacrifice: A Treatise showing the Necessity, End and Manner of
receiving the Holy Communion: together with suitable Prayers and Meditations for
every Month in the Year; and the Principal Festivals in Memory of our Blessed
Savior. In Four Parts. The Third Edition corrected. The Devout Christian
instructed how to Pray and give Thanks to God: or, A Book of Devotions for
Families, and particular Persons, in most of the concerns of Humane life. The
Second Edition, in Twelves. An Advice to a Friend: the Third Edition, in
Twelves. A Friendly Debate between a Conformist and a Nonconformist: in Octavo,
Two Parts. Jesus and the Resurrection justified by Witnesses in Heaven and in
Earth: in Two Parts, in Octavo, New.
The Works of the Learned Mr. Joseph Mede, in Folio. The Fourth Edition.
Memoyres of the late Duke Hamilton, or, A Continuation of the History of the
Church of Scotland, beginning in the year 1625. where Bishop Spotswood ends,
and continued to the year 1653. Fol. New. The Lives of the Apostles in Folio
alone: by William Cave, D.D. Chirurgical Treatises? by R. Wiseman,
Serjeant-Chirurgeon to His Majesty, Fol. New. XXXI. Sermons, by Charles Gibbes,
D.D. Prebendary of Saint Peter's Westminster, in Quarto, New.
The End of the Catalogue.

