NOTES ON DRYDEN's VIRGIL. In a Letter to a Friend. With an ESSAY on the same
Poet. By Mr. MILBOURNE.

Arma virum -- Nonne hoc spumosum and cortice pingui?
Vt Ramale Vetus praegrandi subere coctum.
Pers. Sat. 1. Thus Translated by Mr. Dryden: Friend -- What if I bring
A Nobler Verse? Arms and the Man I sing.
Pers. Why name you Virgil with such Fops as these?
He Is truly great, and must for ever please:
Not Fierce, but Awful is his Manly Page;
Bold is his Strength, but Sober is his Rage.


Caedimus inque vicem praebemus cura Sagittis.
LONDON, Printed for R. Clavill, at the Peacock, over against Fetter-lane-end,
in Fleetstreet, School.

NOTES ON DRYDEN's VIRGIL. In a Letter to a Friend.
SIR,
WHen the late Translation of Virgil first appeared in Public, you desired my
Thoughts of it: The Task was not ungrateful; for tho I never had any great
Opinion of Mr. Dryden's Performances of that kind, yet I had so great a Respect
for Virgil, as made every thing which might endenizen him, acceptable to me: I
set therefore upon reading the Translation presently, and cast my Observations
on it into Writing: But meeting with many Avocations, of which you are not
ignorant, I have had since no Leisure to look over or complete them. Being at
last Master of a little, I send them you; of what Weight they may appear to the
Few, Time will show.

And here, in the first place, I must needs own Jacob Tonson's Ingenuity to be
greater than the Translator's, who, in the Inscription of his fine Gay in the
Front of the Book, calls it very honestly Dryden's Virgil, to let the Reader
know, that this is not that Virgil so much admired in the Augustaean Age, an
Author whom Mr. Dryden once thought Untranslatable, but a Virgil of another
Stamp, of a courser Allay; a silly, impertinent, nonsensical Writer, of a
various and uncertain Style, a mere Alexander Ross, or some body inferior to
him; who could never have been known again in the Translation, if the Name of
Virgil had not been bestowed upon him in large Characters in the Frontispiece
and in the Running Title. Indeed, there is scarce the Magni Nominis Umbra to be
met with in this Translation, which being fairly intimated by Jacob, he needs
add no more, but Si Populus vult decipi decipiatur.

But Mr. Dryden himself, after some little v^litations and odd Complements
bestowed on my Lord Clifford and the E. of Chesterfield, shows his Triarii, and
in a large Battle, with a Front of extraordinary Length, but not very Deep, in
his Address to my Lord Marquis of Normanby; Mr. Dryden knew he had to do with a
Critic of the First Rate in that Noble Lord; That he perfectly understood the
Author, and his Translation, and therefore tried to tire him so with a very
familiar indeed, but tedious and confused Epistle, as might, if possible,
prevent his looking more nicely into the Translation: and doubtless if that
Noble Lord had patience to read over such a Volume of Impertinence, Mr. Dryden
might justly give him leave to damn all the rest of the Book.

It may perhaps be worth the while to examine that Epistle a little, to see
what Thoughts Mr. Dryden in it has of his own Performances, and the
Intellectuals of others; tho a Man must be very careful of his Movements,
since a dreadfully barbarous, and unnatural Postscript lies behind in
Ambuscade, and Heaven knows how many little Scribblers have fallen into the
Hands of those merciless Monsters, to the perpetual Terror of such unthinking
presumptuous Creatures. However I Will March as warily as I can, and being
forewarned, may be perhaps forearm'd too, till I have gone through what I
designed, and you expected from me.

After some Discourse of the Nature of an Epic Poem, He tells us, as he says,
from Bossu, That Statius had a mind to try his Strength with Virgil on a
particular Subject, as Funeral Games, as Virgil had with Homer: I have not
Boss^ by me, but if he talks so, he mistakes. Statius never pretended to come
up to Virgil, much less to Wrestle a Fall with him in Heroics. Tu ne Divinum
Aeneida tenta, sed long sequere, and vestigia semper adora, was more agreeable
to his Modesty. He might imitate Virgil without incurring the Name of that
Capaneus of a Poet, which perhaps, may pass for a fine Thought, but indeed is
Nonsense; nothing but Lightning could hinder Capaneus from entering Thebes in
spite of all their Gods. Pray what hindered Statius from mateing Virgil? And
Virgil can scarce be said to borrow any thing from Homer in this case, since
his Games were of another Nature as 'twas fit they should have been, only his
were Funeral Games as well as those of Homer, and might have been so, tho he
had never read the Grecians Poems.

After a long Story about the Epic and Dramatic Poem, especially the Tragedy,
He closes his Paragraph, with a Character of his own Tragedies, tho he
introduces it with a Reflection on the Lord Orrery, what ever that is, the rest
is true on certain Experience. We can believe Achilles or Aeneas routed Armies
in Homer, or Virgil. But, Ne Hercules contra duos in the Drama. This is coming
to Confession for Almanzor. Afterward He tells some more Truths of Himself,
such as may perhaps make him a Hero, but of no perfect Virtue; However He Is a
Native of Parnassus, and bred up in the Study of its Fundamental Laws. Now if
I Am not mistaken those are Monarchical, but Mr. D -- since he received Mr. M --
es stamp is of another Clan, a mere Renegado from Monarchy, Poetry, and good
Sense. But let him praise himself, while we wonder at his Writings, and
conclude with himself, That All are not Heroic Poets, I add, Nor fit to
Translate them, who have assumed that lofty Title in Ancient or Modern Ages, or
have been so esteemed by their partial or ignorant Admirers.

They are not to be ranked among the three whom I have named, This passage is
somewhat obscure, for whether he means Homer, Virgil, and Tasso, or Tasso,
Spencer, and Milton, or speaks of three where he had named but two, only to
burlesque Scripture, may be disputed. But why was not Mr. Cowley named as well
as Spencer, or Milton, since Spencer's Fairy Queen is no more finished than Mr.
Cowley's Davideis, I know those who have little of their own, condemn the
Superfluity of his Wit, the Reason is their Unhappiness, not His? Those who
have Wit may use it, and those who want it may be Angry: But I Would sooner yield
to my Lord Bishop of Rochester's Character of that Beginning of the Davideis,
That It Is a better instance and beginning of a Divine Poem than he had ever yet
seen in any Language, than submit to the Censorious Ignorance of our latter
Scriblers.

A Poet cannot speak too plain on the Stage -- I Am afraid then a great many
fine words in the Conquest of Granada, must be lost, such as Vivarambla,
Mirador, Escapade etc. which may create some difficulties to Unhispanioliz'd
Readers.

That the Moral of the Aeneis is less Noble than that of the Ilias, I know no
Reason to grant, That union among Confederates, or Little States, is necessary
for the their support, and for their compassing any great or generous Designs,
is a great Truth, and made good by the Ilias, is owned, That Piety to the Gods,
Reverence to Parents, exact Justice, and prudent Valor are necessary and
effectual to carry Men through Difficulties, and as Noble a Truth and as clearly
made out by the Aeneis, and is its great Moral must be owned too. That the
Romans from thence should make an Inference, That they could not be happier
than by a quiet Submission to the Conduct and Government of a Prince in whom
all these Qualifications met, was reasonable; it was what the Poet designed,
and what Augustus might have cause to value the Poem for, and, supposing it the
great Moral, How comes Obedience to an excellent Prince to be a requisite
inferior to that of Unity among little Confederates? Why should it be less
Noble in an Englishman to be Loyal and Faithful to William the III. than for
the seven Provinces to be true to their Uniting Leagues, in Opposition to the
Spaniard, or the Princes of Germany against the Monarch of France? Tho we own
Mr. D. may be a Republican now, it is but agreeable to his Character; from the
Beginning he was an (...), and I doubt not but he'ell continue so to the end of
the Chapter; but his Argumeut to prove Virgil such, is as ridiculous as a Man
could wish. The Verse out of the 8 th Eneid proves it not Secretosque pios etc,
(for so it should be written) Augustus himself would have Honored Cato for his
severe Virtue; but neither Virgil nor any other Wise Man would have admired him
for his mistaken Republicanism; and had Virgil been suspected for such
Principles, the very suspicion would have ruined what Mr. D. makes the great
Moral of the Poem. But Virgil is not the only Person on whom Mr. D. has
endeavored to fix a Scandalous Character.

For the Cause of Religion is but a modern Motive to Rebellion, invented by the
Christian Priesthood refining on the Heathen. This is malicious enough, and
would have been an Invention becoming Mr. Dryden's Wit, had he been unhappily
admitted into Holy Orders; tho for ought I know, his very Christianity may be
questionable. But I Am afraid, Mr. D.'s a little out in his Chronology. His old
Friend Lucretius tells him, Religio peperit scelerata atque impia facta, and
might not Rebellion be reckoned among such kind of Actions, if he questions it,
I Will show him some Instances of Rebellions under the pretense of Religion
before Christianity was heard of; and since then, I have never heard of any
sort of Christians, who have turned Religion into Rebellion, and Faith into
Faction, but those of the Church of Rome, and their spawn of the Separation.
Our Republicans are generally Atheists, and therefore tho they are as ready for
a Rebellion as Heart could wish, it cannot be said to be under Pretense of
Religion.

He being murdered by his own Son. I wonder where Mr. Dryden met with that fine
Piece of History? How many Sons had Julius Caesar? And by which of his Wives
had He this Barbarian of a Son who murdered Him? I have heard indeed, that when
Brutus struck him, he cried out (...). Caesar had been used to call him Son
familiarly, and out of Kindness, but no body ever said He was Caesar's own Son:
Now it is one of the Fundamental Laws of Parnassus to write True History.
Therefore, if Mr. D. attempt any more, -- Pimplaeum ascendere mentem
Musae furcillis praecipitem ejicient.


It would be a great Kindness to the World to give a good Evidence of the Truth
of Virgil's Desire that his Aeneids should be burnt. I don't remember any of
his Contemporaries mentioning it; and Sulpitius's Epigram, and those Verses
fastened on Augustus, and the Story in Donatus are not exact enough to build our
Credit upon in the Case.

The Poetical Revenge he talks of was only fit for his Observation; a Critic
would have been ashamed of it. Among Rowers, or Racers, or Archers, or Players
at Whorlbats, if that Word may be used as English for the Latin Caestus, some
must have been worsted; but Virgil endeavors to represent their Case tenderly;
and either some extraordinary Misfortune, or some Machine is brought in to
excuse the Looser; which needed not, had he made them such out of pique. Thus
Dares was a Terror to every one, and could have been beaten by none but
Entellus, who was a Match for a Demigod.

It Is possible for a Courtier not to be a Knave, is a great Discovery, and an
extraordinary Condescension. But what a Happiness is it, that Mr. D. can speak
so freely as no Dutch Commentator could? Poor Scoundrels, silly illiterate
Fellows they! What were the Heinsius's and Emmenessius's to Mr. Dryden? But one
Poet may judge of another by himself. Excellent! Poet Squab, endued with Poet
Maro's Spirit by a wonderful Metempsychosis, yet just before Virgil was no
Knave. It was an ugly croaking kind of Vermin which would need swell to the
Bulk of an Ox. He who'd burn a Collection of Mr. D's Works every Year to the
Manes of Virgil, would be as just as He who sacrificed a Statius to Him: I Am
sure they would blush, if Souls were capable of it, at the Scandalous Parallel; but
He can speak what the French durst not. Yet would not a French Army, with the
P. of W. at the Head of it, be very welcome to Mr. D. and, without doubt,
they would make us all Free Subjects presently.

Aeneas could not pretend to be Priam 's Heir by Lineal Succession. Heir, to
what? Did He pretend to reign at Troy, to set up again for the Command of all
Asia? No, but He, and a few more, advised by the Gods to put themselves under
his Command, went to seek their Fortunes in another Country, from whence, though
the Trojans had descended, God knows when, yet Priam, nor any Heir of his, had
any thing to do there: But Mr. D. must be squinting at a Prince, who had no
great Opinion of his Merit, and therefore gave the Laurel to another; and thus
the Vengeance He defers is not forgotten. Yet, now I think on it, why should not
Aeneas be Priam's Heir, since Mr. D. tells us in the very next Page, That He
married the Heiress of the Crown. But how could that be, when here he observes,
that Helenus and Atys Priam's Son and Grandson were still living? But these
Great Wits have commonly very bad Memories, and must now and then, to throw
dirt at Princes, or to wreak their Teen, be allowed to talk a little Nonsense.

It was not for Nothing that Virgil made the Office of High Priest vacant by
the Death of Pantheus for his Hero to succeed in it. Of this great Discovery
Mr. D. says, If Commentators have not taken notice, he is sure they ought to
have done it. Now I Am afraid Mr. D.'s a little too confident here; and I durst
adventure much, that Virgil, that most Judicious of Poets, had no such Thought
in his Head: He says indeed, in the Person of Hector appearing to him in the
Vision, Sacra suosque tibi commendat Roma Penates; and he tells us further of
Hector, that presently after these Words, Manibus vittas, Vestamque potentem
Aeternumque adytis effert penetralibus ignem. If by this Aeneas was made the
Pontifex Maximus, it was not in the room of Pantheus, for He was yet living,
and Aeneas meets Him soon after, and from him receives the lamentable Account
of Simon's Villainy and Troy's Ruin; and Pantheus was then flying with his Gods
and his Nephew to seek for Shelter; Pantheus then turns again, as it should
seem, with Aeneas and others to try their utmost to drive off the Enemy; and
Pantheus is killed-afterwards, in the very medley of War, when Aeneas had no
time to look after his Gods; nor do we find him ever seeking for them; but when
he returns home to carry off his Family, Anchises bears the Gods left at Home
by Hector in the Vision before, along with them in their last Flight. Besides,
Pantheus was particularly the Priest of Apollo, and not greater than Laocoon
before, who was Neptune's Priest, of great Interest and Authority, and
therefore made an Example of by angry Minerva; but Augustus, for whose Sake
this deep Discovery was made, was the Chief Priest of all, not devoted to any
one, but presiding over the Religious Ceremonies of all the Gods, and was no
more Aeneas his Heir in this Office, than Aeneas had been the Heir of Pantheus.

But Virgil makes Diomede give him a higher Character for Strength and Courage.
A higher Character than whom? It must be than Hector: Now Segrais was much
wiser to omit this Observation, than Mr. D. to make it; for Virgil says no such
thing; for tho they were Ambo animis ambo insignes praestantibus armis. That
expression makes them not equal by any means, two Men may be very Brave, very
Valiant, and yet one more so than the other; and that very Addition of Hic
pietate Prior; was but to bring the balance even, that Aeneas's piety, might
make up the defects of his Fortitude, when compared with Hector. And it could
not at all become Virgil to contradict Homer, who tho he made Aeneas the second
Champion of the Trojans, yet shows him every where inferior to Achilles, Ajax,
and Diomede; and even Hector himself was thought too weak for any of them.
Diomede therefore only complements Aeneas, not as an over match for himself,
but as a really great Man, whom they would find it very hard to equal, tho he were
inferior to one who was too hard not only for Venus, but for Mars himself.

Mr. D. next gives us ten Lines of Diomedes Speech, but prudently tells his
Lord the Reason why he omitted the Translation. Because he had no Reason to
desire he should see that, and the Original together. And this was a Favor he
ought to have begged of every Man, for never, certainly was such an Original so
barbar^usly abused before. Yet Mr. D. thinks, He has not succeeded ill in the
version of those Lines: this is his old Distemper, admiring and glassing
himself in the Mirror of his own Rhymes; but let us consider a little how he
really has succeeded.

We met in Fight, I know him to my cost; Virgil says not so, nor could Diomede,
they had met indeed in Battle, Iliad ^.
but Diomede got no hurt, only Aeneas was struck down with a Massive Stone, and
had died under Diomedes Hand, had not his Mother luckily saved him, this then
was an absurd Addition without Sense or Reason.

With what a whirling force his Lance he tossed. Did ever any one talk so before?
Tossing intimates no extraordinary Violence in a thing which is aimed at a
Mark, as a Lance is in Battle; Tossing in a Blanket, which the Translator
deserves, indeed is somewhat a violent Motion upward, but downward it is very
natural, as honest Sanco would have informed him; Tossing and Hurling, are very
different, one infers Force and Rapidity, the other only a looser and more
careless Impulse.

Heavens what a Spring was in his Arm to throw! Is too Philosophical for an old
Grecian General, and no way fit for a grave, old Prince, to say the Ambassadors
of another, nor is it in Virgil.

And rose at every blow: Wonderfully Heroical, and somewhat like honest
Tyrrheus the Block-River.

Two more his match in might. Is false Grammar.

They would have changed the Fortune of the Fight. As if there had been but one
Battle during the Siege of Troy; or as if that were a good Expression for the
Fortune of the War.

The War protracted, and the Siege delayed. Is very mean, and a little
mistaken, the taking of Troy was delayed indeed by Hector and Aeneas, but not
the Siege.

Both brave alike, and equal in Command: Is intolerable, Aeneas was but a kind
of Lieutenant General under Hector, not equal in Command with him, tho I find
Homer calling Aeneas, (...), and that before the Death of Priam.

In pious Reverence to the Gods excelled. Mr. D. here forgets what he had
rightly observed in his Dedication, That Piety in Aeneas was of a more
extensive Importance, than only to have relation to the Gods, for it contains
the whole Duty of Man toward his Country, and his Relations. Again, Aeneas was
inferior in the Field to Hector, witness Hector's own Visionary Words to him.
Si Troja dextra Defendi possent etiam hac defensa fuissent, meaning his own,
which if not true, had been indecent for the Ghost of so modest a Man as Hector
was.

This now is Mr. D's Great Success, Mr. Ogilby's must appear much better to an
Impartial Reader, and what if that passage were thus Translated; We too have
tried his Iavelins distant force,
And Hand to Hand have stopped his dreadful course,
We Have seen how high he'ed lift his mighty Shield,
And how his Spear like Whirl-winds raked the Field,
And had the Trojan spacious Bounds supplied
Two more like him for daring Valor tried.
War then had changed his Scene, and Greece had mourned
In ruins, by the Trojan Arms o'erturn'd,
The War was long, the tenth sad Year at last,
On our Victorious Brows the Garland placed.
Great Hector, Great Aeneas stopped the Tide,
They two so long our utmost Force defied;
Both brave, and both for Martial Deeds Renoun'd,
The latter more with God-like goodness Crowned.


But an immediate Revelation dispenses with all duties of Morality: This is one
of those excellent Doctrines Mr. D. would have propagated in the Church, had he
once crept into Orders, his Divinity, and his Law is much alike, and were it
sit to mingle Sacred Matters with his wretched stuff, the case of the
Israelites would by no means fit his turn.

Or the honesty of his Hero would be ill defended: It Is wondrous Honesty indeed
to be true to Whoring. Aeneas had trespassed against Morality, and because at
Heavens warning, he would not persist in it, he was scarce Honest; now
methinks, he represents a Penitent, who is not so far master of himself, but
that he will still hanker after folly, and with much ado, and Heavens warning and
assistance, Subdues his Sensual Inclinations; but what is this to Mr. D.

But possession having cooled his Love as it increased hers. Virgil hints at no
such thing; He represents his Hero pleased with his too amorous Queen, busy
both as a Husband, and a Lover, as well as a Statesman, or Magistrate: Not to
be changed, but by a Divine Command, and even then Animum multo labefactus
amore; so no natural mutability could have diverted his Affections, only
pitying Heaven put a full stop to them.

I think I may be Judge of this, because I Translated both, i. e. Ovid's
Epistle of Dido to Aeneas, and Virgil's Episode; Very great indeed! and it may
be they are Translated a like, and that must evidence the wonderful Acumen of
this assuming Judge. But it would be well if Mr. D. could ascertain the time or
date of Ovids's Epistle, and demonstrate that the Aeneis was written before the
Epistolae Heroidum; for if he fails here, Ovid was not so much out in his
Measures as our Translator imagines.

Mercury calls Aeneas, not only a Husband, but a fond Husband. Here Mr. D's
Memory failed him again.

Virgil makes the Intrigue between Dido, and Aeneas a Marriage, to make way for
the divorce. This is one of Mr. D's Mysteries Revealed; Toland himself could
not have cleared 'em better. But where, in the name of Folly, is the Divorce?
If this be to be called one, there are many of our Modern Heroes of Mr. D's
Cut, who have forsaken their Wives, but can get no Livia's, tho they may
Iulia's.

Ac veluti magno in Populo, etc. This is the first Similitude which Virgil
makes in this Poem, True; but his Translator whose Wit is the very Quintessence
of decency, has helped him to another. Then as an Eagle gripes his trembling
Game, etc. and this where, according to his own Rules, it was by no means
proper.

If I desired to appear more Learned than I am, it had been as easy for me to
have taken their Objections, and Solutions, as it is for a Country Parson to
take the Expositions of the Fathers out of Iunius, and Tremellius. Very smart
on my word! Mr. Bays has a spite to a Country Parson, because refused to be
one, and it is plain he has met somewhere with the names of Iunius and
Tremellius.

How came the Cuisses to be worse tempered than the rest of his Armor? It may
be they were not, but they had joints, which an Arrow's pile might find, or the
wound might be more inward, this then needed no defense; nor is the Story of
Virgil's designing his Aeneis to the Fire any more credible, than Maximus
Planudes's account of Aesops deformity.

That (...) which they shed. This plainly shows how fit Mr. D -- n may be to
Translate Homer, a mistake in a single Letter might fall on the Printer well
enough, but this word for (...) must be the Error of the Author; nor had he art
enough to Correct it at the Press; This of the Gods, was so like our Common
Blood, that it was not to be distinguished from it, but by Name and Color. The
Name indeed, is no great matter, but the Color methinks is very considerable;
and Alexander thought so, when a wound having convinced him of the folly of his
Flatterers, who had almost raised him into a conceit, that he was a God, he bad
them view his Blood, and see if it were like that (...) which Homer attributes
to his Deities.

Non me tua turbida virtus terrent ait, for Turbida terrent dicta ferox. This I
should not have taken notice of, but that it is repeated again soon after. It
may be Mr. D. had another Copy, or thought to mend his Author, and how foolish
must his Solemn Subintelligit appear to any one who reads the Text, Turnus had
not valued the haughty words of Aeneas at all; he had too much of the Hero in
him, but the Gods, and Jupiter himself against him, were enough to daunt the
boldest.

Jupiter ipse duas, etc. Mr. D's Critical Translation of Quem damnet labor, is
as silly here, as in the Place he refers to, not but that others have made the
same wise Interpretation, as well as he, but why may not those Lines bear this
Metaphrase.

Now Jove on high the Sacred Balance hung,
In The Scales the Lots of both the Champions slung.
That Heaven might read the last decrees of Fate,
And whom rough War would sink with Deaths eternal weight.
I say, Turnus not only suffered her to carry him out of danger, but consented
to it. For this, Mr. D. appeals to Turnus's words, which import no such thing,
nor is the Supposition agreeable to his Character. Turnus was almost distracted
with the affront of that Phantome of Aeneas, with which Juno had carried him
away before. And when Iuturna turned Charioteer, she threw Metiscus out of the
Box, and assumed his shape, which had been needless, but that she had no mind
to be known to her Brother; and this was no extraordinary matter for a Goddess
to do, if Turnus did but once turn his Head; but now at last by her ing lorious
Management, he finds her, and declares his suspicion of the tricks she had
played before, for the Agnovi means no more, but I had some apprehension, or
jealousy of such a thing; for had he been certain of it, he could as easily
have dismounted before, and doubtless would have done it for his own Honor,
his Mistresses security, and to avoid the Reproaches of Drances.

I am the first Englishman perhaps, who made it his design to Copy him in his
Numbers, his choice of Words, and his placing them for the sweetness of the
Sound. Is boldly spoken, and doubtless e're long Dr. B -- s will tell us, that
his Address is as exactly designed to copy the purity, the simplicity, and
elegance of Tully; and I think, the Poet and Orator have succeeded much alike;
of which as to Mr. D. we shall have often occasion hereafter to take notice.
But why should Mr. D. boast himself of having avoided the Caesura so much in
translating, nay, in copying an Author, who added Gravity and Majesty to his
own Works by a frequent, but judicious use of them. But thus Mr. D* boasts too
in his Preface to his Translation of the First Book of Ovid's Metamorphoses;
and his Boast is just like that of Schoolboys, who think they have done a
mighty Feat, if they have made a few Golden Verses. It Is true, soft and easy
Lines might become Ovid's Epistles, or his Art of Love; they might be so in the
Metamorphoses to a Fault, for that Book is generally more noble and lofty. But
Virgil, who is all Great and Majestic, who never descends to little things, nor
goes big with Fooleries, requires Strength of Lines, Weight of Words, and
Closeness of Expression; not an ambling Muse, running on a Carpet Ground, and
shod as lightly as a New Market Runner. And though we have a great many
Consonants in our Language, yet withal we have such a Variety of Words Native
and Adopted, or Tralatitious, that we may suit our Language to the Style and
Matter of any Author whatsoever, and may make Caesura's, if not affected,
beautiful and delightsom, and that Roughness they give may advance and not
diminish Majesty.

The Italians are forced upon the Caesura once or twice in every Line. This is
like the rest of Mr. D.'s Critical Observations; Caesura's are not unfrequent
in that Language; but I dare engage to point to many whole Stanza's in Tasso,
and some Hundreds of Lines which have none.

A Thousand Secrets of Versification he may learn from Virgil. True; but not
from his Translator. Virgil is indeed the most absolute of Profane Poets; but
if He had not a better Picture drawn of Him than this done by Mr. D.'s Pencil,
he would soon lose his Reputation.

Whether the Aeneis took up Eleven Years of Virgil' s time, or whether He
thought it imperfect, is a moot Point; but, whether Mr. D. wants Four Years or
not to correct his, is none; for I cannot think his Wit so much more fluent
than his Masters; however we see here the Canis Festinans made good; and if the
Subscribers any of them were too pressing, He has fitted them as they deserved,
with a Translation as absurd as their Importunity.

There is not, to the best of my remembrance, one Vowel gaping on another for
want of a Caerura through the whole Poem. This made me open the Book at
adventure, and Pages the 408, 9. I met with these two, Tell me, ye Trojans, for
that Name you own -- And what we seek of you, of us desired: And perhaps, A
Heroic Poem, which Words begin this tedious Epistle, is not extremely
Euphonical, though in Prose. But why may not such a thing be allowed. Methinks
Virgil's Et succus pecori and lac subducitur agnis. Victor apud rapidum
Simoenta sub Ilio alto. And Ovid's, O and de Latio, O and de gente Sabina, and
many more sound very well: And nothing's more common in the Greek; nor does
that in Tasso's first Stanza sound harshly, Molto egli opro col senno, and con
la mano Molto soffri nel glorioso acquisto; nor is any thing commoner in French
or Spanish: And whatever Mr. D. may think of it, some of as nice an Ear as
himself can pass over such an Hiatus without complaining of the Discord.

Tho deep, yet clear, etc. And why may not others have observed both the
Sweetness and the Reason of the Sweetness of that Couplet? Is Mr. D. the only
Man of Ear? Or cannot others observe the Elegance of the Antitheses, the easy
sliding of one Syllable into another, and the Quantities of English Syllables:
I must believe, that no Man living can teach him to make smooth well-running
Verses, who has not a Musical Ear; unless Mr. D. or some like him, would give
us a new English Parnassus, where he might have smooth Fragments, and nothing
required but Skill to tack 'em together. Certainly Mr. D. himself is not the
smoothest of Poets, whatever he may value himself upon: I think my Lord
Rochester was of that Opinion long since; and but that I have observed somewhat
of his ungraceful Roughness elsewhere, I should think those, And seven long
Years the unhappy wandering Train
Were tossed by Storms, and scattered through the Main.
Which last Phrase is but Nonsense. And again, O E'lus, for to thee the King of
Heaven
The Power of Tempest, and of Winds has given,
were far from smooth or well-sounding Rhimes. But I Am persuaded my Lord
Normanby was very kind to Mr. D. and the English World, if he overruled the
Poet's Itch of thrusting his Prosody out in Print; for he has so far saved his
Credit and our Trouble.

The Alexandrine Line, which we call, though improperly, the Pindaric; though
sillily, he means sure; for none who understood any thing of Pindaric Poetry,
could call that the Pindaric Line in contradistinction to Lines of other
Measures: And since Mr. Spencer uses it to close his Stanza, without any
Thought of Pindarizing in it, why should Mr. Cowley's using it give it that
Name now. Nor indeed does the Nature of a Pindaric Poem show it self in the
Irregularity of Measures, any more than a Chorus in Euripides, from the same
Inequality, should be called a Pindaric.

'Twas given to those who understand no better. Very civil! i. e. Mr. D.
translated Virgil very foolishly for the sake of his foolish Readers. Thus he
talks; yet I have heard some say, He did his best. I was loath to believe it.
But however, some Readers may understand the Impertinency of his Translations.

The Triumvir and Proscriber had descended to us in a more hideous Form, if the
Emperor had not taken care to make Friends of Virgil and Horace. Well, I cannot
but tremble at our present King's Fate: Boast not, Great Prince, of all thy
Martial Acquisitions; boast not of having given Check to the Grand Louis; talk
not of Namure, nor Ireland reduced, nor pretend to Thanksgivings for a Glorious
Peace, for the terrible Mr. Bays is disobliged! What an unlucky thing was it to
give his Laurel to a Shadwell or a Tate, whose drawn Pen is more fatal than
that of Hipponax, and more terrible than a Luxemburg or Boufflers in the Head
of a French veterane Army. Well, how his Majesty'll come off I know not, but
Occursare capro, cornu ferit ille, caveto.


Spencer wanted only to have read the Rules of Bossu. It Is well if Virgil and
Homer did not want 'em too; for it seems, if our French Critics may be
believed, neither of 'em had the luck to write a true Heroic Poem. Mr. D. used
to talk in Days of Yore, of an Heroic Poem to the Honor of Charles II. Had it
ever been finished, doubtless Mr. Bossu's Rules would have appeared in every
Line. It may be Sir R. B. had read 'em too, which gave so much Perfection to
his late Heroic Undertakings: But what will come of us, the poor Chiurma of the
Empire of Parnassus, who have neither Knowledge nor a Genius?

Mr. Le Clerc has made it out, that David 's Psalms were in as errant Rhyme as
they are translated. Mr. Le Clerc's a Man of mickle Authority with some; but
his Discovery in that Point's far from new: The Psalms are some of 'em in
Rhyme, some are not so; but where they are with, or without Rhyme, they are so
far from that Meanness which Mr. D. would throw into their Character, that the
meanest thing in the whole Sacred Book has more of true Poetic Fire in it, than
ever He had from the Days of Oliver's Apotheosis, to those of Virgil in
Macaronique.

He who can write well in Rhyme, may write better in Blank Verse. We shall know
that, when we see how much better Dryden's Homer will be than his Virgil.

Perhaps I have as little Reason to complain of the difficulty of Rhyming as
any Man except Quarles or Withers. They then, with our Incomparable Translator,
make a Triumvirate of Rhymers, and great Ones too, (if that Phrase may pass
with us, which was condemned in Ben Johnson formerly.) But this extraordinary
Facility is not so very apparent in Mr. D.'s Works, and I never heard he was a
great Extempore Man.

I Am afraid I have mistaken Virgil 's Sense more often and more grossly. Never
did Elvira make a truer Confession to her Spanish Friar. But how could one Poet
mistake another so much. I Am afraid there was not so near a Relation between
Virgil and Mr. D.'s Souls, as there was between Mr. D.'s and Mr. Oldham's. The
Confession, whoever understands Virgil's Latin and Scheme, must acknowledge to
be the Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth. And so much must be
said for the Honor of Mr. D.'s Veracity.

Sorti Pater aequs utrique. Ruaeus thinks the word Pater is to be referred to
Evander. And Ruaeus is right in his Judgment; for how could any Man in his
right Senses, think Pallas should tell Turnus of Ioves's impartiality, a whim
quite contrary to the notions Antiquity had of Fate. Fate might be impartial,
tho it were not unconcerned, for its not Partiality to determine a dubious
Matter where Fate it self requires a determination in the case; and, according
to Mr. D's precedent Declaration, Jove cannot control Fate; whence it is plain,
that if Pater refers to Jupiter, it is very impertinent. Turnus had said nothing
to Pallas of Jove, but wished his Father Evander had been present; and what
more Noble Character could Pallas have given of his Father, than that the
Honorable Victory, or the glorious death of his Son would be equally welcome
News to him? And what could confirm Pallas's words more strongly than those of
Evander, when he was brought home Dead?

Quod si immatura manebat
Fors natum, caecis Volscorum millibus ante
Ducentem in Latium Teneros cecidisse juvabit,
As for Mr. D's Criticism on the other Verse, it is La Cerda's Notion before,
and it is of no great consequence whether he or Servius be in the right.

I say nothing of Sir John Denham, Mr. Waller, and Mr. Cowley, it is the utmost
of my ambition to be thought their Equal. Thus the poor Frog would swell
himself into an Ox, had any of them, especially Mr. Cowley, undertaken this
work, we had had Virgils sense and air running through the whole, and the Work
would have been known by every Reader, without the Advertisement of the Running
Title, where now we have false Criticism, mistaken Sense, intolerable
Omissions, absurd Accretions; and indeed any thing rather than Virgil. I own
it is harder to Translate Virgil through, than to Translate a single Book; yet
because Mr. D. throws down his Glove to challenge any one in the 4th, 6th, and
8th Pastoral, and the 1st and 4th Georgic, besides several Books of the Aeneis;
I have taken it up, and have Translated the 4th Pastoral, and 1st Georgic, and
the 1st Pastoral into the bargain, and leave it to Segrais 3d sort of Judges,
to determine who has Translated Virgil so far best.

Spencer, and Milton are nearest in English to Virgil, and Horace in the
Latin. But which of them resembles Horace? Spencer aimed at an Heroic Poem,
and so did Milton, (tho neither of 'em with that success which might have been
wished) but Horace never attempted such a thing as Mr. D. well observes before;
unless either of them be remarkable for that Curiosa Felicitas, formerly
admired in Horace; but Mr. D. knows his own meaning well enough, tho I don't.

My chief Ambition is to please those Readers, who have discernment enough to
prefer Virgil before any other Poet in the Latin Tongue. The Ambition was good,
but never did any Man fail worse than our Translator, for no Man can admire
Virgil who cannot understand him, nor can any Man who understands him be pleased
with Mr. D's. Translation.

The Mob Readers are but a sort of French Huguenots, or Dutch Boors. But how
come these to be matched together? Huguenots are so called with some regard to
their Religion. A Gate would not have given them a Title more than Others who
went often in and out at it, had not they in particular made it their way to
their Public Worship. But pray, what respect to that have Boors? If they have
any, I must needs say, Mr. Dryden's a very fine Gentleman.

As we hold there is a middle State of Souls. We, that is, we of the Church of
Rome; for our Translator pretends to suck the Teats of of that Milk-white Hind,
if any. Mr. D. then believes a Purgatory, and, as in duty bound, should have
taken most pains with the 6 th Book of the Aeneis, since there is the original
Chart of that wonderful Place, and a better account of it, than those of all
the Roman Champions together amount to; yet this Book is none of those he
pretends to have succeeded best in. Heaven send him a good deliverance.

Many Paedagogues, at School, Tutors at the Universities, and Gentlemen's
Governors in their Travels are the most positive Block-heads in the World.
Well, it is time then, to pull down Schools to leave young Gentlemen to live at
Random in our Universities, and abroad; or make Mr. D. Schoolmaster, Tutor,
and Governor General to both Universities: What a glorious Manager would he
prove? Obscure Authors, and old worn out Monuments would be as Intelligible to
him as Virgil or Homer, and one Page of his English Prosodia, would teach 'em
more than our Vossius's or Busby's, our Preston's, or Ellye's, or our
Lassels's, tho jumbled altogether; and a little mooting upon the Magna Charta
of Parnassus, under his Direction, would ruin all our Inns of Court for ever;
but none's so bold as blind Bayard.

But not being of God, as a Wit said formerly, they could not stand. By this
it is plain Mr. D. is no Wit; for one of true Wit would be ashamed to Ridicule
Scripture; and I Am pretty confident, this present Work of Mr. D 's is not of
God; and for his Translation, the more a judicious Reader studies it, the worse
he will like it, and every time he takes it up, he will discover some new Follies
in it; nor indeed can any Applaud it now, or hereafter, but such as are born
Vervecum in Patria crassoque sub aere. Whence I can only call it Impudence, not
Innocence, or Conscience of merit which could make him Appeal to my Lord
Marquess of Normanby.

Virgil has given me the Example of Entellus. Mr. Waller had not lost his
Poetic Fire at Mr. D's age, nor had the famous Cornaro, nor Sophocles, or
Aeschylus. But woe to some little Skip-jack who dares stand in the heated old
Champions way. Methinks, he looks like Colbrond swinging his heavy Club about
his own Head, and threatening to sink poor Sir Guy at every stroke; well, I
heartily pity the poor wretch; but if all his Teeth be dashed out for
challenging such a demi Gorgon, who can help it! But if the air of the Country
which produces Gold is never wholesome, there is some hope the old Spark may
drop off, Poisoned by the Mercury of his own Brain, before the young Scoundrel
be quite ruined.

It rarely happens that a Verse of Monosyllables sounds Harmoniously. Yet in
one very Modern Poem, I find no fewer than 4 as smooth as those he instances
in, viz.

Scorn all the Thoughts of such, and spurn the Ground,
They saw them Storm vast Works which reached the Skies,
He saw you through those Gates could force your way
In Wars rough Storms, and in the Calms of Love.
And I doubt not, but many hundreds of Lines made up of Monosyllables might be
much more soft, and easy than those.

Some things I have omitted, and some too I have added of my own. But by what
Authority? A Man may Paraphrase, or a void a Literal Translation, and yet
retain all the Authors Thoughts, and for Virgil, who has no false Thought in
his whole Work, it is almost Sacrilege to Abridge him; and for the Additions.
Heaven knows they are such as discover their Author too well, so mean, so
trifling, so unbecoming the Majesty of Virgil, that they must be very Flegmatic
Readers, who can forgive him. He has given Virgil's pure Gold so base an Alloy,
that Cromwell's Broad Pieces, with which he cheated the Dutch, were much more
tolerable.

The Additions will seem ( at least I have the Vanity to think so; and Mr. D.'s
Vanity is not to be questioned) not stuck into him, but growing out of him. For
an Instance of this we need go no farther than that in the first Aeneid, where
Juno says of Minerva -- Ipsa Ver. 48.

Illum expirantem transfixo pectore flammas
Turbine corripuit, scopuloque infixit acuto.
Which Mr. D. thus Englishes: Then as an Eagle gripes the trembling Game,
The Wretch yet Hissing with her Father's Flame,
She strongly seized, and with a burning Wound
Transfixed, and naked on a Rock she bound.
Meaning Ajax the Son of Oileus; which Nonsensical Fustian I Am persuaded none
will say grew out of Virgil; whose Sense was more honestly expressed before the
Days of D.'s Virgil in that Couplet.

On pointed Rocks expiring Ajax dashed,
His guilty flying Soul revenging Flames embraced.
The Greeks, we know, were laboring many Hundreds of Years upon their Language
before they brought it to Perfection. It may be so; but how does Mr. D. know
it? How many Hundred Years was that Language cultivated before Homer's time, or
that of Orpheus, or Linus, or Musaeus, of whom, if we have any Fragment, it is
pure Greek; and we meet with nothing after Homer more polite than himself; though
all the great Sophists and Orators were much his Iuniors. But a Man may be
permitted to blunder in such things, who had never heard of Organs before St.
Caecilia's time.

The Word Pater, for Example, signifies not only a Father, but your Father, my
Father, his or her Father, all in a word. From whence I Am convinced that some
great Poets are as positive Blockheads as any little Paedagogue in the World:
Pater signifies Father in general indeed, but is appropriated to none but by
meus, tuus, suus; and so Father in English by mine, thine, hers, etc. and where
those Pronouns are not expressed, they are to be understood, and are not
included in Pater.

The Thought concerning Ambergrease is very fine, and Mr. D. may pass for a
Civet Cat, if he please, or a Catamountain, for me.

I thought fit to keep as near my Author as I could, without losing all his
Graces. To endeavor a Literal Translation might do so; but otherwise there is,
to my Apprehension, more Danger of losing them by leaving him, than by keeping
close to him.

I shall not be wholly without Praise, if in some sort I may be allowed, etc.
Yes certainly, if you have copied Virgil's Clearness, Purity, Easiness, and
Magnificence after a very ill sort; for sure he cannot be so much a
Self-Flatterer, as to pretend to have shadowed any of those things. Nor can we
imagine any more that Virgil with his own Original Faculties, had he lived now,
or written in English, would have written as Mr. D. has done, than that he
would have Fathered Maphaeus's Supplement, or Persius's Satyrs; and the very
difference between that Esteem the Translation of Virgil and the Original have
had, the Poets still living, proves their intrinsic Value, since none but a
Bavius, a Maevius, or Bathyllus carp'd at Virgil, and none but such unthinking
or unlearned Vermin admire his Translator.

I am too much an Englishman to lose what my Ancestors have gained for me; i.
e. Since acquaintance with such, whom he can never praise enough. Things are
mightily altered with him since the Days of the Hind and Panther, and the
Defense of the Strong Box Papers. Thus Tempora mutantur.

Without being injurious to the Memory of our English Pindar. Quae supra nos
nihil ad nos. Mr. Cowley's Genius was far above the Comprehension of so little
a thing as Mr. D. for Figures to be bold, and Metaphors violent in Pindaric,
proved that Ours knew what it was to write like him of Thebes, of which his
Reprover has no Idea: His Language, perhaps, was not so fine as he could have
made it; but He had no Royal Salary, no Encouragement to make him so nice about
Words, though He has fewer Improprieties, and abundantly more Sense and Wit than
those who find fault with him; and had he met with an Augustus or Mecaenas, the
English Virgil had scarce been inferior to the yet unparalleled Roman.

I am confident our Poet never meant to leave him, or any other such a
Precedent, i. e. of Hemistics, or Half Verses. Now I am confident of the
contrary; and there is so much Beauty in every one of them, ( that only
excepted which Mr. D. has instanced in) the Sense goes on with so full and
strong a Spirit, and that very Abruptness gives it such an Emphasis as is
admirable and surprising. Whether Homer ever left any such is more than Mr. D.
knows; He had an Aristarchus to perfect and correct what He thought needed it,
and who was fit for the Work he undertook. None durst pretend to the same for
Virgil; he wanted no Sense, and he had no Equal. The Story of his designing his
Aeneis for the Fire is idle, a Fiction of the Pseudo-Donatus, another Planudes,
more a Fabler than his pretended Aesop; nor do any of his Contemporaries
mention any thing of it. Ovid, Propertius, Silius, Martial Statius, Persius,
mention it; the four last, though later, give it the Character of Divine and
Excellent, but none wishes He had lived to perfect it; and the Story of his
completing those two Hemistics in the 6th Aeneid, is as ridiculous; but all
those Shams are of the same Original; nay, what if we should stumble at, Quem
tibi jam Troja? What if it was, Peperit florente Creusa? What if it was left so
to express Andromache's Passion? When she came to mention her dear native City,
Tears forbad her, and a true Sense of Decency forbad the Poet to finish that
Sentence; and though she recovers her self to enquire of Iulus soon again; yet,
again too, at the loved Name of Hector she bursts into Tears, and can go no
farther. This, to me, I must confess, signifies more than Donatus's Legend; and
if Virgil's Half Verses are the Frogs and Serpents half kindled into Life
(always allowing Equivocal Generation, which Mr. D. knows to a Tittle) Mr. D.'s
full-lin'd Translation is the Lump of unformed unanimated Mud.

The Leaders may be Heroes, but the Multitude must consist of common Men. Mr.
D. would be very kind to point out to us his leading Verses. I make no doubt
but they are Captains over Hundreds, and Captains over Fifties, and very few
Companies double Officer'd.

His Talk about the Difficulty of finding Words is Stuff, not worth regarding.
Our English is now little, if at all inferior to the Latin. But Mr. D. wanted
an Opportunity to let his Patron know he had some notice of the Public
Difficulties about Money.

For I think it is not so Sacred, as that not one Iota must be added nor
diminished on pain of an Anathema. Mr. D. then confesses that Virgil's Text is
not Scripture; but if it were, his Church has such Guides as have more than
once adventured upon that Anathema, and he a true Republican, Son of a
Monarchical Church, has imitated them, having given his Author. Procrustes's
Law, and crop'd and stretched him every where as he thought fit.

There is a Beauty of Sound in some Latin words, which is wholly lost in the
French; I own it, but not so much in the English, our Language now can express
Matters both with Majesty and softness; and I make no doubt, after all Mr. D's
boast of his gift that way; a Man with much less noise, may Translate Virgil
much more agreeably for Style and Sense, than he has done. But I must own, it is
a more delicate Thought than ordinary, that Virgil's mollis amaracus, in a
Grove on a Mountain top, should make us think of Roses and Lilies; but Thoughts
are free.

Aude, Hospes, contemnere opes, and te quoque dignum,
Finge Deo. --
What if thus Translated?

Dare, noble Guest, to scorn all Wealth below,
And as a God, a God-like Virtue show!
Lay by Virgil I beseech your Lordship, and all my better sort of Judges, when
you take up my Version. Is very reasonable Advice, for nothing can provoke any
tolerable Judges Patience mo^^ than to compare them together. But why must this
great Book be called Virgil then, only to catch Gulls, and make them believe
they hug a Juno, when really they have no more than a Cloud or Shadow?

False Critics may think I Latinize too much. And so may true Critics, but Mr.
D. takes care to fix an ill Character before hand on all who condemn him, so
that every one ventures on him at his Peril, and I among the rest.

I carry not out the Treasure of the Nation which is never to Return. A
designed Reflection on some of whom he would have it believed that they do so.
But what I bring from Italy, I spend in England. Now we English are somewhat
Jealous of Italian ware, we had so much of it a few Years since, that we cannot
yet be very fond of it, especially when cooked by ill Hands.

Every Man cannot distinguish between Pedantry and Poetry; every Man therefore
is not fit to Innovate. Mr. D. I hope is unexceptionable in the case, he
understands the Fundamentals of Parnassus, and might with as good Right, as his
Holiness does in Religious Matters, set up for Poetical Infallibility; he
abases and distorts Common Words, and calls that Innovating; and who may say to
him* What do thou? What I have observed of him, is only endeavoring to
taint our English with some Latin Idioms, which I Am afraid will die upon his
Hands, or sink like Irish Money, and come to nothing.

The Poet must first be certain that the word he would introduce, is beautiful
in Latin. Well, it may be so, yet very Foolish in English; for instance, one of
the Reasons of Juno's hate to the Trojans, was, Spretae injuria Formae; where
the Expression is pure and Intelligible. Mr. D. Latinizes in his Version, thus,
And her Form disdained. Which is absurd, improper, and obscure; but this it is
for one who cannot distinguish between Pedantry, and Poetry, to pretend to
Innovate.

Mr. Congreve has done me the favor to Review the Aeneis, and to Compare my
Version with the Original. This is to fix a Scandal upon Mr. Congreve, that the
World might think him as Dull, and Inapprehensive as our Translator; doubtless
if he Read it, he found many Faults in it, but it seems, he is none of the
dangerous Judges, if he might be permitted to make Comparisons; and had he Read
it as a Judge, he would scarce have found five Lines together in the whole, which
might have been called Virgil's.

I only say, Virgil has avoided those Proprieties. Some think quite otherwise,
and that he was extraordinary careful in that matter, and tho such Words are
not usual, yet, even Ladies may be sooner brought to understand things by them,
which require them, than by other supposed plainer Words; and if Virgil wrote
for all in General, Men of Art would have been apt to Censure him for
Improprieties; but I confess I believe Gassendus or Mercator in Astronomy,
Manesson or Vauban in Military Architecture, Monsieur --, or Mr. Evelyn, in
Gardening, and Worlidge, or Markham in Husbandry, may have some Cant Words, as
Mr. D. calls them, which Virgil was unacquainted with, but what he uses, ought
as far as may be, to be so Translated.

I have omitted the four Preliminary Lines, etc. Here Mr. D. sets up again for
a very great Critic; And Ille ego, etc. must be flung away to the Dogs. But why
so angry good Mr. Translator? If your old Friend Donatus be a credible Person,
they are Virgil's, and pray, how long have you known better what became Virgil
to Write, than he knew himself? And much better Judges have concluded them to
be his, and methinks, the very Air of 'em is inimitable and extremely suitable
to the place they are in; beginning as low as his Tityre tu patulae, and rising
by degrees in Style as the Works he refers to do, till at last he mounts high
enough to join with his Arma virumque cano. His Vicina and arva are at no
unusual distance, his quamvis avido, nothing like Affectation; and why should
Horrentia be a Flatter Epithet here than in other places, as his Horrentia
terga, and Horrentia lustra? Some Men, we see, will be wading out of their
Depth: But he thinks Tucca and Varius rather Added, than Retrenched them, it is
Ridiculous to imagine either; Virgil made them, and none else could have made
'em; he left 'em there himself, and none ever dared to remove 'em; and Virgil's
own Judgment of 'em is more valuable than that of a Thousand Rat Critics put
together.

My Master needed not the Assistance of that Preliminary Poet. What Poet does
he mean, Tucca or Varius? Then his English is very good; If any Body else, why
is he not named? But, could not Virgil write well in the mean as well as in the
sublime Style? Is it not Lawful for a Man to go up by steps to a noble Palace?
And is not every Line of the decry'd four such a Step? Any Man, who had a true
taste of Poetry, would find it presently; but a Palate long vitiated with
Fustian Language cannot relish Purity and Agreeableness. They Would be better
Connected to what follows thus: I who but Pip'd on humble Reeds before,
And then through Woods, and Groves, the Muses bore,
Taught greedy Swains with Art to till the Field,
And made lean Soils a weighty Burden yield;
Now rise, and, soaring on a stronger Wing,
Of Martial Deeds in lofty Numbers sing.


I have done him less injury than any of his former Libellers. That may be
questioned. Mr. Ogilby has given us more of Virgil, tho he attempted it with
the greatest disadvantages in the World. And Mr. Sandys on the first Aeneid
hasshown, that, would he have undertaken the whole, Mr. D's pains might have
been superseded, and I hope the D. of Lauderdale's Friends will Publish his
Works now as a Vindication of Virgil, from that Scandal Mr. D. has fixed on him.

Since this long Piece of Impertinence is ad Clerum, I hope I shall meet with
Mr. D's Pardon, if I have gone through it with that Rigor and Ill Nature which I
use, when I hear such things; and Mr. D. may if he please, believe, that I Am
not his Enemy, but cannot with Patience see either Priests or Poets Abused or
Vilify'd.

The Postscript has nothing worth observing at present, so I pass now to the
Poem it self, where, if you find any thing Repeated which has been said
already, you must Impute it to Mr. D. and his Friends, who by their Repetitions
have given the occasion.

It may seem strange for so great second-hand Critics as Mr. Dryden, or his
Friends, to dream of Virgil's Bastardy, or his Mothers Relation to Quinctilius
Varus, or to swallow the Fable of the occasion of Virgil's advancement, I have
wronged my Author less, considering my Circumstances, than those who have
attempted him before, either in our own, or any Modern Language. And tho this
Version is not void of Envy, yet it comforts me, that the Faults of others are
not worth finding, mine are neither gross nor frequent etc. To Lord Clifford.
which the spurious Donatus gives us, but his own Ruaeus justly explodes; nor
have his Predecessors in Criticism applied Virgil's 4th Eclogue to Augustus,
but to Saloninus the Son of Pollio, if their Judgments are of any value. Arrius
who possessed Virgil's House and Farm near Mantua, is said to be fierce of the
Services he had rendered to Octavius, a very odd Phrase in English, and not to
be Endenizen'd on the Recommendation of Mr. Dryden. The account given of
Virgil's changing what he had Written in praise of Gallus into the Story of
Aristaeus, is as unintellegible to me as an old Hieroglyphic, and not a little
silly. I hope he will on a Review, give it another Air, and at least make it
Sense, if not Probable? The Reduction of the old Roman Story, to Virgil's
Persons and Characters, is intolerably Ridiculous; nor is Servius's Authority
sufficient to make Polydorus's Wood allusive to Romulus's Lance. Turnus's
recess, Book 9th, is no more like that of Cocles, than Virgil's own over the
Mincius; Nor Sinon's hiding himself, or rather his pretense to it (for it is
only a sham Story) to that of Marius in the Marshes of Minturnae: Nor is
Latinus's Character agreeable to that of Lepidus. The resemblance imagined
between Tully, and Drances, is absurd, and the Biographers Censure of Agrippa
Scandalous, and against the truth of History, Agrippa being one of the greatest
Persons of his Age; and Monsieur de Scudery does him less wrong in the
Character he bestows on him in Cleopatra, tho Romantic, and French enough, than
our Author in that senceless Idaea he gives us of him. It Is not to be wondered
Critics took no notice of what Livy tells us of Martius, 'twas an idle Story,
and Valerius Antias, or Fabius Pictor were not fit to lie in the Balance
against Polybius, who generally represents them as Fabulous, Legendary Writers,
and whose own Writings would give better Satisfaction to a Man of Virgil's
exact Judgment; and besides Homer had represented his Achilles with such a
Flame on his Head. I wonder how the Gentleman came to know so exactly the
former Bulk and great Reduction of the Aeneis; It was once twenty times bigger
than he left it.
however it had been well if Mr. Dryden himself had taken a little more time to
correct his Version. Some wise Men have thought Virgil correct enough, and that
he designed very little, if any Alteration; and his very Hemistics are so
graceful, that Mr. Cowley could scarce believe he ever designed to fill 'em up:
Whoever compares the present Version with the Original, will conclude it
infinitely below Virgil's Perfection, and would choose sooner to be the Author
of the most dilute Episode in Virgil than of Mr. Dryden's whole Translation.

In the Account of Virgil's Person, Manners, and Fortune, was ever any thing so
Childish, as that Remark about the Word Mulier, being but once in the whole
Aeneis, and that by way of Contempt? This the Index at the end of the Dauphin's
Virgil told him; if he had but looked the Word Faemina, he would have found that
often used; and the Dux Faemina facti was not designed for a Slur upon
Pygmalion's Sister, or the Widow of Sichaeus. Such another's that about the
Death of Dido. Again, his own Dauphin's Virgil would have shown him how
Nascimbaenus reconciles Aeneas and Deiphobus together, as well as Scaliger,
Taubmannus, and others in Emmenessius's Edition. I Am afraid Pollio's Curious
Pencil has drawn a False Line over that of Virgil; and, as for Lavinia her
Submission to her Mother, seems to have influenced her more, than any Fancy to
Turnus; though Youth, Beauty, Valor, and Acquaintance were as pressing Motives,
as the precarious Interpretation of an ambiguous Oracle. Virgil and Mr. Waller
deserve an Honorable Character for the Chastity of their Muses: If other Men's
Poetry were to be reduced to the same Modesty, a great part of them would fall
under the Sponge.

And had Mr. Dryden, and the rest of our wretched Play-wrights of late Years,
filled their Poems with genuine sober Wit instead of Obscenity and Immorality,
our Youth, nay, our Elder Gentry and Nobility, nay, the whole Nation, had made
a more considerable Figure in the World; not to mention our Religion, in which,
God be thanked, they pretend to no Interest; Religion is a Micaiah to our
Hectoring Debauchees, and they hate it because it never prophecies Good
concerning them: But they are a kind of Vermin beneath the Dignity of a Satyr,
in that respect; it is too severe to lash 'em for what they know nothing of.
Let Us try 'em in their own Profession with good Mr. Dryden, their vir gregis
ipse caper, in the Head of 'em, and see if their Poetry be any more brillant
than their Morals.

It Is an effect of an Ill Memory to think Virgil left his Aeneis so imperfect,
and yet never said too little nor too much, the very Observation has cleared
the Writer of any such Imputation; but if his unfinished Works be so admirable,
what would they have been, had they had his last Hand?

Hic illius arma, Hic currus fuit. The rest is none of Virgil's: How knows the
Gentleman that? A Man ought to be well assured of his own Abilities, before he
attacks a Line of an established Reputation.
Or what does he mean by the rest? Is it the latter Hemistick, then he would make
Virgil sick of his Translator's Disease, and now and then write a little
Nonsense; if he would exclude the next verse too, by what Authority pray? The Sense
is apposite, the Verse Majestic, the Style true Virgil, and the Critic
indefensible for an ipse dixit signifies little now a days. But he adds a
pretty Fable of one whom he calls Abienus, if it be not the Printer's Fault. He
has been sometimes called Anianus, Anienus, and Abidnus, but never Abienus. His
Name was really Avienus, a considerable Poet, contemporary with the Great
Theodosius. This Writer He says, turned Virgil into Iambicks. But had he been
of so nice a taste as he pretends, he would have found both the Name of Avienus
false written in Ruaeus and in Emmenessius, and the Name of the Author by him
travestee'd in Iambics mistaken. Aeneid. lib. 10. v. 388.
Servius, according to Emmenessius's Edition, says, He turned all Virgil into
Iambicks; but our Author says, He turned all Livy so too, which was a tedious
Work, but not so impertinent as to have metamorphos'd Virgil in that manner.
Vossius, Vossius de Poetis Latinis, p. 56. De Historicis Latinis, l. 11. c. 19.
Hoffman in Avieno.
a better Critics owns his Pains with Livy, so does Hoffman too, both appeal to
this very place of Virgil, referred to in the Margin; our Author takes his
Notion about Livy from the same Writers; and yet Servius, in the place referred
to, names not Livy but Virgil. This might have persuaded him, that either the
Copyist or the Corrector had given us in that, or it may be some other modern
Editions, Virgil for Livy, which the better Editions of Servius knew nothing of.

Cui regia parent Armenta and late custodia credita campo, Aen. l. 7. not the
9. v. 4885.
The same Learned Gentleman has found old Tyrrhus King Latinus his Herdsman and
Forester or Ranger a very Noble Employment, and has dubbed him Master of the
Horse, an Honor the poor Block-river little dreamt of; nor can it easily be
guessed who construed Virgil's Account of him for our Author; unless a little
Pique against the Unwarlike Dutch, made him wish every Master of the Horse
might be reduced to cleave Blocks for his Livelihood.

As for the Magnae spes altera Romae, the Gentleman would have done well to
have referred us to his other ancient Author; for Ruaeus and others explode the
Fancy, and if it lie under the just Imputation of an Achronism, a wise Man
would not be too fond of it: If his Author be Servius, he might borrow from
Donatus, whom Mr. D. supposes the real Author of Virgil's Life, Anno 360.
Servius flourishing in the 5th. Donatus in the 4th Century. Anno 410.


Whether Latin be only a corrupt Dialect of Greek, with the Critics leave, may
bear a Question.

After the great Encomiums of his clawing Friends, enter Mr. Dryden himself in
his, supposed, Immortal Strain; whose Performance, whether it answers their
Hyperboles or not, is the Subject of our next Enquiry.

Before we proceed to a Critical Examination of the Translation, it may be fit
to lay down some Axioms, as we suppose they will be acknowledged, with respect
to the necessary Qualifications of him who undertakes to naturalize a good
Poet, and to make him pleasant and useful to the unlearned Reader.

1. It Is necessary the Translator should understand the Author he undertakes
and be acquainted, in some measure, with the Customs and Usages of that
Country, which the Original more particularly respects.

2. It Is necessary he should have a right taste of the Poets Genius and
Character, so as to endeavor to write as chastely and purely, in as clear and
noble a Style as the Author; where he is lax and profuse, to indulge himself in
a greater Liberty; where he is concise and short, to keep within the same
Bounds; where he is grave and Majestic, not to be soft and trifling; or where
he is low and easy, not to stalk in Buskins.

3. The Translator should be able to distinguish exactly between the Low, the
Mean, and the Sublime Style, and adapt the Language he translates into, to all
the varieties observable in the Original.

4. It Is necessary he should give us the true Sense and meaning of his Author,
if he knows it, that he who understands not the Original, may be sure yet that
he knows the Author's Mind, has his true genuine Thoughts, and not the
Interpolations of another. That especially where the Author says neither too
little, nor too much, the Interpreter should neither clip his Sterling, nor
give it worthless Bulk and Weight with the Additional Alloy of his own base
Metal. And,

5. He should make his Author speak so in a Modern Language, as he could
reasonably conclude he would have spoken if now living, and writing on the same
Subjects, and maintaining the same Characters he had taken up before.

These seem to be undeniably necessary Qualifications in a good Translator; how
our Author has observed 'em may be doubted; but passing by the smaller, which
are innumerable, we shall only animadvert on his more notorious and
indefensible Errors.

ECLOGUE, I.
FOR never can I deem him less than God. Namque erit ille mihi semper Deus,
relates not to Tityrus's Opinion of Augustus, that he would really believe him to
be a God, whom he knew to be none; but that he would respect him as if he were so,
and pay, those Honors belonging to real a Deity, to him.

He gave my Kine. Ver. 11.
An obscure Latinism, for, He permits my Kine to wander about the Pastures in
safety, and me to play what I please on my Rural Pipe; which the Translation
scarce expresses.

I admire, Ver. 13.
That while the raging Sword, and wastful Fire Destroy the wretched
Neighborhood around, See our Author himself.
No Hostile Arms approach your happy Ground. A Senceless Paraphrase of --
Undique totis usque adeo turbatur agris. The time is come --
The Soldiers neither Murdered the Shepherds of Cremona, or Mantua, When the
grim Capt. in a surly Tone,
by whom are meant the Inhabitants of those places in general; nor were they so
silly as to burn the Houses they were to Live in themselves, Cries out, Pack up
ye Rascals, and be gone.
they turned 'em indeed out of Doors, seized their Lands and kept 'em, and that
was disturbance enough, and which Tiryus was by the favor of Augustus
delivered from. Ecl. 9.


Heic inter densas corylos modo namque Gemellos. Ver. 20.

Spem gregis, ah silice in nuda connixa reliquit.
Who Yeaning on the Rocks has left her Young. The Emphasis quite lost, with the
Circumstances most moving among the Shepherds, and the Sense mistaken.

And the Hoarse Raven on the blasted Bough. Ver. 25.
A Raven is Corvus, not Cornix, and Tully might have taught him to distinguish
between the Cough or Daw, and the Raven, and shown the import of Virgil's
Sinistra Cornix. Quid Augur? De Divinat. l. 1. c. 39.
cur a dextra Corvus, a sinistra Cornix faciat Ratum? And the Cornix is what
the Raven is not Avis inauspicatoe garrulitatis: and Cava Ilex, is not the
blasted Bough.

(...) 41.
Till then a helpless, hopeless, homely Swain. Impertinent all! But for good
Sense sake, why homely Swain? Was Virgil turned Beau, all Periwig, and
Steenkirk when he had once got to Rome? or what Methods of Artificial
Handsomness had honest Tityrus, still knowable by his old Friend, taken up? It
would be too hard to find the Poets sense in the next four Lines.

Ver. 48.
To see your Mistress mourn. Was it Galatea, or Amaryllis?

Ver. 63.
And graciously decreed, etc. Augustus's Oracle is quite lost, which in the
Original carries an extraordinary Majesty and Emphasis along with it.

Ver. 68.
A Stony Harvest. Not Virgil, and too bold a figure for a Shepherd, and the
present Poem.

Fortunate Senex, hic inter flumina nota, Et fonttes sacros, frigus captabis
opacum, were not worth our Translators notice.

Ver. 87.
And some to far Oaxis shall be sold. Et rapidum Cretae veniemus Oaxem. And
does any History talk of the Soldiers Selling the old Possessors for Slaves;
And how far from the Text are the following Lines?

Ver. 100.
Now let me graft my Pears, and prune my Vine.

The Fruit is theirs, the Labor only mine. Virgil's meaning is only Go, poor
Melibus, graft thy Pears, etc. if thou can, but alas! thou have none to
exercise thy pains upon. The following Lines are mere Confusion, and as far as
possible from the beauty of Virgil's connected Thoughts. Ver. 110, etc.
Could never grow out of Virgil's Ground.

And Boughs shall Weave a Covering for your Head. Ver. 116.
A very pretty Complement, and which Virgil had not Address enough to think of.

ECLOGUE II.
YOung Corydon, etc. Virgil calls Alexis Delicias Domini. Ver. 1.
Why not his Translator? The next two Lines are far short of Virgil's Sense,
and the following are of the same strain.

And Thestylis, wild Thyme, and Garlic beats. But could the Translator imagine
Virgil meant no more? Ver. 9.
Garlic and Thyme would have given the poor Harvest Men a mighty Refreshment;
even an ordinary Commentator would have let him know that Garlic and Thyme,
were only some of the Ingredients of the Moretum, a savory Pudding, nourishing
and healthful to the Laborers.

The creaking Locusts. Why Man! the Grasshoppers are the Musicians of the
Harvest, not the Locusts; Ver. 13.
and are meant by the Cicadae. Locusts I doubt make but an odd kind of Music.
The following verse, sure should have been Ovid's not Virgil's.

White Lillyes lie neglected on the Plain, Whilst dusky Hyacinths for use
remain. Ver. 21, 22
Besides the poorness of the Traduction, who taught Mr. D. that Lilies were so
useless, or that Ligustra signified Lilies? Martial would have told him of the
Maid who was whiter Argento, Lib. 1. Ep. 116.
Lib. 8. Ep. 28.
nive, lilio, ligustro? And he Complements another Lilia tu vincis nec ad huc
delapsa Ligustra. The Ligustra were doubtless, the Blossoms of some Tree. Pliny
tells us, the Cyprus in Egypt, is by some thought to be the Ligustrum of Italy,
Plin. Hist. Not. l. 12. c. 24.
whose Flowers may be sweet in their Native Soil, but degenerate in another.

Amphion sung not sweeter to his Herd When summoned Stones the Theban Turret
reared. Ver. 29.30.
Were the Stones then his Herd? Or did not Mr D. talk of the Theban Walls,
because he knew not what Actaeus Aracynthus meant: This to make use of his own
Witicism, is to traduce Virgil indeed.

Ver. 40.
Or perhaps contend with Pan. Virgil had more Judgment than to make his
Shepherds contend for Mastery with their God; but when Mr. D. represented
Alexis and Corydon, his Thoughts were big with his own Maximin: The next Lines
are as wide of Virgil, as of good Sense.

Nor scorns the Pipe. For Nec te poeniteat, etc. Mr, Ver. 43.
D. sencelesly applies that to Pan, which Virgil makes Corydon say to Alexis;
and so to Talk coherently.

Ver. 45.
Corydon's Pipe was not made with seven smooth Joints, but with seven Reeds of
an unequal length joined together, somewhat like the lesser Pipe of a small
Organ.

Two Kids that, for, which, but false Grammar is so common with him, it is not
worth notice.

I found by chance, Ver. 51.
and to my Fold conveyed. i. e. I stole 'em, Virgil meant, he found them in a
dangerous Place, near the Den of some Beast of Prey; so as he ventured his Life
for 'em, Ver. 52.
which would render the present more valuable. Virgil 's Capreoli would have
been little Goats, whose Age yet was more distinguishable by their Marks, than
by their Size. Sparsis etiam nunc pellibus albo.

Alexis is represented as a young Shepherd, Ver. 53.
and the Goats would serve for somewhat better than to play with.

To make amends for his former neglect; Mr. D. now tells us, They were both
fleckt with White, the true Arcadian strain; what Virgil gave then as a mark of
their Age, our Poet makes a mark of their Breed; Ver. 55.
a very considerable discovery! It Is a wonder he did not derive 'em from the
Goats, in whose Watering-Troughs Jacob laid the peeled Rods. But nemo
Mortalium, etc.

The next ten Lines are so wild a Translation of Virgil as is intolerable; the
sweet smelling Daffodil, the Pansy, the Purple Spring, because it brings on
pale Violets, and Marsh Marigolds are such a medly of Flowers, as would fright
Virgil, if he were to see 'em put down for his; nor would he own that Ovidian
Conclusion where, at least, there is too much.

Ver. 90.
Towers are for Gods. A very grave Sentence; but pray, for what kind of Gods?

The wanton Kid the Browse, Excellent for Florentem Cytisum, Ver. 92.
etc.

Ver. 93.
Alexis thou art chased by Corydon. A very noble Expression.

Ver. 95.99.
See from a far the Fields no longer smoke, Cool Breezes now the raging Heats
remove. The Scene is now to be removed to Iamaica or Barbados, which Virgil's
honest Shepherds never thought of. The following three Lines are wonderfully
agreeable to Homespun Corydon. Doubtless Mr. D. when he wrote 'em, thought
himself courting a Town Miss, and had a mind to show all his Improvements by
Court Conversation.

In this whole Eclogue our Translator has kept himself at such a distance from
his Author, that it is plain, he did not or would not understand him, nor can he
be so much a Suffaenus to himself, as to imagine, Virgil, had he been now
living, would have represented a Shepherd, tho of the true Arcadian strein so
injudiciously. He has made Virgil think otherwise than he did, whether better
or no, I leave to their Judgments who understand the Original.

ECLOGUE III.
Ver. 1.
HO Groom! a very Elegant Title for a Shepherd! but I confess, Mr. D. is not
without Authority, for so H. C. in his Popish Courant Jan. 24 th 78/9.
Translates Non ego Romulea miror quod pastor in Urbe Sceptra gerat; Pastor
conditor Urbis erat. It Is nothing strange a Sheperd Reigns in Rome; For he that
built it, was a Shepherd's Groom. While he Neaera Courts, Ver. 4.5.
and Courts in vain. A mistake, for she was their c^^mon Friend, and Aegon was
only afraid Menalcas should have more of her Company than himself.

Of Grass and Fodder thou defrau'dst the Dams. for Et succus pecori. Ver. 6.
Ruaeus teaches him better than to construe it so absurdly.

Yet when I crept the Hedges of the Leys. Ver. 15.
Pure Nonsense! and stole the Stays. Better and better.

Beneath yon ancient Oak. Ver. 17.
Ad veteres fagos. well guest however. When the fair Boy received the gift of
Right. Et cum vidisti puero donata dolebas. If this ben't Translation, pray
what is?

What Nonsense would the Fool thy Master prate. Ver. 21.
Quid domini facient? We use to say, Saying and Doing, are two things.

When thou his Knave. Ver. 21.
Mr. D. has heard of Paul the Knave of Jesus Christ; and if I mistake not, I
have read some Plays said to be written by John Dryden, Servant to His Majesty;
however it is a most profound Quibble.

Ask, Ver. 22.
Damon, ask if he the Debt denies; I think he dares not; if he does, he lies.
Here Is Dametas grown a mere Almanzor. The Lie no Man can bear. But is not this
an admirable Construction of -- Et mihi Damon Ipse fatebatur, sed reddere posse
negabat? i. e. He durst not deliver it, because of his Masters Interest, or
without his leave.

Ver. 34.
Thou Booby. Stoo him Bays! Now I fancy, Virgil intended to expose some dull
Poet for a mere Ballad Singer, Toning out, o Hone o Hone! with sad Lines, and a
dismal voice, and that indeed, his Compositions, tho very mean, were like the
present Translation, Licensed and Entered according to Order. Mr. D. is of
another Mind, and says, He tickled the Crowd with a Straw.

Ver. 40
My brindled Heifer. Now since Mr. D. was at liberty to make it of any Color,
why was it not my Milk-white Heifer, that we might have known it was of the
true Roman strein? But why, her Beestnings never fail? the Dairy Maid at Denham
Court, would have told him, they are Beestnings but for three or four Days
after Calving; afterward they are Strokings; but it was a most miraculous
Heifer, which had her brimming Pails full of either, especially when she had
suckled two Calves before; but if her Strokings were so plentiful, what would
her full Bag have given?

A cursed she, who rules my Hen-peckt Sire, Menalcas says no such thing, Ver.
48, 49.
who does the Translator mean? Alter and Haedos. And once she takes the Tale of
all the Lambs, Well Construed again!

Two Bowls I have. Now here I durst say my Brindled Heifer, Ver. 55.
that our Translator made 'em two, because Virgil calls 'em Pocula in the
Plural Number, and carrys it quite through Menalcas's Speech, Lavinaque venit
litora.
but by Neuters Plural to signify a single thing is not unusual, and Damaetas,
to run him down, tells him, he indeed has duo Pocula, i. e. He was resolved to
overmatch him in every thing, for he treats him altogether in Scorn, tho it
comes to a Wager at last.

The Lids are Ivy -- Bowls don't use to have Lids, Ver. 55.
unless Alcimedon had the way of making Tunbridge Ware, and I dare say,
Menalcas's had not so much as a loose Cover; the word Superaddita, I Am afraid
made Mr. D. think of a Lid. Grapes in clusters lurk beneath, is like the Fellow
looking out of the Window who was to draw in his Head, if any body looked at
him; I Am desperately afraid Mr. D. read it Celatum. For the whole description
of the Bowl, Ruaeus, if consulted, would have set him somewhat righter.

The Kimbo Handles seem with Bearsfoot Carved. Ver. 69.
Nonsense again,

Where Orpheus on his Lyre laments his Love; Ver. 69, 70.
With Beasts encompassed, and a dancing Grove. Mere trifling, and unsuitable to
Virgil, and his Shepherd's Character.

Menalcas rather than be thought a Coward, Ver. 74, 75.
comes to Damaetas's terms in Virgil. Veniam quocunque ^^ocaris; but does not
brag like a Child, this, Ruaeus would have shown our Translator, but he forgets
all that.

And Nature has accomplished all the Spring. Ver. 84.
Admirable!

V. 39, etc.
Me Phoebus loves, for Him my blushing Hyacynths and my Bays I keep. The rest
is the Translators, and impertinently stuck to Virgil.

Ver. 97.
With pelted Fruit, etc. I thought Galatea had pelted him with Apples. Mr.
Dryden thought the Apples were pelted, not the Man.

Then tripping to the Woods -- for Et fugit ad salices.

Ver. 105.
I saw two Stock-doves billing, and e're long will take the Nest. But does
their Billing show where their Nest is? Virgil's Damaetas observed where their
Nest was, Mr. D. only their Gesture.

Ver. 107.
Ten ruddy Wildings, i. e. Crabs; a Noble Present! And doubtless the Aurea Mala
of the Hesperidos were no better. And stood on Tip-toes reaching from the
Ground, i. e. to get at the Wildings: But where says Virgil or Ruaeus so?

Ver. 111.
The lovely Maid lay panting in my Arms, etc. where is nothing of Virgil's
Spirit or Pastoral Style, but pure Ovid, or somewhat looser than he.

Ver. 120.
At Sheering time. Cum faciam vitula pro frugibus.

Ver. 135.
A Bull be bred With spurning Heels and with a butting Head. This, I Am sure, is
no Commentary on the Poet's Meaning, nor is it Intelligible to a mere English
Reader, nor, as translated, is it any just Repartee to Damaetas.

Ver. 138.
Let Myrrh instead of Thorn his Fences fill. Amomum is by some thought to be
the Herb Nightshade, by some the Rose of Jerusalem, by some of Jericho, by
some it is thought to be Cinnamon, only Mr. D. has found it out to be Myrrh. But
why Myrrh to make a Fence? Damaetas would have Pollio his Friend so happy, as
that his very Bushes should bear the sweetest Flowers, or the richest Spices;
but neither Plants like Hemlock, nor Odoriferous Flowers, nor sweet Gums, were
ever fit to make Hedges with; our Translator was certainly here in a Dream, or
worse.

Who hates not living Bavius, Ver. 140.
i. e. N. T. let him be Dead, Maevius, i. e. T. S. damned to love thy Works and
thee. And why are not either of 'em as commendable as a Bathyllus or a
Chaerilus, or one past the fumbling Age of Poetry?

Ioin Dog-Foxes in the Yoke. Ver. 143.
How come Mr. D. to know that Virgil meant Dog-Foxes? Or why must Mulgeat
Hircos be rendered, Sheer the Swine. Methinks it had been better, let him, like
Waltham 's Calf, go nine Mile to suck a Bull, as they do who read this dear
Translation for Virgil.

Is a lewd ridiculous Translation: Ver. 144, 5.
So what Menalcas says afterward, and what Damaetas returns is so far from the
Text, as the silliest Priest in England would have been ashamed of.

Destroys the Groom. Ver. 155*
I Am afraid Mr. D. will hardly show us the Country in England where the
Shepherd's Boy is styled the Groom; but he is in love with the Word, and I have
given him an Authority for it before.

V. 158.
What Magic has bewitched the woolly Dams? Why none at all, Man! They were the
Lambs which looked as if they had sucked sheir Dams through a Hurdle; i. e.
they were overlooked by some Witch.

Ver. 160.
Is more a Riddle than Virgil's.

The whole Eclogue is vitiously translated, that a Man could scarcely pass one
Line without Censure; and Mr. D. seems in general to have no Notion of Virgil's
Air or Sense, but fixes any thing on him which himself thinks fit, lops off his
best Thoughts; and though his Lines are smoother, his Sense is not better, or
more plain than Ogylby's so much decry'd.

ECLOGUE IV.
THis Eclogue is of a piece with the rest of Mr. D.'s; and as to the Subject of
it, it would puzzle a good Critic to reconcile Mr. D.'s Prefatory Talk, Ruaeus
his Preface, and the Argument His Friends gave him for it together. But let who
will compose that Quarrel, let us see what the Version is.

To find no Fault with the Absurd Translation of the Four first Lines.

Ver. 5.
The last Great Age foretold by Sacred Rhimes, Renews it is finished Course.
What can Mr. Translator mean by that? Why this great Age was now but coming,
not past, and beginning again? Virgil knew better than to think that the great
Platonic Year was past when he wrote; but here was now beginning a now, a
better, and a happier Season than had been formerly known since the Golden Age.
He calls ^it the last Age; if the last be finished it cannot be renewed again,
if it be renewed it was not the last; nor can a Quibble excuse the Nonsense,
nor prove what follows, And mighty Years begun, From the first Orb in radiant
Circles run, any thing but glittering Nonsense.

The Father, Ver. 16.
etc. A poor Version of Te Duce siqua manent sceleris vestigia nostri Irrita,
etc. The whole Design of this Eclogue has been much controverted. After what
has been said by Blondel, Boxhorne, Galaeus, and many great Men of our own, it
seems to me, that Virgil, acquainted with ancient Prophecies, reflected on and
repeated often in his Time, concerning an Universal King to be born in the East,
or in Iudaea, (for that Talk was sometimes more particular, sometimes more
general) was wil^ing to divert the Course of those Prophesies, and make the
Romans look at Home for what they expected from Abroad. Whether they were ^he
Sibylline Prophecies, (many of which may ^e Authentic, whatsoever yet has been
said against them) or the more Authentic Jewish Prophecies, then read in many
places; I doubt not but Virgil designed all to the Honor of his Patrons, in
which, I believe, he was not inspired; but though not inspired, he might be ^o
far directed by an unknown Influence, and limited by a Superintending
Providence as to ^mass such things together in this particular Poem, as would
be ridiculous when applied to any, but Jesus the Son of God, the Savior of the
World. To Him these very Verses belong, and were penned by Virgil in an
ambiguous manner, equally applicable to Pollio's Son or Nephew, or Augustus;
and were construed, at that time, by that Notion they had of the Writer, whose
Person and Inclinations is oftentimes the best Comment upon his Work.

Ver. 18.
The Son shall lead the Life of Gods, is very short of, He shall be Partaker of
the Divine Life, which is the true Sense of the Poet's Words.

V. 23, 4, 5.
All mere trifling to the Original; where the very Verses seem to smile, as well
as the promised, Garlands on the Newborn Infant.

Ver. 30.
Each common Bush shall Syrian Roses wear. No sure, Myrrh not Roses; Mr. D.
ought not to change the Signification of Words at his own Pleasure.

Ver. 35.
The knotted Oak shall Showers of Honey weep* And through the melted Grass the
Liquid Gold shall creep. Thus one's for Sense, the other for Convenience, as
our Friend Hudibras has it.

Ver. 42.
Another Argos, I Am afraid is something more than a Typographical Error.

Ver. 51.
Nor Wool shall in dissembled Colors shine* Why, Man, the Diverse Colors are
real not dissembled; no, not so much as mere variou^ modifications of Light;
but Virgil means, the most beauteous Colors Wool could wear should (...)
Natural, not Artificial, as the following Verses show.

Beneath his Pompous Fleece shall proudly sweat, Ver. 55, 6.
And under Tyrian Robes the Lambs shall blea^, i. e. They shall all be Kings,
or Noblemen at least, and appear always in their Parliament Robes. But is this
to Translate Virgil, whose Thoughts are always just, and Expressions proper?

Mature in Years, Ver. 59.
for Aderit jam tempus; as if the Expression referred not to the World, but to
the Child; which the very next Passage corrects.

See to their Base restored Earth, Ver. 63.
Seas, and Air, And joyful Ages from behind in crowding Ranks appear. Nothing
at all to the purpose, but to put one in mind of -- Was not he a Rascal? etc.

The frowning Infant's Doom is read. Ver. 77*
Cui non risere Parents. Through the whole of this Eclogue a Man may look for
Virgil in Virgil, and not be able to find him.

ECLOGUE V.
It Is always accounted unlucky to stumble in the beginning of a Work; Ver. 1.
yet here our Translator begins to the Tune of Fauste, precor gelida, etc.
Since on the Downs our Flocks together feed; which is a very fine Thought. And
why was not the Design of their Sitting down in the Shade mentioned? They who
read the Original understand it; they who pretend to interpret the Poet should
express it.

Ver. 5.
What Mr. D. gave our Poet before, he takes away quite in these four Lines, and
that for false English too. It seems, though a very good Catholic, as doubtless
he is, he never read the Catholic Father's Book De Majoritate and Obedienti^.

Ver. 7.
Or will you to the cooler Cave succeed? This is one of the Latinisms Mr. D.
pretends to boast of, and a silly one it is. Succeed is confined in our
Language to another Sense or two, and will not be naturalized to this, though Mr. D.
should bring the Bill into the Parliament of Poets.

-- Now bring the Swain, Whose Voice you boast, Ver. 20.
and let him try the Strain. This shows the Translator's Folly, who talked of
Amyntas's before, which Menalcas meant not; but that no other Shepherd among
'em had so fine a Vein of Poetry, or made such fine Songs as Amyntas; and the
Canendo afterward is to be interpreted the same way; and here Mopsus promises
to sing his Elegy on Daphnis, and challenges Menalcas to bring in Amyntas to
perform any thing like it; and, in return, Menalcas complements Mopsus not for
his Voice, for his Talent was Calamos inflare leves, but for his Poetry.

No more, but sit and hear the promised Lay, The gloomy Grotto makes a doubtful
day. Ver. 25.
An admirable Paraphrase on Sed tu desine plura, puer: successimus antro.

The Lifeless Parent, his wretched Limbs embraced Accusing all the Gods, V. 34,
etc.
and every Star. The rest is all an Ovidian impertinence of Mr. D's, who
indeed, makes Virgil's Poem look like Damaetas's Armor, patched with any thing
he could gather from the lower Form of Poets. And if Rome was the Parent, the
description's nothing but absurdity; besides, how could the Lifeless Parent
embrace the dead Corpse, or accuse the Gods? The Proverb seems true generally,
that Mortui non mordent.

The Lybian Lions hear, Ver. 42.
and hearing roar. Let Ogylby show a Nobler Line, if he can.

And Holy Revels for his Reeling Train. Ver. 46.
A very pretty Circumstance in commendation of a deceased Hero, and from a
sober Poet; but the Translator puts in a little Burlesque now and then, for a
Ragout for his cheated Subscribers.

And so to the 55th is an impertinent and unseasonable Illustration of Virgil's
neat Eulogy on Daphnis. Ver. 50.


And softly let the running Waters glide. Ver. 62.
Another of Mr. D's sweet smelling Daffodils, who for Virgil's short, yet Noble
Epitaph, has given us a loose, unnerv'd one of his own; it can be no Capital
Crime, after so Celebrated a Trifler, to render it thus; Daphnis the Shepherd I
to Heaven renowned,
Fair was my Flock, my self with fairer Beauties cround.


O Heavenly Poet! Ver. 69.
Here Mr. D. shows his own carelessness before, and confirms my Observation,
that it was not the voice, but the Poetry, for which Mopsus was so much admired.

It Is not the Character of Shepherds to be oppressed with Cares, Ver. 71, 72.
and Virgil never thought of the Sylvan Shade, but the green Grass, which it is
better sleeping in on a Sunny Bank, than under a Shade, the Grass being sweeter
there, and the Steam of the Earth more wholesome.

Your Lays are next to his, and claim the second Praise. Ver. 77.78.
Alter ab illo signifies, not one inferior, or of the second Rank, but another
such an one, or equal to him, nor is Servius's Authority good to the contrary.

For Daphnis was so good to love what e're was mine. Ver 81.
Menalcas's complement to Mopsus is spoiled before, and here he does not say,
Daphnis loved what e're was mine, but he loved me, which a Man may do, without
loving all the failures of his Friend: And if Mr. D. had any thoughts of King
Charles II. tho he had all the sweetness of Nature a mere Man was capable of,
he had too much Wit to like every thing that was his.

Ver. 86, 87, 89.
Should we allow Candidus to signify, the Guest of Heaven, which it does not,
but has a nobler Emphasis, what means the Translator by his viewing the Starry
Skies in the Milky way; sure it is an odd kind of Hypallage. Now whether Daphnis
looked upward or downward for this fine Vision, Virgil makes him see the Stars
below him, Mr. D. the rolling Year, for so he construes Sidera, to the best of
my apprehension; and doubtless, that is a very fine Sight, and a mighty surprise
to his wondering Eyes.

The Purple Spring adorns the various Ground. Virgil could never have reached
so fine, Ver. 91.
and so very agreeable a Thought.

Nor Birds the Springes fear. Ver. 94.
This Mr. D. added, to let us know he understood how to catch Woodcocks.

For Daphnis Reigns above, Ver. 95, 6.
and deals from thence His Mother's milder Beams and peaceful Influence. Who
does the Translator mean by Caesar's Mother, if Daphnis was Caesar? Was it
Aurelia, the Daughter of Caius Catta, who makes a very small Figure in History?
Or was it Venus? If so, she should have been his Grandmother at least? Or was
not his Head full of Aeneas, whose Mother Venus indeed was* as he thinks
Virgil's Head was when he wrote this Eclogue? And is not the whole a pretty
Paraphrase of Amat Bonus otia Daphnis?

The Shrubs partake of Humane Voice. Ver. 98.
But why Humane? Can any thing be more absurd? The Poet never thought of it.
And not only Profane Writers, but Scripture it self, calls upon all the parts
of the Universe to praise God; but they never dreamt of their doing it in a
Humane Voice.

Assenting Nature with a gracious* Nod Proclaims him. Ver. 99.
That Is a very new way of Proclaiming a God; the gracious Nod belongs to Jove,
as the supreme among the Poetical Gods; to ascribe what belongs to him to
Nature, is to make Nature superior to a God, and therefore to condescend very
far, when she allows her gracious Nod to the new dubbed Divinity.

On each is offered Annual Sacrifice. Ver. 121.
Where does Mr. Translator find that? The following Lines are senceless and
idle: Virgil talks nothing of what the Priests should offer, but what he would
offer himself; Two Bowls of New Milk, and two of fresh Oil.

Damaetas shall perform the Rites Divine. Was Damaetas then a Priest? Ver. 113.
If not, what had he to do with Divine Rights? If he was, why should Menalcas
only mention his Singing in the Text? What Aegon was to do, the same was the
Task of Damaetas, but Aegon was to Sing Hymns to Daphnis, not to play the
Priest; therefore Damaetas was only to sing. Mr. D. quite forgot the following
Vow, Haec tibi semper erunt --

Ver. 121.
And Locusts feed on Dew. Where did Mr. D. ever hear of Locusts feeding on Dew?
Scripture, if he troubled that much, would have taught him better, Germany
sometimes, and several parts of Africa very frequently find it otherwise; but
Mr. D. is fond of Translating Cicadae Locusts, which in our Poet, always
signify Grasshoppers, of whom, for ought we know, the observation of their
feeding on Dew, may be true.

Ver. 126.
Tho Damnabis tu quoque votis, may pass well in Latin, yet a pretense to
Translate it literally in English, is ridiculous, when the plain meaning is,
thou too shall oblige Men, or hold them fast to the performance of their Vows
by the awe of thy Divine Power.

Ver. 136.
And had the Judge been just, had won the Prize. An Addition directly contrary
to Virgil's notion of Palaemon, and that Opinion Rhemnius Palaemon had of
himself upon account of Virgil's naming him as a Judge between the contending
Shepherds, therefore this did not grow out of him. The Paraphrase on the last
three Verses is more loose, and trifling than Ovid would have offered at in the
greatest Luxuriancy of his Fancy.

ECLOGUE VI.
NOR blushed the Doric Muse to dwell in Mantuan Plains. Ver. 2.
But why must Sylvae signify the Mantuan Plains? Or why the Doric Muse? Did
Virgil ever write in the Doric Dialect, as Theocritus had done? Who would
imagine the Translator had ever read his Author? The first is every whit as
wide too from the Author's Sense.

-- Nor dare beyond the Reed. Ver. 6.
A very clear Expression, and extremely agreeable to deductum dicere carmen.

-- And reading not disdain. Ver. 11.
Si quis tamen haec quoque, si quis Captus amore leget. The Translation's
admirable English, and very much to the purpose.

The Name of Varus often inscribed shall see In every Grove, Ver. 13.
and every vocal Tree. Virgil says nothing of inscribing, nor would Mr. D. had
he but considered his own Epithet? for why should the Tree be vocal upon which
the Name would be inscribed? It ought to be vocal to sing a Name, as Virgil
says, but the dumbest Tree in all the wood, might serve well enough to carry an
Inscription.

Ver. 15.
And all the Sylvan Reign. I have heard Mr. D. was once a Westminster Scholar.
Dr. Busby I doubt, would have whipped a Boy for Paraphrasing omne nemus so
Childishly. The three next verses are worthy of Mr. D. but unworthy of his
admirable Author.

Ver. 19.
Mr. D. was Nominum asperitate deterritus. And therefore lets Chromis and
Mnasylus pass, but where did he find that Silenus was their Sire; if he were,
his drunkenness would not excuse their Rudeness to bind their Sire for an old
Song.

Ver. 25.
Born by the Tide of Wine, and floating on the Floor. Was ever so senseless, a
Thought? How escaped the old Toper from drowning in his own Spue? And what a
dull Soul was poor Virgil? This is to make him talk better than be ever thought
before; but see the Luxuriancy of Wit! The very next Couplet gives us as fine a
touch with relation to his empty Can, his Gravis Cantharus, (for he is now for
his Statuimus, i. e. abrogamus) with the unusual Ornament of two Ears; 'Twas
hung on high to boast the Triumph of the Day. I suppose it was made out of some
Vocal Tree, and had an Epinicion inscribed on it.

Ver. 33.
The fairest Nais, for Nymph, that it might be the more intelligible; and soon
after, He finds the Fraud, injudiciously for He finds the Trick; for there was
no Fraud in their binding him, and painting his Face.

'Twas Impudence to find A sleeping God, Ver. 38, 39.
it is Sacrilege to bind. Silenus was no God, but a Demigod, which is more than
can be said of our unparalleled Translator. But where did he find that pretty
Notion of Impudence and Sacrilege? Virgil says only, Satis est potuisse videri.
It was favor enough to them that they had seen him, intimating there was no
need of more; if he was willing to be seen, they need not question his
Willingness to satisfy them in other Particulars: But what is the pretended
Version to all this?

Not by Haemonian Hills, etc. Unquestionably true, Ver. 46.
the Hills were very silent all of them; yet if they had any Nodding Forests
upon them, there be somewhat of a Noise among them, a leading up the Brawls, or
so; but where is Virgil?

He sung how Seas, Ver. 50, etc.
etc. Fell through the mighty Void, and in their Fall Were blindly gathered in
this goodly Ball. Ruaeus and others, to whom Mr. D. is blindly gathered,
suppose Silenus an Epicurean Philosopher, his full Gut, his empty Can, his
Tipsie brain, and his abominable Spewing, I suppose, were their Evidences: But
how shall we reconcile Mr. D. and his Friends, the Prefacers to these
Pastorals, who, with a great deal of Judgment deny the matter, and argue better
from Silenus's Words, than from his Posture. Mr. D. is Epicure entire in his
Sense of Virgil; but where says Virgil himself, that the Seeds of all things
fell through the mighty Void? If they fell through it, they fell from some place
or Ubi without it, which was their Terminus a quo, and into some place without
or beneath it again, which was the Terminus ad quem: And pray what Philosophy
is this? But, In their Fall they were blindly gathered, i. e. by Fortune,
commonly called Blind. The Seeds of things then were passive, Fortune was
active; and what is capable of acting, must have an Existence; therefore Fortune
had a Being before the Seeds of all things, which is a great Honor to Her
Divinity. But Virgil says the Semina were, per inane coacta, Gathered together,
but not by chance, or blindly, but by some really powerful Agent; they did not
fall-thro' the void, but were amassed in it. Now if they were gathered
together, they did not gather themselves together, their concourse was not
Fortuitous; if they were managed by some superior Power, that Power could not
be a Name, a Title, a Chimera, but must be a Real, All-wise, and All-Powerful
Being, that is, God, who if he were the Agent, in gathering the Seeds of things
together, Epicurus's Hypothesis falls: And if Virgil instructs us thus, Virgil
was not, in this Eclogue, a Promoter of the Epicurean Philosophy; and for Mr.
D. tho his Sentiments may be very suspicious, if he has any, it is plain he is no
Master of his Notion, nor so much of Expression, as he pretends to; for what
means he by being blindly gathered? to jumble together by chance, or fall
together Blindly, may be allowed, but to be gathered blindly together is pure
Nonsense. Ver. 64.


Prometheus theft, Ver. 74.
and Jove 's avenging Rage. An obscure innuendo for Virgil's plain Declaration
of the punishment of Prometheus.

Tho tender and untried, the Yoke they feared. Meaning the Bull, as in the
following Verses, but Virgil applied those to the Praetides, who in a
Melancholic Madness, fansy'd themselves Heifers; who tho they were afraid of
the Yoke, and felt often for their Horns, yet were not so much Brutes, Ver. 79.
as to look out for a Bull: And must we say, Mr. D. understood Virgil?

He through the Forest Roves, And roars with Anguish for his absent Loves. Just
contrary to Virgil, who aggravates the misery of Pasiphae, from this very
consideration, that the Bull was wholly insensible of her Amors, Lived
careless as Brutes commonly do, and took up with any she among the Herd,
without thinking of his Lady Mistress; and Mr. Dryden takes a civil care to
confute himself, in the very next Lines.

Mr. D. to show his Complaisance for the fair Sex, says, what Virgil, whom, yet
his Translator represents as a Woman-hater, scorned to do, and what is really
False. Mr. D. must not measure all by his own. Virtue, for ought I know, may
survive among some of that Sex, when Men have quite lost it.

How each arising Alder now appears, And over the Po distills her Gummy Tears.
Ver. 91.
But do Alders distill Gum? Some indeed says they were changed into Alders, but
they say nothing of the Gum.
What Arborist told him so, Virgil uses Alnus for Populus; but his Translator
has no such Liberty, except when he has a mind to add a fine Line only to
expose himself.

Ver. 96.
And Linus thus their Gratitude expressed. For what? Wherein had Gallus been such
a Benefactor to them? And what has the Good Man done with Divino Carmine Pastor
Floribus atque Apio crines ornatus amaro? Was Virgil's Muse so dull, that Mr.
D. could make nothing of it? But, to make amends for what is wanting here, he
mistakes Hesiod soon after for Orpheus, Who with his Pipe of old had Charmed
the Savage Train, for we hear of no such thing by Hesiod.

Ver. 101.2, 3, 4.
What Mr. D. meant here I know not, I Am sure he Translates not Virgil, unless
among his several Editions, he has some Copy very wide of Ours.

Ver. 105.
Why should I sing the double Scylla 's Fate? There were two Scylla's indeed,
One the Daughter of Phorcus, the other of Nisus. But Ruaeus thinks Virgil
speaks of but one, and his Text agrees with his Comment, but which of the two
means Mr. D. by The beauteous Maid deformed? What English Reader will know
whose Fleet was devoured by her? Virgil leaves neither of these things really
Ambiguous, but his Interpreter leaves both so, that the whole may be the
plainer.

Ver. 113.
And how in Fields the Lapwing Tereus reigns. Lapwings are no royal Birds, nor
can they pretend to the same command which Tereus had in his Country. And
Virgil takes no notice of Philomela's Music, but of her Cookery, in which she
joined with Progne, v. Ovid Metam. l. 6.

Had taught the Laurels and the Spartan Flood. Ver. 118.
Virgil says no such thing, but the River Eurotas had heard Phoebus sing such
things, and the Banks being covered with Laurels, the River taught those
Laurels the same Songs which she had heard. The other 7 Lines are such Stuff,
so full a mistake of Virgil's Sense, and debauch his Fancy so scandalously, as
Ogylby would have been ashamed of.

ECLOGUE VII.
BEneath a Holm. Ver. 1.
Sub Ilice, under an Oak of a particular kind indeed, and such as is common in
Italy.

The Father of my Flock. Ver. 8.
Mr. D. seems very fond of this Catachresis in several places, as in the former
Eclogue, The Husband of the Herd, but such Figures, though graceful in the
Original are absurd in the Version, and not to be endured.

Here wanton Mincius winds along the Meads -- again. Ver. 15.
And see from you old Oak that, for which* mates the Skies, both mere
Drydenisms, or ungraceful Impertinencies; besides the Swarms did not rise from
the Tree, but ^umm'd in it, as in the Hive in a still, warm Evening.

To house and feed by Hand my weaning Lambs. Ver. 21.
Another as bad. Virgil's saying is, they were not at hand to take 'em from
their Dams, and shut 'em up when they had sucked enough, nor has he any thing
about their dreining the Dams, which after good lugging by the Lambs, could not
Strut much.

Ver. 25.
Alternos Musae meminisse volebant, is quite sunk.

Ver. 27.9.
Your Muses ever fair and ever young -- With all, my Codrus, O inspire my
Breast, the first Silly, the last Nonsense.

Ver. 38.
-- Fence my Brows with Amulets of Bays, Baccare frontem Cingite. There may be
some dispute about what kind of Plant Baccar is, but Mr. D.'s the first I
believe who makes it Bays, which, though they might be good against Thunder,
supposing Laurel and Bays, Synonymous, are no Specific against Witchcraft, or
Fascination.

Ver. 42.
( The first Essay of Arms untried before,) Mr. D. will be adding without Sense
or Reason; Virgil intimates nothing of all this. I observe, he is mighty fond of
his Parian Stone or Marble, which yet the Poet mentions only once as I
remember, in his Aeneids; but the Translator would have it look as if Virgil or
Theocritus had never heard of any other Marble but that. Thy Legs in Buskins
with a purple Band, is an Original.

Ver. 52.
Here the Translator's mad, every Line betrays his Stupidity; first Galatea
comes in with her Silver Feet, a very fine Epithet, and the right meaning of
Nerine. Tall as a Poplar, taper as the Bole; because they say, Man's a Tree
inverted, I suppose by this, Galatea was one of Mrs. Behn's She-Giants, and the
fitter Mistress for that handsome Gentleman Polyphemus; but what is all this to
the Poets Haedera formosior alba? The next is a most exquisite Paraphrase of Si
qua tui Corydonis habet' te cura, venito. But then follows a Flower, Come when
my lated Sheep at Night return. I suppose Corydon's Oxen had undergone the
Noble Experiment of transfusion, and so were become Sheep. Now such a wonderful
Operation might Crown the silent Hours, and stop the rising Morn; if that pretty
verse has any meaning in it.

Here Mr. D. resolves to outdo his Author, Ver. 51.
and Thyrsis, to aggravate his Uglyness, must be black as Night, and what is
much stranger, Deformed like him, who chaws Sardinian Herbage to contract his
Iaws. Sardinian Herbage, is a very general Word; and sure all the Herbs in
Sardinia were not of a malignant Nature; or did ever any Man eat 'em only that
his Iaws might be contracted? Naturalists talk of a Plant in Sardinia, of
which, whosoever pretended to eat, was presently taken with a Fit of Laughter,
in which he Died: Thyrsis wishes that he might be as nauseous, or bitter to his
Mistress, and consequently as odious as that Plant to those who knew of it, if
he did not think that Day longer than a Year, in which she was absent; how
close Mr. D. comes to this Sense! In the next Lines in the Poet, Thyrsis rates
his Bullocks home, that his Mistress might come to him. Mr. D. will have the
Bullocks Sheep still, and will talk absurdly, while his Author gives him good
Sense.

Ver. 66.7.
Ye Mossy Springs inviting easy Sleep, Ye Trees whose leafy shade those Mossy
Fountains keep; How much nearer is Mr. Ogylby to Virgil. Ye Mossy Springs and
Grass more soft than Sleep, and verdant Boughs which you with Shadows keep, but
they are both out in -- Iam laeto turgent in palmite gemmae, for the Gemmae are
neither Grapes nor Blossoms* But those Budds which put out from the Stock at
every joint, and shoot out into those annual Branches which bear the Grapes.

Ver. 70.
With heapy Fires. A Senceless Expression.

Ver. 80.
Nor withering Vines their jucy Vintage yield, which is far from Virgil's
meaning in Liber pampineas invidit collibus umbras, i. e. Bacchus envies the
Hillocks, those shady Vines which used to cover them, and what is that to the
Vintage? Mr. Ogylby much better. And Bacchus viny Shades denies the Hills. The
words are not so well placed, but his meaning is the same with Virgil's, which
the others is not.

Ver. 84.
Those Seven Lines are the best I have yet met with in Seven Eclogues, and they
come nearest to Virgil's, but they are run out to a luxurious length, quite
beneath Virgil's closeness and majesty. They Would have looked pretty well in Ovid,
but they are too light here.

Abies in Montibus altis. Ver. 94.
Is blown quite away, which Ogylby found room for in four Lines, but Mr. D.
could not crowd into six.

I Have heard, Ver. 96.
for Haec Memini. And Thyrsis you contend in vain. The Apostrophe is extremely
ungraceful, and the following Verses unjustifiable from any thing which Virgil
says.

ECLOGUE VIII.
MR. D. somewhere tells us, that the Preface to the Pastorals, the Essay before
the Georgics, and the Arguments, were done by some Friends of his. I don't find
his Friends infallible, tho somewhat less mistaken than himself: But since they
were so kind, it had been civil in Mr. D. to have read what they had Written;
it might have made his own Sense better, and have cleared his Understanding, in
some Particulars. Among others, in the beginning of this Pastoral, where he
talks of.

The Mournful Muse of two despairing Swains, Ver. 1.
i. e. Damon, and a certain Old Witch, as he represents her. Damon, indeed
complains of the falsehood of his Love in preferring his Rival to himself, but
Alphesibaeus only represents the Conjurations of an Old Woman, to reconcile a
Young giddy-headed Fellow to her own decrepid Passions, and what was there in
all this to cast honest Alphesibaeus into despair? Nay, and himself in his
Epistle to my Lord Clifford, says, The former part is the complaint and despair
of a forsaken Lover, the latter a Charm of an Enchantress, to renew a lost
Affection; but nothing can be more pleasant than

Ver. 2.
The Love rejected, and the Lovers Pains, which aggravates his former mistake.
And

Ver. 4.
The Rivers stood on Heaps, and stopped the running Flood, which is so
exquisite a piece of Nonsense, as his famous Hind and Panther can scarce
furnish us with. By the Rivers he cannot mean the Gods of the Rivers: They could
no more stand on Heaps, than Gods meet with Gods, and justle in the Dark; if
not them, then he must by Rivers mean the running Floods, which is a kind of a
Bull too; but allowing that all the favor imaginable, the noble Verse will
amount to this, the Rivers stood on heaps and stopped the Rivers, this it is,
to have a great Genius. Not to observe the false English, for if the Rivers in
the Plural Number stopped any thing, they must stop the Floods in the same
Number, unless there were some Rivers which had no Streams, and this Mr. D. in
days of Yore might have learnt at Westminster. The Sixth Verse is only a dull
Repetition of the former Nonsense, which perhaps he mistook for a Beauty, not
having the Conduct of the Infallible Hind.

Ver. 7, 8.
Thou for whom thy Rome prepares, the ready Triumph of thy finished Wars. If
the Triumph were ready, why were they now to prepare it? The Complaint as
designed by Mr. D. had been fitter for Augustus, than Pollio, for whom, had it
been a suitable Speech, Virgil would scarce have left it for him to make.

In Numbers like to thine could I Rehearse Thy lofty Tragic Scenes, Ver. 13,
14, 15, 16.
thy labored verse, The World another Sophocles in thee, Another Homer should
behold in me. All this is Heavenly wide from Virgil's sense; it may be, Mr. D.
who has always some unfathomable thought in his Head, designed these Lines as a
Court to some of his old Patrons; but it was a high kick to pretend to be a
Homer to any body, (tho I don't remember Homer ever wrote any thing in praise
of Sophocles,) since Mr. D. by his Flatterers, nay, by the best Critic in
England, can be thought to resemble him in nothing but his blindness, which is
no fiction here.

Thine was my earliest Muse, Ver. 1^.
my latest shall be thine. Virgil's is, A te Principium, tibi desinet --
meaning the present Eclogue should begin with him, and end to his Honor. His
Traducer makes him a Liar, for the Aeneids, Virgil 's last Work, say nothing of
Pollio as I remember.

And wildly staring upwards, Ver. 22.
thus inveighed Against the conscious Gods, and cursed the cruel Maid. What a
Maximin of a Shepherd have we here? This it is to have a Brain full of
Blasphemous Idaeas; the Chastest of Poets must be Polluted, rather than a
little Atheistic flight smothered. Why, Mr. Translator distinguished not the
Dialogists by their Names, is beyond my dull Apprehension.

Ver. 30.
Begin my Flute -- I Am afraid there were no Flutes in use, among either the
Sicilian or Italian Shepherds; if they are mentioned at the Dedication of
Nebuchadnezzar 's Image, that will not help the matter.

Ver. 33.
They hear the Hinds, etc. Hinds are Husbandmen, such as follow the Plow, or
labor in the Harvest, not Shepherds, and therefore Pan, not their God.

Ver. 39.
Shall see the Hound and Hind their thirst assuage, Promiscuous at the Spring
-- Why not as well as the Hind and Panther lodge together in one Cell?

Ver. 40.
For him thou have refused my browzing Herd. For Goats, a very pretty Figure!
as if none browze but Goats, or as if their browzing were a great Circumstance
to their Commendation, especially in a hard Winter; but why was the Fistula
left out, unless, because Fistula and Tibia would not both signify the Flute?
And I conclude, the Tibiae pares dextrae and sinistrae in the Inscriptions of
Terence's Comedies, were not Flutes. But the Music in those Days of Pastorals,
was generally more valued than the Flock, and it may be Damon's Complaint is
grounded on this, that Mopsus was Richer indeed, had greater Flocks, but was a
Fool of a Poet, in comparison with himself. Nay, Mr. Dryden almost acknowledges
this himself, in that pretty Supplement of his Unhappy Damon -- sighs, and
sings in vain.

The callow Down began to cloth my Chin. Ver. 57.
On my word 'twas very early to have a buding Beard at Twelve: Love begins
sometimes among Children, and by their Mutual Familiarity advances with their
Years. But perhaps a precoce Beard may be a Symptom of an early Wit. Here Is not
a word of Nisa's gathering Apples with her Mother, but only gathering Crabs
with Damon, a scurvy Omen of what followed: but for a Diamond of Virgil's, Mr.
D. thrusts into our Hands a Pebble of his own, as any who compares this Period
with the Original, will observe. Then soarce the bending Branches I could win,
Is an Incomparable Phrase, for I could but just reach 'em. This is to honor
our Mother Tongue.

Poor Virgil's so curtailed by his Interpreter, Ver. 60.
that in this Period he could never know himself, mean as my Poetry is, I Am
tempted to give that Divine Poet this Translation, at least more agreeable to
his way of speaking than Mr. D's D' Only.

Now, now I know thee Love! Thy Birth must be
On horrid Tmaros, or cold Rhodope,
Or in the inmost Libya's dismal wild,
Hideous with threatening Rocks, and Sand untilled,
No Humane Blood ever filled thy Barbarous Veins.
Begin, my Pipe, with me, begin Maenalian streins.
Nay, the despised Mr. Ogylby's more pardonable here, than our Quondam Laureat.
Now the Spirit of Translation's on me, I Would venture one step farther.

Dire Love the Mothers tender Heart subdued,
And in her Childrens Blood, her Hands embru'd;
Ah cruel! ah unnatural Mother she!
Was she more cruel, or more wicked he?
His wicked, hers a cruel part remains.
Begin, my Pipe, with me begin Maenalian streins.
Ver. 68.
Alien of Birth, Usurper of the Plains. There Convenience went first, the Sense
follows.

Ver. 70.
Old Doting Nature, change thy Course anew. As if Nature had changed her Course
formerly, and now was civilly desired to do so again for a poor despairing
Swain. But why should Mr. D. rail at Nature, just as an Unitarian would at the
Church, when Virgil's Damon had nothing to say to her.

Ver. 75.
And hooting Owls contend with Swans in Skill. For Skill they are much alike,
nay, the Owl has the advantage, as Practicing most; indeed, those who have
heard 'em both, think the Swan may have somewhat the sweeter voice.

Ver. 78.
Or, oh! Let Nature cease, and Chaos Reign. And there is Convenience before
Sense again, and a little Nonsense too, unless Mr. D. reflects on an old
Harmonious Gentleman, whose Government, Milton describes Book II. But I Am
persuaded Virgil, who had never read Paradise lost, knew nothing of him. The
Old Poets Chaos was quite another thing.

Ver. 82.
Farewell, ye secret Woods and shady Groves, Haunts of my Youth, and Conscious
of my Loves. A pretty Paraphrase on Vivite Sylvae, but such as wherein Virgil's
Character is entirely lost.

Rehearse his Friends Complaint, Ver. 88.
and mighty Magic verse. Complaint was to carry on his initial Mistake, that
the whole might be of a piece, according to honest Horace's directions. But
what is meant by Alphesibaeus's mighty Magic verse? Is that the English of non
omnia possumus omnes? I cannot think the Shepherd was a Conjurer, but only
Personated a Witch for a while, without designing to bring any Mistress of his
own, over House tops, and Woods, and Seas, to his own Arms on a Broom-staff.

It Is done, we want but verse. Ver. 91.
Why Carmina signifies not verses here, but a set Form of Words to be made use
of, by which all the Magic Operation, might become effectual. Mr. D. I know, is
acquainted with good Authors, and perhaps, may have met with Fulgurita
sesquiamocca terincta leponta infernonida Utribosca, etc. (some Copies read it
otherwise.) but this will do with a due Preparation, if used in a cold Morning,
with one Stocking on, the other off, and wholly Fasting, But whether those
words make a verse or no, I leave to Mr. D. to find out. He seems more sensible
in the very next words, where he makes Carmina, Charms, tho the following Lines
be but a very lame Version of Ducite ab urbe domum, etc.

Pale Phoebe drawn by verse, from Heaven descends. Ver. 95.
I don't believe all the verses which Mr. Dryden ever made, and he has in his
time, made a world of Thundering Lines, could ever show us this Miracle: Nay, I
don't believe that verse, qua verse will do the Feat. The very same Charms
which changed Ulysses's Companions, may do great-things: But Charms are not
necessary in verse, as Mr. D. may find in Cornelius Agrippa's Occult Philosophy.

Ver. 97, 99.
Verse breaks the Ground, and penetrates the Brake, Verse fires the frozen
Veins -- Now could I almost Recant my precedent Talk; this is certainly
Conjuring -- Latet Anguis -- That penetrating the Brake, is to me
unintelligible, and may be like Abracadabra for ought I know. I cannot tell what
verse may fire the Frozen veins, whether Mr. D's Translation of a Period in
Lucretius, which I remember I once saw; such are a Hellish kind of Charms
indeed, and it is pity but the Conjurers should meet with his Lot, who
Congregating all the Serpents in a Country into one Ditch, was by one of 'em
drawn into the Ditch and devoured among them.

Ver. 103.
Thrice bind about his thrice devoted Head. -- Hence it is plain that the
Translator's a more through-pac'd Conjurer than his Master.

Ver. 115.
Crumble the Sacred Mole. -- Is this Interpreting his Author, or making him
less Intelligible? How much will an Ingenious Lady, but not much acquainted
with the old Methods of Witchcraft and Sacrificing, Edify by that
Appellative, the Sacred Mole? The plain meaning Ogylby calls it a Cake, and
such it was, tho of a particular Composition.

-- Thus Daphnis burn away, Ver. 118.
This Laurel is his Fate -- But if Daphnis melted away as that burnt, he would be
quickly wasted to nothing, and could only come to her as Almahide promised to
come to her Spark Almanzor, and Embrace her only with empty Arms, as a great
Author has it.

While I so scorn his Love -- How Is that? Ver. 127.
As the Bull scorns the Heifer. Virgil intimates no such thing, but her seeking
for one in vain. And so the Enchanters would have Daphnis in Love, so as she,
by playing at Bo-Peep with him, may inflame him with the greater violence of
Love; which down right scorn would not be so likely to effect.

And from the Roots to tear the standing Corn, Ver. 143, 4.
Which whirled a loft to distant Fields is born. Not to observe the word
Negromancer for Nec^^mancer, as one fit to Translate Homer, would have called
him, if Mr. D. meant the same here as Virgil did, it is a very odd way of
Expressing it. The Romans who believed Magic could Transplant one Man's
standing Corn into another Ground, where the Corn should be shill standing and
growing, had a very ancient Law against such Practices; Neve alienam Segetem
pellexeris. But that Law speaks as if the Magician had some wheadling Trick to
persuade the Corn to remove to another Quarter; as the Romans when they had a
design on some Enemy-Cities Tutelar God; but this whirling it aloft, seems no
very proper way to make it grow, but lie on heaps in the designed Field.

Ver. 150.
Break out ye smothered Fires, and kindle smothered Love! What can Mr. D. mean
by this? Was throwing Ashes into the Brook the way to make 'em break out into a
Flame? It was the way to smother Fire indeed, but hardly to kindle it; It Is
mere Riddle, nor can the precedent or consequent Words explain it. Mr. D. is
here again at his God-like Verse, but there being so much of Ceremony in
Magical Operations, the Gods were supposed concurrent willingly, or by force
with the Magicians design. Now Daphnis is complained of as neither regarding
the Gods themselves, nor those Charms, not those Verses, in which their
particular and extraordinary Influences are concerned; the Witch I conclude,
was no great Poet, what ever Mr. D. is.

Ver. 154.
The waking Ashes rise, and round our Altars play: No, but the Ashes of
themselves burst out into a trembling Flame, which blazed round the Altar, but
these were not the Ashes thrown into the Brook, but what continued about the
Altar unremov'd.

Run to the Threshold, Amaryllis, hark! Our Hylax opens and begins to bark.
Ver. 155.
Now Virgil's Witch sent Amaryllis on no such silly Errand, but listn'd her
self. Hylax opened, i. e. he Barked, and began to Bark, which is very
Emphatical.

-- May Lovers what they Wish believe; Or Dream their Wishes, Ver. 157, 8.
and those Dreams deceive Is a very perplexed Illustration of a plain Question.
-- An qui amant ipsi sibi somnia fingunt?

He comes, Ver. 160.
he runs, he leaps to my designing Arms. Doubtless, he was wondrous fond of his
old Lady, but they say, Those who are brought any whither by Magical Powers,
look more like Dogs who have burnt their Tails, than such a brisk Fellow, as
Mr. D. here represents. But he, who (to indulge a Lewd Thought) Translates
Parcite, ab urbe venit, jam parcite carmina, Daphnis; in this manner, may make
any thing of any thing, and be fit to Translate Pindar Twenty Years hence.

ECLOGUE IX.
THE time is come I never thought to see, Ver. 1.
etc. Here Is Nonsense, and a gross mistake of the Poets meaning, but Mr. D.
must be pardoned for it, since it is the blunder of Servius, and the rest of the
Commentators, who follow him, among the rest Ruaeus; yet the very Argument of
the Eclogue might have taught him, and Mr. D. better. Virgil comes by Authority
from Augustus to re-enter upon his Lands, and escapes very narrowly with his
Life: He flies to Rome again for protection, but leaves his Servant, whom
Moeris here represents, to Cicurate and Mollify the Temper of the present
Usurper, lest those left behind should incur the same danger; Moeris goes
trembling, but in have, with his two Kids to atone him, whom Lycidas meets
with, and asks him whither, not whether so fast; to whom with respect to
Dangers past, Moeris answers, O Lycidas thus far we have escaped alive; O that
(what we never feared) a Stranger, in possession of our Farm, should say, these
Lands are mine, away you who tilled them before, where should follow an
Exclamation! And thus both the Grammar and Reason stand good, which, according
to the common Interpretation of it, are both in Ieopardy.

Ver. 7.
-- Pack up ye Rascals -- Veteres migrate coloni. Now whether Veteres coloni
signify Rascals, I leave to our honest Yeomen and Farmers to determine.

Ver. 8.
Kicked out, we set the best Face on it we could, Mr. D. could not leave Virgil
here for the sake of a soft, sweet sounding Verse, but, though we should allow
Victi signifies kicked out, no Dictionary in the World would teach him to
Construe, Contristari, to set a good Face on the Matter.

Ver. 11.
That from the sloping Mountain to the Vale, And dodder'd Oak, and all the
Banks along, This is Mr. D's. Terrar of Virgil 's Lands, by which abuttals,
were Virgil alive again, he would never be able to find 'em out. Virgil, who had
better Skill in these Matters, makes the foot of the Mountain its boundary on
one part, and an old doted Beech, which Mr. D. calls a dodder'd Oak, on the
other, and the River to wash the side of it, and these might be known again, so
long as in being, and would be very intelligible Landmarks

Ver. 19.20.
And had not Phoebus warned me by the Croak Of an old Raven from a Hollow Oak
-- To pass by his Plump of trembling Fowl, which cannot be applied to Chaonian
Doves, and his Sousing Eagle, which I believe he never met with in Latham, why
is Phoebus brought in here? It was the Sinistra Cornix, which he will have
again to be a Croaking Raven, (for he hates to commit a single Fault) not
Phoebus, which warned him; however the cava Ilex is not the blasted Bough, but
the hollow Oak, for which I hope we are obliged to his second Thoughts; The
next two Lines both in Virgil and his Translator, confirm my Observation on the
-- Vivi pervenimus.

Can never pass for a just Translation of Virgil's 17 and 18. Ver. 23, 4.
What Lycidas speaks here, through the whole Period, is such an abuse of the
Text, as is unpardonable; there is not a Line of Virgil's in it -- Who rehearse
The Waters gliding in a smoother Verse? Is downright Nonsense, And -- Tend my
Herd -- Goats are not a Herd, but a Flock -- But for Heavens sake who taught
Mr. D. to Translate Caper, the Libyan Ridgil? I have read somewhere of Goats in
Libya, as big as Oxen, but were Arius, or Milienus Toro, or Claudius of that
Country? Or does Mr. D. know what a Ridgil or Ridgling is? This Verse was only
a warning Iargon, to have a care of him who had got possession of his Lands,
because of the danger his Life would be in from his Fury; but a Ridgling, or
Goat, or Ram, which has but one Testicle, perhaps may not be so furious a
Creature as Virgil represents him, nor is such an imperfect Animal fit to be
the Husband of the Herd. Ogylby's Translation gives these Verses much better,
Thus, Could any barbarous Monster use such spite?
With thee Menalcas farewell all delight.
Who Will sing to Nymphs? Who Will strew the Earth with Flowers?
Or shelter silver Springs with shady Bowers?
Or write such Verse as late I snatched from thee,
When thou our Amaryllis went to see.
Till I return, my Goats, dear Tityrus, feed
(The way is short) and Water if they need.
But as you drive 'em take especial care,
Of the He-Goat (for he will strike) beware.


Here at least we have something like Virgil, but nothing of that kind in Mr. D.

V. 36.7, 8.
To show what he means by Rhymes stronger pinioned than Swans, Mr. D. gives us
that impertinent Fustian, they -- shall soaring bear above The immortal gift of
Gratitude to Jove, which does not grow out of his Author.

Ver. 42.
And Trees to Goats their willing Branches bend, this is one of Mr. D's. fine
Thoughts, without any ground from his Author; for Gabble afterward I suppose
he meant Gaggle. Another Impertinence we have, v. 54 -- Where Nightingales
their Lovesick Dittys sing, where the Epithet's very improper, Nightingales
Sing Mournful, not Lovesick Dittys, Philomel had no occasion for them.

Ver. 6^.4:
Why, Daphnis, do thou search in old Records, To know the Seasons when the
Stars arise? What Records does he mean, Lily's or Gadbury's? Virgil mentions
indeed the old rising Stars, or Constellations, as not worth observing when the
Iulium Sidus appeared so bright above the rest, though perhaps it was no more
than a Comet after all.

Mr. D. describes his own Case appositely enough, Ver. 70 -- 75.
and would he but, for the sake of that acknowledged Truth, have forborne this
unhappy Translation, he had saved, in some measure, his Friends Purses, and his
own Reputation.

Hushed Winds, Ver. 80.
the topmost Branches scarcely bend, As if thy tuneful Song they did attend,
this is running division upon a Word farther than 'twill bear, but this
Caprificus must burst out, or Mr. D. were undone.

Or if e're Night the gathering Clouds we fear, Ver. 88.
A Song will help the beating Storm to bear -- A Song then it seems is better
than a Dipped Hat and Cloak, it is pity but Mr. D. had a Pattent for making these
Weather-fencing Songs; it would make him some Compensation for the loss of his
Laurel. But, for all this gay flourish, Virgil meant no more than this, that if
they were afraid of a Shower yet before Night, a merry Song would make 'em go
nimbly enough to escape it, in order to which he makes Lycidas offer Moeris very
civilly to carry his Burden for him.

The Conclusion of this Eclogue, fares like the rest, and the whole looks like
rich Tissue, covered so thick with Copper-lace, that the Ground cannot be seen
for it.

ECLOGUE X.
THis Eclogue is Translated in a Strein too luscious and effeminate for Virgil,
who might bemoan his Friend, but does it in a noble and a manly Style, which
Mr. Ogylby answers better than Mr. D. whose Paraphrase looks like one of Mrs.
Behns, when some body had turned the Original into English Prose before.

Ver. 19. etc.
Where Virgil says, Lauri and myricae flevere, the Figures beautiful where Mr.
D. says, the Laurel stands in Tears, And hung with humid Pearls the lowly Shrub
appears, the Figure is lost, and a foolish and impertinent Representation comes
in its place; an ordinary Dewy Morning might fill the Laurels and Shrubs with
Mr. D's. Tears, though Gallus had not been concerned in it.

Ver. 27.
And yet the Queen of Beauty blessed his Bed -- Here Mr. D. comes with his ugly
patch upon a beautiful Face: What had the Queen of Beauty to do here, Lycoris
did not despise her Lover for his meanness, but because she had a mind to be a
Catholic Whore. Gallus was of Quality, but her Spark a poor inferior Fellow.
And yet the Queen of Beauty, etc. would have followed there very well, but not
where want on Mr. D. has fixed her.

Flushed were his Cheeks, Ver. 32.
and glowing were his Eyes. This Character is fitter for one that is Drunk, than
one in an Amazement, and is a Thought unbecoming Virgil.

And for thy Rival, Ver. 35.
tempts the raging Sea, The forms of horrid War, and Heavens Inclemency.
Lycoris doubtless, was a jilting Bagage, but why should Mr. D. belie her?
Virgil talks nothing of her going to Sea, and perhaps she had a mind to be only
a Camp Laundress, which Office she might be advanced to without going to Sea:
The forms of horrid War, for horrida castra, is incomparable.

-- His Brows, Ver. 37, 38.
a Country Crown of Fennel, and of nodding Lilies drown. Is a very odd Figure:
Sylvanus had swinging Brows to drown such a Crown as that, i. e. to make it
Invisible, to swallow it up; if it be a Country Crown drown his Brows, it is
false English.

The Meads are sooner drunk with Morning Dews. Ver. 43, 44
Rivi signifies no such thing; but then, that Bees should be drunk with Flowery
Shrubs, or Goats be drunk with Brouze, for Drunk's the Verb, is a very quaint
Thought.

So sad a Song is only worthy you. Ver. 50.
Is a most exact Translation of soli cantare periti Arcades -- which no body
can deny.

Tho Phyllis 's brown -- etc. Ver. 57, 61.
Is all so silly, and beside the Cushion, and the last so lewd, and unbecoming
Virgil 's Chastity and Modesty, as is unpardonable.

As you are Beauteous, Ver. 65.
were you half so true, Here could I Live, and Love, and only Dye with you.
Virgil makes not Gallus talk so dubiously; he is fond of Lycoris, and is for
Dying with her, without reserve; if she were but with him, he would be satisfied
without so nice an inquisition into her Loyalty: The latter Line I Am afraid was
borrowed from an Ode in the Gentleman's Iournal.

Ver. 68.
And strive in Winter Camps -- Gallus talks of no such things.

Ver. 73.
Those are not Limbs for Icicles to tear. How delicate or course soever the
Limbs of Lycoris might be Icicles seldom tear 'em; I have heard indeed of one,
whose Throat was cut with an Icicle; but never of any rent or torn with them.

Ver. 79.
And as the Rind extends -- No it should be as the Letters extend, and grow
larger on the Rind, so let our Loves increase.

Ver. 88, 89, 90, 91.
Is turning Virgil into Ovid, and running looser than Ovid himself would do.

Ver. 94.
Or Italy 's indulgent Heaven forego -- What had Italy to do here? Or where
would Mr. D. fix his Scene?

Ver. 98.
In Hell, and Earth, and Seas, and Heaven above. Is all Tautology, when that
best Translated Line in all the Eclogues follows, Love Conquers all, and we
must yield to Love; the precedent Line was only for convenience of Rhyme.

Ver. 104, 5.
The Song because inspired by you shall shine, And Gallus will approve, because
it is mine. Which is a Conclusion not agreeable to Virgil's modesty; and far
from -- Vos haec facietis maxima Gallo.

As Alders in the Spring their Boles extend, Ver. 108, 9.
And heave so fiercely, that the Bark they rend. Is mere Fustian, and false in
Thought, and Resemblance, and false in Fact, and absurd in Expression.

That Mr. Dryden might be satisfied that I Would offer no foul Play, nor find
Faults in him, without giving him an opportunity of Retaliation, I have
subjoined another Metaphrase or Translation of the I. and IV. Pastoral, which I
desire may be read with his by the Original.

Tityrus, ECLOGUE I.
Melib. BEneath a spreading Beech, you Tityrus lie,
And Country Songs to humble Reeds apply;
We our sweet Fields, our Native Country fly,
We leave our Country; you in Shades may lie,
And Amaryllis Fair and Blithe Proclaim,
And make the Woods repeat her buxom Name.

Ti. O Melibaeus! 'twas a bounteous God
These Peaceful Play-days on our Muse bestowed;
At least, he'st always be a God to me;
My Lambs shall often his grateful Offerings be.
Thou see, he lets my Herds securely stray,
And me at Pleasure on my Pipe to play.

Me. Your Peace I don't with Looks of Envy view,
But I admire your happy state, and you.
In all our Farms severe Distraction reigns,
No ancient Owner, there in peace remains.
Sick I, with much ado, my Goats can drive,
This, Tityrus, I scarce can lead alive;
On the bare Stones, among yon Hazles past
Just now, alas! her hopeful Twins she cast.
Yet, had not all on's dull and senseless been,
We'd long agon this coming Stroke forseen.
Often did the blasted Oaks our Fate unfold,
And boding Coughs from hollow Trees foretold.
But say, good Tityrus! tell me who is the God,
Who Peace, so lost to us, on you bestowed?

Ti. Troth Melibaeus, I, a Homespun Clown,
Thought that called Rome, just like our Neighboring Town,
Where Thou and I were wont to drive our Sheep,
And Mercats with our Suckling Lambs to keep.
So little Whelps like bigger Dogs I Would known,
Kids like their Dams, but not so largely grown;
Thus little Things, I Would often with Great compare:
But Rome o'er-tops all other Towns as far
As Cypress Groves the Fields of bending Brom,

Me. But what great cause could make you visit Rome?

Ti. Sweet Liberty, which, as I lazing lay,
Looked on my Dullness with a Gracious Ray,
Smiled on a Head just white with Aged Snow,
And came at last, tho all her Steps were slow.
Nor have I sighed for Galatea more
Since Amaryllis in my Heart I wore.
It Is true, while fast in Galatea's Chain,
My Liberty, I little hoped to gain.
Unwash'd my Flocks, my Herd at random strayed,
And tho I all my Offerings duly paid
With Cheese of purest Cream; I still might come
Empty from her ungrateful Mercats home.

Me. Often had I wondr'd, Galatea, why
Thou Prayd'st to Heaven with such a doleful cry.
I wondered often the meaning, why so long
Thy Apples on the Trees ungather'd hung;
'Twas all for Tityrus; their absent Lord
The Groves, the Springs, the very Shrubs deplored.

Ti. What should I do? I could not break my Chain,
Nor Gods so good in all our Country Gain.
But here, my Friend, I saw that Youth Divine,
To whom each Month my grateful Altars shine;
His Oracle that God-like Language spoke,
Feed on your Bullocks, Lads, your Oxen Yoke.

Me. Happy old Man! you then your Farm may keep,
Lands large enough, tho craggy part and steep,
And slimy Marrome all the Marshes spread;
Your Flocks may be in usual Pastures fed.
No scabby Neighbors shall disturb them there,
Nor they a taint from their Infection fear.
Happy old Man! Cool gentle Breezes you
Here, by known Streams, and Sacred Springs pursue.
You Sallow Hedge which parts the Neighboring Field,
Will to your Bees abundant Pastures yield.
Drawn by whose pretty murmurs, silent Sleep
Often over your weary Eyes will calmly creep.
From Bushy Rocks the Linet sweetly sing,
Whose Notes to you, the Tuneful Air shall bring,
While your loved Cooing Stock-Doves round you groan;
And from the lofty Elm, the sighing Turtles moan.

Ti. First, then shall Stags along the Welkin feed,
Or flying Seas, desert their scaly Breed.
The wandering Parthian first shall drink the Soan,
And Germany on Tigris Banks be shown;
Each Nation through the others Bounds shall fly,
Ever his loved Image in my Breast shall die.

Me. But we, alas! the World must wander over,
Some to the farthest Africk's thirsty Shore;
Or toward Inhospitable Scythia's Cold,
Or where Oaxis rapid Streams are rolled.
Nay, some quite thrust from all our civil World,
Must on the savage British Coasts be hurled.
Ah! Could I hope, when tedious years are past,
To see my loved, my Native Soil at last!
Once more my poor Thatched Cottage Roofs admire,
And never to greater Royalties aspire?
Must barbarous Troops our labored Tilth employ?
Cursed Soldiers all our hopeful Crops enjoy?
See what sad Fruits our Civil Discord yields,
For whose blessed use, we Tilled our fruitful Fields.
Go, Wretch! Ah could it be! in artful Lines,
Go Graft thy Pears, and Prune thy straggling Vines.
Be gone my once dear happy Flock, be gone!
No more shall I in mossy Grotts alone,
Streak out at ease, and see you clambring go,
Hang over the Rocks, and crop the Shrubs below.
No more, alas! you will hear my Country Strains,
No more be fed by me along the Plains;
Nor shall I lead where Milkie Trefoil grows,
Nor where you would on the bitter Sallows browze.

Ti. Yet, here however, Lodge with me to Night,
I can but to a Leavy Couch invite.
I Have mellow Fruit, and downy Chestnuts here,
Green Cheese, and such, make up our Country Cheer.
And see yon Village Chimnies smoking all,
And longer Shadows nor from lofty Mountains fall.

PASTORAL IV. Or Pollio. A Poem rising somewhat above the Shepherd 's Strein,
and somewhat imitated in the Translation.
TAke now my Rustic Muse a Nobler flight!
All will not in Trees, and lowly Shrubs delight.
If Woods, we'll sing, those very Woods must be
Advanced to suit a Consul's Dignity.
Now the Cumaean Prophecy's fullfill'd,
And rolling Years more happy Ages yield.
Now comes the Virgin, whose soft Smiles presage
Another Saturn's Reign, a Golden Age.
Now from kind Heaven descends a God-like Race,
May thy chaste Hands the coming Infant grace,
In whose blessed Times Hell's stubborn Brood shall cease,
And Heavenly Virtue fill the World with Peace!
His Birth, Lucina's greatest Work remains,
Be kind! in him, thy own Apollo Reigns;
Since, Pollio! thy auspicious Year came in,
The glorious Age, the mighty Months begin.
If any taint of former Guilt remains,
Thy happy Hand shall Purge the Crimson Stains.
The World no more their black Effects shall fear,
When thou thy Standard in their Front shall rear.
He Will live a God, and Saints, and Angels see,
And he again their dearest Object be;
And with his Father's Might immensely Crowned,
The World he will manage in a Peace profound.
To thee, sweet Boy, the Soil untilled shall bring,
And at thy Feet, her little Beauties fling;
Fox-Gloves, and creeping Ivy every where,
And Niles gay Bean, with smiling Iasmines bear.
Flocks scarce shall drag their weighty Vdders home,
And Herds unscar'd by Lions, freely roam.
Thy Cradle shall with fragrant Blossoms spring,
The Poisonous Serpent loose her fatal Sting.
No Venom more, shall Iuicy Plants disclose,
And every Hedge shall bear the Syrian Rose.
But as the Youth his mighty Fathers Deeds,
The Heroes praise, and Virtues Nature reads.
The Self-sown Crop shall load the ripening Field,
And roughest Thorns their purple Clusters yield.
The hardest Oaks shall sweat with tastful Dew,
And Honey still the Golden Drops renew.
Yet shall some steps of ancient Frauds remain,
And some shall try the rolling Seas again;
Some shall their Towns with lofty Walls surround,
And some with Furrows break the harmless Ground.
Tiphys shall live, and Argo float again,
And waft selected Heroes over the Main.
New Wars shall rise, and great Achilles rage
Once more against the Trojan Walls engage.
But when firm Age, thy Manly strength shall show,
The daring Sailor shall the Seas forego;
Merchants shall send abroad their Ships no more,
But every thing shall every Country store.
Untilled the Corn, unprun'd the Vines shall grow,
Rough Hinds discharge their Bullocks from the Plough.
No artful Colors shall the Wool disguise,
But on the Rams a lovely Purple rise.
A deep laid Crimson all their Fleeces line,
And sucking Lambs with Native Scarlet shine.
May such blessed Ages from our Distaff flow!
The Fates, with one Consent, determine so,
And cried, So ever happy, ever go!
Offspring of Heaven! great Jove's immortal Son!
It Is time to put thy destined Honors on.
See the vast World beneath its Pressures reel,
Seas, Earth, and Heaven, the strong Convulsions feel!
Look yet again on Natures smiling Face.
How All with Ioys the rising Age embrace!
O might I live but long enough to raise
Notes fit to sing thy Acts unbounded praise!
Then Thracian Orpheus, Linus then shall yield,
And to my nobler Muse resign the Field.
Tho here the Mother, there the lovely Sire,
Calliope, and Phoebus raise the Fire,
And Orpheus she, and he his Linus breast inspire,
Should Pan himself attempt my soaring Muse,
And for his Judge his dear Arcadia choose;
Pan in his loved Arcadia's sense should be,
And in his own, inferior far to me.
Begin, sweet Babe! thy Sacred Birth to show,
And with soft smiles, thy lovely Mother know!
For thee, her Womb ten tedious Months before,
Ten tedious Months the Qualms of Breeding bore:
But where no Joy the cloudy Parent shows,
That Child, his Guest, no favoring God will choose,
And every Goddess will his luckless Bed refuse.
Notes on the Georgics.
VIrgil's Georgics, are called by Mr. Dryden, The best Poem of the best Poet.
Of his own performance, he says in this what is true of all the rest, I have too
much injured my great Author, Epist. to Earl of Chesterfield.
I would have Translated him, but fear, according to the literal French and
Italian Phrases I have traduced him: and this Acknowledgment is true, for never
was Poet so abused, nor Mankind so imposed on, by a Name before. Virgil I know,
is not the easiest Author in the World to Interpret; But Veteranes in Poetry,
at least, should have sense enough to know -- Quid valiant humeri, quid far
recusent: A Camel, they say, will take no more, when he finds his Burden
sufficient for his Strength: But there is another Beast which crouches under
all, without Reluctance. Mr. D. may Plead Want and Poverty, and many a sorry
Meal, to excuse his Attempt; but his Belly here, was neither Magister Artis,
nor Ingenij largitor, however, it forced him, negatas sequi voces. And Etsi
dolosi spes refulserit nummi, the Man must be too weak, who, with respect to
our present Translator, Cantare credat Pegaseium melos. But methinks, Mr. D. is
soon weary of his humble Talk, and for ought I know, may desire to be
understood so, That the Gleanings of his Ephraim, Ibid.
in comparison with others, will surpass the Vintage of Abiezer. I hope, he
means not that the Produce of his more than fumbling Age is more valuable, than
the vigorous Writings of others, in their undeclining Years; that would grate
too hard upon Mr. Cr. and Mr. Con. the former of which, has used the World
better in his Lucretius and Manilius, than ever Mr. D. could in his best
Translations; but he means, this Performance of his old Age, is to be preferred
before the voluminous trifles of his greener Years. Now, I must confess, Mr. D.
was never the Favorite of my Judgment, there appeared always somewhat forced
and unnatural to me in his finest Pieces, which his own extravagantly
censorious, and injudicious Humor rendered the more notorious; but this Virgil
is far the worst of all, a Poem neither tolerable when Read alone, nor when
compared with what he calls, or few would believe, was the Original; but this
will be more apparent afterward. I Am some what concerned to see Mr. D. still
Railing at the Court, what, tho he lost the Laurel; Must it follow, that the
Court's a place of Forgetfulness, at the best, for well-deservers? Have not his
own Morals been a little infected with that Air, as he represents it? Or is
Good Life now his task indeed? Ibid.
I Am afraid, however he might be first cheated himself, it is no extraordinary
Moral accomplishment, to endeavor to recover his losses, by learning to cheat
others. But can a good, unchanged Catholic talk of losing a Maidenhead in a
Cloister? Is he relapsing to the Spanish Friar? Constancy then, must never be
the Motto of his Arms. It Is an odd Complement to his Patron, That God had
bestowed good Sense on his Lordship, but he had bestowed good Learning upon
himself. I thought, Learning always came from the same Almighty Hand, who gives
the Sense and Apprehension. What has any Man which he has not received? It Is
very hard, that Mr. D. should represent his Patron less Religious than himself;
who thankfully acknowledges to the Almighty Power, the Assistance he had given
him in the Beginning, the Prosecution, and Conclusion of his present Studies;
which, therefore I conclude, he thinks, more happily performed, than he could
have promised to himself. But this Rapture, perhaps, was soon after Saul had
seen the Vision, and therefore ought to be past over.

The Essay on Georgics, it seems, is not Mr. D's, yet, whoever was the Author,
since by appearing before his Work, he lays himself open to the Reader's
censures; he must not take it ill, if I among others, presume to observe what I
think an Error in it, such is the definition of a Georgic. A Georgic is some
part of the Science of Husbandry, put into a pleasing dress, and set off with
all the Beauties and Embellishmeuts of Poetry. Now this is a good Account of
the Georgic, as already Written by Hesiod or Virgil, because they have written
Georgics in Verse, and set 'em off with admirable Beauties. But a true Georgic,
that is, an exact Art of Husbandry, might be as well delivered in Prose, and
without any Ornament, as the Moral Rules of Pythagoras, or Epictetus; and Varro
wrote Georgics as truly, tho not so pleasantly as Virgil.

GEORGIC I.
Ver. 1.
WHat makes a plenteous Harvest, when to turn, The fruitful Soil, and when to
sow the Corn -- It Is unlucky, they say, to stumble at the Threshold, but what
has a plenteous Harvest to do here? Virgil would not pretend to prescribe Rules
for that which depends not on the Husbandman's Care, but the disposition of
Heaven altogether. Indeed, the plenteous Crop depends somewhat on the good
Method of Tillage, and where the Land's ill Manured, the Corn, without a
Miracle, can be but indifferent, but the Harvest may be good, which is its
properest Epithet, tho the Husbandman's Skill were never so indifferent. The
next Sentence is too literal, and when to Plough had been Virgil's meaning, and
Intellegible to every Body; and when to sow the Corn, is a needless addition.

The care of Sheep, Ver. 3.
of Oxen, and of Kine. And when to geld the Lambs, and sheer the Swine* would
as well have fallen under the Cura boum, quis cultus habendo sit Pecori; as Mr.
D's deduction of particulars.

The Birth and Genius of the fruitful Be, I Sing Mecaenas, Ver. 5.
and I Sing to thee -- But where did Experientia ever signify Birth and
Genius? Or what ground was there for such a Figure in this place? How much more
Manly is Mr. Ogylby's Version. What makes rich Grounds, in what Celestial Signs,
It Is good to Plough, and Marry Elms with Vines.
What best fits Cattle, what with Sheep agrees,
And several Arts improving frugal Bees, I Sing Mecaenas.
Which four Lines, tho faulty enough, are yet much more to the purpose than Mr.
D's six.

From Fields and Mountains to my Song repair. For Patrium linquens Nemus, Ver.
22.
saltusque Lycaei -- Very well explained!

Ver. 23, 24.
Inventer Pallas, of the fa^^ing Oil, Thou Founder of the Plough, and
Plough-mans Toil! Written as if these had both been Pallas's invention. The
Plough-man's Toil's impertinent.

Ver. 25.
-- The Shroud-like Cypress -- Why Shroud-like? Is a Cypress pulled up by the
Roots, which the Sculpture in the last Eclogue fills Sylvanus's Hand with so
very like a Shroud? Or did not Mr. D. think of that kind of Cypress used often
for Scarves and Hat-bands at Funerals formerly, or for Widow's Vails, etc. if
so, 'twas a deep good Thought.

Ver. 26.
-- That wear the Rural Honors, and increase the Year -- What Is meant by
increasing the Year? Did the Gods or Goddesses add more Mouths, or Days, or
Hours to it? Or how can Arva tueri -- signify to wear Rural Honors? Is this
to Translate, or abuse an Author? The next Couplet are borrowed from Ogylby, I
suppose, because less to the purpose than ordinary.

Ver. 33.
The Patron of the World, and Rome 's peculiar Guard -- Idle, and none of
Virgil's, no more than the Sense of the precedent Couplet; so again, he
Interpolates Virgil with that and the round Circle of the Year to guide
Powerful of Blessings, which thou strew'st around. A ridiculous Latinism, and
an Impertinent Addition; indeed the whole Period is but one piece of Absurdity
and Nonsense, as those who lay it with the Original must find.

Ver. 42, 43.
And Neptune shall resign the Fasces of the Sea. Was he Consul or Dictator
there? And watery Virgins for thy Bed shall strive. Both absurd Interpolations.

Where in the void of Heaven a place is free. Ver. 47, 48.
Ah happy D -- n. were that place for thee! But where is that void? Or what
does our Translator mean by it? He knows what Ovid says, God did to prevent
such a void in Heaven, perhaps, this was then forgotten: But Virgil talks more
sensibly.

The Scorpion ready to receive thy Laws. Ver. 49.
No, he would not then have gotten out of his way so fast.

The Proserpine affects her silent Seat -- What made her then so angry with
Ascalaphus, Ver. 56.
for preventing her return? She was now mused to Patience under the
determinations of Fate, rather than fond of her Residence.

Pity the Poets, Ver. 61, 2, 3.
and the Plough-mans cares, Interest thy Greatness in our mean Affairs. And use
thy self betimes to hear our Prayers. Which is such a wretched Perversion of
Virgil's Noble Thought as Vicars would have blushed at; but Mr. Ogylby makes us
some amends, by his better Lines. O wheresoe'er thou art, from thence incline,
And grant Assistance to my bold Design!
Pity with me, poor Husbandmens affairs,
And now, as if Translated, hear our Prayers.
This is Sense, and to the purpose: the other, poor mistaken Stuff.

Ver. 67.
And Streams yet new, from Precipices run. An Interpolation, but no Beauty.

Ver. 70.
And Goad him till he groans beneath his toil. Ridiculous, and far from
Virgil's meaning.

Ver. 83.
A fourth with Grass unbidden decks the Ground. Virgil says nothing of such a
fourth kind of Soil; but tells us another, which, with Mr. D. is the third kind
Bears Fruit Trees well, and good Grass, without particular Cultivation; and
indeed, Land which is good for Fruit Trees, is good for Grass too, tho the
spreading of the Trees sour the Grass in time.

Ver. 86.
And soft Idume weeps her odorous Tears. Now, in the Name of Poetry, what does
Mr. D. mean by that fine Verse? How come molles Sabaei to signify soft Idume,
and sua thura, her Odorous Tears? How much more Honestly, says Mr. Ogylby with
his Author. India sends Ivory, Sabaea Gums.

Ver. 91.
This is the Original Contract -- Pray, between what Parties?

Ver. 03, 04.
-- When Ducalion hurled His Mother's Entrails on the Desert World -- But, why
Entrails? Themis's Oracle, was Ossaque post tergum magnae jactate Parentis. And
Men were -- Inde durum Genus -- Stones being as Bones to the Earth; but the
Entrails never carried any such Omen with them -- The Entrails, or Bowels, are
sometimes named for compassion, and tenderness; and had the Oracle named
Entrails, instead of Bones, it would have puzzel'd Deucalion, as much as his
Wife. Had Mr. D. read King Arthur, K. Arth. l. 8.
he might have met with a Story of one Pyrrhus, and his Wife, who, perhaps,
might have tossed his Mothers Entrails; but Deucalion and his Wife acted more
sensibly.

-- Only scar The surface, Ver. 100.
and but lightly print the share. What Stuff's this to Virgil's Manly Sense, or
Mr. Ogylby's? To break a shallow Furrow will suffice?

Least wicked Weeds the Corn should overrun In watery Soils, Ver. 103.
or lest the barren Sand Should suck the Moisture from the thirsty Land --
Virgil talks nothing of any watery Soil; and Weeds will grow in the dry Soil as
well as any; but a light Plowing in a proper Season, helps, in some measure, to
kill the Weeds, as laying it Fallow rots the common Surface. But what Weed does
he mean, which should suck the Moisture from the Land. Virgil's rule is, You
should Plow but shallow, lest the water should run off too much from the Sandy
Ground which needs it most therefore, in deep, moist Grounds Good-Husbands, lay
their Ridges high to drain them, in light Sandy Ground they lay them low, to
keep them as moist as possible; but what excellent Rules for Husbandry Mr. D.
would give?

Both these unhappy Soils, Ver. 106.
etc. These four Lines are so very absurd, and his mentioning a Sabbath in a
Roman Profane Author, so impertinent, as a Wise Man would forswear
Translating, who understood Sense, and his Author no better,

Ver. 110.
The Faults and Blunders are so thick here, that they must be seen by every
Body; he breaks all the Sense of any Rules of Husbandry, as indeed, wholly
ignorant of the Matter. But for his stalks of Lupines, (a stubborn Wood,) I
wonder whether that Parenthesis be the English for Fragiles Calamos, or Sylvam
sonantem? I hope, the next Edition will inform us rightly.

Ver. 115.
And sleepy Poppies harmful Harvests yield. Poppies indeed, do no good in the
Corn, but none make a Harvest of 'em but Apothecaries, or those who distill
compound Waters; and they are gone every where, long before Harvest: Virgil
talks quite otherwise.

Ver. 118.
-- Sordid ashes -- Cinerem immundum, I take, to signify Soot, a thing of
excellent use in Barren Grounds, and where they are overrun with Moss.

Ver. 121.
And Earth Manured, not Idle, tho at Rest. For Nec nulla interea est inaratae
gratia terrae, a Riddle for a plain Axiom.

Ver. 122.
Mr. D's Account of Devonshiring Land, is somewhat darker than his Author; but
his pretty Fancy of new Stringing the Veins: for -- Astringit venas biantes, is
so fine a Pun, as makes amends for the mistakes all-a-round.

Ver. 138.
Who smooths with Harrows, or who pounds with Rakes The crumbling Clods --
These are strange things, and what Virgil never meant. Crates, sometimes
signifies an Harrow indeed, but Vimineae Crates, methinks, looks more like what
I Have seen made use of in a new Ground to smooth it, viz. A Heap of large
Bushes, with a piece of heavy Wood on them, to keep them close, which has
succeeded very well. To pound with Rakes, is certainly, a very odd Idaea of the
use of that Instrument, a Pestle is fitter for that Work; indeed, I have seen a
kind of Rake with short, broad, flat Iron-teeth, and a heavy Head, called a
Clotting Rake, with which, they scatter their Mole-warps, Cow Dung, and that of
Horses, and break them to pieces, but that is commonly in Mowing Grounds. Virgil
in all probability, meant those Iron Forks, like what they empty Dung-Carts
with; with which, in several Countries, they tear up the Strong Soil which was
laid Follow, Turf by Turf, which they call, Breaking of Fallow, and tends much
to the mellowing of the toughest Grounds. And this is most used, where the
Ridges are laid so high as makes cross Plowing, in some measure, impracticable.

For a moist Summer, Ver. 145.
and a Winter dry -- Here indeed, Mr. D. errs with the Multitude, who certainly
mistake Virgil; for there are few wet Summers which are extraordinary
desirable; and a cold, pinching Winter is generally best, for both Trees and
Corn, provided, it be but Snowy too; and there is a Solstice in Winter as well
as Summer; in which a great deal of Rain is expected by our Husbandmen, and
much wished for, to fill the Dikes, which followed with Frosts, and large
Snows, tends much to the security of the following Crop: Indeed a dusty March,
if we'll count March a Winter Month, is very kindly, after which, if April be
but wet, the Husbandman can dispense with a dry time for most of the following
Months, and few Lands are endamag'd by it. Hist. Not. l. 17. c. 2.
Pliny therefore rejects Virgil's Rule, tho in the same Country, if it be
Interpreted, as Commonly it is. And, perhaps, none of Virgil's Commentators
have been Husbandmen enough to give us his right meaning. For my part, I think,
that mentioned before, the most Rational; and should be ready to Interpret
Hibernus Pulvis -- by March Dust, of which our Country Proverb says, A Peck is
worth a Kings Ransom. But I leave the Matter to the ultimate decision of better
Judgments. Yet must think Mr. D's Paraphrase in the next Couplet, very strange,
That Winter Drought rewards the Peasant's pain, And broods indulgent on the
buried Grain.

Ver. 151.
Mr. D. changes Virgil's way of Speaking for a much worse -- Cover it with
speed, i. e. Harrow it, which every body does. Before the surly Clod resists
the Rake. Fields are not Raked, but Gardens, and breaking the pliant Furrows,
is mere Cant, and signifies just nothing.

Ver. 159.
-- On the Mountains brow, undams his Watery stores -- But where was it ever
heard of, that Farmers kept treasures of Water on the tops, or brows of
Mountains? Springs sometimes rise at the Feet of Mountains, sometimes out of
their sides: and Virgil means no more than, They gather it in Pools on the
upper Grounds, from whence into the Plains are oftimes seen considerable Cliffs
or Falls. Capt. Knox in his History of Ceylon, gives us a fine Idaea of this
Husbandry, in his Account of the sowing and managing of Rice, tho that needs
more Water than any other Grain.

Ever yet the aspiring Offspring of the Grain, Ver. 167.
O'ertops the Ridges of the Furrowed Plain. Are Verses very brillant, and mere
sparkling Nonsense.

Too large a Beverage to the Drunken Field -- Carries the Figure too high, Ver.
170.
which in the Poet is agreeable, and modest. The following six Lines, are a
Fustian Paraphrase of a Judicious Representation.

Mr. D. Paraphrases Three excellent Lines of Virgil with no fewer than eight of
his own, Ver. 183.
wherein, he belyes old Father Jupiter, while he makes him the Inventor of the
Plow-share, and of Handy-Crafts, and Arts; and gives us a very impertinent
Idaea of the Silver Age.

Which only Turfs and Greens for Altars found. Ver. 192.
This Line, I Am sure, Virgil gave no hint of, nor is it at all pertinent to the
Matter in Hand, besides, by Mr. D's leave, cutting Turf is as much wounding the
Earth as Plowing, if it make the Body as sore to flea it, as to gash it with a
Knife or Sword.

And shook from Oaken Leaves the liquid Gold -- For Honey, Ver. 200.
but who'd imagine the Translator meant so, but that the Original guides him to
it? Which must needs give great satisfaction to the mere English Reader; after
all, what is Mr. D's Sense in this line? Virgil means, Jupiter took away that
Honey with which, the leaves of every Tree, not the Oak only, flowed in the
Golden Age.

Ver* 202.
And from the Rivers made the Wine retire -- Ovid says jam Flumina Nectaris
ibant -- Of the Golden Age, Wine ran down in mighty Rivers. But Mr. D. speaks,
as if Wine and Water had run down the same Stream, and now the Wine was racked
off, and the Water left in a thin condition.

Ver* 205.
And force the Veins of clashing Flints to Expire The lurking Seeds of that
Celestial Fire. Now, I think, the way of striking Fire was not by Flints
against Flints, but against Steel, which way was certainly, very certain and
Ancient, theother but casual. Expire, is a very Catachrestical word here too:
But why Fire struck from Flints, should be called Celestial, I cannot so much as
guess.

Then first on Seas the hollowed Alder swam. Here Mr. D. stumbles a second time
at Alnus, Ver. 207.
Virgil uses it for any Tree used in Shipping, but Mr. D. will scarce find a
real Alder ever made use of for Sea-service.

Ver. 213.
Drags in the Deep -- Yes, and in the Shallows too, as well as Casting-Nets,
but as for the other Nets Virgil mentions, they are for the Sea, and Baits were
hung on Hooks, which is not Virgil's, but Mr. D's own discovery.

-- And sounding Axes. But why that Epithet to Axes. Ver. 215
Argutae serrae, might be Englished sounding Saws, but I question whether Ferri
rigor, signifies Axes at all -- For wedges first did yielding Wood invade -- A
very silly Catachresis. This, and the following Verse, are wonderfully
beautified by the Dids, and the next is so Elegant a Version of Virgil's noble
Sense, that a Man would think Mr. D. when he undertook Virgil, was very rich,
and above need, or very Idle?

First, Ver. 219, 220.
Ceres taught the Ground with Grain to sow, And armed with Iron Shares the
crooked Plough. It may be so; but Virgil says, only, she taught Men to Plow.

And unblest Oats, Ver. 229.
and Darnel domineers. Pray, what are Oats unblest? Is that the real meaning of
Steriles avenae? Or is that Line good English, not to mention the immediately
precedent Rhymes?

-- And with an Iron War Of Rakes and Harrows, Ver. 232.
the proud Foes expelled. Iron War, distant War, etc. Are Expressions our
Translator's wonderfully fond of; and yet, as he uses 'em, they are generally
mere Nonsense: And if poor Elkanah, or any of the Fifth Rate Scribblers had
used the word Foes, unless in a Jewish Story, Mr. D. before his fumbling Age,
would have been very severe upon 'em.

-- The Boughs that shade. Ver. 235.
For, which is false Grammar; but what Mr. D for all his dormant Rules, is
frequently guilty of.

And shake for Food the long abandoned Oak. Ver. 238.
A dull, toothless Translation of an Emphatical Sarcasm.

-- What Arms they wield, Ver. 239, 240.
who labor Tillage, and the furrowed Field -- Would puzzle a Dutch Commentator
to make Sense of.

Ver. 243.
-- The towering hight of Wagons. What kind of Wagons are those so lofty?
That which Madam Star, and her Comic Brigade rode in, was not so very lofty;
nor have the Ancient Poets given that of Ceres any Gigantic Dimensions.

Ver. 245.
-- And the Flail -- I Am afraid, they were not used in Virgil's Days, nor
perhaps Hurdles. I Will not be too positive, but I Am sure, the Protestant Flail's
of a more Modern Invention, and those who introduced 'em first, were for
Excercising us with an Iron War.

Ver. 247, 8.
These all must be prepared. When Mr. D. writ this Couplet, I suppose, Virgil
was quite out of his Head.

Ver. 252, 3.
On either side the Head produce an Ear, And sink a Socket for the shining
share -- A very pretty Rule, if Mr. D. would illustrate it with a short Note,
and a particular Five Guinea Sculpture in the next Edition. The next Couplet
are too short for the full Sense of Virgil's three Latin Verses.

Ver. 258.
Delve of convenient depth your Threshing Floor. Virgil 's Area, signifies the
whole Barn-Floor: But, why Delve it deep? the Poet teaches how to Consolidate
the Floor, so as other Vermin may not delve in it, but I cannot find that he
teaches the Husbandman any such Art.

Ver. 264.
For sundry Foes the Rural Realm surround -- i. e. The Barn-floor a true
Royaume d' Yvitot; for Virgil is here, wholly contriving to secure that again
Chinks and Weeds, and Mice or Rats, and Moles, and Toads; all which, I Have seen
troublesome in an ill wrought Floor; besides the Pest of Weevels, not Weesels
and Pismires, and which, a due care will admirably prevent.

For gathered Grain the blind labourous Mole In winding Mazes works her hidden
Hole -- Moles generally work straight forward, Ver. 267.
and their common Roads are in a line; when they work irregularly, it is in
pursuit of Worms and Vermin, on which they feed, and not on Grain. But a
Molewarp as it is mischievous in the Field, it is more so in the Floor.

The Glebe will answer to the Sylvan Reign. Ver. 274.
Virgil bids his Farmer observe the Almonds when in Blossom, if they set well,
if they do, the Years Crop is like to be good; but Mr. Dryden drops Virgil's
Rule, and gives us a piece of Senseless Iargonry in the room of it.

But if a Wood -- And Straw will be thy store. Ver. 276.
These four lines are as ridiculous a Paraphrase of Virgil as could have been
contrived; and the Hinds vexing the Threshing-Floor, is a very fine Figure.

-- And some their Seed in Caldrons boil. Ver. 280*
Was certainly, only for a Rhyme to Oil; but is such a piece of Husbandry as
never took place any where, but in the Translator's brain; to soak the Seed in
warm Liquor may be admitted of, but boiling would soon destroy the Radical
Virtue of the fairest Seed; but above all, this boiling, is a very odd way to
drain the Exuberant Juice. Why the Hulls which appear larger than the lank
Kernel within requires, should be called flattering husks, may be a reasonable
Quaere.

Ver. 297, 8.
But when Astrea 's balance hung on high, Betwixt the Nights and Days divides
the Sky. i. e. All the Year round; for Night and Day divides it always, but not
equally; Virgil referred to the Aequinox, but Mr. D. gives no intimation of any
such thing; and indeed, without looking into the Original, sometimes as a
Comment, the Translator's text would be wholly unintelligible.

Ver. 301.
Till cold December comes with driving Rain -- Driving Rain's no great
Impediment; but it is Frost and Snow which gives Mid-winter Virgil's Epithet of
intractable.

Ver. 367.
-- In full career, The Bull beats down the Barriers of the Year. Now would I
fain know what Court Lady, who could not read the Original, or what Plowman
could find out Mr. D's meaning here? What are the Barriers of the Year? Pindar
never used so bold or senceless a Figure. The Sun's Horses, indeed, battered
the Barriers of the Morning with their heels; but they are supposed in a Stable
accommodated with Barriers to check the passage of the unruly Brutes, as Ovid
tells us; but Virgil talks nothing to that purpose. Again, what does he mean by
Argos, in the next Line? Argos was a famous Town in Greece; but the Ship fixed
in Heaven, is called Argo, not Argos, as Mr. D's Dictionary may teach him, or
his Friend Ruaeus's Notes.

Let Maja with her Sisters first descend. Ver. 310
This is to explain Ignotum per Ignotius; and I make no doubt, but Court
Ladies, and honest Boors would as soon find out what Virgil means by his Eoae
Atlantides, as what Mr. D. understands by Maja and her Sisters. Other Poets
have made use of the former name for the Pleiades, but his Periphrasis is
wholly New. Such another admirable elucidation, that is, upon Ariadne's Crown,
is the following Verse. And here I cannot but observe by the way, That it is the
great Fault of Mr. Sandys in his Translation of Ovid's Metamorphosis, that his
work needs a Comment as much as Ovid himself ever did, perhaps more. The design
of a Translation, is to make the Author as intelligible to those who understand
only that Language into which the Translation's made, as the Original was to
those who used it as their Mother Tongue. Now if Arcadian, or Sicilian, or
Mantuan Shepherds, were Men of such excellent Accomplishments, as Mr. D,
represents 'em; no doubt but they understood Theocritus's Greek, and Virgil's
Latin in his Bucolics and Georgics, perfectly well; and Virgil took his
technical words rather from them, than they from him. And it is as little to be
doubted, but that all things mentioned in the Aeneids were perfectly understood
at Court; and the Ladies only needed one to rehearse that Poem, to them with a
just Accent, and a regular Cadence, and they would comprehend the whole with all
the delight and satisfaction imaginable. But Mr. D. writes for the use of our
English Yeomanry, as well as our Court Ladies, to whom all his Pastoral and
Husbandry will sound like Heathen Greek; and those, who, by the advantages of
better Education, are capable of reading Virgil's Original, must comprehend his
Translator worst of all. And tho I have so good an Opinion of the Ladies of our
English Court, as to think their Understandings much finer than Mr. D. would
wish them; yet I Am certain, they can never learn much by Mr. D's obscure
Version, and incomprehensible Nonsense; I Am afraid, he presumed a little too
much upon the weakness of some, while he complemented the sharpness of others
Intellectuals; and placed his greatest security in a confidence, that well
sounding Rhymes might put off disguised and miserably abused Matter; and that
few would either trouble themselves to examine his Translation rigorously, or
compare it, at leisure, with the Original. To me it is the most disagreeable
diversion I ever undertook; for, I hate to be bilk'd where I have laid out for
a good Crib; or to get a Translation to clear my understanding, which leaves me
more at a loss than I was before.

Ver. 313.
-- A listless lazy Crop -- What manner of Crop's that? So Lentil's lean
afterward, unless he designed it for a pun; and vile Vetches; vile in English,
is never taken in the same Sense as Vilis in Latin; and Mr. D. knows that, tho
his Virgil cannot pretend to be so, some things may be very good, and very cheap
too.

The growth of Egypt, Ver. 317.
or the Kidney Bean. That or spoils all, for if we may believe our Botanists,
the Kidney Bean is what Virgil meant by his Lens Peleusiaca. See Rays Herb. p.
884. etc.
The slow Waggoner too, would almost puzzle an Almanac Maker.

Five Girdles bind the Skies -- What an odd Idaea of the upper Region would
common Farmers take from this fine Figure? Ver. 322.
And how do these Girdles bind the Skies? Would ever any Man, who pretended to
take off the Cosmical and Heliacal rising or setting of the Stars, talk of five
Heaven-binding Girdles?

And cross their limits cut a sloping way. Ver. 328.
i. e. Cross the limits of the two temperate Zones. But what strange Astronomy
is this? What Sphere ever represented the Zodiac as crossing the limits of the
temperate Zone? It cuts or crosses the Equator twice, indeed, but only touches
the Tropics. Or whoever called the Zodiac, a sloping way? But Poetis quid libet
audendi -- shall be Mr. D's Motto, tho it should reach to picking of Pockets.

Two Poles turn round the Globe -- For, Ver. 330.
The Globe truns round two Poles. A very pretty Figure in English. And I
question whether the Snake or Dragon glides round the Pole, tho Mr. D. makes
Virgil say so, nolens volens.

The Bears are not by the Poets, Ver. 335.
said to abhor the Sea, but to be forbidden it, at Juno's request; and Virgil
makes 'em still afraid of her jealousy, and consequently of setting in it.

Ver. 324.
And when on us she breaths the living Light. Can never be scrued out of
Virgil's aut ubi primus equis Oriens afflavit anhelis -- The Tapers of the
Night -- A Phrase borrowed out of the English Parnassus.

Ver. 346.
Or when to fell the Furzes -- We sometimes talk of felling Timber, but never
of Furzes before; they are obliged to Mr. D. for the Honor he has done 'em.
And spread the flying Canvas for the Fleet. What is there in that of Virgil, or
of tolerable sense, or expression? And what Stars arise, how extremely fine!
Had poor Elkanah talked so, he would have heard of it on both sides his Head; but
dat veniam corvis --

Ver. 352.
Let him forecast his work -- Maturare, is not to forecast, but to act
deliberatly, and do that thoroughly, which, when fair weather calls the
Husbandman abroad, must have been huddled up in have, and in a worse fashion;
and this Mr. D. could not but see, by the work mentioned in the next lines; the
shining share, he is very fond of.

Ver. 360.
-- Or air the Corn, Or grinded Grain between two Marbles turn. Besides that
very modish word grinded, where does Virgil talk of airing the Corn? Ruaeus
would have taught him better sense, and his own little, might have taught him
that cold wet weather was not fit for that work. And where did Mr. D. ever read
of Marble Millstones, for, those I suppose he means? And if the Grain be
grinded, what need it be turned between the Marbles? Could Mr. D. read Virgil,
and Translate it thus?

The Meads to water. Ver. 364.
For Rivos deducere. Translated the clean contrary way.

-- And steep In wholesome Water-falls the woolly Sheep -- But why in
Water-falls? Ver. 365.
Are those proper washing places? Does any Body ever wash Sheep just below
London Bridge? And pray, how long must a woolly Sheep lie a-steep in the
Water-fall before he is drowned? For I never heard of any living thing steeped
for a cure.

-- Pale Pluto -- An Epithet no way belonging to him, Ver. 373.
who is every where represented as black; indeed, Commentators very
ridiculously make Orcus, here to signify Plato. And so a day unlucky, as 'twas
the Birthday of a God, and one of the first rank too, which is absurd; but
Orcus, means the Hell of the Poets, such as Virgil describes in his 6th Aeneid:
and even Christians themselves, (could they assign it,) might esteem that day
accursed, which first kindled the flames of eternal Hell.

And armed against the Skies the Sons of Earth. Ver, 374.
Virgil says no such thing; he says only the Giants were born on that day; not
that they made their attempt on Heaven as soon as they were born; or watched for
their Birth-days return, as a lucky time to begin a Rebellion in.

To scale the steepy battlements of Jove. Ver. 376.
Is a very odd way of speaking; the battlements of Heaven some have, by too
bold a figure, talked of, but none of Jove before our Poetical Enceladus.

Ver. 381.
Then Weavers stretch your stays upon the weft. If it were not mere Iargonry,
would be Nuts to the Spittle-field-Weavers, and they would buy Mr. D's Virgil
rather than Gadbury or Patridge, if his Rule would hold good.

Ver. 385.
Virgil advises like one who understands business, to mow stubble or Haulm in
the Night, or before Sunrise, not because of coolness or rain, which would
make mowing very uncomfortable; but because of the dew which following the
Scyth, makes it work the better, Mr. D. has quit lost the Rule.

Ver. 390.
To work by Night, and rake the Winter fire. i. e. they rake up the fire in a
Winter Night, and then set up to work til Cock-crowing; a very pretty way to
keep themselves warm, but none of the best Husbandry or Housewifry; for those
must go to bed sooner who work all day hard, and must rise early. But what a
pleasant employment Mr. D. has found for the good Man, to sharpen Torches? If
any such Trees, as they say are found under ground in Lancashire, and other
places, were common in Italy, the sharpning of Torches might mean something;
but Virgil means no more than making of Matches, things of more use, and which
good Husbands and Housewives generally do at idle times.

Ver. 397.
Virgil's direction is lost again, who tells us, that the heat of the day is
best to Reap in, and to tread the Corn out in, or to pass the Wheel over it,
because it then is dry, and leaves the husk best; for which, Mr. D. only tells
us of the Day light, as if that were enough, whether it were hot or cold, or
wet or dry.

For lazy winter numbs the laboring Hand. Ver. 402,
Is a very odd reason why the Swain should Plough and Sow naked; but Virgil
teaches him, not to be afraid of stripping to work in Summer, that his work may
be the sooner over; for winter or cold weather's no proper time for such work.

The four lines are good, Ver. 403, etc.
but not Virgil's, nor much better, as I take it.

For Mast of Oak your Fathers homely Food. Ver. 410.
True, but why that here? They are advised to beat down Mast for their Swine,
not for their own eating.

-- And so hunt the Hare. Ver. 414.
What, when the fleecy Snow new clothes the wood. (Which by the way, is as mere
Fustian as any thing in Silvester's Dubartas.) Huntsmen will tell him, there is
no hunting when the Snow lies upon the Ground; but it is tracing Hares which our
Poet means, which Farmers are more used to, than hunting; as they are more used
to Slings than Bows, which is Mr. D's own silly Invention.

Now sing we stormy Stars, Ver. 419.
when Autumn weighs the Year -- Who could imagine that Mr. D. had considered
his Author? Or where can Virgil afford so fine a Thought as that last? In the
whole Account of the storms in Spring and Harvest, Ogylby out-does Mr. D. in
representing Virgil's Thoughts, as far as Mr. D. would pretend to outdo honest
Vicars.

Ver. 427.
-- The Farmer now secure of fear, Sends in the Swains to spoil the finished
Year. What fear does Mr. D. mean which the Farmer should be secure of, (Not to
take notice of the senceless Latinism) he would do well to tell us in the next
Edition; but for sense sake, who ever, before our Rhymer, called Reaping
spoiling of the finished Year; the two next lines are his own, and tend much to
the eclaircissement of the Matter.

Ver. 434. etc.
And whirled aloft the lighter stubble born, With such a force, the flying
wrack is driven, And such a Winter wears the face of Heaven. Have neither
Virgil's, nor any thing of common sense in 'em; and the order of the words is
ridiculous.

Ver. 437.
-- Whole sheets of slucey Rain -- Is a Metaphor well carried on, and finely
worded.

Ver. 444, etc.
The Father of the Gods his Glory shrouds, Involved in Tempests, and a Night of
Clouds. This said of Phoebus, had been tolerable, tho far from his Author, but
of Jove it is pure Nonsense. By fits he deals his fiery Bolts about. By what
fits? Has Jove his freaks? Or is he troubled with Cramps or Convulsions? He
must be more than half an Atheist, who talks so childishly of him, whom he
calls the Father of the Gods. The 443 long line is of the same Batch.

Ver. 448.
Earth-falls, etc. Here doubtless, Mr. D. was in a Rapture; and, whereas poor
Virgil was flat and lifeless, he is resolved to show us how he would or should
have written, if he had lived now, and fallen under Mr. D's discipline. -- And
flying Beasts in Forests seek abode. Is a line of most charming sense, and
sweetness.

-- When cheerful hours awake the Spring, Ver. 463, 4.
and Spring awake the Flowers. A delicate Ovidian Interpolation, and becomes
Virgil as a patcht Coat would a Prince.

On the green Turf thy careless Limbs display. Ver. 465.
A very mannerly way of Devotion, which Virgil was a stranger to.

-- The Silken Ground, Ver. 468.
Is very pretty Ground indeed, and could Mr. D. but show us where it is, it
might, for ought I know, ruin the East India Company more than all the
Petitions of the Weavers. But Mr. D. has heard of Carpet Ground, and scorned
that common word, Silk was for him. With milder Beams the Sun securely shines.
It seems then, his Empire was in danger when his Beams were too sultry; the
world might have abdicated him for his fierceness, but now he was mild, he
might shine securely; he has been very safe in that respect, for 4 or 5 Years
last past. -- And luscious are the Wines. Is not the meaning of mollissima vina.

Thus in the Spring -- I would not brow beat Devotion in a Quire of Clowns,
Ver. 477.
as Mr. D. very gentilely styles 'em; but Virgil here, talks only of Devotion
at the time of Harvest, before Men begin to Reap, which very few do in the
Spring.

Ver. 480.
-- His hollow Temples. Old Horses and Oxen are very hollow about the Temples,
but Men don't ordinarily sink there so very much; I hope, Mr. D. will not allege
the cava Tempora -- ascribed to Turnus, in the 9th Aeneid, if he does, I Am
ruined for a Critic, and there is no more to be said.

Ver. 490.
The working Seas advance to wash the Shore. So they do every rising Tide, and
what shall the Plowman learn from Mr. D's Diagnosticks?

Ver. 492.
And mountains whistle to the murmuring floods. Is a Silken line, and
doubtless, tickled the Author's fancy extremely; but it is very wide of --
Aridus altis montibus audiri fragor; or if fragor be whistling, it is like that
of some of the Natives of Tenarif, who will whistle so loud, as to be heard 5 or
6 Miles; beside, Virgil does not talk of murmuring, but roaring Floods, and
murmuring Woods; and that is somewhat more natural than this of the Translator.

Ver. 496.
And stretching to the Covert. Virgil only says they make to shore.

Ver. 499.
And mounting upward with erected flight, Gains on the Skies, and soars above
the sight. What manner of flight is that which is called an erected flight? I
don't remember it in all Latham, or the Gentleman's Recreation; this
description is mere Fustian, and a wretched Thought fobb'd upon the World for
Virgil, when he would have scorned it.

Ver. 508, 9, 10, etc.
Are all a loose Paraphrase, liker Ovid again than Virgil. The East and West
meeting on their Frontiers, and crashing the Clouds. All pretty stuff, but
light and unfixt, as the floating Feathers.

-- And sails above the Storm. Ver. 516.
Which is scarce true in fact, and if it were, is not said by Virgil.

Qu. Whether Croaking be the Characteristic of a loquacious crew? Ver. 521.


Huge flocks of rising Rooks forsake their Food, Ver. 525.
And crying, seek the shelter of the Wood. This is no more than they do every
Night, therefore Virgil means something else.

And stem the Stream to meet the promised Rain. Ver. 532.
As if they would not meet the Rain as well Swimming down as up Stream; or as
if Virgil had, like his Translator, talked idly.

And in the sockets Oily Bubbles dance. Ver. 538.
Virgil means the wick gets a cap, as those who look after your Sea lights call
it, which sometimes covers the whole, sometimes multiplies out of the sides, in
a figure somewhat like Mushrooms.

Here we have several Nonsense lines together -- The Moon adorns As with
unborrow'd Be^^s, Ver. 541.
her sharpened Horns. Now, how that is, who can tell us? The filmy Gossamer now
flits no more; i. e. the things like Cobwebs don't fly about in the Air; but
their flying about is a sign of dry weather, and such Signs, Virgil is here
speaking of; so that if Virgil had meant his words of those flying Meteors his
Translator had contradicted him; which he adventures to do more than once --
Nor Halcyons bask on the short Sunny shore. Why the short Sunny shore? I cannot
divine, unless it be for the sweet sounding ss; the Original talks not of it is
being short. Virgil mentions Scylla and Nisus, Ver. 549, etc.
a Story well known to the Romans; but what English Swain would know that he
meant the Lark and Hobby; if at least that be the meaning of it; but the
Translator wants a Servius too; if any can make sense of the closing line --
And thus the Purple Hair is dearly paid, I shall be their very Humble Servant.

Ver. 557.
Then thrice the Ravens rend the liquid Air Is a wild Construing of Ingeminant
liquidas voces -- Their callow Case too, is a choice Flower.

Ver. 564.
-- As Man who Destiny controuls -- What has that to do here, where the Poet
speaks of Ravens understanding the Determinations of Fate better than other
Creatures? Besides, Mr. D. knows, Jove himself cannot control Destiny, much
less can Men.

Ver. 569.
Composed by Calms, and Discomposed by Winds. But that is not to the purpose,
how they are affected by the weather now in being, but how they are affected
before, with a change of weather near at Hand. They feel a Storm, or fair
weather coming, tho at a distance, which the Poet here debates on.

Ver. 570.
From hence the Cows exult, and frisking Lambs rejoice. The Ravens are quite
forgot then, and the Cows put in, pro Arbitrio, to mend Virgil.

Ver. 572.
And the short Year of the revolving Moon. This is to let us know that Mr. D.
has heard of Lunary Years, else Virgil gave him no temptation to mention 'em.

Here Mr. D. drops his Author, Ver. 586.
because he was full of hard Names. So again after Ver. 588. I hope, he will not
plead Horace's Rule, Et quae desperes tractata nitescere posse relinquas.

Or if through Mists he shoots his sullen Beams, Ver. 591, 2.
Frugal of Light in loose and straggling Streams. This is to come up to Virgil's
Majesty, which Mr. D. thinks he has done in this Book, or no where; but whether
it be a just Interpretation of -- Medioque refugerit orb, let the learned
World judge. If he flies to those, Aut ubi sub lucem densa inter nubila sese
Diversi erumpent radii -- He perverts Virgil's Rule, who, ended his Sentence at
the former line; and here begun a new Observation on the Prognostics from the
Sun, of Hail.

When ridgy Roofs and Tiles can scarce avail, Ver. 599.
To bar the ruin of the rattling Hail. What ruin's are here meant? Or what
greater mischief would a violent Hail do if the Roof were laid open, than when
it is Til'd, or has a Ridgy Roof? But what is all this to his Author, who is not
concerned for the Tiles, but for the Grapes, which suffer by such violent
Storms?

-- What Madman then would venture over the Frith? Ver. 613.
-- Was Virgil then acquainted with Scotland? Or had he heard of Edenburg
Frith, or Solway Frith? If Mr. D. would have brought the whole Poem down to our
present Age, and Modified his Author, as the Ingenious Sir R. L' Estrange has
done by his Don Quevedo, this had been well enough; but to have it only here
and there, is Aping Philips's senceless Don Quixot.

Ver. 621.
Quaere, Whether Vesper serus, signify both the late Even, for Evening, and the
early Morn? Or whether Operta Bella be open Wars?

Ver. 629.
And piti'd Rome, when Rome in Caesar fell. Virgil says nothing like that, and
Mr. D. once Condemned, as well he might, his own Verse concerning Lausus, and
uttered by his Father Mezentius, When Lausus died I was already slain, As
trifling, and beneath the Gravity and Majesty of Virgil; but he begins now,
repuerascere, and must be pardoned for fooling.

Ver. 630.
In Iron Clouds -- What Clouds are they? Mr. Cowley never used so forced a
Figure in his most daring Pindariques; and obscura Ferrugo never was Construed
an Iron Cloud before.

Ver. 632.
Nor was the Fact foretold by him alone, Nature her self stood forth and
seconded the Sun. This is one of Mr. D's Native Flights; for which, he owes
nothing to Virgil. But how comes the Sun to be no part of Nature or not within
the Verge? Or else what does he mean by Nature? but perhaps, we shall know more
of his mind in the next Edition.

Ver. 638.
In German Skies afar. Is not English.

Ver. 641.
And from their Summits shook the eternal Snow. Is another of Mr. D's fine
Thoughts, tacked to Virgil, like the Badge of a Parish Pensioner on his sleeve,
not to honor, but expose him.

Ver. 644.
In silent Groves dumb Sheep and Oxen spoke. i. e. They were dumb before they
spoke, but not when or after they did so; but where did Mr. D. read that they
spoke in Groves? Strange voices, indeed, of more than mortal Men were heard in
the Groves; but the Translator's Eyes failed him.

And Holy Sweat from Brazen Idols fell. Ver. 648.
This is Burlesquing his Author; for if the Statue, or figure be an Idol, the
sweat can hardly be holy; indeed his Milk white Hind has told us fine Stories
of Idols which have been in such holy sweats; if he alludes to them, we are
satisfied.

The King of Floods -- Without his proper Name, Ver. 649.
may be an Utopian River for ought any body knows, or may be ascribed ad
libitum; but Virgil meant a particular River, and named it, for a Prodigy
without a place where it was, is a sham.

Red Meteors run along the ethereal space, Ver. 657.
Stars disappeared, and Comets took their place. Welfare an honest Roman
Miracle Monger! Mr. D. thought Virgil had not Prodigies enough, so he adds to
the Tale, and adds one, which is a swinger -- That the Stars disappeared, and
Comets took their places; if such a sight would not fright the World, nothing
would.

Amazed at antique Titles on the Stones. Ver. 666.
As if there had been Tombs or Monuments, Stone-Henges set up in the Pharsalian
and Philippic Fields, which is a very fine fancy. But why should an antique
Title amaze any body? Curious Men will go far to see 'em, and generally return
from 'em sober enough, and not half so much as Men of sense would be, to see a
flattering Inscription, equal Mr. D. to Denham, Waller, or Cowley.

Ver. 683.
The Plain no Pasture to the Flock affords -- This ridiculous line was put to
make up the Rhyme for the next; for there was Pasturage enough, if anythink was
wanting, it was Flocks and Herds to graze on 'em. Virgil thought fit to omit
this grave observation.

Ver. 685.
-- Euphrates her soft Offspring Arms. The Parthians were not the Offspring
of Euphrates, nor ever charged with Effoeminacy before; the Romans found 'em a
Company of rough hardy Fellows, and not to be Conquered by their whole Power.
But the Rhyne rebellowing is so fine an Expression, as ought not to be slipped,
Mr. D, uses the word rebellowing several times, and it is a very full-mouthed,
nonsensical word, and will never be owned by any who pretend to good English,
but to apply his new fangled word to the Rhyne's, not a bold figure, but a Bull.

Ver. 690.
If Servius be in the right, Mr. D. is out in making a Similitude of Virgil's
Three last lines. But Mr. D. has said enough to baffle his own Version in his
Note on the first Georgic, wherein he pretends to the honor of a new
discovery, tho unjustly, of a great Complement to Augustus in those lines; the
Observation's good, tho not his, but he has entirely spoiled it, and made that
which was well in his Note, impertinent in his Translation.

GEORGIC II.
MR. D. in his second line Translates Bacche in the Poet, Ver. 2, 4.
by Generous Vines, which is well done, the sense being made true and
intelligible by that means, but, as if he had repented of a wise thing once
done, The Tarde crescens Oliva, is rendered Minerva's Tree; the Original every
Body understands, the Version very few of those for whom Virgil wrote, as well
as for the Ladies at Court.

-- And drink at every Pore -- Is an admirable flight; Ver. 12.
Bacchus then must have been laid asleep in the Must, as the Sheep before in
the Water-falls, or the Pores would scarce inbibe the Liquors; at least, where
Virgil would have been content the jolly God should have been but over Shoes,
Mr. D. was resolved to dowse him over Head and Ears.

Principio arboribus varia est natura creandis. Was a dull line, and not worthy
to be taken notice of by Mr. D's exalted Genius.

Herculean Poplar -- That Epithet was judiciously added, Ver. 18.
that every one might know what Virgil meant by Populus. I suppose, Populus
Alcidae gratissima was in his Thoughts, and his Translation answers it very
nicely.

Thus Elms, V. 24, 5, 6.
and thus the savage Cherry grows -- Is false Grammar: But why savage Cherries?
As if only the wild grew so, (the savage is an uncouth Epithet for a Tree.) Yet
we have often seen the tame Cherry shoot in the same manner. Mr. D. as if he
were in a Paroxism of false English, adds, Thus the green Bays that binds the
Poets brows, Shoots and is sheltered by the Mother's Boughs. Where, either it
should be Bay, and not Bays, unless Mr. D. be in love with the Title, or it
should be -- Which bind the Poets brows, shoot and are sheltered.

Ver. 28.
-- And all the Sylvan Reign. This Phrase is one of the Elegantiae Drydenianae,
frequently affected, and downright Nonsense.

Ver. 34.
And the dry Poles produce a living Race. If this be not wondrous to behold,
(which was well infarc'd by Mr. D.) pray, tell us what is? I cannot think that
Virgil had any thoughts of Aaron's Rod, the only instance of the Kind. Green
Poles may do something, but dry Poles are no more prolifick than dry Brains.

Ver. 35.
Some bow their Vines which buried in the Plain, Their tops in distant Arches
rise again. This is a fine account of laying Vines; but Virgil never mentions
them in particular, because several Trees may be increased so as the Mulbery,
Goosberry, Current, etc.

Ver. 37.
-- The Labourer cuts young slips -- The Gardener at Denham Court would have
taught him otherwise, and that slips and cuttings are very different things;
slips being so called, from being slipped from a larger Stem, and which are
generally apter, if rightly ordered, to take Root than Cuttings are.

Ver. 39, 40.
Even stumps of Olives barred of Leaves and dead, Revive, and often redeem their
withered Head -- Here Mr. D. has me at a terrible advantage, for here grows the
Mirabile dictu, which he has inarch'd on another Stock; and here Virgil talks
of lignum siccum, or a dry stick shooting again; yet, on better Thoughts, the
danger is not extreme, and I may live another Year. Virgil's account is this,
That pieces of Olive Suckers, or Young Shoots cut at uncertain lengths, as a
Foot, more or less, tho grown a little dry, and sapless on the outside; yet
opened a little to the pith, (that being still sound and green) if buried
flatwise, or Horizontally in a moist warm Ground will shoot; but how it may
redeem the withered Head, is another Quaere.

With Insolence invade a foreign Tree. Ver. 42.
Is very dexterously expressed, and gives a great Idaea of Graffing; but --
with Insolence, is in Latin, Impune, by which Translation, Mr. D. gives us an
excellent Moral, i. e. That impunity in fooling, makes the Coxcomb insolent.

Thus were the Hind and Panther Calv'd of old,
S^^m Coin put off for true Imperial Gold,
And Squab the Leaud appeared with envied Pulpits bold.
-- The ruddy Cornel bears the Plum. Ver. 44.
-- For Lapidosa rubescere Corna, is exact as possible; for it is plain, the
Cornel bears a ruddy Fruit before the Plum's graffed on it.

-- The learned Gardener. Ver. 45.
This is by way of Complement to his Agricolae, whom he had called by all the
ugly Names he could think of before.

Ver. 50.
But Cultivate the Genius of the Ground -- Here are several Couplets very
wildly Translated, and without any regard to the Genius of the Poet; but this
is a choice Flower, and with a good Comment, perhaps, the learned Gardener
might make somewhat of it.

Ver. 53.
The virtues of the several Soils I sing -- That Is not Virgil's Subject there,
it had been the Subject of the former Book, and he was now upon the nature of
Trees; but this is Mr. D's own impertinence, which he is generally sick of, both
in his additions and deductions; so afterward, Inspire thy Poet, and thy Poem
crown, a ridiculous Interpolation; but his Head's always running upon the Bays.

Ver. 58.
-- And breezes from the Shore. Breezes are from the Sea, and of little use for
Sailing; only the Prince of Oranges sailing Chariot, might make some use of 'em.

Ver. 65.
Nor will I tire thy Patience with a train of Preface -- Virgil then, showed a
greater respect to his Maecenas, than Mr. D to his Patron, my Lord Marquess of
Normanby, whom, he has assaulted with such a fardel of impertinencies, as
nothing, but Dotage could excuse.

Ver. 70, 72.
-- Makes a Manly Birth -- Change their salvage mind -- Here, weak Eyes see
Trees walking as Men; else, what absurd Catachreses are these, to talk of a
Manly Birth of Trees, and of their salvage minds? for, their mind is false
English; And Mr. D. knows, One may change his Mind, tho he does not change his
Nature; Animus Sylvestris, signifies, only their wild Nature, which is an easy
figure.

-- Trees sprung from barren Roots, Ver. 75.
In open Fields transplanted, bear their Fruits. Pray, what Fruits are those
which a barren Tree bears? Virgil's Sense is handsomely given us by Mr. Ogylby
-- So those which spring from Roots like profit yield,
If you transplant them to the open Field.
For Virgil teaches his Farmers, that as wild Fruit Trees, for those he speaks
of, are corrected by Graffing, so Suckers from the Roots of other Trees which
are barren, while growing there, come to bear, when transplanted into the open
Air. But now the branching Parents leafy shade
Makes them not bear, or what they bear to fade.
All which, Mr. D. wonderfully Illustrates, by those profound lines; for where
they grow, the Native Energy (is not that some occult quality?) turns all into
the substance of the Tree, starves and destroys the Fruit, is only made for
brawny bulk* a swinging figure that, and for a barren shade.

-- A sullen Tree -- A most Emphatic Epithet, Ver. 81.
if a Man knew why it was given.

The generous flavor lost, the Fruits decay, Ver. 83, 4.
And salvage Grapes are made the Birds ignoble Prey -- But Mr. D. knows, all
Fruits have not a generous flavor; and Virgil names only Apples and Grapes;
which, therefore Mr. Ogylby thus gives us more Correctly -- Apples in time grow
wild, and lose their taste,
And Vines harsh clusters bear for Birds to wast.
For let Mr. D. say what he pleases, salvage Grapes, is a very silly Expression.

Ver. 86.
-- And in ranks reclaim -- For cogere in suleum, or to set in good Ground,
and, then Mr. D. adds a Rule of his own, Well must the Ground be dug and better
dressed, New soil to make and meliorate the rest. How much more Manly is Mr.
Ogylby?

All labor ask, and covering in rich soil,
And must be conquered with much art and toil.
Ver. 89.
Old Stakes of Olive Trees in Plants revive. Is Nonsense; but of this before.
By the same method Paphian Myrtles live -- Is a mistake, and contrary to
Virgil; and here our two Translators Ogylby, and Dryden, are at vye who should
Translatet heir Author the more absurdly -- And Paphian Myrtle springs from
solid Oak -- Solido Paphiae de robore Myrtus, Which is literal Nonsense; but
Virgil's sense is, that the Myrtles increase, by large pieces stuck into a good
Ground, as we propagate Willows in moist Ground.

Ver. 91.
And noble Vines by propagation live. So do all other Trees, for if they were
not propagated, they would soon be destroyed; but it seems, Mr. D. could not
distinguish between Propagatio, and Propago -- ginis -- which signifies a layer
of a Vine, by which, it is generally Propagated.

Ver. 92, 3.
From Roots hard Hazles -- No doubt of it, and all other Trees, for they seldom
grow, but from their Roots; but Virgil's meaning is, Hazles are propagated from
Seedlings, or young Plants, raised from the Nut, The Ash, from young Plants
from the Kays, and the shady Poplar, of which Hercules made his Ghirland, and
the Oak of Jupiter Dodonaeus, and the lofty Palm, and the Pine or Firr,
designed to try it is Fortunes on the Sea; all these are increased by such
seedlings, and not from Cions, (which are for Graffing,) as Mr. D. ignorantly
talks.

The thin leaved Arbute Hazle. Ver. 96.
Here, Mr. D's misled by Ruaeus, who misunderstanding the Arbutus, made horrida
signify thin-leav'd; but Virgil's sense is, The true Nut is graffed on the
prickly Thorn; And this I remember, I Have met with, in some Books of Gardening,
tho denied to be successful in our Soil. And here I cannot but observe how Mr.
D. abounds with his That's, Dids and Does, etc. the former, generally false
Grammar, the latter, in him, a polite Writer, one, who has regulated his Mother
Tongue beyond the Denham's, and Waller's, and Cowley's, mere botching.

-- To bud, to graff, and to inoculate. Mr. D. will be adding to his Author
only to betray his own ignorance. Ver. 103.
Virgil mentions Graffing and Inoculating only, and Budding and Inoculating are
the same thing; Inarching is an Invention of a later date.

-- Where tender Rinds disclose their shooting Gems, Ver. 105.
a swelling knot there grows -- This again is quite beside his Author: what Mr.
D. calls Gems, is not quite so intelligible in English as in the Lattin; but
those Gems are the swelling knots, under which knots Virgil, contrary to Modern
Practice, would have the incision made, which is commonly double, one
downwards, the other cross, for the better raising the bark, to admit the
shield of the Bud to be inserted. Ruaeus talks of an Inoculation, which is but
another kind of Graffing, between the Bark and the Trunk, which is now pretty
common; and his Emplastratio resembles our Budding, as I have seen a piece of
the Bark taken quite off from the Stock sometimes square, sometimes triangular,
to which the Sh^eld of the Bud being exactly sitted, it has taken very well.

Ver. 109.
In whose moist Womb the admitted Infant grows. Is a luscicus Ovidianism,
beneath the Majesty of our Author.

Ver. 111.
We make a deep Incision in the Tree. For Finditur in solidum cuneis via -- Is
very well Construed, and very Edifying to the learned Gardener, to show his
Judgment, in whose Art, he talks in the next Lines of Slips for Cions.

Ver. 113.
The batning Bastard shoots again, and grows -- The batning Bastard, is a dirty
Expression, disagreeable to Virgil's modesty, to the Gardiner's Language, and
Common Sense; the next Couplet, are pitiful creeping lines, which a good Poet
had been ashamed of.

V. 118, etc.
We have as egregious a Specimen of the Translator's ignorance, as we could
wish for; Virgil tells us, That Elms, and Willows, and Lotus's and Cretan
Cypresses, are every one, kinds of Trees, which contain several sorts under
them, agreeing in the same name, or that there are several kinds of Elms,
several of Willows, etc. but where has Mr. D. any thing which can bear this
Sense, or indeed, any? And what a whim is his Funeral Cypress, rising like a
Shroud? A foolery, which he repeats here, as if he were fond of it.

Fat Olive Trees, Ver. 122.
etc. This proves what was Virgil's sense before; for Olive Trees, tho all of
the same name, bear different kinds of Berries, some of that kind called
Orchades, or Berries indented, or as we see a Peach is on one side, some that
called Radij, or long, lank Olives, both which, seem to be properest for the
Table; some bear those called Pausia, or such which are fitter to press for
their Oil. Mr. D. has left his English Reader to interpret, and find out the
kinds of this Fruit, for himself, if he can; and he must be a learned Gardener
indeed, who can learn any thing from his Version.

Unlike are Bergamots, Ver. 12^.
and Pounder Pears. No doubt of it; but what is that to Virgil's Crustumiis,
Syriisque pyris, gravibusque volemis. Ruaeus, it is true, taught this, but
Ruaeus blunders; the Bergamot is so called, from Bergamo, a Town on this side
the Po, Crustumi^m, is a Town near the Tyber, whose Pears Virgil names; the
Syrian Pears are no Bergamots, by the same Rules, and the Volemi are a kind of
Pear somewhat answering the figure of a Gourd, and, as some affirm, is more
like to be the Bon Chretien, or the Gourd Pear; for, I think, I have met with a
kind of large Pear called by that name, from it is shape.

Ver. 128.
Nor our Italian Vines produce, etc. Is false English; the shape of all Grapes,
so far as I Have seen or read, is the same.

The Thasian Vines in richer Soils abound, The Mareotic grow in barren Ground.
Ver. 131.
Ruaeus, and Mr. D. both contradict Virgil here; for it is the Mareotic which
requires the fat, heavy Soil, the Thasian, the light, as any one who considers
the Latin well, and the nature of the thing, must observe. Mr. D. takes no
notice of his Author's observing both these kinds to be white.

Ver. 332.
The Psythian Grape we dry. It Is very dubious whether that be Virgil's meaning
-- Lagaean juice will stammering Tongues, and staggering Feet produce -- Is
such stuff, as is intolerable; Virgil says, there is a dusky brown kind of
Grape, of a very subtle juice, which soon weakens the Feet, and ties the
Tongue; but who can make this sense out of the Translation? Ogylby's infinitely
beyond this -- Lagaeos strong, Which soon will try your Feet, and tie your
Tongue.

Ver. 134.
Rathe ripe are some of later kind, Of Golden some, and some of Purple rind.
This Couplet was made only to bring in the fine Northern Phrase, Rathe ripe,
else it is false, and none of Virgil's; He says, only some Grapes are of a
Purple color, and early Ripe. Grapes of a Golden rind, I Am afraid, are great
rarities.

Ver. 136.
Raethean Grape. I suppose, is an error of the Press; but the next should be
Inferior only to Falernian Wine -- For that is Virgil's sense.

The Amminean many a Consulship survives, Ver. 138.
And longer than the Lydian Vintage lives, Or high Phanaeus King of Chian
growth -- Was ever so absurd a piece of Nonsense, called Translating a Noble
Author? Virgil says, There are a kind of Grapes, called Amminean, from their
place of growth, which yield Wine of a very strong body, to which, that growing
about Mount Tmolus in Lydia, and that about Mount Phanaeus in Chios, tho it
self, the King of Wines, must yield, as must that of the smaller white Grape,
which Grape, yet yields the most, and the most lasting Wine of all others; but
who can make this sense out of Mr. D's Iargonry?

The Rhodian in second Services is poured to Jove -- A ridiculous blunder; Ver.
144.
but, which almost all the Commentators have stumbled on; only they talk of
setting Grapes on the Table among other Fruit, for a second Course. Mr. D. will
have it, Wine poured on the Altar (I suppose, for a second Service.) But Virgil
says, only, It was acceptable at Tables, and to the favorable Gods; and this
answers that other reading best Rhodia sicmensis and dijs servata secundis,
Secundis belonging to Dijs, and not Mensis, as Philargyrius only could observe.

Nor must Bumasthus his old Honors lose, Ver. 146.
In length and largeness like the Dugs of Cows. A Grape this of a very strange
figure; the Grape, indeed, may be named from the Cows Teat, but not for length,
but for largeness, and fullness of juice, and this agrees well enough with
Pliny's account of it.

Ver. 155.
The Sallow loves the watery Grounds and low -- Not always; for it loves the
Banks of Rivers, as Virgil says, and Ditches which are wet, but not low.

Ver. 156.
The Marshes Alders -- Alders love boggy and moorish Ground, indented with
Trenches and Water cuts. The Rocky Clift, is not the meaning Saxosi montis.

Ver. 158.
The baleful Yeugh to Nothern blasts assigns. But how comes this in here, which
his Author has placed better below? To shores the Myrtles, Virgil's Littora,
are only the sides of Rivers, not the salt Beach.

Ver. 160.
Regard the extremest, etc. Is very clear and elegant, instead of See then the
utmost, etc.

Ver. 165.
Balm slowly trickles through the bleeding Veins Of happy shrubs in Idumaean
Plains. Our Botanists, indeed, say the Shrub yields its Gummy juice, both by
incision by others, and by a natural Exudation; which last, Virgil mentions
only, but says nothing of the place where it grows, which gave opportunity to
Mr. D. to show his Skill in Blunder; for Idumaea has it not, Arabia Foelix is
its Native Country; to Palaestine is only adventitious, and Cultivated in
Gardens, as Josephus, and Pliny, and others, inform us.

Ver. 167.
-- For Medicine good -- That Is out of Ruaeus's Notes; not out of his Author.

Ver. 168.
With Aethiops hoary Trees, and woolly Wood. Where Virgil speaks of Woods among
the Aethiopians hoary with soft Wool, which, I suppose were only the Cotton
Trees, now very well known.

-- And how the Seres spin their Fleecy Forests in a slender twine -- Did the
Seres then spin whole Trees? Ver. 170.
So Mr. D. would make us think, but this means only that the Seres drew out the
inner Barks of a certain Tree which was spun like Wool, and woven; of this
kind, are our present Bengals, and spun and woven by the same People; for
Emmenessius's Fancy that the Chinese were known to the Ancients, by the name
of Seres; and the Siamites, by that of Sinae, is altogether groundless.

Who mixing wicked Weeds with Words impure -- But, Ver. 179.
how can Words and Weeds be mingled together? Virgil means, they mingle Herbs,
or the juices of Herbs of a venomous nature, and mutter Charms over them, as
Witches are supposed to do, And Virgil makes his to do in his Pharmaceutria --
The Fate of Envied Orphans would procure -- I think, those are not called
Orphans, who have Fathers alive; but Step-mothers commonly are most spiteful
against such.

Mr. D. here ascribes that to the Flowers, Ver. 183.
which Virgil ascribes to the Leaves, and takes no notice at all of them.

With which the Medes to laboring Age bequeath new Lungs. Ver. 185.
I doubt, Mr. D's mistaken here, and that no recipe can make new Lungs, and
perhaps, shortness of Breath may not always rise from the Corruption of them.

Ver. 191.
Nor any Foreign Earth of greater name -- An impertinent Addition, for Rhymes
sake.

Ver. 200.
The warrior Horse here bred, is taught to train. Virgil says nothing of that,
but that the warlike Horse runs at liberty about the Fields,

Ver. 202.
-- Whose waves -- prepares. False Grammar only for Rhyme.

Ver. 210.
-- Or is, when known, refused -- This, with the preceding verse, is either No
sense, or no English.

Ver. 212.
Or raised on such a spiry volume ride -- Is nonsensical fustian; and ver. 215,
17, 22. Hills that -- Seas that -- Mound that -- For which, but there is nothing
commoner than this false Construction, as has been observed before.

Ver. 214.
Their costly labor, and stupendous frame. What does Mr. D. mean by the
stupendous frames of Cities and their costly Labor? Virgil by the operum
laborem, means their vast Amphi-theaters Theaters, Guglia's. Aquaeducts, and
the like Public, Magnificent, or useful Works.

Ver. 217.
Our twofold Seas -- Is a very odd Phrase; we talk of our four Seas, but few
would call them fourfold Seas, unless they were Seas of fire, Air, Earth and
Water, or however, consisting of different Materials -- The rest is Apocryphal.

Ver. 228.
For veins of Silver, and for Ore of Gold -- But why were the veins of Brass
forgotten?

Ver. 236.
-- And greater Scipio 's double Name. This is another of the Elegantiae
Drydenianae, and perhaps, may have some meaning in it; but it lies very deep.

-- Their fertility. Ver. 248.
Instead of, What kind of Trees their Nature will best agree with.

Yet this suffices the Palladian Plant. Ver. 252.
Here Virgil honestly names the Olive Tree, that his Readers might know his
meaning; but Mr. D's Prudence, has left his learned Gardener to find out, if he
can, what the Palladian Plant is Virgil too says the Grounds above named
delight in Olive Woods, as being the best for that use; our Translator, it
suffices, it makes a sorry shift, or will serve with much ado; and a Soil which
wants all Succor, is a very perspicuous expression.

-- Wild Olive shoots -- Seedlings are never called Shoots by learned
Gardiners. Ver. 254.


Then when the bloated Tuscan blows his Horn, Ver. 268.
And reeking Entrails are in Chargers born. Here Is somewhat of the Horn sticks
in Mr. D's Head, which his Author has not the least hint of. The Tuscans used
to play on their Pipes, it may be, what we call Flageolets, at the time of
Sacrificing, their Pipes were made either of Box or Ivory; but, we don't use to
talk of Ivory Horns nor Boxen Horns; but perhaps, he read for want of his
Spectacles, in some Commentator, Tubicen, for Tibicen -- Reeking Entrails, are
such as are newly taken out of the Belly of a Beast just killed; but Virgil
speaks of fumantia exta -- Smoking Entrails, or such as have been just boiled,
and come off the fire, and from thence, are returned to the Altar.

Ver. 271.
Or Goats that, for which, graze the Field, and burn it bare. Ridiculous, and
quite beside Virgil's purpose, who reflects not on the Goats, as burning up the
Fields, for then, no Pasture would be fit for them, but as mischievous to all
manner of Trees, where they can come at their Barks, for their bite kills the
Trees; which, tho the Latins may express by Uro, is not well interpreted by
burning with us.

Ver. 274.
-- Swans sail down the watery Road. A choice Phrase, above Virgil's reach!

Ver. 276.
There Crystal Streams perpetual tenor keep -- Perpetual tenor, is a choice
Phrase too, and used, as I remember, by Mr. D. in the beginning of Ovid's
Metamorphosis, and there with as little sense as here.

Ver. 278.
For what the Day devours, the Nightly Due Shall to the Morn in Pearly drops
renew -- A very pleasant mistake! Virgil commends the Fertility of the Mantuan
Plains, because the Grass grows so fast, that what the Flocks had eaten down by
Day, would by the next Morning, by assistance of the Nights moisture, be grown
as high again as it was before. Mr. D. thinks that as much as the Sun should
waste the Springs by Day, the Night Dew should make up again by Morning; which
is an evidence of a very quick Apprehension.

Ver. 282.
For Plowing is an imitative toil, Resembling Nature in an easy Soil. Is an
admirable elucidation of Virgil's sense; that by Plowing, we imitate Nature, i.
e. endeavor to make some Lands mellow, as she has done others.

Scarce dewy Beverage for the Bees provides. Ver. 294.
Ruaeus, and reason shows, that Virgil by Rorem, meant not Dew, but Rosemarine,
meaning such poor Land scarce bears so much as Flowers for the Bees to suck on.

-- The Food of Snakes. Ver. 295.
That Is not the meaning of Nigris exesa Chelydris Creta -- But that Chalky
Ground is often pierced full of holes by Water and other Snakes, which Holes
they make not for Food, but for Lodging; but Mr. D. speaks as if the crumbling
Stones too, which, yet would prove but a hard Diet, were Snakes meat. Ver. 306.


Such large increase Vesuvian Nola yields. Mr. D. it seems, was resolved to
cross his Author, and to give Nola a place where Agellius, ridiculously tells
us, Virgil had dashed it out; this is certainly, not doing right to him; but one
comfort is, Mr. D. has made it Nonsense, for it was not Nola, but the Field
about Nola, which yielded the large increase, and Virgil teaches him to speak
so, in the beginning of the same verse.

And such a Country could Acerra boast, Ver. 307.
Till Clanius over-flow'd the unhappy Coast -- No, the overflowing of Clanius
made the Soil rich, and the richer it was, yet the more it endangered Acerra
with its Inundations.

I teach the next, Ver. 309.
etc. Here Mr. D. contracts four admirable lines of Virgil into two, and scarce
sense of his own, which, I Would rather Translate thus; Of Moulds I Will now the
various temper show,
If you the heavy or the light would know,
That for your Bread's the best, and this for Wine,
Corn loves the heavy, but the light the Vine.


Ver. 318.
-- If sullen Earth repines Within its native Mansion to retire, And stays
without a heap of heavy mire, Is a mere heap of absurdities; the first
Periphrasis an obscure Version of Virgil's clean Expressions. But suppose the
Earth dug out of a Hole will not go all in again, but makes a little rising, must
that needs be mire? Mire commonly lies in Holes, not on Hills, unless in
London-streets, by the assistance of the Scavenger.

Ver. 327.
This truth by sure experiment is tried -- What truth does Mr. Translator mean
here? That salt Earth is neither fit for Vines nor Corn -- Virgil says nothing
to that purpose, nor can any of the Experiments he mentions, declare that; the
Poet only shows how, or by what Signs you may distinguish salt and ill tempered
Earth from other kinds; and perhaps, our Salt-Petre-Men, and their method of
working is the best Comment on Virgil's discourse.

Ver. 329.
-- Such toiling Peasants twine When through straight passages they strein
their Wine. Here we should have a Poeta loquitur, meaning Mr. Bays, for hs
Author always talks more to purpose; however, the Idaea is fine, and those who
cure the Wines in France, or elsewhere, will edify much by it.

In this close Vessel -- I believe this is the first time that ever a Colendar
was called a close vessel; Ver. 331.
the good Woman when she took the Colendar for the Chamber Pot, would have been
glad to have found it so. But why should salt Land be called accursed, unless
Mr. D. thinks there was no salt Ground, but what was about the Dead Sea?
Beside, salt Marshes are often very fruitful, and tho not so good for Corn,
excellent for Pasturage, therefore not accursed.

And by the bitter taste, Ver. 334.
etc. A wretched Version of Two of Virgil's excellent lines!

-- The meagre kind -- Is a new Epithet for a poor soil, Ver. 336.
and all poor soil will not crumble into dust, therefore Virgil talks not of it.

The heavier Earth is by her weight betrayed, Ver. 343.
The lighter in the poising hand is weighed -- The first line is truth, the
second, Nonsense. Had Mr. D. said, Light Earth and heavy, are by weight
betrayed, tho betrayed be but a scurvy word, it had been Virgil's sense; but we
had wanted the fine Rhyme tag'd too it.

With furrows deep which cast a rising Mound -- Is a verse with no meaning in
it, Ver. 353.
much less Virgil's, whose advice here is, to fix your Vineyards on the side of
Hills, and to open them with trenches, for the better mellowing of the Soil for
the future Plantation

The Clods exposed to winter winds will bake -- Well, Ver. 354.
but baking is the way to prevent Putrefaction or mellowing, and consequently,
to spoil the Ground.

Ver. 366.
So strong is Custom, such Effects can use In tender Souls of pliant Plants
produce. How soft are the Expressions; and how supra Maronian the figures! But
what effects does he mean? for preparing a Nursery of an Homogemeal Nature, and
planting 'em in a parallel to their Original situation, are the effects of
Care, not of Custom. Virgil's true sense is not to be understood Morally, but
Physically, and amounts to this, So much of advantage arises from keeping
Plants still to the same usage they met with, when they were young and tender,
which, neither Mr. D. nor his Commentators have hit on.

Ver. 368.
Choose next a Province for thy Vineyards reign, etc. Mere fustian, therefore,
be sure, none of Virgil's, who, only bids his Farmer see whether the Hills or
the Plains are like to agree best with the designed Vineyard; for, tho Virgil
recommends the sides, as the most Eligible where their situation's good, yet if
the sides of Hills in my Ground lie exposed to blasting or pinching Winds, and
a falling Sun, I must be content with a Vineyard on the flat, as more likely to
do well than the former.

Ver. 374.
Extend thy loose Battalions, etc. Here Mr. D. like one of the Forlorn-hope, is
running upon the Enemy at random, and spoiling a beautiful Similitude, by
beginning it before the time; and yet, what he puts in front, has no kind of
Cohaerence with that of Virgil, which follows, after; Virgil shows the
Quincuncial Order, some think the Square two, as the best to Plant the Ordines,
See Lipsius de Militia Romana. L. 4. Dial. 1. where he descants on these very
lines of Virgil.
or Rows of Vines in, on Hill sides; but how either one or other can be picked
out of Mr. D's Iargonry, no body can find.

And move to meet their Foes -- Here Mr. D. will, Ver. 380.
as usual, be wiser than his Author. Virgil shows us an Army Embattail'd
standing still, and facing the Enemy, whose posture then, resembles that which
he would have Vines Planted in; but I believe Mr. D. never heard of a Vineyard
moving, tho he may of Macduff's besieging Dunsinnane Castle, or of the Kentish
Parade, to meet William the Conqueror.

And equal Mars, Ver. 384.
like an impartial Lord, Leaves all to fortune, and the dint of Sword. Is by no
means Virgil's sense, which, perhaps, may be better expressed thus; As when
Embattel'd Troops expect a Charge,
And the Battalions all their Fronts enlarge;
Stand to their Arms, and with a Martial Grace,
In Ranks unmoved the opposing Army face,
While yet, they for the fatal Signal stay,
And waving Arms the glittering Fields display;
And fickle Mars to neither part retains,
But hovers dubious over the dreadful Plains;
So let your Vines at equal distance stand,
Not that your Eye the Prospect may command*
But that each Plant alike may taste the Ground,
And freely throw their spreading Branches round.
Which lines, if I Am not too much mistaken, give us a much fairer view of the
Poets meaning, than Mr. D's tedious and impertinent Paraphrase.

Ver. 389.
That their extremest lines may scarce embrace, Is inexplicable Nonsense.

Ver. 392.
But for the Ground it self this only way -- Instead of, For that, without
which it is false English, with which, it is like R. Wisdom's streins.

Ver. 397.
Not to the rest of Plants -- Plants comprehend all things growing from the
Ground, even Roots and Flowers; but Virgil plainly distinguishes between Vines
and Trees, as if the former were only to be reckoned among Shrubs So that Mr.
D's Translation's only a proof of his Ignorance.

Ver. 400.
And next the lower Skies a Bed profound. Whether Nebuchadnezzar's Tree was the
Aesculus, or any kind of Oak, I know not; but this which Mr. D. describes, and
which his Author would have been scared at the thoughts of, must be at least as
high as that he dreams of; for the lower Skies must be those over the Heads of
our Antipodes; but if the Roots of Mr. D's Oak must reach next those Skies,
they must strike through, and beyond the Center at least, and that is a great way,
and very answerable to a Tree, whose top reaches up to Heaven, without a figure.

And Lives of mortal Men contend in vain -- With what? Ver. 406.
Where Is the sense and Grammar of this line? Or where can Mr. D. find a
Parallel expression?

Full in the midst of his own strength, Ver. 407.
etc. is all fustian, absurd figures, neither suitable to Virgil's Character
nor sense. What if this whole Sentence were Translated thus?

If you how deep to plant your vines would know,
Vines, tho but shallow set, will kindly grow:
But solid Trees a deeper Graft require;
So the huge Oak, whose scaring tops aspire
To touch the Clouds, with taper Roots will go
Downward as deep, to reach the shades below.
Hence it unshock'd with Winter storms remains,
Or sudden Whirl-winds, or impetuous Rains;
Out-lasts a tedious Course of Humane Lives,
And a long long Posterity survives;
Spreads out its Boughs, and mighty Arms around,
The Father Trunk it self, with a vast Ombrage crowned.
Nor Prune with blunted Knife the Progeny -- Of what? Ver. 413.
Or who ever, before our Translator, called the Suckers of a Vine, the Progeny?
Or used that word absolutely? And who could pick out Virgil's meaning from this
Translation? Which, advises the Farmer to take his Layers neither from among
the top Branches of the Vine, nor from among the lower Suckers, but from the
middle Branches, which are the strongest, and the best; but not to hurt them
with a blunt Knife, when he lays them; which, by the way, shows what Virgil
meant by his Mala falce. Eclog. 3. ver. 10.

Ver. 415.
For sparkling fire from Hinds unwary Hands, Is often scattered over their
unctuous Rinds. How was it possible Mr. D. should stumble upon so absurd a
Fancy? Or why should -- sub Cartice -- signify, over the Rinds? But was it
ever known, that Farmers planted wild Olives among their vines, and scattered
fire among 'em, which presently set the green Trees a blazing? Or did Virgil's
Farmers take Tobacco, from which, we know what mischiefs have sometimes
happened? Or did the Link-Boys of those days knock their Links against the
Olive Trees, and so set them on fire? Had but Mr. D. looked a little into his
Commentators, he would have found there, a Quotation from Aristotle de Coelo, l. 2.
and Thucydides, l. 2. and from his Friend Lucretius, lib. 5. which would have
taught him, that Trees by rubbing one against another in a wind, have been set
a-fire, which must lurk under the Bark, by the galling of which it is raised,
for a while, till it breaks out by the continual agitation of the wind, and
spreads ruins among the Trees; and this is what Virgil meant and forewarned
his Farmers of.

Ver. 419.
-- It crackles in the leaves -- In other places, Mr. Translator out- rants his
Author, and loads us with bombastic stuff; here he dwindles into nothing, and
talks of crackling in the leaves, where Virgil, who knew how to soar in season,
tells us of the Flame -- Frondes elapsus in altas Ingentem caelo sonitum dedit.
As creeping and insipid are his next lines.

Of the long Files destroys the beauteous Form -- Here Mr. D's gotten again
into his Ranks and Files, Ver. 423.
where no Soldiers are permitted to straggle from their Band, so fond is he of
a silly Thought, and of Burlesquing his Author.

But the wild Olive shoots, Ver. 427.
and shades the ungrateful Plain -- A Plain then it must be, whether the
Vineyard be on a Hill-side or in a Bottom; take the whole Sentence thus
Translated: Let not your Vineyards face the falling Sun,
Nor sow rough Hazles where your Vines should run;
Nor take the utmost Tendrils of the Vine,
And the poor Suckers from the Roots decline*
But draw your Layers from the Trunk below,
Those soon familiar with the Soil will grow:
But never with rough-edg'd Knives the Branches wound,
Nor let wild Olive Plants infect the Ground.
Often, when their Work the thoughtless Farmers leave,
Their fretting Boughs an inward Fire conceive,
Which, hugged beneath the Oily Rind, grows strong,
And grasps the Body as it creeps along,
Till mounting through the crackling Leaves, at last
The flame breaks upward with a thundering Blast.
Feeds on the Boughs, the lofty tops commands,
While wrapped in flames the blazing Forest stands,
And hurls dark Clouds of Smoke against the Skies;
But chiefly, if a sudden Tempest rise,
Break on the Woods, and every blast engage
To add new furies to the Conquerors rage.
Thus should a Vineyard fall, the Sapless Roots
No more could flourish with their former Shoots;
No Pruner's Art could make the Branches rise,
Nor could the Soil advance the like supplies,
But self-sown bitter Olives soon would reign
Over all the Vineyard, and their Ground maintain.


This, whatever the Verse may be, I Am sure's more agreeable to Virgil's sense
than Mr. D's.

Ver. 430.
When Winter Frosts constrain the Field with cold, The fainty Roots can take no
steady hold -- This I Am certain does not grow out of Virgil. To constrain the
Field, is Nonsense; and Virgil talks not of the faintness of the Roots, but the
hardness of the Ground.

Ver. 432.
But when the Golden Spring reveals the Year. Ver Rubens is not the Golden
Spring; and to reveal the Year, is Nonsense.

Ver. 437.
Or Capricorn admits the Winters Sun -- is mere stuff, and not related to
Virgil.

Ver. 439.
The Womb of Earth the Genial Seed receives -- It had been better to have said,
Then Earths rich Womb, etc. but receives, is not the sense of poscunt; and if
Mr. D. does not, I do know that asking and receiving are two things.

And mixing his large Limbs with hers -- gives us a very strange Idaea of
Almighty Jove. Ver. 442.
When Metamorphos'd for an Amor, he might have well-set Limbs; but, when he
influences the Earth, the figure's ridiculous.

-- The Western Spirit -- for Tepentes aurae Zephyri, Ver. 447.
as if Spirits were only Airy Bodies, which, perhaps, may be the Translator's
Philosophy; or as if Aura signified Spirit, or Spirit were a fine way of
expressing the Morning Air or Wind.

And on the Faith of the new Sun relies. Ver. 452.
Virgil speaks somewhat toward this, concerning the Grass; Mr. D. will mend
him, by applying it to the Vines; but his Fancy adds no great Beauty to his
Author -- Nec metuit surgentes pampinus Austros, Aut actum coelo magnis
Aquilonibus imbrem, were beneath Mr. D's regards -- or the swerving Vines on
the tall Elms prevail, quite bewildred me; but if Mr. D. means the Vines crept
up the tall Elms, then it is plain they did not swerve. However, the Phrase is
delicate.

They spread their Gems the genial warmth to share, Ver. 455.
And boldly trust their Buds in open Air -- Gems, as Mr. D. calls 'em, are
Buds, or those little round Puts on the Vine which shoot into Branches; the
Frondes are the leaves afterward rising from those Branches.

In this soft Season, etc is so perverse a Translation, Ver. 457.
as his own Mac-flecno would scarce have been guilty of; but by Translating
Crediderim in Virgil, by, so sweet Poets sing, seems to intiate, that he would have
every body believe what he writes, since he has set up for a sweet-singer -- In
prime of all the Year, and Holydays of Spring -- is unintelligible Fustian.
From hence to the 474 Verse, he comes no nearer Virgil, than a Colt would do to
a windmill; but his observation, That Man at the first Creation, was made of
Stones, (from whence, Virgil had good reason to call him Ferrea Progenies,) is
an Original.

Ver. 475.
-- And dung with hot Manure -- An admirable Hypallage for Manure with hot dung.

Ver. 476.
These 4 lines would move a Stoick's Spleen. Virgil bids his Farmer lay Stones,
or Shells in the Ground about the Roots of his Trees, that by their hollowness
the water may the more easily moisten the Roots, and invigorate the Plants, All
which, is an Operation under ground. Mr. D. supposes it would rise in Dews from
among the stones to water the Shoots above ground, which is a very fine
Speculation, and I hope, our great Planters will thank him for it.

Ver. 492.
-- To raise their forky Head, for Heads is false English; and to set it off
the better, Virgil by Furcas bicornes, means forked Poles, or Crotches to
support the Vines. Mr. D. thought the Vines themselves, had forked Heads, which
argued a very clear Apprehension. The same good English he gives us again, l.
498. While they spread Their springing Leaves, and lift their Infant Head.

Ver. 500.
-- Childhood and Nursling, are Boyish Figures when applied to Plants. Nor
exercise thy Rage on newborn Life; silly and impertinent.

-- Crop luxuriant stragglers, Ver. 504.
nor be loath To strip the Branches of their Leafie growth. Virgil only means,
If the Leaves be too thick within, and hinder the Sun, and Air's influence too
much, you must not cut the inner Branches with the Knife, but thin the Leaves
with your Hand; which I could never have found out by Mr. D's Version.

-- Disobedient Boughs -- Beyond their Ranks -- The Lawless Troops which
Discipline disclaim, Ver. 507, 8, 9.
don't grow out of Virgil, but out of a shallow Brain.

Virgil talks of his Indignae Hyemes; Ver. 517.
Mr. D's Noddle runs upon unworthy Brouze, far enough from the Poet's meaning.

Nor Dog Days parching Heat, Ver. 520.
which splits the Rocks -- is a new Thought, and far above Virgil's reach.

When Earthen Images adorn the Pine, Ver. 536.
And there are hung on high, in Honor of the Vine -- I hope, none will think
this is the meaning of Virgil's Oscilla ex alta suspendunt mollia pinu. Nor can
I agree with Ruaeus's Interpreting Oscilla, by little Earthen Images; since the
mollia are an odd Epithet for them, nor is there any reason to understand
Mobilia by Mollia, the Translation's too Catechrestical; but Mollia Oscilla
seem to be Effoeminate disguises, or Masks, which, after their ridiculous
Bacchanalian Mummeries, they hung up in remembrance of those Games, wherein,
they used such looseness. Whereas, as Mr. D. goes on at ver 540. to Translate,
as if the Images of Bacchus were hung up like Kings-Fishers in Country
Kitchins, to show which way the wind sits; were it true, the Wind would turn
the Pendulous Image every way, and every Field by that means, would be blessed.
But Virgil means, that which way soever the God himself, not his little Image,
turns his jolly Countenance, or nods his Head in token of Favor, (which Favor
was only attainable by offering the appointed Sacrifices at the appointed time)
there the Vineyards would thrive and multiply.

Ver. 546.
Whose offered Entrails shall his Crime reproach, And drop their fatness from
the Hazle broach -- is very obscure, and not the English of Pinguiaque in
verubus torrebimus exta colurnis; where, pinguia exta shows the goodness
required in the Sacrifice, that it should be well fed, and the Entrails white,
but if the fat were never so little, when roasted on the Hazle Spit, or broiled
on the Broach, (to humor the Translator) it might drip away.

Ver. 550.
For thrice at least in compass of the Year Thy Vineyard must employ the sturdy
Steer -- Mistake upon mistake! Virgil does not say, thrice at least, but, very
often; so terque quaterque, signifies as every Schoolboy knows; nor must
Steers be brought in to Plough among well rooted Vines; but the Ground must be
dug with broad-tin'd Forks, to prevent hurting the Vine Roots, and must be
carefully stirred, to mellow the soil, and to give the Root-Fibres liberty.

-- The Leaves to thin that (for which) suck the vital moisture of the Vine.
Ver. 555.
Not at all, but to give the Clusters Air to ripen.

-- In the lowest Months, Ver. 558.
when Storms have shed From Vines the hairy honors of their Head -- What are
the lowest Months! Or in what Country is that Phrase used? I thought too the
Vines, not the Storms, had shed their Leaves; their Head is false English, and,
pray, what are the Hairy honors of the Vines Head? At this rate, I Am afraid,
Sylvester's woods Periwig'd with Snow, must be no more Fustian.

-- To commend excess, Ver. 570.
is absurd, and not countenanced by his Author, in the least.

-- The Shrubs of prickly Thorn, Ver. 572.
suppose it sense, are very unfit to bind Vines with. But Butchers Broom is
used in Italy, V. Raij Hist. Plant. l. 13. c. 12.
and very fit for that work, it growing Densis viminibus, lentis, fractuque
contumacibus, etc.

Nor when thy tender Trees at length are bound, Ver. 576.
is the third Rhyme, but neither ends the sense, nor the Period; nor does ver.
579. do it.

Insulting over the toils, Ver. 581, 4.
etc. An absurd Phrase, and not growing out of Virgil; and their joys are
unsincere; false, for any Man's joys may be very hearty and real for what is
past, tho he have a return of work afterward.

-- But fixed below Rejoice in open air, Ver. 588.
and unconcern'dly grow -- Quite beside his Authors sense, who only asserts,
Olive Trees are very hardy when they have drawn good Root, and are used to, or
seasoned in the weather.

Ver. 593.
Soft Peace they figure, and sweet Plenty bring -- is none of Virgil's sense.
Hoc pinguem and placitam paci nutritor olivam. i. e. Therefore plant the fat
Olive, which is the Emblem of Peace, indeed, but not of Plenty, nor do those
things always go together, nor does Virgil teach any here to sing Hymns to
Pallas.

Ver. 599.
Till with the ruddy freight the bending Branches groan. The precedent lines
are but so many mistakes of his Author; and this line he applies to Apple
Trees, which Virgil applies to those, which Mr. D. very Elegantly calls Trees
of Nature.

Ver. 602.
Vile Shrubs are shorn for browze -- is very pleasant; what Virgil calls
elsewhere, Florentem cytisum, cannot be so very vile a Shrub; but why shorn or
cut for browze, for so Ru^eus Interprets tondentur? Cattle browze on the tender
twigs when growing, If those Shoots are cut off, there is no browzing for them,
nor is it browzing to eat 'em when cut off, if they could, any more than to eat
Hay is grazing.

Ver. 603.
-- The towering height Of Unctucus Trees are Torches for the Night. A very fine
Periphrasis for tall Trees afford Flambeaux Staves, and maintain Fires in the
Night, and give light. By Mr. D's way of expressing it, a Man would think his
Unctuous Trees were made natural Beacons, and fired as they grew, to make
Illuminations; and the towering height -- are -- is very good English.

Ver. 614.
Narycian Woods of Pitch -- Tho Virgil might call them, Picis lucos; yet his
Interpreter should have called 'em Firr, or Pitch Trees; a Wood or Grove of
Pitch or Rosin, sounds very odly in English. -- Whose gloomy shade Is for
retreat of thoughtful Muses made -- is an impertinent flourish of the
Translator.

Even cold Caucasean Rocks with Trees are spread, Ver. 618.
And wear green Forests on their hilly Head -- is to explain Virgil's words,
Barren Woods, or Woods without Fruit grow on the top of Caucasus, and their
Head is exquisite Grammar.

Tho shent their Leaves -- What Is the English of that? Ver. 621.
Our Western People when they say, We shall be shent, mean, They shall be
chidden; but what means Mr. D.?

Cypress provides for Spokes and Wheels for Wains -- I wonder in what Country?
Ver. 624.
Or how the Translator came to think his Author talked so? For, he says, The
Woods in general afforded such; but Cedars and Cypresses were for wainscoting,
and cieling Houses; nor are all kinds of Wood for Keels of Ships, as any
Shipwright will inform him; so Myrtles and Cornels both make Iavelins or
Spears, not Shafts or Arrows, light Wood making them best. And Yeagh and Bow,
is just Brains and Stairs; and it may be Kerve, v. 632. is but a new fangled
word; tho we know there is a Kerf made in sawing Timber.

Wine urged to lawless Lusts the Centaurs train -- I find then the Lapitha are
out of Mr. D's favor, Ver. 627.
sure they were Williamites, and therefore forgotten; but Virgil and Ovid, both
remember them, as concerned as far as the other in Pirithous's wedding-feast,
and the unhappy Consequences.

Ver. 647, 8, 9, 50.
These four lines are all spurious, Excrescences of the Translator's Brain, and
as just as his Thoughts commonly are. The Giants at Guild Hall, doubtless, put
him in mind of his threatening Statues, unless he Dreamt of those which came to
supper with Don Iuan, in the Libertine. His Persian Arras is very quaint too;
and, I suppose, the Town of Arras, since our late Wars, has taken shelter under
the Wings of Casbeen, or Ispahan; or it may be, Babylon was the Ancient Name of
Arras; for I Am sure, Mr. D. had some reason for that Epithet, and the rest is
as plain as the Nose on a Man's Face, that in Persian Arras -- Vests through their
shady Fold, good Grammar again! Betray the streaks of ill dissembled Gold. This
had certainly turned my Stomach, but, that reading Mr. Cowley's admirable
Paraphrase on this Encomium of the Country Life, settled my brain again, and
made me sleep without the trouble of the Night Mare. I pass by his foolish
Alteration of Virgil's whole Scheme.

Ver. 659.60.
Unvext with Quarrels -- This is an impertinent tautology; we had it in 640
before, and Virgil gives us nothing like it.

Ver. 671.
From hence, Astraea took her flight, and here The prints of her departing
steps appear -- This was stolen from Mr. Cowley, and therefore, good.

-- Free from Cares and Strife -- The same ungrounded tautology again. Ver. 686.


Nor, Ver. 707.
when contending Kindred tear the Crown, Will set up one, or pull another down
-- But a Republican will pull both down; and of such, we have now, too many.

The Senate's mad Decrees he never saw -- This is a Flirt at our Parliaments
too, Ver. 718.
and should the Reflection be just, it is besides his Text quite; the Populi
Tabularia were the Chancery Court, and the Rolls, where, what we seek for, I
fear to no purpose, a public Registry of Lands, etc. was kept.

With Wars and Taxes others wast their own -- Still girding at the Public
Management; Ver. 727.
and yet, not unwilling that the French King, while he kept his Honor, should
have put the three Kingdoms to greater Charges.

I^ an extravagant Paraphrase, Ver. 745, 53.
of two full lines, and not at all the advantage of the sense; besides, the
transposition of the Original's beautiful Order.

The Vines liquid Harvest Baked in the Sunshine of ascending Fields -- whatever
Retrospect the Translator may pretend to, Ver. 753.
is Fustian Nonsense.

And winter fruits are mellow'd in the frosts -- is a new discovery, Ver. 758.
and the Farmer commonly takes care to prevent the frosts affecting his fruit,
for rottenness, not a grateful mellowness, commonly succeeds it.

-- Kids with budding Horns prepared -- is an elegancy, Ver. 765.
Valla or Buc^^^ were never acquainted with; such another is that 772. The
Herdmen provoke his Health, i. e. they drink his Health in a round.

Ver. 773.
The Groom his fellow Groom at Buts defies, And bends his Bow, and levels with
his Eyes. As this shows Mr D. a complete Archer, so it is a very good Account of
shooting at a Prize fixed on the top of a Pole, which Virgil speaks of only,
which he mentions again, at the Funeral Games for Anchises, and which, several
Nations practice to this Day; we may be satisfied by this, that Mr. D's
sometimes very cautious, and will not Altum sapere.

Ver. 779.
-- From whom the austere Hetrurian virtue rose -- What, from Romulus and
Remus? that is new! It Is true, Mr. D. out of his vast unknown Treasury,
sometimes furnishes us with an odd piece of Antiquity, very great, and very
surprising. It Is the extreme unhappiness of Graevius and Gr^novius, that
they are un^cquainted with him.

This Description of the Country Life, is Mr. D's Masterpiece, or at least,
the most pardonable of any thing we have met with yet; but whosoever reads the
Original, and Mr. Cowley's Translation, and this together, will easily find the
difference between Tissue and Tinsel, the plain, unaffectedly clear Sense of
Mr. Cowley, and the glaring, taudry, superficial Dress of Mr. Dryden. One
understood, and studied his Author, and by a strange Sympathy of Humor, Copied
him justly; the other, had little of Virgil's Genius, and only studied himself,
and therefore wrote like himself, and almost, has lost the Character of his
incomparable, pretended Master.

BOOK III. Of the GEORGICS.
WE are now entering a new Field, and examining a piece of Mr. D's Younger
Labors, where to spare our own trouble, and the Reader's expense, our
Observations will be fewer, whether his faults be so or not. Mr. D. ought to
look for more severity than other Men, since he values himself above all
Mankind, and is the most unmerciful in his own Reflections on others; which,
considering his own obnoxious State, and how little he was able formerly, when
his Blood ran high, to defend himself against Mr. Settle, was extreme
Imprudence; but we lie open to his Exceptions too, and therefore, need not beg
any Pardon.

Where cooling Streams invite the Flocks to drink -- Is a Patch on a Face which
needed it not; Ver. 21.
Virgil thought not of it, no more than of that impertinent Parenthesis. Ver.
26.

A Hundred Coursers from the Goal will drive -- Read your Author again, Ver. 27.
good Mr. D. and count upon your Fingers, and see if Centum quadrijugi currus,
are not drawn by above 100 Horses; for Coursers, is a very senceless word
there. I Am almost certain, those words could not mean single Horse Caleshes;
but, so I remember, some positive Pedants have thought a Hecatomb was but 25
Oxen, but they had some reason, for 25 Oxen might have a 100 feet among them.

Ver. 31.
-- Shall be reserved for Caesar, and Ordained by Me -- is quite beside the
Cushion.

Ver. 37.
From thence return attended with my train -- Thank you, good John Hopkins!

Ver. 40.
And show their Triumph which their shame displays -- Speaking of the Britons,
whom Mr. D. very learnedly calls Britains, as if it had been so great a shame
for a little Island, under a great many petty Kings of different Interests, to
be worsted by the Veterane united Armies of the Roman Empire; or as if solido
Elephanto in Latin, were intelligibly Translated by simple Elephant in English.

Ver. 44.
His shattered Ships on brazen Pillars ride -- Very well guest however, and a
clear Evidence how one Poet understands another by Inspiration. Virgil
promises, in a fit of Poetic Grandeur, that he will erect lofty Pillars, cast of
the brazen Beaks of Ships, taken from the Egyptians, alluding to the four
brazen Pillars so cast by Augustus's Orders, after the Reduction of Egypt. And
has not Mr. D. given this sense very clearly? Nor, does he show less discretion
in talking of Niphates with inverted Urne, and dropping Sedge; when Virgil
talks of the same Mountain, which Horace, on a like occasion, calls rigidum
Niphaten, which Epithet, tho there is a River of the same name, and rising, as
they say, out of that very Mountain, can properly be applied only to such a
Mountain, as that part of the Taurus, which is so called is.

With backward Bows the Parthians shall be there, Ver. 48.
And spurring from the Fight confess their fear. Virgil's sense is, The
Parthians shall be represented there, who confide in their flight, and in their
way of shooting backward, which is just the same. So immediately, he makes
Augustus's two Trophies to be recovered from Europe and Afric, which really
were meant from Asia and Britain; which argues good skill in Geography. But
neither Shore his Conquests shall confine; is an absurd addition; but above
all, for clean Paraphrase, and Noble Figures, the next six lines are
Non-pareils, unless equaled by the closeness of the six following.

Come then, Ver. 71.
and with thy self thy Genius bring -- as if en age segnes Rumpe moras, were
spoken to Mecaenas, which is only applicable to his own Muse.

Sour Headed, strongly Neck'd -- Virgil says, Ver. 88.
big Headed, and long Neck'd, but so small a difference breaks no squares; but,
I suppose, he was thinking of the Manchegan Hero's Triumphal Cage, drawn A la
mode d' Espagne, when he would have the Cows strong Neck'd for the Yoke. But
what he means by rising in her Gate, and being free from fears, I believe, few
Farmers understand, whatever the Ladies may.

Watch the quick motions of the frisking Tail -- that is a new Diagnostic of the
Translator's own Ver. 105.
Experience; Damaetas thought such a thing an ill Omen.

Ver. 122.
-- And prancing in his Gate, for Et mollia crura reponit, nicely Translated!
and to tempt the Flood, is a very good English Phrase; but attempt it, had been
better. And Argutum Caput, is rather a lean than a sharp Head, if Iockies
mistake not.

Ver. 132.
-- And trembling with Delight, no, he trembles with Rage, and all his other
motions show it; but I Am afraid, the double Chin'd Horse must be a Monster.

Ver. 140.
He bears his Rider headlong on the Foe -- (to pass the foregoing line,) is the
character, not of a Horse well trained for War, and well Manned, but of a fiery
Steed, under a Clinias, or a Damaetas, or a Man of Mr. D 's own Courage; but
it is such a Commendation, as Virgil would never have given him, and Virgil's
next line, would be enough to confute this Translation.

Ver. 149.
-- Saturn turned Horse, etc. Ran up the ridges of the Rocks amain -- It was a
very strange Beast indeed, and Pacolet's could not have much outdone him; but
it is a little unlucky, that Virgil knew not one word of all this. Virgil, good
Man! thought that He filled Mount Pelion with his Neighings -- Mr. D. says no,
it was the Plain, the reason must be, He durst not Neigh as he run up the
Rocks, for fear of making a false step, and breaking his Neck. It Is a wonder
Mother Ops did not discover the Traitor by his strange scampering.

These are a lewd Illustration of the most modest Expressions of a chaste Poet,
Ver. 155 60.
who would blush, were he alive again, to see himself Painted in so filthy a
Dress.

The flying Chariot kindles in the Course -- is absurd Nonsense; Ver. 170.
but instead of farther Criticism on these 12 lines, take them thus; Have you
not seen, when Chariots lightly wheeled
Start from their Stands, and rush along the Field.
How the brisk Drivers pant with Hopes and Fears,
And each with eager cries his Horses chears.
They stretch, and cut, and reach to give the Reins,
While the hot Axis smokes along the Plains;
Now they run smooth, now jump, and mounting high,
Rake through the Air, and seem to touch the Sky.
No stay, nor rest! while Sandy Tempests rise,
And they who strein, the foremost toward the Prize
Grow wet with Foam, and Breath of those behind,
Such eager thirst of Praise enflames the meanest Mind.


To stop, Ver. 183, 4
to fly, the Rules of War to know, To obey the Rider, and to dare the Foe --
The Lapithae were fine Gentlemen, and Mr. D. an excellent Panegyrist; but these
excellencies are wholly new Discoveries, which, Virgil not knowing of, would
sooner have ascribed to the Centaurs, than the Lapithae. The next four lines
are strangely wide from the Text.

Ver. 207.
For all is too little for the craving kind -- is so lewd an illation, and this
whole Period is so scandalously Translated, and beside his Author, as might
justly strike the Book out of every modest Hand.

Ver. 218.
For fear the rankness -- etc. here Mr. D's mad after his old Lucretian
Episode, and what Virgil expresses with the greatest purity, he vitiates, and
makes wholly obscaene and detestable, when all Virgil's meaning is only, that
the Mare too rank fed, especially with Grass, will not take so well as one dry
fed, and in a lower Condition; which every Horse-breeder knows.

Ver. 231.
-- Where Nature shall provide green Grass, and fatning Clover -- this is
somewhat extraordinary in Forests, and what his Author forgot.

Ver. 235.
-- With holly green -- Virgil says, -- ilicibus virentem --

Ver. 34^.
Tanagrus hastens thence, and leaves his Channels dry -- Risum teneatis --
Virgil says, The roar of Cattle bitten by the Breez reaches the very Skies, and
makes the woods, and dry banks of Tanagrus, a Winter Torrent, but dry in
Summer, Echo again, Mr. D. supposes the Brook runs away frighted at the noise,
which is extremely Poetical.

Ver. 261.
Set him betimes to School, and let him be Instructed in the Rules of Husbandry
-- these, and the following lines, would put a Man beside all patience;
certainly, Mr. D. wanted this care himself; but if Calves must go to School
while their Youth is flexible and green, nor have seen the bad Examples of the
World; and the stubborn Children must begin to be broke early. St. Francis for
my Money! Unless the Translator thinks he can do wonders in the Case.

Thy flattering Method on the Youth pursue, Ver. 270, 5
Joined with his School-fellows by two and two -- Ever the Licentious Youth be
thus restrained, Or Moral Precepts on their Minds have gained -- all this of
Calves still! Sure, Calves thus Educated, would make excellent Poets; I Am sure
some Poets for want of it, have proved mere Brutes,

Who filled the Pail with Beestnings of the Cow -- Well remembered again, Ver.
288.
Mr. Bays, this comes of not going to School to learn the Country Trade.

And let him clashing Whips in Stables hear -- is beyond question, Ver. 292.
the meaning of -- Stabulo fraenos audire sonantes. So again, -- Et plausae
sonitum cervicis amare -- Make him understand The loud applauses of his
Master's Hand. Is not this, exquisite Interpreting? To which, may be added --
Inscius aevi -- very well explained -- Guiltless of Arms --

It Is an endless work to mark the Absurdities of this Translation, yet, who can
forbear observing how Mr. D. Translates -- spumas aget ore cruentas --

Sustains the goring Spurs -- but who can Ver. 316.
guess why he Translates -- Belgica vel molli melius feret esseda collo -- Or,
bred to Belgian Wagons leads the way, Untired at Night, and cheerful all the
Day?

Ver. 360.
His Horns, yet soar, he tries against a Tree, And Meditates his absent Enemy
-- is ridiculous Nonsense, and all this Battle of Bulls so impertinently varied
from his admirable Author, as if he designed an abuse, not a Translation of
him; and tho Virgil might say in Latin -- Signa movet -- meaning, -- He marches
forward, could any Man of sense remember what he was speaking of, and say, A
Bull, single too, moves his Camp? It Is a wonderful Honor to our English
Tongue, to have a topping Author write thus.

Ver. 376.
The secret Ioys, etc. -- This, and several following lines show how hard it is
for an inveterate Debauchee to be modest, and what care ought to be taken of
such as pretend to Translate Latin Authors, who it seems, creep under the
shelter of their Authors Names to instill Filthiness, and Obscoenity into the
Minds of such who cannot command the Originals; the Faults are too many to be
noted.

Ver. 399.
The sleepy Leacher shuts his little Eyes, About his churning Chops the frothy
Bubbles rise -- Virgil has nothing like this, and every word in it is
ridiculous. The Boar while he is grinding and rooting, cannot be very sleepy,
Love commonly keeps the Lover awake. Shuts his little Eyes -- that is, for
Sleeping or Meditation; for why may not Boars have as good Morals as the best
educated Calves in the World? But the Chaps must churn in the Dream, or else
the Pigsnyes must be awake again; and for the frothy bubbles, they must rise
from the Churn, and, must needs be extraordinary indications of violent Love.
The Sluices of the Sky were open spread -- is another very sensible Expression,
and much to Virgil's purpose.

But far above the rest, Ver 419.
etc. -- here again our Translator runs at random, indulging his own lewd
Fancy, and neglecting his Text.

But when they seem exhausted swell the Pail -- Never, Ver. 484.
certainly, has any Man met with such Cows and she Goats as Mr. D. Their dugs
are inexhaustible, and the least of 'em would almost make a Chedder Cheese at a
Meal. But Camelots made of Goats hair is a Bull, and neither private Sentinels,
nor Mariners are much troubled with Camelot Cloaks.

In depth of Winter to defend the Snow -- is a particular way of speaking, Ver.
495.
which Mr. D. much delights in; and to defend the Snow, is indeed, to defend
from the Snow, which is a Phrase as clear as the Sun at Midnight.

-- Produce in open Air Both Flocks, Ver. 502.
and send 'em to their Summer fare -- needs not to be reflected on, but as the
English to In saltus utrumque Gregem atque in pascua mittes.

Before the Sun, Ver. 50^.
while Hesperus appears -- what can that mean? Hesperus appears presently after
Sunset; but that cannot be the Poets meaning, but it is Lucifer, as Virgil calls
him, which appears before the Sun in the Morning, and which, follows in the
rear of the departing Stars, as Ovid; and while he shines, and before the Sun's
up, the Dew lies in deed upon the Grass; but it is plain, Mr. D. knows no
difference between the Evening and the Morning Star.

Ver. 522.
When Linnets fill the Woods, etc. Mr. D. will defend himself here by his
Friend Ruaeus, and other Dutch Commentators, yet Servius hints at the
Nightingale; and since the Poet is describing the Evening when Linnets are all
hushed, Common Sense would have taught him, that Virgil could mean no Bird but
the Nightingale, and this, a judicious Translator would easily have observed.

Ver. 556.
-- The Ice an Hostry now for Wagons -- which, if it answer Virgil's --
Hospita Plaustris, is a very considerable Discovery, and is somewhat beyond the
Thames, during Blanket Fair; so again, -- And thence By weight the solid
Portions they dispense, is not Virgil's -- Et totae solidam in glaciem vertere
lacunae.

Ver. 566.
The sterving Cattle perish in their Stalls -- by no means; they are stall'd to
prevent it, for, there they are warm, and their Keepers find means to give 'em
Fodder, tho the Snow be very deep.

Ver. 571.
-- Or makes a distant War with Dogs -- can never be the sense of -- non
agitant immissis Canibus -- Mr. D. here mentions several Implements of Hunting,
which Virgil names not, but takes no notice of -- Puniceaeve agitant pavidos
formidine pinnae -- was it because it was insignificant, or because, he really
did not understand it?

-- Such are the cold Ryphaean race, Ver. 586.
and such The savage Scythian, and Unwarlike Dutch -- Pray, what difference
must we put between the Ryphaean race and the Scythian, since the Ryphaean
Mountains are in Scythia? And what temptation could Mr. D. have, to attack the
Dutch in their Winter Quarters? Was it because they are of the same Flegmatic
and Unwarlike Temper with himself? Of all Persons, a Roman Writer would never
have called the Batavians unwarlike, and they would rarely mention 'em without
Honor. And Mr. D. should have remembered he was now Translating the great
Master of Decency among the Romans, and not Advice to a Painter. The Batavians
are Celebrated by the Romans, both for their Fidelity, and their Valor. And
those who are acquainted with the Story of their Recess from Spain, must own,
either that the Spaniards were mere Cowards, and Men of no spirits, or that the
Dutch were not so unwarlike as our Malecontent would make 'em. And the Camps of
Prince Maurice, and Prince Henry Frederic, were the Schools of Mars, where most
of the great Commanders of the last Age were brought up in the Art of War; and
perhaps, His present Majesty, the Heir of those Martial Princes, has let the
World see that his Countrymen can fight; nor have our Naval Broils proved 'em
altogether unwarlike, for it is possible Men may be stout Soldiers, and cunning
Merchants at the same time; but however, they must be with our Translator, rude
Barbarians, dressed in the skins of Beasts, Bears, and Foxes. I remember Report
talked such things of some of that unwarlike Crew who came over with the Prince
of Orange, but the same report said they were Swisses and Laplanders, which
frighted some very unwarlike People.

Ver. 608.
-- And to the Taste restore the savor of the Salt -- for Et salis occultum
referunt in lacte saporem -- Does not such an Interpretation show an
extraordinary acumen?

Ver. 610.
Some, when the Kids the Dams too deeply drein, With Gags and Muzles their soft
Mouths restrain -- This is Mr. D's sense. Virgil's is, When it is time to wean
the Kids, some put a prickly Muzle on their Noses, which hurting the Dam,
she will let 'em suck no more; but for Gagging 'em, that is a new Device; as new a
way of speaking is that of -- Pursuing the fear of flying Hares with the cries
of Hounds, and To rouse from their Dens the bristled rage of Boars; which,
shows too no great skill in Hunting But I must remember, Mr. D. long since,
rejected cant Words, and terms of Art.

Ver. 631.
-- And shunning Heavens broad Eye, Coelum does not signify that broad thing.
But the English Parnassus is a very good help sometimes. And Snakes familiar to
the Heath succeed, Disclose their Eggs, and near the Chimney breed -- this,
beside that superfine Phrase of succeeding to the Hearth -- is nihil ad Iphicli
boves. I don't remember that the Italians had Chimneys in their neat Houses,
nor in their Sheepcoats, nor did they live in Virgil's days, as they had done
under the Government of old Saturns beard. -- Cum frigida parvas
Praeberet spelunca domos, ignemque laremque
Et pecus and dominos communi clauderet umbra.
Iuven. Satyr 6. which Mr. D. thus scantily Translates -- When in a narrow
Cave, their common shade,
The Sheep, the Shepherds, and their Gods were laid.
And which, was thus Paraphrased by a former Hand; 'Twas when whole Families
and Gods were found
Nestled in little Burrows under ground;
When Hall and Kitchen were one nasty hole,
Where Men and Swine in common dirt might roll --
But these Days are now past; and therefore, Mr. D's Version's unseasonable,
and childish.

Or with hard Stones demolish from afar His haughty Crest, Ver. 640.
the seat of all the War -- is a strange kind of Language; and sure, that
demolish is a Cant word, and very odly applied; but by the seat of all the War,
I suppose, Mr. D. means the place where all the danger springs; now that is the
Mouth, not the Crest, for, I think, the venom seldom lies there, but about the
Teeth; now if the Teeth be demolished, the Adder will soon be Crest-fallen, I
make no doubt; but what demolishing it means, I confess, I know not; nor do I
believe, that when a wounded Adder, or Snake hides his Head -- he leaves
exposed to blows his Back and battered Sides -- any longer than needs must.

-- Forgets to rear The hopes of Poison for the following Year -- is all
fustian again, Ver. 668.
and extravagant; for tho the Calabrian Snake may fly off his Nest at a Man, or
for thirst may go a great way off, and be very dangerous to all he meets, it
does not follow at all, that he must leave his Brood; such a Thought could
never have grown out of Virgil, and looks but scurvily now it is stuck to him.

Ver. 673.
When the raw Rain has pierced 'em to the quick, Or searching Frosts have eaten
through the Skin -- where Virgil teaches his Shepherd, that the scab breeds in his
Flocks, either in moist slabby weather, or in severe frosts, either of which
affect 'em to the quick. But for that, when burning Icicles are lodged within,
it is an Original; and if the Court Ladies cannot understand it better than your
Shepherds and Farmers, it will pass for exquisite Nonsense; however, burning
Icicles will always be admired.

Ver. 681.
And their Flock's Father -- his usual Periphrasis for the Ram. Forced from
high to leap -- false English, and which, that he might have been all of a
piece, should have been -- whom in Floods they steep -- and that had been
better Rhyme too -- Swims down the Stream, and plunges in the deep -- now durst
I lay a Iacobus, that if the Father of the Flock be forced to leap from high,
he will plunge in the deep before he swims down the Stream -- so that this is an
egregious Hysteron Proteron. But if Mr. D. stands to see Sheep washed in a
River, he will find they are not only thrown in from high, but that Men are fain
to take somewhat more pains with 'em, and if after washing, they are left to
swim down the Stream, it is only for a convenient Landing place.

Virgil's Medicine for the Scab among Sheep, Ver. 683.
is a Composition of Lees of Oil, Mercury, Flower of Brimstone, Rosin,
Beeswax, Squills, Helebore; for which, now adays, they take Tobacco stalks,
and Pitch -- for these, Mr. D. orders, Mother'd Oil, Founts where living
Sulphurs boil, The Scum that swims on molten Silver, fat Pitch, black Bitumen,
the wanton labor of the Bees, with Hellebore and Squills deep rooted in the
Seas -- Quaere, who is the better Leach, and more intelligible Author? Add to
this, -- The secret Vice is fed -- for alitur vitium, as if vitium in Latin
were of no larger a signification, than vice in English, and you have an
excellent Doctor and Interpreter together.

Virgil for the Fever in Sheep, Ver. 700.
advises -- Inter ima ferire pedis venam -- i. e. says, Servius, to Breath a
vein on the top of the Foot, or between the Nails. Mr. D. advises to breath a
vein underneath the Foot, so he construed his Author; but what part of the
Hoof, pray, do the veins lie in in Horses, Kine, Goats, or Sheep?

Ver. 709.
Revenge the Crime, and take the Traytor's Head -- but, why is it a Crime for a
Sheep to be sick? Or how comes the sick Creature to be a Traitor? Or why must
he lose his Head? These Questions, I confess, are to me unanswerable, to kill
one which is diseased to prevent Contagion, is good, but Shepherds very seldom
turn Headsmen. But this agrees well enough with the Nation of Sheep, because
Virgil calls 'em gentem, which shows a deep reach; and with the Shepherds happy
Reigns -- for Regna Pastorum -- Dr. Busby would never have pardoned such
Construing.

Ver. 722.
-- The dumb Creation -- i. e. Trees, unless they happen to be vocal; Earth,
unless there be some Aetnaean Rupture in it, Sea, Sky, Stars, yet Virgil talks
nothing of these; but Birds and Beasts are not the dumb Creation, unless every
thing be so which cannot speak with Humane voice. Birds and Beasts have a
Language of their own, which they mutually understand, and are as noisie, and
as rational too as some Men. Again, whence comes that difference between tame
Cattle, and the Beasts of Nature? Are tame Cattle monsters, or unnatural
Products? But this is the Iauntee way of writing.

Ver. 731.
Converting into Bane the kindly juice Ordained by Nature for a better use; is
the exact sense of -- Omniaque in se ossa minutatim morbo collopsa trahebat.

Ver. 737.
-- By the holy Butcher -- This becomes Mr. D. and doubtless, is the true
English of such a sacerdos as he would have made, had he been admitted, but in
it he shows his respect, not to Pagan Priests, whom prehaps, in many cases, it
might be proper enough to ridicule, but to all, for with him the Priests of all
Religions are the same.

Or the black Poison stained the sandy Floor -- not to take notice of Mr. D's
ignorance in Heathen Sacred Rites, Ver. 742.
it is plain, he takes Iejuna sanie -- to signify black Poison, and he is the
first, and I hope, will be the last who understands it so.

And render their sweet Souls -- Dulces Animas -- well Construed again! Ver.
744.
These, doubtless, were some of those well educated moral Calves, of whom, Mr.
D. gave us so fine an account before.

-- And rugged are his Hairs -- never was any thing more insipid, Ver. 752.
than this Noble part of the III. Georgic, as Mr. D. has given it us; among the
rest, he says, rugged are his Hairs. Virgil says, his skin grows hard; which is
a very different thing. But it seems, this Distemper sublimes the brutal Nature
of the Horse, so as he comes to groan with Manly moans; I suppose, he means
moans of such Men as were Originated from Deucalion's Mother's Bowels, which I
have shown before, must make 'em of a very soft temper.

Which timely taken ope'd his closing Iaws, Ver. 764*
But if too late, the Patients death did cause. Virgil's sense is, that When
this Pestilence first began, a Drench of Wine proved very good for the sick
Beast. But the Pest spreading the Disease was altered, and what had been
Physic before, now became the grand incentives of the Distemper, adding fury
to the inward flame; but he thought nothing of giving the Dose sooner or later,
for that made no difference. I wish too, Mr. D. would give us some application
of l 768, 9. Ye Gods to better Fate good Men dispose, And turn that impious
Error on our Foes; I doubt not, but it will be very diverting.

Ver. 771.
The Steer studious of Tillage, and the crooked Plough -- this too must have
come of those Calves of liberal Education, mentioned before.

Ver. 774.
The Clown who cursing Providence repines -- Must every one then who is sad,
repine, and curse Providence? It becomes a Republican Atheist well enough, or
one who has lost the Bays to do so; but Virgil's Farmers had better Manners.

Ver. 781.
His Eyes are settled in a stupid Peace -- A dull Nonsensical way of saying, --
A heavy dullness hangs upon his Eyes.

Thus have I gone through this III. Book, noting a few of almost numberless Faults
in English, in sense, in his Authors meaning, and in propriety of Expression;
and cannot but wonder that any Man, who could not but he Conscious of his own
unfitness for it, should go to amuze the learned World with such an
undertaking. A Man ought to value his Reputation more than his Money, and not
to hope, that those, who can read for themselves, will be imposed upon, merely
by a Partially, and unseasonably celebrated Name.

BOOK IV. Of the GEORGICS.
THis again is one of Mr. D's labored Pieces, and which, he values himself
upon, where, if I meet with fewer blunders, I shall be very glad for his, and
for the Readers, and for my own sake; for I know but of one thing more Nauseous
to a wise Man, than to find fault; and that is, to meet with any one who has so
many to find. But to the Book it self.

-- Before the busy Shop -- Mr. D. resembles the Bees-hive to as many things
as the famous Preacher did Meditation. Ver. 26.
Here in a few lines it is their Station, their City, their place of Trade,
their Mansion, their Shop, and doubtless, it is resembl'd to many more things
afterward; but with such a Copia, as Virgil would have been no ways pleased
with.

-- As the cold Congeals into a lump of liquid Gold -- Who'd think this liquid
Gold were mere Honey? Ver. 49.
Or where is any Author whoever called it by that Name? Virgil's our Text, and
it is best keeping to him.

-- The niceness of their Nose -- false Grammar for Noses. Ver. 67.
Such another incoherent verse is that, And doubled Images of voice rebound.
Which, if any one can make sense of, with the precedent, or subsequent Lines,
they will oblige me.

The winged Nation wanders through the Skies -- This supposes Bees very high
flyers, Ver. 73.
which really they are not, and therefore, Virgil says nothing like it.

Ver. 77.
-- Drunk with secret Joy -- for Nescio qua dulcedine laetae; and for Progeniem
nidosque fovent, the Paraphrase is wonderful; Their young Succession all their
cares employ, They breed* they brood, Instruct and educate, And make Provision
for the future State. These Bees then are brought up at the same Academy, where
the Calves were in the former Book under Tutor D -- n, but I Am afraid, in the
issue, they will prove Anti-Republicans.

Ver. 87.
Then Milfoil beat, and Hony-suckles pound -- this is not Virgil's Recipe, and
any Country Housewife could have taught him, that Balm and Hony-wort, are the
proper Herbs to daub a Hive with, not the Ground to which you will draw the
Swarm; and so our Botanists interpret Melisphylla and Cerinthe. V. Raium de
Plan.
And mix with tinkling Brass the Cymbal's droning found -- is a very singular
way of speaking. Should these have been beaten and pounded too?

Ver. ^90.
Straight to their ancient Cells recalled from air, The reconciled Deserters
will repair -- what a strange Idaea has the Translator of the management of
Bees? House-wives will tell him, they don't try to reduce the Swarms to the
old, but to new Hives. The old stock turn 'em out for want of room, and they
put 'em into new-Hives to increase 'em; so that I have known an old stock, in a
kindly Year, throw out two good Swarms and a Cast, which makes 'em multiply
apace, else the smothering of their Bees, which is easier than driving, would
quickly ruin the Bee-Merchant.

With shouts, Ver. 98.
the Cowards courage they excite -- Here Mr. D. enlarges violently, and gives
us a glorious Representation of the Bee-war, far beyond his Author; and yet
methinks, Virgil talks very handsomely too; but he knew not any thing of the
shouting of Bees, nor could he distinguish which of the Bees were Foot, which
Horse, and which Dragoons, nor between the Light Horse, and those heavy Armed;
nor had he any notice of an Order of Knighthood among 'em, and knew nothing of
the Bannerets, these have been discoveries of later Ages; and Mr. D. has
honored us with a very exact account of them. Thus too, he runs riot from ver.
122 to 130, and beyond his Author's design, carries on the Fray till it is
scarce worth while to part 'em. But if one only can reign -- What will become
of our new Republicans?

And like their grizly Prince appears his gloomy Race -- As if all the rest of
the Bees were bred by him, Ver. 145.
which is much to his Honor -- But, we may observe, Mr. D. here talks of the
Lawful King, and some Usurper; Virgil makes that Lawful King merely Elective at
the will of the Bee-Master, whose Judgment interposing quite beside any Right
of Succession, makes a Lawful, when a good, and abdicates an ill-look'd, i. e.
a bad King; I would not have Mr. D. misapply it, but it gives us a somewhat
particular notion of Legal Royalty.

Qu. Whether Falx saligna, signifies a Lath-Sword?

Ver. 215.
And tame to Plums the sourness of the Sloes -- This is such a piece of
Husbandry and Elegancy, and rises so naturally from Virgil's words, as may be
justly admired, but is really inimitable; it is a way of meliorating Fruits, by
Graffing beyond any Experiments of my Lord Bacon. Nor less valuable is that,
Each has a certain home, a several stall; All is the States, the State provides
for all. Ver. 228. Which savours too much of Republicanism.

Ver. 232.
Some over the Public Magazine preside -- is a Thought so extremely ridiculous,
as none but Mr. D. could have stumbl'd on; nor could any but he, have dreamt of
Bees making use of Narcissus leaves, in building of their Combs.

Ver. 238.
Some nurse the future Nation of the Hive -- Virgil says -- Aliae, spem gentis,
adultos Educunt foetus -- This looks as if it had another meaning; but Ruaeus
interprets it just as wisely as Mr. D. and both without any reason; when the
true sense is, Some lead out and exercise the young Bees; i. e. that they may
know how, and where to feed themselves, to work, and to gather Honey, and Wax
against the time they are to set up for themselves. And this is proper to be
done for the Foetus adulti, who are past Nursing, when called by that name; and
every Body must know the difference between Educere and Educare.

Ver. 239.
-- Some Purge the Grout -- I confess my ignorance of what Mr. D. means by that
Employment; Virgil forgot it, and I have not Butler by me; but upon this, I
find our Translator fell fast asleep, and quite slipped those admirable Lines. --
Sunt, quibus ad Portas cecidit custodia sorti: Inque vicem speculantur aquas
and nubila Coeli, Aut onera accipiunt venientum -- What if they were thus
Translated?

Some by their Lots before the Portal ply,
Some view the Clouds, and watch the changing Sky,
Unload their wearied Mates; and jointly strive
From lazy Drones to clear the thrifty Hive. But for the Bees being stung with
Envy, and therefore, I suppose, working the harder, it is the Genuine Product of
Mr. D's own Brain.

Subdued in Fire the Stubborn Metal lies -- Ver. 247.
is neither Poetical, nor proper English, nor telerable sense; nor does the
Translator mend in those. -- Huge flakes of flames expire, With Tongs they turn
the Steel and vex it in the Fire. And when he tells us the Employment of the
Elder Bees, he is as ridiculous as possible; but he is beyond measure exact in
the Names of Plants and Flowers, which his Author mentions; and those two, The
hollow murmurs of their Evening Bells Dismiss the sleepy Swains, and toll 'em
to their Cells -- ver. 276. are Originals.

-- Their modest Appetites, is Grammar; Ver. 288.
but Their Heroic Mind -- Their strength, are false English; and to talk of
their not using Womankind, is absurd; and the rage of Honey, ver. 299. is a
Nonsensical Latinism.

Ver. 313.
The King presides, etc. are all impertinent, and silly Excursions, an
affectation of fine Thoughts without reason, and without any Countenance of his
Author.

Ver. 326.
-- And kindles as he goes -- is what I can make no sense of; if it refer to
God, here made the Soul of the World, He kindles, must be understood passively,
for he is kindled, and what sense it will have then, I know not; if it refers
to the several parts of the Creation, it must mean his influence kindles them
in an active sense, which is an odd way of speaking, and would require a larger
Commentary then I Am at leisure for; it may be, this Translation may express
Virgil's meaning more clearly.

Such wondrous Signs, and Instances of old
Made Men renowned, for Sacred Wisdom, hold
That Bees were by Ethereal Fires enflamed,
And Portions of the eternal Essence claimed.
God might through all the parts of Nature move,
Through Earth and Seas, and Heavens vast Orbs above;
Hence Flocks, Herds, Men, and all the Savage Crew,
Their Lives from that Immortal Substance drew;
All when dissolved, to this return at last,
Not into nothings Inexistence cast;
But live the Life of Stars; are always bright,
And always beamed with indefective Light.
Ver. 340.
-- When their Quire surveys, The Scorpion mend his pace -- such English as a
Man would hardly look for, from a Master of our Language.

And break the Waxen Walls to save the State -- Virgil says, Ver. 351.
Take away the empty Combs to prevent Vermin harboring in 'em. And here he
pursues a Metaphor till it grows nauseous.

-- Or Wasps infest the Camp -- Every Dictionary, Ver. 358.
I believe, would have satisfied Mr. D. that Crabrones are Hornets, not Wasps.

These four lines, Ver. 363.
in which, Virgil talks of the care of the Bees to recover their own ruins and
losses, Mr. D. absurdly enough, applies to the Bee-Masters; but he writes for
the Ladies, not for use.

-- And shagged is their Hair -- A singul^r Observation, Ver. 371.
but which, the Farmer could scarcely have made without a Microscope; and I Am
afraid that line, Their Friends attend the Hearse, the next Relations Mourn --
is all Apocryphal, and as wide from truth and his Text, is the following line.

With such a Tempest through the Skies they steer -- is an absurd sense added to
the Poet, Ver. 447.
who makes them appear thick, as a stormy Shower in the Summer; but never
thought of their driving like a Tempest, which had been such an Idaea of their
first rising, as would have been hist at by Augustus and Maecenas, and the
Roman Ladies. And such a form the winged Squadron bear, is applicable to
nothing which went before.

On Peneus banks he stood -- is false measure; Ver. 453.
it is not Pe-neus with two Syllables, but Pe-ne-us with three, and the
penultima long, as any Poet would have showed him.

Ver. 459.
The third by him, and thee from Heavens high King -- Who could imagine Mr. D.
a Denizon of Parnassus, who could not find out the difference between two and
three upon his Fingers? (...). Il. 1.
Apollo was the Son of Jupiter, by Latona, as Homer shows, Aristaeus was the
Son of Apollo, by Clymene; therefore but the second from his Heavens high King;
but, perhaps, he was thinking of -- A Jove tertius Ajax, and fansy'd Aristaeus
a Grecian Commander, which might bring his Thoughts to a dislocation.

Ver. 462.
Why did thou me, unhappy me, create? This, I doubt, is the first time that
any Mother was said to have Created her Child; I hope Mr. D. may know some
difference between Generation and Creation, or his Theology, and Philosophy,
must run very low.

Ver. 482.
-- And clad in party-colored Cloth -- i. e. according to the high mode of our
English Ladies; but it was the worst Fashion which could have been thought of,
for those who lived under water, and could not get from their Lodgings but through
the Flood. Had Mr. D. here erred with his Author, he had been excusable; but
this was mere whimsie and indefensible. Mr. D. it seems, was better acquainted
with these Nymphs than his Author; and therefore has sixth Characters on them
all, or else he took 'em from some, whose Names, if known, would doubtless, be
very diverting.

But Are^husa leaping from her bed -- is a very new thought, Ver. 498.
nor could I have believed the Ladies lay spinning a bed, had not Mr. D. found
it out; I think Knoting was not quite so ancient, or it had been a more
agreeable business for such lazy Lasses.

-- His careless Mother -- says Mr. D. -- Tua maxima cura -- says Virgil; Ver.
504.
both respecting the same Aristaeus. -- Upraiding Heaven from whence his
Lineage came, And cruel calls the Gods -- this addition both abuses Aristaeus,
and Virgil.

-- Conduct him here -- is false English, Ver. 510.
for Conduct him hither. Qu. Whether -- jubet -- signifies, She waved her hand
on either side.

He hears the crackling sound of Coral Woods -- is wild enough, Ver. 521.
and from the Original distant enough; but why Coral Woods? Ruaeus thinks,
Virgil meant only Weeds and Bul-rushes growing in the bottoms of Rivers. And
Mr. D. should have remembered, he was here discovering a Rivers Head; now Coral
is no growth of Rivers, but of the Sea, and therefore, was by no means to have
been mentioned here.

And rub his Temples with fine Towels dry -- is a very smooth verse; Ver. 542.
but since he was washed all over, why were his Temples only rubbed dry? It Is
not intimated in -- Tonsisque ferunt mantilia villis -- There must be some
Mystery in it, if a Man could but find it out.

Mr. D. talks of two Bowls, Ver. 547.
and afterward of this to the Ocean, this to the Nymphs, which is all stuff;
in their Libations but one was used, and when one, the Principal, had sprinkled
a few drops on the Altar or Table, and had drunk first, the same Bowl went from
Hand to Hand, as may be seen in that Feast which Dido makes to Aeneas.

Ver. 551.
She sprinkled thrice with Wine the Vestal Fire -- is an intolerable
Anachronism. Vesta here signifies, the Fire it self, not the Fire as kept to
the honor of that Goddess which was an Institution of Numa Pompilius, as we
learn both from Livy, and Plutarch.

Ver. 571.
-- The wily Wizard -- a very civil, and a very sensible Expression of him,
whom he calls both a Prophet and a God before. For unconstrained he nothing
tells for naught, Nor is with Prayers, or Bribes, or Flattery bought, is all
Riddle, and past my understanding.

Ver. 595.
-- Beware to strein his Fetters -- is a fine new way of speaking, and worthy
of the Inventor.

Ver. 599.
With Nectar she her Son anoints -- No, it was with Ambrosia, Virgil says, and
there is as much difference between them, as between Meat and Drink, for neither
of 'em are like true nappy Ale; which of our two Authors now should be chiefly
credited? He breathed of Heaven, and look above a Man; is bombastick
impertinence, in which, it is certain, Mr. D. does not creep servilely after
sense, a thing, which he condemned long since.

Ver. 605.
If any Man or Woman can explain the meaning of those three Verses concerning
the Cave of Proteus, where heaps of Billows driven by Wind and Tide, In form of
War their watery ranks divide, And there like Centries set (a very Poetical
word) without the mouth abide -- or can show me how they grow out of Virgil's
-- Quo plurima vento Cogitur, inque sinus scindit sese unda reductos, I shall
own my self their most Humble Servant.

Her self involved in Clouds precipitates her flight -- here Mr. D. very
honestly contradicts his Author, Ver. 614.
who tells us only, that She stood at a distance muffled in a Cloud, indeed, to
see the event, which answered the Character of a tender Mother. That some
Copies read recessit, is not to the purpose, and is refuted by the Sequel of
the Story, where, Cyrene is at hand to cheer up her Son daunted with Proteus 's
terrible tale. Mr. D. says indeed, She returned to comfort him, ver. 769. But
Virgil says nothing of returning, nor was Cyrene so great a Goddess, as to have
known her Son's condition in a trice, if she had not been near, as appears by
her insensibility and slowness to hear him when he came crying, to tell her his
misfortunes.

-- They rouling spirt the bitter Sea; Ver. 622.
for Gens rorem dispersit amarum; the meanest Pedant in England, would have
whipped a Lubber of Twelve for Construing so absurdly; what follows is of the
same batch, Unweildily they wallow, first in Ooze, Then in the shady Covert
seek repose. Whereas, Virgil says, The Sea Calves lay themselves down on the
shore; and Navigators say, they choose the Sun to bask in when they sleep. The
rest to 630, are mere Kim Kam.

Ver. 638.
And wearies all his Miracles of Lies -- It seems then, they were Roman
Miracles. Convinced of Conquest, for Convinced that he was conquered, is a very
quaint Phrase.

Ver. 642.
-- What madness could Provoke a mortal Man to invade a sleeping God! Mr. D.
tacks this to his Author, and with his usual Success; for Aristaeus was a God
too, tho a Shepherd, as his Father had been; he was as Honorably descended as
Proteus himself, and invoked as a God, by Virgil, in the beginning of his
Georgics.

Ver. 645.
Aristaeus's answer is in Virgil so apposite, and lively, in the Translation so
dilute and insipid, that, it is intolerable to Compare 'em; but who would think
that Aristaeus meant his Bees, by his perished People?

Ver. 663.
Qu. Whether Ante Pedes, signifies, At her Heels?

Ver. 667.
The Realms of Mars remurmur'd all around -- What Realms were they?

Ver. 727.
After abundance of extravagant additions to his Author, to show the Luxuriancy
of his vanity, he adds, -- He prays, he raves, all means in vain, he tries,
With rage enflamed, astonished with surprise, But she returned no more to bless
his longing Eyes -- But, we must remember, it is Mr. D's Orpheus, not Virgil's,
of whom, these things are said,

Ver. 735.
-- In the leaky Sculler -- i. e. I suppose, in Charon's lap; for the Boat is
the Scull, the Waterman who rows, is the Sculler, as Mr. D. may learn every day
at the Waterside.

Whoever pleases to read Virgil's Latin in this Similitude of the Nightingale,
Ver. 742.
with Mr. D's Version, will soon be sick of the latter, or else must have a
very mean taste of Poetry.

Alone he tempts the Floods, Ver. 751.
etc. Virgil, Solus lustrabat -- quam been convenient!

On the glad Earth the Golden Age renews, Ver. 814.
And his great Fathers path to Heaven pursues. This is one of Mr. D's
Interpolations, and what it means, is not very plain. If by Augustus's Father,
he means Julius Caesar, his History's but indifferent; and no body ever passed
that complement on Julius Caesar, That he had restored the Golden Age, or had
much cultivated the Arts of Peace. Octavius did so indeed, but that was not
pursuing his Father's way; in short, Mr. D. abuses 'em both, by affixing
inconsistent Characters on them, and his Author, by presuming to teach him how
to Court his Patrons.

THus, Sir, at your Desire, I have gone through the Eclogues and Georgics, as
Translated by Mr. D. and have been sufficiently wearied with the Task; I will not
pretend to have been infallible in all my Observations, but as I think, I have
rarely charged him where he was not guilty; so I can easily satisfy him, or
you, that I let many pass, only, because they were too thick; and none can pass
a Rational Censure on them, who reads not Virgil's Original, and Mr. D's. and
these Remarks together. The Aeneids I design not to meddle with, at present,
tho the Faults in them, are innumerable, and such as convince me, that Mr. D.
either did not, or would not understand his Author. After all, I Am not the
Translator's enemy, but a Lover of Virgil for whom, if by showing the Errors of
this Translation, I could procure an accurate one, I should think this time
well spent. I cannot bear to see the best Poets, either Sacred or Profane,
Burlesqu'd, or abused; and it is no ill Nature, but Zeal for their Honor, which
makes me turn Critic; and I must thank Mr. D. that his Mistakes, have given me
an opportuntiy to dive farther into Virgil's meaning, and to admire his
beauties more than I had ever done before. If I have turned Mr. D's harsh words
sometimes upon himself, he may remember, that besides his Brother Poets, he
never spared a Clergyman, which perhaps, might make the Hands the rougher of

Your Humble Servant.

The I. Book of Virgil's Georgics made English.
WHat makes the richest Tilth, beneath what Signs
To Plough, and when to match your Elms and Vines?
What care with Flocks and what with Herds agrees,
And all the management of frugal Bees,
I sing Maecenas! Ye immensely clear,
Vast Orbs of Light which guide the rolling Year;
Bacchus, and Mother Ceres, if by you
We fatning Corn for hungry Mast pursue,
If taught by you, we first the cluster pressed,
And thin cold streams with spritely juice refresht.
Ye Fawns the present Numens of the Field,
Wood Nymphs and Fawns, your kind assistance yield,
Your gifts I sing! And thou, at whose feared stroke
From rending Earth the fiery Courser broke,
Great Neptune, O assist my artful Song!
And thou to whom the Woods and Groves belong,
Whose Snowy Heifers on her flowery Plains
In mighty Herds the Caean Isle maintains!
Pan, happy Shepherd, if thy cares Divine,
Ever to improve thy Moenalus incline;
Leave thy Lycaean Wood and Native Grove,
And with thy lucky smiles our work approve!
Be Pallas too, sweet Oils Inventor, kind;
And he, who first the crooked Plough designed!
Sylvanus, God of all the Woods appear,
whose Hands a new drawn tender Cypress bear!
Ye Gods and Goddesses who ever with Love,
Would guard our Pastures, and our Fields improve!
You, who new Plants from unsown Lands supply;

And drop 'em softly thence in fruitful Showers,
Assist my Enterprise, ye gentler Powers!
And thou great Caesar! Tho we know not yet
Among what Gods thou wilt fix thy lofty Seat,
Whether thou wilt be the kind Tutelar God
Of thy own Rome; or with thy awful nod,
Guide the vast World, while thy great Hand shall bear,
The Fruits and Seasons of the turning Year,
And thy bright Brows thy Mother's Myrtles wear:

And Seamen only to thy self shall pray,
Thule, the Farthest Island kneel to thee,
And, that thou may her Son by Marriage be,
Tethys will for the happy Purchase yield
To make a Dowry of her watery Field;
Whether thou wilt add to Heaven a brighter Sign,
And over the Summer Months serenely shine;
Where between Cancer and Erigone,
There yet remains a spacious Room for thee.
Scorpion too his Arms declines,
And more to thee than half his Arch resigns;
What ever thou wilt be; for sure the Realms below
No just pretense to thy Command can show:
No such Ambition sways thy vast desires,
Tho Greece her own Elysian Fields admires.
And now at last, contented Proserpine
Can all her Mother's earnest Prayers decline.
What ever thou wilt be, O, guide our gentle course,
And with thy smiles our bold attempts enforce;
With me the unknowing Rustics wants relieve,
And tho on Earth our sacred vows receive!
In early Spring, when first the melting Snow
Begins from Mountains hoary tops to flow,
And western Gales dissolve the Frozen Soil,
Then let my Bullocks first begin their toil.
Groan at the weighty Plough, and make the Share
With constant work a cheerful brightness wear!
That Soil must gratify the greediest Swains,
Which Summer twice, and Winter twice sustains.
Ground turned so much, with heavy Crops
Barns narrow walls, and in huge Stacks must rise.
But ever the Plough a Field unpracticed tries,
First let us observe, beneath what Winds it lies,
What Air it is in, hot, dry, or moist, or cold,
It Is former Crops, and how Manured of old;
What Fruit the Land will bear, and what refuse,
Some better Grain, some nobler Vines produce;
Some are for Fruits, and native Pastures best:
Hence T'molus is with fragrant Saffron blessed.
India with Ivory, the World supplies,
Which Incense from the soft Sabaean buys,
In Steel for Trade the hot Sinopian toils;
And Pontus sells the faetid Beavers spoils;
Epirus is for fleetest Mares renowned,
Often with the famed Olympic Garlands crowned.
Nature of old these lasting Sanctions made,
And certain Tasks on certain Countries laid,
Ever since Deucalion stones behind him threw,
And made Man's stubborn Race the World renew.

Let sturdy Oxen turn the fruitful Land;
And let the dusty Summers Sun digest
The sloping Turf with inward fatness blessed.
But if the Soil be poor when Charles's Wain
In Autumn rises, let the wary Swain
The Land with shallow Furrows slightly Plow
Here left a Crop of baneful Weeds should grow,
And choke the Corn, there lest the moisture drein'd,
A scorching Drought should burn the barren
Sometimes a new reaped Field recovers best
When left unplow'd each other Year to rest;
Else, when the Sign is changed sow Broad-Corn there,
Where Pulse had flourished the preceding Year,
Where the thin Vetch, and bitter Lupines grew,
The stalks Plowed in the mellow'd Soil renew.
So often the Noblest Crops of Wheat we find,
Where those dry Husks stood rattling in the wind.
But hungry Flax, and Oats exhaust the Field,
And Poppies, which forgetful Slumbers yield.
Yet still that cure's the easiest, and the best,
To leave the Ground each other Year at rest.
Rich fatning Dung on Glebe half spent bestow,
And Mossy Lands with Sooty Ashes sow.
It Is often proved good the barren Fields to fire,
Where Haum and Leaves, and crackling Flames conspire;
Whether their inward warmth the ground relieves,
And fatning Food, and secret vigor gives;
Or flames against the barren parts prevail,
And off the useless moisture quite exhale;
Or finds new ways, and clears exhausted Pores,
And freer Sap to springing Plants restores;
Or bakes the Glebe* and stops it is gaping Veins
Against the untimely flows of soaking Rains;
Or to secure it from the fierce extremes
Of Winters cold, or Summers furious Beams.
He too improves his new laid Lands who breaks
The tough unbearing Clods with sturdy Rakes,
Then lays 'em smooth with weighty twisted Thorns.
Kind Ceres too, his pains with wealth adorns,
Who, where the Leys are low, cross Plows the Lands,
And stirs 'em often, and every Clod commands.
Such careful Tillage makes the Mysians boast,
Their wondrous Crops, when on the Phrygian Coast,
Fair Ida her astonished Brows can raise,
When she the monstrous growth beneath surveys.
I Will pass those by, who, when they are newly sown,
Straight Harrow all the crumbling Ridges down;
Then all the Plains from Neighboring Rivers flow,
When all for want of moisture languid grow.

Draw down embodied Waters over the Plains;
Which over the Stones their chiding murmurs yield,
And cool the thirst of all the neighboring Field.
What should I mention those who, when the blade
Makes all the Leys diffuse an even shade,
Lest too too weighty Ears the stalk should crown,
Let in their Sheep and feed the rankness down.
Or when the glutted Fields have drunk at large,
With double Plows the excessive wets discharge;

Breaks over it is Banks, and spreads the Fields with mud;
And every swamp a standing Water shows,
And moisture warm, and noxious vapor spues.
Thus' when the busy Men and Oxen toil
To turn, and manage, and improve the Soil.
Sometimes the improving Soil, of hurt complains,
By greedy Wild-Geese, and destructive Cranes,
And from wild Chichory, whose noxious shade,
And bitter Roots the forward Crops invade.
Great Jove himself first clogged our Lives with
Taught Tillage, and repaid our Art with gains.
He whetted Humane Wits with studious care;
Nor would his Reign a lazy temper bear;
Before his Government no careful Swains
Plowed up the Field, or measured over the Plains,
No Balks, no Mounds the proper Owners showed,
But all in Common, Golden Plenty flowed.
What from unwounded Earth by Nature sprung
Into their Arms a blessed abundance flung.
Jove made the gloomy Serpents poisonous grow,
Wolves ravenous, and Storms at Sea to blow.
No more the sweets from dropping Branches flowed,
No more the flames at wholesome distance glowed,
No Rivers now with native Nectar swelled,
But all their Lives by sleights and practice held.
For new Inventions now their thoughts they strein'd,
And Art by slow degrees perfection gained.
He made them get their Bread with restless pains,
Amd force their fire from flints obscurer veins.
Then hollowed Trees the Rivers wondering bore,

The Stars in various Constellations threw,
And all their names, and all their numbers knew.
And could fit times for Voyages declare
From Pleiad's, Hyad's, and the Northern Bear.
Bird-lime and Springes, then for Birds were found.
And Hounds to draw the spacious Forests round.
With jagged Spears the largest Brooks they tried,
And let long Nets drive down the briny Tide.
Beside the Wedge, they would through the Timber draw

Then various Arts in various ways appeared
And want extreme, which nothing sharper feared,
With indefatigable pains renewed,
Forced every bar, and every stop subdued.
When common Trees, and sacred Groves denied
Their Mast, and Jove's blessed Oaks no more supplied.
Kind Ceres first the Share and Coulter showed,
And Men by her Divine Instruction Plowed.
Yet troubles soon attacked their labors there,
And Blite, and Mill-Dew blackt the weightless
Now the wild Teazle starves our hopeful Fields,
Thistles and Thorns, the richest surface yields.
And where a Golden Crop had rarely failed,
There Darnel soon, and barren Oats prevailed.
And now, unless with restless Rakes and Hoes,
You Brakes and Briars, and springing Weeds oppose,
Shout off the Birds, and lop the shady rows,
Till the free Air through every quarter flows,
And beg, and pray for seasonable Rain,
You Will look on others rising Stacks in vain;
In vain you will envy their Industrious Care,
And must to Woods again for wretched Mast repair.
Now will we teach the Tools which Farmers need
When ever they would House their Crops, or sow their Seed;
A Plough-Share, Coulter, and a weighty Beam,
A slow-paced Cart, and Gears to fix the Team,
Such Ceres kind, once taught her Host to make,
The Sledge, the Tumbrel, and the weighty Rake.
And if you would be for Husbandry renowned,

Implements of the pliant Osier made,
Sieves, Riddles, Fans with turning Canvas made,
Or on the Knees of toyling Threshers played.
Now search the Woods some crooked Elm to find,
Or for a Plough-Beam force it to your mind,
Give it Eight Foot in length, and double Ears
Of Iron toothed, to fix the toiling Steers.
Then some fair Beech, or Teil in season fell,
Which for a lightsome Yoke, and Staff excel.

To check the Wheels, and guide the Coulters stroke.
Here, could I many ancient Rules declare,
Unless you scorn the Countries meaner care.
To make your Barn a solid Floor assume,
Forge Dust and common Earth, and binding Loom,
Temper and mix 'em well, till firmer grown,
You roll 'em level with a pondrous Stone.
Then will not it crumble, nor the creeping weed,
Nor other Pests of Corn about it breed;

And plenty fill the little progging Beasts.
There dark Eyed Moles will cast, and loathsome Toads
Lurk in their holes, and Vermin swarm by loads.
Weevils the largest heaps of Grain infest,
And Ants with fears of future wants possessed.
Then watch the time when budding Almonds show,
And tender Twigs with fragrant Blossoms bow.
If thick the Fruit, and thin the Leaves appear,
'Twill prove a sultry, but a plenteous Year;
But if the Leaves above the Fruit abound,
The Sheaves will be but lank, and empty found.
I Have seen the subtle Farmer, wisely sure,
His Seed with Lees of Oil, and Nitre cure:
That Art your Seed in weight and bulk improves,
And all the Vermin of the Field removes;
But when it is nicely culled, and plump, and fair,
And steeped, and warmed with all his utmost care.
'Twill soon degenerate, till with Art renewed,
Culled over, and still with double care pursued.
Thus all things suffer in their fatal course,
Change every day, and every day grow worse.
So when a Man with restless toils and pains,
Rows up the Stream, and ground but slowly gains;
If he but slacks his Arms a while, he is gone,
And in the rapid Stream is hurried headlong down.
Besides, the Farmer with a curious Eye,
Should watch the various motions of the Sky;
On Charles's Wain his Observations make,
And on the rising Kids, and glittering Snake,
As those who venture on a stormy Sea,
And near Abydos take their dangerous way.
When Libra balances the Day with Night,
And parts the Globe with equal shades and light,
Then Yoke your Oxen, Swains, your Barley sow,
Till Winter's cold extreme, and churlish grow.
Then Harrow in your Flax and Poppy-seed,
And ply your busy Ploughs with early speed.
Sow Beans in Spring, and in a mellow Soil,
Clover and Millet ask your Annual toil.
When first bright Taurus's Golden Horns appear,
And setting Sirius, shows the rising Year.
But if with Ryes and Wheats, you will sow the Field,
And none but Grains which solid substance yield.
First let the Pleiades a Mornings set,
And the bright Crown before the Sun retreat
Before you sow, or trust the Field Manured,
With all those hopes your yearly toils ensur'd.
Some cannot indeed, for the right season stay,
Whose greedy hopes as wretched Crops repay.
But if you would common Tares or Vetches sow,
Egypts Pulse bestow,
Boots set the proper season shows,
And the wise Swain from thence, to middle* Winter sows.
The Times and Seasons that we thus might know,
The Sphere by certain Lines is parted so,
That through Twelve Heavenly Signs the Golden Sun
Might Yearly with commanding Influence run.
Five Climates the superior Skies divide,
One with eternal heats and scorchings fried,
From which the two extremes on either Hand,
Horrid with Ice, and gloomy Tempests stand.
The Two between Jove's condescending Grace
Made Habitable for our Mortal Race;
Through them the Zodiac cuts its Oblique way,
Whence Twelve bright Signs the lower World survey.
And since to us the Scythian Mountains rise,
Beneath our feet the Southern Circle lies;
Over us the Freezing Constellations roll,
And our Horizon views the Northern Pole.
The Southern sinks to those dark deeps below
Where Ghosts reside and Stygian waters flow.
Over us the monstrous winding Serpent glides,
And like some Flood the neighboring Bears divides.
The Bears by jealous Juno's fury scared,
And from the cooling Oceans waves debarred.
Some think there Reigns impenetrable Night,
And Clouds repel the smallest Gleams of light.
Or that with us when cheerful Light decays,
There Phosphorus his Morning Beams displays;
And the gay Sun's hot Car that Hemisphere
Hence, we before the various seasons know,
And when to Reap the Fields, and when to Sow.
When with our nimble Boats at Sea to ply,
Where Warlike Fleets with Canvas Wings may fly,
When Timber may be kindly felled, and be
From Sap, and penetrating Vermin free.
Nor do we watch the moving Signs in vain
How they alike through all the Quarters Reign.
When Frost and Storm the busy Swain confines,

At leisure ends, which in a clearer Sky
He Would hurry over, or too confusedly ply.
One Plates anew, or files his blunted Shares,
Or for his Cattle hollow Troughs prepares,
Brands them, or Figures out his Sacks for Corn,
Another sharpens Stakes, or Forks if worn;
Makes ready Twigs with which his Vines he binds,
Or nimble Skeps with pliant Osiers winds.
Then Is time to grind your Corn, your Batch to bake;

Some work, all Laws of Gods and Men permit
On those great Days; no wise Religion yet
Forbad the Boor his flooded Fields to drein,
Or mend his Fences to secure his Grain.
To burn the Thorns, or greedy Birds to allure,
Or sickly Sheep in wholesome Streams to cure.
Often too he drives his slow-paced Ass to Town
With Oil, or mellow Apples loaded down;
Which, there he trucks for necessary things,

The Silver Moon too with her powerful Rays
Marks out the unlucky, and auspicious Days,
On her Fifth Day never stir the Fruitful Earth,
Then Hell and Hellish Furies took their Birth.
On that cursed Day Earth with a hideous roar
Caeus, Briareus, and Typhoeus bore.
At Heavens bright Realms the Brother monsters flew,
And Ossa thrice on staggering Pelion threw,
Thrice huge Olympus from the Center torn,
Was to the top of groaning Ossa born.
Thrice angry Jove impetuous Lightnings hurled,
Rushed down the three-pil'd Hills, and save the Starry World.
Next to the Tenth the Seventh's a Lucky Day,
To prove your Bullocks, and your Vines to lay;
Or warp your Pieces; on the Ninth you will be
Safe in your Journeys, and from Padders free.
Some Business in the Night may best be done,
Or ever the Dawn leads up the rising Sun.
Night's best to Cut your Haum, your Meads to Mow,
While to the Scythe the dewy Vapors flow.
In The Chimney Corner one a Winter Nights
Makes Matches, while his Wife with Songs delights
His Ears, and makes the cheerful hours consume,
Or with her nimble Shuttle plies the Loom.
Else he boils up his Must with gentle Fire,
And makes superfluous Particles retire;
And ever as the rising scum appears,
He with a Bough the foaming Copper clears.
But Mid-days heat best reaps the burdened Fields,
And Mid-days heat the fairest Flooring yields.
Sow then, and Plow when the kind season's warm,
And tho you strip to work you will catch no harm.
But he some Rest in lazy Winter gains,
And reaps the Fruits of all his former pains.
From House to House the jolly Farmers feast,
With easy Thoughts, and honest plenty blessed.
As Seamen when their Ships have made their Port,
Put out their Wast-cloaths and dissolve in sport.
Yet then beat Acorns down, your Olives clear,

When Earth lies covered over with driving Snow,
And Rivers scarce beneath their Ice can flow.
The Swain for greedy Cranes his Springes sets,
And for the Stag extends his Toils and Nets;
Or traces to their Fourms the listening Hares,
Or else his Balearian sling prepares.
With mighty force he whirls it round his Head,
And strikes the game with glowing Bullets dead.
What should I sing, what Constellations Reign,

The Farmers work when days in length decline
And Summer Beams with fainter Furies shine,
Or when wet Spring rolls hurrying toward an end,
And bearded Ears over all the Fields ascend,
And Milky Grains the swelling Husks extend?
Often have I seen the gathering Vapors jarr,
And full grown Winds commence a fatal War,
Then when the Reapers plied the Golden Field,
And Mowers made the crackling Barlies yield.
I Have seen the storm tear up the standing Corn,
The weighty heaps on rapid Whirl-winds born,
And Stalks, and Ears like horrid Tempests fly,
Spread far and wide, and darken all the Sky.
Often have I seen prodigious Spouts ascend,
And gathering Clouds their heavy Wings extend,
Till Heaven all black with gloomy Tempests grown,
Seas through the Air at once rusht tumbling down,
Drenched all the cheerful Harvest, drowned the Field,
The slimy Dikes, and low sunk Rivers filled,
Till the swelled Waters over their Bounders flowed,
And Seas, enraged with foaming Whirl-winds glowed.
Nay, Jove himself, in that unnatural Night
With ruddy Bolts enhaunc'd the dismal fright.
Shocked the wide World, with hideous Thunders roar,
Till Savage Forests Herds could bear no more,
In Humane hearts dejecting Terrors reigned,
While he stern Lightnings with a fatal Hand
At Rhodope, and lofty Athos hurled,
And flames around the glowing Mountains whirled;
And pouring Rains and Storms embodied more,
Made the Woods reel, and dashed the founding shore.
For fear of this, observe the Months and Signs,
Which way old Saturn's frigid Orb inclines,
See in what secret Roads bright Mercury,
Northward or Southward wanders through the Sky.
But above all, the bounteous Gods adore
Thy Tilth once past, of all thy Yearly store
A cheerful Sacrifice to Ceres bring,
When sinking Winter greets the rising Spring,
When fatted Calves, and racy Wines delight,

Then let the merry Youth to Ceres bow,
And with thy self, to her their service vow.
New Wines with Milk and Honey Sacrifice,
And let your Prayers before her Altars rise.
Lead then the Consecrated Heifer round,
Thrice let her trace the pious Farmer's Ground.
Let all the jolly Lads her steps attend,
And that she may with happy smiles descend.
To humble Cells let all the Jovial Crew

Nor let the Sickle touch the ripened Corn
Till all the Swains with Oaken Wreaths adorn
Their cheerful Brows, and in an Antic Dance,
Her mighty Name with sacred Hymns advance.
And, that we might by certain Signs descry
Heats, Rains, and every Wind which rakes the Sky.
Great Jove himself, the changing Moons decreed,
To show what Weather every Month should breed,
What Signs raised Southern storms, and when the Swain

When Storms are brewing from an unseen cause,
A Billow breaks at Sea with mighty flaws.
The lofty Hills with crackling noises sound,
And rising Murmurs roll the Forests round,
And hollow groans from distant Cliffs rebound.
The Ship may then expect an angry Sky,
When off from Sea the Gulls directly fly,
And with a sudden Clamor stretch to shore,
And Fen-ducks wanton all the Meadows over;
Or when the Hern his watery haunt forsakes,
And over some Cloud his Airy Passage makes.
Often you may see before a Storm can rise
Bright Star-like Meteors shoot along the Skies,
And where they pass through shades of darksome Night,
A glittering Tract drawn out of Silver light.
See Chaff, or Leaves as nimbly whisking round,
And stillest Lakes with floating Feathers crowned.
But if a Northern dreadful Tempest roars,
Or East, or Western Gusts assault the Shores;
High Floods over all the Country Banks prevail,
The cautious Seaman furls the dripping Sail.
Nor yet can sudden Flaws the Swain surprise,
Who reads Prognostics with attentive Eyes;
If he will observe the soaring Crane aspire,
And from the Vale, before the Storm, retire.
He Will often the Bullocks spacious Nostrils find
Tossed toward the Skys, and snuffing up the Wind.
He Will see the prattling Swallow skim the Lake,
Or croaking Frogs their old complainings make;
The busy Ants their ancient Lodgments fly,
Drag out their Eggs, and narrow Tracts apply.
Vast Bows suck up the Rain, and noisy Crows
Scared early home, a threatening Change disclose.
The Fowls which haunt the Seas, and those which near
Ca^ster's Banks and Marshy Pools appear,
Dip down their Heads, and toss the wavy Dew
High over their Shoulders, and their Mates pursue.
Run back and forward, and with Gesture gay
Wash wildly, and along the Waters play.
Coughs aloud the Rains implore,
And stately stalk along the Sandy shore.
Thus too, the merry Maids who Nightly spin
Their carded Wools, can see the change begin,
While from their Lamps the glittering sparkles rise,
And round the Wick a sooty Capping lies.
By Signs as sure, the cunning Swain descrys
Fair Weather breaking through the louring Skys.
Then all the Stars shoot out with brisker gleams,
And the bright Moon returns her Brother's Beams

Aloft, no Halcyons, to the Ocean dear,
Bask with their open Wings along the shore,
And nasty Swine their Litter toss no more;
But Foggs descend, and belly toward the Plain,
And when the Sun sinks down beneath the Main,
From some lone Turrets melancholic height
Owls hallow shrilly through the silent Night.
The royal Hobby cuts the liquid Air,
And the poor Lark still rues the Purple hair;
Where ever the wretched Lark for shelter flies,
Her cruel Sire pursues her through the Skies,
Where ever the cruel Hobby cuts the Skies,
Away the trembling Lark for shelter flies*
Then often the Raven with a hollow noise
More deep than usual, streins his croaking voice
They meet in Flocks with uncouth blithness gay,
Hop through the fluttering Leaves, and loosly play,
And to their dear loved Nests, and young at last
Return before the driving Storms are past.
Not that I think they are blessed with Nobler Sense,
Or know more nicely what the Fates dispense.
But when the Weather, and the various Air
Their tempers change, and what before was rare,
Condensed appears beneath a Cloudy Sky,
Or Dense grows rarer when the Season's dry;
They with the changing Weather change their Sense,
And flying Clouds their Bosoms influence.
Hence through the Fields we hear the cheerful Quire,
The joyous Ravens croakes, the Cattels freaks admire.
If from the rapid Sun your Rules you will take,
Or from the Moons sequacious Circles make;
To morrows Gray will never delude your sight,
Nor the false Calmness of the sliding Night.
When first the Moon's declining Beams renew,
If then her Horns obscure, and gloomy show,
Thick weighty Clouds are gathering in the Wind,
And all is to wet by Sea and Land inclined.
But if her Cheeks a Virgin blush diffuse,
Winds, stormy Winds the blushing Moon foreshews.

The Farmer thence unfailing Signs descrys.
If bright and sharp her Silver Horns appear,
That, and the following Days will all be clear.
No Winds, no heavy Rains will clog the Sky,
But the expiring Months serenely die.
Then Sailors safe a shore, their Vows shall pay,
And Offerings on the sacred Altars lay,
To Panope their grateful Sacrifice,
To Glaucus and to kind Palaemon rise.
Sun too, watch his rising Signs,
And how he toward his watery Couch declines.
The Sun's Prognostics all are plain and clear,
Both when he mounts, and when the Stars appear;
If with a spotted Limb he climbs the Skies,
Or Masks in Clouds, or half his Beams denies,
Then look for Showers and for a Southern wind,
To Plants and Herds a moist unwholsom kind.
If when he rises first his languid Beams
Break through the gathered Clouds with watery Gleams.
Morning leaves her Saffron Bed,
Her faded Cheeks with deadly paleness spread,
What rattling storms of Hail their looks attend?
What Leaves can then their tender Grapes defend?
Your Observations yet are surer far
When down Heavens steep he drives his burning Carr;
His Brows often change then with a various hue,
And Winds his Red, and Rains his Black pursue.
If gloomy spots mix with his ruddy Flame,
All mighty Winds, and mighty Rains proclaim.
With such a Sky I Would never quit the shore,
Be drilled to Sea, or once my Boat unmoore.
But if his Rise unclouded Beams display,
And with unclouded Beams he close the Day,
Fear neither Rains nor Winds, the North then moves,
Drives off the Clouds, and rustles through the Groves
In short, the Farmer by the Sun may know
Whence Clouds will rise, or gentle Gales will blow,
What Storms the Watery South designs to bring,
What Weather from the falling Night may spring,
For who'd with false Prognostics charge the Sun?
He warns us often of Mischiefs scarce begun;
Foreshows blind Insurrections, unfledged Iarrs,
Fermenting Treacheries, and brooding Wars.
He pitied Rome when murdered Caesar died,
And to the World his cheerful Beams denied,
Behind a gloomy Scurf obscured his light,
And Godless Men feared an Eternal Night.
'Twas then the Time when Seas, and Air, and Earth,
Contrived to give prodigious Monsters birth.
Dark Heaven on that Inhumane Action scowl'd,
And Dogs obscoene in every Quarter howled;
Ill-boding Schriech-Owls with their ominous Notes,
Scream'd through the Day, and stretched their fatefull Throats.
Hot Aetna burst his fiery bounds below,
And made Sicilia's Fields with Sulphur glow,
Made melted Rocks in livid Torrents roll,
And shot vast fiery Globes against the Pole.
The affrighted Germans heard the dismal sound
Of clanking Arms which marched the Welkin round.
Alps with uncouth tremblings reeled,
And silent Groves prodigious voices filled.
Pale meager Ghosts broke from the rending Tomb,
And glaring, stalkt through Nights obscurer gloom.
Brutes (horrid strange!) with Humane Language spoke,
And staggering Earth her shattered Surface broke.
Swift Brooks a passage to their Streams denied,
And quite forgot the Seas attending Tide;
Big with their Tears the sacred Marbles stood,
And sweating Statues dropped a Sanguine Flood.
Po, Prince of Streams, with uncouth madness swelled,
Bore down the Groves, and Forests headlong felled,
At once drowned all the Fields, and Herds and Stalls,
Hurried with violent fury to his dreadful falls.
Beasts Livers all with boding Lines were Vein'd,
And bloody Springs their Streams with Gore distained.
The unpeopled Streets were filled with hideous sounds,
And howling Wolves there took their Midnight rounds.
Lightnings n'ere shot so thick from Cloudless Skies,
Nor such portentous Comets plagued our Eyes
Philippi then a grieved Spectator stood,
And saw her Fields o'erflow'd with streams of Blood.
While Roman Troops in War with Romans closed,
And Friends their Friends with equal Arms opposed*
Heaven angry, thought it worth it is while once more
TO enrich the barren soils with Roman Gore*
To glut the wide Pharsalian Fields around,
And the large Plains by lofty Haemus crowned.
The time shall come, when as the toiling Swains
With crooked Plows shall furrow up the Plains*
They Will find our Spears with eating Rust consumed,
And hollow Helmets long in Earth inhum'd,
And Pigmy Heirs shall with amazement see
The mighty Bones of their Gigantic Ancestry.
Ye kindred Gods who over great Rome preside,
Quirinus too to all the Gods allied!
And Mother Vesta, whose protecting Hand
Makes Tiber flow, and Rome triumphant stand.
O let this one, this gallant Youth remain,
And the vast ruins of the World sustain!
Enough of Blood for Perjuries we have paid
To Woes by false Laomedon betrayed.
To us the Gods, Great Caesar! envy thee,
And all thy Triumphs here with Envy see*
They grudge to see a wretched Age, oppressed
With Lawless Guilt, by such a Guardian blessed.
For all our lower World's involved in Blood,
And horrid Sins with impious Art pursued*
The Plough lies rusting by, the Soldiers scorn,
The Fields uncultivated, wild, forlorn.
New Swords of Scyth's, the Martial Farmers make,
And armed, their desolated Lands forsake.
Euphrates sounds with marching Troops from far,
And nearer Germany renews the War.
All Leagues are broke, and Civil Wars divide
Cities by all the nearest Bonds allied.
We see this All in dire confusions hurled,
And Tyrant Mars rage through an Impious World.
The fiery Coursers rushing from the Stand
Fly out, and scorn the Charloteers command.
In vain he draws the Bit, along the Plains
The headstrong Horses scour, and scorn the sounding Reins.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 6. line 20. for. read, p. 7. l. 15. after Davides? l. 22. after his d? p.
8. l. 4. d. the. l. 19. after for, p. 19. r. (...). p. 13. l. 6. r. Sin^^'s. p.
15. l. 25. after say, add to. p. 20. l. 13. r. terrat. l. 18. r.
subintelligitur. p. 22. l. 21. r. Racer. p. 23. l. 23. r. Caes^ra. p. 28. l.
25. r. Teueros. p. 38. l. 24. r. abuses. p. 54. l. ult. r. Pipes. p. 63. l. 13.
r. Gallaeus. p. 101. l. 17. r. Y^npu^. l. 12. r. d. good. p. 111. l. 13 r. The.
l. 16. f. mu^'d, r. inured. p. 113. l. 17. f. weed, r. sand. p. 125. l. 25. r.
turns. p. 134. l. 14. f. case, r. c^re. p. 138. l. 1. ^f. much, r. surpised.
p. 186. l. 30. f. Heath* r. Hearth. p. 219. l. 31. r. When. p. 221. l. 10. r.
saved.

Many more Errors in the Pointing, the Reader will observe, and Correct himself.


