

THE SECOND PART OF The Nights Search Discovering The Condition of the various
Fowls of Night.

OR, The second great Mystery of Iniquity exactly revealed: With the Projects
of these TIMES.

In a Poem, By HUMPHREY MILL, Author of the Nights Search.

Nocte patent mendae.
-- Audaxomnia perpeti,
Gens humana ruit per veti^um nefas.
Imprimatur. NATH. BRENT.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Shepherd, and William Ley, and are to be sold at
the Bible in Tower-street, and at PAUL'S Chain near Doctors Commons 1646

To the much Honored, and thrice Noble Lord, Robert, Earl of Warwick, Baron
of Lees, etc.
Right Honorable;
HAving presented the first part of my endeavors of this nature to an
honorable Peer, and finding his noble acceptance with respect in the world,
above the desert of the Authur, or merit of the work, which with some other
encouragements made me bold to tender this second Part, as a free will offering
(in love) to your Lordship: being ambitious that it should bear the name of so
truly a noble Patron (honor ed of all) who have been and still is such a
great pillar to uphold this tottering State, whose gallant, faithful, and
successful service, will render you famous to all posterity.

I confess the humble wing of my Muse lights upon a low-borne Subject, yet
modestly possessed with fury, in the midst of temptations, keeps her Virgin
beauty; although she has to doc with the works of darkness, (ripened with
the corruption of these times) yet your Lordship may justly judge it too light
for your serious meditations. However I doubt not but it may prevail in the
intermission of (...) employments, so as to invite a favorable looks from your
Honor, which will preserve it from the (...) of envy.

I am not so soobe-hardy, as to plead the worth of my Muse, whereby to match
her to the mits of the time; (nor will she think her self preferred by it,
unless they be wisely honest as well as (...)) but her true intention free
from flattery, trimmed in a plain dress, only somewhat of a strange new
fashion: yet so, as the fancies may be pleasing to some, the discoveries,
useful to others, and the moralls profitable to all, who will consider them.

All which I leave to your Lordships protection, and you, to him that will
never leave you, till he has given you the complement of all (...). So prays
he that desires to subscribe himself,

The humblest of your honors Servants, Humphrey Mill.

To the intelligent Reader.
Gentle Reader:
I Have provided a second course, which perhaps may please thy palate: those
Wilt find company of all sorts, if thou should disdain any of them, take thy
mess apart and choose thy comrades, thou may have varieties of baits in the
way; but if thou likest the Bills of Fare, keep thy stomach for the feasts,
something may be Worth thy taste and all thy observation it (...) in a right
sense; be jealous of thine eyes, and (...) not appetite, least thou surfes with
strange dishes: if thou should be taken by the Centineus Scou's, or Guard, or
discovered by the Soyes, give good language: read the Letters of Advise which
may direct thee to thy freedom. This is but a supply to What has been
formerly dressed in the Night-search, or rather a running banquet, where thou
may see how far the sweet of sin can extend it self: if thou art found
guilty, look for the Sentence, yet thou may be reprieved upon thy good
behaviourif thou art free, learn here to keep thy self so. I have dressed my
conceits With the fancies of night to make them pleasing, and with moral
similies to make them profitable, the lauguage of the times being suitable to
the subject; I dare not take the style of a Poet, for fear this squint-eyed
age should suspect my integrity, or common fame blast my endeavors, because of
the corruption of many: But finding my pockets empty, in respect the times have
let them blood, I begin to swell with conceit, and challenge the name, seeing
poverty is taken for their coat, and labor in vain for their crest, the
mantle dis-daine, being blazed by dull ignorance, and sale-fast envy.

I have somewhat else to follow, than this unthristy science, but as well for my
own recreation, as for thy good, I have bent my self to discover this mystery
of iniquity, which may be useful to all sorts of persons, young and old, good
and bad, it is somewhat against my nature to plead excuse, or crave pardon for
What I have writ: to show that I am a freeman, not a slave for any man's
humor, I intend no ill, if taken ill by any, let it rest with him; if I
purchase thy good word particularly, and a reformation generally, I shall
obtain my ends.

All those that would these lines digest,
Must read'em over twice at least:
Observe the points, how sense does meet,
The accents, cadence, and the feet.
The humble ebbs and swelling hopes,
Of Figures, Epithetes, and Tropes.
Good night.
To the degenerate Nobility, and new found Gentry.
YOu that are truly Noble, and the best
Deserving Gentry, who are always blessed
With honored virtues: that do ever stand
For peace and truth, the freedom of the Land;
I do not aim at you, nor shall my lays
Sound ought of you, except it be your praise.
But unto you, who are the ushers in
Of foul abuses, whose accursed sin
Draws fools to sale, each from example cry,
If Gentlemen may do so, why not I?
Your learning fits you for it, your poisoned wit
And beastly Logic, from the infernal pit
Prescribe you rules, to find a neater way
To Pluto's Court: your bloods, bound to convey
Your lusts on freely, and your means you make
To bear your charges to the boiling lake.
A yeoman fool goes slily, with one whore,
You rush on boldly, carrying half a score:
Your 'state will bear it, and your noble birth
Attones the ill, being higher stuff then earth.
Rich fare provokes you, and you drench your dust
With costly liquors, which do gender lust.
Your idleness invites you to receive
Temptations gratis, never to bereave
The flesh of pleasures. And your rich attire
Does tempt allurements, your express desire
Not Bungler-like: and your attendants go
Along with you, can low-borne fools do so?
You dive for new delights and make a trench,
To bury jurdice, like the baser French,
Who from their full-mouth pride and arms of steel,
(Being pockifi'd) to prove themselves gentile;
Despising chastity, you love such weeds
That harbor snakes, and praise him that exceeds
In choicer evils. You perhaps had rise
From Brokers, Jaylors, Tapsters, or the dice
Might help your grand fathers, you might be screwed
From userie, extortion, or be brewed
In (...) liqaor; or some misers wheat
Saved from his mow (till mouldie) made you great:
You vainly spend what they with curses got,
Raised quickly with your names, so soon you rot.
To tax the females here, or draw their shapes
That keep their dogs, their monkies, and their apes,
To make them sport, or those that swell with pride,
And are too good for all the world beside
To look upon, Religion is too base
For flaming furies, is not now the case.
You should have lived from such corruptions free,
And proved sweet patterns of humility;
Preferring goodness, loving purer theames
To stop the tide of baseness in the streams.
Do good with your estates, your wit, your art
Should make you careful, to prevent the smart
Which follies buy. I doubt what I rehearse,
Will make you slight my subject, or my verse.
Yet read the book, and pay for it, if you fret,
They will not give you trust to run in debt.
To all Judges, Justices, Churchwarden, Constables, etc.
YOu whom Astrea greets, were you all right,
I had not been so sharp, nor had this night
Been twisted into whip-cold: Was it made,
To help the Jaylours, or the Beadles trade?
I am your Usher, come, for here is a race
Able to bring the Hangman to disgrace.
You are to find out sinners, and to give
Them punishment; that honesty might live
In Courts of justice; that the world may see;
How some of widow Truths posterity
Do walk in gowns; should favor, friends, or lies,
Or fear, or bribes, blind any of your eyes?
But ah! they do too much! some of you nurse
These Fly-blowne vermin, styled Englands curse.
Convert not sins, nor plagues into a jest,
Nor yet with mischiefs make your selves a feast.
I do but move in Court, I dare not treat
With upstart Plush. which sin has made so great.
To Justices, and Judges, I present
(And all inferior Officers intent
Upon the public good) these humble strains,
As the untutour'd issue of my brains,
Rough with revenge; although conceived at night,
You may bring forth my black birds to the light,
And heare'em chirp. Let sin have no release,
Which nourishes our woes, and wounds our peace.
To the Fowls of Night.
TO you, whose lives are eaten up with lust,
Your spirits and your names consumed with rust,
Whose souls are bought and sold, whose bodies will
Vnsheath your wicked practices, to fill
The world with wonder; you, by whom Hell best
Is here, and in her place below expressed:
To you, who poison earth with your foul deeds,
And from your breast your torment ever feeds,
I do present my lines, if taken well,
They may hedge up your passages to Hell,
And break your league: If not, your damned cause
(Which is condemned by my Satyrick Laws)
Will gender vipers, who will gnaw the sweet,
And bite your bowels, 'till their teeth do meet:
Whence life it self, against your health shall strive;
You vassals, are not dead, nor yet alive.
You trim your vice, and will your humors have,
Although your corpse are dressing for the grave,
Maintain your sinful freedom, prove it is more
Disgrace in living chaste, than be a whore.
Death has his charge, your plots being all revealed,
Judged by a Statute not to be repealed)
Expect the execution; then your pet
Vill no way save you, till you pay the debt;
o which you were engaged for, with delight,
(...) can time bale you; though you are found by night,
You cannot 'scape away. Ah! well! I must
With such vile Rebels leave my Search in trust.
To his friend Mr. H. Mill, upon his Discoveries of Night.
KInd Friend, (...) made a golden frame,
For glory of thy lasting name;
Thou paint'st most fair the foulest globe,
Hell Hounds in a most comely robe;
Virtues luster, for all men's sight,
Wit and sense do touch aright:
A style that is so Indian rich,
As brave Palace exceeds a ditch,
Proves he haunted the pious ways,
Yet shows the ill of all those days,
To see the Verge, not to enter
Vices Circle, know the Center.
To him is given so large a grant,
Each of the Nine shall be his Aunt;
Whose Cherub-Muse has wing alone,
To fetch that Ore from Helicon:
Pride of the tongue, from Peru shore,
The words rich Ingots, subject poor.
That Poet does excel in parts,
When matter smells perfumed by Arts;
Not he who has a noble theme,
Weighs out his phrase with Cicros Beam:
Print, buy this book, all that live well;
Who this despise, are bound for Hell.
Edw, Peyton, Knight and Baronet.

To his ingenious friend Mr. Mill, upon his lostie Discoveries of Night.
THou have laid out, to each man's view,
The Rogue, the Cutpurse, and that Crew,
Who with their damned plots do strive
To kill, and torture men alive.
From henceforth no Eclipse shall be,
Since thou have made the Welkin free;
Thy Moon in srate shall ever shine:
For now the night is made divine.
Light, Luna borrowed of the Sun,
When infant time was but begun,
She Will now confess the brightest night,
From thee received that borrowed light.
Those that have wit, will gain from hence
Embroidered reason, high-borne sense:
Fools from thy Search would feign get free:
But wise men will stand bound to thee.
Tho. Perrin, Knight.

To his industrious and quick-sighted friend, Mr. Humphrey Mill, upon his
Night-search.
FRiend Mill, thy rare descriptions I admire,
More than the Indians, when they (...) found fire
By clashing canes; for you by this your skill
(Down dropping wonders from your fluent quill)
Incense the gods, in that you should aspire,
Prometheus-like, from heaven to fetch this fire:
The Indians fire, materials did combust,
But this thy fire does purge the soul from rust:
The vicious conscience it so thoroughly tries,
And by men's deeds discovers what there lies.
Should I compare thy light unto the Sun?
He never could find out what thou have done:
Or had he spied it, Pimp-like he would conceal
The fact, which honor drives thee to reveal,
Not spite. Thy hate to mankind is not such,
But that who good are, thou admit'st as much:
Such creatures then as do thy lines abhor,
Express themselves but what thou took'st them for:
Deluding Miscreants, living thus, did urge
Thy Genius to twist this triple scourge,
Like Pedlars wares that are sophisticate,
Hating the light, because the light brings hate:
The honest need not thou should them reprove,
For to others hate it is better far than love:
In this thy conscience thou do fully clear,
Spurning their folly which they bought so dear.
In stately measures, with thy lamp so bright,
Thou have displaid the villainies of night.
Will. Scot Gent.

To his worthy friend Mr. Mill, upon his excellent Poem of the Night-Birds.
PAle Envie's at a stand, let Momus bark
His lungs into a palsy; here is a mark,
Though Pride and Folly shoot, they cannot hit;
Or charged with choler, or discharged of wit.
These lines are rich and lofty, smooth and even,
To fit the noblest subject under Heaven:
But thou have chus'd the blackest, which might be
Set as a foil to thy brave Poetry.
So full of useful wit, the Birds of night,
Found, caught, unroosted, darkness brought to light:
Shames Enfignes took, vice conquered, which no man
Did more than challenge since the world began.
Where are those canceled wits, that racked their verse
To varnish guilt, and thatch a rotten hearse?
Praise Madams curlings? they thy scourge may feel,
And like the Serpent, nibble at the heel;
But cannot wound: like Basilisks, whose eyes
Dart feeble poison. Malice cannot rise
To vent her venom, as to blast a line
Drawn by thy pen, thy name, or ought of thine.
What needs this troop of worthies offer Bays
To crown thy fame, who art above their praise?
Which perish not with age, nor canc'ring rust,
Compo'd with fury, and the spiteful dust.
Till time gives up the ghost, this work shall be
Praised, pleasing, honored, to posterity.
Hen. Limbruke Mr. of Arts Came.

THE Second Part of the Nights Search, discovering the conditions of the
various Fowls of Night.
To fetch their dross, what wiles they use,
The Pedlers boy, the State abuse,
A puff, a murder, one runs mad,
A Seaman took, what loss he had.
SECT. I.
NOw glorious Titan has withdrawn his light,
Whose presence makes a day, his absence night:
He traced the sky, and like a Champion bold
Rode in his chariot all in cloth of gold:
Is now grown bleare-ey'd; or, for want of sleep,
He drives his Steeds into the Western deep,
To take a nap: bright Vespers train, whose hue
Enricht the skies, the ground enameled blue.
Then Luna shines, whose patent was by birth,
At several times to overlook the earth;
Yet change with age: as soon as they begun,
(For all they had their ticket from the Sun)
To pass and view the world, yet envious night
Cast out a fog, being swelled with raging spite,
Charged them for Spies; sh'ad had them all arraigned,
But could not bring'em down. When men complained
Of tyranny, she kept her silent den,
Where bodies live without the souls of men:
And virtue's out of use, unheard of sins
I shall unmaske: for now my Search begins.
Who to your view I shall present, your mind
Will apprehend, their sight is worse then blind.
Where all things are converted into crimes
To let us blood, and to undo the times.
First, here is a piece of earth, that seeks a place
T'unman himself, save only in his face;
A tenderhearted Bawd, that never made whore,
But ever used such as were broke before;
(Her conscience give her license) meets this beast,
Who had him home: and she at his request
Must send for one whom he esteemed most dear,
Her husband's jealous, and she sins in fear:
He found one in her bed, and with the shears
Cut off his nose, a warning for his ears.
The messenger must make some neat excuse,
To take a room, but it is not for his use:
Or borrow something, pull her by the coat,
Or wink, or nod, or give a private note,
Or whisper in her ear, or touch her foot,
Or else some secret sign; being willing to it,
She goes with speed, or else some Pedlers mad
Pimp Maximus, being master of his trade,
He Will sell her pins, or lace, or dainty lawne,
Fine noon, gloves, or any thing; and pawn
His soul to use her kindly, so he will find
His time to speak, and know each others mind.
She comes, he has his fee, and who'd mistrust
Such bugs should gender in a pedlers dust?
Then came a rumbling coach, which made the ground
Fall in an Ague: looking in I found
A fether'd blade, his jacket was of plush,
A curious less, who with a crimson blush
Be wrai'd her self; her eyes were full and gray,
With ruddy lips, round cheeks, her forehead lay
Archt like a snowie bank, which did uphold Perfect Beauty

Her native tresses, which did shine like gold.
Her azure veins, which with a well shaped nose,
Her whiter neck, broad shoulders to compose
A slender wast, a body straight and tall,
With swanlike breasts, long hands, with fingers small,
Her ivorie knees, her legs were neat and clean,
A swelling calfe, with ancles round and lean,
Her insteps thin, short heels, with even toes,
A sole so straight, proportioned feet, she goes
With modest grace: I judge her (viewing well)
Too good to go on foot, or ride to hell.
With civil habit, if you had her seen,
You Would say sh'were lovely, aged seventeen.
This knave is called Commander, who did use
To plunder men: those whom he did abuse
He Would call Malignants, he did serve the State
(Not as a thief) this varlet was of late Abuse of State

A Pedlers boy, and still a Cobblers son:
When Countries by this vermin were undone
They made him known, by which they gained relief,
He was no soldier, but a sharking thief.
A while about the City he does pass
For Major Dangerfield; this comely less
Was like to beinsnar'd; great means, rich friends,
But he had no thing save the cobblers ends.
He Will says Debenter will be shortly signed, The vapourer.

Had he'is arreares (he would not be confined
To private lodgings) paid him by the State,
He Would drink and whore it, at a higher rate.
And to his mistrisse he would be free and true,
Though he had nothing but an halter due.
This hackney coachman, pimpt in former times
For broken courtiers: he concealed their crimes,
And cared their trash, though sinning on the score,
Pay him but well, he would bring'em down a whore
At any time, whose bloody sins do crave The Courtier

For plagues on earth, or an untimely grave.
But searching on, I heard a glittering spark
Tearing the ground with oaths; as I did mark,
He met a civil man, and fell to strife;
This lawless ape would take away his wife;
But he the better man, soon laid his bones
Into the sink, his shoulders felt the stones:
Till dammie boys came by him; then he rose,
To break the windows, and he cut a nose
Which cost him eighteen pence; this daring rout
Will sleep by night, till Bailies find'em out.
I heard great moaning as I went along,
'Twas one whose sense a Basalisk had stung,
With looking on him; now she will not be seen
Till all be turned to dross, or else in spleen
She Will melt away his wit: because distaste
Had dis-ingag'd her sin, her fancies wast
And made salt humors rise, the man grows mad
With fiery lust, the reason that he had
Is under hatches, rage and sorrow pressed,
To share affections with that venom beast:
And standing still, I heard a gentle cry,
I turned, and saw a tender infant lie A murder.

Breathing its last; the new received life
Was let out by the barbarous mothers knife,
Who wrung its neck, and threw it in a sink,
The whiter skin made blacker then my ink,
By this vile scum of filth; but now she is tried,
And ground enough, above the ground she di'd.
Her Epitaph.
Death, had thou done this office at the first,
Or if thou had but don't a year ago,
She had not been so openly accursed,
Nor had my Muse (with fury) turned her foe.
The infant had not been, nor had my verse,
Been for a Tiburne grave, but for her hearse.
Two Pincks did spread their sails, and cast about,
They in a harbor found a Seaman out;
Who strived by skill, which first shall take the prize,
Till one of them did scratch the others eyes.
He Is my free prize, I Will do the best I can,
Thou art for fraught, but I am for the man;
The times are envious, men by sea, and land,
Are cast and cut away, on every hand.
I loose my custom, (...) a witty theft,
To make some sure, while there are any left;
I cannot live without'em, art not mine?
Then with a kiss and a bewitching twine
She stole his lungs, and preyed upon his heart,
The next his mezell liver feels the dart.
Like to the little fish which in the seas Moral

Do suck the (...), their watery humors please,
Amongst the cutled waves; they frisk and seek
For (...) delights; at last into some Creek
The saker streams convey them, where the tide
Forsakes them unawares, when they are spide,
Or from the shore, or from their muddie holes
They Are took, imbowell'd, cast upon the coals;
Or in the pan, like traitors half alive,
Dye by degrees: for it is in vain to strive,
With deaths (...). So, these Vassalls play
In waves of lusts, till wrath drives them away
Into a straight, where miseries are vast,
(Not like delights which perish in the taste)
And constant dwellers, there they must remain,
Till they are plucked away, like Traitors shine
And cast into the flames: but still their name
Shall stink on earth, as monuments of shame.
The Devil likes grand Seigniors golden vice,
Finding a man inclined to avarice,
Filled with disdain: whose cruelties beside
Make him a Tyrant to maintain his pride.
He does prefer him to'a lofty place,
As full of envy, as he is free from grace.
He peels the great ones, and undoes the poor
To fill his coffe rs when his golden store
Is at the height, the Turk does cast his eye,
To spy a fault, he is condemned to dye
By word of mouth; to squeeze his vast estate
Into his treasury, at such a rate
My fondlings live, who are inclind to lust,
The Devil sets them in a place of trust;
Who suck the poisoned sweet, until they burst,
They Will feel that then they nere believed at first.
To undergo their tortures could they hire,
Or like to Salamanders, live in fire,
Or loose their senses in the flaming fume,
Or might their lasting souls in fire consume,
I would decline my task, and spare my brains,
And let them take their pleasures for their gains.
But bodies, souls, and sins in flames must frye,
Last by consuming spirits never dye.
SECT. II.
The Centinells, the Drunkards note,
One cuts his hat and burns his coat:
Two Devils would de file abride,
And two to lust by coin are tide:
Exchange of Pimps, a harlot shent,
A fools conceit, the whores intent,
A counter-greeting of the store,
How to his friend, one lends his whore.
THe world now hung with black, my charge begun;
The Western Seas had swallowed down the sun:
But Heavens tapers then began to light,
Which did by turns attend the Queen of night;
The sky was all enameled (in my view)
With glittring Diamonds, all the panes were blue.
But straight the clouds those riches did disgrace;
For every heavenly torch did hide his face.
The sable storms arose, proud winds grew high,
Which blew my candle out: Alas, said I,
My task is heavy! here is a hard beginning!
Must I return, and leave the harlots sinning?
My Muse will never brook it; all the best
Are locked with th'leaden keys to quiet rest,
Their mantles darkness; all their brains do steep
In watrie humors, being rockt asleep
With rough-breath'd lullabies. I held my tongue,
But hoped the best: such tempests are not long.
Some thriving Bawd, that is newly turned a witch,
Or else her father Demon (think you which)
Has raised this blast from Hell, congealed with spite,
To stop my course, and spoil my search to night:
Or else some Calve-skin Pander, for a spell,
To keep the door, has sold himself to Hell:
And this the breath of triumph. But I must
Go now in have, to overlook my trust.
I from the Center went, to see how far
My charge extended; then a twinekling star
Broke prison through the clouds: the backer door
Was open set, and out came diverse more:
The lower gates were opened for the Queen,
Where in their offices the Sparks were seeve.
The lesser lights of Heaven stirred my fire:
Oh! heaven-borne patience! thee I must admire)
Which warmed my breast. Now, now my care begins,
I spy an Army clad with several sins:
But they disperse themselves, the Front for fear
Turns back in have, to fall behind the Rear:
The Files observe no distance, and the Ranks
Are out of order, firing in the Flanks,
Will end their service: for the Wings are fled,
Or changed to Scouts. See, who goes there in red?
A scarlet Drunkard? Strength has made him weak,
He reeling railes about, yet cannot speak.
His brains are like his guts, you need not fear
His wit; for he has none, but garbidge there:
Though he be three parts drowned; yet this I know.
H'as a fire that is unquencht, he is burnt below.
He has been feasted by a man of note,
Who burnt his hat for joy, and shot his coat,
To make him welcome. Tom of Bedlams grace!
They drank the hogshead out, to take his place.
Then by and by appeared before mine eyes,
Two earth-borne Devils of the largest size, 2 devils

Shaped just like men, and covered over with skin,
They broke a door quite down; and rushing in
Upon a Bridegroom, with his faithful Bride,
(Who lying like a Turtle by his side)
Would feign have ravished her; for they did think
'Thad been a Cell, through which there was a fink,
Which older Devils made, first to convay
Their ordure into hell a nearer way.
From hence they go unfurnisht of a whore,
Crying, Confound us, we mistook the door.
Then Next to them come ruffling on, whose hair
Hung down almoft a yard, being rich and fair
In his apparel; he was kept so high,
And pampered like a Bore within a stie:
His pockets full, which made him much rejoice,
His sputs were off, because they had a voice.
I followed on, to understand his bent, A Lecher freed

A chamber door being open, in he went;
Where was a powdered Ape, as full of lust,
As Spiders are of poison, graves of dust.
They intermixed their sins, to purchase shame,
He had his golden fee, then out he came.
I met another of a lower breed,
He Is like a common Bull; his wife agreed,
To let him out for half a Crown a week,
Who undertakes he shall not be to seek,
When any Queen is salt, and cannot have
A Cur, to give her what her lust will crave:
The Bawd that entertaines 'em, for her pains,
From the insatiate whore has double gains;
Or coupling in the corners of the street,
She saves a fee; so Dogs and Bitches meet.
I went on still, and spied two Blades together,
One was in Frize, the other clad in Leather:
The first was bred in Wales; the other, he A poor Scholar

Came newly from the University:
His words are not his own; yet, full of Art,
As in pra^senti is his own by heart.
They Are bare and pennilesse: and this was it
Had made them Poets, had they had but wit.
They Would take a whore up gratis. Frize was vexed;
Pimp thou for me, said Leather, I Will pimp next.
But coming by a Hall, I saw the wine
Pass to and fro in bowls, and for a sign
They had a whore to hang, one brought her in
(Which was a Gull) to tempt the rest to sin:
She fawned upon 'em, she muft clip and kiss;
One wiser than the rest perceiving this,
Reprives her to the Bar, where she must bide
To kiss the cup; and there her case is tried.
She speaks her name in Welsh; had they not grace,
She would bewitch them with her smiling face.
The Pimp that brought her in will make no stay,
Can he be merry while his Punck's away?
When this was past, I forward went, and found
A prating Mushroome, which would feign be crowned
For witty deep conceits; and now and then
He has applause amongst the worst of men.
He speaks by patterns, being very nice;
And idleness in men, he will prove no vice.
He makes his wife his slave, which God did make
To be his fellow-helper, he will take
Advantage to abuse her, fhe must do
His servile drudgerie, yet cannot woo
From him a loving word, nor gentle look;
I reckoned him with men, but I mistook;
They eat and lie apart, and still will he
Maintain she is only for necessity.
He leave this busy pratler (never gripe)
For like a medler he is rotten ripe.
Then I discri'd, a harlot caught a man
To view her in the light: now if he can
Let him avoid the snare, the Pimp brings up
His pots half full, that is common; let them sup. A harlot.

I cannot ftay to watch'em, but a Saint
Was on the sign without, in curious paint.
I parted, saying thus, heaven sees your sin,
A Saint without, but Devils are within:
I heard a noise a Trull was counter-laid,
Her fees for her enlargement must be paid,
By that old Citie-whore: and now they meet,
She asks her money in the open street;
The other moved with spleenbegan to roar
And in revenge she cried a whore, a whore.
Thus crying out, she ran away apace,
The old one's bolted in the young ones place.
But then my cares were with a voice oppressed,
The which to me was stranger then the rest:
And yet he did but whisper this, outright,
Pray lend my master but your wench to night;
(For his is out of town) and he will be A borrowed whore.

Engaged t'your worfhip for the courtesy:
He Will send is own Sedan. Then he replied,
He is my friend, he must not be denied.
I see my walk at length, I hope my brain
May find more ease, as I return again;
The Sun nere saw such things, the pale-fac't Moon
Shrinks back with shame, my night is come too soon.
Darkness it self is veiled with a mask,
To hide her blush, I Have undertook a task
Which none alive will second, that my Muse
Sings out such theames, which other do refuse;
The earth bears all, what springs from hell grows high,
The Air will not be infected, why should I?
My soul abhores those things, of which I write,
My Muse and I, are both confined to night.
My search is but begun, I cannot ftay,
My walking back shall be another way.
SECT. II.
A sharking thief, how knaves do spend
Their Masters goods, and of the end
That Strumpets have, the Letchers gold,
One loved young flesh and starved being old.
One welcomes three, the dance is round,
The Laundresse plea, a Charter found.
The Drunkards moanes, the Fiends do rise,
He falls dispairing so he dies.
BY this, the middle Region was refined
The fire-fac't Travellours did in their kind
Post through the azure globe: but from above
The distance great, I could not see'em move.
The Metamorphis'd Nymph, did sometimes hide
Her face with cipresse like a maiden Bride:
But suddenly the saucy clouds would rush
Most rudely by them, with a modest blush
She Would over-looke the world. Muse do not thou
Sing comic strains, thou'st tragic fancies now
To try thy Genius: yonder comes a thief, A thief

Who seeks at doors and windows for relief;
If he can snap a prey, that would redeem
His loss amongst his drabs, he would esteem
Himself a happy bruit: and it would be
A coverlet, and present remedy
For drunkenness, and lost; he is very bare,
The spending of his money bought his care.
He cannot speed as yet, oh, this a spite!
His wife and children have not supt to night;
They wait his coming home, had he but sped
With any thing that would but purchase bread,
'Twould serve for once: but home he must not go
Till he has touched, his shadow tells him so.
A little further-there a rout I spide,
Feasting and kissing; where they did divide
Their Masters goods by retaile, every jade
Must have her share, then she will freely trade;
They sparing not for cost, provide such cheer,
Their Masters would be glad of once a year:
They drink their Mistress health, and then they woo,
They Will pay, and so away, yet tarry too,
To drink another pottle we will allow,
We meet but seldom, let us be merry now.
With many times adieu, at last they part,
Each one with corner kisses leaves his heart.
Then meet I with a Trub, most shameless, vild,
Sh'was of the old translation, big with child,
And wants a father for it: now, if she can,
She does intend to shame a guiltless man.
Her friends had cast her off: she hopes to find
(Though they are harsh) their nearest neighbor kind:
He being honest, scorns to bribe this whore,
She Will after wait to leave it at his door.
When this was past, a fierce enammell'd Queen
Came raging with her Whiskin, who did mean
To trade in mischief; they a match did make,
To endure Hell for one another fake:
They newly came from prison, bailed from thence
By Mutton-mongers, who for recompense
Crave but her love: and now they may abuse
Their neighbors freely; neither can they choose,
Because it fits their tempers. Oh, abhor it!
They think in time to get a Patent for it.
A Justice with his Letter makes a way:
When that is done, it will increase their joy.
The next a sordid Letcher, very old,
Tempting a modest Beauty with his gold:
Though sin had sucked him dry, yet his desire
Did mock his lost into a foolish fire. A denial

In his conceit, if he his will could have,
'Twould make him young, and keep him from his grave.
But she being wisely honest, would not fawn
On him, nor's gold, to lay her soul to pawn.
Ere this was past, I heard a woman cry,
Being weak with age; Ah, woe is me! must I
Be feign to beg my bread? I married thee
Being young, for pity, that thy misery
Might be removed, thee succor'd, being poor,
My wealth I made thine own; and thou this store
Have vainly spent, thou slight'st me in my need,
Now I am punisht' cause I did thee feed.
Another yet? a door being open made,
Two men together lying by a jade,
'Twas monstrous to behold, they would away,
She past all shame, desired them to stay,
I thought they had been brothers, made a stand,
To see a third man seize upon their land:
And at his entrance if he will give a fee Three to one

He may beone, for she had room for three:
Help her but in a case, conceal the crime,
She Will pleasure him at any other time.
Just as I stepped away, I looked about,
I saw a place, from whence came dancing out
A troup of Gallants, other while they staid,
Sometimes the fiddler sung, sometimes he played.
The spark that led the dance, was all in black,
He cut his capers till the strings did crack.
And then he stunke apace, they feared no weather,
What need they fear seeing they were drunk together?
The dances being past, it was my fate
To see a Landresfs, who had been so late
To fetch her Masters linen, all was hushed,
She went in pale, but coming out she blushed.
But making her defense thus (quick enough)
I by misfortune, did forget a ruff, A Landresse

Which I must starch, before I close mine eyes,
And bring it home, before he will please to rise.
I do no ill, mistrust me not, I pray;
I come so late, 'cause he is from home all day,
But after this, I heard (without a cause)
A Pimping cheater rail against the Laws;
He had for's villainy been lately whipped,
Warmed in the hand, then shoulder marked and snipt:
O cruel times! hard bound! and thus he sits,
This is an Age, we cannot use our wits.
I pimp, I shark, and steal, (do I amiss?)
Yet cannot be allowed, to live by this;
A Senior thus replied, Do thou begin
To curse the Law, which shames thee for thy sin?
Hell gapes for such as thee: then out he flings
Bis pueri senes, is the note he sings.
My Muse with sad conceits begins to scan
The Sentinels, where first my Search began:
I heard such moanes as cut my heart like swords,
Consisting more in groans, and less in words:
A dying sinner loath to change his life,
For whom vast hell is with the earth at strife;
He drunk into a surfeit, he must have
The hottest wines, there is coldness in the grave;
Fill me the the other bowl, I like it well,
They say such liquor's very scarce in hell:
Alas it will not down! ah, now must I
Go down, down, down, where I shall still be dry.
Then crying toward the shadow of the Moon,
Away ye horrid Fiends! ye come too soon!
I am not rotten yet, though I am cursed,
Oh, do not take me, till I Have quenched my thirst!
Earth, will thou leave thy friend? and as he cried
My hope is gone, he of the surfeit died.
His Epitaph.
Forbear ye tender hearts, let not your eyes
Drop pearls in vain: h'was wet too much before:
He was a sink to what the grave denies,
Death yeoman of his celler, keeps the door.
He drank himself to dust, nor can his skin
Keep out the worms, which kept the liquor in.
I see my charge is heavy, what will fall,
In my precinct, when I shall sum up all?
I have a strange beginning! who will share Complaints

With me in pains? or undertake my care?
All kinds of walking spirits I must meet,
Though they are wrapped in skin: the open street
Gives all the succor I am like to find,
To cheer my weary muse, or case my mind.
Man that was made of all the creatures free,
The beasts are not such vassalls now as he.
He Is borne, he lives, and dies, yet never knows
His errand to the world: nor what he owes
To him that framed him in his mothers womb,
His soul is out at use, until his tomb
Closes upon his flesh: and then hard stones
With natures leave, are partners with his bones.
You have but yet a taste, to what I will
Discover to your view of night-born ill.
I cannot pass my serious part so brief,
'Twill ask some time to sifta a Bawd: the thief
Will with the rabble put their answers in,
And you shall hear, how they will plead for sin,
With the reply: which turns the poison dart,
Then all their actions moraliz'd in part;
Together with the helps I shall apply,
That they may learn to live before they die.
Without the practice, how those things I know,
To clear all doubts, I at the end will show.
So, now my Muse go search for stranger sins,
Thy charge is ended, when the day begins
SECT. IV.
A Lord, his train, the beastly slaves,
The midwifes faults, the catchfull knaves,
One bedridden lies, that lost his whore,
The house of sin, made fit for more,
A convert found, his sonder elfe
Does read his lines, and hang her self.
Of Justice Had-bin once, the nurse,
The spotted dame, Fogs empty purse.
The vapors that were summond by the sun
Into the sire, before the night begun,
Within the cloudie mantles, swell, till they
Break prison in the dark, and force away
To vent their watery humors, to disgrace
The swarm that buz about, whose blacker face
Exceeds black night her self; now forced with fears
To turn to drops, and then dissolve to tears:
(Not flattered into pearls) they fall down right,
Which do lament the whoredom of the night.
My babes got refuge, where they had relief,
I sought for ease, which did increase my grief:
For, in a troubled slumber, I did find
Strange fearful visions brought unto my mind,
All tragical, which did my senses take;
Me thought I saw, as though I had been awake,
A Lord (so called) his Train with worsted Lace
Daubed very thick; his Pimp found out a place
To buy another hell, he is guarded in, a Lord

(He having took possession of his sin)
His Honor is no Knave, his queen no whore.
He being a Lord, she is but his Paramour:
His Lordships bare of coin, but those may have
Protection gratis that bespeak his grave:
With cap and knee, my Lord, at every word;
His Pander's his Buffoone, which can afford
To break a jest, to make his Lordship merry;
He Is like to those whom trust did make so weary,
Till they deceived it. Shortly he will take pet,
Because he cannot run no more in debt,
For cloth, for lace, for beavours, and for silk,
For capons, herbs, for butchers meat and milk,
And other things: my Lord will sail away,
Must Pesants haunt him? let them seek their pay.
A Mid wife, and a Keeper, that did use
To keep all close, belonging to the stews, A midwife

Which had their fees, and would convey the fact
Into a sink, or else translate the Act.
Then came a Farmer with his Bearish Cubs,
Made such a smell and rattling with his tubs,
That night was much in fear; such noise they made,
Their language was much fowler than their trade:
With postures suting, this polluted trash,
By filthiness, do here escape the lash.
What, Bailiffs walk by night? your Guard is strong:
Do no man right, I pray, but all men wrong Bailiffs

With whom you deal: Come, make the Plaintiff pay
For waiting times; the night exceeds the day.
If the Defendant come within your power,
Pray, make him pay an Angel for an hour.
Or you will degenerate: how is truth abused!
Such roguing Catch-polls should be ever used.
A weakling taken with a harlots voice,
And fawning looks, neglects his former choice,
To cleave to her, who with her venomed breath,
Divides his heart alive: but at her death
This Sot falls sick, his senses do decay,
And now his filth breaks out another way:
For he lies bedridden, vexed, and he does rave,
All his delights are buried in the grave.
With that, me thought, I saw, and heard a Bawd,
The situation, and her house applaud,
Which stands entire; a fob made under ground,
To hide her Cattle, where a catch turns round,
To let them in and out: a sly back door,
Where any bash full knave, or modest whore,
May come and go unseen; besides, the leads,
Where they may hide, if they should search the beds.
Iron boks to every door, and the stairs made
So cunningly, that I can drive my trade
Unknown to all: with wanton pictures trimmed
My rooms are all, some painted, and some limbed.
Like to the paler vermin, whose renown
(...) to creep up, and nest upon the Crown,
The height of their ambition can no higher,
They with such bawdes must down into the fire.
A man whose passion had engaged his heart
To one whose lust had tied to act her part,
With him: being lawless she her time will spend,
With what is most precious, so to have her end.
But he began to have an inward eye,
And having drawn the streams of pleasures dry,
The gravel fills his mouth. Thus he complains
Unto himself, I must expect the pains A penitent

Which follow sinful sweets; which are at strife
To seal disgrace upon, then take my life.
Lust steals the name of love: I must abide
Reproach among my friends, on every fide
My sores break out, my childrens cries breed grief;
My 'state's consumed, I cannot give relief
To serve their wants. Diseases which I have,
Will (...) my (...) piece-meale to the grave.
What helps to make me weary of my life,
The constant barking of a froward wife, A froward wife

Who used to vex me, where she did me find,
And spread my same, yet could not change my mind.
But most of all, my soul a bleeding lies,
Fearing to be released; from him it flies
That must give help (if any comes at all)
Or to the burning deep I down must fall;
Where hypocrites must dwell, who are misled,
That seek for living fruits among the dead.
She muses, he so long from her did stay,
And sends these lines to hasten him away.
My love, I long to see thy face,
Oh! come to me! I will embrace
Thy sweet bosom; let not me her Letter.

For want of thy sweet company
Lie dipped in tears, is love grown cold?
Or have those six days made thee old?
Or has thy peevish brawling wife
Made thee refrain so sweet a life?
Be not dismayed! when fortune brings
Me gold, with other gallant things,
It Is all thine own, to come make have,
And then the winter will be past.
With all conditions, I can fit
To humor thee, and hear thy wit:
Thy absence makes my heart oppressed
Which lives in thine, and so I rest,
Thy friend or not for this world, H. E.
From my lodging in Lukeners-lane.

His Answer.
Though I was foolish, mad, and vain,
To sell away my heart,
To buy a never-dying stain
And cheapen lasting smart;
By thy temptations, I was drawn
To fall in love with sin,
To lay my soul, my life to pawn his Letter.

To fetch new torments in.
I now renounce my former deeds,
And what I loved before
I hate it; bitter grief exceeds;
Tears wash them off the score.
Vain is thy suit, repent and turn,
Thy former ways amend,
Least wrath in thee does ever burn,
Where cursed pleasures end:
Thine once, but now his own.
From Princes street.

Like to an Ox, when she these lines had read,
Which having felt the axe upon his head, Similies.

Staggers a while, and gains a little stay;
Then tugs the roap, but cannot 'scape away.
Or like the swine whose throat receives the knife,
He runs about to loose his wearied life:
She fumes with rage, and stares about for death,
The knife's mislaid, she cannot get out breath;
Without some warning: then a rope she got,
And tide it to a beam, made fast the knot
And stretched her neck: so thus she ends her life,
And changes mortal, for immortal strife.
Her Epitaph as she hangs.
This lump of clay, the heavens do disdain,
O're-matcht by hell, died over-charg'd with sin:
Hangs in the air whereas the Devils reign,
Earth brought her out, which scorns to take her in.
Her soul's confined, within those black precincts,
Which will not take her carkase, 'cause she stinks.
Sir Justice Had-been, prompting whores and thieves,
Turned to the slime of shame: whom he releeves
Must wear the badge of hell. A poor man's grief
Being forced to lodge a punck, and keep a thief,
At his command for naught: broke out so fast,
That shame did blush to hear't, till at the last
He told him, had he brought a -- in hand
He had been eased, for justice cannot stand
With bare complaints. This tribe was lately shent,
And routed too, pray thank the Parliament.
Shame steeld with impudence! one brings his nurse
That Is gagged for hell, to twist a double curse,
And challenge vengeance: 'cause his wife lies in,
They Will have a chamber writ to charge their sin.
A spotted fondling which begins to swagger,
'Cause she is indicted: here the codpiece-dagger,
Receives it name, Fog, with a fiery face,
As free from coin, as he is bare of grace;
(Yet stockt with knavetie) would adjourne this curse,
His words are bribes, because his empty purse
Stands out-lawed, for the fact he did last night,
Though he appears, that durst not come in sight.
Some are not ripe enough for death to pluck,
Nor is their measure full; some others suck Moral.

The poison with their sins, until they burst:
All turning not are at the last accursed.
Like Toads, or Traitors, being Malcontents,
"That from fair daylight hide their foul intents,"
But spets 'em in the night. Here they do mind
Their own undoing, in another kind.
The Panther draws men with his pleasing sent
Into, or near his den; when his intent
Is to devoure'em. So the Devil draws
The sinners in, where with his sharper claws
He tears their flesh. Poor creature, that exceeds
The second Devil in his cursed deeds!
Who freely loves the sins, but hates the shames
That follow close, nor will he own those names.
The Devil lives a Batchelour, but he
Is free from acting of adultery,
As from foul language; he was never drunk,
Nor did he ere lie bedridden for a Punk.
He Will nere begin, nor pledge thy Masters health,
He Would rather give, than steal a way men's wealth:
Whom he arrests, they do not take it well;
Yet ere he will hang himself, he will hang in hell:
His sins are spiritual; to act such ill,
He has nor flesh, nor bones; he wants no will.
Where wolves do prey upon the silly sheep,
The Shepherd is unweapon'd, or asleep.
When you neglect your souls, then lust destroys,
And ruins me on in a thousand ways:
Those that do whip out time, in the event
Will crosses find, where they expect content.
He that above does place his love aright,
Shall find true joy, in stead of base delight.
The greatest torment here lies in the breast
Of him that in his humors seeks for rest,
With restless motion. After death he must
Meet flaming hot, the second part of lust.
SECT. V.
Imps feasting those that hide their shame,
What they had, from Whence it came:
Their figures drawn. A Searchers doubt,
What ways to find these sinners out,
And spoil their nests. Hell is revealed;
Upon What terms the Devil sealed.
The Witch denied. The hateful Fry
Turned to a dreadfull' Natemie.
NIght bribes the greedy Clouds, whose Buckrom skin
Tan'd black with envy, draws thick darkness in;
Flatters the subtle vapors from the earth,
T'assist the goddess, traveling in birth,
With various changings of the last edition,
Which must be covered close: no repetition
Of her conception, she conceales her breed
For black designs; pray Officers take heed:
Moryheus resignes his keys, and she has pressed
The world to silence, who must keep a feast
For men of quality: the Jaylors first
Show kindness to their Brats, when no man durst.
The Bride well Beadle's next: if any slip, The guests.

They Will twist it soft, and oker (...) the Whip,
To make a sign for show, but save their skin:
They Are welcome here; then Marshals men come in;
For passing by the doors they are invited:
The common watchmen, when they are benighted,
Conduct them to their lodgings, and will hide
Faults, persons, places; if they be espide,
The Beadle winks at all: and they must be
Their middle guests to this society.
Two Supervisors, Justice -- his Clark
Came blundring, found it, though it was so dark:
To do them service he will be their page.
The others over-see them, and the cage
Diverted from a Bug-beare, they pass by,
With careless looks, and a disdainful eye.
At last the Hangman came, (being very late)
And proved himself an Officer of State;
Cause he can help'em to a falling band
That is in fashion, turn them of his hand
With gentleness, he is entertained in love,
He sits below, that used to ride above.
The place where they did feast, I Am loath to name;
Seeing I disclose, and they conceal their shame, The place.

(...) note, (...) was near Long-Acre, in a place,
In which Hells featfull She shall reap disgrace:
If with her Imps she haunt it in the day,
Where Sodom and (...) (as they say)
Receive a second being, where in fell
The tragic part, the second Scene of Hell.
Now all the guests are come, and for their fare,
Those that are frinds to darkness, do prepare
Their dishes several: for the love they found
From them at (...) times, their cheer shall now abound,
The Bill of Fare.
A Letter pard'ning sweet offense,
With half a thousand Peter Pence,
As tickets from Queens street,
A Court-like dish of diverse things,
Larks, Puets, Teile, (...) Germane brings
From a child of the Kitchen,
A Lady known to diverse Peers,
I dare not name her for mine cares,
Sent a Venison Pastie.
Black Jenkin brought from turne-taile Megs,
Two Pheasants roasted full of eggs,
With a charger of sweet meats.
A Mutton-pastie full of plums,
A roasted pig, with sauce, which comes
From the old Cherrie-garden.
A Leg of Mutton, and a Hen,
Well dressed, for half a dozen men;
From Parkers Lane.
Two necks of Mutton, neatly boiled,
The meat was good, the broth was spoiled,
From the Cole-yard.
A Loyne of Mutton of the best,
Two Rabbets which did grace (...),
From the new (...).
A Loyne of Veale, a curious Hare,
Two Pippin-pies, which was the fare,
From Pickadella and So-ho.
A hanch of Venson very fat,
(And when they saw't, they smiled at that)
From Mistress Peele.
A brace of Woodcocks, and a flight
Of Partridges, all caught since night,
From Mistress Gray and Mistress Hill,
Dame Agur showed she loves her trade,
Who sent two Custards ready made,
With a pottle of Sack.
Moll Cutpurse sent, with Ambergreece,
Two fools made sweet, worth Crowns apeece,
With a Monkey to make'em sport.
They had a Turkey roasted brown,
It Is thought it cost at least a Crown,
From Nine-penny Mod.
Dame Lopas sent the Brewers Clark,
(Who lost his way it was so datk)
With a Pigeon-pie.
From mother Gardner was convay'd
To them, two Pullets never laid,
With a gallon of Claret.
Pimp Major brought from every jade,
That was in stock, and kept her trade,
Six pence at least for wine.
Who knows what that lascivious Imp,
Which swore Saint George into a Pimp,
Might send in his Sedan.
To show what Gammer Welsh did send,
Or Goody Grigs, I should not end,
Till I had tired my Muse.
What Giles's, Martins in the fields,
What Black-mans street, or Kent street yields,
Would be tedious to relate.
For every one within the Line,
Which sent in money, meat, or wine,
Cannot be named.
The Beadle tuned his pipes, and raised his throat,
He has a mind to sing, his straggling note
Is now reduced; but had his neck been ftrung,
He Had played a fit or two, but never sung.
The Song.
What candid sweetness is expreft,
From hearts, by love, made free?
Pans Tribe had never such a feast,
Nor such rewards as we.
The bounty of the winged God
Is in his subjects fhowne,
Blind (...)! make for those a rod
Who traffiqne with their own?
Jove, crowze with pleasures and content
With freedom. and success,
Those pollisht treasures nature meant
Her offspring should posse'sse.
Does any Swain enjoy a field
Which may not sow the ground,
And reap the fruit which it does yield
With pleasures that abound?
The Spring bestows her Maidenhead
Where natures fine is paid,
Whose babes had been but hunger-fed
Had Ceres died a maid.
Jove crown, etc.
We'll honor still the freeborn race,
Whole minds to merits move:
Wink at, help, free all those with grace
And praise the Queen of Love.
To please young gallants is no crime,
Or put new life to age,
We'll clap a perriwig on time,
And he shall be their page.
Jove crown with pleasures, etc.
Love muzzells envy, puts a bit
Into the mouths of them,
Whose beards hang down for signs of wit
Yet prize not Cupids jem.
Let Supervisors search the air,
And Paper-scare-crowes fly,
To vent their spleen into despair,
Till malice bleake and dye.
Jove crown etc.
We Will travel dry-shod through the deep
And cool through fiery flames,
Our brains in Helicon we'll steep,
To blaze their honored names.
Let Pegasus their Sumptures bear,
Parnassus train attend
Their joys alive, and Trophies wear
To grace them to their end.
Jove crown, etc.
When they with wounds of love shall dye,
Fame shall their virtues crown,
And every star that is in the sky,
Shall wear a mourning gown:
The Sun a sable riding suit,
The Moon a Tabbie veil,
The world (with Cypress hung) be mute,
Grim death, go under bail.
Jove crown, etc.
The birds which visit shadie groves,
In silence droop the wing;
Save Philomel which sorrow moves
Their Elegies to sing.
The painful Silk-wormes Masterpiece
(Perfumed) shall make them shrouds:
For balm we will rob the pride of Greece,
Cut seare-cloth from the clouds.
Jove crown, etc.
With roses, pinks, and gilly-flowers,
Adorn their monefull Hearse;
Tears turned to pearls, with honey showers,
Composed with stately verse;
To measure out Apollo's height,
Which strong-breath'd lofty lines,
Shall sacrifice the Muses right,
To consecrate their shrines.
Jove crown with pleasure and content,
With freedom and success,
The pollisht treasures Nature meant.
Her offspring should possess.
They Are very joviall drinking healths about
To all their benefactors. E're the rout
Did fall in pieces, thus the clarke did wish,
On that my Master had but such a dish!
He loves it deerly, think it is not lost,
His courtesies will countervaile the cost.
But Squire Dicks perceivd, to whom the slip
Belonged by right, did hardly feel the whip.
And that his place was wronged, which by descent
Did fall to him, took pet, away he went;
To show their humors (to prevent the harms
They use their names as vizards do their charms)
Is needless here, but all this dunghill breed
Look like the excrements, on which they feed.
A maistive litter! which at carrion plucks,
And like the witches, which the Devil sucks; Dung hill breed.

They live on sins (as Parrators did use)
And strip truth naked, to maintain their stews.
I turned, and did a powerful man epsy,
And he began to search as well as I; Another Searcher.

With whom I had discourse: he asked me how
These things might be redrest? said I, allow
Wise men, but leave to search suspected places
With Warrants; by their habits, and their faces,
With carriage, course of life, will soon bewray
(First try a smooth, and then a rugger way)
Their guiltiness. One's poor, being over-awde,
Plundered of all, a Cozen to the bawd
Another proves her self: a soldiers wife, How to (...)

The third will be, and she is now in strife
To get his pay: the fourth i^ in debt;
^he lives in private, for the Hounds are set
^o smell her out. Another can produce
^etters, to show her portion's out at use,
And cannot get it in; her mother's feign
To send her means, which by her notes is plain:
But written by the Pimp still, once a week.
The last, of all, her answers are to seek,
And she will confess the vileness of this trash,
So you will save her from the Beadles lash:
Send out to seize 'em, as they walk the street,
They Will call familiar names, you smiling greet,
With C^ze, How do you Sir? What Is a clock? Good night:
Oh, Countryman! what news? and you invite
To drink a cup: put them within (for state)
One of the Bridewells, or the Counter gate.
The houses you may know, by little cans,
And Pimping pots, from any honest man's.
Where, they sell drink, or of their neighbors bought,
Of every penny they will make a groat.
Their times of meeting's after candlelight,
You Will find them in their filthy nests by night,
With their foul Train; try, finding bad their cause,
Do justice quickly; bribes will blind the Laws:
Shame partial Knaves: do (trusting faithful men)
More in a year than has been done in ten.
This pleased him well; he would use his power and skill,
To honor true men, chase away the ill.
And parting thus, a Rogue, that bought his wife,
Being kin to great men, they might save his life,
And make him Sessions proof, appeared before.
When he was past, there was behind a door Conference with the Devil.

The Devil booted, in his hand a switch,
Who with a Bawd, a Strumpet, and a Witch,
Held conference; the first, as it appears,
Demands a lease of one and thirty years,
To live at ease, with mirth (as she has seen)
But his Commission grants but seventeen
Upon a rotten soul. The second must
Have forty five to satiate her lust,
And dwell with pleasures; and the Fiend must be
Engaged to keep her from the Gallow-tree,
And whipping posts: 'cause her bewitching tongue
Must bring him custom, being fair and young;
He seals for thirty, giving her a jeere,
I never used to buy a soul so dear.
Then spoke the Witch, to have her lease renewed,
Most out of date; which when the Devil viewed,
He laughing said, I will renew thy roll,
If thou can pawn me but thy daughters soul;
For this is mine. Do take me for thy slave?
Lend time on that, which shortly I must have!
Fear made her quake. He (to resolve the doubt)
Will keep her warm when her Indenture's out.
As strangers, flattered with deceitful snow,
Fall in a deadly pit; they do not know, Moral.

That ruin waits upon them. Like the Ass,
Upon bare quarter to and fro does pass,
Laden with spices, gold, and precious stones,
Fowls tear his flesh, and dogs do gnaw his bones.
When they die, slain, diseased, weak, or old,
They cannot bribe these vermin with their gold.
So Hell Hounds, peece-meale, vexes every part,
Which suck their blood; the Vulture cats the heart.
Their feet make creepers, to support the brand,
Their legs in flames, like hand-irons do stand:
Their bellies filled with horrors, and for racks,
To hang their bowels on, they use their backs:
They dry their livers, and they broyle their lungs;
Slicing their Arms, their hands they use like tongs,
To stir the burning coals: in sulph'rie smoke,
Their heads must hang, with which the throat must choke:
The veins and sinnewes shrink, the ribs must lie
Like gridirons, on which their souls must fire:
Their spirits dye alive, they have their skin
Tanned brimstone proof, to keep their torments in.
They Had better been unborne, than thus misled,
To be in Hell anatomized when they' are dead.
SECT. VI.
A formle sse female you shall find,
As well in body as in mind;
Her face, her speech, her breath bewrayed,
Her hands, back, sides, legs, feet, displayed:
She Would feign turn Whore, if not a Bawd,
Her means have Suitors; none appland
Her parts, non person, in disgrace
They leave her, when they see her face.
ERe Flora's sa vour had the air perfumed,
Or barren winter was by time consumed,
The teeming earth did promise wealth and peace,
When she was stored with blessings of increase.
The day had morgag'd time to envious night,
Then was a Female brought unto my sight,
Drained from the dregs of time; which when I saw,
How she was framed to oppose great Natures Law,
I could not choose but wonder: then my Muse
Called Fancy in, took libertis to use
Her skill, to limb this virgin: you may see Descriptions.

How both her beauty, and her parts agree.
You might perceive the hair upon her head
Was took on trust, or purchased from the dead.
Her ears were large, and hanged about with (...),
She Would shak'em often, and prick them like an Ass:
Her brows were furrowed, very deep, and large,
And filled with soil, ('t was but an easy charge)
They like a Pent-house hung, to save her face
From all misfortunes; colored with such grace,
Say what you would, her color would not change,
'Twas Chesnut-like: In maids it is very strange.
Her nose did show, how Envy does appear:
Above 'twas pale: Consumption, grief, and fear,
Had made it shrink; the other part did swell,
And looked so red, as if it would rebel:
It did disdain the other in distress,
That part grew rich, the other poor and less:
The lower part turned up again with spleen;
To quiet all, there was a hill between,
Kept down the fire: but still the grain does fret,
The holes were made, some of the Rubies set.
Two streams run through't, how strange it was to me,
That fire and water should so well agree!
Her eyes perceived this strife about the nose,
Though they were sunk, the water then arose
To cool this broyle: fresh remedy it seeks,
With running post it gutter'd all her cheeks,
But all in vain: then both her eyes did bend
Their force to wait upon the lower end.
Though diverse ways they seemed to go astray,
They viewed the nose as constant as the day;
They altogether shamed great Neutunes pride,
When that is low, it is always here high tide:
Her pimpl'd cheeks made fruitful by the itch,
Decked over with pearls, but were not half so rich;
They still were solid in the midst of mirth,
For gardning time, her nails had rakt up earth.
Her breasts were like two bottles made of leather,
Yet thev were twins, for they stuck close together,
Some Carbunkles, with Saphires there were set,
The ground, some yellow, some as black as jet,
She had one fault, her mouth was too too narrow,
Reached but from ear to ear, mouthed like a sparrow;
Her lips were shrewdly beaten with the weather,
And so at ods they would not come together:
They swelled with pride, then emulation rose
Which first should catch the droppings of her nose;
The lower lip did always cheat the other,
And quite forgot the upper was her brother;
Her teeth being kind, did grieve so much, that they
Fell in consumption pining still away.
All mourned in black, each tooth did lose his life
Died by degrees, and left them thus at strife;
The language that did steal out from her throat
Did jarre, and sound just like a Ravens note;
The Screech-owle in the tone did bear a part,
But not a word proceeded from her heart.
To see this Damsel many there did throng,
Her breath did keep them of it smelt so strong,
Full six yards of (Muse prithee do not lie)
Her breath was smelt, judged of the standers by.
A silly cur was for this savor blamed,
He being guiltless, ran away ashamed.
Her neck was sable, and decitfull too,
Bearing the head with very much ado;
Nor could it once be brought to own her face,
But sink it do wne, and left it in disgrace.
Her shoulders still were constant at a pinch,
Her head abov'em could not creep an inch:
They held together and did domineer,
Keeping the head with force below in fear;
Her hands were wrinkled, with so gross a grain
You could not see the rising of a vein.
And being colored of the sadest white
Like mourning-gloves, and yet swelled up with spite:
Her fingers were too short to tell a sum,
Nor could you know her fingers from her thumb.
Then looking on her back, a bunch I spied
That was most constant on the weakest side:
'Twas broad and ridged, yet not much in length,
Made fit for burdens, but she wanted strength.
She Would lost a joint being frighted in this fray,
One side sunk half a yard the other way:
Her hips did shrink aside, yet they with passion
Broke out, 'cause fardingales were out of fashion.
To all the rest, her buttocks were unkind,
They followed after, but a yard behind;
Her massy legs, seemed to be made of wood,
Here Is one fault more, the wrong ends downwards stood.
She on her leg did scorn to nurse a calfe,
The lower end was fuller fed by half:
Her fleshly ancles would not be content,
But spread themselves (think but how spare she went)
Her corn-fed feet with haste were never moved,
Her heels would strike each others, yet they loved;
The sides were not so hollow as the rest,
The bottomes too did like plain dealing best:
She loves square play, she is even with her toes,
They Were borne together, but they live like foes.
They will not yield, although they are kept under,
They keep true distance still a yard asunder;
Her temper is the lowest in degrees,
Pray pardon one mistake, I Have mist her knees;
They did uphold each other in this fight,
Like faithful friends, yet they would often smite;
Her mind was wanton but her face and shape
Would cool the lusting of the filthiest ape.
She was a Foul of night, what nature did
Lay open to her shame, she would have hid;
A whore she would have been, none did appliud
Her parts, nor person, then she would turn abawd,
But that she proved to be the common scoff,
But as a foil, to set such cattle off,
She might be used, if she could get a place,
For she is as shameless, as the begger's base.
To shun temptation, there is no need to mask her,
Show but her face, there is none alive will ask her.
Her fame was spread, to see this less came store,
But then her looks did fright'em from the door:
The raiment on her back was very rich
Or for her lands and coin, I know not which
Suitors came in; the wealth they came to woe,
Bur none could hav't except they would have her too,
Then they left off their suits, still to this time
She leads a single life, being past her prime.
If I should show her wit, how she will vapor,
'Twould (...) my time, besides a sheet of paper:
Her outside now shall satisfy my rhyme,
I Will blaze her inside at another time.
Look where she is, and view her in the light,
Now I Will be filent, least I shame her quite.
SECT. VII.
A Carpenter the Devil turns,
And in a Brothell-house, he learnes
To pimp about. He falls in love
With two or three that lie above.
He'ad been gentile, to please one whore,
Had not the Surg'on found her sore.
A Cheat, complaints, a filthy damp
From Traitors vaults, the beastly Camp;
A Phoenix found; two sherking Spies;
The Bawds profession, ere she dies.
AFter the storm, the clouds which did embrace
The nights black bosom, flattered with disgrace,
Prove Turne-coats on her; or, like Moors in spite,
Being black themselves, do paint the Devil white:
Their shrowds were gleanes and comets. Now their pride
(Their watne robes dropped peece-meale) cannot hide
The passages of Hell: they rather make
A Court of Guard, that the infernal Lake
May have commerce more freely: at the last,
Hell sent a private Spy, who with a blast. a Spy.

Mounts to an upper room, and gained relief,
Where Cock the Cobblers Pink commands in chief.
His habit like a Carpenter, his hose His habit.

Of Beggars velvet, here and there a rose
Brancht out with fruits; his wast-coat very red,
A plaited band, a cap wrought on his head,
A rule by's side, his apron rugged leather,
His stockings blue, his heels went close together;
With flat sol'd shoes. I drawing near to see,
His cloke-bag hose were ti'd above the knee:
His hands were brawnie, with a swarfie face, his person.

Much like the Jew that used to haunt the place,
Which ends this bawdie Row. Black Nick's their guest,
Who minds them most, when they do mind him least.
He Is much in love with Cock, and haunts her bed,
He ccurts her twice, and if her maidenhead
Had been but vampt, sh'ad pleased this cautious Spy,
Who feared the heat. She did but draw his eye;
He hopes to match her, to increase the breed The Divel's in love.

Of Vulcans nephews, and the Serpents seed.
He loves the Mistress too, because she is right,
He Would be the Jews corrivall: but to night
The Clerk must becord her first; he will patience learn,
Finding she breeds up others for his turn,
And pays the use to hell: when she does call,
Who hopes at last to have the principal.
This fiend is active, downward he does creep,
And finds a vassal entered, fast asleep, Custom for sin.

Who had not paid the custom for his sin,
But thought to cheat the Devil; who came in
And like a coarse he winds him in the sheet,
And carr's him out, and lays him in the street;
By rule he measured him, as though his doom
Had been to make his coffin or his tomb,
But left him on his face, as if this slave
For's (...), were to scratch himself a grave.
When waking he amazed, and affright,
With nembling joints, fierce looks, with his hair upright
Ran to, and fro: he by experience found The devils grave.

His lodging was upon the Devils ground;
Where he will build anew, or pitch his tent,
And for this end this carpenter was sent.
He Is often in the cellar, through a chink
He Will peep, when Giunie comes to draw the drink,
Sculk in the drinking-rooms, when any whore
Looks on his face, he slinks behind the door
And vanishes: yet knocking near the rout,
Stamps on the flower, and throws the goods about:
Trips up the stairs, and finds a sherk a bed,
He walks about the room, then holds his head.
He proves a constant ghuest, both night, and day,
But like the Scotch-man, Deile a groat he will pay.
Well, Nick mounts higher yet, and whets his tools,
Throws down the table, up and down the stools:
And finds a Pinnace waking, by and by
He takes his axe ands lifts it up on high, The devils tools.

Aims at her neck, and holds it over the bed,
As though he did intend to chop her head
Off at a blow: if thus he had served this jade,
'Thad been enough to' ve spoiled the hang-mans trade.
A real warning! and the stroke had been,
But yet she is not black enough with sin.
She Is fearful, strange, she does not like his pitch,
If she were old enough to make a witch, She likes not his pitch.

He Would grow familiar with her, then he spv'd
A Surgeon coming on, who must be fried, The Surgeons fears.

For being scalded, or the old disease
Creeps through her bones, which can afford no ease:
Must have a private search, and who but he
Attend him up? the Carpenter must see.
Sometimes he would peep, and by and by he would pause,
First here, then there; and when he found the cause,
Slunk out of sight, the Surgeon saw him first,
Called for a Jugge of beer, to quench his thirst;
Took him to be the tapster: but in fear
He left his Patient, and forgot his beer.
The Carpenter was taken with this Jade,
And for her sake he had forsook his Trade,
Pack't up his tools, and sent away his box,
Save that he was afraid to catch the --
Or to be burn'nt, he could not leave his Nel:
Alas, he knows there is heat enough in bell.
I heard a sudden knocking, at a door,
None in the house, but choice of goods, and store;
The answer was, No person is within,
They heard one as they said, and do begin
To give salutes, to blind the Neighbors eyes,
They put one in, and cared away the prize.
Near to that place, was a malignant crew,
Plotting deceits: (let Casar have his due)
And spurn at those (like Drones within the hives)
That fetch them honey, to preserve their lives.
Then coming near their Camp, some swore, some drunk,
Each, two or three. betwixt them had their punck:
Some robbed, some stole, and brought it to their den,
They Have license for it, shall Princes loose their men
For want of pincks and plunder, Is it right?
Th'associated pillage made 'em fight.
As they preserve Truth, Liberty, and Laws,
So let them thrive: let Justice try the cause.
Here Is one comes moaning of her self, her case
Is very bad; she cannot keep her place
For Supervisers. Wenches took away
For Bridewell birds. But I shall see the day
When they shall suffer for this foul abuse.
I made amends. Now pleasures out of use,
If such prevail, we that have pleased the Age,
Shall have rewards; in Bridewell, or the Cage.
But here is another (which is rare to find)
Of better temper: formerly too kind,
Which breaks her heart, makes tears drop down along
Her paler cheeks: true sorrow moves her tongue,
Thus, to disclose her grief:
Oh! thou that govern'st all things, pity me!
That have loved sinners, and forsaken thee!
I Have purchased shame. Oh! thou that giv'st all grace,
Show me thy beauty, let me see thy face
In sweeter terms: and let thy Spirit fill
My soul with love of thee, to hate all ill.
Teach me to fear thee while I draw my breath:
And free me from the snares of sin and death.
Although in sin I Have spent my former days,
Yet, make me now an Instrument of praise.
Among the fondlings one is found, here blessed:
Who like a Pliemix will disgrace the rest.
I press't on still, (my night being sharp and long)
And spied two Shifters, but I held my tongue.
One was in threed-bare scarlet, wanting color;
The other was in black: as he grew duller
His robes turned gray with age: 'twas my intent
To mark their carriage: to a stews they went.
The bawd was Pocky-sicke; yet spoke this beast
Ah! I am going to eternal rest,
To see my Savior. I must mind my toombe.
Those whom you seek are in the drawing room.
Go, take your choice, when I am dead and rotten,
Honest Meg Spencer will not be forgoten. M(...) Sp(...) (...)

My Girls were free, you never knew that I
Di^grac't a m^n that left our company.
that comfort's this to me! go, I am ill
You stand in thorns until you have your will. (...)

Here Is mischeife in the abstract: In their path
Sin walks with hell in state: death armed with wrath
Dogs them behind. The devil keeps his Court
A while on earth, to make his fondlings sport.
Had hell a quezie stomach, they might be
Saved from her Jaws: or at the least if she
Did swallow them: when once she left the pain
(To ease her spleen) she would spue them up again,
But nothing frets her lungs: she needs must thrive:
The ten horned beast she swallowed down alive,
With monstrous locusts. she will her Patent use,
To take in all which Heavens does refuse
Bawd-like, the Spider, in his Pantry spies,
To sieze the heedelesse carkases of flies;
And vent his poisoned humors. For his hire
He with his brood are swept into the fire,
Or pressed to death. As wandering Comets fall
To earth from whence they rose, (this rabble shall
Speed like the Spider) and their sparkling flame
Shall fall as low as hell: but still their shame
Must live on earth: Except my papers rot,
Or time consume their memory. If not,
Some sharper quill may chase them to their Inn,
When they have only privilege to sin;
And pleasures are degraded, by their pains,
Old time consumed; Eternity remains.
SECT. VI
A hateful swarm, the shot one pai'd:
The plastered Crew, seizd goods, what stayed.
They bib a fresh; the Cripples will:
A bore, the Ruiners lines prove ill.
THe day being driven near the furthest point,
Sense dead asleep: Discretion out of joint;
Black darkness ruled with triumph: sent out spies,
To take close prisoners, all with open eyes;
Least they should view the works (by candle light)
Until they were exchanged for bratts of night.
The Stars did fear infection: and the Moon
Turned back with fear to see one night so soon
Should gender such corruption; wherein breeds
Such strange shaped Vermin, and such hateful deeds,
By them adored. Those that love slothful rest,
Call her sweet shadow, Chamber for the blessed.
Now, to my work. I scouted out, and found
A six fold knotte, One in a drunken swound
Lay stretching by the rest. One's like to choke;
The third (whose heathen weed -- turned into smoke,
Will cure all distempers, in the brain,)
Is but a learner yet, The fourth had a vain
With newfound baits, to cheat the silly fish, The capt.

Had he but catcht'em, he would present a dish
To these, his friends. The fifth a gross offender,
And judged to be but of the doubtful gender.
The last was of the neuter: but to night
Their gender's common in the Cobblers sight.
The lustful Ape would blush to hear it named,
And brazen impudence would be ashamed.
They Would swear and drink out time: they with their whores
Did only chase his fore top out of doors,
And saw him bald behind: one sculks away;
But now the reckoning comes, which one must pay.
The Captain has no coin: but he intends
To leave his tools: which with the Cobblers ends,
Will stop a hole. The man that suks the weed
Is flush, as yet; -- and he must do the deed.
The Bill.
No. 1. For two and forty Pots of Ale, o 11 s. 6 d. And Jug that told the merry
tale: No. 2. For Wine, and Sugar, and for Nell, 1l. 2 s. 3 d. But you must pay
for what befell No. 3. For Cakes, Strong-water, Smoke, and Wood, o 17 s. o Pay
all, and there is my Flagon good: No. 4. But I forgot, you had at first, o r. s.
7 d. Of Red - Cowes milk to quench your thirst. His purse did swell, till he
had paid, 2l. 12 s. 4 d. But then the rising bunch was laid.

One foaming like a Boar, that is not excused,
Who hatmis the sinkes of sin, and he is used
For hotter work. For he goes up and down
To serve the queanes, their friends being out of town
But then, there was presented to my sight
A Master-Peere: the worst I saw to night:
A formelesse heap of rubbish in a Cell,
Almost as dark, and not so hot as Hell
Yet living buggs. Some had but half a face
Some half a nose, some none, some in the place
(...) lost their legs, another wants his arm,
Another both: some hands, some had their harm
About their loins: some wanting (...), some (...)
(...) Gregory scorcht; their sight I did despise,
^
^
^
^
^
^
They point their (...), (...), when to (...)
Which rob in private, which in open street;
Who to be baud in chief: who (...),
Who Warden of the (...): and every Impe
(...) their orders from (...), and they do
(...) laws, and punish gross offenders too;
They make them pay (...) for several sins;
(...) Cabbs in grain: -- yet, one of them begins
(...) malignant humors; and (...),
(...) they consume their stock; and he prepares
A bill against them, but, before it was framed
His goods were seized in th'inventery named.
Primo A dish, two spoones, two earthen pans, (...)
A tub, two stools, one was his man's. Secundo A dublet, and a pair of hose:
The coat's at pawn belong to those (...)
Tertio A pot, a cubbard, and a knife, A gooding bag, a coyfe for s wife.
Quarto A box of salve, and two brass rings; (...)
With Parkers works, and such like things. Quinto A bedstead and a bed of
straw A sheet a rugge: all which I saw. Sexto With other lumber, being gest,
Will come to nine pence at the least

Besides, he has conveyed away,
A bowl, a skillet, and a tray,
A trowell, and a pair of tongs:
And down this Court apparent wrongs.
He stands sequesterd: now he`s made their (...);
Being a delinquent, who can take it off?
I must go view my Senators, who have
New plaisterd all their sores: they only crave
An other tub of Ale, to laugh and prate:
And he shall pay for`t out of his estate.
The chief of these did surfeit, and was ill:
So sick, at last, that he did make his will.
In manner and form following. Inprinsis I do bequeath my pallet bed The
Beggars Will.
My hat, my cap upon my head. To Will in (...) Item My pewter dish, my earthen
ware, And sheets, I think I have a pair. To Doll in Old Bridewell. Item My
table, and my two joined stools, My trusses, and my plascering tools. To Ned
in the Clink. Item I freely give my pleared Ruff, The third part of my
Housholdstuffe. To (...) in the Gate-Honse. Item The other two parts I bestow
(If he will pay what ere I owe.) To George in the White Lion. (...) I give my
shirt, an ell of lawne, Which lie for eighteen pence at pawn. To Nan in the
Marshall Sea for clouts. Item My wearing clothes within my Chest, The Cloak
has been but nine times dressed. To (...) in the Counter. Item My second cruch,
scrapt lint, fine clouts. An ounce of pills, or thereabouts To Giles in the
Hospital. Item My better crutch, my plasterd roll, Boxe-legge, receipts, and
bowzing bowl. To this Worthy Assemby.

As for my foul, I cannot tell
Whe`re it is for heaven or for hell:
I leave it to the venture.
A private dunghill for my grave,
My corpse cast in, by night, I Would have:
Least (...) Idolize my name,
Or envious Roundheads blase my shame.
I leave it to your wise consideration.
Being joint Executors, this my will
Within two months, you must fulfill.
Or my Ghost will (...) you.
But this disaster parted all the rout,
It Will cost you pains again to find ^
A Poetaster comes, ^
And yet I ^
The'are rough, ^
They ^
They ^
^
He ^
How ^
Art, ^
They are not ^
With ekes, from ^ weight.
As is the horseleech, ^, the Poetaster.
Whose sides bagg out when newly fetched from grass
His praises make them rich. He hewes their feet
Like his that rim'd for farthings in the street.
Yet they have took a Pinnas, who is at strife,
To cut the throat, or poison his poor wife.
But fears the Wardens check: (her love of late)
That walks to's Manor once a Month in start.
He Is (...) a begging paper to a Knight, Begging

Or else he had bin study'ng all this night
They made his worship laugh: yet gave no chink:
But stuffed his belly, and his brains with drink. (...)

His rimes made privy seals: he swears (being vexed,)
He Will write no more to Knights: a Lord's the next.
He railed, and reeled about, until he found
His heels betrayed his fancies to the ground:
But no learshon: poor Poets old excuse!
His stock was wit, before 'twas put to use.
As is the Ty-dog mad, when he breaks loose, the Morrall.

Here spoils a sheep, and there he pulls a goose,
Yonder a calfe. With rage and venom pressed,
He Will bite a man, as well as tear a beast.
At last he is caught; he dies: they seize his skin;
He suffers for his fact (yet free from sin)
Being hard to take, so violent and cursed,
Before he dies, he is knocked and (...) first.
Such fit similitude may blaze your ill;
To open view: although he made no will.
You all had chains, by nature, on your necks;
Nor did all spring from dunghills: but had checks
With sweeter education: Natures tie
Is broke by force: from what you learned your fly:
Make spoil of what you find. (...) a while
You pull and tear: and growing still more vile
By finne you are caught: burnt, mangled and disgraced,
Disarmd, unnos'd, dismouth'd, and some unfac't.
The Law does sear, whippe, crop you: at the last
Death takes you as he finds you: having cast
Your naisty, plaisterd (...) into the dirt,
Your souls grow mad, where they can do no hurt.
I pity you. Ah! must your helpless souls
Dwell still in tears and groans! where hels black roules
Ingroc't with all your sins, lie in your sight!
To gnaw your wounds, but never see the light!
Yet all such torments, with the soul, in sums,
Dwell but in as earnest till the body comes,
SECT. IX.
A (...) is (...),
His shirt exchanged, a smock displaid
With Arms upon it. Another time
A basket-wench renues his crime.
The grated Vermin. Rebels land
Shall buy no finne at second hand
The drunken dust, how shame breaks in.
A wooden ligge prevents a sin:
The guilty Priests, a Drab denies
Her husbands names: the Judge then spies
A glorious sight. The young man's grief
The olds man's shame must have (...).
THe Air as now enlightened with a gleame,
Night winkes at all: or being in a dream:
A gentle (...) glides in: she is over-prest;
Or having took a surfeit at the feast,
Quick eyes took license to behold the crimes,
That are in (...), with the charge of times.
Dark losers (...), bearded Comets seen,
Backebite Dame Venus, flatter with the Queen,
Yet breaking (...) with finners, they devide
Their shame by equal portions. Then I spi'de
A Squire of (...) Court, to recruite his sin,
A facke of female kitchin-stuffe took in
To greaze his way to hell: and his intents
With (...), oaths, and compleents.
Were varnishd thus -- Dam-me I Have a mind
To court thy louzie carkase: be but kind,
Let me embrace thy corpse: it is my will
To search thy closet: do not take it ill:
Be not so coy -- confound me thou art strange?
Sir, did not your Grandfather build the exchange.
You are a worthy Gentleman: but I
Am far unfit fot your sweet company;
Being old, and dirty, and my dressing tore
My smock is nasty, ragged, course and poor.
Hanged thou shall have my shirt, thy smock I Will make
Gentile in love: I Will wear it for thy sake.
They are gone to bed: but how the bold faced night
Did turn, their baud, I,m silent; when the light
Had out-fac'd darkness, she had quit the bed:
The Squire gropt, but kissing Shiffe was fled.
He rose in rage, inquired, searched about,
His shirt did wipe her heels when she went out.
He in her Frocke as black as hell did look;
Armed with a patch of green, the left arm took
The azuae trophie, time did now uncase,
The devils fondlings. In another place,
The bloody colors, from an ancient house,
Where the pale (...) of the passent louse,
Lie couchent bend, in Sable-field: but he
Is rampant, gules a trope of victory.
A badge: the Mullet seated on the breast
A Woodcock moulting: squire had lends creast
But the supporters were (this vesture bore)
An Ape in chains, a Letcher burned before.
Some laughing said, this garment was astray:
The hangman was too proud, to bring't away.
When crosse-lane Peggy died: and some did think
It was the devils dish-clout, dipped, in ink.
Inricht, with Bluekins tippet (being seen)
Or Lady Katherines flesh-bag trimmed with green.
When this choice robe, was by the Landresse found,
The Relics was reserved, the Creepers drowned.
Let grief in, Commans wait upon this Spark:
His only shirt is lost, which cost a Mark.
Who'd be the devils Vassal, if he must
Be always cheated by a sinners trust?
This Blade recruites again: his Courtly mind
Was to salute, disgrace: where he did find
A watered clod of dust: whose dropping nose,
With waper eyes, and matter, did disclose
Deformity, if self: her broadsold feet
Bore natures grief, which at the heels did meet:
Lust was in travel, when the watchman found
These lovely Babes where sin with shame is crrownd.
His wife, who heard the fame, spoke thus: you will have
Your name, and state go mourning to the grave,
Attended with disdain. Reproach will live
To stain your family, when death shall give
A challenge to your dust: who will display
His fable flagges and storm your house of clay.
He answered her, let me have pleasure sealed
For term of life: such acts may be repealed
Ere saucie death be armed; I Will leave my luft
When drops of pleasure cannot drench my dust.
Quit scores with me. But she with tears replyde
How vain is that revenge, where sins abide.
With misery! but Justice gives releife
To plunderd hopes: and will casheere my grief,
When wounded joys shall muster; [dead] they must
Have all free quarter in the easy dust.
Had I had portion, comeliness or wit,
I had not been so fond, as to have quit
My freedom thus: or sold content to borrow
A dying Prop, where strife breeds living sorrow.
This stately Courtier scorns to harbor shame
But impudence is guardian to his name,
From the assaults of modesty. And he
Will have the rules of hell for's libertle.
Could they but bring his Pinnace under sail,
Placed next the herbe-wench with her dagl'd tail
He in his scutchin'd robe; and one by vote,
To read this history, and blaze the cote,
Set near the exchange, about the golden (...).
If they afford this Show for pence a piece,
The Turkie-Rom, the double footed Heart,
The dancing Horse, and Hocus with his Art,
Being jointly, or a part put out to use,
Flags to entice the eyes, can near produce
Such choice of penny-customers, who'd see
This cominicke story with the tragedy.
A Nest of water-rats with dropsy swell;
Grin through the grates: being like to challenge hell
One tamer then the rest, as he did stand
A spy for death, cause he would come to hand
He was allowed such privilege to have;
As suites the confines of a living grave.
This Vermin spies a Fury, one, whose hair
Had quit the skull: her face with age and care
Was tan'd and furrowed deep: her purled skin,
Was pleated, for the grave rat brings her in.
To stock his crimes, must arm this fondling up,
Salutes the Lady having drank a cup.
He Would grow familiar, she begins to fight,
And scratch his face, and had a mind to bite,
But that her guns lay follow: in their play
Her (...) were dag'd, her legs were wreathed with hay.
Hell has her ends. All those Percullos Imps
Under her privy seal, became their Pimps.
Despised (...) of vice! whose putri'd slime
Makes living vengeance ripe before its time.
One who pretends she is plunderd, with a breife
Will beg in print, to keep a Pimping theife;
Came creeping by. A bloody rebel then
Who had acquaintance with Committee Men,
If they will befreind him so, to save his land,
He (...) scorn destiuction at the second hand:
But give a rate, for any, newfound sin,
Though but at (...); as when he did begin
To murder under seal. New here is a Punk,
Seized by a lump of clay: being stag'ring drunk
Will slake his hell-bred heat: this rake-shame must
Spawne plagues in (...), and gender guilt with dust:
But found her lin ping. When he brought her in,
She could but give bare quarter to his sin
Her wooden leg, or turne-pipe, being stout,
Which like a Barracado kept him out:
And when it was unbrac't, with what belong
To this Rare-peece: ye buckle and ye throng,
Fell out upon it: which skirmish did betray
Their twisted shame, before they went away.
This damsel could not walk, until by Art
The Stump was reconci'd: nor could he part
From his beloved Criple. Greedy hell
Cast lots with death, when her Choy'e member sell,
As Pars pro toto. All this Pot-cat kind,
When ere they pass, they leave a stink behind
As did ye Vxebridge Priest, who needs must woo
The guard of death, when he did lie with two.
One that joins issue with an heir of shame,
Forsweares her husband, and denies his name,
Keeps him in prison, Angels teach the Judge,
He Will take no bale. And now she will not grudge
His Clarke a feeling: reason out of sight,
He weighes down sorrow, cause the woman's light.
An aged father breeds his childrens grief,
Truths persecuter, and a bloody theife:
Props shame with crooked shoulders, and invites
A Lease of Strumpets to his base delights.
Who tyrant-like promotes a damned cause,
To banish right, and poison wholesome laws.
Strong parts speak plainly, when they grace the devil,
It Is grace, not knowledge, keeps a man from evil.
Flesh genders lust, which flaming torments breeds,
Without manuring, as the earth does weeds. Morrall.

Which shelters vengeance; and contracts the crime
Of years of pleasure in a minuites time,
With lasting shame. That fool, who for a bowl
Would sell his coat, denied to pawn his soul.
These venture all, they have not enough of life.
To taste all sweets, before the fatal knife
Strikes all their joys, like beasts (for what the've eat)
Their parts divided, pay for all their meat.
When reason is engaged to beastly sense,
A man turns (...) again: and will commence
Lost by degrees: saluting death he spies
(...) break prison, where his pleasure dies
For hells burned offering. In which horrid frights,
His Soul has took her leave of all delights.
His dust committed; till the impartial toombe
Upon the summons leaves him to his doom;
Wner's justice is complete, and hell-hounds-have
Eternity to guard their burning grave.
SECT. 10.
A Cell of Sharks, the Tutor made,
A falcity, dogs learn his Trade,
He bayts his snares with Rings and Glass,
To catch the weak, his words shall pass,
To Cheat the Doblt, his strange decipes
An other finding newer baits,
He spies his times, hides ill with Lies,
And rides the Circuit of the Size.
ABout the second Watch I saught the places
Where Sharkes did meet, the Stars had hid their faces
The vapors were congealed into a cloud
With which the shades of night had made a shroud
To wrap poor mortals in: I being in fear,
Did hear a whispering, but I knew not where.
But gaining courage guided by the sound,
I, spied a Cell, where cheats were under ground.
They did divide the spoil, the lots were thrown,
All had their shares, but no man had his own.
They bragged, and told each other how they sped,
How some did take the prize, while others fled.
The Tutor first begins: I have to night The tutor.

Met with a booty; as I took my flight.
I was discovered I began to try.
Stop, stop the Theife; to catch him who but I?
I gave my prey unto another man;
I was discharged: But find him if you can.
I have a Dog, that can convey a purse The dogs rode.

Unto my fellows, what am I the worse?
If he be took, I Am gone, that did the deed.
If he be hanged I Have others of the breed, A tumule.

I raise a tumult as I walk abroad,
To help my Friends. I Am partner with a Bawd.
There Is not a term, but I do understand
Where Gamesters lie; with some new slite of hand
I get their gold, new plotts I do devise, Sherkes plots.

To gull the world I baite'em fresh with lies.
To cast a Coular'd chain, a ring of brass,
An empty purse, or Braceletts made with glass,
To catch a Countryman; or draw him in
To pick his purse, persuade him we are kin:
To name his Neighbors, or to give a slip
Before to make him fall, while others (...)
His purse away, to cut a Cloak-bagg down,
These tricks are stale; and common in the town.
I borrow money, other men are bound,
I give my name in wrong: nor am I found Wrong (...).

When it is to be repai'd: and those again
Take names of worth, but they are not the men.
I do procure it, they will set me free.
It Is but to give the Scribe a treble fee.
Or any Heir, not come to his estate,
Yet would be brave; paying but twice the rate
I Will bring him one shall fit him, if he will
Morgage his Land: he pays me for my skill:
But if the Land be forfeit, then my pains
Will be rewarded with the greater gains.
He that has no invention, is not fit
To use this Trade, 'twas Industry and wit
That made me perfect; things both old and new
May help our traffic, and uphold our crew.
But new conceits I love, pray how was he
That had the Carte, and then the Pillorie New conceits.

Praised and beloved? his witty projects made
Him both gentle, and master of his Trade.
Feign I would give you rules, and tell you how
To cast your plotts, but i will say nothing now.
Just, as he stopped, another broke his mind:
I Walk the City round, and where I find.
A door left open, if it be but late,
I slinke in quick, and take a piece of plate,
Or any thing of worth: if any spy me
I'se hide the prize, and swear they do belie me.
Or else to cover and prevent all fear,
I ask for such a one, or call for beer?
I took it for an Alehouse, if the maid
Will be familliar, I am not afraid
To try again, perhaps i will be her Suitor,
To bring my ends about sh'ell be my Tutor.
If all be closse, or if there be a hatch
Where I have laid my gin, then I must watch
Walk to and fro, until I find the slight
To turn the wards; it is a hateful spite
That they were e're devised, tha're altered still;
I am to seek; I strive to learn the skill
Where they be sold, when I have found the way
Let me alone, i will quickly take my prey.
I change my walks: for where I show my face
This night; the next i am in another a place;
Unless it be full term: then I do stand
To take my turn in Fleet-streete, or the strand.
I were a Livery, and what I can
That men may think I am a Serving-man;
I counterfeit a Letter, or a Bond, Counterfeits.

A Justice-warrant; any thing will stand
When I am wittnes to it, if I am found
It Is but a whip, or snip: twice turning round
Will wear it out; and for a single fee
I Will swear a lie, as others will for me.
At any meeting, revelling, or feast
I make up one, when I am neatly dreast
Who will distrust me? then I take my time
To snap a bone, as perfect in the crime.
I go to Church; if there I do but spy
A man that on the Preacher has his eye,
I Will seem as strict as he; and with a grace
I Will shake my head and look upon his face,
Till I have got his purse, or cut his cloak,
Then look on still: I care not what is spoke.
Nay, more, I ride the circuit, cheat and steal
Before the Judge: I see him every meal,
And taste his fare: and yet I scapt' till now:
I keep a Whore or two, can tell you how
I spend my means. Come, rise, let us dispatch
To quitt this place: for yonder comes the Watch.
I would have told you more; but now I must
Commit my skill and secrets to your trust.
As does the snake in Summer first begin Moral

To shift his hole, and then to change his skin;
So, do those Vermin, when the light appears
Change place and skin: their necks, backs, nose, or ears
Will bear the brunt on it. they will be made a prey,
Sweep down the Cobwebs, th'Spiders creep away.
Those noisome flies that on the dunghills feed,
And buz about, though now they are agreed
To read to one an other, yet they will find
The meat they feed upon, will make'm blind.
They lay the Scene above ground: but they make
The Vult et exit in the infernal Lake.
They crawle together, growing still more vilde,
If one repenting dies, their plots are spoiled.
Humanity with them is out of date,
All Right and Justice, till it be to late.
They praise themselves for sin: what art from Hell
They can but learn (till there they come to dwell)
Shall be preferred, but ah! how soon they slide
Down to their mourning shade! who can abide
To reckon up their woes? such cheating slaves
Are brought full soon to their unwelcome Graves.
Who can rehearse the misery that they
Do meet withal toward Hell? when all the way
Is full of snares and fears, which will undo
Their Mirth at best: it is joined with torments too.
A serious look, the shaking of a hand,
A Dog that barks, or any thing will stand
To let in shame upon them, all they get,
Or makes them lasting Gins, or weaves a Net
To keep them for the trial: when they must
Be sent from whence they came; from thence to Dust.
And as at first, when cheating they begun,
They loved the darkest shade, and loathed the Sun;
Now darkn esse is their portion: where Death have
Took all their cheats to purchase them a Grave.
Poor Sotts! that were bewitch't! you did but find
A smacke of Hell: what followed on behind
You could not see till now. Oh let my Quill
Display, not teach, nor countenance such ill!
Oh, that my Muse could show what horrid state
Hell meets with sin and death! Then sinners fate
In mournful measures would be ever sung
By all that love the Muses; every tongue
Would move in order. But my slender quill
Suits with my Muse, compared with my skill.
Vile sinners are in life and death distressed
Read but this Epitaph then take your rest.
The Epitaph.
TWo Sharkes being dead, alive did fear no weather
They pawned themselves or any ill they would do:
The Hangman put'm in a hole together:
Their hopes are earth, now they are private too.
Beware of (...), 'twill raise a horrid blast.
These sherking Rogues did cheat themselves at last.
SECT. II.
A Constable is wise and grave,
He sucks the sack: and he will have
His guilty neighbors escape the Laws,
The beadle, does bewray the cause,
Another Strikes where he is abused
His (...) guard, his wit accused.
His love his tears beget a feast,
His (...) preferment is expressed.
I Searching went, my business to dispatch,
And on a sudden spied the common watch:
The Constable being grave, put me in fear,
He should have bin the Officer last year: The petty side Constable.

His rule was by example, when he spoke
One half was sack, the other part was smoke
The Tavern was his center: he must have
The other quart, and he is an errand knave
That will not pledge him: if a hansome Whore
Be guilty found, her freedom he will restore:
She promise to amend: but this the case
She pays her fees; he points a private place
To meet about it, if the Bawd can make
But Friends, or money, he her part will take
And quitt her for this once: to please her then
He Will wink in love, or not come there again.
The Wine converts him to a cunning spy;
None but his favorites dare look so high
As such out landish liquor, some a sleep
Are, while the vermin round about them creep.
The rest are in blind Alc-houses; for they
Have pence a piece to spend, and when the day
Begins to peep they cannot see it: why?
Tobacco's cloudy smoke does charm the eye:
And they will be all Gentile, before they go:
For they can prove this weed makes all men so
The roaring smokers, they me thinks do mock;
Let him be judge that is in the Porters frocke.
Some are bewitch't to this outlandish weed;
Nor can they leave, though that with fire do breed
A sulphrous sinoake, that represents hell.
Is It Christian like? the Heathens they can tell
Is It whole some in excess? those that did strive
TO exceed, found death too soon: were they alive
They Would fright you from it, if men were not blind
They would not to the Devil be so kind.
It Is not Gentile, this cause the hangman tried;
Who took it but the day before he died.
Mistake me not! it is lawful to be used
As Physical: but not to be abused.
I have digrest, where (...) the Watch so long?
I cannot find: now I may hold my tongue.
Peace, yonder sits the Beadle on a Bench,
His candles out; and he has got a Wench,
With whom he is to familliar, that is the cause
He frees such Imps contrary to the laws.
He Will over look their Cells if you complain,
(What would you have him cruel) it is in vain,
He Will plead their custom: urge me not; must I
Do what my Predecessors did deny?
And for the Constable, he is much in fear:
For those that went before him, year by year
Did pass such things, perhaps they got a fee
They be our neighbors, and we must agree.
We must be merciful what er'e we do
That Is harsh to'ards them, we should repent o'nt too
Ah, no redress! I must go search again,
Some honesty may dwell among such men.
Well now I am in hope: for here is a man
Reputed just: accuse him if you can.
Make room for Master Constable: for he The terrible (...).

Has purchased wisdom by authority
His Staff is neatly painted; he will frown:
Keep off; or else point black he will knock you down.
He Will use his power freely in his fit
What ere you think, pray question not his wit.
He naturally knows his charge, in's place,
And he can judge before he hears a case.
His confidence is strong, his fancy weak;
His eyes are dim; yet he can see to speak:
When once his toungue is dipped in Spanish oil
It runs all byas, though his heels do fail.
Submit your selves; for he is a man of might:
He is no spirit though he walks by night,
He Is Justice in the Letter, Friend, or foe;
If you offend him, to the Goyle you go.
His Guard attends upon him, weapon'd men,
Affront'em not, for fear they turn again:
But there is no danger with an angry word
Th'ir laid, at least wise if they see a sword.
Mistrust him not, to differ place, or time:
He being proved not guilty of the crime,
He Will make you smoke; one fearing he had wit,
Was shrewdly shent, the Officer was quit,
From such a slander, the others fain to make
Confession of his fault: he will warning take
By this mischance; and promising to men
Never to be jealous of his wit again.
The Magistrate being pleased, does at his charge
Make him a feast, and now he will enlarge
His words beyond all measure: nor can I
Attend upon him till his eyes be dry.
Oh tender heart! how sudden is thy change
The Juglers slights are common, thine are strange.
Nature for changes, forced now must be
To work by night, and take her aim from thee:
If full mouthed winter thus can charm thy years
The gentle spring will (...) thee into tears
He that to buy a jest, can spend his store,
I Would have him still collected for the poor.
When honesty and wit are in a fright,
Who shall we find to overlooke the night?
One is a fool in gross: the other dreams
His retaile's just: yet both are in extremes.
A foolish pity makes a hellhound worse,
And justice out of joint, will spurn and curse
All reason out of use, who can but see
It Is hot and cold beyond the ninth degree?
Video et doceo, perhaps I may
Find better orders, when I search by day.
SECT. 12.
A Doctor kept a (...) Jade
His Will, being dead, she will (...) his Trade,
With his Receipts what she can cure,
The Will is proved, she must endure
To take the shame, and leave the rest
Her husbands sorrow is expressed:
Of her Reply, she will print a Bill,
To blaze her Art, and hide her ill.
I Went forth right and saw within my Round
A great Physician; but he was not sound.
His wife was old, his promised love was dead:
He shunned her company and loathed her bed.
Although his love was dead, yet he did strive
With all his Art, to keep his Lust alive.
A young one he must have and she must be
A married wife, that their Adultery
Might be complete, he would keep her in despite
Of all Gainsayers: through the Devils right
He claymes her for his own, her husband may
Bewail his wrong; but can not find away
To right himself, for they have both agreed
To stand for Hell and Death: his heart does bleed
But they rejoice in glist'ring all their sins,
To make exchange. Now Infamy begins
To blaze their shame abroad: yet they do fleight
The breath of men; they will not break delight.
But the Physician (though his Trull was by)
Did fall down sick, so sick that he must dye.
Now farewell all delights: Thou must endure
The Lance of Death, thy art can find no cure.
But he had time to mourn before he died;
Yet, in that time, his Doxie from his side
Would never part: his wife and Children may
See him for once; but there they must not stay.
He makes his Will, and gives unto his Whore
Half his Estate; his cast off wife's left poor,
With all his offspring: Mourning she must have
To Attend his Corpse unto his silent Grave,
Wherein he is laid; and there he must abide
Past cure, until his second Act be tried.
His Epitaph.
THis piece of art that lie beneath these stones,
Maintained a (...), until his flesh was dried
With death she (...) the marrow from his bone:
He broke his marriage vow before he died.
He lived a (...); but now he must
Like paracelsus only deal in dust.
THis half excextrix has gained great skill
she will practice Physic, to remove what ill
Is gender'd in the bladder: (she will endure,)
But Morbus Gallicus she cannot cure.
She cures the stone exactly, with your pains,
To help you to the running of the reins.
All fleshly humors with her art she will nurse;
And last of all, she will ease you of your purse.
She Will car' her medicene home: with all of which
She Will help her Husbands head, and make him rich.
And when the will is proved, she will begin
To temper druggs, to counter veil her sin.
She Will have her share: these goods were hers before
And those she had for playing of the Whore:
Some petty things she begged: whose are the rest
The will declares: he swore he loved me best.
I was his darling, should not he bestow
His goods in love, where he most love did owe?
But when she was examined by what right
She claim d her Legacy, she did indite
Her self for her offenses: she was feign
To bear away the shame, and leave the gain.
The reason's found of his distempered mind,
The Letcher was bewitch't lust made him blind
No share but in the sin, that she can have
Now she is gone weeping home if she can crave.
Pardon for this offense, she will not miss
To act another sin as bad as this.
But when her Husband spied her, he began
To 'vent his grief: Alas! is any man the Husbands grief.

In my condition? Thou, have broke thy vow
Together with my heart. There Is nothing now
For me but shame and sorrow, till that day
When gentle Death shall wrap my corpse in clay.
Keep at a distance from me: For with fear
My heart will bleed afresh if thou come near.
The Adulterer and his gold did ravish thee
From thy dear Love; whose death has set thee free.
Then she replied: In vain your tears are spent.
Did you but know the scope of my intent,
You would not grieve: 't was not for want of love
That I did leave you: 't was his art did move
Me to embrace his love: I have a way the Whores defense.

That when you know, you cannot choose but say
My time was well employed: He and his Books
Have taught me skill, to know men by their looks
And what disease they have; and can apply
To every one a present remedy.
And I can keep them underhand for gain,
And make them give me gold to ease their pain.
To bring in Customers I Will print a Bill:
I do not mean to barrel up my skill.
If you do thrive, by whatso'ere I do,
You may forgive my fault and thank me too.
Blush all you Birds of night I was it ever heard
Among the Fowls, that fouler things appeared? maral.

How are thy sins made snares? the World denies
Thy breath free passage: the Heavens twinkling eyes
Look through the veil of night: all things that be
(Made loving friends) are enemies to thee.
Do mock thy Maker, that thou sell'st the Truth
To change thy Lover that should guide thy youth?
When need did drive thee home, thou in thy sin
Did wrap thy self (by pleading) further in.
And he that kept thee with his foul endeaver
(Cast off his mate, which none but death should sever)
Will find the Serpents eggs which sin has hatched
Among the brood; he will then be overmatch't.
After your pleasures, you may feel the smart,
Always together where you cannot part.
SECT. XIII.
Two Spawns from Earth, want sturres their crimes;
A Damsel stole with borrowed rimes:
Her usage, he prefers a pink,
A bed at board: being like to sink
She makes her moan; what was replied
By both; all favor was (...).
She Is sent away, they grow more ruds,
To vex her more they do conclude.
WHen I perceived the cloudy seals of night
Compose themselves against the glim'ring light,
(Those that did plot to'ards Hell, did make no stay,
For all't was dark, they could not lose their way)
With artificial light I did descry a scum.

A scum boiled out of Earth: when he came nigh
His breath gave warning: but it was not good
H'was seen, felt, heard, yet was not understood.
The kennel spewed him up; but you may rake
For such another, till your hearts do ache,
And lose your labor. Being drunk he reels;
And if his guts were hanged about his heels
He would not vex me. Stay; here comes his whore
With open mouth; but ah I she cannot roar,
Because his cash is gone. He wants a wife:
If you know any weary of her life,
Pray wish her to him: money he must have
To keep his Queen: then let the hungry grave
Open his jaws upon her; what cares he?
This Trull will serve for his necessity.
Well, they must part a while, till he has got
One to releeve his need; and then the lot
Will fall to her again. If he can get
Some begging Poet, he will die in's debt
If he will write him verses: but he must
Keep it all private, not betray his trust;
They must be called his own. His Love they will break,
Though he be drunk or mad and cannot speak.
He has betrayed a Girl, with much ado,
That Is honest, hansome, with a portion too:
To a poor home she is brought. Within a while
He brings one to compet with her, as vile
As Hell and sin can make her; she will be
Mistress of all. Did you but hear and see
The passages, you could not choose but grieve
For her, whose case, death only may relieve.
To trick his Jade up fine, he spends her store.
One night he lies with her, three with his Whore.
She has her chamber furnished, and her meat
O'th best cut first; the Woman's fain to eat
What scraps the Punk does leave. Oh! most unkind!
Then to her Husband thus she broke her mind:
How have I bought my sorrow! This is bad!
You drew me in to marry what I had.
You keep a common Strumpet: How can I the Woman's grief.

Behold her but with grief! You set me by
As out of date. Entreaties cannot move
You from your ruin, to embrace my love.
Death, do thy office: for I cannot have
A fitter chamber then a quiet grave.
With that the Tib o'r-heard her, and began
(First to the Woman, then unto the Man) the railing Whore.

To break her spleen: am I the mark, which thou
Do shoot thy spite against? Thou know not how
To help thy self: but thou shall find e're long
I Will be revenged, and make thee hold thy tongue.
I Will have the rule of all: and make thee know
He Is mine above stairs, though he is thine below.
We two are old acquaintance: and will be
Kind and familiar in despite of thee.
He Is tied to me in love; why should not I
Please him at bed and board? Will thou deny
Our love free course? Be silent; or I shall
Trouble his goods, and make him sell'em all.
He Is mine by promise: Shall I be controlled?
He Had never took thee, save only for thy gold.
What says my Chuck? Speak; Did not thou begin
To draw me with conditions unto sin?
Now I am thine for ever. Let not me
Be grumbled at by such a one as she.
Let not her howling move thee: let her frown,
Another time, I Will pawn her Tammy-gown.
Then if she will not be warned, this I will do,
Sell her best petti-coat; and then we two
Will make a merry-day, while her fond breath
Shall wast away with crying after death.
He having matter lay about his chest, his reply.

Which slep't quite through his maw, along his breast
Into his windpipe: When It had bluster'd long
It shoke his jaws, and seaz'd upon his tongue,
Which made him speak: I am not moved to cast
A way my sweet; my love is tied too fast
To be removed with breath: Though thou art pained
Through fruitless humors, and the Law's have gained
A part of what I had; I will not leave
Her company, till time does me bereave
Of sense and motion. If thou still wilt nurse
Such jealous fancies, thou will make me worse,
Be ruled by her, and do not me mistake;
Thou speedst and far'st the better for her sake.
Do'it think for diet I would be so free,
Spend thus at home, but for her company?
Then turning to his hag, he thus did say:
I am no turn-coat: I Have devised a way
To fit her in her kind: I Will send her down
In The Country to her friends: although they frown,
What matter is it? expenses will be large,
There let her leave her load: 'twill ease my charge.
And when she is gone, we will fell the household stuff
To spend the coin; we will have delight enough.
When she sees this, and hears what mirth we had,
Being wild before, these things will make her mad.
Poor soul! thou art bought and sold! but do not fear,
Thy Hell is all on Earth, their Heaven's here. moral.

Thy sufferings will be short. Repent and pray;
Thy next will be a sweeter marriage-day.
Ye cursed blind-worms! if ye had your due
Hell should be hotter made, and brought to you.
Yo've wronged a harmle's soul. Your sins will be
Changed into plagues and then you will disagree.
Thou Incubus how cans't escape the curse
That Is laid below? and Succuba is worse.
Your hateful brood being passent in their ill,
Keeps off the Muses from my humble Quill.
SECT. XIV.
The Usurer and Broker stepped
Into a hole; how dried: Whore kept
The rueful Court. A Witch descried:
A devilish Lawyer in his pride.
The speechles bell. A trap, two stroyes:
A Beggar does adopt two Boys.
The vaporing Rogues, new Traitors found:
The Guards neglected in the Round.
A Welchmans guilt much sorrow brings:
Though he complains, his Cozen sings.
SO many changes in a night! before
The meadows were like ^allet ^ugger'd ore,
Now change their party colors: and the Ice
E'rewhile was proof of steel; yet in a trice
Falls in consumption: as it does decay
Ingenders treacherous pits, which do betray
My 'nocent Babes. The Broker does begin
To try the depth; the Usurer steps in
To free his Debtor. To be dried they went
To White-crosse-street. The Usurer had lent
The Broker many a pound; and he (no doubt)
Had lent upon good pawns the money out.
This house had pawned him diverse precious things.
Silk Peticoats, and Gowns, with Diamond rings,
Hats, scarffs, and dressings, handkechers of lawn:
Their smocks in time of trouble went to pawn,
To line themselves within. When trading fails,
Poor tyers Hackneys cannot pawn their --
The Usurer is fearful (not of sin)
Since Story broke, he will call his money in: in Cow-crosse.

Yet, having seen the pawns, without abuse,
He Will have gratuity besides the use:
For feelings now and then, he will be content the conditions.

To take'em here; forbear the money lent,
So he be shot-free. Trading will increase,
Seeing cutthroat huxters sue to make their peace.
With that I met a man that rung a bell, the Court in Hell.

Who thought the Marshall-Court was kept in Hell:
Chief Officers were sunk; the Marshals brains
Could find no grave: the Steward left his gains.
The Crier and the Jailer, with the rest,
Which to recrute their Den were judged the best,
By Devils are preferred. How they agree,
You Will hear more on it; for Web is gone to see.
A Lawyer known, that died, of Lincolns-Inne
Appeared in sight, as living he had bin;
Who spit out haile-shot: which did fall so fast,
That made us run. A seeming beauty past,
And kept her distance: as we traced the ground,
His bell grew speechless: having lost the sound,
So, Damb yet still remains. And in a fray
A Witch, Cat-like, did carr' his Dog a way.
Then one that had been carted for a bawd,
Complained she was betrayed: yet did applaud
The plot of those that bargained for a Whore,
And made her panderesse to keep the door,
Till Tostes came, from one whom she did sue,
Who called her so; but could not prove it true, carting.

Till sin conceived again; which with consent
Made proclamation for her punishment.
A man complete in habit, dogged a Whore,
Ashamed to arm her: but he marked the door
Where (fetching of a compass) she went in:
He followed after; not ashamed of sin, dogging a Whore.

So it be private. Sorrow meets with shame,
To seize his person first, and then his name.
With that I heard three voices sing with grace,
The Mean, the Treble, and the Beggars Base: the Beggars adoption.

Two of them vapouring Citizens, both known,
Adopted by the Beggar for his own.
He Will bring them up, that they may grow more vile;
Let them but sin, and he will beg the while
To bear'em out in it. Then this Grandy sings,
A public Maunder; deals with private things.
Still moving on, I heard a hideons brawl;
Their chief Commander had been a Corporal,
But now cashierd: they swore and did protest
They Are Majors all; a Captain was the least: Major. Corporal.

And so they pass, they live by theft; and rore,
With sack-split-oaths: Each Vassal keeps his Whore.
Horn was as great, though he in New-gatetry'd
The Virginals, till he at Tyburn died.
But in a Fog, I heard a twisted breath,
As though that sin and Hell had brawl'd with death
For's (...): but near the Dammee crew
I durst not venture (as I lay perdue)
Being twice in such (so like the Devils) hands,
I bought distrust; I do not like such bands.
Methought I heard these words; compositions.

We have compounded for the blood we spilt,
Which ran as Roundheads; purged away the guilt
By a confiding Oath. And now we may
Without distrust, walk weapon'd night and day,
To find out Royalists, about the Town, bold Rogues.

Upon Commission, pull the prisons down,
To make a gallant party. If we please
To raise a stock, we will plunder, rob, and seize
On any thing. Our projects being hid,
Will better thrive then ever Waller's did
With Roiler's wit. Our fortunes all are crossed;
Let Us swear each other: it is but labor lost.
We Are all made men, if this invention thrives:
Or at the worst we can but lose our lives.
We are despised. We may (our Father tells) desperate villains.

Break faith with Heretics and infidels.
What sores may break when knaves are discontented?
It Is best to doubt, to have the worst prevented.
Their water's low; they double in like shrimps:
As witches are forsaken by their Imps.
When Justice meets them; so, these twice sold slaves
Are left by wrath, to vengeance-purchast graves.
Then to the line I went, to walk the round;
Where fast asleep a Sentinel I found:
I checked him thus; Thou art cipher'd Ginne, neglects of the guards.

To let knaves out with ease, and villains in.
The guards were careless, with their matches out;
Some drunk, some absent, others marched about
In grumbling postures: wheels, when wanting liquer,
Do move as free, and turn about much quicker.
They take a charge, but not discharge the thing;
An old acquittance goes for Manwaring;
A cancelled bill, they pass in Reading's name
They read their ignorance, and pass their shame,
When folly's in the front. They love to look
As did the tripe wife in her gilded book,
Who could not read a word. But this they say,
They do their duties as they have their pay.
Their wages small; yet this their hardest lot,
That sometimes they are paid, and sometimes not.
The Master Gunners run so far in debt, neglect of pay.

Their credits die. The poor Matrosses get
Their poverty renewed. Ah! then thought I,
The Stewards are unjust. Truth must not die.
At my return, I found within the City
A Welshman thus complaining: Was cret peete
Her shod pee' pus'd! Py taffee wass not cood,
Her leck py Cownt-men, put in shink ap wood.
Her Shentilman ap Wales, was take creat scorn,
Her peticree was 'print,' fore Prute was porn.
Was take it feree pad, ap all her Nation: the Welshman.

Was porn a Pritan ap te told translason.
Her was ap Morgan, shinkin, (...) shile,
Was trug cret Muntaine ore, 'pove fife-score mile;
Was see her cusse, trink two pot cud ale;
Pe merree, kish her cosh: was tell a tale.
Was learn cod Englis; her put take her turn:
Shon was put ich pefore: put now her purn
Was loosse her silfar. Was her cussen true?
Was say, her was ap leiws, ap shones, ap hue;
Put her was lie. Was naty page, pe pold;
Was make her purn pelow, her, pove was cold,
Was let her co? py shon ap Morcans solc,
Was no cod fashion put her shink in hole.
This brazen morter-peece, within the cage,
Enough to fire a Town, bites in her rage;
Yet she could gnaw the grates. At what he said
Is no whit moved; but laughed: being not afraid
Of whip, nor halter. When sh'ad chav'd her tongue,
Her humors dropped upon it. She sings a song.
A SONG.
1. Though lovers be in prison cast
Or cag'd like birds, our pleasures last,
To dress delights, a pleasing Theme:
Which fool: never know but in a dream.
Fala, falare, fala falee;
Tandan, tandare, tandan tandec.
2. What though we chatter in the cold?
One night cut piece meal, brings in gold
To charm the lock; then we will flee
Beyond the Welshmans Pedigree.
Fala, etc.
3. If windbound troubles, grievings move,
We Will drown'em in a draught of love:
And Candie every lovers kiss,
To purchase magazins of bliss.
Fala etc.
4. The prick-song warblers of the Spring,
Our pleasing strains in Winter sing:
While dull breathed fancies whine and play
Sad Lachrymae and Weladay.
Fala etc.
5. Let gold-worms morgage ease and mirth,
To rob the bowels of the Earth:
Their Spawns will sacrifice, and cast
Those drugs to Venus at the last.
Fala etc.
6. Conserving joys, we feel and see,
As Schedules of a Jubilee;
Make Stoics Dumb, our Courtlike plays,
With silken credit guilt our joys.
Fala etc.
7. Imp't, lured by the noble race:
Let Clowns that play at prison base
Be mocked from pleasures: sense will find
Though Cupid be, we are not blind.
Fala etc.
8 Fair daylight courts, as black hair'd night,
Our private handmaid to delight.
Though we are taxed, our love is free:
And that is the Subjects liberty.
Fala etc.
The drowsy Lethargy! which makes men (...),
Yet, Juggles laughter out, before they dye. moral.

Sinners have running gouts; though they rejoice,
Their tone is like the hateful scritch-owls voice,
Presaging death. Their language does foretell
The doleful sounding of the passing bell
Rings pleasure to the grave. Their ill-got gain,
Like Traitors bribing death, whose menstroas stain
Age cannot eat away. Their conscience sits,
As Judge and Jury: while their dear-length wits
Are charged with (...). All their senses chained;
As thieves before a (...) are arrain'd
By one another: those that there are caft,
Receive their doom, before the've sentence past.
As (...) in half-starv'd Garrisons, are beat,
To drown complaints, when children cry for meat.
Their lusts raise tumults, reason to control:
Or parling cheat the hunger-starved soul
With fond relief. As slaves their freedom sell
To tug with (...) oars themselves to Hell.
And as they row, they spy upon the way
Their sins by daylight, march in battel-ray.
Where wrath's in commons, they arrive at night.
Black vengeance, feed, sequesters saucy light.
SECT. XV.
A Tailors shred plucked out of Hell
Is trimmed, a Monkey loves her well.
She Is free to all; the Monkey frets;
Her open shop: whom in she lets
Are lost. But one whose nose is sunk
Gets much in favor with this punk.
Conceit of want does make her swound;
The gold all gone, they change their ground.
O, This a busy night! who, who comes here?
A shred plucked out of Hell! Can shreds appear
In shape so like a woman, charming men?
Yes, and bewitch them too, till Hell again
Does close upon her. Now it is open, hush:
How came her Carcass to be wrapped in plush?
She chop't for broken pieces, (being free)
The serving-man gave no such Liverie.
Perhaps the flower that fore-runs the Spring,
For quick commodities might change the thing.
'Twas Mistress Maudlins gown: when she was fried
For Morbus Gallicus, she did divide
Her clothes about in parcels: this was cast
On her at (...)' Baudy-house where she dwelt last.
A Monkey bred beyond Sea, full of lust,
Found out this Apish shred: alas! he must
Needs couple with her: married they must be:
The foreign Beast is tied to misery:
For when he had fulfilled his foul desire,
The home-born'd Ape grew common: and her fire
Sparkles into a flame: Who will, may have
This Hell, his Bier, to carr' him to his grave.
Her fullness made her worse. She bends her will
To taste and relish every thing that is ill.
When he perceived his fate, thus he began
To breath his meaning somewhat like a man.
What have I done? How fatal was my birth!
I Have traveled far to seek a Hell on Earth:
Which I have found too soon. But ah! it is fit
That punishment with grief should teach me wit.
Did I redeem thee from a house of sin
To make thee honest? and do thou begin
To treble up thy shame? Thou wantst for naught.
I sold my self too cheap: but I have bought
My cross too dear. Hell is not easily drawn
(Unless a man will lay his hopes to pawn)
To promise pleasure. I am laid at stake
For shameand sorrow. How my heart does ache!
She hearing this, replied: Pray blame not me:
It was your fault to seek for misery.
I did not think but that you would consent
That I might pleasure friends: you have content:
You have your times; the choice of all my store.
What harm is it then if I can pleasure more?
You know what house I lived in: Did you think
To have me free from sin? Did you but wink
We might agree: If you would have had me clear,
You Would not have come to such a house; for there
We'are seasoned (...). I cannot leave it now:
I Will venture all I have, if you will allow
That I might have return, from French, and Dutch,
With English too, that you may do as much.
That will be quid for (...): thou know my mind:
Come, little Monkey, every Beast in's kind.
With that he steered away, and feared no weather;
But with more shame then ever he came hither.
Now, come, my Customers; for I Will be free
Of what I have. I Am set at liberty. free Trade.

She Is such an active Whore, to all that come,
As if sh'had learned it in her mothers womb.
She wears out one; another, he is lost;
A third's consumed; she jeers him for his cost.
Then meeting with a shifter, who of late
Maintained a nastie Whore, till his estate
Was sunk much like his nose: and she had bin
Under the lash to suffer for her sin,
Indicted, and arraigned; and then she fell
To tune aloud the fourth part of Hell.
He being flig'd again, he chatters out
Like to a rook in Spring: and flies about
To find a place to build in; where he brings
His newfound Whore, whose tail is full of stings.
But there the nest is made, till he had spent
His present stock, besides what to him lent.
And now this Ape's grown sullen; she is not well:
What, nor a place, nor lands, nor goods to sell?
I want a petti-coat, a bag, a jewel,
Another thing or two. Such beasts are cruel.
He pitty'd her, and answered with a smile,
Thou shall have those; but thou must stay a while:
I Have such a thing to sell: I know not how
To sell't but with great loss, as times go now.
He going forth, she drops down to the ground;
Dissemblingly she falls into a swound: a swound.

And being taken up, she hangs her head;
Hold's in her breath, as if she had been dead:
Closing her eyes, and slobbering out her tongue:
'T had been some hope on it, had she been so long.
Her neck like Tyburns blossoms had been, if
It had been long enough, or half so stiff.
But here is was pliable, to turn about,
Forward, or backward; all might find it out
That 'twas but fained. She was thoroughly vex't
'T was done no neater: but she will mend the next.
He hearing of her fall, came in again; his coming.

And when she was revived, she did complain:
Ah, ah! unkindnesse! Ah! 't will break my heart!
Alas, I love too much! the more's my smart.
Unkindnesse kills me. Oh! my heart is broke!
She dropped down tears like charms. Then thus he spoke:
What, should I be undone? woulds't have me strive
(To humor thee) to dig my grave alive?
Thou have bewitch't me. What he spoke was true.
The Jade had her desire. Sh'was trimmed anew.
Within a little time. The Land was sold:
They laid it on a while, until the gold
Was sent from whence it came: then with a jest
She cast him off, as she had done the rest.
She Is taken up and coatch't unto the bath:
But still she is followed with a cloud of wrath.
How she did truck in common, with what men;
Perhaps I Will tell you, when she comes again.
SECT. XVI.
One vampt with plush, lives not in awe;
Is found a Letcher at the Law.
A married man; four Queans he will have:
One very young, one tall, and brave;
The third for wit: the fourth she must
Be full of stuff to slake his lust;
They live apart, for each his wife:
One with his worship falls to strife.
WHen in my search Queen Phoebe cast a blush,
I turned aside and saw a thing in plush,
As black as Hell: his lust was in the prime:
He had a Gown (too long) did hide his crime.
His wit was put to Nurse; his face was blew,
And all his upper parts were vamp't anew.
His garbidge kept him moist, because his (...)
Was lately bottomed. Till his purse does fail
He Will wear a Ruff, a full-crown'd Beaver-hat:
Loves he the Law or no? guess you by that.
He Will give you words, as good as gold can make;
Give him his way, advice he will not take.
He Is wise enough for Hell, pray let him stand:
His practice of delight lies underhand.
He Is often distant from his native place;
I Will show the Cells he hants, then judge the case.
His wife and children in the Country be;
They hardly will believe (nor can they see)
What Hell does daily venture on his side;
Nor how he bought a Whore; sweet Mistress Bride
She must be called: He does consume his 'state
To keep her to himself at any rate.
She Is young and fresh, her hair brown, like a berry,
And full of mirth to make his worship merry.
A second he must have, that is full of wit;
She gives him great content: for that is it
That he stands most in need of. She is thin,
Small, low, and active, with a milk-white skin.
The third that he does choose is very tall;
Well joined, upright, her fingers long and small,
With yellow hair, her eyes being full and gray,
With cherry cheeks: This modest Queen will stay
Her turn and never grumble. But the next,
If he but break his day, she is shrewdly vexed.
She Is very fleshly minded; full of stuff,
With greasy brawny limbs, and tongue enough
To rail him to her self: as free from fear
As honesty: but not from -- stand clear.
He visits them with papers in his hand,
As though he came to state them in his land.
He spends his time, his substance, and his life:
And every one of these goes for his Wife.
He takes a part, for every one a Room,
Maintains them at his cost, and he is the Groom
To each of them by turns. When he would have
A laughing bout, the pleasant Wench he will crave.
When he would hear new fancies, then he will dwell
With her that with her shame has wit to sell.
When he to sin with silence has desire,
The tallest bashfulr'st Whore must quench his fire:
But at Spring-tides, his lusts swell high: then she
That Is full ofstuffe shall have his company.
Although a part their seized, they do forecast
With joint consent to help him to his last.
One of his Tibs, full of the lustful itch,
Did kick and bite; I need not tell you which.
He staid a way too long; nor could she have
What she desired: Though silence he did crave
It could not be obtained. They fell to strife
Till't was perceived they were not man and wife.
The'are hist a way from thence: But then her mother
Does prove their baud, the whisking is their brother.
But tell him if you durst: What Law affords,
Or violence, to make you eat your words,
Shall not be wanting. But the common fame
Is mounted up to blaze their sin and shame.
The several Nests are found: now he must be
Purged by the Law. But ah! the misery
Is not bewailed: No means can give redress
TO a man that is morgag'd to his wickedness.
He keeps his truce with Hell. He does bereave
Himself of hopes: till Devils give him leave
He cannot change his course: or till grim death,
Age, want, or sickness does attach his breath.
Had he so many souls, as many lives,
As he has Whores, for his supposed Wives,
He Would venture all: but is not one too much
To lie at hazard for a World of such?
Thou common vassal! what do mean to do?
Thy various sins, breed several Torments too.
Thou can not live here ever: thou must have
To end delights, a prison and a grave.
You Have change of rooms for death, being dead alive:
One room in Hell may easily hold all five.
Though sin remains there still, there is no delight:
Souls dwell with horror and eternal night.
But where is the scurf of age, that is so vilde
To turn a Baud? and offer Hell her child
Upon such easy terms? I would not ask,
But that she has performed such a Task,
That Hell seems innocent. What did she hatch
A brat for living shame? then make the match?
Her sense, her nature she does now control,
To give the body life, to damn the soul.
Her shame is died in grain: why write I thus?
She Is fit for nothing but an Incubus.
There is a Pander too; I Would call him in,
But that he is so overgrown with sin;
Being made an Officer, his humors swell;
He Will curse and swear the devils out of hell.
His counsel cost him naught: his sisters man;
Call him but so, he will swear but by her fan.
I cannot talk with him, he does so stink;
Being parboiled twice, and overcharged with drink.
I Will leave you altogether, till my Pen
Be sharper set, and then I Will write again.
If I should show her wit, how she will vaper,
'Twould steal a way my time, besides a sheet of paper.
Her outside now, shall satisfy my rhyme;
I Will blaze her inside at another time.
Look where she is, and view her in the light:
Now I Will be silent, left I shame her quite.
SECT. XVII.
A young man's (...), furies rise,
His mothers ghost, her words, his eyes
Disclose his grief: Into the fire
They thrust his soul, the sinners (...):
His soul returns, his mothers train,
And whiter Devils come again:
Some pull, some call, he sound his tongue;
He was released, but 'twas not long.
A Devil grave, feigned love expressed,
More wantonsome then all the rest.
Played, sung, and dane'd; while he did pray
The evil spirits flunck away.
WHen through contempt and wilfulness to sin
Man forfeited the day, he did begin
To side with darkness: and to Hell he would creep,
Unheard, unseen, when Conscience was asleep.
She leaves the charge to Cerb'rus; made no stay,
But sends out strength to meet him in the way.
Who marching on, desired sinful leisure;
Because the way was sweet, and full of pleasure.
But lusting mischief ever comes too soon,
Unlook't for, in the morning; if at noon,
It Is concealed to the mind; or if at night,
It Is most unthought of. He should take delight
To reckon well spent-time. But as he stands
Expecting rest, as purchased by his hands,
Death strains his senses. Ah! he must submit
To Deaths pale Tenant; where the hungry pit
Will keep him Prisoner. But I must indite
A Scean of dolor. Hell's broke loose to night.
He that neglects his Watch, will find too late
Terrors and feinds, assuming pomp and state,
With Furies waiting on them. Passing by Furies.

A hollow Cave, I heard a hideous cry:
Come, lets divide the spoil; his bones are thine:
Betwixt you part his flesh, his soul is mine.
A masculine being past the third degree,
And into manhood entered now is he,
Yet never lived, unless it were to sin;
Being frighted from himself, he will now begin
To change his course. If this black storm were past
Which Hell has raised; to Heaven now at last,
He Would consecrate himself. The night, being dark,
It cannot hide his grief: Hell light's a spark
To blaze his crime in colors. First, there came
His mothers Ghost, to gender fear and shame the Ghost.

Within his breast: and threatening him, she said;
Ah! thou art lost (...) how often have I stayed
Thee from thy ruin? Worse, and worse thou art;
I was thy mother once: e're we did part
I begged thy change with tears: but I was crossed
In my desire. Turn, turn, or thou art lost.
And many other spirits with consent,
Did becken from above; then out they went:
But fear came in the more; for there he saw
A troop of deadly (...), who strove to draw
(As they were gaping on the fiery brim)
Him to the furious lake, or that to him.
(But, Species sine visu) he believed
His torment was begun; and still he grieved;
Which made his wound more wide: his loathed bed
Helps not his quaking limbs: his heavy head
Hardens the gentle feathers: and his tears
Did only show, not mitigate his fears.
Then came the feinds, and snatched his soul away,
Making a triumph: soon they cast their prey
(As he conceived) into a Vault of fire;
Thrust it with forks. This is the Sinners hire.
Then to the Bed, a Fury brings a Bier,
To lay his corpse upon: and now his fear
Has made him speechless: but his sense remains,
To fold up sorrow. Who can judge what pains
Hell gives in earnest! But the hardened sinner
Knows what hell is: for he was the beginner
Of Discord in the World; and he shall have
A bed of sorrow, lower then the grave.
I must not stray too much: my feeble Pen
Must give account (his soul being come again)
Of what the issne was. In this distress
He watered his pale-earth. Groans did express
The horror of his mind: he spied again
His mother all in white; with her a train
Of Saint-like figures, pointing down to'ards hell;
Then heavenward: he mused, but could not tell
What speech they used. Of gleams they had a shroud:
With verba sine voce, in a cloud,
They vanished all away. But there remained
The horrid Vision, which from hell was strained
With strange deformities. A Fury called
Upon him strangely: other would have hall'd
Him from his watery couch: Fear made him strong,
And home-born danger help him to his tongue.
Thus he in anguish said:
Ye Feinds of darkness! what have you to do
With me that am redeemed? you shall not woo
My soul with your enchantments, to embrace
The motions drawn in hell. Although my case
Is much to be lamented, I am free
For mercy, as the rest of sinners be.
This Book (the Book of God) may end the strife;
My name is written in the Book of Life.
Nor shall your (...) remove me: I am set
To keep possession here: and all my debt
Is paid by him that gave himself to death,
That I might live. From him I draw my breath.
Depart, ye damned spirits: I have cast
My self for sin. I Have grieved for what is past.
Thus said, they quit the room. With that he raised
His feeble (...); and in his heart he praised
Him that had bought his Freedom. But he spied
As he went down, once more, his mother ti'd
(But not from motion) in her winding sheet,
He thought to gain his freedom in the street,
But could not find the key within the door:
Being frighted worser, then he was before,
With lamentable voice he did begin
To call for help; and then the key was in,
By which he was discharged. And now he will
Take notice of his ways to shun the ill.
Now, like a Heart freed from the hungry hounds,
Which won his life by swiftness, keeps his bounds
Among the horned heard: he never goes
At random by himself, for fear his foes
Should sent him, bring him to the bloody knife;
To dine with Corn he will not pawn his life.
So, he escaped from Hell Hounds, cannot be
Contented by himself: good company
Is that which he desires: what was amiss
He Will mend, as knowing 't was the cause of this.
Alas, I have not done! You must excuse
My wandering Genius: for my bashful Muse
Did never see a Ghost. Pray tell me how
Her Songs may rise to that (...) sung while now.
His spirits being settled, home he came,
And brought a Friend; believing fear and shame
Were banished from the Earth: but when his head
Was laid upon the Pillow, then the Bed
Seemed overcharged with the sinful weight:
The walking Devils laid another bait
To snare his soul. A Messenger from Hell
(In his appearance grave) began to tell
What favors he would do him: he should find
His words all true, if he would frame his mind
To keep him company. Then he begins
To reckon up in order all his sins.
And sealed them to the curse: Still when he spoke
Hell gave a vent, from whence there came a smoke.
His courage like to armor made of steel,
Turned back the assault. What horror he did feel
Was secret to himself. He would not make
His Bedfellow afraid; yet he does take
The Advantage to reply: And thus he said;
Thy message is from Hell; I Am not dismayed:
I Will have no aid from thee. Do, do thy worst, arguments.

I will not lose my hope: 'cause thou art cursed,
Thou'l (...) make me so. My sinful soul was bought
From Hell with stripes: I by the Truth am taught
To wait for grace; believe, repent, and pray;
Man by despairing gives himself away.
Thy plots are vain. Thou cursed Fiend, be gone:
I am a child of promise, thou art none.
Thou go but under bail: Thou Wilt shortly be
Imprisoned to eternal misery.
When he had done his speech, he did perceive
Th'Embassadour of Hell had took his leave.
But e're sweet Slumber had his eyes possessed
Or bridled up his thoughts, to silent rest,
Hell sounds again: but with a smoother Theme;
(She thought to take him swimming down the stream.)
Of Heroes, Nymphs, and Fairies, in came store
(Not shaped like Fiends and Furies, as before)
With wanton postures, and with whorish tire,
Unsav'ry speeches, stirring foul desire
In all their gestures. Some with lustful singing
Strived to enchant him, while their Lutes were stringing.
Then in a Consort, when their Lutes were strung,
Naked about his bed they played and sung. Wanton devils.

Dancing with nimble measures, seeming fair,
And in their motions they excelled the air
But hell's befooled again: for now his dust
Is dried, and cooled with grief: and all his Lust
Is to be freed from shame. Truths common so Hell fooled.

May well be fooled, when hell is foiled so.
These words he uttered with an inward voice:
You show me what I was (I Have changed my choice)
Not what I am. Away, ye haggs! your spell
Is but damnation varnisht: for in hell
There Is no such music: Trebles give no grace:
Their tunes are howling discords from the Bace.
My music shall be praise (which I intend
To sing in heaven) that shall never end.
Hell has her own again, with labor lost;
And all her Factors are as often crossed.
They miss their ends; their prey keeps off too long;
Or if they take it soon, it proves too strong.
Nor can they well be rid on it: for the cry
Calls help from heaven; so the takers die.
Who can express the torment he endured!
The passion of his mind being somewhat cured,
He with his Bedfellow did quit the room;
Who was half dead with fear. They thought their Toom
Had been erected there. Now out they creep,
Both in a trance: as men which from the deep
Half drowned are brought to shore; who musing then
Will breathe half words; then stop, and muse again.
But having gained their sense, strength gaining time,
Their stomachs cleansed from the watery slime,
They Will tell you of the shipwreck, how it past;
And of the storm, how they escaped at last:
Just so these tired Partners do begin
(Partners in punishment, but not in sin)
To breathe their woes in parts: they make their moans
In words, then sighs; but make it up in groans.
But having felt their footing, they will tell
What they escapt; how near they were to hell.
Man sins, then suffers; sorrow, mixed with fears;
Shame leaves him naked in the vale of tears.
He sowes disgrace, which genders unto strife,
And runs the row grief with cost to lose his life.
Hell joins with heaven to revenge a sin:
When she falls fcul upon us, we begin
To feel the storms of wrath: and then we cry
Help, Lord, we (...) alive. But by and by
(The tempest being calmed) we do repent
Of our Repentance. Then we give consent
To what we did deny: and at the last
We do renew the score for what is past.
The devils trace the earth; and where they find
A Patentee for (...); as he is inclined,
So they can bait the snare. They take up shapes,
With change of habit: as his fancy gapes,
He Is humor'd for a time. They are not men,
Nor women that are dead, that come again;
But Devils in their likeness, to invite
The heedlesse sinner to eternal night.
Or looking home, they with despairing site,
Shake him from his believing and his wits.
Were they not chained, they would take up all for strayes,
To trap our souls they have a thousand ways.
I raised not Fiends, to drive you to a fright;
The'are of my Theme, because they walk by night.
SECT. XVIII.
A meeting, and a costly Feast,
The Meet, and sitting of each guest,
Their Wines, their carriage, Healths among,
They drown their souls, Pimp-Minors song.
NIght sits enthroned in State, to seize a prize,
"In darkest robes, whose objects blind our eyes."
She clothed the Clouds in black, and did upbraid
Bright Cynthia's gesture, cause she was a Maid.
She arch d her screens with Jett; the virgin Queen
Could neither overlook, nor look between.
Thus (...) close, my Muse began to call
A Poet up, to write her Funeral. Fancies.

Ill humors she does cherish with her breath,
She Is both of a tipe of Hell, and Nurse of death:
So, black with Envy, and being swelled with pride
Did shroud the Stars in Cipresse; and devy'd
Her tempus in the middle: half her store
Was left behind, half (...) on before.
She ad put the Spies in prison: gentle rest
Had (...) some to silence; others pressed
To hide their shame with sin, among the crowd
Some sucked in poison, but I Am not allowed
Fresh garments from the Sky. I Am paund in birth
To show such Feastings, seldom seen on Earth.
I do invite my Readers (pray come near)
As lookers on, take heed, taste not the Cheer.
Those that are guests, love darkness; and do dwell
Or near unto, or else belong to hell.
The time's most fit, it is midnight; and the place
Was used for burnt sacrifice; the grace
Dropped from a Bawd, who did invite the guests,
The bank did pay the charge of both the feasts. the order of sitting.

They sit in order: they that took their heats,
And temper most from hell, had the chief seats.
The Bawd being old, and constant, and no waster,
Served fourscore years, and never hanged her master:
She'as done good service, laying still her gins
To draw them to, then snare'em in their sins.
The major vote is, she must sit above;
And next to her, the Haxter and his Love:
He robbed before men's faces in the field;
She cut the throats of those that would not yield.
The common whore sits on the other side,
Next to her Mistress: she has nere denied
A motion, or an order from the Devil,
To plead for sin, and tempting men to evil.
The private Whore sits by her, and she says
She never scor'd upon the public Faith.
Her Pimp sits next her, who did still devise
New tricks to fetch her out, for studying lies.
He did exceed the rest, to manage it,
They say he has a Magazine of wit.
The Pander for his subtlety, and pride,
Sits equal with him on the other side.
The theife sat close by him, the Out-purse Jade
Sat over-right, that drove a double trade
With men and beasts, the Prodigal (their friend)
His money's spent, and now the lower end
Must serve his turn to night: when he for love
Renues his pockets, he shall sit above.
The Constable came in that us d (you know)
To search above, and leave the watch below.
The outworn Letcher, and the drunken Gull
Sat down together: now the table's full.
Above they had varieties of meat,
Some standing dishes, but not good to eat. choice of meats.

They'ad Oysters pickled and the best Lavere
Anchoves Woodcocks (which was dainty cheer)
whose brains didmake them sauce, with ambergreece
And Mumma of Man's flesh which cost a piece.
With diverse other dishes from the fire,
Where Nature mixed with art, to breed desire.
For those below, that could but Pimp and steal,
Had Butchers meat, Ram, Mutton, Hog, and veal.
No second course; nor did these sordid Elves
Desire fowl: For they were foul themselves,
Yet they had tongues and hearts, dried, slic't and cold,
With several sorts of wine, but some did hold
That Viper-wine was best. Some loved the Red,
Being likest blood; some that the Dragon bred
And bears his name, all loved it mixed with sin:
They'ad healths, and some diseased souls put in.
Now, in their midst of Mirth, they drink the round,
They may be bold upon the Divills ground,
Where every one must freely drink his bowl;
And he that cannot swear away his soul,
And drink his reason dry, and play the beast,
(...) be bid to such a gallant Feast.
Before they rose (though sitting over long)
Pimp Minor came, and he will sing a song.
My song shall relate, what pleasure and state
What mirth, and contentments are in love,
The world is at at rest, now how we are blessed.
No sorrow can make us remove.
In love we do agree, Pimp Minors Song.

And who so merry as we.
Black night is our Bawd; and Fates do aplaud
Our happiness: Heavens consent,
To mask up the Moon, least coming too soon
Prove treacherous to (...) content.
Our pleasures do all agree.
And who so merry as we?
This delicate Feast, and every guest
Still praised shall be with Delight:
There Is nothing but day, can fright us away:
Let Us honor the Goddess of night,
That does with us agree.
And who are merry but we?
The searcher's asleep, nor durst he once peep
To backbite our Revells; again,
If the Rimer should write of our meeting to night, With
We Will vow to sequester his pen.
With us he will not agree
But who so merry as we.?
What need we to fear? the Constables here:
Pale Envy is laid in her grave;
Our drinkings breed health, and pleasures bring wealth
And Joys are the clothing we crave.
With laughing all agree.
Oh none so merry as we.
We Will reap our desire, when lovt is on fire,
and (...) of the pleasant dishes;
What happiness can, be more to man
Then so to embrace his wishes?
Our love do thus agree,
And who so merry as we?
The scraps which we leave, let watchmen receive,
When Brokers have (...),
Now give me a Cup, and (...) drink it all up,
And the Divill shall have the (...).
Who does with us agree,
Then who so merry as we?
When they had laughed at this, some (...), asleep,
Fell on the ground: and some began o creep
In private Corners, others fell to play,
Some to their plots; while others (...) away
The neighbors goods, but (...) this (...)
Was broken up, they had a (...).
Now like a herd fast by a River side,
Had eat their Commons bare, but having spied
Fresh quarters ore the water, they begin
To strive by force which shall go foremost in.
And enter first the several: as they swim
The proud curled waves assault them, every limb
Is shaken with their fury, some do sink,
Some beaten out of life upon the brink.
The rest the streams leave prisoners in a Lake,
Where death must set them free, none of them take,
Possession of the Pasture. So, do these,
Swim down the tide of lusts, although they please
Their humors for a time, at last the shore
Receives them breathless. Charon sculls them ore
Into the land of everlasting night.
Nor Sun, nor Moon shall vex'em with their Light.
Guilt, shame and tears will mingle with their sins:
This Feasting's done, the devils Feast begins.
SECT. XIX.
The Night does quarrel with the Moon,
The Divills feasting comes too soon;
How all was dressed, their staying long,
Before they part they have a song.
The Whirlwinds, (...), the furious rent,
Made through the earth, which way they went.
BEfore bright Phebe did begin to steep
Her shining body in the Atlantic deep,
Or entered Latmos Palace, where she used
To sleep with her Endymion; or refused
To choose her whiter binds, her clearer eye
Look t through the sarsnet vail, and did discry
The folly of the Goddess Night, who did
Defend the fowls of prey, she would have them hid.
And spits ill language at the Moon, and looks
Black in the face with pride. Her secret books
Are sealed with pitch, as black as her aparrell;
Her rage breaks out; thus she begins to quarrel.
Thou upstart, to Antiquity a Fo. Nights railing

I am no light huswife; but I Will prove thee so.
Go, go, thou Changeling, vex me not: must I
Be subject to thy Check? must thy fond eye
Be made the overseer of my trade,
That had my birth before the World was made,
And ruled alone? and but for thee still might,
I change not color: for my nam's black night.
I can do nothing private, now, but you
Must ride above in state, and take a view.
Of all my plots, as other Roundheads do,
Sometimes yo' are like a Roundhead slit in two:
Sometimes yo'are dressed with horns upon your head,
Coming from Sols or from Endymions bed,
Yo'are big with child; and looking pale yo'are shamd;
Being loath to have it known, or have it named,
You travel in the sea: and then you smother
The babe ('it is thought) least he should peach the mother
That must be called a virgin, you in rage
Turn men to beasts, and make an hour an Age,
Bald time Eternal. As your humors swell,
The Seas must ebb and flow; if I should tell
All that I know, 'twould keep you from the Feast,
Drive down your Charret, quickly, to the West.
She blushing glanc't away. And now the cheer
Is making ready, that must cost so dear.
Here are no Sheriffs, nor hinch Boys, nor no Mayor,
Nor no Churchwarden, nor none seeming fair.
Forbidding Johnson's guests, both all, and some,
Except the Jailer, and the Sergeant come. forbidden guests.

Those that are hard and seasoned in their evil,
Will make the fittest Messes for the Devil.
Nor did the time agree; for 'twas at Noone,
And this by night, who (...) away the Moon.
The Devil being invited by a sinner,
H'ad rather come to supper then to dinner:
For then his work is done Nor did his haste
Show any stomach, he but came to taste.
And here he came unlook't for. Hear the cries;
He came but thither Choach't, but here he flies.
He was invited by the Cook, and had
His man to dress his Meat; but good, or bad,
He does it here himself. The place is fit:
A vault, where souls do sink for want of wit.
What hideous noise is this? what brimston smell?
What sparkling flames are these? their'e guests from Hell,
In (...) postures. Dreadful storms arise,
Which dumbs the tongue, and deaffes the ears, the eyes
Are dipossest. Strange fears possess the hearts,
With dreadful horror in the inward parts.
Of all the former Feasters, none can hold
For furious burning; yet they shake with cold.
The Prince of darkness, seizes on his prey,
Divides the spoils, and peece-meale he does lay
His choicest bits in order: some he boiled,
And made him broth, and other some he broiled.
The bawd he stewed, because she was so tough.
The common Trull, before sh' was boiled enough
He snapt her up; because his stomach ak't:
The haxter and his litter, hardly baked, his sure.

Was chop't in after: rotten roasted Pimp
Was swallowed in; and next the parboiled Imp;
From whom he gravie squeis'd: which scall'd his tongue;
The Pander lying at the fire long
Was dried away: whereat the Devil vexed;
And swore by Hell, what ere he met with next
He Would make no bones on it. With his griping claw
He tore the Cutpurse, and he eats him raw.
A bone (being greedy) in his stomach sticks:
And he perceiving, that the bloody flix
Was like to take him; boiled into a Jelly
The Prodigal, to ease his rumbling belly.
To stay the flux, the gull was neatly fried;
The letcher gum'd, being finely cut and dried,
Was whift away in smoke: the smoking Cell
Is found on Earth; 'twas used to be in Hell. the smoke.

The Officer escaped, this once, ('it was late)
For he may turn Informer to the State,
And find out such Delinquents. If he can
I Will have him put in Print, a gallant man!
But this unwelcome guest, grown full, he groans,
To broil the marrow out, he burnt the bones. Bones burnt

His train must eat the scraps, though he begins;
The sauce was all brains, livers, hearts, and sins.
Their drink was blood, but from the buttrie hatch
A little divill sprung, who sings a Catch.
Never were Angels entertaind the devils song

As we have bin, to swell with mirth:
We Will break the Jail where we were chaind
To lick up the honey and Cream of the earth.
with hay down down, etc.
This Castle, and the fare we found
Have pleased our princely humors well,
Lust leavens blood, theft tears the ground,
To make us free trading 'twixt earthworms and hell.
with hay down, etc.
The scandalous priest, that lives at ease
Who studies earth, and sucks her store,
His state he spends his lusts to please,
And a hundred a year to furnish his whore.
with hay down, etc.
I like the cunning cutpurse Jade,
That (...) twins of sin; if she
Be questioned for her theiving trade,
She Will swear he would have ravished her, or it was her fee
with hay down, etc.
That gallant wench that lies at stake,
To seize a prey, her Pimp made bold,
Most quarrel with him, for her sake,
She Will hug him, to save him, then pilfer his gold
with hay down, etc.
Our noble friend that keeps his Pincks,
Steals, pawns, and sells by common vote;
And if his wife with sorrow finks,
He Will starve her, or kick her, or else cut her throat,
with hay down, etc.
Take pleasure, fear not sin, nor shame,
You babes of Night, fly from despair:
Joy, wealth, and praise, shall guard his name
Who honors Diabilo prince of the Air.
with hay down, etc.
Then having finished all; a whirlwind rose;
The hel-bred furies did begin to close the passage

Divisions ranks, and files, and with a wound,
They forc,d a passage through the trembling ground:
But left a blaste behind, resolves the doubts,
That you would believe that hell lies thereabouts.
Are sinners torment proof, that they do take
Delight in their undoing? who can make Moral.

The angry Heavens smile? or gaping hell
Take bribes for souls, when lusts like Seas do swell
Beyond all bounds? where furious winds do cast
Those straggling torments, till they run their last:
Which thirsty earth drinks up, or angry time,
For their assault converts them into slime.
So Mortals do, pass reasons rules, and please
Their senses, till a writ of little case
Be sent from heaven, then their heart misgives,
Whose (...) one day, whose torment ever lives.
Earth drinks their joys alive: and hell receives
The slime at (...), the trees, the fruit, and leaves.
Are fit for fire, or like the fox, whose prey
Is stole at night, but eaten in the day.
This theife is so gentle, he makes his den
A Poultrers shop. A Rabbit, and a hen
Lie by his side: and at his back a goose;
So thrives a while, at last the dogs get loose,
And catch the crafty fox, his flesh is tore,
His plots are are spoiled: his Cribidge stole before,
Now (...) for want of eating, Ah! me thinks,
Here Is meat, sharp sauce, and yet my subject (...),
For want of seasoning, being peece-meal cut,
Into the Devils Lardar they are put.
Who plays the Caniball: and still he strives
With black reproach to crown their dying lives.
SECT. XX.
To share their boungs, three Beggars meet,
One stunke erewhile, but now made sweet.
The second pass, the third (...) treat,
Their begging tone is not complete:
The Rules to beg, on what they feed;
Their Trade and triumph, how agreed,
From all oppressions they are free,
How merry they at parting (...).
I Walked alone, my brain on Fancies fed,
The man in the Moon being newly gone to bed,
My light was all confined within my breast,
My ears were open, forward, still I pressed,
Till at the last I spied a glimmering shine,
And heard a voice, which made my Muse incline
To tune her song anew. Three mandies did
Divide their boungs: the matter should be hid.
One had his nightcap brought him, and his Ruff,
His Gown, clean Lynen; every thing enough
To please his humor. He is very grave Accommodations

His Leg's unti'd; his pleasure was to have
His Crutches out of fight; he cleares his throat
With butter'd-Ale, to help his begging note.
The others young, (a whipping bought his pass)
Not borne a Beggar as the other was:
He Is changed from top to toe; he feels no smart
His arme's restored, his sores were made by Art.
But looking towar'ds the right, I did epsy
A Doxie lately bottomed, which did cry
Salva the King of Beggars! let the rest
In bowsing Kenadoes be ever blessed!
Then altogether they began to prate
Of City businesses, of Church, and State,
Where they should beg to morrow, such a place
Brings in most coin, the other gives more grace
To our endeavors: Fleet Street shall be thine,
Turn-style is his, the Temple-lane is mine.
It Is late, they must divide what they have got,
There Is but a Mark betwixt them: but the Lot
Falls double on the Seignor. I was fain
To bring you both into a begging strain. begging tones.

Yet, thou beg'st out of turn; nor can thou cry
With doleful tones, to move the Passers by
To draw their bounty. Thou should show thy sore
To make their purses open: then our store
Would be increased. But Tib does beg with grace,
She Will howl out, (...) your Worship, make a face,
To coin a groat at once: She Is young in years,
But old in cunning: her dissembling tears
Will make a Usurer a penny spare,
So in her prayers he may have a share.
There Is not a day, if once I sit but down
But is a Noble-day: alas, a Crown daily gains

Will hardly bear my charge! a dish of meat
Would cast one half on it: many things I eat
Which are not common: now and then I have
A Pullet, and a Tart; sometimes a Crave, Fine fare.

A Pigeon-pye, a Woodcock, or a Goose,
A Pig, a dish of Larks; let me but loose,
I know what comforts age. Beife is but course,
Veal's waterish, mutton gross, and Pork is worse,
I cry and hold my Leg, some laboring gull
Gives me a penny, when my purse is full.
When he (perhaps) has not aishilling left
To keep himself. Then begging joined with theft,
There is no better Trade. I have excuse
To save my money which I have at use,
To keep my port, and credit to the last, his port, his Port.

When all my merry begging days are past.
How ever all the day I seem to men,
When I come home, I am no beggar then.
What er'e I ask, I have for my delight,
My Table's spread with meat, my bread is white.
A fire, slippers, and a Cup of Ale,
Good Wine, well suggar'd, with a merry tale,
To cheat the slow pac't minutes: I am free
From all suspicion by my Beggerie. the Begger's Triumph.

Who Will seek for money in a Beggars house,
The Proverb is, there is nothing but a
Though I keep Fellons goods, I Am quit from shame,
The harmless Beggar is both old and lame.
Come, let us share our boungs, thou must away,
My entered Rogue! ten groats shall be thy pay.
My little Gill, thy subtle antique tricks (...)

Gain four shillings, I Will have the other six.
This parting Cup shall drown all care and sorrow,
Chuck thou art mine to night, and his to morrow.
As do the Snakes in Dunghills, bre'd, and thrive,
And have their vents to keep their stinck alive, Moral.
So do this brood of vermin, baske all day
To suck the spoil; at night they part the prey.
Those rotten Vassals, cannot choose but see
They are the Drones which rob the painful Be.
To all that is begging-base they are agreed,
They Are (...) for the (...) then for breed.
They swarm like Catterpillars: none can stand
Before their mouths: they cover all the Land.
They are the sores of England, which do run
Almost past cure. Alas they have begun
To bring the body low! let lusty Knaves
Be whip't to work, and hampered up for slaves.
Let Bridewells join to guard these begging whores
Which breed like Mice, they are the greatest sores.
The weak might then be kept, the blind and Lame
'Pon Charity, our Kingdom quit from shame.
If they were dealt with, as they are displaid,
In half an age those Rats might be destroyed
SECT. XXI.
Her,e Officers are guilty found,
A Sodomite, a Spy, our ground
Breed Monsters, now, the Soldiers punck,
The Reformado shameful (...);
The ramping Dame one robs the State,
The choice of pincks, the Harlots rate.
To take a bribe, this cannot brook:
Two Bawds twice burnt; a Frenchman took.
When swarfie night had mufled up the Queen
With clouds of darkness, sable vails, in spleen
Were spread before the Stars; their twinkling light,
Must look tow'ards home, accused by envious night:
All Colors were alike; she seemed to have
The glory of the world, bound in a grave. Fancies.

The watch was set, the Court of guard was placed,
The spies went forth, bold sinners were disgracd,
Though masked with darkness. By and by they brought
A rabble rout, that sold themselves for naught,
To purchase hell on earth. A Captain came
That spit out oaths; I must not tell his Name.
A damme blade, for he will take it in snuff;
He Is dawbd with silver lace, and clad in buffe.
But pennylesse poor slave! the night before
He had a Crown, but that he met a whore, A Damie Blade:

That robbed him of his wits, to trade with sin,
He to the bargain gave his money in.
He was a plunderer, roving up and down;
Just such a one would have betrayed the Town.
A theif in Office. Ever until that,
This swash was judged to be a beggars brat.
But here is a Mayor, that can keep his Jade
At hard meat all the year; and drive a trade
Of robbing by a word. This Country Votes Mayor. Plunder.

Can justify: but he will cut their throats
If they complain. His Colonel's out
And when he went, he cared hi Doxie down,
Until his shame increast, and coin was spent;
His Tenants plundered, cannot pay his rent. A Colonel.
At Basing, Redding, or at Maidenhead,
He drops his ware, and he is gone to bed
Without his supper; having little ease,
His brains, and cash are morgag'd for disease.
But here s a woman, that is feign to stay
In Town a while, to get her husbands pay:
Ye died with wounds; and while she stays in town,
She Will truck with hell, to bear her charges down.
And then she will leave: ere this she'ad changed her ground
Her bawd has still a noble in the pound.
Sir, here is a Sodomite, a soldier too, The Bawd a Noble in the pound.

A damned Cab: that used much to woo
An Incubus, and he will sell men's lives
For pence a piece. He thinks because he thrives A Sodomite.

That Hel's his friend. He must commit Incest,
Or else a Rape, or bugger any beast.
He Is like the Dutchman, hell has made so bold
That ravished women, having stole their Gold.
He Is for the Subjects Liberty, and will a mad rub.

Die a good Protestant. He Will only kill
The Kings ill wishers. Here Is his only friend
Has still three wives alive. And it is his end
To take another, help him in this case,
For all his wives are distant from this place. 4. Wives.

She must have means (for here awhile he will stay)
To keep him brave, till he can run away.
What greasy piece is this? this is a spy,
That has been long in service; feign to fly
For Conscience sake. His company was lost
At Edgehill fight: was ever Captain crossed A conceited Captain.

As he has been? he was beyond Sea maimed,
At Hoast-end fiege, but he is here maintaind
For Information. He does sculk about,
In bawdy Cells, to send down news, no doubt,
He has allowance: and his queans for naught;
As for the running in the Raines he bought.
He Is fiery faced; his company was raised
Within his bosom: of ill spirits praysd, hit Condition.

He gives this Motto, (and he kicks at Fate)
Au Segnior, Captiano, grand Souldate.
A monstrous woman! to the guard we will send her,
A parboild frow, and of the neuter gender.
Who always waits to snare men in a gin; a Frow.

And claims a privilege to make them sin.
To beg sometimes, and otherwhile complain,
Then breath out wishes; any thing to gain
A mony'd guest. Oh! now 'tas found a spark,
That Is flig indeed, a walking in the dark:
The Jades are all too course: this frap must borrow
A finer tib: they shall be paid to morrow.
If Gill comes from the Knight, that did so seek
To gain her love; she is hired for a week.
Here Is a common soldier, who was found
At letchers base, within the Devils ground. A common Soldier.

He Is dressed with rags; nor can he get his pay
To cloth himself. He hopes to see the day
When theft shall be in fashion: yet he must
Eat, drink, game, whore; all on the common trust.
Who Is this, his trull? indeed forsooth I went his Trull.
Down to the Army; with no ill intent,
Only to see my friends; and use my trade,
The Marshall used me roughly; that he made
Me leave the field; my Love and I to rest,
Did think (in Winter) Garrison was best,
To ease each other: is it any sin?
He pimps without, whiles I do work within.
With Cabies we are suffered, day and night,
Their plunder and their Wenches, mak'em fight.
Pray Marshall keep'em safe.
Sir; here is a Reformado, who being drunk,
He reeld about the street; and met a punck, A Reformado. a Belt paun'd.

Who had her waiting Maid; he took 'em up,
In Druery lane; together they must sup;
He Is charged with eighteen pence; and then he felt
Into his fob; but he must pawn his belt
To free his heels. Did that discharge the score?
His Sword had gone too; but 'twas pawned before.
He Would take a lodging; but she scorned to swive
Under a Crown, with any man alive.
More night-work yet? Oh, here is a ramping Dame,
Composed with baseness, impudence, and shame:
Pray, who'se your Clerk? thou lying paultry spy!
Do dare to prate to such a one as I? Impudence.

If Courtiers were at home, and all the Peers,
I should find friends; thou durst not for thy ears
Say half so much: for I took many a crown
Of Courtiers weekly; they being out of Town
My trading's low; but I was one that went
To cry for peace, and thousands, with intent
To force it on; and level all our Forts, Cry for Peace. Make

To let the King come in. But false reports
Make us Malignants. I shall live to see Malignant wishes.

Our Fortunes raised, and you as low as we:
Or higher by the Gallows. Then we will sing,
Hang all the Roundheads: we are for the King.
Here Is Impudence indeed!
A man in Office comes, that is very grave,
You would not think that he should prove a Knave,
He has a trick unknown, to raise the rate; Parish Officers.

I am jealous on it, I doubt he robs the State.
He Is like the Coleman, for he peeles the poor,
And spends the Parish stock to keep a whore.
Does he convert our seasments into crimes?
I wish there were no reason for these Rimes.
No new-made Statesman, nor no proud Priest can be Sub-Committee men.

Close Patron, to this bearded villainy.
A Sub-Committee-man? oh! let him pass,
He rides in State; he will call thee fool and Ass:
To question him: I doubt he is not right,
I Am vexed to see him cause my purse is light.
She second, met a Lady that was wise,
Fair, young, and virtuous too, (...) Husband lies
Fined a D. linquent: but if she would consent
To be his Prostitute, he would be content
To get the charge removed: when (...) come in
He Will gain a Vote, make taxes, pay for sin.
Another of 'em? he has laid his baits,
To snare his partner, cause he hates deceits,
And will not cheat the State; and therefore he
Shall be sequestr'd: but this treachery
Is laid to view: seized goods he would purloyne
Praised for himself: head pocket up the Coin
For's private use. Oh! how that Province grieves
That must be subject to a pack of theives!
Wise Senators being in their choice deceived,
Truth's in exile, and rights's by trust bereaved.
If public men, for private ends shall cope,
And sue divorce 'twixt Charity and hope,
Let plundered men fit still: poor Soldiers cry,
They may confide, until they starve and dye.
Here Is Null the neuter, that could never abide.
To draw his Sword: or stick to either side.
But which prevails is his: and he will be
A man of War, when all the world is free.
A noted Letchers found, that used to seek
Varieties of sinkes; for twice a week
He must have choice; this Incubus is bred a (...) Letcher.

Of Gomurs race, it is the Maidenhead
He aims at most. This vassals worse then mad.
For Killegrue and Mints are not so bad:
A Commit of divills, chus'd him well,
To trade by wholesale for the pit of hell strife

What, three at once? two drunkards were at strife
For this fine Trull, and she is a married wife,
But leaves her husband. He that has most cash
At any time, may have this nastie trash. most coin

Oh here comes one, that will not take a Fee
Of any man, but if they do agree trade free

If he will send a thng to make her fine
She loves her lust, she (...) not trade for coin.
Two Charcole bawds, being burned twice a piece,
Did spread a net, and took a flock of geese,
To pluck their Feathers, they to dress them strive,
Some stewd, some roasted, some were burned alive.
They wink at one another, with a grace; 2 burnt Bawds

Thee'l have their houses in an other place,
A place of fame, betwixt them they maintain
A Surgeon private paid with hellish gain.
This Frenchman comes to night, to be a guest.
Me been a Sowder, an wood nom been priest,
Me feet for Anlish Croons: an wood non have The Frenchman.

Tashentelman go goon, it is boon me crave
Dat me (...) pos; me none more sick been seen:
Me non Malignant. Me been vor de Queen.
See here you troop of fondlings; you are bent
To please the prince of darkness; his intent morrall

Is to requite you, payments please you well
You'are all of the black Regiment of hell.
You live without a soul, and you do make
Sinful conceit your leader: you mistake
To fall in love with ruin. Such a sink
"Will venom paper, and 'twill poison Ink,"
Is common reason lost? sense will be heard,
With mournful groans: that hell will be afeard
To stand before it: you will with terror see it,
Sin, shame, and torment shall together meet?
Fraught with disdain, yet empty tubs, you sownd
Your misery possessed; but when you are bound
With Chains of darkness, and clost prisoners cast
Into the gronndlesse dungeon, when your last
Vapor shall vanish, who will stand for you?
Heaven will despise you: Hell will claim her due.
Before the Clouds grow black, turn from your sin:
Or else 'twill call eternal darkness in.
SECT. XXII.
A Monster raisd, that is espied
And by a ragged bawd descried
And pointed out, the monster ple ads
To justify the Life it leads.
And blames that fowl, and all her (...)
That roost with all for pence a piece,
Provoking meats; this must be tried
When that is to the gallows tied.
BEfore the Queen of night, had made dispatch
of her resignment, or discharged the watch
Of Lanthorn-service, or the blushing maid
Before old Tython had her flags displaid
Or fairer Venus had unmasked her face,
To tempt the Shepherd from his warmer place.
I to perform my task, did walk the round,
And searched about; at last a thing I found,
Which made me wonder: as it there did stand
T would fight with man, or woman hand to hand.
It Is face was like a woman's, but behind
A seemed a Divill of the better kind,
It was nor man, nor woman, bird, nor beast
It was bespoke of Hell, to make a Feast.
It was a fearful Monster: no man may
Without a blush behold it in the day,
I did conclude at last, (I veiw'd it is pitch)
'Twas not a Devil, but the devils witch.
'Twould rob, and steal men's goods, and cut a purse
And help all them that could but swear and curse.
Yet it had learned some charity from hell,
For those that would believe, 'twould raise a spell,
Bring in the mould-bred Devils, call'em men,
And help you to your goods and Purse again:
But you must call it Mistress; and confess
It Is truly Divellfi'd: then 'twill express
A Serpents love: 'twill swagger, strut, and roar,
Save that the gender's wrong 'twould turn a whore,
And Pimping is away it does applaud,
But being old enough 'twill be a Baud.
'Twas fed with dainties (being puffed with pride)
And something for a monkie left beside.
It overcharged mine eyes. I turned about,
And presently I found a woman out,
Being poor diseased, and ragged, and her Crime
Had made her turn a Bawd before her time.
She spied that pampered Monster, and she ran
To take the prize; she thought t'had bin a man.
But finding 'twas a thing that did invade
Her Custom (coming on) to spoil her trade,
She did disgorge her self; and to begin
Thus she accused it of a Common sin.
What mankind stuffed art thou? thou art in rage
To lead the front of Sinners on the Stage.
They say thou wast a man; but since the Devil
Made one part like a Woman, that thy Evil,
To all that see thee may appear: the rest
Is doubled in thy shame to make a beast.
Thou entertainst the Roysters of the age,
And highway Thieves; each one a hackney page,
Dressed like a Man: they domineer and roar;
At such a price thou do provide a whore
For him that is unfurnish't. But the rate
Is always double when the Thief comes late.
One that with friends, and Husband lives at strife,
A broken Madam, or a Courtiers Wife,
A chambermaid that is weded to her crime,
Or Gentlewomen, that are past their prime,
Starch't over with painting, fitting them for vice,
Out of the Wardrop suiting to the price.
If any be in danger for his theft,
Or any whore of whiping, thou art left.
To fetch'em off: for at the Sessions still
Thou brib'st the men, or else keep'st back the bill.
(We know when Sessions is begun by thee)
And for thy service thou do get a fee.
Thy Ruffians go in Scarlet, or in plush;
Thy Truls in silks: There Is not a modest blush
Amongst them all. Thou, thou do hide their sin
And this the evidence that I give in
Against thy knot, and thee, another day.
Come, slash and Cut, have any thing to say?
Thou threadbare witch! what beggarly and bold!
Am I thy fellow? I can hardly hold
My tallens from thy flesh: should I deprive
My self of proffits? any way to thrive
I mean to use. How should brave hacksters be
Preservd, and furnished, were it not for me?
No low pris'd ware, shall come within my door;
(She that will truck for sixpence is a whore)
I company with Gallants, Lords, and Knights,
And please their humors, to increase delights,
I furnish them with Lasses: who dare say
I am a Bawd to deal with such as they?
I fear no Law, nor Prison: now and then
I have bin in; but I came out again.
The Justices, the Jury, and the clarks
Do know and favor me: the velvet Sparks
Will plead my cause: Or any thing they will do,
Run, ride, make friends, drop down a piece or two.
To make my cause run smooth: why then should I
Fear or forsake my trade until I die?
I live in pleasure: Cocks, Bears, Bulls and Plays:
Bring fresh delights. What sweet and merry days
Have I enjoyed! Then Dogs, and Monkies be
At other times good Company for me:
I drink Tobacco, wine, but toward the shot
I break a jest; but never pay a Jott.
Why speak I thus to such a one as thou?
I Have justified my self. I Will tax thee now.
How dos my spirit boil, to hear what trade
Thou driv'st for death? how every Common Jade
Is entertained by thee? thy seely Geese
Will dable in the dirt for pence a piece;
Thy halfe-fac'd frows will put a man to fright;
They beg all day, and play the whore at night.
The'r slic't and dried: yet one of them must be
Extremely modest; hardly won: for she
Is tired at the Brokers, she must seek
A penny more: she pays a groat a week.
Another's soon persuaded, she will yield
With words on trust: for in the open field
She keeps a Market: there the vermin play,
Who scapes at night, she takes him in the day.
The third is marked with reding: she will try
(Tempt, fawn and call upon the passers by
To come to Hell, if she can draw them (so)
She burns them half a live before they go.
The last lies to be cured of her curse;
She Will deal wi'ye even hand, and spare your purse.
She has provoking means to stir up lust,
One must be whip't with rods; another must
Be beaten out of doors, and for his (...)
Cool at the gates of Hell; it is hot within.
Another's made a skullin: he must wash
The dishes, and be knocked. and then the trosh
Must kiss to make amends, until desire
Is by degrees, converted into fire.
The common cheaters when they take a prey
Do come to thee by turns: (the more fools they)
Thou can not help them in a dangerous case!
Nor at the Sessions dare thou show thy face.
Who come to thee to night, the next be
Hid in a hole, for fear when thou do see
A Gorget, that is for Cis; a handsome Dress
Must be for Gin; the wastcoate is for Besse,
Being trimmed with stolen goods, their price is raised
Thou art maintained, and hell and thee both praisd:
Thou art a baud, a theif, an out-worn whore,
If e're I come to Tyburn I Will say more.
I was in hope the morn by this would smile,
But it is grown darker then it was ere while;
A tedious night! nor can I once forecast
To ease my Muse, until the night be past.
Those that do sin in State, do here foretell
That they shall have the hottest room in hell.
For those that live to sin, and sin to live,
Shall find what Motto Death and Hell do give.
They purchase pain and shame with greedy sinning,
Whose life is death, whose end is deaths beginning.
Sin is at ods, I need not tell you how;
Hell did agree, but it is divided now.
She Will never yield, till she has all she had;
When she is chok't, her Tenants will grow mad.
SECT. XXIII.
The Devil with a Priestling meets,
A Soldier comes, the Devil greets;
He rails at first: the feinds unkind;
How he in sorrow speaks his mind.
The Priest is charged, of his advise,
How he did tempt the Devil twice.
Pandorssus tried, how he did woo,
Casts off one Whore, and takes in two:
The dreadful fight, the combat past;
Their healths, and triumph at the last.
NOw hell will sound a parle, before tshe'l beat
Up her travail; or seem to make rereat:
She musters all her forces, views their scope,
Draws up the rear: in the forlorn hope
The Prelates Train was placed. She iounds again
(The Devil has reserves as well as men)
But light (though distant) scorns to stoop, or see
Her issue join with this black Pedigree.
The Devil met a Priestling, where came in
A bloody rustic; who had lately bin
A suitor to this feind, that he might take The Devil and a Priest.

Men's lives, and plunder freely; who did make
Him promise to that end: but, cause he fails
Souldate grows mad, and at the Devil railes.
Have I been servant to thee many years? A Soldier.

And took thy word for all? as it appears
By my success: nor did I fear to kill
The innocent, being promp't to what was ill.
Rob, tear, swear, curse at those that did rebel
A'gainst thy Laws. Devil.

Just so do we in Hell.
Soldier. And so thou wilt serve me too: and for my gains,
Thou Wilt send black death, with torment for my pains.
Is It come to this?

Devil. I pray thee tell me how
Our Plots should thrive, if we should not allow
False Protestations, with the breach of truce, The Devils plots.

To cheat conceit? such subtletie's in use.

Soldier. Now thou dealst plainly, had thou don't at first
I had been happy.

Devil. Now thou art accursed.
We try all means your senses to invade,
Sometimes we will be gentile; but it is our trade
To chain your reason to the breath of men,
Who are our journey men: and now and then
They send such Chapmen to our darksome cave,
To purchase tombs with life, that loathed a grave.
They can do more then we, being in request,
Our names are stained; what is by us expressed
Is put in use by Deputies. But we
Work privately.

Soldier. Ah! to what misery
Have I engaged my self! if Earth and Hell
Combined against me, is it in vain to tell
My cause to Heaven?

Devil. Ask this flattring Priest,
That goes in velvet slippers; give a list
Of all thy rapes, and he perchance may give
An absolution; his conceits do live
With wastefull hopes: being pregnant in his evil,
He thinks in pride, to go beyond the Devil.
All Learning dwells in him: what falls beside
Are but the concrets of his inward pride.

Soldier. You're comforters alike! thou did begin
A bloody Plot; and slily drew'st him in,
To be thy Executioner: and what is ill
Is but the execution of thy will;
Being of the Horsleech kind, and mettle free The Priest tempts the Devil.
To take thy easy stamp.

Devil. He tempted me:
For when the stubborn Scot did give abuse,
To his Divinity, that was in use,
Du ni'd the gudly bukes, he raised his voice
In folio suddenly, and then made choice
Of my assistance: when he could not prate
His hunderts out; nor could retain that State,
He vomits blood afresh: and then indeed
I got an Office, loved to see men bleed
As well as he; and when I went to fight,
I longed to have the Parson in my sight.

Soldier. How are poor souls deluded! that are taught
By such to loose themselves! now am I brought
For sale to Death. The trembling Earth does gape
To let me down; and would commit a rape
Upon my reason too; the shivering air
Benums my senses, but then, black despair
Revives my grief again: the saucy wind,
That Is quarterd, with the anguish of mind:
Makes Earthquakes in my breast; nor can I tell
Of one weeks pay to bear my charge to Hell.
Shame joins with terror, to increase my evil:
Oh pity me!

Devil. Ask mercy from a Devil?
I shall be made thy Jailer, never look
For pardon any more, now the black book
Is laid before thee.

Soldier. Reverend Sir come (...)
Oh now! or never quell the rage of sin.

Priest. Shake off thy dumps, and lose not thy renown;
Had not the Service Book been voted down,
I Would conjure out this Fiend, do thou but fight,
Defend our cause, thou need'st not fear the sight
Of men and Devils, if thou do forsake
Our blessed way, the devil will thee take:
Well, be advised.

Soldier. Away ye Fiends, away,
You both desire my ruin, you would destroy
Me, soul and body, thou have laid a (...)
To catch poor souls, of which thou should take care
Thou limb of Antichrist, is this the rest
Thou did propose? thour't proctor for the beast,
The Devil tells more truth, I do defy
A seeming friend, a real enemy.
Go, changeling, go.

Priest. Can Idiots understand,
What Is best for peace, and freedom of the Land?
And such a one, as I be still to seek,
That understand the Hebrew and the Greek,
In ways of truth?

Devil. Ho, -- ho, here is dainty sport,
Because tha'st been a flattrer at the Court,
Chok't with conceit, thy parts do raise the rate;
I lived in heaven, yet lost my happy state.
Thy fall is coming.

Priest. I had best be gone,
This Fortune Tellers odds is two to one.

Soldier. No trust in clods of clay, let men address
Themselves toward heaven, for their happiness.
When this discourse was past the knot dissolved.
A'crooked piece of filth that was involved
Within a trebble curse, came crawling by,
And after him his trul, who used to lie, Pandorsus,

To take him captive: many years they had
Been jogging to the Devil, he was mad,
To wed this tub of treasure, kept for store,
Though lovely by contraries, (...) befote,
P andor sus now declines her, he has found
At prison base upon the common ground:
Two Punks new underlaid, and in his view,
Male a the best of them, was vamp't (...)
And Furia had been bottomed, had not she His change.

Been over dried near Smithfield, but if he
Can turn old Querpa off, that he may have
Those pretty pugs to drill him to his grave,
He Will give a double fine: it is agreed,
That he shall work for death, and he will make speed,
Left hell should be too full, before his lust,
Commits his rotten carcass to the dust.
Well, now the wantons meet, and Querpa sees
That Furia had his heart, and Maleas fees,
Were fruits of pleasure, she advanced her tongue,
Would you ingrose my dear? I Have had him long,
Above these fifte n years, and I will claim
Priority in trust, it is my aim,
Still to enjoy my sweet.

Furia. What needst thou move?
Malea and I are partners in his love,
He works, and brings us gains, he'ad rather piue
And press his heart, then we should want for coinc,

Querpa. I cannot hold my hands, I Will have thy nose,
And tear thy eyes out, such a pair as those,
Bewitch my joy! these (...) birds of prey,
May chatter charms and doetheir work by day:
I vow I Will make you pack.

Malea. I Will vex her more,
Here are the clothes which yesterday he wore,
Left as the pledges of his free intent (...)

To wait on us in lovely merriment:
What ere he has is ours, his daughter now
Gets naught from him, but what we do allow.
Chuck? Chuck is right.

Pandor. Ha, if you find meflinch,
Then blame me, no, I scorn to stir an inch
From what I promise: Querpa, you are old,
Tuf, dry, unactive, sense conjealjd with cold:
Go, trudgeto feeble Dick: for I have made
My choice a new.

Querpa. I am no out-worne jade.
Thou Varlet of the tub! I Will make thy name
A common stench, thou excrement of shame!
Chief in the roll of rogues, in Bride-well died,
Twice free of Newgate, once to Tyborn tied:
Deny my Love? How like an ass he stands,
Come once again into the hangmans hands, A fight.

He Will choke thy mirth. Impatient of disgrace,
He tore her head-clothes off, she scratcht his face.
But then his chieflings came unto his aid,
He got the day, poor Querpa now is paid:
For tongue tale scores being fled; the bonny three
Drink healths in riumph of the victory:
They reingage themselves, his valors known,
Together with his love, they will have it blown
With th'silver Trump of same, that all may find The triumph Moarall.

The rich borne issue of Pandorsus mind.
The Devil breaks his covenants with men,
When they are in a straight: and they again
With one another in a frenzy fit,
He gains his ends, because he has more wit;
When their's are frustrate. When the Hare
To quarter freely where the hungry Hounds
Keep randevouze; or if the Partridge treats
With angry Hawks about her choice of meats,
What will the issue be? these did agree,
That are discover, d here: but now you see
How justice parts'em: if they do rebel
In change of sins, how will they do in hell,
Where plagues are crowned? for, there the hungry flames
Are in commission; bodies, souls and names
Must 'bide the arbitrament: they need not fight,
To make their curse complete. Day's turned to night,
Where horror, (free from chains) does gnaw the sore;
Makes hope as blind, as reason was before:
And greedy sorrow, feeding upon tears,
Cender's despair, which rules over fears
With imbred terror, born by helpless grief:
Shame's no abortive: death commands in chief.

SECT. XXIV.
The Serving-man, relate what he
Had known of's Masters misery:
His Coach, Sedan, what Letters fees.
He falls from Satin to his Freeze.
How sin brings death, the purchased strife:
A Villain that betrayed his wife.
BEfore the vails were drawn, or dimfac'd night
'Pon composition, would resign her right
To Hespers train, before old Tithons head
Was raysd with glory from his frosty bed,
To show his hoary locks: nor did the day
Peep through the streaked Tiffany, of gray.
For Chantecleers Commission was not sealed
To sound a parle; nor any way revealed
To bring Aurora, in her silver pride,
To storm the works of darkness: yet I spied
Two silent walkers; one was much afraid;
And I perceived she was a Chambermaid,
The other was a Serving-man: for he
I soon discovered by his liverie.
He being stayed confessed he did belong
To one that kept his coach when he was young,
For Hackney ware, and feasted them in Town,
And in the Country cared them up and down,
Who had at every stage, a common Inn,
Where he did put himself to sale for sin.
He had sedans, which he did use to send
To fech his Minions private, and did spend
His means upon them: Now he paid his whore,
When cash was low, he sinned upon the score,
Sometimes he borrowed of a Cavaliere,
That used to hire a Strumpet by the year,
Thei'd feel his pockets pulses ere ther'd join,
And have their courses when he had no coin.
They Would often be at ods, then he would curse
The minntes of expense; his humble purse
Did languish for his riot: she would rail,
Because the suit depending on her --
Was staid with an injunction: high-courts writs
Put down the Common Pleas, and bring their wits
To bill and answers, if their orders must
Be seeming prohibitions, to their lust,
And stop their commings in, they will sin the more.
(Both orders and decrees were broke before,)
Subpoena shame, their mischiefs to recruit;
Again, at non-equity they will try a suit.
If any maid was handsome in his eye,
He Would lay a snare to trap her, and would try
With gold to win her, such a one as she
Was made for pleasure not for (...),
He Will take a chamber for her, make her fine,
And keep her at his cost, if thou't be mine:
Thou shall not want; most modest gives content,
Another time she that is most impudent.
He sends his pimping Letters, I must be
His whiskin, else, we never could agree.
Here is a copy to his Mistress which
Has spent him much, her fingers ofted ich
To nim his gold, her answer I Will rehearse,
But you may read, for they are both in verse.
His Letter. To the Mistress of my Affection, at Her Chamber in the Strand,
Mistrisse I. G.
Sweetheart thou art my chief delight,
I dreamed I was with thee to night,
Since I have seen thee, time appears
To me as five and forty years:
I cannot eat, nor drink, nor sleep,
But sometimes sighth, and sometimes weep.
I Will freely take what e`re thou giv'st,
The latter should excel:
I Am thine while thou in credit liv'st,
Poor, or diseased, farewell.?
Till then thine, for pleasure. I.G.


He Is now declining, Satin, Silk and Plush
Are turned to freeze: and yet he will not blush
Though all men jeer him; he to gain his ease
Will take some wholesome drudge, that his disease
May be removed to her. A hellish woing!
For he minds nothing but his own undoing.
He runs in debt, but never means to pay:
Had I my wages I would never stay.
His former bawd, because he lest her stew
Comes railing to him, there`s a quarter due
For retaile dealing, and for common fees;
He`s sinking now, and falling by degrees
Down to his purchas`d place; where he will meet
With course salutes: sin sifted from the sweet.
I served another gentleman, whose use
Was to defile himself; all foul abuse.
He judg`d as gentle qualities, and when
The damned haxters met, they were the men
That could excel in vileness, drink, swear, roar,
Or take a purse; and he that kept his whore
At greatest rate; they thought these bloody times
Would grant them pattents, patronize their crimes.
If any sought to turn him from the sting,
A rounded knave! a Rebel to the King.
Should not control him: he did never deny
His lusts a vent, his reason still did dye
To keep his curse alive: his soul thus tossed,
Till credit, means, with man, and all were lost.
Sin took advantage when his bones were dried,
Put him a year in hell before he died.
Another once I knew, that did a fact
Which impudence did blush at; such an act
Was never heard of; he would give a fee
To one that should commit Adultery A Villain.

With his own wife, and he would have at hand
His Evidence with him, who there would stand
To see it done, that he might freely take
Occasion, that he might his wife forsake.
And turn her off with shame, then he would find
Content in wickedness: and set his mind
To pimp for Venus, as I came along
I heard a noise, but still a woman's tongue.
Did carr' the sound away: she is one man's friend,
And deals with none but him: yet in the end
She Would trade with them by turns. Jack pays his shilling,
But that he is out of Town, she would not be willing.
This piece was over-hat they fell to words,
And then to blows; had not their state-bought swords
Bin bound unto the peace, they had not left
Until their pates, or else some post had cleft,
Their cloaks were put in prison for this crime,
Their cause adjourned until a purging time.
Is thy relation true, yes.
Can pity here take place? then summon fear,
That any men that are but inmates here Moral. Should

Should live like devils, pain from pleasure springs:
Contempt from sinful sweets, a thousand stings
Wait on the sinners joy, and when they must
Be kept close prisoners in the surly dust,
They Will meet their rising fresh when they shall run
To Mill Malis, which were here begun.
Like to the fouls of prey, that soar aloft,
Whose stomachs bribe their eyes: and seizing often
Upon the harmless birds, at last the Net
Does take them prisoners, where they dye in debt:
They Are pol'd like traitors, shame out-lives their gains
Who for example hang abroad in chains.
So, these despised Vultures soaring high,
Their pleasures are unwing'd, they fall and die
In debt to all the world, then who can tell
Their misery, but those that come from hell?
Fond dreams where Serpents are imbrac t for friends,
Contracting torments when the fable ends.
SECT. XXV.
Strange stories from a Chambermaid,
The Pimps employments are displayed,
The Justice, Watch, the Marshalls guard,
Protect the sinners for reward,
The Tavern pawns, a Spy espied.
Two sworn for hell, and how they di'd.
BY this the night began to be in fear,
The sweet-fac'd light beginning to draw near,
To bring the morning in, with rosy dawn,
With Officers in scarfes of cobweb Lawne.
To raise up forces which did all resort
To Phoebus which did scale the Royal Fort.
Without resistance, all within the line,
Was repossessed with his glittring shine.
Aurora raised, did send out many Spies,
With scouts and trumpets, being full of eyes;
With Ambuscadoes, who did (...) creep;
(The black faced Regiment being most asleep)
They seized their works, and pillag`d all within;
Kept those close prisoners, that had traitors bin,
To have their trial. Juno all in state
Made Vulcan horn`d by Venus advocate.
The sentence past, they being guilty found;
And Sol in pride riding the third days round
Must see the execution, from the stews,
Yet here`s a prisoner that will tell more news.
Indeed forsooth I am a Chambermaid,
When I was young I merely was betray`d
With shows of gold, rich fare, and brave attire,
A Gincrack like a Lady did me hire,
To be as her companion, till she brought
Me to her will; my honesty was bought,
Sold for disgrace, all sorts were entertain`d,
Who ever lost, of every one she gain`d
That had but coin, if any one seem`d poor,
She`d send Pimp Minor for a pocky whore,
To fit his rate: if any Spark came rich
She`d come in silk, and painted; if this witch
Was not accepted for her wrinkled face,
I must be trim`d to take my Mistress place.
If two or three came in pimp Major must, Pimp Majo

Take up some sinner on the brokers trust,
To gain a double Fee: our rates were higher
According to our beauty, and attire.
She`ad skill to cure her guests, being over-hat,
Or frenchifi`d; she had the more for that. The Baud. skill

If lads came thin, she`d send her Pimpes about.
To raise a Tumult; bring a totter`d rout.
Before some Tavern door, rail, swear and curse
At one another: so they`d cut a purse, Plots

Or pick a pocker; then they`d take their flight
To rob some house, being always in the night,
Were any of us taken in the dark,
We`d bribe the Justice, and We`d Fee his Clerk,
And (...) the lasses Were in fear, Robbers

When (...) away, on May day was a year,
About Long-Acre; Common stinking (...),
But they were freed and never had the lash.
For justice nimis was their friend, and can
Do courtesies: but they must pay this man,
And parish Officers will them enlarge,
Excuse their faults lest they should keep their charge.
At other times, our Pimps would much frequent
The shovell-bourds, the dicers, and they went
To Ordinaries to gamsters, bowling places,
To gain acquaintance, when they knew their faces,
Thei`d grow familiar: so they drew them in,
And made them tenants to the house of sin.
Gamsters and thieves, that drink the full Carouse,
Are the chief piilars or a Dawdy house.
We'd tell each other all: who is best for play,
Who, for the house, and who will freely pay;
Who Is pleasant for discourse, what slave does grutch,
Our common fees, and who will give too much:
We Will now seem chaste, but if the golden crew
Comes greedily, sirs, it is for love of you
We break our vows, beliwing what we say
The'l drop dust freely, when they are gone away
To jeer, or praise 'em, as we found em right.
It is our recreation and delight.
A Villain used our house that was accused
For ravishing two children: he abused
Them, as 'twas proved: hells factor gave consent
He should be freed, but damned the innocent.
A wise man's case, (his bribes were all but fees)
Fined, censured, and imprisoned, by degrees
Being judg`d for hell, stood for his Plaintiff sin;
And walking on her brinck she took him in.
When any feared our wenches were not sound,
The bawd would stand engaged to turn them round,
But they must pay for (...), if they will not
They run the hazard, every one his lot.
She Will name her golden guests, and make great brags
Such gallants use her house, if one in rags Golden Guests.

Comes to exchange a sin, and truck for shame,
He came by chance, nor does she know his name.
If Court and Term be here for every crime,
She Will ask a crown, but in Vacation time,
A (...) serves, she as once a year new whores;
Poor, sick, or old she turns them out of doors,
No man dares question her, for devils do
Grant her protection: being guilty too,
They Will but disclose teir shame, the common watch
Both harbor, and defend, and often hatch The Watch.

Some of our brood, their profit lies at stake,
And for the Constables and Beadles sake,
They Will wink at small faults, hood-wink sawey Laws:
And now and then a feeling in the cause
Would chase our fears, some Officers at first
Will lie in wait to take us, till their thirst
Turn to a surfeit, what is the Marshalls guard?
If in their walks they spy us, a reward
Will keep them silent. Many of them will
Protect us, to be partners in the ill.
We'd have them to the Tavernes, one of note
Did pawn his cloak, and I my peticote; Pawn.

Another left a watch, for want of coin,
To pay the shot; their love they did assign
To help us at a pinch, our time we spent
Free from all fear, in joviall merriment.
A greazy punck once in one house did lie,
An Oxford bawd, first, then a Basing Spy:
A bawd to her own child, who came to town
For information, walking up and down,
She was suspected to be much in debt,
And by a chance a Sergeant with her met,
And scrap't acquaintance with her, being weary
Arrested her, yet, she could not be merry,
A new filled bawd, now grown an out worn whore;
She (...) a breadth, and went upon the score,
Being begging ripe; but yet her bed was made
In ample sort too good for such a jade,
Out at the window in the night, by rope
She stole away, the hangman is in hope,
To find her shortly, he that do`s her see
And bring her in shall have a double fee.
She`s black, and brawny, shameless, in the close
She`s goggle ev`d, and ha`s a crooked nose,
Her lodging is near Westminster, and she
Haunts bawdy travernes, and where treachery
Is most in fashion; now she keeps her bed, Macquiers head

And drinks no sack, because Macquiers head
Is taken from their plot, `tis thought she had
A daughter for her time was full as bad.
But beautiful without, and yet within
The devil kept a count; she sold her sin
To him that bid most for it, or at least
A Royalist transform`d into a beast.
She took a Ladies name, her sinful leisure
Is tied to one man now, but at her pleasure
She`l change him for another; at the last Hells mouth

Thed devil made a match, and ty`d her fast
To one that did him service, what of hell
He had which made him proud, and what befell
Him at the last, is known; for in his pride
He fought for sin, fell down, and so he dy`d.
Her Epitaph
This vapering spark sprung from an unknown race
By Venus made a captain in the field;
But Mars was angry, when he saw his face,
A Soldiers look, unhorst him, made him yield,
First he was pillag`d, after seiz`d by death,
He`ad run away, save that he wanted breath.
His glorious Minnon hearing of the chance,
Being charg`d with sorrow fell into a trance;
But when she was recoverd, she began
To tear and rave, oh! where is that man, that man?
And shot a Pistol in her side; her breath
Was charged out, to let in Sergeant death.
Her Epitaph.
She`s buried here that should no burying have,
She sunk her self being overfraught with evil;
Her lusts before did make her bed a grave,
She`as quite undone her self to please the Devil
To meet her joy, she kill`d her self and fell,
Where love is cool`d: but beds are hot in hell.
You see vile actions spring from vain desires;
Which in their meeting kindle furious fires, Moral.

To scorch the sinners: like the knats by night,
They buz, and fly about the Candle light,
Being fearelesse of the issue; till by turns
The wings first scorcht, and then the body burns,
Or like the beasts, that travel many a mile,
One swinnes a brook, another leapes a style,
Some mir`d in a lake, some beaten blind,
Some leave their hoofs, and some their horns behind
All will not free them from the Butchers knives;
They buy those weary steps to sell their lives.
So here are all diseases, which, if well
Considered of, they might prevent a hell.
Alas! they but increase it! now my might
Must banished be; on Marry with the light. 54. Sect. of the first part.

The sores are searched, my patient must endure
Perpetual torments, or apply the cure.
SECT. XXVI.
What the ames declined by my muse
What night-born subjects she does nse:
The Authors Charge; by whom 'twas penned,
His answer to it, and there is an end.
MY muse, scarce treats with any one that fights.
For Princely crimes, nor of the new-made Knights
(...) lands do lie, that should maintain
Their worships titles, or what number slain,
To feed conceit; nor where they sell, or when:
Nor those ignoble ones that came again,
When riding paund their trust, nor of the cursed
Humors of such, whom blood must quench their thirst.
Nor how our brave Commanders in the West,
Have gained eternal fame; how they are blessed
From heaven with success: but if I may
Make truce with time, I Will view their acts by day:
Nor has she ransack't in the Cavies den;
Nor touched the Excize, nor Grand Committee men,
Nor of those flattering rimes, that can declare
A coward valiant, knaves beyond compare,
Nor of the false imprisoning of the just,
Nor what in traitors hands are left in trust,
Nor of the torments which the Laws endure,
How those make wounds, that should apply the cure.
But chides with beggar buff, and charms the pride
Of Major plund'rer; all that do divide
The spoils of mem, bawds, panders, whores, and pimps,
Thieves. Witches, sherks, the Devil and his Imps:
Gulls, letchers, jaylors, beadles, bribing Clerks,
Buffoons, base upstarts, drunkards, swagg'ring sparks,
That parle with lust, and for the Devil fight,
Make articles with hell, all found last night,
Now laid in view: the fowls were hard to find,
More hard to take; yet bats, you know, are blind.
But, here is a swash, drained from this dropsy age,
Who keeps his punk, attyred like a Page.
His second [rich] was husband to a Whore;
He Is but her cousin now, 'cause he is grown poor:
A Bridewell strumpet [salt] being moved with ire,
Tom ran away with all her whorish hire,
Coms with them, railing, in whose hands Ispie
My charge drawn up, to which I must reply,
Partly ingrost by them; the rest does speak
From better minds, though ignorant and weak.
What! malice sold in print? revenge is set The charge.

To seize delight, to make us die in debt.
Our sweet's o're-charg'd with envy: if we die,
We'll wage the bill, and never will comply.
Yet he may do us favor, to renew
And teach our art, which many never knew.
His practice taught his art, for which he gives
To charge from sense, so Clavill peacht the thieves.
He has been bit, which makes his courage cool,
Boys pays for wit, when they are whipped at school
Can he court truth, does heaven judge stews fit
To teach men reason, modesty and wit?
The Answer.
Had it been malice, enmity or hate The Charge Answered.

That mov`d my pen, I had not searched so late,
To chide your sin, your misery uncloath,
`Tis not your persons, but your ways I loath.
But wave it if you can, your plagues renew,
`Twas more for love of others, then for you
That urg`d this night, let vices warning have,
`Fore death does sammon you unto the grave.
If any from contraries do amiss,
To feed his lust, and take a ground from this,
Hell will but grasp him sooner: this no gin
To snare tame fools, it is to scourge their sin.
A wise man does a strumpets wiles descry,
Allurements promises, and her bed whereby
Poor simpleton is caught, then he does tell
Her chambers lead to death, her stairs to hell:
This is my aim: th` Assembly of Divines,
With toleration cannot charge my lines;
To see a drunkard reel, or court a whore,
Wise men will prize sobriety the more;
And Idiots shun the shame, when `tis uncloath`d,
Vice must be known before it can be loath`d.
There`s no Physician swallows poyson`d pills
To help his art, he knows before what kills.
If Preachers opening sins, (to break the frame)
Did practice what they know, they`d preach their shame
The guiltless man, is wise who better can?
Describe the drunkard then a sober man?
The thief`s convicted by the Judge that`s free,
Who never knew the crime so well as he.
To speak of what they gave consent unto,
Or saw at large, is that which fools may do.
These things you`l say are true, pray tell me how
You prove them so, yet could not see while now?
Experience taught you, bring me one that`s bit
Almost to death, and now recover`d wit,
I`d have his counsel in`t; but few there be
That purchase wit by sin, but misery.
Envy will quit me, she`s of this belief
(...) ne`re was drunkard, beggar, sherk, nor thief,
Though they are here displac`d, nor shall the rest
Be charg`d upon me, `tis your shame expressed.
Some part is merely fanci`d; some takes sense
From observation and Intelligence;
Which I have dressed in colors, that it may
Stop you from hell, or vex you in the way.
Defense to those whom heaven and earth despise,
Is more then needs, truth will content the wise.
Good morrow.
THE TABLE.
1. THe preparation and the plots. 2. The strange passages of the Spy. 3. The
changes in returning to the Centinells. 4. The slumbring Vision, and the
accidents. 5. The Officers feast, and hells commission. 6. The counter-panes of
beauty and virtue. 7. The Devils trade, and the Bawds profession. 8. The (...)
full meeting charged. 9. The black Courtier, the Rats and the turn-pike. 10.
The nature of sherks and sherking. 11. The differences between Constables. 12.
The Physicians foul disease, his will. 13. The Scum and his Doxies triumph. 14.
The new traitors, and the Welshmans grief. 15. The Shred from hell, and the
Monkie. 16. The lecherous Lawyers varieties. 17. The young man's dreadful
vision. 18. The bank feast and company. 19. The Devils feast with them. 20.
The conditions of beggars, their rules. 21. The examination at the Court of
Guard. 22. The Monster and the petty Bawd. 23. The Devils dispute, and
Pandorsus change. 24. The serving-mans relation. 25. The Chamber-maids
confession. 26. The subjects (...), and the Authors Charge answered.
FINIS.

