ACCEDENCE Commenc't GRAMMAR, Supplied with sufficient RULES, For the use of
such (Younger or Elder) as are desirous, without more trouble than needs to
attain the LATIN TONGUE; The Elder sort especially, with little Teaching, and
their own Industry.

By JOHN MILTON.

LONDON, Printed for S. S. and are to be sold by John Starkey at the Miter in
Fleet Street, near Temple Bar. 1669.

TO THE READER
IT has been long a general complaint not without cause, in the bringing up of
Youth, and still is, that the tenth part of man's life, ordinarily extended, is
taken up in learning, and that very scarcely, the Latin Tongue. Which ^ardy
proficience may be attributed to several causes; In particular, the making two
labors of one, by learning first the Accedence, then the Grammar in Latin, ere
the Language of those Rules be understood. The only remedy of this, was to join
both Books into one, and in the English Tongue; whereby the long way is much
abbreviated, and the labor of understanding much more easy: A work supposed
not to have been done formerly, or if done, not without such difference here in
brevity and alteration, as may be found of moment. That of Grammar, touching
Letters and Syllables, is omitted, as learnt before, and little different from
the English Spelling-book; especially, since few will be persuaded to pronounce
Latin otherwise then their own English. What will not come under Rule, by reason
of too much variety in Declension, Gender, or Construction, is also here
omitted, least the course and clearness of method be clogged with Catalogues
instead of Rules, or too much interruption between Rule and Rule: Which Linaker
setting down the various Idiomes of many verbs, was fore't to do by Alphabet;
and therefore, though very learned, not thought fit to be read in Schools. But
in such words, a Dictionary stored with good Authorities will be found the
readiest guide. Of figurate Construction what is useful is digested into
several Rules of Syntaxis: and Prosodie, after this Grammar well learnt, will
not need to be Englisht for him who has a mind to read it. Account might be
now givn what addition or alteration from other Grammars has been here made,
and for what reason. But he who would be short in teaching, must not be long in
Prefacing: The Book it self follows, and will declare sufficiently to them who
can discern.

J. M.

ACCEDENCE Commenc't GRAMMAR.
LAtin Grammar is the Art of right understanding, speaking, or writing Latin,
observd from them who have spoken or written it best.

Grammar has two Parts: Right-wording, usually called Etymology, and
right-joyning of words, or Syntaxis.

Etymology, or Right-wording, teaches what belongs to every single word or
part of Speech.

Of Latin SPEECH are Eight General Parts:
Declined.
Noun Pronoun Verb Participle
Undeclin'd.
Adverb Conjunction Preposition Interjection
Declined are those Words which have diverse endings; as Homo a man, hominis of
a man; Amo I love, amas thou love. Undeclin'd are those words which have but
one ending, as been well, cum when, tum then.

Nounes, Pronounes, and Participles, are declined with Gender, Number, and
Case; Verbs, as hereafter in the Verb.

Of Genders.
GEnders are three, the Masculin, Feminin, and Neuter. The Masculin may be
declined with this Article Hic, as hic Vir a Man; The Feminin with this Article
Haec, as haec Mulier a Woman; The Neuter with this Article Hoc, as hoc S^um a
Stone.

Of the Masculin are generally all Nounes belonging to the Male kind, as also
the Names of Rivers, Months, and Winds.

Of the Feminin, all Nounes belonging to the Female kind, as also the names of
Countries, Cities, Trees, some few of the two latter excepted: Of Cities, as
Agragas and Sulmo, Masculin; Argos, Tibur, Praen^ste, and such as end in um,
Neuter; Anxur both. Of Trees, Oleaster and Spinus, Masculin; but Oleaster is
read also Feminin, Cic. Verr. 4. Acer, siler, suber, thus, robur, Neuter.

And of the Neuter are all Nouns, not being proper Names, ending in um, and
many others.

Some Nouns are of two Genders, as hic or haec dies a Day; and all such as may
be spoken both of Male and Female, as hic or haec Parens a Father or Mother;
some be of three, as hic haec and hoc Pelix Happy.

Of Numbers.
WOrds Declined have two Numbers, the Singular, and the Plural. The Singular
speaks but of one, as Lapis a Stone. The Plural of more then one, as Lapides
Stones; yet sometimes but of one, as Athenae the City Athens, Literae an
Epistle, aedes aedium a House.

Note that some Nounes have no Singular, and some no Plural, as the nature of
their signification requires. Some are of one Gender in the Singular; of
another, or of two Genders in the Plural, as reading will best teach.

Of Cases.
NOunes, Pronounes, and Participles are declined with six Endings, which are
called Cases, both in the Singular and Plural Number. The Nominative, Genitive,
Dative, Accusative, Vocative, and Ablative.

The Nominative is the first Case, and properly names the thing, as Liber a
Book.

The Genitive is Englisht with this Sign of, (...) Libri of a Book.

The Dative with this Sign to, or for, as Libro to or for a Book.

The Accusative has no sign.

The Vocative calls or speaks to, as O Liber O Book, and is commonly like
the Nominative.

But in the Neuter Gender the Nominative, Accusative, and Vocative, are like in
both Numbers, and in the Plural end always in a.

The Ablative is Englisht with these Signs, in, with, of, for, from, by, and
such like, as d^ Libro of or from the Book, pro Libro for the Book And the
Ablative Plural is always like the Dative.

Note, that some Nouns have but one ending throughout all Cases, as Frugi,
nequam, nihil; and all words of number from three to a hundred, a^ quatuor
four, quinque five, etc.

Some have but one, some two, some three Cases only, in the Singular or Plural,
as use will best teach.

Of a Noune.
A Noune is the Name of a thing, as Manus a Hand, Do^ a House, Bonus Good,
Pulch^r Fair.

Nounes be Substantives or Adjectives.

A Noun Substantive is understood by it self, as homo a man, domus a house.

An Adjective, to be well understood, requires a Substantive to be joined with
it, as bonus good, parvus little, which cannot be well understood unless
something good or little be either named, as bonus vir a good man, parvus puer a
little boy; or by use understood, as honestum an honest thing, boni good men.

The Declining of Substantives.
NOunes Substantive have five Declensions or forms of ending their Cases,
chiefly distinguished by the different ending of their Genitive Singular.

The first Declension.
THe first is when the Genitive and Dative singular end in ae, etc. as in the
Example following. Singular. Plural. Nom. Voc. Abl. musa Nom. Voc. musae Genesis
Dat. musae Genesis musar um Acc. musam Dat. Abl. mus^s. Acc. Musas

This one word familia joined with pater, matter, filius, or filia, ends the
Genitive in as, a^ pater familias, but sometimes familiae: Dea, mu^, equa,
liberta, make the Dative and Ab^ative plural in abus; filia and nata in is or
abus.

The first Declension ends always in a, unless in some words derived of the
Greek: and is always of the Feminin Gender, except in names attributed to men,
according to the general Rule, or to Stars, as Cometo, Planeta.

Nounes, and especially proper Names derived of the Greek, have here three
endings, as, es, e, and are declined in some of their Cases after the Greek
form. Aeneas, acc. Aenean, voc Aene^. Anchises, acc. Anchisen, voc Anchise or
Anchisa, ^bl. Anchise. Penelope, Penelopes, Penelope, Penelopen, voc. abl.
Penelope. Sometimes following the Latin, as Marsya, Philocteta, for as and es;
Philoctetam, Eriphylam, for an and en. Cic.

The second Declension.
THe second is when the Genitive Singular ends in i, the Dative in o, etc.
Sing. Plur. Nom. Voc. Liber Nom. Voc. Libri Genesis libri Genesis librorum Dat. Abl.
libr^ Dat. Abl. libr^ Acc. librum Acc. libros.

Note that when the Nominative ends in us, the Vocative shall end in e, as
Dominus o Domine, except Deus o Deus. And those following, Ag^us, lucus,
vulgus, populus, chorus, f^vius, e or us.

When the Nominative ends in ius, if it be the proper name of a man, the
Vocative shall end in i, as Georgius o Georgi; hereto add filius o fili, and
genius o geni.

All Nounes of the Second Declension are of the Masculin or Neuter Gender; of
the Masculin, such as end in ir, or, or us, except some few, humus, domus,
alvus, and others derived of the Greek, as methodus, antidotus, and the like,
which are of the Feminin, and some of them sometimes also Masculin, as atomus,
phaselus; to which add f^us the name of a disease, grossus, pampinus, and rubus.

Those of the Neuter, except virus, pelagus, and vulgus (which last is
sometimes Masculin) end all in (...), and are declined as follows: Sing.
Plur. Nom. Ac. Voc. Studium Nom. Ac. Voc. Studia Genesis studii Genesis studiorum
Dat. Abl. studio Dat. Abl. studiis.

Some Nouns in this Declension are of the first Example Singular, of the second
Plural, as Pergamus the City Troy, Plur. Haec Pergama; and some names of hills,
as Maenalus, Ismarus, haec Isma ra; So also Tartarus, and the Lake Avernus;
others are of both, as sibilus, jocus, locus, hi lo^i, or haec loca. Some are
of the Second Example Singular, of the first Plural, as Argos, Caelum, Plur. hi
Caeli; others of both, as Rastrum, Capistrum, Filum, Fraenum; Plur. fraeni or
fraena. Nundinum, and Epulum, are of the first Declension Plural, Nundinae,
Epulae; Balneum of both, balneae or balnea.

Greek proper names have here three endings, os, on, and us long from a Greek
Diphthong. Haec Delos, hanc Delon. Hoc Ilion. The rest regular, Hic panthus, o
panthu, Virg.

The third Declension.
THe third is when the Genitive singular ends in is, the Dative in i, the
Accusative in om and sometimes in im, the Ablative in e, and sometimes in i, the
Nom. Acc. Voc. Plural in es, the Genitive in um and sometimes in ium, etc. Sing.
Plur. Nom. Genesis Voc. Panis Nom. Ac. Vo. panes Dat. pani Gen panum Acc. panem
Dat. Abl. panibus. Abl. pane Sing Plur. Nom. Voc. Parens No. Ac. Voc. parents
Genesis parentis Genesis parentum Dat. parenti Dat. Abl. parentibus. Acc. parentem
Abl. parente

This third Declension, with many endings, has all Genders, best known by
dividing all Nounes hereto belonging into such as either increase one syllable
long or short in the Geni^ive, or increase not at all.

Such as increase not in the Genitive are generally Feminin, as Nubes nubis,
Caro carnis.

Except such as end in er, as hic venture ventris, and these in is following,
natalis, aqualis, lienis, ^rbis, callis, caulis, collis, follis, mensis, ensis,
fustis, funis, panis, penis, crinis, ignis, cassis, fascis, to^is, ^iscis,
unguis, vermis, vectis, postis, a^is, and the Compounds of assis, as centussis.

But Canalis, finis, clunis, restis, sentis, amnis, cor^is, linter, torquis,
anguis, hic or haec; To these add ^epres.

Such as end in e are Neuters, as mare, rete, and two Greek in es, as
hippomanes, cacoethes.

Nounes increasing Long.
Nounes increasing one syllable long in the Genitive are generally Feminin, as
haec pietas pietatis, virtus virtutis.

Except such as end in ans Masculin, as dodrans, quadrans, sextans; in ens, as
oriens, torrens, bidens a pick-axe.

In or, most commonly derived of Verbs, as ^or, clamor; In o, not thence
derived, as ternio, senio, ser^o, temo, and the like.

And these of one syllable, sal, sol, ren, splen, as, bes, pes, mos, flos, ros,
dens, mons, pons, sons, grex.

And words derived from the Greek in e^, as lichen; in er, as crater; in as, as
adamas; in es, as lebes; to these, hydrops, thorax, phaenix.

But scrobs, rudens, stirps the body or root of a tree, and calx a heel, hic or
haec.

Neuter, these of one syllable, mel, sell, lac, sar, ver, cor, aes, vas vasis,
os ossis, os oris, rus, thus, jus, crus, pus. And of more syllables in all and
ar, as capital, laquear, but halec hoc or haec.

Nounes increasing Short.
Nounes increasing short in the Genitive are generally Masculin, as hic sanguis
sanguinis, lapis lapidis.

Except, Feminin all words of many syllables ending in do or go, as dulcedo,
compago, arbor, hyems, cuspis, pecus, pecudis: These in ex, forfex, carex,
tomex, supellex: In ix, appendix, histrix, co^endix, filix. Greek Nounes in as
and is, as lampas, iaspis: To these add chlamys, bacehar, syndon, icon.

But margo, cinis, pulvis, adeps, forceps, pumex, vamex, imbrex, obex, silex,
cortex, onix and sardonix, hic or haec.

Neuters are all ending in a as problema, in en, except hic pecten, in ar as
jubar, in er these, verber, iter, uber, cadaver, zinziber, laser, cicer, siser,
piper, papaver; sometimes in ur, except hic furfur, in us as onus, in ut as
caput; to these, marmor, aequor, ador.

Greek proper names here end in as, an, is and eus, and may be declined some
wholly after the Greek form, as Pollas pallados palladi pallada; others in some
Cases, as Atlas, acc. Atlanta, voc. Atla. Goramas, plur. garamantes, acc.
garamantas. Pan panos pana Phyllis phyllidos, voc phylli, plur. Phyll^des, acc.
phyllidas. Tethys, tethyos, acc. tethyn, voc. tethy. Neapolis, neapolios, acc.
neapolin. Paris, paridos or parios, acc. parida or parin. Orpheus orpheos
orphei orphea orpheu. But Names in eus borrow sometimes their Genitive of the
Second Declension, as Erechtheus, erech^hei. Cic. Achilles or Achilleus,
Achillei; and sometimes their Accusative in on or um, as Orpheus Orpheon,
Theseus Theseum, Perseus Perseum, which sometimes is formd after Greek words of
the First Declension Latin, Perseus or Perses, Persae Persae Persen Persae
Persa.

The fourth Declension.
THe fourth is when the Genitive Singular ends in us, the Dative Singular in
ui, and sometimes in u, Plural in ibus and sometimes in ubus. Sing. Plur. Nom.
Genesis Vo. Sensus Nom. Ac Voc. Sensus Dat. sensui Genesis sensuum Acc. sensum Dat.
Abl sensibus. Abl. sensu

The fourth Declension has two endings, us and u; us generally Masculin,
except some few, as haec manus, ficus the fruit of a tree, acus, porticus,
tribus: but penus and specus hic or haec. U of the Neuter, as gelu, genu, veru;
but in the Singular most part defective.

Proper Names in os and o long pertaining to the Fourth Declension Greek, may
belong best to the fourth in Latin, as Androgeos, Genesis Androgeo, Acc.
Androgeon. Hic Athos, hunc Atho, Virg. Haec Sappho, Genesis Sapphus, Acc. Sappho.
Better Authors follow the Latin form. as Dido didonis didonem. But Jesus Jesus
Jesus Iesum Jesus Jesus.

The fifth Declension.
THe fifth is when the Genitive and Dative Singular end in ei, etc. Sing. Plur.
Nom. Voc. Res Nom. Acc. Voc. res Genesis Dat. rei Genesis rerum Acc. rem Dat. Abl.
rebus. Abl. re

All Nounes of the fifth Declension are of the Feminin Gender, except dies hic
or haec, and his Compound meridies hic only.

Some Nounes are of more Declensions then one, as vas vasis of the third in the
Singular, of the second in the Plural vasa vasorum. Colus, laurus, and some
others, of the second and fourth. Saturnalia saturnalium or saturnaliorum
saturnalibus, and such other names of feasts, Poe^mata poe^matum, Poematis or
poematibus, of the second and third Plural. Plebs of the third and fifth,
plebis or plebei.

The declining of Adjectives.
A Noun Adjective is declined with three Terminations, or with three Articles.

An Adjective of three terminations is declined like the first and second
Declension of Substantives joined together after this manner. Sing. Plur. Nom.
bonus bona bonum Nom. Vo. boni bonae bona Genesis boni bonae boni Genesis bonorum
bonarum bonorum Dat. bono bonae bono Dat. Abl. bonis Ac. bonum bonam bonum Ac.
bonos bonas bona. Voc. bone bona bonum Abl. bono bona bono

In like manner those in er and ur, as sacer sacra sacrum, satur satura
saturum: but unus, totus, solus, alius, alter, ullus, uter, ^ith their
compounds Neuter, uterque, and the like, make their Genitive Singular in ins,
the Dative in i, as Unus una unum, Genesis unius, Dat. uni, in all the rest like
bonus, save that olius makes in the Neuter Gender aliud, and in the Dative
alii, and sometimes in the Genitive.

Ambo and duo be thus declined in the plural only. Nom. Voc. Ambo ambae ambo.

Genesis amborum ambarum amborum.

Dat. Abl. Ambobus ambabus ambobus.

Acc. ambos or ambo, ambas ambo.

Adjectives of three Articles have in the Nominative either one ending, as hic,
haec, and hoc felix; or two, as hic and haec tristis, and hoc triste; and are
declined like the Third Declension of Substantives, as follows. Sing. Plur.
Nom. hic haec and hoc Felix Nom. hi and hae felices; and haec felicia Genesis
felicis Genesis felicium Dat. felici Dat. Abl. felicibus Acc. hunc and hanc
felicem, and hoc felix Acc. hos and has felices, and haec felicia Voc. o felix
Voc. o felices, and o felicia. Abl. felice or felici Sing. Plur. No. hic and
haec tristis, and hoc triste Nom. hi and hae tristes; and haec tristio Genesis
tristis Genesis tristium Dat. Abl. tristi Dat. Abl. tristibus Acc. hunc and hanc
trist^, and hoc triste Acc. hos and has tristes, and haec tristia Voc. o
tristis, and o triste Voc. o tristes, and o tristia.

There be also another sort which have in the Nominative Case three
Terminations and three Articles, as hic acer, hic and haec acris, hoc acre. In
like manner be declined equester, volucer, and some few others, being in all
other cases like the Examples beforegoing.

Comparisons of Nounes.
ADjectives, whose signification may increase or be diminish't, may form
Comparison, whereof there be two degrees above the positive word it self, The
Comparative, and Superlative.

The Positive signifies the thing it self without comparing, as durus hard.

The Comparative exceeds his Positive in signification, compared with some
other, as durior harder; and is formd of the first Case of his Positive that
ends in i, by putting thereto or and us, as of duri, hic and haec durior, and
hoc durius; of dulci, dulcior dulcius.

The Superlative exceeds his Positive in the highest degree, as durissimus
hardest; and it is formd of the first case of his Positive that ends in is,
by putting thereto simus, as of duris durissimus, dulcis dulcissimus.

If the Positive end in er, the Superlative is formd of the Nominative case by
putting to rimus, as pulcher pulcherrimus. Like to these are vetus veterrimus,
maturus maturimus; but dexter dextimus, and sinister sinisterior sinistimus.

All these Nouns ending in lis make the Superlative by changing is into limus,
as humilis, sunilis, facilis, gracilis, agilis, docilis docillimus.

All other Nounes ending in lis do follow the general Rule, as utilis
utilissimus.

Of these Positives following are formd a different sort of Superlatives; of
superus, supremus and summus; inferus, infimus and imus; exterus, extimus and
extremus; posterus postremus.

Some of these want the Positive, and are formed from Adverbs; of intra,
interior intimus, ultra ulterior ultimus, citra citerior citimus, priden^ prior
primus, prope propior proximus.

Others from Positives without Case, as nequam nequior nequissimus.

Some also from no Positive, as ocior ocissimus. Some want the Comparative, as
novus novissimus, sacer sacerrimus.

Some the Superlative, as senex senior, juvenis junior, adol^scens
adolescentior.

Some ending in us, frame their Comparative as if they ended in e^s, benevolus,
maledicus, magnificus magnificentior magnificentissimus.

These following are without Rule, Bonus melior optimus, Malus pejor pessimus,
Magnus major maxi^, Porvus minor minimus; Multus plurimus, multa plurima,
multum plus plurimum.

If a Vowel come before us, it is compared with magis and maxim, as pius,
magis pius, maxim pius; idoneus, magis and maxim idoneus. Yet some of these
follow the general Rule, as Assiduus assiduissimus, strenuus strenuior, exiguus
exiguissimus, tenuis tenuior tenuissimus.

Of a Pronoun.
A Pronoun is a part of Speech that stands for a Noun Substantive, either at
present or before spoken of, as ille he or that, hic this, qui who.

There be Ten Pronounes, Ego, tu, su^, ille, pse, iste, hic, is, qui and quis,
besides their Co^pounds, egomet, the, hic^e, idem, quisnam, aliq^, and such
others. The rest so called, a^ (...), ^uus, suus, noster, vester, nostras,
vestras, cuj^ and cujas, are not Pronouns, but Adjectives ^hence derived.

Of Pronounes such as show the thing present are called Demonstrotives, as ego,
tu, hic; and such as refer to a thing antecedent or spoken of before are called
Relatives, as qui who or which.

Quis, and often qui, because they ask a question, are called Interrogatives,
with their Compounds ecquis, numquis.

Declensions of Pronouns are three.
Ego, tu, sui, be of the First Declension, and be thus declined. Sing. Plur.
Nom. Ego Nom. Acc. Nos Genesis mei Genesis nostrum or nostri Dat. mihi Dat Abl. nobis
Acc. Abl. me Voc. Caret Voc. Caret. Sing. Plur. Nom. Voc. Tu Nom. Acc. Voc vos
Genesis tui Genesis vestrum or vestri Dat. tibi Dat. Abl. vobis. Acc. Abl. te Sing.
Nom. Voc Caret Dat. sibi Plur. Genesis sui Acc. Abl. se.

From these three be derived meus, tuus, suus, noster, vestor, nostras,
vestras, (which are called Possessives) whereof the former five be declined
like Adjectives of three Terminations, except that meus in the Vocative Case
makes mi, m^, meum; Nostras, Vestras, with three Articles, as hic and haec
nostras and hoc nostrate, vestrate. In other Case^ according to Rule.

These three, ille, iste, ipse, be of the Second Declension, making their
Genitive singular in ius, their Dative in i; and the former two be declined
like the Adjective alius, and the Third like unus before spoken of.

Sing. Nom. ille illa illud, Genesis illius, Dat. illi. Nom. iste ista istud, Gen
istius, Dat. isti. Nom. ipse ipsa ipsum, Gen ipsius, Dat. ipsi.


These four, hic, is, q^ and quis, be of the third Declension, making their
Genitive singular in jus, with j consonant, and be declined after this manner.
Sing. Plur. Nom. hic haec hoc Nom. hi hae haec Genesis hujus Genesis horum harum
horum Dat. huic Dat. Abl. his Acc. hunc hanc hoc Acc. hos has haec Voc. Caret
Voc. Caret Abl. hoc hac hoc

Of iste and hic is compounded istic istaec, istoc or istuc. Acc. istunc
istanc, istoc or istuc. Abl. istoc istac istoc. Plur. istaec only. Sing. Plur.
Nom. is ea id Nom. ii eae ea Genesis ejus Genesis eorum earu^ eorum Dat. ei Dat. Abl.
iis or eis Acc. eum ea^m id Acc. eos eas ea Voc. Caret Voc. Caret Abl. eo ea eo
Sing. Plur. Nom. qui quae quod Nom. qui quae quae Genesis cujus Genesis quorum quarum
quorum (queis Dat. cui Dat. Abl. quibus or Acc. quem quam quod Acc. quos quas
quae Voc. Caret Voc. Caret Abl. quo qua, quo or qui

In like manner quivi^, quilibet, and quicunque the Compounds.

Sing. Nom. Quis, qua or quae, quid. Gen: etc. like qui. So quisquam, quisnam,
Compounds.

Of Quis are made these Pronoun Adjectives, Cujus cuja cujum, whose: and hic
and haec cujas and hoc cujato, of what Nation.

Quisquis is defective, and thus declined. No.
Quisquis Quicquid
Ac.
Quicquid
Ab.
Quoquo Quaqua Quoquo


Of a Verb.
A Verb is a part of Speech, that betokens being, as Sum I am, or doing, as
Laudo I praise: and is declined with Mood, Tense, Number and Person.

Moods.
THere be four Moods, which express the manner of doing: the Indicative, the
Imperative, the Potential or Subjunctive, and the Infinitive.

The Indicative Mood shows or declares, as Laud I praise.

The Imperative bids or exherteth, as Lauda praise thou.

The Potential or Subjunctive is Englisht with these Signs, may, (...), might,
would, could, should; Or without (...) (...) Indicative, if a Conjunction go
(...) ^llow. As Laudem. I may or ^an prais^ (...) (...) when I praised. Ca^, si
prae^ (...) (...) bewar'd if I ha^ (...)

The (...) is englisht with this sign To, a^ Laudare to praise.

Tenses.
THe^ be three Tenses which express the time of doing: The Present, the
Preterit o^ past, and the Future.

The Present Tense speaks of the time tha^ now is, as Laudo I praise.

The Preterit speaks of the time past, and i^ (...) by three degrees: the
Preterimperfect, the Preterperfect, and the Preterpluperfect^

The Preterperfect speaks of the time n^ perfectly past, as Laudabam I
praised or did praise.

The Preterperfect speaks of the time perfectly past, as Laudavi I have
praised.

The Preterpluperfect speaks of the time more then perfectly past, as
Laudaveram I had praised.

The Future Tense speaks of the time to come as Laudabo I shall or will
praise.

Persons.
THrough all Moods, except the Infinitive, there be three Persons in both
Numbers, as Sing. Laudo I praise, laudas thou praisest, lauda^ he praises;
Plur. Laudamus we praise, laudati^ ye praise, laudant they praise. Except some
Verb^ which are declined or formed in the Third Person only, and have before
them this sign, It; a^ Taedet it irketh, oportet it behooves, and are called
Impersonals.

The Verb which betokens being, is properly this Verb Sum only, which is
therefore called a Verb Substantive, and formd after this manner.

Indicative.
Pres. sing. I am. Sum, es, est, Plur. sumus, estis, sunt.

Pret. imp. I was. Eram, eras, erat, Pl. eramus, eratis, erant.

Pret. perfect I have been. Fui. fuisti, fuit, Plur. suimus, fuistis, fuerunt
or fuere.

Pret. plup. I had been. Fueram, fueras, fuerat, Pl. fueramus, fueratis,
fuerant.

Future. I shall or will be. Ero, eris, erit, Pl. erimus, eritis, erunt.

Imperative.
Be thou. Sing. Plur. Sis, es, esto. Sit, esto.
Simus, Sitis, este, estote. Sint, sunto


Potential.
Pres. sing. I may O^ can be. Sim, sis, sit, Pl. simus, sitis, sint.

Preter impers I might or could be. Essem or forem, es, et, Pl. essemus, esse
it is, essent or sorent.

Preterperfect I might or could have been. Fuerim, ris, rit, Pl. rimus, ritis,
rint.

Preterplup. with a conjunction. Si If I had been. Fuissem, es, et, Pl. emus,
etis, ent.

Future Si If I shall be or shall have been. Fuero, ris, rit, Pl. rimus, ritis,
rint.

Infinitive.
Pres. and preterimperf Esse, to be.

Preterperfect, and pret. pluper. Fuisse, to have or had been.

Future Fore, to be hereafter.

In like manner are formed the Compounds: Absum, adsum, desum, obsum, praesum,
prosum, possum; but possum something varies after this manner.

Indicat. Pres. Sing. Possum, potes, potest, Plur. possumus, potestis, possunt.
The other are regular, pot^ram, potui, potuer^m, potero.

Imperative it wants.

Potent. Pres. Possim, etc. Preterimperfect, Possem.

Infin. Pres. Posse. Preterit. Potuisse.

Voices.
IN Verbs that betoken doing are two Voices, the Active and the Possive.

The Active signifies to do, and always ends in o, as Doceo, I teach.

The Passive signifies what is done to one by another, and always ends in
or, as Doceor I am taught.

From these are to be excepted two sorts of Verbs. The first are called
Neuters, and cannot take or in the Passive, as Curro I run, Sodeo I sit; yet
signify sometimes passively, as Vapulo I am beaten.

The second are called Deponents, and signify actively, as Loquor I speak; or
Neuters, as Glorior I boast: but are formed like Passives.

Conjugations.
VErbs both Active and Passive have four Conjugations, or forms of declining,
known and distinguished by their Infinitive Mood Active, which always ends in
re.

In the first Conjugation, after a long, as Laudare to praise.

In the second, after e long, as habere to have.

In the third, after e short, as legere to read.

In the fourth, after i long, as audire to hear

In these four Conjugations, Verbs are declined or formd by Mood, ^ense,
Number, and Person, after these Examples.

Indicative Mood,
Present Tense
Singular. Plural. I praise. Thou praisest. He praises We praise. Te praise.
They praise. Laudo, laudas, laudat, laudamus, laudatis, laudant. Habeo, habes,
habet, habemus, habetis, habent. Lego, legis, legit, legimus, legitis, legunt.
Audio, audis, audit, audimus, auditis, au^t.

I praisd or did praise. Preterimperfect tens. sing. Laudabam, Habebam,
Legebam, Audiebam,
bas, bat, Plur. bamus, batis, bant.

I have praisd. Preterperfect tens. sing. Laudavi Habui Legi Audivi
isti, it, Plur. imus, istis, erunt or ere.

I had praisd. Preterpluperfect tense sing. Laudaveram Habueram Legeram
Audiveram
ras, rat, Plur. ramus, ratis, rant.

Future tense sing. I shall or will praise. Laudabo Habebo
bis, bit, Plur. bimus, bitis, bunt. Legam Audiam
es, et, Plu. emus, etis, ent.

Imperative Mood.
Pres. Sing. Praise thou. Let him praise. Let us praise. Praise ye. Let them
praise. Lauda, laudato. Laudet laudato. Pl. laudemus. Laudate, laudatote.
Laudent, laudanto. Habe, habeto. Habeat habeto. Pl. habeamus, Habete, habetote.
Habeant, habento. Lege, legito. Legate legito. Pl. legamus. Legite, legitote.
Legant, legunto. Audi, audito. Audiat audito. Pl. audiamus. Audite, auditote.
Audiant, audiunto.

Potential Mood.
I may or can praise. Present tense sing. Laudem, lauds, laudet, Pl. laudemus,
laudetis, laudent. Habeam, Legam, Audiam,
as, at, Pl. amus, atis, ant.

I might or could praise. Preterimperfect t^nse sing. Lauda^em, Haberem,
Legerem, Audirem,
res, ret, Plur. remus, retis, rent.

I might or should have praisd. Preterperfect tense sing. Laudaverim, Habuerim,
Legerim, Audiverim,
ris, rit, Pl. rimus, ritis, rint.

If I had praisd. Preterplu. sing. with a Conjunction. Si Laudavissem,
Habuissem, Legissem, Audivissem,
ses, set, Pl. semus, setis, sent.

If I shall praise or shall have praisd. Future tense sing. Si Laudavero,
Habuero, Legero, Audivero,
ris, rit, Plur. rimus, ritis, rint.

Infinitive Mood.
Present and Preterimperfect tense Laudare, Habere Legere, Audire,
To Praise. Have. Read. Hear.


Preterperfect and Preterpluperfect tense. Laudavisse, Habuisse, Legisse,
Audivisse,
To have or had Praised. Read. Heard.


Verbs of the third Conjugation irregular in some Tenses of the Active Voice.
Indicative Mood
Present Tense singular.
Volo, vis, vult, Plur. Volumus, vultis, volunt.

Nolo, -- Plur. Nolumus, -- nolunt.

The rest is wanting in this Tense.

Malo, mavi^, mavult Plur. Malumus, mavultis, malunt.

Preterit.
Volui. Nolui. Malui.
Volo and Malo want the Imperative Mood.

Imperative.
Sing.
Noli, Nolito.
Plur.
Nolite, Nolitote.
Potential.
Present tens. sing. Velim, Nolim, Malim,
is, it, Plur. imus, itis, int.

Preterim perfect tens. sing. Vellem, Nollem, Mallem,
es, et, Pl. emus, etis, ent.

Infinitive.
Present. Velle, Nolle, Malle.


Indicat. Pres. Edo, edis or es, edit or est; Plur. Editis or estis.

Imper. Ede or es, edito or esto. Edat, edito or esto. Plur. Edite este editote
estote.

Poten. Preterimperfect Tense, Ederem or essem.

Infinite. Edere or esse.

Verbs of the fourth Conjugation irregular in some Tenses Active.
EO and queo, with his Compound Nequeo, make ^unt and qu^unt in the Plural
Indicative present, and in their Preterimperfect ibam and quibam, their Future
i^o and quibo.

Imperat. I, ito. Eat, ito. Plur. Eamus. Ito, itote. Eant, eunto.

Potent. Eam. Irem. etc.

The forming of the Passive Voice.
Indicative.
I am praised. Pres. Sing.
Laudor, aris or are, atur, Habeor, eris or ere, etur, Legor, eri^ or ere,
itur, Audior, iris or ire, itur,
Plur.
amur, amini, antur. emur, emini, entur. imur, imini, untur. imur, imini,
iuntur.


I was praisd. Preterim. perfect ^ens. sing. Laudabar, Habebar, Legebar,
Audiebar,
baris or bare, batur, Plur. bamur, bamini, bantur.

Note that the Passive Voice has no Preterperfect, nor the Tenses derived from
thence in any Mood.

I shall or will be praisd. Future tense sing. Laudabor, Habebor,
beris or bear, bitur, Plur. bimur, bimini, buntur. Legar, Audiar,
eris or ere, etur, Plu. emur, emini, entur.

Imperative.
Present (...) Be thou praisd. Let him be praisd. Let us be praisd. Be ye
praisd. Let them be praisd. Laudare, laudator. laudetur, laudator. Pl.
laudemur. laudamini, laudaminor. laudentur, laudantor Habere, habetor.
habeatur, habetor. P. habeamur. habemini, habeminor. habeantur, habentor.
L^gere, legitor. legatur, legitor. Pl. legamur. legimini, legiminor. legantur,
leguntor. Audire, auditor. audiatur, auditor. P. audiamur. audimini, audiminor.
audiantur, audiuntor.

Potential.
I may or can be praisd. Present sing. Lauder, eris or ere, etur, Plur. emur,
emini, entur. Habear, Legar, Audiar,
aris or are, atur, Plu. amur, amini, antur.

I might or should be praisd. Preterimperfect sing. Laudarer, Haberer, Legerer,
Audirer,
reris or rere, retur, Pl. remur, remini, rentur.

Infinitive.
Present and Preterimperfect Laudari Haberi Legi Audiri
To be Praisd. Had. Read. Heard.


Verbs irregular in some Tenses Passive.
EDor, editur or estur: The test is Regular.

The Verb Fio, is partly of the Third, and partly of the Fourth Conjugation,
and has only the Infinitive of the Passive Form.

Indicat. Pres. Sing. Fio, fis, fit, Plur fim^s, fitis, fiunt. Preterimperfect,
Fieb^m. Preterperfect it wants. Future Fiam, etc.

Imperat. Fi, fito. Plur fite, fitot^. Fiant, fi^mo.

Potent. Pres. Fiom, etc. Preterimperfect, (...).

Infinite. Fieri.

Also this Verb Fero, (...) contracted or short'n'd in some Tenses, both Active
and Passive, as F^rs, ^rt, for fer^, ferit, etc.

Indicat. Pres. Sing. Fero, fers, fert, Plur. -- ^ertis is, -- Preterperfect,
Tuli

Imperat. ^er ferto, etc. Plur. Forto ^ertote.

Potent. Preterimperfect, F^rrem, etc.

Infinite. Far.

Passive.
Indicat. Pres. Sing. Feror, ^rris or far, f^rtur, etc.

Imperat. Sing. Forro, fertor, etc.

Potent. Preterimperfect, Ferrer.

Infinite. Ferri.

Of Gerunds and Supines.
THere be also belonging to the Infinitive Mood of all Verbs certain Voi^es
called G^runds and Supines, both of the Active and Passive signification

The first Gerund ends in di, as Laudandi of praising or of being praisd. The
second in do, as Laudando in praising or in being praisd. The third in dum, as
Laud^ndum to praise or to be praisd.

Note that in the two latter Conjugation^, the Gerunds end s^ntimes in undi,
do, dum, as dicendi or (...): But from Eo always eundi, except in the Compound
Ambiendi.

Supines are two. The first signifies Actively, a^ laudatum to praise; the
latter Passively, as laudatu to be praised. Note that most Neuters of the
second Conjugation, and volo, nolo, malo, with many other Verbs, have no Supine.

Verbs of the four Conjugations irregular in the Preterperfect Tense or Supines.
VErbs of the first Conjugation form their Preterperfect Tense in avi, Supine in
atum, as Laudo laudavi laudatum.

Except,

Poto potavi potatum ox potu^; neco necavi necatum or nectum.

Domo, tono, sono, crepo, veto, ^ubo, form ui, itum, as cubui cubitum; but
secui sectum, fricui frictum, ^ico micui: yet some of these are found Regular
in the Preterperfect Tense or Supine, especially compounded, as increpavit,
dis^repavit, dimicavit, sonatum, dimicatum, intonatum, infricatum, and the like.

Plico and his Compounds form ui or avi, as explicui explicavi explicitum or
explicatum; except supplico, and such as are compounded with a Noun, as Duplico
Multiplico in avi only.

But Lavo lavi lautum lotum or lavatum, juvo juvi, adjuvo adjuvi adiutum.

Do dedi datum, Sto ^eti statum, in the Compounds, s^isi, stitum and sometimes
stotum, as Presto prestiti prestitum and prestatum.

VErbs of the second Conjugation form their their Preterperfect Tense in ui, their
Supine in itum, as habeo habui habitum.

Some are Regular in their Preferperfect Tense; but not in their Supines, as
doceo docui doctum, misceo miscui mi^um, teneo tenui, torreo tortui tostum,
censeo censui censum, pateo patui passum, careo carui cassum and caritum.

Others are Irregular both in Preterperfect Tense and Supines, as Jubeo jussi
jussum, sorbeo sorbui sorpsi sorptum, mulceo mulsi mulsum, luceo luxi.

Deo in di, as sedeo sedi sessum, video vidi visum, prandeo prondi pransum. And
some in si, as suadeo suasi suasum, rideo risi risum, ardeo a^si arsum. Four
double their first Letters, as Pondeo pependi pensum, mordeo momordi morsum,
spondeo spopondi sponsum, tondeo totondi tonsum, but not in their Compounds, as
dependi depensum.

Geo in si, and some in xi, as urgeo ursi, mulgeo mulsi mulxi mulctum, augeo
auxi auctum, indulgeo indulsi indultum, frigeo frixi, lugeo luxi.

ieo leo and neo nevi, vieo vievi vietum, But Cieo cievi citum, deleo delevi
deletum, fleo flevi fletum, ^mpleo complevi completum; as also the Compounds of
Oleo, except redoleo and suboleo; but adolevi adul^m, neo nevi netum, but maneo
mansi, torqueo torsi tortum, haereo haesi.

Veo in vi, as serveo servi, but deferveo deferbui, conniveo connivi and
connioci, movi motum, vovi vo^m, cavi cautum, savi saut^.

THe third Conjugation sormeth the Preterperfect Tense, by changing O of the
Present Tense into I; the Supine without certain Rule, as lego legi lectum bibo
bibi bibitum, lambo lambi, scabo s^abi, ico ici ictum, mando mandi mansum,
pando pandi (...), edo edi esum or estum, in like manner comedo, the other
compounds esum only; rudo rudi, s^lla salli salsum, psallo psalli, emo emi
emptum, viso visi visum, verto verti versum, solvo solvi solutum, volvo volvi
volutum, exuo exui exutum, but ruo rui ruitum, in compound rutum, as derui
derutum; ingruo, metuo metui.

Others are irregular both in Preterperfect Tense and Supine.

In bo, scribo scripsi scriptum, nubo nupsi nuptum, cumbo cubui cubitum.

In co, vinco visi victum, dico dixi dictum, in like manner duco, parco peperci
and parsi parsum and parcitum.

In do, these three loos n, findo fidi fissum, s^indo scidi scissum, fundo fudi
fusum. These following, vado, rado, laedo, ludo, divido, trudo, claudo, plaudo,
rodo, si and sum, as rosi rosum, but cedo cessi cessum. The rest double their
first Letter in the Preterperfect Tense, but not compounded, as tundo tu^udi
tunsum, contundo contudi contusum, and so in the other Compounds. Pendo pependi
pensum, dependo dependi, tendo tetendi tensum and tentum, contendo contendi,
pedo pepedi peditum, c^do cecidi casum, occido, recido recidi recasum. The
other Compounds have no Supine. Caedo cecidi caesum, occido occidi occisum. To
these add all the compounds of do in this Conjugation, addo, credo, edo, dedo,
reddo, perdo, ab^lo, obdo, condo, indo, trado, prodo, vendo vendidi venditum,
except the double Compound, abscondo abseondi.

In go, ago egi actum, dego degi, satago sategi, frango fregi fractum, pango to
join pegi pactum, pango to sing panxi, ango anxi, jungo junxi junctum; but
these five, fingo, mingo, pingo, stringo, ringo, loos n in their Supines, as
finxi fictum, ningo ninxi, figo fixi fixum, ^go ve^i v^ctum; diligo, negligo,
intelligo, le^i lectum, spargo sparsisparsum. These double their first Letter,
tango tetigi tactum, but not in his Compounds, as contingo contigi, pango to
bargain pepigi pactum, pungo and repungo pupugi and pun^i punctum the other
Compounds punxi only.

Ho in xi, (...) traxi tractum, veho vexi vectum.

In lo, vello velli and vulfi vulsum, colo colui cul^; excello, precello,
cellui celsum; ^lo alui alitum ^ltum. The rest, not compounded, double their
first Letter, Fallo fefelli falsum, refello refelli, pello pepuli ^ulsum,
compello compuli, cello ceculi, percello perculi perculsi perculsum.

In mo, vomo vomui vomitum, tremo tremui, premo pressi pressum, como, promo,
demo, sumo, after the (...) manner, as sumpsi, sumptum.

In No, sino sivi s^um, sterno stravi stratum, sp^rno sprevi spretum, lino levi
lini and livi litum, cerno (...) cretum, tomno tempsi, contemno contempsi
contemp^, gigno genui genitum, pono posui positum, cano ^ini ^ntum, con^ino
concinui concentum.

In Po, ^umpo rupi ruptum, scalpo scalpsi scalptum, The rest in (...), as
strepo strepui strepitum.

In qu^, linquo liqui, relinquo reliqui relictum, coque (...) (...).

In ^o, verro verri and versi versum, sero to sow s^vi satum, in compound
situm, as insero insitum; sero of another signification most used in his
compounds, ^ssero, consero, desero exero, serui ^rium, (...) ussi ust^m, gero
gessi gestum, quaero quaesivi quae^um, tero trivi tri^um, curro, excurro,
prae^urro, cucurri cursum, the other compounds double not, as concurro concurr^.

In So, accerso, arcesso, incesso, i^cesso, ivi itum, ^pesso both i and iv^,
pinso pinsui pistum and pin^.

In sco, pasco pavi pastum; compesco, d^spesco, u^; posco poposci, disco
didici, quinisco quexi, nosco novi notum, but agnosco ognitum, cognosco
cognitum.

In to, sisto stiti statum, flecto flexi flexum, pecto pexui pexi pexum and
pectitum, necto nexui nexi nexum, plecto plexi plexum, sterto stertui, meto
messui messum, mitto misi missum, peto petivi petitum.

In vo, vivo vi^ victum.

In xo texo texui textum, nexo nexui nexum.

In cio, fa^io feci factum, jacio jeci jactum, lacio lexi lectum, specio spexi
spectum, with their Compounds, but elicio elicui elicitum.

In dio, fodio fodi fossum.

In gio, fugio fugi fugitum.

In pio, capio cepi captum, ^apio ^epui ^aptum, cupio cupivi ^upitum, sapio
sapui sapivi sapitum.

In rio, pario peperi partum.

In tio, quatio quassi quassum, concutio concussi concussum.

In uo, pluo plui pluvi plutum, struo struxi structum, fluo fluxi fluxum.

THe fourth Con^ugation sormeth the Preterperfect Tense in ivi, the Supine in
itum.

Except, Venio vent ventum comperio, reperio, reperi reper^, ^ambio ^ampsi
^ampsum, sepio sepsi septum, sa^cio sarsi sar^um, ^cio farsi fartum, fulceo
fulsi ful^um, se^tio sensi (...), haur^ hausi haustum, sancio sa^ sanctum ^itum
vin^, vin^ vin^ s^lio ^alui saltum, in Compound sultum, as desilio desilui
d^sultum, amicio amicui ^ctum, aperio, ^erio pe^ui pe^tum, ve eo v^nivi venum,
singultivi singultum, sepelivi sepultum.

Of Verbs Compounded.
THese Verbs Compounded change a into e throughout, Damno, lacto, sacro, fallo,
arceo, tracto, partio, sarcio, carpo, patro, scando, spargo, as conspergo
conspersi conspersum.

These following change their first vowel into i, and some of them their Supines
into e, habeo, lateo, salio, statuo, cado, laedo, cano, quaero, caedo, tango,
egeo, teneo, taceo, sapio, rapio, placeo, displiceo, displicui displicitum;
Except complaceo, perplaceo, posthabeo.

Scalpo, calco, salto, change a into u, as exculpo.

Claudo, quatio, lavo loos a, as excludo, excutio, eluo.

These following change their first Vowel into i, but not in the Preterperfect
Tense, and sometimes a into e in the Supine, emo, sedeo, rego, frango, capio,
jacio, lacio, specio, premo, as comprimo compressi compressum, conjicio conjeci
conjectum, pango in two only, compingo, impingo: Ago, in all but perago,
satago, circumago, dego and cogo coegi: Facio with a Preposition only, not in
other Compounds, as inficio, olfacio: Lego in these only, diligo, eligo,
intelligo, negligo, seligo, in the rest not, as praelego, add to these
supersedeo.

Of Verbs Defective.
VErbs called Inceptives ending in sco, borrow their Preterperfect Tense from
the Verb whereof they are derived, as tepesco tepui from tepeo, ingemisco
ingemui from ingemo; as also these Verbs, cerno to see, vidi from video, sido
sedi from sedeo, fero tuli from tulo out of use, in the Supine latum, tollo
sussuli sublatum from suffero.

These want the Preterperfect Tense.

Verbs ending in asco, as puerasco; in isco, as satisco; in urio, except
parturio, osurio: these also, vergo, ambigo, ferio, furo, polleo, nideo, have
no Preterperfect Tense.

Contrary, these four, Odi, caepi, novi, memini, are found in the Preterperfect
Tense only, and the Tenses thence derived, as odi, oderam, oderim, odissem,
odero, odisse, except memini, which has memento mementote in the Imperative.

Others are defective both in Tense and Person, us Aio, ais, ait, Plur. aiunt.
The Preterimperfect aiebam is entire. Imperative, ai. Potential, aia^, aiat,
Plur. ^iamus, aiant.

Ausim for ausus sim, ausis, ausit, Plur. ausint.

Salveo, salvebis, salve salveto, salvete salvetote, salvere.

Ave aveto, avete avetote.

Faxo, faxis, faxit, faxint.

Quaeso, Plur. quaesimus.

Infit, infiunt

Inquio or inquam, inquis inquit, Plur inquiunt. Inquibat, Cic Topic. inquisti,
inquit. Future, inquies, inquiet Imperat. Inque inquito. Potent Inquia^.

Dor the first person Passive of do, and for before faris or fare in the
Indicative, are not read, nor d^ or fer in the Potential.

Of a Participle.
A Participle is a part of Speech, partaking with the Verb from whence it is
derived in Voice, Tense, and signification, and with a Noun Adjective in manner
of Declining.

Participles are either of the Active or Passive Voice.

Of the Active Two. One of the Present Tense ending in ans, or ens, as laudans
praising, habens, legens, audiens, and is declined like faelix, as hic haec and
ho^ habens, Genesis habentis, Dat habenti, etc. Docens docentis, etc. But from eo,
euns, and in the compounds iens euntis, except ambiens ambientis. Note that
some Verbs otherwise defective, have this Participle, as aiens, inquiens.

The other of the Future Tense is most commonly formd of the first Supine, by
changing m into rus, as of laudatum laudaturus to praise or about to praise,
habiturus, lecturus, auditurus; but some are not regularly formd, as of sectum
secaturus, of jutum juvaturus, sonitum sonaturus, partum pariturus, argutum
arguiturus, and such like; of sum, futurus: This, as also the other two
Participles following are declined like bonus.

This Participle, with the Verb Sum, affords a second Future in the Active
Voice, as laudaturus sum, es, est, etc. as also the Future of the Infinitive,
as laudaturum esse to praise hereafter, futurum esse, etc.

Participles of the Passive Voice are also two, one of the Preterperfect tense,
another o^ the Future.

A Participle of the Preterperfect Tense, is formd of the latter Supine, by
putting thereto s, as of laudatu laud^us praisd, of habitu habitus, lectu
lectus, auditu audit^.

This Par^iciple joined with the Verb Sum, supplyeth the w^nt of a
Pre^erperfect and Preterpluperfect ^ense in the Indicative ^od passive, and
both them and the Future of the Potential; as also the Preterperfect and
Preterpluperfect of the Infinitive, and with ire or fore the Future; as
laudatus sum or sui I have been praisd, Plur. laudati sumus or suimus we have
been praisd, laudatus eram or fueram, etc. Potential, laudatus sim or ^uerim,
laudatus essem or fuissem, laudatus ero or fuero, Infinite. laudatum esse or
fuisse to have or had been praisd; laudatum ire or fore to be praisd hereafter.

Nor only Passives, but some Actives also or Neuters, besides their own
Preterperfect Tense, borrow another from this Participle; Caeno Caenavi and
Caenatus sum, Juravi and ^uratus, Potavi and potus sum, Titubavi and tituba^us,
Car^ car^i cassus sum, Prandeo prandi and pransus, Pateo p^tui and passus sum,
Pla^eo placui pla^tus, Sues^o suevi suetus sum, Liber libuit and libitum est,
Licet li^uit licitum, Pudet puduit puditum, Piget piguit pigitum, Taedet teduit
p^rtaesum est, and this Deponent Me^eor m^rui and meritus sum

These Neuters following, like Passives, have no other Preterperfect Tense, but
by this Participle, Gaudeo g^isus sum, fido fisus, audeo ausus, fio fact^ soleo
solitus sum.

These Deponents also form this Participle from Supines irregular; Labor
lapsus, patior passus, perpetior perpessus, fateor fassus, conf^eor, diffiteor
diffessus, gradior gressus, ingredior ingressus, fati^or fessus, metior mensus,
utor usus, ordior to spin orditus, to begin orsus, nitor nisus and nixus,
^iscor ultus, irascor iratus, reorratus, obliviscor oblitus, fruor fructus or
fruitus, miserior misertus, tuor and tueor tuitus, loquor locutus, sequor
secutus, experior expertus, paciscor pactus, ^anciscor nactus, apiscor aptus,
adipiscor adeptus, queror questus, proficiscor profectus, expergiscor
experrectus, comminiscor commentus, nascor natus, morior mortuus, orior ortus
sum.

A Participle of the Future Passive is formd of the Gerund in dum, by changing
m into s, as of laudandum laudandus to be praisd, of habendum habendus, etc.
And likewise of this Participle with the Verb Sum, may be formd the same Tenses
in the Passive, which were formed with the Participle of the Preterperfect
Tense, as laudandus sum or fui, etc.

Infinite. Laudandum esse, or fore.

Of Verbs Deponent come Participles, both of the Active and Passive form, as
loquor loquens locutus locuturus loquendus; whereof the Participle of the
Preter Tense signifies sometimes both Actively and Passively, as dignatus,
testatus, meditatus, and the like.

Of an Adverb.
AN Adverb is a part of Speech joined with some other to explain its
signification, as valde probus very honest, been est it is well, valde doctus
very learned, been mane early in the morning.

Of Adverbs, some be of Time, as hodie to day, Cras to morrow, etc.

Some be of Place, as Ubi where, ibi there, etc. And of many other sorts
needless to be here set down.

Certain Adverbs also are compared, as Doct^ learnedly, doctius doctissime,
fortiter fortius fortissime, saepe saepius saepissime, and the like.

Of a Conjunction.
A Conjunction is a part of Speech, that joyneth Words and Sentences together.

Of conjunctions some be Copulative, as (...) and, quoque also, nec neither.

Some be Disjunctive, as aut or.

Some be Causal, as nom for, quia because, and many such like.

Adverbs when they Govern Mood and Tense, and join Sentences together, as cum,
ubi, postquam, and the like, are rather to be called Conjunctions.

Of a Preposition.
A Preposition is a part of Speech most commonly, either set before Nouns in
Apposition, as ad patrem, or joined with any other words in Composition, as
indoctus.

These six, di, dis, re, se, am, con, are not read but in Composition.

As Adverbs having Cases after them, may be called Prepositions, so
Prepositions having none, may be counted Adverbs.

Of an Interjection.
AN Interjection is a part of Speech, expressing some passion of the mind.

Some be of sorrow, as heu, hei.

Some be of marvelling, as papae.

Some of disdaining, as vah.

Some of praising, as euge.

Some of exclaiming, as o, proh, and such like.

Figures of Speech.
WOrds are sometimes encreast or diminisht by a Letter or Syllable in the
beginning, middle or ending, which are called Figures of Speech:

Encreast
In the beginning, as Gnatus for Natus, Tetuli for tuli. Prothesis.

In the middle, as Rettulit for Retulit, Cinctutus for Cinctus. Epenthesis.

In the end, as Dicier for dici. Paragoge.

Diminisht
In the beginning, as Ruit for Eruit. Apherisis.

In the middle, as Audiit for Audivit, Dixti for dixisti, ^amna for lamina.
Syncope.

In the end, as Cons^i for consilii; scin for scisne. Apocope.

The second part of Grammar, commonly called Syntaxis, or Construction.
HItherto the Eight Parts of speech Declined and Undeclin'd have been spoken of
single, and each one by it self: Now follows Syntaxis or Construction, which
is the right joining of these parts together in a Sentence

Construction consists either in the agreement of words together in Number,
Gender, Case, and Person, which is called Concord; or the governing of one the
other in such Case or Mood as is to follow.

Of the Concords.
THere be Three Concords or Agreements.

The First is of the Adjective with his Substantive.

The Second is of the Verb with his Nominative Case.

The Third is of the Relative with his Antecedent.

An Adjective (under which is comprehended both Pronoun and Participle) with
his Substantive or Substantives, a Verb with his Nominative Case or Cases, and
a Relative with his Antecedent or Antecedents, agree all in number, and the two
latter in person also: as Amicus certus. Viri docti. Praeceptor praelegit, vos
vero negligitis. Xenophon and Plato fuere aequales. Vir sapit, qui pauca
loquitur. Pater and Praeceptor veniunt. Yea though the Conjunction be
disjunctive, as Quos neque d^sidia neque luxuria vitiarant. Celsus. Pater and
Praeceptor, quos quaeritis. But if a Verb singular follow many Nominatives, it
must be applied to each of them apart, as Nisi foro and curiae officium ac
verecundia sua constiterit. Val. max.

An Adjective with his Substantive, and a Relative with his Antecedent agree in
Gender and Case; but the Relative not in case always, being oft-times governed
by other constructions: as Amicus certus in re incerta cernitur. Liber quem
dedisti mihi.

And if it be a Participle serving the Infinitive Mood future, it oft-times
agrees not with the Substantive neither in Gender nor in Number, as Hanc sibi
rem praesidio sperat futurum. Cic. Audierat non datum ire filio Uxorem. Terent.
Omnia potius actum iri puto quam de provinciis. Cic.

But when a Verb comes between two Nominative cases not of the same number, or
a Relative between two Substantives not of the same Gender, the Verb in Number,
and the Relative in Gender may agree with either of them; as Amantium irae
amoris integratio est. Quid enim nisi vota supersunt. Tuentur illum globum qui
terra dicitur. Animal plenum rationis, qu^m vocamus hominem. Lutetia est quam
nos Parisios dicimus.

And if the Nominative cases be of several persons, or the Substantives and
Antecedents of several Genders, the Verb shall agree with the second person
before the third, and with the first before either; And so shall the Adjective
or Relative in their Gender; as Ego and tu sumus in tuto. Tu and Pater
periclitamini. Pater and Matter mortui sunt. Frater and Soror quos vidisti.

But in things that have not life, an Adjective or Relative of the Neuter
Gender, may agree with Substantives or Antecedents, Masculin or Feminin, or
both together; as Arcus and calami sunt bona. Arcus and calami quae fregisti.
Pulcritudinem, constantiam, ordinem in Consiliis factisque conservanda putat.
Cic. Off. 1. Ira and aegritudo permista sunt. Sal.

Note that the Infinitive Mood, or any part of a Sentence may be instead of a
Nominative Case to the Verb, or of a Substantive to the Adjective, or of an
Antecedent to the Relative, and then the Adjective or Relative shall be of the
Neuter Gender; And if there be more parts of a Sentence then one, the Verb
shall be in the plural number; Diluculo sur^ere saluberrimum est. Virtutem
sequi, vita est honestissima. Audito proconsulem in Ciliciam tendere. In
tempore veni, quod omnium rerum est primum. Tu multum dormis and saepe potas,
quae duo sunt corpori inimica.

Sometimes also an Adverb is put for the Nominative Case to a Verb, and for a
Substantive to an Adjective; as Partim signorum sunt combust^. Prope centies
and vicies erogatum est. Cic. verr. 4.

Sometimes also agreement, whether it be in Gender or Number, is grounded on the
sense, not on the words; as Illum senium for illum senem. Iste scelus for iste
scelestus. Ter. Transtulit in Eunuchum suam, meaning Comaediam. Ter. Pars magna
obligati, meaning Homines. Live. Impliciti laqueis nudus uterque for Ambo. Ov.
Alter in alterius jactantes lumina vultus, Ovid. that is, Alter and alter.
Insperanti ipsa refers te nobis, for mihi. Catul. Disco omn^. Virg. Aen. 2. for
tu quisquis es. Duo importuna prodigia, quos egestas tribuno plebis constrictos
addix^rat. Cic. pro Sest Pars mersi tenuere ratem. Rhemus cum fratre Quirino
jura dab^nt. Virg. that is, Rhemus and frat^ Quirinus. Divillimur inde Iphitus
and Pelias (...). Virg.

Construction of Substantives.
HItherto of Concord or agreement; the other part follows, which is
Governing, whereby one part of Speech is governed by another, that is to say,
is put in such Case or Mood as the word that governs or goes before in
construction requires.

When two Substantives come together, betokening diverse things, whereof the
former may be an Adjective in the Neuter Gender taken for a Substantive; the
latter (which also may be a Pronoun) shall be in the Genitive Case; as Facundia
Ciceronis. Amator studiorum. Ferimur per opaca locorum. Corruptus vanis rerum.
Hor. Desiderium tui. Pater ejus.

Sometimes the former Substantive, as this word Officium or Mos, is understood;
as Oratoris est, It is the part of an Orator. Extremae est dementiae, It is
the manner of extreme madness. Ignavi est, It is the quality of a sloathful
man. Ubi ad Dianae veneris; Templum is understood. Justitiaene prius mirer
belline laborum. Virg. Understand Causa. Neque illi sepositi Ciceris, neque
longae invidit avenae. Hor. Supply partem.

But if both the Substantives be spoken of one thing, which is called
apposition, they shall be both of the same case; as P^ter meus vir, amat me
puerum.

Words that signify Quality, following the Substantive whereof they are
spoken, may be put ^n the Genitive or Ablative Case; as Puer bonae indolis, or
bona indole. Some have a Genitive only; as Ingentis Rex nominis. Live. December
annorum puer. Hujusmodi pax. Hujus generis animal. But genus is sometimes in
the Accusative: as Si hoc genus rebus non proficitur. Varr. de re rust. And the
cause or manner of a thing in the Ablative only; as Sum tibi natura parens,
preceptor consiliis.

Opus and Usus when they signify Need, require an Ablative; as Opus est mihi
tuo judicio. Vigint^ minis usus est filio. But Opus is sometimes taken for an
Adjective undeclin'd, and signifies Needful; as Dux nobis and Author opus est.
Alia quae opus sunt para.

Construction of Adjectives, Governing a Genitive.
ADjectives that signify Desire, Knowledge, Ignorance, Remembrance,
Forgetfulness, and such like; as also certain others derived from Verbs, and
ending in ax, require a Genitive; as Cupidus auri. Peritus belli. Ignarus
omnium. M^mor praeteriti. Reus surti. Tenax propositi. Tempus edax rerum.

Adjectives called Nouns Partitive, because they signify part of some whole
quantity or number, govern the word that signifies the thing parted or
divided, in the Genitive; as Aliquis nost^um. Primus omnium. Aurium mollior est
sinistra. Oratorum eloquentissimus. And often in the Neuter Gender; as Multum
lucri. Id negotii. Hoc noctis. Sometimes, though seldom, a word signifying the
whole is read in the same Case with the Partitive, as Habet duos gladios quibus
altero te occisurum minatur, altero villicum, Plaut. For Quorum altero. Magnum
opus habeo in manibus; quod jampridem ad hunc ipsum (me autem dicebat) quaedam
institui. Cic. Acad. 1. Quod quaedam for cujus quaedam.

A Dative.
ADjectives that betoken Profit or Disprofit, Likeness or Unlikeness, Fitness,
Pleasure, Submitting, or Belonging to any thing, require a Dative; as Labor est
utilis corpori. Aequalis Hectori. Idoneus bello. Jucundus omnibus. Parenti
supplex. Mihiproprium.

But such as betoken Profit or Disprofit have sometimes an Accusative with a
Preposition; as Homo ad nullam partem utilis. Cic. Inter se aequales.

And some Adjectives signifying Likeness, Unlikeness, or Relation, may have a
Genitive. Par hujus. Ejus culpae affines. Domini similis es. Commune onimantium
est conjunctionis appetitus. Alienum dignitatis ejus. Cic. Fin. 1. Fuit hoc
quondam proprium populi Romani long a domo bollare. But propior and proximus
admit sometimes an Accusative; as proximus Pompeium sedebam. Cic.

An Accusative.
NOuns of Measure are put after Adjectives of like signification in the
Accusative, and sometimes in the Ablative; as Turris alta centum pedes. Arbor
lata tres digitos. Liber crassus tres pollices, or tribus pollicibus. Sometimes
in the Genitive; as Areas latas pedum denum facito.

All words expressing part or Parts of a thing, may be put in the Accusative,
or sometimes in the Ablative; as Saucius frontem or front. Excepto quod non
simul esses caetera laetus. Hor. Nudapedom. Ov. Os humerosque deo similis.
Virg. Sometimes in the Genitive, as Dubious mentis.

An Ablative.
ADjectives of the Comparative degree, englisht with this sign then or by, as
also Dignus, Indignus, Praeditus, Contentus, and these words of Price, Carus,
vilis, require an Ablative; as Frigidior glacie. Multo doctior. Uno pede
altior. Dignus honor. Virtute praeditus. Sort sua contentus. Ass charum.

But of Comparatives, plus, amplius, and minus, may govern a Genitive, also a
Nominative, or an Accusative; as Plus quinquaginta hominum. Amplius duorum
millium. Ne plus tertia pars eximatur mellis. Varro. Paulo plus quingentos
passus. Ut ex sua cujusque part n^ minus dimidium ad fratrem perveniret. Cic.
Verr. 4. And Dignus, Indignus, have sometimes a Genitive after them; as Militia
est operis altera dign^tui. Indignus avorum. Virg.

Adjectives betokening Plenty or Want, will have an Ablative, and sometimes a
Genitive; as Vacuus ira, or irae. Nulla Epistola inanis re aliqua. Ditissimus
agri. Stultorum plena sunt omnia Integer vitae, scelerisque purus. Expers
omnium. Vobis immunibus hujus esse mali dabitur.

Words also betokening the cause, or form, or manner of a thing, are pu^ after
Adjectives in the Ablative Case; as Pallidus i^a. Trepidus morte futura. Nomine
Grammaticus, re Ba^s.

Of Pronouns.
PRonouns differ not in Construction from Nouns, except that Possessives, Meus,
tuus, suus, noster, vester, by a certain manner of speech, are sometimes joined
to a Substantive, which governs their Primitive understood with a Noun or
Participle in a Genitive Case; as Di^o mea unius opera (...) esse liberatam
Cic. For Mei unius o^era. In like manner Nostra, duorum, trium, pau^um, omnium
virtute, for nostrum duorum, etc. Meum solius peccatum, Cic Ex tuo ipsius
animo, For ^ui ipsius. Ex sua cujusque part, Id. Verr. 2^. Ne tua quidem
recentia proximi Praetoris vestigia persequi po^erat. Cic. verr. 4. Si meas
presentis preces non pu^as profuisse, id. Pro Planc. Nostros vidisti slentis
ocellos. Ovid.

Also a Relative, as qui or is, sometimes answers to an Antecedent Noun or
Pronoun Primitive understood in the Possessive; as Omnes laudare fortunas meas
qui fi^ium haberem tali ingenio praeditum. Terent.

Construction of Verbs.
VErbs for the most part govern either one case after them, or more then one in
a different manner of Construction.

Of the Verb Substantive Sum, and such like, with a Nominative, and other
oblique Cases.
VErbs that signify Being, as Sum, existo, fio; and certain Passives, as
dicor, vocor, salutor, appellor, habeor, existimor, videor; also Verbs of
motion or rest, as incedo, discedo, sed^o, with such like, will have a
Nominative Case after them as they have before them, because both Cases belong
to the same person or thing, and the latter is rather in apposition with the
former, then governed by the Verb; as Temperantia est virtus. Horatius
silutatur Poeta. Ast ego quae divum incedo regina.

And if est be an impersonal, it may sometimes govern a Genitive, as Usus
Poetae, ut moris est, licentia, Phaedrus l. 4. Neg^vit moris esse Graecorum, ut
etc Cic. verr. 2.

But if the following Noun be of another person, or not directly spoken of the
former, both after Sum and all his Compounds, except possum, it shall be put in
the Dative; as Est mihi do^i pater. Multa petentibus desunt multa.

And if a thing be spoken of, relating to the person, it may be also in the
Dative; as Sum tibi praesidio. Haecres est mihi voluptati. Qu^rum alteri
Capitoni cogn men fuit. Cic. Pastori nomen (...) fuisse serunt. Live.

Of Verbs Transitives with an Accusitive, and the Exceptions thereto belonging.
VErbs Active or Deponent, called Transitive, because their action passes forth
on some person or thing, will have an Accusative after them of the person or
thing to whom the action is done; as Amo te. Vitium fuge. Deu^ venerare. Usus
promptos facit. Juvat me. Oporte^ te.

Also Verbs called Neuters, may have an Accusative of their own signification;
as Duram servit servitutem. Longam ire viam. Endimion^ somnum dormis. Pastillos
Rufillus olet. Ne^ vox hominem sonat. Cum Glaucum saltasset. Paterc. Agit
laetum convivam. Horat. Hoc me latet.

But these Verbs, though Transitive, Misereor and Miseresco, pass into a
Genitive; as Miserer^ mei. Sometimes into a Dative. Huic misereor. Sen. Dilige
bonos, miseresce malis. Boet.

Reminiscor, Obliviscor, Recordor, and Memini, sometimes also require a
Genitive; as Datae fidei veminis^itur. Memini tai. Obliviscor carminis. Sometime
retain the Accusative; as Recordor pueritiam. Omnia quae curant senes
meminerunt. Plaut.

These Impersonals also, interest and resert, signifying to concern, require a
Genitive, except in these Ablatives Feminine, Moa, tua, sua, nostra, vestra,
c^ja. And the measure of concernment is often added in these Genitives, magni,
parvi, tanti, quanti, with their Compounds; as Interest omnium recte agere. Tua
resert teipsum nosse. Vestra parvi interest.

But Verbs of Profiting or Disprofiting, Believing, Pleasing, Obeying,
Opposing, or being angry with, pass into a Dative; as non potes mihi commodare
nec incommodare. Placeo omnibus. Creed mihi. Nimium ne creed colori. Pareo
parentibus. Tibi repugno. Adolescenti nihil est quod succenseat. But of the
first and third sort, Juvo, adjuvo, laedo, offendo, retain an Accusative.

Lastly, these Transitives, fungor, fruor, utor, potior, and Verbs betokening
want, pass direct into an Ablative. Fungitur officio. Aliena frui insania.
Utere sort tua. But fungor, fruor, utor, had anciently an Accusative. Verbs of
want, and potior, may have also a Genitive. Pecuniae indiget. Quasi ^u hujus
indigeas patris. Potior Urbe, or Urbis.

Sometimes a phrase of the same signification with a single Verb, may have the
Case of the Verb after it; as Id operam do, that is to say, id ago. Idne estis
authors mihi? for id suadetis. Quid mo vobis tactio est? for tangitis. Plaut.
Quid tibi hanc curatio est rem? Id.

The Accusative with a Genitive.
HItherto of Transitives governing their Accusative, or other Case, in single
and direct Construction: Now of such as may have after them more Cases then one
in Construction direct and oblique, that is to say, with an Accusative, a
Genitive, Dative, other Accusative, or Ablative.

Verbs of Esteeming, Buying or Selling, besides their Accusative, will have a
Genitive betokening the value of price, flocci, nihili, pili, hujus, and the
like after Verbs of Esteeming: Tanti, quanti, pluris, minoris, and such like,
put without a Substantive, after Verbs of Buying or Selling; as Non hujus te
aestimo. Ego illum flocci pendo. Aequi boni hoc facio or consulo. Quanti
mercatus es hunc equum? Pluris quam vellem.

But the word of Value is sometimes in the Ablative; as Parvi or parvo aestimas
probitatem. And the word of Price most usually; As Teruncio eum non emerim. And
particularly in these Adjectives, Vili, paulo, minimo, magno, nimio, plurimo,
dimidio, duplo, put without a Substantive, as Vili vendo triticum. Redimete
captum quam queas mini^o. And sometimes minore for minoris. Nam a Caelio
propinqui minore centessimis nummum movere non possunt. Cic. At. l. 1. E^t
Verbs Neuter or Parsive have only the oblique Cases after them; as Tanti eris
aliis, quanti ribi (...). Pudor parvi penditur. Which is also to be observed in
the following Rules.

And this Neuter Valeo governs the word of value in the Accusative^; as
Denarii dicti quod denes aeris valebant. Varr.

Verbs of admonishing, accusing, condemning, acquitting, will have, besides
their Acc^sative, a Genitive of the Crime, or (...), or Thing; a^ Admonuit me
errati. Accusas me (...) ^em sc^leris damnat. Furem d^pli (...). And sometimes
an Ablative with a preposition, or without; ^s Condemnsbo eodem ego to (...).
Accusas furti, an stu^ri, an utroque? De repetundis accusavit, or d^mnavit. Cic.

Also these impersonals, poenitet, taedet, miseret, miserescit, pudet, piget,
to their Accusative will have a Genitive, either of the person, or of the thing;
as Nostri no^met poenitet. Urbis me taedet. Miseret ^e tui. Pudet me
negligentiae.

An Accusative with a Dative.
VErbs of Giving or Restoring, Promising or Paying, Commanding or Showing,
Trusting or Threatening, add to their Accusative a Dative of the person; as
Fortuna multis nimium d^ dit. Haec tibi promitto. Aes alienum mihi numeravit.
Frumentum imperat civitatibus. Q^id and cui dicas, videto.

Hoc tibi suadeo. Tibi or ad te s^ribo. Pecuniam omnem tibi credo. Utrique
mortem minatu^ est.

To these add Verbs Active compounded with hese prepositions, prae, ad, ab,
con, de, ex, ante, sub, post, ob, in and inter; as Praecipio hoc tibi. Admovit
urbi (...). Collegae suo imperium abrogavit. Sic parvis componere magna solebam.

Neuters have a dative only; as Meis majoribus virtute praeluxi. But some
compounded with prae and ante may have an accusative; as Praestat ingenio alius
alium. Multos anteit sapientia. Others with a Preposition; as Quae ad ventris
victum conducunt. In haec studia incumbite. Cic.

Also all Verbs Active, betokening acquisition, likening, or relation, commonly
englisht with to or for, have to their accusative a dative of the person; as
Magnam laudem sibi peperit. Huic habeo non tibi. Se illis aequarunt. Expedi
mihi hoc negotium: but mihi, tibi, sibi, sometimes are added for El^gance, the
sense not requiring; as Suo hunc sibi iugul^t gladio. Terent Neuters a dative
only; as Non omnibus dormio. Libet mihi. Tibi licet

Sometimes a Verb Transitive will have to his accusative a double dative, one of
the person, another of the thing; as Do tibi vestem pignori. Verto hoc tibi
vitio. Hoc tu tibi laudi du^.

A double Accusative.
VErbs of asking, teaching, arraying, and concealing, will have two
accusatives, one of the person, another of the thing; as Rogo is pecuniam.
Doceo te literas. Quod te jamdudum h^rtor. Induit se calceos. Hoc me cel^bas.

And being Passives, they retain one accusative of the thing, as Sumptumque
recingitur anguem, Ovid. Met. 4. Induitur togam. Mart.

But Verbs of arraying sometimes change the one accusative into an ablative or
dative; as Induo to tunica, or tibi tunicam. Instravit equum penula, o^ eque
penulam.

An Accusative with an Ablative.
VErbs Transitives may have to their accusative an ablative of the instrument or
cause, matter, or manner of doing; and Neuters the ablative only; As Ferit eum
gladio. Taceo metu. Ma^is gaud^ alienis. Summa eloquentia causam egit.
Capitolium sa^o quadrato substructum est. Tuo consilio ni^. (...) pan^. Affluis
opibus. Amore abundas. Sometimes with a Preposition of the manner; as Summa ^um
humanitate me tractavit.

Verbs of endowing, imparting, depriving, discharging, filling, emptying, and
the like, will have an ablative, and sometimes a genitive; as Dono te ^oc (...).
Plurima salute ^e impertit. Aliquem (...) suo sermon participavit. Paternum
servum ^ui participavit consilii. Interdico tibi aqua and igni, ^ibero ^e hoc
metu. Impl^ntur veteris Bacchi.

Also Verbs of comparing, or exceeding, will have an ablative of the excess; as
Praefero hunc ^ultis gradibus. Magno intervallo eum superat.

After all manner of Verbs, the word signifying any part of a thing, may be put
in the genitive, accusative, or ablative; as Absurd facis qui angas (...)
animi. P^et animi. Dis^rucior animi. Desipit ^entis. Conde^ dentes. Rubet
capillos. Aegrot^t ani^, magu quam corpors.

Nouns of Time and Place after Verbs.
NOuns betokening part of time, be put after Verbs in the ablative, and
sometimes in the accusative; as Nocte vigilas, luce dormis. Nullam partem noctis
requiescit. Cic. Abhinc triennium ex Andro comigravit. Tit. Respondit triduo
illum, ad summum quatriduo periturum, Cic. Or if continuance of time, in the
accusative, sometimes in the Ablative: as Sexaginta annos natus. Hyemem totam
stertis. Imperium deponere maluerunt, quam id tenere punctum temporis contra
Religionem. Cic. Imperavit triennio, and december mensibus. Suet. Sometimes with a
Preposition; as Fere in diebus paucis, quibus haec acta sunt. Ter. Rarely with
a genitive; as Temporis angusti mansit concordia discors. Lucan.

Also Nouns betokening Space between places are put in the accusative, and
sometimes in the ablative; as Pedem hinc ne discesseris. Abest ab Uybe
quingentis milibus passuum. Terra marique gentibus imperavit.

Nouns that signify Place, and also proper Names of greater places, as
Countries, be put after Verbs of moving or remaining, with a Preposition,
signifying to, from, in, or by, in such case as the Preposition requires; as
Proficiscor ab Urbo. Vivit in Anglia. Veni per Galliam in Italiam.

But if it be the Proper Name of a Lesser Place, as of a City, Town, or Lesser
Island, or any of these four, Humus, Domus, Militia, Bellum, with these signs,
on, in, or at before them, being of the first or second Declension, and
singular number, they shall be put in the genitive; if of the third Declension,
or Plural Number, or this word rus, in the dative or ablative; as Vixit Romae,
Londini. Ea habitabat ^hodi. Conon plurimum Cypri vixit. Cor. Nep. pro^bit
(...) bos. Domi bellique simul viximus. Militavit Carthagini or Carthagine.
S^duit Athenis. Ruri or rure educatus est.

If the Verb of moving be to a Place, it shall be put in the accusative; as Eo
Romam, Domum, Ru^. If from a Place, in the ablative; as Discessie Londino.
Abii^ Domo. Rure est reversui.

Sometimes with a Preposition: as A Brundisio profectus est. Cic. Manil. Ut ab
Athenis in Boeotian^ trem. Sulpit. apud. Cic. Fam. l. 4. Cum te profectum ab
domoscirem. Live. l. 8.

Construction of Passives.
A Verb Passive will have after it an ablative of the doer, with the
Preposition a or ab before it, sometimes without, and more often a dative: as
Virgilius legitur a me. Fortes creantur sortibus. Hor. Tibi sama petatur. And
Neutropassives, as Vapulo, veneo, liceo, exulo, (...), may have the same
Construction; as Ab host ^enire.

Sometimes an accusative of the thing is found after a Passive; as Coronari
Olympia. Hor. Epist. I. Cycl^ movetur. Hor. for salta^ or agit. Purgor ^ilem.
Id.

Construction of Gerunds and Supines.
GErunds and Supines will have such cases as the Verb from whence they come; as
Otium scrib^ndi literas. Eo ^uditum Poe^s. Ad consulendum tibi.

A Gerund in di is commonly governed both of Substantives and Adjectives in
manner of a genitive; as Causa videndi. Amor habendi. Cupidus visendi. Certus
eundi. And sometimes governs a genitive Plural; as Illorum videndi gratia.
Ter.

Gerunds in do are used after Verbs in manner of an ablative, according to
former Rules, with or without a preposition; as Defessus sum ambulando. A
discendo facile deterretur. Caesar dando, sublevando, ignoscendo, gloriam
adeptus est. In apparando consumunt diem.

A Gerund in dum is used in manner of an accusative after prepositions
governing that case; as Ad capiendum hosts. Ante domandum ingentes tollent
animos. Virg. Ob redimendum captivos. Inter ^nandum.

Gerunds in signification are o^t-times used as Participles in dus; Tuorum
consiliorum reprimendorum causa. Cic. Orationem Latinam legendis nost is (...)
pleniorem. Cic. Ad accusandos homines praemio ducitur.

A Gerund in dum joined with the Impersonal est, and implying some necessity or
duty to do a thing, may have both the Active and Passive construction of the
Verb from whence it is derived; as Utendum est aetate. Ov. Pacem Trojano a rege
pe^endum. Virg. Iterandum eadem ista mihi. Cic Serviendum est mihi amicis.
Plura dixi quam di^endum suit. Cic. pro Sest.

Construction of Verb with Verb.
WHen two Verbs come together without a nominative case between them, the
latter shall be in the Infinitive Mood; as Cupio discere. Or in the first
Supine after Verbs of moving; a^ Eo cubitum, spectatum. Or in the latter with
an adjective; as Turpe est dictu. Facile sactu opus scitu.

But if a Case come between, not governed of the former Verb, it shall always
be an accusative before the Infinitive Mood; as Te rediisse incolumem gaudeo.
(...) me divitem esse, quam haberi.

And this Infinitive esse, will have always after it an accusative, or the
same case which the former Verb governs; as Expedit bonos esse vobis. Quo mihi
commisso, non licet esse piam. But this accusative agrees with another
understood before the Infinitive; as Expedit vobis vos esse bonos. Natura
be^tis omnibus esse dedit. Nobis non licet esse tam di ortis. The same
Construction may be used after other Infinitives Neuter or Passive like to esse
in signification; as Maximo tibi post^a and civi, and duci (...) con^. Val.
Max. L. 6.

Sometimes a Noun ^ctive or Substantive governs an Infinitive; as Audax omnia
perpeti. Dignus amari. Consilium ceperunt ex oppido profugere. Caes. Minari
divisoribus ratio non erat. Cic. verr. 1.

Sometimes the Infinitive is put absolute for the preterimperfect or
preterperfect Tense; as Ego ^lud sedulo negare factum. Ter. Galba autem mul^as
similitudines afferre. Cic. Ille contra haec omnia ^uere, agere vitam. Ter.

Construction of Participles.
PArticiples govern such cases as the Verb from whence they come, according to
their Active or Passive signification; as Fruiturus amicis. Nunquam audita
mihi. Diligendus ab omnibus. Sat sanguine divum. Yelamone creatus. Corpore
mortali cretus. Lucret. Note dea. Edite regibus. Laevo suspensi loculos
tabulasq^e locerto. Hor. Census eque strem summam. Id. Abeundum est mihi. Venus
orta mari. Exosus Bella. Virg. Exosus diis. Gell. Ar^a Perosus. Ovid. But
Pertaesus has an accusative otherwise then the Verb; as Pertaesus ^gnaviam.
Semet ipse portaesus. Suet. To these add participia^ adjectives ending in bilis
of the Passive signification, and requiring like case after them; as Nulli
penetrabilis astro lucus erat.

Participles changed into Adjectives have their Construction by the Rules of
Adjectives; as Appetens vini, Fugitans litium. Fidens animi.

An Ablative put absolute.
TWo Nouns together, or a Noun and Pronoun with a Participle express or
understood, put absolutely, that is to say, neither governing nor governed of a
Verb, shall be put in the ablative; as Authore Sena^u bellum geritur. Me duce
vinces. Caesare veniente hosts fugerunt. Sublato clamore praelium committitur.

Construction of Adverbs.
EN and ecce will have a Nominative, or an accusative, and sometimes with a
dative; as En Priamus. Ecce tibi status noster. En habitum. Ecce au^em alterum.

Adverbs of quantity, time, and place require a genitive; as Satis loquentiae,
sapientiae parum Sa^ also compounded with a Verb; as Is rerum suarum satagit.
Tunc temporis. Ubique gentium. Ed impudentiae processit. Quoad ejus fieri
poterit.

To these add Ergo signifying the cause; as Illius ergo Virg. Virtutis ergo.
Fugae atque formidinis ergo non abiturus Live.

Others will have such case as the Nouns from whence they come; as Minime
gentium. Optime omnium. Venit ob^iam illi. Canit similiter huic. Albanum, sive
Falernum te magis appositis delectat. Hor.

Adverbs are joined in a Sentence to several Moods of Verbs.

Of Time, Ubi, postquam, cum or quum, to an Indicative or Subjunctive; as Haec
ubi dicta de^it. Ubi nos laverimus. Postquam excessit ex Ephebis. Cum faciam
vitula Virg. Cum canerem reges. Id.

Donec while, to an Indicative. Donec er is feliae. Donec until, to an
Indicative or Subjunctive; Cogere donec oves jussit. Virg. Donec ea aqua
decocta sit. Colum.

Dum while, to an Indicative. Dum apparatur Virgo. Dum until, to an Indicative
or Subjunctive; as Dum redeo. Tertia dum Latio regnante^ viderit aestas. Dum
for dummodo so as, or, so that, to a Subjunctive. Dum prosim tibi.

Quoad while, to an Indicative. Quoad expectas contubernalem. Quoad until, to
a Subjunctive. Omnia integra servabo, quoad exercitus huc mittatur.

Simulac, simulatque to an Indicative or Subj^ctive; a^ Simulac belli patiens
erat simulatque adoleverit atas.

Ut as, to the same Moods. Ut salutabis, ita resalutaberis. Ut sementem
feceris, ita and metes. Hor. Ut so soon as, to an Indicative only: as Ut ventum
est in Urbem.

Quasi, tanquam, perinde, ac si, to a Subjunctive only; as Quasi non nori^us
nos inter nos. Tanquam feceris ipse aliquid.

Ne of forbidding, to an Imperative or Subjunctive; as Ne saevi. Ne metuas.

Certain Adverbs of quantity, quality, or cause; as Quam, quoties, cur, quare,
etc. Thence also qui, quis, quantus, qualis, and the like, coming in a sentence
after the principal Verb, govern the Verb following in a Subjunctive; as vide^e
quam valde mal^tiae suae considat. Cic. Quid est cur tu in isto loco sedeas?
Cic pro Cluent. Subsideo mihi diligentiam comparavi quae quanta sit intelligi
non potest, nisi etc. Cic. pro Quint. Nam quid hoc iniquius dici potest, Quam
me qui caput alterius fortunasque defendam, Priore loco dicere. Ibid. Nullum
est Officium tam sanctum atque solenne, quod non avaritia violare s^leat. Ibid.
Non me fallit, si consulamini quid sitis responsuri. Ibid. Dici vix potest quam
multa sint quae respondeatis ante fieri oportere. Ibid. Docui quo die hunc fibi
promisisse dicat, eo die ne Romae quidem eum fuisse. Ibid. Conturbatus discedit
neque mirum, cui haec optio tam misera daretur, Ibid. Narrat quo in loco
viderit Quintium. Ibid. Recte majores eum qui socium fefellisse^ in virorum
bonorum numero non putarunt haberi oportere. Cic. pro Rosc. Am. Quae
concursatio percontantium (...) Praetor edixisset, ubi caenaret, quid
enuntiasset. Cic. Agrar. 1.

Of Conjunctions.
COnjunctions Copulative and Disjunctive, and these four, Quam, nisi,
^raeterquam, an, couple like cases; as Socrates docuit Xenophontem and
Platonem. Aut dies est, aut nox. Nescio albus an ater sit. Est minor natu
quamtu. Nemini placet praeterquam sibi.

Except when some particular construction requires otherwise; as Studui Romae
and Athenis. Emi fundum centum nummis and pluris. Accusas furti, on stupri, an
utroque?

They also couple for the most part like Moods and Tenses; as Recto stat
corpore, despicitque terras. But not always like Tenses; as Nisi mo lactasses,
and vana spe produceres. Et habetur, and referetur tibi a me gratia.

Of other Conjunctions, some govern an Indicative, some a Subjunctive,
according to their several significations.

Etsi, tametsi, etiamsi, quanquam an Indicative; quamvis and licet most
commonly a Subjunctive; as Etsi nihil novi afferrebatur. Quanquam animus
meminisse horret. Quamvis Elysios miretur Graecia campos. Ipse li^et venias.

Ni, nisi, si, siquidem, quod, quia, postquam, posteaquam, antequam, priusquam
an Indicative or Subjunctive; as Nisivi mavis eripi. Ni faciat. Cas^go te, non
quod odeo habeam, sed quod amem. Antequam dicam. Si for quamvis a Subjunctive
only. Redeam? Non si me obsecret.

Si also conditional may sometimes govern both Verbs of the sentence in a
Subjunctive; as Respiraro, si te videro. Cic ad Attic.

Quando, quandoquidem, quoniam, an Indicative; as Dicite quandoquidem in molli
consedimus herba. Quoniam convenimus ambo

Cum seeing that, a Subjunctive; as Cum sis officiis Gradive virilibus aptus.

Ne, an, number, of doubting, a Subjunctive; as Nihil resert, fecerisne, an
persuaseris. Vise number redierit.

Interrogatives also of disdain or reproach understood govern a Subjunctive; as
tantum them, quantum ille poposcerit? Cic. verr. 4. Sylvam tu Scantiam vendas?
Cic. Agrar. Hunc tu non ames? Cic. ad Attic. ^urem aliquem aut rapacem
accusaris? Vitanda semper erit omnis avaritiae suspicio. Cic. verr. 4.
Sometimes an Infinitive; as Mean incaepto desistere victam? Virg.

Ut that, lest not, or although, a Subjunctive; as Te aro, ut redeat jam in
viam. Metuo ut substes hospes. Ut omnia contingant quae volo.

Of Prepositions.
OF Prepositions, some will have an accusative after them, some an ablative,
some both, according to their different signification.

An accusative these following, Ad, apud, ante, adversus adversum, cis citra,
circum circa, circiter, contra, erga, extra, inter, intra, infra, juxta, ob,
pone, per, prope, propter, post, penes, praeter, secundum, supra, secus, trans,
ultra, usque, versus; But versus is most commonly set after the case it
governs, as Londinum versus.

And for an accusative after ad, a dative sometimes is used in Poets; as It
clamor coel^. Virg. Coelo si gloria tollit Aeneadum. Sil. for ad coelum.

An ablative these, A, ab, abs, absque, cum, coram, de, e, ex, pro, prae,
palam, sine, tenus, which last is also put after his case, being most usually a
genitive, if it be Plural; as Capulo tenus. Aurium tenus.

These, both cases, In, sub, super, subter, clam, procul.

In, signifying to, toward, into, or against, requires an accusative; as
Pisces emptos obolo in coenam seni. Animus in Teu^ros benignus. Versa est in
cineres Troja. In te committere tantum quid Troes potuere? lastly, when it
signifies future time or for; as Bellum in triges^um diem indixerunt. Designati
consules in annum sequentem. Alii pretia faciunt in singula capita canum. Var.
Otherwise in will have an ablative; as In Urbe. In Te^ris.

Sub, when it signifies to, or in time, about, or a little before, requires an
accusative; as sub umbram properemus. Sub id tempus. Sub noctem. Otherwise an
Ablative. Sub pedibus. Sub umbra.

Super signifying beyond, or present time, an accusative; as Super Garamantas
and Indos. Super coenam. ^uet. at supper time. Of or con^erning, an ablat^ve;
as Multa super Priamo rogitans. Super hac re.

Super, over or upon, may have either case; as Super ripas Tiberis effusus,
Saeva s^dens super arma. Fronde super viridi.

So also may subter; as pugnatum est super subterque terras. Subter densa
testudine. Virg. Clam patrem or patre. Procul muros. Live. Patria pr^ul.

Prepositions in composition govern the same cases as before in apposition.
Adibo hominem. Petrudunt n^ves scopulo. And the Preposition is sometimes
repeated; as Detrahere de tua f^ma nunquam ^ogitovi. And sometimes understood,
governs his usual case; as Habeo te loco parentis. Apparuit humana specie.
Cumis erant oriundi. Live. Liberis parentibus oriundus. Colum Muta^
quadrotarotundis. Hor. Pridie Compitalia. Pridie nonas or calendas. Postridie
Idus. Postridie ludos. Before which accusatives ante or post is to be
understood, Filii id aetatis. Cic. Hoc noctis. Live. Understand Secundum. Or
refer to part of time. Omnia Mercurio similis. Virg. Understand per.

Of Interjections.
CErtain Interjections have several cases after them. O, a Nominative,
Accusative or Vocative; as O sestus d^es hominis. O ego l^vus. Hor. O
fortunatos. O formose puer.

Others a Nominative, or an Accusative; as Heu prisca fides! Heu stirpem
invisam! Proh sancte Jupiter! Proh deum atque hominum fidem! Hem tibi davum!

Yea, though the Interjection be understood; as Me miserum! Me coecum, qui haec
ante non viderim!

Others will have a Dative; as Hei mihi. Vae misero mihi. Terent.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 16. Line 5. for hoc nostrate Read hoc nostras or nostrate.

P. 31. L. 11. f. visi r. vici.

P. 35. l. 21: f. Quaesimus r. Quaesumus.

P. 54. l. 8. f. Transitives r. Transitive.

P. 55. l. 8. f. Tit. r. Ter.


