Considerations TOUCHING The likeliest means to remove HIRELINGS out of the
church.

Wherein is also discourc'd Of Tithes, Church-fees, Church-revenues; And
whether any maintenance of ministers can be settled by law. The author J. M.

LONDON: Printed by T. N. for L. Chapman at the Crown in Popeshead Alley. 1659.

TO THE PARLIAMENT OF THE commonwealth OF ENGLAND with the dominions thereof.
OWing to your protection, supreme Senate, this liberty of writing which I have
used these 18 years on all occasions to assert the just rights and freedoms
both of church and state, and so far approved, as to have bin trusted with the
representment and defense of your actions to all Christendom against an
adversary of no mean repute, to whom should I address what I still publish on
the same argument, but to you whose magnanimous councels first opend and
unbound the age from a double bondage under prelatical and regal tyranny;
above our own hopes heartning us to look up at last like men and Christians
from the slavish dejection, wherein from father to son we were bred up and
taught; and thereby deserving of these nations, if they be not barbarously
ungrateful, to be acknowledgd, next under God, the authors and best patrons of
religious and civil liberty, that ever these Islands brought forth. The care
and tuition of whose peace and safety, after a short but scandalous night of
interruption, is now again by a new dawning of Gods miraculous providence among
us, revolvd upon your shoulders. And to whom more appertain these
considerations which I propound, then to your selves and the debate before you,
though I trust of no difficulty, yet at present of great expectation, not
whether ye will gratify, were it no more then so, but whether ye will hearken
to the just petition of many thousands best affected both to religion and to
this your return, or whether ye will satisfy, which you never can, the
covetous pretenses and demands of insatiable hirelings, whose disaffection ye
well know both to your selves and your resolutions. That I, though among many
others in this common concernment, interpose to your deliberations what my
thoughts also are, your own judgment and the success thereof has given me the
confidence: which requests but this, that if I have prosperously, God so
favoring me, defended the public cause of this commonwealth to foreiners, ye
would not think the reason and ability, whereon ye trusted once, and repent
not, your whole reputation to the world, either grown less by more maturitie
and longer study, or less available in English then in another tongue: but
that if it sufficed some years past to convince and satisfy the uningag'd of
other nations in the justice of your doings, though then held paradoxal, it may
as well suffice now against weaker opposition in matters, except here in
England (with a spirituality of men devoted to their temporal gain,) of no
controversy else among Protestants. Neither do I doubt, seeing daily the
acceptance which they* find who in their petitions venture to bring advice also
and new modells of a commonwealth, but that you will interpret it much more the
duty of a Christian to offer what his conscience persuades him may be of
moment to the freedom and better constituting of the church:) since it is a
deed of highest charity to help undeceive the people, and a work worthiest
your authority, in all things else authors, assertors and now recoverers of our
liberty, to deliver us, the only people of all Protestants left still
undeliverd, from the oppressions of a Simonious decimating clergy; who shame
not against the judgment and practice of all other churches reformd, to
maintain, though very weakly, their Popish and often refuted positions, not in a
point of conscience, wherein they might be blameles, but in a point of
covetousnes and unjust claim to other men's goods; a conuention foul and odious
in any man, but most of all in ministers of the gospel, in whom contention,
though for their own right, scarce is allowable. Till which greevances be
removed and religion set free from the monopoly of hirelings, I dare affirm,
that no model whatsoever of a commonwealth will prove succesful or undisturbd;
and so persuaded, implore divine assistance on your pious councels and
proceedings to unanimitie in this and all other truth.

John Milton.
CONSIDERATIONS touching the likeliest means to remove hirelings out of the
church.
THe former treatise, which leads in this, begann with two things ever found
working much mischief to the church of God, and the advancement of truth; force
on the one side restraining, and hire on the other side corrupting the teachers
thereof. The latter of these is by much the more dangerous: (for under force,
though no thank to the forcers, true religion oft-times best thrives) and
flourishes: but the corruption of teachers, most commonly the effect of hire,
is the very bane of truth in them who are so corrupted. Of force not to be used
in matters of religion, I have already spoken; and so stated matters of
conscience and religion in faith and divine worship, and so severd them from
blasphemy and heresy, the one being such properly as is despiteful, the other
such as stands not to the rule of Scripture, and so both of them not matters of
religion, but rather against it, that to them who will yet us^ force, this only
choice can b^ left, whether they will force them to believe, to whom it is not
given from above, being not forced thereto by any principle of the gospel,
which is now the only dispensation of God to all men, or whether being
Protestants, they will punish in those things wherein the Protestant religion
denies them to be judges, either in themselves infallible or to the consciences
of other men, or whether, lastly, they think fit to punish error, supposing
they can be infallible that it is so, being not wilful, but conscientious, and,
according to the best light of him who errs, grounded on scripture: which kind
of error all men religious, or but only reasonable, have thought worthier of
pardon; and the growth thereof to be prevented by spiritual means and
church discipline, not by civil laws and outward force; since it is God only
who gives as well to believe aright, as to believe at all; and by those means
which he ordaind sufficiently in his church to the full execution of his divine
purpose in the gospel. It remanes now to speak of hire; the other evil so
mischeevous in religion: whereof I promisd then to speak further, when I should
find God disposing me, and opportunity inviting. Opportunity I find now
inviting; and apprehend therein the concurrence of God disposing; since the
maintenance of church-ministers, a thing not properly belonging to the
magistrate, and yet with such importunity called for, and expected from him, is
at present under public debate. Wherein least any thing may happen to be
determind and establishd prejudicial to the right and freedom of church, or
advantageous to such as may be found hirelings therein, it will be now most
seasonable, and in these matters wherein every Christian has his free suffrage,
no way misbecoming Christian meeknes to offer freely, without disparagement to
the wisest, such advice as God shall incline him and enable him to propound.
Since heretofore in commonwealths of most fame for government, civil laws were
not establishd till they had been first for certain days publishd to the view
of all men, that who so pleased might speak freely his opinion thereof, and give
in his exceptions, ere the law could pass to a full establishment. And where
ought this equity to have more place, then in the liberty which is unseparable
from Christian religion? This, I am not ignorant, will be a work unpleasing to
some: but what truth is not hateful to some or other, as this, in likelihood,
will be to none but hirelings. And if there be among them who hold it their duty
to speak impartial truth, as the work of their ministry, though not performd
without money, let them not envy others who think the same no less their duty
by the general office of Christianity, to speak truth, as in all reason may be
thought, more impartially and unsuspectedly without money.

Hire of itself is neither a thing unlawful, nor a word of any evil note,
signifying no more then a due recompense or reward; as when our Savior says,
the laborer is worthy of his hire. That which makes it so dangerous in the
church, and properly makes the hireling, a word always of evil signification,
is either the excess thereof, or the undue manner of giving and taking it. What
harm the excess thereof brought to the church, perhaps was not found by
experience till the days of Constantine: who out of his zeal thinking he could
be never too liberally a nursing father of the church, might be not unfitly
said to have either overlaid it or choakd it in the nursing. Which was
foretold, as is recorded in ecclesiastical traditions, by a voice heard from
heaven on the very day that those great donations and church-revenues were
given, crying aloud, This day is poison pourd into the church. Which the event
soon after verified; as appeers by another no less ancient observation, That
religion brought forth wealth, and the daughter devourd the mother. But long
ere wealth came into the church, so soon as any gain appeerd in religion,
hirelings were apparent; drawn in long before by the very sent thereof. Judas
therefore, the first hireling, for want of present hire answerable to his
coveting, from the small number or the meanness of such as then were the
religious, sold the religion it self with the founder thereof, his master. Simon
Magus the next, in hope only that preaching and the gifts of the holy ghost
would prove gainful, offered beforehand a sum of money to obtain them. Not long
after, as the apostle foretold, hirelings like wolves came in by herds, Acts
20. 29. For, I know this, that after my departing shall greevous wolves enter
in among you, not sparing the flock. Tit. 1. 11. Teaching things which they
ought not, for filthy lucres sake. 2 Pet. 2. 3. And through covetousnes shall
they with feigned words make merchandise of you. Yet they taught not falls
doctrine only, but seeming piety: 1 Timothy 6. 5. supposing that gain is Godliness.
Neither came they in of themselves only, but invited oft-times by a corrupt
audience: 2 Timothy 4. 3. For the time will come, when they will not endure sound
doctrine, but after their own lusts they will heap to themselves teachers, having
itching ears: and they on the other side, as fast heaping to themselves
disciples, Acts 20. 30, doubtless had as itching palms. 2 Pet. 2. 15. Following
the way of Balaam, the son of Bosor, who lovd the wages of unrighteousnes. Jude
11. They ran greedily after the error of Balaam for reward. Thus we see that
not only the excess of hire in wealthiest times, but also the undue and vicious
taking or giving it, though but small or mean, as in the primitive times, gave
to hirelings occasion, though not intended, yet sufficient, to creep at first
into the church. Which argues also the difficulty, or rather the impossibility,
to remove them quite; unless every minister were, as St. Paul, contented to
teach gratis: but few such are to be found. As therefore we cannot justly take
away all hire in the church, because we cannot otherwise quite remove all
hirelings, so are we not for the impossibility of removing them all, to use
therefore no endevor that fewest may come in: but rather, in regard the evil, do
what we can, will always be incumbent and unavoidable, to use our utmost
diligence, how it may be least dangerous. Which will be likeliest effected, if
we consider, first, what recompense God has ordaind should be given to
ministers of the church; (for that a recompense ought to be given them, and may
by them justly be received, our Savior himself from the very light of reason
and of equity has declared: Luke 10. 7. The laborer is worthy of his hire)
next by whom; and lastly, in what manner.

What recompense ought be given to church-ministers, God has answerably
ordaind according to that difference which he has manifestly put between those
his two great dispensations, the law and the gospel. Under the law he gave them
tithes; under the gospel, having left all things in his church to charity and
Christian freedom, he has given them only what is justly given them. That, as
well under the gospel as under the law, say our English divines, and they only
of all Protestants, is tithes; and they say true, if any man be so minded to
give them of his own the tenth or twentieth: out that the law therefore of tithes
is in force under the gospel, all other Protestant divines, though equally
concernd, yet constantly deny. For although hire to the laborer be of moral and
perpetual right, yet that special kind of hire, the tenth, can be of no right
or necessity, but to that special labor for which God ordaind it. That special
labor was the Levitical and ceremonial service of the tabernacle, Numb. 18. 21,
31. which is now abolishd: the right therefore of that special hire must needs
be withal abolishd, as being also ceremonial. That tithes were ceremonial, is
plane; not being given to the Levites till they had bin first offered a
heave offering to the Lord, Verse. 24, 28. He then who by that law brings tithes
into the gospel, of necessity brings in withal a sacrifice, and an altar;
without which tithes by that law were unsanctifi'd and polluted, Verse. 32. and
therefore never thought on in the first Christian times, till ceremonies,
altars, and oblations, by an ancienter corruption were brought back long
before. And yet the Jews ever since their temple was destroid, though they have
Rabbis and teachers of their law, yet pay no tithes, as having no Levites to
whom, no temple where to pay them, no altar whereon to hallow them; which argues
that the Jews themselves never thought tithes moral, but ceremonial only. That
Christians therefore should take them up, when Jews have laid them down, must
needs be very absurd and preposterous. Next, it is as clear in the same
chapter, that the priests and Levites had not tithes for their labor only in
the tabernacle, but in regard they were to have no other part nor inheritance
in the land, Verse. 20, 24. and by that means for a tenth lost a twelfth. But
our levites undergoing no such law of deprivement, can have no right to any
such compensation: nay, if by this law they will have tithes, can have no
inheritance of land, but forfeit what they have. Besides this, tithes were of
two sorts, those of every year, and those of every third year: of the former,
every one that brought his tithes, was to eat his share. Deuteronomy. 14. 23. Thou
shall eat before the Lord thy God, in the place which he shall choose to place
his name there, the tithe of thy corn, of thy wine, and of thine oil, etc.
Nay, though he could not bring his tithe in kind, by reason of his distant
dwelling from the tabernacle or temple, but was thereby forced to turn it into
money, he was to bestow that money on whatsoever pleased him; oxen, sheep, wine,
or strong drink; and to eat and drink thereof there before the Lord both he and
his household, Ver. 24, 25, 26. As for the tithes of every third year, they were
not given only to the Levite, but to the stranger, the fatherles, and the
widow, Verse. 28, 29. and Chap. 26. 12, 13. So that ours, if they will have
tithes, must admit of these sharers with them. Nay, these tithes were not paid
in at all to the Levite, but the Levite himself was to come with those his
fellow guests and eat his share of them only at his house who provided them;
and this not in regard of his ministerial office, but because he had no part
nor inheritance in the land. Lastly, the priests and Levites, a tribe, were of
a far different constitution from this of our ministers under the gospel: in
them were orders and degrees both by family, dignity and office, mainly
distinguishd; the high priest, his brethren and his sons, to whom the Levites
themselves paid tithes, and of the best, were eminently superior, Number. 18. 28,
29. No Protestant, I suppose, will liken one of our ministers to a high priest,
but rather to a common Levite. Unless then, to keep their tithes, they mean to
bring back again bishops, archbishops and the whole gang of prelatry, to whom
will they themselves pay tithes, as by that law it was a sin to them, if they
did not, v. 32. Certainly this must needs put them to a deep demurr, while the
desire of holding fast their tithes without sin, may tempt them to bring back
again bishops as the likeness of that hierarchy that should receive tithes from
them, and the desire to pay none, may advise them to keep out of the church all
orders above them. But if we have to do at present, as I suppose we have, with
true reformed Protestants, not with Papists or prelates, it will not be denied
that in the gospel there be but two ministerial degrees, presbyters and
deacons: which if they contend to have any succession, reference or conformity
with those two degrees under the law, priests and Levites, it must needs be
such whereby our presbyters or ministers may be answerable to priests, and our
deacons to Levites: by which rule of proportion it will follow, that we must
pay our tithes to the deacons only, and they only to the ministers. But if it
be truer yet that the priesthood of Aaron typifi'd a better reality, 1 Pet. 2.
5. signifying the Christian true and holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual
sacrifice; it follows hence, that we are now justly exempt from paying tithes,
to any who claim from Aaron, since that priesthood is in us now real, which in
him was but a shadow. Seeing then by all this which has bin shown that the
law of tithes is partly ceremonial, as the work was for which they were given,
partly judicial, not of common, but of particular right to the tribe of Levi,
nor to them alone, but to the owner also and his household, at the time of their
offering, and every three year to the stranger, the fatherles, and the widow,
their appointed sharers, and that they were a tribe of priests and deacons
improperly compared to the constitution of our ministry, and the tithes given
by that people to those deacons only, it follows that our ministers at this
day, being neither priests nor Levites, nor fitly answering to either of them,
can have no just title or pretense to tithes, by any consequence drawn from the
law of Moses. But they think they have yet a better plea in the example of
Melchisedec, who took tithes of Abram ere the law was given: whence they would
infer tithes to be of moral right. But they ought to know, or to remember,
that not examples, but express commands oblige our obedience to God or man:
next, that whatsoever was don in religion before the law written, is not
presently to be counted moral, when as so many things were then don both
ceremonial and Judaically judicial, that we need not doubt to conclude all
times before Christ, more or less under the ceremonial law. To what end servd
else those altars and sacrifices, that distinction of clean and unclean entering
into the ark, circumcision and the raising up of seed to the elder brother,
Genesis 38. 8? If these things be not moral, though before the law, how are
tithes, though in the example of Abram and Melchisedec? But this instance is so
far from being the just ground of a law, that after all circumstances duly
waighd both from Genesis 14. and Heb. 7, it will not be allowd them so much as an
example. Melchisedec, besides his priestly benediction, brought with him bread
and wine sufficient to refresh Abram and his whole army; incited to do so,
first, by the secret providence of God, intending him for a type of Christ and
his priesthood; next by his due thankfulness and honor to Abram, who had freed
his borders of Salem from a potent enemy: Abram on the other side honors him
with the tenth of all, that is to say, (for he took not sure his whole estate
with him to that war) of the spoils, Heb. 7. 4. Incited he also by the same
secret providence, to signify as grandfather of Levi, that the Levitical
priesthood was excelld by the priesthood of Christ. For the giving of a tenth
declared it seems in those countries and times, him the greater who receivd it.
That which next incited him, was partly his gratitude to requite the present,
partly his reverence to the person and his benediction: to his person, as a
king and priest; greater therefore then Abram; who was a priest also, but not a
king. And who unhir'd will be so hardy as to say, that Abram at any other time
ever paid him tithes, either before or after; or had then, but for this
accidental meeting and obligement; or that else Melchisedec had demanded or
exacted them, or took them otherwise, then as the voluntary gift of Abram? But
our ministers, though neither priests nor kings more then any other Christian,
greater in their own esteem then Abraham and all his seed, for the verbal labor
of a seventh days preachment, not bringing, like Melchisedec, bread or wine at
their own cost, would not take only at the willing hand of liberality or
gratitude, but require and exact as due the tenth, not of spoils, but of our
whole estates and labors; nor once, but yearly. We then it seems by the example
of Abram must pay tithes to these melchisedecs: but what if the person of Abram
can either no way represent us, or will oblige the ministers to pay tithes no
less then other men? Abram had not only a priest in his loins, but was himself
a priest; and gave tithes to Melchisedec either as grandfather of Levi, or as
father of the faithful. If as grandfather (though he understood it not) of
Levi, he obliged not us but Levi only, the inferior priest, by that homage (as
the apostle to the Hebrews clearly anough explanes) to acknowledge the
greater. And they who by Melchisedec claim from Abram as Levi's grandfather,
have none to seek their tithes of but the Levites, where they can find them. If
Abram as father of the faithful paid tithes to Melchisedec, then certainly the
ministers also, if they be of that number, paid in him equally with the rest.
Which may induce us to believe, that as both Abram and Melchisedec, so tithes
also in that action typical and ceremonial, signified nothing else but that
subjection, which all the faithful, both ministers and people owe to Christ,
our high priest and king. In any literal sense from this example they never
will be able to extort that the people in those days paid tithes to priests;
but this only, that one priest once in his life, of spoils only, and in
requital partly of a liberal present, partly of a benediction, gave voluntary
tithes, not to a greater priest then himself as far as Abram could then
understand, but rather to a priest and king joind in one person. They will
reply, perhaps, that if one priest paid tithes to another, it must needs be
understood that the people did no less to the priest. But I shall easily remove
that necessity by remembering them that in those days was no priest, but the
father, or the first born of each family; and by consequence no people to pay
him tithes, but his own children and servants, who had not wherewithal to pay
him, but of his own. Yet grant that the people then paid tithes, there will not
yet be the like reason to enjoin us: they being then under ceremonies, a mere
laity, we now under Christ* a royal priesthood, 1 Pet. 2. 9, as we are
coheirs, kings and priests with him, a priest for ever after the order or
manner of Melchisedec. As therefore Abram paid tithes to Melchisedec because
Levi was in him, so we ought to pay none because the true Melchisedec is in us,
and we in him who can pay to none greater, and has freed us by our union with
himself, from all compulsive tributes and taxes in his church. Neither does the
collateral place, Heb. 7, make other use of this story, then to prove Christ,
personated by Melchisedec, a greater priest then Aaron: Verse. 4. Now consider
how great this man was, etc. and prov^ not in the least manner that tithes be
of any right to ministers, but the contrary: first the Levites had a
commandment to take tithes of the people according to the law, that is of their
brethren, though they com out of the loins of Abraham, Verse. 5. The
commandment then was, it seems, to take tithes of the Jews only, and according
to the law. That law changing of necessity with the priesthood, no other sort
of ministers, as they must needs be another sort, under another priesthood, can
receive that tribute of tithes which fell with that law, unless renu'd by
another express command and according to another law: no such law is extant.
Next, Melchisedec not as a minister, but as Christ himself in person blessd
Abraham, who had the promises, Verse. 6; and in him blessd all both ministers
and people, both of the law and gospel: that blessing declared him greater and
better then whom he blessd, Verse. 7; receiving tithes from them all not as a
maintenance, which Melchisedec needed not, but as a sign of homage and
subjection to their king and priest: whereas ministers bear not the person of
Christ in his priesthood or kingship, bless not as he blesses, are not by their
blessing greater then Abraham, and all the faithful with themselves included in
him, cannot both give and take tithes in Abram, cannot claim to themselves that
sign of our allegiance due only to our eternal king and priest, cannot
therefore derive tithes from Melchisedec. Lastly, the eighth verse has thus:
Here men that die receive tithes: There he received them, of whom it is witnesd
that he lives. Which words intimate that as he offered himself once for us, so
he received once of us in Abraham, and in that place the typical acknowledgment
of our redemption: which had it bin a perpetual annuitie to Christ, by him
claimd as his due, Levi must have paid it yearly, as well as then, Verse. 9. and
our ministers ought still to some Melchisedec or other, as well now as they did
in Abraham. But that Christ never claimd any such tenth as his annual due, much
less resigned it to the ministers, his so officious receivers without express
commission or assignement, will be yet cleerer as we proceed. Thus much may at
length assure us, that this example of Abram and Melchisedec, though I see of
late they build most upon it, can so little be the ground of any law to us,
that it will not so much avail them as to the authority of an example. Of like
impertinence is that example of Jacob, Genesis 28. 22, who of his free choice, not
enjoind by any law, vowed the tenth of all that God should give him: which, for
aught appeers to the contrary, he vowed as a thing no less indifferent before
his vow, then the foregoing part thereof; That the stone which he had set there
for a pillar, should be God's house. And to whom vowed he this tenth, but to
God; not to any priest; for we read of none to him greater then himself? and to
God, no doubt, but he paid what he vowed; both in the building of that Bethel
with other altars else where, and the expense of his continual sacrifices, which
none but he had right to offer. However therefore he paid his tenth, it could in
no likelihood, unless by such an occasion as befell his grandfather, be to any
priest. But, say they, All the tithe of the land, whether of the seed of the
land, or of the fruit of the tree, is the Lords, holy unto the Lord, Levit. 27.
30. And this before it was given to the Levites; therefore since they ceasd. No
question; For the whole earth is the Lords, and the fulness thereof, Psalm. 24. 1;
and the light of nature shows us no less: but that the tenth is his more then
the rest, how know I, but as he so declares it? He declares it so here of the
land of Canaan only, as by all circumstance appeers; and passes by deed of gift
this tenth to the Levite; yet so as offered to him first a heaveoffring, and
consecrated on his altar, Numb. 18. all which I had as little known, but by
that evidence. The Levites are ceasd, the gift returns to the giver. How then
can we know that he has given it to any other, or how can these men presume to
take it unofferd first to God, unconsecrated, without an other clear and
express donation, whereof they show no evidence or writing? Besides, he has now
alienated that holy land: who can warrantably affirm, that he has since
hallowd the tenth of this land; which none but God has power to do or can
warrant? Their last prooff they cite out of the gospel, which makes as little
for them; Matthew. 23. 23; where our Savior denouncing woe to the Scribes and
Pharisees, who paid tithe so exactly, and omitted waightier matters, tells them,
that these they ought to have don, that is, to have paid tithes. For our
Savior spoke then to those who observd the law of Moses, which was yet not
fully abrogated, till the destruction of the temple. And by the way here we may
observe out of their own prooff, that the Scribes and Pharisees, though then
chief teachers of the people, such at least as were not Levites, did not take
tithes, but paid them: So much less covetous were the Scribes and Pharisees in
those worst times then ours at this day. This is so apparent to the reformed
divines of other countries, that when any one of ours has attempted in Latin
to maintain this argument of tithes, though a man would think they might suffer
him without opposition in a point equally tending to the advantage of all
ministers, yet they forbear not to oppose him, as in a doctrine not fit to pass
unoppos'd under the gospel. Which shows the modesty, the contentednes of those
foreign pastors with the maintenance given them, their sincerity also in the
truth, though less gainful, and the avarice of ours: who through the love of
their old Papistical tithes, consider not the weak arguments, or rather
conjectures and surmises which they bring to defend them. On the other side,
although it be sufficient to have proved in general the abolishing of tithes,
as part of the Judaical or ceremonial law, which is abolishd all, as well that
before as that after Moses, yet I shall further prove them abrogated by an
express ordinance of the gospel, founded not on any type, or that municipal law
of Moses, but on moral, and general equity, given us instead: 1 Cor. 9. 13,
14. Know ye not, that they who minister about holy things, live of the things
of the temple; and they which wait at the altar, are partake^s with the altar?
so also the Lord has ordaind, that they who preach the gospel, should live of
the gospel. He says not, Should live on things which were of the temple or of
the altar, of which were tithes, for that had given them a clear title: but
abrogating that former law of Moses, which determind what and how much, by a
later ordinance of Christ, which leaves the what and how much indefinit and
free, so it be sufficient to live on, he says, The Lord has so ordaind, that
they who preach the gospel, should live of the gospel; which has neither
temple, altar nor sacrifice: Heb. 7. 13. For he of whom these things are
spoken, pertains to another tribe, of which no man gave attendance at the
altar: his ministers therefore cannot thence have tithes. And where the Lord
has so ordaind, we may find easily in more then one evangelist: Luke 10. 7,
8. In the same house remane, eating and drinking such things as they give: For
the laborer is worthy of his hire, etc. And into whatsoever city you enter,
and they receive you, eat such things as are set before you. To which ordinance
of Christ it may seem likeliest, that the apostle referrs us both here and 1 Timothy 5. 18, where he cites this as the saying of our Savior, That the laborer
is worthy of his hire: and both by this place of Luke, and that of Matthew. 10.
9, 10, 11, it evidently appeers that our Savior ordaind no certain maintenance
for his apostles or ministers publicly or privately in house or city receivd,
but that, what ever it were, which might suffice to live on: and this not
commanded or proportiond by Abram or by Moses, whom he might easily have here
cited, as his manner was, but declared only by a rule of common equity which
proportions the hire as well to the ability of him who gives as to the labor
of him who receives, and recommends him only as worthy, not invests him with a
legal right. And mark whereon he grounds this his ordinance; not on a perpetual
right of tithes from Melchisedec, as hirelings pretend, which he never claimd
either for himself, or for his ministers, but on the plane and common equity
of rewarding the laborer; worthy sometimes of single, sometimes of double honor,
not proportionable by tithes. And the apostle in this forecited chapter to the
Corinthians, Verse. 11, affirms it to be no great recompense, if carnal things
be reapd for spiritual sown; but to mention tithes, neglects here the fittest
occasion that could be offered him, and leaves the rest free and undetermind.
Certainly if Christ or his apostles had approved of tithes, they would have
either by writing or tradition recommended them to the church: and that soon
would have appeerd in the practice of those primitive and the next ages. But
for the first three hundred years and more, in all the ecclesiastical story, I
find no such doctrine or example: though error by that time had brought back
again priests, altars and oblations; and in many other points of religion had
miserably Judaiz'd the church. So that the defenders of tithes, after a long
pomp and tedious preparation out of Heathen authors, telling us that tithes
were paid to Hercules and Apollo, which perhaps was imitated from the Jews,
and as it were bespeaking our expectation, that they will abound much more with
autorities out of Christian story, have nothing of general approbation to
beginn with from the first three or four ages, but that which abundantly serves
to the confutation of their tithes; while they confess that churchmen in those
ages livd merely upon freewill offerings. Neither can they say, that tithes
were not then paid for want of a civil magistrate to ordain them, for
Christians had then also lands, and might give out of them what they pleased;
and yet of tithes then given we find no mention. And the first Christian
emperors, who did all things as bishops advised them, supplied what was wanting
to the clergy not out of tithes, which were never motiond, but out of their own
imperial revenues; as is manifest in Eusebius, Theodorit and Sozomen, from
Constantine to Arcadius. Hence those ancientest reformed churches of the
Waldenses, if they rather continued not pure since the apostles, denied that
tithes were to be given, or that they were ever given in the primitive church;
as appeers by an ancient tractate inserted in the Bohemian history. Thus far
has the church bin always, whether in her prime, or in her ancientest
reformation, from the approving of tithes: nor without reason; for they might
easily perceive that tithes were fitted to the Jews only, a national church of
many incomplete synagogues, uniting the accomplishment of divine worship in one
temple; and the Levites there had their tithes paid where they did their bodily
work; to which a particular tribe was set apart by divine appointment, not by
the peoples election: but the Christian church is universal; not ti'd to
nation, dioces or parish, but consisting of many particular churches complete
in themselves; gatherd, not by compulsion or the accident of dwelling nigh
together, but by free consent choosing both their particular church and their
church officers. Whereas if tithes be set up, all these Christian privileges
will be disturbd and soon lost, and with them Christian liberty. The first
authority which our adversaries bring, after those fabulous apostolic canons,
which they dare not insist upon, is a provincial council held at Cullen, where
they voted tithes to be Gods rent, in the year three hundred fifty six; at the
same time perhaps when the three kings reignd there, and of like authority. For
to what purpose do they bring these trivial testimonies, by which they might as
well prove altars, candles at noone, and the greatest part of those
superstitions, fetchd from Paganism or Jewism, which the Papist, inveigl'd by
this fond argument of antiquity, retains to this day? to what purpose those
decrees of I know not what bishops, to a Parliament and people who have thrown
out both bishops and altars, and promisd all reformation by the word of God?
And that altars brought tithes hither, as one corruption begott another, is
evident by one of those questions which the monk Austin propounded to the Pope,
Concerning those things, which by offerings of the faithful came to the altar;
as Beda writes, l. 1. c. 27. If then by these testimonies we must have tithes
continued, we must again have altars. Of fathers, by custom so called, they
quote Ambrose, Augustine, and some other ceremonial doctors of the same leaven:
whose assertion without pertinent scripture, no reformed church can admit; and
what they vouch, is founded on the law of Moses, with which, every where
pitifully mistaken, they again incorporate the gospel; as did the rest also of
those titular fathers, perhaps an age or two before them, by many rights and
ceremonies, both Jewish and Heathenish introduced; whereby thinking to gain
all, they lost all: and instead of winning Jews and Pagans to be* Christians*
by too much condescending they turned Christians into Jews and Pagans. To heap
such unconvincing* citations as these in religion, whereof the scripture only is
our rule, argues not much learning nor judgment, but the lost labor of much
unprofitable reading. And yet a late hot Quaerist for tithes, whom ye may know
by his wits lying ever beside him in the margent, to be ever beside his wits in
the text, a fierce reformer once, now ranckl'd with a contrary heat, would send
us back, very reformedly indeed, to learn reformation from Tyndarus and
Rebuffus, two canonical Promooters. They produce next the ancient constitutions
of this land, Saxon laws, edicts of kings, and their counsels, from Athelstan,
in the year nine hundred twenty eight, that tithes by statute were paid: and
might produce from Ina, above two hundred years before, that Romescot, or
Peter's penny, was by as good statute law paid to the Pope, from seven hundred
twenty five, and almost as long continued. And who knows not that this law of
tithes was enacted by those kings and barons upon the opinion they had of their
divine right, as the very words import of Edward the Confessor, in the close of
that law: For so blessed Austin preachd and taught; meaning the monk, who first
brought the Romish religion into England from Gregory the Pope* And by the way
I add, that by these laws, imitating the law of Moses, the third part (...)
tithes only was the priests due; the other two were appointed for the poor, and
to adorn or repare churches; as the canons of Ecbert and Elfric witness:
Council. Brit. If then these laws were founded upon the opinion of divine
authority, and that authority be found mistaken and erroneous, as has bin
fully manifested, it follows, that these laws fall of themselves with their falls
foundation. But with what face or conscience can they allege Moses, or these
laws for tithes, as they now enjoy or exact them; whereof Moses ordains the
owner, as we heard before, the stranger, the fatherles and the widow partakers
with the Levite; and these fathers which they cite, and these though Romish
rather then English laws, allotted both to priest and bishop the third part
only. But these our Protestant, these our new reformed English presbyterian
divines, against their own cited authors, and to the shame of their pretended
reformation, would engross to themselves all tithes by statute; and supported
more by their wilful obstinacy and desire of filthy lucre then by these both
insufficient and impertinent autorities, would persuade a Christian magistracy
and parliament, whom we trust God has restored for a happier reformation, to
impose upon us a Judaical ceremonial law, and yet from that law to be more
irregular and unwarrantable, more complying with a covetous clergy, then any
of those Popish kings and parlaments alleagd. Another shift they have to plead,
that tithes may be moral as well as the sabbath, a tenth of fruits as well as a
seventh of days. I answer, that the prelates who urge this argument, have
least reason to use it; denying morality in the sabbath, and therein better
agreeing with reformed churches abroad then the rest of our divines. As
therefore the seventh day is not moral, but a convenient recourse of worship in
fit season, whether seventh or other number, so neither is the tenth of our
goods, but only a convenient subsistence morally due to ministers. The last and
lowest sort of their arguments, that men purchased not their tithe with their land
and such like pettifoggerie, I omit; as refuted sufficiently by others: I
omit also their violent and irreligious exactions, related no less credibly:
their seizing of pots and pans from the poor, who have as good right to tithes
as they; from some, the very beds; their sueing and imprisoning; worse then when
the canon law was in force; worse then when those wicked sons of Eli were
priests, whose manner was thus to seize their pretended priestly due by force, 1 Samuel 2. 12, etc. Whereby men abhorrd the offering of the Lord; and it may be
feared that many will as much abhor the gospel, if such violence as this be
sufferd in her ministers, and in that which they also pretend to be the
offering of the Lord. For those sons of belial within some limits made seizure
of what they knew was their own by an undoubted law; but these, from whom there
is no sanctuary, seize out of men's grounds, out of men's houses their other
goods of double, sometimes of treble value, for that, which did not covetousnes
and rapine blind them, they know to be not their own by the gospel which they
preach. Of some more tolerable then these, thus severely God has spoken: Esa.
46. 10, etc. They are greedy dogs; they all look to their own way, every one for
his gain, from his quarter. With what anger then will he judge them who stand
not looking, but under color of a divine right, fetch by force that which is
not their own, taking his name not in vain, but in violence? Nor content as
Gehazi was to make a cunning, but a constraind advantage of what their master
bids them give freely, how can they but return smitten, worse then that
sharking minister, with a spiritual leprosy? And yet they cry out sacrilege,
that men will not be gulld and baffled the tenth of their estates by giving
credit to frivolous pretenses of divine right. Where did God ever clearly
declare to all nations, or in all lands (and none but fools part with their
estates, without cleerest evidence, on bare supposals and presumptions of them
who are the gainers thereby) that he required the tenth as due to him or his
son perpetually and in all places? Where did he demand it, that we might
certainly know, as in all claims of temporal right is just and reasonable? or
if demanded, where did he assign it, or by what evident conveyance to
ministers? unless they can demonstrate this by more then conjectures, their
title can be no better to tithes then the title of Gehazi was to those things
which by abusing his masters name he rookd from Naaman. Much less where did he
command that tithes should be fetchd by force, where left not under the gospel
whatever his right was, to the freewilloffrings of men? Which is the greater
sacrilege, to belly divine authority, to make the name of Christ accessory to
violence, and, robbing him of the very honor which he aimd at in bestowing
freely the gospel, to committ Simonie and rapin, both secular and
ecclesiastical, or on the other fide, not to give up the tenth of civil right
and propriety to the tricks and impostures of clergy men, contrived with all
the art and argument that their bellies can invent or suggest; yet so ridiculous
and presuming on the peoples dulnes or superstition, as to think they prove the
divine right of their maintenance by Abram paying tithes to Melchisedec, when as
Milchisedec in that passage rather gave maintenance to Abram; in whom all both
priests and ministers, as well as laymen paid tithes, not receivd them. And
because I affirmd above, beginning this first part of my discourse, that God
has given to ministers of the gospel that maintenance only which is justly
given them, let us see a little what has bin thought of that other maintenance
besides tithes, which of all Protestants, our English divines either only or
most apparently both require and take. Those are, fees for christnings,
marriages, and burials: which, though whosoever will may give freely, yet being not
of right, but of free gift, if they be exacted or establishd, they become
unjust to them who are otherwise maintaind; and of such evil note, that even
the council of Trent, l. 2. p. 240, makes them liable to the laws against
Simonie, who take or demand fees for the administering of any sacrament: Che la
sinodo volendo levare gli abusi introdotti, etc. And in the next page, with
like severity condemns the giving or taking for a benefice, and the celebrating
of marriages, christnings, and burials, for fees exacted or demanded: nor
counts it less Simonie to sell the ground or place of burial. And in a state
assembly at Orleans, 1561, it was decreed, Che non si potesse essi ger cosa
alcuna, etc, p. 429. That nothing should be exacted for the administering of
sacraments, burials, or any other spiritual funstion. Thus much that council,
of all others the most Popish, and this assembly of Papists, though, by their
own principles, in bondage to the clergy, were induced, either by their own
reason and shame, or by the light of reformation then shining in upon them, or
rather by the known canons of many councels and synods long before, to condemn
of Simonie spiritual fees demanded. For if the minister be maintaind for his
whole ministry, why should he be twice paid for any part thereof? why should he,
like a servant, seek vailes over and above his wages? As for christnings,
either they themselves call men to baptism, or men of themselves com: if
ministers invite, how ill had it becomd John the Baptist to demand fees for his
baptising, or Christ for his christnings? Far less becoms it these now, with a
greedines lower then that of tradesmen calling passengers to their shop, and yet
paid beforehand, to ask again, for doing that which those their founders did
freely. If men of themselves com to be baptized, they are either brought by
such as already pay the minister, or com to be one of his disciples and
maintainers: of whom to ask a fee as it were for entrance, is a piece of
paultry craft or caution, befitting none but beggarly artists. Burials and
marriages are so little to be any part of their gain, that they who consider
well, may find them to be no part of their function. At burials their attendance
they allege on the corpse; all the guests do as much unhir'd: But their prayers
at the grave; superstitiously required: yet if required, their last performance
to the deceasd of their own flock. But the funeral sermon: at their choice: or if
not, an occasion offered them to preach out of season, which is one part of their
office. But something must be spoken in praise: if due, their duty; if undue,
their corruption: a peculiar Simonie of our divines in England only. But the
ground is broken, and especially their unrighteous possession, the chancel. To
sell that will not only raise up in judgment the Council of Trent against them,
but will lose them the best champion of tithes, their zealous antiquary, Sir
Hen: Spelman; who in a book written to that purpose, by many cited canons, and
some even of times corruptest in the church, proves that fees exacted or
demanded for sacraments, marriages, burials, and especially for interring, are
wicked, accursed, Simoniacal and abominable. Yet thus is the church, for all
this noise of reformation, left still unreformd, by the censure of their own
synods, their own favorers, a den of thieves and robbers. As for marriages that
ministers should meddle with them, as not sanctified or legitimat without their
celebration, I find no ground in scripture either of precept or example.
Likeliest it is (which our Seldom has well observd, l. 2. c. 28, ux. Eb.) that
in imitation of heathen priests who were wont at nuptials to use many rites and
ceremonies, and especially, judging it would be profitable, and the increase of
their authority, not to be spectators only in business of such concernment to the
life of man, they infinuated that marriage was not holy without their
benediction, and for the better color, made it a sacrament; being of it self a
civil ordinance, a household contract, a thing indifferent and free to the whole
race of mankind, not as religious, but as men: best, indeed, undertaken to
religious ends, and, as the apostle says, 1 Cor. 7, in the Lord. Yet not
therefore invalid or unholy without a minister and his pretended necessary
hallowing, more then any other act, enterprise or contract of civil life, which
ought all to be don also in the Lord and to his glory. All which, no less then
marriage, were by the cunning of priests heretofore, as material to their
profit, transacted at the altar. Our divines deny it to be a sacrament; yet
retaind the celebration, till prudently a late parliament recoverd the civil
liberty of marriage from their incroachment; and transferrd the ratifying and
registring thereof from the canonical shop to the proper cognizance of civil
magistrates Seeing then, that God has given to ministers under the gospel,
that only which is justly given them, that is to say, a due and moderat
livelihood, the hire of their labor, and that the heave offering of tithes is
abolishd with the altar, yea though not abolishd, yet lawles, as they enjoy
them, their Melchisedecian right also trivial and groundles, and both tithes and
fees, if exacted or establishd, unjust and scandalous, we may hope, with them
removed, to remove hirelings in some good measure, whom these tempting baits, by
law especially to be recoverd, allure into the church.

The next thing to be considerd in the maintenance of ministers, is by whom it
should be given. Wherein though the light of reason might sufficiently inform
us, it will be best to consult the scripture: Gal. 6. 6. let him that is taught
in the word, communicate, to him that teaches, in all good things: that is to
say, in all manner of gratitude, to his ability. 1 Cor. 9. 11. if we have sown
unto you spiritual things, is it a great matter if we reap your carnal things?
to whom therefore has not bin sown, from him wherefor should be reapd? 1 Timothy
5. 17. let the elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor;
especially they who labor in the word and doctrine. By these places we see, that
recompense was given either by every one in particular who had bin instructed,
or by them all in common, brought into the church-treasurie, and distributed to
the ministers according to their several labors: and that was judgd either by
some extraordinary person, as Timothy, who by the apostle was then left
evangelist at Ephesus, 2 Timothy 4. 5, or by some to whom the church deputed that
care. This is so agreeable to reason and so clear, that any one may perceive
what iniquity and violence has prevaild since in the church, whereby it has
bin so orderd, that they also shall be compelld to recompense the parochial
minister, who neither chose him for their teacher, nor have receivd instruction
from him, as being either insufficient, or not resident, or inferior to whom
they follow; wherein to bar them their choice, is to violate Christian liberty.
Our lawbooks testify, that before the council of Lateran, in the year 1179,
and the fifth of our Henry 2, or rather before a decretal epistle of Pope
Innocent the third, about 1200, and the first of king John, any man might have
given his tithes to what spiritual person he would: and, as the L. Coke notes
on that place, instit. part 2, that this decretal bound not the subjects of
this realm; but, as it seemd just and reasonable. The Pope took his reason
rightly from the above cited place, 1 Cor. 9. 11: but falsely supposed every one
to be instructed by his parishpriest. Whether this were then first so decreed
or rather long before, as may seem by the laws of Edgar and Canute, that tithes
were to be paid, not to whom he would that paid them, but to the cathedral
church or the parishpriest, it imports not; since the reason which they
themselves bring, built on falls supposition, becoms alike infirm and absurd,
that he should reap from me, who sows not to me; be the cause either his
defect, or my free choice. But here it will be readily objected, What if they
who are to be instructed be not able to maintain a minister, as in many
villages? I answer, that the scripture shows in many places what ought to be
don herin. First I offer it to the reason of any man, whether he think the
knowledge of Christian religion harder then any other art or science to attain.
I suppose he will grant that it is far easier; both of it self, and in regard
of Gods assisting spirit, not particularly promisd us to the attainment of any
other knowledge, but of this only: since it was preachd as well to the
shepherds of Bethleem by angels, as to the eastern Wisemen by that starr: and
our Savior declares himself anointed to preach the gospel to the poor, Luke
4. 18. then surely to their capacity. They who after him first taught it, were
otherwise unlearned men: they who before Hus and Luther first reformd it, were
for the meanenes of their condition called, the poor men of Lions: and in
Flanders at this day, les gueus, which is to say, beggars. Therefore are the
scriptures translated into every vulgar tongue, as being held in main matters
of belief and salvation, plane and easy to the poorest: and such no less then
their teachers have the spirit to guide them in all truth, Jo^. 14. 26, and 16.
13. Hence we may conclude, if men be not all their life time under a teacher to
learn Logic, natural Philosophy, Ethics or Mathematics, which are more
difficult, that certainly it is not necessary to the attainment of Christian
knowledge that men should sit all their life long at the feet of a pulpited
divine; while he, a lollard indeed over his elbow-cushion, in almost the
seventh part of 40. or 50. years teaches them scarce half the principles of
religion; and his sheep oft-times sit the while to as little purpose of
benifiting as the sheep in their pues at Smithfield; and for the most part by
some Simonie or other, bought and sold like them: or, if this comparison be too
low, like those women, 1 Timothy 3. 7. ever learning and never attaining; yet not
so much through their own fault, as through the unskilful and immethodical
teaching of their pastor, teaching here and there at random out of this or that
text as his ease or fancy, and oft-times as his stealth guides him. Seeing
then that Christian religion may be so easily attaind, and by meanest
capacities, it cannot be much difficult to find ways, both how the poor, yea
all men may be soon taught what is to be known of Christianity, and they who
teach them, recompensed. First, if ministers of their own accord, who pretend
that they are called and sent to preach the gospel, those especially who have no
particular flock, would imitate our Savior and his disciples who went
preaching through the villages, not only through the cities, Matthew. 9. 35, Mark
6. 6, Luke 13. 22, Acts 8. 25. and there preachd to the poor as well as to the
rich, looking for no recompense but in heaven: John 4. 35, 36. Look on the
fields; for they are white already to harvest: and he that reapeth, receives
wages, and gathers fruit unto life eternal. This was their wages. But they
will soon reply, we our selves have not wherewithal; who shall bear the
charges of our journey? To whom it may as soon be answered, that in likelihood
they are not poorer then they who did thus; and if they have not the same faith
which those disciples had to trust in God and the promise of Christ for their
mainten^nce as they did, and yet intrude into the ministry without any
livelihood of their own, they cast themselves into a miserable hazard or
temptation, and oft-times into a more miserable necessity, either to starve,
or to please their paymasters rather them God: and give men just cause to
suspect, that they came neither called nor sent from above to preach the word,
but from below, by the instinct of their own hunger, to feed upon the church.
Yet grant it needful to allow them both the charges of their jorn^y and the hire
of their labor, it will belong next to the charity of richer congregations,
where most commonly they abound with teachers, to send some of their number to
the villages round, as the apostles from Jerusalem sent Peter and John to the
city and villages of Samaria, Acts 8. 14, 25; or as the church at Jerusalem
sent Barnabas to Antioch, chap. 11. 22; and other churches joining sent Luke to
travail with Paul, 2 Cor. 8. 19: though whether they had their charges born by
the church or no, it be not recorded. If it be objected that this itinerarie
preaching will not serve to plant the gospel in those places, unless they who
are sent, abide there some competent time, I answer, that if they stay there a
year or two, which was the longest time usually staid by the apostles in one
place, it may suffice to teach them, who will attend and learn, all the points
of religion necessary to salvation; then sorting them into several
congregations of a moderat number, out of the ablest and zealousest among them
to create elders, who, exercising and requiring from themselves what they have
learnd (for no learning is retaind without constant exercise and methodical
repetition) may teach and govern the rest: and so exhorted to continue faithful
and steadfast, they may securely be committed to the providence of God and the
guidance of his holy spirit, till God may offer some opportunity to visit them
again and to confirm them: which when they have don, they have don as much as
the apostles were wont to do in prop^gating the gospel, Acts 14. 23. And when
they had ordaind them elders in every church, and had prayed with fasting, they
commended them to the Lord, on whom they beleevd. And in the same chapter,
Verse. 21, 22, When they had preachd the gospel to that city, and had taught
many, they returned again to Lystra and to Iconium and Antioch, confirming the
souls of the disciples, and exhorting them to continue in the faith. And Chap.
15. 36. Let us go again and visit our brethren. And Verse. 41. He went through
Syria and Cilicia, confirming the churches. To these I might add other helps,
which we enjoy now, to make more easy the attainment of Christian religion by
the meanest: the entire scripture translated into English with plenty of notes;
and some where or other, I trust, may be found some wholesome body of divinity,
as they call it, without school terms and metaphysical notions, which have
obscured rather then explan'd our religion, and made it seem difficult without
cause. Thus taught once for all, and thus now and then visited and confirmd, in
the most destitute and poorest places of the land, under the government of their
own elders performing all ministerial offices among them, they may be trusted
to meet and edify one another whether in church or chapel, or, to save them
the trudging of many miles thither, nearer home, though in a house or barn. For
notwithstanding the gaudy superstition of some devoted still ignorantly to
temples, we may be well assured that he who disdaind not to be laid in a
manger, disdains not to be preachd in a barn; and that by such meetings as
these, being, indeed, most apostolical and primitive, they will in a short time
advance more in Christian knowledge and reformation of life, then by the many
years preaching of such an incumbent, I may say, such an incubus often times, as
will be meanly hired to abide long in those places. They have this left perhaps
to object further, that to send thus and to maintain, though but for a year or
two, ministers and teachers in several places, would prove chargeable to the
churches, though in towns and cities round about. To whom again I answer, that
it was not thought so by them who first thus propagated the gospel, though but
few in number to us, and much less able to sustain the expense. Yet this
expense would be much less, then to hire incumbents or rather encumbrances, for
lifetime; and a great means (which is the subject of this discourse) to
diminish hirelings. But be the expense less or more, if it be found burdensome
to the churches, they have in this land an easy remedy in their recourse to
the civil magistrate; who has in his hands the disposal of no small revenues;
left, perhaps, anciently to superstitious, but meant undoubtedly to good and
best uses; and therefore, once made public, appliable by the present magistrate
to such uses as the church or solid reason from whomsoever shall convince him
to think best. And those uses may be, no doubt, much rather then as glebes and
augmentations are now bestowd, to grant such requests as these of the churches;
or to erect in greater number all over the land schools and competent
libraries to those schools, where languages and arts may be taught free
together, without the needles, unprofitable and inconvenient removing to
another place. So all the land would be soon better civilized, and they who
are taught freely at the public cost, might have their education given them on
this condition, that therewith content, they should not gadd for preferment out
of their own country, but continue there thankful for what they receivd freely,
bestowing it as freely on their country, without soaring above the meannes
wherein they were born. But how they shall live when they are thus bred and
dismissd, will be still the sluggish objection. To which is answered, that those
public foundations may be so instituted, as the youth therein may be at once
brought up to a competence of learning and to an honest trade; and the hours of
teaching so orderd, as their study may be no hindrance to their labor or other
calling. This was the breeding of S. Paul, though born of no mean parents, a
free citizen of the Roman empire: so little did his trade debase him, that it
rather enabld him to use that magnanimity of preaching the gospel through Asia
and Europe at his own charges: thus those preachers among the poor Waldenses,
the ancient stock of our reformation, without these helps which I speak of,
bred up themselves in trades, and especially in physic and surgery as well as
in the study of scripture (which is the only true theology) that they might
be no burden to the church; and by the example of Christ, might cure both soul
and body; through industry joining that to their ministry, which he joind to
his by gift of the spirit. Thus relates Peter Gilles in his history of the
Waldenses in Piemont. But our ministers think scorn to use a trade, and count
it the reproach of this age, that tradesmen preach the gospel. It were to be
wishd they were all tradesmen; they would not then so many of them, for want of
another trade, make a trade of their preaching: and yet they clamor that
tradesmen preach; and yet they preach, while they themselves are the worst
tradesmen of all. As for church-endowments and possessions, I meet with none
considerable before Constantine, but the houses and gardens where they met, and
their places of burial: and I persuade me, that from them the ancient Waldenses,
whom deservedly I cite so often, held, that to endow churches is an evil thing;
and, that the church then fell off and turned whore sitting on that beast in the
Revelation, when under Pope Sylvester she receivd those temporal donations. So
the forecited tractate of their doctrine testifies. This also their own traditions
of that heavenly voice witnesd, and some of the ancient fathers then living,
foresaw and deplored. And indeed, how could these endowments thrive better with
the church, being unjustly taken by those emperors, without suffrage of the
people, out of the tributes and public lands of each city, whereby the people
became liable to be oppressd with other taxes. Being therefore given for the
most part by kings and other public persons, and so likeliest out of the
public, and if without the peoples consent, unjustly, however to public ends
of much concernment to the good or evil of a commonwealth, and in that regard
made public though given by private persons, or which is worse, given, as the
clergy then persuaded men, for their soul's health, a pious gift, but as the
truth was, often times a bribe to God or to Christ for absolution, as they were
then taught, from murders, adulteries, and other heinous crimes, what shall be
found heretofore given by kings or princes out of the public, may justly by
the magistrate be recalld and reappropriated to the civil revenue: what by
private or public persons out of their own, the price of blood or lust, or to
some such purgatorious and superstitious uses, not only may but ought to be
taken off from Christ, as a foul dishonor laid upon him, or not impiously
given, nor in particular to any one, but in general to the churches good, may
be converted to that use, which shall be judgd tending more directly to that
general end. Thus did the princes and cities of Germany in the first
reformation; and defended their so doing by many reasons, which are set down at
large in Sleidan, l. 6, an. 1526, and l. 11, an. 1537, and l. 13, an. 1540. But
that the magistrate either out of that church revenue which remanes yet in his
hand, or establishing any other maintenance instead of tithe, should take into
his own power the stipendiarie maintenance of church-ministers, or compel it
by law, can stand neither with the peoples right nor with Christian liberty,
but would suspend the church wholly upon the state, and turn her ministers into
statepensioners. And for the magistrate in person of a nursing father to make
the church his mere ward, as always in minority, the church, to whom he ought
as a magistrate, Esa. 49. 23, To bow down with his face toward the earth, and
lick up the dust of her feet, her to subject to his political drifts or
conceivd opinions by mastring her revenue, and so by his examinant committies
to circumscribe her free election of ministers, is neither just nor pious; no
honor don to to the church, but a plane dishonor: and upon her, whose only head
is in heaven, yea upon him, who is her only head, sets another in effect, and,
which is most monstrous, a human on a heavenly, a carnal on a spiritual, a
political head on an ecclesiastical body; which at length by such
heterogeneal, such incestuous conjunction, transformes her oft-times into a
beast of many heads and many horns. For if the church be of all societies the
holiest on earth, and so to be reverenced by the magistrate, not to trust her
with her own belief and integrity, and therefore not with the keeping, at least
with the disposing of what revenue shall be found justly and lawfully her own,
is to count the church not a holy congregation, but a pack of giddy or
dishonest persons, to be ruled by civil power in sacred affairs. But to proceed
further in the truth yet more freely, seeing the Christian church is not
national, but consisting of many particular congregations, subject to many
changes, as well through civil accidents as through schism and various
opinions, not to be decided by any outward judge, being matters of conscience,
whereby these pretended churchrevenues, as they have bin ever, so are like to
continue endless matter of dissension both between the church and magistrate,
and the churches among themselves, there will be found no better remedy to
these evils, otherwise incurable, then by the incorruptest council of those
Waldenses, our first reformers, to remove them as a pest, an apple of discord
in the church, (for what else can be the effect of riches and the snare of money
in religion *) and to convert them to those more profitable uses above expressd
or other such as shall be judgd most necessary; considering that the church of
Christ was founded in poverty rather then in revenues, stood purest and
prosperd best without them, receivd them unlawfully from them who both
erroneously and unjustly, sometimes impiously, gave them, and so justly was
ensnared and corrupted by them. And least it be thought that these revenues
withdrawn and better imploid, the magistrate ought in stead to settle by
statute some maintenance of ministers, let this be considerd first, that it
concerns every man's conscience to what religion he contributes; and that the
civil magistrate is entrusted with civil rights only, not with conscience,
which can have no deputy or representer of it self, but one of the same mind:
next, that what each man gives to the minister, he gives either as to God, or
as to his teacher; if as to God, no civil power can justly consecrate to
religious uses any part either of civil revenue, which is the peoples, and must
save them from other taxes, or of any man's propriety, but God by special
command, as he did by Moses, or the owner himself by voluntary intention and
the persuasion of his giving it to God; forced consecrations out of another
man's estate are no better then forced vows; hateful to God, who loves a
cheerful giver; but much more hateful, wrung out of men's purses to maintain a
disapproved ministry against their conscience; however, unholy, infamous and
dishonorable to his ministers and the free-gospel, maintaind in such unworthy
manner as by violence and extortion: If he give it as to his teacher, what
justice or equity compells him to pay for learning that religion which leaves
freely to his choice whether he will learn it or no, whether of this teacher or
another, and especially to pay for what he never learnd, or approves not;
whereby, besides the wound of his conscience, he becoms the less able to
recompense his true teacher? Thus far has bin inquired by whom
church-ministers ought to be maintaind; and has bin proved most natural, most
equal and agreeable with scripture, to be by them who receive their teaching;
and by whom, if they be unable. Which ways well observd, can discourage none
but hirelings, and will much lessen their number in the church.

It remanes lastly to consider in what manner God has ordaind that recompense
be given to ministers of the gospel: and by all scripture it will appeer that
he has given it them not by civil law and freehold, as they claim, but by the
benevolence and free gratitude of such as receive them: Luke 10. 7, 8. Eating
and drinking such things as they give you. If they receive you, eat such
things as are set before you. Matthew. 10. 7, 8. As ye go, preach, saying, The
kingdom of God is at hand, etc. Freely ye have receivd, freely give. If God
have ordaind ministers to preach freely, whether they receive recompense or
not, then certainly he has forbidd both them to compel it, and others to
compel it for them. But freely given, he accounts it as given to himself:
Phillip. 4. 16, 17, 18. Ye sent once and again to my necessity. Not because I
desire a gift; but I desire fruit that may abound to your account. Having
receivd of Epaphroditus the things which were sent from you, an odor of sweet
smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing to God. Which cannot be from force
or unwillingnes. The same is said of alms, Heb. 13. 16. To do good and to
communicate, forgett not: for with such sacrifices God is well pleased. Whence
the primitive church thought it no shame to receive all their maintenance as the
alms of their auditors. Which they who defend tithes, as if it made for their
cause, when as it utterly confutes them, omit not to set down at large;
proving to our hands out of Origin, Tertullian, Cyprian, and others, that the
clergy livd at first upon the mere benevolence of their hearers: who gave what
they gave, not to the clergy, but to the church; out of which the clergy had
their portions given them in baskets; and were thence called sportularii,
basket-clerks: that their portion was a very mean allowance, only for a bare
livelihood; according to those precepts of our Savior, Matthew. 10. 7, etc; the
rest was distributed to the poor. They cite also out of Prosper, the disciple
of St. Austin, that such of the clergy as had means of their own, might not
without sin partake of church-maintenance; not receiving thereby food which
they abound with, but feeding on the sins of other men: that the holy ghost
says of such clergy men, they eat the sins of my people: and that a council
at Antioch, in the year 340, sufferd not either priest or bishop to live on
church-maintenance without necessity. Thus far tithers themselves have
contributed to their own confutation, by confessing that the church livd
primitively on alms. And I add, that about the year 359, Constantius the
emperor having summond a general council of bishops to Ariminum in Italy, and
provided for their subsistence there, the British and French bishops judging it
not decent to live on the public, chose rather to be at their own charges.
Three only out of Britain constraind through want, yet refusing offered
assistance from the rest, accepted the emperor's provision; judging it more
convenient to subsist by public then by private sustenance. Whence we may
conclude, that bishops then in this Island had their livelihood only from
benevolence: in which regard this relater Sulpitius Severus, a good author of the
same time, highly praises them. And the Waldenses, our first reformers, both
from the scripture and these primitive examples, maintaind those among them who
bore the office of ministers, by alms only. Take their very words from the
history written of them in French, Part. 3. l. 2. c. 2. La nourriture and ce
de quoy nous sommes couverts etc. Our food and clothing is sufficiently
administerd and given to us by way of gratuitie and alms, by the good people
whom we teach. If then by alms and benevolence, not by legal force, not by
tenure of freehold or copyhold: for alms, though just, cannot be compelld; and
benevolence forced, is malevolence rather, violent and inconsistent with the
gospel; and declares him no true minister thereof, but a rapacious hireling
rather, who by force receiving it, eats the bread of violence and exaction, no
holy or just livelihood, no not civilly counted honest; much less beseeming
such a spiritual ministry. But, say they, our maintenance is our due, tithes
the right of Christ, unseparable from the priest, no where repeald; if then,
not otherwise to be had, by law to be recoverd: for though Paul were pleased to
forgo his due, and not to use his power, 1 Cor. 9. 12, yet he had a power, v.
4, and bound not others. I answer first, because I see them still so loath to
unlearn their decimal arithmetic, and still grasp their tithes as inseparable
from a priest, that ministers of the gospel are not priests; and therefore
separated from tithes by their own exclusion; being neither called priests in the
new testament, nor of any order known in scripture: not of Melchisedec, proper
to Christ only; not of Aaron, as they themselves will confess; and the third
priesthood, only remaining, is common to all the faithful. But they are
ministers of our high priest. True; but not of his priesthood, as the Levites
were to Aaron: for he performs that whole office himself incommunicably. Yet
tithes remane, say they, still unreleasd, the due of Christ; and to whom
payable, but to his ministers? I say again, that no man can so understand them,
unless Christ in some place or other so claim them. That example of Abram argues
nothing but his voluntary act; honor once only don, but on what consideration,
whether to a priest or to a king, whether due the honor, arbitrarie that kind
of honor or not, will after all contending be left still in mere conjecture:
which must not be permitted in the claim of such a needy and subtle spiritual
corporation pretending by divine right to the tenth of all other men's estates;
nor can it be allowd by wise men or the verdit of common law. And the tenth
part, though once declared holy, is declared now to be no holier then the other
nine, by that command to Peter Act. 10. 15. 28: whereby all distinction of holy
and unholy is removed from all things. Tithes therefore though claimd, and holy
under the law, yet are now releasd and quitted both by that command to Peter,
and by this to all ministers, abovecited Luke 10; eating and drinking such
things as they give you: made holy now by their free gift only. And therefore S.
Paul, 1 Cor. 9. 4, asserts his power, indeed; but of what? not of tithes, but,
to eat and drink such things as are given in reference to this command: which
he calls not holy things or things of the gospel, as if the gospel had any
consecrated things in answer to things of the temple, v. 13, but he calls them
your carnal things, v. 11. without changing their property. And what power had
he? not the power of force but of conscience only, whereby he might lawfully
and without scruple live on the gospel; receiving what was given him, as the
recompense of his labor. For if Christ the master has professd his kingdom to
be not of this world, it suits not with that profession either in him or his
ministers to claim temporal right from spiritual respects. He who resus'd to be
the divider of an inheritance between two brethren, cannot approve his
ministers by pretended right from him to be dividers of tenths and freeholds
out of other men's possessions, making thereby the gospel but a cloak of carnal
interest, and, to the contradiction of their master, turning his heavenly
kingdom into a kingdom of this world, a kingdom of force and rapin. To whom it
will be one day thunderd more terribly then to Gehazi, for thus dishonoring a
far greater master and his gospel, is this a time to receive money and to
receive garments and olive-yards and vinyards and sheep and oxen? The leprosy
of Naaman linkd with that apostolic curse of perishing imprecated on Simon
Magus, may be feared will cleave to such and to their seed for ever. So that when
all is don, and belly has used in vain all her cunning shifts, I doubt not
but all true ministers, considering the demonstration of what has bin here
proved, will be wise, and think it much more tolerable to hear, that no
maintenance of ministers, whether tithes or any other, can be settled by
statute; but must be given by them who receive instruction; and freely given,
as God has ordaind. And indeed what can be a more honorable maintenance to
them, then such whether alms or willing oblations as these, which being
accounted both alike as given to God, the only acceptable sacrifices now
remaining, must needs represent him who receives them much in the care of God
and nearly related to him, when not by worldly force and constraint, but with
religious awe and reverence, what is given to God, is given to him, and what to
him, accounted as given to God. This would be well anough, say they; but how
many will so give? I answer, as many, doubtless, as shall be well taught; as
many as God shall so move. Why are ye so distrustful both of your own doctrine
and of Gods promises, fulfilld in the experience of those disciples first sent:
Luke 22. 35. When I sent you without purse and scrip and shoes, lackd ye
anything? And they said, Nothing. How then came ours, or who sent them thus
destitute, thus poor and empty both of purse and faith? Who style themselves
ambassadors of Jesus Christ, and seem to be his tithegatherers, though an
office of their own setting up to his dishonor, his ex^cters, his publicans
rather, not trusting that he will maintain them in their embassy, unless they
bind him to his promise by a statute law that we shall maintain them. Lay down
for shame that magnific title, while ye seek maintenance from the people: it is
not the manner of ambassadors to ask maintenance of them to whom they are sent.
But he who is Lord of all things, has so ordaind: trust him then; he doubtless
will command the people to make good his promises of maintenance more honorably
unaskd, unrak'd for. This they know, this they preach, yet believe not: but
think it as impossible without a statute law to live of the gospel, as if by
those words they were bid go eat their bibles, as Ezechiel and John did their
books; and such doctrins as these are as bitter to their bellies: but will serve
so much the better to discover hirelings, who can have nothing, though but in
appearance, just and solid to answer for themselves against what has bin here
spoken, unless perhaps this one remaning pretense, which we shall quickly see
to be either falls or uningenuous. They pretend that their education either at
school or universitie has bin very chargeable; and therefore ought to be
repar'd in future by a plentiful maintenance: whenas it is well known that the
better half of them, and often times poor and pitiful boys of no merit or
promising hopes that might entitle them to the public provision but their
poverty and the unjust favor of friends, have had the most of their breeding
both at school and universitie by schollarships* exhibitions and fellowships
at the public cost; which might engage them the rather to give freely, as they
have freely receivd. Or if they have missd of these helps at the latter place,
they have after two or three years left the course of their studies there, if
they ever well began them, and undertaken, though furnishd with little else but
ignorance, boldness and ambition, if with no worse vices, a chaplainship in some
gentleman's house, to the frequent imbasing of his sons with illiterate and
narrow principles. Or if they have livd there upon their own, who knows not that
seven years charge of living there, to them who fly not from the government of
their parents to the license of a universitie, but com seriously to study, is
no more then may be well defraid and reimbours'd by one years revenue of an
ordinary good benifice? If they had then means of breeding from their parents,
it is likely they have more now; and if they have, it needs must be mechanique
and uningenuous in them to bring a bill of charges for the learning of those
liberal arts and sciences, which they have learnd (if they have indeed learnd
them, as they seldom have) to their own benefit and accomplishment. But they
will say, we had betaken us to some other trade or profession, had we not
expected to find a better livelihood by the ministry. This is that which I
lookd for, to discover them openly neither true lovers of learning, and so very
seldom guilty of it, nor true ministers of the gospel. So long ago out of date
is that old true saying, 1 Timothy 31. if a man desire a bishopric, he desires a
good work: for now commonly he who desires to be a minister, looks not at the
work but at the wages; and by that lure or loubel may be toald from parish to
parish all the town over. But what can be planer Simonie, then thus to be at
charges beforehand to no other end then to make their ministry doubly or trebly
beneficial? to whom it might be said as justly as to that Simon, thy money
perish with thee, because thou have thought that the gift of God may be
purchased with money: thou have neither part nor lot in this matter. Next, it
is a fond error, though too much beleevd among us, to think that the
universitie makes a minister of the gospel; what it may conduce to other arts
and sciences, I dispute not now: but that which makes fit a minister, the
scripture can best inform us to be only from above; whence also we are bid to
seek them; Matthew. 9. 38. Pray ye therefore to the Lord of the harvest, that he
will send forth laborers into his harvest. Acts 20. 28. The flock, over which
the holy ghost has made you overseers. Romans 10. 15. How shall they preach,
unless they be sent? by whom sent? by the universitie, or the magistrate, or
their belly? no surely: but sent from God only, and that God who is not their
belly. And whether he be sent from God or from Simon Magus, the inward sense of
his calling and spiritual ability will sufficiently tell him; and that strong
obligation felt within him, which was felt by the apostle, will often express
from him the same words: 1 Cor. 9. 16. Necessity is laid upon me, yea, woe is
me, if I preach not the gospel. Not a beggarly necessity, and the woe feared
otherwise of perpetual want, but such a necessity as made him willing to
preach the gospel gratis, and to embrace poverty rather then as a woe to fear
it. 1 Cor. 12. 28. God has set some in the church, first apostles, etc. Ephesians. 4.
11, etc. He gave some apostles, etc. For the perfeting of the saints, for the
work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all
come to the unity of the faith. Whereby we may know that as he made them at
the first, so he makes them still, and to the worlds end. 2 Cor. 3. 6. Who has
also made us fit or able ministers of the new testament. 1 Timothy 4. 14. The gift
that is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy and the laying on of the
hands of the presbytery. These are all the means which we read of required in
scripture to the making of a minister. All this is granted you will say: but
yet that it is also requisite he should be traind in other learning; which can
be no where better had then at universities. I answer, that what learning
either human or divine can be necessary to a minister, may as easily and less
chargeably be had in any private house. How deficient else and to how little
purpose are all those piles of sermons, notes, and comments on all parts of the
bible, bodies and marrows of divinity, besides all other sciences, in our
English tongue; many of the same books which in Latin they. read at the
universitie? And the small necessity of going thither to learn divinity, I
prove first from the most part of themselves, who seldom continue there till
they have well got through Logic, their first rudiments; though, to say truth,
Logic also may much better be wanting in disputes of divinity, then in the
subtle debates of lawyers and statesmen, who yet seldom or never deal with
syllogisms. And those theological disputations there held by Professors and
graduates are such as tend least of all to the edification or capacity of the
people, but rather perplex and leaven pure doctrine with scholastical trash then
enable any minister to the better preaching of the gospel. Whence we may also
compute, since they com to recknings, the charges of his needful library:
which, though some shame not to value at 600 l, may be competently furnishd for
60 l. If any man for his own curiosity or delight be in books further
expensive, that is not to be recknd as necessary to his ministerial either
breeding or function. But Papists and other adversaries cannot be confuted
without fathers and councels, immense volumes and of vast charges. I will show
them therefore a shorter and a better way of confutation: Tit. 1. 9. Holding
fast the faithful word, as he has bin taught, that he may be able by sound
doctrine, both to exhort and to convince gainsayers: who are confuted as soon
as heard, bringing that which is either not in scripture or against it. To
pursue them further through the obscure and intangld wood of antiquity,
fathers and councels fighting one against another, is needles, endless, not
requisite in a minister, and refused by the first reformers of our religion.
And yet we may be confident, if these things be thought needful, let the state
but erect in public good store of libraries, and there will not want men in
the church, who of their own inclinations will become able in this kind against
Papist or any other adversary. I have thus at large examind the usual
pretenses of hirelings, colored over most commonly with the cause of learning
and universities: as if with divines learning stood and fell; wherein for the
most part their pittance is so small: and, to speak freely, it were much better,
there were not one divine in the universitie; no schoole-divinitie known, the
idle sophistry of monks, the canker of religion; and that they who intended to
be ministers, were traind up in the church only, by the scripture and in the
original languages thereof at school; without fetching the compass of other arts
and sciences, more then what they can well learn at secondary leisure and at
home. Neither speak I this in contempt of learning or the ministry, but hating
the common cheats of both; hating that they who have preachd out bishops,
prelates and canonists, should, in what serves their own ends, retain their falls
opinions, their Pharisaical leaven, their avarice and closely their ambition, their
pluralities, their nonresidences, their odious fees, and use their legal and
Popish arguments for tithes: that Independents should take that name, as they
may justly from the true freedom of Christian doctrine and church discipline
subject to no superior judge but God only, and seek to be Dependents on the
magistrate for their maintenance; which two things, independence and state-hire
in religion, can never consist long or certainly together. For magistrates at
one time or other, not like these at present our patrons of Christian liberty,
will pay none but such whom by their committies of examination, they find
conformable to their interest and opinions: and hirelings will soon frame
themselves to that interest and those opinions which they see best pleasing to
their paymasters; and to seem right themselves, will force others as to the
truth. But most of all they are to be reviled and shamed, who cry out with the
distinct voice of notorious hirelings, that if ye settle not our maintenance by
law, farewell the gospel: then which nothing can be utterd more falls, more
ignominious, and, I may say, more blasphemous against our Savior; who has
promisd, without this condition, both his holy spirit and his own presence with
his church to the worlds end: nothing more falls (unless with their own mouths
they condemn themselves for the unworthiest and most mercenary of all other
ministers) by the experience of 300. years after Christ, and the churches at
this day in France, Austria, Polonia, and other places witnessing the contrary
under an advers magistrate not a favorable: nothing more ignominious, levelling
or rather undervaluing Christ beneath Mahomet. For if it must be thus, how can
any Christian object it to a Turk, that his religion stands by force only; and
not justly fear from him this reply, yours both by force and money in the
judgment of your own preachers. This is that which makes atheists in the land,
whom they so much complain of: not the want of maintenance or preachers, as
they allege, but the many hirelings and cheaters that have the gospel in their
hands; hands that still crave, and are never satisfied. Likely ministers,
indeed, to proclaim the faith or to exhort our trust in God, when they
themselves will not trust him to provide for them in the message whereon, they
say, he sent them; but threaten for want of temporal means to desert it;
calling that want of means, which is nothing else but the want of their own
faith; and would force us to pay the hire of building our faith to their
covetous incredulity. Doubtless, if God only be he who gives ministers to his
church till the worlds end; and through the whole gospel never sent us for
ministers to the schools of Philosophy, but rather bids us beware of such
vain deceit, Col. 2. 8. (which the primitive church, after two or three ages
not remembering, brought herself quickly to confusion) if all the faithful be
now a holy and a royal priesthood, 1 Pet. 2. 5. 9, not excluded from the
dispensation of things holiest, after free election of the church and
imposition of hands, there will not want ministers, elected out of all sorts
and orders of men, for the Gospel makes no difference from the magistrate
himself to the meanest artificer, if God evidently favor him with spiritual
gifts, as he can easily and often has don, while those bachelor divines and
doctors of the tippet have bin passd by* Heretofore in the first evangelic
times (and it were happy for Christendom if it were so again) ministers of the
gospel were by nothing else distinguishd from* other Christians but by their
spiritual knowledge and sanctity of life, for which the church elected them to
be her teachers and overseers, though not thereby to separate them from
whatever calling she then found them following besides, as the example of S.
Paul declares, and the first times of Christianity. When once they affected to
be called a clergy, and became as it were a peculiar tribe of levites, a
party, a distinct order in the commonwealth, bred up for divines in babbling
schools and fed at the public cost, good for nothing else but what was good
for nothing, they soon grew idle: that idleness with fulness of bread begat
pride and perpetual contention with their feeders the despised laity, through
all ages ever since; to the perverting of religion, and the disturbance of all
Christendom. And we may confidently conclude, it never will be otherwise while
they are thus upheld undepending on the church, on which alone they anciently
depended, and are by the magistrate publicly maintaind a numerous faction of
indigent persons, crept for the most part out of extreme want and bad nurture,
claiming by divine right and freehold the tenth of our estates, to monopolize
the ministry as their peculiar, which is free and open to all able Christians,
elected by any church. Under this pretense exempt from all other employment,
and enriching themselves on the public, they last of all prove common
incendiaries, and exalt their horns against the magistrate himself that
maintains them, as the priest of Rome did soon after against his benefactor
the emperor, and the presbyters of late in Scotland. Of which hireling crew
together with all the mischiefs, dissentions, troubles, wars merely of their
kindling, Christendom might soon rid herself and be happy, if Christians
would but know their own dignity, their liberty, their adoption, and let it not
be wonderd if I say, their spiritual priesthood, whereby they have all equally
access to any ministerial function whenever called by their own abilities and the
church, though they never came near commencement or universitie. But while
Protestants, to avoid the due labor of understanding their own religion are
content to lodge it in the breast or rather in the books of a clergy man, and
to take it thence by scraps and mammocks as he dispences it in his sundays
dole, they will be always learning and never knowing, always infants, always
either his vassals, as lay-papists are to their priests, or at odds with him,
as reformed principles give them some light to be not wholly conformable, whence
infinite disturbances in the state, as they do, must needs follow. Thus much I
had to say; and, I suppose, what may be anough to them who are not avariciously
bent otherwise, touching the likeliest means to remove hirelings out of the
church; then which nothing can more conduce to truth, to peace and all happiness
both in church and state. If I be not heard nor beleevd, the event will bear me
witness to have spoken truth: and I in the mean while have borne my witness not
out of season to the church and to my country.

The end.

