THE Countrymans Friend, AND No circumventing Mountebanck

But a rare method of Chyrurgery and physic, teaching the country people
excellent cures, the like was never laid open in any age before.

Besides here are four arts, three of them concerning horses, and the fourth an
art to keep a Field of corn from any manner of Fowls, that devour grain, this
art is only by anointing a few Crow feathers, for neither Pidgeon, Sparrow,
Rook nor Crow will endure the Field where they stick.

By ABRAHAM MILES,

London printed for E. Andrews at the White Lion near Pye-corner, 1662.

The Epistle to the Reader.
FRiends, whosoever you are that shall obtain the rules of my practice, which
are laid open to the view of people, and not hid and kept close as it is the
use of some Physicians, and Chyrurgeons, because they love darkness rather then
light, and many people there are who are lost for want of help, that have not a
great deal of money to give for a small cure; these corrupt wretches will in no
wise help the sick nor the lame, no more then Dives did help Lazarus in the
time of his necessity; if we would but regard, we have the holy Scripture to
enlighten our hearts to charity, and to be pitiful-hearted one toward another,
Mat. 24. but we are in cruelty one toward another; Sure the Judgment day is
drawing near at hand; is not this one of they most evident signs? For as much
says he, as iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold; when did
iniquity ever so abound? when was the love of men ever so cold toward the
poor? how many now in so great a multitude do cloth the poor, naked creatures
of God with canvas and rugg; they give shoes of silver and gold, and set with
rich stones, to dumb Mahomets; but who now gives shoes of leather to the
poor? O too much unmercifulnes! can these things escape unplagued? remember
well this saying is truth, He that is well needs not the Physician, but he that
is sick; But they may be sick and recover as they can, for any help they shall
have, without great store of money to pay for the cure: But here is an easy way
for thee to work by to help thy self in time of necessity of any desperate
impediment, and at a very easy rate to help thee or thy friend, and thou may
gain both love and profit; and the purer thou do lead thy life, the more God
will bless that which thou does undertake.

And these are the diseases a follows in the next pages.

A Catalogue of the diseases cured in the Book following.
TO prevent sickness. For convulsion fits. For falling sickness. For corns in
the feet. For old sores, For broken bellies. For a Timpany. For melancholy. For
the stone in the kidneys. For the Stone-colick. For the Rickets. For the Thrush
in the mouth. For a Cancer in the mouth. For a Quinzey, or sore throat. For
difficulty of breath. For a Rhume-Meager. For hot watery rhumes in the eyes.
For sore eyes. For a green wound. For the running of the reins. For the Falling
of the Fundament. For the bleeding at the Nose. For the Spleen. For a Plurisie.
For the Worms. For the Warts. For the Joynt-evil. For the French Pox. For the
Chin Cough. For the Dropsy. For the Wind-collick. For a Wolf in the breast.
For the Itch. For to preserve a horse from any disease. To cure a horse of the
red water. For to cure a horse of the Mourning of the Chine. For to scare
fowls, that devour grain in the field.
The Country man's friend, and no circumventing Mounte-bancke.
Here is a rare way to prevent any manner of sickness whatsoever.
TAke milk new from the Cow, about the quantity of a half pint porringer full;
and if it be not warm enough of it self, set it a little while upon some warm
embers, and then you must have the quantity of half a penny worth of Saffron,
tied up in a little holland rag, and that end of the rag as the Saffron lies
in, dip it into the milk, and squeez the end of the rag that it may drop into
the milk, so dip the Saffron rag into it six or seven times, one after another;
every time you squeez the rag, you must do it with your thumb and forefinger,
and when you have so done, lay your Saffron rag aside, and put a spoonful of
life honey into it, and stir it with a spoon, and when your honey is dissolved,
let the party that is ill drink it up, and this take when they find themselves
first amiss; it prevents almost any desease and drives away evil humors from
the heart and is a rare desensiive, it prevents either Pox or Plague, or any
other cruel diseases; taking this potion but three mornings and three evenings.
Probatum est.

A rare way to cure the convulsion Fits.
YOu that are troubled with convulsion fits, observe this rule; that it is the
best time at the new of the Moon, or after the full, to begin to take any thing
against the convulsion fits, take your Elethergie of gold as much at a time as
will lie on a groat; after you have made it into a powder, and put it into your
broth, into any manner of broth, or milk, or posset drink; always when you go
to meals, or to your diet; And if the the party be curable, this cures either
man, woman, or child in a short time. Probarum est.

A certain and sure way to cure the falling-sick.
BEgin to take this, which I shall prescribe here for the Falling sickness,
much about the same time, as is above mentioned concerning the convulsion fits;
Let the party that is afflicted, have a pie, and three young Ravens baked in
it, or a pie with three young Jeas baked in it; and let the party so afflicted,
eat of it three times a day, a little quantity at a time: take a handful of
Sage, red Sage, and a quart of white Wine; if you cannot have it, take a quart
of fair spring water, and boil the Sage in it very gently, until it be boiled
half away; They take it off, and set it a cooling, and when it is cold, put it
into a glass, and if you can have it, put to it two grains of the Countess of
Kents powder, and that you may have at the Apothecaries; and when you go to use
it, you must shake the glass a little, and drink the quantity of a quarter of a
pint of it at a time, in an evening; this cured several of the
Falling Sickness. Probatum est.

A rare and easy way to cure corns in the feet.
IN the first place soak your corns in warm water, that will soften them, that
you may cut them with ease, spread a plaster of Flossunguentorum on a little
thin bit of lambs leather, And so many corns as you have, make so many little
plasters to cover the places where the corns are; the plasters will stick
fast, and in one day it will soften them, that you may cut them at your ease,
then you must have a little unslact Lime, and the best crown soap mixed
together; a little quantity of each will serve the turn; then lay a little of
this on each corn that is ready cut, and open a Raisin of the Sun, to lay over
each place; where you have laid your soap and Lime, then wrap a linen cloth
about your foot, and make it fast; and this art kills the corn to the very root,
and makes a perfect cure. Probatum est.

Here is a rare way to make a salve to cure old stinking sores, Rotten and
putrified, as old sore legs, loath som-like gouts, or old sores in other parts
of the body.
TAke the quantity of a wine pint of Sallet oil, and Linseed oil, and put them
together, then take a penny worth of red head and a penny worth of white Lead,
and a penny worth of soft sealing wax, and a penny worth of verdigrease, put
these with the other oils into a pot that is well leaded; stir it about a
little before you set it to the fire, then you should have a spotellet; it is
at one end like a spad; then your pot of salve being set to the fire, you must
stir it constantly; it will change of several colors as it stands against the
sire; but when you preceive black spots arise in your salve; then it begins to
be enough, stir constantly, and when it is black all over, and rises all
frothy, it is enough, then you must have a little bole or basin almost full of
fair cold water, to set the bottom of your salve pot into; this is to cool the
heat of the salve, by setting the pot into the water, and still you must keep
it stirring, until it be cold; then it is ready for your use. You may spread
this salve upon dry oaken leaves, or Primrose leaves, or fine holland rags, or
fine writing paper; and if the sore be very broad, or long, you may spread it
on London brown paper, and apply it to the sore. There was of this salve sent
to the Hospital, and it cured such sores that the Cyhrurgeons did admire at the
virtue of it, and proffered many pieces of gold for the receipt of it; But the
author of this book obtained the art in making this salve, by keeping a
gentleman company, that used much to frequent the gentleman's house where this
salve was made; this has cured sore legs that should have been cut off.
Probatum est.

Here is an excellent and rare way to cure brokenbellied children, either male,
or female.
TAke half a handful of five-leaved grass, and the roots with it, and half a
handful of comferry roots, and half a handful of pollipodum, and half a handful
of Sallowmans seal, Pollipodum is fearn that grows in an Oak tree; and half
handful of knot grass, and half a handful of webroad planten leaves; boil these
in five quarts of the strongest wort, of the first shot, and let it boil
gently, until it be boiled half away, then take it off and set it a cooling,
and when you see time put barm, yest, or quickening to it, call it what you
will the thing is all one, and when it is ready to tun, as they do beer or ale,
put it up into a pitcher or two Jug bottles, or what you have most convenient
to keep it in, you must give it room to work, and afterward keep it close from
the air, it will be the stronger; If it be a young child, give it this diet
drink, as often in the day time as the child will take it, three spoonful at a
time, if the party be of riper years let them take it three times a day, after
breakfast, after dinner, and after supper, the quantity of a quarter of a pint
at a time, then you must anoint the privy parts of the body twice a day with
Oleum extrensi, and you must have a Chaffing dish of coals, stand near to the
broken place of the belly, that the heat of the coals may dry in the ointment,
you must use but little of your ointment at a time, and chafe it in with your
hand very gently, do this twice a day, morning and evening, then fold up a
double cloth, a linen cloth I mean, heat it hot and lay to the place
defected; or if you will you may bruise a little hemp seed, and sew it up in a
cloth like a little purse, heat it hot and lay it flat upon the place, tie it
fast up with a swade and if you will lay the party to bed, let the middle part
of the body lie some thing higher then the head, and when they sit up, let them
sit very soft, and you must have some little soft thing made with feathers, or
wool to lie under the belly, as they sit by the fire, or in any other place,
you need not question this curing either old or young with Gods help for the
Author of this book has cured them that have been broken, and broken fifteen
years, and by thy art has made a perfect cure. Probatum est.

A rare way to cure a Timphany in the belly of Woman or Maid.
TAke half a handful of Sentary, and boil it in two quarts of strong Ale, until
it be boiled to one quart, and drink half a quarter of a pint at a time, and
follow this constantly, and in a short time this will do the cure. Probatum est,

To cure Melancholy.
TAke a little quantity of Pollipodum or Fern of the Oak, and boil it in a
little new milk, and make a Posset; skim off the curd, and sweeten the
Posset Drink with a little hard Sugar, and drink this often; and you that are
troubled with Melancholy it will drive it clean away, and make you as jovial as
ever you were melancholy before, Probatum est.

A very gallant way to cure the stone in the Kidneys.
TAke a quart of spring water, and put into it a pound of the best life honey,
and let it boil until almost half of it be boiled away, keep this in a little
earthen bottle or glass, and drink five spoonful fasting, and five after diner,
and five after supper, and in a short time this will give you ease, and cure
you of that impediment. Probatum est.

Here is a rare way to cure the Stone-colick.
FIrst you must take a pint of white Wine and have the back bone of a red
herring beat to powder, and the weight of six pence in Hollyberries, beat to a
powder, and the kirnels of Ashen-keyes, beat to powder, and take as much of it
as will lie on a groat, and put these powders into a pint of white Wine, and
put into it an indifferent spoonful of the juice of Camomile, new pressed from
the herb, and let the party either man or woman drink this at two or three
draughts; if they can, let them drink the whole pint at one draught; this has
cured those at three times taking, that has spent many a pound in seeking far
and near for help, yet never could be eased of this cruel impediment the
Stone-colick, until they took this before mentioned, and this has cured them
in eight and forty hours space, to the admiration of many people. Probatum est.

Here is an excellent, and rare way to cure the Rickets in little children.
TAke half a handful of the middle peil of the bark of Sallowes, and half a
handful of Tamerisk, and half a pound of Raisins of the sun three half penny
worth of Liquorish, and a half penny worth of Aniseeds, and a quarter of a
handful of Maiden hair; boil these in four quarts of st ong Wourt until it be
boiled to two quarts, then strain it out very clean, and set it a cooling, then
barm it as you do beer, and when it is worked skim off the barm, then tun it up
into a closs Vessel, a Pitcher of two quarts, or two Jugs, and at three day end
it is for you use, give it the child, either boy or girl, morning and evening,
the quantity of a quarter of a wine pint at a time, and give the child a little
of this diet-drink often in the day time, after any manner of diet.

Another for the same.
TAke three or four penny worth of Parmaceti, and half an ounce of the oil of
Caphas and two penny worth of Muskadine, put these into a Viol-glass, and when
you go to anoint, the child shake that which is in the glass well together, and
anoint the breast, the bow of the arms, the wrists, the Reins of the back, the
hams, and the anckles, every morning and every night.

This diet drink and ointment, has cured poor lame and weak children, that
could neither stand nor go; The Author of this book has proved it in practice
on a hundred several children. Probatum est.

Here is a rare way to cure either Thrush or Cancer, in the mouth of a child.
TAke a quarter of a pint of fair spring water, and put as much Roman-viteral
as the quantity of a white pease, break it to powder in a little white paper,
and put it into the water, and having a rag, or linen tide about a stick not so
big, as a hand-cudgel, a little stick, I mean dip the little stick with the rag
tide about it, into the water, and stir the water, and Romanviteral together,
and then rub then child's mouth, but not so hard as a man would rub a horse
heels; but rub the mouth of the child very gently and this will cure it.

Probatum est.

You may have this Romanviteral at the Apothecaries, four penny worth, or six
peny-worth will serve the turn, and do the cure, this cure is performed, at
half a dosen times dressing, the time is every morning and every night.

A most sure way to cure a swelling in the throat, called the Quinzy.
TAke half a handful of Mugwort, and heat it between two tilsors in a fire
Showel and lay it as hot all under the throat, as the party can suffer it, if
there be any swelling betwixt the ear and the throat which is called the aumuns
of the ears falling down, spread two plasters of Burgany pitch, upon two
little holland clothes, an inch and half long, and half an inch broad, and
then lay one end to the lower part of the ear, and the other end toward the
throat; so likewise lay a plaster on the other side, just upon the place that
is swelled, which is called the aumuns of the ears, then lay on the Mugwort as
hot as you can suffer it; do this at a night when you go to bed, then wash and
gargle the mouth throat with a little Romanviteral, called the Celestial stone,
and this will cure you in two or four hours space, keeping your self warm.
Probatum est.

A rare and excellent way to cure the difficulty of breath or the heaving of
the Lungs.
THere is a long herb, or plant that grows common almost in every hedge; it runs
long like a vine, but the leaves are very broad, of a dark green color, it is
called amaradulsis and some calls it woody-might shade, it is governed under
Mercury; take a pound of the leaves and stalks together, and bruise them a
little, then put them into three pints of White wine, and let it stand and
infuse by the fire very gently in an earthen pot covered with embers about it;
it must infuse twelve hours, then take it off, and if you will you may put a
quarter of a pound of Sugar candy; and when it is cold, you may use it; you
may take the quantity of a quarter of a wine pint morning and evening, and
once at noon after dinner; this has cured several men and women of the heaving
of the lungs, that could not get help from any before. Probatum est.

Here is a rare way to cure the Rhume Meger, or wind Meger; which is a dizng
giddiness in the head of man or woman, or younger people.
TAke fine Flaxen cloth, new Flaxen cloth, and make it just the compass of
the forehead, from temple to temple, and when you have so done, then take your
Flax cloth, and spread it on a board, then spread a quarter of a handful of
Flax-hurds, or Flax-tow on the top of your Flax cloth, just the same compass,
and with your hand pat it down together very close upon the flaxen cloth, and
wipe in any loose hurds that you see round the edges of the plaster, with the
back of the knife, then having the white of a new laid egg, ready beat in a
dish with a spoon, spread with the spoon the white of the egg all over the Flax
hurds; then having your Sanguis draconis beat to powder, strew the Sanguis
draconis all over the white of the egg, then lay this plaster to the forehead,
and pin it on with a cloth, and let it lie twenty four hours on the forehead,
then if it be not loose, let it lie untilit beloose, then take it off. Two of
these plasters one after another has cured some that have been blind with
Rhume.

Probatum est.

Here is a rare medicine for hot watery Rhumes in the eyes; or sore eyes.
TAke a bit of Roach-allum about the bigness of a Pigeons egg, or a small
walnut; then take a new laid egg, and break the white of it into a clean dish,
then take your Roach-Allum, and stir the white of the egg about in the dish
very lustily for a quarter of an hour until it be very thick and curdled, it
will seem like white bread and milk beat together, take this, and with your
finger wipe it upon your eye, and into your eye; and lying on your back; let it
disolve in the eyes for a quarter of an hour at a time; in the morning, and at
noon, and at night; you may use the plaster before mentioned, with this if you
please, or this of it self, according as you see occasion. Friends, whosoever
you are, that shall make use of this art, it will by Gods blessing help you;
and the Author of this book has cured them with this art, that has been
almost blind with Rhume.

Probatum est.

Another rare medicine for the eyes.
TAke the juice of plantan the herb is governed under Venus; and a penny worth
of eiebright water; take of each a like quantity, and put these into a little
Vial-glass, and then put therein a little Romanviteral, or the Celestial stone;
as much as the quantity of a gray pease, and put it into the glass or vial, and
let it dissolve in the juice and water; then when you go to dress your eyes,
shake the Vial a little; dress your eyes as occasion shall serve, and your own
discretion uide you; you may dress your eyes at morning, and at noon, and at
night, if your eyes be very hot; dress them more often; this is a curing
sovereign medicine for the eyes, and has done good to many both men, women,
and children. Probatum est.

A rare way to cure a green wound.
TAke two penny worth of good sack and wash the sore with it twice a day,
morning and evening, and dip your lint into the oil of St. Johnswort, and bind
it up, and this will heal a green wound that is cut deep, more firm and sound
then balsum,

Probatum est.

Here is a rare way for the curing the Gonorhea or Running of the reins.
IN the first place, if you mistrust, you have caught the Running of the reins
by keeping company with any foul or unclean person; go this way to work, first,
either to help your self, or your friend, Take a dram of Pulvus-sanctus, In
English, holly powder; and put this powder into half a pint of dear posset
drink, and sur it about with a knife; and then drink it up, and then take good
store of posset drink after, that it may cause the purge to work lustily; you
must begin always to take a purge in a morning fasting, but if you are of a
strong constution, I would wish you to take a dram of Extractum ^rudi, and make
it into four or five little pills, and drink either posset drink, or strong Ale,
or Beer to cause it to work, then after it has worked well, take some warm
broth made on purpose; these purges purge choler from the chest, and slime
from the guts, and wrinseth and washes the reins of the back, and prepares the
body fit for that which is restraining or restringing. Now in the second place
if you would seek to stop this flux, called the Running of the reins; take a
good handful of Yarow, Milfoyl, Nose-bleed, or Thousand leaf, it has all
these names, but it is commonly called Yarow, take a good handful of this green
herb, and put it into a Mortar, and bruise it with a pestle, and when you have
well beat it, or bruised it, put to it the quantity of a pint of good fresh
small beer, and stir it altogether, then take a thin cloth, and strain it
through, and then put it into a Vialglass, or a little close jug bottle, and put
to it two ounces of the best hard Sugar, and let the Sugar dissolve in it, and
when you go to use it, shake it together, and the quantity that you must take
is as follows; if the day be very hot take a spoonful at a time often in the
day time, or otherwise three times a day; The Author of this book, has applied
this medicine as fasting in a morning three spoonfuls, three spoonfuls at noon,
after diner, and three spoonfuls after supper, this has cured men and women;
that several noted Physicians has left, and could not cure.

Probatum est.

Here is another way for to cure the Gonorhea, or the running of the reins.
TAke Cipress Turpentine, or Venus Turpentine, to the quantity of two ounces
and put to it the quantity of three measured spoonful of clear spring water;
and then stir it well together with the point of a knife, until it be white;
this is called washing of Turpentine or if you be so well provided, instead of
washing it with water, wash it with the juice of Lemond, and you must wash it
in a little white Gally pot, and let it stand in the same pot covered with a
white paper; so you may take it three times a day, at the end of a knife point,
an indifferent quantity at a time, or you may take it in little pills, rolled in
Sugar, upon a trencher; and if you will you may add to it Sanguis draconis, or
the blood of a Dragon beat to powder, and so you may mix it with the pills, and
these pills works a gallant effect in man or woman, and it will do the cure.

Probatum est.

Another way to cure the Gonorhea, or running of the Reins.
TAke every Morning fasting, and every Evening after supper, as much as will
lie on a shilling of the hard row of a red Herring dried, and beat to powder,
and put it into a quarter of pint of beer, and drink it up; and often in the
day time, drink your black double refined Rosin, it is clear like a glass, let
it be beat to powder, and drink it; this has cured the foul disease, of the
running of the Reins it self. The Author of this book gives notice to all
people, both men and women, to observe this rule; those that shall have
occasion to make use concerning this cure, if it be in winter to wear a warm
red cloth next to the reins of the back; and if it be in Summer, wear next to
the Reins of the back a plaster of Dioccula, spread upon a linen cloth,
about the length of your hand, and four fingers broad one plaster will stick
on a week; this plaster is drying, and by Gods help performs the cure.

Probatum est.

Here is a most excellent and rare way to cure the falling at the fundament,
never the like laid open before for the good of the Country.
IN the first place, for either man or child or what party soever that has the
impediment of the fundament falling down when they go to stool, they always
void a great deal of blood; take the herb knot grass, it is as common as the
high way, because it grows by the high way side, but the herb is as honest as
if it grew in a Ladies garden, and as full of virtue; there is another herb
grows close by; it is called Planten, not Bucks-horn Planten, but Webroad
Planten, it is governed under Venus, and under the sign Libra a very honest
herb; and helps Venus girls of many a loose disease: But concerning our cure
before mentioned; Take Planten and Knot-grass, and beat them in a mortar with a
pestle; then strain out the juice, and put it into a vial-glass, then that is
ready for use; then the party afflicted with the disease before mentioned, let
them take two spoonful of the juice, and a spoonful of good strong sack; mix
them together, and drink this quantity morning and evening, and after dinner;
if the party be past sixteen, take it oftener in the day time; And likewise
take three thin rashers, or slices of Martelmass-beef And put, these three
slices of Beef upon the Chaffing-dish of coals, and the Caffing dish into a
close stool and so it over it, and this is so strong, and of such virtue, that
it will go quite through the body, when you breath, you will taste the sent of
it in your mouth; do this often, and with the help of God you will not miss of
the cure; The Author of this book has cured them that has been far and near
before, and could get no help, and this has cured them.

Probatum est.

An excellent way to cure desperate bleeding at Nose.
IF you be passing along on the high way and (...) bleed at Nose, by reason of
heat of travel, or by the heat of the Sun, take green nettles, or the roots,
and bruise them, and put them to your Nose, and snuf up the juice, or sent into
your head, and this will stop it; but if you be at home, and at no hard work or
labor, and your Nose do fall a bleeding, take the herb above mentioned, and
apply first to the Nose and if that will not stop it, tie thy left finger for
thy right nostril, and thy right finger for thy left nostril, if an occasion
serve tie both; if that will not do let the party lie down backward, and have a
cloth dipped in fair spring water and apply to the private parts of the body;
(...) mean to lay it close too. If that will not do, take a toad dried in the
sun, and lay it on the bare chest of man or woman, if the party be a little
fearful, as some maids are to loose their maidenheads, but very few; wrap the
toad in a fine thin white rag, and if it be for a woman or maid, they will like
it the better, my reason is, the female sex delights in clean linen. But
friends whosoever you are that makes use of this book; these rules before
mentioned, will not fail you in time of need

Probatum est

A rare way to cure the Spleen or stiches in the side,
TAke black double refined Rosin, it is clear like glass, when you hold it
against the light; take a little quantity of it a time and beat it to a powder,
and take up as much of the powder at a time as willie upon a four penny piece,
called a groat, and put it into a quarter of a pint of sack, or strong beer, or
ale, and drink it quick, and it will give you ease immediately after you have
taken it; and it will cause you to break wind immediately, and give you case;
and this helps either man, or woman at a convenient time, with speed.

Probatum est.

Here is a sure and speedy way to cure the Plurisie in man, woman or child.
THE impediment of the Plurisie is desperate, and will kill either man, woman
or child, without they have a speedy remedy; but this which I shall here
prescribe, it is most certain and true; Take Stone-horse dung press forth the
juice of it, and take one spoonful of it and two spoonfuls of Aniseed water;
and stir them together in a little earthen cup, or porringer, and let the ^arty
drink it up presently, and it will give them ease, and taking of it three times
one after another it cures either man, woman or child of a Plurisie speedily
without leting blood.

Probatum est.

A most sure and speedy way to cure children of the worms.
TAke a handful of the young buds of Ashentrees, you may know them from any
other buds, for the outside shows as black as Seacoal; take a handful of the
buds before mentioned and a handful of unset Hysop, and half a handful of
wormwood, mix these together, and heat them very hot in a Fire-shovel, or
between two tyles; then lay it to the child's belly, as hot as the child may
suffer it; and bind it on with a cloth at night, and let it lie till the
morning, and in the morning give the child three spoonfuls of new milk, and put
a little of the seeds of Wormwood into it, and bruise it before you put it
into the milk; and stir them together; then give the child the milk and
worm-seed, stirred together, the quantity of three spoonful I mean the seeds of
the common worm-word, that grows almost in every place; this art cures
children of the worms and cleanses the body, and causes children to thrive
very lustily after the taking of it.

Probatum est.

A fine art to cure and kill all manner of Warts that grows on the hands of
men, women, or children.
THere is an herb grows by the high wayside, it is called Arssmart; one sort of
it has a little black spot grows on it, I judge that the Planet Saturn has
some influence over it, but I mean the Arssmart, that bears a green leaf, and
it bites; if you bruise it, and it touches any sore; all you that have Warts,
bruise the herb, and rub the Wart with it, and this will kill all Warts
whatsoever.

Frobatum est,

A rare way to cure the Ioynt-evil, or other foul running sores.
TAke a handful of the buds of Broom, and half a handful of Fenel, and half a
handful of Thime, mother Thime, or field Thime, and half a handful of unset
Hysop, and a quarter of a handful of Balm, and half a handful of Sage; boil
these in five ale quarts of fair spring water, until it be boiled to five
pints, and let it boil gently over a wood fire, and when it is cool, put it
into some manner of Vessel, that will keep it closs; as a small Firkin or closs
Pitcher, and take of this five spoonful in the morning, and three at noon, and
five at night after supper. This has cured three or four in a house, that have
the disease they call the King's Evil, before his Majesty came into the Land;
and now it does cure the Joynt-evil, the Gout in the Joints, and other foul
diseases in the body; this has cured several of these impediments, that never
could get any help before.

Probatum est.

A rare art to cure the Morbus Gallicus, or the French Pox.
IN he first place purge your self; and that you may do, and take but a dram of
pulvus sanctus, in half a pint of clear posset drink, and the quantity of five
pints of clear posset drink, to to drink after; and if you are of a stronger
constitution, take a dram of the extract of Rudi, and make it into five or six
pills, acording as you can Swallow them; and drink about five pints of good
strong beer luke warm, or as warm as milk from the Cow; that you may easily
do, and set it against the fire; now after purging your self, do this, take
the bark of an Ashen tree, and pare off the outside, and take the middle bark,
as the Tanners do of Oak bark; if it be winter dry your bark in an Oven, but
if it be Summer, dry it in the heat of the sun; and when it is dry, sweep your
hearth clean, and set the ends of the bark upright, leaning one against
another, then with a candle, or a piece of paper, set your Ashen-bark on fire,
and if you look to the burning of it well, it will burn as white as chalk; and
take these Ashes, and have them ready about you in a box in your pocket; and
you must have Apples, any manner of Apples ready roasted, and ever and anon,
then dip an Apple into the ashes and eat it, and in a short time this will cure
you of the French Pox, and none can tell for what disease you take it, this art
has cured them of the foul disease, the French Pox; that has been at the
Hospital, and could not have cure.

Probatum est.

For a Hoarse cough, or a hooping cough, or other chin cough.
THere grows a stone very common on many plowed lands, some call it a hauk-bill
stone, some call it a hod-mondod, some call it a kicks-foot stone; it grows in
the manner of an oyster shell, like to the great welflead oyster-shel, take
this stone and burn it in the fire, for the space of five or six hours; then
take it out, and beat it, and sift it to a pure fine powder, and put to it half
a penyworth of horse spice, and put to it three half penny worth of white sugar,
and mix these together, and let the party that is afflicted with the cough,
either man or woman, or child, take this and eat of it as often in the day time
as you will, and it will cure them in a short time; this is far better then a
Apothecaries Lohosamim, that they sell for eight pence an ounce.

Probatum est.

A rare way to cure the dropsy.
TAke a wine quart of the ashes of broom, and boil them in four quarts of
wormwood beer, or ale, and let it boil until it comes to two quarts, then let
it settle, and let the clear be poured out from the thick, and put to it two
penny worth of the power of Cinnamon and take five spoonfuls fasting in the
morning, and five spoonfuls at night; if you be very far gone take likewise
three at noon, and this will cure you in a short time.

Probatum est.

For the Wind-chollick.
TAke Lozanges Rute, or Dietrionpeperion, it is in English Lozenges three
poppers aet these and you wild quickly find ease.

Probatum est.

A rare way to cure a woman's breast of a Wolf.
TAke a little Romanviteral, and beat it to powder, then take a live Pidgeon
and slit it in two, then take your celestial stone being beat to a power, and
strew the Romanviteral all over the inside of one half of your Pidgeon, and lay
that presently to the Wolf to feed on, let it lie about an hour, and then take
the other half of the Pidgeon, the feathers being picked off clean, and lay it
on a Chaffin dish of coals, then hold the breast over it, and the Wolf will
sever immediately from the breast, by virtue of the Celestial stone, and drop
into the Chaffin-dish; then after this you may soake a little of the same
Romanviteral in a little fair spring water, and wash the breast morning and
evening, and lay a primrose leaf to it, dipped in the oil of St. John's Wort, and
Sallet oil mixed together; and you must be sure to keep your breast warm; and
when you try this art, think of the Author of this book; for this has cured
many of this impediment to the admiration of many people.

Probatum est.

A fine art to cure the Itch.
TAke one penny worth of the Oil of Roses and two penny worth of Sallet oil, and
mix these both together in a little gally pot, or drinking pot, take green
glass, and beat to a pure small powder, and mix this with brimstone beat to a
powder; take these two powders, and tie them up fast in a little holland rag
together; and let the powders tied up in the rag, lie and soak in the oils,
and when you go to dress your self, take out the ball or rag tied up round
like a ball, and gently rub the wrists and the bow of the arm, and the share
that is betwixt the lower part of the belly and the upper part of the inside of
the thigh, and anoint under your hams; do this morning and evening, and this
will kill an itch in a very short time, if it be to the bone. Probatum est.

Remedies for Horses.
Here is a rare way to make a drink to keep Horse or Mare from any disease.
TAke three or four penyworth of squch ingreale, and in small brass mortar,
bruise it a little, and put it into a Skillet of strong beer the quantity of a
quart; take a little Rosemary and Hyope and a little green balm, and a little
Fennel and Time, and shred all these together, and put them into the Skillet,
and half a pennyworth of Anniseeds; let these boil together, for the space of
half an hour, then take it from the fire, and when it is cold enough give it to
horse or mare; it prevents the Plague in the guts, or any other diseases if
they have stood in stables that are infected: All you that are masters of
horses, and shall make use of this, you will have little need of the Farrier to
drench your horses, after you have made trial of this a little while; this is
approved of by some gentlmen to be the best drink now in England, and a sure
defensive for the heart.

Probatum est.

A rare art to cure a horse of the Red-water, some calls it the strong gullion.
When you see the horse have this disease, he will lie on his back, and kick
with all four of his legs, and very much swell in his body; take two quarts of
Chamber-lye, our stale, and bruise some Burdock-seeds, as many as will lie on a
shilling, and put into the Chamber-lye, and give the horse this with a horn, as
soon as possible may be, then swich him up, and ride him for the space of three
quarters of an hour, then set him in the stable, and as soon as he does ftal,
he has his cure.

Probatum est.

Here is a rare way to cure either horse or mare of the mourning of the chine,
if they are not too far spent.
TAke a pennyworth of Towsillagine, and a pennyworth of Uripigmentum, and as
much of the powder of both of them as will lie on a shilling; put this to two
spoonfils of barley flower, and make it into three ^^kes, about the bigness of
three half crowns, ^ay these on a chaffing dish of wood coals, and cover them
with a Tunnel, that the pipe of the Tunnel may convey the smoke into his
nostrils, then ride him for half an hour; do this morning and evening, and in
short time the cure will be perfect.

Probatum est.

Here is a rare way and necessary for country men to keep their corn from all
manner of fowl that do devour corn in the field.
TAke two pennyworth of Stavesacre, and one pennyworth of gunpowder, and half
a penyworth of Sulphur, or brimstone, and half a pennyworth of common
Terpentine, mix all these together, and anoint it, at the end of crows
feathers, and stick here and there a crow feather at a lands end, and some tie
at the end of a long straw, close under the ear of corn, and them that you
stick on the ground you must stick with the quil end downward: This will fright
all the fowls that devour corn; neither Pidgeon, Rooke, nor crow, nor Sparrow,
will endure the field nor close where these feathers stand, but will fly over
the place as if they were frighted.

Probatum est.

FINIS.

