(...)es Ghost:
(...) where she formerly lived in Rotten(...) (...) afraid to speak unto her;
but she grow(...) Instant March, 1680, declarred her mind (...) with an
Unanimous Spirit adhered to her, (...)s, how that if they took up two Tiles by
the (...)ones of Bastard-Children that the said Midwife (...)nd that she
desired that her Kinswoman Mary should see them decently buried; which
accordingly they did, and found it as the Maid had said. The Bones are to be
seen at the Cheshire-Cheese in the said place at this very time, for the
satisfaction of those that believes not this Relation.

To the Tune of, When Troy Town, etc.


TO speak of Murders that have been
committed in our Sphere of late;
There Is none like these I shall declare,
by monstrous hand, and cruel Fate:
Being acted by a Midwife fell,
Which in Scroop-Court of late did dwell.


Mistress Atkins she there was called,
of Reputation good always;
Till Death did send his piercing Dart,
and told her that be could not stay:
But she must to the Stigion Lake,
For murdering Babes for Parents sake.
(...)
most bitterly began to weep;
And lifting up her hands on high,
she took a short, not lasting sleep:
Six months ago, as I am told,
Before she did this same unfold.
Therefore not to detain you long
to this discourse, I now will press;
Which is a truth assuredly,
as many know, and you may guess:
When as it is plainly told herein,
Whereas their bones are to be seen.
The House whereas this Midwife lived,
has very much disturbed been;
With Apparitions very strange,
the like whereof has not been seen:
Sometimes resembling of her shape,
At other times Hells mouth to gape.
Which put the people in great fear,
that there had taken up abode,
Being loath for to disclose the same,
for fear expersions they should load
On her whom they really thought
Could never be to Lewdness brought.
But still they daily was oppressed,
with dismal shapes, and Lightings strange
That by no means they could not rest,
being very loath from thence to range:
They told some Neighbors secretly,
Desiring them their Faith to try.
To speak unto this Spirit strange,
if that occasion they saw;
But they thereby was daunted quite,
and very much was kept in awe:
The hair o'their heads standing on end,
To see their late Familiar Friend.
She finding none that would Reply,
importunate at last did grow;
O'th 16th. of this Instant March,
unto the Maid revealed her Woe:
Who then was by her Mistress sent,
To fetch Night-cloaths Incontinent.
(...)
for I to you will do no harm;
And tell Mary whom I love most,
that I hereby, her now do charm,
Two Tiles by the fire up to take,
A Board also, and then to make
A Burial of what she finds,
in decent and most handsome sort;
And let the World to know my Crime,
and that I am most sorry for it:
Desiring Midwives to take heed,
How they dispose their Bastard-breed.
She having now revealed her mind,
did vanish in a Flash away,
And none does know where she is confined,
until the General judgement-day:
When as she shall the answer make,
For what she then did undertake.
The Maid at first astonished was,
at this which she her self did hear;
And to her Mistress did impart,
the same that now I do declare:
Concerning of the Murders strange,
And did not seem at all to change.
Which being thoroughly searched out,
accordingly it did appear;
The Maid she spoke of is supposed,
to be her kind Kinswoman near:
That will fulfill her will, it is said,
She being a Religious Maid.
Most People they are apt of late,
to condemn (most) strange things as lies*
To The Cheshire-Cheese you may repair,
for this they will you satisfice:
Having the Childrens Bones to show,
In Holbourn if you do it know.
FINIS.
London, Printed for T. Vere, at the Sign of the Angel in Guiltspur-Street.
1680.


