POEMS, etc. UPON Several Occasions.

BY Mr. JOHN MILTON: Both ENGLISH and LATIN, etc. Composed at several times.

With a small Tractate of EDUCATION To Mr. HARTLIB.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Dring at the Blew Anchor next Mitre Court over
against Fetter Lane in Fleet Street. 1673.

THE TABLE Of the English Poems.
ON the Morning of Christ's Nativity. Page 1 The Hymn. 2 A Paraphrase on Psalm
114. 13 -- on Psalm 136. 14 On the Death of a fair Infant dying of a Cough. 17
The Passion. 21 On Time. 24 Upon the Circumcision. 25 At a Solemn Music. 26 An
Epitaph on the Marchioness of Winchester. 27 Song on May morning. 31 On
Shakespeare. 31 On the University Carrier, who sickn'd in the time of his
Vacancy, being forbid to go to London, by reason of the Plague. 32 Another on
the same. 33 L'Allegro. 35 Il Penseroso. 41 Sonnets. 49 To Mr. Henry Laws, on
his Aires. 57 On the late Massacre in Piemont. 58 The fifth Ode of Horace, Lib.
1. Englished. 62 At a Vacation Exercise in the College. 64 On the new forcers
of Conscience under the Long Parliament. 69 Arcades. Part of an Entertainment
presented to the Countess Dowager of Darby. 70 1. Song. 70 2. Song. 74 3. Song.
74 LYCIDAS. In this Monody the Author bewailes a Learned Friend, unfortunately
drowned in his passage from Chester, on the Irish Seas, 1637. 75 A MASK. 84
Song. 94 Song. 122 Song. 126 Song. 127 Psalm 1. done into Verse, 1653. 130
Psalm 2. 131 Psalm 3. 132 Psalm 4. 133 Psalm 5. 135 Psalm 6. 137 Psalm 7. 138
Psalm 8. 141 Psalm 80. 143 Psalm 81. 146 Psalm 82. 149 Psalm 83. 151 Psalm 84.
154 Psalm 85. 156 Psalm 86. 158 Psalm 87. 161 Psalm 88. 162
THE TABLE. Of the Latin Poems.
ELegia prima ad Carolum Diodatum. Page 11 Elegia secunda in Obitum Praeconis
Academici Cantabigiensis. 15 Elegia tertia in Obitum Praesulis Wintoniensis. 16
Elegia quarta, ad Thomam Junium, etc. 19 Elegia quinta, in adventum veris. 25
Elegia sixta, ad Carolum Diodatum, ruri Commorantem. 31 Elegia septima 35 In
proditionem Bombardicam. 40, 41 In Inventorem Bombardae. 42 Ad Leonoram Romae
Canentem. 42, 43 Apologus de Rustico and Hero. 44 Sylvarum Liber. 45 In Quintum
Novembris. 47 In Obitum Praesulis Wintoniensis, 57 Naturam non pati senium. 60
De Idea Platonica, Quemadmodum Aristoteles intellexit. 63 Ad Patrem. 64 Psalm C
XIV. 70 Philosophus ad Regem quendam qui eum ignotum and insontem inter reos
forte captum inscius damnaverat, (...) haec subito misit. 71 In Effigiei Ejus
Sculptorem. ibid. An Salsillum Poetam Romanum aegrotantem. ib. Mansus 74
Epitaphium Damonis. 80 Ad Joannem Rousium Oxoniensis Academiae Bibliothecarium.
90 Of Education to Mr. Samuel Hartlib. 94
ERRATA.
PAge 21. at the end of the Elegy should have come in the Verses at a Vacation
Exercise, which follow afterward, from page 64. to p. 68, p. 56. line 8. after
is r. it, ib. l. 9. for Colikto r. Colkitto, p. 59 l. 4. for so r. sow, p. 69.
l. 17. for bank r. bank, p. 90. l. 9. for Heccat' r. Hecat', p. 91. l. 19.
leave out the Comma after May, and for here r. hear, p. 128. l. 3. leave out
that. In the second part p. 43. l. 1. for Canentam r. Canentem, ibid. l. 4. for
desipulisset r. desipuisset, p. 49. l. 2. for Adamantius r. Adamantinus, ibid.
l. 9. for Notat r. Natat, p. 52. l. 2. for Relliquas r. Relliquias, p. 53. l.
17, 18. a Comma after Manes, none after Exululat. Some other Errors and
mispointings the Readers judgment may correct.

ON THE MORNING OF Christ's Nativity.
I.
THis is the Month, and this the happy morn
Wherein the Son of Heavens eternal King,
Of wedded Maid, and Virgin Mother born,
Our great Redemption from above did bring;
For so the holy Sages once did sing,
That he our deadly forfeit should release,
And with his Father work us a perpetual peace.
II.
That glorious Form, that Light unsufferable,
And that far-beaming blaze of Majesty,
Wherewith he wont at Heavens high Councel-Table,
To sit the midst of Trinal Unity,
He laid aside; and here with us to be,
Forsook the Courts of everlasting Day,
And chose with us a darksom House of mortal Clay.
III.
Say Heavenly Muse, shall not thy sacred vein
Afford a Present to the Infant God?
Have thou no verse, no hymn, or solemn strein,
To welcome him to this his new abode,
Now while the Heaven by the Suns team untrod,
Has took no print of the approaching light,
And and all the spangled host keep watch in squadrons bright?
IV.
See how from far upon the Eastern rode
The Star-led Wisards haste with odours sweet,
O run, prevent them with thy humble ode,
And lay it lowly at his blessed feet;
Have thou the honor first, thy Lord to greet,
And join thy voice unto the Angel Quire,
From out his secret Altar touched with hallowed fire.
The Hymn.
I.
IT was the Winter wild,
While the Heav'n-born-childe,
All meanly wrapped in the rude manger lies;
Nature in awe to him
Had doff't her gaudy trim,
With her great Master so to sympathize:
It was no season then for her
To wanton with the Sun her lusty Paramour.
II.
Only with speeches fair
She woo's the gentle Air
To hide her guilty front with innocent Snow,
And on her naked shame,
Pollute with sinful blame,
The Saintly Veil of Maiden white to throw,
Confounded, that her Makers eyes
Should look so near upon her foul deformities.
III.
But he her fears to cease,
Sent down the meek-ey'd Peace,
She crowned with Olive green, came softly sliding
Down through the turning sphere
His ready Harbinger,
With Turtle wing the amorous clouds dividing,
And waving wide her myrtle wand,
She strikes a universal Peace through Sea and Land.
IV.
No War, or Battles sound
Was heard the World around
The idle Spear and Shield were high up hung,
The hooked Chariot stood
Unstained with hostile blood,
The Trumpet spoke not to the armed throng,
And Kings sat still with awful eye,
As if they surely knew their sovran Lord was by.
V.
But peaceful was the night
Wherein the Prince of light
His reign of peace upon the earth began:
The Winds with wonder whist,
Smoothly the waters kissed,
Whispering new joys to the mild Ocean,
Who now has quite forgot to rave,
While Birds of Calm sit brooding on the charmed wave.
VI.
The Stars with deep amaze
Stand fixed in steadfast gaze,
Bending one way their precious influence,
And will not take their flight,
For all the morning light,
Or Lucifer that often warned them thence;
But in their glimmering Orbs did glow,
Until their Lord himself bespake, and bid them go.
VII.
And though the shady gloom
Had given day her room,
The Sun himself withheld his wonted speed,
And hid his head for shame,
As his inferior flame,
The new enlightn'd world no more should need;
He saw a greater Sun appear
Then his-bright Throne, or burning Axletree could bear.
VIII.
The Shepherds on the Lawn,
Or ere the point of dawn,
State simply chatting in a rustic row;
Full little thought they than,
That the mighty Pan
Was kindly come to live with them below;
Perhaps their loves, or else their sheep,
Was all that did their silly thoughts so busy keep.
IX.
When such music sweet
Their hearts and ears did greet,
As never was by mortal finger struck,
Divinely-warbl'd voice
Answering the stringed noise,
As all their souls in blissfull rapture took:
The Air such pleasure loath to lose,
With thousand echo's still prolongs each heavenly close.
X.
Nature that heard such sound
Beneath the hollow round
Of Cynthia's seat, the Airy region thrilling,
Now was almost won
To think her part was done,
And that her reign had here its last fulfilling;
She knew such harmony alone
Could hold all Heaven and Earth in happier union.
XI.
At last surrounds their sight
A Globe of circular light,
That with long beams the shame-fac't night arrayed,
The helmed Cherubim
And sworded Seraphim,
Are seen in glittering ranks with wings displaid,
Harping in loud and solemn quite,
With unexpressive notes to Heavens newborn Heir.
XII.
Such Music (as'tis said)
Before was never made,
But when of old the sons of morning sung,
While the Creator great
His Constellations set,
And the well-ballanc't world on hinges hung,
And cast the dark foundations deep,
And bid the weltring waves their oozy channel keep.
XIII.
Ring out ye Crystal spears,
Once bless our humane ears,
(If ye have power to touch our senses so)
And let your silver chime
Move in melodious time;
And let the Base of Heavens deep Organ blow,
And with your ninefold harmony
Make up full consort to th'Angelike symphony.
XIV
For if such holy Song
Enwrap our fancy long,
Time will run back, and fetch the age of gold,
And speckl'd vanity
Will sicken soon and die,
And leprous sin will melt from earthly mould,
And Hell it self will pass away,
And leave her dolorous mansions to the peering day.
XV.
Yea Truth, and Justice then
Will down return to men,
Orb'd in a Rainbow; and like glories wearing
Mercy will sit between,
Throned in Celestial sheen,
With radiant feet the tissued clouds down stearing,
And Heaven as at some Festival,
Will open wide the Gates of her high Palace Hall.
XVI.
But wisest Fate says no,
This must not yet be so,
The Babe lies yet in smiling Infancy,
That on the bitter cross
Must redeem our loss;
So both himself and us to glorify:
Yet first to those ychain'd in sleep,
The wakeful trump of doom must thunder through the deep.
XVII.
With such a horrid clang
As on mount Sinai rang
While the red fire, and smouldring clouds out brake:
The aged Earth aghast
With terror of that blast,
Shall from the surface to the center shake;
When at the world last session,
The dreadful Judge in middle Air shall spread his throne.
XVIII.
And then at last our bliss
Full and perfet is,
But now begins; for from this happy
The Old Dragon under ground
In straiter limits bound,
Not half so far casts his usurped sway,
And wroth to see his Kingdom fail,
Swindges the scaly Horror of his foulded tail.
XIX.
The Oracles are dum,
No voice or hideous humm
Runs through the arched roof in words deceiving.
Apollo from his shrine
Can no more divine,
With hollow shreik the steep of Delphos leaving.
No nightly trance, or breathed spell,
Inspires the pale-ey'd Priest from the prophetic cell.
XX.
The lonely mountains over,
And the resounding shore,
A voice of weeping heard, and loud lament;
From haunted spring, and dale
Edged with poplar pale,
The parting Genius is with sighing sent,
With flowre-inwov'n tresses torn
The Nimphs in twilight shade of tangled thickets mourn.
XXI.
In consecrated Earth,
And on the holy Hearth,
The Lars, and Lemures moan with midnight plaint,
In Urns, and Altars round,
A drear and dying sound
Affrights the Flamins at their service quaint;
And the chill Marble seems to sweat,
While each peculiar power forgoes his wonted seat.
XXII.
Peor, and Baalim,
Forsake their Temples dim,
With that twice battered god of Palestine
And mooned Ashtaroth,
Heavens Queen and Mother both,
Now sits not girt with Tapers holy shine,
The Libyc Hammon shrinks his horn,
In vain the Tyrian Maids their wounded Thamuz mourn.
XXIII.
And sullen Moloch fled,
Has left in shadows dred,
His burning Idol all of blackest hue;
In vain with Cymbals ring,
They call the grisly King,
In dismal dance about the furnace blue;
The brutish gods of Nile as fast,
Isis and Orus, and the Dog Anubis have.
XXIV.
Nor is Osiris seen
In Memphian Grove, or Green,
Trampling the unshowr'd Grass with lowings loud:
Nor can he be at rest
Within his sacred chest,
Naught but profoundest Hell can be his shroud,
In vain with Timbrel'd Anthems dark
The sable stoled Sorcerers bear his worshipped Ark.
XXV.
He feels from Juda's Land
The dredded Infants hand,
The rays of Bethlehem blind his dusky eyn;
Nor all the Gods beside,
Longer dare abide,
Not Typhon huge ending in snaky twine:
Our Babe to show his Godhead true,
Can in his swaddling bands control the damned crew.
XXVI.
So when the Sun in bed,
Curtain'd with cloudy red,
Pillows his chin upon an Orient wave,
The flocking shadows pale,
Troop to the infernal Jail,
Each fettered Ghost slips to his several grave,
And the yellow-skirted Fayes,
Fly after the Night-steeds, leaving their Moon-lov'd maze.
XXVII.
But see the Virgin blessed,
Has laid her Babe to rest.
Time is our tedious Song should here have ending:
Heavens youngest teemed Star,
Has fixed her polisht Car,
Her sleeping Lord with Handmaid Lamp attending:
And all about the Courtly Stable,
Bright-harnest Angels sit in order serviceable.
A Paraphrase on Psalm 114.
This and the following Psalm were done by the Author at fifteen years old.
WHen the blessed seed of Terah's faithful Son,
After long toil their liberty had won,
And past from Pharian Fields to Canaan Land,
Led by the strength of the Almighties hand,
Jehovah's wonders were in Israel shown,
His praise and glory was in Israel known.
That saw the troubled Sea, and shivering fled,
And sought to hide his froth becurled head
Low in the earth, Jordans clear streams recoil,
As a faint Host that has received the foil.
The high, huge-bellied Mountains skip like Rams
Amongst their Ews, the little Hills like Lambs.
Why fled the Ocean? And why skipt the Mountains?
Why turned Jordan toward his Crystal Fountains?
Shake earth, and at the presence be aghast
Of him that ever was, and ay shall last,
That glassy floods from rugged rocks can crush,
And make soft rills from fiery flint stones gush.
Psalm 136.
LEt us with a gladsom mind
Praise the Lord, for he is kind
For his mercies ay endure,
Ever faithful, ever sure.
Let us blaze his Name abroad,
For of gods he is the God;
For his, etc.
O let us his praises tell,
Who does the wrathful tyrants quell.
For his, etc.
Who with his miracles does make
Amazed Heaven and Earth to shake.
For his, etc.
Who by his wisdom did create
The painted Heavens so full of state.
For his, etc.
Who did the solid Earth ordain
To rise above the watery plain.
For his, etc.
Who by his all-commanding might,
Did fill the new-made world with light
For his, etc.
And caused the Golden-tressed Sun,
All the day long his course to run.
For his, etc.
The horned Moon to shine by night,
Amongst her spangled sisters bright.
For his, etc.
He with his thunder-clasping hand,
Smote the firstborn of Egypt Land.
For his, etc.
And in despite of Pharao fell,
He brought from thence his Israel.
For, etc.
The ruddy waves he cleft in twain,
Of the Erythraean main.
For, etc.
The floods stood still like Walls of Glass,
While the Hebrew Bands did pass.
For, etc.
But full soon they did devour
The Tawny King with all his power.
For, etc.
His chosen people he did bless
In the wastfull Wilderness.
For, etc.
In bloody battle he brought down
Kings of prowess and renown.
For, etc.
He foild bold Seon and his host.
That ruled the Amorrean coast.
For, etc.
And large-limb'd Og he did subdue,
With all his over-hardy crew.
For, etc.
And to his Servant Israel,
He gave their Land therein to dwell.
For, etc.
He has with a piteous eye
Beheld us in in our misery.
For, etc.
And freed us from the slavery
Of the invading enemy.
For, etc.
All living creatures he does feed,
And with full hand supplies their need.
For, etc.
Let us therefore warble forth
His mighty Majesty and worth.
For, etc.
That his mansion has on high
Above the reach of mortal eye.
For his mercies ay endure,
Ever faithful, ever sure.
Anno aetatis 17.
On the Death of a fair Infant dying of a Cough
I.
OFairest flower no sooner blown but blasted,
Soft silken Primrose fading timelesslie,
Summers chief honor if thou had out-lasted,
Bleak winters force that made thy blossom dry;
For he being amorous on that lovely die
That did thy cheek envermeil, thought to kiss
But killed alas, and then bewayl'd his fatal bliss.
II.
For since grim Aquilo his charioter
By boistrous rape the Athenian damsel got,
He thought it touched his Deity full near,
If likewise he some fair one wedded not,
Thereby to wipe away th'infamous blot,
Of long-uncoupled bed, and childless eld,
Which'mongst the wanton gods a foul reproach was held.
III.
So mounting up in ycie-pearled carr,
Through middle empire of the freezing air
He wanderd long, till thee he spied from far,
There ended was his quest, there ceast his care.
Down he descended from his Snow-soft chair,
But all unwares with his cold-kind embrace
Unhous'd thy Virgin Soul from her fair biding place.
IV.
Yet art thou not inglorious in thy fate;
For so Apollo, with unweeting hand
Whilome did slay his dearly-loved mate
Young Hyacinth born on Eurota's strand
Young Hyacinth the pride of Spartan land;
But then transformed him to a purple flower
Alack that so to change thee winter had no power.
V.
Yet can I not persuade me thou art dead
Or that thy coarse corrupts in earths dark womb,
Or that thy beauties lie in wormie bed,
Hid from the world in a low delved tomb;
Could Heaven for pity thee so strictly doom?
Oh no? for something in thy face did shine
Above mortality that showed thou wast divine.
VI.
Resolve me then oh Soul most surely blessed
(If so it be that thou these plaints do hear)
Tell me bright Spirit where e're thou hoverest
Whether above that high first-moving Sphere
Or in the Elisian fields (if such there were.)
Oh say me true if thou were mortal wight
And why from us so quickly thou did take thy flight.
VII.
Were thou some Starr which from the ruined roof
Of shook Olympus by mischance did fall;
Which careful Jove in natures true behoof
Took up, and in fit place did reinstall?
Or did of late earths Sons besiege the wall
Of sheenie Heaven, and thou some goddess fled
Amongst us here below to hide thy nectar'd head.
VIII.
Or were thou that just Maid who once before
Forsook the hated earth, O tell me sooth
And came again to visit us once more?
Or were thou that sweet smiling Youth!
Or that cown'd Matron sage white-robed truth?
Or any other of that heavenly brood
Let down in clowdie throne to do the world some good.
IX.
Or were thou of the golden-winged host,
Who having clad thy self in humane weed,
To earth from thy praefixed seat did poast,
And after short abode fly back with speed,
As if to show what creatures Heaven does breed,
Thereby to set the hearts of men on fire
To scorn the sordid world, and unto Heaven aspire.
X.
But oh why did thou not stay here below
To bless us with thy heaven loved innocence,
To slake his wrath whom sin has made our so
To turn Swift-rushing black perdition hence,
Or drive away the slaughtering pestilence,
To stand 'twixt us and our deferved smart
But thou can best perform that office where thou art.
XI.
Then thou the mother of so sweet a child
Her false imagined loss cease to lament,
And wisely learn to curb thy sorrows wild;
Think what a present thou to God have sent,
And render him with patience what he lent;
This if thou do he will an offspring give,
That till the worlds last-end shall make thy name to live.
The Passion.
I.
ERe-while of Music, and Ethereal mirth,
Wherewith the stage of Air and Earth did ring,
And joyous news of heavenly Infants birth,
My muse with Angels did divide to sing;
But headlong joy is ever on the wing,
In Wintry solstice like the shortn'd light
Soon swallowed up in dark and long out-living night.
II.
For now to sorrow must I tune my song,
And set my Harp to notes of saddest woe,
Which on our dearest Lord did sease er'e long,
Dangers, and snares, and wrongs, and worse then so,
Which he for us did freely undergo.
Most perfect Hero, tried in heaviest plight
Of labors huge and hard, too hard for human wight.
III.
He sov ran Priest stooping his regal head
That dropped with odorous oil down his fair eyes,
Poor fleshly Tabernacle entered,
His starry front low-rooft beneath the skies;
O what a mask was there, what a disguise!
Yet more; the stroke of death he must abide,
Then lies him meekly down fast by his Brethrens side.
IV.
These latest scenes confine my roving verse,
To this Horizon is my Phoebus bound,
His Godlike acts; and his temptations fierce,
And former sufferings other where are found;
Loud over the rest Cremona's Trump does sound;
Me softer airs befit, and softer strings
Of Lute, or Viol still, more apt for mournful things.
V.
Befriend me night best Patroness of grief,
Over the Pole thy thickest mantle throw,
And work my flattered fancy to belief,
That Heaven and Earth are colored with my woe;
My sorrows are too dark for day to know:
The leaves should all be black whereon I write,
And letters where my tears have washed a wannish white.
VI.
See see the Chariot, and those rushing wheels,
That whirled the Prophet up at Chebar flood,
My spirit some transporting Cherub feels,
To bear me where the Towers of Salem stood,
Once glorious Towers, now sunk in guiltless blood;
There does my soul in holy vision sit
In pensive trance, and anguish, and ecstatick fit,
VII.
Mine eye has found that sad Sepulchral rock
That was the Casket of Heavens richest store,
And here though grief my feeble hands up lock,
Yet on the softened Quarry would I score
My plaining verse as lively as before;
For sure so well instructed are my tears,
That they would fitly fall in ordered Characters.
VIII.
Or should I thence hurried on viewles wing,
Take up a weeping on the Mountains wild,
The gentle neighborhood of grove and spring
Would soon unbosom all their Echoes mild,
And I (for grief is easily beguild)
Might think the infection of my sorrows loud,
Had got a race of mourners on some pregnant cloud.
This Subject the Author finding to be above the years he had, when he wrote
it, and nothing satis^^'d with what was begun, less it unfinisht.

On Time.
FLy envious Time, till thou run out thy race,
Call on the lazy leaden-stepping hours,
Whose speed is but the heavy Plummets pace;
And glut thy self with what thy womb devours,
Which is no more then what is false and vain,
And merely mortal dross;
So little is our loss,
So little is thy gain.
For when as each thing bad thou have entombed,
And last of all thy greedy self consumed,
Then long Eternity shall greet our bliss
With an individual kiss;
And Joy shall overtake us as a flood,
When every thing that is sincerely good
And perfectly divine,
With Truth, and Peace, and Love shall ever shine
About the supreme Throne
Of him, t'whose happy-making sight alone,
When once our heav'nly-guided soul shall clime,
Then all this Earthy grosness quit,
Attired with Stars, we shall for ever sit,
Triumphing over Death, and Chance, and thee O Time.
Upon the Circumcision.
YE flaming Powers, and winged Warriors bright,
That erst with Music, and triumphant song
First heard by happy watchful Shepherds ear,
So sweetly sung your Joy the Clouds along
Through the soft silence of the listening night;
Now mourn, and if sad share with us to bear
Your fiery essence can distill no tear,
Burn in your sighs, and borrow
Seas wept from our deep sorrow,
He who with all Heavens heraldry whilear
Entered the world, now bleeds to give us ease;
Alas, how soon our sin
Sore does begin
His Infancy to sease!
O more exceeding love or law more just?
Just law indeed, but more exceeding love!
For we by rightful doom remediles
Were lost in death, till he that dwelt above
High throned in secret bliss, for us frail dust
Emptied his glory, even to nakedness;
And that great Covenant which we still transgress
Entirely satisfied,
And the full wrath beside
Of vengeful Justice bore for our excess,
And seals obedience first with wounding smart
This day, but O ere long
Huge pangs and strong
Will pierce more near his heart.
At a solemn Music.
Blessed pair of Sirens, pledges of Heavens joy,
Sphear-born harmonious Sisters, Voice, and Verse,
Wed your divine sounds, and mixed power employ
Dead things with inbreath'd sense able to pierce,
And to our high-rais'd fantasy present,
That undisturbed Song of pure concent,
Ay sung before the saphire-colour'd throne
To him that sits thereon
With Saintly shout, and solemn Jubily,
Where the bright Seraphim in burning row
Their loud up-lifted Angel trumpets blow,
And the Cherubick host in thousand quires
Touch their immortal Harps of golden wires,
With those just Spirits that wear victorious Palms,
Hymns devout and holy Psalms
Singing everlastingly;
That we on Earth with undiscording voice
May rightly answer that melodious noise;
As once we did, till disproportioned sin
Jarr'd against natures chime, and with harsh din
Broke the fair music that all creatures made
To their great Lord, whose love their motion swayed
In perfet Diapason, whilst they stood
In first obedience, and their state of good.
O may we soon again renew that Song,
And keep in tune with Heaven, till God ere long
To his celestial consort us unite,
To live with him, and sing in endless morn of light.
An Epitaph on the Marchioness of Winchester.
THis rich Marble does enterr
The honored Wife of Winchester,
A Vicounts daughter, an Ealrs heir,
Besides what her virtues fair
Added to her noble birth,
More then she could own from Earth.
Summers three times eight save one
She had told, (...) too soon,
After so short time of breath,
To house with darkness, and with death.
Yet had the number of her days
Bin as complete as was her praise,
Nature and fate had had no strife
In giving limit to her life.
Her high birth, and her graces sweet,
Quickly found a lover meet;
The Virgin quire for her request
The God that sits at marriage feast;
He at their invoking came
But with a scarce-wel-lighted flame;
And in his Garland as he stood,
Ye might discern a Cypress bud.
Once had the early Matrons run
To greet her of a lovely son,
And now with second hope she goes,
And calls Lucina to her throws;
But whether by mischance or blame
Atropos for Lucina came;
And with remorsles cruelty,
Spoiled at once both fruit and tree:
The haples Babe before his birth
Had burial, yet not laid in earth,
And the languisht Mothers Womb
Was not long a living Tomb.
So have I seen some tender slip
Saved with care from Winters nip,
The pride of her carnation train,
Plucked up by some unheedy swain,
Who only thought to crop the flowr
New shot up from vernal shower;
But the fair blossom hangs the head
Side-ways as on a dying bed,
And those Pearls of dew she wears,
Prove to be presaging tears
Which the sad morn had let fall
On her hastening funeral.
Gentle Lady may thy grave
Peace and quiet ever have;
After this thy travel sore
Sweet rest sease thee evermore,
That to give the world increase,
Shortened have thy own lives lease;
Here, besides the sorrowing
That thy noble House does bring,
Here be tears of perfect moan
Weept for thee in Helicon,
And some Flowers, and some Bays,
For thy Hears to strew the ways,
Sent thee from the banks of Came,
Devoted to thy virtuous name;
Whilst thou bright Saint high sit'st in glory.
Next her much like to thee in story,
That fair Syrian Shepherdess,
Who after years of barrenness,
The highly favored Joseph bore
To him that served for her before,
And at her next birth much like thee,
Through pangs fled to felicity,
Far within the boosom bright
Of blazing Majesty and Light,
There with thee, new welcome Saint,
Like fortunes may her soul acquaint,
With thee there clad in radiant sheen,
No Marchioness, but now a Queen.
SONG.
On May Morning.
NOw the bright morning Star, Days harbinger,
Comes dancing from the East, and leads with her
The Flowery May, who from her green lap throws
The yellow Cowslip, and the pale Primrose.
Hail bounteous May that do inspire
Mirth and youth and warm desire,
Woods and Groves are of thy dressing,
Hill and Dale does boast thy blessing.
Thus we salute thee with our early Song,
And welcome thee, and wish thee long.
On Shakespeare. 1630.
WHat needs my Shakespeare for his honored Bones,
The labor of an age in piled Stones,
Or that his hallowed relics should be hid
Under a Star-ypointing Pyramid?
Dear son of memory, great heir of Fame,
What need'st thou such weak witness of thy name?
Thou in our wonder and astonishment
Have built thy self a live-long Monument.
For whilst to th'shame of slow-endeavouring art,
Thy easy numbers flow, and that each heart
Has from the le^res of thy unvalu'd Book,
Those Delphick lines with deep impression took,
Then thou our fancy of it self bereaving,
Do make us Marble with too much conceaving;
And so Sepulcher'd in such pomp do lie,
That Kings for such a Tomb would wish to die.
On the University Carrier, who sickn'd in the time of his vacancy, being
forbid to go to London, by reason of the Plague.
HEre lies old Hobson, Death has broke his girt,
And here alas, has laid him in the dirt,
Or else the ways being foul, twenty to one,
He Is here stuck in a slough, and overthrown.
'Twas such a shifter, that if truth were known,
Death was half glad when he had got him down;
For he had any time this ten years full,
Dodg'd with him, betwixt Cambridge and the Bull.
And surely, Death could never have prevailed,
Had not his weekly course of carriage failed;
But lately finding him so long at home,
And thinking now his journeys end was (...)
And that he had taken up his latest (...)
In the kind office of a Chamberlin
Showed him his room where he must lodge that night,
Pulled off his Boots, and took away the light:
If any ask for him, it shall be fed,
Hobson has supt, and's newly gone to bed.
Another on the same.
HEre lies one who did most truly prove,
That he could never die while he could move,
So hung his destiny never to rot
While he might still jogg on and keep his trot,
Made of sphear-metal, never to decay
Until his revolution was at stay.
Time numbers motion, yet (without a crime
Against old truth) motion numbered out his time:
And like an Engine moved with wheel and weight,
His principles being ceast, he ended strait,
Rest that gives all men life, gave him his death,
And too much breathing put him out of breath;
Nor were it contradiction to affirm
Too long vacation hastened on his term.
Merely to drive the ^ime away he sickn'd,
Fainted, and died, nor would with Ale be quickn'd,
Nay, quoth he, on his swooning bed out-stretch'd,
If I may not carry, sure I Will never be fetched,
But vow though the cross Doctors all stood hearers,
For one Carrier put down to make six bearers.
Ease was his chief disease, and to judge right,
He di'd for heavinefs that his Cart went light,
His leisure told him that his time was com,
And lack of load, made his life burdensome,
That even to his last breath (there be that say it)
As he were pressed to death, he cried more weight;
But had his doings lasted as they were,
He had been an immortal Carrier.
Obedient to the Moon he spent his date
In course reciprocal, and had his fate
Linkt to the mutual flowing of the Seas,
Yet (strange to think) his wain was his increase:
His Letters are delivered all and gone,
Only remains this superscription.
L' Allegro.
HEnce loathed Melancholy
Of Cerberus, and black(...) ^^dnight born,
In Stygian Cave forlorn.
Amongst horrid shapes, and shreiks, and fights unholy,
Find out some uncouth cell,
Where brooding darkness spreads his jealous wings,
And the night-Raven sings;
There under Ebon shades, and low-brow'd Rocks,
As ragged as thy Locks,
In dark Cimmerian desert ever dwell.
But com thou Goddess fair and free,
In Heaven ycleap'd Euphrosyne,
And by men, heart-easing Mirth,
Whom lovely Venus at a birth
With two sister Graces more
To Ivy-crowned Bacchus bore;
Or whether (as some Sager sing)
The frolic Wind that breathes the Spring.
Zephir with Aurora playing,
As he met her once a Maying,
There on Beds of Violets blew,
And fresh-blown Roses washed in dew,
Filled her with thee a daughter fair,
So (...)some, blithe, and debonair.
Haste thee (...) and bring with thee
Jest and youthful Jollity,
Quips and Cranks, and wanton Wiles,
Nods, and Becks, and Wreathed Smiles,
Such as hang on Hebe's cheek,
And love to live in dimple sleek;
Sport that wrincled Care derides,
And Laughter holding both his sides.
Com, and trip it as you go
On the light fantastic toe,
And in thy right hand lead with thee,
The Mountain Nymph, sweet Liberty;
And if I give thee honor due,
Mirth, admit me of thy crew
To live with her, and live with thee,
In unreproved pleasures free;
To hear the Lark begin his flight,
And singing startle the dull night,
From his watch-towre in the skies,
Till the dappled dawn does rise;
Then to com in spite of sorrow,
And at my window bid good morrow,
Through the weet-Briar, or the Vine,
Or the twisted Eglantine.
While the Cock with lively din,
Scatters the rear of darkness thin,
And to the stack, or the Barn door,
Stoutly struts his Dames before,
Often listening how the Hounds and Horn
Chearly rouse the slumbring morn,
From the side of some Hoar Hill,
Through the high wood echoing shrill.
Some time walking not unseen
By Hedge-row Elms, on Hillocks green,
Right against the Eastern gate,
Where the great Sun begins his state,
Roab'd in flames, and Amber light,
The clouds in thousand Liveries dight,
While the Plowman near at hand,
Whistles ore the Furrowed Land,
And the Milkmaid sings blithe,
And the Mower whets his sith,
And every Shepherd tells his tale
Under the Hawthorn in the dale.
Streit mine eye has caught new pleasures
Whilst the Lantskip round it measures,
Run(...) Lawns, and Fallows Gray,
Where (...) flocks do stray,
Mountains on whose ^^rren breast
The laboring clouds do often rest:
Meadows trim with Daisies pide,
Shallow Brooks, and Rivers wide.
Towers, and Battlements it sees
Boosom'd high in tufted Trees,
Where perhaps some beauty lies,
The Cynosure of neighboring eyes.
Hard by, a Cottage chimney smokes,
From betwixt two aged Oaks,
Where Corydon and Thyrsis met,
Are at their savory dinner set
Of Herbs, and other Country Messes,
Which the neat-handed Phillis dresses;
And then in haste her Bower she leaves,
With Thestylis to bind the Sheaves;
Or if the earlier season lead
To the tanned Haycock in the Mead,
Some times with secure delight
The up-land Hamlets will invite,
When the merry Bells ring round,
And the jocond rebecks sound
To many a y(...)h, and many a maid,
Dancing in the Checkered shade;
And young and old com forth to pla(...)
On a Sunshine Holyday,
Till the live-long daylight fail,
Then to the Spicy Nut-brown Ale,
With stories told of many a feat,
How Faery Mab the junkets eat,
She was pincht, and pulled she sed,
And by the Friars Lanthorn led
Tells how the drudging Goblin swet,
To ern his Cream-bowle duly set,
When in one night, ere glimps of morn,
His shadowy Flale has thresh'd the Corn,
That ten day-labourers could not end,
Then lies him down the Lubbar Fend.
And stretched out all the Chimney's length,
Basks at the fire his hairy strength;
And Crop-full out of doors he flings,
Ere the first Cock his Mattin rings.
Thus done the Tales, to bed they creep,
By whispering Winds soon lulled asleep.
Towred Cities please us then,
And the busy humm of men,
Where throngs of Knights and Barons^
In wards of Peace high triumphs hold,
With store (...), whose bright eyes
Rain influence, and judge the prise,
Of Wit, or Arms, while both contend
To win her Grace, whorn all commend,
There let Hymen often appear
In Saffron robe, with Taper clear,
And pomp, and feast, and revelry,
With mask, and antique Pageantry,
Such sights as youthful Poets dream
On Summer eeves by haunted stream.
Then to the well-trod stage anon,
If Jonsons learned Sock be on,
Or sweetest Shakespeare fancies child,
Warble his native Wood-notes wild,
And ever against eating Cares,
Lap me in soft Lydian Aires,
Married to immortal verse
Such as the meeting soul may pierce
In notes, with many a winding bout
Of lincked sweetness long drawn out,
With wanton heed, and giddy cunning,
The melting voice through mazes running;
Untwisting (...)e chains that ty
The hidden soul of harmony.
That Orpheus self may heave his h(...)
From golden slumber on a bed
Of heapt Elysian flowers, and hear
Such streins as would have won the ear
Of Pluto, to have quite set free
His half regained Eurydice.
These delights, if thou can give,
Mirth with thee, I mean to live.
Il Penseroso.
HEnce vain deluding joys,
The brood of folly without father bred,
How little you bested,
Or fill the fixed mind with all your toys;
Dwell in some idle brain,
And fancies fond with gaudy shapes possess,
As thick and numberless
As the gay motes that people the Sun Beams,
Or likest hovering dreams
The fickle Pensioners of Morpheus train.
(...)ail thou Goddess, sage and holy,
Hail divinest Melancholy,
Whose Saintly (...) is too bright
To hit the Sense of human sight;
And therefore to our weaker view,
Ore laid with black staid Wisdoms hue.
Black, but such as in esteem,
Prince Memnons sister might beseem,
Or that starr'd Ethiope Queen that strove
To set her beauties praise above
The Sea Nymphs, and their powers offended,
Yet thou art higher far descended,
Thee bright-hair'd Vesta long of yore,
To solitary Saturn bore;
His daughter she (in Saturns reign,
Such mixture was not held a stain)
Often in glimmering Bowres, and glades
He met her, and in secret shades
Of woody Ida's inmost grove,
While yet there was no fear of Jove.
Com pensive Nun, devout and pure,
Sober, steadfast, and demure,
All in a robe of darkest grain,
Flowing with majestic train,
And sable stole of Cipres Lawn,
Over thy decent shoulders drawn.
Com, but keep thy wonted state,
With eev'n step, and musing gate,
And looks commercing with the skies,
Thy rapt soul sitting in thine eyes:
There held in holy passion still,
Forget thy self to Marble, till
With a sad Leaden downward cast,
Thou fix them on the earth as fast.
And join with thee calm Peace, and Quiet,
Spare Fast, that often with gods does diet,
And hears the Muses in a ring,
Ay round about Joves Altar sing.
And add to these retired leisure;
That in trim Gardens takes his pleasure;
But first, and chiefest, with thee bring,
Him that you soars on golden wing,
Guiding the fiery-wheeled throne,
The Cherub Contemplation,
And the mute Silence hist along,
'Less Philomel will deign a Song,
In her sweetest, saddest plight,
Smoothing the rugged brow of night,
(...)e Cynthia checks her Dragon yoke,
Gen(...)'re th'accustom'd Oak;
Sweet Bird that (...)nn'st the noise of folly,
Most musical, most Melancholy!
Thee Chauntress often the Woods among,
I woo to hear thy Even-Song;
And missing thee, I walk unseen
On the dry smooth-shaven Green,
To behold the wandering Moon,
Riding near her highest noon,
Like one that had bin led astray
Through the Heavens wide pathles way;
And often, as if her head she bowed,
Stooping through a fleecy cloud.
Often on a Plat of rising ground,
I hear the far-off Curfeu sound,
Over some wide-water'd shore,
Swinging slow with sullen roar;
Or if the Air will not permit,
Some still removed place will fit,
Where glowing Embers through the room
Teach light to counterfeit a gloom,
Far from all resort of mirth.
Save the Cricket on the hearth,
Or the Belmans drowsy charm,
To bless the doors from nightly harm:
Or let my Lamp at midnight hour,
Be seen in some high lonely Towr
Where I may often out-watch the Bear,
With thrice great Hermes, or unsphear.
The spirit of Plato to unfold
What Worlds, or what vast Regions hold
The immortal mind that has forsook
Her mansion in this fleshly nook:
And of those Demons that are found
In fire, air, flood, or under ground,
Whose power has a true consent
With Planet, or with Element.
Some time let Gorgeous Tragedy
In Sceptered Pall com sweeping by,
Presenting Thebs, or Pelops line,
Or the tale of Troy divine.
Or what (though rare) of later age,
Ennobled has the Buskind stage.
But, O sad Virgin, that thy power
Might raise Musaeus from his bower,
Or bid the soul of Orpheus sing
Such notes as warbled to the string,
Drew Iron tears down Pluto's cheek,
And ^^de Hell grant what Love did seek.
Or call up (...) left half told
The story of Cambu^can bold,
Of Camball, and of Algarsife,
And who had Canace to wife,
That owned the virtuous Ring and Glass,
And of the wondrous Horse of Brass,
On which the Tartar King did ride;
And if ought else, great Bards beside,
In sage and solemn tunes have sung,
Of Turneys and of Trophies hung;
Of Forests, and enchantments drear,
Where more is meant then meets the ear,
Thus night often see me in thy pale career,
Till civil-suited Morn appeer,
Not trickt and frounc't as she was wont,
With the Attick Boy to hunt,
But Cherchef't in a comely Cloud,
While rocking Winds are Piping loud,
Or ushered with a shower still,
When the gust has blown his fill,
Ending on the russling Leaves,
With minute drops from off the Eaves.
And when the Sun begins to fling
His flaring beams, me Goddess bring
To arched walks of twilight groves.
And shadows brown that Sylvan (...)
Of Pine, or monumental Oak,
Where the rude Ax with heaved stroke,
Was never heard the Nymphs to daunt,
Or fright them from their hallowed haunt.
There in close covert by some Brook,
Where no prophaner eye may look,
Hide me from Day's garish eye,
While the Be with Honied thie,
That at her flowery work does sing,
And the Waters murmuring
With such consort as they keep,
Entice the dewy-feather'd Sleep;
And let some strange mysterious dream,
Wave at his Wings in Airy stream,
Of lively portrature displayed,
Softly on my eyelids laid.
And as I wake, sweet music breath
Above, about, or underneath,
Sent by some spirit to mortals good,
Or th'unseen Genius of the Wood.
But let my due feet never fail,
To walk the studious Cloisters pale.
And love the high embowed Roof,
With antic Pillars massy proof,
And storied Windows richly dight,
Casting a dimm religious light.
There let the pealing Organ blow,
To the full voic'd Quire below,
In Service high, and Anthems clear,
As may with sweetness, through mine car,
Dissolve me into ecstasies,
And bring all Heaven before mine eyes.
And may at last my weary age
Find out the peaceful hermitage,
The Hairy Gown and Mossy Cell,
Where I may sit and rightly spell
Of every Star that Heaven does show,
And every Herb that sips the dew;
Till old experience do attain
To something like Prophetic strain.
These pleasures Melancholy give,
And I with thee will choose to live.
SONNETS.
I.
ONightingale, that on you bloomy Spray
Warbl'st at eeve, when all the Woods are still,
Thou with fresh hope the Lovers heart do fill,
While the jolly hours lead on propitious May,
Thy liquid notes that close the eye of Day,
First heard before the shallow Cuccoo's bill
Portend success in love; O if Jove's will
Have linkt that amorous power to thy soft lay,
Now timely sing, ere the rude Bird of Hate
Foretell my hopeles doom in some Grove ny:
As thou from year to year have sung too late
For my relief; yet had no reason why,
Whether the Muse, or Love call thee his mate,
Both them I serve, and of their train am I.
II.
Donna leggiadra il cui bell nome honora
L'herbosa val di Rheno, e il nobil varco,
Been e colui d'ogni valor scarco
Qual tuo spirto gentil non innamora,
Che dolcemente mostra si di fuora
De sui atti soavi giamai parco,
E i don', che son d'amor saette ed arco.
La onde l' alta tua (...) (...).
Quando tu v^ga parli, o lieta canti
Che mover possa duro alpestre legno,
Guardi ciascun a gli occhi, ed a gli orecchi
L'entrata, chi di te si truova indegno;
Gratia sola di su glivaglia, inanti
Che'l disio amoroso al cuor s'invecchi.
III.
Qual in colle aspro, al imbrunir di sera
L'avezza givvinetta pastorella
Va bagnando l'herbetta strana e bella
Che mal si spande a disusata spera
Fuor di sua natia alma primavera,
Cosi amor meco insu la lingua suella
Desta il fior novo di strania favella,
Mentre io di te, vezzosamente altera,
Canto, dal mio buon popol non inteso
E'l bell Tamigi cangio col bell Arno.
Amor lo volse, ed io a l'altrui peso
Seppich' Amor cosa may volse indarno.
Deh! foss' il mio cuor lento e'l duro seno
A chi pianta dal ciel si buon terreno.
Canzone.
RIdonsi done e giovani amorosi
M' accostandosi attorno, e perch scrivi,
Perch tu scrivi in lingua ignota e strana
Verseggiando d'amor, e come t'osi?
Dinne, se la tua speme sia may vana,
E de pensieri lo miglior to arrivi;
Cosi mivan burlando, altri rivi
Altri lidi t'aspettan, and altre onde
Nelle cui verdi sponde
Spuntati ad hor, ad hor a la tua chioma
L'immortal guiderdon d'eterne frondi
Perch all spalle tue soverchia soma?
Canzon dirotti, e tu per me rispondi
Dice mia Donna, e'l suo dir, e il mio euore
Questa e lingua di cui si vanta Amore.
IV.
Digdati, e te'l diro con maraviglia,
Quel ritroso io ch'amor spreggiar solea
E de suoi lacci spesso mi ridea
Giacaddi, ov'huom dabben talhor s'impiglia.
Ne treecie d'oro, ne guancia vermiglia
M' abbaglian si, ma sotto nova idea
Pellegrina bellezza che'l euor bea,
Portamenti alti honesti, e nelle ciglia
Quel sereno fulgor d' amabil nero,
Parole adorn di lingua piu d'una,
E'l cantar che di mezzo l'hemispero
Traviar ben puo la faticosa Luna,
E degli occhi suoi auventa si gran fuoco
Che l'incerar gli orecchi mi fia poco.
V.
Per certo i bei vostr'occhi, Donna mia
Esser non puo che non fian lo mio sole
Si mi percuoton forte, come ei suole
Per l'arene di Libia chi s'invia,
Mentre un caldo vapor (ne senti pria)
Da quel lato si spinge ove mi duole,
Che forse amanti nelle lor parole
Chiaman sospir; io non so che si sia:
Part rinchiusa, e turbida si cela
Scosso mi il petto, e poi n'uscendo poco
Quivi d'attorno o s'agghiaccia, o s'ingiela;
Ma quanto a gli occhi giunge e trovar loco
Tutte le notti a me suol far piovose
Finche mia Alba rivien colma di rose.
VI.
Giovane piano, e semplicetto amante
Pei che fuggir me stesso indubbio sono,
Madonna a voi del mio cuor l'humil dono
Faro divoto; io certo a prove tante
L'hebbi fedele, intrepido, costante,
De pensieri leggiadro, accorto, e buono;
Quando rugge il gran mondo, e scocca il tuono,
S'arma dise, d'intero diamante,
Tanto del forse, e d'invidia sicuro,
Ditimori, e speranze al pepol use
Quanto d'ingegno, e d' alto valor vago,
E di cetra sonora, e delle muse:
Sol troverete in tal part men duro
Ove amor mise l'insanabil ago.
VII.
How soon has time the subtle thees of youth,
Soln on his wing my three and twentieth year!
My hasting days fly on with full career,
But my late spring no bud or blossom shew'th.
Perhaps my semblance might deceive the truth,
That I to manhood am arrived so near,
And inward ripenes does much less appear,
That some more timely-happy spirits indu'th.
Yet be it less or more, or soon or slow,
It shall be still in strictest measure eev'n,
To that same lot, however mean or high,
Toward which Time leads me, and the will of Heaven;
(...), if I have grace to use it so,
As ever in my great task Masters eye.
VIII.
Captain or Colonel, or Knight in Arms,
Whose chance on these defenseless doors may fease,
If deed of honor did thee ever please,
Guard them, and him within protect from harms,
He can requite thee, for he knows the charms
That call Fame on such gentle acts as these,
And he can spread thy Name over Lands and Seas,
What ever clime the Suns bright circle warms.
Lift not thy spear against the Muses Bower,
The great Emathian Conqueror bid spare
The house of Pindarus, when Temple and Tower
Went to the ground: And the repeated air
Of sad Electra's Poet had the power
To save the Athenian Walls from ruin bare.
IX.
Lady that in the prime of earliest youth,
Wisely have shunned the broad way and the green,
And with those few art eminently seen,
That labor up the Hill of heavenly Truth,
The better part with Mary and with Ruth,
Chosen thou have, and they that overween,
And at thy growing virtues fret their splee^
No anger find in thee, but pity and ruth.
Thy care is fixed and zealously attends
To fill thy odorous Lamp with deeds of light,
And Hope that reaps not shame. Therefore be sure
Thou, when the Bridegroom with his feastfull friends
Passes to bliss at the mid hour of night,
Have gained thy entrance, Virgin wise and pure.
X.
Daughter to that good Earl, once President
Of Englands Counsel, and her Treasury,
Who lived in both, unstained with gold or fee.
And left them both, more in himself content,
Till the sad breaking of that Parliament
Broke him, as that dishonest victory
At Chaeronea, fatal to liberty
Killed with report that Old man eloquent,
Though later born, then to have known the days
Wherein your Father flourisht, yet by you,
Madam, me thinks I see him living yet;
So well your words his noble virtues praise,
That all both judge you to relate them true,
And to possess them, Honored Margaret.
XI.
A Book was was writ of late called Tetrachordon;
And wov'n close, both matter, form and style;
The Subject new: it walked the Town a while,
Numbering good intellects; now seldom por'd on.
Cries the stall-reader, bless us! what a word on
A title page is this! and some in file
Stand spelling falls, while one might walk to Mile-
End Green. Why is harder Sirs then Gordon,
Coliktto, or Macdonnel, or Galasp?
Those rugged names to our like mouths grow sleek
That would have made Quintilian stare and gasp.
Thy age, like ours, O Soul of Sir John Cheek,
Hated not Learning wors then Toad or Asp;
When thou taught'st Cambridge, and King Edward Greek.
XII. On the same.
I did but prompt the age to quit their cloggs
By the known rules of ancient liberty,
When strait a barbarous noise environs me
Of Owls and Cuckoes, Asses, Apes and Dogs.
As when those Hinds that were transformed to Froggs
Raild at Latona's twin-born progeny
Which after held the Sun and Moon in fee.
But this is got by casting Pearl to Hoggs;
That bawle for freedom in their senceless mood
And still revolt when truth would set them (...)*
License they mean when they cry liberty;
For who loves that, must first be wife and good;
But from that mark how far they roave we see
For all this wast of wealth, and loss of blood.
To Mr. H. Laws, on his Aires.
XIII.
Harry whose tuneful and well measured Song
First taught our English Music how to span
Words with just note and accent, not to scan
With Midas Ears, committing short and long;
Thy worth and skill exempts thee from the throng,
With praise enough for Envy to look wan;
To after age thou shall be writ the man,
That with smooth air could humor best our tongu
Thou honour'st Verse, and Verse must send her wing
To honor thee, the Priest of Phoebus Quire
That tun'st their happiest lines in Hymn, or Story.
Dante shall give Fame leave to set thee higher
Then his Casella, whom he wooed to sing
Met in the milder shades of Purgatory.
XIV.
When Faith and Love which parted from thee never,
Had ripened thy just soul to dwell with God,
Meekly thou did resign this earthy load
Of Death, called Life; which us from Life does sever.
Thy Works and Alms and all thy good Endeavor
Staid not behind, nor in the grave were trod;
But as Faith pointed with her golden rod,
Followed thee up to joy and bliss for ever.
Love led them on, and Faith who knew them best
Thy handmaids, clad them over with purple beams
And azure wings, that up they flew so dressed,
And speak the truth of thee on glorious Theams
Before the Judge, who thenceforth bid thee rest
And drink thy fill of pure immortal streams.
On the late Massacher in Piemont.
XV.
Avenge O Lord thy slaughtered Saints, whose bones
Lie scattered on the Alpine mountains cold,
Even them who kept thy truth so pure of old
When all our Fathers worshiped Stocks and Stones,
Forget not: in thy book record their groans
Who were thy Sheep and in their ancient Fold
Slain by the bloody Piemontese that rolled
Mother with Infant down the Rocks. Their (...) is
The Vales redoubled to the Hills, and they
To Heaven. Their martyred blood and ashes so
Over all the Italian fields where still does sway
The triple Tyrant: that from these may grow
A hunder'd-fold, who having learnt thy way
Early may fly the Babylonian woe.
XVI.
When I consider how my light is spent,
E're half my days, in this dark world and wide,
And that one Talent which is death to hide,
Lodged with me useless, though my Soul more bent
To serve therewith my Maker, and present
My true account, least he returning chide,
Does God exact day labor, light denied,
I fondly ask; But patience to prevent
That murmur, soon replies, God does not need
Either man's work or his own gifts, who best
Bear his mild yoke, they serve him best, his State
Is Kingly. Thousands at his bidding speed
And post over Land and Ocean without rest:
They also serve who only stand and wait.
XVII.
I w(...)e of virtuous Father virtuous Son,
Now that the Fields are dank, and ways are mire,
Where shall we sometimes meet, and by the fire
Help wast a sullen day; what may be won
From the hard Season gaining: time will run
On smoother, till Favonius re-inspire
The frozen earth; and cloth in fresh attire
The Lilly and Rose, that neither sowed nor spun.
What neat repast shall feast us, light and choice,
Of Attick taste, with Wine, whence we may rise
To hear the Lute well touched, or artfull voice
Warble immortal Notes and Tuskan Air?
He who of those delights can judge, And spare
To interpose them often, is not unwise.
XVIII.
Cyriack, whose Grandsire on the Royal Bench
Of British Themis, with with no mean applause
Pronounced and in his volumes taught our Laws,
Which others at their Bar so often wrench;
To day deep thoughts resolve with me to drench
In mirth, that after no repenting draws;
Let Euclid rest and Archimedes pause,
And what the Swede intend, and what the French.
To measure life, learn thou betimes, and know
Toward solid good what leads the nearest way
For other things mild Heaven a time ordains,
And disapproves that care, though wise in show,
That with superfluous burden loads the day,
And when God sends a cheerful hour, refrains.
XIX.
Methought I saw my late espoused Saint
Brought to me like Alcestis from the grave,
Whom Joves great Son to her glad Husband gave,
Rescued from death by force though pale and faint.
Mine as whom washed from spot of childbed taint,
Purification in the old Law did save,
And such, as yet once more I trust to have
Full sight of her in Heaven without restraint,
Came vested all in white, pure as her mind:
Her face was veiled, yet to my fancied sight,
Love, sweetness, goodness, in her person shined
So clear, as in no face with more delight.
But O as to embrace me she inclined
I waked, she fled, and day brought back my night.
The Fifth Ode of Horace. Lib. I.
Quis multa gracilis te puer in Rosa,
Rendered almost word for word without Rhyme according to the Latin Measure, as
near as the Language will permit.
WHat slender Youth bedewed with liquid odours
Courts thee on Roses in some pleasant Cave,
Pyrrha for whom bindst thou
In wreaths thy golden Hair,
Plain in thy neatness; O how often shall he
On Faith and changed Gods complain: and Seas
Rough with black winds and storms
Unwonted shall admire:
Who now enjoyes thee credulous, all Gold,
Who always vacant always amiable
Hopes thee; of flattering gales
Unmindfull. Hapless they
To whom thou untried seem fair. Me in my vowed
Picture the sacred wall declares to have hung
My dank and dropping weeds
To the stern God of Sea.
AD PYRRHAM. Ode V.
Horatius ex Pyrrhae illecebris tanquam e naufragio enataverat, cujus amore
irretitos, affirmat esse miseros..

QUis multa gracilis te puer in rosa
Perfusus liquidis urget odoribus,
Grato, Pyrrha, sub antro?
Cui flavam religas comam
Simplex munditie? heu quoties fidem
Mutatosque deos flebit, and aspera
Nigris aequora ventis
Emirabitur insolens,
Qui nunc te fruitur credulus aurea:
Qui semper vacuam, semper amabilem
Sperat, nescius aurae
Fallacis. miseri quibus
Intentata nites. me tabula sacer
Votiva paries indicat uvida
Suspendisse potenti
Vestimenta maris Deo.
Anno Aetatis 19. At a Vacation Exercise in the College, part Latin, part
English. The Latin speeches ended, the English thus began.
HAil native Language, that by sinews weak
Did move my first endeavoring tongue to speak,
And made imperfect words with childish tripp s,
Half unpronounc't, slide through my infant-lipps,
Driving dum silence from the portal door,
Where he had mutely sat two years before:
Here I salute thee and thy pardon ask,
That now I use thee in my latter task:
Small loss it is that thence can come unto thee,
I know my tongue but little Grace can do thee:
Thou needst not be ambitious to be first,
Believe me I have thither packt the worst:
And, if it happen as I did forecast,
The daintest dishes shall be served up last.
I pray thee then deny me not thy aid
For this same small neglect that I have made:
But haste thee strait to do me once a Pleasure,
And from thy wardrope bring thy chiefest treasure;
Not those new fangled toys, and triming slight
Which takes our late fantasticks with delight,
But cull those richest Robes, and gay'st attire
Which deepest Spirits, and choicest Wits desire:
I have some naked thoughts that rove about
And loudly knock to have their passage out;
And weary of their place do only stay
Till thou have decked them in thy best array;
That so they may without suspect or fears
Fly swif^y to this fair Assembly's ears;
Yet I had rather if I were to choose,
Thy service in some graver subject use,
Such as may make thee search thy coffers round,
Before thou cloth my fancy in fit sound:
Such where the deep transported mind may soar
Above the wheeling poles, and at Heavens door
Look in, and see each blissful Deity
How he before the thunderous throne does lie,
Listening to what unshorn Apollo sings
To th'touch of golden wires, while Hebe brings
Immortal Nectar to her Kingly Sire:
Then passing through the Spherse of watchful fire,
And mistie Regions of wide air next under,
And hills of Snow and lofts of piled Thunder,
May tell at length how green-ey'd Neptune raves,
In Heavens defiance mustering all his waves;
Then sing of secret things that came to pass
Wh(...)eldam Nature in her cradle was;
And last of Kings and Queens and Hero's old,
Such as the wise Demodocus once told
In solemn Songs at King Alcinous feast,
While sad Ulisses soul and all the rest
Are held with his melodious harmony
In willing chains and sweet captivity.
But fie my wandering Muse how thou do stray!
Expectance calls thee now another way,
Thou know it must be now thy only bent
To keep in compass of thy Predicament:
Then quick about thy purposed business come,
That to the next I may resign my Room.
Then Ens is represented as Father of the Praedicaments his ten Sons, whereof
the Eldest stood for Substance with his Canons, which Ens thus speaking,
explains.
GOod luck befriend thee Son; for at thy birth
The Faiery Ladies daunc't upon the hearth;
Thy drowsy Nurse has sworn she did them spy
Come tripping to the Room where thou did lie;
And sweetly singing round about thy Bed
Strew all their blessings on thy sleeping Head.
She heard them give thee this, that thou should still
From eyes of mortals walk invisible,
Yet there is something that does force my fear,
For once it was my dismal hap to hear
A Sybil old, bow-bent with crooked age,
That far events full wisely could presage,
And in times long and dark Prospective Glass
Foresaw what future days should bring to pass,
Your Son, said she, (nor can you it prevent)
Shall subject be to many an Accident.
Over all his Brethren he shall Reign as King,
Yet every one shall make him underling,
And those that cannot live from him asunder
Ungratefully shall strive to keep him under,
In worth and excellence he shall out-go them,
Yet being above them, he shall be below them;
From others he shall stand in need of nothing,
Yet on his Brothers shall depend for Clothing.
To find a Foe it shall not be his hap,
And peace shall lull him in her flowery lap;
Yet shall he live in strife, and at his door
Devouring war shall never cease to roar:
Yea it shall be his natural property
To ha(...)our those that are at enmity.
What power, what force, what mighty spell, if not
Your learned hands, can loose this Gordian knot?
The next Quantity and Quality, spoke in Prose, then Relation was called by his
Name.
RIvers arise; whether thou be the Son,
Of utmost Tweed, or Oose, or gulphie Dun,
Or Tren^, who like some earth-born Giant spreads
His thirty Arms along the indented Meads,
Or sullen Mole that runs underneath,
Or Severn swift, guilty of Maidens death,
Or Rockie Avon, or of Sedgie Lee,
Or Coaly Tine, or ancient hollowed Dee,
Or Humber loud that keeps the S^ythians Name,
Or Medway smooth, or Royal Towred Them.
The rest was Prose.
On the new forcers of Conscience under Long PARLIAMENT.
BEcause you have thrown of your Prelate Lord,
And with stiff Vows renounced his Liturgy
To seize the widdow'd whore Plurality
From them whose sin ye envied, not abhorred,
Dare ye for this adjure the Civil Sword
To force our Consciences that Christ set free,
And ride us with a classic Hierarchy
Taught ye by mere A. S. and Rotherford?
Men whose Life, Learning, Faith and pure intent
Would have been held in high esteem with Paul
Must now be named and printed Heretics
By shallow Edwards and Scotch what do you call:
But we do hope to find out all your tricks,
Your plots and packing wors then those of Trent,
That so the Parliament
May with their wholesome and preventive Shears
Clip your Phylacteries, though bank your Ears,
And succor our just Fears
When they shall read this clearly in your charge
New Presbyter is but Old Priest writ Large.
ARCADES.
Part of an Entertainment presented to the Countess Dowager of Darby at
Harefield, by some Noble Persons of her Family, who appear on the Scene in
Pastoral Habit, moving toward the seat of State, with this Song.
1. SONG.
LOok Nymphs, and Shepherds look,
What sudden blaze of Majesty
Is that which we from hence descry
Too divine to be mistook:
This this is she
To whom our vows and wishes bend,
Here our solemn search has end.
Fame that her high worth to raise,
Seemed erst so lavish and profuse,
We may justly now accuse
Of detraction from her praise,
Less then half we find expressed,
Envy bid conceal the rest.
Mark what radiant state she spreds,
In circle round her shining throne,
Shooting her beams like silver threads,
This this is she alone,
Sitting like a Gods bright,
In the center of her light.
Might she the wise Latona be,
Or the towred Cybele,
Mother of a hundred gods;
Juno dare's not give her odds;
Who had thought this clime had held
A deity so unparalleled?
As they com forward, the Genius of the Wood appears, and turning toward them,
speaks.
Genesis Stay gentle Swains, for though in this disguise,
I see bright honor sparkle through your eyes,
Of famous Arcady ye are, and sprung
Of that renowned flood, so often sung,
Divine Alpheus, who by secret sluse,
Stole under Seas to meet his Arethuse;
And ye the breathing Roses of the Wood,
Fair silver-buskin'd Nymphs as great and good,
I know this quest of yours, and free intent
Was all in honor and devotion meant
To the great Mistres of you princely shrine,
Whom with low reverence I adore as mine,
And with all helpful service will comply
To further this nights glad solemnity;
And lead ye where ye may more near behold
What shallow searching Fame has left untold;
Which I full often amidst these shades alone
Have sat to wonder at, and gaze upon:
For know by lot from Jove I am the power
Of this fair Wood, and live in Oak'n bowr,
To nurse the Saplings tall, and curl the grove.
With Ringlets quaint; and wanton windings wove.
And all my Plants I save from nightly ill,
Of noisome winds, and blasting vapors chill.
And from the Boughs brush off the evil dew,
And heal the harms of thwarting thunder blew,
Or what the cross dire-looking Planet smites,
Or hurtful Worm with cankered venom bites.
When Evening gray does rise, I fetch my round
Over the mount, and all this hallowed groun'd,
And early ere the odorous breath of morn
Awakes the slumbring leaves, or tasseld horn
Shakes the high thicket, haste I all about,
Number my ranks, and visit every sprout
With puissant words, and murmurs made to bless,
But else in deep of night when drowfines
Has locked up mortal sense, then listen I
To the celestical Sirens harmony,
That sit upon the nine enfolded Spears,
And sing to those that hold the vital shears,
And turn the Adamantine spindle round,
On which the fate of gods and men is wound.
Such sweet compulsion does in musickly,
To lull the daughters of Necessity,
And keep unsteddy Nature to her law,
And the low world in measured motion draw
After the heavenly tune, which none can hear
Of human mould with gross unpurged ear;
And yet such music worthiest were to blaze
The peerles height of her immortal praise,
Whose luster leads us, and for her most fit,
If my inferior hand or voice could hit
Inimitable sounds, yet as we go,
What ere the skill of lesser gods can show,
I will assay, her worth to celebrate,
And so attend ye toward her glittering state;
Where ye may all that are of noble stemm
Approach, and kiss her sacred vestures hemm.
2. SONG.
Over the smooth enameled green
Where no print of step has been,
Follow me as I sing,
And touch the warbled string.
Under the shady roof
Of branching Elm-Star-proof.
Follow me,
I will bring you where she sits
Clad in splendour as befits
Her deity.
Such a rural Queen
All Arcadia has not seen.
3. SONG.
NYmphs and Shepherds dance no more
By sandy Ladons Lillied banks,
On old Lycaeus or Cyllene hoar,
Trip no more in twilight ranks,
Though Erymanth your loss deplore,
A better soil shall give ye thanks.
From the stony Maenalus,
Bring your Flocks, and live with us,
Here ye shall have geater grace,
To serve the Lady of this place.
Though Syrinx your Pans Mistress were,
Yet Syrinx well might wait on her.
Such a rural Queen
All Arcadia has not seen,
LYCIDAS.
In this Monody the Author bewails a learned Friend, unfortunately drowned in
his passage from Chester on the Irish Seas, 1637. And by occasion foretells the
ruin of our corrupted Clergy then in their height.

YEt once more, O ye Laurels, and once more
Ye Myrtles brown, with Ivy never sear,
I com to pluck your Berries harsh and crude,
And with forced fingers rude,
Shatter your leaves before the mellowing year.
Bitter constraint, and sad occasion dear,
Compells me to disturb your season due:
For Lycidas is dead, dead ere his prime,
Young Lycidas, and has not left his peer:
Who would not sing for Lycidas? he knew
Himself to sing, and build the lofty rhyme.
He must not flote upon his watery bear
Unwept, and welter to the parching wind,
Without the meed of some melodious tear.
Begin then, Sisters of the sacred well,
That from beneath the seat of Jove does spring,
Begin, and somewhat loudly sweep the string.
Hence with denial vain, and coy excuse,
So may some gentle Muse
With lucky words favor my destined Urn,
And as he passes turn,
And bid fair peace be to my sable shroud.
For we were nursed upon the self-same hill,
Fed the same flock; by fountain, shade, and rill.
Together both, ere the high Lawns appeared
Under the opening eyelids of the morn,
We drove a field, and both together heard
What time the Gray-fly winds her sultry horn,
Batt'ning our flocks with the fresh dews of night,
Often till the Star that rose, at Evening, bright,
Toward Heavens descent had slop'd his westering wheel.
Mean while the Rural ditties were not mute,
Tempered to the Oaten Flute,
Rough Satyrs danced, and Fauns with clov'n heel,
From the glad sound would not be absent long,
And old Damaetas loved to hear our song.
But O the heavy change, now thou art gone,
Now thou art gone, and never must return!
Thee Shepherd, thee the Woods, and desert Caves,
With wild Thyme and the gadding Vine o'regrown,
And all their echoes mourn.
The Willows, and the Hazle Copses green,
Shall now no more be seen,
Fanning their joyous Leaves to thy soft lays.
As killing as the Canker to the Rose,
Or Taint-worm to the weanling Herds that graze,
Or Frost to Flowers, that their gay wardrop wear,
When first the White Thorn blows;
Such, Lycidas, thy loss to Shepherds ear.
Where were ye Nymphs when the remorseless deep
Closed over the head of your loved Lycidas?
For neither were ye playing on the steep,
Where your old Bards, the famous Druids, ly,
Nor on the shaggy top of Mona high,
Nor yet where Deva spreads her wisard stream:
Ay me, I fondly dream!
Had ye bin there -- for what could that have don?
What could the Muse her self that Orpheus bore,
The Muse her self for her enchanting son
Whom Universal nature did lament,
When by the rout that made the hideous roar,
His goary visage down the stream was sent,
Down the swift Hebrus to the Lesbian shore.
Alas! What boots it with uncessant care
To end the homely slighted Shepherds trade,
And strictly meditate the thankless Muse,
Were it not better don as others use,
To sport with Amaryllis in the shade,
Or with the tangles of Neaera's hair?
Fame is the spur that the clear spirit does raise
(That last infirmity of Noble mind)
To scorn delights, and live laborious days;
But the fair Guerdon when we hope to find,
And think to burst out into sudden blaze,
Comes the blind Fury with th'abhorred shears,
And slits the thin spun life. But not the praise,
Phoebus replied, and touched my trembling ears;
Fame is no plant that grows on mortal soil,
Nor in the glistering foil
Set off to the world, nor in broad rumor lies,
But lives and spreds aloft by those pure eyes,
And perfet witness of all-judging Jove;
As he pronounces lastly on each deed,
Of so much fame in Heaven expect thy meed.
O Fountain Arethuse, and thou honored flood,
Smooth-sliding Mincius, crowned with vocal reeds,
That strain I heard was of a higher mood:
But now my Oat proceeds,
And listens to the Herald of the Sea
That came in Neptune's plea,
He asked the Waves, and asked the Fellon Winds,
What hard mishap has doomed this gentle swain?
And questioned every gust of rugged wings
That blows from off each beaked Promontory;
They knew not of his story,
And sage Hippotades their answer brings,
That not a blast was from his dungeon strayed,
The Air was calm, and on the level brine,
Sleek Panope with all her sisters played.
It was that fatal and perfidious Bark
Built in th'eclipse, and rigged with curses dark,
That sunk so low that sacred head of thine.
Next Camus, reverend Sire, went footing slow,
His Mantle hairy, and (...) Bonnet sedge,
Inwrought with figures ^im, and on the edge
Like to that sanguine flower inscribed with woe.
Ah; Who has rest (quoth he) my dearest pledge?
Last came, and last did go,
The Pilot of the Galilean lake,
Two massy Keys he bore of metals twain,
(The Golden opes, the Iron shuts amain)
He shook his Miter'd locks, and stern bespake,
How well could I have spared for thee, young swain,
Anow of such as for their bellies sake,
Creep and intrude, and climb into the fold?
Of other care they little reckoning make,
Then how to scramble at the shearers feast,
And shove away the worthy bidden guest;
Blind mouths! that scarce themselves know how to hold
A Sheep-hook, or have learned ought else the least
That to the faithful Herdmans art belongs!
What recks it them? What need they? They are sped;
And when they list, their lean and flashy songs
Grate on their scrannel Pipes of wretched straw,
The hungry Sheep look up, and are not fed,
But swollen with wind, and the rank mist they draw,
Rot inwardly, and foul contagion spread:
Besides what the grim Woolf with privy paw
Daily devours apace, and nothing sed,
that two-handed engine at the door,
Stands ready to smite once, and smite no more.
Return Alpheus, the dread voice is past,
That shrunk thy streams; Return Sicilian Muse,
And call the Vales, and bid them hither cast
Their Bells, and Flourets of a thousand hues.
Ye valleys low where the mild whispers use,
Of shades and wanton winds, and gushing brooks,
On whose fresh lap the swart Star sparely looks,
Throw hither all your quaint enameld eyes,
That on the green terf suck the honied showers,
And purple all the ground with vernal flowers.
Bring the rathe Primrose that forsaken dies.
The tufted Crow-toe, and pale Gessamine,
The white Pink, and the Pansie freakt with jeat,
The glowing Violet.
The Musk-rose, and the well attired Woodbine,
With Cowslips wan that hang the pensive head,
And every flower that sad embroidery wears:
Bid Amarantus all his beauty shed,
And Daffadillies fill their cups with tears,
To strew the Laureat Hearse where Lycid lies.
For so to interpose a little ease,
Let our frail thoughts dally with false surmise.
Ay me! Whilst thee the shores, and sounding Sea
Wash far away, where ere thy bones are hurled,
Whether beyond the stormy Hebrides
Where thou perhaps under the whelming tide
Visit'st the bottom of the monstrous world;
Or whether thou to our moist vows denied,
Sleep'st by the fable of Bellerus old,
Where the great vision of the guarded Mount
Looks toward Namancos and Bayona's hold;
Look homeward Angel now, and melt with ruth.
And, O ye Dolphins, waft the haples youth.
Weep no more, woeful Shepherds weep no more,
For Lycidas your sorrow is not dead,
Sunk though he be beneath the watery floar,
So sinks the day star in the Ocean bed,
And yet anon repairs his drooping head,
And tricks his beams, and with new spangled Ore,
Flames in the forehead of the morning sky:
So Lycidas sunk low, but mounted high,
Through the dear might of him that walked the waves
Where other groves, and other streams along,
With Nectar pure his oozy Lock's he laves,
And hears the unexpressive nuptial Song,
In the blessed Kingdoms meek of joy and love.
There entertain him all the Saints above,
In solemn troops, and sweet Societies
That sing, and singing in their glory move,
And wipe the tears for ever from his eyes.
Now Lycidas the Shepherds weep no more;
Henceforth thou art the Genius of the shore,
In thy large recompense, and shall be good
To all that wander in that perilous flood.
Thus sang the uncouth Swain to the Oaks and rills,
While the still morn went out with Sandals gray,
He touched the tender stops of various Quills,
With eager thought warbling his Dorick lay:
And now the Sun had stretched out all the hills,
And now was dropped into the Western Bay;
At last he rose, and twitch'd his Mantle blew:
To morrow to fresh Woods, and Pastures new.
A MASK PRESENTED At LUDLOW-CASTLE, 1634. etc.
The first Scene discovers a wild Wood.
The attendant Spirit descends or enters.
BEfore the starry threshold of Joves Court
My mansion is, where those immortal shape
Of bright atreal Spirits live insphear'd
In Regions mild of calm and serene Air,
Above the smoke and stir of this dim spot,
Which men call Earth, and with low-thoughted care
Confined, and pestered in this pin-fold here,
Strive to keep up a frail, and Feverish being
Unmindfull of the crown that Virtue gives
After this mortal change, to her true Servants
Amongst the enthroned gods on Sainted seats.
Yet some there be that by due steps aspire
To lay their just hands on that Golden Key
That ope's the Palace of Eternity:
To such my errand is, and but for such,
I would not soil these pure Ambrosial weeds,
With the rank vapors of this Sin-worn mould.
But to my task. Neptune besides the sway
Of every salt Flood, and each ebbing stream,
Took in by lot 'twixt high, and nether Jove,
Imperial rule of all the Sea-girt Isles
That like to rich, and various gemms inlay
The unadorned boosom of the Deep,
Which he to grace his tributary gods
By course commits to several government,
And gives them leave to wear their Sapphire crowns,
And weild their little tridents, but this I Will
The greatest, and the best of all the main
He quarters to his blu-hair'd deities,
And all this tract that fronts the falling Sun
A noble Peer of mickle trust, and power
Has in his charge, with tempered awe to guide
An old, and haughty Nation proud in Arms:
Where his fair offspring nurs't in Princely lore,
Are coming to attend their Fathers state,
And new-entrusted Scepter, but their way
Lies through the perplex't paths of this drear Wood,
The nodding horror of whose shady brows
Threats the forlorn and wandering Passinger.
And here their tender age might suffer peril,
But that by quick command from Soveran Jove
I was dispatched for their defense, and guard;
And listen why, for I will tell you now
What never yet was heard in Tale or Song
From old, or modern Bard in Hall, or Bowr.
Bacchus that first from out the purple Grape,
Crush't the sweet poison of mis-used Wine
After the Tuscan Mariners transformed
Coasting the Tyrrhene shore, as the winds listed,
On Circes Island fell (who knows not Circe
The daughter of the Sun? Whose charmed Cup
Whoever tasted, lost his upright shape,
And downward fell into a grovelling Swine)
This Nymph that gazed upon his clustring locks,
With Ivy berries wreathed, and his blithe youth,
Had by him, ere he parted thence, a Son
Much like his Father, but his Mother more,
Whom therefore she brought up and Comus named,
Who ripe, and frolic of his full grown age,
Roaving the Celtick, and Iberian fields,
At last betakes him to this ominous Wood,
And in thick shelter of black shades imbowr'd,
Excells his Mother at her mighty Art,
Offering to every weary Traveller,
His orient Liquor in a Crystal Glass,
To quench the drouth of Phoebus, which as they taste
(For most do taste through fond intemperate thirst)
Soon as the Potion works, their human countenance,
Th'express resemblance of the gods, is changed
Into some brutish form of Woolf, or Bear,
Or Ounce, or Tiger, Hog, or bearded Goat,
All other parts remaining as they were,
And they, so perfect is their misery,
Not once perceive their foul disfigurement,
But boast themselves more comely then before
And all their friends, and native home forget
To roll with pleasure in a sensual stie.
Therefore when any favored of high Jove,
Chances to pass through this adventrous glade,
Swift as the Sparkle of a glancing Star,
I shoot from Heaven to give him safe convoy,
As now I do: But first I must put off
These my sky robes spun out of Iris Wooff,
And take the Weeds and likeness of a Swain,
That to the service of this house belongs,
Who with his soft Pipe, and smooth dittied Song.
Well knows to still the wild winds when they roar,
And hush the waving Woods, nor of less faith,
And in this office of his Mountain watch,
Likeliest, and nearest to the present aid
Of this occasion. But I hear the tread
Of hateful steps, I must be viewles now.
Comus enters with a Charming Rod in one hand, his Glass in the other, with him
a rout of Monsters, headed like sundry sorts of wild Beasts, but otherwise
like Men and Women, their Apparel glistering, they come in making a riotous and
unruly noise, with Torches in their hands. Comus. The Star that bids the
Shepherd fold.
Now the top of Heaven does hold,
And the gilded Car of Day,
His glowing Axle does allay
In the steep Atlantic stream,
And the slope Sun his upward beam
Shoots against the dusky Pole,
Pacing toward the other gole
Of his Chamber in the East.
Mean while welcome Joy, and Feast,
Midnight shout, and revelry,
Tipsie dance, and Jollity.
Braid your Locks with rosy Twine
Dropping odours, dropping Wine.
Rigor now is gone to bed,
And Advice with scrupulous head,
Strict Age, and sour Severity,
With their grave Saws in slumber lie.
We that are of purer fire
Imitate the Starry Quire,
Who in their nightly watchful Spears,
Lead in swift round the Months and Years.
The Sounds, and Seas with all their finny drove
Now to the Moon in wavering Morris move,
And on the Tawny Sands and Shelves,
Trip the pert Fairies and the dapper Elves;
By dimpled Brook, and Fountain brim,
The Wood-Nymphs decked with Daisies trim,
Their merry wakes and pastimes keep:
What has night to do with sleep?
Night has better sweets to prove,
Venus now wakes, and wak'ns Love.
Com let us our rights begin,
It Is only daylight that makes Sin
Which these dun shades will never report,
Hail Goddess of Nocturnal sport
Dark veiled Cotytto, t'whom the secret flame
Of midnight Torches burns; mysterious Dame
That never art called, but when the Dragon woom
Of Stygian darkness spets her thickest gloom,
And makes one blot of all the air,
Stay thy cloudy Ebon chair,
Wherein thou rid'st with Heceat', and befriend
Us thy vowed Priests, till utmost end
Of all thy dues be done, and none left out,
Ere the blabbing Eastern scout,
The nice Morn on the Indian steep
From her cabin'd loop-hole peep,
And to the tell-tale Sun discry
Our concealed Solemnity.
Com, knit hands, and beat the ground,
In a light fantastic round.

The Measure.
Break off, break off, I feel the different pace,
Of some chaste footing near about this ground.
Run to your shrouds, within these Brakes and Trees,
Our number may affright: Some Virgin sure
(For so I can distinguish by mine Art)
Benighted in these Woods. Now to my charms,
And to my wily trains, I shall e're long
Be well stock't with as fair a herd as grazed
About my Mother Circe. Thus I hurl
My dazzling Spells into the spungy air,
Of power to cheat the eye with blear illusion,
And give it false presentiments, lest the place
And my quaint habits breed astonishment,
And put the Damsel to suspicious flight,
Which must not be, for that is against my course;
I under fair pretense of friendly ends,
And well placed words of glozing courtesy
Baited with reasons not unplausible
Wind me into the easie-hearted man,
And hug him into snares. When once her eye
Has met the virtue of this Magic dust.
I shall appear some harmles Villager
And hearken, if I may, her business here.
But here she comes, I fairly step aside
The Lady enters. This way the noise was, if mine ear be true,
My best guide now, me thought it was the sound
Of Riot, and ill managed Merriment,
Such as the jocond Flute, or gamesom Pipe
Stirs up among the loose unlettered Hinds,
When for their teeming Flocks, and granges full
In wanton dance they praise the bounteous Pan,
And thank the gods amiss. I should be loath
To meet the rudeness, and swill'd insolence
Of such late Wassailers; yet O where else
Shall I inform my unacquainted feet
In the blind mazes of this tangl'd Wood?
My Brothers when they saw me wearied out
With this long way, resolving here to lodge
Under the spreading favor of these Pines,
Stepped as they se'd to the next Thicket side
To bring me Berries, or such cooling fruit
As the kind hospitable Woods provide.
They left me then, when the gray-hooded Eev'n
Like a sad Votarist in Palmers weed
Rose from the hindmost wheels of Phoebus wain.
But where they are, and why they came not back,
Is now the labor of my thoughts, it is likeliest
They had engaged their wandering steps too far,
And envious darkness, e're they could return,
Had stole them from me, else O theevish Night
Why should thou, but for some fellonious end,
In thy dark Lantern thus close up the Stars,
That nature hung in Heaven, and filled their Lamps
With everlasting oil, to give due light
To the misled and lonely Traveller?
This is the place, as well as I may guess,
Whence eev'n now the tumult of loud Mirth
Was rife, and perfet in my listening ear,
Yet naught but single darkness do I find.
What might this be? A thousand fantasies
Begin to throng into my memory
Of calling shapes, and beckning shadows dire,
And airy tongues, that syllable men's names
On Sands, and Shoars, and desert Wildernesses.
These thoughts may startle well, but not astound
The virtuous mind, that ever walks attended
By a strong siding champion Conscience. --
O welcome pure-ey'd Faith, white-handed Hope,
Thou hovering Angel girt with golden wings,
And thou unblemish't form of Chastity,
I see ye visibly, and now believe
That he, the Supreme good, t'whom all things ill
Are but as slavish officers of vengeance,
Would send a glistring Guardian if need were
To keep my life and honor unassail'd.
Was I deceived, or did a sable cloud
Turn forth her silver lining on the night?
I did not err, there does a sable cloud
Turn forth her silver lining on the night,
And casts a gleam over this tufted Grove.
I cannot hallow to my Brothers, but
Such noise as I can make to be heard farthest
I Will venture, for my new enliv'nd spirits
Prompt me; and they perhaps are not far off.
SONG.
Sweet Echo, sweetest Nymph that liv'st unseen
Within thy airy shell
By slow Meander's margent green,
And in the violet imbroider'd vale
Where the love-lorn Nightingale
Nightly to thee her sad Song mourns well.
Can thou not tell me of a gentle Pair
That likest thy Narcissus are?
O if thou have
Hid them in some flowery Cave,
Tell me but where
Sweet Queen of Parley, Daughter of the Sphere.
So may thou be translated to the skies,
And give resounding grace to all Heavens Harmonies.
Com. Can any mortal mixture of Earths mould
Breath such Divine enchanting ravishment?
Sure something holy lodges in that breast,
And with these raptures moves the vocal air
To testify his hidd'n residence;
How sweetly did they float upon the wings
Of silence, through the empty-vaulted night
At every fall smoothing the Raven down
Of darkness till it smiled: I have often heard
My Mother Circe with the Sirens three,
Amid'st the flowry-kirtl'd Naiades
Culling their potent herbs, and balefull drugs,
Who as they sung, would take the imprisoned soul,
And lap it in Elysium, Scylla wept,
And chid her barking waves into attention,
And fell Charybdis murmured soft applause:
Yet they in pleasing slumber lulled the sense,
And in sweet madness robbed it of it self,
But such a sacred, and home-felt delight,
Such sober certainty of waking bliss
I never heard till now. I Will speak to her
And she shall be my Queen. Hail foreign wonder
Whom certain these rough shades did never breed
Unless the Gods that in rural shrine
Dwell'st here with Pan, or Silvan, by blessed Song
Forbidding every bleak unkindly Fog
To touch the prosperous growth of this tall Wood.

La. Nay gentle Shepherd ill is lost that praise
That is addressed to unattending Ears,
Not any boast of skill, but extreme shift
How to regain my severed company
Compelled me to awake the courteous Echo
To give me answer from her mossie Couch.

Co. What chance good Lady has bereft you thus?

La. Dim darkness, and this leavie Labyrinth.

Co. Could that divide you from near ushering guides?

La. They left me weary on a grassie terf.

Co. By falsehood, or discourtesie, or why?

La. To seek in the valley some cool friendly Spring.

Co. And left your fair side all unguarded Lady?

La. They were but twain, and purposed quick return.

Co. Perhaps fore-stalling night prevented them.

La. How easy my misfortune is to hit!

Co. Imports their loss, beside the present need?

La. No less then if I should my brothers loose.

Co. Were they of manly prime, or youthful bloom?

La. As smooth as Hebe's their unrazor'd lips.

Co. Two such I saw, what time the labored Ox
In his loose traces from the furrow came,
And the swink't hedger at his Supper sat;
I saw them under a green mantling vine
That crawls along the side of yon small hill,
Plucking ripe clusters from the tender shoots,
Their port was more then human, as they stood;
I took it for a faery vision
Of some gay creatures of the element
That in the colors of the Rainbow live
And play* in the plighted clouds. I was aw^strook,
And as I past, I worshipped; if those you seek
It were a journey like the path to Heaven,
To help you find them.

La. Gentle villager
What readiest way would bring me to that place?

Co. Due west it rises from this shrubby point.

La. To find out that, good Shepherd, I suppose,
In such a scant allowance of Starlight,
Would overtask the best Land-Pilots art,
Without the sure guess of well practiced feet.

Co. I know each lane, and every alley green
Dingle, or bushy dell of this wild Wood,
And every bosky bourn from side to side
My daily walks and ancient neighborhood,
And if your stray attendance be yet lodged,
Or shroud within these limits, I shall know
Ere morrow wake, or the low roosted lark
From her thatch't pallat rowse, if otherwise
I can conduct you Lady to a low
But loyal cottage, where you may be safe
Till further quest'.

La. Shepherd I take thy word,
And trust thy honest offered courtesy,
Which often is sooner found in lowly sheds
With smoaky rafters, then in tapstry Halls
And Courts of Princes, where it first was named,
And yet is most pretended: In a place
Less warranted then this, or less secure
I cannot be, that I should fear to change it,
Eye me blessed Providence, and square my trial
To my proportioned strength. Shepherd lead on. --

The two Brothers. Eld. Bro. Unmuffle ye faint Stars, and thou fair Moon
That wontst to love the travelers benizon,
Stoop thy pale visage through an amber cloud,
And disinherit Chaos, that raigns here
In double night of darkness, and of shades;
Or if your influence be quite damm'd up
With black usurping mists, some gentle taper
Though a rush Candle from the wicker hole
Of some clay habitation visit us
With thy long levelled rule of streaming light,
And thou shall be our star, of Aready,
Or Tyrian Cynosure.

2. Bro. Or if our eyes
Be barred that happiness, might we but hear
The folded flocks penned in their watled cotes,
Or sound of pastoral reed with oa^en stops,
Or whistle from the Lodge, or Village Cock
Count the night watches to his feathery Dames,
'Twould be some solace yet some little chearing
In this close dungeon of innumerous bows.
But O that haples virgin our lost sister
Where may she wander now, whether betake her
From the chill dew, amongst rude burrs and thistles?
Perhaps some cold bank is her boulster now
Or against the rugged bark of some broad Elm
Leans her unpillow'd head fraught with sad fears,
What if in wild amazement, and affright,
Or while we speak within the direful grasp
Of Savage hunger, or of Savage heat?

Eld. Bro. Peace Brother, be not over-exquisite
To cast the fashion of uncertain evils;
For grant they be so, while they rest unknown,
What need a man forestall his date of grief,
And run to meet what he would most avoid?
Or if they be but false alarms of Fear,
How bitter is such self-delusion?
I do not think my sister so to seek,
Or so unprincipl'd in virtues book,
And the sweet peace that goodness boosoms ever,
As that the single want of light and noise
(Not being in danger, as I trust she is not)
Could stir the constant mood of her calm thoughts,
And put them into mis-becoming plight.
Virtue could see to do what virtue would
By her own radiant light, though Sun and Moon
Were in the flat Sea sunk. And Wisdoms self
Often seeks to sweet retired Solitude,
Where with her best nurse Contemplation
She plumes her feathers, and lets grow her wings
That in the various bussle of resort
Were all to ruffl'd, and sometimes impaired.
He that has light within his own clear breast
May sit in the center, and enjoy bright day,
But he that hides a dark soul, and foul thoughts
Benighted walks under the midday Sun;
Himself is his own dungeon.

2. Bro. It Is most true
That musing meditation most affects
The pensive secrecy of desert cell,
Far from the cheerful haunt of men, and herds,
And sits as safe as in a Senate house,
For who would rob a Hermit of his Weeds,
His few Books, or his Beads, of Maple Dish,
Or do his gray hairs any violence?
But beauty like the fair Hesperian Tree
Laden with blooming gold, had need the guard
Of dragon watch with uninchanted eye,
To save her blossoms, and defend her fruit
From the rash hand of bold Incontinence.
You may as well spread out the unsun'd heaps
Of Misers treasure by an outlaws den,
And tell me it is safe, as bid me hope
Danger will wink on Opportunity,
And let a single helpless maiden pass
Uninjur'd in this wild surrounding wast.
Of night, or loneliness it recks me not,
I fear the dred events that dog them both,
Lest some ill greeting touch attempt the person
Of our unowned sister.

Eld. Bro. I do not, Brother,
Infer, as if I thought my sisters state
Secure without all doubt, or controversy:
Yet where an equal poise of hope and fear
Does arbitrate the event, my nature is
That I incline to hope, rather then fear,
And gladly banish squint suspicion.
My sister is not so defenseless left
As you imagine, she has a hidden strength
Which you remember not.

2. Bro. What hidden strength,
Unless the strength of Heaven, if you mean that?

Eld. Bro. I mean that too, but yet a hidden strength
Which if Heaven gave it, may be termed her own:
It Is chastity, my brother, chastity:
She that has that, is clad in complete steel,
And like a quiver'd Nymph with Arrows keen
May trace huge Forests, and unharbour'd Heaths,
Infamous Hills, and sandy perilous wilds,
Where through the sacred rays of Chastity,
No savage fierce, Bandite, or Mountaneer
Will dare to soil her Virgin purity,
Yea there, where very desolation dwells
By grots, and caverns shag'd with horrid shades,
She may pass on with unblench't majesty,
Be it not don in pride, or in presumption.
Some say no evil thing that walks by night
In fog, or fire, by lake, or moorish fen,
Blew meager Hag, or stubborn unlaid ghost,
That breaks his magic chains at curfeu time,
No Goblin, or swart Faery of the mine,
Has hurtful power over true Virginity.
Do ye believe me yet, or shall I call
Antiquity from the old Schools of Greece
To testify the arms of Chastity?
Hence had the huntress Dian her dred bow
Fair silver-shafted Queen for ever chaste,
Wherewith she tamed the brinded lioness
And spotted mountain pard, but set at naught
The frivolous bolt of Cupid, gods and men
Feared her stern frown, and she was queen oth'Woods.
What was that snaky-headed Gorgon shield
That wise Minerva wore, unconquered Virgin,
Wherewith she freez'd her foes to congealed stone?
But rigid looks of Chaste austerity,
And noble grace that dash't brute violence
With sudden adoration, and blank aw.
So dear to Heaven is Saintly chastity,
That when a soul is found sincerely so,
A thousand liveried Angels lacky her,
Driving far off each thing of sin and guilt,
And in clear dream, and solemn vision
Tell her of things that no gross ear can hear,
Till often convers with heavenly habitants
Begin to cast a beam on the outward shape,
The unpolluted temple of the mind,
And turns it by degrees to the souls essence,
Till all be made immortal: but when lust
By unchaste looks, loose gestures, and foul talk,
But most by lewd and lavish act of sin,
Lets in defilement to the inward parts,
The soul grows clotted by contagion,
Imbodies, and imbrutes, till she quite loose
The divine property of her first being.
Such are those thick and gloomy shadows damp
Often seen in Charnel vaults, and Sepulchers
Lingering, and sitting by a new made grave,
As loath to leave the Body that it loved,
And linked it self by carnal sensuality
To a degenerate and degraded state.

2. Bro. How charming is divine Philosophy!
Not ha^sh, and crabbed as dull fools suppose,
But musical as is Apollo's lute,
And a perpetual feast of nectar'd sweets,
Where no crude surfeit raigns.

Eld. Bro. List, li^, I hear
Some far of hallow break the silent Air.

2. Bro. Me thought so too; what should it be?

Eld. Bro. For certain
Either some one like us night-sounder'd here,
Or else some neighbor Wood-man, or at worst,
Some roaving Robber calling to his fellows.

2. Bro. Heaven keep my sister, again, again, and near,
Best draw, and stand upon our guard.

Eld. Bro. I Will hallow,
If he be friendly he comes well, if not,
Defense is a good cause, and Heaven be for us.
The attendant Spirit habited like a Shepherd. That hallow I should know, what
are you? speak;
Com not too near, you fall on iron stakes else.

Spir. What voice is that, my young Lord? speak again.

2. Bro. O brother, it is my father Shepherd sure.

Eld. Bro. Thyrsis? Whose artful strains have often delaid
The hudling brook to hear his madrigal,
And sweetn'd every muskrose of the dale,
How came thou here good Swain? has any Ram
slipped from the fold, or young Kid lost his dam,
Or straggling Weather the pen't flock forsook?
How could thou find this dark sequestered nook?

Spir. O my loved Masters heir, and his next joy,
I came not here on such a trivial toy
As a strayed Ewe, or to pursue the stealth
Of pilfering Woolf, not all the fleecy wealth
That does enrich these Downs, is worth a thought
To this my errand, and the care it brought.
But O my Virgin Lady, where is she?
How chance she is not in your company?

Eld. Bro. To tell thee sadly Shepherd, without blame,
Or our neglect, we lost her as we came.

Spir. Ay me unhappy then my fears are true.

El. Bro. What fears good Thyrsis? Prithee briefly show.

Spir. I Will tell ye, it is not vain or fabulous,
(Though so esteemed by shallow ignorance)
What the sage Poets taught by th'heav'nly Muse,
Storied of old in high immortal verse
Of dire Chimera's and enchanted Isles,
And rifted Rocks whose entrance leads to Hell,
For such there be, but unbelief is blind.
Within the navil of this hideous Wood,
Immured in cypress shades a Sorcerer dwells
Of Bacchus, and of Circe born, great Comus,
Deep skilled in all his mothers witcheries,
And here to every thirsty wanderer,
By sly enticement gives his baneful cup,
With many murmurs mixed, whose pleasing poison
The visage quite transforms of him that drinks,
And the inglorious likeness of a beast
Fixes instead, unmoulding reasons mintage
Charactered in the face; this have I learned
Tending my flocks hard by in the hilly crofts,
That brow this bottom glade, whence night by night
He and his monstrous rout are heard to howl
Like stabl'd wolves, or tigers at their prey,
Doing abhorred rites to Hecate
In their obscured haunts of inmost bowres,
Yet have they many baits, and guileful spells
To inveigle and invite th'unwary sense
Of them that pass unweeting by the way.
This evening late by then the chewing flocks
Had ta'n their supper on the savoury Herb
Of Knot-grass dew-besprent, and were in fold,
I sat me down to watch upon a bank
With Ivy canopied, and interwove
With flaunting Hony-suckle, and began
Wrapped in a pleasing fit of melancholy
To meditate upon my rural minstrelsie,
Till fancy had her fill, but ere a close
The wonted roar was up amidst the Woods,
And filled the Air with barbarous dissonance
At which I ceas't, and listened them a while,
Till an unusual stop of sudden silence
Gave respit to the drowsy frighted steeds
That draw the litter of close curtain'd sleep;
At last a soft and solemn breathing sound
Rose like a stream of rich distilled perfumes,
And stole upon the Air, that even Silence
Was took e're she was ware, and wished she might
Deny her nature, and be never more
Still to be so displac't. I was all ear,
And took in strains that might create a soul
Under the ribs of Death, but O ere long
Too well I did perceive it was the voice
Of my most honored Lady, your dear sister.
Amazed I stood, harrow'd with grief and fear,
And O poor hapless Nightingale thought I,
How sweet thou sing'st, how near the deadly snare!
Then down the Lawns I ran with headlong have
Through paths, and turnings oft'n trod by day,
Till guided by mine ear I found the place
Where that damned wisard hid in sly disguise
(For so by certain signs I knew) had met
Already, ere my best speed could prevent,
The aidless innocent Lady his wished prey,
Who gently ask't if he had seen such two,
Supposing him some neighbor villager;
Longer I durst not stay, but soon I guess't
Ye were the two she meant, with that I sprung
Into swift flight, till I had found you here,
But further know I not.

2. Bro. O night and shades,
How are ye joined with Hell in tripple knot
Against th'unarmed weakness of one Virgin
Alone, and helpless! is this the confidence
You gave me Brother?

Eld. Bro. Yes, and keep it still,
Lean on it safely, not a period
Shall be unsaid for me: against the threats
Of malice or of sorcery, or that power
Which erring men call Chance, this I hold firm,
Virtue may be assailed, but never hurt,
Surpised by unjust force, but not enthralled,
Yea even that which mischief meant most harm,
Shall in the happy trial prove most glory.
But evil on it self shall back recoyl,
And mix no more with goodness, when at last
Gathered like scum, and settled to it self
It shall be in eternal restless change
Self-fed, and self-consum'd, if this fail,
The pillar'd firmament is rott'nness,
And earths base built on stubble. But com let us on.
Against th'opposing will and arm of Heaven
May never this just sword be lifted up,
But for that damned Magician, let him be girt
With all the greisly legions that troop
Under the sooty flag of Acheron,
Harpyes and Hydra's, or all the monstrous forms
'Twixt Africa and Inde, I Will find him out,
And force him to restore his purchase back,
Or drag him by the curls, to a foul, death,
Cursed as his life.

Spir. Alas good ventrous youth,
I love thy courage yet, and bold Emprise,
But here thy sword can do thee little stead,
Far other arms, and other weapons must
Be those that quell the might of hellish charms,
He with his bare wand can unthred thy joints,
And crumble all thy sinew.

Eld. Bro. Why prithee Shepherd
How durst thou then thy self approach so near
As to make this Relation?

Spir. Care and utmost shifts
How to secure the Lady from surprisal,
Brought to my mind a certain Shepherd Lad
Of small regard to see to, yet well skilled
In every virtuous plant and healing herb
That spreds her verdant leaf to th'morning ray,
He loved me well, and often would beg me sing,
Which when I did, he on the tender grass
Would sit, and hearken even to ecstasy,
And in requital open his leathern scrip,
And show me simples of a thousand names
Telling their strange and vigorous faculties;
Amongst the rest a small unsightly root,
But of divine effect, he culled me out;
The leaf was darkish, and had prickles on it,
But in another Country, as he said,
Bore a bright golden flower, but not in this soil:
Unknown, and like esteemed, and the dull swain
Treads on it daily with his clouted shoon,
And yet more med'cinal is it then that Moly
That Hermes once to wise Ulysses gave;
He called it Haemony, and gave it me,
And bad me keep it as of sov'ran use
Against all enchantments, mildew blast, or damp
Or ghastly furies apparition;
I purs't it up, but little reckoning made,
Till now that this extremity compelled,
But now I find it true; for by this means
I knew the foul inchanter though disguised,
Entered the very lime-twigs of his spells,
And yet came off: if you have this about you
(As I will give you when we go) you may
Boldly assault the necromancers hall;
Where if he be, with dauntless hardihood,
And brandish't blade rush on him, break his glass,
And shed the lushious liquor on the ground,
But sease his wand, though he and his cursed crew
Fierce sign of battle make, and menace high,
Or like the Sons of Vulcan vomit smoke,
Yet will they soon retire, if he but shrink.

Eld. Bro. Thyrsis lead on apace, I Will follow thee,
And some good angel bear a shield before us.

The Scene changes to a stately Palace, set out with all manner of
deliciousness: soft Music, Tables spread with all dainties. Comus appears with
his rabble, and the Lady set in an enchanted Chair, to whom he offers his
Glass, which she puts by, and goes about to rise. Comus. Nay Lady sit; if I but
wave this wand,
Your nerves are all chained up in Alablaster,
And you a statue, or as Daphne was
Root-bound, that fled Apollo,

La. Fool do not boast,
Thou can not touch the freedom of my mind
With all thy charms, although this corporal rind
Thou haste immanacl'd, while Heaven sees good.

Co. Why are you vexed Lady? why do you frown?
Here dwell no frowns, nor anger, from these gates
Sorrow flies far: See here be all the pleasures
That fancy can beget on youthful thoughts,
When the fresh blood grows lively, and returns
Brisk as the April buds in Primrose-season.
And first behold this cordial Julep here
That flames, and dances in his crystal bounds
With spirits of balm, and fragrant Syrops mixed.
Not that Nepenthes which the wife of The One,
In Egypt gave to Jove-born Helena
Is of such power to stir up joy as this,
To life so friendly, or so cool to thirst.
Why should you be so cruel to your self,
And to those dainty limms which nature lent
For gentle usage, and soft delicacy?
But you invert the cov'nants of her trust,
And harshly deal like an ill borrower
With that which you received on other terms,
Scorning the unexempt condition
By which all mortal frailty must subsist,
Refreshment after toil, ease after pain,
That have been tired all day without repast,
And timely rest have wanted, but fair Virgin
This will restore all soon.

La. 'Twill not false traitor,
'Twill not restore the truth and honesty
That thou have banished from thy tongue with lies,
Was this the cottage, and the safe abode
Thou told'st me of? What grim aspects are these,
These oughly-headed Monsters? Mercy guard me!
Hence with thy brewed enchantments, foul deceiver,
Have thou betrayed my credulous innocence
With visor'd falsehood, and base forgery,
And would thou seek again to trap me here
With lickerish baits fit to ensnare a brute?
Were it a draft for Juno when she banquets,
I would not taste thy treasonous offer; none
But such as are good men can give good things,
And that which is not good, is not delicious
To a well-governed and wise appetite.

Co. O foolishnes of men! that lend their ears
To those budge Doctors of the Stoic Furr,
And fetch their precepts from the Cynick Tub,
Praising the lean and sallow Abstinence.
Wherefore did Nature power her bounties forth,
With such a full and unwithdrawing hand,
Covering the earth with odours, fruits, and flocks,
Thronging the Seas with spawn innumerable,
But all to please, and sat the curious taste?
And set to work millions of spinning Worms,
That in their green shops weave the smooth-hair'd silk
To deck her Sons, and that no corner might
Be vacant of her plenty, in her own loins
She hutch't th'all-worshipt ore, and precious gems
To store her children with; if all the world
Should in a pet of temperance feed on Pulse,
Drink the clear stream, and nothing wear but Freize,
Th'all-giver would be unthank't, would be unprais'd,
Not half his riches known, and yet despised,
And we should serve him as a grudging master,
As a penurious niggard of his wealth,
And live like Natures bastards, not her sons,
Who would be quite surcharged with her own weight,
And strangled with her waste fertility;
The Earth cumber'd, and the winged air dark't with plumes,
The herds would over-multitude their Lords,
The Sea o'refraught would swel, and th'unsought diamonds
Would so emblaze the forhead of the Deep,
And so bestudd with Stars, that they below
Would grow inured to light, and com at last
To gaze upon the Sun with shameless brows.
List Lady be not coy, and be not cosen'd
With that same vaunted name Virginity,
Beauty is natures coin, must not be hoorded,
But must be current, and the good thereof
Consists in mutual and partak'n bliss,
Unsavory in th'injoyment of it self
If you let slip time, like a neglected rose
It withers on the stalk with languish't head.
Beauty is natures brag, and must be shown
In courts, at feasts, and high solemnities
Where most may wonder at the workm(...)
It is for homely features to keep home,
They had their name thence; course complexions
And cheeks of sorry grain will serve to ply
The sampler, and to teize the huswifes wool.
What need a vermeil-tinctur'd lip for that
Love-darting eyes, or tresses like the the Morn?
There was another meaning in these gifts,
Think what, and be adviz'd, you are but young yet.

La. I had not thought to have unlockt my lips
In this unhallowed air, but that this Jugler
Would think to charm my judgment, as mine eyes
Obtruding false rules pranckt in reasons garb.
I hate when vice can bolt her arguments,
And virtue has no tongue to check her pride:
Impostor do not charge most innocent nature,
As if she would her children should be riotous
With her abundance she good cateres
Means her provision only to the good
That live according to her sober laws,
And holy dictate of spare Temperance:
If every just man that now pines with want
Had but a moderate and beseeming share
Of that which lewdly-pamper'd Luxury
Now heaps upon some few with vast excess,
Natures full blessings would be well dispenc't
In unsuperfluous eeven proportion,
And she no whit encomber'd with her store,
And then the giver would be better thank't,
His praise due paid, for swinish gluttony
Never looks to Heaven amidst his gorgeous feast,
But with besotted base ingratitude
Cramms, and blasphemes his feeder. Shall I go on?
Or have I said anow? To him that dares
Arm his profane tongue with contemptuous words
Against the Sun-clad power of Chastity;
Fain would I something say, yet to what end?
Thou have nor Ear, nor Soul to apprehend
The sublime notion, and high mystery
That must be uttered to unfold the sage
And serious doctrine of Virginity,
And thou art worthy that thou should not know
More happiness then this thy present lot.
Enjoy your dear Wit, and gay Rhetoric
That has so well been taught her dazzling fence,
Thou art not fit to hear thy self convinced;
Yet should I try, the uncontrouled worth
Of this pure cause would kindle my raped spirits
To such a flame of sacred vehemence,
That dumb things would be moved to sympathize,
And the brute Earth would lend her nerves, and shake,
Till all thy magic structures reared so high,
Were shattered into heaps over thy false head.

Co. She fables not, I feel that I do fear
Her words set off by some superior power;
And though not mortal, yet a cold shuddring dew
Dips me all over, as when the wrath of Jove
Speaks thunder, and the chains of Erebus
To some of Saturns crew. I must dissemble,
And try her yet more strongly. Com, no more,
This is mere moral babble, and direct
Against the canon laws of our foundation;
I must not suffer this, yet it is but the lees
And setlings of a melancholy blood;
But this will cure all straight, one sip of this
Will bathe the drooping spirits in delight
Beyond the bliss of dreams. Be wise, and taste. --

The Brothers rush in with Swords drawn, wrest his Glass out of his hand, and
break it against the ground; his rout make sign of resistance, but are all
driven in; The attendant Spirit comes in. Spir. What, have you let the false
Enchanter escape?
O ye mistook, ye should have snatched his wand
And bound him fast; without his rod revers't,
And backward mutters of dissevering power,
We cannot free the Lady that sits here
In stony fetters fixed, and motionless;
Yet stay, be not disturbed, now I bethink me,
Some other means I have which may be used,
Which once of Melibaeus old I learnt
The soothest Shepherd that ere pip't on plains.
There is a gentle Nymph not far from hence,
That with moist curb sways the smooth Severn stream,
Sabrina is her name, a Virgin pure,
Whilom she was the daughter of Locrine,
That had the Scepter from his Father Brute.
The guiltless damsel flying the mad pursuit
Of her enraged stepdam Guendolen,
Commended her fair innocence to the flood
That stayed her flight with his cross flowing course,
The water Nymphs that in the bottom played,
Held up their pearled wrists and took her in,
Bearing her straight to aged Nereus Hall,
Who piteous of her woes, reared her lank head,
And gave her to his daughters to imbathe
In nectar'd lavers strewn with Asphodil,
And through the porch and inlet of each sense
Dropped in Ambrosial Oils till she revived,
And underwent a quick immortal change
Made Goddess of the River; still she retains
Her maid'n gentleness, and often at Eeve
Visits the herds along the twilight meadows,
Helping all urchin blasts, and ill luck signs
That the shrewd meddling Else delights to make,
Which she with precious viold liquors heals.
For which the Shepherds at their festivals
Carrol her goodness loud in rustic lays,
And throw sweet garland wreaths into her stream
Of pancies, pinks, and gaudy Daffadils.
And, as the old Swain said, she can unlock
The clasping charm, and thaw the numming spell,
If she be right invok't in warbled Song,
For maid'nhood she loves, and will be swift
To aid a Virgin such as was her self
In hard besetting need, this will I try
And add the power of some adjuring verse.

SONG.
Sabrina fair
Listen where thou art sitting
Under the glassie, cool, translucent wave,
In twisted braids of Lillies knitting
The loose train of thy amber-dropping hair,
Listen for dear honors sake,
Goddess of the silver lake,
Listen and save.
Listen and appear to us
In name of great Oceanus,
By the earth-shaking Neptune's mace,
And Tethys grave majestic pace,
By hoary Nereus wrincled look,
And the Carpathian wisards hook,
By scaly Tritons winding shell,
And old sooth-saying Glaucus spell,
By Leucothea's lovely hands,
And her son that rules the strands,
By Thetis tinsel-slipper'd feet,
And the Songs of Sirens sweet,
By dead Parthenope's dear tomb,
And fair Ligea's golden comb,
Wherewith she sits on diamond rocks
Sleeking her soft alluring locks,
By all the Nymphs that nightly dance
Upon thy streams with wily glance,
Rise, rise, and heave thy rosy head
From thy coral-pav'n bed,
And bridle in thy headlong wave,
Till thou our summons answered have.
Listen and save.
Sabrina rises, attended by water-Nymphs, and sings.
By the rushy-fringed bank,
Where grows the Willow and the Osier dank,
My sliding Chariot stays,
Thick set with Agat, and the azurn sheen
Of Turkis blew, and Emrauld green
That in the channel strayes,
Whilst from off the waters fleet
Thus I set my printless feet
Over the Cowslips Velvet head,
That bends not as I tread,
Gentle swain at thy request
I am here.
Spir. Goddess dear
We implore thy powerful hand
To undo the charmed band
Of true Virgin here distressed,
Through the force, and through the wile
Of unblest inchanter vile.

Sab. Shepherd it is my office best
To help ensnared chastity;
Brightest Lady look on me,
Thus I sprinkle on thy breast
Drops that from my fountain pure,
I have kept of precious cure,
Thrice upon thy fingers tip,
Thrice upon thy rubied lip,
Next this marble venomed seat
Smeared with gumms of glutenous heat
I touch with chaste palms moist and cold,
Now the spell has lost his hold;
And I must haste ere morning hour
To wait in Amphitrite's bowr.

Sabrina descends, and the Lady rises out of her seat. Spir. Virgin, daughter
of Locrine
Sprung of old Anchises line
May thy brimmed waves for this
Their full tribute never miss
From a thousand petty rills,
That tumbled down the snowy hills:
Summer drouth, or singed air
Never scorch thy tresses fair,
Nor wet Octobers torrent flood
Thy molten crystal fill with mudd,
May thy billows roll ashore
The beryl, and the golden ore,
May thy lofty head be crowned
With many a tower and terras round,
And here and there thy banks upon
With Groves of myrrh, and cinnamon.
Com Lady while Heaven lends us grace,
Let us fly this cursed place,
Lest the Sorcerer us entice
With some other new device.
Not a waste, or needless sound
Till we com to holier ground,
I shall be your faithful guide
Through this gloomy covert wide,
And not many furlongs thence
Is your Fathers residence,
Where this night are met in state
Many a friend to gratulate
His wished presence, and beside
All the Swains that there abide,
With Jiggs, and rural dance resort,
We shall catch them at their sport,
And our sudden coming there
Will double all their mirth and chere;
Com let us haste, the Stars grow high,
But night sits monarch yet in the mid sky.

The Scene changes, presenting Ludlow Town and the Presidents Castle, then com
in Countrey-Dancers, after them the attendant Spirit, with the two Brothers and
the Lady. SONG. Spir. Back Shepherds, back, anough your play,
Till next Sunshine holiday,
Here be without duck or nod
Other trippings to be trod
Of lighter toes, and such Court guise
As Mercury did first devise
With the mincing Dryades
On the Lawns, and on the Leas.
This second Song presents them to their Father and Mother. Noble Lord, and
Lady bright,
I have brought ye new delight,
Here behold so goodly grown
Three fair branches of your own,
Heaven has timely tried their youth,
Their faith, their patience, and their truth.
And sent them here through hard assays
With a crown of deathless Praise,
To triumph in victorious dance
Over sensual Folly, and Intemperance.

The dances ended, the Spirit Epiloguizes. Spir. To the Ocean now I fly,
And those happy climes that ly
Where day never shuts his eye,
Up in the broad fields of the sky:
There I suck the liquid air
All amidst the Gardens fair
Of Hesperus, and his daughters three
That sing about the golden tree:
Along the crisped shades and bowres
Revels the spruce and jocond Spring,
The Graces, and the rosie-boosom'd Hours,
Thither all their bounties bring,
That there eternal Summer dwells,
And West winds, with musky wing
About the cedar'n alleys fling
Nard, and Cassia's balmy smells.
Iris there with humid bow,
Waters the odorous banks that blow
Flowers of more mingled hew
Then her purfl'd scarf can show,
And drenches with Elysian dew
(List mortals if your ears be true)
Beds of Hyacinth, and Roses
Where young Adonis often reposes,
Waxing well of his deep wound
In slumber soft, and on the ground
Sadly sits the Assyrian Queen;
But far above in spangled sheen
Celestial Cupid her famed Son advanced,
Holds his dear Pysche sweet intranc't
After her wandering labors long,
Till free consent the gods among
Make her his eternal Bride,
And from her fair unspotted side
Two blissful twins are to be born,
Youth and Joy; so Jove has sworn.
But now my task is smoothly don,
I can fly, or I can run
Quickly to the green earths end,
Where the bowed welkin slow does bend,
And from thence can soar as soon
To the corners of the Moon.
Mortals that would follow me,
Love virtue, she alone is free,
She can teach ye how to clime
Higher then the Spheary chime;
Or if Virtue feeble were,
Heaven it self would stoop to her.

PSALM. I. Done into Verse, 1653.
Blessed is the man who has not walked astray
In counsel of the wicked, and in the way
Of sinners has not stood, and in the seat
Of scorners has not sat. But in the great
Jehovahs Law is ever his delight,
And in his Law he studies day and night.
He shall be as a tree which planted grows
By watery streams, and in his season knows
To yield his fruit, and his leaf shall not fall,
And what he takes in hand shall prosper all.
Not so the wicked, but as chaff which fanned
The wind drives, so the wicked shall not stand
In judgment, or abide their trial then,
Nor sinners in the assembly of just men.
For the Lord knows the upright way of the just,
And the way of bad men to ruin must.
PSALM. II. Done Aug. 8. 1653. Terzetti.
WHy do the Gentiles tumult, and the Nations
muse a vain thing, the Kings of the earth upstand
With power, and Princes in their Congregations
Lay deep their plots together through each Land,
Against the Lord and his Messiah dear
Let us break off, say they, by strength of hand
Their bonds, and cast from us, no more to wear,
Their twisted cords: he who in Heaven does dwell
Shall laugh, the Lord shall scoff them, then severe
Speak to them in his wrath, and in his fell
And fierce ire trouble them; but I says he
anointed have my King (though ye rebel)
On Sion my holi' hill. A firm decree
I will declare; the Lord to me has said
Thou art my Son I have begotten thee
This day; ask of me, and the grant is made;
As thy possession I on thee bestow
The Heathen, and as thy conquest to be swayed
Earths utmost bounds: them shall thou bring full low
With Iron Scepter bruised, and them disperse
Like to a potters vessel shivered so.
And ^ow be wise at length ye Kings averse
Be taught ye Judges of the earth; with fear
Jehovah serve, and let your joy converse
With trembling; kiss the Son least he appear
In anger and ye perish in the way
If once his wrath take fire like fuel sere.
Happy all those who have in him their stay.
PSALM. 3. Aug. 9. 1653. When he fled from Absalom.
LOrd how many are my foes
How many those
That in arms against me rise
Many are they
That of my life distrustfully thus say,
No help for him in God there lies.
But thou Lord art my shield my glory,
Thee through my story
The exalter of my head I count
Aloud I cried
Unto Jehovah, he full soon replied
And heard me from his holy mount.
I lay and slept, I waked again,
For my sustain
Was the Lord. Of many millions
The populous rout
I fear not though incamping round about
They pitch against me their Pavillions.
Rise Lord, save me my God for thou
Have smote ere now
On the cheek-bone all my foes,
Of men abhorred
Have broke the teeth. This help was from the Lord
Thy blessing on thy people flows.
PSALM. IV. Aug. 10. 1653.
ANswer me when I call
God of my righteousness
In straights and in distress
Thou did me disinthrall
And set at large; now spare,
Now pity me, and hear my earnest prai'^.
Great ones how long will ye
My glory have in scorn
How long be thus forborne
Still to love vanity,
To love, to seek, to prize
Things false and vain and nothing else but lies?
Yet know the Lord has chose
Chose to himself a part
The good and meek of heart
(For whom to choose he knows)
Jehovah from on high
Will hear my voice what time to him I cry.
Be aw^d, and do not sin,
Speak* to your hearts alone,
Upon your beds, each one,
And be at peace within.
Offer the offerings just
Of righteousness and in Jehovah trust.
Many there be that say
Who yet will show us good?
Talking like this worlds brood;
But Lord, thus let me pray,
On us lift up the light
Lift up the favor of thy count' nance bright.
Into my heart more joy
And gladness thou have put
Then when a year of glut
Their stores does over-cloy
And from their plenteous grounds
With vast increase their corn and wine abounds
In peace at once will I
Both lay me down and sleep
For thou alone do keep
Me safe where ere I lie
As in a rocky Cell
Thou Lord alone in safety make me dwell.
PSALM. V. Aug. 12. 1653.
JEhovah to my words give ear
My meditation weigh
The voice of my complaining hear
My King and God for unto thee I pray.
Jehovah thou my early voice
Shall in the morning hear
In The morning I to thee with choice
Will rank my Prayers, and watch till thou appear.
For thou art not a God that takes
In wickedness delight
Evil with thee no biding makes
Fools or mad men stand not within thy sight.
All workers of iniquity
Thou hat'st; and them unblest
Thou will destroy that speak a ly
The bloodi' and guileful man God does detest.
But I will in thy mercies dear
Thy numerous mercies go
Into thy house; I in thy fear
Will toward thy holy temple worship low
Lord lead me in thy righteousness
Lead me because of those
That do observe If I transgress
Set thy ways right before, where my step goes.
For in his faltring mouth unstable
No word is firm or sooth
Their inside, troubles miserable;
An open grave their throat, their tongue they s(...)
God; find them guilty, let them fall
By their own counsels quelled;
Push them in their rebellions all
Still on; for against thee they have rebelled;
Then all who trust in thee shall bring
Their joy, while thou from blame
Defend'st them, they shall ever sing
d shall triumph in thee, who love thy name.
For thou Jehovah wilt be found
To bless the just man still,
As with a shield thou will surround
Him with thy lasting favor and good will
PSALM. VI. Aug. 13. 1653.
LOrd in thine anger do not reprehend me
Nor in thy hot displeasure me correct;
Pity me Lord for I am much deject
Am very weak and faint; heal and amend me,
For all my bones, that even with anguish ache,
Are troubled, yea my soul is troubled sore
And thou O Lord how long? turn Lord, restore
My soul, O save me for thy goodness sake
For in death no remembrance is of thee;
Who in the grave can celebrate thy praise?
Wearied I am with sighing out my days,
Nightly my Couch I make a kind of Sea;
My Bed I water with my tears, mine Eye
Through grief consumes, is waxen old and dark
In The midst of all mine enemies that mark.
Depart all ye that work iniquity.
Depart from me, for the voice of my weeping
The Lord has heard, the Lord has heard my prai'r
My supplication with acceptance fair
The Lord will own, and have me in his keeping.
Mine enemies shall all be blank and dash't
With much confusion; then grow red with shame,
They shall return in have the way they came
And in a moment shall be quite abash't.
PSALM. VII. Aug. 14. 1653.
Upon the words of Chush the Benjamite against him.
LOrd my God to thee I fly
Save me and secure me under
Thy protection while I cry,
Least as a Lion (and no wonder)
He have to tear my Soul asunder
Tearing and no rescue nigh.
Lord my God if I have thought
Or done this, if wickedness
Be in my hands, if I have wrought
Ill to him that meant me peace,
Or to him have rendered less,
And not fre'd my foe for naught;
Let the enemy pursue my soul
And overtake it, let him tread
My life down to the earth and roll
In the dust my glory dead,
In the dust and there out spread
Lodge it with dishonor foul.
Rise Jehovah in thine ire
Rouse thy self amidst the rage
Of my foes that urge like fire;
And wake for me, their furi' assuage;
Judgment here thou did engage
And command which I desire.
So the assemblies of each Nation
Will surround thee, seeking right,
Thence to thy glorious habitation
Return on high and in their sight.
Jehovah judges most upright
All people from the worlds foundation.
Judge me Lord, be judge in this
According to my righteousness
And the innocence which is
Upon me: cause at length to cease
Of evil men the wickedness
And their power that do amiss.
But the just establish fast,
Since thou art the just God that tries
Hearts and reins. On God is cast
My defense, and in him lies
In him who both just and wise
Saves the upright of Heart at last.
God is a just Judge and severe,
And God is every day offended;
If the unjust will not forbear,
His Sword he whets, his Bow has bended
Already, and for him intended
The tools of death, that waits him near.
(His arrows purposely made he
For them that persecute.) Behold
He travels big with vanity,
Trouble he has conceav'd of old
As in a womb, and from that mould
Has at length brought forth a Lie.
He dig'd a pit, and delv'd it deep,
And fell into the pit he made,
His mischief that due course does keep,
Turns on his head, and his ill trade
Of violence will undelay'd
Fall on his crown with ruin steep.
Then will I Jehovah's praise
According to his justice raise
And sing the Name and Deity
Of Jehovah the most high.
PSALM. VIII. Aug. 14. 1653.
O Jehovah our Lord how wondrous great
And glorious is thy name through all the earth?
So as above the Heavens thy praise to set
Out of the tender mouths of latest bearth,
Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings thou
Have founded strength because of all thy foes
To stint the enemy, and slack th'avengers brow
That bends his rage thy providence to oppose
When I behold thy Heavens, thy Fingers art,
The Moon and Stars which thou so bright have set,
In the pure firmament, then says my heart,
O what is man that thou remembrest yet,
And think upon him; or of man begot
That him thou visit'st and of him art found;
Scarce to be less then Gods, thou made his lot,
With honor and with state thou have him crowned.
Over the works of thy hand thou made him Lord,
Thou have put all under his lordly feet,
All Flocks, and Herds, by thy commanding word,
All beasts that in the field or forest meet.
Fowl of the Heavens, and Fish that through the wet
Sea-paths in shoals do slide. And know no dearth.
O Jehovah our Lord how wondrous great
And glorious is thy name through all the earth.
April. 1648. J. M.
Nine of the Psalms done into Meter, wherein all but what is in a different
Character, are the very words of the Text, translated from the Original.
PSALM. LXXX.
THou Shepherd that do Israel keep
Give ear in time of need,
Who leadest like a flock of sheep
Thy loved Joseph's seed,
That sitt'st between the Cherubs bright
Between their wings out-spread
Shine forth, and from thy cloud give light,
And on our foes thy dread
In Ephraims view and Benjamins,
And in Manasse's sight
Awake Gnorera.
thy strength, come, and be seen
To save us by thy might.
Turn us again, thy grace divine
To us O God vouchsafe;
Cause thou thy face on us to shine
And then we shall be safe.
Lord God of Hosts, how long will thou,
How long will thou declare
Thy Gnashanta.
smoking wrath, and angry brow
Against thy peoples praire.
Thou feed'st them with the bread of tears,
Their bread with tears they eat,
And make them Shalish.
largely drink the tears
Wherewith their cheeks are wet.
A strife thou make us and a prey
To every neighbor foe,
Among themselves they play,
laugh, they
And Jilgnagu.
flouts at us they throw
Return us, and thy grace divine,
O God of Hosts vouchsafe
Cause thou thy face on us to shine,
And then we shall be safe.
A Vine from Egypt thou have brought,
Thy free love made it thine,
And drov'st out Nations proud and haut
To plant this lovely Vine.
Thou did prepare for it a place
And root it deep and fast
That it began to grow apace,
And filled the land at last.
With her green shade that covered all,
The Hills were overspread
Her Bows as high as Cedars tall
Advanced their lofty head.
Her branches on the western side
Down to the Sea she sent,
And upward to that river wide
Her other branches went.
Why have thou laid her Hedges low
And brok'n down her Fence,
That all may pluck her, as they go,
With rudest violence?
The tusked Boar out of the wood
Up turns it by the roots,
Wild Beasts there brouze, and make their food
Her Grapes and tender Shoots.
Return now, God of Hosts, look down
From Heaven, thy Seat divine,
Behold us, but without a frown,
And visit this thy Vine.
Visit this Vine, which thy right hand
Has set, and planted long,
And the young branch, that for thy self
Thou have made firm and strong.
But now it is consumed with fire,
And cut with Axes down,
They perish at thy dreadful ire,
At thy rebuke and frown.
Upon the man of thy right hand
Let thy good hand be laid,
Upon the Son of Man, whom thou
Strong for thy self have made.
So shall we not go back from thee
To ways of sin and shame,
Quick'n us thou, then gladly we
Shall call upon thy Name.
Return us, and thy grace divine
Lord God of Hosts voutsafe,
Cause thou thy face on us to shine,
And then we shall be safe.
PSALM. LXXXI.
TO God our strength sing loud, and clear
Sing loud to God our King,
To Jacobs God, that all may hear
Loud acclamations ring.
Prepare a Hymn, prepare a Song
The Timbrel hither bring
The cheerful Psaltry bring along
And Harp with pleasant string,
Blow, as is wont, in the new Moon
With Trumpets lofty sound,
The appointed time, the day whereon
Our solemn Feast comes round.
This was a Statute given of old
For Israel to observe
A Law of Jacobs God, to hold
From whence they might not swerve.
This he a Testimony ordained
In Joseph, not to change,
When as he passed through Egypt land;
The Tongue I heard, was strange.
From burden, and from slavish toil
I set his shoulder free;
His hands from pots, and mirie soil
Delivered were by me.
When trouble did thee sore assail,
On me then did thou call,
And I to free thee did not fail,
And led thee out of thrall.
answered thee in Be Sether ragnam.
thunder deep
With clouds encompassed round;
I tried thee at the water steep
Of Meriba renowned.
Hear O my people, heark'n well,
I testify to thee
Thou ancient stock of Israel,
If thou will list to me,
Through out the land of thy abode
No alien God shall be
Nor shall thou to a foreign God
In honor bend thy knee.
I am the Lord thy God which brought
Thee out of Egypt land
Ask large enough, and I, besought,
Will grant thy full demand.
And yet my people would not hear,
Nor hearken to my voice;
And Israel whom I loved so dear
Mislik'd me for his choice.
Then did I leave them to their will
And to their wandering mind;
Their own conceits they followed still
Their own devises blind.
O that my people would be wise
To serve me all their days,
And O that Israel would advise
To walk my righteous ways.
Then would I soon bring down their foes
That now so proudly rise,
And turn my hand against all those
That are their enemies.
Who hate the Lord should then be fain
To bow to him and bend,
But they, his People, should remain,
Their time should have no end.
And we would feed them from the shock
With flowr of finest wheat,
And satisfy them from the rock
With Honey for their Meat.
PSALM. LXXXII.
GOd in the Bagnadath-^l.
great * assembly stands
Of Kings and lordly States,
Bekerev.
Among the gods on both his hands
He judges and debates.
How long will ye Tishphetu gnavel.
pervert the right
With * judgment false and wrong
Favoring the wicked by your might.
Who thence grow bold and strong
Shiphtu-dal.
Regard the * weak and fatherless
* Dispatch the * poor man's cause,
And raise the man in deep distress
By Hatzdiku.
just and equal Laws.
Defend the poor and desolate,
And rescue from the hands
Of wicked men the low estate
Of him that help demands.
They know not nor will understand,
In darkness they walk on
The Earths foundations all are * moved
And Jimmotu.
out of order gone.
I said that ye were Gods, yea all
The Sons of God most high
But ye shall die like men, and fall
As other Princes die.
Rise God, * judge thou the earth in might,
This wicked earth Shiphta.
redress,
For thou art he who shall by right
The Nations all possess.
PSALM. LXXXIII.
BE not thou silent now at length
O God hold not thy peace,
Sit not thou still O God of strength
We cry and do not cease.
For lo thy furious foes now * swell
And Jehemajun.
storm outrageously,
And they that hate thee proud and fell
Exalt their heads full hie.
Against thy people they Jagnarimu
contrive
Sod.
Their Plots and Counsels deep,
Jithjagnatsugnal.
Them to ensnare they chiefly strive
Tsephuneca.
Whom thou do hide and keep.
Come let us cut them off say they,
Till they no Nation be
That Isreal's name for ever may
Be lost in memory.
For they consult Levjachdau.
with all their might,
And all as one in mind
Themselves against thee they unite
And in firm union bind.
The tents of Edom, and the brood
Of scornful Ishmael,
Moab, with them of Hagars blood
That in the Desert dwell,
Gebal and Ammon there conspire,
And hateful Amalec,
The Philistims, and they of Tire
Whose bounds the Sea does check.
With them great Asshur also bands
And does confirm the knot,
All these have lent their armed hands
To aid the Sons of Lot.
Do to them as to Midian bold
That wasted all the Coast
To Sisera, and as is told
Thou did to Jabins host,
When at the brook of Kishon old
They were repulst and slain,
At Endor quite cut off, and rolled
As dung upon the plain.
As Zeb and Oreb evil sped
So let their Princes speed
As Zeba, and Zalmunna bled
So let their Princes bleed.
For they amidst their pride have said
By right now shall we seize
Gods houses, and will now invade
Neoth Elohim bears both.
Their stately Palaces.
My God, oh make them as a wheel
No quiet let them find,
Giddy and restless let them reel
Like stubble from the wind.
As when an aged wood takes fire
Which on a sudden straies,
The greedy flame runs hier and hier
Till all the mountains blaze,
So with thy whirlwind them pursue,
And with thy tempest chase;
They seek thy Name, Heb.
And till they * yield thee honor due;
Lord fill with shame their face.
Ashamed and troubled let them be,
Troubled and shamed for ever,
Ever confounded, and so die
With shame, and escape it never.
Then shall they know that thou whose name
Jehova is alone,
Art the most high, and thou the same
Over all the earth art one.
PSALM. LXXXIV.
How lovely are thy dwellings fair!
O Lord of Hoasts, how dear
The pleasant Tabernacles are!
Where thou do dwell so near.
My Soul does long and almost die
Thy Courts O Lord to see,
My heart and flesh aloud do cry,
O living God, for thee.
There even the Sparrow freed from wrong
Has found a house of rest,
The Swallow there, to lay her young
Has built her brooding nest,
Even by thy Altars Lord of Hoasts
They find their safe abode,
And home they fly from round the Coasts
Toward thee, My King, my God.
Happy, who in thy house reside
Where thee they ever praise,
Happy, whose strength in thee does bide,
And in their hearts thy ways.
They pass through Baca's thirsty Vale,
That dry and barren ground
As through a fruitful watery Dale
Where Springs and Showrs abound.
They journey on from strength to strength
With joy and gladsom cheer
Till all before our God at length
In Sion do appear.
Lord God of Hoasts hear now my prayer
O Jacobs God give ear,
Thou God our shield look on the face
Of thy anointed dear.
For one day in thy Courts to be
Is better, and more blessed
Then in the joys of Vanity,
A thousand days at best.
I in the temple of my God
Had rather keep a door,
Then dwell in Tents, and rich abode
With Sin for evermore.
For God the Lord both Sun and Shield
Gives grace and glory bright,
No good from them shall be withheld
Whose ways are just and right.
Lord God of Hoasts that raign'st on high,
That man is truly blessed,
Who (...)ly on thee does rely,
And in thee only rest.
PSALM. LXXXV.
THy Land to favor graciously
Thou have not Lord been slack,
Thou have from hard Captivity
Returned Jacob back.
The iniquity thou did forgive
That wrought thy people woe,
And all their Sin, that did thee grieve
Have hid where none shall know.
Thine anger all thou had removed,
And calmly did return
From thy Heb. The burning heat of thy wrath.
fierce wrath which we had proved
Far worse then fire to burn.
God of our saving health and peace,
Turn us, and us restore,
Thine indignation cause to cease
Toward us, and chide no more.
Will thou be angry without end,
For ever angry thus
Will thou thy frowning ire extend
From age to age on us?
Will thou not Heb Turn to quicken us.
turn, and hear our voice
And us again * revive,
That so thy people may rejoice
By thee preserved alive.
Cause us to see thy goodness Lord,
To us thy mercy show
Thy saving health to us afford
And life in us renew.
And now what God the Lord will speak
I will go strait and hear,
For to his people he speaks peace
And to his Saints full dear,
To his dear Saints he will speak peace,
But let them never more
Return to folly, but surcease
To trespass as before.
Surely to such as do him sear
Salvation is at hand
And glory shall ere long appear
To dwell within our Land.
Mercy and Truth that long were missed
Now joyfully are met
Sweet Peace and Righteousness have kissed
And hand in hand are set.
Truth from the earth like to a flowr
Shall bud and blossom then,
And Justice from her heavenly bowr
look down on mortal men.
The Lord will also then bestow
Whatever thing is good
Our Land shall forth in plenty throw
Her fruits to be our food.
Before him Righteousness shall go
His Royal Harbinger,
Then * will he come, and not be slow
His footsteps cannot err.
* Heb. He will set his steps to the way.
PSALM. LXXXVI.
THy gracious ear, O Lord, incline,
O hear me I thee pray,
For I am poor, and almost pine
with need, and sad decay.
Preserve my soul, sor Heb. I am good, loving, a doer of good and holy things.
I have trod
Thy ways, and love the just,
Save thou thy servant O my God
Who still in thee does trust.
Pity me Lord for daily thee
I call;
O make rejoice
Thy Servants Soul; for Lord to thee
I lift my soul and voice,
For thou art good, thou Lord art prone
To pardon, thou to all
Art full of mercy, thou alone
To them that on thee call.
Unto my supplication Lord
give ear, and to the cry
Of my incessant prayers afford
Thy hearing graciously.
I in the day of my distress
Will call on thee for aid;
For thou will grant me free access
And answer, what I prayed.
Like thee among the gods is none
O Lord, nor any works
Of all that other gods have done
Like to thy glorious works.
The Nations all whom thou have made
Shall come, and all shall frame
To bow them low before thee Lord,
And glorify thy name.
For great thou art; and wonders great
By thy strong hand are done,
Thou in thy everlasting Seat
Remainest God alone.
Teach me O Lord thy way most right,
I in thy truth will bide,
To fear thy name my heart unite
So shall it never slide
Thee will I praise O Lord my God
Thee honor, and adore
With my whole heart, and blaze abroad
Thy name for ever more.
For great thy mercy is toward me,
And thou have freed my Soul
Eev'n from the lowest Hell set free
From deepest darkness foul.
O God the proud against me rise
And violent men are met
To seek my life, and in their eyes
No fear of thee have set.
But thou Lord art the God most mild
Readiest thy grace to show,
Slow to be angry, and art styled
Most merciful, most true.
O turn to me thy face at length,
And me have mercy on,
Unto thy servant give thy strength,
And save thy handmaids Son.
Some sign of good to me afford,
And let my foes then see
And be ashamed, because thou Lord
Do help and comfort me.
PSALM. LXXXVII.
AMong the holy Mountains high
Is his foundation fast,
There Seated in his Sanctuary,
His Temple there is placed.
Sions fair Gates the Lord loves more
Then all the dwellings fair
Of Jacobs Land, though there be store,
And all within his care.
City of God, most glorious things
Of thee abroad are spoke;
I mention Egypt, where proud Kings
Did our forefathers yoke,
I mention Babel to my friends,
Philistia full of scorn,
And Tire with Ethiops utmost ends,
Lo this man there was born:
But twice that praise shall in our ear
Be said of Sion last
This and this man was born in her,
High God shall fix her fast.
The Lord shall write it in a Scrowle
That never shall be out-worn
When he the Nations does enrowle
That this man there was born.
Both they who sing, and they who dance
With sacred Songs are there,
In thee fresh brooks, and soft streams glance
And all my fountains clear.
PSALM. LXXXVIII.
LOrd God that do me save and keep,
All day to thee I cry;
And all night long, before thee weep
Before thee prostrate lie.
Into thy presence let my prayer
With sighs devout ascend
And to my cries, that ceaseless are,
Thine ear with favor bend.
For cloyed with woes and trouble store
Surcharged my Soul does lie,
My life at deaths uncherful door
Unto the grave draws nigh.
Reck'n'd I am with them that pass
Down to the dismal pit
I am a Heb. A man without manly strength,
man, but weak alas
And for that name unfit.
From life discharged and parted quite
Among the dead to sleep,
And like the slain in bloody fight
That in the grave lie deep.
Whom thou rememberest no more,
Do never more regard,
Them from thy hand delivered over
Deaths hideous house has barred.
Thou in the lowest pit profound
Have set me all forlorn,
Where thickest darkness hovers round,
In horrid deeps to mourn.
Thy wrath from which no shelter saves
Full sore does press on me;
The Hebr. bears both.
Thou break'st upon me all thy waves,
* And all thy waves break me.
Thou do my friends from me estrange,
And make me odious,
Me to them odious, for they change,
And I here pent up thus.
Through sorrow, and affliction great
Mine eye grows dim and dead,
Lord all the day I thee entreat,
My hands to thee I spread.
Will thou do wonders on the dead,
Shall the deceased arise
And praise thee from their loathsome bed
With pale and hollow eyes?
Shall they thy loving kindness tell
On whom the grave has hold,
Or they who in perdition dwell
Thy faithfulness unfold?
In darkness can thy mighty hand
Or wondrous acts be known,
Thy justice in the gloomy land
Of dark oblivion?
But I to thee O Lord do cry
E're yet my life be spent,
And up to thee my prayer does hie
Each morn, and thee prevent.
Why will thou Lord my soul forsake,
And hide thy face from me,
That am already bruised, and Heb. Prae Concussione.
shake
With terror sent from thee;
Bruz'd, and afflicted and so low
As ready to expire,
While I thy terrors undergo
Astonished with thine ire.
Thy fierce wrath over me does flow
Thy threatenings cut me through.
All day they round about me go,
Like waves they me pursue.
Lover and friend thou have removed
And fever'd from me far.
They fly me now whom I have loved,
And as in darkness are.
FINIS.
Joannis Miltoni LONDINENSIS POEMATA.

Quorum pleraque intra Annum aetatis Vigesimum Conscripsit.

Nunc primum Edita.



LONDINI, Excudebat W. R. Anno 1673,

HAec quae sequuntur de Authore testimonia, tametsi ipse intelligebat non tam
de se quam supra se esse dicta, eo quod praeclaro ingenio viri, nec non amici
ita fere solent laudare, ut omnia suis potius virtutibus, quam veritati
congruentia nimis cupide affingant, noluit tamen horum egregiam in se
voluntatem non esse notam; Cum alii praesertim ut id faceret magnopere
suaderent. Dum enim nimiae laudis invidiam totis ab se viribus amolitur,
sibique quod plus aequo est non attributum esse mavult, judicium interim
hominum cordatorum atque illustrium quin summo sibi honori ducat, negare non
potest.

Joannes Baptista Mansus, Marchio Villensis Neapolitanus ad Joannem Miltonium
Anglum.
VT men's, forma, decor, facies, mos, si pietas sic,
Non Anglus, verum hercle Angelus ipse sores.
Ad Joannem Miltonem Anglum triplici poeseos laurea coronandum Graeca nimirum,
Latina, atque Hetrusca, Epigramma Joannis Salsilli Romani.
CEde Meles, cedat depressa Mincius urna;
Sebetus Tassum desinat usque loqui;
At Thamesis victor cunctis ferat altior undas,
Nam per te, Milto, par tribus unus erit.
Ad Joannem Miltonum.
GRaecia Maeonidem, jactet sibi Roma Maronem,
Anglia Miltonum jactat utrique parem.
Selvaggi
Al Signor Gio. Miltoni Nobile Inglese. O D E.
ERgimi all' Etra o Clio
Perch di stelle intrecciero corona
Non piu del Biondo Dio
La Fronde eterna in Pindo, e in Elicona,
Diensi a merto maggior, maggiori i fregi,
A' celeste virtu celesti pregi.
Non puo del tempo edace
Rimaner preda, eterno alto valor
Non puo l'oblio rapace
Furar dalle memory eccelso onore,
Su l'arco di mia cetra un dardo forte
Virtu m'addatti, e feriro la morte.
Del Ocean profondo
Cinta dagli ampi gorghi Anglia risiede
Separata dal mondo,
Pero che il suo valor l'umano eccede:
Questa feconda sa produrre Eroi,
Ch' hanno a ragion del sovruman tra noi.
Alla virtu sbandita
Danno ne i petti lor fido ricetto,
Quella gli e sol gradita,
Perch in lei santrovar gioia, e diletto;
Ridillo tu, Giovanni, e mostra in tanto
Con tua vera virtu, vero il mio Canto.
Lungi dal Patrio lido
Spinse Zeusi l'industre ardente brama;
Ch' udio d' Helena il grido
Con aurea tromba rimbombar la fama,
E per poterla effigiare al paro
Dalle piu belle Idee trasse il priu raro.
Cosi l' Ape Ingegnosa
Trae con industria il suo liquor pregiato
Dal giglio e dalla rosa,
E quanti vaghi fiori ornano il prato;
Formano un dolce suon diverse Chorde,
Fan vary voci melodia concord.
Di bella gloria amante
Milton dal Ciel natio per vary parti
Le peregrine piante
Volgesti a ricercar scienze, ed arti;
Del Gallo regnator vedesti i Regni,
E dell' Italia ancor gl' Eroi piu degni.
Fabro quasi divino
Sol virtu rintracciando il tuo pensiero
Vide in ogni confino
Chi di nobil valor calca il sentiero;
L' ottimo dal miglior dopo scegliea
Per fabbricar d'ogni virtu l' Idea.
Quanti nacquero in Flora
O in lei del parlar Tosco appreser l' art,
La cui memoria onora
Il mondo fatta eterna in dotte carte,
Volesti ricercar per tuo tesoro,
E parlasti con lor nell' opre loro.
Nell' altera Babelle
Per te il parlar confuse Giove in vano,
Che per vary favelle
Di se stessa trofeo cadde su'l piano:
Ch' Ode oltr' all Anglia il suo piu degno Idioma
Spagna, Francia, Toscana, e Grecia e Roma.
I piu profondi arcani
Ch' occulta la natura e in cielo e in terra
Ch' a Ingegni sovrumani
Troppo avara tal' hor gli chiude, e serra,
Chiaramente conosci, e giungi al fine
Della moral virtude al gran confine.
Non batta il Tempo l' ale,
Fermisi immoto, e in un fermin si gl' anni,
Che di virtu immortale
Scorron di troppo ingiuriosi a i danni;
Che s' opre degne di Poema e storia
Furon gia, l' hai presenti alla memoria.
Dammi tua dolce Cetra
Se vuoi ch'io dica del tuo dolce canto,
Ch' inalz indoti all' Etra
Di farti huomo celeste ottiene il vanto,
Il Tamigi il dira che gl' e concesso
Per te suo cigno pareggiar Permesso.
Io che in riva del Arno
Tento spiegar tuo merto alto, e preclaro
So che fatico indarno,
E ad ammirar, non a lodarlo imparo;
Freno dunque la lingua, e ascolto il core
Che ti prende a lodar con lo stupore.
Del sig. Antonio Francini gentilhuomo Fiorentino.

JOANNI MLTONI LONDINENS 1.
Juveni Patria, virtutibus eximio,
VIro qui multa peregrinatione, studio cuncta, orbis terrarum loca perspexit,
ut novus Ulysses omnia ubique ab omnibus apprehenderet.

Polyglotto, in cujus ore linguae jam deperditae sic reviviscunt, ut idiomata
omnia sint in ejus laudibus infacunda; Et jure ea percallet ut admirationes and
plausus populorum ab propria sapientia excitatos, intelligat.

Illi, cujus animi dotes corporisque, sensus ad admirationem commovent, and per
ipsam motum cuique auferunt; cujus opera ad plausus hortantur, sed venustate
vocem laudatoribus adimunt.

Cui in Memoria totus Orbis: In Intellectu Sapientia: In voluntate ardor
gloriae: In ore Eloquentia: Harmonicos coelestium Sphaerarum sonitus Astronomia
Duce audienti; Characteres mirabilium naturae per quos Dei magnitudo
describitur magistra Philosophia legenti; Antiquitatum latebras, vetustatis
excidia, eruditionis ambages comite assidua autorum Lectione. Exquirenti,
restauranti, percurrenti.
At cur nitor in arduum?


Illi in cujus virtutibus evulgandis or a Famae non sufficiant, nec hominum
stupor in laudandis satis est. Reverentiae and amoris ergo hoc ejus meritis
debitum admirationis tributum offert Carolus Datus Patricius Florentinus.

Tanto homini servus, tantae virtutis amator.
ELEGIARUM Liber Primus.
Elegia prima ad Carolum Diodatum.
TAndem, chare, tuae mihi pervenere tabellae,
Pertulit and voces nuncia charta tuas,
Pertulit occidua Devae Cestrensis ab ora
Vergivium prono qua petit amne salum.
Multum creed juvat terras aluisse remotas
Pectus amans nostri, tamque fidele caput,
Quodque mihi lepidum tellus longinqua sodalem
Debet, at unde brevi reddere jussa velit.
Me tenet urbs reflua quam Thamesis alluit unda,
Meque nec invitum patria dulcis habet.
Jam nec arundiferum mihi cura revisere Camum,
Nec dudum vetiti me laris angit amor.
Nuda nec arva placent, umbrasque negantia molles,
Quam male Phoebicolis convenit ille locus!
Nec duri libet usque minas perferre magistri
Caeteraque ingenio non subeunda meo.
Si fit hoc exilium patrios adiisse penates,
Et va ^um curis otia grata sequi,
Non ego vel profugi nomen, sortemve recuso,
Laetus and exilii condition fruor.
O utinam vates nunquam graviora tulisset
Ille Tomitano flebilis exul agro;
Non tunc Jonio quicquam cessisset Homero
Neve foret victo laus tibi prima Maro.
Tempora nam licet hic placidis dare libera Musis,
Et totum rapiunt me mea vita libri.
Excipit hinc fessum sinuosi pompa theatri,
Et vocat ad plausus garrula scena suos.
Seu catus auditur senior, seu prodigus haeres,
Seu procus, aut posita casside miles adest,
Sive decennali foecundus lite patronus
Detonat inculto barbara verba foro,
Saepe vafer gnato succurrit servus amanti,
Et nasum rigidi fallit ubique Patris;
Saepe novos illic virgo mirata calores
Qud sit amor nescit, dum quoque nescit, amat.
Sive cruentatum furiosa Tragoedia sceptrum
Q^assat, and effusis crinibus ora rotat,
Et dolet, and specto, juvat and spectasse dolendo,
Interdum and lacrymis dulcis amaror inest:
Seu puer infelix indelibata reliquit
Gaudia, and abrupto flendus amore cadit,
Seu ferus e tenebris iterat Styga criminis ultor
Conscia funereo pectora torre movens,
Seu maeret Pelopeia domus, seu nobilis Ili,
Aut luit incestos aula Creontis avos.
Sed neque sub tecto semper nec in urbe latemus,
Irrita nec nobis tempora veris eunt.
Nos quoque lucus habet vicina consitus ulmo
Atque suburbani nobilis umbra loci.
Saepius hic blandas spirantia sydera flammas
Virgineos videas praeteriisse choros.
Ah quoties dignae stupui miracula formae
Quae possit senium vel reparare Jovis;
Ah quoties vidi superantia lumina gemmas,
Atque faces quotquot volvit uterque polus;
Collaque bis vivi Pelopis quae brachia vincant,
Quaeque fluit puro nectare tincta via,
Et decus eximium frontis, tremulosque capillos,
Aurea quae fallax retia tendit Amor.
Pellacesque genas, ad quas hyacinthina sordet
Purpura, and ipse tui floris, Adoni, rubor.
Cedite laudatae toties Heroides olim,
Et quaecunque vagum cepit amica Jovem.
Cedite Achaemeniae turrita sronte puellae,
Et quot Susa colunt, Memnoniamque Ninorr.
Vos etiam Danaae fasces submittite Nymphae,
Et vos Iliacae, Romuleaeque nurus.
Nec Pompeianas Tarpeia Musa columnas
Jactet, and Ausoniis plena theatra stolis.
Gloria Virginibus debetur prima Britannis,
Extera sat tibi sit foemina posse sequi.
Tuque urbs Dardaniis Londinum structa colonis
Turrigerum late conspicienda caput,
Tu nimium felix intra tua moenia claudis
Quicquid formosi pendulus orbis habet.
Non tibi tot caelo scintillant astra sereno
Endymioneae turba ministra deae,
Quot tibi conspicuae formaque auroque puellae
Per medias radiant turba videnda vias,
Creditur huc geminis venisse invecta columbis
Alma pharetrigero milite cincta Venus,
Huic Cnidon, and riguas Simoentis flumine valles,
Huic Paphon, and roseam posthabitura Cypron.
Ast ego, dum pueri s^^it indulgentia caeci,
Moenia quam subito linquere fausta paro;
Et vitare procul malcfidae infamia Circes
Atria, divini Molyos usus open.
Stat quoque juncosas Cami remeare paludes,
Atque iterum raucae murmur adire Scholae.
Interea fidi parvum cape munus amici,
Paucaque in alternos verba coacta modos.
Elegia secunda, Anno aetatis 17.
In obitum Praeconis Academici Cantabrigiensis.
TE, qui conspicuus baculo fulgente solebas
Palladium toties ore ciere gregem,
Ultima praeconum praeconem te quoque saeva
Mors rapit, officio nec favet ipsa suo.
Candidiora licet fuerint tibi tempora plumis
Sub quibus accipimus delituisse Jovem,
O dignus tamen Haemonio juvenescere succo,
Dignus in Aesonios vivere posse dies,
Dignus quem Stygiis medica revocaret ab undis
Art Coronides, saepe rogante dea.
Tu si jussus eras acies accire togatas,
Et celer a Phoebo nuntius ire tuo,
Talis in Iliaca stabat Cyllenius aula
Alipes, aetherea missus ab arce Patris.
Talis and Eurybates ante ora furentis Achillei
Rettu^it Atridae jussa severa ducis.
Magna sepulchrorum regina, satelles Averni
Saeva nimis Musis, Palladi saeva nimis,
Quin illos rapias qui pondus inutile terrae,
Turba quidem est telis ista petenda tuis.
Vestibus hunc igitur pullis Academia luge,
Et madeant lachrymis nigra feretra tuis.
Fundat and ipsa modos querebunda Elegeia tristes,
Personet and totis naenia moesta scholis.
Elegia tertia, Anno aetatis 17.
In obitum Praesulis Wintoniensis.
Moestus eram, and tacitus nullo comitante sedebam,
Haerebantque animo tristia plura meo,
Protinus en subiit funestae cladis Imago
Fecit in Angliaco quam Libitina solo;
Dum procerum ingressa est splendentes marmore turres
Dira sepulchrali mors metuenda face;
Pulsavitque auro gravidos and jaspide muros,
Nec metuit satrapum sternere falce greges.
Tunc memini clarique ducis, fratrisque verendi
Intempestivis ossa cremata rogis.
(...) Agmina gemmatis plaudunt caelestia pennis,
Pura triumphali personat aethra tuba.
Quisque novum amplexu comitem cantuque salutat,
Hosque aliquis placido misit ab ore sonos;
Nate veni, and patrii felix cape gaudia regni,
Semper ab hinc duro, nate, labor vaca.
Dixit, and aligerae tetigerunt nablia turmae,
At mihi cum tenebris aurea pulsa quies.
Flebam turbatos Cephaleia pellice somnos,
Talia contingant somnia saepe mihi.
Elegia quarta. Anno aetatis 18.
Ad Thomam Junium praeceptorem suum, apud mercatores Anglicos Hamburgae
agentes, Pastoris munere fungentem.
CUrre per immensum subito mea littera pontum,
I, pete Teutonicos laeve per aequor agros,
Segnes rumpe moras, and nil, precor, obstet eunti,
Et festinantis nil remoretur iter.
Ipse ego Sicanio fraenantem carcere ventos
Aeolon, and virides sollicitabo Deos;
Caeruleamque suis comitatam Dorida Nymphis,
Ut tibi dent placidam per sua regna viam.
A^ tu, si poteris, celeres tibi sum jugales,
Vect. quibus Colchis fugit ab ore viri.
Aut queis Triptolemus Scythicas devenit in oras
Gratus Eleusina missus ab urbe puer.
Atque ubi Germanas flavere videbis arenas
Ditis ad Hamburgae moenia flecte gradum,
Dicitur occiso quae ducere nomen ab Hama,
Cimbrica, quem fertur clava dedisse neci.
Vivit ibi antiquae clarus pietatis honor
Praesul Christicolas pascere doctus oves;
Ille quidem est animae plusquam pars altera nostrae,
Dimidio vitae vivere cogor ego.
Hei mihi quot pelagi, quot montes interjecti
Me faciunt alia part carere mei!
Charior. ille mihi quam tu doctissime Graium
Cliniadi, pronepos qui Telamonis erat.
Quamque Stagirites generoso magnus alumno,
Quem peperit Libyco Chaonis alma Jovi.
Qualis Amyntorides, qualis Philyreius Heroes
Myrmidonum regi, talis and ille mihi.
Primus ego Aonios illo praeeunte recessus
Lustrabam, and bifidi sacra vireta jugi,
Pieriosque hausi latices, Clioque savente,
Castalio sparsi laeta ter ora mero.
(...) Et memini Heroum quos vidit ad aethera raptos,
Flevit and amissos Belgia tota duces.
At te praecipue luxi dignissime praesul,
Wintoniaeque olim gloria magna tuae;
Delicui fletu, and tristi sic ore querebar,
Mors fera Tartareo diva secunda Jovi,
Nonne satis quod sylva tuas persentiat iras,
Et quod in herbosos jus tibi detur agros,
Quodque afflata tuo marcescant lilia tabo,
Et crocus, and pulchrae Cypridi sacra rosa,
Nec finis ut semper fluvio contermina quercus
Miretur lapsus praetereuntis aquae?
Et tibi succumbit liquido quae plurima coelo
Evehitur pennis quamlibet augur avis,
Et quae mill nigris errant animalia sylvis,
Et quod alunt mutum Proteos antra pecus.
Invida, tanta tibi cum sit concessa potestas;
Quid juvat humana tingere caede manus?
Nobileque in pectus certas acuisse sagittas,
Semideamque animam sede fugasse sua?
Talia dum lacrymans alto sub pectore volvo,
Roscidus occiduis Hesperus exit aquis,
Et Tartessiaco submerserat aequore currum
Phoebus, ab eoo littore mensus iter.
Nec mora, membra cavo posui refovenda cubili,
Condiderant oculos noxque soporque meos.
Cum mihi visus eram lato spatiarier agro,
Heu nequit ingenium visa refer meum.
Illic punicea radiabant omnia luce,
Ut matutino cum juga sole rubent.
Ac veluti cum pandit opes Thaumantia proles,
Vestitu nituit multicolore solum.
Non dea tam variis ornavit floribus hortos
Alcinoi, Zephyro Chloris amata levi.
Flumina vernantes lambunt argentea campos,
Ditior Hesperio flavet arena Tago.
Serpit odoriferas per opes levis aura Favoni,
Aura sub innumeris humida nata rosis.
Talis in extremis terrae Gangetidis oris
Luciferi regis fingitur esse domus.
Ipse racemiferis dum densas vitibus umbras
Et pellucentes miror ubique locos,
Ecce mihi subito Praesul Wintonius astat,
Sydereum nitido fulsit in ore jubar;
Vestis ad auratos defluxit candida talos,
Infula divinum cinxerat alba caput.
Dumque senex tali incedit venerandus amictu,
Intremuit laeto florea terra sono.
(...) Flammeus at signum ter viderat arietis Aethon,
Induxitque auro lanea terga novo,
Bisque novo terram sparsisti Chlori senilem
Gramine, bisque tuas abstulit Auster opes:
Necdum ejus licuit mihi lumina pascere vultu,
Aut linguae dulces aure bibisse sonos.
Vade igitur, cursuque Eurum praeverte sonorum,
Quam sit opus monitis res docet, ipsa vides.
Invenies dulci cum conjuge forte sedentem,
Mulcentem gremio pignora chara suo,
Forsitan aut veterum praelarga volumina patrum
Versantem, aut very biblia sacra Dei.
Caelestive animas saturantem rore tenellas,
Grande salutiferae religionis opus.
Utque solet, multam, sit dicere cura salutem,
Dicere quam decuit, si modo adesset, herum.
Haec quoque paulum oculos in humum defixa modestos,
Verba verecundo sis memor ore loqui:
Haec tibi, si teneris vacat inter praelia Musis
Mittit ab Angliaco littore fida manus.
Accipe sinceram, quamvis sit sera, salutem;
Fiat and hocipso gratior illa tibi.
Sera quidem, sed vera fuit, quam casta recepit
Icaris a lento Penelopeia viro.
Ast ego quid volui manifestum tollere crimen,
Ipse quod ex omni part levare nequit.
Arguitur tardus merito, noxamque fatetur,
Et pudet officium deseruisse suum.
Tu modo da veniam fasso, veniamque roganti,
Crimina diminui, quae patuere, solent.
Non ferus in pavidos rictus diducit hiantes,
Vulnifico pronos nec rapit ungue leo.
Saepe sarissiferi crudelia pectora Thracis
Supplicis ad moestas delicuere preces.
Extensaeque manus avertunt sulminis ictus,
Placat and iratos hostia parva Deos.
Jamque diu scripsisse tibi fuit impetus illi,
Neve moras ultra ducere passus Amor.
Nam vaga Fama refert, heu nuntia vera malorum!
In tibi finitimis bella tumere locis,
Teque tuamque urbem truculento milite cingi,
Et jam Saxonicos arma parasse duces.
Te circum late campos populatur Enyo,
Et sata carne virum jam cruor arva rigat.
Germanisque suum concessit Thracia Martem,
Illuc Odrysios Mars pater egit equos.
Perpetuoque comans jam deflorescit oliva,
Fugit and aerisonam Diva perosa tubam,
Fugit io terris, and jam non ultima virgo
Creditur ad superas justa volasse domos.
Te tamen interea belli circumsonat horror,
Vivis and ignoto solus inopsque solo;
Et, tibi quam patrii non exhibuere penates
Sede peregrina quaeris egenus opem.
Patria dura parens, and saxis saevior albis
Spumea quae pulsat littoris unda tui,
Siccine te decet innocuos exponere faetus;
Siccine in externam ferrea cogis humum,
Et sinis ut terris quaerant alimenta remotis
Quos tibi prospiciens miserat ipse Deus,
Et qui laeta ferunt de caelo nuntia, quique
Quae via post cineres ducat ad astra, docent?
Digna quidem Stygiis quae vivas clausa tenebris,
Aeternaque animae digna perire fame!
Haud aliter vates terrae Thesbitidis olim
Pressit inassueto devia tesqua pede,
Desertasque Arabum salebras, dum regis Achabi
Effugit atque tuas, Sidoni dira, manus.
Talis and horrisono laceratus membra flagello,
Paulus ab Aemathia pellitur urbe Cilix.
Piscosaeque ipsum Gergessae civis Jesum
Pinibus ingratus jussit abire suis.
At tu sum animos, nec spes cadat anxia curis
Nec t^a concutiat decolor ossa metus.
Sis etenim quamvis fulgentibus obsitus armis,
Intententque tibi millia tela necem,
At nullis vel inerme latus violabitur armis,
Deque tuo cuspis nulla cruore bibet.
Namque eris ipse Dei radiante sub aegide tutus,
Ille tibi custos, and pugil ille tibi;
Ille Sionaeae qui tot sub moenibus arcis
Assyrios fudit nocte silente viros;
Inque fugam vertit quos in Samaritidas oras
Misit ab antiquis prisca Damascus agris,
Terruit and densas pavido cum rege cohortes,
Aere dum vacuo buccina clara sonat,
Cornea pulvereum dum verberat ungula campum,
Currus arenosam dum quatit actus humum,
Auditurque hinnitus equorum ad bella ruentum,
Et strepitus ferri, murmuraque alta virum.
Et tu (quod superest miseri) sperare memento,
Et tua magnanimo pectore vince mala.
Nec dubites quandoque frui melioribus annis,
Atque iterum patrios posse videre (...),
Elegia quinta, Anno aetatis 20.
In adventum veris.
IN se perpetuo Tempus revolubile gyro
Jam revocat Zephyros vere tepente novos.
Induiturque brevem Tellus reparata juventam,
Jamque soluta gelu dulce virescit humus.
Fallor? an and nobis redeunt in carmina vires,
Ingeniumque mihi munere veris adest?
Munere veris adest, iterumque vigescit ab illo
(Quis putet) atque aliquod jam sibi poscit opus.
Castalis ante oculos, bifidumque cacumen oberrat,
Et mihi Pyrenen somnia nocte ferunt.
Concitaque arcano fervent mihi pectora motu,
Et furor, and sonitus me sacer intus agit.
Delius ipse venit, video Peneide lauro
Implicitos crines, Delius ipse venit.
Jam mihi men's liquidi raptatur in ardua coeli,
Perque vagas nubes corpore liber eo.
Perque umbras, perque antra feror penetralia vatum,
Et mihi fana patent interiora Deum.
Intuiturque animus toto quid agatur Olympo,
Nec fugiunt oculos Tartara caeca meos,
Quid tam grande sonat distento spiritus ore?
Quid parit haec rabies, quid sacer iste furor?
Ver mihi, quod dedit ingenium, cantabitur illo;
Profuerint isto reddita dona modo.
Jam Philomela tuos soliis adoperta novellis
Instituis modulos, dum silet omne nemus.
Urbe ego, tu sylva simul incipiamus utrique,
Et simul adventum veris uterque canat.
Veris io rediere vices, celebremus honores
Veris, and hoc subeat Musa perennis opus.
Jam sol Aethiopas fugiens Tithoniaque arva,
Flectit ad Arctoas aurea lora plagas.
Est bieve noctis iter, brevis est mora noctis opacae
Horrida cum tenebris exulat illa suis.
Jamque Lycaonius plaustrum caeleste Boots
Non longa sequitur fessus ut ante via,
Nunc etiam solitas circum Jovis atria toto
Excubias agitant sydera rara polo.
Nam dolus, and caedes, and vis cum nocte recessit,
Neve Giganteum Dii timuere scelus.
Forte aliquis scopuli recubans in vertice pastor,
Roscida cum primo sole rubescit humus,
Hac, ait, hac certe caruisti nocte puella
Phoebe tua, c^leres quae retineret equos,
Laeta suas repetit sylvas, pharetramque resumit
Cynthia, Luciferas ut videt alta rotas,
Et tenues ponens radios gaudere videtur
Officium fieri tam breve fratris open.
Desere, Phoebus ait, thalamos Aurora seniles,
Quid juvat effoeto procubuisse toro?
Te manet Aeolides viridi venator in herba,
Surge, tuos ignes altus Hymettus habet.
Flava verecundo dea crimen in ore fatetur,
Et matutinos ocyus urget equos.
Exuit invisam Tellus rediviva senectam,
Et cupit amplexus Phoebe subire tuos;
Et cupit, and digna est, quid enim formosius illa,
Pandit ut omniferos luxuriosa sinus,
Atque Arabum spirat messes, and ab ore venusto
Mitia cum Paphiis fundit amoma rosis.
Ecce coronatur sacro frons ardua luco,
Cingit ut Idaeam pinea turris Opim;
Et vario madidos intexit flore capillos,
Floribus and visa est posse placere suis.
Floribus effusos ut erat redimita capillos
Tenario placuit diva Sicana Deo.
Aspice Phoebe tibi faciles hortantur amores,
Mellitasque movent flamina verna preces.
Cinnamea Zephyrus leve plaudit odorifer ala,
Bland^tiasque tibi far videntur aves.
Nec sine dote tuos temeraria quaerit amores
Terra, nec optatos poscit egena toros,
Alma salutiferum medicos tibi gramen in usus
Praebet, and hinc ticulos adjuvat ipsa tuos.
Quod si te pretium, si te fulgentia tangunt
Munera, (muneribus saepe coemptus Amor)
Illa tibi ostentat quascunque sub aequore vasto,
Et superinjectis montibus abdit opes.
Ah quoties cum tu clivoso fessus Olympo
In vespertinas praecipitaris aquas,
Cur te, inquit, cursu languentem Phoebe diurno
Hesperiis recipit Caerula matter aquis?
Quid tibi cum Tethy? Quid cum Tartesside lympha,
Dia quid immundo perluis ora salo?
Frigora Phoebe mea melius captabis in umbra,
Huc ades, ardentes imbue rore comas.
Mollior egelida veniet tibi somnus in herba,
Huc ades, and gremio lumina pone meo.
Quaque jaces circum mulcebit lene susurrans
Aura per humentes corpora fusa rosas.
Nec me (creed mihi) terrent Semeleia fata,
Nec Phaetonteo fumidus axis equo;
Cum tu Phoebe tuo sapientius uteris igni,
Huc ades and gremio lumina pone meo.
Sic Tellus lasciva suos suspirat amores;
Matris in exemplum caetera turba ruunt.
Nunc etenim toto currit vagus orb Cupido,
Languentesque fovet solis ab igne faces.
Insonuere novis lethalia cornua nervis,
Triste micant ferro tela corusca novo.
Jamque vel invictam tentat superasse Dianam,
Quaeque sedet sacro Vesta pudica foco.
Ipsa senescentem reparat Venus annua formam,
Atque iterum tepido creditur orta mari.
Marmoreas juvenes clamant Hymenaee per urbes,
Litus io Hymen, and cava saxa sonant.
Cultior ille venit tunicaque decentior apta,
Puniceum redolet vestis odora crocum.
Egrediturque frequens ad amoeni gaudia veris
Virgineos auro cincta puella sinus.
Votum est cuique suum, votum est tamen omnibus unum,
Ut sibi quem cupiat, det Cytherea virum.
Nunc quoque septena modulatur arundine pastor,
Et sua quae jungat carmina Phyllis habet.
Natvia nocturno placat sua sydera cantu,
Delphinasque leves ad vada summa vocat.
Jupiter ipse alto cum conjuge ludit Olympo,
Convocat and famulos ad sua festa Deos.
Nunc etiam Satyri cum sera crepuscula surgunt,
Pervolitant celeri florea rura choro,
Sylvanusque sua Cyparissi fronde revinctus,
Semicaperque Deus, semideusque caper.
Quaeque sub arboribus Dryades latuere vetustis
Per juga, per solos expatiantur agros.
Per sata luxuriat fruticetaque Maenalius Pan,
Vix Cybele matter, vix sibi tuta Ceres,
Atque aliquam cupidus praedatur Oreada Faunus,
Consulit in trepidos dum sibi Nympha pedes,
Jamque latet, latitansque cupit male tecta videri,
Et fugit, and fugiens pervelit ipsa capi.
Dii quoque non dubitant caelo praeponere sylvas,
Et sua quisque sibi numina lucus habet.
Et sua quisque diu sibi numina lucus habeto,
Nec vos arborea dii precor ite domo.
Te referant miseris te Jupiter aurea terris
Saecla, quid ad nimbos aspera tela redis?
Tu saltem len^e rapidos age Phoebe jugales
Qua potes, and sensim tempora veris eant.
Brumaque productas tarde ferat hispida noctes,
Ingruat and nostro serior umbra polo.
Elegia sexta.
Ad Carolum Diodatum ruri commorantem.
Qui cum idibus December. scripsisset, and sua carmina excusari postulasset si
solito minus essent bona, quod inter lautitias quibus erat ab amisis exceptus,
haud satis felicem operam Musis dare se posse affirmabat, hunc habuit responsum.
MItto tibi sanam non pleno ventre salutem,
Qua tu distento forte carere potes.
At tua quid nostram prolectat Musa camoenam,
Nec sinit optatas posse sequi teneb(...)?
Carmine scire velis quam te redamemque colamque,
Creed mihi vix hoc carmine scire queas,
Nam neque noster amor modulis includitur arctis,
Nec venit ad claudos integer ipse pedes.
Quam been solennes epulas, hilaremque Decembrim
Festaque coelifugam quae coluere Deum,
Deliciasque refers, hyberni gaudia ruris,
Haustaque per lepidos Gallica musta focos.
Quid queretis resugam vino dapibusque poesin?
Carmen amat Bacchum, Carmina Bacchus amat.
Nec puduit Phoebum virides gestasse corymbos,
Atque hederam lauro praeposuisse suae.
Saepius Aoniis clamavit collibus Euoe
Mista Thyoneo turba novena choro.
Naso Corallaeis mala carmina misit ab agris:
Non illic epulae non sata vitis erat.
Quid nisi vina, rosasque racemiferumque Lyaeum
Cantavit brevibus Teia Musa modis,
Pindaricosque inflat numeros Teumesius Evan,
Et redolet sumptum pagina quaeque merum.
Dum gravis everso currus crepat axe supinus,
Et volat Eleo pulvere fuscus eques.
Quadrimoque madens Lyricen Romanus Iaccho
Dulce canit Glyceran, flavicomamque Chloen.
Jam quoque lauta tibi generoso mensa paratu,
Mentis alit vires, ingeniumque sovet.
Massica foecundam despumant pocula venam,
Fundis and ex ipso condita metra cado.
Addimus his arts, fusumque per intima Phoebum
Corda, favent uni Bacchus, Apollo, Ceres.
Scilicet haud mirum tam dulcia carmina per te
Numine composito tres peperisse Deos.
Nunc quoque Thressa tibi caelato barbitos auro
Insonat arguta molliter icta manu;
Auditurque chelys suspensa tapetia circum,
Virgineos tremula quae regat art pedes.
Illa tuas saltem teneant spectacula Musas,
Et revocent, quantum crapula pellit iners.
Creed mihi dum psallit ebur, comitataque plectrum
Implet odoratos festa chorea tholos,
Percipies tacitum per pectora serpere Phoebum,
Quale repentinus permeat ossa calor,
Perque puellares oculos digitumque sonantem
Irruet in totos lapsa Thalia sinus.
Namque Elegia levis multorum cura deorum est,
Et vocat ad numeros quemlibet illa suos;
Liber adest elegis, Eratoque, Ceresque, Venusque,
Et cum purpurea matre tenellus Amor.
Talibus inde licent convivia larga poetis,
Saepius and veteri commaduisse mero.
At qui bella resert, and adulto sub Jove coelum,
Heroasque pios, semideosque duces,
Et nunc sancta canit superum consulta deorum,
Nunc latrata fero regna profunda cane,
Ille quidem parce Samii pro more magistri
Vivat, and innocuos praebeat herba cibos;
Stet prope fagineo pellucida lympha catillo,
Sobriaque e puro pocula font bibat.
Additur huic scelerisque vacans, and casta juventus,
Et rigidi mores, and sine labe manus.
Qualis vest nitens sacra, and lustralibus undis
Surgis ad infensos augur iture Deos.
Hoc ritu vixisse ferunt post rapta sagacem
Lumina Tiresian, Ogygiumque Linon,
Et lare devoto profugum Calchanta, senemque
Orpheon edomitis sola per antra feris;
Sic dapis exiguus, sic rivi potor Homerus
Dulichium vexit per freta longa virum,
Et per Monstrificam Perseiae Phoebados aulam,
Et vada foemineis insidiosa sonis,
Perque tuas rex i am domos, ubi sanguine nigro
Dicitur umbrarum detinuisse greges.
Diis etenim sacer est vates, divumque sacerdos,
Spirat and occultum pectus, and ora Jovem.
At tu si quid agam, scitabere (si modo saltem
Esse putas tanti noscere siquid agam)
Paciserum canimus caelesti femine regem,
Faustaque sacratis saecula pacta libris,
Vagitumque Dei, and stabulantem paupere tecto
Qui suprema suo cum patre regna colit.
Stelliparumque polum, modulan tesque aethere turmas,
Et subito elisos ad sua fana Deos.
Dona quidem dedimus Christi natalibus illa
Illa sub auroram lux mihi prima tulit.
Te quoque pressa manent patriis meditata cicutis,
Tu mihi, cui recitem, judicis instar eris.
Elegia septima, Anno aetatis undevigesimo.
NOndum blanda tuas leges Amathusia noram,
Et Paphio vacuum pectus ab igne suit.
Saepe cupidineas, puerilia tela, sagittas,
Atque tuum sprevi maxim, numen, Amor.
Tu puer imbelles dixi transfige columbas,
Convenient tenero mollia bella duci.
Aut de passeribus tumidos age, parve, triumphos,
Haec sunt militiae digna trophaea tuae:
In genus humanum quid inania dirigis arma?
Non valet in fortes ista pharetra viros.
Non tulit hoc Cyprius, (neque enim Deus ullus ad iras
Promptior) and duplici jam serus igne calet.
Ver erat, and summae radians per culmina villae
Attulerat primam lux tibi May diem:
At mihi adhuc refugam quaerebant lumina noctem
Nec matutinum sustinuere jubar.
Astat Amor lecto, pictis Amor impiger alis,
Prodidit astantem mota pharetra Deum:
Prodidit and facies, and dulce minantis ocelli,
Et quicquid puero, dignum and Amore suit.
Talis in aeterno juvenis Sigeius Olympo
Miscet amatori pocula plena Jovi;
Aut qui formosas pellexit ad oscula nymphas
Thiodamantaeus Naiade raptus Hylas;
Addideratque iras, sed and has decuisse putares,
Addideratque truces, nec sine fell minas.
Et miser exemplo sapuisses tutius, inquit,
Nunc mea quid possit dextera testis eris.
Inter and expertos vires numerabere nostras,
Et faciam vero per tua damna fidem.
Ipse ego si nescis strato Pythone superbum
Edomui Phoebum, cessit and ille mihi;
Et quoties meminit Peneidos, ipse fatetur
Certius and gravius tela nocere mea.
Me nequit adductum curvare peritius arcum,
Qui post terga solet vincere Parthus eques.
Cydoniusque mihi cedit venator, and ille
Inscius uxori qui necis author erat.
Est etiam nobis ingens quoque victus Orion,
Herculeaeque manus, Herculeusque comes.
Jupiter ipse licet sua fulmina torqueat in me,
Haerebunt lateri spicula nostra Jovis.
Caetera quae dubitas melius mea tela docebunt,
Et tua non leviter corda petenda mihi.
Nec te stulte tuae poterunt defendere Musae,
Nec tibi Phoebaeus porriget anguis opem.
Dixit, and aurato quatiens mucrone sagittam,
Evolat in tepidos Cypridos ille sinus.
At mihi risuro tonuit ferus ore minaci,
Et mihi de puero non metus ullus erat,
Et modo qua nostri spatiantur in urbe Quirites
Et modo villarum proxima rura placent.
Turba frequens, facieque simillima turba dearum
Splendida per medias it que reditque vias.
Auctaque luce dies gemino fulgore coruscat,
Fallor? an and radios hinc quoque Phoebus habet.
Haec ego non fugi spectacula grata severus,
Impetus and quo me fert juvenilis, agor.
Lumina luminibus male providus obvia misi
Neve oculos potui continuisse meos.
Unam forte aliis supereminuisse notabam,
Principium nostri lux erat illa mali.
Sic Venus optaret mortalibus ipsa videri,
Sic regina Deum conspicienda fuit.
Hanc memor objecit nobis malus ille Cupido,
Solus and hos nobis texuit ante dolos.
Nec procul ipse vafer latuit, multaeque sagittae,
Et facis a tergo grande pependit onus.
Nec mora, nunc ciliis haesit, nunc virginis ori,
Insilit hinc labiis, insidet inde genis:
Et quascunque agilis parts jaculator oberrat,
Hei mihi, mill locis pectus inerme ferit.
Protinus insoliti subierunt corda furores,
Uror amans intus, flammaque totus eram.
Interea misero quae jam mihi sola placebat,
Ablata est oculis non reditura meis.
Ast ego progredior tacit querebundus, and excors,
Et dubious volui saepe refer pedem.
Findor, and haec remanet, sequitur pars altera votum,
Raptaque tam subito gaudia flere juvat.
Sic dolet amissum proles Junonia coelum,
Inter Lemniacos praecipitata socos.
Talis and abreptum solemn respexit, ad Orcum
Vectus ab attonitis Amphiaraus equis.
Quid faciam infelix, and luctu victus, amores
Nec licet inceptos ponere, neve sequi.
O utinam spectare semel mihi detur amatos
Vultus, and coram tristia verba loqui!
Forsitan and duro non est adamante creata,
Forte nec ad nostras furdeat illa preces.
Creed mihi nullus sic infeliciter arfit,
Ponar in exemplo primus and unus ego.
Parce precor teneri cum sis Deus ales amoris,
Pugnent officio nec tua facta tuo.
Jam tuus O certe est mihi formidabilis arcus,
Nate dea, jaculis nec minus igne potens:
Et tua fumabunt nostris altaria donis,
Solus and in superis tu mihi summus eris.
Deem meos tandem, verum nec deem furores,
Nescio cur, miser est suaviter omnis amans:
Tu modo da facilis, posthaec mea siqua futura est,
Cuspis amaturos figat ut una duos.
HAec ego mente olim laeva, studioque supino
Nequitiae posui vana trophaea meae.
Scilicet abreptum sic me malus impulit error,
Indocilisque aetas prava magistra fuit.
Donec Socraticos umbrosa Academia rivos
Praebuit, admissum dedocuitque jugum.
Protinus extinctis ex illo tempore flammis,
Cincta rigent multo pectora nostra gelu.
Unde suis frigus metuit puer ipse Sagittis,
Et Diomedeam vim timet ipse Venus.
In Proditionem Bombardicam.
CUm simul in regem nuper satrapasque Britannos
Ausus es infandum perfide Fauxe nefas,
Fallor? an and mitis voluisti ex part videri,
Et pensare mala cum pietate scelus;
Scilicet hos alti missurus ad atria caeli,
Sulphureo curru flammivolisque rotis.
Qualiter ille feris caput inviolabile Parcis
Liquit Jordanios turbine raptus agros.
In eandem.
SIccine tentasti caelo donasse Jacobum
Quae septemgemino Belua monte lates?
Ni meliora tuum poterit dare munera numen,
Parce precor donis insidiosa tuis.
Ille quidem sine te consortia serus adivit
Astra, nec inferni pulveris usus open.
Sic potius foedos in caelum pelle cucullos,
Et quot habet brutos Roma profana Deos,
Namque hac aut alia nisi quemque adjuveris art,
Creed mihi caeli vix been scandet iter.
In eandem.
PUrgatorem animae derisit Iacobus ignem,
Et sine quo superum non adeunda domus.
Frenduit hoc trina monstrum Latiale corona
Movit and horrificum corona dena minax.
Et nec inultus ait temnes mea sacra Britanne,
Supplicium spreta relligione dabis.
Et si stelligeras unquam penetraveris arces,
Non nisi per flammas triste patebit iter.
O quam funesto cecinisti proxima vero,
Verbaque ponderibus vix caritura suis!
Nam prope Tartareo sublime rotatus ab igni
Ibat ad aethereas umbra perusta plagas.
In eandem.
QUem modo Roma suis devoverat impia diris,
Et Styge damnarat Taenarioque sinu,
Hunc vice mutata jam tollere gestit ad astra,
Et cupit ad superos evehere usque Deos.
In invertorem Bombardae.
JApetionidem laudavit caeca vetustas,
Qui tulit aetheream solis ab axe facem;
At mihi major erit, qui lurida creditur arma,
Et trifidum fulmen surripuisse Jovi.
Ad Leonoram Romae canentem.
ANgelus unicuique suus (sic credit gentes)
Obtigit aethereis ales ab ordinibus.
Quid mirum? Leonora tibi si gloria major,
Nam tua praesentem vox sonat ipsa Deum.
Aut Deus, aut vacui certe men's tertia coeli.
Per tua secreto guttura serpit agens;
Serpit agens, facilisque docet mortalia corda
Sensim immortali assuesoere posse sono.
Quod si cuncta quidem Deus est, per cunctaque fusus,
In te una loquitur, caetera mutus habet.
Ad eandem.
ALtera Torquatum cepit Leonora Poetam,
Cujus ab insano cessit amore furens.
Ah miser ille tuo quanto felicius aevo
Perditus, and propter te Leonora foret!
Et te Pieria senfisset voce canentam
Aurea maternae fila movere lyrae,
Quamvis Dircaeo torsisset lumina Pentheo
Saevior, aut totus desipulisset iners,
Tu tamen errantes caeca vertigine sensus
Voce eadem poteras composuisse tua;
Et poteras aegro spirans sub cord quietem
Flexanimo cantu restituisse sibi.
Ad eandem.
CRedula quid liquidam Sirena Neapoli jactas,
Claraque Parthenopes fana Acheloiados,
Littoreamque tua defunctam Naiada ripa
Corpora Chalcidico sacra dedisse rogo?
Illa quidem vivitque, and amoena Tibridis unda
Mutavit rauci murmura Pausilipi.
Illic Romulidum studiis ornata secundis,
Atque homines cantu detinet atque Deos.
Apologus de Rustico and Hero.
RUsticus ex Malo sapidissima poma quotannis
Legit, and urbano lecta dedit Domino:
Hic incredibili fructus dulcedine Captus
Malum ipsam in proprias transtulit areolas.
Hactenus illa ferax, sed longo debilis aevo,
Mota solo assueto, protinus aret iners.
Quod tandem ut patuit Domino, spe lusus inani,
Damnavit celeres in sua damna manus.
Atque ait, Heu quanto satius fuit illa Coloni
(Parva licet) grato dona tulisse animo!
Possem Ego avaritiam froenare, gulamque voracem:
Nunc periere mihi and foetus and ipsa parens.
Elegiarum Finis.
Sylvarum Liber.
Anno aetatis 16. In obitum Procancellarii medici.
PArere fati discite legibus,
Manusque Parcae jam date supplices,
Qui pendulum telluris orbem
Iapeti colitis nepotes.
Vos si relicto mors vaga Taenaro
Semel vocarit flebilis, heu morae
Tentantur incassum dolique;
Per tenebras Stygis ire certum est.
Si destinatam pellere dextera
Mortem valeret, non ferus Hercules
Nessi venenatus cruore
Aemathia jacuisset Oeta.
Nec fraud turpi Palladis invidae
Vidisset occisum Ilion Hectora, aut
Quem larva Pelidis peremit
Ense Locro, Jove lacrymante.
Si^riste fatum verba Hecateia
Fugare possint, Telegoni parens
Vixisset infamis, potentique
Aegiali soror usa virga.
Numenque trinum fallere si queant
Arts medentum, ignotaque gramina,
Non gnarus herbarum Machaon
Eurypyli cecidisset hasta.
Laesisset and nec te Philyreie
Sagitta echidnae perlita sanguine,
Nec tela te fulmenque avitum
Caese puer genitricis alvo.
Tuque O alumno major Apolline,
Gentis togatae cui regimen datum,
Frondosa quem nunc Cirrha luget,
Et mediis Helicon in undis,
Jam praesuisses Palladio gregi
Laetus, superstes, nec sine gloria,
Nec puppe lustrasses Charontis
Horribiles barathri recessus.
At fila rupit Persephone tua
Irata, cum te viderit artibus
Succoque pollenti tot atris
Fausibus eripuisse mortis.
Colende praeses, membra precor tua
Molli quiescant cespite, and ex tuo
Crescant rosae, calthaeque busto,
Purpureoque hyacinthus ore.
Sit mite de te judicium Aeaci,
Subrideatque Aetnaea Proserpina,
Interque felices perennis
Elysio spatiere campo.
In quintum Novembris, Anno aetatis 17.
JAm pius extrema veniens Iacobus ab arcto
Teucrigenas populos, lateque patentia regna
Albionum tenuit, jamque inviolabile foedus
Sceptra Caledoniis conjunxerat Anglica Scotis:
Pacificusque novo felix divesque sedebat
In solio, occultique doli securus and hostis:
Cum ferus ignifluo regnans Acheronte tyrannus,
Eumenidum pater, aethereo vagus exul Olympo,
Forte per immensum terrarum erraverat orbem,
Dinumerans sceleris socios, vernasque fideles,
Participes regni post funera moesta futuros;
Hic tempestates medio ciet aere diras,
Illic unamimes odium struit inter amicos,
Armat and invictas in mutua viscera gentes;
Regnaque olivifera vertit florentia pace,
Et quoscunque videt purae virtutis amantes,
Hos cupit adjicere imperio, fraudumque magister
Tentat inaccessum sceleri corrumpere pectus,
Infidiasque locat tacitas, cassesque latentes
Tendit, ut incautos rapiat, seu Caspia Tigris
Insequitur trepidam deserta per avia praedam
Nocte sub illuni, and somno nictantibus astris.
Talibus infestat populos Summanus and urbes
Cinctus caeruleae fumanti turbine flammae.
Jamque fluentisonis albentia rupibus arva
Apparent, and terra Deo dilecta marino,
Cui nomen dederat quondam Neptunia proles
Amphitryoniaden qui non dubitavit atrocem
Aequore tranato furiali poscere bello,
Ante expugnatae crudelia saecula Troiae.
At simul hanc opibusque and festa pace beatam
Aspicit, and pingues donis Cerealibus agros,
Quodque magis doluit, venerantem numina very
Sancta Dei populum, tandem suspiria rupit
Tartareos ignes and luridum olentia sulphur.
Qualia Trinacria trux ab Jove clausus in Aetna
Efflat tabifico monstrosus ab ore Tiphoeus.
Ignescunt oculi, stridetque adamantius ordo
Dentis, ut armorum fragor, ictaque cuspide cuspis.
Atque pererrato solum hoc lacrymabile mundo
Inveni, dixit, gens haec mihi sola rebellis,
Contemtrixque jugi, nostraque potentior art.
Illa tamen, mea si quicquam tantamina possunt.
Non feret hoc impune diu, non ibit inulta,
Hactenus; and piceis liquido notat aere pennis;
Qua volat, adversi praecursant agmine venti,
Densantur nubes, and crebra tonitrua fulgent.
Jamque pruinosas velox superaverat alps,
Et tenet Ausoniae fines, a part sinistra
Nimbifer Appenninus erat, priscique Sabini,
Dextra veneficiis infamis Hetruria, nec non
Te furtiva Tibris Thetidi videt oscula dantem;
Hinc Mavortigenae consistit in arce Quirini.
Reddiderant dubiam jam sera crepuscula lucem,
Cum circumgreditur totam Tricoronifer urbem,
Panificosque Deos portat, scapulisque virorum
Evehitur, praeeunt submisso poplite reges,
Et mendicantum series longissima fratrum;
Cereaque in manibus gestant funalia caeci,
Cimmeriis nati in tenebris, vitamque trahentes,
Templa dein multis subeunt lucentia taedis
(Vespe^ erat sacer iste Petro) fremitusque canentum
Saepe tholos implet vacuos, and inane locorum.
Qualiter exululat Bromius, Bromiique caterva,
Orgia cantantes in Echionio Aracyntho,
Dum tremit attonitus vitreis Asopus in undis,
Et procul ipse cava responsat rupe Cithaeron.
His igitur tandem solenni more peractis,
Nox senis amplexus Erebi taciturna reliquit,
Praecipitesque impellit equos stimulante flagello,
Captum oculis Typhlonta, Melanchaetemque ferocem,
Atque Acherontaeo prognatam patre Siopen
Torpidam, and hirsutis horrentem Phrica capillis.
Interea regum domitor, Phlegetontius haeres
Ingreditur thalamos (neque enim secretus adulter
Producit steriles molli sine pellice noctes)
At vix compositos somnus claudebat ocellos,
Cum niger umbrarum dominus, rectorque silentum,
Praedatorque hominum falsa sub imagine tectus
Astitit, assumptis micuerunt tempora canis,
Barba sinus promissa tegit, cineracea longo
Syrmate verrit humum vestis, pendetque cucullus
Vertice de raso, and ne quicquam desit ad arts,
Cannabeo lumbos constrinxit sune salaces.
Tarda fenestratis figens vestigia calceis.
Talis uti fama est, vasta Franciscus eremo
Tetra vagabatur solus per lustra ferarum,
Sylvestrique tulit genti pia verba salutis
Impius, atque lupos domuit, Lybicosque leones.
Subdolus at tali Serpens velatus amictu
Solvit in has fallax ora execrantia voces;
Dormis nate? Etiamne tuos sopor opprimit artus?
Immemor O fidei, pecorumque oblite tuorum!
Dum cathedram venerande tuam, diademaque triplex
Ridet Hyperboreo gens barbara nata sub axe,
Dumque pharetrati spernunt tua jura Britanni:
Surge, age, surge piger, Latius quem Caesar adorat,
Cui reserata patet convexi janua caeli,
Turgentes animos, and fastus frange procaces,
Sacrilegique sciant, tua quid maledictro possit,
Et quid Apostolicae possit custodia clavis;
Et memor Hesperiae disjectam ulciscere classem,
Mersaque Iberorum lato vexilla profundo,
Sanctorumque cruci tot corpora fixa probrosae,
Thermodoontea nuper regnante puella.
At tu si tenero mavis torpescere lecto
Crescentesque negas hosti contundere vires,
Tyrrhenum implebit numeroso milite pontum,
Signaque Aventino ponet fulgentia colle:
Relliquas veterum franget, flammisque cremabit,
Sacraque calcabit pedibus tua colla profanis,
Cujus gaudebant soleis dare basia reges.
Nec tamen hunc bellis and aperto Mart lacesses,
Irritus ille labor, tu callidus utere fraud,
Quaelibet haereticis disponere retia fas est;
Jamque ad consilium extremis rex magnus ab oris
Patricios vocat, and procerum de stirpe creatos,
Grandaevosque patres trabea, canisque verendos;
Hos tu membratim poteris conspergere in auras,
Atque dare in cineres, nitrati pulveris igne
Aedibus injecto, qua convenere, sub imis.
Protinus ipse igitur quoscunque habet Anglia fidos
Propositi, factique moan, quisquamne tuorum
Audebit summi non jussa facessere Papae.
Perculsosque metu subito, casumque stupentes
Invadat vel Gallus atrox, vel saevus Iberus.
Saecula sic illic tandem Mariana redibunt,
Tuque in belligeros iterum dominaberis Anglos.
Et nequid timeas, divos divasque secundas
Accipe, quotque tuis celebrantur numina fastis.
Dixit and adscitos ponens malefidus amictus
Fugit ad infandam, regnum illaetabile, Lethen.
Jam rosea Eoas pandens Tithonia portas
Vestit inauratas redeunti lumine terras;
Maestaque adhuc nigri deplorans funera nati
Irrigat ambrosiis montana cacumina guttis;
Cum somnos pepulit stellatae janitor aulae
Nocturnos visus, and somnia grata revolvens.
Est locus aeterna septus caligine noctis
Vasta ruinosi quondam fundamina tecti,
Nunc torvi spelunca Phoni, Prodotaeque bilinguis
Effera quos uno peperit Discordia partu.
Hic inter caementa jacent praeruptaque saxa,
Ossa inhumata virum, and trajecta cadavera ferro;
Hic Dolus intortis semper sedet ater ocellis,
Jurgiaque, and stimulis armata Calumnia fauces.
Et Furor, atque viae moriendi mill videntur
Et timor, exanguisque locum circumvolat Horror,
Perpetuoque leves per muta silentia Manes
Exululat, tellus and sanguine conscia stagnat.
Ipsi etiam pavidi latitant penetralibus antri
Et Phonos, and Prodotes, nulloque sequente per antrum
Antrum horrens, scopulosum, atrum feralibus umbris
Diffugiunt sontes, and retro lumina vortunt,
Hos pugiles Romae per saecula longa fideles
Evocat antistes Babylonius, atque ita fatur.
Fi^ibus occiduis circumfusum incolit aequor
Gens exosa mihi, prudens natura negavit
Indignam penitus nostro conjungere mundo:
Illuc, sic jubeo, celeri contendite gressu,
Tartareoque leves difflentur pulvere in auras
Et rex and pariter satrapae, scelerata propago
Et quotquot fidei caluere cupidine verae
Consilii socios adhibete, operisque ministros.
Finierat, rigidi cupide paruere gemelli.
Interea longo flectens curvamine coelos
Despicit aetherea dominus qui fulgurat arce,
Vanaque perversae ridet conamina turbae,
Atque sui causam populi volet ipse tueri.
Esse ferunt spatium, qua distat ab Aside terra
Fertilis Europe, and spectat Mareotidas undas;
Hic turris posita est Titanidos ardua Famae
Aerea, lata, sonans, rutilis vicinior astris
Quam superimpositum vel Athos vel Pelion Ossae
Mill fores aditusque patent, totidemque fenestrae,
Amplaque per tenues translucent atria muros;
Excitat hic varios plebs agglomerata susurros;
Qualiter instrepitant circum mulctralia bombis
Agmina muscarum, aut texto per ovilia junco,
Dum Canis aestivum coeli petit ardua culmen
Ipsa quidem summa sedet ultrix matris in arce,
Auribus innumeris cinctum caput eminet olli,
Queis sonitum exiguum trahit, atque levissima captat
Murmura, ab extremis patuli confinibus orbis.
Nec tot Aristoride servator inique juvencae
Isidos, immiti volvebas lumina vultu,
Lumina non unquam tacito nutantia somno,
Lumina subjectas late spectantia terras.
Istis illa solet loca luce carentia saepe
Perlustrare, etiam radianti imper^ia soli^*
Millenisque loquax auditaque visaque linguis
Cuilibet effundit temeraria, veraque mendax
Nunc minuit, modo confictis sermonibus auget.
Sed tamen a nostro meruisti carmine lauds
Fama, bonum quo non aliud veracius ullum,
Nobis digna cani, nec te memorasse pigebit
Carmine tam longo, servati scilicet Angli
Officiis vaga diva tuis, tibi reddimus aequa.
Te Deus aeternos motu qui temperat ignes,
Fulmine praemisso alloquitur, terraque tremente*
Fama siles? an te latet impia Papistarum
Conjurata cohors in meque meosque Britannos,
Et nova sceptrigero caedes meditata Iacobo:
Nec plura, illa statim sensit mandata Tonantis,
Et satis ante fugax stridentes induit alas,
Induit and variis exilia corpora plumis;
Dextra tubam gestat Temesaeo ex aere sonoram.
Nec mora jam pennis cedentes remigat auras,
Atque parum est curfu celeres praevertere nubes,
Jam ventos, jam solis equos post terga reliquit:
Et primo Angliacas solito de more per urbes
Ambiguas voces, incertaque murmura spargit,
Mox arguta dolos, and detestabile vulgat
Proditionis opus, nec non facta horrida dictu,
Authoresque addit sceleris, nec garrula caecis
Insidiis loca structa silet; stupuere relatis,
Et pariter juvenes, pariter tremuere puellae,
Effaetique senes pariter, tantaeque ruinae
Sensus ad aetatem subito penetraverat omnem
Attamen interea populi miserescit ab alto
Aethereus pater, and crudelibus obstitit ausis
Papicolum; capti poenas raptantur ad acres;
At pia thura Deo, and grati solvuntur honores;
Compita laeta focis genialibus omnia fumant;
Turba choros juvenilis agit: Quintoque Novembris
Nulla Dies toto occurrit celebratior anno.
Anno aetatis 17. In obitum. Praesulis Eliensis.
ADhuc madentes rore squalebant genae,
Et sicca nondum lumina;
Adhuc liquentis imbre turgebant salis,
Quem nuper effudi pius,
Dum maesta charo justa persolvi rogo
Wintoniensis praesulis.
Cum centilinguis Fama (proh semper mali
Cladisque vera nuntia)
Spargit per urbes divitis Britanniae,
Populosque Neptuno satos,
Cessisse morti, and ferreis sororibus
Te generis humani decus,
Qui rex sacrorum illa fuisti in insula
Quae nomen Anguillae tenet.
Tunc inquietum pectus ira protinus
Ebulliebat fervida,
Tumulis potentem saepe devovens deam:
Nec vota Naso in Ibida
Concepit alto diriora pectore,
Graiusque vates parcius
Turpem Lycambis execratus est dolum,
Sponsamque Neobolen suam.
At ecce diras ipse dum fundo graves,
Et imprecor neci necem,
Audisse tales videor attonitus sonos
Leni, sub aura, flamine:
Caecos furores pone, pone vitream
Bilemque and irritas minas,
Quid temere violas non nocenda numina,
Subitoque ad iras percita.
Non est, ut arbitraris elusus miser,
Mors atra Noctis filia,
Erebove patre creta, sive Erinnye,
Vastove nata sub Chao:
Ast illa caelo missa stellato, Dei
Messes ubique colligit;
Animasque mole carnea reconditas
In lucem and auras evocat:
Ut cum fugaces excitant Horae diem
Themidos Jovisque filiae;
Et sempiterni ducit ad vultus patris;
At justa raptat impios
Sub regna furvi luctuosa Tartari,
Sedesque subterraneas
Hanc ut vocantem laetus audivi, cito
Foedum resiqui carcerem,
Volatilesque faustus inter milites
Ad astra sublimis feror:
Vates ut olim raptus ad coelum senex
Auriga currus ignei,
Non me Bootis terruere lucidi
Sarraca tarde frigore, aut
Formidolosi Scorpionis brachia,
Non ensis Orion tuus.
Praetervolavi fulgidi solis globum,
Longeque sub pedibus deam
Vidi trisormem, dum coercebat suos
Fraenis dracones aureis.
Erraticorum syderum per ordines,
Per lacteas vehor plagas,
Velocitatem saepe miratus novam,
Donec nitentes ad fores
Ventum est Olympi, and regiam Chrystallinam, and
Stratum smaragdis Atrium.
Sed hic tacebo, nam quis effari queat
Oriundus humano pa^^e
Amoenitates illius loci, mihi
S^t est in aeternum frui,
Naturam non pati senium.
HEu quam perpetuis erroribus acta fatiscit
Avia men's hominum, tenebrisque immersa profundis
Oedipodioniam volvit sub pectore noctem!
Quae vesana suis metiri facta deorum
Audet, and incisas leges adamante perenni
Assimilare suis, nulloque solubile saeclo
Consilium fati perituris alligat horis.
Ergone marcescet sulcantibus obsita rugis
Naturae facies, and rerum publica matter
Omniparum contracta uterum sterilescet ab aevo?
Et se fassa senem male certis passibus ibit
Sidereum tremebunda caput? number tetra vetustas
Annorumque aeterna fames, squalorque s^usque
Sidera vexabunt? an and insatiabile Tempus
Esuriet Caelum, rapietque in viscera patrem?
Heu, potuitne suas imprudens Jupiter arces
Hoc contra munisse nefas, and temporis isto
Exemisse malo, gyrosque dedisse perennes?
Ergo erit ut quandoque sono dilapsa tremendo
Convexi tabulata ruant, atque-obvius ictu
Stridat uterque polus, superaque ut Olympius aula
Decidat, horribilisque retecta Gorgone Pallas.
Qualis in Aegaeam proles Junonia Lemnon
Deturbata sacro cecidit de limine caeli.
Tu quoque Phoebe tui casus imitabere nati
Praecipiti curru, subitaque ferere ruina
Pronus, and exincta fumabit lampade Nereus,
Et dabit attonito feralia sibila ponto.
Tunc etiam aerei divulfis sedibus Haemi
Dissultabit apex, imoque allisa barathro
Terrebunt Stygium dejecta Ceraunia Ditem
In superos quibus usus erat, fraternaque bella.
At pater omnipotens fundatis fortius astris
Consuluit rerum summae, certoque peregit
Pondere fatorum lances, atque ordine summo
Singula perpetuum jussit servare tenorem.
Volvitur hinc lapsu mundi rota prima diurno;
Raptat and ambit os socia vertigine caelos.
Tardior haud solito Saturnus, and acer ut olim
Fulmineum rutilat cristata casside Mavors.
Floridus aeternum Phoebus juvenile coruscat,
Nec fovet effoetas loca per declivia terras
Devexo temone Deus; sed semper amica
Luce potens eadem currit per signa rotarum,
Surgit odoratis pariter formosus ab Indis
Ethereum pecus albenti qui cogit Olympo
Mane vocans, and serus agens in pascua coeli,
Temporis and gemino dispertit regna color.
Fulget, obitque vices alterno Delia cornu,
Caeruleumque ignem paribus complectitur ulnis.
Nec variant elementa fidem, solitoque fragore
Lurida perculsas jaculantur fulmina rupes.
Nec per inane furit leviori murmr Corus,
Stringit and armiferos aequali horrore Gelonos
Trux Aquilo, spiratque hyemem, nimbosque volutat.
Utque solet, Siculi diverberat ima Pelori
Rex maris, and rauca circumstrepit aequora concha
Oceani Tubicen, nec vasta mole minorem
Aegaeona ferunt dorso Balearica cete.
Sed neque Terra tibi saecli vigor ille vetusti
Priscus abest, servatque suum Narcissus odorem,
Et puer ille suum tenet and puer ille decorem
Phoebe tuufque and Cypri tuus, nec ditior olim
Terra datum sceleri celavit montibus aurum
Conscia, vel sub aquis gemmas. Sic denique in aevum.
Ibit cunctarum series justissima rerum,
Donec flamma orbem populabitur ultima, late
Circumplexa polos, and vasti culmina caeli*
Ingentique rogo flagrabit machina mundi.
De Idea Platonica quemadmodum Aristoteles intellexit.
DIcite sacrorum praesides nemorum deae,
Tuque O noveni perbeata numinis
Memoria matter, quaeque in immenso procul
Antro recumbis otiosa Aeternitas,
Monumenta servans, and ratas leges Jovis,
Caelique fastos atque ephemeridas Deum,
Quis ille primus cujus ex imagine
Natura solers finxit humanum genus,
Aeternus, incorruptus, aequaevus polo,
Unusque and universus, exemplar Dei?
Haud ille Palladis gemellus innubae
Interna proles insidet menti Jovis;
Sed quamlibet natura sit communior,
Tamen seorsus extat ad morem unius,
Et, mira, certo stringitur spatio loci;
Seu sempiternus ille syderum comes
Caeli pererrat ordines decemplicis,
Citimumve terris incolit Lunae globum:
Sive inter animas corpus adituras sedens
Obliviosas torpet ad Lethes aquas:
Sive in remota forte terrarum plaga
Incedit ingens hominis archetypus gigas,
Et iis tremendus exigit celsum caput
Atlante major portitore syderum.
Non cui profundum caecitas lumen dedit
Dircaeus augur vidit hunc alto sinu;
Non hunc silenti nocte Pleiones nepos
Vatum sagaci praepes ostendit choro;
Non hunc sacerdos novit Assyrius, licet
Longos vetusti commemoret atavos Nini,
Priscumque Belon, inclytumque O^^ridem.
Non ille trino gloriosus nomine
Ter magnus Hermes (ut sit arcani sciens)
Talem reliquit Isidis cultoribus.
At tu perenne ruris Academi decus
(Haec monstra si tu primus induxit scholis)
Jam jam poetas urbis exules tuae
Revocabis, ipse fabulator maximus,
Aut institutor ipse migrabis for as.
Ad Patrem.
NUnc mea Pierios cupiam per pectora fontes
Irriguas torquere vias, totumque per ora
Volvere laxatum gemino de vertice (...)um;
Ut tenues oblita sonos audacibus alis
Surgat in officium venerandi Musa parentis.
Hoc utcunque tibi gratum peter optime carmen
Exiguum meditatur opus, nec novimus ipsi
Aptius a nobis quae possunt munera donis
Respondere tuis, quamvis nec maxima possint
Respondere tuis, nedum ut par gratia donis
Esse queat, vacuis quae redditur arida verbis.
Sed tamen haec nostros ostendit pagina census,
Et quod habemus opum charta numeravimus ista,
Quae mihi sunt nullae, nisi quas dedit aurea Clio
Quas mihi semoto somni peperere sub antro,
Et nemoris laureta sacri Parnassides umbrae.
Nec tu vatis opus divinum despice carmen,
Quo nihil aethereos ortus, and semina caeli,
Nil magis humanam commendat origin mentem,
Sancta Prometheae retinens vestigia flammae.
Carmen amant superi, tremebundaque Tartara carmen
Ima ciere valet, divosque ligare profundos,
Et triplici duros Manes adamante coercet.
Carmine sepositi retegunt arcana futuri
Phoebades, and tremulae pallantes ora Sibyllae;
Carmina sacrificus sollennes pangit ad aras
Aurea seu sternit motantem cornua taurum;
Seu cum fata sagax fumantibus abdita fibris
Consulit, and tepidis Parcam scrutatur in extis.
Nos etiam patrium tunc cum repetemus Olympum,
Aeternaeque morae stabunt immobilis aevi,
Ibimus auratis per caeli templa coronis,
Dulcia suaviloquo sociantes carmina plectro,
Astra quibus, geminique poli convexa sonabunt.
Spiritus and rapidos qui circinat igneus orbs,
Nunc quoque sydereis intercinit ipse choreis
Immortale melos, and inenarrabile carmen;
Torrida dum rutilus compescit sibila serpens,
Demissoque ferox gladio mansueseit Orion;
Stellarum nec sentit onus Maurusius Atlas.
Carmina regales epulas ornare solebant,
Cum nondum luxus, vastaeque immensa vorago
Nota gulae, and modico spumabat coena Lyaeo.
Tum de more sedens festa ad convivia vates
Aesculea intonsos redimitus ab arbore crines,
Heroumque actus, imitandaque gesta canebat,
Et chaos, and positi late fundamina mundi,
Repeantesque Deos, and alentes numina glandes,
Et nondum Aetneo quaesitum fulmen ab antro.
Denique quid vocis modulamen inane juvabit,
Verborum sensusque vacans, numerique loquacis?
Silvestres decet iste choros, non Orphea cantus
Qui tenuit fluvios and quercubus addidit aures
Carmine, non cithara, simulachraque functa canendo
Compulit in lacrymas; habet has a carmine lauds.
Nec tu perge precor sacras contemnere Musas,
Nec vanas inopesque puta, quarum ipse peritus
Munere, mill sonos numeros componis ad aptos,
Millibus and vocem modulis variare canoram
Doctus, Arionii merito sis nominis haeres.
Nunc tibi quid mirum, si me genuisse poetam
Contigerit, charo si tam prope sanguine juncti
Cognatas arts, studiumque affine sequamur:
Ipse volens Phoebus se dispertire duobus,
Altera dona mihi, dedit altera dona parenti,
Dividuumque Deum genitorque puerque tenemus.
Tu tamen ut simules teneras odisse camoenas,
Non odisse reor, neque enim, pater, ire jubebas
Qua via lata patet, qua pronior area lucri,
Certaque condendi fulget spes aurea nummi:
Nec rapis ad leges, male custoditaque gentis
Jura, nec insulsis damnas clamoribus aures.
Sed magis excultam cupiens ditescere mentem,
Me procul urbano strepitu, sccessibus altis
Abductum aoniae jucunda per otia ripae
Phoebaeo lateri comitem finis ire beatum.
Officium chari taceo commune parentis,
Me poscunt majora, tuo pater optime sumptu
Cum mihi Romuleae patuit facundia linguae,
Et Latii veneres, and quae Jovis ora decebant
Grandia magniloquis elata vocabula Graiis,
Addere suasisti quos jactat Gallia flores,
Et quam degerreri novus Italus ore loquelam
Fundit, Barbaricos testatus voce tumultus,
Quaeque Palaestinus loquitur mysteria vates.
Denique quicquid habet coelum, subjectaque coelo
Terra parens, terraeque and coelo interfluus aer,
Quicquid and unda tegit, pontique agitabile marmor,
Per te nosse licet, per te, si nosse libebit.
Dimotaque venit spectanda scientia nube,
Nudaque conspicuos inclinat ad oscula vultus,
Ni fugisse velim, ni sit libasse molestum.
I nunc, confer opes quisquis malesanus avitas
Austriaci gazas, Peruanaque regna praeoptas.
Quae potuit majora pater tribuisse, vel ipse
Jupiter, excepto, donasset ut omnia, coelo?
Non potiora dedit, quamvis and tuta fuissent,
Publica qui juveni commisit lumina nato
Atque Hyperionios currus, and fraena diei,
Et circum undantem radiata luce tiaram.
Ergo ego jam doctae pars quamlibet ima catervee
Victrices hederas inter, laurosque sedebo,
Jamque nec obscurus populo miscebor inerti,
Vitabuntque oculos vestigia nostra profanos.
Este procul vigiles curae, procul este querelae,
Invidiaeque acies transverso tortilis hirquo,
Saeva nec anguiferos extend Calumnia rictus;
In me triste nihil faedissima turba potestis,
Nec vestri sum juris ego; securaque tutus
Pectora, vipereo gradiar sublimis ab ictu.
At tibi, chare pater, postquam non aequa merenti
Posse refer datur, nec dona rependere factis,
Sit memorasse satis, repetitaque munera grato
Percensere animo, fidaeque reponere menti.
Et vos, O nostri, juvenilia carmina, Iusus,
Si modo perpetuos sperare audebitis annos,
Et domini superesse rogo, lucemque tueri,
Nec spisso rapient oblivia nigra sub Orco,
Forsitan has lauds, decantatumque parentis
Nomen, ad exemplum, sero servabitis aevo.
PSALM CXIV.
(...)
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...);
(...)
(...);
(...)
(...);
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...).
Philosophus ad regem quendam qui eum ignotum and in tem inter reos forte
captum inscius damnaverat (...) haec subito misit.
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...)*
(...).
In Effigei Ejus Sculptorem
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Ad Salfillum poetam Romanum aegrotantem.
SCAZONTES.
OMusa gressum quae volens trahis claudum,
Vulcanioque tarda gaudes incessu,
Nec sentis illud in loco minus gratum,
Quam cum decentes flava Deiope suras
Alternat aureum ante Junonis lectum,
Adesdum and haec s'is verba pauca Salsillo
Ref^r, camoena nostra cui tantum est cordi,
Quamque ille magnis praetulit immerito divis.
Haec ergo alumnus ille Londini Milto,
Diebus hisce qui suum linquens nidum
Polique tractum, (pessimus ubi ventorum,
Insanientis impotensque pulmonis
Pernix anhela sub Jove exercet flabra)
Venit feraces Itali soli ad glebas,
Visum superba cognitas urbes fama
Virosque doctaeque indolem juventutis,
Tibi optat idem hic fausta multa Salsill^,
Habitumque fesso corpori penitus sanum;
Cui nunc profunda bilis infestat renes,
Praecordiisque fixa damnosum spirat.
Nec id pepercit impia quod tu Romano
Tam cultus ore Lesbium condis melos.
O dulce divum munus, O salus Hebes
Germana! Tuque Phoebe morborum terror
Pythone caeso, sive tu magis Paean
Libenter audis, hic tuus sacerdos est.
Querceta Fauni, vosque rore vinoso
Colles benigni, mitis Evandri seeds,
Siquid salubre vallibus frondet vestris,
Levamen aegro ferte certatim vati.
Sic ille charis redditus rursum Musis
Vicina dulci prata mulcebit cantu.
Ipse inter atros emirabitur lucos
Numa, ubi beatum degit otium aeternum,
Suam reclivis semper Aegeriam spectans.
Tumidusque and ipse Tibris hinc delinitus
Spei favebit annuae colonorum:
Nec in sepulchris ibit obsessum reges
Nimium sinistro laxus irruens loro:
Sed fraena melius temperabit undarum,
Adusque curvi salsa regna Portumni.
Mansus.
Joannes Baptista Mansus Marchio Villensis vir ingenii laud, tum literarum
studio, nec non and bellica virtute apud Italos clarus in primis est. Ad quem
Torquati Tassi dialogus extat de Amicitia scriptus; erat enim Tassi
amicissimus; ab quo etiam inter Campaniae principes celebratur, in illo poemate
cui ritulus Gerusalemme conquistata, lib. 20.

Fra cavalier magnanimi, e cortesi
Risplende il Manso --
Is authorem Neapoli commorantem summa benevolentia prosecutus est, multaque ei
detulit humanitatis officia. Ad hunc itaque hospes ille antequam ab ea urbe
discederet, ut ne ingratum se ostenderet, hoc carmen misit.

HAec quoque Manse tuae meditantur carmina laudi
Pierides, tibi Manse choro notissime Phoebi,
Quandoquidem ille alium haud aequo est dignatus honor,
Post galli cineres, and Mecaenatis Hetrusci.
Tu quoque si nostrae tantum valet aura Camoenae,
Victrices hederas inter, laurosque sedebis.
Te pridem magno felix concordia Tasso
Junxit, and aeternis inscripsit nomina chartis.
Mox tibi dulciloquum non inscia Musa Marinum
Tradidit, ille tuum dici se gaudet alumnum,
Dum canit Assyrios divum prolixus amores;
Mollis and Ausonias stupefecit carmine nymphas
Ille itidem moriens tibi soli debita vates
Ossa tibi soli, supremaque vota reliquit.
Nec manes pietas tua chara fefellit amici,
Vidimus arridentem operoso ex aere poetam.
Nec satis hoc visum est in utrumque, and nec pia cessant
Officia in tumulo, cupis integros rapere Orco,
Qua potes, atque avidas Parcarum eludere leges:
Amborum genus, and varia sub sort peractam
Describis vitam, moresque, and dona Minervae;
Aemulus illius Mycalen qui natus ad altam
Rettulit Aeolii vitam facundus Homeri.
Ergo ego te Clius and magni nomine Phoebi
Manse pater, jubeo longum salvere per aevum
Missus Hyperboreo juvenis peregrinus ab axe.
Nec tu longinguam bonus aspernabere musam,
Quae nuper gelida vix enutrita sub Arcto
Imprudens Italas aufa est volitare per urbes.
Nos etiam in nostro modulantes flumine cygnos
Credimus obscuras noctis sensisse per umbras,
Qua Thamesis late puris argenteus urnis
Oceani glaucos perfundit gurgite crines.
Quin and in has quondam pervenit Tityrus ora^.
Sed neque nos genus incultum, nec inutile Phoebo,
Qua plaga sept^^o mundi sulcata Trione
Brumalem patitur longa sub nocte Booten.
Nos etiam colimus Phoebum, nos munera Phoebo
Flaventes spicas, and lutea mala canistris,
Halantemque crocum (perhibet nisi vana vetustas)
Misimus, and lectas Druidum de gente choreas.
(Gens Druides antiqua sacris operata deorum
Heroum lauds imitandaque gesta canebant)
Hinc quoties festo cingunt altaria cantu
Delo in herbosa Graiae de more puellae
Carminibus laetis memorant Corine^ida Loxo,
Fatidicamque Upin, cum flavicoma Hecaerge
Nuda Caledonio variatas pectora fuco.
Fortunate senex, ergo quacunque per orbem
Torquati decus, and nomen celebrabitur ingens,
Claraque perpetui succrescet sama Marini,
Tu quoque in ora frequens venies plausumque virorum,
Et parili carpes iter immortale volatu.
Dicetur tum sponte tuos habitasse penates
Cynthius, and famulas venisse ad limina Musas:
At non sponte domum tamen idem, and regis adivit
Rura Pheretiadae coelo fugitivus Apollo;
Ille licet magnum Alciden susceperat hospes;
Tantum ubi clamosos placuit vitare bubulcos,
Nobile mansueti cessit Chironis in antrum,
Irriguos inter saltus frondosaque tecta
Peneium prope rivum: ibi saepe sub ilice nigra
Ad citharae strepitum blanda prece victus amici
Exilii duros lenibat voce labores.
Tum neque ripa suo, barathro nec fixa sub imo,
Saxa stetere loco, nutat Trachinia rupes,
Nec sentit solitas, immania pondera, silvas,
Emotaeque suis properant de collibus orni,
Mulcenturque novo maculosi carmine lynces.
Diis dilecte senex, te Jupiter aequus oportet
Nascentem, and miti lustrarit lumine Phoebus,
Atlantisque nepos; neque enim nisi charus ab ortu
Diis superis poterit magno favisse poetae.
Hinc longaeva tibi lento sub flore senectus
Vernat, and Aesonios lucratur vivida fusos,
Nondum deciduos servans tibi frontis honores,
Ingeniumque vigens, and adultum mentis acumen.
O mihi si mea sors talem concedat amicum
Phoebaeos decorasse viros qui tam been norit,
Si quando indigenas revocabo in carmina reges,
Arturumque etiam sub terris bella moventem;
Ant dicam invictae sociali foedere mensae,
Magnanimos Heroas, and (O modo spiritus ad fit)
Frangam Saxonicas Britonum sub Mart phalanges.
Tandem ubi non tacitae permensus tempora vitae,
Annorumque satur cineri sua jura relinquam,
Ille mihi lecto madidis astaret ocellis,
Astanti sat erit si dicam sim tibi curae;
Iile meos artus liventi morte solutos
Curaret parva componi molliter urna.
Forsitan and nostros ducat de marmore vultus,
Nectens aut Paphia myrti aut Parnasside lauri
Fronde comas, at ego secura pace quiescam.
Tum quoque, si qua fides, si praemia certa bonorum,
Ipse ego caelicolum semotus in-aethera divum,
Quo Iabor and men's pura vehunt, atque ignea virtus
Secreti haec aliqua mundi de part bidebo
(Quantum fata sinunt) and tota mente serenum
Ridens purpureo suffundar lumine vultus
Et simul aethereo plaudam mihi laetus Olympo.
EPITAPHIUM DAMONIS.
ARGUMENTUM.
THyrsis and Damon ejusdem viciniae Pastores, eadem studia sequuti a pueritia
amici erant, ut qui plurimum. Thyrsis animi causa profectus peregre de obitu
Damonis nuncium accepit. Domum postea reversus, and rem ita esse comperto, se,
suamque solitudinem hoc carmine deplorat. Damonis autem sub persona hic
intelligitur Carolus Deodatus ex urbe Hetruriae Luca Paterno genere oriundus,
caetera Anglus; ingenio, doctrina, clarissimisque caeteris virtutibus, dum
viveret, juvenis egregius.

EPITAPHIUM DAMONIS.
HImerides nymphae (nam vos and Daphnin and Hylan,
Et plorata diu meministis fata Bionis)
Dicite Sicelicum Thamesina per oppida carmen:
Quas miser effudit voces, quae murmura Thyrsis,
Et quibus assiduis exercuit antra querelis,
Fluminaque, fontesque vagos, nemorumque recessus,
Dum sibi praereptum queritur Damona, neque altam
Luctibus exemit noctem loca soia perrerans.
Et jam bis viridi surgebat culmus arista,
Et totidem flavas numerabant horrea messes,
Ex quo summa dies tulerat Damona sub umbras,
Nec dum aderat Thyrsis; pastorem scilicet illum
Dulcis amor Must Thusca retinebat in urbe.
Ast ubi men's expleta domum, pecorisque reli(...)i
Cura vocat, simul assueta seditque sub ulmo,
Tum vero amissum tum denique sen^it amicum,
Coepit and immensum sic exonerare dolorem.
Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni.
Hei mihi! quae terris, quae dicam numina coelo,
Postquam te immiti rapuerunt funere Damon;
Siccine nos linquis, tua sic sine nomine virtus
Ibit, and obscuris numero sociabitur umbris?
At non ille, animas virga qui dividit aurea,
Ista velit, dignumque tui te ducat in agmen,
Ignavumque procul pecus arceat omne silentum.
Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni.
Quicquid erit, certe nisi me lupus ante videbit,
Indeplorato non comminuere sepulchro,
Constabitque tuus tibi honos, longumque vigebit
Inter pastores: Illi tibi vota secundo
Solvere post Daphnin, post Daphnin dicere lauds
Gaudebunt, dum rura Pales, dum Faunus amabit:
Si quid id est, priscamque fidem coluisse, piumque,
Palladiasque arts, sociumque habuisse canorum.
Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni.
Haec tibi certa manent, tibi erunt haec praemia Damon,
At mihi quid tandem fiet modo? quis mihi fidus
Haerebit lateri comes, ut tu saepe solebas
Frigoribus duris, and per loca foeta pruinis,
Aut rapido sub sole, siti morientibus herbis?
Sive opus in magnos fuit eminus ire leones
Aut avi (...)s terrere lupos praesepibus altis;
Quis fando sopire diem, cantuque solebit?
Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni.
Pectora cui credam? quis me lenire docebit
Mordaces curas, quis longam fallere noctem
Dulcibus alloquiis, grato cum sibilat igni
Molle pyrum, and nucibus strepitat focus, at malus auster
Miscet cuncta foris, and desuper intonat ulmo.
Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni.
Aut aestate, dies medio dum vertitur axe,
Cum Pan aesculea somnum capit abditus umbra,
Et repetunt sub aquis sibi nota sedilia nymphae.
Pastoresque latent, stertit sub sepe colonus,
Q^is mihi blanditiasque tuas, quis tum mihi risus,
Cecropiosque sales referet, cultosque lepores?
Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat agni.
At jam solus agros, jam pascua solus oberro,
Sicubi ramosae densantur vallibus umbrae,
Hic serum expecto, supra caput imber and Eurus
Triste sonant, fractaeque agitata crepuscula silvae.
Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni.
Heu quam culta mihi prius arva procacibus herbis
Involvuntur, and ipsa situ seges alta fatiscit!
Innuba neglecto marcescit and uva racemo,
Nec myrteta juvant; ovium quoque taedet, at illae
Moerent, inque suum convertunt ora magistrum.
Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni.
Tityrus ad corylos vocat, Alphesiboeus ad ornos,
Ad salices Aegon, ad flumina pulcher Amyntas,
Hic gelidi fontes, hic illita gramina musco,
Hic Zephiri, hic placidas interstrepit arbutus undas;
Ista canunt surdo, frutices ego nactus abibam.
Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni.
Mopsus ad haec, nam me redeuntem forte notarat
(Et callebat avium linguas, and sydera Mopsus)
Thyrfi quid hoc? dixit, quae te coquit improba bilis?
Aut te perdit amor, aut te male fascinat astrum,
Saturni grave saepe fuit pastoribus astrum,
Intimaque obliquo figit praecordia plumbo.
Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni.
Mirantur nymphae, and quid te Thyrsi futurum est?
Quid tibi vis? aiunt, non haec solet esse juventae
Nubila frons, oculique truces, vultusque severi,
Illa choros, lususque leves, and semper amorem
Jure petit, bis ille miser qui serus amavit.
Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni.
Venit Hyas, Dryopeque, and filia Baucidis Aegle
Docta modos, citharaeque sciens, sed perdita fastu,
Venit Id manii Chloris vicina fluenti;
Nil me blanditiae, nil me solantia verba,
Nil me, si quid adest, movet, aut spes ulla futuri.
Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni.
Hei mihi quam similes ludunt per prata juvenci,
Omnes unanimi secum sibi lege sodales,
Nec magis hunc alio quisquam secernit amicum
De grege, sic densi veniunt ad pabula thoes,
Inque vicem hirsuti paribus junguntur onagri;
Lex eadem pelagi, deserto in littore Proteus
Agmina Phocarum numerat, vilisque volucrum
Passer habet semper quicum sit, and omnia circum
Farra libens volitet, sero sua tecta revisens,
Quem si fors letho objecit, seu milvus adunco
Fata tulit rostro, seu stravit arundine fossor,
Protinus ille alium socio petit inde volatu.
Nos durum genus, and diris exercita fatis
Gens homines aliena animis, and pectore discors,
Vix sibi quisque parem de millibus invenit unum,
Aut si sors dederit tandem non aspera votis,
Illum inopina dies qua non speraveris hora
Surripit, aeternum linquens in saecula damnum.
Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni.
Heu quis me ignotas traxit vagus error in oras
Ire per aereas rupes, Alpemque nivosam!
Ecquid erat tanti Romam vidisse sepultam?
Quamvis illa foret, qualem dum viseret olim,
Tityrus ipse suas and oves and rura reliquit;
Ut te tam dulci possem caruisse sodale,
Possem tot maria alta, tot interponere montes,
Tot sylvas, tot saxa tibi, fluviosque sonantes.
Ah certe extremum licuisset tangere dextram,
Et been compositos placide morientis ocellos,
Et dixi^^e vale, nostri memor ibis ad astra.
Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni.
Quamquam etiam vestri nunquam meminisse pigebit
Pastores Thusci, Musis operata juventus,
Hic Charis, atque Lepos; and Thuscus tu quoque Damon.
Antiqua genus unde petis Lucumonis ab urbe.
O ego quantus eram, gelidi cum stratus ad Arni
Murmura, populeumque nemus, qua mollior herba,
Carpere nunc violas, nunc summas carpere myrtos,
Et potui Lycidae certantem audire Menalcam.
Ipse etiam tentare ausus sum, nec puto multum
Displicui, nam sunt and apud me munera vestra
Fiscellae; calathique and cerea vincla cicutae,
Quin and nostra suas docuerunt nomina fagos
Et Datis, and Francinus, erant and vocibus ambo
Et studi^^ noti, Lydorum sanguinis ambo.
Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni.
Haec mihi tum laeto dictabat roscida luna,
Dum solus teneros claudebam cratibus hoedos.
Ah quoties dixi, cum te cinis ater habebat,
Nunc canit, aut lepori nunc tendit retia Damon,
Vimina nunc texit, varios sibi quod sit in usus;
Et quae tum facili sperabam mente futura
Arripui voto levis, and praesentia finxi,
Heus bone numquid agis? nisi te quid forte retardat,
Imus? and arguta paulum recubamus in umbra,
Aut ad aquas Colni, aut ubi jugera Cassibelauni?
Tu mihi percurres medicos, tua gramina, succos,
Helleborumque, humilesque crocos, foliumque hyacinthi'
Quasque habet ista palus herbas, artesque medentum,
Ah pereant herbae, pereant artesque medentum
Gramina, postquam ipsi nil profecere magistro.
Ipse etiam, nam nescio quid mihi grande sonabat
Fistula, ab undecima jam lux est altera nocte,
Et tum forte novis admo^ram labra cicutis,
Dissiluere tamen rupta compage, nec ultra
Far graves potuere sonos, dubito quoque ne sim
Turgidulus, tamen and referam, vos cedite silvae.
Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni.
Ipsa ego Dardanias Rutupina per aequora puppes
Dicam, and Pandrasidos regnum vetus Inogeniae,
Brennumque Arviragumque duces, priscumque Belin(...)
Et tandem Armoricos Britonum sub lege colonos;
Tum gravidam Arturo fatali fraud Jogernen
Mendaces vultus, assumptaque Gorlo^is arma,
Merlini dolus. O mihi tum si vita supersit,
Tu procul annosa pendebis fistula pinu
Multum oblita mihi, aut patriis mutata camoenis
Brittonicum strides, quid enim? omnia non licet uni
Non sperasse uni licet omnia, mi satis ampla
Merces, and mihi grande decus (sim ignotus in aevum
Tum licet, externo penitusque inglorius orbi)
Si me flava comas legate Usa, and potor Alauni,
Vorticibusque frequens Abra, and nemus omne Treantae,
Et Thamesis meus ante omnes, and fusca metallis
Tamara, and extremis me discant Orcades undis.
Ite domum impasti, domino jam non vacat, agni.
Haec tibi servabam lenta sub cortice lauri,
Haec, and plura simul, tum quae mihi pocula Mansus,
Mansus Chalcidicae non ultima gloria ripae
Bina dedit, mirum artis opus, mirandus and ipse,
Et circum gemino caelaverat argumento:
In medio rubri maris unda, and odoriferum ver
Littora longa Arabum, and sudantes balsama silvae,
Has inter Phoenix divina avis, unica terris
Caerulcum fulgens diversicoloribus alis
Auroram vitreis surgentem respicit undis.
Part alia polus omnipatens, and magnus Olympus,
Quis putet? hic quoque Amor, pictaeque in nube pharetrae,
Arma corusca faces, and spicula tincta pyropo;
Nec tenues animas, pectusque ignobile vulgi
Hinc ferit, at circum flammantia lumina torquens
Semper in erectum spargit sua tela per orbs
Impiger, and pronos nunquam collimat ad ictus,
Hinc mentes ardere sacrae, formaeque deorum.
Tu quoque in his, nec me fallit spes lubrica Damon,
Tu quoque in his certe es, nam quo tua dulcis abiret
Sanctaque simplicitas, nam quo tua candida virtus?
Nec te Lethaeo fas quaesivisse sub orco,
Nec tibi convenient lacrymae, nec flebimus ultra,
Ite procul lacrymae, purum colit aethera Damon,
Aethera purus habet, pluvium pede reppulit arcum;
Heroumque animas inter, divosque perennes,
Aethereos haurit latices and gaudia potat
Ore Sacro. Quin tu coeli post jura recepta
Dexter ades, placidusque fave quicunque vocaris,
Seu tu noster eris Damon, sive aequior audis
Diodotus, quo te divino nomine cuncti
Coelicolae norint, sylvisque vocabere Damon.
Quod tibi purpureus pudor, and sine labe juventus
Grata fuit, quod nulla tori libata voluptas,
En etiam tibi virginei servantur honores;
Ipse caput nitidum cinctus rutilante corona,
Letaque frondentis gestans umbracula palmae
Aeternum perages immortales hymenaeos;
Cantus ubi, choreisque furit lyra mista beatis,
Festa Sionaeo bacchantur and Orgia Thyrso.
Jan. 23. 1646.
Ad Joannem Rousium Oxoniensis Academiae Bibliothecarium.
De libro Poematum amisso, quem ille sibi denuo mitti postulabat, ut cum aliis
nostris in Bibliotheca publica reponeret, Ode.
Strophe 1.
GEmelle cultu simplici gaudens liber,
Fronde licet gemina,
Munditieque nitens non operosa,
Quam manus attulit
Juvenilis olim,
Sedula tamen haud nimii Poetae;
Dum vagus Ausonias nunc per umbras
Nunc Britannica per vireta lusit
Insons populi, barbitoque devius
Indulsit patrio, mox itidem pectine Daunio
Longinquum intonuit melos
Vicinis, and humum vix tetigit pede;
Antistrophe.
Quis te, parve liber, quis te fratribus
Subduxit reliquis dolo?
Cum tu missus ab urbe,
Docto jugiter obsecrante amico,
Illustre tendebas iter
Thamesis ad incunabula
Caerulei patris,
Fontes ubi limpidi
Aonidum, thyasusque sacer
Orbi notus per immensos
Temporum lapsus redeunte coelo,
Celeberque futurus in aevum;
Strophe 2.
Modo quis deus, aut editus deo
Pristinam gentis miseratus indolem
(Si satis noxas luimus priores
Mollique luxu degener otium)
Tollat nefandos civium tumultus,
Almaque revocet studia sanctus
Et relegatas sme sede Musas
Jam pene totis finibus Angligenum;
Immundasque volucres
Unguibus imminentes
Figat Apollinea pharetra,
Phineamque abigat pestem procul amne Pegaseo.
Antistrophe.
Quin tu, libelle, nuntii licet mala
Fide, vel oscitantia
Semel erraveris agmine fratrum,
Seu quis te teneat specus,
Seu qua te latebra, forsan unde vili
Callo tereris institoris insulsi,
Laetare felix, en iterum tibi
Spes nova fulget posse profundam
Fugere Lethen, vehique Superam
In Jovis aulam remige penna;
Strophe 3.
Nam te Rousius sui
Optat peculi, numeroque justo
Sibi pollicitum queritur abesse,
Rogatque venias ille cujus inclyta
Sunt data virum monumenta curae:
Teque adytis etiam sacris
Voluit reponi quibus and ipse praesidet
Aeternorum operum custos fidelis,
Quaestorque gazae nobilioris,
Quam cui praefuit Ion
Clarus Erechtheides
Opulenta dei per templa parentis
Fulvosque tripodas, donaque Delphica
Ion Actaea genitus Creusa.
Antistrophe.
Ergo tu visere lucos
Musarum ibis amoenos,
Diamque Phoebi rursus ibis in domum
Oxonia quam valle colit
Delo posthabita,
Bifidoque Parnassi jugo:
Ibis honestus,
Postquam egregiam tu quoque sortem
Nactus abis, dextri prece sollicitatus amici.
Illic legeris inter alta nomina
Authorum, Graiae simul and Latinae
Antiqua gentis lumina, and verum decus.
Epodos.
Vos tandem haud vacui mei labores,
Quicquid hoc sterile fudit ingenium,
Jam sero placidam sperare jubeo
Perfunctam invidia requiem, sedesque beatas
Quas bonus Hermes
Et tutela dabit solers Rousi,
Quo neque lingua procax vulgi penetrabit, atque long
Turba legentum prava facesset;
At ultimi nepotes,
Et cordatior aetas
Judicia rebus aequiora forsitan
Adhibebit integro sinu.
Tum livore sepulto,
Si quid meremur sana posteritas sciet
Rousio favente.
Ode tribus constat Strophis, totidemque Antistrophis una demum epodo clausis,
quas, tametsi omnes nec versuum numero, nec certis ubique colis exact
respondeant, ita tamen secuimus, commode legendi potius, quam ad antiquos
concinendi modos rationem spectantes. Alioquin hoc genus rectius fortasse dici
monostrophicum debuerat. Metra partim sunt (...) partim (...). Phale^cia quae
sunt, spondaeum tertio loco bis admittunt, quod idem in secundo loco Catullus
ad libitum fecit.
OF EDUCATION. To Master Samuel Hartlib. Written above twenty Years since.
Mr. Hartlib,
I Am long since persuaded, that to say, or do ought worth memory and
imitation, no purpose or respect should sooner move us, then simply the love of
God, and of mankind. Nevertheless to write now the reforming of Education,
though it be one of the greatest and noblest designs that can be thought on,
and for the want whereof this Nation perishes, I had not yet at this time been
induc't, but by your earnest entreaties, and serious conjurements; as having my
mind for the present half diverted in the pursuance of some other assertions,
the knowledge and the use of which, cannot but be a great furtherance both to
the enlargement of truth, and honest living, with much more peace. Nor should
the laws of any private friendship have prevailed with me to divide thus, or
transpose my former thoughts, but that I see those aims, those actions which
have won you with me the esteem of a person sent hither by some good providence
from a far country to be the occasion and the incitement of great good to this
Island. And, as I hear, you have obtained the same repute with men of most
approved wisdom, and some of highest authority among us. Not to mention the
learned correspondence which you hold in foreign parts, and the extraordinary
pains and diligence which you have used in this matter both here, and beyond
the Seas; either by the definite will of God so ruling, or the peculiar sway of
nature, which also is Gods working. Neither can I think that so reputed, and so
valued as you are, you would to the forfeit of your own discerning ability,
impose upon me an unfit and over-ponderous argument, but that the satisfaction
which you profess to have received from those incidental Discourses which we
have wandered into, has pressed and almost constrained you into a persuasion,
that what you require from me in this point, I neither ought, nor can in
conscience defer beyond this time both of so much need at once, and so much
opportunity to try what God has determined. I will not resist therefore,
whatever it is either of divine, or humane obligement that you lay upon me; but
will forthwith set down in writing, as you request me, that voluntary Idea,
which has long in silence presented it self to me, of a better Education, in
extent and comprehension far more large, and yet of time far shorter, and of
attainment far more certain, then has been yet in practice, Brief I shall
endeavor to be; for that which I have to say, assuredly this Nation has
extreme need should be done sooner then spoken. To tell you therefore what I
have benefited herein among old renowned Authors, I shall spare; and to search
what many modern Janua's and Didactics more then ever I shall read, have
projected, my inclination leads me not. But if you can accept of these few
observations which have flowr'd off, and are, as it were, the burnishing of
many studious and contemplative years altogether spent in the search of
religious and civil knowledge, and such as pleased you so well in the relating,
I here give you them to dispose of.

The end then of Learning is to repair the ruins of our first Parents by
regaining to know God aright, and out of that knowledge to love him, to imitate
him, to be like him, as we may the nearest by possessing our souls of true
virtue, which being united to the heavenly grace of faith makes up the highest
perfection. But because our understanding cannot in this body found it self but
on sensible things, nor arrive so clearly to the knowledge of God and things
invisible, as by orderly conning over the visible and inferior creature, the
same method is necessarily to be followed in all discreet teaching. And seeing
every Nation affords not experience and tradition enough for all kind of
Learning, therefore we are chiefly taught the Languages of those people who
have at any time been most industrious after Wisdom; so that Language is but
the Instrument conveying to us things useful to be known. And though a
Linguist should pride himself to have all the Tongues that Babel cleft the
world into, yet, if he have not studied the solid things in them as well as the
Words and Lexicons, he were nothing so much to be esteemed a learned man, as
any Yeoman or Tradesman competently wise in his Mother Dialect only. Hence
appear the many mistakes which have made Learning generally so unpleasing and
so unsuccessful; first we do amiss to spend seven or eight years merely in
scraping together so much miserable Latin and Greek, as might be learnt
otherwise easily and delightfully in one year. And that which casts our
proficiency therein so much behind, is our time lost partly in too often idle
vacancies given both to Schools and Universities, partly in a preposterous
exaction, forcing the empty wits of Children to compose Theams, Verses and
Orations, which are the acts of ripest judgment and the final work of a head
filled by long reading and observing, with elegant maxims, and copious
invention. These are not matters to be wrung from poor striplings, like blood
out of the Nose, or the plucking of untimely fruit: besides the ill habit which
they get of wretched barbarizing against the Latin and Greek idiom, with their
untutored Anglicisms, odious to be read, yet not to be avoided without a well
continued and judicious conversing among pure Authors digested, which they
scarce taste, whereas, if after some preparatory grounds of speech by their
certain forms got into memory, they were led to the praxis thereof in some
chosen short book lesson'd thoroughly to them, they might then forthwith proceed
to learn the substance of good things, and Arts in due order, which would bring
the whole language quickly into their power. This I take to be the most
rational and most profitable way of learning Languages, and whereby we may best
hope to give account to God of our youth spent herein: And for the usual method
of teaching Arts, I deem it to be an old error of Universities not yet well
recovered from the Scholastic grossness of barbarous ages, that in stead of
beginning with Arts most easy, and those be such as are most obvious to the
sense, they present their young unmatriculated Novices at first coming with
the most intellective abstractions of Logic and Metapysicks: So that they
having but newly left those Grammatick flats and shallows where they stuck
unreasonably to learn a few words with lamentable construction, and now on the
sudden transported under another climate to be tossed and turmoil'd with their
unballasted wits in fadomless and unquiet deeps of controversy, do for the
most part grow into hatred and contempt of Learning, mocked and deluded all this
while with ragged Notions and Babblements, while they expected worthy and
delightful knowledge; till poverty or youthful years call them importunately
their several ways, and hasten them with the sway of friends either to an
ambitious and mercenary, or ignorantly zealous Divinity; Some allured to the
trade of Law, grounding their purposes not on the prudent and heavenly
contemplation of justice and equity which was never taught them, but on the
promising and pleasing thoughts of litigious terms, fat contentions, and
flowing fees; others betake them to State affairs, with souls so unprincipl'd
in virtue, and true generous breeding, that flattery, and Court shifts and
tyrannous Aphorisms appear to them the highest points of wisdom; instilling
their barren hearts with a conscientious slavery, if, as I rather think, it be
not feigned. Others lastly of a more delicious and airie spirit, retire
themselves knowing no better, to the enjoyments of ease and luxury, living out
their days in feast and jollity; which indeed is the wisest and the safest
course of all these, unless they were with more integrity undertaken. And these
are the fruits of mispending our prime youth at the Schools and Universities as
we do, either in learning mere words or such things chiefly, as were better
unlearnt.

I shall detain you no longer in the demonstration of what we should not do,
but strait conduct ye to a hill side, where I will point ye out the right path
of a virtuous and noble Education; laborious indeed at the first ascent, but
else so smooth, so green, so full of goodly prospect, and melodious sounds on
every side, that the Harp of Orpheus was not more charming. I doubt not but ye
shall have more ado to drive our dullest and laziest youth, our stocks and
stubbs from the infinite desire of such a happy nurture, then we have now to
hale and drag our choicest and hopefullest Wits to that asinine feast of
sowthistles and brambles which is commonly set before them, as all the food and
entertainment of their tenderest and most docible age. I call therefore a
complete and generous Education that which fits a man to perform justly,
skilfully and magnanimously all the offices both private and public of Peace
and War. And how all this may be done between twelve, and one and twenty, less
time then is now bestowed in pure trifling at Grammar and Sophistry, is to be
thus ordered.

First to find out a spacious house and ground about it fit for an Academy, and
big enough to lodge a hundred and fifty persons, whereof twenty or thereabout
may be attendants, all under the government of one, who shall be thought of
desert sufficient, and ability either to do all, or wisely to direct, and
oversee it done. This place should be at once both School and University, not
needing a remove to any other house of Schollership, except it be some peculiar
College of Law, or Physic, where they mean to be practitioners; but as for
those general studies which take up all our time from Lilly to the commencing,
as they term it, Master of Art, it should be absolute. After this pattern, as
many Edifices may be converted to this use, as shall be needful in every City
throughout this Land, which would tend much to the increase of Learning and
Civility every where. This number, less or more thus collected, to the
convenience of a foot Company, or interchangeably two Troops of Cavalry, should
divide their days work into three parts, as it lies orderly. Their Studies,
their Exercise, and their Diet.

For their Studies, First they should begin with the chief and necessary rules
of some good Grammar, either that now used, or any better: and while this is
doing, their speech is to be fashioned to a distinct and clear pronuntiation,
as near as may be to the Italian, especially in the Vowels. For we Englishmen
being far Northerly, do not open our mouths in the cold air, wide enough to
grace a Southern Tongue; but are observed by all other Nations to speak
exceeding close and inward: So that to smatter Latin with an English mouth, is
as ill a hearing as Law-French. Next to make them expert in the usefullest
points of Grammar, and withal to season them, and win them early to the love
of virtue and true labor, ere any flattering seducement, or vain principle
seize them wandering, some easy and delightful Book of Education would be read
to them; whereof the Greeks have store, as Cebes, Plutarch, and other Socratic
discourses. But in Latin we have none of classic authority extant, except the
two or three first Books of Quintilian, and some select pieces elsewhere. But
here the main skill and groundwork will be, to temper them such Lectures and
Explanations upon every opportunity, as may lead and draw them in willing
obedience, enflamed with the study of Learning, and the admiration of Virtue;
stirred up with high hopes of living to be brave men, and worthy Patriots, dear
to God, and famous to all ages. That they may despise and scorn all their
childish, and ill-taught qualities, to delight in manly, and liberal Exercises:
which he who has the Art, and proper Eloquence to catch them with, what with
mild and effectual persuasions, and what with the intimation of some fear, if
need be, but chiefly by his own example, might in a short space gain them to an
incredible diligence and courage: infusing into their young breasts such an
ingenuous and noble ardor, as would not fail to make many of them renowned and
matchless men. At the same time, some other hour of the day, might be taught
them the rules of Arithmetic, and soon after the Elements of Geometry even
playing, as the old manner was. After evening repast, till bedtime their
thoughts will be best taken up in the easy grounds of Religion, and the story
of Scripture. The next step would be to the Authors Agriculture, Cato, Varro,
and Columella, for the matter is most easy, and if the language be difficult,
so much the better, it is not a difficulty above their years. And here will be
an occasion of inciting and inabling them hereafter to improve the tillage of
their Country, to recover the bad Soil, and to remedy the waste that is made of
good: for this was one of Hercules praises. Ere half these Authors be read
(which will soon be with plying hard, and daily) they cannot choose but be
masters of any ordinary prose. So that it will be then seasonable for them to
learn in any modern Author, the use of the Globes, and all the Maps; first with
the old names, and then with the new: or they might be then capable to read any
compendious method of natural Philosophy. And at the same time might be entering
into the Greek tongue, after the same manner as was before prescribed in the
Latin; whereby the difficulties of Grammar being soon overcome, all the
Historical Physiology of Aristotle and Theophrastus are open before them, and
as I may say, under contribution. The like access will be to Vitruvius, to
Seneca's natural questions, to Mela, Celsus, Pliny, or Solinus. And having thus
past the principles of Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy, and Geography with a
general compact of Physics, they may descend in Mathematics to the
instrumental science of Trigonometry, and from thence to Fortification,
Architecture, Enginry, or Navigation. And in natural Philosophy they may
proceed leisurely from the History of Meteors, Minerals, plants and living
Creatures as far as Anatomy. Then also in course might be read to them out of
some not tedious Writer the Institution of Physic; that they may know the
tempers, the humors, the seasons, and how to manage a crudity: which he who
can wisely and timely do, is not only a great Physician to himself, and to his
friends, but also may at some time or other, save an Army by this frugal and
expenseless means only; and not let the healthy and stout bodies of young men
rot away under him for want of this discipline; which is a great pity, and no
less a shame to the Commander. To set forward all these proceedings in Nature
and Mathematics, what hinders, but that they may procure, as often as shall be
needful, the helpful experiences of Hunters, Fowlers, Fishermen, Shepherds,
Gardeners, Apothecaries; and in the other sciences, Architects, Engineers,
Mariners, Anatomists; who doubtless would be ready some for reward, and some to
favor such a hopeful Seminary. And this will give them such a real tincture of
natural knowledge, as they shall never forget, but daily augment with delight.
Then also those Poets which are now counted most hard, will be both facil and
pleasant, Orpheus, Hesiod, Theocritus, Aratus, Nicander, Oppian, Dionysius, and
in Latin Lucretius, Manilius, and the rural part of Virgil.

By this time, years and good general precepts will have furnished them more
distinctly with that act of reason which in Ethics is called Proairesis: that
they may with some judgment contemplate upon moral good and evil. Then will be
required a special reinforcement of constant and sound endoctrinating to set
them right and firm, instructing them more amply in the knowledge of Virtue and
the hatred of Vice: while their young and pliant affections are led through all
the moral works of Plato, Xenophon, Cicero, Plutarch, Laertius, and those
Locrian remnants; but still to be reduced in their nightward studies wherewith
they close the days work, under the determinate sentence of David or Solomon,
or the Evanges and Apostolic Scriptures. Being perfect in the knowledge of
personal duty, they may then begin the study of Economics. And either now, or
before this, they may have easily learnt at any odd hour the Italian Tongue.
And soon after, but with wariness and good antidote, it would be wholesome
enough to let them taste some choice Comedies, Greek, Latin, or Italian: Those
Tragedies also that treat of Household matters, as Trachiniae, Alcestis, and the
like. The next remove must be to the study of Politics; to know the beginning,
end, and reasons of Political Societies; that they may not in a dangerous fit
of the Commonwealth be such poor, shaken, uncertain Reeds, of such a tottering
Conscience, as many of our great Counselors have lately shown themselves, but
steadfast pillars of the State. After this they are to dive into the grounds of
Law, and legal Justice; delivered first, and with best warrant by Moses; and as
far as humane prudence can be trusted, in those extolled remains of Grecian
Lawgivers, Licurgus, Solon, Zaleucus, Charondas, and thence to all the Roman
Edicts and Tables with their Justinian; and so down to the Saxon and common
Laws of England, and the Statutes. Sundays also and every evening may be now
understandingly spent in the highest matters of Theology, and Church History
ancient and modern: and ere this time the Hebrew Tongue at a set hour might
have been gained, that the Scriptures may be now read in their own orginal;
where^o it would be no impossibility to add the Chaldey, and the Syrian
Dialect. When all these employments are well conquered, then will the choice
Histories, Heroic Poems, and Attic Tragedies of stateliest and most regal
argument, with all the famous Political Orations offer themselves; which if
they were not only read; but some of them got by memory, and solemnly
pronounced with right accent, and grace, as might be taught, would endue them
even with the spirit and vigor of Deviosthenes or Cicero, Euripides, or
Sophocles. And now lastly will be the time to read with them those organic arts
which enable men to discourse and write perspicuously, elegantly, and according
to the f(...)d style of lofty, mean, or lowly. Logic therefore so much as is
useful, (...) to be referred to this due place withal her well coucht Heads
and Topics, until it be time to open her contracted palm into a graceful and
ornate Rhetoric taught out of the rule of Plato, Aristotle, Phalereus, Cicero,
Hermogenes, Longinus. To which Poetry would be made subsequent, or indeed
rather precedent, as being less subtle and fine, but more simple, sensuous and
passionate. I mean not here the prosody of a verse, which they could not but
have hit on before among the rudiments of Grammar; but that sublime Art which
in Aristotle's Poetics, in Horace, and the Italia(...) Commentaries of
Castelvetro, Tasso, Mazzoni, and others, teaches what the laws are of a true
Epic Poem, what of a Dramatic, what of a Lyric, what Decorum is, which is the
grand masterpiece to observe. This would make them soon perceive what
despicible creatures our comm Rimers and Play-writers be, and show them, what
religious, what glorious and magnificent use might be made of Poetry both in
divine and humane things. From hence and not till now will be the right season
of forming them to be able Writers and Composers in every excellent matter,
when they shall be thus fraught with an universal insight into things. Or
whether they be to speak in Parliament or Counsel, honor and attention would
be waiting on their lips. There would then also appear in Pulpits other
Visages, other gestures, and stuff otherwise wrought then what we now sit
under, often times to as great a trial of our patience as any other that they
preach to us. These are the Studies wherein our noble and our gentle Youth
ought to bestow their time in a disciplinary way from twelve to one and twenty;
unless they rely more upon their ancestors dead, then upon themselves living.
In which methodical course it is so supposed they must proceed by the steady
pace of learning onward, as at convenient times for memories sake to retire
back into the middle ward, and sometimes into the rear of what they have been
taught, until they have confirmed, and solidly united the whole body of their
perfeted knowledge, like the last embattelling of a Roman Legion. Now will be
worth the seeing what Exercises and Recreations may best agree, and become
these Studies.

Their Exercise.
The course of Study hitherto briefly described, is, what I can guess by
reading, (...) to those ancient and famous Schools of Pythagoras, Plato,
Isocrates, Aristotle and such others, out of which were bred up such a number
of renowned Philosophers, Orators, Historians, Poets and Princes all over
Greece, Italy, and Asia, besides the flourishing Studies of Cyrene and
Alexandria. But herein it shall exceed them, and supply a defect as great as
that which Plato noted in the Commonwealth of Sparta; whereas that City
trained up their Youth most for War, and these in their Academies and Lycaeum,
all for the Gown, this institution of breeding which I here delineate, shall be
equally good both for Peace and War. Therefore about an hour and a half ere
they eat at Noon should be allowed them for exercise and due rest afterward:
But the time for this may be enlarged at pleasure, according as their rising in
the morning shall be early. The Exercise which I commend first, is the exact
use of their Weapon, to guard and to strike safely with edge, or point; this
will keep them healthy, nimble, strong, and well in breath, is also the
likeliest means to make them grow large and tall, and to inspire them with a
gallant and fearless courage, which being tempered with seasonable Lectures and
Precepts to them of true Fortitude and Patience, will turn into a native and
heroic valor, and make them hate the cowardice of doing wrong. They must be
also practiced in all the Locks and Gripes of Wrestling, wherein English men
were wont to excel, as need may often be in fight to tugg or grapple, and to
close. And this perhaps will be enough, wherein to prove and heat their single
strength. The interim of unsweating themselves regularly, and convevenient rest
before meat may both with profit and delight be taken up in recreating and
composing their travailed spirits with the solemn and divine harmonies of
Music heard or learnt; either while the skilful Organist plies his grave and
fancied descant, in lofty fugues, or the whole Symphony with artful and
unimaginable touches adorn and grace the well studied chords of some choice
Composer; sometimes the Lute, or soft Organ stop waiting on elegant Voices
either to Religious, martial, or civil Ditties; which if wise men and Prophets
be not extremely out, have a great power over dispositions and manners, to
smooth and make them gentle from rustic harshness and distempered passions.
The like also would not be unexpedient after Meat to assist and cherish Nature
in her first concoction, and send their minds back to study in good tune and
satisfaction. Where having followed it close under vigilant eyes till about two
hours before supper, they are by a sudden alarm or watch word, to be called
out to their military motions, under sky or covert, according to the season,
as was the Roman wont; first on foot, then as their age permits, on Horseback,
to all the Art of Cavalry; That having in sport, but with much exactness, and
daily muster, served out the rudiments of their Souldiership in all the skill
of Embattelling, Marching, Encamping, Fortifying, Besieging and Battering, with
all the helps of ancient and modern stratagems, Tacticks and warlike maxims,
they may as it were out of a long War come forth renowned and perfect
Commanders in the service of their Country. They would not then, if they were
trusted with fair and hopeful armies, suffer them for want of just and wise
discipline to shed away from about them like sick feathers, though they be
never so often supplied: they would not suffer their empty and unrecrutible
Colonels of twenty men in a Company to quaff out, or convey into secret hoards,
the wages of a delusive list, and a miserable remnant: yet in the mean while to
be over-master'd with a score or two of drunkards, the only souldery left about
them, or else to comply with all rapines and violences. No certainly, if they
knew ought of that knowledge that belongs to good men or good Governors, they
would not suffer these things. But to return to our own institute, besides
these constant exercises at home, there is another opportunity of gaining
experience to be won from pleasure it self abroad; In those vernal seasons of
the year, when the air is calm and pleasant, it were an injury and sullenness
against nature not to go out, and see her riches, and partake in her rejoicing
with Heaven and Earth. I should not therefore be a perswader to them of
studying much then, after two or three year that they have well laid their
grounds, but to ride out in Companies with prudent and staid Guides, to all the
quarters of the Land: learning and observing all places of strength, all
commodities of building and of soil, for Towns and Tillage, Harbors and Ports
for Trade. Sometimes taking Sea as far as to our Navy, to learn there also what
they can in the practical knowledge of sailing and of Sea Fight. These ways
would try all their peculiar gifts of Nature, and if there were any secret
excellence among them, would fetch it out, and give it fair opportunities to
advance it self by, which could not but mightily redound to the good of this
Nation and bring into fashion again those old admired Virtues and Excellencies,
with far more advantage now in this purity of Christian knowledge. Nor shall we
then need the Monsieurs of Paris to take our hopeful Youth into their slight
and prodigal custodies and send them over back again transformed into Mimicks,
Apes and Kicshoes. But if they desire to see other Countries at three or four
and twenty years of age, not to learn Principles but to enlarge Experience, and
make wise observation, they will by that time be such as shall deserve the
regard and honor of all men where they pass, and the society and friendship of
those in all places who are best and most eminent. And perhaps then other
Nations will be glad to visit us for their Breeding, or else to imitate us in
their own Country.

Now lastly for their Diet there cannot be much to say, save only that it would
be best in the same House; for much time else would be lost abroad, and many
ill habits got; and that it should be plain, healthful, and moderate I suppose
is out of controversy. Thus Mr. Hartlib, you have a general view in writing,
as your desire was, of that which at several times I had discourst with you
concerning the best and Noblest way of Education; not beginning as some have
done from the Cradle, which yet might be worth many considerations, if brevity
had not been my scope, many other circumstances also I could have mentioned,
but this to such as have the worth in them to make trial, for light and
direction may be enough. Only I believe that this is not a Bow for every man to
shoot in that counts himself a Teacher; but will require sinews almost equal to
those which Homer gave Ulysses, yet I am withal persuaded that it may prove
much more easy in the assay, then it now seems at distance, and much more
illustrious: howbeit not more difficult then I imagine, and that imagination
presents me with nothing but very happy and very possible according to best
wishes; if God have so decreed, and this age have spirit and capacity enough to
apprehend.

THE END.
A Catalogue of some Books printed for and sold by Tho. Dring at the Blew
Anchor over against Fetter lane in Fleet Street.
LAW BOOKS.
1 THe Statutes at large by Ferdinando Pulton, and continued to the year 1670.
by T. Manby of Lincolns Inn Esquire in Folio, Price 50. s. 2 A Collection of
Entries, etc. by W. Rastal Esquire newly amended and much enlarged with many good
Presidents of late times, whereof diverse are upon sundry Statutes, and noted in
the end of the Table, in fol. price 3. l. 3 A Book of Entries, containing
Presidents of Counts, Declarations, Informations, etc. By Sir Edward Coke
Knight, in fol. price 3. l. 4 The 11. Reports of the Lord Coke in French with a
Table, fol. price 3. l. 5 The whole Office of a Sheriff: By Mich. Dalton, with
very large Additions since Mr. Daltons death, in fol. price 12. s. 6 The
Country Justice, containing the practice of the Justices of Peace, as well in
as out of Sessions; By Mich. Dalton with Additions, in fol. price 8. s. 7 Cokes
Commentary on Littleton, printed 1670. fol. price 18. s. 8 Formulae been
placitandi, A Book of Entries containing variety of choice Presidents, of
Counts, Declarations, etc. and diverse other Pleadings collected from the
Manuscrips, as well as some of the late learned Prothonotaries of the Court of
Common Pleas, as of other eminent Practisers in the Court of Kings Bench, never
before in print, methodically digested under apt Titles, with an exact Table;
By W. B. a Clerk of the Common Pleas, in folio, printed 1671. price. 12. s. 9
Lord Dyers Reports, with a Table never before printed with it, in fol. printed
1671. price 18. s. 10 Thesaurus Brevium, in fol. price 6. s. 11 Brevia
Judicialia, being a Collection of of Presidents for Writs in the Kings Bench,
fol. price 10. s. 12 Actions on the Case for Slander; By W. Sheppard, in fol.
price 6. s. 13 A Collection of all the Acts and Statutes made in the Reigns of
King Charles the first and King Charles the second, with the Abridgment of such
as stand Repealed or expired, continued after the Method of Mr. Pulton, with
Notes of Reference one to the other; to which also is added the Statutes and
private Acts of Parliament passed by their said Majesty's, until the year
1671. with a Table directing to the principal matters of the said Statutes; By
Tho. Manby of Lincolns Inn Esquire fol. price 14. s. 14 Tables to most of the
printed Presidents of Pleading, Writs, and Return of Writs at the Common Law,
collected by George Townsend, fol. price 12. s. 15 The Law of Common Assurances
touching Deeds in general, viz. Feoffments Gifts, Grants, Leases, etc. with two
Alphabetical Tables; By W. Sheppard Esquire fol. price 14. s. 16 Modern Reports; by
William Style of the Inner Temple Esquire fol. price 10. s. 17 Complete Clerk,
containg forms of all sorts of Presidents for Conveyances and Assurances, and
other Instruments now in use and Practice, the third Edition, very much enlaged
in Quarto, price 12. s. 18 A Treatise of the Forest Laws; By Jo. Manwood, the
third Edition corrected and enlarged, in Quarto, price 6. s. 19 The Complete
Attorney, showing the Office of an Attorney in the Court of Kings Bench, Common
Pleas, and Pleas of the Exchequer, the manner of their proceeding, with
Instructions for the Solicitation of any cause in the Chancery, Exchequer
Chamber, Duchy Chamber, in Oct. price 3. s. 20. The Young Clerks Guide, or an
exact Collection of Choice English Presidents according to the best forms now
used, very useful and necessary for all, but chiefly for those that intend to
follow the Attorneys Practice, in Oct. price 5. s. 21 Fitzherberts Natura
Brevium, corrected and amended, printed 1667, Large Octavo, price 5. s. 22
Practical Register, Or the Accomplished Attorney, consisting of Rules, Orders
and the most principal observation of the Practice of the Common Law in his
Majesty's Courts, but more particularly applicable to the proceedings in the
Kings Bench, the second Edition very much enlarged, in Oct. price 3. s. 6. d.
23 Parsons Law, or A View of Advowsons, Wherein is contained the Right of
Patrons, Ordinaries and incumbents to Advowsons of Churches and Benefices and
Cure of Souls and other Spiritual Promotions, the third Edition, enlarged by W.
Hughes, in Oct. price 2. s. 6. d. 24 Terms of the Law with Additions, in Oct.
price 4. s. 25 An Abridgement of all the Statutes from Magna Charta, until the
year 1671; By E. Wingat, in Oct. price 6. s. 26 Complete Justice, being an
exact Collection out of such as have treated of the Office of Justice of the
Peace, in Twelves, price 2. s. 27 Lord Cokes complete Copyholder, whereunto is
added a large Treatise by way of Supplement, printed 1668. in 120. price 1. s.
6. d. 28 Doctor and Student in English, in Oct. printed 1663. price 2. s. 29
Fortescue de Laudibus Legum Angliae, with Notes on Fortescue and Hengam; By
John Seldom Esquire in small Oct. price 3. s. printed 1672. 30 Tractatus de Legibus
and Consuetudinibus per Ranulphum de Glanvillia, in Oct. price 2. s. 31
Littletons Tenures in French and English, carefully corrected and amended,
printed 1670. (...) Quarto, price 2. s. 6. 32 A Philosophical Commentary, or an
Illustration of the most obvious and useful terms in the Law; By Edw. Leigh
Gent. sometimes of the middle Temple, in Oct. price 1. s. 6. d. 33 A Profitable
Book of the Laws of England; By John Perkins, in small Oct. price 2. s. 34
Studii Legalis Ratio, or directions for the Study of the Law under these seven
Heads, viz. the Qualifications for study, the nature means, method, time and
place of study, in Twelves, price 1. s. 6. d. 35 Statuta Vetera and Recentiora,
A methodical Collection and Abridgement of the Statutes that relate to the
Practice of the Common Law, in small Oct. price 1. s. 36 Speculum Juris
Anglicani, or a View of the Laws of England, as they are divided into Statutes,
Common Law and Customs, incidently of the Customs of the famous City of London,
never before printed, together with Resolutions on several of them, by the
Reverend Judges at Westminster, in Oct. price 1. s. By John Brydall Esquire. 37
Young Clerks Tutor, being a Collection of the best Presidents of Recognisances,
Obligations, Conditions, Acquittances, Bills of Sale, Warrants of Attorney,
etc. in Twelves, price 1. 6. d. 38 Jus Sigilli, or the Law of England, touching
His Majesty's four principal Seals, Viz. The Great Seal, the Privy Seal, the
Exchequer Seal, and the Signet; also of those grand Officers to whose Custody
these Seals are committed, in small Twelves, price 10. d. 39 Young Clerks
Companion, or a Manual for his daily practice, wherein are contained the most
absolute modern presidents, fitted for all occasions of present use, in a more
accurate and facile Method then ever yet was published, in 240: price 1. s.
FINIS.

