Licensed,

July 2. 1670.

PARADISE REGAINED. A POEM. In IV BOOKS. To which is added SAMSON AGONISTES.

The Author JOHN MILTON.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for John Starkey at the Mitre in Fleetstreet, near
Temple Bar. MDCLXXI.

PARADISE REGAINED, A POEM. The First BOOK.
I Who e're while the happy Garden sung,
By one man's disobedience lost, now sing
Recovered Paradise to all mankind,
By one man's firm obedience fully tried
Through all temptation, and the Tempter foiled
In all his wiles, defeated and repuls't,
And Eden raised in the wast Wilderness.
Thou Spirit who ledst this glorious Eremite
Into the Desert, his Victorious Field
Against the Spiritual Foe, and broughtst him thence
By proof the undoubted Son of God, inspire,
As thou art wont, my prompted Song else mute,
And bear through highth or depth of natures bounds
With prosperous wing full summed to tell of deeds
Above Heroic, though in secret done,
And unrecorded left through many an Age,
Worthy to have not remained so long unsung.
Now had the great Proclaimer with a voice
More awful then the sound of Trumpet, cried
Repentance, and Heavens Kingdom nigh at hand
To all Baptized: to his great Baptism flocked
With aw the Regions round, and with them came
From Nazareth the Son of Joseph deemed
To the flood Jordan, came as then obscure,
Unmarkt, unknown; but him the Baptist soon
Descri'd, divinely warned, and witness bore
As to his worthier, and would have resigned
To him his Heavenly Office, nor was long
His witness unconfirm'd: on him baptized
Heaven opened, and in likeness of a Dove
The Spirit descended, while the Fathers voice
From Heaven pronounced him his beloved Son.
That heard the Adversary, who roving still
About the world, at that assembly famed
Would not be last, and with the voice divine
Nigh Thunderstruck, the exalted man, to whom
Such high attest was given, a while surveyed
With wonder, then with envy fraught and rage
Flies to his place, nor rests, but in mid air
To Council summons all his mighty Peers,
Within thick Clouds and dark ten-fold involved,
A gloomy Consistory; and them amidst
With looks aghast and sad he thus bespake.
O ancient Powers of Air and this wide world,
For much more willingly I mention Air,
This our old Conquest, then remember Hell
Our hated habitation; well ye know
How many Ages, as the years of men,
This Universe we have possessed, and ruled
In manner at our will th'affairs of Earth,
Since Adam and his facil consort Eve
Lost Paradise deceived by me, though since
With dread attending when that fatal wound
Shall be inflicted by the Seed of Eve
Upon my head, long the decrees of Heaven
Delay, for longest time to him is short;
And now too soon for us the circling hours
This dreaded time have compast, wherein we
Must bide the stroke of that long threatened wound,
At least if so we can, and by the head
Broken be not intended all our power
To be infringed, our freedom and our being.
In this fair Empire won of Earth and Air;
For this ill news I bring, the Woman's seed
Destined to this, is late of woman born,
His birth to our just fear gave no small cause,
But his growth now to youths full flowr; displaying
All virtue, grace and wisdom to atchieve
Things highest, greatest, multiplies my fear.
Before him a great Prophet, to proclaim
His coming, is sent Harbinger, who all
Invites, and in the Consecrated stream
Pretends to wash off sin, and fit them so
Purified to receive him pure, or rather
To do him honor as their King; all come,
And he himself among them was baptized,
Not thence to be more pure, but to receive
The testimony of Heaven, that who he is
Thenceforth the Nations may not doubt; I saw
The Prophet do him reverence, on him rising
Out of the water, Heaven above the Clouds
Unfold her Crystal Doors, thence on his head
A perfect Dove descend, whatever it meant,
And out of Heaven the Sovereign voice I heard,
This is my Son beloved, in him am pleased.
His Mother then is mortal, but his Sire,
He who obtains the Monarchy of Heaven,
And what will he not do to advance his Son?
His first-begot we know, and sore have felt,
When his fierce thunder drove us to the deep;
Who this is we must learn, for man he seems
In all his lineaments, though in his face
The glimpses of his Fathers glory shine.
Ye see our danger on the utmost edge
Of hazard, which admits no long debate,
But must with something sudden be opposed,
Not force, but well couch't fraud, well woven snares,
E're in the head of Nations he appear
Their King, their Leader, and Supreme on Earth.
I, when no other durst, sole undertook
The dismal expedition to find out
And ruin Adam, and the exploit performed
Successfully; a calmer voyage now
Will waft me; and the way found prosperous once
Induces best to hope of like success.
He ended, and his words impression left
Of much amazement to the infernal Crew,
Distracted and surpised with deep dismay
At these sad tidings; but no time was then
For long indulgence to their fears or grief:
Unanimous they all commit the care
And management of this main enterprise
To him their great Dictator, whose attempt
At first against mankind so well had thrived
In Adam's overthrow, and led their march
From Hell's deep-vaulted Den to dwell in light,
Regents and Potentates, and Kings, yea gods
Of many a pleasant Realm and Province wide.
So to the Coast of Jordan he directs
His easy steps; girded with snaky wiles,
Where he might likeliest find this new-declar'd,
This man of men, attested Son of God,
Temptation and all guile on him to try;
So to subvert whom he suspected raised
To end his Reign on Earth so long enjoyed:
But contrary unweeting he fulfilled
The purposed Counsel pre-ordain'd and fixed
Of the most High, who in full frequence bright
Of Angels, thus to Gabriel smiling spoke.
Gabriel this day by proof thou shall behold,
Thou and all Angels conversant on Earth
With man or men's affairs, how I begin
To verify that solemn message late,
On which I sent thee to the Virgin pure
In Galilee, that she should bear a Son
Great in Renown, and called the Son of God;
Then toldst her doubting how these things could be
To her a Virgin, that on her should come
The Holy Ghost, and the power of the highest
O're-shadow her: this man born and now up-grown,
To show him worthy of his birth divine
And high prediction, henceforth I expose
To Satan; let him tempt and now assay
His utmost subtilty, because he boasts
And vaunts of his great cunning to the throng
Of his Apostasy; he might have learnt
Less overweening, since he failed in Job,
Whose constant perseverance overcame
Whatever his cruel malice could invent.
He now shall know I can produce a man
Of female Seed, far abler to resist
All his solicitations, and at length
All his vast force, and drive him back to Hell,
Winning by Conquest what the first man lost
By fallacy surpised. But first I mean
To exercise him in the Wilderness,
There he shall first lay down the rudiments
Of his great warfare, e're I send him forth
To conquer Sin and Death the two grand soes,
By Humiliation and strong Sufferance:
His weakness shall overcome Satanic strength
And all the world, and mass of sinful flesh;
That all the Angels and Aetherial Powers,
They now, and men hereafter may discern,
From what consummate virtue I have chose
This perfect Man, by merit called my Son,
To earn Salvation for the Sons of men.
So spoke the Eternal Father, and all Heaven
Admiring stood a space, then into Hymns
Burst forth, and in Celestial measures moved,
Circling the Throne and Singing, while the hand
Sung with the voice, and this the argument.
Victory and Triumph to the Son of God
Now entering his great duel, not of arms,
But to vanquish by wisdom hellish wiles.
The Father knows the Son; therefore secure
Ventures his filial Virtue, though untri'd,
Against whatever may tempt, whatever seduce,
Allure, or terrify, or undermine.
Be frustrate all ye stratagems of Hell,
And devilish machinations come to naught.
So they in Heaven their Odes and Vigils tuned:
Mean while the Son of God, who yet some days
Lodged in Bethabara where John baptized,
Musing and much revolving in his breast,
How best the mighty work he might begin
Of Savior to mankind, and which way first
Publish his God-like office now mature,
One day forth walked alone, the Spirit leading;
And his deep thoughts, the better to converse
With solitude, till far from track of men,
Thought following thought, and step by step led on,
He entered now the bordering Desert wild,
And with dark shades and rocks environed round,
His holy Meditations thus persu'd.
O what a multitude of thoughts at once
Awakn'd in me swarm, while I consider
What from within I feel my self, and hear
What from without comes often to my ears,
Ill sorting with my present state compared.
When I was yet a child, no childish play
To me was pleasing, all my mind was set
Serious to learn and know, and thence to do
What might be public good; my self I thought
Born to that end, born to promote all truth,
All righteous things: therefore above my years,
The Law of God I read, and found it sweet,
Made it my whole delight, and in it grew
To such perfection, that e're yet my age
Had measured twice six years, at our great Feast
I went into the Temple, there to hear
The Teachers of our Law, and to propose
What might improve my knowledge or their own;
And was admired by all, yet this not all
To which my Spirit aspired, victorious deeds
Flamed in my heart, heroic acts, one while
To rescue Israel from the Roman yoke,
Then to subdue and quell over all the earth
Brute violence and proud Tyrannick power,
Till truth were freed, and equity restored:
Yet held it more humane, more heavenly first
By winning words to conquer willing hearts,
And make persuasion do the work of fear;
At least to try, and teach the erring Soul
Not wilfully mis-doing, but unware
Missed; the stubborn only to destroy.
These growing thoughts my Mother soon perceiving
By words at times cast forth inly rejoiced,
And said to me apart, high are thy thoughts
O Son, but nourish them and let them soar
To what highth sacred virtue and true worth
Can raise them, though above example high;
By matchless Deeds express thy matchless Sire.
For know, thou art no Son of mortal man,
Though men esteem thee low of Parentage,
Thy Father is the Eternal King, who rules
All Heaven and Earth, Angels and Sons of men,
A messenger from God foretold thy birth
Conceived in me a Virgin, he foretold
Thou should be great and sit on David's Throne,
And of thy Kingdom there should be no end.
At thy Nativity a glorious Quire
Of Angels in the fields of Bethlehem sung
To Shepherds watching at their folds by night,
And told them the Messiah now was born,
Where they might see him, and to thee they came;
Directed to the Manger where thou lais't,
For in the Inn was left no better room:
A Star, not seen before in Heaven appearing
Guided the Wise Men thither from the East,
To honor thee with Incense, Myrrh, and Gold,
By whose bright course led on they found the place,
Affirming it thy Star new grav'n in Heaven,
By which they knew thee King of Israel born.
Just Simeon and Prophetic Anna, warned
By Vision, found thee in the Temple, and spoke
Before the Altar and the vested Priest,
Like things of thee to all that present stood.
This having heard, strait I again revolved
The Law and Prophets, searching what was writ
Concerning the Messiah, to our Scribes
Known partly, and soon found of whom they spoke
I am; this chiefly, that my way must lie
Through many a hard assay even to the death,
E're I the promised Kingdom can attain,
Or work Redemption for mankind, whose sins
Full weight must be transferred upon my head.
Yet neither thus disheartn'd or dismayed,
The time prefixed I waited, when behold
The Baptist, (of whose birth I often had heard,
Not knew by sight) now come, who was to come
Before Messiah and his way prepare.
I as all others to his Baptism came,
Which I believed was from above; but he
Strait knew me, and with loudest voice proclaimed
Me him (for it was shown him so from Heaven)
Me him whose Harbinger he was; and first
Refused on me his Baptism to confer,
As much his greater, and was hardly won;
But as I rose out of the laving stream,
Heaven opened her eternal doors, from whence
The Spirit descended on me like a Dove,
And last the sum of all, my Father's voice,
Audibly heard from Heaven, pronounced me his,
Me his beloved Son, in whom alone
He was well pleased; by which I knew the time
Now full, that I no more should live obscure,
But openly begin, as best becomes
The Authority which I derived from Heaven.
And now by some strong motion I am led
Into this Wilderness, to what intent
I learn not yet, perhaps I need not know;
For what concerns my knowledge God reveals.
So spoke our Morning Star then in his rise,
And looking round on every side beheld
A pathless Desert, dusk with horrid shades;
The way he came not having marked, return
Was difficult, by humane steps untrod;
And he still on was led, but with such thoughts
Accompanied of things past and to come
Lodged in his breast, as well might recommend
Such Solitude before choicest Society.
Full forty days he passed, whether on hill
Sometimes, anon in shady vale, each night
Under the covert of some ancient Oak,
Or Cedar, to defend him from the dew,
Or harbored in one Cave, is not revealed;
Nor tasted humane food, nor hunger felt
Till those days ended, hunger'd then at last
Among wild Beasts: they at his sight grew mild,
Nor sleeping him nor waking harmed, his walk
The fiery Serpent fled, and noxious Worm,
The Lion and fierce Tiger glar'd aloof.
But now an aged man in Rural weeds,
Following, as seemed, the quest of some stray Ewe,
Or withered sticks to gather; which might serve
Against a Winters day when winds blow keen,
To warm him wet returned from field at Eve,
He saw approach, who first with curious eye
Perused him, then with words thus utt'red spoke.
Sir, what ill chance has brought thee to this place
So far from path or road of men, who pass
In Troop or Caravan, for single none
Durst ever, who returned, and dropped not here
His Carcass, pined with hunger and with droughth?
I ask the rather, and the more admire,
For that to me thou seem the man, whom late
Our new baptizing Prophet at the Ford
Of Jordan honored so, and called thee Son
Of God; I saw and heard, for we sometimes
Who dwell this wild, constrained by want, come forth
To Town or Village nigh (nighest is far)
Where ought we hear, and curious are to hear,
What happ'ns new; Fame also finds us out.
To whom the Son of God. Who brought me hither
Will bring me hence, no other Guide I seek.
By Miracle he may, replied the Swain,
What other way I see not, for we here
Live on tough roots and stubs, to thirst inured
More then the Camel, and to drink go far,
Men to much misery and hardship born;
But if thou be the Son of God, Command
That out of these hard stones be made thee bread;
So shall thou save thy self and us relieve
With Food, whereof we wretched seldom taste.
He ended, and the Son of God replied.
Think thou such force in Bread? is it not written
(For I discern thee other then thou seem)
Man lives not by Bread only, but each Word
Proceeding from the mouth of God; who fed
Our Fathers here with Manna; in the Mount
Moses was forty days, nor eat nor drank,
And forty days Eliah without food
Wandered this barren waste, the same I now:
Why do thou then suggest to me distrust,
Knowing who I am, as I know who thou art?
Whom thus answered the Arch Fiend now undisguis'd.
It Is true, I am that Spirit unfortunate,
Who leagued with millions more in rash revolt
Kept not my happy Station, but was driven
With them from bliss to the bottomless deep,
Yet to that hideous place not so confined
By rigor unconniving, but that often
Leaving my dolorous Prison I enjoy
Large liberty to round this Globe of Earth,
Or range in the Air, nor from the Heaven of Heavens
Has he excluded my resort sometimes.
I came among the Sons of God, when he
Gave up into my hands Uzzean Job
To prove him, and illustrate his high worth;
And when to all his Angels he proposed
To draw the proud King Ahab into fraud
That he might fall in Ramoth, they demuring,
I undertook that office, and the tongues
Of all his flattering Prophets glibb'd with lies
To his destruction, as I had in charge.
For what he bids I do; though I have lost
Much luster of my native brightness, lost
To be beloved of God, I have not lost
To love, at least contemplate and admire
What I see excellent in good, or fair,
Or virtuous, I should so have lost all sense.
What can be then less in me then desire
To see thee and approach thee, whom I know
Declared the Son of God, to hear attent
Thy wisdom, and behold thy God-like deeds?
Men generally think me much a foe
To all mankind: why should I? they to me
Never did wrong or violence, by them
I lost not what I lost, rather by them
I gained what I have gained, and with them dwell
Copartner in these Regions of the World,
If not disposer; lend them often my aid,
Often my advice by presages and signs,
And answers, oracles, portents and dreams,
Wherbey they may direct their future life.
Envy they say excites me, thus to gain
Companions of my misery and woe.
At first it may be; but long since with woe
Never acquainted, now I feel by proof,
That fellowship in pain divides not smart,
Nor lightens aught each man's peculiar load.
Small consolation then, were Man adjoined:
This wounds me most (what can it less) that Man,
Man fallen shall be restored, I never more.
To whom our Savior sternly thus replied.
Deservedly thou griev'st, composed of lies
From the beginning, and in lies wilt end;
Who boast'st release from Hell, and leave to come
Into the Heaven of Heavens; thou come indeed,
As a poor miserable captive thrall,
Comes to the place where he before had sat
Among the Prime in Splendor, now deposed,
Ejected, emptyed, gazed, unpityed, shunned,
A spectacle of ruin or of scorn
To all the Host of Heaven; the happy place
Imports to thee no happiness, no joy,
Rather inflames thy torment, representing
Lost bliss, to thee no more communicable,
So never more in Hell then when in Heaven.
But thou art serviceable to Heaven's King.
Will thou impute to obedience what thy fear
Extorts, or pleasure to do ill excites?
What but thy malice moved thee to misdeem
Ofirghteous Job, then cruelly to afflict him
With all inflictions, but his patience won?
The other service was thy chosen task,
To be a liar in four hundred mouths;
For lying is thy sustenance, thy food.
Yet thou pretend'st to truth; all Oracles
By thee are given, and what confessed more true
Among the Nations? that has been thy craft,
By mixing somewhat true to vent more lies.
But what have been thy answers, what but dark
Ambiguous and with double sense deluding,
Which they who asked have seldom understood,
And not well understood as good not known?
Who ever by consulting at thy shrine
Returned the wiser, or the more instruct
To fly or follow what concerned him most,
And run not sooner to his fatal snare?
For God has justly given the Nationsup
To thy Delusions; justly, since they fell
Idolatrous, but when his purpose is
Among them to declare his Providence
To thee not known, whence have thou then thy truth,
But from him or his Angels President
In every Province, who themselves disdaining
To approach thy Temples, give thee in command
What to the smallest tittle thou shall say
To thy Adorers; thou with trembling fear,
Or like a Fawning Parasite obey'st;
Then to thy self ascrib'st the truth foretold.
But this thy glory shall be soon retrenched;
No more shall thou by oracling abuse
The Gentiles; henceforth Oracles are ceast,
And thou no more with Pomp and Sacrifice
Shall be inquired at Delphos or elsewhere,
At least in vain, for they shall find thee mute.
God has now sent his living Oracle
Into the World, to teach his final will,
And sends his Spirit of Truth henceforth to dwell
In pious Hearts, an inward Oracle
To all truth requisite for men to know.
So spoke our Savior; but the subtle Fiend,
Though inly stung with anger and disdain,
Dissembled, and this Answer smooth returned.
Sharply thou have insisted on rebuke,
And urged me hard with doings, which not will
But misery has rested from me; where
Easily can thou find one miserable,
And not enforced oft-times to part from truth;
If it may stand him more in stead to lie,
Say and unsay, feign, flatter, or abjure?
But thou art placed above me, thou art Lord;
From thee I can and must submiss endure
Check or reproof, and glad to escape so quit.
Hard are the ways of truth, and rough to walk,
Smooth on the tongue discourst, pleasing to th'ear,
And tuneable as Silvan Pipe or Song;
What wonder then if I delight to hear
Her dictates from thy mouth? most men admire
Virtue, who follow not her lore: permit me
To hear thee when I come (since no man comes)
And talk at least, though I despair to attain.
Thy Father, who is holy, wise and pure,
Suffers the Hypocrite or Atheous Priest
To tread his Sacred Courts, and minister
About his Altar, handling holy things,
Praying or vowing, and vouchsafed his voice
To Balaam Reprobate, a Prophet yet
Inspired; disdain not such access to me.
To whom our Savior with unaltered brow.
Thy coming hither, though I know thy scope,
I bid not or forbid; do as thou find'st
Permission from above; thou can not more.
He added not; and Satan bowing low
His gray dissimulation, disappeared
Into thin Air diffused: for now began
Night with her sullen wing to double-shade
The Desert, Fowls in their clay nests were couch't;
And now wild Beasts came forth the woods to roam.
The End of the First Book.
PARADISE REGAINED. The Second BOOK.
MEan while the new-baptiz'd, who yet remained
At Jordan with the Baptist, and had seen
Him whom they heard so late expressly called
Jesus Messiah Son of God declared,
And on that high Authority had believed,
And with him talked, and with him lodged, I mean
Andrew and Simon, famous after known
With others though in Holy Writ not named,
Now missing him their joy so lately found,
So lately found, and so abruptly gone,
Began to doubt, and doubted many days,
And as the days increased, increased their doubt:
Sometimes they thought he might be only shown,
And for a time caught up to God, as once
Moses was in the Mount, and missing long;
And the great Thisbite who onfiery wheels
Rode up to Heaven, yet once again to come.
Therefore as those young Prophets then with care
Sought lost Eliah, so in each place these
Night to Bethabara; in Jerico
The City of Palms, Aenon, and Salem Old,
Machaerus and each Town or City walled
On this side the broad lake Genezaret,
Or in Perea, but returned in vain.
Then on the bank of Jordan, by a Creek:
Where winds with Reeds, and Osiers whispering play
Plain Fishermen, no greater men them call,
Close in a Cottage low together got
Their unexpected loss and plaints out breathed.
Alas, from what high hope to what relapse
Unlooked for are we fallen, our eyes beheld
Messiah certainly now come, so long
Expected of our Fathers; we have heard
His words, his wisdom full of grace and truth,
Now, now, for sure, deliverance is at hand,
The Kingdom shall to Israel be restored:
Thus we rejoiced, but soon our joy is turned
Into perplexity and new amaze:
For whither is he gone, what accident
Has rapt him from us? will he now retire
After appearance, and again prolong
Our expectation? God of Israel,
Send thy Messiah forth, the time is come;
Behold the Kings of the Earth how they oppress
Thy chosen, to what highth their power unjust
They have exalted, and behind them cast
All fear of thee, arise and vindicate
Thy Glory, freethy people from their yoke,
But let us wait; thus far he has performed,
Sent his Anointed, and to us revealed him,
By his great Prophet, pointed at and shown,
In public, and with him we have conversed;
Let us be glad of this, and all our fears
Lay on his Providence; he will not fail
Nor will withdraw him now, nor will recall,
Mock us with his blessed sight, then snatch him hence,
Soon we shall see our hope, our joy return.
Thus they out of their plaints new hope resume
To find whom at the first they found unsought:
But to his Mother Mary, when she saw
Others returned from Baptism, not her Son,
Nor left at Jordan, tidings of him none;
Within her breast, though calm; her breast though pure,
Motherly cares and fears got head, and raised
Some troubled thoughts, which she in sighs thus clad.
O what avails me now that honor high
To have conceived of God, or that salute
Hale highly favored, among women blessed;
While I to sorrows am no less advanced,
And fears as eminent, above the lot
Of other women, by the birth I bore,
In such a season born when scarce a Shed
Could be obtained to shelter him or me
From the bleak air; a Stable was our warmth,
A Manger his, yet soon enforced to fly
Thence into Egypt, till the Murderous King
Were dead, who sought his life, and missing filled
With Infant blood the streets of Bethlehem;
From Egypt home returned, in Nazareth
Has been our dwelling many years, his life
Private, unactive, calm, contemplative,
Little suspicious to any King; but now
Full grown to Man, acknowledged, as I hear,
By John the Baptist, and in public shown,
Son owned from Heaven by his Father's voice;
I looked for some great change; to Honor? no,
But trouble, as old Simeon plain foretold,
That to the fall and rising he should be
Of many in Israel, and to a sign
Spoken against, that through my very Soul
A sword shall pierce, this is my favored lot,
My Exaltation to Afflictions high;
Afflicted I may be, it seems, and blessed;
I will not argue that, nor will repine.
But where delays he now? some great intent
Conceals him: when twelve years he scarce had seen,
I lost him, but so found, as well I saw
He could not lose himself; but went about
His Father's business; what he meant I mused,
Since understand; much more his absence now
Thus long to some great purpose he obscures.
But I to wait with patience am inured;
My heart has been a storehouse long of things
And sayings laid up, portending strange events.
Thus Mary pondering often, and often to mind
Recalling what remarkably had passed
Since first her Salutation heard, with thoughts
Meekly composed awaited the fulfilling:
The while her Son tracing the Desert wild,
Sole but with holiest Meditations fed,
Into himself descended, and at once
All his great work to come before him set;
How to begin, how to accomplish best
His end of being on Earth, and mission high:
For Satan with slye preface to return
Had left him vacant, and with speed was gone
Up to the middle Region of thick Air,
Where all his Potentates in Council sat;
There without sign of boast, or sign of joy,
Sollicitous and blank he thus began.
Princes, Heavens ancient Sons, Ethereal Thrones,
Demonian Spirits now, from the Element
Each of his reign allotted, rightlier called,
Powers of Fire, Air, Water, and Earth beneath,
So may we hold our place and these mild seats
Without new trouble; such an Enemy
Is risen to invade us, who no less
Threat'ns our expulsion down to Hell;
I, as I undertook, and with the vote
Consenting in full frequence was empowered,
Have found him, viewed him, tasted him, but find
Far other labor to be undergon
Then when I dealt with Adam first of Men,
Though Adam by his Wives allurement fell,
However to this Man inferior far,
If he be Man by Mothers side at least,
With more then humane gifts from Heaven adorned,
Perfections absolute, Graces divine,
And amplitude of mind to greatest Deeds.
Therefore I am returned, lest confidence
Of my success with Eve in Paradise
Deceive ye to persuasion over-sure
Of like succeeding here; I summon all
Rather to be in readiness, with hand
Or counsel to assist; lest I who erst
Thought none my equal, now be over-match'd.
So spoke the old Serpent doubting, and from all
With clamor was assured their utmost aid
At his command; when from amidst them rose
Belial the dislolutest Spirit that fell,
The sensuallest, and after Asmodai
The fleshliest Incubus, and thus advised.
Set women in his eye and in his walk,
Among daughters of men the fairest found;
Many are in each Region passing fair
As the noon Sky; more like to Goddesses
Then Mortal Creatures, graceful and discreet,
Expert in amorous Arts, enchanting tongues
Persuasive, Virgin majesty with mild
And sweet allayed, yet terrible to approach,
Skilled to retire, and in retiring draw
Hearts after them tangl'd in Amorous Nets.
Such object has the power to soft'n and tame
Severest temper, smooth the rugged'st brow,
Enerve, and with voluptuous hope dissolve,
Draw out with credulous desire, and lead
At will the manliest, resolutest breast,
As the Magnetic hardest Iron draws.
Women, when nothing else, beguiled the heart
Of wisest Solomon, and made him build,
And made him bow to the Gods of his Wives.
To whom quick answer Satan thus returned.
Belial, in much uneven scale thou weigh'st
All others by thy self; because of old
Thou thy self doat'st on womankind, admiring
Their shape, their color, and attractive grace,
None are, thou think, but taken with such toys,
Before the Flood thou with thy lusty Crew,
False titl'd Sons of God, roaming the Earth
Cast wanton eyes on the daughters of men,
And coupl'd with them, and begot a race.
Have we not seen, or by relation heard,
In Courts and Regal Chambers how thou lurk'st,
In Wood or Grove by mossie Fountain side,
In Valley or Green Meadow to way-lay
Some beauty rare, Calisto, Clymene,
Daphne, or Semele, Antiopa,
Or Amymone, Syrinx, many more
Too long, then lay'st thy scapes on names adored,
Apollo, Neptune, Jupiter, or Pan,
Satyr, or Fawn, or Silvan? But these haunts
Delight not all; among the Sons of Men,
How many have with a smile made small account
Of beauty and her lures, easily scorned
All her assaults, on worthier things intent?
Remember that Pellean Conqueror,
A youth, how all the Beauties of the East
He slightly viewed, and slightly over-pass'd;
How he sirnam'd of Africa dismissed
In his prime youth the fair Iberian maid.
For Solomon he lived at ease, and full
Of honor, wealth, high fare, aimed not beyond
Higher design then to enjoy his State;
Thence to the bait of Women lay exposed;
But he whom we attempt is wiser far
Then Solomon, of more exalted mind,
Made and set wholly on the accomplishment
Of greatest things; what woman will you find,
Though of this Age the wonder and the fame,
On whom his leisure will vouchsafe an eye
Of fond desire? or should she confident,
As sitting Queen adored on Bauties Throne,
Descend with all her winning charms beg'rt
To enamour, as the Zone of Venus once
Wrought that effect on Jove, so Fables tell;
How would one look from his Majestic brow
Seated as on the top of Virtues hill,
Discount'nance her despised, and put to rout
All her array; her female pride deject,
Or turn to reverent awe? for Beauty stands
In the admiration only of weak minds
Led captive; cease to admire, and all her Plumes
Fall flat and shrink into a trivial toy,
At every sudden slighting quite abasht:
Therefore with manlier objects we must try
His constancy, with such as have more show
Of worth, of honor, glory, and popular praise;
Rocks whereon greatest men have oftest wrecked;
Or that which only seems to satisfy
Lawful desires of Nature, not beyond;
And now I know he hungers where no food
Is to be found, in the wide Wilderness;
The rest commit to me, I shall let pass
No advantage, and his strength as often assay.
He ceased, and heard their grant in loud acclaim;
Then forthwith to him takes a chosen band
Of Spirits likest to himself in guile
To be at hand, and at his beck appear,
If cause were to unfold some active Scene
Of various persons each to know his part;
Then to the Desert takes with these his flight;
Where still from shade to shade the Son of God
After forty days fasting had remained,
Now hungring first, and to himself thus said.
Where will this end? four times ten days I have passed
Wandering this woody maze, and humane food
Nor tasted, nor had appetite; that Fast
To Virtue I impute not, or count part
Of what I suffer here; if Nature need not,
Or God support Nature without repast
Though needing, what praise is it to endure?
But now I feel I hunger, which declares,
Nature has need of what she asks; yet God
Can satisfy that need some other way,
Though hunger still remain: so it remain
Without this bodies wasting, I content me,
And from the sting of Famine fear no harm,
Nor mind it, fed with better thoughts that feed
Me hungring more to do my Fathers will.
It was the hour of night, when thus the Son
Commun'd in silent walk, then laid him down
Under the hospitable covert nigh
Of Trees thick interwoven; there he slept,
And dreamed, as appetite is wont to dream,
Of meats and drinks, Natures refreshment sweet;
Him thought, he by the Brook of Cherith stood
And saw the Ravens with their horny beaks
Food to Elijah bringing Even and Morn,
Though ravenous, taught to abstain from what they brought:
He saw the Prophet also how he fled
Into the Desert, and how there he slept
Under a Juniper; then how awakt,
He found his Supper on the coals prepared,
And by the Angel was bid rise and eat,
And eat the second time after repose,
The strength whereof sufficed him forty days;
Sometimes that with Elijah he partook,
Or as a guest with Daniel at his pulse.
Thus wore out night, and now the Herald Lark
Left his ground-nest, high towering to descry
The morns approach, and greet her with his Song:
As lightly from his grassy Couch up rose
Our Savior, and found all was but a dream,
Fasting he went to sleep, and fasting waked.
Up to a hill anon his steps he reared,
From whose high top to ken the prospect round,
If Cottage were in view, Sheep-cote or Herd;
But Cottage, Herd or Sheep-cote none he saw,
Only in a bottom saw a pleasant Grove,
With chaunt of tuneful Birds resounding loud;
Thither he bent his way, determined there
To rest at noon, and entr'd soon the shade
High rooft and walks beneath, and alleys brown
That opened in the midst a woody Scene,
Natures own work it seemed (Nature taught Art)
And to a Superstitious eye the haunt
Of Wood-Gods and Wood-Nymphs; he viewed it round,
When suddenly a man before him stood,
Not rustic as before, but seemlier clad,
As one in City, or Court, or Palace bred,
And with fair speech these words to him addressed.
With granted leave officious I return,
But much more wonder that the Son of God
In this wild solitude so long should bide
Of all things destitute, and well I know,
Not without hunger. Others of some note,
As story tells, have trod this Wilderness;
The Fugitive Bondwoman with her Son
Out cast Nebaioth, yet found he relief
By a providing Angel; all the race
Of Israel here had famished, had not God
Rained from Heaven Manna, and that Prophet bold
Native of Thebes wandering here was fed
Twice by a voice inviting him to eat.
Of thee these forty days none has regard,
Forty and more deserted here indeed.
To whom thus Jesus; what conclud'st thou hence?
They all had need, I as thou see have none.
How have thou hunger then? Satan replied,
Tell me if Food were now before thee set,
Would thou not eat? Thereafter as I like
The giver, answered Jesus. Why should that
Cause thy refusal, said the subtle Fiend,
Have thou not right to all Created things,
Owe not all Creatures by just right to thee
Duty and Service, nor to stay till bid,
But tender all their power? nor mention I
Meats by the Law unclean, or offered first
To Idols, those young Daniel could refuse;
Nor proffered by an Enemy, though who
Would scruple that, with want oppressed? behold
Nature ashamed, or better to express,
Troubled that thou should hunger, has purvey'd
From all the Elements her choicest store
To treat thee as beseems, and as her Lord
With honor, only deign to sit and eat.
He spoke no dream, for as his words had end,
Our Savior lifting up his eyes beheld
In ample space under the broadest shade
A Table richly spread, in regal mode,
With dishes pill'd, and meats of noblest sort
And savor, Beasts of chase, or Fowl of game,
In pastry built, or from the spit, or boiled,
Gris-amber-steam'd; all Fish from Sea or Shore,
Freshet, or purling Brook, of shell or fin,
And exquisitest name, for which was drained
Pontus and Lucrine Bay, and Afric Coast.
Alas how simple, to these Cates compared,
Was that crude Apple that diverted Eve!
And at a stately side-board by the wine
That fragrant smell diffused, in order stood
Tall stripling youths rich clad, of fairer hew
Then Ganymed or Hylas, distant more
Under the Trees now trip'd, now solemn stood
Nymphs of Diana's train, and Naiades
With fruits and flowers from Amalthea's horn,
And Ladies of the Hesperides, that seemed
Fairer then feigned of old, or fabl'd since
Of Fairy Damsels met in Forest wide
By Knights of Logres, or of Lyones,
Lancelot or Pelleas, or Pellenore,
And all the while Harmonious Airs were heard
Of chiming strings, or charming pipes and winds
Of gentlest gale Arabian odors fanned
From their soft wings, and Flora's earliest smells.
Such was the Splendor, and the Tempter now
His invitation earnestly renewed.
What doubts the Son of God to sit and eat?
These are not Fruits forbidden, no interdict
Defends the touching of these viands pure,
Their taste no knowledge, works at least of evil,
But life preserves, destroys life's enemy,
Hunger, with sweet restorative delight.
All these are Spirits of Air, and Woods, and Springs,
Thy gentle Ministers, who come to pay
Thee homage, and acknowledge thee their Lord:
What doubt'st thou Son of God? sit down and eat.
To whom thus Jesus temperately replied:
Said thou not that to all things I had right?
And who withholds my power that right to use?
Shall I receive by gift what of my own,
When and where likes me best, I can command?
I can at will, doubt not, as soon as thou,
Command a Table in this Wilderness,
And call swift flights of Angels ministrant
Arrayed in Glory on my cup to attend:
Why should thou then obtrude this diligence,
In vain, where no acceptance it can find,
And with my hunger what have thou to do?
Thy pompous Delicacies I contemn,
And count thy specious gifts no gifts but guiles.
To whom thus answered Satan malecontent:
That I have also power to give thou see,
If of that power I bring thee voluntary
What I might have bestowed on whom I pleased,
And rather opportunely in this place
Chose to impart to thy apparent need,
Why should thou not accept it? but I see
What I can do or offer is suspect;
Of these things others quickly will dispose
Whose pains have earned the far fet spoil. With that
Both Table and Provision vanished quite
With sound of Harpies wings, and Talons heard;
Only the importune Tempter still remained,
And with these words his temptation pursued.
By hunger, that each other Creature tames,
Thou art not to be harmed, therefore not moved;
Thy temperance invincible besides,
For no allurement yields to appetite,
And all thy heart is set on high designs,
High actions; but wherewith to be achieved?
Great acts require great means of enterprise,
Thou art unknown, unfriended, low of birth,
A Carpenter thy Father known, thy self
Bred up in poverty and streights at home;
Lost in a Desert here and hunger-bit:
Which way or from what hope do thou aspire
To greatness? whence Authority deriv'st,
What Followers, what Retinue can thou gain,
Or at thy heels the dizzy Multitude,
Longer then thou can feed them on thy cost?
Money brings Honor, Friends, Conquest, and Realms;
What raised Antipater the Edomite,
And his Son Herod placed on Juda's Throne;
(Thy throne) but gold that got him puissant friends?
Therefore, if at great things thou would arrive,
Get Riches first, get Wealth, and Treasure heap,
Not difficult, if thou hearken to me,
Riches are mine, Fortune is in my hand;
They whom I favor thrive in wealth amain,
While Virtue, Valor, Wisdom sit in want.
To whom thus Jesus patiently replied;
Yet Wealth without these three is impotent,
To gain dominion or to keep it gained.
Witness those ancient Empires of the Earth,
In highth of all their flowing wealth dissolved:
But men endu'd with these have often attained
In lowest poverty to highest deeds;
Gideon and Jephtha, and the Shepherd lad,
Whose offspring on the Throne of Juda sat
So many Ages, and shall yet regain
That seat, and reign in Israel without end.
Among the Heathen, (for throughout the World
To me is not unknown what has been done
Worthy of Memorial) can thou not remember
Quintius, Fabricius, Curious, Regulus?
For I esteem those names of men so poor
Who could do mighty things, and could contemn
Riches though offered from the hand of Kings.
And what in me seems wanting, but that I
May also in this poverty as soon
Accomplish what they did, perhaps and more?
Extol not Riches then, the toil of Fools,
The wise man's cumbrance if not snare, more apt
To slacken Virtue, and abate her edge,
Then prompt her to do aught may merit praise.
What if with like aversion I reject
Riches and Realms; yet not for that a Crown,
Golden in show, is but a wreath of thorns,
Brings dangers, troubles, cares, and sleepless nights
To him who wears the Regal Diadem,
When on his shoulders each man's burden lies;
For therein stands the office of a King,
His Honor, Virtue, Merit and chief Praise,
That for the Public all this weight he bears.
Yet he who reigns within himself, and rules
Passions, Desires, and Fears, is more a King;
Which every wise and virtuous man attains:
And who attains not, ill aspires to rule
Cities of men, or headstrong Multitudes,
Subject himself to Anarchy within,
Or lawless passions in him which he serves.
But to guide Nations in the way of truth
By saving Doctrine, and from error lead
To know, and knowing worship God aright,
Is yet more Kingly, this attracts the Soul,
Governs the inner man, the nobler part,
That other over the body only reigns,
And often by force, which to a generous mind
So reigning can be no sincere delight.
Besides to give a Kingdom has been thought
Greater and nobler done, and to lay down
Far more magnanimous, then to assume.
Riches are needless then, both for themselves,
And for thy reason why they should be sought
To gain a Scepter, oftest better miss't.
The End of the Second Book.
PARADISE REGAINED. The Third BOOK.
SO spoke the Son of God, and Satan stood
A while as mute confounded what to say,
What to reply, confuted and convinced
Of his weak arguing, and fallacious drift;
At length collecting all his Serpent wiles,
With soothing words renewed, him thus accosts.
I see thou know what is of use to know,
What best to say can say, to do can do;
Thy actions to thy words accord, thy words
To thy large heart give utterance due, thy heart
Conteins of good, wise, just, the perfect shape.
Should Kings and Nations from thy mouth consult,
Thy Counsel would be as the Oracle
Urim and Thummim, those oraculous gems
On Aaron's breast: or tongue of Seers old
Infallible; or were thou sought to deeds
That might requireth' array of war, thy skill
Of conduct would be such, that all the world
Could not sustain thy Prowess, or subsist
In battle, though against thy few in arms.
These God-like Virtues wherefore do thou hide?
Affecting private life, or more obscure
In savage Wilderness, wherefore deprive
All Earth her wonder at thy acts, thy self
The fame and glory, glory the reward
That sole excites to high attempts the flame
Of most erected Spirits, most tempered pure
Aetherial, who all pleasures else despise,
All treasures and all gain esteem as dross,
And dignities and powers all but the highest?
Thy years are ripe, and over-ripe, the Son
Of Macedonian Philip had e're these
Won Asia and the Throne of Cyrus held
At his dispose, young Scipio had brought down
The Carthaginian pride, young Pompey quelled
The Pontic King and in triumph had rode.
Yet years, and to ripe years judgment mature,
Quench not the thirst of glory, but augment.
Great Julius, whom now all the world admires
The more he grew in years, the more inflamed
With glory, wept that he had lived so long
Inglorious: but thou yet art not too late.
To whom our Savior calmly thus replied.
Thou neither do persuade me to seek wealth
For Empires sake, nor Empire to affect
For glories sake by all thy argument.
For what is glory but the blaze of fame,
The peoples praise, if always praise unmixt?
And what the people but a herd confused,
A miscellaneous rabble, who extol
[praise,
Things vulgar, and well weighed, scarce worth the
They praise and they admire they know not what;
And know not whom, but as one leads the other;
And what delight to be by such extolled,
To live upon their tongues and be their talk,
Of whom to be disprais'd were no small praise?
His lot who dares be singularly good.
The intelligent among them and the wise
Are few, and glory scarce of few is raised.
This is true glory and renown, when God
Looking on the Earth, with approbation marks
The just man, and divulges him through Heaven
To all his Angels, who with true applause
Recount his praises; thus he did to Job,
When to extend his fame through Heaven and Earth,
As thou to thy reproach may well remember,
He asked thee, have thou seen my servant Job?
Famous he was in Heaven, on Earth less known*
Where glory is false glory, attributed
To things not glorious, men not worthy of fame.
They err who count it glorious to subdue
By Conquest far and wide, to overrun
Large Countries, and in field great Battles win,
Great Cities by assault: what do these Worthies,
But rob and spoil, burn, flaughter, and enslave
Peaceable Nations, neighboring, or remote,
Made Captive, yet deserving freedom more
Then those their Conquerours, who leave behind
Nothing but ruin wheresoever they rove,
And all the flourishing works of peace destroy,
Then swell with pride, and must be titl'd Gods,
Great Benefactors of mankind, Deliverers,
Worshiped with Temple, Priest and Sacrifice;
One is the Son of Jove, of Mars the other,
Till Conqueror Death discover them scarce men,
Rolling in brutish vices, and deformed,
Violent or shameful death their due reward.
But if there be in glory aught of good,
It may by means far different be attained
Without ambition, war, or violence;
By deeds of peace, by wisdom eminent,
By patience, temperance; I mention still
Him whom thy wrongs with Saintly patience born,
Made famous in a Land and times obscure;
Who names not now with honor patient Job?
Poor Socrates (who next more memorable?)
By what he taught and suffered for so doing,
For truths sake suffering death unjust, lives now
Equal in fame to proudest Conquerours.
Yet if for fame and glory aught be done,
Aught suffered; if young African for fame
His wasted Country freed from Pun^^ rage,
The deed becomes unprais'd, the man (...) least,
And loses, though but verbal, his (...)
Shall I seek glory then, as vain me^(...)
Often not deserved? I seek not mine,(...)
Who sent me, and thereby witness whence I am.
To whom the Tempter murmuring thus replied.
Think not so slight of glory; therein least
Resembling thy great Father: he seeks glory,
And for his glory all things made, all things
Orders and governs, nor content in Heaven
By all his Angels glorified, requires
Glory from men, from all men good or bad,
Wise or unwise, no difference, no exemption;
Above all Sacrifice, or hallowed gift
Glory he requires, and glory he receives
Promiscuous from all Nations, Jew, or Greek,
Or Barbarous, nor exception has declared;
From us his foes pronounced glory he exacts.
To whom our Savior fervently replied.
And reason; since his word all things produced,
Though chiefly not for glory as prime end,
But to show forth his goodness, and impart
His good communicable to every soul
Freely; of whom what could he less expect
Then glory and benediction, that is thanks,
The slightest, easiest, readiest recompense
From them who could return him nothing else,
And not returning that would likeliest render
Contempt instead, dishonor, obloquy?
Hard recompense, unsuitable return
For so much good, so much beneficence.
But why should man seek glory? who of his own
Has nothing, and to whom nothing belongs
But condemnation, ignominy, and shame?
Who for so many benefits received
Turned recreant to God, ingrate and false,
And so of all true good himself despoiled,
Yet, sacrilegious, to himself would take
That which to God alone of right belongs;
Yet so much bounty is in God, such grace,
That who advance his glory, not their own,
Them he himself to glory will advance.
So spoke the Son of God; and here again
Satan had not to answer, but stood struck
With guilt of his own sin, for he himself
Insatiable of glory had lost all,
Yet of another Plea bethought him soon.
Of glory as thou will, said he, so deem,
Worth or not worth the seeking, let it pass:
But to a Kingdom thou art born, ordained
To sit upon thy Father David's Throne;
By Mothers side thy Father, though thy right
Be now in powerful hands, that will not part
Easily from possession won with arms;
Judaea now and all the promised land
Reduced a Province under Roman yoke,
Obeys Tiberius; nor is always ruled
With temperate sway; often have they violated
The Temple, often the Law with foul affronts,
Abominations rather, as did once
Antiochus: and think thou to regain
Thy right by sitting still or thus retiring?
So did not Machabens: he indeed
Retired unto the Desert, but with arms;
And over a mighty King so often prevailed,
That by strong hand his Family obtained,
Though Priests, the Crown, and David's Throne usurped,
With Modin and her Suburbs once content.
If Kingdom move thee not, let move thee Zeal,
And Duty; Zeal and Duty are not slow;
But on Occasions forelock watchful wait.
They themselves rather are occasion best,
Zeal of thy Fathers house, Duty to free
Thy Country from her Heathen servitude;
So shall thou best fulfill, best verify
The Prophets old, who sung thy endless reign,
The happier reign the sooner it begins,
Reign then; what can thou better do the while?
To whom our Savior answer thus returned.
All things are best fullfil'd in their due time,
And time there is for all things, Truth has said:
If of my reign Prophetic Writ has told,
That it shall never end, so when begin
The Father in his purpose has decreed,
He in whose hand all times and seasons roll.
What if he has decreed that I shall first
Be tried in humble state, and things adverse,
By tribulations, injuries, insults,
Contempts, and scorns, and snares, and violence;
Suffering, abstaining, quietly expecting
Without distrust or doubt, that he may know
What I can suffer, how obey? who best
Can suffer, best can do; best reign, who first
Well has obeyed; just trial e're I merit
My exaltation without change or end.
But what concerns it thee when I begin
My everlasting Kingdom, why art thou
Sollicitous, what moves thy inquisition?
Know thou not that my rising is thy fall,
And my promotion will be thy destruction?
To whom the Tempter inly rackt replied.
Let that come when it comes; all hope is lost
Of my reception into grace; what worse?
For where no hope is left, is left no fear;
If there be worse, the expectation more
Of worse torments me then the feeling can.
I would be at the worst; worst is my Port,
My harbor and my ultimate repose,
The end I would attain, my final good.
My error was my error, and my crime
My crime; whatever for it self condemned,
And will alike be punished; whether thou
Reign or reign not; though to that gentle brow
Willingly I could fly, and hope thy reign,
From that placid aspect and meek regard,
Rather then aggravate my evil state,
Would stand between me and thy Fathers ire;
(Whose ire I dread more then the fire of Hell)
A shelter and a kind of shading cool
Interposition, as a summers cloud.
If I then to the worst that can be have,
Why move thy feet so slow to what is best,
Happiest both to thy self and all the world,
That thou who worthiest art should be their King?
Perhaps thou linger'st in deep thoughts detained
Of the enterprise so hazardous and high;
No wonder, for though in thee be united
What of perfection can in man be found,
Or human nature can receive, consider
Thy life has yet been private, most part spent
At home, scarce viewed the Gallilean Towns,
And once a year Jerusalem, few days
Short so journ; and what thence could thou observe?
The world thou have not seen, much less her glory,
Empires, and Monarchs, and their radiant Courts,
Best school of best experience, quickest in sight
In all things that to greatest actions lead.
The wisest, unexperienc't, will be ever
Timorous and loath, with novice modesty;
(As he who seeking Asses found a Kingdom)
Irresolute, unhardy, unadventrous:
But I will bring thee where thou soon shall quit
Those rudiments, and see before thine eyes
The Monarchies of the Earth, their pomp and state;
Sufficient introduction to inform
Thee, of thy self so apt, in regal Arts;
And regal Mysteries; that thou may know
How best their opposition to withstand.
With that (such power was given him then) he took
The Son of God upto a Mountain high.
It was a Mountain at whose verdant feet
A spacious plain out stretched in circuit wide
Lay pleasant; from his side two rivers flowed,
The one winding, the other strait and left between
Fair Champain with less rivers interveind,
Then meeting joined their tribute to the Sea*
Fertile of corn the glebe, of oil and wine,
With herds the pastures thronged, with flocks the hills,
Huge Cities and high towr'd, that well might seem
The seats of mightiest Monarchs, and so large
The Prospect was, that here and there was room
For barren desert fountainless and dry.
To this high mountain top the Tempter brought.
Our Savior, and new train of words began.
Well have we speeded, and over hill and dale,
Forest and field, and flood, Temples and Towers
Cut shorter many a league; here thou behold'st
Assyria and her Empires ancient bounds,
Araxes and the Caspian lake, thence on
As far as Indus East, Euphrates West,
And often beyond; to South the Persian Bay,
And inaccessible the Arabian drouth:
Here Ninevee, of length within her wall
Several days journey, built by Ninus old,
Of that first golden Monarchy the seat,
And ^^t of Salmanassar, whose success
Israel in long captivity still mourns;
There Babylon the wonder of all tongues,
As ancient, but rebuilt by him who twice
Judah and all thy Father David's house
Led captive, and Jerusalem laid waste,
Till Cyrus set them free; Persepolis
His City there thou see, and Bactra there;
Ecbatana her structure vast there shows,
And Hecatompylos her hunderd gates,
There Susa by Choaspes, amber stream,
The drink of none but Kings; of later fame
Built by Emathian, or by Parthian hands,
The great Seleucia, Nisibis, and there
Artaxata, Teredon, Tesiphon,
Turning with easy eye thou may behold.
All these the Parthian, now some Ages past,
By great Arsaces led, who founded first
That Empire, under his dominion holds
From the luxurious Kings of Antioch won.
And just in time thou come to have a view
Of his great power; for now the Parthian King
In Ctesiphon has gathered all his Host
Against the Scythian, whose incursions wild
Have wasted Sogdiana; to her aid
He marches now in have; see, though from far,
His thousands, in what martial equipage
They issue forth, Steel Bows, and Shafts their arms
Of equal dread in flight, or in pursuit;
All Horsemen, in which fight they most excel;
See how in warlike muster they appear,
In Rhombs and wedges, and half moons, and wings.
He looked and saw what numbers numberless
The City gates out powered, light armed Troops
In coats of Mail and military pride;
In Mail their horses clad, yet fleet and strong,
Prauncing their riders bore, the flower and choice
Of many Provinces from bound to bound;
From Arachosia, from Candaor East,
And Margiana to the Hyrcanian cliffs
Of Caucasus, and dark Iberian dales,
From Atropatia and the neighboring plains
Of Adiabene, Media, and the South
Of Susiana to Balsara's hav'n.
He saw them in their forms of battle ranged,
How quick they wheeled, and flying behind themshot
Sharp sleet of arrowie shower against the face
Of their pursuers, and overcame by flight;
The field all iron cast a gleaming brown,
Nor wanted clouds of foot, nor on each horn,
Cuirassiers all in steel for standing fight;
Chariots or Elephants endorst with Towers
Of Archers, nor of laboring Pioners
A multitude with Spades and Axes armed
To lay hills plain, fell woods, or valleys fill,
Or where plain was raise hill, or over-lay
With bridges rivers proud, as with a yoke;
Mules after these, Camels and Dromedaries,
And Wagons fraught with Utensils of war.
Such forces met not, nor so wide a camp,
When Agrican with all his Northern powers
Besieged Albracca, as Romances tell;
The City of Gallaphrone, from thence to win
The fairest of her Sex Angelica
His daughter, sought by many Prowest Knights,
Both Paynim, and the Peers of Charlemane.
Such and so numerous was their Chivalrie;
At sight whereof the Fiend yet more presumed,
And to our Savior thus his words renewed.
That thou may know I seek not to engage
Thy Virtue, and not every way secure
On no slight grounds thy safety; hear, and mark
To what end I have brought thee hither and shown
All this fair fight; thy Kingdom though foretold
By Prophet or by Angel, unless thou
Endeavor, as thy Father David did,
Thou never shall obtain; prediction still
In all things, and all men, supposes means,
Without means used, what it predicts revokes.
But say thou were possessed of David's Throne
By free consent of all, none opposite,
Samaritan or Jew; how could thou hope
Long to enjoy it quiet and secure,
Between two such enclosing enemies
Roman and Parthian? therefore one of these
Thou must make sure thy own, the Parthian first
By my advice, as nearer and of late
Found able by invasion to annoy
Thy country, and captive lead away her Kings
Antigonus, and old Hyrcanus bound,
Maugre the Roman: it shall be my task
To render thee the Parthian at dispose;
Choose which thou will by conquest or by league.
By him thou shall regain, without him not,
That which alone can truly reinstall thee
In David's royal seat, his true Successor,
Deliverance of thy brethren, those ten Tribes
Whose offspring in his Territory yet serve
In Habor, and among the Medes dispers't,
Ten Sons of Jacob, two of Joseph lost
Thus long from Israel; serving as of old
Their Fathers in the land of Egypt served,
This offer sets before thee to deliver.
These if from servitude thou shall restore
To their inheritance, then, nor till then,
Thou on the Throne of David in full glory,
From Egypt to Euphrates and beyond
Shall reign, and Rome or Caesar not need fear.
To whom our Savior answered thus unmoved.
Much ostentation vain of fleshly arm,
And fragile arms, much instrument of war
Long in preparing, soon to nothing brought,
Before mine eyes thou have set; and in my ear
Vented much policy, and projects deep
Of enemies, of aids, battles and leagues,
Plausible to the world, to me worth naught.
Means I must use thou say, prediction else
Will unpredict and fail me of the Throne:
My time I told thee, (and that time for thee
Were better farthest off) is not yet come;
When that comes think not thou to find me slack
On my part aught endeavoring, or to need
Thy politic maxims, or that cumbersome
Luggage of war there shown me, argument
Of human weakness rather then of strength.
My brethren, as thou call'st them; those Ten Tribes
I must deliver, if I mean to reign
David's true heir, and his full Scepter sway
To just extent over all Israel's Sons;
But whence to thee this zeal, where was it then
For Israel, or for David, or his Throne,
When thou stood'st up his Tempter to the pride
Of numbering Israel, which (...) (...)
Of threeseore and ten thousand Israelites
By three days Pestilence? such was thy zeal
To Israel then, the same that now to me.
As for those captive Tribes, themselves were they
Who wrought their own captivity, fell off
From God to worship Calves, the Deities
Of Egypt, Baal next and Ashtaroth,
And all the Idolatries of Heathen round,
Besides their other worse then heathenish crimes;
Nor in the land of their captivity
Humbled themselves, or penitent besought
The God of their forefathers; but so died
Impenitent, and left a race behind
Like to themselves, distinguishable scarce
From Gentiles, but by Circumcision vain,
And God with Idols in their worship joined.
Should I of these the liberty regard,
Who freed, as to their ancient Patrimony,
Unhumbl'd, unrepentant, unreform'd,
Headlong would follow; and to their Gods perhaps
Of Bethel and of Dan? no, let them serve
Their enemies, who serve Idols with God.
Yet he at length, time to himself best known,
Remembering Abraham by some wondrous call
May bring them back repentant and sincere,
And at their passing cleave the Assyrian flood,
While to their native land with joy they have,
As the Red Sea and Jordan once he cleft,
When to the promised land their Fathers passed;
To his due time and providence I leave them.
So spoke Israel's true King, and to the Fiend
Made answer meet, that made void all his wiles
So fares it when with truth falsehood contends.
The End of the Third Book.
PARADISE REGAINED. The Fourth BOOK.
Perplexed and troubled at his bad success
The Tempter stood, nor had what to reply,
Discovered in his fraud, thrown from his hope,
So often, and the persuasive Rhetoric
That sleek't his tongue, and won so much on Eve,
So little here, nay lost; but Eve was Eve,
This far his over-match, who self deceived
And rash, beforehand had no better weighed
The strength he was to cope with, or his own:
But as a man who had been matchless held
In cunning, over-reach't where least he thought,
To salve his credit, and for very spite
Still will be tempting him who foyls him still,
And never cease, though to his shame the more;
Or as a swarm of flies in vintage time,
About the wine press where sweet moust is powered,
Beat off, returns as often with humming sound;
Or surging waves against a solid rock,
Though all to shivers dash't, the assault renew,
Vain battry, and in froth or bubbles end;
So Satan, whom repulse upon repulse
Met ever; and to shameful silence brought,
Yet gives not over though desperate of success,
And his vain importunity pursues.
He brought our Savior to the western side
Of that high mountain, whence he might behold
Another plain, long but in breadth not wide;
Washed by the Southern Sea, and on the North
To equal length backed with a ridge of hills
That screen'd the fruits of the earth and seats of men
From cold Septentrion blasts, thence in the midst
Divided by a river, of whose banks
On each side an Imperial City stood,
With Towers and Temples proudly elevate
On seven small Hills, with Palaces adorned,
Porches and Theaters, Baths, Aqueducts,
Statues and Trophies, and Triumphal Arcs,
Gardens and Groves presented to his eyes,
Above the highth of Mountains interposed.
By what strange Parallax or Optic skill
Of vision multiplied through air, or glass
Of Telescope, were curious to enquire:
And now the Tempter thus his silence broke.
The City which thou see no other deem
Then great and glorious Rome, Queen of the Earth
So far renowned, and with the spoils enricht
Of Nations; there the Capitol thou see
Above the rest lifting his stately head
On the Tarp^ian rock, her Citadel
Impregnable, and there Mount Palatine
The Imperial Palace, compass huge, and high
The Structure, skill of noblest Architects,
With gilded battlements, conspicuous far,
Turrets and Terrases, and glittering Spires.
Many a fair Edifice besides, more like
Houses of Gods (so well I have disposed
My Aerie Microscope) thou may behold
Outside and inside both, pillars and roofs
Carved work, the hand of famed Artificers
In Cedar, Marble, Ivory or Gold.
Thence to the gates cast round thine eye, and see
What conflux issuing forth, or entering in,
Pretors, Proconsuls to their Provinces
Hasting or on return, in robes of State;
Lictors and rods the ensigns of their power,
Legions and Cohorts, turmes of horse and wings:
Or Embassies from Regions far remote
In various habits on the Appian road,
Or on the Aemilian, some from farthest South,
Syene, and where the shadow both way falls,
Meroe Nilotic Isle, and more to West,
The Realm of Bocchus to the Black-moor Sea;
From the Asian Kings and Parthian among these,
From India and the golden Chersoness,
And utmost Indian Isle Taprobane,
Dusk faces with white silken Turbants wreathed:
From Gallia, Gades, and the British West,
Germans and Scythians, and Sarmatians North
Beyond Danubius to the Tauric Pool.
All Nations now to Rome obedience pay,
To Rome's great Emperor, whose wide domain
In ample Territory, wealth and power,
Civility of Manners, Arts, and Arms,
And long Renown thou justly may prefer
Before the Parthian; these two Thrones except,
The rest are barbarous, and scarce worth the sight,
Shared among petty Kings too far removed;
These having shown thee, I have shown thee all
The Kingdoms of the world, and all their glory.
This Emperor has no Son, and now is old,
Old, and lascivious, and from Rome retired
To Capreae an Island small but strong
On the Campanian shore, with purpose there
His horrid lusts in private to enjoy,
Committing to a wicked Favorite
All public cares, and yet of him suspicious,
Hated of all, and hating; with what ease
Indu'd with Regal Virtues as thou art;
Appearing, and beginning noble deeds;
Might thou expel this monster from his Throne
Now made a stye, and in his place ascending
A victor, people free from servile yoke?
And with my help thou may; to me the power
Is given, and by that right I give it thee.
Aim therefore at no less then all the world,
Aim at the highest, without the highest attained
Will be for thee no sitting, or not long
On David's Throne, be propheci'd what will.
To whom the Son of God unmoved replied.
Nor does this grandeur and majestic show
Of luxury, though called magnificence,
More then of arms before, allure mine eye,
Much less my mind; though thou should add to tell
Their sumptuous gluttonies, and gorgeous feasts
On Cittron tables or Atlantic stone;
(For I have also heard, perhaps have read)
Their wines of Setia, Cales, and Falerne,
Chios and Creet, and how they quaff in Gold,
Crystal and Myrrhine cups imboss'd with Gems
And studs of Pearl, to me should tell who thirst
And hunger still: then Embassies thou show
From Nations far and nigh; what honor that,
But tedious wast of time to sit and hear
So many hollow complements and lies,
Outlandish flatteries? then proceed'st to talk
Of the Emperor, how easily subdued,
How gloriously; I shall, thou say, expel
A brutish monster: what if I withal
Expel a Devil who first made him such?
Let his tormenter Conscience find him out,
For him I was not sent, nor yet to free
That people victor once, now vile and base,
Deservedly made vassal, who once just,
Frugal, and mild, and temperate, conquered well,
But govern ill the Nations under yoke,
Peeling their Provinces, exhausted all
By lust and rapine; first ambitious grown
Of triumph that insulting vanity;
Then cruel, by their sports to blood enured
Of fighting beasts, and men to beasts exposed,
Luxurious by their wealth, and greedier still,
And from the daily Scene effeminate.
What wise and valiant man would seek to free
These thus degenerate, by themselves enslaved,
Or could of inward slaves make outward free?
Know therefore when my season comes to sit
On David's Throne, it shall be like a tree
Spreading and over-shadowing all the Earth,
Or as a stone that shall to pieces dash
All Monarchies besides throughout the world,
And of my Kingdom there shall be no end:
Means there shall be to this, but what the means,
Is not for thee to know, nor me to tell.
To whom the Tempter impudent replied.
I see all offers made by me how slight
Thou valu'st, because offered, and reject'st:
Nothing will please the difficult and nice,
Or nothing more then still to contradict:
On the other side know also thou, that I
On what I ofser set as high esteem,
Nor what I part with mean to give for naught;
All these which in a moment thou behold'st,
The Kingdoms of the world to thee I give;
For given to me, I give to whom I please,
No trifle; yet with this reserve, not else,
On this condition, if thou will fall down,
And worship me as thy superior Lord,
Easily done, and hold them all of me;
For what can less so great a gift deserve?
Whom thus our Savior answered with disdain.
I never liked thy talk, thy offers less,
Now both abhor, since thou have dared to utter
The abominable terms, impious condition;
But I endure the time, till which expired,
Thou have permission on me. It is written
The first of all Commandments, Thou shall worship
The Lord thy God, and only him shall serve;
And dare thou to the Son of God propound
To worship thee accursed, now more accursed
For this attempt bolder then that on Eve,
And more blasphemous? which expect to rue.
The Kingdoms of the world to thee were given,
Permitted rather, and by thee usurped,
Other donation none thou can produce:
If given, by whom but by the King of Kings,
God over all supreme? if given to thee,
By thee how fairly is the Giver now
Repaid? But gratitude in thee is lost
Long since. Were thou so void of fear or shame,
As offer them to me the Son of God,
To me my own, on such abhorred pact,
That I fall down and worship thee as God?
Get thee behind me; plain thou now appear'st
That Evil one, Satan for ever damned.
To whom the Fiend with fear abasht replied.
Be not so sore offended, Son of God;
Though Sons of God both Angels are and Men,
If I to try whether in higher sort
Then these thou bear that title, have proposed
What both from Men and Angels I receive,
Tetrarchs of fire, air, flood, and on the earth
Nations besides from all the quartered winds,
God of this world invok't and world beneath;
Who then thou art, whose coming is foretold
To me so fatal, me it most concerns.
The trial has indamag'd thee no way,
Rather more honor left and more esteem;
Me naught advantaged, missing what I aimed.
Therefore let pass, as they are transitory,
The Kingdoms of this world; I shall no more
Advise thee, gain them as thou can, or not.
And thou thy self seem otherwise inclined
Then to a worldly Crown, addicted more
To contemplation and profound dispute,
As by that early action may be judged,
When slipping from thy Mothers eye thou went
Alone into the Temple; there was found
Among the gravest Rabbis disputant
On points and questions fitting Moses Chair,
Teaching not taught; the childhood shows the man,
As morning shows the day. Be famous then
By wisdom; as thy Empire must extend,
So let extend thy mind over all the world,
In knowledge, all things in it comprehend,
All knowledge is not couch't in Moses Law,
The Pentateuch or what the Prophets wrote,
The Gentiles also know, and write, and teach
To admiration, led by Natures light;
And with the Gentiles much thou must converse,
Ruling them by persuasion as thou mean,
Without their learning how will thou with them,
Or they with thee hold conversation meet?
How will thou reason with them, how refute
Their Idolisms, Traditions, Paradoxes?
Error by his own arms is best evinc't.
Look once more e're we leave this specular Mount
Westward, much nearer by Southwest, behold
Where on the Aegean shore a City stands
Built nobly, pure the air, and light the soil,
Athens the eye of Greece, Mother of Arts
And Eloquence, native to famous wits
Or hospitable, in her sweet recess,
City or Suburban, studious walks and shades;
See there the Olive Grove of Academe,
Plato's retirement, where the Attic Bird
Trills her thick-warbl'd notes the summer long,
There flowrie hill Hymettus with the sound
Of Bees industrious murmur often invites
To studious musing; there Ilissus rouls
His whispering stream; within the walls then view
The schools of ancient Sages; his who bred
Great Alexander to subdue the world,
Lyceum there, and painted Stoa next:
There thou shall hear and learn the secret power
Of harmony in tones and numbers hit
By voice or hand, and various-measur'd verse,
Aeolian charms and Dorian Lyric Odes,
And his who gave them breath, but higher sung,
Blind Melesigenes thence Homer called,
Whose Poem Phoebus challenged for his own.
Thence what the lofty grave Tragoedians taught
In Chorus or Iambic, teachers best
Of moral prudence, with delight received
In brief sententious precepts, while they treat
Of fate, and chance, and change in human life;
High actions, and high passions best describing:
Thence to the famous Orators repair,
Those ancient, whose resistless eloquence
Wielded at will that fierce Democratie,
Shook the Arsenal and fulmin'd over Greece,
To Macedon, and Artaxerxes Throne;
To sage Philosophy next lend thine ear,
From Heaven descended to the low-rooft house
Of Socrates, see there his Tenement,
Whom well inspired the Oracle pronounced
Wisest of men; from whose mouth issued forth
Mellifluous streams that watered all the schools
Of Academics old and new, with those
Sirnam'd Peripatetics, and the Sect
Epicurean, and the Stoic severe;
These here revolve, or, as thou like, at home,
Till time mature thee to a Kingdom's weight;
These rules will render thee a King complete
Within thy self, much more with Empire joined.
To whom our Savior sagely thus replied.
Think not but that I know these things, or think
I know them not; not therefore am I short
Of knowing what I aught: he who receives
Light from above, from the fountain of light,
No other doctrine needs, though granted true;
But these are false, or little else but dreams,
Conjectures, fancies, built on nothing firm.
The first and wisest of them all professed
To know this only, that he nothing knew;
The next to fabling-fell and smooth conceits,
A third sort doubted all things, though plain sense;
Others in virtue placed felicity,
But virtue joined with riches and long life,
In corporal pleasure he, and careless ease,
The Stoic last in Philosophic pride,
By him called virtue; and his virtuous man,
Wise, perfect in himself, and all possessing
Equal to God, often shames not to prefer,
As fearing God nor man, contemning all
Wealth, pleasure, pain or torment, death and life,
Which when he lists, he leaves, or boasts he can,
For all his tedious talk is but vain boast,
Or subtle shifts conviction to evade.
Alas what can they teach, and not mislead;
Ignorant of themselves, of God much more,
And how the world began, and how man fell
Degraded by himself, on grace depending?
Much of the Soul they talk, but all awrie,
And in themselves seek virtue, and to themselves
All glory arrogate, to God give none,
Rather accuse him under usual names,
Fortune and Fate, as one regardless quite
Of mortal things. Who therefore seeks in these
True wisdom, finds her not, or by delusion
Far worse, her false resemblance only meets,
An empty cloud. However many books
Wise men have said are wearisom; who reads
Incessantly, and to his reading brings not
A spirit and judgment equal or superior,
(And what he brings, what needs he elsewhere seek)
Uncertain and unsettl'd still remains,
Deep verst in books and shallow in himself,
Crude or intoxicate, collecting toys,
And trifles for choice matters, worth a sponge;
As Children gathering pibles on the shore.
Or if I would delight my private hours
With Music or with Poem, where so soon
As in our native Language can I find
That solace? All our Law and Story strewn
With Hymns, our Psalms with artful terms inscribed,
Our Hebrew Songs and Harps in Babylon,
That pleased so well our Victors ear, declare
That rather Greece from us these Arts derived;
Ill imitated, while they loudest sing
The vices of their Deities, and their own
In Fable, Hymn, or Song, so personating
Their Gods ridiculous, and themselves past shame.
Remove their swelling Epithetes thick laid
As varnish on a Harlots cheek, the rest,
Thin sown with aught of profit or delight,
Will far be found unworthy to compare
With Sion's songs, to all true tastes excelling,
Where God is praised aright, and Godlike men,
The Holiest of Holies, and his Saints;
Such are from God inspired, not such from thee;
Unless where moral virtue is expressed
By light of Nature not in all quite lost.
Their Orators thou then extoll'st, as those
The top of Eloquence, Statists indeed,
And lovers of their Country, as may seem;
But herein to our Prophets far beneath,
As men divinely taught, and better teaching
The solid rules of Civil Government
In their majestic unaffected style
Then all the Oratory of Greece and Rome.
In them is plainest taught, and easiest learnt,
What makes a Nation happy, and keeps it so,
What ruins Kingdoms, and lays Cities flat;
These only with our Law best form a King.
So spoke the Son of God; but Satan now
Quite at a loss, for all his darts were spent,
Thus to our Savior with stern brow replied.
Since neither wealth, nor honor, arms nor arts,
Kingdom nor Empire pleases thee, nor aught
By me proposed in life contemplative,
Oractive, tended on by glory, or fame,
What do thou in this World? the Wilderness
For thee is fittest place, I found thee there,
And thither will return thee, yet remember
What I foretell thee, soon thou shall have cause
To wish thou never had rejected thus
Nicely or cautiously my offered aid,
Which would have set thee in short time with ease
On David's Throne; or Throne of all the world,
Now at full age, fullness of time, thy season,
When Prophesies of thee are best fullfill'd.
Now contrary, if I read aught in Heaven,
Or Heaven write aught of Fate, by what the Stars
Voluminous, or single characters,
In their conjunction met, give me to spell,
Sorrows, and labors, opposition, hate,
Attends thee, scorns, reproaches, injuries,
Violence and stripes, and lastly cruel death,
A Kingdom they portend thee, but what Kingdom,
Real or Allegoric I discern not,
Nor when, eternal sure, as without end,
Without beginning; for no date prefixed
Directs me in the Starry Rubric set.
So saying he took (for still he knew his power
Not yet expired) and to the Wilderness
Brought back the Son of God, and left him there,
Feigning to disappear. Darkness now rose,
As daylight sunk, and brought in lowering night
Her shadowy offspring unsubstantial both,
Privation mere of light and absent day.
Our Savior meek and with untroubl'd mind
After his aerie jaunt, though hurried sore,
Hungry and cold betook him to his rest,
Wherever, under some concourse of shades
Whose branching arms thick intertwind might shield
From dews and damps of night his sheltered head,
But sheltered slept in vain, for at his head
The Tempter watched, and soon with ugly dreams
Disturbed his sleep; and either Tropic now
Can thunder; and both ends of Heaven, the Clouds
From many a horrid rift abortive poured
Fierce rain with lightning mixed, water with fire
In ruin reconciled: nor slept the winds
Within their stony caves, but rushed abroad
From the four hinges of the world, and fell
On the vexed Wilderness, whose tallest Pines,
Though rooted deep as high, and sturdiest Oaks
Bowed their Stiff necks, laden with stormy blasts,
Or torn up sheer: ill wast thou shrouded then,
O patient Son of God, yet only stoodst
Unfnaken; nor yet staid the terror there,
Infernal Ghosts, and Hellish Furies, round shrieked,
Environed thee, some howled, some yell'd, some
Some bent at thee their fiery darts, while thou
Sat'st unappall'd in calm and sinless peace.
Thus passed the night so foul till morning fair
Came forth with Pilgrim steps in amice gray;
Who with her radiant finger stilled the roar
Of thunder, chased the clouds, and laid the winds,
And grisly Specter, which the Fiend had raised
To tempt the Son of God with terrors dire.
And now the Sun with more effectual beams
Had cheered the face of Earth, and dried the wet
From drooping plant, or dropping tree; the birds
Who all things now behold more fresh and green,
After a night of storm so ruinous,
Cleared up their choicest notes in bush and spray
To gratulate the sweet return of morn;
Nor yet amidst this joy and brightest morn
Was absent, after all his mischief done,
The Prince of darkness, glad would also seem
Of this fair change, and to our Savior came,
Yet with no new device, they all were spent,
Rather by this his last affront resolved,
Desperate of better course, to vent his rage,
And mad despite to be so often repelled,
Him walking on a Sunny hill he found,
Backed on the North and West by a thick wood,
Out of the wood he starts in wonted shape;
And in a careless mood thus to him said.
Fair morning yet betides thee Son of God,
After a dismal night; I heard the rack
As Earth and Sky would mingle; but my self
Was distant; and these flaws, though mortals fear them
As dangerous to the pillard frame of Heaven,
Or to the Earths dark basis underneath,
Are to the main as inconsiderable,
And harmless, if not wholesome, as a sneeze
To man's less universe, and soon are gone;
Yet as being often times noxious where they light
On man, beast, plant, wastful and turbulent,
Like turbulencies in the affairs of men,
Over whose heads they rore, and seem to point,
They often fore-signifie and threaten ill:
This Tempest at this Desert most was bent;
Of men at thee, for only thou here dwell'st.
Did I not tell thee, if thou did reject
The perfet season offered with my aid
To win thy destined seat, but wilt prolong
All to the push of Fate, pursue thy way
Of gaining David's Throne no man knows when,
For both the when and how is no where told,
Thou shall be what thou art ordained, no doubt;
For Angels have proclaimed it, but concealing
The time and means: each act is rightliest done,
Not when it must, but when it may be best.
If thou observe not this, be sure to find,
What I foretold thee, many a hard assay
Of dangers, and adversities and pains,
E're thou of Israel's Scepter get fast hold;
Whereof this ominous night that closed thee round,
So many terrors, voices, prodigies
May warn thee, as a sure foregoing sign.
So talked he, while the Son of God went on
And staid not, but in brief him answered thus.
Me worse then wet thou find'st not; other harr^
Those terrors which thou speak of, did me none;
I never feared they could, though noising loud
And threatening nigh; what they can do as signs
Betok'ning, or ill boding, I contemn
As false portents, not sent from God, but thee;
Who knowing I shall reign past thy preventing,
Obtrud'st thy offered aid, that I accepting
Atleast might seem to hold all power of thee,
Ambitious spirit, and would be thought my God,
And storm'st refused, thinking to terrify
Me to thy will; desist, thou art discerned
And toil'st in vain, nor me in vain molest.
To whom the Fiend now swollen with rage replied:
Then hear, O Son of David, Virgin-born;
For Son of God to me is yet in doubt,
Of the Messiah I have heard foretold
By all the Prophets; of thy birth at length
Announc't by Gabriel with the first I knew,
And of the Angelio Song in Bethlehem field,
On thy birth-night, that sung thee Savior born.
From that time seldom have I ceased to eye
Thy infancy, thy childhood, and thy youth,
Thy manhood last, though yet in private bred;
Till at the Ford of Jordan whither all
Flocked to the Baptist, I among the rest,
Though not to be Baptized, by voice from Heaven
Heard thee pronounced the Son of God beloved.
Thenceforth I thought thee worth my nearer view
And narrower Scrutiny, that I might learn
In what degree or meaning thou art called
The Son of God, which bears no single sense;
The Son of God I also am, or was,
And if I was, I am; relation stands;
All men are Sons of God; yet thee I thought
In some respect far higher so declared.
Therefore I watched thy footsteps from that hour,
And followed thee still on to this wast wild;
Where by all best conjectures I collect
Thou art to be my fatal enemy.
Good reason then, if I beforehand seek
To understand my Adversary, who
And what he is; his wisdom, power, intent,
By parl, or composition, truce, or league
To win him, or win from him what I can.
And opportunity I here have had
To try thee, sift thee, and confess have found thee
Proof against all temptation as a rock
Of Adamant, and as a Center, firm
To the utmost of mere man both wise and good,
Not more; for Honors, Riches, Kingdoms, Glory
Have been before contemned, and may again:
Therefore to know what more thou art then man,
Worth naming Son of God by voice from Heaven,
Another method I must now begin.
So saying he caught him up, and without wing
Of Hippogrif bore through the Air sublime
Over the Wilderness and over the Plain;
Till underneath them fair Jerusalem,
The holy City lifted high her Towers,
And higher yet the glorious Temple reared
Her pile, far off appearing like a Mount
Of Alabaster, top't with Golden Spires:
There on the highest Pinnacle he set
The Son of God; and added thus in scorn:
There stand, if thou will stand; to stand upright
Will ask thee skill; I to thy Fathers house
Have brought thee, and highest placed, highest is best,
Now show thy Progeny; if not to stand,
Cast thy self down; safely if Son of God:
For it is written, He will give command
Concerning thee to his Angels, in their hands
They shall up lift thee, lest at any time
Thou chance to dash thy foot against a stone.
To whom thus Jesus: also it is written,
Tempt not the Lord thy God, he said and stood.
But Satan smitten with amazement fell
As when Earths Son Antaeus (to compare
Small things with greatest) in Irassa strove
With Joves Alcides, and often foiled still rose,
Receiving from his mother Earth new strength,
Fresh from his fall, and fiercer grapple joined,
Throttl'd at length in the Air, expired and fell;
So after many a foil the Tempter proud,
Renewing fresh assaults, amidst his pride
Fell whence he stood to see his Victor fall.
And as that Theban Monster that proposed
Her riddle, and him, who solved it not, devoured;
That once found out and solved, for grief and spite
Cast her self headlong from the Ismenian steep,
So struck with dread and anguish fell the Fiend,
And to his crew, that sat consulting, brought
Joyless triumphals of his hoped success,
Ruin, and desperation, and dismay,
Who durst so proudly tempt the Son of God.
So Satan fell and strait a fiery Globe
Of Angels on full sail of wingflew nigh,
Who on their plumy Vans received him soft
From his uneasy station, and upbore
As on a floating couch through the blithe Air,
Then in a flowery valley set him down
On a green bank, and set before him spread
A table of Celestial Food, Divine,
Ambrosial, Fruits fetched from the tree of life,
And from the fount of life Ambrosial drink,
That soon refreshed him wearied, and repaired
What hunger, if aught hunger had impaired,
Or thirst, and as he fed, Angelic Quires
Sung Heavenly Anthems of his victory
Over temptation, and the Tempter proud.
True Image of the Father whether throned
In the bosom of bliss, and light of light
Conceiving, or remote from Heaven, enshrined
In fleshly Tabernacle, and human form,
Wandering the Wilderness, whatever place,
Habit, or state, or motion, still expressing
The Son of God, with Godlike force indu'd
Against th'Attempter of thy Fathers Throne,
And Thief of Paradise; him long of old
Thou did debel, and down from Heaven cast
With all his Army, now thou have avenged
Supplanted Adam, and by vanquishing
Temptation, have regained lost Paradise,
And frustrated the conquest fraudulent:
He never more henceforth will dare set foot
In Paradise to tempt; his snares are broke:
For though that seat of earthly bliss be failed,
A fairer Paradise is founded now
For Adam and his chosen Sons, whom thou
A Savior art come down to re-install.
Where they shall dwell secure, when time shall be
Of Tempter and Temptation without fear.
But thou, Infernal Serpent, shall not long
Rule in the Clouds; like an Autumnal Star
Or Lightning thou shall fall from Heaven trod down
Under his feet: for proof, e're this thou feel'st
Thy wound, yet not thy last and deadliest wound
By this repulse received, and hold'st in Hell
No triumph; in all her gates Abaddon rues
Thy bold attempt; hereafter learn with awe
To dread the Son of God: he all unarmed
Shall chase thee with the terror of his voice
From thy Demoniac holds, possession foul,
Thee and thy Legions, yelling they shall fly,
And beg to hide them in a herd of Swine,
Lest he command them down into the deep
Bound, and to torment sent before their time.
Hail Son of the most High, heir of both worlds,
Queller of Satan, on thy glorious work
Now enter, and begin to save mankind.
Thus they the Son of God our Savior meek
Sung Victor, and from Heavenly Feast refresht
Brought on his way with joy; he unobserved
Home to his Mothers house private returned.
The END.
SAMSON AGONISTES, A DRAMATIC POEM.

The Author JOHN MILTON.

Aristot. Poet. Cap. 6. (...), etc.

Tragoedia est imitatio actionis seriae, etc. Per misericordiam and metum
perficiens talium affectuum lustrationem.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for John Starkey at the Mitre in Fleetstreet, near
Temple Bar. MDCLXXI.

Of that sort of Dramatic Poem which is called Tragedy.
TRagedy, as it was anciently composed, has been ever held the gravest,
moralest, and most profitable of all other Poems: therefore said by Aristotle
to be of power by raising pity and fear, or terror, to purge the mind of those
and such like passions, that is to temper and reduce them to just measure with
a kind of delight, stirred up by reading or seeing those passions well
imitated. Nor is Nature wanting in her own effects to make good his assertion:
for so in Physic things of melancholic hue and quality are used against
melancholy, sour against sour, salt to remove salt humors. Hence Philosophers
and other gravest Writers, as Cicero, Plutarch and others, frequently cite out
of Tragic Poets, both to adorn and illustrate their discourse. The Apostle Paul
himself thought it not unworthy to insert a verse of Euripides into the Text of
Holy Scripture, 1 Cor. 15. 33. and Parsus commenting on the Revelation, divides
the whole Book as a Tragedy, into Acts distinguished each by a Chorus of
Heavenly Harpings and Song between. Heretofore Men in highest dignity have
labored not a little to be thought able to compose a Tragedy. Of that honor
Dionysius the elder was no less ambitious, then before of his attaining to the
Tyranny. Augustus Caesar also had begun his Ajax, but unable to please his own
judgment with what he had begun, left it unfinisht. Seneca the Philosopher is
by some thought the Author of those Tragedies (at lest the best of them) that
go under that name. Gregory Nazianzen a Father of the Church, thought it not
unbeseeming the sanctity of his person to write a Tragedy, which he entitled,
Christ suffering. This is mentioned to vindicate Tragedy from the small esteem,
or rather infamy, which in the account of many it undergoes at this day with
other common Interludes; hap'ning through the Poets error of intermixing Comic
stuff with Tragic sadness and gravity; or introducing trivial and vulgar
persons, which by all judicious has bin counted absurd; and brought in without
discretion, corruptly to gratify the people. And though ancient Tragedy use no
Prologue, yet using sometimes, in case of self defense, or explanation, that
which Martial calls an Epistle; in behalf of this Tragedy coming forth after
the ancient manner, much different from what among us passes for best, thus
much beforehand may be Epistl'd; that Chorus is here introduced after the
Greek manner, not ancient only but modern, and still in use among the Italians.
In the modelling therefore of this Poem, with good reason, the Ancients and
Italians are rather followed, as of much more authority and fame. The measure
of Verse used in the Chorus is of all sorts, called by the Greeks Monostrophic,
or rather Apolelymenon, without regard had to Strophe, Antistrophe or Epod,
which were a kind of Stanza's framed only for the Music, then used with the
Chorus that sung; not essential to the Poem, and therefore not material; or
being divided into Stanza's or Pauses, they may be called Allaeostropha.
Division into Act and Scene referring chiefly to the Stage (to which this work
never was intended) is here omitted.

It suffices if the whole Drama be found not produced beyond the fifth Act, of
the style and uniformitie, and that commonly called the Plot, whether intricate
or explicit, which is nothing indeed but such economy, or disposition of the
fable as may stand best with verisimilitude and decorum; they only will best
judge who are not unacquainted with Aeschulus, Sophocles, and Euripides, the
three Tragic Poets unequalled yet by any, and the best rule to all who
endeavor to write Tragedy. The circumscription of time wherein the whole Drama
begins and ends, is according to ancient rule, and best example, within the
space of 24 hours.

The ARGUMENT.
SAmson made Captive, Blind, and now in the Prison at Gaza, there to labor as
in a common workhouse, on a Festival day, in the general cessation from
labor, comes forth into the open Air, to a place nigh, somewhat retired there
to sit a while and bemoan his condition. Where he happens at length to be
visited by certain friends and equals of his tribe, which make the Chorus, who
seek to comfort him what they can; then by his old Father Manoa, who endeavors
the like, and withal tells him his purpose to procure his liberty by ransom;
lastly, that this Feast was proclaimed by the Philistines as a day of
Thanksgiving for their deliverance from the hands of Samson, which yet more
troubles him. Manoa then departs to prosecute his endeavor with the Philistian
Lords for Samson's redemption; who in the mean while is visited by other
persons; and lastly by a public Officer to require his coming to the Feast
before the Lords and People, to play or show his strength in their presence; he
at first refuses, dismissing the public Officer with absolute denial to come;
at length persuaded inwardly that this was from God, he yields to go along with
him, who came now the second time with great threatenings to fetch him; the
Chorus yet remaining on the place, Manoa returns full of joyful hope, to
procure e're long his Sons deliverance: in the midst of which discourse an
Ebrew comes in haste confusedly at first; and afterward more distinctly
relating the Catastrophe, what Samson had done to the Philistines, and by
accident to himself; wherewith the Tragedy ends.

The Persons.
Samson. Manoa the Father of Samson. Dalila his Wife. Harapha of Gath. Public
Officer. Messenger. Chorus of Danites.
The Scene before the Prison in Gaza.

SAMSON AGONISTES.
Sams. A Little onward lend thy guiding hand
To these dark steps, a little further on;
For yonder bank has choice of Sun or shade,
There I am wont to sit, when any chance
Relieves me from my task of servile toil,
Daily in the common Prison else enjoined me,
Where I a Prisoner chained, scarce freely draw
The air imprisoned also, close and damp,
Unwholsom draught: but here I feel amends,
The breath of Heaven fresh-blowing, pure and sweet,
With dayspring born; here leave me to respire.
This day a solemn Feast the people hold
To Dagon their Sea-Idol, and forbid
Laborious works, unwillingly this rest
Their Superstition yields me; hence with leave
Retiring from the popular noise, I seek
This unfrequented place to find some ease,
Ease to the body some, none to the mind
From restless thoughts, that like a deadly swarm
Of Hornets armed, no sooner found alone,
But rush upon me thronging, and present
Times past, what once I was, and what am now.
O wherefore was my birth from Heaven foretold
Twice by an Angel, who at last in sight
Of both my Parents all in flames ascended
From off the Altar, where an Offering burned,
As in a fiery column charioting
His Godlike presence, and from some great act
Or benefit revealed to Abraham's race?
Why was my breeding ordered and prescribed
As of a person separate to God,
Designed for great exploits; if I must dye
Betrayed Captived, and both my Eyes put out,
Made of my Enemies the scorn and gaze;
To grind in Brazen Fetters under task
With this Heav'n-gifted strength? O glorious strength
Put to the labor of a Beast, debas't
Lower then bondslave! Promise was that I
Should Israel from Philistian yoke deliver;
Ask for this great Deliverer now, and find him
Eyeless in Caza at the Mill with slaves,
Himself in bonds under Philistian yoke;
Yet stay, let me not rashly call in doubt
Divine Prediction; what if all foretold
Had been fulfilld but through mine own default,
Whom have I to complain of but my self?
Who this high gift of strength committed to me,
In what part lodged, how easily berest me,
Under the Seal of silence could not keep,
But weakly to a woman must reveal it,
Overcome with importunity and tears.
O impotence of mind, in body strong!
But what is strength without a double share
Of wisdom, vast, unwieldy, burdensome,
Proudly secure, yet liable to fall
By weakest suttleties, not made to rule,
But to subserve where wisdom bears command.
God, when he gave me strength, to show withal
How slight the gift was, hung it in my Hair.
But peace, I must not quarrel with the will
Of highest dispensation, which herein
Happ'ly had ends above my reach to know:
Suffices that to me strength is my bane,
And proves the sourse of all my miseries;
So many, and so huge, that each apart
Would ask a life to wail, but chief of all,
O loss of sight, of thee I most complain!
Blind among enemies, O worse then chains,
Dungeon, or beggary, or decrepit age!
Light the prime work of God to me is extinct,
And all her various objects of delight
Annulled, which might in part my grief have eased,
Inferior to the vilest now become
Of man or worm; the vilest here excel me,
They creep, yet see, I dark in light exposed
To daily fraud, contempt, abuse and wrong,
Within doors, or without, still as a fool,
In power of others, never in my own;
Scarce half I seem to live, dead more then half.
O dark, dark, dark, amid the blaze of noon,
Irrecoverably dark, total Eclipse
Without all hope of day!
O first created Beam, and thou great Word,
Let there be light, and light was over all;
Why am I thus bereaved thy prime decree?
The Sun to me is dark
And silent as the Moon,
When she deserts the night
Hid in her vacant interlunar cave.
Since light so necessary is to life,
And almost life it self, if it be true
That light is in the Soul,
She all in every part; why was the sight
To such a tender ball as the eye confined?
So obvious and so easy to be quenched,
And not as feeling through all parts diffused,
That she might look at will through every pore?
Then had I not been thus exiled from light;
As in the land of darkness yet in light,
To live a life half dead, a living death,
And buried; but O yet more miserable!
My self, my Sepulcher, a moving Grave,
Buried, yet not exempt
By privilege of death and burial
From worst of other evils, pains and wrongs,
But made hereby obnoxious more
To all the miseries of life,
Life in captivity
Among inhuman foes.
But who are these? for with joint pace I hear
The tread of many feet stearing this way;
Perhaps my enemies who come to stare
At my affliction, and perhaps to insult,
Their daily practice to afflict me more.

Chor. This, this is he; softly a while,
Let us not break in upon him;
O change beyond report, thought, or belief!
See how he lies at random, carelessly diffused,
With languish't head unpropt,
As one past hope, abandoned,
And by himself given over;
In slavish habit, ill-fitted weeds
Over worn and soild;
Or do my eyes misrepresent? Can this be he,
That Heroic, that Renowned,
Irresistible Samson? whom unarmed withstand;
No strength of man, or fiercest wild beast could
Who tore the Lion, as the Lion tears the Kid,
Ran on embattelld Armies clad in Iron,
And weaponless himself,
Made Arms ridiculous, useless the forgery
Of brazen shield and spear, the hammered Cuirass,
Chalybean tempered steel, and frock of mail
Adamantean Proof;
But safest he who stood aloof,
When insupportably his foot advanced,
In scorn of their proud arms and warlike tools,
Spurned them to death by Troops. The bold Ascalonite
Fled from his Lion ramp, old Warriors turned
Their plated backs under his heel;
Or grovling soild their crested helmets in the dust.
Then with what trivial weapon came to hand,
The Jaw of a dead Ass, his sword of bone,
A thousand fore-skins fell, the flower of Palestin
In Ramath-lechi famous to this day:
Then by main force pulled up, and on his shoulders bore
The Gates of Azza, Post, and massy Bar
Up to the Hill by Hebron, seat of Giants old,
No journey of a Sabbath day, and loaded so;
Like whom the Gentiles feign to bear up Heaven.
Which shall I first bewail,
Thy Bondage or lost Sight,
Prison within Prison
Inseparably dark?
Thou art become (O worst imprisonment!)
The Dungeon of thy self; thy Soul
(Which Men enjoying sight often without cause com plained)
Imprisoned now indeed,
In real darkness of the body dwells,
Shut up from outward light
To incorporate with gloomy night;
For inward light alas
Puts sorth no visual beam.
O mirror of our fickle state,
Since man on earth unparalled?
The rarer thy example stands,
By how much from the top of wondrous glory,
Strongest of mortal men,
To lowest pitch of abject fortune thou art fallen.
For him I reckon not in high estate
Whom long descent of birth
Or the sphere of fortune raises;
But thee whose strength, while virtue was her mate,
Might have subdued the Earth,
Universally crowned with highest praises.

Sam. I hear the sound of words, their sense the air
Dissolves unjointed e're it reach my ear.

Chor. He speaks, let us draw nigh. Matchless in might,
The glory late of Israel, now the grief;
We come thy friends and neighbors not unknown
From Eshtaol and Zora's fruitful Vale
To visit or bewail thee, or if better,
Counsel or Consolation we may bring,
Salve to thy Sores, apt words have power to swage
The tumors of a troubled mind,
And are as Balm to fester'd wounds.

Sam. Your coming, Friends, revives me, for I learn
Now of my own experience, not by talk,
How counterfeit a coin they are who friends
Bear in their Superscription (of the most
I would be understood) in prosperous days
They swarm, but in adverse withdraw their head
Not to be found, though sought. Ye see, O friends,
How many evils have enclosed me round;
Yet that which was the worst now least afflicts me,
Blindness, for had I sight, confused with shame,
How could I once look up, or heave the head,
Who like a foolish Pilot have shipwrack't,
My Vessel trusted to me from above,
Gloriously rigged; and for a word, a tear,
Fool, have divulged the secret gift of God
To a deceitful Woman: tell me Friends,
Am I not sung and proverbd for a Fool
In every street, do they not say, how well
Are come upon him his deserts? yet why?
Immeasurable strength they might behold
In me, of wisdom nothing more then mean;
This with the other should, at least, have paird,
These two proportiond ill drove me transverse.

Chor. Tax not divine disposal, wisest Men
Have erred, and by bad Women been deceived;
And shall again, pretend they never so wise.
Deject not then so overmuch thy self,
Who have of sorrow thy full load besides;
Yet truth to say, I often have heard men wonder
Why thou should wed Philistian women rather
Then of thine own Tribe fairer, or as fair,
At least of thy own Nation, and as noble.

Sam. The first I saw at Timna, and she pleased
Me, not my Parents, that I sought to wed,
The daughter of an Infidel: they knew not
That what I montion'd was of God; I knew
From intimate impulse, and therefore urged
The Marriage on; that by occasion hence
I might begin Israel's Deliverance,
The work to which I was divinely called;
She proving false, the next I took to Wife
(O that I never had! fond wish too late.)
Was in the Vale of Sorec, Dalila,
That specious Monster, my accomplished snare.
I thought it lawful from my former act,
And the same end; still watching to oppress
Israel's oppressors: of what now I suffer
She was not the prime cause, but I my self,
Who vanquished with a peal of words (O weakness!)
Gave up my fort of silence to a Woman.

Chor. In seeking just occasion to provoke
The Philistine, thy Countries Enemy,
Thou never wast remiss, I bear thee witness:
Yet Israel still serves with all his Sons.

Sam. That fault I take not on me, but transfer
On Israel's Governors, and Heads of Tribes,
Who seeing those great acts which God had done
Singly by me against their Conquerours
Acknowledged not; or not at all considered
Deliverance offered: I on the other side
Used no ambition to commend my deeds,
The deeds themselves, though mute, spoke loud the dooer;
But they persisted deaf, and would not seem
To count them things worth notice, till at length
Their Lords the Philistines with gathered powers
Enterd Judea seeking me, who then
Safe to the rock of Etham was retired,
Not flying, but fore-casting in what place
To set upon them, what advantaged best;
Mean while the men of Judah to prevent
The harrass of their Land, beset me round;
I willingly on some conditions came
Into their hands, and they as gladly yield me
To the uncircumsised a welcome prey,
Bound with two cords; but cords to me were threads
Touched with the flame: on their whole Host I flew
Unarmed, and with a trivial weapon felled
Their choicest youth; they only lived who fled.
Had Judah that day joined, or one whole Tribe,
They had by this possessed the Towers of Gath,
And lorded over them whom now they serve;
But what more often in Nations grown corrupt,
And by their vices brought to servitude,
Then to love Bondage more then Liberty,
Bondage with ease then strenuous liberty;
And to despise, or envy, or suspect
Whom God has of his special favor raised
As their Deliverer; if he aught begin,
How frequent to desert him, and at last
To heap ingratitude on worthiest deeds?

Cho. Thy words to my remembrance bring
How Succoth and the Fort of Penuel
Their great Deliverer contemned,
The matchless Gideon in pursuit
Of Madian and her vanquished Kings:
And how ungrateful Ephraim
Had dealt with Jephtha, who by argument,
Not worse then by his shield and spear
Defended Israel from the Ammonite,
Had not his prowess quelled their pride
In that sore battle when so many died
Without Reprieve adjudg'd to death,
For want of well pronouncing Shibboleth.

Sam. Of such examples add me to the roll,
Me easily indeed mine may neglect,
But Gods proposed deliverance not so.

Chor. Just are the ways of God,
And justifiable to Men;
Unless there be who think not God at all,
If any be, they walk obscure;
For of such Doctrine never was there School,
But the heart of the Fool,
And no man therein Doctor but himself.
Yet more there be who doubt his ways not just,
As to his own edicts, found contradicting,
Then give the rains to wandering thought,
Regardless of his glories diminution;
Till by their own perplexities involved
They ravel more, still less resolved,
But never find self-satisfying solution.
As if they would confine th'interminable,
And tie him to his own prescript,
Who made our Laws to bind us, not himself,
And has sull right to exempt
Whom so itipleases him by choice
From National obstriction, without taint
Of sin, or legal debt;
For with his own Laws he can best dispense.
He would not else who never wanted means,
Nor in respect of the enemy just cause
To set his people free,
Have prompted this Heroic Nazarite,
Against his vow of strictest purity,
To seek in marriage that fallacious Bride,
Unclean, unchaste.
Down Reason then, at least vain reasonings down,
Though Reason here aver
That moral verdit quits her of unclean:
Unchaste was subsequent, her stain not his.
But see here comes thy reverend Sire
With careful step, Locks white as down,
Old Manoah: advise
Forthwith how thou oughtst to receive him.

Sam. Ay me, another inward grief awak't,
With mention of that name renewsth' assault.

Man. Brethren and men of Dan, for such ye seem,
Though in this uncouth place; if old respect,
As I suppose, toward your once gloried friend,
My Son now Captive, hither has informed
Your younger feet, while mine cast back with age
Came lagging after; say if he be here.

Chor. As signal now in low dejected state,
As erst in highest, behold him where he lies.

Man. O miserable change! is this the man,
That invincible Samson, far renowned,
The dread of Israel's foes, who with a strength
Equivalent to Angels walked their streets,
None offering fight; who single combatant
Duell'd their Armies rank't in proud array,
Himself an Army, now unequal match
To save himself against a coward armed
At one spears length. O ever failing trust
In mortal strength! and oh what not in man
Deceivable and vain! Nay what thing good
Prayed for, but often proves our woe, our bane?
I prayed for Children, and thought barrenness
In wedlock a reproach; I gained a Son,
and Such a Son as all Men hailed me happy;
Who would be now a Father in my stead?
O wherefore did God grant me my request,
And as a blessing with such pomp adorned?
Why are his gifts desirable, to tempt
Our earnest Prayers, then given with solemn hand
As Graces, draw a Scorpions tail behind?
For this did the Angel twice descend? for this
Ordained thy nurture holy, as of a Plant;
Select, and Sacred, Glorious for a while,
The miracle of men: then in an hour
Ensnared, assaulted, overcome, led bound,
Thy Foes derision, Captive, Poor, and Blind
Into a Dungeon thrust, to work with Slaves?
Alas methinks whom God has chosen once
To worthiest deeds, if he through frailty err,
He should not so o'rewhelm, and as a thrall
Subject him to so foul indignities,
Be it but for honors sake of former deeds.

Sam. Appoint not heavenly disposition, Father,
Nothing of all these evils has befallen me
But justly; I my self have brought them on,
Sole Author I, sole cause: if aught seem vile,
As vile has been my folly, who have profaned
The mystery of God given me under pledge
Of vow, and have betrayed it to a woman,
A Canaanite, my faithless enemy.
This well I knew, nor was at all surprised,
But warned by often experience: did not she
Of Timna first betray me, and reveal
The secret wrested from me in her highth
Of Nuptial Love professed, carrying it strait
To them who had corrupted her, my Spies,
And Rivals? In this other was there found
More Faith? who also in her prime of love,
Spousal embraces, vitiated with Gold,
Though offered only, by the sent conceived
Her spurious firstborn; Treason against me?
Thrice she assayed with flattering prayers and sighs,
And amorous reproaches to win from me
My capital secret, in what part my strength
Lay stored, in what part summed, that she might know:
Thrice I deluded her, and turned to sport
Her importunity, each time perceiving
How openly, and with what impudence
She purposed to betray me, and (which was worse
Then undissembl'd hate) with what contempt
She sought to make me Traitor to my self;
Yet the fourth time, when mustring all her wiles,
With blandisht parlies, feminine assaults,
Tongue-batteries, she surceas'd not day nor night
To storm me over-watch't, and wearied out.
At times when men seek most repose and rest,
I yielded, and unlocked her all my heart,
Who with a grain of manhood well resolved
Might easily have shook off all her snares:
But foul effeminacy held me yok't
Her Bond-slave; O indignity, O blot
To Honor and Religion! servil mind
Rewarded well with servil punishment!
The base degree to which I now am fallen,
These rags, this grinding, is not yet so base
As was my former servitude, ignoble,
Unmanly, ignominious, infamous,
True slavery, and that blindness worse then this,
That saw not how degeneratly I served.

Man. I cannot praise thy Marriage choises, Son,
Rather approved them not; but thou did plead
Divine impulsion prompting how thou might
Find some occasion to infest our Foes.
I state not that; this I am sure; our Foes
Found soon occasion thereby to make thee
Their Captive, and their triumph; thou the sooner
Temptation found'st, or over-potent charms
To violate the sacred trust of silence
Deposited within thee; which to have kept
Tacit, was in thy power; true; and thou bear
Enough, and more the burden of that fault;
Bitterly have thou paid, and still art paying
That rigid score. A worse thing yet remains,
This day the Philistines a popular Feast
Here celebrate in Gaza; and proclaim
Great Pomp, and Sacrifice, and Praises loud
To Dagon, as their God who has delivered
Thee Samson bound and blind into their hand^
Them out of thine, who slew'st them many a (...).
So Dagon shall be magnified, and God,
Besides whom is no God, compared with Idols,
Disglorifi'd, blasphemed, and had in scorn
By th'Idolatrous rout amidst their wine;
Which to have come to pass by means of thee,
Samson, of all thy sufferings think the heaviest,
Of all reproach the most with shame that ever
Could have befallen thee and thy Fathers house.

Sam. Father, I do acknowledge and confess
That I this honor, I this pomp have brought
To Dagon, and advanced his praises high
Among the Heathen round; to God have brought
Dishonor, obloquie, and op't the mouths
Of Idolists, and Atheists; have brought scandal
To Israel, diffidence of God, and doubt
In feeble hearts, propense anough before
To waver, or fall off and join with Idols;
Which is my chief affliction, shame and sorrow;
The anguish of my Soul, that suffers not
Mine eye to harbor sleep, or thoughts to rest.
This only hope relieves me, that the strife
With me has end; all the contest is now
'Twixt God and Dagon; Dagon has presumed,
Me overthrown, to enter lists with God,
His Deity comparing and preferring
Before the God of Abraham. He, be sure,
Will not connive, or linger, thus provoked,
But will arise and his great name assert:
Dagon must stoop, and shall e're long receive
Such a discomfit, as shall quite despoil him
Of all these boasted Trophies won on me,
And with confusion blank his Worshippers.

Man. With cause this hope relieves thee, and these words
I as a Prophecy receive: for God,
Nothing more certain, will not long defer
To vindicate the glory of his name
Against all competition, nor will long
Endure it, doubtful whether God be Lord,
Or Dagon. But for thee what shall be done?
Thou must not in the mean while here forgot
Lie in this miserable loathsome plight
Neglected. I already have made way
To some Philistian Lords, with whom to treat
About thy ransom: well they may by this
Have satisfied their utmost of revenge
By pains and slaveries, worse then death inflicted
On thee, who now no more can do them harm.

Sam. Spare that proposal, Father, spare the trouble
Of that solicitation; let me here,
As I deserve, pay on my punishment;
And expiate, if possible, my crime,
Shameful garrulity. To have revealed
Secrets of men, the secrets of a friend,
How heinous had the fact been, how deserving
Contempt, and scorn of all, to be excluded
All friendship, and avoided as a blab,
The mark of fool set on his front?
But I Gods counsel have not kept, his holy secret
Presumptuously have published, impiously,
Weakly at least, and shamefully: A sin
That Gentiles in their Parables condemn
To their abyss and horrid pains confined.

Man. Be penitent and for thy fault contrite,
But act not in thy own affliction, Son,
Repent the sin, but if the punishment
Thou can avoid, self-preservation bids;
Of the execution leave to high disposal,
And let another hand, not thine, exact
Thy penal forfeit from thy self; perhaps
God will relent, and quit thee all his debt;
Who evermore approves and more accepts
(Best pleased with humble and filial submission)
Him who imploring mercy sues for life,
Then who self-rigorous chooses death as due;
Which argues over-just, and self-displeas'd
For self-offence, more then for God offended.
Reject not then what offered means, who knows
But God has set before us, to return thee
Home to thy country and his sacred house,
Where thou may bring thy offerings, to avert
His further ire, with prayers and vows renewed.

Sam. His pardon I implore; but as for life,
To what end should I seek it? when in strength
All mortals I excelled, and great in hopes
With youthful courage and magnanimous thoughts
Of birth from Heaven foretold and high exploits,
Full of divine instinct, after some proof
Of acts indeed heroic, far beyond
The Sons of Anac, famous now and blazed,
Fearless of danger, like a petty God
I walked about admired of all and dreaded
On hostile ground, none daring my affront.
Then swollen with pride into the snare I fell
Of fair fallacious looks, venereal trains,
Softn'd with pleasure and voluptuous life;
At length to lay my head and hallowed pledge
Of all my strength in the lascivious lap
Of a deceitful Concubine who shore me
Like a tame Weather, all my precious fleece,
Then turned me out ridiculous, despoiled,
Shav'n, and disarmed among my enemies.

Chor. Desire of wine and all delicious drinks,
Which many a famous Warrior overturns,
Thou could repress, nor did the dancing Rubie
Sparkling, out-pow'rd, the flavor, or the smell,
Or taste that cheers the heart of Gods and men,
Allure thee from the cool Crystalline stream.

Sam. Where ever fountain or fresh current flowed
Against the Eastern ray, translucent, pure.
With touch aetherial of Heavens fiery rod
I drank, from the clear milkie juice allaying
Thirst, and refresht; nor envied them the grape
Whose heads that turbulent liquor fills with fumes.

Chor. O madness, to think use of strongest wines
And strongest drinks our chief support of health,
When God with these forbid'n made choice to rear
His mighty Champion, strong above compare,
Whose drink was only from the liquid brook.

Sam. But what availed this temperance, not complete
Against another object more enticing?
What boots it at one gate to make defense,
And at another to let in the foe
Effeminatly vanquished? by which means,
Now blind, disheartn'd, shamed, dishonored, quelled,
To what can I be useful, wherein serve
My Nation, and the work from Heaven imposed,
But to sit idle on the household hearth,
A burdenous drone; to visitants a gaze,
Or pitied object, thief redundant locks
Robustious to no purpofe clustring down,
Vain monument of strength; till length of years
And sedentary numness craze my limbs
To a contemptible old age obscure.
Here rather let me drudge and earn my bread,
Till vermin or the draff of servil food
Consume me, and oft-invocated death
Hast'n the welcome end of all my pains.

Man. Will thou then serve the Philistines with that gift
Which was expressly given thee to annoy them?
Better at home lie bedridden, not only idle,
Inglorious, unimploy'd, with age out-worn.
But God who caused a fountain at thy prayer
From the dry ground to spring, thy thirst to allay
After the brunt of battle, can as easy
Cause light again within thy eyes to spring,
Wherewith to serve him better then thou have;
And I persuade me so; why else this strength
Miraculous yet remaining in those locks?
His might continues in thee not for naught,
Nor shall his wondrous gifts be frustrate thus.

Sam. All otherwise to me my thoughts portend,
That these dark orbs no more shall treat with light,
Nor the other light of life continue long,
But yield to double darkness nigh at hand:
So much I feel my genial spirits droop,
My hopes all flat, nature within me seems
In all her functions weary of her self;
My race of glory run, and race of shame,
And I shall shortly be with them that rest.

Man. Believe not these suggestions which proceed
From anguish of the mind and humors black,
That mingle with thy fancy. I however
Must not omit a Fathers timely care
To prosecute the means of thy deliverance
By ransom or how else: mean while be calm,
And healing words from these thy friends admit.

Sam. O that torment should not be confined
To the bodies wounds and sores
With maladies innumerable
In heart, head, breast, and reins;
But must secret passage find
To the inmost mind,
There exercise all his fierce accidents,
And on her purest spirits prey,
As on entrails, joints, and limbs,
With answerable pains, but more intense,
Though void of corporal sense.
My griefs not only pain me
As a lingering disease,
But finding no redress, ferment and rage,
Nor less then wounds immedicable
Ranckle, and fester, and gangrene,
To black mortification.
Thoughts my Tormenters armed with deadly stings
Mangle my apprehensive tenderest parts,
Exasperate, exulcerate, and raise
Dire inflammation which no cooling herb
Or medcinal liquor can assuage,
Nor breath of Vernal Air from snowy Alp.
Sleep has forsook and given me over
To deaths benumming Opium as my only cure.
Thence faintings, swounings of despair,
And sense of Heavens desertion.
I was his nurssing once and choice delight,
His destined from the womb,
Promisd by Heavenly message twice descending.
Under his special eye
Abstemious I grew up and thrived amain;
He led me on to mightiest deeds
Above the nerve of mortal arm
Against the uncircumsised, our enemies.
(...) has cast me off as never known,
(...) those cruel enemies,
Whom I by his appointment had provoked,
Left me all helpless with the irreparable loss
Of sight, reserved alive to be repeated
The subject of their cruelty, or scorn.
Nor am I in the list of them that hope;
Hopeless are all my evils, all remediless;
This one prayer yet remains, might I be heard,
No long petition, speedy death,
The close of all my miseries, and the balm.

Chor. Many are the sayings of the wise
In ancient and in modern books enrolled;
Extolling Patience as the truest fortitude;
And to the bearing well of all calamities,
All chances incident to man's frail life.
Consolatories writ
With studied argument, and much persuasion sought
Lenient of grief and anxious thought,
But with' afflicted in his pangs their sound
Little prevails, or rather seems a tune,
Harsh, and of dissonant mood from his complaint,
Unless he feel within
Some sourse of consolation from above;
Secret refreshings, that repair his strength,
And fainting spirits uphold.
God of our Fathers, what is man!
That thou toward him with hand so various,
Or might I say contrarious,
Temperst thy providence through his short course,
Not evenly, as thou rul'st
The Angelic orders and inferior creatures mute,
Irrational and brute.
Nor do I name of men the common rout,
That wandering loose about
Grow up and perish, as the summer fly,
Heads without name no more rememberd,
But such as thou have solemnly elected,
With gifts and graces eminently adorned
To some great work, thy glory,
And peoples safety, which in part they effect:
Yet toward these thus dignified, thou often
Amidst their highth of noon,
Changest thy countenance, and thy hand with no regard
Of highest favors past
From thee on them, or them to thee of service.
Nor only do degrade them, or remit
To life obscured, which were a fair dismission,
But throw'st them lower then thou did exalt them high,
Unseemly falls in human eye,
Too grievous for the trespass or omission,
Often leave them to the hostile sword
Of Heathen and profane, their carcasses
To dogs and fowls a prey, or else captived:
Or to the unjust tribunals, under change of times,
And condemnation of the ungrateful multitude.
If these they escape, perhaps in poverty
With sickness and disease thou bow'st them down,
Painful diseases and deformed,
In crude old age;
Though not disordinate, yet causless suffering
The punishment of dissolute days, in fine,
Just or unjust, alike seem miserable,
For often alike, both come to evil end.
So deal not with this once thy glorious Champion,
The Image of thy strength, and mighty minister.
What do I beg? how have thou dealt already?
Behold him in this state calamitous, and turn
His labors, for thou can, to peaceful end.
But who is this, what thing of Sea or Land?
Femal of sex it seems,
That so bedeckt, ornate, and gay,
Comes this way sailing
Like a stately Strip
Of Tarsus, bound for the Isles
Of Javan or Gadier
With all her bravery on, and tackle trim,
Sails filled, and streamers waving,
Courted by all the winds that hold them play,
An Amber sent of odorous perfume
Her harbinger, a damsel train behind;
Some rich Philistian Matron she may seem,
And now at nearer view, no other certain
Then Dalila thy wife.

Sam. My Wife, my Traytress, let her not come near me.

Cho. Yet on she moves, now stands and eyes thee fixed,
About to have spoke, but now, with head declined
Like a fair flower surcharged with dew, she weeps
And words addressed seem into tears dissolved,
Wetting the borders of her silk'n veil:
But now again she makes address to speak.

Dal. With doubtful feet and wavering resolution
I came, still dreading thy displeasure, Samson,
Which to have merited, without excuse,
I cannot but acknowledge; yet if tears
May expiate (though the fact more evil drew
In the perverse event then I foresaw)
My penance has not slack'n'd, though my pardon
No way assured. But conjugal affection
Prevailing over fear, and timorous doubt
Has led me on desirous to behold
Once more thy face, and know of thy estate.
If aught in my ability may serve
To light'n what thou suffer'st, and appease
Thy mind with what amends is in my power,
Though late, yet in some part to recompense
My rash but more unfortunate misdeed.

Sam. Out, out Hyaena; these are thy wonted arts,
And arts of every woman false like thee,
To break all faith, all vows, deceive, betray,
Then as repentant to submit, beseech,
And reconcilement move with feigned remorse,
Confess, and promise wonders in her change,
Not truly penitent, but chief to try
Her husband, how far urged his patience bears,
His virtue or weakness which way to assail:
Then with more cautious and instructed skill
Again transgresses, and again submits;
That wisest and best men full often beguiled
With goodness principl'd not to reject
The penitent, but ever to forgive,
Are drawn to wear out miserable days,
Entangl'd with a poysnous bosom snake,
If not by quick destruction soon cut off
As I by thee, to Ages an example.

Dal. Yet hear me Samson; not that I endeavor
To lessen or extenuate my offense,
But that on the other side if it be weighed
By it self, with aggravations not surcharged,
Or else with just allowance counterpois'd,
I may, if possible, thy pardon find
The easier toward me, or thy hatred less.
First granting, as I do, it was a weakness
In me, but incident to all our sex,
Curiosity, inquisitive, importune
Of secrets, then with like infirmity
To publish them, both common female faults:
Was it not weakness also to make known
For importunity, that is for naught,
Wherein consisted all thy strength and safety?
To what I did thou shewdst me first the way.
But I to enemies revealed, and should not.
Nor should thou have trusted that to woman's frailty
E're I to thee, thou to thy self wast cruel.
Let weakness then with weakness come to parl
So near related, or the same of kind,
Thine forgive mine; that men may censure thine
The gentler, if severely thou exact not
More strength from me, then in thy self was found.
And what if Love, which thou interpret'st hate,
The jealousy of Love, powerful of sway
In human hearts, nor less in mine toward thee,
Caused what I did? I saw thee mutable
Of fancy, feared lest one day thou would leave me
As her at Timna, sought by all means therefore
How to endear, and hold thee to me firmest:
No better way I saw then by importuning
To learn thy secrets, get into my power
Thy key of strength and safety: thou will say,
Why then revealed? I was assured by those
Who tempted me, that nothing was designed
Against thee but safe custody, and hold:
That made for me, I knew that liberty
Would draw thee forth to perilous enterprises,
While I at home sat full of cares and fears
Wailing thy absence in my widowed bed;
Here I should still enjoy thee day and night
Mine and Loves prisoner, not the Philistines,
Whole to my self, unhazarded abroad,
Fearless at home of partners in my love.
These reasons in Loves law have past for good,
Though fond and reasonless to some perhaps;
And Love has often, well meaning, wrought much woe,
Yet always pity or pardon has obtained.
Be not unlike all others, not austere
As thou art strong, inflexible as steel.
If thou in strength all mortals do exceed,
In uncompassionate anger do not so.

Sam. How cunningly the sorceress displays
Her own transgressions, to upbraid me mine?
That malice not repentance brought thee hither,
By this appears: I gave, thou say, the example,
I led the way; bitter reproach, but true,
I to my self was false e're thou to me,
Such pardon therefore as I give my folly,
Take to thy wicked deed: which when thou see
Impartial, self-severe, inexorable,
Thou will renounce thy seeking, and much rather
Confess it feigned, weakness is thy excuse,
And I believe it, weakness to resist
Philistian gold: if weakness may excuse,
What Murderer, what Traitor, Parricide,
Incestuous, Sacrilegious, but may plead it?
All wickedness is weakness: that plea therefore
With God or Man will gain thee no remission.
But Love constrained thee; call it furious rage
To satisfy thy lust: Love seeks to have Love;
My love how could thou hope, who tookst the way
To raise in me inexpiable hate,
Knowing, as needs I must, by thee betrayed?
In vain thou striv'st to cover shame with shame,
Or by evasions thy crime uncoverst more.

Dal. Since thou determinst weakness for no plea
In man or woman, though to thy own condemning,
Hear what assaults I had, what snares besides,
What sieges girt me round, e're I consented;
Which might have awed the best resolved of men,
The constantest to have yielded without blame.
It was not gold, as to my charge thou lay'st,
That wrought with me: thou know the Magistrates
And Princes of my country came in person,
Solicited, commanded, threatened, urged,
Adjur'd by all the bonds of civil Duty
And of Religion, pressed how just it was,
How honorable, how glorious to entrap
A common enemy, who had destroyed
Such numbers of our Nation: and the Priest
Was not behind, but ever at my ear,
Preaching how meritorious with the gods
It would be to ensnare an irreligious
Dishonourer of Dagon: what had I
To oppose against such powerful arguments?
Only my love of thee held long debate;
And combated in silence all these reasons
With hard contest: at length that grounded maxim
So rife and celebrated in the mouths
Of wisest men; that to the public good
Private refpects must yield; with grave authority
Took full possession of me and prevailed;
Virtue, as I thought, truth, duty so enjoining.

Sam. I thought where all thy circling wiles would end;
In feigned Religion, smooth hypocrisy.
But had thy love, still odiously pretended,
Bin, as it ought, sincere, it would have taught thee
Far other reasonings, brought forth other deeds.
I before all the daughters of my Tribe
And of my Nation chose thee from among
My enemies, loved thee, as too well thou knew'st,
Too well, unbosom'd all my secrets to thee,
Not out of levity, but over-powr'd
By thy request, who could deny thee nothing;
Yet now am judged an enemy. Why then
Did thou at first reccive me for thy husband?
Then, as since then, thy countries foe professed:
Being once a wife, for me thou wast to leave
Parents and country; nor was I their subject,
Nor under their protection but my own,
Thou mine, not theirs: if aught against my life
Thy country sought of thee, it sought unjustly,
Against the law of nature, law of nations,
No more thy country, but an impious crew
Of men conspiring to uphold their state
By worse then hostile deeds, violating the ends
For which our country is a name so dear;
Not therefore to be obeyed. But zeal moved thee;
To please thy gods thou did it; gods unable
To acquit themselves and prosecute their foes
But by ungodly deeds, the contradiction
Of their own deity, Gods cannot be:
Less therefore to be pleased, obeyed, or feared,
These false pretexts and varnished colors failing,
Bare in thy guilt how foul must thou appear?

Dal. In argument with men a woman ever
Goes by the worse, whatever be her cause.

Sam. For want of words no doubt, or lack of breath,
Witness when I was worried with thy peals.

Dal. I was a fool, too rash, and quite mistaken
In what I thought would have succeeded best.
Let me obtain forgiveness of thee, Samson,
Afford me place to show what recompense
Toward thee I intend for what I have misdone,
Misguided; only what remains past cure
Bear not too sensibly, nor still insist
To afflict thy self in vain: though sight be lost,
Life yet has many solaces, enjoyed
Where other senses want not their delights
At home in leisure and domestic ease,
Exempt from many a care and chance to which
Eyesight exposes daily men abroad.
I to the Lords will intercede, not doubting
Their favorable ear, that I may fetch thee
From forth this loathsome prisonhouse, to abide
With me, where my redoubled love and care
With nursing diligence, to me glad office,
May ever tend about thee to old age
With all things grateful cheered, and so supplied,
That what by me thou have lost thou least shall miss.

Sams. No, no, of my condition take no care;
It fits not; thou and I long since are twain;
Nor think me so unwary or accursed
To bring my feet again into the snare
Where once I have been caught; I know thy trains
Though dearly to my cost, thy ginns, and toyls;
Thy fair enchanted cup, and warbling charms
No more on me have power, their force is nulled,
So much of Adders wisdom I have learned
To fence my ear against thy sorceries.
If in my flower of youth and strength, when all men
Loved, honored, feared me, thou alone could hate me
Thy Husband, slight me, sell me, and forgo me;
How would thou use me now, blind, and thereby
Deceiveable, in most things as a child
Helpless, thence eafily contemned, and scorned,
And last neglected? How would thou insult
When I must live uxorious to thy will
In perfet thraldom, how again betray me,
Bearing my words and doings to the Lords
To gloss upon, and censuring, frown or smile?
This Gaol I count the house of Liberty
To thine whose doors my feet shall never enter.

Dal. Let me approach at least, and touch thy hand.

Sam. Not for thy life, lest fierce remembrance wake
My sudden rage to tear thee joint by joint.
At distance I forgive thee, go with that;
Bewail thy falsehood, and the pious works
It has brought forth to make thee memorable
Among illustrious women, faithful wives:
Cherish thy hast'n'd widowhood with the gold
Of Matrimonial treason: so farewell.

Dal. I see thou art implacable, more deaf
To prayers, then winds and seas, yet winds to seas
Are reconciled at length, and Sea to Shore:
Thy anger, unappeasable, still rages,
Eternal tempest never to be calmed.
Why do I humble thus my self, and suing
For peace, reap nothing but repulse and hate?
Bid go with evil omen and the brand
Of infamy upon my name denounc't?
To mix with thy concernments I desist
Henceforth, nor too much disapprove my own.
Fame if not double-fac't is double-mouth'd,
And with contrary blast proclaims most deeds,
On both his wings, one black, the other white,
Bears greatest names in his wild aerie flight.
My name perhaps among the Circumcised
In Dan, in Judah, and the bordering Tribes,
To all posterity may stand defamed,
With malediction mentioned, and the blot
Of falsehood most unconjugal traduc't.
But in my country where I most desire,
In Ecron, Gaza, Asdod, and in Gath
I shall be named among the famousest
Of Women, sung at solemn festivals,
Living and dead recorded, whoto save
Her country from a fierce destroyer, chose
Above the faith of wedlock-bands, my tomb
With odours visited and annual flowers.
Not less renowned then in Mount Ephraim,
Jael, who with in hospitable guile
Smote Sisera sleeping through the Temples nailed.
Nor shall I count it heinous to enjoy
The public marks of honor and reward
Conferred upon me, for the piety
Which to my country I was judged to have shown.
At this who ever envies or repines
I leave him to his lot, and like my own.

Chor. She Is gone, a manifest Serpent by her sting
Discovered in the end; till now concealed.

Sam. So let her go, God sent her to debase me,
And aggravate my folly who committed
To such a viper his most sacred trust
Of secrecy, my safety, and my life.

Chor. Yet beauty, though injurious, has strange power,
After offense returning, to regain
Love once possessed, nor can be easily
Repuls't, without much inward passion felt
And secret sting of amorous remorse.

Sam. Love-quarrels often in pleasing concord end,
Not wedlock-trechery endangering life.

Cho. It is not virtue, wisdom, valor, wit,
Strength, comeliness of shape, or amplest merit
That woman's love can win or long inherit;
But what it is, hard is to say:
Harder to hit,
(Which way soever men refer it)
Much like thy riddle, Samson, in one day
Or seven, though one should musing sit;
If any of these or all, the Timnian bride
Had not so soon preferred
Thy Paranymph, worthless to thee compared,
Successor in thy bed,
Nor both so loosly disally'd
Their nuptials, nor this last so trecherously
Had shorn the fatal harvest of thy head.
Is it for that such outward ornament
Was lavish't on their Sex, that inward gifts
Were left for have unfinish't, judgment scant,
Capacity not raised to apprehend
Or value what is best
In choice, but oftest to affect the wrong?
Or was too much of self-love mixed,
Of constancy no root infixt,
That either they love nothing, or not long?
What e'reit be, to wisest men and best
Seeming at first all heavenly under virgin veil,
Soft, modest, meek, demure,
Once joined, the contrary she proves, a thorn
Intestin, far within defensive arms
A cleaving mischief; in his way to virtue
Adverse and turbulent, or by her charms
Draws him awry enslaved
With dotage, and his sense depraved
To folly and shameful deeds which ruin ends.
What Pilot so expert but needs must wreck
Embarked with such a Stears-mate at the Helm?
Favored of Heaven who finds
One virtuous rarely found,
That in domestic good combines:
Happy that house! his way to peace is smooth:
But virtue which breaks through all opposition,
And all temptation can remove,
Most shines and most is acceptable above.
Therefore Gods universal Law
Gave to the man despotic power
Over his female in due awe,
Nor from that right to part an hour,
Smile she or lowre:
So shall he least confusion draw
On his whole life, not swayed
By female usurpation, nor dismayed.
But had we best retire, I see a storm?

Sam. Fair days have often contracted wind and rain.

Chor. But this another kind of tempest brings.

Sam. Be less abstruse, my riddling days are past.

Chor. Look now for no enchanting voice, nor fear
The bait of honied words; a rougher tongue
Draws hitherward, I know him by his stride,
The Giant Harapha of Gath, his look
Haughty as is his pile high-built and proud.
Comes he in peace? what wind has blown him hither
I less conjecture then when first I saw
The sumptuous Dalila floating this way:
His habit carries peace, his brow defiance.

Sam. Or peace or not, alike to me he comes.

Chor. His fraught we soon shall know, he now arrives.

Har. I come not Samson, to condole thy chance,
As these perhaps, yet wish it had not been,
Though for no friendly intent. I am of Gath,
Men call me Harapha, of stock renowned
As Og or Anak and the Emims old
That Kiriathaim held, thou know me now
If thou at all art known. Much I have heard
Of thy prodigious might and feats performed
Incredible to me, in this displeased,
That I was never present on the place
Of those encounters, where we might have tried
Each others force in camp or listed field:
And now am come to see of whom such noise
Has walked about, and each limb to survey,
If thy appearance answer loud report.

Sam. The way to know were not to see but taste.

Har. Do thou already single me; I thought
Gives and the Mill had tamed thee? O that fortune
Had brought me to the field where thou art famed
To have wrought such wonders with an Asses Jaw;
I should have forced thee soon wish other arms,
Or left thy carcass where the Ass lay thrown:
So had the glory of Prowess been recovered
To Palestine, won by a Philistine
From the unforeskinn'd race, of whom thou bear
The highest name for valiant Acts, that honor
Certain to have won by mortal duel from thee,
I lose, prevented by thy eyes put out.

Sam. Boast not of what thou would have done, (...)
What then thou would, thou see it in thy hand.

Har. To combat with a blind man I disdain,
And thou have need much washing to be touched.

Sam. Such usage as your honorable Lords
Afford me assassinated and betrayed,
Who durst not with their whole united powers
In fight withstand me single and unarmed,
Nor in the house with chamber Ambushes
Close-banded durst attaque me, no not sleeping,
Till they had hired a woman with their gold
Breaking her Marriage Faith to circumvent me.
Therefore without feigned shifts let be assigned
Some narrow place enclosed, where sight may give thee,
Or rather flight, no great advantage on me;
Then put on all thy gorgeous arms, thy Helmet
And Brigandine of brass, thy broad Habergeon,
Vant-brass and Greves, and Gauntlet, add thy Spear
A Weavers beam, and seven-times-folded shield,
I only with an Oak'n staff will meet thee,
And raise such outcries on thy clatter'd Iron.
Which long shall not withold me from thy head,
That in a little time while breath remains thee,
Thou often shall wish thy self at Gath to boast
Again in safety what thou would have done
To Samson, but shall never see Gath more.

Har. Thou durst not thus disparage glorious arms
Which greatest Heroes have in battle worn,
Their ornament and safety, had not spells
And black enchantments, some Magicians Art
Armed thee or charmed thee strong, which thou from Heaven
Feigndst at thy birth was given thee in thy hair,
Where strength can least abide, though all thy hairs
Were bristles ranged like those that ridge the back
Of chaf't wild Boars, or ruffl'd Porcupines.

Sam. I know no Spells, use no forbidden Arts;
My trust is in the living God who gave me
At my Nativity this strength, diffused
No less through all my sinews, joints and bones,
Then thine, while I preserved these locks unshorn,
The pledge of my unviolated vow.
For proof hereof, if Dagon be thy god,
Go to his Temple, invocate his aid
With solemnest devotion, spread before him
How highly it concerns his glory now
To frustrate and dissolve these Magic spells,
Which I to be the power of Israel's God
Avow, and challenge Dagon to the test,
Offering to combat thee his Champion bold,
With the utmost of his Godhead seconded:
Then thou shall see, or rather to thy sorrow
Soon feel, whose God is strongest, thine or mine.

Har. Presume not on thy God, what e're he be,
(...) he regards not, owns not, has cut off
Quite from his people, and delivered up
(...) thy Enemies hand, permitted them
(...) out both thine eyes, and fettered send thee
(...) common Prison, there to grind
Among the Slaves and Asses thy comrades,
As good for nothing else, no better service
With those thy boyst'rous locks, no worthy match
For valor to assail, nor by the sword
Of noble Warrior, so to stain his honor,
But by the Barbers razor best subdued.

Sam. All these indignities, for such they are
From thine, these evils I deserve and more,
Acknowledge them from God inflicted on me
Justly, yet despair not of his final pardon
Whose ear is ever open; and his eye
Gracious to re-admit the suppliant;
In confidence whereof I once again
Defy thee to the trial of mortal fight,
By combat to decide whose god is God,
Thine or whom I with Israel's Sons adore.

Har. Fair honor that thou do thy God, in trusting
He will accept thee to defend his cause,
A Murderer, a Revolter, and a Robber.

Sam. Tongue-doubtie Giant, how do thou prove me these?

Har. Is not thy Nation subject to our Lords?
Their Magistrates confessed it, when they took thee
As a League-breaker and delivered bound
Into our hands: for had thou not committed
Notorious murder on those thirty men
At Askalon, who never did thee harm,
Then like a Robber stripdst them of their robes?
The Philistines, when thou had broke the league,
Went up with armed powers thee only seeking,
To others did no violence nor spoil.

Sam. Among the Daughters of the Philistines
I chose a Wife, which argued me no foe;
And in your City held my Nuptial Feast:
But your ill-meaning Politician Lords,
Under pretense of Bridal friends and guests,
Appointed to await me thirty spies,
Who threatening cruel death constrained the bride
To wring from me and tell to them my secret,
That solved the riddle which I had proposed.
When I perceived all set on enmity,
As on my enemies, where ever chanced,
I used hostility, and took their spoil
To pay my underminers in their coin.
My Nation was subjected to your Lords.
It was the force of Conquest; force with force
Is well ejected when the Conquered can.
But I a private person, whom my Country
As a league-breaker gave up bound, presumed
Single Rebellion and did Hostile Acts.
I was no private but a person raised
With strength sufficient and command from Heaven
To free my Country; if their servile minds
Me their Deliverer sent would not receive,
But to their Masters gave me up for naught,
Th'unworthier they; whence to this day they serve.
I was to do my part from Heaven assigned,
And had performed it if my known offense
Had not disabl'd me, not all your force:
These shifts refuted, answer thy appellant
Though by his blindness maimed for high attempts,
Who now defies thee thrice to single fight,
As a petty enterprise of small enforce.

Har. With thee a Man condemned, a Slave enrol'd,
Due by the Law to capital punishment?
To fight with thee no man of arms will deign.

Sam. Came thou for this, vain boaster, to survey me,
To descant on my strength, and give thy verdit?
Come nearer, part not hence so slight informed;
But take good heed my hand survey not thee.

Har. O Baal-zebub! can my ears unused
Hear these dishonours, and not render death?

Sam. No man withholds thee, nothing from thy hand
Fear I incurable; bring up thy van,
My heels are fettered, but my fist is free.

Har. This insolence other kind of answer fits.

Sams. Go baffled coward, left I run upon thee,
Though in these chains, bulk without spirit vast,
And with one buffet lay thy structure low,
Or swing thee in the Air, then dash thee down
To the hazard of thy brains and shattered sides.

Har. By Astaroth e're long thou shall lament
These braveries in Irons laden on thee.

Chor. His Giantship is gone somewhat crest-fall'n,
Stalking with less unconsci'nable strides,
And lower looks, but in a sultrie chafe.

Sam. I dread him not, nor all his Giant-brood,
Though Fame divulged him Father of five Sons
All of Gigantic size, Goliath chief.

Chor. He will directly to the Lords, I fear,
And with malicious counsel stir them up
Some way or other yet further to afflict thee.

Sam. He must allege some cause, and offered fight
Will not dare mention, lest a question rise
Whether he durst accept the offer or not,
And that he durst not plain enough appeared.
Much more affliction then already felt
They cannot well impose, nor I sustain;
If they intend advantage of my labors
The work of many hands, which earns my keeping
With no small profit daily to my owners.
But come what will, my deadliest foe will prove
My speediest friend, by death to rid me hence,
The worst that he can give, to me the best.
Yet so it may fall out, because their end
Is hate, not help to me, it may with mine
Draw their own ruin who attempt the deed.

Chor. Oh how comely it is and how reviving
To the Spirits of just men long oppressed!
When God into the hands of their deliverer
Puts invincible might
To quell the mighty of the Earth, the oppressor,
The brute and boisterous force of violent men
Hardy and industrious to support
Tyrannic power, but raging to pursue
The righteous and all such as honor Truth;
He all their Ammunition
And feats of War defeats
With plain Heroic magnitude of mind
And celestial vigor armed,
Their Armories and Magazins contemns,
Renders them useless, while
With winged expedition
Swift as the lightning glance he executes
His errand on the wicked, who surprised
Lose their defense distracted and amazed.
But patience is more often the exercise
Of Saints, the trial of their fortitude,
Making them each his own Deliverer,
And Victor over all
That tyranny or fortune can inflict,
Either of these is in thy lot,
Samson, with might endu'd
Above the Sons of men; but sight bereaved
May chance to number thee with those
Whom Patience finally must crown.
This Idols day has bin to thee no day of rest,
Laboring thy mind
More then the working day thy hands,
And yet perhaps more trouble is behind.
For I descry this way
Some other tending, in his hand
A Scepter or quaint staff he bears,
Comes on amain, speed in his look.
By his habit I discern him now
A Public Officer, and now at hand.
His message will be short and voluble.

Off. Ebrews, the Prisoner Samson here I seek.

Chor. His manacles remark him, there he fits.

Off. Samson, to thee our Lords thus bid me say;
This day to Dagon is a solemn Feast,
With Sacrifices, Triumph, Pomp, and Games;
Thy strength they know surpassing human rate,
And now some public proof thereof require
To honor this great Feast, and great Assembly;
Rise therefore with all speed and come along,
Where I will see thee heartn'd and fresh clad
To appear as fits before the illustrious Lords.

Sam. Thou know I am an Ebrew, therefore tell them,
Our Law forbids at their Religious Rites
My presence; for that cause I cannot come.

Off. This answer, be assured, will not content them.

Sam. Have they not Sword-players, and every sort
Of Gymnic Artists, Wrestlers, Riders, Runners,
Juglers and Dancers, Antics, Mummers, Mimics,
But they must pick me out with shackles tired,
(...)labored at their public Mill,
(...) them sport with blind activity?
(...) not seek occasion of new quarrels
On my refusal to distress me more,
Or make a game of my calamities?
Return the way thou came, I will not come.

Off. Regard thy self, this will offend them highly.

Sam. My self? my conscience and internal peace.
Can they think me so broken, so debased
With corporal servitude, that my mind ever
Will condescend to such absurd commands?
Although their drudge, to be their fool or jester,
And in my midst of sorrow and heart-grief
To show them feats, and play before their god,
The worst of all indignities, yet on me
Joined with extreme contempt? I will not come.

Off. My message was imposed on me with speed,
Brooks no delay: is this thy resolution?

Sam. So take it with what speed thy message needs.

Off. I am sorry what this stoutness will produce.

Sa. Perhaps thou shall have cause to sorrow indeed.

Chor. Consider, Samson; matters now are strained
Up to the highth, whether to hold or break;
He Is gone, and who knows how he may report
Thy words by adding fuel to the flame?
Expect another message more imperious,
More Lordly thundering then thou well wilt bear.

Sam. Shall I abuse this Consecrated gift
Of strength, again returning with my hair
After my great transgression, so requite
Favor renewed, and add a greater sin
By prostituting holy things to Idols;
A Nazarite in place abominable
Vaunting my strength in honor to their Dagon?
Besides, how vile, contemptible, ridiculous,
What act more execrably unclean, profane?

Chor. Yet with this strength thou serv'st the Philistines,
Idolatrous, uncircumsised, unclean.

Sam. Not in their Idol-worship, but by labor
Honest and lawful to deserve my food
Of those who have me in their civil power.

Chor. Where the heart joins not, outward acts defile not.

Sam. Where outward force constrains, the sentence holds
But who constrains me to the Temple of Dagon,
Not dragging? the Philistian Lords command.
Commands are no constraints. If I obey them,
I do it freely; venturing to displease
God for the fear of Man, and Man prefer,
Set God behind: which in his jealousy
Shall never, unrepented, find forgiveness.
Yet that he may dispense with me or thee
Present in Temples at Idolatrous Rites
For some important cause, thouneedst not doubt.

Chor. How thou will here come off surmounts my reach.

Sam. Be of good courage, I begin to feel
Some rouzing motions in me which dispose
To something extraordinary my thoughts.
I with this Messenger will go along,
Nothing do, be sure, that may dishonor
Our Law, or stain my vow of Nazarite.
If there be aught of presage in the mind,
This day will be remarkable in my life
By some great act, or of my days the last.

Chor. In time thou have resolved, the man returns.

Off. Samson, this second message from our Lords
To thee I am bid say. Art thou our Slave,
Our Captive, at the public Mill our drudge,
And dare thou at our sending and command
Dispute thy coming? come without delay;
Or we shall find such Engines to assail
And hamper thee, as thou shall come of force,
Though thou were firmlier fastn'd then a rock.

Sam. I could be well content to try their Art,
Which to no few of them would prove pernicious:
Yet knowing their advantages too many,
Because they shall not trail me through their streets
Like a wild Beast, I am content to go.
Masters commands come with a power resistless
To such as owe them absolute subjection;
And for a life who will not change his purpose?
(So mutable are all the ways of men)
Yet this be sure, in nothing to comply
Scandalous or forbidden in our Law.

Off. I praise thy resolution, doff these links:
By this compliance thou will win the Lords
To favor, and perhaps to set thee free.

Sam. Brethren farewell, your company along
I will not wish, lest it perhaps offend them
To see me girt with Friends; and how the sight
Of me as of a common Enemy,
So dreaded once may now exasperate them
I know not. Lords are Lordliest in their wines
And the well-feasted Priest then soonest fired
With zeal, if aught Religion seem concerned:
No less the people on their Holy Days
Impetuous, insolent, unquenchable;
Happ'n what may, of me expect to hear
Nothing dishonorable, impure, unworthy
Our God, our Law, my Nation, or my self,
The last of me or no I cannot warrant.

Chor. Go, and the Holy One
Of Israel be thy guide
To what may serve his glory best, and spread his name
Great among the Heathen round:
Send thee the Angel of thy Birth, to stand
Fast by thy side, who from thy Fathers field
Rode up in flames after his message told
Of thy conception, and be now a shield
Of fire; that Spirit that first rusht on thee
In the Camp of Dan
Be efficacious in thee now at need.
For never was from Heaven imparted
Measure of strength so great to mortal seed.
As in thy wondrous actions has been seen.
But wherefore comes old Manoa in such have
With youthful steps? much livelier then e're while
He seems: supposing here to find his Son,
Or of him bringing to us some glad news?

Man. Peace with you brethren; my inducement hither
Was not at present here to find my Son,
By order of the Lords new parted hence
To come and play before them at their Feast.
I heard all as I came, the City rings
And numbers thither flock, I had no will,
Lest I should see him forced to things unseemly.
But that which moved my coming now, was chiefly
To give ye part with me what hope I have
With good success to work his liberty.

Cho. That hope would much rejoice us to partake
With thee; say reverend Sire, we thirst to hear.

Man. I have attempted one by one the Lords
Either at home, or through the high street passing,
With supplication prone and Fathers tears
To accept of ransom for my Son their prisoner,
Some much averse I found and wondrous harsh,
Contemptuous, proud, set on revenge and spite;
That part most reverenced Dagon and his Priests,
Others more moderate seeming, but their aim
Private reward, for which both God and State
They easily would set to sale, a third
More generous far and civil, who confessed
They had anough revenged, having reduced
Their foe to misery beneath their fears,
The rest was magnanimity to remit,
If some convenient ransom were proposed.
What noise or shout was that? it tore the Sky.

Chor. Doubtless the people shouting to behold
Their once great dread, captive, and blind before them,
Or at some proof of strength before them shown.

Man. His ransom, if my whole inheritance
May compass it, shall willingly be paid
And numberd down: much rather I shall choose
To live the poorest in my Tribe, then richest,
And he in that calamitous prison left.
No, I am fixed not to part hence without him.
^or his redemption all my Patrimony,
If need be, I am ready to forgo
And quit: not wanting him, I shall want nothing.

Chor. Fathers are wont to lay up for their Sons,
Thou for thy Son art bent to lay out all;
Sons wont to nurse their Parents in old age,
Thou in old age car'st how to nurse thy Son.
Made older then thy age through eyesight lost.

Man. It shall be my delight to tend his eyes,
And view him sitting in the house, enobl'd
With all those high exploits by him achieved,
And on his shoulders waving down those locks,
That of a Nation armed the strength contained:
And I persuade me God had not permitted
His strength again to grow up with his hair
Garrisoned round about him like a Camp
Of faithful Soldiery, were not his purpose
To use him further yet in some great service,
Not to sit idle with so great a gift
Useless, and thence ridiculous about him.
And since his strength with eyesight was not lost,
God will restore him eyesight to his strength.

Chor. Thy hopes are not ill founded nor seem vain
Of his delivery, and thy joy thereon
Conceived, agreeable to a Fathers love,
In both which we, as next participate.

Man. I know your friendly minds and -- O what noise!
Mercy of Heaven what hideous noise was that!
Horribly loud unlike the former shout.

Chor. Noise call you it or universal groan
As if the whole inhabitation perished,
Blood, death, and deathful deeds are in that noise,
Ruin, destruction at the utmost point.

Man. Of ruin indeed methought I heard the noise,
Oh it continues, they have slain my Son.

Chor. Thy Son is rather slaying them, that outcry
From slaughter of one foe could not ascend.

Man. Some dismal accident it needs must be;
What shall we do, stay here or run and see?

Chor. Best keep together here, lest running thither
We unawares run into dangers mouth.
This evil on the Philistines is fallen,
From whom could else a general cry be heard?
The sufferers then will scarce molest us here,
From other hands we need not much to fear.
A little stay will bring some notice hither,
For evil news rides post, while good news baits.
And to our wish I see one hither speeding,
An Ebrew, as I guess, and of our Tribe.

Mess. O whither shall I run, or which way fly
The sight of this so horrid spectacle
Which erst my eyes beheld and yet behold;
For dire imagination still persues me.
But providence or instinct of nature seems,
Or reason though disturbed, and scarce consulted
To have guided me aright, I know not how,
To thee first reverend Manoa, and to these
My Countrymen, whom here I knew remaining,
As at some distance from the place of horror,
So in the sad event too much concerned.

Man. The accident was loud, and heard before thee
With rueful cry, yet what it was we hear not,
No Preface needs, thou see we long to know.

Mess. It would burst forth, but I recover breath
And sense distract, to know well what I utter.

Man. Tell us the sum, the circumstance defer.

Mess. Gaza yet stands, but all her Sons are fallen,
All in a moment overwhelmed and fallen.

Man. Sad, but thou know to Israelites not saddest
The desolation of a Hostile City.

Mess. Feed on that first, there may in grief be surfeit.

Man. Relate by whom.

Mess. By Samson.

(Man. That still lessens
The sorrow, and converts it nigh to joy.

Mess. Ah Manoa I refrain, too suddenly
To utter what will come at lasttoosoon;
Lest evil tidings with too rude irruption
Hitting thy aged ear should pierce too deep.

Man. Suspense in news is torture, speak them out.

Mess. Then take the worst in brief, Samson is dead.

Man. The worst indeed, O all my hope's defeated
To free him hence! but death who sets all free
Has paid his ransom now and full discharge.
What windy joy this day had I conceived
Hopeful of his Delivery, which now proves
Abortive as the firstborn bloom of spring
Nipt with the lagging rear of winters frost.
Yet e're I give the rains to grief, say first,
How died he? death to life is crown or shame.
All by him fell thou say, by whom fell he,
What glorious hand gave Samson his deaths wound?

Mess. Unwounded of his enemies he fell.

Man. Wearied with slaughter then or how? explain.

Mess. By his own hands.

Man. Self-violence? what cause
Brought him so soon at variance with himself
Among his foes?

Mess. Inevitable cause
At once both to destroy and be destroyed;
The Edifice where all were met to see him
Upon their heads and on his own he pulled.

Man. O lastly over-strong against thy self!
A dreadful way thou took'st to thy revenge.
More then anough we know; but while things yet
Are in confusion, give us if thou can,
Eyewitness of what first or last was done,
Relation more particular and distinct.

Mess. Occasions drew me early to this City,
And as the gates I entered with Sunrise,
The morning Trumpets Festival proclaimed
Through each high street: little I had dispatched
When all abroad was rumored that this day
Samson should be brought forth to show the people
Proof of his mighty strength in feats and games;
I sorrow'd at his captive state, but minded
Not to be absent at that spectacle.
The building was a spacious Theater
Half round on two main Pillars vaulted high,
With seats where all the Lords and each degree
Of sort, might sit in order to behold,
The other side was open, where the throng
On banks and scaffolds under Sky might stand;
I among these aloof obscurely stood.
The Feast and noon grew high, and Sacrifice
Had filled their hearts with mirth, high cheer, and wine,
When to their sports they turned. Immediately
Was Samson as a public servant brought,
In their state Livery clad; before him Pipes
And Timbre's, on each side went armed guards,
Both horse and foot before him and behind
Archers, and Slingers, Cataphracts and Spears.
At sight of him the people with a shout
Rifted the Air clamouring their god with praise,
Who had made their dreadful enemy their thrall.
He patient but undaunted where they led him,
Came to the place, and what was set before him
Which without help of eye, might be assayed,
To heave, pull, draw, or break, he still performed
All with incredible, stupendous force,
None daring to appear Antagonist.
At length for intermission sake they led him
Between the pillars; he his guide requested
(For so from such as nearer stood we heard)
As over-tir'd to let him lean a while
With both his arms on those two massy Pillars
That to the arched roof gave main support.
He unsuspitious led him; which when Samson
Felt in his arms, with head a while inclined,
And eyes fast fixed he stood, as one who prayed,
Or some great matter in his mind revolved.
At last with head erect thus cried aloud,
Hitherto, Lords, what your commands imposed
I have performed, as reason was, obeying,
Not without wonder or delight beheld.
Now of my own accord such other trial
I mean to show you of my strength, yet greater;
As with amaze shall strike all who behold.
This uttered, straining all his nerves he bowed,
As with the force of winds and waters pent,
When Mountains tremble, those two massy Pillars
With horrible convulsion to and fro,
He tugged, he shook, till down they came and drew
The whole roof after them, with burst of thunder
Upon the heads of all who sat beneath,
Lords, Ladies, Captains, Counselors, or Priests,
Their choice nobility and flower, not only
Of this but each Philistian City round
Met from all parts to solemnize this Feast.
Samson with these immixt, inevitably
Pulld down the same destruction on himself;
The vulgar only escaped who stood without.

Chor. O dearly-bought revenge, yet glorious!
Living or dying thou have fulfilled
The work for which thou wast foretold
To Israel, and now lie victorious
Among thy slain self-kill'd
Not willingly, but tangl'd in the fold,
Of dire necessity, whose law in death conjoined
Thee with thy slaughtered foes in number more
Then all thy life had slain before.

Semichor. While their hearts were jocund and sublime,
Drunk with Idolatry, drunk with Wine,
And fat regorg'd of Bulls and Goats,
Chaunting their Idol, and preferring
Before our living Dread who dwells
In Silo his bright Sanctuary:
Among them he a spirit of phrenzie sent,
Who hurt their minds,
And urged them on with mad desire
To call in have for their destroyer;
They only set on sport and play
Unweetingly importuned
Their own destruction to come speedy upon them.
So fond are mortal men
Fallen into wrath divine,
As their own ruin on themselves to invite,
Insensate left, or to sense reprobate,
And with blindness internal struck.

Semichor. But he though blind of sight,
Despised and thought extinguish't quite,
With inward eyes illuminated
His fiery virtue roused
From under ashes into sudden flame,
And as an evening Dragon came,
Assailant on the perched roosts,
And nests in order ranged
Of tame villatic Fowl; but as an Eagle
His cloudless thunder bolted on their heads.
So virtue given for lost,
Deprest, and overthrown, as seemed,
Like that self-begott'n bird
In the Arabian woods embost,
That no second knows nor third,
And lay e're while a Holocaust,
From out her ashie womb now teemed,
Revives, reflourishes, then vigorous most
When most unactive deemed,
And though her body die, her fame survives,
A secular bird ages of lives.

Man. Come, come, no time for lamentation now,
Nor much more cause, Samson has quit himself
Like Samson, and heroicly has finished
A life Heroic, on his Enemies
Fully revenged, has left them years of mourning,
And lamentation to the Sons of Caphtor
Through all Philistian bounds. To Israel
Honor has left, and freedom, let but them
Find courage to lay hold on this occasion,
To himself and Fathers house eternal fame;
And which is best and happiest yet, all this
With God not parted from him, as was feared,
But favoring and assisting to the end.
Nothing is here for tears, nothing to wail
Or knock the breast, no weakness, no contempt,
Dispraise, or blame, nothing but well and fair,
And what may quiet us in a death so noble.
Let us go find the body where it lies
Sok't in his enemies blood, and from the stream
With lavers pure and cleansing herbs wash off
The clotted gore. I with what speed the while
(Gaza is not in plight to say us nay)
Will send for all my kindred, all my friends
To fetch him hence and solemnly attend
With silent obsequie and funeral train
Home to his Fathers house: there will I build him
A Monument, and plant it round with shade
Of Laurel ever green, and branching Palm,
With all his Trophies hung, and Acts enrolled
In copious Legend, or sweet Lyric Song.
Thither shall all the valiant youth resort,
And from his memory inflame their breasts
To matchless valor, and adventures high:
The Virgins also shall on feastful days
Visit his Tomb with flowers, only bewailing
His lot unfortunate in nuptial choice,
From whence captivity and loss of eyes.

Chor. All is best, though we often doubt,
What the unsearchable dispose
Of highest wisdom brings about,
And ever best found in the close.
Often he seems to hide his face,
But unexpectedly returns
And to his faithful Champion has in place
Bore witness gloriously; whence Gaza mourns
And all that band them to resist
His uncontrollable intent,
His servants he with new acquist
Of true experience from this great event
With peace and consolation has dismissed,
And calm of mind all passion spent.

THE END.
Omissa.
Page 89 after verse 537. which ends, Not much to fear, insert these.

What if his eyesight (for to Isreal's God
Nothing is hard) by miracle restored,
He now be dealing dole among his foes,
And over heaps of slaughtered walk his way?

Man. That were a joy presumptuous to be thought.

Chor. Yet God has wrought things as incredible
For his people of old; what hinders now?

Man. He can I know, but doubt to think he will;
Yet Hope would fain subscribe, and tempts Belief.

After the next verse which begins, A little stay, insert this.

Chor. Of good or bad so great, of bad the sooner;
Then follows in order, For evil news, etc.

Errata in the former Poem.
PAge 4. verse 62. after being no stop, p. 13. verse 226. for destroy, r.
subdue, p. 21. v. 373. for demuring, r. demurring, p. 22. v. 400. for never, r.
nearer, p. 23. v. 407. for Imports, r. Imparts, p. 35. v. 127. after threat'ns,
insert then, p. 44. v. 313. for Thebes, r. Thebez, p. 46. v. 341. for pill'd,
r. pil'd, p. 47. v. 371. no comma after knowledge, but after works, p. 71. v.
323. for shower, r. showers, p. 83. v. 102. no stop after victor.

Errata in the latter Poem.
PAge 16. verse 127. for Irresistible, r. Irresistible, p. 17. v. 158. for
complained, r. complain, p. 21. v. 222. for mentioned, r. motion'd, p. 28. v.
255. before, such r. And, p. 43. v. 657. no stop at the end, p. 44. v. 661. for
to, r. with, p. 75. v. 259. for divulged, r. divulge, p. 78. v. 324. for race
r. rate, p. 79. v. 336. for Mimirs, r. Mimics, p. 90. v. 553. for heard r. here.


