Englands Caveat: OR Warning-piece.

Showing her Daughters estate and condition she lies in, for the present, As
also to rouse her out of her deadly slumber of a carnal and desperate
security: Together with the means of her recovery and preservation.

By Alexander Mingeis, Minister.

June 2. 1647.
Imprimatur.

Ja. Cranford.



LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, For the Author, and his Assigns. 1647.

Englands Caveat, OR Warning-peece.
ECCLES. 12.11. The words of the wise are as goods and as nails fastened by the
Masters of Assemblies, which are given from one Shepherd.


Hear Oh Virgin, Daughter of Zion, mart of the Nations, who say I sit as
a Queen, and shall know no sorrow, Rev. 18.7. When as destruction it at hand,
and misery (as a whirle wind) shall take thee away. Yea, pain shall come upon
thee, as the pains of a woman in travel. Thou say thou art rich, and
increased with goods, and have need of nothing, and see not how thou art
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. Rev. 3.17. Thy former
Prophets prophesied unto thee of corn, and wine and oil, Joel, 2.19. but I
have nothing to comfort thee withal, but the sword, famine, and pestilence.
And though they spoke true, yet would thou not believe them, but becamest
unthankful and vain in thy imaginations, and thy foolish heart was full of
darkness, To. 1.21. therefore judgment is sprung up into hemlock, and thou art
made bare and desolate. Yea, thou art returned with the dog unto the vomit, and
with the swine that was washed, to the wallowing in the mire of thy sins, and
in the sink of thine own ruin and perdition, 2 Pet. 2.22. Yea, thou have
multiplied thy transgressions yet seventimes more, and have been more vile then
the heathen.

Thou criest peace, peace, when as sudden calamity will overwholm thee, Jer.
6.14. Thou dwell careless and secure, and see not that the sword is at
hand; yea the Philistines are upon thee, O England, and thy casting down will
be in the midst of thee: for from within is murder, and slaughter and ruin,
thy destruction is of thy self, and perpetual desolations, if mercy prevent
not, and happy will he be, that takes thy children and dasheth them against
the stones, except thou repent. Make mourning therefore, for England, and take
up a lamentation for her, yea let the mourning women bewail her, as a woman
mourns for her first born or only begotten; or as Rachel for her children,
that would not be comforted because they were not Matt. 2.18.

Thou say, that the Earth is full of the knowledge of the Lord, Isa. 11.9.
and that God is with thee, that thou have the divine oracles, To. 3.2. yea and
that thou art the seed of Abraham, and boastest of the Temple, of the
Sanctuary, Jer. 7.4. and of reformation, when as there is nothing but deformity
in thee, and all things are turned into disorder and confusion.

Is not unity the bond of peace and perfectness Ephesians. 4.3. and the
establishment of all estates and kingdoms, and yet how little thereof is there
to be found in thee? For is not the father against the son, and the son
against the father, is not the head against the members, and the members
against the head? Is not the Presbyterian against the Independent, and the
Independent against the Presbyterian? Is not the Brownist against the
Anabaptist, and the Anabaptist against the Brownist? Is not the Libertine
against the Familist, and the Familist against the Libertine? Nay, is not one
Christan brother against another? so that the whole world seems to be out of
frame, and the foundations of the earth are shaken, yea, and the veil of our
temple is rent, from the top to the bottom, Mat. 27.51. Christ is dead and
torn in pieces among us, and we have crucified the Lord of glory, 1. Cor. 7.8.
and put him to an open shame. We are fallen into the hands of thieves, and
left for half dead; O good Samaritan heal us, and have compassion on us! Is
not the whole head sick, and the whole heart faint? Isa. 1.5 yea, from the
sole of the foot unto the crown of the head, there is no soundness in us, but
we are full of wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores, we have not been
closed, neither bound up, neither mollified with ointment. Is not our Country
desolate, our Cities are burnt with fire, have not strangers devoured our land
in our presence, and are we not desolate as overthrown by strangers? Are we
not left as a cottage in a vineyard, and as a lodge in a garden of cucumbers,
and as a besieged city? Verily, except the Lord of Hosts had left us a small
remnant, we should have been as Sodom, and we should have been like to
Gomorrah. Are not our goods according to the number of our cities, nay
according to our tribes, and families, so that so many heads, so many several
sects and opinions? Is not Christ divided, and seems not Paul 1. Cor. 1.13. to
be crucified among us, while as Christ's precepts are neglected, and Paul's
Epistles abused? and while as some preach Christ of envy, and for filthy
lucres sake, and some of good will, and out of a good conscience. Nay, has not
Baal as many false prophets among us, as Christ has true Ministers? and do not
many run before they are sent? the lowest and meanest of the people (to the
dishonor of God, and scandal of the Nation) thrusting themselves in to be
Priests, to serve Christ at his Altar, while as Christ is neglected and
persecuted in his poor saints and members.

O England, look about thee! and see, whether these be not the deadly and
dangerous symptoms of an angry and offended God, and of thine approaching ruin
and desolation. Yea, and that which is worse, thou have false reachers in the
midst of thee, which bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that
bought them, and bring upon themselves swift damnation, 2. Pet. 2.1. Thou have
justified all Nations in their sinful courses and abominable idolatries; for
thy blasphemies are gone up unto heaven, and in them thou have exceeded all
people. The Jews do only deny Christ but thou have them which not only deny
him, but also blasphemously use him and persecute him, cursing the time that
ever they knew him, his word or sacraments; holding the divine truth to be but
a fable, and a dead letter, and that all the means to grace and salvation, is
but needless and unprofitable; that stocks and stones are God, and that God
is in them. The Gentiles called Christ, the crucified God, but they never said
that he was weak and unperfect, in charging him with folly and ignorance.
[Because some have affirmed that Christ did more hurt in teaching the Lords
Prayer, and saving the Thief upon the Cross, then ever he did good in all his
life.] The Jews called him a glutton, a wine-bibber, and a friend of publicans
and sinners, and we do little less. The Turks grant him to be the great
Prophet, and Messiah that should come into the world, only they deny him to
be the Son of God: there be among us, that deny that ever there was any
such thing as a Christ in the world; and foam that confess him, but hold him
to be no better then illegitimate, and a sinner. Yea, and that which is worst
of all, this has been and is maintained with a high hand, as if God did not
see, and as if the Almighty regarded it not. For this our Land mourns, and
bleeds even unto the death. Nay, the cry thereof is gone up even unto the
heaven, and has entered into the ears of the Lord, pleading for vengeance.

Repent therefore, O England, and do the first works, lest God remove the
light of his countenance, and candlestick from thee, Rev. 2.5. and give thee
thy portion with them that shall be without; even with dogs and forcerers, and
whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and whatsoever loves, or makes a
lie.

Thou have much teaching, and great is the company of Preachers, whereof some
set forth Christ syncerely, powerfully and plainly: but where is thy
conversion, or turning unto the Lord? Does not pride, malice; cruelty,
oppression, covetousness, hypocrisy, profaneness, contempt of Gods
ordinances, unprofitablenesse under the means, unthankfulness for mercies
received, self love, hardness of heart, wilful ignorance, and carnal
security, reign as much in thee as ever it did? Does it not sound as loud,
yea louder, in the ears of the Lord, then ever it did, and yet will thou say
that thou art reformed, that thou art a people beloved of God, and dwell
under the shadow of the Almighty? Will thou say, that thou art Gods choice
vine, and do thou bring forth nothing but the grapes of Sodom, and the
vintage of Gomorrah? Do thou profess Christ in word, and deny him in deed?
Is not Religion derided, and faith and a good conscience made shipwreck of?
Do thou not hear, O England, the bleating of Saul's sheep, and the lowing of
his oxen, 1. Sam. 15.14. Do thou not* see, that judgment is waxen ripe, and
how that vengeance is laid to the line, and how the Almighty is watching over
thee, for evil, and not for good; yet notwithstanding all this, will thou
promise thy self peace in the midst of war? What peace (think thou) can
there be to Ioram, so long as the whoredoms of his mother Iezabel, and her
witchcrafts are so many, 2. King. 9.22. There is no peace (says my God) unto
the wicked, Isa. 48.22. Wherefore let my counsel be acceptable to thee, (O
England) to break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquity, by
showing mercy to the poor, if it may be a lengthning of thy tranquillity Dan.
4.27. Let righteousness flow down as a stream, and true judgment as a strong
water course. Seek peace and ensue it. Let the Kings throne be established in
judgment and equity, but let it be thy chiefest care to advance Christ, in
his throne and kingdom: for if thou advance him, he will honor thee, and they
that regard him not shall be but lightly esteemed. Let Religion and the power
of godliness be established, and look up on the blubberd and bedewed cheeks
of thy spiritual mother the Church, for it is only she that by profession has
brought thee forth a Christian: O grieve her not, nor see her sit any longer in
the dust, to bewail her rents and schisms, in the discord of her children.
Repair her beauty by bringing in good order and discipline, and let them even
be cut off that trouble her, and the peace of this our Zion. Prepare to meet
thy God, O England, for he is ready to take vengeance, upon all disobedient and
unbeleeving children. And, Kiss the son lest he be angry, and thou perish
from the way, if his wrath be kindled but a little, blessed are all they that
put their trust in him, Psalm. 2.12. The which that we may all do, God grant us
his grace, love, fear, and unity of heart, for Christ's sake, Amen.

FINIS.

