MILTONS REPUBLICAN-LETTERS OR A Collection of such as were written by Command
of the LATE COMMONWEALTH OF ENGLAND; from the Year 1648. to the Year 1659.

Originally writ by the learned JOHN MILTON, Seecrtary to those times, and now
translated into English, by a Wel-wisher of Englands honor.

Printed in the Year 1682.

Courteous Reader
WHEN these following Letters came first to my hand in Latin, I began to
question with myself whether the usurpatious proceedings of their authors had
not rather fitted them for the fire, then reading. But considering that
whatever their proceedings, previous to their obteining the Government, might
be, that, when obtein'd, the support thereof obliged them to consult the
inclinations of the people, and square their actions by the most honorable of
their humors: I adventured, and in their peruseall found the true Spirit of
the English Nation so livelyly displayed, that I was not only glad I was
swayed to their reading, but Resolved for the common benefit of my Country, to
translate them into English; that they might see how Zealous our predecessors
have been in ascertaining and maintaining the liberty and property both of the
Civil, and religious Rights, not only of themselves, but also their Allies
and Confederates, whenever invaded, though by the most potent of their
Enemies. And of what necessity they then found a protestaut Union to be, may
easily be guest at by their continued Cares and endeavors for the obteining
and strengthening the same both at home and abroad. And in what degree of
honor our Nation must then have stood, when their Resolutions were a Balance
to the actions of Europe? Nor will it be unworthy of Consideration, that so
far was the french King then from dareing to offer such violence to his
Protestant Subjects, as of Late he has, that he, at our Desire, became
Mediator with the Duke of Savoy, on behalse of his; Whom that Prince for their
close adherence to the Reformed Religion has so barbarou^y butchered. Et
Readily Disclaim^d the a^ions of such of his Forces as were Co-acters in that
Cruelty as done without his consent or privity. Neither rested he ^ere* but
uudertooke with that Prince for the future fidelity and obedience to Government
of those persecuted people.

Now, that the consider aeion of these things may stir up ^ Zeal in every
individual Englishman, to be, so far as in his station he legally may, an
augmentor or at least a Pre^erver of those Libertyes, Privileges, and honors,
which our vvorthily Ren^ned Predecessors transmitted to (...), Not only to
secure us in a happy enjoyment of our Lives and propertyes; but also in Trust
for the Generations unborn. And in what dishonerable Characters those our
Posteritys will be enforced to write our memory, if we prove so faithless in
our Trust* as to leave them only ^ bare Report of* what our Progenitors have
purchased for us and them, and, to their irrepairable vvrong, and our
Everlasting Infamy, ^ave imbezilled; is that which no true English ^eart, ^ut
must tremble at the very thought of.

Fare well.
LETTERS From the COMMONWEALTH of ENGLAND, To foreign Princes, etc.
The Parliament, and People of England, to the most Noble Senate, and
Corporation of Hamburgh greeting.
WE do unanimously acknowledge the antiquity of, and shall be (...) willing
also to revive the Correspondence, which has been, upon several good
inducement^, erected and established by our Praedecessours, and to this day
continued between this Government, and your most noble Corporation. And having
by yours of the 25. of June understood of some alteration in the comportment of
some of our people, who do not, it seems, behave themselves with that
punctualyty and integrity they formerly did among you, we did immediately
thereupon truly consult with some Persons of judgment in the point* whom we
charged to inquire, narrowly among the Clothiers and the rest of the people
concerned in that manufacture; assureing you withal, our further car^ such to
be, as may render you sensible of all our genuine inclination and affection
toward you. But some thing also there appears, which not only we, but equity
and ^ason it self calls for from you, and that is, that some care, Suitable to
the dignity of your City, be taken of the security of the Privileges, Lives,
and ^ortunes of such of our Merchants as are present Liver^ a^ong you. Which as
it has been the main purport of our former letters, so the d^yly complaints
broug^t us on behalf of the said Merchants and Estates; (all at stake) render
it necessary, that this repetition of the said Letter of ours, be looked upon
as comeing with suitable earnestness: For albeit they seem to own the Recept
of some Ease, (as to time) from our former interposition on their behalf; and
a proportionable Breathing from the offensive villainy of their Enemies, yet,
since the arriv^le of Cochrane (of whom our former complaints made mention) who
pretends I know not what of an Embassy from Charles the Son of the late
decea^ed King, they seem to complain of the want of that protection, which
they were formerly won^ to receive, upon demand made t^erof against some late
indecencies, and mortal assaul^s made upon them. And that to such adegree that
when one or more of the said Merchants, together with the Governor of the
Company himself, were, by fraud, seduced on board a certain Privateer and
thereupon applying to you for relief, they were deyed, so that the Merchants
themselves were by force of arms constrained (not without hasard of their
lives) to rescue their friends from out of the hands of their Enemies, and that
at your very door. Whom when by good fortune they brought home, and as if it
were r^cued from slavery through mere strength, and delivered the Pira^s also
into custody, ^uch has been the insolent p^oceedings of that vagabonde and
Rebel Cochrane* we understand, as to require not only the discharge of the
said Rovers, but the surrender of the said Merchants as his Prisoners. We
therefore with all earnestness pray and desire, that if you are such as you
^eeme to be, inclinable to the inviolable support of those contracts,
alliances, and commerce for along time observed be^ween us, our people may be
at some certainty to be at length relied upon, in your faith, prudence, and
authority, and that in Order thereto you he prevailed with to assign them
afair hearing in reference as well to Cochrane and Party concerned in this
fact, as such also as were concerned in the yet un-accounted for affront
tendered the Curate, whom we exp^ct you would see Right done unto; by exposeing
to prosecution, and seeing brought to condign punishment, those that abetted in
that assault, or expelling them your ^urisdiction* and do not think, that
people under their circumstances, and banished like Tarquins, are preferrable
to the amity and power of England. For if you do think fit to suffer our
Enemies to practice what they list upon our Merchants in your City, consider
among your selves how unsafeand dishonorable it may be for them to continne
an^ longer among you. All which we refer to your prudence and equity;
recommendnig your selves, in the mean time, to the divine Diety. Adieu.

Westminster dated August 10. 1649.

To the Senate of Hamburgh.
THE Experienxe which we have had of your integrity toward us, when our
affairs lay under a declineing condition, gives us an assuran^ of the
sincerity of your good will and affection to them now, at atime, when in a
thriveing One. The determination of the War, and the Defeat of our Enemies on
all hands, have been our inducements to judge nothing to be either more
equitable, or more conduceing to the establishment af a firm peace, and
settlement of public matters, then that those, who through Gods guidance, and our
means, have either attained to their liberty, or who by our Gift, and Grace,
have out of the Broils of a Civil man, their lives and fortunes ^ecured unto
them, shoud on their part, if required, and that in a Solemn manner too testify
unto us as their Governors a becomeing fealty and obedience; now espe^ally, at
a time, when so many turbulent Persons in enimity, and more then once taken
into favors still continue their restless and perfidious practice of
disturbing us both abroad, and at home, and sollicitting fresh Ones against us.
We have therefore caused a certain Form of an Oath to be ^ramed and expressly
be be sworn unto by all such, who are to bear either public office, or enjoy
the benefit of our Laws; such as peace, Tranquillity, or other the effects of a
peaceable Being. Our care herein has likewise extended to the forreige
plantations, and where ever elce our Merchants reside abroad upon the account
of trade, in order to answer the convenience and necessity of secureing the
fealty and allegiance of those whom we Govern Which heightens our admiration,
when we reflect upon some tideings sent us from some of our Merchants liveing
at Hamburgh, who write of theirbeing interrupted by some among you in their due
obedience to our Commandment. The States of Holland a truly thinking, politic
people in their Go^ernment of aff^ires, have judged it no way concerning them,
(...) strangers; namely, English obeyed their Magistrates at home in this or
that Method; And for you to act contrarily is, we confess, a point we cannot
get over. But it is not a charge which we impute to you, but rather reckon it
as the ^ffect either of a privatc design or fear of some who are reported to
have been scared away from their al^egiance unto us, by the insolent useage of
some wandering and banished Scotchmeu. We^ do in the mean time pray and desire
(not on behalf of Trade so much as that of the Commonwealth) that you ^ill
suffer none among you, here^n concerned, to interfere under, any pretense
whatever, or meddle with the exercise of our Gove^ment over our people, as
being an intrinsic Jurisdiction of our own without deferrence to any
foreign power or authority whateve^. For w^o among yourselves would not
resent any practice tending to the alienation of the allegiance of your people?
Adieu.

Dated January 4. 16^.

To the King of Spain.
ANThony Ascan, a man of Justice, Learning, and splendid family comes to your
Majesty in our name upon a message tending, we hope, to the mutnall and common
profit as well of Spain as this nation. We therefore desire that, as we are
sincerely disposed to return a suitable acknowledgment npon occasion, you will
according to custom vouchsafe him a fair, and peaceable admission to, and
Retreat from year Court: But if otherwise inclined, to order him a speedy
intimation thereof, with liberty to repair with safety where he shall think
fit.

Dated Eebruary the 4. 1649.

Ditto.
YOUR Majesty, nor any elce, who have Inpartially pereused our public Edicts
concerning this matter, can pretend ignorance of the present State of our
affairs, and how we were necessitated to shake off oppression by taking up
Arms, rescuing our Liberty, and establishing the Form of Government which we
now exercise. We truly look upon it as an easy task to justify our
proceedings to all the world, in referrence to our allegiance, equity and
patience, nor ought we to under go the harsh Censures of any that are
competent Judges, for asserting our own, and the Guard of our Authority,
honor and dignity against the scandalous and infamous Barking of banished
Wanderers. Now that which more particularly concerns the Intrest of foreign
Nations is this; our Enemies are dissipated and quelled, and we thereby, through
Gods assistance, arived at a wonderful deliverance, and therefore do publicly
and genuinly declare our readynesse to embrace and enter into an alliance
athing preferrable to all (controwle, with our Neighbors: And previous thereto
have deputed unto your Majesty Anthony Ascane a Person of known prudence and
Integrity, in order to his treating with your Majesty on behalf of the usual
alliance and correspondence between both Nations, or of entering into a new one
if need be; Who we pray may have free access to your Majesty, and such furt^er
provision made for his safety and honor as is fitting, dureing the time of his
abode with you under that character; Together with liberty freely, to make
knownsuch matters as he has in command from us to communicate to your Maj. for
that they tend, we hope, to the mutual benefitof both Nations, Enableing him
to return unto us the result of your sense of his said Errand.

Dated at Westminster February 4. 1649.

Ditto.
YOUR Majesty has ere this we presume, understood from what we have already
publicky exposed, the sundry mischiefs conveyed unto us from an unfaithful
peace, and the civil war that followed it; the low condition which we were
brought under of suffering the commonwealth either to sink under its own
burden, or altering, and that in a considerable degree, the Form of the
Government. To which public Declarations if there be more weight applied, or
credit given, as of right there ought to be, then to the most insolent
calumnies of needy people, verily those persons who judge very uncharitably of
our affairs abroad, might depend upon far more moderate useage from ns. For
to tax what ever we cheerfully contended for, in imitation of our ancessours
pnrsuant to our own Right, and the national liberty of England censeriously,
argues ill breeding. But uow in referrence to matters of community with other
Nations, it is not our purpose to lessen, but rather promote and ratify all we
can the alliance, and commerce usually observed by England with all other
Nations what ever. And in as much as our Trade with your Kingdom may be
considerable and suitably profitable to both, all becomeing care imaginable
shall be by us taken to prevent the same's being impeded, or any way
prejudiced. But yet all these our promises are but wast paper, while Pirates,
and our Revolters are tolerated to lay violent hands upon, carry in into your
Ports, and, as it is reported, expose to public sale at Lisbonemarket, our
Merchant men and Goods loaded thereon. To your timely prevention of which
practice, and to the end our desireof an alliance may appear more visible, we
have sent your Majesty Charles Vane a very noble Gentleman under the figure of
our Ambassador with Comands and Credential letters testifiing our said Trust
committed to his Care. And do therefore pray that your Maj. may be pleased to
admit and hear him Courteously, and make all becomeing provision for his honor
and safety through out the extent of your Empire. All which shall be kindly
acknowledged by us from whom your Majesty may depend upon suitable returns
when occasion shall seem to call for it.

Dated at Westminster February 4. 1642.

To the King of Spain.
DAILY almost, and most lamentable complaints are brought us against certain
Masters and Pilots, who being English men, and revolting from us the last year,
carrying away villanously and treacherously, ships committed to their care as
Masters, at length went off from that part in Ireland where they were all last
sumer besieged, and have scarce escaped the reproof due to their wickedness,
but they betake themselves to the port of Lisbone planting themselves at the
mouth of the River. Tagi, where they exercise without control, piracy upon all
Eng^ish Merchant men tradeing to and again thither infesting; and renderiug
infamous by Robbers all the neighboring, as well as the sea berdering upon the
streights of Gibraeltaer. To the speedy prevention and removeall of which
practice if there be not some sudden remedy applied, who cannot but discern
the drooping decay of the great Trade now carried on between us and Portugal,
and which intrinsically consist of vast advantage to both Nations. We
therefore again and again pray, that you will forthwith Issue your commands for
the speedy suppressing of our said Revolters, and Rebels, causeing them to be
with all imaginlble speed rooted out and banished the Confines of Portugal;
And if in case there be any false, conterfeited Ambassador resideing there
from Charles Stuart, you vouchafe him no hearing, or take any other notice of
him, but rather look upon us as those to whom the Government of England is,
through Gods decree, descended, and that you would, not Suffer the River and port
of Lisbone to be blockt up against a people who reckon the Intrest of England
and that of their yours as One.


To the King of Spain.
YOUR Majesty's, and Don Alphonso de Codenas your Ambassadors Letters have
demonstrated the quality and degree of your Majesty's resentment of the most
wicked murder of our Ambassador Anthony Ascane, and what has been hitherto
done, toward the punishment of those that are suspected to have had a hand in
his death. Yet when we seriously consider upon that act, and that it removes
and ^estroyes the very foundation of entering into, or manteining a
correspondence, when the Right of Ambassadors (most sacred among all Nations.)
shall be found to suffer so great an affront, we cannot decline the repeating
our instant Pressures unto your Majesty for due and speedy punishment to be
exercised upon those Parricides, and that your will not suffer justice to be
further suspended through any deferrence to, or Restraint of Religion. And albeit
we very much admire the friendship of a most potent Prince, yet we reckon it a
breach of our duty to spare any endeavors tending to the reduceing to just
acknowledgment, the Authors of so great a Villainy

We kindly thank your Majesty for that kindness which it has commanded to be
shown our people in the Ports of Spain, and the great signification of your
affection, received by the conveyance of your Ambassador; nor will it be less
pleasant unto us to meet with an opportunity that may furnish us with a
capacity of making you suitable returns. But if justice be further resoited
(as we have for a long time sollicitted that it shoud not) we cannot apprehend
any foundation to e^ect a sincere and dureing alliauce upon, toward the
support of which t^ere shall not be however any honest occasion slipped on our
parts, and are of opinion that the presence of an Ambassador from you here,
may not contribute a little thereto.


To the Spanish Ambassador
THE Council of State have as soon ever as the other more weighty affairs of
the Nation coud permit them, presented the Parliament with the four memorialls,
which your Excellency gave in thereto upon the 21. of December last, and in
answer to the first paragraph thereof relateing to the wicked Murder of Mr
Ascane their late Ambassador are commanded to offer the following reply; viz.

That the Parliament having so long, so often, and so justly called for
Justice against the said persons, judge it an act of superfluity to add any
further solicitation thereto, especially when as your Excelleu^y well
observed, his Majesty's own honor was so much concerned to do it without
importunity; and ^thing which, if not complied with, will certainly defeat the
foundation upon which humane society is erected. Nor can it be truly
underastood by any argument borrowed from Religion, why innocent blood, basely
drawn, ought not to be vindicated. Therefore the Parliament seems earnestly
to require, and no less to depend upon an effectual compliance with their
former Demands in referrence to a through satisfaction to be given for the loss
of their subject.


To the most serene Prince LEOPOLD, Arch Duke of Austria, Praesident to King
PHILIP in Flanders.
WHEN we were, not without great Clamor, made acquainted with the stealth of
Jeane Puccheringam a maiden Gentlewoman of good extraction, plentiful fortune,
and an heiresse, who yet under age, and consequently the care of a Guardian,
has been seized upon, not far from the place of her habitation at Greenwich,
forced on board a vessel ready at hand for that purpose, and suddenly hurried
away out of the hands and embraces of her friends, by the contrivance of one
Walsh, who since used indirect means; such as the Terror of death etc. to
freight the wealthy girl into a marriage with hm; We did immediately thereupon,
previous to the stopping the success of a villainy fo cruel and un heard of,
direct some persons to apply to the Governors of Newport and Oostend (to one
of which two places she was reported to have been Snatched) on behalf of her
freedom out of the hands of her Ravishers, who both acted suitable to persons
of singular integrity, and upright dealings to wards the relief of the poor
captive thus felloniously hurried from home; But she is, to escape (in the mean
time) the violence of these villans, retreating unto a Nunnery as a sequestered
person, the said Walsh, to force her thence, brings his action at Law in the
spiritual Court at Ipre where in his declaration, he lays his claine to her by
Contract of Marriage. Now in regard the Thief, and the Heiresse are both our
people, and that it, by good evidence, appears, that this outrage has been
commmitted within our Dominion; and withal that the considerable Bait, being
the Estate, which he mainly and originally gaped at, lies under our
Jurisdiction; as also that the cognizance of the whole cause, and consequently
it is Judgment does in our opinion, properly belong to us alone; Let him repair
hither with his claim, let him comence his Suit here, and make out the right
he pretends unto her being his wife. This brings your Excellency in the mean
time, an earnest Repetittion of what has been already very often pressed by our
Envoy at Brussells, that the afflicted and forlorn maiden, the honesty of her
exactation, the surreptitious method wherein she was conveyed from out of her
Country by theft, be prevalent Inducements to you to take care of her being in
safety permitted to repair home. Which, not onelywe, (who if there be occasion
for it, shall make a suitably ready expression of our aknowledgments, but even
humanity and modesty it self, which ought to influence the disposition of all
good and valiant men and engage them in the de^nc of the honor and chastity of
her sex, se^me, with united petition, to call for.

Dated at Westminster, March 28. 1650.

To the most Serene Prince, JOHN, the IV. King of Portugal.
THE consideration of your Majesty's honorable Reception of, and courteous
speedy audience allowed unto our Ambassador, has induced us to let you know
by the quick dispatch o^ this our second, that we accept thereof very kindly,
and that our purposes contain nothing more venerably to observe with deeds, as
well as words, then the inviolable support (without we be first provoked to
contrary dealings) of the peace, alliance, and commerce which we are engaged in
with several Nations, and which among the rest, have been for a long time
ratified between us, and Portugal. Nor has our fleet gone to the River Tagus
upon any other different Errand, then barely to chastise our Enemies, (who will
not be warned by the many Flights, which we so often already instructed them
with the experience of) and rescue such effects of ours, as, being by force and
Treachery taken away from our people, the Murrain of these Reb Ils has carried
into your Ports and especially Lisbone it self, where they vend the proceed of
their theft at open sale. But yet we are apt to believe that most of the peoole
of Portugal have, by their depraved behaviors, discovered what sort of
persons they are, how addicted to impudence, fury, and madness. The
consideration of which strenghtens our confidence and hopes so much the more,
of prevailing (in the first place) with your Majesty in favor of Edward
Popham, a very worthy Gentlemen, whom we have appointed Comander in chief of
this squadron; and sent for the overthrow of these Pirates; And that in the next
place you would treat them, and their Comanders not as persons worthy of
hospitality, but ^heeves, not merchants, but the Bane of thrade and Breakers of
National Laws, and consequently deny them admittance into, or shelter within
the pro ection of your Kingdom, but rather banish them the limitts thereof:
But if you should think fit to be otherwise inclinable, that then we may be at
liberty, to assault, r^duce, and, at our ^ngle charge, force them to thatdue
subjection from which they have Renegadoes, and Rogues like revolted. Which as
it has been the substance of our former pressing D^es, so this comes to your
Majesty as a repetition thereof, accompanied with no less fervency and
Earnestness. In which, be your compliance the effect either of Justice, or
complement, it will not only advance and add to the Glory of your j^stice in
all other well governed Nations of the world, but oblige us and more
particularly the people of England, before of no contrary disposition toward
the people of Portngall, and your family in amore especial manner.

Dated at Westminster Aprell 27. 1653.

To the City of Hamburgh.
LEtters have more then once interchangeably passed between us and you,
concerning differences ariseing between Merchants, and some other matters also,
which seemed more particularly to relate to, and touch the Dignity of our
Republicke. But in as much as we apprehend that such matters can be
scarcetransacted by letters alone, and understanding of the refort of certain
seditious Persons thither from Charles Stuart, whose Errands consist of nothing
so much, as to practice wickedness and insolence in order to the defeating and
^oly removeing the trade, which some of known affection to their Country drove
with your City. Wherefore having appointed Richard Bradshaw a very noble and
worthy Gentleman to go under the Character of our Envoy thither, to propose and
transact such matter at Large, as equally concern the joint advantage of both
Republics and that in pursuance of our Commssiion and subsequent Instructions
to him, we pray that you give him speedy, audience, and in all things, cause
such provision to be made for the honout and Credit of his Errand, as custo^e
has renderend practicable in all Nations to Persons of his Degree. Adieu.

Dated at Westminster April II. 1650.

To the Corporation of Hamburgh.
Most Noble, Magnificent and Worthy Gentlemen. Dear friend.
YOur Entertainment to our Resident, upon his arrival with you, under that
figure, has appeared so free, affectionate, and singular, that we own it as
such, and earnestly entreat your continuance of that inclination and
disposition toward Us. And that the rather, for that we are told, that those
under banishment hence, of whom our former letters took so much notice, do
daily more and more heighten in their Insolence among you, and that not only
in an instance of opprobrious language to our Envoy, but an open declaration of
some ill design to be practiced upon him. This therefore brings an earnest
repetition of our recommendation of his safety, and due honor to your Care.
And the sooner you reprove those new, as well as old villains, and murderers,
the more acccptable shall we reckon the act^on, and perform a Deed very much
consisting with your power and (...).

Dated at Westminster Mey 31. 1650.

To PHILIP the IIII. King of Spain.
WE are, to our great trouble, informed that Am honey Ascane lately deputed
hence to your Majesty as our Ambassador, and as such, very civilly and
publicly treated in his way thither, after having vanquished the hardships of
a dangerous and tedious journey, was upon his first Entry into your Royal
City, stripped of all protection, filthily set upon, and, with his Interpreter
John Baptista de Ripa, most basily murdered at a certain ^nn where he took
up his quartters, yet in as much as we apprehend that not only we our selves,
^ut your faith, and reputation also have been in this action stabbed, and
almost transfixt through his fides, we do with all imaginable earnestness pray
your Majesty, to see imme diat jus^ice executed upon such of the Murderers, as
are reported to have been already taken, and committed to prison, their
punishments ^roportioned to their guilt, and their abe^s and confederates (who
ever they be) exemplyed suitable to the quality of this crime, and as the (...)
calls for. Albeit w^ doudt not but that a King naturally pious and just, would
unsollicited, persorme nevertheless what we seem here to desire. Whereto what
we have to add, is to pray that the body be delivered to the receipt of his
Friends and relations in order to its transportationin to its own Country, and
our consulting a little, and provideing for the health of his survivers as we
shall think fit; till they, accompanid with an answer hereto give us, upon
their return if possible, an account of your piety and justice herein.

Westminster Dat. 28. January, 1650.

To His Excellency Don ANTONIO JOANNI LUDOVICO, Duke of Corda, Medina Celi,
Praesident of Andalitia. The Council of State constituted by the Authority of
the Parliament of England, Greeting.
THE Person entrusted with the command in chief of that fleet sent hence to
the Coast of Portugal to persecute, ^d recover the Damages sustein'd from our
enemies in those parts, has acquainted us with your Highness Friendship, upon
the fleets touching upon the Coast of Galicia, a place belonging to your
Jurisdiction, where thy were, he says, very courteously used, and furnished
with all manner of necessary supplies incident to the want of seamen. Which
kindness of yours, as it has always justly challenged our gratitude, so in a
more particular manner now, at a time when experience acquaints us with the
effects of some ill dispositions from abroad toward us un proveoked that we
know of. We therefore pray you, most Illustrious Sir, to be pleased not to
discontinue the same disposition, and affection toward us, and that as often
as any of our ships may for the future happen to touch at any place in the said
Coasts, they fail not of the same favor and help; Resting in the mean time
assured, that upon any opportunity occuring, and that may be improved to your
advantage and service, our Returns shall be suitable.

Dated at Westminster November 7. 1650. The Council-seale, affixed, and
countersigned By JOHN BRADSHAW, President.


To the Illustrious and Magnificent Senate of Switserland etc.
Magnificent and most Noble Sirs, most dear Friends,
WE have, by Letters from our Merchants tradeing for Prusia, received heavy
Complaints of an intolerable and inusual Tax; lately imposed upon them by a
decree enacted by the great Coudcil of Poland, who seem to have assessed them
in the Tenth part of their Estates, with a design of applying the same to the
support of our enemy the King of Scots. Which as it is an act standing indirect
opposition to the Laws of Nations to treat Merchants and sttangers after a
method of this Make, it is also as pregnant with injustice to force such to
contribute to the maintenance of one abroad, from whose Tyranny divine
providence has so lately delivered them at home, and consequently do not doubt
but that as we know you to be a free People, you will not abide, or give way to
the laying of such Impositions upon Persons whose correspondence and traffic
has for several years past been of no small advantage to your City. If
therefore you will protect them as Merchants and strangers, it is no less then
what we may undoubtedly expect, as being a thing becoming your justice, and
prudence, and no less suitable to the dignity of your splendid Corporation, and
what our endeavors shall render you sensible of our acknowledgment of, as
often as any of your People, or Ships, which often happens, shall need the
friendship of our Ports.

Dated at Westminster February 6. 1650.

To the Portugal-Envoy.
YOurs of the 15. current were delivered us at Hampton Court signifying your
being sent from the Crown of Portugal, with a message to the Representatives
of the Commonwealth of England, but take no notice under what Character;
whether of an Agent, Ambassador, Envoy, or what; which pray resolve us in, by
remitting us with as much speed as you can, Coppys of such Letters, and
Credentials as accompany you from your King; together with an account whether
you come with full power to repair such injuryes, and making Amends for such
Damages as your King has been the occasion of involving this Commonwealth in;
in protecting (all the last sumer) within your harbors our enemies, and Rebels
against the assault of our fleet while on the other hand, they were at liberty
to invade us. If you say that you come with full power and directions to answer
all these points, and that you send the aforesaid Coppies, care shall be
thereupon taken for your public, and safe access unto us who, when we peruse
the King's Letters, shall direct liberty to be given you of expounding the
Errand you are sent upon.


The Representatives of the Commonwealth of England, To the most Serene Prince,
D. FERDINANDO the second, Great Duke of Toskany.
MR Almerico Salvetti, your Resident here, has delivered us your Highnesse's
Letter, dated at Florence the 22. of Aprile, plainly showing the value your
Highness retains for the English Nation; confirmed by the account we have not
only from such of our Merchants as have for several years, lived as Traders i^
your Ports, but also young Gentlemen of our best Nobility, who have had the
experience of your Country either by traveling throw, or liveing there to
gain the education thereof. Which as it is a thing that cannot miss of ouf
grateful approveall, so we earnestly pray, that you do not withdraw, or
discontinue the like to such of our Merchants or other our Subjects, as may for
the future have occasion of traveling through your Highness's Dukedom: Assureing
you, that as far as it concerns the Parliament, nothing shall be wanting that
may conduce to the fortifying and establishing the commerce and mutual
affection with has (time out of mind) united both Nations, which we truly
desire and wish may be perpetually maintained with all true endeavors, and
mutual observance of both hands reciprocally.

Westminster 20. January 1651. Subscribed by William Lenthale, Speaker to the
House of Commons, whose Seal he fixed hereto.


The Parliament of England, to the Illustrious and Magnificent Senate of
Hamburgh.
Most magnificent, Noble, and worthy Gentlemen, dearest Friends,
THE Parliament of England, to evidence their great disposition to the
inviolable observance of the mutual correspondence and commerce anciently held
between England and your Corporation has lately deputed thither Richard
Bradshaw Esquire to reside with you under the Character of their Resident, who
among other t^ings relating thereto, has it in express commands from them to
demand Justice upon certain of your People, who made an attempt upon the Person
of the Minister belonging to the English Company there, with a design (we
understand) of murdering him, as also their Deputy, who had violent hands laid
upon, as well as some of the chiefest of the Merchants themselves, whom they
dared to offer the like affront unto, by spiritting them on board a certain
Privateer etc. And albeit the said Resident has upon his first Entrance, after
he had audience given him, made particular pressure to you relateing thereto,
pursuant to the Parliaments said comands, in order to the obtaining of Justice
upon these villains, yet when we found our selves dis^ppointed in our said
expectation, and likewise considering the danger which our Merchants, and
Estates should be always exposed unto, ^or want of a guard against the
restless malice of their Enemies, we have commanded him to represent a fresh
our sense of that affair: And that he should, in the name of this Commonwealth
solicit your taking care of the preservation o^ the amity and alliance
ratified between this Republic and your City, and the considerable Comerce
which intercedes between both, and with all to protect as well our Merchants
themselves, as their Privileges, without suffering them to be liable to any
violation what ever; and that in a particular degree in referrence to One
Garmet whose deportment to this Commonwealth has appeared very insolent, and
wh^, to the great dislquiet o^ our Merchants, and in contempt of this
Republic, has publicly cited certain Merchants of the English Company resi
^eing in your City, into the Chamher of Spire: Wherein we depend upon such
reparation, as may consist with equity and Justice.

All these Particulars, and if there be any thing further, that may affect the
^riendship now on foot betvveen this Repubblick and your City, we have
directed the said Resident to vvait upon you with: Whom we desire that you
give ample Credit unto in such things relating the reto as he shall propose.

Westwinster 12. March, 1651. Subscribed by the Speaker of the House, whose
(...) be fixed thereto.


To the most serene CHRISTIANA, Queen of Sweedland etc. the Parliament of
England, greeting.
THis comes to your Majesty with an account of our recept and peruseall of your
letters, dated the 26. of September last from Stokholme, directed to, and
delivered the Parliament of England by Peter Spiering Silvercroon: and to
intimate that we earnestly and cordially wish, that the alliance commerce, and
great traffic anciently observed between England and Sweedland be permanent,
and daily thrive, Nor do we doubt but that an Ambassador had come from your
Majesty furnished with full power of making such proposalls, as principally
tended to the mutual Intrest, and reputation of both Governments, and such as
we shoud very freely have received from him, and that should seem to imply more
particularly the health and profit of both, and who should have returned upon
the speedy accomplishment thereof: But it having pleased God* The c^iefe
Moderator of things, to remove that person out of this world (whose loss we
have as bitterly and sharply lamented, as consisted with our due deferrence to
the will of God* before he could have made known unto the Parliament the
message he came upon from your Majesty, the same has kept them hitherto from
the knowledge of your Majesty's mind, so that the further progress thereof
lies under present suspense; wherefore we have thought fit to let you know by
our Envoy expressly dismissed herewith to that purpose; what welcome your
Majesty Letters and public Minister may depend upon from the Parliament of
England, and how ambitious we are of your Majesty's ^riendshipp; as also what
weight we shall, as we ought, be found to lay upon the ^avour of so great a
Prince: And our regard to the augmentation of that commerce now in being
^etween this Government and your Majesty's shall appear to be such, as we ought
to retain in re errence to a point in it self every way valuable: and which,
for that very reason, shall be of ultimat acceptance to the Parliament of
England; in whose name, and pursuant to whoseauthority, first recommending your
Majesty to the protection of God, their speaker has fixed their seal and
counter signed this letters.

Dated at Westminster March Anno Domini 1651.

The Parliament of the Comonwealth of England.
To the Most serene and potent Prince, Philip the IV. King of Spain greeting.
GReat complaints have been made us from such of our people as exercise the
faculty of merchandizeing within your Majesty's Dominions, of great violence,
and injurious practices, and of proportionably new customs imposed upon them
by the magistrates and other officers of your respective ports and other places
where the* trade, and more particularly in the Canaery Islands; and that
contrary to the Articles wherein both Nations have engaged each ^ther for the
Support of Trade. The Truth of whick complaints they have by oath made appear,
and tell us, that if in case they are not justly treated, and their damages
repaired, as also their Persons and Estates secured against such oppressions
and affronts, they purpole to withdraw, and trade no longer into those places.
Which having seriously considering, and judgeing that the misbehaviours of
your Ministers, were not at all known, or represented to your Maj. otherwise
then as they really stood, They thought fit to transmit herewith their said
complaints to your Majesty, not questioning but that your Majesty may, out of
regard to Justice, as the incentive consideration of Trade, wherein your own
people's, as well as the advantage of ours, is equally involved, be pleased to
^ssue such directions to your officers, as may wean such vexatious practices,
and that the English Merchants have speedy Justice done them in consideration
of the damages sustained through the means of Mr Peter de Carillo de Gusman and
other persons, contrary to the said Articles, and that your Majesty may please
to order that the said Merchants receive the benefi^ of the said Articles, and
so to be retained in your Majesty's Ey, as that they in their persons and
estates be lyableto no future oppression what ever. This they think they may,
in a great measure attain unto, if your Majesty will grant them back again
that Charter which protected them in cases of this kind; Otherwise they may be,
for want of a due refuge from Injurys (...) to the discontinuance of that
comerce, which is of no small advantage to both through these kind of violations,
and encroachments upon the Articles of peace.


To the most Serene Prince the Duke of Venice. The Council of State
constituted by the Authority of the Common - wealth of England greeting.
JOhn Dickons, and John Throgmorton, with several others of our Merchants have
complained that having, pursuant to the constitution and Authority of our
Admirality Court, about the 28. of November 1651. Seized upon a quantity of
Camphire of about one handred Fatts on board a certain ship called the swallow,
under the Command of Isaac Tailor, then in the downs, but loaded thereon at a
place in Muscovy called the Archangel, obtein'd, according to Law, adecrre in
that Court*, directing the delivery of the said Goods to the receipt of the
said petitioners, upon Caution first entered into by them, of standing to the
award of the Court; that the said Court, by whom this matter was to be
determined, writ, according to Custom, to the Magistrates and Judges of
Venice, praying that John Perat a venetian; who pretended a propriety to the
said Good, would, by proxy appear in the admiralty Court of England where that
differrence depended, to prove the equity of his Claim. Yet the said Piatt and
one David Butt^ a dutch man have, while this quarrel lay under the debate of
our Court; exposed the said John Dickons, and the other Merchants to very much
trouble touching the propriety of the said Camphire, arresting their goods and
effects at Venice* the particulars of all which, and the sum of all the
proceedings hitherto acted in our Court, are in these Letters of request more
succinctly and largely contained; Which, after they were inspected into and
perused by us, we have thought fit to transmit to the most serene Rebublick of
Venice, presumeing that they might help the Merchants in this case, earnestly
praying that the said Letters carry not only their own force and weight, but
that the Merchants Goods thus arrested by ^he means of the said Pat^us and
David Rutts be discharged; and the said controversys remitted to the
determination of our Court, who are ready to decide by Law their Right to this
Camphire. In doing wh ch your Highness, and the most serene Republic will do
an act that in it self is principally just; worthy the untainted friendship of
both Republics, and finally that shall be recompensed by this Republic upon
any occasion that may offer of expressing their affection or good offices.

Dated at Whitehall Febr. 1652. Sealed and signed by the President of the
Council.


To the Spanish Ambassador.
Most excellent Sir,
THe Council of State having, in pursuance of a command from the Parliament
dated the 2. of March, taken into their serious considederation your
Excellency's memorial presented to a Committee of this board the 17. of
February, wherein your Excellency has thought fit to propose a demand of an
answer, to be before hand given to the two heads therein expressed: orderd your
Excellency the following reply.

That the Parliament, when they gave answer to such proposalls, as were made by
your Excellency upon your first audience, as also in the contents of the
letters sent the most serene King of Spain, declared at Large how grateful
and acceptable that friendships, and mutual comerce offered as well by the King
himself, as you in his name was, and finally how much he stood disposed on his
part toward the returning the like friendship and offices,

That Your Excellency, being afterward heard in Council, thought fit to
propose thereto on the 19. of December old Style, a kind of a project tending
to the fortifying of this alliance, whereof you having then made an offer; as
if certain of their board were appointed to receive, and debate such things as
your Excellency had to propose, and after deliberation had thereon, to report
their opinion of the advantage thereof forthwith to the Council, the matter
might receive no damage by it: They, did to gratify your said Proposalls,
nominate certain of their Number, to give your Excellency a meeting* who
having conv^n'd pursuant thereto, their said meeting, instead of what were
expected to be proposed, amounted to noe more then the purport of the aforsai'd
Memorial, to which the Council directed the subsequent answer.

That, considering the Parliaments declaration, when your Excellency is got
over the fere going progress, we are ready to give your Excellency a meeting
touching such Overtures as you shall have to make on behalf of the King your
Master, in referrence as well to the alliance already made, as a stricter to be
enter d into, or if there be any thing that may occur, or we judge to move on
behalf of this Republic. And when we come to particulars, our Reply shall be
meet, and consistent.

Whitehall March 21. 1652.

The Representatives of the Comonwealth of England, to the most Serene Prince
Frederick the 3. King of Denmark greeting
Most serene and potent King,
WE have by the conveyance of Henry Williamson Rosenwing of Lysaker a worthy
person received, and, suitable to the merit of their proposalls, freely perused
your Majesty's letters dated the 21. of December last from your Court at
Hasnia, and desire that your Majesty would rest assured, that we retain the
same disposition of mind, and the same affection to the continuance and
preservation of the ancient correspondence, comerce, and friendship for so many
years supported between England and Denmark, which we apprehend your Majesty
to do; knowing that albeit it has pleased God, in favor of the Peace, and
tranquillity of this Nation, to alter (we hope to abetter (the formerly
established Form of this Government, yet to continue imoveable the same
correspondence, maintain the same Intrest, and recover its former vigor, to
the mutual Trade and comerce, which have been the Results of former Contracts
and alliances between both Nations, and by improveing those alliances all that
may be to engage each other in an united and joint endeavor o^ perfecting and
strengthering daily more and more, that friendshipp, is what we understand to
be our advantage. And when it shall please your Majesty to pursue those
Counsels mentioned in your Royal Letters, the Parliament will, with all
alacrity, and sincerity, be ready to embrace them, and join all they can in
any other contribution that may conduce to the promotion of such a design, and
are therefore inclinable to believe your Majesty's resolutions in referrence to
this commonwealth to be such (it being also provided for in former contracts)
as may consistwi^h that willingness met with by your Majesty in us upon your
(...) proposal thereof. The Parliament in the mean time wish your Majesty and
subjects health and happiness*

Dated at Westminster April Anno Domini 1662. Signed and sealed by the speaker,
directed there to by Authority of Parliament.


The Representatives of the Comon-wealth of England, to the ^llustrious and
Noble Magistrates and Senators of the Hanseatick Cittys greeting.
THE Representatives of the Republic of England have received, and perused
your letters of the 16* of January last, and conform^ble to their Demands
admitted into audience Leo ab Aisem your public Minister who brought'em, and
withal represented the ^nclination and affection your people bear this
Republic, praying withal and soliciting the future inviolable continuance of
the ancient alliance now in being between us. The Parliament therefore do, for
themselves, (...) and assert it to be amost grateful thing to them to renew
and ratify that friendship and correspondence which have formerly interceded
between this Nation and those Co^porations, and their Readynesse upon all fit
occasions to evidence their promises in their Performances, expecting to be
treated with suitable faithfulness and integrity by those their ancient friends
and confederates.

As to the other Branches more particularly committed to, and urged by your
Resident, no sooner were the same transmitted unto, proposed, and debated
before the Council of State, but such an answer was resolved upon as seemed to
consist with equity and reason, And which your Resident himself may remit to
you, whose prudence and known integrity show how much he deserves the honor of
your present favor to him.

Dated at Westminster April Anno Domini 1652. Signed and sealed, pursuant to
the authority of Parliament, by the speaker.


The Representatives of the Comon-wealth of England, to the Illustrious and
noble Corporation of Hambroug greeting.
Most noble, renowned, and Worthy Gentlemen. Dearest Friends
THE Representatives of the comonwealth of England have received and perused
your Letters dated at Hambrough the ^5. of January last, brought them by a
noble Gentleman Mr Leo ab Aisem, who styles himself under the character of
yours, and the rest of the Hanseatique Cittys Resident, who has had audience
allowed him pursuant to the Import of the said letteas; and what he had further
in command on the particular behalf of your City, transmitted to ^he Council
of State, whom having directed to receive such proposalls as he had to offer,
and transact with him forthwithabout such thing as shoud consist with equity
and Justice treated with him since accordingly. And as the Parliament has
demonstrated the just regard that shoud be always had to such things as came
from you, and testified it is singular affection to your City in the appointment
of a Resident sent to reside there, so it cannot but depend upon, and justly
challenge a suitable return to such practicable proposalls as their said
Resident either already has, or which he may for the future make in their
name, to your City so long in amity and confederacy with us.

Westminster April 1652. Subscribed ut supra.


The Council of State, etc. To the most Serene Prince FERDINANDO the II. Great
Duke of Toskany greeting.
WHereas Charles Longland, Sollicitour for the English Merchants at Livorne,
having advised thence, that upon the arrival there of a fleet consisting of
about fourteen Sails of Dutch men of war, publicly declareing that the
Errand they came upon was to burn within your Port, or otherwise destroy such
English Ships as they found there, Your Highness was, upon application made on
behalf of the English, pleased to disappont the said Design, by recommending
them to the protection of your Governor there: The Council of State has
judgedit becoming her duty and office to observe unto Your Highness how
gratefully that kindness and protection so seasonably and courteously done the
English Merchants, is accepted of by the Republic of England; promising and
engageing unto Your Highness that the Memory of this good turn has made such
an impression, as is never to be forgot, and their Readiness to improve all
opportunities that may offer of effectually returning Your People the like
frindship and office and performing all other things that may conduce to the
support of the usual benevolence and commerce of this, and Your Nation. And
whereas the Dutch Fleet have, even while conferences of their own dictation
concerning an alliance were under debate; made perfidious attempts upon ours,
and that not only in our own harbors even (in which wicked attempt God, as a
most just Arbitrator, prevented their wickedness) but in foreign Ones also,
where they would take, or sink our Merchant Men* We have thought it necessary
to transmit unto Your Highness this Paper on behalf of the Parliament of
England; which some controversies lately arisen between this Government and
Holland; have occasioned the sending of. Whereby, how much the iniquity of that
people in their behavior to this Republic has been, and how void of regard to
all Justice, and the Law of Lands themselves, is what may be very obvious to
your Highness, and how studious the Parliament's endeavors have been to show
their Tenderness to the public peace; coud the former friendship, and society
of that people be any way continued.

Dated at Whitehall July 29. 1652. Signed and sealed by the President of the
Council


To the Spanish Embassadonr.
THE Council of State having considered the two Memorials exhibited thereto by
your Excellency; the one dated the 6. of June, or 27. May, and the other the 6*
or 16. current, return the following Answer to both; that the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England is very w^ll* disposed toward the continuance of that
Amity, and well constituted peace now in Existency between this Republic and
the King of Spaine's Royal Majesty, since Your Excellency has intimated that to
be the Bent of his said Majesti^ too, and that all imaginable Readiness should
be met with of improving the same to the common Good of both Nations. The
which, the Council of State has in the Name, and by the direction of the
Parliament so often demonstrated in their written replys to Your Excellency;
and particularly, in conformity to Your Excellencies desire, has appointed a
Comittee to give Your Excellency a meeting and receive such proposals as you
had to offer conduceing to the aforesaid End. Which meeting afterward has, in
liew of other expectations, produced some things Consisting in general Terms,
and as it were, previous to a future conference, which the Council believed the
Parliament had in former replies made plain its opinion concerning: Yet to
give further satisfaction, and to remove any doubt which Your Excellency may
pretend to remain under, concerning the particular Instances of the Overtures
you then made, the Councils Reply of the 31. March or 10. April, shows that
when all steps necessarily previous thereto, such as what Your Excellency had
to offer on behalf of his said Royal Majesty, in reference to the sormer, as
any other stricter alliance to be entered into on the one hand, as what we
should exhibit on behalf of this Republicke, were discoursed about and
determined, on the other hand, yea when all things were truly debated as they
ought to be, and that Your Excellency came to confer accordingly, they were
ready: To which Your Excellency made no reply, nor proceeded further in the
matter these almost two months past. And Your Excellencie's of the 27. May or
6. June 52. is the first that the Council heard of since that time, which
seems to signify no more then to desire that the Articles of peace and
alliance entered into by Charles the late King, and your Master, dated the 6.
or 16. of November 1630. might be reviewed, and such alterations made in the
heads thereof in reference to an addition to, or diminution therefrom, as the
frame of the government and time now altered should call for; which as it
amounted to no more, then what we, in our aforesaid Reply of the 10. Aprile or
31. March, fully and plainly signified: the Council did ere this expect some
application from Your Exc^llecy, with an account of those particular Articles
and alterations which you mention you would have made in the League,
considering that it is otherwise impossible for us to give any other Reply
different from what we have already done. But whereas Your Excellency seems,
by your late Memorial to lay the fault at our door, the Conncil therefore
resolved, and made a fresh inspection into your said Memorial of the 27. of May
or 6. of June and its contents, and thinks it has, in that former paper, fully
satisfied your Excellency. In addition whereto, can say no more then that when
your Excellency is at leisure to make known your desires of altering the
alliances now established, or proposeing such other Terms conduceing to the
accommodation of times, and affairs, as they now stand, and which you would, on
your part lay the foundation of an alliance upon; their answer thereupon shall
be such as they judge may consist with equity, and testify the Parliaments
inclination of persevering in the same sincerity of maintaining unstained, and
^irme, it is friendship wi^h the King your Master; and contributeing to any
other expedient, which becoming it, may tend to the prosperity of such an
alliance.

The Council does moreover judge it abranch of her duty to remind your
Excellency of our Memorial transmitted unto you under the 30. of January 1651
which being yet unanswerd, we continue still under instant expectations of the
Parliaments being satisfied in the contents of.


The Council of State's answer to a Reply of the most serene King of
Denmarke's Ambassadors extraordinary delivered to the Committee of Council,
in answer to a former One of the Councills concerning their fourteen Demands.
THe Council, previous to the satisfaction of the a foresaid Ambassadors, in
her answer to the fifth, sixth, seventh, eight and ninth Articles does assent
to the following paragraph's being added to the foot of their former answer:
that is to say; Besides those Colonys, Islands, ports and places under the
Government of either, whether it is by Law forbidd to resort upon the account
of Trade, or traffic, without his special license first obtein'd, to whose
Jurisdiction the said Colony, Island Ports, or places shall appertain. The
taking of any thing on board of a ship driven into the Rivers, Ports, or
havens of either party, shall not render such a ship etc. liable to any
molestation or search, as the said Ambassadors would, in their said Reply,
seem to have interpreted that of the Council to the eleaventh Article,
Saveing in places where such a Reception happens to fall contrary to the Laws,
Statutes, and Custom of the place wherein such a ship took Port. In which
case the Council does, think to have imposed nothing of hardship, but that is
equally conduceing to the welfare of both Republics.

As to the proof of the propriety of such ships, or Goods, as shall, by
shipwreck, happen to be driven on shore: it is the opinion of the Council
that, in such cases, Oath be taken in such Courts as either already are, or
hereafter may be erected for the hearing and determining such Cases, where,
such as may at any time lay claim to such Goods, may be distinctly heared, and
every one's Right known and determined; which by paper (commonly called
Certificates) cannot ^e so clearly and infallibly attained unto, whence a cloud
of scruples and Doubts may of times arise, as also cover a deal of fraud, and
deceit often creeping under such a kind of proof which concern both partys
equally to prevent. The Council is also of judgment that a certain time be
limited not to be exceeded without the forfeiture of such a claim, by persons
to bring their proof with in the extent of, of their propriety, and to be
excluded the benefit of the Court upon failing to make clear their Right within
the space of) to avoid endless Suites of Law.

As to a method of vending such goods found in the wrack, as are perishable,
the Council has also thought fit to propose that of (the Inch of Ca^dle) which
as it is a means very probable, so it is equally as expedient to secure the
O^ner a good price for his Goods; But if the aforesaid Ambassadors shall come
furnished with any other detected Expedient, that may be found more conduceing
to this end, the Council shall not withstand the promotion of what is
equitable, nor can it see how it may occasion any demurr to the dispatch of
this Treaty.

As to the forfeiture they are to be liable unto, that shall be found to
incroach upon the proposalls herein contained, the Council inserted the same
in their Reply to the fourteenth Article, to the rendering the said Article of
more efficacy, and the Treaty it self more durable and firm.

As for an answer to the last clause of the 14. Article, it is inconsistent
with our Judgment to give our assen to those alliances, and fraternity
mentioned in the said Replys and which are proposed in General Terms only,
till, by a further explanation, we see what they may mean. Which when Your
^xcellency is pleased to be plain with the Council in, we shall be able then
to be more particular on our part.


The Council of States Reply to the said Ambassadors Answer, given in Reply
to theirs to the 16. Articles exhibited by the Council in the name of the
Republic of England.
THE Council having perused the Letters Parents impowering the said Lords
Ambassadors to treat with the Parliament it self, or it is Deputies in
referrence to such matters as were expedient to be transacted toward the
renewing the ancient alliances, and adding new ones, did truly think, that the
said Lords Ambassadors came with such authority, as to have been able to
Answer, and transact all such things as should be proposed on behalf as well
of this Republic, as of the King of Denmark and Norway, and therefore did not
expect those Replies which the said Lords Ambassadors were pleased to give to
the Council's first, second, third and fifth Demand, which renders it
necessarily obvious to be pressed to the consideration of the present Treaty; as
a thing in it self most just, and accordingly determined in Council to
comprimise, and take in the whole, as well what concerns this Republic, as
the Kingdoms o^ Denmark and Norway. It is therefore the earnest Request of the
Council, that Your Excellencie's Answer to our said first, second, third, and
fifth Demand be made known.

As to the 4. Article concerning the Customs at Gl^kstadt, as Your
Excellencie's Answer intimated their being antiquated, the Council seems to
press that the same be expressly ratified in the Treaty, least they should be
hereafter revoaked.

As to the 6. Article about Pirates, the mutual advantage of both parties has
been the end of that Article, and to establish the repose of Trade in common
against the disquiet and interruption of Rogues and Thieves, and as the Lords
Ambassadors Reply to this Article was peculiarly applicable to the Enemy, and
therefore took no special notice of pirates: The Council therefore desires to
be expressly dealt which in that point.

And whereas the aforesaid Lords Ambassadors, in their Reply to the Council's
Answer, in reference more especially to their 10. Article took no notice of
the Council's Answer, the Council thought fit to add the following Article to
their former demands; That the People, and Inhabitants of the Commonwealth of
England, who held or exercised any Trade or Comerce with any of the Kingdoms,
Dominions, or Jurisdictions belonging in the Crown of Denmark and Norway;
should be liable to the Payment of no excess of Castome Tax, Toll, Tribute, or
any other Imposition what ever for the future, beyond what the Dutch, and all
other foreign Nations, exerciseing Trade, shall, or ought to pay, and to enjoy
with freedom, the same full Liberty, Privileges, and Imunities in their
comeing in, stay, as well as departure; as also their FishingTrade, and all
other circumstances what ever, equal, and in proportion with any other
strangers inhabiting the aforesaid Kingdoms or Empire of the said King of
Denmark and Norway; which Privileges the said King of Denmark's and Norway's
Subjects shall likewise enjoy throughout all the Provinces, and Jurisdictions
belonging to the Republic of England.


The Council of State, to the most Illustrious Prince, FERDINANDO the II Great
Duke of Toskany, Greeting.
Most Illustrious Prince, and dearest Friend,
CHarles Longland, Attorney for the English Factory at Livorne, as also Your
High: Resident here having comunicated unto us with what affection and
sincerity our Merchantmen were protected by Your Highness upon their repair
to Livorne, to escape the design of Dutch Rovers, who breathed nothing but
ruin and destruction against them, the Council of State's Letters dated the
31. of July last, and come to hand ere this we hope, have signified unto Your
Highness how grateful so seasonable a piece of kindness as that happened to be,
was to them, where by the same conveyance, they transmitted unto Your Highness
other Papers containing an account of the ground of the controversy now
depending between the Parliament of England and the States of Holland; And upon
such advise transmitted from the said Charles Longland, of your Highness's
further care bestowed upon the English, by warning the Dutch to supersede,
notwithstanding their industrious solicitation to the Country, the said
Council has taken the Liberty of signifying unto Your Highness by this
conveyance, that as your Justice and singular constancy in defending their
Ships calls for the height of their esteem, so it likewise does their
g^atitude. Which as it is no slight indication of your sound friendship, and
affection to this Republic, so Your Highness may rest Confident that upon any
occasion opportunely represented, our Returns shall lead your desires, and that
in a method becoming the respect and affection we ow you and yours, and that in
such a degree as may declare how much we make it our endeavor to render the
Alliance between this Government and Your Highnesses both constant and
permanent. We have in the mean time Issued our strict command to such of our
Ships, as may happen to call at your ports, that they fail not saluteing you
with a just Number of Canons, and paying you all other imaginable due respect.

Dated at Whitehal, September 2625. Subscribed by the Praesident of the
Council, whoseseale he fixed thereto.


TO ALPHONSO DE CARDENAS, the Spanish Ambassador.
Most Excellent Sir,
YOUR Excellencies Letter, dated the 5. or 15. November 1652, together with two
Petitions enclosed concerning the Ship commonly known by the Name of the Samson
and Salvador, were by Your Secretary upon the 8. Ditto, delivered unto, and
read in Council, who appointed the following Answer to both. That the said
Shipp fell in the English-man's ways super altum mare not in the Downs, as
Your Excellency seems to have understood it, where having set upon and seized
her as a Vessel belonging to the Enemy, brought her home, and proceeded
against her as a lawful prize in the Admiralty Court, to which alone the
cognizance of such cases is solely belonging, and where the pretenses of all
parties are audibly and freely debated, and lawfully determined. We have
moreover transmitted Your Excellencies Demand to the ^udges of the laid Court,
with directions requireing our being informed concerning what proceedings were
made toward the condemnation of the said Shipp. Which when we have
satisfaction given us in, such further care shall be taken therein, as is
consistent with Justice, and becomeing the friendship subsisting between this
Republic and Your King, relying upon a suitable confidence that his Royal
Majesty will not suffer himself to be made a Cloack of, to protect the goods
of our Enemies, or see us otherwise ba^led under the pretense of their owning
themselves his Subjects.

Subscribed by William Lenthal, President of the Council* whose Seal he caused
to be affixed thereto.
Dated at Whitehal, November 11, 1652.

To the Spanish Ambassador.
Most Noble Sir,
BAldid, a Comander of one of the Men of War belonging to this Commonwealth,
having lately advised the Council that being necessitated to put in at a place
commonly called by the name of Longone, to repair some damages susteind in a
Battle of two days constant continuance fought in the streights of Gibralter
against eleaven Dutch Men of War, having but three besides himself, and
furnish himself and Company with such further supplies as he wanted for fight,
the Governor of that place acquitted himself like a very just, and civil
Person toward both him and the rest of his Ships. And whereas the said place
lies within the King of Spain's Dominions, the Council reckons the singular
humanity of that Civility effectually demonstrated, to be the true and
plenti^ul Result of the strict alliance so fortunately established, and so
judge it an act becoming them to thank His Majesty for so seasonable a piece
of service, and desire Your Excellency to be pleased to signify the same
without loss of time to His most Serene Majesty, and to assure him of a
suitable Return of friendship and kindness upon any occasion that may offer.

Dated at Westminster, November the11. Anno Domini 1652. Signed and sealed by
William Masham, Praesident of the Council.


To the most Serene Prince FERDINAND the II. Duke of Great Toscany, the
Representa^ives of the Commonwealth of England greeting.
Most Serene Prince, and dearest Friend,
THe Representatives of the Commonwealth of England, have received Your
Highnesse's Letter, dated the 3. of August, from Florence, touching the
Restitution of a Vessel loaded with Rice, challenged by a Master belonging to
Livorns called Cardio, and albeit Sentence is already awarded in our Cour of
Admiralty against the said Cardio concerning that affair, and that the appeal
then hung before the Delegate, yet upon Your Highnesses interposition, the
Parliament, to show their opinion of the amity and friendship of so great a
Prince, commanded those that were entrusted with the management of that affair,
that that Vessel wit^ her loadeing of Rice, or an equivalent value (at least)
should be restored to the said Captain Cardeo, whose Correspondent has since
received the effect of the said Command accordingly: And as Your Highnesses
Protection to the English Merchants, and principally in the Port of Livorne,
has very much obliged the Parliament (of which Your Resident as well as Charles
Longland, Solicitor for the English Factor^ at Livorne, have given us an
account) so the Parliament is, on it is part, well disposed to the taking care,
that as often as there is occasion for it, no offices of sincere Friendship or
love toward Your Excellency shall need to be complained of. Comendig You in
the mean time fervently to the Tuition of Divine Providence.

Dated at Westminster November 1652. Subscribed b^ the Speaker of the House of
Commons, whose seal he caused to be affixed thereto.


The Representatives of the Republic of England. To the Most Serene and Porent
Prince the King of Denmark.
Most Serene and Po^ent King.
THE Comander in chief of the Fleet, la^ely ^ent hence to give Convoy
homewards to such of our Merchantmen as attended, to that purpose,, at the
Port of Hasnia having advised our Parliament, that upon his arrival thore, he
found an Embergo laid upon the departure of the said Mer^hant men, pursuant to
an order of Your Majesty's, comanding that none of them shoud be suffered to
budge, notwithstanding his having produced your Majesty's letters signifiing
your pleasure to the contrary, and demanding the reason of such detention. To
prevent therefore any ill consequences that may arise therefrom to either of
the Nations so palpably concerned, and which may be pursued by a worse, the
Parliament has directed Richard Bradshaw Esquire. a worthy Gentleman, of known
fidelity, and their Orator now at Hamburgh, to wait upon Your Majesty under the
same Character, with express commands directing him to discourse and treat
concerning that affair; Praying that Your Majesty would therefore please
courteously to listen unto, and allow him full credit in what ever he shall
propose unto Your Majesty in our Name r^lating to this affair; Whom we, in the
mean time, heartily recomend to the care and protection of God.

Dated at Westminster, November, 1652. Signed and sealed by the Speaker, in
pursuance of the Parliaments direction.


The Representatives of the Commonwealth of England, to the most Serene Duke of
Venice, greeting.
LAurence Paulet has delivered the Parliament Your Highness Letter, dated the
first of June 1652. which as it testifys the good disposition of Your Senate, as
well as Your Highnesses toward this Republic, so they on their parts, have
thought fit to make known by this occasion the respect and affection they
bearto the most Serene Commonwealth of Venice, and shall not grudge their
continueing so to do, and making no difference between their performances and
promises, as often as they are furnished with occasions that may enable them to
act suitably, and also cheerfully pursue such means, as may be employed
toward the support and improvement of the Amity and mutual comerce now
existent. wishing and praying, in the mean time, that all happiness and
prosperity may attend Your Highness and most S^rene Republic.

Dated at Westminster, December Anno Domini 1652. Signed and sealed by the
Speaker purs^ant to the command and authority of the Parliament.


The Representatives of the Commonwealth of England, to the most Serene Prince
Ferdinando the II. Great Duke of Toscany.
WHereas the Representatives of the Commonwealth of Englaud have, in former
^nstructions to their Sea Comanders, strictly charged them, upon their touching
at any Port within Your Highnesses Empire, to behave themselves peaceably,
modestly and suitable to that observance which Your Civilityes to this
Government justly call for from us, and to whose Kindnesses they cannot but
own themselves much obliged. Yet it proved matter of great Surprise to them to
find all forgot, in the comportment of one of their said Officers, named
Appleton, whose demeanor to the watch at Livorne is said to have been very
insolent, and that contrary as well to the allegiance wherein be is indebted to
this Republic, as well as the regard every Prince ought to have shown him
within his own Territories. Which the Parliament had an account of as it
happend, not onel from Your own Letters under the 7. and 9. of December last
from Florence, but more particularly from Master Almericus Salvetus Your
Resident ^ere, who is a very worthy Gentleman. Your Highnesses honor, which
seems to be involved in this matter, lies under that veneration with the
State, as that this matter is wholly and particularly recommended to the care
of the Council, with direction to write fortwith to Captain Appleton, for his
repaiting home by land, to answer the insolency of this unpresidented
misbehaviour of his (of which the enclosed is a Copy) who upon hi^ arrival,
shall be examined, and such punishment awarded him, as shall testify that we
are no less concerned, than if it were done in contempt of our own Government.

As concerning the Phoenix taken at ^vorne, Your Excellency and Resident seem to
say and urge, that the same was committed contrary to Appletons promise, who
was obliged to make no attempt upon the Dutch within sight of the Port or its
Lantborne: that Your E^cellency relying thereon, entered into the like
engagement to the D^ch, and that therefore they ought to depend upon
satisfaction for the damage susteind from their depending upon Your protection
and promise. The Parliament assure You, that as the same was committed without
their Council or advice, so it is a thing very distant from their inclination
and mind to expose Your Excellency to any manner of inconveniency, or
diminution of honor, upon the score of that Deed; Nay shall endeavor that
away be found out of making You such satis^ction. as shall seem suitable to
the demerit of the cause, after inquiry first made. To be more fully informed
wherein, they think it a very necessary point to have Appleton himself
examined before them, who was obliged by his promise, and consequently believed
by Your Excellency to have a betted (at least) in that violation; especially
considering that he is to return in so short a time, who, when ever he is
heard by the Parliament, and further debate had thereon with Your Orator,
shall have such sentence awarded him upon this so considerable a crime, as
shall consist with equity and the extraordinary affection which they bear Your
Excellency, and finally not unworthy Your Kindnesses. To confirm Your
Excellencies belief of which, they have directed this present messenger to be
forthwith dispatched away with these Letters, least they shoud be said to S^ip
any opportunity that may be improved into a real Testimony of their sincerety
toward You.

Dated at Westminster, 14. December Anno Domini 1652. By authority and Command
of Parliament signed, and sealed by the Speaker.


The Council of State, to the most Serene Prince Frederick Heir of Norway,
Duke of Slesvice, Alsace, Ha^mar, Ditmarse, Earl in Oldenburgh and Delmhorst
greeting.
Although it has been the Decree of the all knowing God, and most merciful Ruler
of the universe, to engage us, (beyond that duty sustained by, and transmitted
unto us from our Ancestors) in a most just quarrel, for the resuceing our
Liberty's from the oppression of Tyrany, and lend us such singnall Marks of his
divine help, and assistance, in preferrence to them, as to have enabled us not
only to lay the fury of a civil war, but destroy the future growth thereof,
as also withstand and repel the unexpected assaults of foreign Enemies.
Yetunder as sincere acknowledgments as we can be, of the favor and love of the
most high Diety toward us, we are not nevertheless so far transported with
the consideration of our prosperity, as, pursuant to the singular providence
and Justice of God, (which we have had a plentiful experience of) not rather
to declare all we can our averseness to war, and readiness to embrace a
willing peace with all people, then otherwise. Therefore as we our selves have
not hitherto nor leaded, nor promoted in others, the violation of such
friendship and Terms of alliances, as have formerly interceded between us,
and all foreign People and Princes whatever, so your Excellency may rest
assured, on behalf of your people, as well as your own, of all fair dealings
from us, pursuant to the ancient correspondence settled by your Ancestors with
the English. And as we are ready to return all due acknowledgments, for those
affectionate offices already bestowed by your Highness upon us, so our work
shall be to render you, and yours sensible of the want of none on our part:
Recomending the while, as much as may be, your Excellency to the omnipotenty,
and Diety of Almighty God.

Dated at Whitehall July Anno Domini 1653. Signed and sealed (ut supra) by the
President.


To the Earl of Oldenburgh.
Most Illustrious Sir.
THE Representatives of the Comonwealth of England have received your many
Salutes, very carefully and courteously comunicated by Harmanus Miles Your
Counselor, Deputy; and Solicitor, who in your name wished that all
happiness might attend England and it is Parliament, and solicited the
continuance of the friendship now in being between this Republic and you; as
also the grant of our letters of safe conduct, to the end your people might
trade the securer and navigate and exercise comerce; together with our comands,
to be transmitted to our public Ministers abroad, in order to their being
aiding with their councills and offices to you and yours. Which we have freely
assented unto, and granted as well what his demand was in referrece to an
alliance, as the other two, under the Parliaments seal: Albeit some months
are slipped, since our sirst receipt of your Ministers address unto us. Yet that
delay cannot be properly imputed to any difficulty of ours to assent to your
petition, nor neglect in your servant of pressing it (who to ^ave his
solicitations answered, and he dismissed master of his errand, behaved
himself dilligently, and with all pressure imaginable) it springing wholly
from the great and weighty concerns of the Republic, whose Transactions have
taken up most of this win^er. Which we thought fit to acquaint your most serene
Honor with, that none, by inter preting this demurr otherwise then as it is
occasioned, may take the liberty of saying that what the Parliament of England
has freely granted, might be said to have been extorted therefrom, in whose
name this was directed to be signed by.

HENRY SEOBELE, Cl. of the Parliament.


The Parliament of the Comonwealth of England to the Illustrious, and most
noble Counselors and States of the Cantons of Switzerland etc. greeting,
WE have, ( Illustrious, and dearest Friends) received yours Letter dated the
24 December. 1652 pregnant with all humanity, kindness and great assection
toward us and our Government; and which ought to sway more with us, breathing
brotherly and truly Christian Charity: And must be more particular in our
acknowledgments to the most good and great God, for that he has been pleased to
raise and secure, (as a most firm bulwark to the safety of the protestant
Intrest there) you, and your so many most noble Corporations, surrounded and
munified not so much by those muontains, with which you are impaled, as your
naturable Courage, Piety, Prudence, and most just administration of public
affairs; together with the mutual reputation of alliances: You afterward,
(who after the removeall of the Tirany of Barbarous Kings from the North, have
been almost the sirst of all Europe, who, God favoring your Enterprise,
purchased your Libertys, and mainteind it so purchased untainted, with no less
prudence and moderation, through the difficulty of so many years) to judge so
charitably of us, and our lately purchased liberty, and being such sencere
Admirers of the Gospel; to be so constant in your opinion of the love and
affection we bear to the Orthodox Faith, is a thing which we cannot but value at
a^ extraordinar rate. And as to the affection with vv^ich you solicit us to a
peace, we novvay question the sincerity thereof, but that it proceeds from
pi^ty and true affection; That intepposition ought to influence us very much,
as well for what it leads unto. (which is in it self ver^ desirable) as
the Authority, which in pref^ence to all others, is justly applicable to you,
who among all the Storms of war, blowing from every Corner, have main^aind
so long your peace abroad and at home, and were examples without exception,
and Persvvaders of peace to all other people; And because you Persuade that
which we endeavored more then once (not so much o^t of regard to our own,
as the Intrest of the protestants universally) and sollicitted by Embassys and
other public Ministers to effect, that is; to contract astrict alliance and
Friendship with the States General of the united Provinces. But they (or as
we ought to style them) that Orange Faction our perpetual enemies, addict^d to
the Royal party, and among their own club, of known affection to Tyranny,
how have they entertained our Ambassadors? not as people that came to
discourse of Peace, but brotherly kindness and most strict alliance, what
provocations have they given to a war afterward may plentifully appear from
what we publicly writ concerning it, and herewit^ transmit nnto you, of their
having, while their own Embass^dours were treating, surprised and Saulted our
ships with a fleet of theirs and that at a time, when ours lay in their
stations, without as much as imagining such a thing. But through Gods help such
has been our care hitherto, as that although matters happened to fall out so well,
yet we do not take the glory to our selves, our strength, or Number of hands,
but give all to God alone. Nor are we troubled with the least extraordinary
fit of Transportation upon the score of our prosperity; We are still the same
people and very ready to embrace all occasions of making a just and honorable
peace. In the mean time Illustrious and most noble Sirs, you who, under the
impulse of Evangelicall love, make it your pious and sincere endeavor to
reconcile, and compose brotherly misunderstandings, and who, wor^hy the esteem
of all mankind; entitle your selves doubtless to that Blessing awarded by the
divine Sentence of Gods decree to the peace makers, and to whose most lofty
affection and grace, we do most sincerely and heartily recommend you, if in any
thing our service can be of service to you, we are ready to show our selves not
as friends but Brethren.

Dated at Westminster October Anno 1653. Signed and sealed by the Speaker to
the House of Commons.


To the Spanish Ambassador.
Most Illustrious Sir,
UPon the receipt of a petition in the names of Philip Noel, John Goddall and
other Merchants belonging to Foy in England, heavily bemoaning that a ship of
theirs called the Ann of Foy of their own buildding in England, was about
Michaelmas last most injustly set upon, and seized by a certain privateer
belonging to Ostend commanded by Erasmus Bruerus, who in his way homewards
seized her loading, wholly belonging to the petitioners, and treated the
mariners unworthily and barbarously: The Council of State thereupon writ to
the Duke of Leda (a copy whereof comes herewith to your Excellency) and
expected that he would, according to justice and equity, make speedy inquiry
into that affair. But the said Noel, and the rest of the Petitioners renewing
their said heavy complaint, and urgeing, that although the said Duke had our
said letters delivered him, and that the said Merchants repaired since to
Bruges, where at the Admiralty Court they made proof of their cause and the
integrity of their Claim, but that Justice is nevertheless denied 'em, and
they exposed to so unjust use^ge; That albeit the case has stood ready for
determination any time these three months and more, yet coud not obtain the
sentence of that Court; but that their said shipp and goods are still
nevertheless under the same Restraint, and they themselves, from this delay of
Justice, exposed to considerable expenses in the prosecution of their Right.
Your Excellency is not ignorant of its being contrary to the Laws of Nations,
as well as the Terms of Trade and correspondence ^ow existent between the
English and Flanders, that any Osteender shoud offer to touch any English ship,
provided she be loaded with Euglish goods, and bound for England, and that the
said Captain's in^umane and barbarous useage of the Mariners ought to be
severly punished. The Council therefore recommends the case to your
consideration, and prays that you would write to Flanders about it, and
endeavor that speedy care be taken, that this business be no longer
prolonged, but that Justice be done: as that the said shipp and Goods, together
with the damages, expenses, and loss which the said English have susteind upon
the score of that injust interception, be by the Authority of the said maritime
Court of Brussels, or some other good manner, restored them, and provision made
against any such future interception, but that the correspondence now in being
betvveen England and France be supported without any Interruption.

Signed and sealed by the direction of the Council of State appointed by the
Parliament.


To the Duke of Lisle.
PHillip Noel, John Gad^ll, with several other Merchants belonging to the
Town of Foy having made large complaints unto us concerning a Ship of theirs
called the Ann of Foy, representing that the said Ship Anne built, and loaded
at their sole and peculiar cost and charges, was about Michaelmas last in her
way homewards, unawares set upon, and seized by one Erasmus Bruerus a Master
of a shipp belonging to Ostend. They moreover say, that the Osteenders, when
they got the vessel into their possession misused the mariners very
inhumanely by dipping and almost stiffleing'em, to prevent their telling of
Tales, and disposed of the goods, as if they were French propriety. Which albe
it the Master as well as the Mariners positively denied to be, yet the
Ostenders carried both Ship and Goods to their own homes. The truth of these
things has, upon inquiry made, and the testimony of sworn witnesses been
proved, as is evident by the Certificate herewith sent. In as much therefore as
the said Ship, called the Anne of Foy, witth all the Goods truly, properly, and
bonafide b^longed to the English, so as that there appears no cause why they of
Ostend shoud lay violent hands on her or them, much less touch the Master or
expose the Seamen to so much hardship; and whereas the constitution of the Laws
of Nations, and the alliance now existent between England, and Flanders call
for the restitution of the said Shipp and Goods, we earnestly desire Your
Excellency, that timely Right be done the English in having their own
forthwith returned 'em, and satisfaction made for the damages they suftein'd,
and that the Trade and Commerce which now interceede betvveen England and
Flanders may be supported firm and permanent.


To the Spanish Ambassador.
WHereas the Representatives of the Commonwealth of England, being informed,
that great many People about Town relating as well to Your Excellency, as
other Ambassadors and for^eign public Ministers attending here, resort to
Your, as well as other Hou^es under the pretense of hearing Mass, Gave it in
strict charge to the Coun^il to observe to Your Excellency, that as the said
practice tends to the express prejudice of the Laws of this Nation, and of
proportionable ^ll example and offense to the Government: They judged it
abranch of their ossice to prohibit such a practice for the future, and declare
their dislike of such Assemblies for the ensuing time. Whereof we desire Your
Excellency to take notice, and suffer none of the Subjects of this Republic to
frequent Your House for the time to come to hear Mass. And as the Parliament
shall take due care to have the Right of Ambassadors as well as their
Privileges secured inviolable to Your Excellency, so they depend upon no
encroachments to be made by You or Yours upon the Laws of the Land dureing
Your abode therein.


An Abstract of the particular Damages Susteind by the English East India
Company through the means of the Dutch, in several places of the East Indies.
Imprimis, THE Damages conteind in the 16. Articles lately exhibitted,
amounting in pieces (...) 291555. in Sterling make-73638: lb. 15, ss. 2.
Satisfaction is expected for the Croppariseing from the ^sland of Pularon from
between the year 1622. to this time, amounting in value to two handred thousane
preces 5/8 besides future expense, till the same be restored, as it was when it
was taken from us; and that according to articles of agreement. Which in
sterling is. -- 50000. lb. 0: 0. 3. We expect satisfaction for all those Sea
pr^visions and apparel aken from the English in the Indies, by the Dutch
Factory, delivered to, or forced from their ships in their going to, or
returning thence. Amounting to 10635. Royalls, and in sterling. -- 30158: lb.
0. 4. We expect satisfaction for the Custom of all Dutch comoditys imported
into, and exported out of Persia from the year 1624. according to the King of
that Countries Grant unto us, which we cannot calculat at less^n value then
eighty thousand Royalls. -- -- 20000. lb. 0. 0. 5. We expect satisfaction for
the reparation of four houses most maliciously and unjustly destroyed at
Jocatra, together with warehouses and other necessarys, occasioned by the
means of the Dutch Governor there. Of all which we have had an account send
us thence before our former complaint was exhibitted, which damage amounts unto
two hundred thousand pieces (...). -- -- 50000. lb. 0. 6. We expect
satisfaction for 32899 pounds of pepper taken by force out of the shipp
Endimion, in the year 1649. whose damage amounts unto -- -- -- 6003. lb. 0.


220796. lb. 16. ss.

An Abstract of some particular losses sustein'd by the English East India
Company from that of the Dutch,
1. For the dama^es sustaind from the siege of Bantham, which hindered our Trade
with that place for the continued space of six years, and prevented our laying
in a stok of 600000. pieces (...) for the buying of pepper according to our
proportion. Which might serve to load such of our ships, as wandered up and
down the Indian Coast in their ballast, for want of freight: Our adventure
having been, in the mean space, in seamens wages, victuals, and apparel
diminished and exhausted among the Indians to that degree, that the loss cannot
amount to less then 103000. pieces 8/8 which in our coin is. -- 6000000* lb.
0. ss* 0. 2. More for the damages sustaind by the loss of our just part of the
Islands of Molluco, Banda and Amboyna, since the time we have been murdered,
and driven thence. For the prejudice of which and other expenses we expect to
be satisfied, amounting (in time) from the year 1622. to che current year 1650.
at the yearly Income of 25000. lb. for 28. years the Su^e of. -- -- 700000.
lb, 0. ss. 3. Reparation is likewise expected for 12950. pieces (...) damage
done us at Surrat by those of Mogul so protected by the dutch, that we coud not
repay our selves either in money, or goods which we might otherwise, and had it
in our power to have taken from them* had not the Dutch most unjustly stood in
their defense. Which loss might in Europe be improved ere this, to triple the
value. Whi^ we judge to amount to. -- -- -- -- 77020. lb. 4 For Customs at
Persia, whose moity the King of that place granted the English anno 1624. which
to the year 162^. is calculated to come to 80000. Mill Royalls as aforesaid.
Which being subtracted, they are obliged to pay from the year 1629. being
twenty one years, at the rate off our thousand pounds a year, comes to the
sum of. 84000. lb. 0. ss.


The Kings Hand.

From the other side 220976. lb. 15. ss. 0.

The Sum total 1681996. lb. 15. ss. 0.

The intrest for the said time having far exceeded the principle.

Here follow all the LETTERS Written by OLIVER CROMWELL, To foreign Princes
and Potentates, while Protector of England.
To the Count of Oldenburgh.
Most Illustrious Sir.
I do, by Yours of the 20. of January 1654. apprehend, that Frederick (...)
Wollisogg, ^ Noble Gentleman, and Your Secretary, with Christopher Griffie,
were with certain comands sent from Your most Illustrious Dignity into England:
Who, upon their approach unto Us, have in Your Name both congratulated our
undertaking of the Administration of the Government of the Republic of
England, and solicited for an admittance for You and People into the Peace
lately concluded between Us and the Hollanders: Petitioning (with all) our
confirming the Grant lately obteind from the Parliament of Letters, commonly
known by the name of Letters of safe conduct. We therefore, pursuant to our
obligation, return our thanks for so friendly a Complement, and ^ave freely
assented to the said two petitions, as being disposed to improve all future
occasions, which may at any time express our affection toward You, And are of
opinion that You have had the same communicated unto You at large, by Your said
(...), whose fidelity and diligence in this affair have been apparent. What I
have to add is sincerely to wish You and affairs prosperity and tranquillity.

Westminster, June 27. 1654. I am your etc. most affectionally OLIVER Protector
of England, Scotland and Ireland, etc.


To the Count of Oldinburgh.
YOur Letters of the 2. of May from Oldenburgh, are come to hand, and obliged
me not in a single degree, for that the Letters themselves were so pregnant
with singular kindness and affection toward me and withal delive^ed by the
hand of the most Illustrious Lord Count Antonio, Your most beloved Son. That
that I apprehend my self most dignified by, being the knowledge I now have of
his virtues, whorthy so noble Ancestors of his extraordinary behavior, and
finally of his singular affection testified unto me now beyond words. Nor ought
it to be a thing disputable, whether he gives his Relations at home
inducements, to hope his inheriting the qualities of his worthy, and Noble
Father, whose clear virtue and prudence administered the continuance of many
years interrupted Peace to the People of Oldenburgh, and cherished them with
the effects of tranquillity among the severe Storms of War, blowing from
every Corner. Why should I therefore do otherwise then value the Alliance of
such a Friend? whose conduct is so wise, and provident, so as to be able to
avoid the enmity of all people. It is finally for that gift alone, Most
Illustrious Sir, that I am thankful; It is out of regard to justice, and Your
merits that I (...) subscribe my self

Your most etc. OLIVER Protector of England, etc.
Westminster, 29. June, 1654. To the most Illustrious Lord ANTHONY GUNTER,
(...) of Oldenburgh and Delmhorst, Leid in Jehven and Kniphausen.

OLIVIER, Protector of the Republic of England, Scotland, Ireland, etc. To the
most Serene Prince CHARLES GUSTAVUS, King of Sweedland, Goths and Vandals,
Great Prince of Finland* Duke of Esthany, Carelia, Bremen, Verde, Stetin,
Pomeranie, Castalies and Vandale, Prince of Russin, Lord of Ingry Wismare, as
also Duke Palatin of the Rhine, Bavaria, Jul. Clivia, and Duke of Monts,
greeting.
Most Serene King.
THe choice made by Your Majesty of communicateing unto us by your most
friendly letters that in particular, which common same has for some days
dispersed over all the world, of the delcent of the Government of the Kingdom
of Sweedland upon you, and that to the great content of the people, and the
free suffrage of all persons, i^ no slender argument of your great affection
toward us, and an honor not of the meanest degree. We therefore freely and
with Justice congratulate that addition of dignity to Your most singu (...)
merits, and reward very worthy of so great a virtue, and do, with united
prayers to God, wish, that which we are confident you do, namely, that the same
may prove to the good, and prosperity of Your Majesty the Kingdom of
Sweedland, and the Intrest of all Christendom. But as to what you mention
touching your disposition to the alliance lately contracted between England and
Sweedland, and acting our part toward its support, as also that Your Majesty
will endeavor not only the (...), but likewise the improveing (if it were a
thing fesible) the league now established, were an injustice to call to
question the sinc^rity of: The faith of so great a Prince having engaged
for it: whose extraordinary virtue has not only won an everlasting inheritance
in the affection of stangers abroad, but has been so powerful* as to have
invited (...) most August Queen, daughter of Gustaves (whose m^tch in all
manner of good qualitys many past ages coud not produce) to make a resignation
of the Government to you without either your knowledge or seeking. Be pleased
therefore to be confident that your so singular affection unto us, and so clear
a signification of your mind, are circumst^nces of utmost acceptance unto us;
and that nothing shall promote more our delight, then to oblige your kindness
with our endeavors never to be wanting as far as they can be made serviceable,

Westminster 4. July 1654. Your Majestyes most affectionally OLIVER, Protector
of England, Scotland, Ireland, etc.


To the most (...) Ludovico Mendesio de Haro.
WHat you write me, Illustrious Sir, of the most Serene King of Spains having
appointed, and nominated a person to come hitheir under the character of his
E^bassadour to congratulate with me my undertaking in the (...) of England, as
it is a thing in it self justly grateful, sovour (...) study and quickness
of care has renderd it so much the more so, who to heighten the obligation,
have been pleased to be the first admenisher your self: For to have the love
and affection of one, who, by his prudence and virtue, (...) gaind so much
Authority with his own prince, as to influence, (like your self) matters of
the greatest moment in that Kingdom, ought to be no less pleasure to me, then
^nunderstand the good opinion of a most Excellent person, to be an ornament to
me. But as to any disposition of mind to wards the most Serene King of Spain,
in referrence as well to the Support of an alliance with that King, as
readynesse to improve it daily more and more, I hope, I have satisfied the
Ambassador here, in that point, and may do it plentifully to him that is to
succeed him. I wish that the figure Moreover, and favor, under which you now
move most Illustrious Sir, may be dureable; and that what ever you manage, or
administer for the good of the public, may end in aprosperous and happy (...).
(...) am most Illustrious Sir, Your Excellencies most affectionatly.

OLIVER Protector of the Republic of England, Scotland, (...), etc.
Whitehall, September, 1654.

To the most Serene Prince, CAROLUS GUSTAVUS ADOLPHUS, King of Sweedland, Goths
and Vandales, etc.
AS Your Majesty's last Letter, answered by me with a suitable Reply,
represented Your Majesty's singular love to me, so the consideration of our
Friendships seemed to establish such an obligation upon me for the future, that
as I communicate occurrences answering our mutual desires, so to observe unto
you, as a'most dear friend, my sense and grief in instances of contrary
effects. I am truly of opinion that the figure I make in this Republic,
implies a duty of studying, all ^ can, the common Repose of the protestants in
particular. Which heightens our concernednesse so much the more, when we hear
of the battails and mutual slaughters acted by those of Bremen and Sweedland
upon each other. I am, in the first place sorry to see both our friends engaged
in such bloody differences, so much to the hazard of the Intrest of the
protestant Religion; Next that peace of 52. which was believed to be a main
Bulwark to all reformed Churches, should prove the cause of such an uhappy
(...) that the Arms of Sweedland are now employed to destroy those who, for
Religion sake, they would so lately engage in the vigarous defense of: and that
now, at a time, when the Episcopacy is reported to persecute the (...) all
Germany over, and revive former violences and oppressions upon them. Being
therefore informed that the (...) of Bremen h^d few days Cessation of arms
(...) it, I could not truly decline the signifing unto your Majesty by this
opportunity, how heartily I coud wish, and how earnestly I would pray the God of
peace, that that Truce may end in a happy reconcliation of both Partys, and
that things be drawn to a peaceable composure equally conduceing to the
advantage of both. To the promotion of which, if your Majesty can judge my
endeavor capable of contributing oug^t, I do promise, and freely tender the
same, as in apoint of utmost acceptance (without doubt) to God Almighty: And do
in the mean time from my heart wish, that God Almighty may direct and steer all
Your Majesty Councills, to the public advantage of Christendom; a prayer which
I doubt not but may (...) with your own inclination too.

Whitehall October 26, 16545. Your Majestys most affectionately. OLIVER
Protector of the Repnblick of England.


To the most Magnificent and Noble Magistrates and Senators of Bremen.
I do, with so much the more (...) and grief of mind, see by the account
brought me by Henry Oldenburgh your Envoy, the difference arisen between your
Corporation and your most potent neighbor, and the extremity which you are
thence reduced unto, by how much I love and respect the City of Bremen for her
affection to the Orthodox Religion beyond others; nor do I entertain any thing
more in my wishes, then that the universal name of the Protestants may at
length be cemented into a brotherly Union and Concord* That the common Enemy of
the Reformation does, in the mean space, rejoice at these our contentions, and
promote them the more violently abroad, is a thing most certain. But the
controversy it self, as it is not the matter now to be debated, I pray God
that the progress therefore already made toward a peace, may determine
happily. I have, according to you desires, writ to the King of Sweedland
touching this matter, sollicitting him to peace and Concord, as a thing of
utmost acceptance to God, and acted freely and as Iough in a thing of th^r
piety, and ofter it as my opinion that it is not (...) viseable for you to
stand off, bat bear an affectionat inclination to any conditions of peace that
are truly honorable. Comending you and your City, in the mean time, to Gods
Tuition an Providence.

Whitehall October 26. 1654. Your highnesses most aff ection ally O Protector,
etc


OLIVER, Protector of the Republic of England, to themost (...) Prince
Tarentine.
YOur affection to Religion, made apparent in Your Letters to me, together with
Your extraordinary piety, and singular love to the reformed Church's; more
especially the nobility and generosity of the manner wherein; and that in a
Government, wherein so many of the Nobility dissenting from theProtestant
Faith, receive such plentiful encouragements of preferment, w^ile on the other
hand, such as adhere thereto, are, for that very reason, exposed to
proportionable inconveniences; are instances that have filled me with very
much content and pleasure. Nor has it proved lesso delightful to me to have
pleased You, by being of that Religion, which is the inducement which
principally ought to endear and render you a Subject fit for my esteem. But as
to what you mention concerning what the Churches may hope or expect from me, I
pray God I may be able to answer the same, one time or other, if they need it,
and let the World see how I stand inclined toward it; For I should not truly
judge my self better rewarded in any thing ariseing from the station I hold in
this my Republicke, then to be able to promote the Intrest, safety, and (which
exceeds all) the repair of the reformed Churches. Let me therefore earnestly
desire that the piety and affection with which You profess the Orthodox Faith,
transmitted unto You from Your Ancestors, be to the end steddily and constantly
adhered unto. Nor will there be any thing more truly worthy both Your self,
and Your most Religious progeny, nor ought wherein I can wishingly express my
gratitude in better and clearer acknowledgments of Your Obligations upon me,
(albeit I wish all things well for Your sake) then to compose and accommodate
Your self so, as that the Churches, (those of Your Country more especially,
under whose Discipline You have had so (...) a (...) and education) may, in
you, sensibly find a protection proportionable to those Merits, wherein you
exceed others.

Whitehall April 1655.

OLIVER, Protector of the Republic of England to the most Serene Prince
Emanuel, Duke of Savoy, Prince of Piedmont, greeting.
Most Serene Prince.
WE are, by letters sent us from Geneva, as well as Delphin, and many other
places bordering upon your Confines, informed of a proclamation lately
published by your Royal Highness, implying that if such of your Subjects, as
were Professors of the Protestant Religion, did not, within three days after
the publication thereof, either declare their renunciation of their own, and
acceptance of the Popish Religion they were strictly charged to forsake their
Lands and habitations, within twenty days after upon pain of forfeiting their
lives and fortunes: And that having thereupon made humble supplication to your
Royal Highness, praying that the same might be repealed, and that they,
(taken into former favor) migt be restored to the Privileges granted 'em by
your most Serene Predecessors; yet they were set upon by part of your Army,
who cruelly murdered many, chained others* and drove the rest into
wildernesses, and uninhabited mountains covered with Snow and desolation,
where hundreds of Familys are reduced to that extremity, that it is much to be
feared whether their misery may not be such, as may soon draw utter Ruin upon
them, under the oppression of Cowld and hunger. Upon our Receipt of this
account, we coud not truly decline our being troubled at heart, at so unhear'd
of a calamity imposed upon these most afflicted people. But as we own our
selves united to them, not only as men, but (in communion of Religion)
altogether related as Brethren also. We judged our selves imperfect in the
discharge of our duty to God, the charity due to our Brethren, and our
profession to Religion it self, did we barely pity this calamity and misery of
our Brethren, without applying all the further endeavor we could, toward the
meeting 'em with Relief against so many unexpected mischiefs. We do
therefore, in the first place pray and beseech your Royal Highness with all
imaginable earnestness, to incline your heart to the continueing to your
Subjects at Piedmont, those Institutions granted, and from time to times
conf^irmed unto them by your most serene Predecessors. In the allowance and
con^ of which, as thoir Grants were, without doubt, conformable to Gods own
approvall (who has decreed and appropriated unto himself only, the inviolable
Government and Jurisdiction of Souls) so there was also due regard held
(doubtless) to their meritts, who, in time of war, were found equally positive
in their loyalty and courage, and of peace, subjects suitably obedient to
Government. And as your Royal Highness in all other things bravely and
gloriously accomplished, has pursued directly the pattern of your Forefathers,
so we do again and again beseech, that you would not begin to act the contrary
in this; but that this proclamation, and if their be any other demand made use
of, to interrupt your Subjects, upon the score of their professing the Reformed
Religion, be abolished; they restored to their native Country and habitations;
their former Rights and libortys ratified unto 'em; their sustained damages
repaired; and that you cause all their vexations to be drawn to an end. Which
if your Royal Highness will See done, you will act a thing of utmost
acceptance to God, raise and comfort those miserable and calamitous people, win
the good opinion both of all your Neighbors, and those who admire the Reformed
Religion, and more (...) Ours, who shall look upon your kindness and clemency
to them as the essectof this our Request. Which will draw us under an
obligation o making all suitable Returns; and lay a most solid found^tion not
only of an alliance and friendship to be raised, but improved upon, between
this Government and yours. Nor do we truly entertain a cheaper opinion of your
Justice and moderation of mind in this case. To the (...) of whom, that
Almighty God may incline your disposition and thoughts: and do heartily wish
both your self and people, peace, truth, and a happy ^ssue in all your affairs.

Whitehall May 1655.

OLIVER, P. of the Republic of England To the most Serene Prince (...)
Transsilvania, greeting.
Most Serene Prince.
YOur Letters of the 16. of December 1654. whom this brings You an account of
our receipt of, have shown Us, the singular love and affection You bear Us;
Your Envoy who brought and delivered them having declared at large Your
ambition of contracting a fellowship and alliance with this Government. It did
not truly please us in any small degree, to meet with this occasion of
declareing and demonstrateing all we can, our inclination toward You, and how
much we ought to value that of Your Highnesses. But considering that the
account, which we have had of Your clear Obligations upon, and undertaking for
the welfare of the Christian Republic, hitherto unknown unto us otherwise then
by report, and that all these, besides what You design further to be concerned
in, either for the defense or promotion of the Christian Interest, are come
confirmed in the letters which Your (...) ness has been so friendly pleased to
send Us: The same have plenti^ully added to our satisfaction: Namely that it
has been Gods pleasure to have raised in those Countries, so powerful and worthy
a Minister, to the service of his Providence and Glory; who notwithstanding the
efficacy of his own power and Arms, desires to join with Us for the Defense
of the Protestant Religion, now groaning under the oppression and design of all
hands. But God, whose providence has inspired us both (albeit at this distance)
with the same inclination and disposition toward the support of the Orthodox
Religion, he will doubtless become our Author in such future Resolutions, as
may enable Us to be in, and among our selves as well as all other Protestants
and Corporations, a considerable Relief and advantage, in a matter of this
consequence, as being truly bent upon all opportunity administered by God, which
we shall not, through the good help of the (...) God, decline the doing our part
in the improvement of. We cannot in the mean time, without very great grief
observe unto Your Highness, with what inclemency the Duke of Savoy persecutes
such of his Subjects, as (inhabitingabout the Alps) profess the Protestant
Religion, and whom he has not only (...) as many of, as denied to embrace the
Roman Religion; to quit their nature Country and abandon all their
Possessions*, but also set upon them with his Forces, who exposed many to most
cruel murders, dispatched others with barbarous and invented Tortures, and
drove great Multitudes of 'em into the mountains, there to be consumed with
hunger and cowld, having set fire to their Houses, and goods, (if these
Butchers did chance to leave any unplunderd for want of conveyance.) And are
very apt to believe that Your Highness could not decline being much displeased
at so great a cruelty, when first you heard it, (which I presume may be some
time past,) and that you did what you could toward the Relief and assi^tance
of those miserable wretches, if inhuman Murders and Miseries have left any
surviveing. We have writ to the Duke of Savoy to divert his Rage from off his
People; as also the King of France, that he might do so too; together, with the
neighboring Protestant Princes* to let them understand how we resented so
inhumane an instance of cruelty: Which albeit it was begun upon these needy
wretches, yet its design seems to extend to all that are of the same Judgment
in Religion: And so heightens the necessity conveyed unto them so much the
more, of taking care of *hemselves, and consulting the welfare of all their
Friends: Which pursuant to that light, which God has inspired us with, shall
always be the very level of our pursuit. A thing Your Highness may depend upon
the sincerity of, as that of our love and affection wherewith we heartily wish
you a properous issue in all things; Praying that all Your Enterprises and
Approaches toward the asserting the Liberty of the Gospel and its adherents
may determine happily.

Whitehall, May 1655.

OLIVER, Protector, etc. To the most Serene Prince Charles Gustavus Adolphus,
King of Sweedland, Greeting.
YOur Majesty has ere this (and to Your great trouble we presume) had an
account of that most bitter Proclamation, reported to have been lately
published, whereby the Duke of Savoy has afflicted to the marrow, such of his
Subjects inhabiting about the Alps, as style themselves Reformed Protestants,
and directed, that if in case they did not renounce their own, and embrace the
Roman Catholic Religion within twenty days, they should be rooted out of
their Native Country and habitations, so that after the murder of many, the
rest plundered and exposed to invented Deaths, they wander now with their
Wives, and small Children over the wild Mountains in a continual Winter,
Consumed wit^ hunger and cowld. For the universal hatred of the contrary
party, even unto all Protestants, Demonstrates that albeit they differ in some
frivolus things among themselves, their cause and intrest yet in the main ought
to be the same, and almost one. And there is none but knows, that how, upon
all occasions, the Kings of Sweedland have joined with the Reformed, and powered
their Forces into Germany to defend without distinction the Protestant Religion
there: We therefore (and that with more then ordinary earnestness) pray that
Your Majesty would in the first place (if You have not already done it in
imitation of Us and other Protestant Republics) write to the Duke of Savoy,
concerning this matter, and endeavor to reverse (if it be possible) by the
interposition of Your Authority) the severitd of this so cruel a proclamation,
from off of a People, that are innocent as well as religious: For these so
cruel beginnings what do they mean, what may they threaten Us all; is a thing
which we judge very unnecessary to advise Your Majesty of. If this man will
sligth all our prayers to gratify his own peevish humor, truly we shall,
after having first con^ulted with Your Majesty and the rest of the Protestant
Princes (as we ought ^f, there be any obligation* any love or community of
Religion to be regarded or observed) fix upon some speedy resolution that may
serve timelily to prevent the miserable destruction of a multude of our most
innocent Brethren destitute of all help. Which as we do not in the least
question to have beeu Your Majesty's sense, and resolution too, nothing can, in
our opinion, be more advisable in this point, than that we all, without the
least loss of time, unite our power, Council, Purses, and if there be any
thing else that can be judged to stop the further gro^vth of this evil. In the
mean time we heartily recommend Your Majesty's to the Tuitionof the most great
omnipotent God.


OLIVER Protector of the Republic of England* to the high and mighty Lords,
the States General of the united Provinces.
RUmor, and the frequent advices and Tideings which letters bring you from your
correspondents abroad, have ere this we judge, informed you of the Duke of
Savoyuss late proclamation issued against such under his subjection about the
Alps, as have been ancient professors of the Protestant Religion, by verture
of which proclamation, they, unless they embrace the Roman Catholic Religion
^ithin twenty da^s, are commanded to quit their Lands and houses, being first
stripped of all they have besides. and with what cruelty the Authority ^f that
Edict has tyranyzed over inocent persons, and (which very much concerns us)
our helpless friends, and Brethren in Christ. Many of them being destroyed by
a Limb of his forces appointed to that purpose, the rest plundered and forced
from home, so that they, with their wives and small Ones, have been for some
time, driven into the roughest of mountains covered with continual snow, where
they now labor under the oppression of hunger and cowld. But your
concernednesse whereat, and how you Symphathyzed these calamities of our
Brethren, is a thing we can easily gues^ at by our own grief which is truly
very great. For we that are but One (as it were) in point of Religion, why
should not we be equally such in our concernednesse at so unworthy a misuseage
of our Brethren? And truly many are the experiences of your apparent piety to
the Orthodox people in times of oppression, and no less favorable to many
Ecclesiastical difficultys and adversitys, As for my part, I had, (if I know
my own mind,) rather been outon in any thing elce, then in love and charity to
Brethren laboring under affliction and persecution, upon the account of their
Religion: For that I would freely give way to the health and repose of the
Church, in preferrence to my own par ticular safety. What we coud therefore
hitherto act in it, was to writ to the Duke of Savoy, almost humbly praying him
to entertain milder thoughts and disposition toward these his most inocent
subjects and humble people; that he would restore the wretches to their homes
and Estates, and put them in possession of their former liberty of Religion. We
did the like to the chiefest of the Protestant Princes and Magistrates, whom we
judged it most concerning, to join with us in our Mediation with the Duke of
Savoy on behalf of this people. You have done the same perhaps and more. For
if this so dangerous example succeeds with the Instruments concerned, and this
Revivall of their late cruelty upon the Protestants thrives with them, to
admonish your prudence how far the same may endanger the Protestant Intrest,
is a thing we judge uunecessary* And this person, if he suffers himself to be
persuaded by our united importunitys and prevailed with to give over, we shall
reap a Noble and plentiful crop, and Recompense from our susteind care; But
if we shoud find him wilful so as to endeavor to bring into utter despair, or
destroy totally those, who with their own strength, and (free from
corruption,) have either preserved our Religion delivered by the original
Preachers of the Gospel, or long before it was restored to its primitive
purity in all other Nations, We are ready to join with you and the rest of
our Reformed Brethren and confederates, in a common Council, whereby the
support of the sincking just, may be, with most inconveniency provided for, and
let him at length see how impossible it is for us to put up the Injuries and
burdensome afflictions of the protestants. Fare ye well.


To the Evangelicall Cantons of Svvitzerland.
YOu have, ere we had it, doubtless, an account of that calamity which those
of our Religion about Piedmont, were lately exposed unto, who, being under the
allegiance and subjection of the Duke of Savoy, were by their own Prince's
prolam^tion* strictly commanded to forsake their Native habitations, if that in
three days they gave not satisfaction of their Turning to the Roman Religion,
and thereupon soon set upon with Arms, and destroyed by the forces of their
said Duke: many also driven into banishment, do now with their wives and
children, wander most miserably over the deserted mountains loaded with Snow
etc. where they are ready to perish under the afflictions of hunger, cowld,
nakedness and want of places of habitation There is less reason why we shoud
doubt of your being equally troubled at your first receipt of these Tydeings,
and it may be more, proportionable to your Neernes to them in point of
Neighborhood in excess of us. For your singular affection to the O^hodox
faith, and great Stedd^nesse in adhereing as well to, as resolution in
defending it, is a thing we very well know you to be inferior to none in.
Therefore as ye are in the str ctest comunion of Religion Brethren unto, or
rather incorporated with these wretches equal with us; of which Body not one
Member can suffer affl^ction without the sense, the smart, the detriment, and
the hasard of the whole: we have thought fit to write and signify unto you,
how much we judge it concerning us all to help, (...) comfort (all we can) and
that in a common, ^id and assistance; the want and distress of our Brethren;
and make timely provision for the removeing not only their mischiefess and
misfort^es, but also stopping the further growth of any danger, which (by
example or chance may be created us* We likewise writ to the Duke of Savoy,
earnestly entreating, that he vvoud out of his clemency, treat his most fa
thfull people more gently, and that he vvou^ restore ^em already almost
destroyed, to their goods and (...). And do very well (...) that these our
letters, or rather the joint importunity of this Nation may easily induce a
most Glorious Prince to listen to what we have, with so much Toil, petitioned
him for. But if he should happen to persist, we are ready to join advice with
you, concerning a means to be fixed upon, for the preservation of so many
most inocent Persons, laboring under the yoke of so many oppressions and
vexations; comfort and bear up our most dear Brethren in Christ, and protect
them from most exquisit and unworthy ends. Whose health and safety your piety
leads (lam confident) very much to study the preservation of: For my part I
would neglect my own most important concerns, yea my life, to make way for it.
Adieu.

Westminster May 19. 1655. OLIVER Protector.
To the most Illustrious and Noble Lords the Councills and Senators of the
Protestant and confederat Towns of Switzerland. greeting.

To the most Serene and potent Prince Lewis, King of France.
YOur Majesty's letters in answer to mine of the 25. of May, plainly show how
little I was mislead by that opinion I entertained that those late most
inhumane slaughters and barbarous butchery, committed by certain squadrons of
your Army, upon the persons of such in the Duke of Savoy's Country, as profess
the protestant Religion, were not the effects either of your direction or
Command, and am exceeding gladd truly of your having so timelyly signified unto
your Comanders (who unbidd committed these inhumane outrages pursuant to the
dictates of their own inclinations) how much the same displeas^d your
Majesty, and the notice you took of so great a Cruelty to the Duke of Savoy
himself, and vvithall your having with so much sincerity and humanity
interposed and employed your Intrest, friendshipp and power for the bringing
back those miserable banished people, to the place where they were driven
from, and might well expect that that Prince vvond have done some thing at the
desire and request of your Majesty. But apprehending that yours, nor the
solicitation and pressure of other Princes, can no way incline him in favor
of the distressed, I hold it consistent with the duty of my province, to
depute this noble person under the character of our Ambassador extraordinary
to the Duke of Savoy, to tell him plainly, how I take his useage of the
Protestants, tho for no other reason, then out of detestation to the Religion
it self. And do truly hope, that the account which this Embassy comes to, may
prove so much the more succesfull, if Your Majesty will be pleased to adhibit a
fresh, and with more Instance, your Authority to, and endeavor in the thing.
And as your Majesty has undertaken unto that Prince, for their future fidelity
and Obedience to Government, so be pleased to make some provision likewise sor
their safety and security, against any the like Injuries, and most cruel
affronts, that may be offered for the future, to the Inocent and peaceable:
This, as it is in it self an act of Justice, and truly becoming Majesty, and
no less suitable to your benignity and Mercy, who secures the peace and safety
of such of your own Subjects in all places, as profess that Religion, so we
cannot in any reason decline the expectation of, from your Majesty, which, in
this very work, will make a through conquest over the hearts of all the
Protestants inhabiting your own Dominions, who in times of difficulty, have
been already found of unexceptable affection and loyalty toward you, as well
as show your Neighbors, that Royal Council has no way abetted to this
Mischief, whatever Royal Ministers and Magistrates might presume to have
done: Especially if your Majesty exacts due punishment, to be examplified upon
those Captains and Officers, who, pursuant to their own Wills and Pleasures,
have dared to be the Actors of such inhumane villanys, In the mean time, when
your Majesty will think fit to show your aversnes to the detestation this
deserves, I do not doubt but that your Kingdom may, by your allowance, become
a reception and secure refuge to those miserable and distressed People, when
their address shall seem to call for it, nor that you will suffer, that any of
your Subjects give the Duke of Savoy any assistance to their prejudice. What we
have to add, is to assure your Majesty how much I esteem your friendship: To
the improvement of which I assert to be wanting neither in faith nor ^ndeavour.

I am your Majesty's most affectionatly OLIVER, Protector of the Republic of
England.
Whitehall July 29. 16^5.

To his Excellency Cardiual Mazarine.
Most eminent Lord Cardinal.
Upon my resolveing to send the bearer with Letters (whereof the enclosed is a
Copy) to the King, I did then direct him to accost your Eminency in my Name,
and committed some things to his Trust, to be comunicated to you in particular:
Wherein I desire your Excellency to give him full Credit, as being a person in
whom I have reposed very great confidence.

Whitehall July 29. 1655. Your Eminency's most affectionatly OLIVER, Protector
of the Republic of England, etc.


OLIVER, Protector etc, to the most Serene Prince Frederick the 3. King of
Denmark, Norway, etc greeting.
YOur Majesty has (ere this we judge, and that as much to your grief as
becomes a champion and a Protestant Prince,) had an account of the unmercifull
proclamation lately published by Imanuel, Duke of Savoy, for the overthrow of
his own Subjects, inhabiting about the Alps, inocent People and men of note
and Renown, and that for the sincerity of their Zeal to the true Protestant
Religion, for many years past; having driven them out of their native Land,
out of detestation to their Faith, and after butchering many, expos^d the rest,
(needy naked, and lo^ded with all other miserys) unto all the mischiefs and
hardships, which those desered mountains usually administer. If the principles
of Christianity lays an obligation upon us in general to resent or Sympathize
the sufferings of any particular scan^leing thereof, we do not, if well
acquainted with your piety and prudence, know of any that can clearlyer foresee
what danger the example and consequence of this Fact bespeaks us all, as well
as the protestant Intrest, then your self. We have therefore exercised all
freedom in our letters, to let you know, that however you resent this calamity
of our most inocent brethren, what opinion or judgment we expect you may
entertain of it, the same shoud be a pattern for our imitation. And, for that
reason, have writ to the Duke of Savoy, where we earnestly prayed, that he
would treat the poor and meek more spareingly, and prevent the said bloody
proclamation's being of any further Force. Which if your Majesty and the rest
of the Protestant Princes, have imitated, or otherwi^e performed, (as we
believe you have,) it is to be hoped, that the most Serene Duk's, fury may be
allayed, and this his Rage appeased, at the intercession and Instance of so
many Neighboring Princes at least. But if he will rather choose to continue
his resolution, we declare our readynesse to join with your Majesty, and the
rest of our Confederats (concerned for the ^ntrest of the Protestant Religion,)
in such a resolution as may provide for their speedy Relief, srom their
distress, and do what we can for their sasety and Liberty. Our prayers, in the
mean time, bespeake your Majesty all health and happiness.

Westminster May 1655.

OLIVER Protector etc. To the most Noble Magistrates and Senators of Geneva.
OUr Letters lately send you to shoud have intimated the very great grief
conveyed unto us from the vast, and unheard of calamitys, to which the Duke of
Savoy has exposed the Protestants, inhabiting in, and about the Vallyes of
Piedmont, did we not then make it more our business, to let you know, that we
were not only concerned at such their miserys, as it was our care to provide
(all we could) for their relief and comfort. Wherefore we have caused a
Collection to be levied over all this Republic: which we justly expect may
prove such, as may express the passionat affection, which this Land bear to
their Brethren' in time of such most inhumane persecution. And as we are One in
point of Religion, so we ought to admit of a fellowfeeling of their Calamityes.
In the mean time, while the Collection is a raising, which will take up time;
And considering that their want and helplessnes cannot admit of any delay; we
have judged it necessary to transmit (with all imaginable speed, to be, before
hand, distributed among'em, who shall appear most to need present help and
comfort) the present sum: of 2000. li: But in as much, as we know, how much
the miserys and Injurys done Inocencyl, affect you, and that you will look
upon nothing either painful or troublesome, that may tend to their help and
assistance, we have ventured the transmitting the said sum to you, to be
distributed among these calamitous people, and give you the trouble of
considering in your piety and prudence, of the justest method, pursuant to
which, that money may be soonest disposed of among the needyest of those
people, And albeit the sum is truly small, Yet some what it may be at least
toward their present Ease and refreshment, till we grow able to enlarge our
charity by sending them a greater sum: And as we doubt not of your accepting
of this employment in good part, so we pray the Omnipotent Great God to
furnish his own Protestant people with the courage of desending each other
in common, and of being a mutual assistance to each other, against the
barbarity of their enemy; wherein we shoud be gladd, that our endeavor might
be of any use to the service of the Church. Adieu.

Fifteen hundred pounds of the said sum of two thousand remitted by Gerard
Hensh to Paris, the other five hundred shall be taken care of, by Master
Stoupely in bills of exchange.

OLIVER, Protector of England, etc. To the most Serene Prince Duke, of Venice.
Most Serene Prince.
As we have been always found manifest (...) of your Outdoing your Enemies, in
Instances (...) to the promotion of the Christain Interest more particularly,
so now more especially, at the tydeing of the late Sea-battle which we no way
repine at the success of, although it seems (as we are informed) to have happend
some thing to the detriment of our people. For certain of our Traders* namely
William, and Daniel Williams with Edward Beale Merchants, have, by petition,
humbly represented unto us, that a ship of theirs called the Great Prince,
employed for their account to Constantinople, was there ptessed by the Grand
Signeur's Ministers, and employed to transport Provision and Soldiers to Crete,
in which constrained Service while sailing, was, among others of the Turcks
Fleet, which happend to engage with the Venetians, taken, carried to Venice,
and by the Gourt of Admiralty there, condemned to the use of the public. As
the said shipp therefore was, contrary to the approvall and knowledge of her
Owners, forced into the Turcks Service, and that he could not disintangle
himself, out of the (...), being loaded with Soldiers, we earnestly entreat
Your Serenity to repeal, (out of regard to (...) alliance) the sentence of that
admiralty Court, and take care of the restitution of the said shipp (having no
way deserved ill of your Republic), to her Owners. The allowance of which we
have no reason to despair (...) obtain (atour request especially) when we find
the Merchants themselves entertain so good an opinion of your Clemency: And
therefore heartily recommend your great Councills and the affairs of Venice both
by sea and Land, to the happy guidance of God Almighty. I am

Westminster, 1655. Your Serenity's, and the Republic of Venice's very
affectionately. OLIVER Protector.


OLIVER, Protector of the Comonwealah of England, to the most Serene Prince,
Lewis King of France.
Most Serene King.
SAmuel Mico, William Coran, George Poyner, with several others of (...)
Merchants have showed us by their humble petition, that they, in the year 1650.
(...) on board a certain shipp called the Unicorne a very considerable part of
their Estates, and that the same Shipp, with her feight of raw silcks, Oils
and other goods (amounting, by their Estimate, to no less then four and thirty
thousand pounds sterling) was, by two of your Men of War, set upon and taken
in the ^ranea Sea: that Our Subjects would not, out of regard to the peace that
was then between the English and the french, make any violent defense, but
referr to the maritime Laws, as being induced thereto by the promises of Paul
and Terrer, the Comanders of the said Men of War, who engaged to dismiss the
shipp upon peruseall of her bills of loading: That the said Merchants employed
moreover, and sent into france an attorney to solicit the restitution of the
said ship and Goods: where after, the expense of three years and more, when
matters were brought to that maturity, as that there was nothing (...) to be
done but to award sentence for restitution his Emenency Cardinal Mazarine
owned unto Hugh Morelly their Attorney, that the Merchants had wrong done 'em;
and undertook that they should have satisfaction done 'em as soon ever, as
the peace between both nations, and the alliance then under Treaty was ended
and ratified: Yea his Excelleecy the Lord de Bordeaux your Majesty's
Ambassador has lately confirmed the same, in express words, pursuant to your
Majesty's comands, seconded by those of the Council, and that the said shipp
and Goods and the peculiar demurr, under which they lay, shoud be taken into
consideration, a part from those other controversys provided for the decision
of, by the general Import of the Treaty. Of which promise the said Ambassador
him self, who by good luck has repaired home upon occasions of his own, can
bear Testimony. Upon the allowance of such strong presumptions, and that the
Right of these Merchants in the repetition of their Goods, lies so clear, It Is
our earnest request to your Majesty, that they be put off no longer, and that
you would be pleased (at our Instance*) to render your compliance herewith the
leading fruits of the Treaty lately revived, and restablish't. Which we
confide in the effect of: wishing that the Omnipotent Great God may influence
your self and Kingdom with all imaginable felicity.

Westminster December 1655. Your Majesty's most affectionatly OLIVER Protector
of England, etc.


To the Evangelicall Cantons of Svvitzerland.
THE account transmitted unto us from our Commissioners at Genova concerning
your public proceedings, as well as the substance of your Letters of the 27.
of December from Tigur, sufficiently inform us in the posture of your affairs
(being none of the best we doubt:) wherein albeit we apprehend, (to our
trouble) that your peace, and so long continued collateral alliance is
dissolved into a Rupture, yet nothing appearing applicable to your fault, the
Iniquity and perverseness of your Enemies may (we doubt not) furnish you with an
opportunity of repeating your known disposition and constancy to the
Protestant Religion. For the Swi^zers* who condemn (for Traitors any who turn
to our Religion, what have they attempted, what have their practices been, to
raise malicious spirits against the Orthodox Faith; is a thing that can escape
the knowledge of none, who has not totally forgot that most unworthy Massacre
committed upon our Brethren at Piedmont. Wherefore, dearest Friends, forget not
your former wont, rouse up in Gods Name, yield not your Reights, Friends, your
Liberty of Conscience, and conscience it self to be trampled in the dirt,
under the heels of incroaching Idolatrous; Prepare your selves therefore, that
you may not seem to look like Men, who cared not how the World went, so they
themselves were well, but such as reckon the sufferings of their Neighbors
their Own, especially theirs of Piedmont; help and comfort those most
distressed People all you can: Assureing your selves that your own sides were
darted at, and their deaths and blood made but an Inled of, to reach you. As
for my part, know, that your safety and prosperity, are no less the Subject of
my care and trouble, than if this Massacre had been executed within the Bowels
of this Republic and, as if the Switzers Axes and Drawn Swords (as they truly
are against all Protestants) were ready to fall upon our own Necks. No sooner
had we therefore had an account of your condition, and the virulency of your
Enemies, but we presently entered into a strict consultation with persons of very
great worth, and known piety and affection to the Church, in order to the
making such provision for your subsistence, as the posture of our own affairs
at home could bear, and came to such a determination, as you may know from our
Comissary Mr Pell. What I have to add is the continuance of our petitions to
Almighty God that he would be pleased to stand by, and guide all your
councills, and take under his more particular conduct, and defend by peace or
war (which he thinks most advisable) this your most just Cause.

Westminster January 1655. Yours etc. most affectionatly OLIVER Protector of
the Republic of England, etc.


OLIVER, P. of the Republic of England, To the most Serene Prince Charles
Gustavus, by the Grace of God, King of Sweedland, Goths, and Vandalls, Great
Prince of Finland, etc.
Most Serene Prince.
AS it is a custom of known antiquity, especially among friends, to admit of
an obligation of useing all freedom in communicateing to each other, passages
of adversity as well as prosperity and comunity, so that most delightful part
of friendship relateing to the import of the Letters, which Your Majesty has
been pleased to give us the honor of, is what we cannot but take very kindly:
Seeing that it is an indication of singular humanity, and true Royalty, to be
as communicable in enjoyments, as way of liveing, and to believe nothing to be
pleasant, without it be in community with Friends and Confederates* And
therefore cannot but justly rejoice at the birth of a young Prince to his Son,
to inherit (we hope) the glory and virtue of so good a King, and gladly lay it
in parallel with the felicity, and glory that befell Philip of Macedone both
abroad and at home, whom Records cite to have conquered the most powerful
Greeks, at the very time of the birth of his Son Alexander. For we do not
doubt, but that Your kindness to Poland in dischargeing, and* as it were,
forceing it by the very strength of Your Army, from the papal ^oke* and the
establishment of that Peace with Brandenburgh; which the desires of all pious
men gaped for, notwitstanding the storming opposition made to the contrary, may
conduce very considerably to the peace and advantage of the Church. That God
may, in the mean time bless such Glorious Beginings with suitable Issues; that
his Gift of a Son may pursue the pattern of his Father in Piety, Virtue, and
noble Deeds: That which we truly both hope, and from our hearts wish the
Omnipotent and Great God, (always favorable to Your undertakings) may grant.

Westminster, 1655. Your Majesty's most affectionally, OLIVER, Protector of
England, etc.


To the King of Denmark.
Most Serene and potent Prince.
JOhn Freeman and Phillip Traverse Subjects of this Republic, have, (...)
their own, and the names of several other Merchants of London a petitioned
humbly complained, that having in the month of October 1653. loaded on board a
certain ship of Sunderbrugh called the Salvador, Nicolas Winskins Master,
several Merchandises, woolen manufacture, Clothes, and other woven commodities
and Goods, amounting (according to Estimate) to the value of between three and
four thousand pounds sterling, charged the said Master, that as he sailed through
the Baltique sea, he shoud go directly to Dantzick, and pay the usual duty at
Elsenor, and for the same purpose furnished him with a competent sum of money.
Yetnotwithstanding, t hat the said master most treacherously, and contrary to
his Instructions from the Merchants, passed by the said place, without
dischargeing that duty; so that the said ship, with her whole loading, had hue
and Cry sent after them and were arrested, to the great damage of the Owners,
in favor of whom we writ to your Majesty's Ambassador then here in London,
who, as they say, engaged, that as soon as he came to speak with your
Majesty, he would endeavor to (...) justice done the Merchants. But in as much
as the said person has been dispatched upon Your Majesty's affairs into other
Countries, and that their application to him before his departure, amounted to
nothing; so that they were forced to sen'd an Attorney purposely to solicit
their Right at Hafnia, and demand restitution of said shipp and Goods: which
they also found coud amount to no more then an aggravation of the former
Reckoning and heap of fruitless trouble upon trouble; and that the said Goods
Ly under confiscation and present Restraint, notwithstanding that, according to
the Laws of Denmark, a Master of a ship ought, (as they seem to urge in their
petition upon any misdedmeanour of his own) to suffer corporal punishment,
exclusive to any confiscation that shipp or Merchandises can be pretended to be
liable unto: and reckon themselves so much the unkindlyer dealt with all, for
that the custom which ought to be paid at Essen'or, is (as we apprehend) very
inconsiderable. Therefore as our Merchants have given no provocation, that can
be interpreted to the rendering their effects liable to forfeiture; and that
the Master, a little before his death, confessed that the neglect was wholly
applicable to his proper guilt, which exposed the Merchants to so (...) damage;
and in as much as the Parent of the deceased Master himself* has, as we
understand, by petition already presented unto Your Majesty, charged all the
blame to his son's account, and quitted the Merchants: We coud not truly
decline our condemning the detention of the said (...) and goods to be most
arbitrary; and are so much the more strengthened in our confidence, that as
soon as your Majesty has a clear State of this thing, you will not only award
a competent reproof to the Ministers concernd in these Injuryes, but Issue
your comands also for the doing the Mercha^ts Right, and direct speedy
restitution to be made of those Goods and reparation of damages sustaind, to
the said Owuers or Asfignes. Which we instantly pray your Majesty's compliance
in, as a thing guarded with so much reason and justice, that we cannot appear in
the solicitation of ought on behalf of our people, which we less ought to
accept of a denial in, as being ready to make suitable returns on behalf of
your Subjects as often as there is like occasion for it.


To the most Serene Prince John the 4. King of Portugal.
THE Peace and alliance, which your Majesty's most Noble and splendid Embassy,
lately sent hither, sollicitted the Parliament about, (which then had the
conduct of this Republic in their hand) We have now at length, through Gods
help, and pursuant to the (...) we hold in the Administration of this
Government, as well as the affection we always bore theteto, drawn unto a happy
(...), and such (we hope) as may continue to perpetuity. And therefore return
you Your Ambassader extraordinary, Mr John Roderick de Saa Menesses, Count
Pennagavad, a per son whose Civil carriage, understanding, prudence and
faithfulness, we have found very eminent, and worthy your esteem, and one who
having discharged this Trust with extraordinary applause, comes to you with
the Ratification of the said Pe^ce. As to the Import of your letters of the
second of April from Lisbona, intimating your good esteem of us, how much you
tender our honor, and the excess of your Gladness^ at your ^earing of our
present undertakeing in this Government; the same are apparent indications of
singular affection, and shall endeavor that all Men may hereafter see from my
readynesse to serve Your Majesty at all times, that the same is of utmost
acceptance unto me. Nor am I in the mean time, less painful in the
preferrence of my expres prayers to God for your safety, for the happy State of
Your Kingdom, and the prosperity of your affairs.

Your Majesty's most affectionatl^ OLIVER, Protector of England, Scotland,
Ireland, etc


OLIVER, Protector of the Republic of England to the high and mighty States of
Holland, etc.
High and mighty Lords, dearest Friends.
THomas Bushel and Richard Bear, with several other of our Subjects have made
their joint complaint unto us, setting forth, that a shipp of theirs called the
Edmond and John did (being set upon in her way between Brasile and (...))
submit to the assault of a certain Privateor belonging to Vlushing, called the
Red Lion, whose Comander went by the name of Lambert Bartelson, but upon such
conditions and Terms ((...) by the said Lamberts hand and seal) as that upon
their arrival at Vluissing, restitution shoud be made of such Goods as shoud
appear to belong unto the English; That upon their arrival there, the shipp
was acquitted, and the seamen their respective goods restored them, but the
Merchants effects taken out, and exposed to imediat sale; That they, namely the
Merchants, who had this affront put upon, did, (upon their repair to Vlushing
to demand their effects at the Admiralty Court there) after five y^ares
expensive prosecution, loose the cause with vast charges through amost wicked
sentence awarded against them, by those Judges, namely they who, concerned in
the said Privateer, were themselves both Juges and Jury in the thing; That they
have no other hope left 'em, except it be in your equity and incorrupted
uprightness, which they now at length fly unto, whom they judge some relief
and favor from, if backed with our (...) of their complaint to you. And truly
this is a thing pardonable in the people* if in so great a hasard of their
fortunes as this seems to be, they, under an uuiversall dread from all hands,
consider what they ought to fear from your power and authority, as well as what
they were to hope from the integrity of Judges especially in a case where they
were themselves (...). We do not doubt but that the influence you are under of
Religion, Justice and Integrity may, in preferrence to any solicitation of
Ours, become an Incentive to you of comeing to such a determination herein, as
you may (...) to consist with Equity and justice, and an act that may become
you. God preserve both your selves, and Republic, to the service of his Glory,
and the comfort of his Church.

Westminster April 1. 1656. OLIVER, Protector of England, etc.


OLIVER, Protector of the Comonwealth of England. To the most Serene Prince
Charles Gustavus King of Sweedland, Goths, and Vandalls, Great Prince of
Finland, Duke of Esthon, Carelia, Bremen, Verda* Stetin, Pomerania, Cassubia*
and Vandalia, Prince of Russia, Lord of Ingry, Wismar; as also Count Pallatine
of the Rhine, Bavaria, Jul Clevia, and Duke of the Mounains, etc.
Most Serene Prince.
PEter Julius Coitus, having discharged his Embassy here, and so discharged
it, as that I thought it a thing unfit to dismiss him hence, without,
accompanying him with my opinion of his just merits, which he now returns to
your Majesty with; as being a person who, upon your score (who have a just
Right to our highest esteem) was, as (well as for that of his own meritts)
very acceptable unto us, and no less praise worthy by the most dilligent
discharge of this Trust. Therefore we freely certify (if any Testimony can add
thereto) that he has answered that character which he brought Us, as your
Majestys most just gift to him: who may with the same fidelity and integrity
relate the singular respect, which we bear toward your Majesty. What we have
to add is to breath our wishes to the Omnipotent Great God to bless your
Majesty with all prosperity, and continue the influence of your victorys over
the enemies of the Church, to perpetuity.

Westminster April 17. 1656. Your Majesty's most affectionately OLIVER,
Protector of the Republic of England, etc.


OLIVER, Protector of the Republic of England. To the most Serene and potent
Prince Lewis King of France. S. D.
APplication being by petition made us, in the names of John Dethicke present
Lord Mayor of t^is City of London, and William Wackfield Merchant, setting
forth, that having about the Calends of the month of October Auno 1649. loaded
a certain shipp called the (...) of London, one Lig^tbagh Master, the whole
freight consisting of their own proper goods, to be transported to Ostend, the
said shipp was seized upon in the mouth of the River of Thames, carried away,
and disposed of at Dunkirk, then under the obedience of the Crown of France,
and that by the contrivance of a certain Privateer called White belonging to
Berkin, who exercises piracy, by virtue of a Commission from the son of Charles
the late deceased King, contrary to the purport of your Majest^s proclamations
published to the contrary Annis 1647. and 1649; besides some resolutions of
Council in favor of the Parliament of England, whereby they (understanding
that the transportation of any Goods, or ships taken from the English, dureing
that (...), into any place under your Majesty's jurisdiction, or suffered to be
in any such place exposed to sale was provided against as unlawful) dispatched
Hugh Morrell their solliciter to Dunkirke, with directions to apply to Mr
Lestrado Governor of that City, and demand restitution of the said shipp and
Goods, as knowing that they were in a great measure yet untoucht in Town; who
upon such application replied, not like a gentleman nor one that would seem to
be very observable of the Comands of his prince, that his present employ was a
benefit comferr'd upon him in consideration of public and past services,
performed in the King of France s Service, and that he therefore intended to
make as much improvement thereof as he coud (as if comisionated to Robb his
neighbors.) Upon which disappointment, the said sollicitour, after a great
expense both of money and time, comeing home, the peti^ioners (destitute of all
other hopes other then what they imagined they might meet with upon appeal to
your Majesty's Clemency and Justice, and believing that our recomendatory
Letters in their favor might render their access to your Majesty more facile)
pray that you would not decline your help from a people robbed in defiance of
all Justice, and in derision of your repeated Comands to the Contrary. Which if
obtainable at our importunity; albeit it is truly a thing which seems ver
equitable, yet we shall believe it to be rather the effect of your natural
(...) to Justice, then the fruit of my so^licitation.

Westminster May 1656. Your Majesty's most affectionately OLIVER, Protector of
the Republic of England, etc.


OLIVER, Protector of the Republic of England, etc. To the high and mighty
Lords, the States General of the United Provinces, S. D.
High and mighty Lords, Dearest Friends,
IOohn Brown, Nicolas Williams, with other Londoners, have in a Petition
humbly showed unto us, that having severally ventured to the East Indies, by
the Ship Good Hope of London, then bound thither, directed their Correspondents
at Amsterdam, about the Month of February, 1644. to ensure there two thousand
and forty Pounds Flemish: That the said Ship being* in her way thither, taken
upon the very East India Coast, by a certain Ship, belonging to the (...) East
India Company; the Ensurer's denied to fulfill their Contract in paying the
ensured Sum* and have so far prevailed, as to be capable, by various delays,
to elude our People now after the expensive consumption of Six years in
prosecution of their Right Which in regard they look upon as an usage of great
oppression and injustice, and that some obliged for the Payment of the Money
agreed for, are either already dead, or become insolvent, We earnestly pray
that you would (to prevent ^urther expenses in addition to the said Losses* be
pleased to suffer your equity, to be a safe Port and refuge to them after so
many Years stormy useage, and almost Shipwreck in your Court of ^udicature;
and that Sentence be with all speed awarded concerning their cause, in whose
justice they seem very confident. Wishing (in the mean time) that happine^s
and prosperity may attend all you undertake, to the Glory of God, and the
safety of his Church.

Your High and Mighty Lordships most affectionally, OLIVER, Protector, etc.


OLIVER, Protector of the Commonwealth of England, To the High and Mighty
Lords, the States of Holland. S, D.
THomas and William Lower, lawful Heirs of Nicholas Lower, lately deceased,
on whose account you have had some former trouble giveu you, (about the ^des of
September last I think,) do bawl now a fresh again, alleging, that they
still labor under the oppression of their Adversaries, who^e power, or other
private Intrest has (notwitstanding the integrity of their claims, and when
that coud not do, our Letters sent in favor of their cause) ^o far prevailed,
as to hinder them from entering upon the benefit of their Father's will: That
being rejected by the Court of Holland, where the action first began, and
thrown upon yours, packed thence to Zee-land, and thence hurryed back again to
your high Court of Judicatorie (to their content) accompanied to each place
with our Letters (For where the hight and power is, there they depend upon the
dispensation of Justice proportionably) If that fails they are at a loss to
know where to cast anchor for relief after the pains they undertoke in pursuit
of Justice: For if they find that this our fourth recomendation of their cause
can do no good, it will be to little purpose for 'em to extend their hopes any
further. We shall reckon it as a true instance of kindness, if after so many
rejections, you let them see, that your apprehension of our Authority could
contribute somewhat to their Relief in bringing their claim to a speedy
determination, as well altogether as have them believe it to be the entire
effect of your own Justice and equity. As we can no way dispond of your
allowance of the former of which, so we are confident that the consideration of
our Friendship will incline you to the later.

Yours, etc. OLIVER, Protector.


OLIVER, Protector of the Republic of England, To the most Serene Prince John,
King of Portugal.
Most Serene Prince.
WHereas several Merchants, belonging the Brazil Company in Portugal, did in
the Years 1649. and 1650. become indebted unto sundry English Merchants, in a
considerable Sum of Money, upon the account of freight and Moorage, and that
the said Society respit the Payment thereof, pursuant to an order of your
Majesty's to that purpose; notwithstanding that they did truly depend upon the
Payment thereof conformable to the Terms, and conditions of the league lately
ratified: But fear they may be frustrated in their hope, and other means of
recovering their Right, as being informed of your Majesty hayeing seized, and
sent to the Exchequer their said debt, and assigned the repayment thereof upon
the moity of your Customs, so that the Merchants are like to have no more then
the bare Interest of their Money, the principal lying (in the mean while)
wholly dead. Having taken the hardship of which under our strict
consideration, the conviction of their just importunities prevailed upon our
giveing your Majesty this trouble on their behalf, requireing that instant
satisfaction be by the Brazil Company, made the Merchants of his Republic, in
reference as well to each ma ns demand respectively, as five Years Intrest.
This as it is a thing in it self consistent with lustice, and conformable with
the league lately contracted with you, let me on their behalf desire in an
amicable manner, that it be complied with without further delay.

From our palace at Westminster, July 1656. Your Ma^esties most affectionally
OLIVER, Protector of England, etc.


OLIVER, P. of the Republic of England, To the most Sere^e Prince Charles
Gustavus, by the Grace of God, King of Sweedland, Goths, and Vandalls, Great
Prince of Finland, etc.
Most Serene King.
AS the alliance of so great a Prince, and so famous for his actions, as Your
Majesty is, has ^ just Title to the height of our esteem, so that person,
through whose means we have been so strictly allied, I mean that most ^llustrious
Gentleman Christernus Bondur, your Ambassador Extraordinary, must have been
(upon that very consideration) necessarily gratful and welcome unto us. Whom
therefore (having laudably discharged this Embassy) we could not dismiss
hence, without accompanying him with a Testimony of our being highly satisfied
in the rest of ^is singular virtues; as being one who seems to entert^ine a
bel^efe, that this our recommendation of him may add' considerably to that
value and esteem which he is already in possession of with Your Majesty, in
reference (...) particularly to the diligence and prudence he exerted in this
affair. What remains to be further transacted, we have resolved to send Your
Majesty an Ambassador soon about: Whose health God (in the mean time)
preserve, for the defense of his Church, and that of the Kingdom of Sweedland.

From our Court at Westminster, July, An. Dom. 1656. Your Majesty's most
affectionally, OLIVER, Protector of the Republic of England, etc.


OLIVER, Protector of the Repbul. of England, etc To the most Serene Prince
Lewis, King of France.
Most Serene Prince, Friend and dearest Consederate.
WE have had a petition in the names of Richard Baker, and several other
Merchants of London, and his Associates, wherein they humbly complain, that an
English built Ship, called the Endeavor, William Jopp Master, and hired into
their service, was, about the 21. of Novemder 1655. set upon in her way,
between a place called the Palm, and the Island of Tenerif (where she put out
for London from) and seized by four French Vessels who, in appearance looking
like Merchantmen, but armed like Men of War, and under the chief command of
one Egedius de la Rock, carried her with her whole freight, consisting in
Medera, wines, to the East Indy's, whether they said they were bound; together
with most o^ the Mariners, saveing fourteen which they landed upon the shore of
Guiny; Which the said Egidius declared the inten^ of to be, to prevent (by
planting them in so remote and inhumane a place) the escape of any who might by
a declaration of the fact, hurht him For he did own, that he had no directions
to meddle either with the English, or others, which he might have troubled
before; and with all that he was not ignorant of the English and French's being
at Peace at that vety time: But designing to revictual at Portugal, but was
prevented therein by contrary Winds, was necessitated to supply his Wants with
what he found in that Ship: That he moreover believed he might content the
Owners thereof in what damage they didthem. Which, by sworn Testimony, will
appear to amount to above sixteen thousand Pounds damage to the Merchants. But
yet if People will, upon such slender temptations, venture upon the rash
violation, and turn into scorn (as it were) the Decrees of Princes, (whose
force ought to be of utmost weight,) so as to exercise (...) licentiousness
upon Merchants to serve their own Ends, it truly acts toward a total
dissolution of the Ty of alliances for the future, the word and authority of
Princes will decline; and signify just nothing. We do therefore not only pray,
but judge it very much concerning Your Majesty's Intrest that those who have
dared, to make so slight a matter of being the first Breakers of their King's
Contract, and most sacred Word, have speedy punishments executed upon them,
suitable to the nature of their perfidiousnesse and insolency; and that the
Owners of the said Ships, do in the mean time, make our Merchants full
satisfaction for the damage, and prejudice which this act has injuriously
exposed 'em unto. Gods care be Your Majesty's continual Guard, and become the
defense of the affairs of France against both our common Enemy.

From our Court at Westminster, August An. Dom. 1656. Your Majesty's most
affectionally OLIVER, Protector of England, etc.


OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc* To Cardinal Mazarine.
Most Eminent Sir
WHen the imporatance of any affair gives me a necessary Invitation of writeing
to the King. I do judge the same, expediently to include an occasion of doing
the like to your Excellency; for to conceal from his knowledge, whose singular
prudence alone moderates, with suitable fidelity, advice and vigilance, the
weightyest affairs of France what I write about, is apoint I reckon' of utmost
Inconsistency. That Treaty most strictly established by you, (whose sinceriry
were a sin to dispute) we complain of the violation and contempt of, and that
through the Means of a (...) (...) called Egidius, who with his Abettors, broake
the same the very sameday (almost) of its confirmation, as our Letters to the
King, and the applications from the Merchants themselves can make appear to
your Excellency, who must in particular know how much it concerns not only
the Magistrates, but his Majestys own Intrest, to see the original Infringers
of this Contract brought to Justice. But these perhaps upon their arrival in
the Indies, whether they went, may look upon the Goods of our Subject (seized
upon, upon the heels if so fresh an alliance contrary to all Justice and
truth) as Prised Goods lawfully forced from the Enemy. That that we would have
your Excellency (in the mean time) do, amounts to no more, then that (...)
Owners of the said ships would make good the promise of this Comander in
chief, in returning to our people that that may be equivalent to what he has
taken from'em, to supply the necestary occasi^ns o^ his voyage: wherein we
understand Your Excellency to be able to do much by virtue of Your Authority.

From our Court at Westminster, August, A. D. 1656. Your Eminency's most
affectionatly OLIVER, Protector of the Republic of England, etc


OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the High and mighty
States of the united Provinces
High and mighty Friends and dearest Confederates.
WE do not (truly) doubt, but that all persons will say, that nothing has
been more the design of our making Friends abroad, then in order to the
raising of them, as such, for the Intrest of the Protestant Religion, nor that
has appeared more the subject of our aim, then the uniteing of their hearts,
who either were Friends and champions for the Protestants, or who were not
their Enemies at least. Which raises our grief and trouble of mind so much the
higher, when we hear of their suspecting and entertaining of suspicions and
animositys against each other, who, as Protestant Princes and Republics ought
to Cherish one another in all imaginable Sincerity; especially You, and the
Kingdom of Sweedland, (two of the principallest Defenders of the Protestant
Religion, and the best Friends this Republic has) not to have that confidence
in each other, whick you were wont to have, yea to ^et appear signs either of
a growing difference, or an evident decay of your Friendship. What the causes
were, or how far this alienation of mind has extended of either hand, are
things which we profess our ignorance of. We coud not (nevertheless) but be
much troubled at these (tho never so inconsiderable) sparcks of disagreements
between Brethren, which must necessarily convey a deal of inconveniency to the
repose of the Protestant Religion's Intrest, and (whichif sufferd to go on,
(which God Farbidd) how will it endanger the Reformed Churches, how will the
Enemy swell and triumph thereat, the (spaniards more especially); is a thing
that cannot escape the prudent Ey of one of your experience. The Spaniard will
certainly so swell and swagger hereat, as not to fail of rendering it the
business of his Embsssadour with you, to obtrude his advices (and that more
Confidently) upon you to be guided by; and with the apprehension of raiseing
new war partly, and by the prospect, of a false advantage partly; tempt to
solicit you to forsake (at his Instance) your old and faithful Friends; the
French, English and Sweedes, and engage in a very strict fellowshipp with one,
formerly your Enemy and Tyrant, tho now a seeming Friend, and (which is much to
be feared) a a conterfeited One. Truly he, who from a most cankered Enemy,
shall, upon so slight an occasion, press of a sudden, to become your
Counselor, what is it that such a Man will not assume unto himself? what
confidence will he raise to, if he can but once see with his Eyes, such things
as are now only the b^re conceptions and imaginations of his heart; namely to
plant discord and civil War amongst the Protestant Confederates? We know
that you often, pursuant to your wisdom, take the State of all Europe, and
the condition of the Protestant Religion more especially, into your
consideration; that such of the Cantons of Switzerland as profess the Orthodox
faith, are amused; and grow pregnant with the apprehension of new troubles from
their neighbors the Papists, w^le yet scare cowld from the heat of that Wart
levied upon them by the Spaniard, upon the bare score of their Religion, who
having inflamed and kindled that war, supplied their Enemies with men and
Money; that the Massacre and destruction executed the last year upon the
Protestant Inhabitants of Piedmont, were the effects of Spanish Influences;
that the Protestants of Germany under the subjection of the Emperor, underwent
intolerable disquiets and with much difficulty held their native habitations;
That the King of Sweedland, whom God (we hope) raised as a most curagious
champion for the Protestant Religion, was exposed to the necessity of
maintaining with the strength of his whole Kingdom, a foul and rigid War
against the most powerful Enemy, that the Reformation has extant; how your own
Provinces are threatend by the malicious confederacy lately struck by your
Neighbors the Papists, who are the King of Spaine's Subjects; And sinally we,
who are taken up by the war declared against the King of Spain. If, while
things stand thus, a misunderstanding shoud happen to arise between you and the
King of Sweedl^nd, what a sad and lamentable condition shoud Protestancy fall
under, all Europe over being subjected to the cruelty, and fury of inhuman
Enemies? The consideration of which does not a little trouble us; and believe
you to be of the same mind, and that you will withal, pursuant to the great
affection you always expressed on behalf of the Protestant cause in general,
and disposition to the maintaining uninterupted the peace of such, as are (...)
both in their Judgment and desires, accommodate your counsels to these
considerations, which are preferrable to all others whatever, and that you will
not decline the doing of ought, that may conduce to the establishing of a peace
between you and the King of Sweedland. Wherein (...) we can ^e of any service;
what ever opinion you may entertain of our Authority or Intrest, we most
freely offer you the tender of our endeavor, with the same readynesse, which
we do it to the King of Sweedland, to whom we design likewise to send an
Embassy out of hand, to let him know our opinion of this affair. And ^ope that
God will incline your minds on both sides to moderat Couucills, and prevent the
falling out of any thing that may give cause of offense on either hand, or
carry things to an extremity. But that contrariwise, both partys endeavor to
remove what may offend or Administer matter of Iealousy to to'ther. Which if
you concur to, you will ^oth disappoint your Enemies, and become a comfor't to
your Friends, and finally provide plentifully for your own, and the safety of
the Republicke: And do pray you to rest likewise very confident in this, that
we, as often as we are supplyd with an opportunity for it, shall employ our
endeavor toward the rendering the united Provinces sensible of the great
affection and love we bear'em. Sollicitting God wit^all, with our daily
prayers, that he would be pleased to bless your Repulick with a flourishing
peace, riches, Liberty and more especially love and true worshipp, to the
Christian faith.

From our Court at Westminster, August 1656. Your etc. OLIVER, Protector.


OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most Serene Prince
John King of Portugal,
Most Serene King.
THomas Maynard has, upon the 11. of July last (old style) delivevered into our
Receipt, your Majesty's Ratification of the peace concluded by your Ambassador
at London, as well as of the private and preliminary articles thereof, and by
letters then transmitted hither from Phillip Meaddaw our Envoy at Lisbona,
understand that he has delivered your Majesty ours likewise, pursuant to our
direction to him on that behalf: the aforesaid Instruments of Ratification
being about the beginning of June last interchanged. So that a most firm Peace
is confirmed between both Nations. From which peace we have derived no small
pleasure; for that we judged that as it bespeaks a general advantage to both,
so it does a proportionable detriment to the common Enemy: Who as they have been
the first Inventers of means to interrupt the former alliance, so they have
lefr nothing unattempted to prevent its renovation now. Nor do we doubt of
their slipping any occasion that can be improved toward the creating matter
of suspicion and offense between Us. Which we have truly resolved to employ
our utmost endeavors and constancy in opposition of; yea it is our earnest
desire that the alliance may strengthen our confidence in each other daily more
and more, so as to reckon those our Enemies, who, by any artifices, shall
appear to employ any project toward the lesseningh our friendship among
ourselves, and those contained in this Ratification; and are verily persuaded
that Your Majesty is much of the same mind. And whereas Your Majesty has been
pleased (in it is Letters to Us under the 24. of June new Style, and delivered
unto our Envoy some days after the mutual exchange of the Instrument concerning
the establih't Peace) to mention some Clauses of this Treaty, which you would
have altered, as things which, tho of small moment to this Republic in Your
Majesty's opinion, yet of very great consequence to the Kingdom of Portugal,
We shall be found ready to treat apart about such things as shall be propound
on Your Majesty's behalf, and settleing such things as shall seem to either
party to conduce to the further strengthening or binding the same: Wherein we
shall observe such measures as may equally conduce to the satisfaction of Your
Majesty and People, as our own, and referr to your choice where you will have
all these things debated, either at London or Lisbona. But this Treaty being
already confirmed, passed the lawful Firm of both Nations, and mutually
interchanged; to alter any part of it, were to destroy the whole, which we know
is a thing far from Your Majesty's seeking. We wish Your Majesty all prosperi^y
and happiness.

From our Court at Westminster August 1656. Your Majesty's most affectionatly
OLIVER, Protector of England, etc.


OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most serene Prince
John, King of Portugal. S. D.
WE have had an account of that base and wicked attempt, made toward the
Murder of Phillip Meadows sent hence under the Character of our Envoy, to
treat with you touching a peace: The cruelty of which has appeared so great,
that his escape is the sole effect of God providence and care of him. And do by
your Majestys Letters of the 26. of May delivered by Thomas Maynard,
understand, that your Majesty, moved at the indignity of the Fact, Issued your
comands in pursuit of the Assacinates, in order to their being brought to
condign punishment: but do not yet hear of the apprehension of any of them,
nor that your Comands concerning them signified any thing. We have therefore
thought fit to declare openly how much we resent that base and barbarous
attempt, and the approach it made toward its design: And require that due
punishment ^e executed upon the Authors, Confederates and Instruments concerned
in that Villainy: And the sooner its done, and People of honesty, utmost
integrity, and who study the Peace of both Nations, appointed to inquire into
this affront, whereby the whole may receive a through inspection, and the Authors
of the villainy, and those that employed'em, punished with the great or severity
the better. For without which, it will (...) rain your Majesty laws of
^njustice, nor will the reputation of this Republic be vindicated; nor can any
true friendshipp subsist between both Nations, without its correction. We wish
Your Majesty all felicity and good luck: remaining

Erom our Court at Westminster, August 1656. Your Majesty's most affectionately
OLIVER, Protector of the Republic of England, etc


OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most ^llustrious Lord
Connt Mariano. S. D.
Most illustrious Sir.
THE indication of Your singular Love both to me, and this Republic, contained
in Your Letter of the 25. of June, last to me; as also the import of others*
sent me from Phillip Meaddow, whom I sent to the King of Portugal to treat with
him about the conclusion of a Peace, wherein he gives us a full account of your
extraordinary Parts and endeavor in the Transaction thereof, has obliged us
very much by what I (...) from the Import of the said Letters. This last
consirmation I have received with very much content, and am so far satisfied
in the Issue of things, as that you shall never have cause to repent of
whatever you have (...) contributed (...) the promotion of this Peace, (...)
your sincerity to the English, nor of your faithfulness, exerted in this point
to His Majesty: It (...) (through Gods assistance) to be hoped, that this Peace
may be very advantageous to both Nations, as well as of contrary effects to the
Enemy. All the misfortune and ill luck that attended thi^ affair consists in
that wicked attempt basely projected against our Envoy Philips Meaddow, Against
whose unknown Authors there ought to be no less care taken, then in Instances
of manifest Roguery: Nor (...) I doubt of Your Kings Justice and severity in
punishing so deep a piece of villainy, nor of your (...) promotion thereof in
particular, as one, whose practice is Justice and Piety, and make it your
business to continue both Nations in amity and peace: Which can no way
subsist, if such wicked attempts shall be suffered to escape unpunishd and
unvindicated. But your know^ detestation of that villainy renders it unnecessary
for me to enlarge any further upon it for the present. As I have therefore
assured you how ready I shall (at all times) be to demonstrate my sincerity
toward you; That that remains is, to let you know of my having recommended
very fervently both you and all yours to the favor and protection of the
Almighty.

From our Court at Westminster, August 1656. Yours, etc. OLIVER, Protector of
England, etc.


OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most Serene Prince
Charles Gustavus, King of Sweedland, Goths and Vandals, etc.
Most Serene King, Friend and dearest Confederated.
WHen I consider that Your Majesty and I, concur both in disposition and
resolution, in reference to the defense of the Protestant Religion against it s
now (if never before) malignant Enewys: Thence it comes to pass, that as your
prosperous Successes and Tideings of your daily (almost) Victories adds to our
satisfaction, so I am very much troubled at that one thing, which disquiets,
and destroys this our united content, and that is, to hear, among other news,
that your former understanding with the States of Holland does not stand as
well as it did, and that things (...) carried to that State (...) you ((...)
the (...) Zea especially) as to draw seemingly toward a Rupture. The causes I
know not I must confess; I visibly see that without it please God divert it;
it will very much devolve the Protestant Intrest. Wherefore we thought it
becomeing that nearest relation wherein we are united to you both, and
(pursuant to that love and affection to the Reformed Religion, which ought to
be a principal inducement to us all) to repeat unto Your Majesty now those
perswa^ions which we highly pres'st upon the States of Holland to list^n unto,
of Peace and Quietness. Every Corner swells with Envy against the Protestants;
they seem to have conspired our destruction as being never pregnant with more
malice. Witness Piedmont loaded but yesterday (as it were) with the blood and
Massacre of those miserable wretches; Germany quashed by the late Edicts and
proscriptions of the Emperor; witness Switz^rland. What need there many words
to overhall the memory and grief of so many fresh calamity's? Who knows not
but that those Massacres, Distractions and Vexations, to which the Protestants
were for three Years together exposed, were the effects of Spanish Couucils,
and those of Roman Pontificates. If to so many mischiefs a civil dissension
among Protestant Brethren be added; among you more especially, in whose Power,
Riches and constancy the greatest safety left to the Reformed Churches, is (as
far as human help is to be depended upon) lodged: It will unavoidably hasard
the Reformed Religion it self, and plunge it into the depth of danger. Whereas
on the other side, if the Protestants universally join in that brotherly unity
which becomes them to do, we need fear nothing that the arts, or power of
our Enemy's can do to hurt us; whom our Concord alone will baffle and
disappoint. I therefore in an extraordinary manner pray and beseech Your
Majesty, that you would be pleased to apply a vvilling and well disposed mind
to the confirming the former understanding with the States of Holland, if in
any point the same b^ slacken or abated. If in any thing my endeavor, faith
and diligence can be thought of use toward an accommodation; I do promised and
tender you the same. God in the mean time bless, and prosper the success of
what I vvish; which is, that Your Majesty's affairs may prosper and run in
an interrupted stream of felicity.

From our Court at Westminster, August 1656. Your Majesty's most affectionatly
OLIVER, Protector of England, etc.


OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the States of Holland.
High and mighty Lords, dearest Frirnds.
WIlliam Cooper a -- Londone^ and our Subject made his complaint, that John la
Mair an Amsterdamer and his father in Law, did about thirty years ago; invent
a means of raiseing the Revenue of your Republic ^arr higher then it was, and
that without any extraordinary burden to the people; and made a Covenant with
one John van den Brook, importing that upon some consideration between 'em, he
should receive the moity of such (...) as should redound from the said
Invention, which was the (...) of the small seal in the Provinees. In
consideration of which your mighty Highness were pleased to settle the yearly
allowance of three thousand Guilders (which amounts to three hundred pounds in
English money) to be paid annually to the said van den (...) and posterity: But
now, albeit the said Invention of the small seal has been found very easy and
expedient, and of a considerable advantage to your Highnesses and the other
Provinces, yet no part of the said settlement has been made good to this day,
although sought with much sollicicitation. So that he the said van den Brook, and
la Maire being tired out with delays, that affair lawfully descended to the
said William Cooper our subject; who out of a desire of receiveing the effects
of his Father in Laws Industry, applied unto us by petition, praying that we
would recomend this his Request to the consideration of your Mighty Highnesses;
which we thought unsit to de^y' him in. Wherefore make it our friendly request
to Your Mighty Highnesses, that you would please to give a fair hearing to the
petition of the said William Cooper, and take care that the stipulated Reward
of Industry, and so just a stipend, and for so many years past, with a yearly
(...) fot the time to come, be paid him. Which as we doubt not of your Mighty
Highnesses free allowance of, as a just thing and worthy Your Bounty; so we
shall be on ou^ part ready to show the like just disposition to your People in
their Requests, as often as we are in that nature applied unto.

From our Court at Westminster, September, Anno Dom. 1656. I am your mighty
Highnesses most affectionally, OLIVER, Protector of England, etc.


OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most Serene Prince
Lewis, King of France.
Most serene King, Friend, and dearest Confederate.
IT is with violence to our inclination, that so many complaints of ours,
against the injustice of your Subjects, should happen to pursue the peace
reestablish't with Your Majesty: But as we are confident that our sufferings
are no way the effects of your consent, so we cannot be vvanting to the
Complaints of our People. It is evident that the Capture of the Ship Anthony of
Deep was lavvful prize, if the Sentence of our Admiralty Court be consulted
with; which says, that her seizure happened before the Treaty was concluded.
Part of which Prize, to the number of about four thousand Hides more or less,
Robert Brown Merchant of London, bought of those who had the overseeing of
the public sale: Upon his sending, selling, ^d calling for the price of about
two hundred of which Hides from a certain Skinner at Deep, he complains
that the same was stopped and arrested in his Correspondents hands, a quarrel
fastend upon him, so that he cannot attain to Justice in that Court. Wherefore
we have thought fit to desire Your Majesty to cause the whole matter, to be
brought before your Council, and that money disengaged from that most u^just
restraint. For if what were committed before the conclusion of the Peace,
shall be liable to be called into question and Judgment after its confirmation:
We do not see what a Treaty can signify. For there can be no end of quarrels
of this kind, if some severe punishment be not timely avvarded these frequent
PeaceBreakers, which we hope Your Majesty will take speedy care to see done*
Whom God honor with his most holy Def^nce.

^om our P^llace at Westminster, September, 1656. Your Majesty's most
affectionatly, OLIVER, Protector of England, etc.


OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most Serene and
Potent Prince John, King of Portugal.
Most Serene King.
THe peace between this Republic and the Kingdom of Portugal, being now
transacted, and all due provision and (...) ^ken of Trade. We have thought it
a thing (...) and necessary to dispatch the bearer Thomas Maynard to your
Majesty, to act in your Kingdom as Consul; to hear and determine matters of
debate usually ariseing amongst Merchan^. But in regard it often f^lls out,
that the nature of his employ may necess^rily require (...) to your Majesty,
relateing as well to the Intrest of this Nation, as Trade, in general. We
desire your Majesty, that as often as he has occasion of being h^ar'd, you will
please to allow him the liberty of approaching to, and being heard by your
Majesty, which shall pass with us for an evident argument and singular
Testimony of your esteem of us. That the omnipotent great God may (in the mean
time) prosper all your Majestys undertakeings.

From our Court at Westminster October 1656. Your Majesty's most
affectionately OLIVER, Protector of England, etc.


To the King of Svveedland.
Most Serene and Potent King.
ALbeit your Majesty's wonted and natural disposition to men of merit is such,
as to reckon all additionall comendations unecessary, yet we coud not dismiss
this worthy Gentleman Sir William Vavasor Knight a person of note in warlike
discipline, and now upon his Journey toward you, with out accompaining him
with the trouble of a letter to your Majesty. Our freedom in the doing of
which was prompted so much the more, when we were told that much of his time
and blood has been spent in the pursuit of your service, and in many battles
fought on your behalf: So that the late Kings of Sweedland have, in
consideration of his warlike skill and true courage, often exerted in war,
settled Landsand annual Pensions upon him. Nor do we doubt but that he may be
of future great use to your Majesty in the present Wars, as being faithful
and of known skill in Martial discipline. It is therefore but what he merits,
if we recomend him to your Majesty; that the allowances granted him by them
formerly, be paid. This we will take very kindly; nor shall we, upon any the
like occasion that may offer grudge, to gratify your Majesty, whom we wish all
hapy^ and prosperity unto.

From our Court at Westminster October. An. Dom. 1656. Your Majesty's most
affectionatly OLIVER, Protector of England, etc.


OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most Serene Prince,
John, King of Portugal. S. D.
Most Serene King, Friend and dearest Confederate.
Thomas Evans Skipper, and one of the Subjects of this L^d, complains that,
having served the Brasile Company Annis 1649. and 1650 in a small vessel of
his, of about forty Tuns, and whereof he was himself Master, the said vessel,
with all her Freight and apparel, was taken from him, pursuant to a command of
your Majestys: So that the damages done the man, besides the loss of six years
profit, amounts (according to the Report of the Commissioner appointed by the
League to decide differrences on both sides,) to above seven thousand pounds
sterling or twice that number of Milreis of Portugal, Which proveing such a
great affliction to the a foresaid Thomas, so as to be constrained to repair to
Lisbon to recover his Right according to Terms of the Treaty, humbly prayed
us, that we vvoud grant him our Letters to your Majesty: We, (although we did the
last year writ on behalf of those merchants cause in Common, to whom the
Brasile Company is indebted, yet that we may be wanting to none justly
requireing our help): pray, that the consideration of our friendship may be an
inducement to your Majesty to take particular care of this man's case, and so
direct your people, that nothing may, in your City, stand in this man's way,
which may interrupt his demanding and without delay recovering forthwith what
ever the said Company or any others ^an accountable to him in. God incr^se your
Majesty in perpetual felicity, and render our friendship d^eable.

From our Court at Westminster October. An. Dom. 1656. Your M^jesties most
affectionatly OLIVER, Protector of England, etc.


OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the Illustrious and
Magnificent City of Hamburgh.
Noble, Magnificent, and worthy Gentlemen, dearest Friends.
James and Patrick Hay, Subjects of this Republic made us their heavy
complaint, setting forth, that being the lavvsul heirs to a third brother
called Alexander, who died intestate, and so declared by a sentence of your
Court, pronounced thirteen years ago against his vviddovv, avvarding the
petitioners the Estate of their said Brother, dedueting only her portion; coud
not hither to, either by by their own solicitation, or the interposition of
the late King Charles (who writ to that effect,) received he benefit of the
said sentence; That the purse and ^ntrest of one Albert van Eisen, a great Man
among you, (in whose hands great part of this Estate lies) are made use of to
keep them out of their Right, who Acts all he can to prevent their Recepit
thereof. Being thus eluded, shamed often with delays, and at length reduced to
great poverty, and supplicateing that we would not suffer them to sink under the
oppression of a Corporation that is our Friend. And looking upon it as a
principal branch of our Office to deny our assistance to none of our Subjects
in cases, wherein our help and protection are justly called for and applicable,
our Request to your Corporation shall not exceed what may be easily obtein'd,
and that is; to give the said sentence its due force, without suffering your
Justice to be further suspended, or the said Brethren exposed to any the like
future delays whatever; for we have consulted and accordingly herewith send you
under Hand and Sealed the opinion of our learned in the Law, awarded here
concerning their cause. W^erein if Intreatys cano^ do, the Laws of Nations
must (...) such other methods as we would willingly avoid the pursuit of, and
which we are confident your prudence will invite you to prevent.

From our Court at Westminster, October, 16. A. D. 1656. Yours most
affectionately OLIVER, Protector of England, etc.


OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most Serene and
Potent Prince Lewis, King of France. S. D.
Most Serene and Potent King, Friend, and dearest Confederate
OUr Letters of the 14. of the May last was twelve Month are (we suppose) come
to Your Majesty's hands, containing acomplaint made by John Dethick, then Lord
Mayor of the Cit^y of London, and William Wackfield Merchant, who declared that
a Ship of theirs, called the John, laden with their proper Goods, to be
transported to Ostend, was snatched away from out of the River of Thames's
mouth, and carried to Dunkirke, by a cer^ain Privateer Comissionated thereto,
by the Son of Charles Stuart: That they (pursuant to your Proclamations and
Decrees of Council prohibitting the admission into, or s^le of any Ship taken
from the Parliament of England, in any of your Po^ts) praying Monsr. l'Estrade
Governor of that Gitty to command the restitution of the said S^ipp and Goods;
had an answer ^o way truly suitable to the worth of a Gentleman, nor such as
would seem* inclinable to show obedience enough to his Kings comands; namely
that the King of France conferred that Governership upon him in Consideration
of services in the Wars; moreover, that he would take care to improve it all
he coud (right or wrong for sooth he did not seem to matter which) As if your
Majesty had bestowed this Governership and office upon him to robb his
Neighbors with and Wipe his breech (as it were) with Edicts proclaimd in
their favor. If the King of France will be no more concerned at injurys done
us by our (...), then b^ly to forbidd his Subjects from abetting therein a
Royal Governor has, in his connivance thereat, not only violated and
despised a Royal prohibition, in suffering us to be robbd, and made a prey of
before your doors, but he himself is the Robber and made a prey of us, and
owned himsel^e openly to be Author of the Fact. The Merchants therefore pu^t
off with this answer; provoaked and eluded, went away with a flea in their
Ears: Our letters of last years date carried Your Majesty an account of this
affair, tho to as little purpose we must confess (for we we have yet seen no
answer thereto) The reason why was, we believe, because that Governor
attended, about that time, your army in Flanders; he lives now at Paris, or
rather Rants up and down, City and Country loaded with the spoils of our
people unpunished. This therefore brings your Majesty a Repetition of our said
demands, which concerns your Majesty's own Intrest principally to provide
for, that none dare to heighten the thing by adding the contempt of Royal
Edicts to Injuries done his Neighbors: This matter cannot be properly referred,
or carried before the Deputys or Commissioners appointed to the decision of
Controversys on both sides; seeing it goes beyond the Right of Society, Royal
Authority and the reverence due to that name is struck at. It is to be truly
admired, if Merchants will be more concerned at their sufferings, then your
Majesty at yours, namely the diminution of your honor. Which if you will not
suffer, you will at one stroke show, that it does not repent you of any
friendly office which those most friendly Edicts might have intended in favor
of us and this Republic, nor that you have connived at the sufferings of our
people, nor that you would not listen to our Demands. I am, in affection,
friendship and fellowship,

From our Court at Westminster An. Dom. 1656. Your Majesty's most affectionally
OLIVER, Protector of the Republic of England, etc


OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most Serene and
Potent Prince Frederick the 3. King of Denmark, Norway, Vandalls and Goths;
Duke of Slesvice, Holsatia, Stormaria and Dithmarsia, Earl of Oldenburgh and
Delmenhort, etc. S. D.
Most Serene King, Friend and dearest Confederate.
THis brings you an account of our Receipt of your Majesty's Letters of the 16.
of Frebuary from Hasnia, brought by amost worthy Gentleman Simon de Perkinn
your Ambassador here; The peruseall of which, and the very weight of their
contents, did so affect us, that we did forthwith resolve upon sending unto
your Majesty One, furnished with such Instructions as should enable him to open
unto Your Majesty at large our sense of this affair. And although we continue
still under the same inclination, yet we could not hitherto fix upon one fit to
be entrusted with a Matter of that importance, as we hope we may in very little
time. We did in the mean time, judge it inconsistent with convenience to
suspend any longer the letting you know for a truth, how much our thoughts and
Care are taken up (and that in an imoderat measure) for the present State of
Europe: We having, from several Years observation, collected to our great
(...), matter enough to infer from, that the principal Protestant Princes and
Corporations (who out of regard to their comunity in Religion and its support,
ought to use all means tending to its confirmation and defense) grow daily
more and more animated against each other, and suspect, or put an ill meaning,
upon whatever the rest attempt or project; freightening their friends, while on
the contrary they dictat hopes to the Enemy of ensuing Enmity and dissent in
this Bent of affairs, rather then a firm union of minds to the mutual
safeguard and defense of each other. And truly this anxiety made the deeper
figure in our minds, and continues to gain daily, from some sparks of
Jealousy, which seem to remain unquelled between Your Majesty and the King of
Sweedland; or at last from your being at greater distance in your minds, then
our common love and affection to the Orthodox Religion seems to call for;
whilst your Majesty entertains (by what fate I know not) a Jealousy that the
Trade of your Kingdom may receive some prejudice from the King of Sweedland;
who is likewise little better satisfied, but that you may aggravat the war,
wherein he is now engaged, and render the Terms of peace, which he might
otherwise make, more intricat. Your Majesty cannot but, from that great prudence
exerted in all your affairs, know, how much it will expose the protestant
Religion, if such suspicion continues long among you, and how much more, if,
(which God forbidd) any token of hostility shoud break out. However these
things stand, we, as we have earnestly sollicitted both the King of Sweedland
and States of Holland to peace and moderat resolutions, (and should be
extraordinarily gladd to see you reconciled to peace and concord, the States
having sent us the heads of that league) so we reckoned it our part, and very
consistent with our friendshipp, not to co^ceale from your Majesty what ever we
thought of this matter, especially when we consider the most friendly
invitation given us by your Majesty's Letters so to do; a thing we look upon
to be a singular argument, and embrace it as one, of your good disposition
toward us. And lay before your Majesty what a charge divine providence has
laid upon the professors of Protestancy, of maintaining peace among our selves,
when our Enemies (now especially if never before) seem so violent against us,
as to have conspired, as it were, from all places to our destructiom. It helps
not to overhall the Blood and Massacre, wherein these at Piedmont lately Swam;
nor those of Germany tore to pieces by the Edicts and proscriptions of the
Emperor, nor finally the furious assaults of the Popish Swittsers upon their
Protestant Neighbor. If to these misfortunes a falling ou^ among protestant
Brethren be added, as Oil to quench fire; especially among you, who are so
great a part of our strength, and in whom so much o^ the Protestant Protection
and strength is reposed in tickelish times; Reformation must (as far as human
power can reach,) go down and be destroyed. When on the contrary, if you
cherish peace among your selvas as Neighbors, and the rest of the Protestant
Princes, if brotherly concord be of all hands studied, we shall have no reason
to fear (with Gods help) what the artifice or force of our enemy can do Us. The
dissipation of whose designs depending wholly upon our agreement. Nor do we
truly fear, but that your Majesty, will contribute all it can (and that's much)
toward that end. Wherein I shall (my self) be very ready to join Issue with
your Majesty as a Professor of true friendshipp, and one whose study shall be
not only in maintaining the peace already so happily established, but also go as
far as God shall be pleased to suffer me to go, toward the improveing that
now existent. God, in the mean time, bless and prosper all your undertakeings*
Iam in friendship, alliance and affection.

From our Court at Westminster, December. An. Dom. 1656. Your Majesty's most
affectionately OLIVER, Protector of the Republic of England, etc


OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most Serene and
Illustrious Prince and Lord, the Lord William, Earl of Hasnia, Prince of
Herefield Count in Cattimelibock* Decia Lingehain, Nidda and Schaumburgh, etc.
Most Serene Prince.
WE would not have respitted the answering your highnesses Letters so long, (of
which we are almost ashamed) did not many other affairs, of utmost importance
truly (which our charge in the administration of this Government would not
suffer us to deferr the dispatch of, much against our inclination) prevent it.
For what Letters ought I to entertain with more regard, then such as come from
a most virtuous Prince, and related to a Race suitably Religious, and which
concern nothing so much, as the Repose of Religion, and the reconcileing of
Curches to concord; and which also, not only in your, but in the opinion and
judgment of the Christian world, ought to be generally attributed unto me as an
honor to be the promoter of the Christian peace? And truly what we have
endeavoured'd toward it, through these three (formerly) Kingdoms, what have we
accomplished (through divine help) by perswadeing, suffering, and conquest; is a
thing not unknown to most of our own people, and that which they are very
sensible of in the great tranquillity of their conscience. We have studied the
repose of all the Churches, through out Germany more especially, where they have
been most, and longest at variance; and have been, for a considerable time
past, wanting in nothing that coud contribure thereto. We continue the same
inclination still; We wish the said churches may be united among themselves in
brotherly charity. But we are, to our very great grief, more then sensible,
how difficult a Task he undertakes, who takes upon him the reconciliation of
such (as pretend only) to be Sons of peace* For it is a thing to be scarce
hoped ever to see the Resormed and Augustins brought to one Church; nor
preaching nor writeing will be able to reconcile their opinion, nor prohibitted
without violence; But violence is a thing inconsistent with the peace of the
Church: dissenters may be prevailed upon by Prayers, to act more meekly and
moderately at least, nor ought they to grow the cowlder among themselves;
Differing not as enemies but friends, (...) at variance in frivolous matters,
yet most united in the main point of Faith. We shall never own our selves weary
in the repeating and perswadeing of these things; which the strength nor
council of man can exceed: God* whose peculiar work it is, will in his time
do it. You have in the mean time, Most Serene Prince, left a samous declaration
of your inclination to the Churches, as ^n everlasting monument, becoming your
family, and a pattern fit for the imitation of all Princes hereafter. We do,
pursuant to your deserts, pray that the great good God may bless all your other
undertakeings with as much felicity as you your self can desire, and continue
you in your present mind, no alteration being able to mend it*

Westminster March An. Dom. 1656.

OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most Serene Prince,
the Duke of Courland.
Most Serene Prince,
YOur kind entertainment of our Ambassador, during those few days, he stayed
in Your Country, in his way to the Duke of (...), has, beside other
considerations, showed Your Highness's opinion of us; who hope that your own
natural disposition, added to our interposition, may (...) Your Highness not
toalter those inclinations of your kindness toward us now; ^n the case of
John Jameson a Scotchman, who having (...) you seven years, and that
faithfully, as Master at Sea, delivered a Ship of yours lately committed to his
charge, in her Ballast, to the care of a Pilot, upon her arrival (as the
custom is) in the Mouth of the River, and made out by good evidence, that
discovering the ignorance of the said Pilot, did all he coud to advise him, so
that the miscarriage of the said Ship can be no way imputed to him, but wholly
to the un skill fullness or obstinacy of the said Pilot. Admitting which, its
our earnest Request to Your Excellency, that the said Shipwreck be not laid to
the said John the Master's charge, nor the wages remaining due to him stopped
therefore, upon that score; which is what he has left to subsist, comfort
himself with, or take to in the end, having, by a precedent shipwreck, lost
what he had a little before.

Westminster, March, Anno 1657.

OLIVER, Protector of the Repbul. of England, etc. To the Noble Consuls and
Senators of the Commonwealth of Switzerland. S. P. D.
Most Noble, Magnificent Gentlemen,
WE have been always of opinion, that in Industry, Riches, and Practice of
Arts and Sciences, the Fame of your City might vie and stand in competition
with any the Noblest Citty*s whatever: Now having chosen to take part with
Poland, rather then Sweedland, in that War, which has for* a considerable time
raged upon the Frontiers of your Country, it were truly to be wished, that the
consideration of that Religion which you profess, and of the ancient Comerce
between you and the English, had inclined you to the choice of such
Resolutions, as shoud seem to consist with the Glory of God, and the dignity
and splendour of your Corporation. We therefore pray that the Alliance
established by the length of custom and now extant between the English Nation
and you, and my name, (if it may add any thing,) may induce you to set at
liberty the Noble and famous Conismarek, the chiefest among the Sweedish
Captains, a singular person in warlike discipline more especially, and who has
been casually, and through the Treachery of his People, betrayed at Sea and by the
Law of War (not yet got to the height of bitterness) made Prisonner: But if
you should chance to Judge it inconsistent with the present posture of your
affairs to free him that then you would please to render his Confinement more
easy. Whatever of these two you happen to resolve upon, you will resolve upon
that which will be truly and principally consistent with the reputation of your
Corporation; and consequently beget the esteem of all Noble Comanders and
oblige us more especially in an extraordinary manner what ever you think it
may avail you.

From our Court at Westminster, Anno Dom. 1657. Your most affectionatly OLIVER,
Protector of England, etc.


OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most Serene and
Potent Prince and Lord, the Emperor, and Great Duke of all Russia, Lord of
Voladomar, Muschow, Novogrady, King of Kazin, and Astracan, Syboria, Lord of
Vobsco, Great Duke of Novcgrod, and of the Law Countries, Chernigoy, Rezanscoa,
etc. Lord of all the North Seas, also Lord of Everscoa, Cartaluisa, and many
other Places. S. P. D.
THe antiquity of the alliance, great and generally noted Trafficq, together
with the vast and ancient comerce for along time observed betvveen this
Government and your people, but ( Great Emperor) that (...) virtue more
especially, wherein you outdo your Ancestors very much, with the opinion
entertained thereof by all your Neighboring Princes; have been our principal
Inducement, to cherish that affection for your Majesty, which we do, and
communicate thereto, what we may judge not a little conduceing to the Intrest
of Christian affairs, and suitably subservient to the Glory of your Name.
Previous whereto; We have deputed, under the character of our Ambassador to
your Majeay, a very worthy Gentlemen Mr Richard Bradshaw, in whose fidelity,
Integrity, Prudence, and experience, we have been sufficiently satisfied by his
discharge of former Embassys, and who comes fully capacitated, to make kowne
the singular affection and observance we bear you; and suitably empowered to
treat with your Majesty concerning the affairs above mentioned Be plased
therefore to receive him courteously in our name, and order him, as he shall
have occasion for it, (...) access to your speech and Ear, with proportionable
credit to what he shall propose or transact and that in as full a (...) as you
would unto us if personally present. We wish that the Almighty and Great God
may bless Your Majesty and Kingdom of Russia with all properity.

From our Court at Westminster April An. Dom. 1657. Your Majesty's most
affectionatly OLIVER, Protector of England, etc.


OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most Serene and
Potent Prince Charles Gustavus* King of Sweedland, Gothe and Uandals, Great
Prince of Finland, Duke of Esthon, Carelia, Bremen, Verd, Stetin, Pomerania,
Cassuby and Vandall, etc.
Most Serene and Potent King, Friend and dearest confederate
WIlliam Jepson Kinght, and a member (...) our Parliament, who reckons it an
honor to have the delivery hereof to your Majesty, comes to let your Majesty
know, with what trouble and grief of mind (...) we surprised at our
receipt of the (...) of that fatal war arisen between your Majesty and the
King of Sweedland, and how much its become our study and care to advance as
(...) as God will enable us to go, toward the (...) stopping of this growing
mischief, and (...) to beat back those calamitys which this war must
necessarily beget to the general concerns of Religion; now more especially, at
a time when our adversarys are visibly seen united in their most pernicious
counsels, and consequently in their strength against us. These and many other
considerations and reasons, of utmost moment to the public advantage of both
Nations, have been our inducements to dispatch this very worthy Gentleman under
the character of our Envoy Extraordinary to your Majesty, whom we pray you to
(...) kindly, and throly confide in, in referrence to such things as he shall
comunicate in our name to your Majesty; as being a person whose fidelity and
prudence we confide very much in; praying withal that you would not in the least
suspect our singular affection and sincerity we bear Your Majesty. Which our
disposition of mind, and redynes to Serve you upon all occasions, shall contain
real demonstrations of.

From our Court at Westminster, 1656. Your Majesty's most affectionatly
OLIVER, Protector of England, etc.


To this Excellency the Lord of Bourdeaux, Ambassador Extraordinary from his
most (...) Majesty the King of France,
Most Excellent Sr.
SAmuel Dawson, John Campsey, and John Nevin Merchants of London, have
preferred a petition to the most Serene Lord Protector, setting forth, that
they, upon their being informed of the conclusion of the Treaty between this
Republic and France, freighted Anno 1655. a ship (called by a Name not
answered by her luck; viz. the Speedwel, whereof John Karr war Master) with
(...) commodities, to be thence transported to Portugal; where having
unloaded, and taken in fresh freight consisting in Wines, and other commodities,
was, in her way back, set upon about the 24. of November in the said year, and
seized by two Men of War belonging to Breast, whose Comanders were called, the
one Adrian Vindmain Swart, and the other James Jonshon, who carried her to a
place commonly called Brivat; where she was condemned as lawful prize, and
exposed to public sale, the goods taken from'em being bona fide and really
worth eleaven hundred pounds, besides the further damage of a thousand pound:
That they pursued all lawful means with the Governor and Magistrates of that
place to recover'em: That all amounted to nothing hitherto: That they (...),
pursuant to the Customs of the Admiralty Court, sued out a publication,
whereby they were to be sumond and cited to Justice, who were concerned in the
capture of the said shipp, who (...) to insist upon the legalty of their
Seizure. That this publication was duly and orderly published and delivered,
and (...) the public Ministers of the said Court, timelily (...) to the
French Ambassador; That when none appeared on the contrary side, it was
desired that witnesses might be (...) and examined concerning the matter under
(...). Which, as it was presented to the Lord Protector by the petitioners, and
by him referred to the cognizance and opinion of the Council; and whereas the
affidavits of witnesses annexed to the petition make plain enough, that the
petitioners were at liberty to trade with Portugal; and seeing none can be so
blind but may see, that the after-seisure of Goods bought and loaded there, is
(as we said before) an act contrary to the reputation of the alliance: who
cannot but judge it a very (...) demand to have the said shipp and goods
restord, or full satisfaction made of the damage (...) from this (...), in
referrence as well to the expense (...) in the prosecution at Law, as the goods
and shipp themselves? Let me therefore desire you in the name of the most
Serene Protector, added to my own request to Your Excellency, that you would
endeavor all you can, (and therein to employ the Authority of Your Employment
too) toward the speedy effecting of either of the two. In regard you cannot
labor in a cause more equitable, nor that you can please me more in; who, by
how much the earlyer Your Excellency shall appear to have acquitted your (...)
in what you ought to do herein; by so much the more that diligence shall
appear, which I am always inclinable to observe in the allowance of the demands
made upon me by my people.

Whitehall August An. Dom. 1657.

OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most Serene Prince,
the Lord Frederick Williams, Duke of Brandenburgh, High Chamberlain of the Holy
Roman Empire, and Prince Elector of Magdeburgh, Prussia, Julia, Clivia* the
Mountains of Stetin, Pomerania, Cassubyes, and Vandalls; as also in Silesia,
Crosna and Carnovia, Duke Burgrave, Norinbergin, Prince of Halberstad and Mind,
Earl of Marca and Ravensbergh, Lord in Ravestein, S. P. D.
Most Serene Prince, Friend, and dearest Confederate.
WHereas you (...) singular virtue in peace and War, having sounded all over
the world with that Renown (such is your Greatness and (...) of courage that
the ambition of your friendship is gaped at by the neighboring Princes about
you,) so as that none need to desire a friend and neighbor of more fidelity or
constancy. We have also (to let you know of our being one of thsoe, who
entertain high and clear thoughts of you, and Your Exttaordinary obligations
upon the Christian Republic) (...) you a very worthy Gentleman William Jepson
Knight, and one of our Parliament Men, who comes to Salute (...) in our name,
bespeake and wish your affairs all happiness, and finally to make known at
large the love and great affection. we bear Your Highness: Praying that
whatever proposalls he makes you, you listen thereto with as much attention
and confidence, as you vvoud to our selves if personally present at the
delivery thereof.

From our Court at Westminster August Dom. 1656.

OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most Noble
Magistrates and Senators of the City of Hambrough. S. P. D.
Most Noble, Magnificent and worthy Gentleman, Dearest Friends*
Having directed a very worthy Gentleman William Jepson Knt, and member of our
Parliament (upon his going through (...) City, in his way to the most Serene King
of Sweedland, whether we sent him on an Embassy) not to pass by, without
saluteing you in our name; and praying that if in ought he judged your
Authority and advice to be of any service to him, you would deny him in neither:
The freelyer you show you selves wherein, the more sensible shall you be made
of our disposition toward you.

From (...) Court at (...) August An. (...). 1657.

To the most noble Magistrates of the City of Bremen. S. P. D.
Most Noble, Magnisicent and Worthy Gentlemen, Dearest Friends.
YOu have heretofore, and shall as often as there is occasion for it, be made
sensible, how you stood in our opinion, and affection, and that as well out of
regard to your Religion as the Renown of your City. Now; whereas William
Jeps^n Kut, a member of our Parliament, and a very worthy person, may in his
way to the most Serene King of Sweedland (whether he goes on an Embassy) pass
through ^our City, our present request to you amounts to no more then this, that
upon his delivery of our Salutes, which he is directed to hand to you, if in
any thing he happens to need your help or ^iendshipp, we have ordered him to
propose our ^ntrest with you as an inducement to your complying with him in any
demand he shall make upon you wherein we no less rely upon your allowance of,
then you ought to do upon our love and singular affection toward you.

From our Court at Westminster August An. Dom. 16^7.

OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most Noble
Corporation of Lubeck.
Most Noble, Magnificent, and worthy Gentleman, Dearest Friends.
WIlliam Jepson Knt, a very worthy person, and a Member of our Senate, proceeds
under the character of our public minister, to the most Serene King of
Sweedland's Court, held not far distant from yours. Do therefore pray that
while his Journey happens to continue within the limits either of your City or
Jurisdiction, our alliance and comerce may be inducements to you to aid, if
need be, and protect him. We moreover directed him to salute you in our name
very kindly. and invite you to an assurance of our Clear disposition of mind
and (...) toward you.

From our Court at Westminster, August An. Dom. 1657.

OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most Noble
Magistrates and Senators of the City of Hambrugh. S. P. D.
Most Noble, Magnificent, and worthy Gentlemen, Dearest Friends.
PHillip Meddow, who brings you this, takes your City in his way to Denmark,
(whether we have sent him as our Ambassador to the most Serene King of that
C^ntry.) Whom we earnestly recomend to your favor, if in any thin^ he may
judge it needful to make use of your Authority or help. Praying that our
Recomendation be of no less weight now, than it was always wont to draw with
you; who shall (...) of nothing from us of an acknowledgment upon a like
occasion.

From our Court at Westminster August An. Dom. 1657.

OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most Serene Prince
Frederick Heir of Norway, Duke of Slesvice, Holsatia, Flormaria, Ditmarsia,
Count in Oldenburgh and Delmenhorst.
We have sent William Jepson to the most Serene King of Denmark, (being a
Gentleman of a noble Family, and member of our Parliament,) to treat with him
as our Embassader, about an affair that concerns the felicity and prosperity
of the peace of Christendom. And have, among other things, directed him to
visit and salute (in his way shither) your in our name, and make mention of our
former kindness and most constant affection. And desire that your Authority may
be employed to secure and (...) his Journey through your Country. In which your
Highness will oblige us and ours in a more special manner to suitable Returns.

From our Court at Whitehall August An. Dom. 1657.

OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most Serene Prince
Ferdinando, Great Duke of Toskany.
Most Serene great Duke, Dearest Friend.
APplication has been made unto us by petition, in the names of several
Merchants tradeing to the Levant Seas, setting forth, that one William Ellis
master of a certain shipp called the Little L^wis being by an Otoman Peer
hired in the (...) of Alexandria, to carry Rice, Suggars with other commodities
thence^ Constantinople or Smirna, there to be disposed of to his directions;
the said person withdrew from the (...) fleet, and, contrary to his Trust,
(...) the said (...) to Livorne: where he disposes of it as prized Goods. Which
misbehaviour as it is of utmost (...) example, of great infamy to the name of
Christians, and a passage that may expose the fortunes of such English
Merchants as live in the Ottoman Empire, to Reprizall. We desire that your
Highnese would Issue your Comands for the apprehension and laying up of the said
perfon, secureing (in the mean time) the said shipp and Goods, till intimation
be transm^tted hence to the said Ottoman Prince of the care taken of the
Re^titution of his said Goods. Promiseing that if your Excellency shall happen
to need the like from us, in any Instance of this kind, we shall be as ready to
answer it, as we are now to ask.

From our Court at Westminster, An Dom. 1657. Your Highness's most
affectionatly, OLIVER, Protector of England, etc.


OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most Serene Prince
and Lord, the Lord Frederick William, Duke of Brandeburgh, etc.
Most Serene Prince, Friend, and dearest Conf^derate,
OUR last to Your Highness by William Jepson, who either already has, or soon
may deliver'em, will show you what errand we have sent him upon; and how that
we could not have done the same without doing you the Justice of inserting some
mentions of your virtues, and the affection we bear you. But to prevent any
man's thinking, that our notice of these great obligations of yours conferred
upon the Protestant Interest, and celebrated as such in the Report of all Men,
is the slight effect of ordinary Custom; we must ^ay hold upon the same
argument now, where, tho we cannot be more sincere, yet a little more large we
have thought fit to be then we have been, in our expressions toward Your
Serenity. And not without cause truly, considering that we are daily told, that
notvvithstanding all the attempts, that are made upon you by the supple address
of Trick and artifices, yet your constancy and loyalty is found to give no way,
nor be persuaded to part from the friendship of a most courageous King and
Confeder^t; and that at a time, when the condition of Sweedland is such, as
that it is manifest, that your regard to the welfare of the Protestant Religion
in general, is the only inducement that keeps you to their Society, and no
private end of your own: As also when hemmed in, and, as it were, besieged by
private as well as public enemy, peeping from every Corner: to continue
nevertheless that steddynesse and comanding-vertue, as that the Judgment of
the whole matter and the Issue of this very great War seem to acquiesce in
whatever your shall determine. Wherefore your Highness has no reason to
question, but promise it self any thing that may be expected from our
friendshipp; who would arraign our self of all Delinquency, if we did seem to
entertain cheaper thoug (...) of your fidelity, constancy, and other Merits,
or seem less in our acknowledgments to your particular Government upon the
common account o^ Religion. As to the delay met with by John Frederick (...)
your Counselor and Ambassador here, and our respitting hitherto that reply
which, according to our inclinations, we ought to have made to his proposalls,
we pray that our Highness would impute the same to the condition (...) our
affairs, and not the said person, whose Industry and diligence act and contend
for it; and rest assured, that we look upon nothing more dear or desirable,
then to be serviceable and assisting to your affairs so inseparable from the
Intrest of the Protestant Religion. We, in the mean time, pray in our prayers
to to the most Great and Omnipotent God, that your apparent virtue and courage
may never sail, fall under oppression, or miss of its due reward and praise.

From onr Court at Westminster September An. Dom. 1657. Your Highnes's most
affectionately OLIVER, Protector of England, etc.


To the most Excellent Lord, Monsieur de Bourdeux, Ambassador extraordinary
from his most Serene Majesty the King of France.
Most Excellent Sir,
THE most Serene Lord Protector has had a demand, made upon him by Luke Lucius'
Merchant of London, concerning a Ship of his, called the Maria, which, in her
way between Ireland and Bajone, (being by distress of weather forced into a
place called the Bay of divi Johannis de Luce,) was there retained and arrested
in the name of one Martine de Lawson; nor to be discharged, till satisfied by
his Merchant Correspondents, and the propriety of the said Ship and Goods
decided by a lawsuit to be comenced between them and the said Martin. The said
Martin pretending to a considerable debt due from the Parliament of England
upon the account of some Goods of his, which were laid hold o^, pursuant to the
authority of Parliament Anno 1642. But whereas it is manifest that the said
Martin had nothing to do with the propriety of the said Goods, but solicited
the Right of two Persons Richald and Triat, against one Anthony Fernand, and
the said Anthony and Martine at variance among themselves, the Parliament
directed that the said Merchandises should be laid up, till the law did
determine who of the two had most Right to 'em; the said Anthony, being always
ready to go to Law; whereas; nor Martin, nor any for ^im has hitherto appeared
in Court, as may appear throly in the former proceedings annexed to the humble
address of the Petitioner; It is a point of very great Injustice that the
person who denies to try his pretended Title with Anthony his Colleague,
concerning other men's Goods here, shoud be able to force our people and the
true Owners too, to the trouble of proveing their Right to their own Goods
there: The most Serene Lord Protector is of opinion, that to be of the same
judgment i^ a thing consistent with your equity and prudence too, by whom I
have it in command to recomend this case of Luke Lucius the petitioner to your
Excellency in an Extraordinar namer: that Martin, who neglects to prosecute the
Right of another here, be not sufferrd in that restraint to lay hold upon other
men's goods ^here.

Westminster October An. Dom. 1657. Your Excellencys most affectionatly


OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most Serene Duke and
State of Venice.
Most Serene Duke, and Senate, dearest Friends,
WE have such frequent Tideings da^ly brought us of your happy success
against the Infidels, that nothing happens to be oftener the Subject of our
Pen, then to congratulate with you concerning some signal victory or other.
We wish, that this very last One may prove comfortable and of advantage to
your Republicke, and which is of utmost Glory, a Deliverer of all the
Christians laboureing under the slavery of the Turk; More particularly of
Thomas Galile, formerly Master of a shipp called the Relief, whom albeit this
is not the first time of our recomending to your Government, yet we do it with
so much the more freedom now, by how much we consider the length of his
Captivity, being now the fifth year: When you commanded him and shipp into the
service of Your Rebublick, he did, in an engagement with many Gally's belonging
to the Enemy, depresse some, and committed a great Massacre among others; He was
at length (the good Man) taken, his ship burnt, after the good service he did
the Venetians, and lives now in the fifth year of his Captivity under the
slavery of Barbary: He has nothing left to pay his Ransom; for whatever there
was either in goods, shipp, or sallary, he says it remains yet due from Your
Government. But, that means may not be wanting for his Redemption; (^et the
Enemy say they I part with him upon no other Terms, then in exchange of one of
theirs of an equivalent price.) We earnestly desire yours, and the serenity of
the Senate, jointly, (as does the most miserable ancient Man his father,
pregnant with grief and years, which have truly engaged us in his behalf)
that you wound, as soon as may be, out of the multitude of Turkish Prisoners,
which so many prosperous battles must have furnished you with, pick out some
person which they may accept of, in exchange of one, who has fought so well for
you, and is the only son of the most afflicted old man as well as our Subject.
And thereupon see that, whatever appears due unto him from your Government
upon the account of wages or otherwise, be forth with paid unto either his
father, or attorney. Our former interposition, or rather your own Justice has
induced you, upon a former inspection made into this matter, and examination of
accounts, to order the imediat (...) of what was his due: but no payment has
pursued that direction, the intervention of other urgent considerations having
possibly prevented it. Now the poor man's health can bear with no further
delay. You must, if you desire he may live, endeavor to discharge him
forthwith out of the filthy sestraint of imprisonment. We are confident that
your own most natural inclination will (without any importunity of ours)
prompt you to his speedy enlargement: considering that, in justice, moderation,
and prudence, you are no less considerable and flourishiug, then in glory and
warlike Tryumphs. And that you may long continue therein in prejudice of your
most iminent Enemy, is the content of our supplications to the Omnipotent
Greatest God.

From our Court at Westminster October An. Dom. 1657. Your Highnsse's most
affectionally OLIVER, Protector of the Republic of England, etc.


OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the High and Mighty
States of Holland. S. P. D.
High and Mighty States, Friends, and dearest Consederates,
WIllam Newport, that very worthy Person, who for some years past, attended
here as your Ambassador Extraordinary, brings you this upon his return home:
But goes with your permission only, leaveing us, in the mean time, under hopes
of his return hither quickly again. His conversation, while here, has been
accompanied wi^h so much faithfulness, vigilance, prudence and Justice, as that
we would not, nor can expectmore virtue and integrity (in all respects) from an
Ambassador, and a very good Man, so addicted was he to the study and practice
of manteining a fair understanding, (void of all deceit and fraud) between us,
as that dureing his continuance among us under that Character, we could not see
any thing of offense or jealousy that could arise or spring up among us: And
truly we would have been much more troubled at his departure (as things seem
now to stand) were we not very assured, that none being better, or that with
more faithfulness can represent the General State of our affairs, or the
sincerity of the love and affection, we bear your Excellency, will force his
return hither a gain. Wherefore we pray that you would please to receive him
both as a Person, who in all circumstances, has done both our governments
extraordinary good service: and dismissed him, (tho as) such almost against our
will, accompanied with the most genuin' Testimony of our thought of him. God
prosper your affairs, in subserviency to his own Glory, the defense of the
true Protestant Religion, and perseverance of friendshipp.

From our Court at Westminster, Nomember, Anno Dom. 1657. Your Highnesses most
affectionatly, OLIVER, Protector of England, etc.


OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the High and Mighty
Lords, the States General of the United Provinces.
High and Mighty Lords; Friends, and dearest Confederates,
WE have (in consideration of the long and clear experience had of his
fidelity in several affairs, uprightness, and knowledge) sent you George
Downing, Gentleman, under the Character of our Envoy, and furnished him with
ample directions accordingly. We therefore pray that you would, according to
your wont, receive him kindly, and give credit to what he shall say; as often
as he shall signify his having ougt to be (in our name) comunicated to Your
Excellency; and likewise commit to him with as little distrust, as if it were to
ourselves, whatever you would have imparted unto us. What we have to add, is
fervently to wish you all prosperity, in subserviency to t^ Glory of God, and
the keeping up of the Church.

From our Court at Westminster, December 1656. Yours Highnesse's most
affectionatly OLIVER, Protector of England, etc.


To the States of Holland.
Wher^as such is the correspondence between this Republic and Yours, and such
is the mutual Trasficq, that unless an Envoy or Agent be sent hither thence,
or hence thither, matters of that great importance to the advantage of both
Nations, cannot be so conveniently carried on. We have, in pursuance of common
Custom, determined upon the sending you under that Character, George Downing
Gentleman, a Person whom, in the discharge of many and various former Trusts,
we found of great faithfulness integrity and knowledge; To continue there in
our name, and spend his time in such offices, as may seem most conduceing to
the inviolable preservation and continuance of our alliance. Having
comunicated these things in writeing to the High and Mighty States, we have
thought it requisite to do the like to you also, (who in your Province bear so
great a part of the government, and are so considerable a limb of the States of
Holland) to the end you might receive our Envoy with all convenient decency.
And assure yourselves that what ever he treates with the States General about,
or conclude we shall stand thereto as imoveable and steady, as if we our selves
were personally present there at. God direct all your Councils and Actions to
his own Glory, and the Repose of the Church.

Westminster, etc. Deeember, 1657.

OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most Serene Prince
Ferdinando, Great Duke of Toskany.
Most Serene Great Duke, much to be honored Friend.
YOur Highness*s Letter of the 10. of November from Florence, has added
considerably to our delight, in that the contents thereof show much of your
affection toward us, and that in a nature so extraordinary, as to (...) the
true Image o^ a sincere mind: Your Excellency writes of it^ having, with all
imaginable care (we understand) performed our Request, which solicited, that
you would ^ssue forth your comands for the appre^ending of Wiliam Ellis Master
of the ship called the Little Lewis (who very dirtily broake his word to the
Turcks) and stopping in port the said shipp and Goods, till the Turcks had
restitution made them, to prev^nt any disgrace that might ari^e from such Theft
to the reputation of Christianity. We therefore both thank you for this
kindness, and withal desire this; that in regard the Merchants undertook to
satisfy the Turks, you forthwith discharge the said Master, shipp, and Goods;
least we shoud seem to take more care of the concerns of Infidels, then those
of our own people. Your Highness es affection has been (in the mean time) so
apparent, so (...), and so acceptable unto us, that to deferr our wishes of
being supplied with an occasion of making you suitable Returns, were to own
the stain of being reputed ungrateful persons* and whereby we might also
demonstrate our dispofition of mind in the ready return of our effectual
acknowledgments.

From our Court at Westminster December An. Dom. 1657. Your Highness's most
affectionately OLIVER, Protector of the Republic of England, etc.


OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most Serene and
Potent Prince, Charles Gustavus King of Sweedland, etc.
Most Serene, etc.
YOur Majesty's Letter of the 21. of February from your Court at Selandia, came
pregnant with matter enough to fill us with satis^action of no small degree, in
reference as well to our own private, as the concern of the entire welfare of
Christendom: First that the King of Denmarck, (to gratify I believe no private
Inclination or end of his own, but driven into hostility, rather by the
artifice of the common Enemy) shoud be, upon your entry into the bowls of his
Countr^, suddenly so reduced, and that without much blood, (that as the case
stood) he judged his taking up of arms against you, might be ameanes of his
atteining at length to a more advantageous peace: Next concluding that the
only means of accomplishing such a peace, was to make use of our interposition
if he coud obtain it; that your Majesty, prevailed upon at the single ^nstance
of our Envoy in his letter, shoud, in so easy a condescension, show what value
it had for the interposition of our friendshipp and Intrest: and to have been
pleased to lodge my endeavor in the front of so pious aworke; so as to become
the main Instrument and author my self of a peace so promiseing as this (I
hope) may be to the Protestant Intrest. For whereas the Enemies of Religion
dispaired of disuniteing yours, by any other means then that of setting you by
the Ears among your selves, they must now certainly have reason to apprehend*
that this sudden conjunction of your forces, and of your minds (we hope) may
turn to the destruction of the kindlers of this War; Go on in the mean time,
(most valiant King) in prosperity, and see that the Enemies of the Church smart
now (through Gods help) under the weight of that felicity, which they lately
admired in your exploits and stream of victories, against a King now your
friend.


OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most Serene Prince
Ferdinando, Great Duke of Toskany.
Most Serene Prince.
OUr answer to your Envoy here, may, we suppose, prove of satisfaction to your
Highness, concerning the Comander in chief of our fleet lately arrived in your
Road. We have been in the mean time) petitioned unto by John Hosier a
Londoner, and Master of a certain vessel called the Mistress, wherein he says,
that, having in the Month of April 1656 comited by charter party his shipp to
one Joseph Harman an Italian. and finding that the said Italian apparently
broake the Terms of the said Charter party, was forced, (to prevent the loss
of ship, goods and adventure, to call him to Justice at Livorn^, having
previous thereto published, (according to the custom of Merchants in like
cases) and recorded the Cheat. But that he, to back one fraud by another,
seized (by a feigned attach'ment) upon six thousand Pieces of eight of one Mr
Thomas C^atterbuck money in the name of the Petitioner, having (to promote the
design) drawn in, two other litigious fellows: That he, after the expense of
much money and time, (...) not attain to justice at Livorne; nor indeed dared
to appear at that Court, for (...) of the threatenings and snares said for him
by his adversaryes. We therefore pray Your Highness to be pleased to lend your
help to this Petitioner thus oppressed, and, according to your wonted custom,
checque the artifice of his adver^aries: For it totally defeates the d^signe of
such Laws as the authority of Princes confines Corporations unto, if what
violence and injury, for want of the force of a Law, cannot do, terror and
Threatenings must supply the place of, to keep the Laws from being appealed
unto. Yet we do not doubt but that Your Highness whom the Almighty and most
High God bless with Peace and Prosperity, will order timely reproof to be
awarded these methods of presumption.

Dated at Westminster 7. April, Anno Dom. 1658.

To the most Serene and potent Prince Levis, King of France.
Most Serene and potent King, Friend, and a^gust Confederate,
YOur Majesty may call to mind, that when we treated about renew^ning of the
league, (the fortunately laid fundation of which has proved the spring, whence
arose so many advantages to both Parties concern*d, as well as expose the common
enemy to (...) (...)) that miserable Massacre befell at Piedmont; whose cause
((...) and afflicted on all hands) we did, with great (...) and (...) of mind,
recomend to your pity and Relief. Nor do we think that Your Majesty has, as
far as concerns your own particular, been wanting to a work of that piety;
yea so human, as not to have employed the extent of what you ought to have of
favor or intrest, with the Duke of Savoy. Our interposition by Embassyes,
Letters, and Prayers has, in imitation of other many Princes and Corporations,
not been wanting. After the execution of a most bloody Massacre upon both Sexes
of all ages, a peace is at length given, or rather a secret kind of hostility,
wrapped up and laid under the vizard of a seeming peace: The Conditions of this
peace are brought to your Town of (...), yea those hard Ones, but such, as
those wretched and needy people (tired out with all imaginable hardship and
cruelty) would gladly have condescended unto, as hard and unjust as they were,
provided they were stood unto; (...) the Faith of every single one of 'em is
eluded and violated, under false constructions and quibleing equivocations;
many being thrown out of their (...) habitations; prohibited the exercise of
the Religion of their Forefathers; new Taxes exacted; new yokes clapped to their
Necks; to that degree, that such as happen to fall in the way of the Soldiers,
(who often ^ally out upon 'em) are either robbed or murdered. To which, add
the new Levyes lately and secretly raised against 'em; and such of 'em as are
Roman Catholicques commanded to stepp out of the way within a certain time
limited; so that all things seem now a fresh to threaten the Ruin and
Destruction of those few, which the last Massacre left undispacht. Which I
beseech and pray, tha^ by that Right hand of Yours (most Christian King) which
has confirmed the League and Alliance with us, by the most holy reputation of
that most Christian Title, you will not suffer to be carried on, nor give
countenanceto (I do not mean any Prince for no Prince, much less one of his
tender years and motherly Spirit, can entertain so much* Tyrany, but those
most sanctified Murderers) to the promotions of so much li^entious Tyrany; The
persons concerned, (...) they pretend to act as servants and Pursuers of the
(...) (...) our savior Christ, who came into the mansion of flesh to become a
sacrifice for the sins of mankind*) a buseing his most meek name and Laws in
the cruel murder of the (...). Relieve, (you that can, and who, in such a
case, are worthy of the power) so many humble petitioners of yours out of the
(...) of Men - Bu^chers, who lately drunk with Blood, would (...) (...) thirst
with the same liquor; and who judge it very aduiseable to charge the effect of
their cruelty, to the account of Princes. But do not you (...) your Titles, or
the hem's of your Kingdom* nor the most (...) Gospel of Christ to be (while
you reign*) (...) with that envy or cruelty. Remember, that these very People,
in the time of Your (...) King Henry, a great Friend of the Protestants, (...)
a submissive People; and Promoters of the entrance of Digvierius, when he, through
the most accessible places o^ Italy, victoriously invaded the yeeldieg People
of Savoy, over the Alps* The instrument containing that submission remains yet
extant among the Record^ of Your Kingdom; wherein it is, among other things,
excepted and provided for, that the Protestants about the (...) should not ^e
yielded to Any, except it were under the Tea^mes which Your most invincible
Father received em upon, into his allegiance.

This they now lay claim to* they humbly require a Grandfather from You his
Nephew: They would wish that, if by any exchange it might be done, they might be
come yours, rather then remain his, whose Subject^ they now are. Which if it
cannot be; you may lawfully become a harbor (at least) comfort, and refuge unto
'em. There are some Intreagues of State, which may render it advisable for
you, not to reject the revolt of the Protestants of Piedmont to you; But I would
not, considering the greatness of such a King as you are, propose any other
inducement to invite you to the defense of the Calamitous, different from the
engagements of your Predecesser's piety, Royal benignity, and Greatness of
Spirit: So that the praise and Glory of a most noble deed will be uncomunicably
and entirely your own, and you your self find, that the father of Mercy, and
his son Christ, King, whose name and doctrine you will thereby vindicate from
all wicked cruelty, will so much the more favor and prosper the remaining part
of all your life time. The Omnipotent most Great God inspire Your Majesty with
this inclination, for the service of his own Glory, the salvation of so many
most inocent Christians now at stake, and your own reputation.

Dated at Westminster May 1658.

To the Evangelicall Cantons of Switzerland.
We have judge it an unnecessary work, to write you about matters, which (you
your selves knowing better byfarr then we) we abhor in our Souls to remember*
and that out of detestation to the barbarity of the things themselves, imposed
upon your most afflicted Neighbors the Protestants of Savoy* and the
intolerable persecutions which their own Prince has exposed 'em to, upon the
account of their Religion. We have also seen a copy of the Letter, which your
Ambassadors, sollicitours and other persons present at the late Peace at
Pinaroll, writ to the Duke of Savoy; and the Praesident of his -- Council,
wherein they show, and evince, that all the conditions of peace (broke, as soon
as made) tended ratherto amus and impose upon the poor people, then provide in
any sense for their security. The violation of which, following upon the
veryheeles of the grant of the peace, is to this day continued, and their
su^ferings likely to grow worse. If they do not submit patiently, if they do
not prostrate and cast themselves downright, to be kicked, and have the Dirt
strained through their bodies, and forsake their Religion the same calamity still
hang's over their heads, the same Massacre, which has raced and afflicted them,
their wives and children most lamentably, but three years a go, is still in
view and which if they undergo again, will destroy 'em stock and branch. What
will you have the Wretches do? on whose behalf no prayers can prevail, no
Ease can be had, no Refuge yet open for; they have to do with wild beasts and
Furyes, whom the memory of former slaughters cannot call to the grace of
Repentance, nor pity toward their Countrymen, quench their Thirst of shedding
inocent blood. These things are not, in plain Terms, to be boarn with, if we
either bear any love to the safety of our Brethren, so an^ient adherers to the
Orthodox Religion, or if we tender the safety of Religion it self. We have,
albeit at this great distance, already done it, and shall not forbear our
cordial supplying, of what we can, either of help or subsistence toward their
Relief. You that are, not only within call of the Groans and clamours of
your Brethren, but also stand in the mouth of their Enemies fury, look about
you, in the name of the Imortal God, and see timelily what you ought to do on
your part, Advise with your own prudence, piety and courage, and consider what
you can, or ought to contribut of help or protection toward the support of
your perishing neighbors and Brethren. You may certainly assure your selves
that the very same Enemy would, for the very same reason, (being Religion)
rejoice at your destruction too; yea consume your confederates in the flames of
an (...) war the very same time of the a^oresaid year. The power, next to God,
seems to remain in your hand, of preventing the ultimat decay of the reformed
Religion, in the ashes of that remaining scantleing of ancient fidelity* whom
if you now neglect in the height of their distress, take care that the next
Turn prove not your own, and that in little time. While we are employing
our selves in the promoteing of these persuasions, as Brethren and plain
Dealers, they languish: What we can do at this great distance toward the
purchase of the safety of the afflicted, as well as easeing the want of the
needy; we have, and shall do all we can. God provide us both that tranquillity
and peace at home, and put our affairs in such a conditiou of settlement, as
that we may employ all our power and strength and affection for the d^fence
of his Church against the fury and Rage of the Enemy.

Dated at Westminster May An. Dom. 1658.

To his Eminency Cardinal Mazarine greeting.
Most Eminent Sir.
THe enclosed to his Royal Majesty, as well as the other to your Eminency, are
the effects of the intolerable calamityes and most cruel Massacre lately
exercised by the Duke of Savoy upon such of his Subjects, as profess the
Protestant Religion, And albeit I cannot judge so uncharitably, as not to
believe, that to a most Glorious King such barbarous proceedings, of destroying
the Inocency and helpesnesse of people, must imply much displeasure and
offense, yet I am of opinion that what I move about, on behalf of their
condition (which is miserable) may not miss of your furtherance and favor
toward the procureing of its end; ^t being a very plain thing that nothing can
go further toward the establishing a good opinion of France in the hearts of
her Protestant neighbors abroad, then to assert, the grant of the Liberty and
Privileges settled upon 'em by the public acts of former times. And truly
this was (among other considerations) a Maine One, to induce this Republicke to
engage in an Alliance and League with France* Previous to the establishment of
which his Majesty's Ambassador has sollicitted here for a considerable time,
and things seem now to draw toward a conclusion. The singular sincerity and
moderation, which in the conduct of the considerable concerns of the Kingdom,
you have testified to the Protestants of France, does truly induce me to hope
for, and rely upon this; and from which, a bottom will be also laid by your
Excellency ^or the raiseing an alliance upon of stricter friendshipp between
England and France, and oblige me in particular to the making all imaginable
Returns of friendshipp and kindness: and would have your Excellency think so.

Your Eminency's most affectionately


OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most Serene and
Potent Prince, Lewis King of France.
Most Serene and Potent King, Friend, and August Confederat.
ALbeit the affability of his society coud scarce suffer me to give way to the
departure of Thomas Vicount Falkonbridge my Son in Law, who, bent upon a
present Visit into France, desired to beenabled to testify the duty and
reverence he bears your Majesty, by having a view of, and kissing your Royal
hand; yet I did not think fit to baulke or withstand his said purpose, or
decline his request: When I cannot doubt but that upon his Return after little
time from the Court of so great a King, where the conversation of so many very
prudent and valiant men is to be had, he may come back better instructed, and
as it were, perfected in all manner of good accomplishments, And albeit he is,
if I mistake not, one who carries his own Recomendation wherever he goes, yet
if he finds himself the more so, upon my account, I shall reckon the favor
done my self. God preserve your Majestys safety, and long continue our
friendshipp steady for the Common Good of all Europe.

Dated at our Court at Westminster May An. Dom. 1651.

OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To His Eminency Cardinal
Mazarine.
Most eminent Lord.
Having recomended Thomas Vicount Falconbridge my Son in Law* now bound for
France, to the most Serene King, I coud not decline ^omunicateing the knowledge
thereof, with a repetition of the like trouble to your Excellency, as being
unignorant of the weight and moment the same May be of to the former one. The
benefit which he proposes to himself from his stay among you (and he hopes
this may be no small one) he cannot but own the most part of to your favor and
kindness; whose Judgment and vigilance alone bear so great a share in the
Government of that Kingdom. What ever kindness your Eminency will please to
show him, reckon it to my account; who shall add it to the man other Instanc^s
of friendshipp which you have been courteously and amicably concerned in upon my
account.

Dated at Westminster May An. Dom. 1658.

OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To His Eminency Cardinal
Mazarine*
Most Eminent Lord.
Having sent a very worthy Gentleman Thomas Bellasis Vicount Faulcounbridge my
Son in Law, to compliment the most Serene King upon his arrival at Dunkirke; I
commanded him to attend upon, and salute your Eminency in my name, and thank
you, as the person to whose fidelity, prudence, and vigilance alone, the
affairs (...) France in diverse places, and in the neighbor hood of flanders,
more especially ovv their prosperity against the (...) Enemy the Spaniard; whom
I hope, open and prepared force may soon bring to a Reckoning for his
fraudulent and underhand dealings* wherein consisted much of his defense:
Toward the speedy promotion of which, our Prayer and Pikes shall not, as far
a^ we are able, be wanting.

Dated at Court at Westminster An Dom. 1658.

OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc* To the most Serene and
Potent Prince Lewis King of France.
Most Serene and Potent King, Friend, and August Confederate.
AS soon ever as I had an account of Your Majestys comeing into the field, and
with such a force, to lay a siege to Dunkirke, that infamous Recess for
Thieves; I grew much affected thereat, and began to entertain sure
apprehensions that little time might, with Gods assistance, render the sea more
navigable and less inflected with Rovers, th^n it has hitherto been; that Your
Majesty would bring the fraudulent Spaniards to an account for Hesden and Ostend
(being both the purchase of corruption and Bribery) by w^ning that with your
sword, which was Iost through the treachery of ill servants. I therefore send
Thomas Vicount Falkonbridge my Son in Law, and a very worthy person, to bidd
you, and the approach of your Camp so neeer, welcome; and to let you know
personally, how ready are, not only our wis^es, but also our united strength,
to testify the affection we bear to the good success of your conq^ests, and
our supplications to the Almighty Great God for your safety, and the long
continuance thereof, for the common good of Christendom and the friendshipp
wherein we are now engaged.

Dated at Westminster May An. Dom. 1658.

To the most Serene Prince Ferdinando, Great Duke os Toskany.
Most Serene Great Duke.
THe Purport of all your Highness s former letters having invited us into a
dependence upon the sincerity of the disposition you bo^r us, We are troubled
to find that the same has been so obscurely signified unto ^our Governors and
public Ministers, or so ill understood, as that in the port of Livorne
(where your good Inclinations toward us ought most to be known) we cannot
receive the benefit or Eflect thereof; but the contrary rather; from the
Trials which we are forced to contend daily with, of animosities and
strangness. We seem to have more then known the unfriendlynesse, with
which those of Livo^ne lately treated our Fleet, how little help or supply it
could receive, and fin^lly with what hostility entertained, and how it was
forced ^o quit that Port, (as the Testimony of several credible wiltnesses
belonging to that place makes appear, as well as that of the Comander in chief
of the Fleet, whom as we have entrusted therewith, we cannot den^ belief unto
in this point) Upon his first arrival and the delivery of our Letters to Your
Highnessse about the Calends of (...), your Promises of all Friendship and good
Offices passed to our Men, were very large. When, praying the liberty of
making use of the convenience of Port Ferara, the following Reply was given;
that the same could not be granted least the King of Spain (our Enemy) shoud
be offended at it forsooth. And yet what is it that a friendly Prince is more
usual in the grant of to his Neighbors, then the liberty of his Port and
shore? What is it that we can propose of advantage from such a Friendship,
which, rather then offend our Enemies shall be found ready er to incomode, then
act the contrary, or supply, us in the least of our necessities? And more
particularly, that out of every of our Ships, there were not above two or three
suffered to go a shore and that conditionally too, videlicet Praticque; That
as soon ever as the Town understood and had notice of our having intercepted
a Dutch Vessel designed for Sapine with a supply of Corn, there was present
admittance. Mr Longland, President to our Factory there, was denied the Liberty
of going a board our Fleet: Fresh Water, which is a comodity free for the use
of all Nations, that are not down right Enemies, we could not obtain, but at
an ext^aordinary price, and that under the difficulty of a Guard too: So many
of our Merchants, whose Residence there is of no small advantage to your
Country, are forbid to visit or help their Countrymen with any thing: Upon the
approach of our Fleet about the latter end of March last, none were suffered to
go a shore: Five days after; when by chance one of our Men of war ^ell fo
vvl of a little inconsiderable Boat belonging to the States of Venice, and
took her* your City took it in such a Dudgeon I warrant you as to have
accosted us with two hundred Guns, or thereabouts, tho without damage, what
ever they intended. Which argues how far into the sea from the reach of your
Castle and the privilege of your Port these things were committed which you would
causlely pretend to be an incroachment upon the privilege of (...) port. For
presently our Waterboates (then a shore) were set upon before your doors, one
taken and detained, and when demanded that without restitution of the said
Naple's boot, notwitstanding the justifiableness of her capture, considering
where it happened; nor men (...) boat were to be parted with, so that our
People were (...) at last, to rest contended under their losses, and pack away
without carrying along what they so dearly paid for.

If all these things were, (as we hope they were) committed without the consent
or command of Your Highness, we desire that you show it in the punishment of
that Governor, who made so slight a matter of (...) ^is masters (...). But if
otherwise, and that you were privy to it, think that as we always valued your
friendship at an extraordinary Rate, so we have learned the lesson of
distinguishing between kindnesses, and open Injuries. Iam. etc.

Dated at our Court at Westminster, May, An. Dom. 16^8. Your Friend as far as I
may, OLIVER, Protector of England, etc.


OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most Serene and
potent Prince, L^vis King of France.
Most Serene and potent King, Friend, and august Confederate,
THE double amends made me by the quickness by Your Majesty's so Illustrious an
Embassy, as it has testified your singular goodness and Grandeur of mind, so it
has laid open not only to me, but all England also, the height of the regard
you bear to my honor and dignity: For which I do, in theirs and my own name
(render a^ I ought,) you very great thanks. I wish you Joy of that signal
victory, which God and our aid has blessed you with over your Enemy, and look
upon it as a thing of utmost acceptance to us, to find that our people have
not, in that battle, been wanting to your help, the warlike Glory of their
Ancessors, nor their own former valor. As to Dunkirk and the hopes your write
to be under, of having it soon surrendered; it adds to my content to be able
to take notice in writeing so soon of its capture: Hopeing vvithall that the
double fraud of the Spaniard may be punished beyond the loss of a single City;
that the taking of another City may furnish your Majesty with an occasion of
being as quick in your Reply hereto concerning the taking of another. As to
what you add of your Intentions toward my concerns, that is a thing I no was
distrust, as having the word of so good a King confirmed by so worthy a Noble
man as Captain Crequi's your Envoy for it; And do wish that the Almighty High
God may endow your Majesty, and the Affairs of France with prosperity both at
home and abroad.

Dated at Westminster Jun. An. Dom. 1685.

OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To his Eminency Cardinal
Mazarine.
Most Eminent Sir.
IN the comunication of my acnowledgments to the most Serene King by Letter,
(who, to give me the honor of a salute, and an account of his late most noble
victory d^spatcht hither a most splendid Embassy) I shoud own the guilt of
Ingratitude, if I failed in (...) your Eminency mutual payment of my
acknowledgment in the same Met^od, who* to testify your good disposition
toward me, and st^dy of doing me all the honor lying within your power, have
sent your nephew, a very worthy exquisit Gentleman, adding that if you had a
nearer relation, or whom you esteemed more, you would not fail of ^aveing sent
him to choose. To which consideration adding also, that the comei^g under the
approveal of the judgment of so (...) a man, is a thing which I deem for no
small honor, or ornament unto me; namely that the nearest of your relations,
shoud, in the payment of their resp^cts and kindness to me, follow the pattern
of your Excellency: They may (its probable) look upon this example of your
worthynes, Candor and friendshipp in loveing of me, as none o the least; others
they may find in you, which for great virtue and prudence, are far fitter to
be imitated, as leading to the knowledge o^ Governing and managei^g the Reins
of State affairs. Your Eminencie's long and happy conduct of which, the common
Good of the Kingdom of France, the entire Christian Republic, and your own
reputation, are instances which we vvish all happyness unto.

From our Court of Westminster June An. Dom. 16^8. Your Eminency's most
affectionately.


OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most Serene and
Potent Prince Charles Gustavus King of Sweedland, etc.
Most Ssrene and Potent King, Friend and dearest Confed^rate*
AS often as the councels and various artifices of the common Enemy of Religion
come under our deliberation, so often do we enter into a consultation with
our selves, and calculate how necessary and how conduceing to the future
vvelfare of the Chri^ian world it vvoud be, if the Protestant Princes did
among themselves, and more especially your Majesty and this Republic, engage
in a very strict alliance, in order to the easy disappointing of the projects
of the adversary. The subject of our conversation with your Ambassadors, ever
since first they came hither to treat about this business, has evidenced
unto'em, how ear^estly and painfully have our vvishes been, and withal how
much it vvoud have ansvverd our aim, if ours, and the Concerns of Sweedland
were putt into such a condition and posture, as that the said alliance might be
settled under such an establishment, as might answer both partys expecta tions
equally, and enable'em to be in a capacity of supplying each other with timely
help upon any emergent occasion. Nor were they wanting on their parts, who
exercised that prudence and diligence in this, which they usually observed in
all the rest of their solicitations. But we have been so taken up in looking
after the Treachery of some insolent people at home, (who tho often forgiven,
yet imbark upon new attempts and desist not in conjunction of Rebels (and
those Spaniards too) to venture upon Resolutions wherein they were often shaken
and defeated) that, employed in removeing of Domestic dangers, we coud not
hitherto apply that care (which we wished we might) or entire help to the
common defense of Religion. Yet what we coud have done, we have (as far as we
were able) carefully performed before, and if we are apprehended capable of
conduceing Ought, that may be thought of future service to Your Majesty's
affairs, we shall be not only vvilling, but also ready to join with you to
the utmost, upon any occasion in the promotion of it. We do (in the mean time)
congratulate, and from our hearts vvish you Joy in your most prudently and
resolutely managed enterprises: and continue our constant prayers to God, that
he vvoud be pleased to enable your course of felicity and victory to be
permanent to the service of his Glory.

Dated at our Court at Westminster June An. Dom. 1658.

OLIVER, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most Serene Prince,
the King of Portugal.
Most Serene King, Friend, and Confederate,
JOhn Buffield of London, Merchant complains of his having delivered in the
Year 1649. certain Commodities to Antony Jones and Manuel Ferdinand ^astaneo of
Tamarin, to be by them disposed of by sale, and to be, according to the custom
among (...), accounted for with him: That Fallin^, in his way to England, into
the hands of Pirates, and sufficiently damaged; the said Anthony and Manuel,
upon an account had thereof, and beleeveing that he was dead, looked upon the
said Goods as their own, and accordingly retain 'em hitherto, denying to come
to any account for 'em; And subsequent to this fraud, exposed the said English
Goods to open sale; the better to paliate their design: Of his being himself
forced at length to repair in the depth of last Winter to Portugal to challenge
his own; but in vain; for that he could not prevail with these Persons to
return him either Goods, or Money; But found them (which is to be wondered at)
justifying the private possession of these Goods, with the pretense of their
being the result of a public sale: Being a stranger, and having to do with a
People in their own C^untry (which is worse) he appealed to Your Majesty, and
humbly petitiond for his Judgment; who is appointed to the decision of
differences relating to the English; but was sent back again by Your Majesty to
that Court, that had rejected him. Which albeit it is in it self an act full
of iujustice, yet in regard it is apparent that these Tamiran Merchants have
incroached upon the reputation of that public Edict of yours, in perverting
its intent to serve their own fraudulent Ends: It is our earnest request to
Your Majesty, that the cause of these Persons, whose afflictions are manifold
through the poverty which they are reduced unto, be wholly referred, (as the
effect of your Clemency) to the Determination of the proper Judge: Whereby, the
unfortuna^e may rescue the remainder of theirfortunes out of the hands of such
a perfidious society, which (the thing, being apparent and clear) we doubt not
of Your Majesty's concurring with us in.

Dated at our Court at Westminster, August A. D. 1658.

To the most Serene Prince Leopald, Arch - Duke of Austria, Praesident to
Philip, King of Spain* now in Flanders.
Most Serene Sir,
CHarles Harbert, Knt; Petitioned unto us; that having directed the
transportation of some certain Goods and other household stuff out of Holland
into Bruges, within your Jurisdiction, to prevent their being taken from him by
form of injustice, is unexpectedly fallen into the hasard of looseing the
same; Videlicet by the means of the Earl o^ Suffolcke, for whom the P^titioner
being engaged for the Payment of considerable Sumes of Money, and having in
the Year 1643. sent out of England the said Goods as a security to the
Petitione^, to answer any de^and, which might be made upon him, upon the
account of the said obligation: Richard Greenwill, one of the order of
Knihthood also, broke in into the place, where they were laid up, seized and
keepes'em, in violation of the Terms under which they came into the (...)
possession: Under this pretense of Right only, that there remained due ^o
(...) (...) know not what from Theophilus ^arle of Suffolcke deceased, by
virtue of a decree of our Court of Chancry, and that those Goods, as being the
said E^rles, were Subject to the said decree, and therefore ar^ested them:
Whereas according to our Laws, the said Earl, who now is, and whose Goods
these are, nor is obliged b^ that decree, nor oug^t ^is Goods to be liable to
seizure or restraint upon it is score; as appears by the Sentence of the said
Court herewi^ sent you, at the request of the said Charles Harbert. We pray
your Highnsse to see the said Goods forthwith discharged from all restraint, as
well as from the unjust action of the said. Richard Greenwill: in regard it is
a thing so plainly contrary to the Laws and practice of Nations to give way
to the legality of an action in another Land, which in the Land, where the
cause of the action originally arose, cannot be lawfully allowed of. The
Consideration of Justice it self, and the reputation which you have abroad of
an upright man, has induced us to recomend this cause to your Highness. Which
if it falls out at any time, that the Right or Concerns of your Sub^ects come
under debate with us in this kind, assure your self of finding u^ (...) way
slack; but rather very r^dy to serve you upon all occasions.

Westminster. Your Highness's most affectionately OLIVER, (...) of the
Republic of England, etc*


To t^ High Court of Parliament at Paris.
We the Commiss^yes of the great Seal of England make it our request ^o the
hig^* Court of Parliament at Paris, that it would be entreated ^o s^e care
taken, that Miles, William and Mary Sandys Children of (...) (...) and
Ellsabeth soame his wife lately dece^sed, English Natives and under age; be at
Liberty forthwith to repair to us hither from Pa^is where they now remain
under the Tuition and Guarranty of the said Court: comitting them to the care
of James Mowath a Scoth man, and a person of integrity and uprightness, to
whom we have assigned this trouble of taking them thence and bringing of them
hither: engageing that upon any the like occasion or demand, the like Right and
Justice shall be by this Court administered in favor of any of the Subjects of
France.


LETTERS Written in the Name of RICHARD CROMWELL Protector Upon the death of
OLIVER his Father.
RICHARD, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most Serene and
Potent Prince, Lewis King of France.
Most Serene and potent King, Friend and Confederate.
WHereas my most Serene Father of Glorious memory Oliver, Protector of the
Comonwealth of England having, pursuant to the will of Almighty God, departed
this li^e the 3. of this instant September, I declared his l^wfull Successor in
the administration of this Government, coud not decline, (not without very great
grief and troubie I must confess) the giveing timely account of a matter of
that importance, to Your Majesty, who I am confident ca^t, considering your
friendly disposition as well toward him as this Republic, conceive any pl^ at
this so sudden an account of his death. It is now become my w^ke to invite Your
Majesty into such apprehensions of me, as are fit to be entertained of one,
who has nothing more in his thoughts, then a f^hfull and constant inclination
to the support of that Society and amity, which my iaid most Glorious Father
and Your Majesty were concerned in with each other; and with the same study and
affection maintain and observe the alliances, Resolutions, and Intelligencie
wherein he was engaged with you* It is my purpose to continue to our
Ambassador there, the power formerly lodged with him. What ever he offers you
in our name, accept thereof, I pray, as if tendered you by our self. That that
remains, is to tell you that I wish you all happynes.

D^ted at our Court at Westminster 5. September 1658.

To his Eminency Cardinal Mazarine.
Most Eminent Sir.
Although nothing coud fall out more to my trouble, then to have an occasion given
me of writeing concerning the death of my most Serene and Famous Father, and
considering the mutual esteem which fl^wed between your Eminency and him, and
that I do not question but that the death of so faithful and constant a
friend, must affect one so much concerned in the Government of France as your
Eminency is, I have judged it very material to accompany the account I sent o^
this m^st fatal bus^nesse to the King, wit^ a Letter to you; and withal to
act that that is just, in assureing you of a most sacred per^ormance of all
those things by me, which my father of most Serene memory has been by agreement
obliged to y^u to ^eepe and perform: and take care that tho you may justly
lament the l^sse of one so much your friend and admi^er, you may not miss him
as far forth as may concern the preservation of his promise to you: To the
performance of which on your part also, that God may preserve Your Eminency
long, and as an ^nstrument for the promotion of the common Good of both Nations.

Westminster September 1658.

^HARD, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most Sere^e and Potent
Prince Charles Gustavus, King of Sweedland, Goths and Vandals, etc.
Most Serene and p^tent King, Friend and Confederate.
WHen I consider that it is scarce possible for me to follow the pattern of my
fathers vertu^s, without I expres it in a desire of retaining and valuing those
Intrests also, which were both the purchase of his valor, and that which (...)
judged very advisable to retain and cherish, You^ Ma ^sty need no^ q^stion
whether I understand the incumbency of continueing that study and affection
toward you, which my father of most famous memory seems to h^ve entertaind.
Notwithstanding therefore that I do not, upon my entry upon this G^verment and
its dignity, find things in such a posture (...) the present, so as to be able
to be so quick in an answer to some heads offe^r'd by Your Embass^dours, as I
would, ^et t^ continue the League establish* by my father with Your Majesty, and
enter into another also of stricter Tearins; is a thing I shall very willingly
Listen to. And s^ soon as I have a true state of things as they stand of both
sides, shall, as far as concerns me, be always very ready to come to such
Resolutions, as shall seem to consist most with the advantage o^ both
Goverments: God, in the mean time, long preserve Your Majesty to his own
Glory, and the defense and protection of the Orthodox Church.

Dated at our Court at Westminster October 1658.

RICHARD, Protector of the Repub. of England, etc. To the most se^ene and
potent Prince Charles Gustavus. King of Sweedland, Goths Vandalls, Great
Prince of Finland, Duke of Scania, Erthonia, Care^ia, Bremen* verda, and
Vandal, Prince of Russia, Lord of Engria and Wismar, as also Count Pallatin of
the Rhine, Bavaria, Julia, Clivia, and Duke of the Mounts.
Most Serene, Potent King, Friend, and Confiderate.
THis brings you an account of my receipt of both Your Majesty's Letters, the
one by your E^vo, and the other transmitted unto us from Mr Philip Meadow our
Ambassador. Which denote not only Your M^griefe concerning the death of my
most Serene father evident and your opinion of him, but of me also his
successor, and your expectations of me And as to my father, nothing can truly
add to his future (...), which for nobility or wor^h can exceed the praise of
so worthy a person; nothing that can portend m^re good Luck to my undertakeing
of the administration of the Government, then to be c^ngratulated by so great a
Congratulator nothing of an estate tho never so plentiful, coud have adv^nced
so far toward the kindleing an ambition of pursueing the v^rtue of a father,
equal to so considerable a Counselor. As to what you mention concerning the
common safety of Protestancy, and the reasons you offer to draw us into a
concurrence of with you, I would have your Majesty believe, that, albeit since
my arrival to this Government, the posture of our affairs has been such, as to
have taken up and approprinted the Re^ult o^ our diligence, care and vigilance
to the special consideration o^ matters at home, yet nothing has been, or is
dearer, or more in our purposes, then to employ all means tending to the
support of that alliance ratified in my fathers time with Your Majesty. I have
therefore taken care of sending a fleet to the Baltique sea, with such
Instrucons, as our Envoy, pursuant to such directions as we ^ave given him at
large relateing thereto, shall communicate to Your Majesty. Whom the Almighty
God take care of the safety of, and make ^ortunate and succesfull in all your
undertakeing; in referrence more particularly to the Orthodox faith, for whose
defense may he long stand by you.

Dated at our Court at Westminster October 13. 1658.

RICHARD, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc To the most Serene and
potent Prince Charles Gustavus King of Sweedland, Goths, and Vandalls etc.
Most Serene and potent King, Friend and Confederate,
I send Your Majesty the best thing I coud part with, both in w^rth and
Excellency, I mean Sir George Ascue Knight, a very worthy and noble Gentleman,
and a person of long knowledge and Tried experience not only in warlike
affairs, especially those of the sea, but also enriched (...) integrity,
Modesty, understanding, and learning, unwelcome upon the account of his most
acceptable moralls to none; and, which is above all, now and ^or some time,
under a desire of serveing under Your Majesty's (...), so famous every where
upon the score of your power in warlike discipline. And would have Your Majesty
think, that what ever you please to commit to the care of this man, either of
trust or otherwise, wherein faithfulness, experience, and courage is requisite
to be shown or exercised, you cannot do it to a more faithful, stout, or
probably skillfull person. As to what I committed to his Trust to be
communicated to Your Majesty, let his admittance (I pray) be quick, his
audience courteous, and that very weight laid upon what he says, which you would
upon our imediat delivery thereof: show him such respect withal, as you shall
judge convenient to be shown to a person of his character, and, for his
merits, very worthy of our recomendation. That God may bless your affairs,
and assign them a happy Issue, and that to his own Glory and the support of
the Orthodox Faith.

Dated at our Court at Westminster October 1658.

RICHARD, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most Serene Prince,
Charles Gustavus King of Svveedland, Goths and Vandals.
Most Serene and potent King, Friend, and confederate.
COmplaint has been made us by Petition, in the name of Samuel Piggot of London
Merchant, setting forth; his having lately sent two ships (the one called the
Post, Jacob Tidd Master, and the other the Water dog Graband Pieters Master)
from London into France. upon the account of Trade; thence to Amsterdam with
their loading of salt; thence to Stetin near Pomerania in the Baltique sea
within your jurisdiction, the one in her Ballast, and the other with her
freight of salt, loaded at the joint cost of the petitioner and one Peter
Hensbergh, who was his Copartener; But that both the said ships were, as he
understands, set upon and taken by some of your Forces in some part of the
said sea, and retained; Although he has (to prevent this mischief) sent a
Certificate under the seal of the Admiralty Court, with both the said ships,
testifying that, (...) the moity of the said herings, the sole propriety of
both lay peculiarly in him. Which having made clear proof of before us, I
(...) desire, that in regard the loss of both the ships cannot be without very
gre^ prejudice to the man, and, it may be, the (...) of his whole fortune: Your
Majesty would charge and command your Subjects to discharge the said ships
without the least delay of time. God preserve your Majesty long, to the service
of his own glory, and the Protection of the Orthodox Church.

Dated at our Court at Westminster Jan. 27. Ann^ Dom. 1658.

RICHARD, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc. To the high and mighty
Lords the States of West Friesland. S. D.
High and mighty Lords, Friends and dearest Confederates.
Mary Grindar Widow has, in her petition to me, made a great complaint against
one Thomas Killig rue now a soldier in your service, who to escape the paying
of a considerable sum of money due from him to the petitioner for about eighteen
years, or being brought to any account either with her, or her attorney by
Law, or other tendency to a satisfaction; is said to have petitioned your
Highnesses, that he might not be prosecuted by Law upon the score of any debt
contracted in England. But if I let your Highnesses see this only, that she
is a widow, poor, a mother of many small Children, whose entire support
almost this man seems to endeavor to divert, I shall keep far from thinking
that I need the use of many arguments with you, who are too well acquainted with
Gods Comands, especially on behalf of widows and Orphans against
oppression; as to imagine your giveing way to the grant of such a fraudulent
privilege: which I am confident you will never allow of.

Dated from our Court at Westminster January 27. 1658.

RICHARD, Protector of the Republ. of England, etc* To the most Serene and
Potent Prince Lewis, King of France.
Most Serene and Potent King, Friend, and august Confed^rate.
We have, not without grief, had and account of some unworthy interruption
given, by some ill minded Persons, to the Protestants while in the exercise of
their devotion in Province; to that degree, that when complaint was made
thereof to the Magistrates at Gratianopoli, whom it lawfully concerned, they
condemned the thing as worthy of a severe reproof: And that the Neighboring
Clergy did thereupon prevail with your Majesty to remit the whole matter to
the Judgment of your Royal Council at Paris: W^o having done nothing
hitherto, (...) Churches there, the Protestants more (...), conot peaceably
(...) to the exercise of their devotion. Let my earnest desires therefore
prevail with Your Majesty, first that they, whose prayers sacrificed for your
(...), and the prosperity of your Kingdom, were not rejected, their public
meetings to pray be not prohibitted: Next that the Disturber of Gods peace be,
pursuant to their judgment, to whom alone belongs the law^ll and usual
cognizance of such Cases at Gratianopoli, accounted with, Long and peaceable
may God render Your Majestys days; And that if these our desires prove
acceptable and judged (by you) of service to God, you declare them as such, by
removeing that prohibition from off the Protestants Churchs, and laying a
speedy injunction to have the same repealed,

Dated at Westminster February 18. An. 1658.

To his Eminency Cardinal Mazarine.
Most Eminent Mr Cardinal.
THe most illustrious Lady Richmond, widow of the Duke of Richmond lately
deceased, designs with her young son, to visit and (...) (...) small stay in
France. My earnest request therefore to Your Eminency is, that, if they chance
to need, in any instance, you^ (...), favor, o^ help as strangers, you would
please to exercise that regard to their quality consisting with your wont in
instances of extraordinary comendations; So as to let them see, that as far as
the usual dispensation of your curtesys to all persons coud be rendered more
then ordinary, our Letters were able to do it: and rest assured in this, that
if an^ comendation from your Eminency do seem to call for any thing of this
kind at my hands, my allowance thereof may be noe less depended upon.

Westminster February 29. 1658.

RICHARD, Protector of the Repub. of England, etc To the most Serene and potent
Prince (...), King of Portugal.
(...) (...) and Potent King. Friend, and (...)
Although I ought to write upon various Subjects to a Prince that is a Friend, and
ver^ much concerned in the welfare of this Republic, yet there is nothing
which I can with more freedom go about, then what I now (...) of letting your
Majesty and the people of (...) know how glad I am of the late sig^all victory
(...) of the common Enemy the Spaniard: tending in the apprehension of all men,
not only to your own, but the most (...) peace and Repose of all Europe, and
which may (...) entail thereon an advantage of many years continuance. The
next thing is to own Your Majestys Justice as the undoubted fountain, from
whence spring Your victorys instance'd in the provision made by the 24* article
of the League concluded b^ the Arbitrators at London for the satisfaction of
our Merchants, whose Merchant Men were hired into the service of the Brasile
Company. Thereis one Alexandar Banck Merchant of London, whom the said Company
denies to pray the freight contracted for, for the service of a ship of his
called the three Brothers John Wilk Master in consideration of two voyages
performed in the said Company's service: Whereas the rest have been long ago
paid, notwithstanding their having been in (...) (...) but once. Which I do
not understand the reason of, except he; in their opinion, is beter worthy of a
reward, who has served them once, then he that did it twice. My earnest Request
to Your Majesty therefore is, that this only man, to whom a double reward is
due, be not kept out, of the satisfaction of his hire, and cause, by the
influenc^ of your Authority, the said Company to fix upon some speedy day of
payment, and repairing his damages, their delays having exposed the Merchant
to inconveniencyes far exceeding his hire. God increase your power and
continue unto you the uper hand over your Enemies.

Dated at our Court rt Westminster An. 1658.

RICHARD, Protector of the Republ. of Egland, etc. To his Eminency Cardinal
Mazarine.
Most Eminent Sr.
THe Case of Peter Pett, a person of singular honesty, and very serviceable to
us and the Republic in navall affairs, came recomended to your Eminency in
ours of the 13. of June, being now about eight months past. It was about a
vessel of his called the Edward, which was, as we observed, seized upon in the
mouth of the River of Thames and sold at the Port of Bayon by one Bascon a
Frenchman in the year 1646. And although the King did by an order of Council
dated the 4. of November 1647. direct; that what ever the Council shoud Judge
equivalent in money to answer the damage susteind, care shoud be taken of his
being satisfied accordingly: Yet the petitioner complains of his having
received no benefit hitherto from the said decree. But as I no way doubt, but
that your Eminency will, at my request, command the speedy application of what
may be requisite, ^revious to the execution of that order: This brings you an
earnest Repetion of my said request, praying that you would inspect where it
sticks, inquire through whose neglect or obstinacy it comes to pass, that the
Kings order shall not, after ten years respit, be obeyed, and exercise your
authority in the pressure of the execution of that Decree, and payment of that
appointed sum, which we judge has been (...) long ago: causeing'a speedy
demand to be made thereof, and the Result paid to the Receipt of the
Petitioner. Wherein your Eminency will act a thing conformable principally with
Justice, and that shall oblige me besides in a singular degree.

Dated at our Court at Westminster February 22. 1659.

The two following LETTERS Were written in the name of the long Parliament,
when restrored, upon the Removeall of Richard Cromwell.
The Parliament of the Republ. of England, etc. To the most serene and potent
Prince Charles Gustavus King of Sweedland, Goths and Vandalls.
Most Serene and potent King, Dearest Friend,
IT having pleased the almighty God, with whom the power of all Changes in
Kingdoms and Republics is lodged, to restore us to our former charge in this
the Government of the comonwealth of England, we have thought fit first to
acquaint you therewith, and next to let your Majesty know of the very great
affection we bear to so potent a prince as you are, and how ben^ upon the
support of that peace, which our industry and most sincere endeavor were the
sole means of establishing between you and the King of Denmark, also a potent
protestant Prince. It is therefore ou^ will that the authority, by which Philip
Meddowes our ex^raordinary Ambassador there has in the name of this Republic
hitherto acted, be now continued as from us: And do hereby confirm unto him
the power of proposeing, acting, and transacting with your Majesty to be the
same, with the Original: What ever he acts or contracts in our name, we do,
with Gods assistance, engage to make good: God take your Majesty into his
continual guide; with tendency to the safety and security of the Protestants.

Westminster May 15* An* 1659* Subscribed by William Leuthall, speaker to the
Parliament.


The Parliament of the Republic of England. To the most Se^ne Prince Frederick
King of Denmark.
Most Serene King, dearest Friend.
IT gaveing pleased the Almighty great God, the chief Ruler of all things to
(...) us (...) former S^ion and charge in the administration of this Republic,
we held it apoint mainly becomeing our disposition to our Neighbor, and Ally,
to observe the same to your Majesty, and to intimat how much we are concerned
at your troubles: the proof whereof you shall see in the endeavor and
diligence, which we now do, and shall, as far as there is necessity for it,
exercise to reconcile your Majesty and the King of Sweedland to peace. To which
purpose we have directed Phillip Meadows our extraordinary Embasadour at the
Court of Swedland, that for the furure he wait upon your Majesty in our name
concerning this affair, and let you know, that whatever he communicates,
proposes, acts or transact the, at he should do the same as the effect of
our Comands. The Credit given him by your Majesty in the discharge of which
Character, we pray that it be believed as given to our selves. God deliver your
Majesty to your content, out of all those Difficultyes which you so resolutely
contend with, and draw all to happy and pleasing Issue.

Westminster May 15. 1659. Signed by William Leuthall Speaker to the
Comonwealth Parliament.


FINIS.

