THE TENURE OF KINGS AND MAGISTRATES: PROVING, That it is Lawful, and has
been held so through all Ages, for any, who have the Power, to call to account
a Tyrant, or wicked KING, and after due conviction, to depose, and put him to
death; if the ordinary MAGISTRATE have neglected, or denied to do it.

And that they, who of late, so much blame Deposing, are the Men that did it
themselves.

The Author, J. M.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, at the Gilded Lion in Aldersgate Street,
1649.

THE TENURE OF KINGS And MAGISTRATES.
IF Men within themselves would be governed by reason, and not generally give
up their understanding to a double tyranny, of custom from without, and blind
affections within, they would discern better what it is to favor and uphold
the Tyrant of a Nation. But being slaves within doors, no wonder that they
strive so much to have the public State conformably governed to the inward
vicious rule, by which they govern themselves. For indeed none can love freedom
heartily, but good men; the rest love not freedom, but license; which never
has more scope or more indulgence then under Tyrants. Hence is it that Tyrants
are not often offended, nor stand much in doubt of bad men, as being all
naturally servile; but in whom virtue and true worth most is eminent, them they
fear in earnest, as by right their Masters, against them lies all their hatred
and suspicion. Consequently neither do bad men hate Tirants, but have been
always readiest with the falsifi'd names of Loyalty and Obedience, to color
over their base compliances. And although sometimes for shame, and when it
comes to their own grievances, of purse especially, they would seem good
Patriots, and side with the better cause, yet when others for the deliverance
of their Country, endu'd with fortitude and Heroic virtue, to fear nothing
but the curse written against those That do the work Jer. 48. 10.
of the Lord negligently, would go on to remove, not only the calamities and
thraldomes of a people, but the roots and causes whence they spring, straight
these men, and sure helpers at need, as if they hated only the miseries but
not the mischiefs, after they have juggl'd and palter'd with the World,
bandied and borne arms against their King, divested him, disanointed him, nay
cursed him all over in their Pulpits, and their Pamphlets, to the engaging of
sincere and real men, beyond what is possible or honest to retreat from, not
only turn revolters from those principles, which only could at first move
them, but lay the stain of disloyalty, and worse, on those proceedings, which
are the necessary consequences of their own former actions; nor disllik'd by
themselves, were they managed to the entire advantages of their own Faction;
not considering the while that he toward whom they boasted their new fidelity,
counted them accessory, and by those Statutes and Laws which they so impotently
brandish against others, would have doomed them to a traitors death for what
they have done already. It Is true, that most men are apt anough to civil Wars
and commotions as a noveltie, and for a flash, hot and active; but through
sloth or inconstancy, and weakness of spirit either fainting, ere their own
pretenses, though never so just, be half attained, or through an inbred
falsehood and wickedness, betray often times to destruction with themselves, men
of noblest temper joined with them for causes which they in their rash
undertakings were not capable of. If God and a good cause give them Victory,
the prosecution whereof for the most part, inevitably draws after it the
alteration of Laws, change of Government, downfall of Princes with their
Families; then comes the task to those Worthies which are the soul of that
Enterprise, to be swett and labored out amidst the throng and noises of
vulgar and irrational men. Some contesting for Privileges, customs, forms,
and that old intanglement of iniquity, their gibrish Laws, though the badge
of their ancient slavery. Others who have been fiercest against their Prince,
under the notion of a Tyrant, and no mean incendiaries of the War against
him, when God out of his providence and high disposal has delivered him into
the hand of their brethren, on a sudden and in a new garb of Allegiance,
which their doings have long since cancelled; they plead for him, pity him,
extol him, protest against those that talk of bringing him to the trial of
Justice, which is the Sword of God, superior to all mortal things, in whose
hand soever by apparent signs his testified will is to put it. But certainly,
if we consider who and what they are, on a sudden grown so pitiful, we may
conclude, their pity can be no true and Christian commiseration, but either
levitie and shallowness of mind, or else a carnal admiring of that worldly
pomp and greatness, from whence they see him fallen; or rather lastly a
dissembled and seditious pity, feigned of industry to beget new commotions. As
for mercy, if it be to a Tyrant, under which name they themselves have cited
him so often in the hearing of God, of Angels, and the holy Church assembled, and
there charged him with the spilling of more innocent blood by far, then ever
Nero did, undoubtedly the mercy which they pretend, is the mercy of wicked men;
and their mercies, we read, Prove. 12. 10.
are cruelties; hazarding the welfare of a whole Nation, to have saved one,
whom so often they have termed Agag, and villifying the blood of many Jonathans
that have saved Israel; insisting with much niceness on the unnecessariest
clause of their Covenant; wherein the fear of change, and the absurd
contradiction of a flattering hostility had hamperd them, but not scrupling to
give away for complements, to an implacable revenge, the heads of many thousand
Christians more.

Another sort there is, who coming in the course of these affairs, to have
their share in great actions above the form of Law or Custom, at least to give
their voice and approbation, begin to swerve and almost shiver at the majesty
and grandeur of some noble deed, as if they were newly entered into a great sin;
disputing presidents, forms, and circumstances, when the Common wealth nigh
perishes for want of deeds in substance, don with just and faithful
expedition. To these I wish better instruction, and virtue equal to their
calling; the former of which, that is to say Instruction, I shall endeavor, as
my duty is, to bestow on them; and exhort them not to startle from the just
and pious resolution of adhering with all their assistance to the present
Parliament and Army, in the glorious way wherein Justice and Victory has set
them; the only warrants through all ages, next under immediate Revelation, to
exercise supreme power; in those proceedings which hitherto appear equal to
what has been don in any age or Nation heretofore, justly or magnanimouslie.
Nor let them be discouraged or deterred by any new Apostate Scar crows, who
under show of giving counsel, send out their barking monitories and momento's,
empty of ought else but the spleen of a frustrated Faction. For how can that
pretended counsel, be either sound or faithful, when they that give it, see
not for madness and vexation of their ends lost, that those Statutes and
Scriptures which both falsely and scandalously, they wrest against their Friends
and Associates, would by sentence of the common adversary, fall first and
heaviest upon their own heads. Neither let mild and tender dispositions be
foolishly softn'd from their duty and perseverance with the unmasculine
Rhetoric of any puling Priest or Chaplain, sent as a friendly Letter of
advice, for fashion sake in private, and forthwith published by the Sender
himself, that we may know how much of friend there was in it, to cast an
odious envy upon them, to whom it was pretended to be sent in charity. Nor
let any man be deluded by either the ignorance or the notorious hypocrisy and
selfe-repugnance of our dancing Divines, who have the conscience and the
boldness, to come with Scripture in their mouths, gloss'd and fitted for their
turns with a double contradictory sense, transforming the sacred verity of
God, to an Idol with two faces, looking at once two several ways; and with the
same quotations to charge others, which in the same case they made serve to
justify themselves. For while the hope to be made Classic and Provincial
Lords led them on, while pluralities greased them thick and deep, to the shame
and scandal of Religion, more then all the Sects and Heresies they exclaim
against, then to fight against the Kings person, and no less a party of his
Lords and Commons, or to put force upon both the Houses was good, was lawful,
was no resisting of Superior powers; they only were powers not to be
resisted, who countenanced the good and punished the evil. But now that their
censorious domineering is not suffered to be universal, truth and conscience
to be freed, Tithes and Pluralities to be no more, though competent allowance
provided, and the warm experience of large gifts, and they so good at taking
them; yet now to exclude and seize on impeach't Members, to bring Delinquents
without exemption to a fair Tribunal by the common National Law against
murder, is now to be no less then Corah, Dathan, and Abiram. He who but
erewhile in the Pulpits was a cursed Tyrant, an enemy to God and Saints, laden
with all the innocent blood split in three Kingdoms, and so to be sought
against, is now though nothing penitent or altered from his first principles, a
lawful Magistrate, a Sovrane Lord, the Lords Anointed, not to be touched,
though by themselves imprisoned. As if this only were obedience, to preserve
the mere useless bulk of his person, and that only in prison, not in the
field, and to disobey his commands, deny him his dignity and office, every
where to resist his power but where they think it only surviving in their own
faction.

But who in particular is a Tyrant cannot be determind in a general discourse,
otherwise then by supposition; his particular charge, and the sufficient proof
of it must determine that: which I leave to Magistrates, at least to the
uprighter sort of them, and of the people, though in number less by many, in
whom faction least has prevaild above the Law of nature and right reason, to
judge as they find cause. But this I dare own as part of my faith, that if
such a one there be, by whose Commission, whole massacres have been committed
on his faithful Subjects, his Provinces offered to pawn or alienation, as the
hire of those whom he had solicited to come in and destroy whole Cities and
Countries; be he King, or Tyrant, or Emperor, the Sword of Justice is above
him; in whose hand soever is found sufficient power to avenge the effusion, and
so great a deluge of inuocent blood. For if all humane power to execute, not
accidentally but intendedly, the wrath of God upon evil doers without
exception, be of God; then that power, whether ordinary, or if that fail,
extraordinary so executing that intent of God, is lawful, and not to be
resisted. But to unfold more at large this whole Question, though with all
expedient brevity, I shall here set down, from first beginning, the original
of Kings; how and wherefore exalted to that dignity above their Brethren; and
from thence shall prove, that turning to tyranny they may be as lawfully
deposd and punishd, as they were at first elected: This I shall do by
autorities and reasons, not learnt in corners among Schisms and Herisies, as
our doubling Divines are ready to calumniate, but fetched out of the midst of
choicest and most authentic learning, and no prohibited Authors, nor many
Heathen, but Mosaical, Christian, Orthodoxal, and which must needs be more
convincing to our Adversaries, Presbyterial.

No man who knows ought, can be so stupid to deny that all men naturally were
borne free, being the image and resemblance of God himself, and were by
privilege above all the creatures, borne to command and not to obey: and that
they livd so, till from the root of Adams transgression, falling among
themselves to do wrong and violence, and foreseeing that such courses must
needs tend to the destruction of them all, they agreed by common league to bind
each other from mutual injury, and jointly to defend themselves against any
that gave disturbance or opposition to such agreement. Hence came Cities,
Towns and Commonwealths. And because no faith in all was found sufficiently
binding, they saw it needful to ordain some authority, that might restrain
by force and punishment what was violated against peace and common right: This
authority and power of self-defence and preservation being originally and
naturally in every one of them, and unitedly in them all, for ease, for order,
and least each man should be his own partial judge, they communicated and
derived either to one, whom for the eminence of his wisdom and integrity they
chose above the rest, or to more then one whom they thought of equal deserving:
the first was called a King; the other Magistrates. Not to be their Lords and
Masters (though afterward those names in some places were given voluntarily to
such as had bin authors of inestimable good to the people) but, to be their
Deputies and Commissioners, to execute, by virtue of their entrusted power, that
justice which else every man by the bond of nature and of Covenant must have
executed for himself, and for one another. And to him that shall consider well
why among free persons, one man by civil right should bear authority and
jurisdiction over another, no other end or reason can be imaginable. These for
a while governd well, and with much equity decided all things at their own
arbitrament: till the temptation of such a power left absolute in their hands,
perverted them at length to injustice and partiality. Then did they who now by
trial had found the danger and inconveniences of committing arbitrary power to
any, invent Laws either framed or consented to by all, that should confine and
limit the authority of whom they chose to govern them: that so man of whose
failing they had proof, might no more rule over them, but law and reason
abstracted as much as might be from personal errors and frailties. When this
would nor serve, but that the Law was either not executed, or misapplied, they
were constraind from that time, the only remedy left them, to put conditions
and take Oaths from all Kings and Magistrates at their first instalment to do
impartial justice by Law: who upon those terms and no other, received
Allegiance from the people, that is to say, bond or Covenant to obey them in
execution of those Laws which they the people had themselves made or assented
to. And this often times with express warning, that if the King or Magistrate
proved unfaithful to his trust, the people would be disengaged. They added
also Counselors and Parlaments, not to be only at his beck, but with him or
without him, at set times, or at all times, when any danger threatn^d to have
care of the public safety. Therefore says Claudius Sesell a French Statesman,
The Parliament was set as a bridle to the King; which I instance rather, because
that Monarchy is granted by all to be a far more absolute then ours. That
this and the rest of what has hitherto been spok'n is most true, might be
copiously made appear throughout all Stories Heathen and Christian; eev'n of
those Nations where Kings and Emperors have sought means to abolish all
ancient memory of the peoples right by their encroachments and usurpations. But
I spare long insertions, appealing to the German, French, Italian, Arragonian,
English, and not least the Scottish Histories: not forgetting this only by the
way, that William the Norman though a Conqueror, and not unsworne at his
Coronation, was compelld a second time to take oath at S. Albanes, ere the
people would be brought to yield obedience.

It being thus manifest that the power of Kings and Magistrates is nothing
else, but what is only derivative, transferrd and committed to them in trust
from the people to the Common good of them all, in whom the power yet remains
fundamentally, and cannot be taken from them, without a violation of their
natural birthright, and seeing that from hence Aristotle and the best of
Political writers have defined a King, him who governs to the good and profit
of his people, and not for his own ends, it follows from necessary causes that
the titles of Sovran Lord, natural Lord, and the like, are either arrogancies,
or flatteries, not admitted by Emperors and Kings of best note, and dislikt by
the Church both of Jews, Isai. 26. 13. and ancient Christians as appears by
Tertullian and others. Although generally the people of Asia and with them the
Jews also, especially since the time they chose a King, against the advice and
counsel of God, are noted by wise authors much inclinable to slavery.

Secondly, that to say, as is usual, the King has as good right to his crown
and dignity, as any man to his inheritance, is to make the subject no better
then the Kings slave, his chattell, or his possession that may be bought and
sold, And doubtless if hereditary title were sufficiently inquired, the best
foundation of it would be found but either in courtesy or convenience. But
suppose it to be of right hereditarie, what can be more just and legal, if a
subject for certain crimes be to forfet by Law from himself and posterity,
all his inheritance to the King, then that a King for crimes proportional,
should forfet all his title and inheritance to the people: unless the people
must be thought created all for him, he not for them, and they all in one body
inferior to him single, which were a kind of treason against the dignity of
mankind to affirm.

Thirdly it follows, that to say Kings are accountable to none but God, is the
overturning of all Law and government. For if they may refuse to give account,
then all covnants made with them at Coronation; all Oaths are in vain, and
mere mockeries, all Laws which they swear to keep, made to no purpose; for if
the King fear not God, as how many of them do not? we hold then our lives and
estates, by the tenure of his mere grace and mercy, as from a God, not a
mortal Magistrate, a position that none but Court parasites or men besotted
would maintain. And no Christian Prince not drunk with high mind, and prouder
then those Pagan Caesar's, that deifi'd themselves, would arrogate so
unreasonably above human condition, or derogate so basely from a whole Nation
of men his brethren, as if for him only subsisting, and to serve his glory,
valuing them in comparison of his own brute will and pleasure no more then so
many beasts, or vermin under his feet, not to be reasond with, but to be
injurd; among whom there might be found so many thousand men for wisdom,
virtue, nobleness of mind and all other respects, but the fortune of his
dignity, far above him. Yet some would persuade us that this absurd opinion
was King David's; because in the 51 Psalm he cries out to God, Against thee
only have I sinned; as if David had imagind that to murder Uriah and
adulterate his Wife, had bin no sin against his neighbor, when as that law of
Moses was to the King expressly, Deuteronomy. 17. not to think so highly of himself
above his Brethren. David therefore by those words could mean no other, then
either that the depth of his guiltiness was known to God only, or to so few as
had not the will or power to question him, or that the sin against God was
greater beyond compare then against Uriah. What ever his meaning were, any wise
man will see that the patheticall words of a Psalm can be no certain decision
to a point that has abundantly more certain rules to go by. How much more
rationally spoke the Heathen King. Demophoon in a Tragedy of Euripides then
these interpret^s would put upon King David, I rule not my people by tyranny,
as if they were Barbarians, but am my self liable, if I do unjustly to suffer
justly Not unlike was the speech of Traian the worthy Emperor, to one whom he
made General of his Praetorian Forces. Take this drawn sword, says he, to use
for me, if I reign well, if not, to use against me. Thus Dion relates. And not
Traian only, but Theodosius the younger a Christian Emperor and one of the
best, causd it to be enacted as a rule undeniable and fit to be acknowledgd by
all Kings and Emperors, that a Prince is bound to the Laws; that on the
authority of Law the authority of a Prince depends, and to the Laws ought submit.
Which Edict of his remains yet unrepeald in the Code of Justinian. l. 1. tit.
24. as a sacred constitution to all the succeeding Emperors. How then can any
King in Europe maintain and write himself accountable to none but God, when
Emperors in their own imperial Statutes have writt'n and decreed themselves
accountable to Law. And indeed where such account is not feared, he that bids a
man reign over him above Law, may bid as well a savage beast.

It follows lastly, that since the King or Magistrate holds his authority of
the people, both originally and naturally for their good in the first place,
and not his own, then may the people as often as they shall judge it for the
best, either choose him or reject him, retain him or depose him though no
Tyrant, merely by the liberty and right of free born men to be governed as
seems to them best. This, though it cannot but stand with plain reason, shall
be made good also by Scripture, Deuteronomy. 17. 14. When thou art come into the Land
which the Lord thy God gives thee, and shall say I will set a King over me,
like as all the Nations about me These words confirm us that the right of
choosing, yea of changing their own government is by the grant of God him self
in the people. And therefore when they desit'd a King, though then under
another form of government, and though their changing displeasd him, yet he that
was himself their King, and rejected by them, would not be a hindrance to what
they inended, further then by persuasion, but that they might do therein as
they saw good, 1 Samuel 8. only he reserved to himself the nomination of who
should reign over them. Neither did that exempt the King as if he were to God
only accountable, though by his especial command anointed. Therefore David
first made a Covenant with the Elders of Israel, and so was by them anointed
King, 1 Chronicles. 11. And Jehoiada the Priest making Jehoash King, made a Covenant
between him and the people, 2 Kings 11. 17. Therefore when Roboam at his
coming to the Crown, rejected those conditions which the Israelites brought
him, hear what they answer him, what portion have we in David, or inheritance
in the son of Jesse. See to thine own house David. And for the like conditions
not performed, all Israel before that time deposd Samuel; not for his own
default, but for the misgovement of his Sons. But some will say to both these
examples, it was evilly don. I answer, that not the latter, because it was
expressly allowed them in the Law to set up a King if they pleased; and God
himself joynd with them in the work; though in some sort it was at that time
displeasing to him, in respect of old Samuel who had governd them uprightly.
As Livy praises the Romans who took occasion from Tarquinius a wicked Prince to
gain their liberty, which to have extorted, says he, from Numa or any of
the good Kings before, had not bin seasonable. Nor was it in the former example
don unlawfully; for when Roboam had prepared a huge Army to reduce the
Israelites, he was forbidd'n by the Profet, 1 Kings 12.24. Thus says the Lord
ye shall not go up, nor fight against your brethren, for this thing is from
me. He calls them their brethren, not Rebels, and forbidds to be proceeded
against them, owning the thing himself, not by single providence, but by
approbation, and that not only of the act, as in the former example, but of
the fit season also; he had not otherwise forbidd to molest them. And those
grave and wise Counselors whom Rehoboam first advised with, spoke no such
thing, as our old gray headed Flatterers now are wont, stand upon your
birthright, scorn to capitulate, you hold of God, and not of them; for they
knew no such matter, unless conditionally, but gave him politic counsel, as in
a civil transaction. Therefore Kingdom and Magistracy, whether supreme or
subordinat is called a human ordinance, 1 Pet. 2. 13. etc. which we are there
taught is the will of God we should submitt to, so far as for the punishment
of evil doers, and the encouragement of them that do well. Submitt says he,
as free men. And there is no power but of God, says Paul, Romans 13. as much as
to say, God put it into man's heart to find out that way at first for common
peace and preservation, approving the exercise thereof; else it contradicts Peter
who calls the same authority an Ordinance of man. It must be also understood of
lawful and just power, else we read of great power in the affairs and
Kingdoms of the World permitted to the Devil: for says he to Christ, Luke 4.
6. all this power will I give thee and the glory of them, for it is deliverd to
me, and to whomsoever I will, I give it: neither did he ly, or Christ gainsay
what he affirmed: for in the thirteenth of the Revelation we read how the
Dragon gave to the beast his power, his seat, and great authority: which beast
so autoriz'd most expound to be the tyrannical powers and Kingdoms of the
earth. Therefore Saint Paul in the forecited Chapter tells us that such
Magistrates he meanes', as are, not a terror to the good but to the evil,
such as bear not the sword in vain, but to punish offenders, and to encourage
the good. If such only be mentiond here as powers to be obeyed, and our
submission to them only requird, then doubtless those powers that do the
contrary, are no powers ordaind of God, and by consequence no obligation laid
upon us to obey or not to resist them. And it may be well observd that both
these Apostles, whenever they give this precept, express it in terms not
concret but abstract, as Logicians are wont to speak, that is, they mention
the ordinance, the power, the authority before the persons that execute it, and
what that power is, lest we should be deceavd, they describe exactly. So that
if the power be not such, or the person execute not such power, neither the one
nor the other is of God, but of the Devil, and by consequence to be resisted.
From this exposition Chrysostom also on the same place dissents not;
explaining that these words were not writt'n in behalf of a tyrant. And this is
verified by David, himself a King, and likeliest to be Author of the Psalm 94.
20. which says, Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee. And it
were worth the knowing, since Kings, and that by Scripture boast the justness
of their title, by holding it immediately of God, yet cannot show the t^me when
God ever set on the throne them or their forefathers, but only when the people
chose them; why by the same reason, since God ascribes as often to himself the
casting down of Princes from the throne, it should not be thought as lawful,
and as much from God when none are seen to do it but the people, and that for
just causes. For if it needs must be a sin in them to depose, it may as likely
be a sin to have elected. And contrary if the peoples act in election be
pleaded by a King, as the act of God, and the most just title to enthrone him,
why may not the peoples act of rejection, be as well pleaded by the people as
the act of God, and the most just reason to depose him? So that we see the
title and just right of reigning or deposing in reference to God, is found in
Scripture to be all one; visible only in the people, and depending merely upon
justice and demerit. Thus far has bin considerd briefly the power of Kings
and Magistrates; how it was, and is originally the peoples, and by them
conferrd in trust only to be imployd to the common peace and benefit; with
liberty therefore and right remaining in them to reassume it to themselves, if
by Kings or Magistrates it be abused; or to dispose of it by any alteration, as
they shall judge most conducing to the public good.

We may from hence with more ease, and force of argument determine what a
Tyrant is, and what the people may do against him. A Tyrant whether by wrong
or by right coming to the Crown, is he who regarding neither Law nor the
common good, reigns only for himself and his faction: Thus St. Basil among
others defines him. And because his power is great, his will boundless and
exorbitant, the fulfilling whereof is for the most part accompanied with
innumerable wrongs and oppressions of the people, murders, massacres, rapes,
adulteries, desolation, and subversion of Cities and whole provinces; look how
great a good and happiness a just King is, so great a mischeife is a Tyrant; as
he the public Father of his Country, so this the common enemy. Against whom
what the people lawfully may do, as against a common pest, and destroyer of
mankind, I suppose no man of clear judgment need go surder to be guided
then by the very principles of nature in him. But because it is the vulgar
folly of men to desert their own reason, and shutting their eyes to think they
see best with other men's, I shall show by such examples as ought to have most
weight with us, what has bin don is this case heretofore. The Greeks and
Romans as their prime Authors witness held it not only lawful, but a glorious
and Heroic deed, rewarded publicly with Statues and Garlands, to kill an
infamous Tyrant at any time without trial; and but reason, that he who trod
down all Law, should not be voutsaf'd the benefit of Law. Insomuch that Seneca
the Tragedian brings in Hercules the grand suppressor of Tyrants, thus
speaking, -- Victima haud ulla amplior
Potest, magisque opima mactari Jovi
Quam Rex iniquus --
-- There can be slain
No sacrifice to God more accetable
Then an unjust and wicked King --


But of these I name no more, lest it be objected they were Heathen; and come
to produce another sort of men that had the knowledge of true Religion. Among
the Jews this custom of tyrant-killing was not unusual. First Ehud, a man whom
God had raysd to deliver Israel from Eglon King of Moab, who had conquered and
ruled over them eighteen years, being sent to him as an Ambassador with a
present slew him in his own house. But he was a foreign Prince, an enemy, and
Ehud besides had special warrant from God. To the first I answer, it imports
not whether foreign or native: For no Prince so native but professes to hold by
Law; which when he himself overturnes, breaking all the Covnants and Oaths
that gave him title to his dignity, and were the bond and alliance between him
and his people, what differs he from an outlandish King or from an enemy? For
look how much right the King of Spain has to govern us at all, so much right
has the King of England to govern us tyrannically. If he, though not bound to
us by any league, coming from Spain in person to subdue us or to destroy us,
might lawfully by the people of England either be slain in fight, or put to
death in captivity, what has a native King to plead, bound by so many
Covnants, benefits and honors to the welfare of his people, why he through the
contempt of all Laws and Parlaments, the only tie of our obedience to him, for
his own wills sake, and a boasted praerogative unaccountable, after sev'n
years warring and destroying of his best subjects, overcom, and yielded
prisoner, should think to escape unquestionable, as a thing divine, in respect
of whom so many thousand Christians destroyed should lie unaccounted for,
polluting with their slaughterd carcasses all the Land over, and crying for
vengeance against the living that should have righted them. Who knows not that
there is a mutual bond of amity and brotherhood between man and man over all
the World, neither is it the English Sea that can sever us from that duty and
relation: a straiter bond yet there is between fellow subjects, neighbors, and
friends; But when any of these (...) to another so as hostility (...) does the
Law decree less against them, then oepn enemies and invaders? or if the Law be
not present, or too weak, what does it warrant us to less then single defense
or civil war? and from that time forward the Law of civil defensive War
differs nothing from the Law of foreign hostility. Nor is it distance of place
that makes enmity, but enmity that makes distance. He therefore that keeps
peace with me near or remote of whatsoever Nation, is to me as far as all
civil and human offices an Englishman and a nighbour: but if an Englishman
forgetting all Laws, human, civil and religious offend against life and
liberty, to him offended and to the Law in his behalf, though born in the same
womb, he is no better then a Turk, a Sarasin, a Heathen. This is Gospel, and
this was ever Law among equals; how much rather then in force against any King
whatsoever, who in respect of the people is coufessd inferior and not equal: to
distinguish therefore of a Tyrant by outlandish, or domestic is a weak evasion.
To the second that he was an enemy, I answer, what Tyrant is not? yet Eglon by
the Jews had bin acknowledgd as their Sovran, they had servd him eighteen
years, as long almost as we our William the Conqueror, in all which time he
could not be so unwise a Statesman but to have taken of them Oaths of Fealty
and Allegiance by which they made themselves his proper subjects, as their
homage and present sent by Ehud testifyd. To the third, that he had special
warrant to kill Eglon in that manner, it cannot be granted, because not
expressd; it is plain that he was raysd by God to be a Deliverer, and went on
just principles, such as were then and ever held allowable, to deal so by a
Tyrant that could no otherwise be dealt with. Neither did Samuel though a
Profet, with his own hand abstain from Agag; a foreign enemy no doubt; but
mark the reason, As thy Sword has made women childless; a cause that by the
sentence of Law it self nullifies all relations. And as the Law is between
Brother and Brother, Father and Son, Master and Servant, wherefore not between
King or rather Tyrant and People? And whereas Jehu had special command to slay
Jehoram a successive and hereditarie Tyrant, it seems not the less imitable
for that; for where a thing grounded so much on natural reason has the
addition of a command from God, what does it but establish the lawfulness of
such an act. Nor is it likely that God who had so many ways of punishing the
house of Ahab would have sent a subject against his Prince, if the fact in it
self as don to a Tyrant had bin of bad example. And if David refused to lift
his hand against the Lords anointed, the matter between them was not tyranny,
but private enmity, and David as a private person had bin his own revenger, not
so much the peoples; but when any tyrant at this day can show to be the Lords
anointed, the only mentioned reason why David with held his hand, he may then
but not till then presume on the same privilege.

We may pass therefore hence to Christian times. And first our Savior himself,
how much he favored tyrants and how much intended they should be found or
honored among Christians, declares his mind not obscurely; accounting their
absolute authority no better then Gentilisme, yea though they flourishd it over
with the splendid name of Benefactors; charging those that would be his
Disciples to usurp no such dominion; but that they who were to be of most
authority among them, should esteem themselves Ministers and Servants to the
public. Matt. 20. 25. The Princes of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them,
and Mark 10. 42. They that seem to rule, says he, either slighting or
accounting them no lawful rulers, but ye shall not be so, but the greatest
among you shall be your servant. And although he himself were the meekest, and
came on earth to be so, yet to a tyrant we hear him not voutsafe an humble
word: but Tell that Fox, Luc. 13. And wherefore did his mother the Virgin Mary
give such praise to God in her profetic song, that he had now by the coming of
Christ Cut down Dynasta's or proud Monarchs from the throne, if the Church,
when God manifests his power in them to do so, should rather choose all
misery and vassalage to serve them, and let them still sit on their potent
seats to be adored for doing mischief. Surely it is not for nothing that
tyrants by a kind of natural instinct both hate and fear none more then the
true Church and Saints of God, as the most dangerous enemies and subverters of
Monarchy, though indeed of tyranny; has not this bin the perpetual cry of
Courtiers, and Court Prelates? whereof no likelier cause can be alleged, but
that they well discerned the mind and principles of most devout and zealous
men, and indeed the very discipline of Church, tending to the dissolution of
all tyranny. No marvel then if since the faith of Christ received, in purer or
impurer times, to depose a King and put him to death for tyranny has bin
accounted so just and requisite, that neighbor Kings have both upheld and taken
part with subjects in the action. And Ludovicus Pius, himself an Emperor, and
son of Charles the great, being made Judge, Du Haillan is my author, between
Milegast King of the Vul^zes and his subjects who had deposed him, gave his
verdit for the subjects, and for him whom they had chos'n in his room. Note
here that the right of electing whom they please is by the impartial testimony
of an Emperor in the people. For, said he, A just Prince ought to be preferred
before an unjust, and the end of government before the prerogative. And
Constantinus Leo, another Emperor in the Byzantine Laws says, that the end of
a King is for the general good, which he not performing is but the counterfeit
of a King. And to prove that some of our own Monarchs have acknowledged that
their high office exempted them not from punishment, they had the Sword of St.
Edward born before them by an Officer who was called Earl of the palace eev'n
at the times of their highest pomp and solemnity, to mind them, says Matthew
Paris, the best of our Historians, that if they errd, the Sword had power to
restrain them. And what restraint the Sword comes to at length, having both
edge and point, if any Skeptic will needs doubt, let him feel. It is also
affirmed from diligent search made in our ancient books of Law, that the Peers
and Barons of England had a legal right to judge the King: which was the cause
most likely, for it could be no slight cause, that they were called his Peers,
or equals. This however may stand immovable, so long as man has to deal with
no better then man; that if our Law judge all men to the lowest by their Peers,
it should in all equity ascend also, and judge the highest. And so much I find
both in our own and foreign Story, that Dukes, Earls, and Marqueses were at
first not hereditary, not empty and vain titles, but names of trust and office,
and with the office ceasing, as induces me to be of opinion, that every worthy
man in Parliament, for the word Baron imports no more, might for the public good
be thought a fit Peer and judge of the King; without regard had to petty
caveats, and circumstances, the chief impediment in high affairs, and ever
stood upon most by circumstantial men. Whence doubtless our Ancestors who were
not ignorant with what rights either Nature or ancient Constitution had endowd
them, when Oaths both at Coronation, and renewd in Parliament would not serve,
thought it no way illegal to depose and put to death their tyrannous Kings.
Insomuch that the Parliament drew up a charge against Richard the second, and
the Commons requested to have judgment decreed against him, that the realm
might not be endangerd. And Peter Martyr a Divine of foremost rank, on the
third of Judges approves their doings. Sir Thomas Smith also a Protestant and a
Statesman in his Commonwealth of England putting the question whether it be
lawful to rise against a Tyrant, answers that the vulgar judge of it according
to the event, and the learned according to the purpose of them that do it. But
far before those days Gildas the most ancient of all our Historians, speaking
of those times wherein the Roman Empire decaying quitted and relinquishd what
right they had by Conquest to this Island, and resigned it all into the peoples
hands, testifies that the people thus re-invested with their own original right,
about the year 446, both elected them Kings, who^ they thought best (the first
Christian British Kings that ever reigned here since the Romans) and by the
same right, when they apprehended cause, usually deposd and put them to death.
This is the most fundamental and ancient tenure that any King of England can
produce or pretend to; in comparison of which, all other titles and pleas are
but of yesterday. If any object that Gildas condemns the Britanes for so doing,
the answer is as ready; that he condemns them no more for so doing, then he
did before for choosing such, for says he, They anointed them Kings, not of
God, but such as were more bloody then therest. Next he condemns them not at
all for deposing or putting them to death, but for doing it over hastily,
without trial or well examining the cause, and for electing others worse in
their room. Thus we have here both Domestic and most ancient examples that the
people of Britain have deposd and put to death their Kings in those primitive
Christian times. And to couple reason with example, if the Church in all ages,
Primitive, Romish, or Protestant held it ever no less their duty then the power
of their Keys, though without express warrant of Scripture, to bring
indifferently both King and Peasant under the utmost rigor of their Canons and
Censures Ecclesiastical, eev'n to the smiting him with a final excommunion, if
he persist impenitent, what hinders but that the temporal Law both may and
ought, though without a special Text or president, extend with like
indifference the civil Sword, to the cutting off without exemption him that
capitally offends. Seeing that justice and Religion are from the same God, and
works of justice ofttimes more acceptable. Yet because that some lately with
the tongues and arguments of Malignant backsliders have writt'n that the
proceedings now in Parliament against the King, are without president from any
Protestant State or Kingdom, the examples which follow shall be all Protestant
and chiefly Presbyterian.

In the year 1546. The Duke of Saxony, Lantgrave of Hessen, and the whole
Protestant league raysd open War against Charles the fifth their Emperor, sent
him a defiance, renounced all faith and allegiance toward him, and debated long
in Counsel whether they should give him so much as the title of Caesar.
Sleidan. l. 17. Let all men judge what this wanted of deposing or of killing,
but the power to do it.

In the year 1559. the Scotch Protestants claiming promise of their Queen
Regent for liberty of conscience, she answering that promises were not to be
claimed of Princes beyond what was commodious for them to grant, told her to
her face in the Parliament then at Sterling, that if it were so, they renounced
their obedience; and soon after betook them to Arms. Buchanan Hist. l. 16.
certainly when allegiance is renounced, that very hour the King or Queen is in
effect deposed.

In the year 1564. John Kn^x a most famous Divine and the reformer of Scotland
to the Presbyterian discipline, at a general Assembly maintaind op'nly in a
dispute against Lethington the Secretary of State, that Subjects might and
ought execute Gods judgments upon their King; that the fact of Jehu and others
against their King having the ground of Gods ordinary command to put such and
such offenders to death was not extraordinary, but to be imitated of all that
preferred the honor of God to the affection of flesh and wicked Princes, that
Kings, if they offend, have no privilege to be exempted from the punishments of
Law more then any other subject; so that if the King be a Murderer, Adulterer,
or Idolater, he should suffer not as a King, but as an offender; and this
position he repeates again and again before them. Answerable was the opinion
of John Craig another learned Divine, and that Laws made by the tyranny of
Princes, or the negligence of people, their posterity might abrogate, and reform
all things according to the original institution of Commonwealths, And Knox
being commanded by the Nobility to write to Calvin and other learned men for
their judgments in that question refused; alleging that both himself was fully
resolved in conscience, and had heard their judgments, and had the same opinion
under handwriting of many the most godly and most learned that he knew in
Europe; that if he should move the question to them again, what should he do
but show his own forgetfulness or inconstancy. All this is far more largely
in the Ecclesiastic History of Scotland l. 4. with many other passages to this
effect all the book over; set out with diligence by Scotchmen of best repute
among them at the beginning of these troubles, as if they labourd to inform us
what we were to do and what they intended upon the like occasion.

And to let the world know that the whole Church and Protestant State of
Scotland in those purest times of reformation were of the same belief, three
years after, they met in the field Mary their lawful and hereditary Queen, took
her prisoner yiedling before fight, kept her in prison and the same year
deposd her. Buchan. Hist. l. 18.

And four years after that, the Scots in justification of their deposing Queen
Mary, sent Ambassadors to Queen Elizabeth, and in a writt'n Declaration
alleag'd that they had used toward her more lenity then she deservd; that
their Ancestors had heretofore punishd their Kings by death or banishment; that
the Scots were a free Nation, made King whom they freely chose, and with the
same freedom un-Kingd him if they saw cause, by right of ancient laws and
Ceremonies yet remaining, and old customers yet among the High-landers in
choosing the head of their Clanns, or Families; all which with many other
arguments bore witness that regal power was nothing else but a mutual Covenant
or stipulation between King and people. Buch. Hist. l. 20. These were Scotchmen
and Presbyterians; but what measure then have they lately offered, to think such
liberty less beseeming us then themselves, presuming to put him upon us for a
Master whom their Law scarce allows to be their own equal? If now then we hear
them in another strain then heretofore in the purest times of their Church, we
may be confident it is the voice of Faction speaking in them, not of truth and
Reformation.

In the year 1581. the States of Holland in a general Assembly at the Hague,
abjured all obedience and subjection to Philip King of Spain; and in a
Declaration justify their so doing; for that by his tyrannous government against
faith so oft'n given and brok'n he had lost his right to all the Belgic
Provinces; that therefore they deposd him and declared it lawful to choose
another in his stead. Thuan. l. 74. From that time, to this no State or Kingdom
in the World has equally prosperd: But let them remember not to look with an
evil and prejudicial eye upon their neighbors walking by the same rule.

But what need these examples to Presbyterians, I mean to those who now of
late would seem so much to abhor deposing, whenas they to all Christendom have
given the latest and the liveliest example of doing it themselves. I question
not the lawfulness of raising War against a Tyrant in defense of Religion, or
civil liberty; for no Protestant Church from the first Waldenses of Lions, and
Languedoc to this day but have don it round, and maintaind it lawful. But this
I doubt not to affirm, that the Presbyterians, who now so much condemn
deposing, were the men themselves that deposd the King, and cannot with all
their shifting and relapsing, wash off the guiltiness from their own hands. For
they themselves, by these their late doings have made it guiltiness, and turned
their own warrantable actions into Rebellion.

There is nothing that so actually makes a King of England, as righful
possession and Supremacy in all causes both civil and Ecclesiastical: and
nothing that so actually makes a Subject of England, as those two Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy observd without equivocating, or any mental
reservation. Out of doubt then when the King shall command things already
constituted in Church, or State, obedience is the true essence of a subject,
either to do, if it be lawful, or if he hold the thing unlawful, to submit to
that penalty which the Law imposes, so long as he intends to remain a
subject. Therefore when the people or any part of them shall rise against the
King and his authority executing the Law in any thing establishd civil or
Ecclesiastical, I do nor say it is rebellion, if the thing commanded though
establishd be unlawful, and that they sought first all due means of redress
(and no man is further bound to Law) but I say it is an absolute renouncing both
of Supremacy and Allegiance, which in one word is an actual and total deposing
of the King, and the setting up of another supreme authority over them. And
whether the Presbyterians have not don all this and much more, they will not
put me, I suppose, to reck'n up a seven years story fresh in the memory of
all men. Have they not utterly broke the Oath of Allegiance, rejecting the
Kings command and authority sent them from any part of the Kingdom whether in
things lawful or unlawful? Have they not abjured the Oath of Supremacy by
setting up the Parliament without the King, supreme to all their obedience, and
though their Vow and Covenant bound them in general to the Parliament, yet
sometimes adhering to the lesser part of Lords and Commons that remaind faithful
as they term it, and eev'n of them, one while to the Commons without the
Lords, another while to the Lords without the Commons? Have they not still
declared their meaning, whatever their Oath were, to hold them only for supreme
whom they found at any time most yiedling to what they petitiond? Both these
Oaths which were the straitest bond of an English subject in reference to the
King, being thus broke and made void, it follows undeniably that the King from
that time was by them in fact absolutely deposd, and they no longer in reality
to be thought his subjects, notwithstanding their fine clause in the Covenant to
preserve his person, Crown, and dignity, set there by some dodging Casuist with
more craft then sincerity to mitigate the matter in case of ill success, and
not taken I suppose by any honest man, but as a condition subordinate to every
the least particle that might more concern Religion, liberty, or the public
peace. To prove it yet more plainly that they are the men who have deposd the
King, I thus argue. We know that King and Subject are relatives, and relatives
have no longer being then in the relation; the relation between King and
Subject can be no other then regal authority and subjection. Hence I infer past
their defending, that if the Subject who is one relative, takes away the
relation, of force he takes away also the other relative; but the Presbyterians
who were one relative, that is to say Subjects, have for this sev'n years taken
away the relation, that is to say the Kings authority, and their subjection to
it, therefore the Presbyterians for these sev'n years have removd and
extinguish the other relative, that is to say the King, or to speak more in
brief have deposed him; not only by depriving him the execution of his
authority, but by conferring it upon others. If then their Oaths of subjection
brok'n, new `Supremacy obeyed, new Oaths and Covnants taken, notwitstanding
frivolous evasions, have in plain terms unking'd the King, much more then
has their sev'n years War not deposed him only, but outlawd him, and defied
him as an alien, a rebel to Law, and enemy to the State. It must needs be
clear to any man not averse from reason, that hostility and subjection are
two direct and positive contraries; and can no more in one subject stand
together in respect of the same King, then one person at the same time can be
in two remote places. Against whom therefore the Subject is in act of hostility
we may be confident that to him he is in no subjection: and in whom hostility
takes place of subjection, for they can by no means consist together, to him
the King can be not only no King, but an enemy. So that from hence we shall
not need dispute whether they have deposed him, or what they have defaulted
toward him as no King, but show manifestly how much they have don toward the
killing him. Have they not levied all these Wars against him whether offensive
or defensive (for defense in War equally offends, and most prudently before
hand) and given Commission to slay where they knew his person could not be
exempt from danger? And if chance or flight had not saved him, how oft'n had
they killd him, directing their Artillery without blame or prohibition to the
very place where they saw him stand? Have they not converted his revenue to
other uses, and detained from him all means of livelihood, so that for them
long since he might have perished, or have st rv'd? Have they not hunted and
pursued him round about the Kingdom with sword and fire? Have they not formerly
denied to Treat with him, and their now recanting Ministers preached against
him, as a reprobate incurable, an enemy to God and his Church marked for
destruction, and therefore not to be treated with? Have they not beseig'd him
and to their power forbid him Water and Fire, save what they shot against him to
the hazard of his life? Yet while they thus assaulted and endangerd it with
hostile deeds, they swore in words to defend it with his Crown and dignity; not
in order, as it seems now, to a firm and lasting peace, or to his repentance
after all this blood; but simply, without regard, without remorse or any
comparable value of all the miseries and calamities sufferd by the poor
people, or to suffer hereafter through his obstinacy or impenitence. No
understanding man can be ignorant that Covnants are ever made according to the
present state of persons and of things; and have ever the more general laws of
nature and of reason included in them, though not expressed. If I make a
voluntary Covenant as with a man to do him good, and he prove afterward a
monster to me, I should conceave a disobligement. If I covenant, not to hurt an
enemy, in favor of him and forbearance, and hope of his amendment, and he,
after that, shall do me tenfould injury and mischief to what he had don when
I so Covnanted, and still be plotting what may tend to my destruction, I
question not but that his after actions release me; nor know I Covenant so
sacred that withholds me from demanding Justice on him. Howbeit, had not their
distrust in a good cause, and the fast and loos of our prevaricating Divines
oversway'd, it had bin doubtless better, not to have inserted in a Covenant
unnecessary obligations, and words not works of a supererogating Allegiance to
their enemy; no way advantageous to themselves, had the King prevailed, as to
their cost many would have felt; but full of snare and distraction to our
friends, useful only, as we now find, to our adversaries, who under such a
latitude and shelter of ambiguous interpretation have ever since been plotting
and contriving new opportunities to trouble all again. How much better had it
bin, and more becoming an undaunted virtue to have declard op'nly and boldly
whom and what power the people were to hold Supreme, as on the like occasion
Protestants have don before, and many conscientious men now in these times have
more then once besought the Parliament to do, that they might go on upon a sure
foundation, and not with a ridling Covenant in their mouths, seeming to swear
counter almost in the same breath Allegiance and no Allegiance; which doubtless
had drawn off all the minds of sincere men from siding with them, had they not
discerned their actions far more deposing him then their words upholding him;
which words made now the subject of cavillous interpretations, stood ever in
the Covenant by judgment of the more discerning sort an evidence of their fear
not of their fidelity. What should I return to speak on, of those attempts for
which the King himself has oft'n charged the Presbyterians of seeking his
life, whenas in the due estimation of things they might without a fallacy be
said to have don the deed outright. Who knows not that the King is a name of
dignity and office, not of person: Who therefore kills a King, must kill him
while he is a King. Then they certainly who by deposing him have long since
taken from him the life of a King, his office and his dignity, they in the
truest sense may be said to have killd the King: nor only by their deposing
and waging War against him, which besides the danger to his personal life, set
him in the fardest opposite point from any vital function of a King, but by
their holding him in prison vanquishd and yielded into their absolute and
despotic power, which brought him to the lowest degradement and incapacity of
the regal name. I say not whose matchless valor next under God, lest the story
of their ingratitude thereupon carry me from the purpose in hand, which is to
convince them that they, which I repeat again, were the men who in the truest
sense killd the King, not only as is proud before, but by depressing him their
King far below the rank of a subject to the condition of a Captive, without
intention to restore him, as the Chancellor of Scotland in a speech told him
plainly at Newcastle, unless he granted fully all their demands, which they
knew he never meant. Nor did they Treat or think of Treating with him, till
their hatred to the Army that deliverd them, not their love or duty to the King,
joined them secretly with men sentencd so often for Reprobates in their own
mouths, by whose subtle inspiring they grew madd upon a most tardy and
improper Treaty. Whereas if the whole bent of their actions had not bin against
the King himself, but against his evil Council, as they faind, and publishd,
wherefore did they not restore him all that while to the true life of a King,
his Office, Crown, and Dignity, when he was in their power, and they themselves
his nearest Counselers. The truth therefore is, both that they would not, and
that indeed they could not without their own certain destruction, having
reduced him to such a final pass, as was the very death and burial of all in
him rhat was regal, and from whence never King of England yet revivd, but by
the new re inforcement of his own party, which was a kind of resurrection to
him. Thus having quitc extinguished all that could be in him of a King, and from
a total privation clad him over like another specifical thing with forms and
habitudes destructive to the former, they left in his person dead as to Law and
all the civil right either of King or Subject the life only of a Prilner, a
Captive and a Malefactor. Whom the equal and impartial hand of justice finding,
was no more to spare then another ordnary man; not only made obnoxious to the
doom of Law by a charge more then once drawn up against him, and his own
confession to the first Article at Newport, but summond and arraignd in the
sight of God and his people, cutst and devoted to perdition worse then any
Ahab, or Antiochus, with exhortation to curse all those in the name of God that
made not War against him, as bitterly as Meroz was to be cursed, that went not
out against a Canaanitish King, almost in all the Sermons, Prayers, and
Fulminations that have bin utterd this sev'n years by those clov'n tongues of
falsehood and dissension, who now, to the stirring up of new discord, acquitt
him; and against their own discipline, which they boast to be the throne and
scepter of Christ, absolve him, unconfound him, though unconverted,
unrepentant, unsensible of all their precious Saints and Martyrs whose blood
they have so often laid upon his head: and now again with a new sovran
anointment can wash it all off, as if it were as vile, and no more to be
reckn'd for then the blood of so many Dogs in a time of Pestilence: giving the
most opprobrious lie to all the acted zeal that for these many years has
filld their bellies, and fed them fatt upon the foolish people. Ministers of
sedition, not of the Gospel, who while they saw it manifestly tend to civil
War and bloodshed, never ceasd exasperating the people against him; and now
that they see it likely to breed new commotion, cease not to incite others
against the people that have savd them from him, as if sedition were their only
aim whether against him or for him. But God as we have cause to trust, will put
other thoughts into the people, and turn them from looking after these
firebrands, of whose fury, and sals prophecies we have anough experience; and
from the murmurs of new discord will incline them to heark'n rather with
erected minds to the voice of our supreme Magistracy, calling us to liberty and
the flourishing deeds of a reformed Commonwealth; with this hope that as God
was heretofore angry with the Jews who rejected him and his form of Government
to choose a King, so that he will bless us, and be propitious to us who reject
a King to make him only our leader, and supreme governor in the conformity as
near as may be of his own ancient government; if we have at least but so much
worth in us to entertain the sense of our future happiness, and the courage to
receave what God voutsafes us: wherein we have the honor to precede other
Nations who are now laboring to be our followers. For as to this question in
hand what the people by their just right may do in change of government, or of
governor, we see it cleerd sufsiciently; besides other ample authority eev'n
from the mouths of Princes themselves. And surely they that shall boast, as we
do, to be a free Nation, and not have in themselves the power to remove, or to
abolish any governor supreme, or subordinate with the government it self upon
urgent causes, may please their fancy with a ridiculous and painted freedom, fit
to coz'n babies; but are indeed under tyranny and servitude; as wanting that
power, which is the root and sourse of all liberty, to dispose and oeconomize
in the Land which God has given them, as Masters of Family in their own house
and free inheritance. Without which natural and essential power of a free
Nation, though bearing high their heads, they can in due esteem be thought no
better then slaves and vassals born, in the tenure and occupation of another
inheriting Lord. Whose government, though not illegal, or intolerable, hangs
over them as a Lotdly scourge, not as a free government; and therefore to be
abrogated. How much more justly then may they fling off tyranny, or tyrants?
who being once deposed can be no more then private men, as subject to the reach
of Justice and arraignment as any other transgressors. And certainly if men,
not to speak of Heathen, both wise and Religious have don justice upon Tyrants
what way they could soonest, how much more mild and human then is it to give
them fair and open trial? To teach lawless Kings and all that so much adore
them, that not mortal man, or his imperious will, but Justice is the only true
sovran and supreme Majesty upon earth. Let men cease therefore out of faction
and hypocrisy to make outcrys and horrid things of things so just and
honorable. And if the Parliament and Military Council do what they do without
president, if it appear their duty, it argues the more wisdom, virtue, and
magnanimity, that they know themselves able to be a president to others. Who
perhaps in future ages, if they prove not too degenerat, will look up with
honor and aspire toward these exemplary, and matchless deeds of their
Ancestors, as to the highest top of their civil glory and emulation. Which
heretofore in the persuance of fame and foreign dominion spent it self
vain-gloriously abroad; but henceforth may learn a better fortitude to dare
execute highest Justice on them that shall by force of Arms endeavor the
oppressing and bereaving ofReligion and their liberty at home: that no unbridl'd
Potentate or Tyrant, but to his sorrow for the future, may presume such high
and irresponsible license over mankind to havoc and turn upside-down whole
Kingdoms of men as though they were no more in respect of his perverse will
then a Nation of Pismires. As for the party called Presbyterian, of whom I
believe very many to be good and faithful Christians, though misled by some of
turbulent spirit, I wish them earnestly and calmly not to fall off from their
first principles; nor to affect rigor and superiority over men not under them;
not to compel unforcible things in Religion especially, which if not
voluntary, becomes a sin; nor to assist the clamor and malicious drifts of men
whom they themselves have judged to be the worst of men, the obdurat enemies of
God and his Church: nor to dart against the actions of their brethren, for want
of other argument those wrested Laws and Scriptures thrown by Prelates and
Malignants against their own sides, which though they hurt not otherwise, yet
taken up by them to the condemnation of their own doings give scandal to all
men and discover in themselves either extreme passion or apostasy. Let them
not oppose their best friends and associats who molest them not at all, infringe
not the least of their liberties; unless they call it their liberty to bind other
men's consciences, but are still secking to live at peace with them and
brotherly accord. Let them beware an old and perfet enemy, who though he hope
by sowing discord to make them his instruments, yet cannot forbear a minute
the open threatening of his destind revenge upon them when they have servd his
purposes. Let them fear therefore, if they be wise, rather what they have don
already, then what remains to do, and be warned in time they put no
confidence in Princes whom they have provokd, lest they be added to the
examples of those that miserably have tasted the event. Stories can inform them
how Christiern the second, King of Denmark not much above a hundred years
past, driven out by his Subjects, and receavd again upon new Oaths and
conditions, broke through them all to his most bloody revenge; slaying his
chief opposers when he saw his time, both them and their children invited to a
feast for that purpose. How Maximilian dealt with those of Bruges, though by
mediation of the German Princes reconciled to them by solemn and public writings
drawn and sealed. How the massacre at Paris was the effect of that credulous
peace which the French Protestants made with Charles the ninth their King: and
that the main visible cause which to this day has saved the Netherlands from
utter ruin, was their final not belei^ing the perfidious cruelty which as a
constant maxim of State has bin used by the Spanish Kings on their Subjects
that have taken arms and after trusted them; as no later age but can testify,
heretofore in Belgia it self, and this very year in Naples. And to conclude
with one past exception, though far more ancient, David after once he had
taken arms, never after that trusted Saul, though with tears and much
relenting he twice promised not to hurt him. These instances, few of many,
might admonish them both English and Scotch not to let their own ends, and the
driving on of a faction betray them blindly into the snare of those enemies
whose revenge looks on them as the men who first begun, fomented and carried on
beyond the cure of any sonnd or safe accommodation all the evil which has
since unavoidably befallen them and their King.

I have something also to the Divines, though brief to what were needful; not
to be disturbers of the civil affairs, being in hands better able and more
belonging to manage them; but to study harder and to attend the office of good
Pastors, knowing that he whose flock is least among them has a dreadful
charge, not performd by mounting twice into the chair with a formal preachment
huddl'd up at the od hours of a whole lazy week, but by incessant pains and
watching in season and out of season, from house to house over the souls of
whom they have to feed. Which if they ever well considerd, how little leisure
would they find to be the most pragmatical Sidesmen of every popular tumult and
Sedition? And all this while are to learn what the true end and reason is of
the Gospel which they teach; and what a world it differs from the censorious
and supercilious lording over conscience. It would be good also they lived so
as might persuade the people they hated covetousness, which worse then heresy,
is idolatry; hated pluralities and all kind of Simony; left rambling from
Benefice to Benefice, iike ravnous Wolves seeking where they may devour the
biggest. Of which if some, well and warmely seated from the beginning, be not
guilty, twere good they held not conversation with such as are: let them be
sorry that being called to assemble about reforming the Church, they fell to
progging and soliciting the Parliament, though they had renouncd the name of
Priests, for a new settling of their Tithes and Oblations; and double lined
themselves with spiritual places of commodity beyond the possible discharge of
their duty. Let them assemble in Consistory with their Elders and Deacons,
according to ancient Ecclesiastical rule, to the preserving of Church
discipline each in his several charge, and not a pack of Clergy men by
themselves to belly cheer in their presumptuous Sion, or to promote designs,
abuse and gull the simple Laity, and stir up tumult, as the Prelates did, for
the maintenance of their pride and avarice. These things if they observe and
wait with patience, no doubt but all things will go well without their
importunities or exclamations: and the Printed letters which they send
subscribed with the ostentation of great Characters and little moment, would be
more considerable then now they are. But if they be the Ministers of Mammon
instead of Christ, and scandalize his Church with the filty love of gain,
aspiring also to sit the closest and the heaviest of all Tyrants, upon the
conscience, and fall notoriously into the same sins, whereof so lately and so
loud they accused the Prelates, as God rooted out those immediately before, so
will he root out them their imitators: and to vindicate his own glory and
Religion, will uncover their hypocrifie to the open world; and visit upon their
own heads that curse ye Meroz, the very Motto of their Pulpits, wherewith so
frequently, not as Meroz, but more like Atheists they have mocked the vengeance
of God, and the zeal of his people.

The End.

