Miracles upon Miracles: OR, Great News from the King's Bench Prison in
Southwark, Of a Monster called by the name of TITUS upon OATS.
Being a strange and wonderful Relation of Ten Miraculous Miracles, lately made
known; the like having not been heard of in many Ages.
NOW, now you that fancy all miracles ceased,
I Will tell you a Tale of a late Popish Priest,
Who has produced such a number, that he
Must own they had Birth most miraculously.
And never hereafter be hard of Belief,
And thus I Will begin them, although I Will be brief;
And when I my Task in this point do fulfill,
They will be all Miracles say what you will.
First, out of pure zeal to discover the Plot,
He was a Papist, and yet he was not;
For though to the Pope he was sworn, and more,
The Host he received, and the Bread did adore,
And knew their Conspiracy, and each design,
And in a most Hellish Plot did with them join:
O yet the famed Hero's a Protestant still,
And this is a Miracle say what you will.
He knew on what mischief their Malice was bent,
And on what dire murders their minds were intent,
Yet trusted their fury long e're he made known
The Hellish design, which to mountains was grown,
And might have prosper'd in spite of the Priest,
Had not the kind Heavens their fury suppressed;
For why they had time enough all to fulfill,
Yet this is a Miracle say what you will.
Then that there appointed were Armies so great,
Of Spanish Pilgrims, wild Irish, and that
Some thousands of Papists were cruelly bent,
For with black Bills, Guns, Swords, and Staves, 'twas their intent
To set on the Nation, yet strange is the thing
That none of them e're to light any could bring,
Or where they such Magazines hoarded up still,
Yet this is a Miracle say what you will.
That this Priestly worthy who knew all the Plot,
And might have commanded the Devil knows what;
Who had at his beck still the Lives and Estates
Of Romes bold Villains, who held such Debates,
Should be in such misery, so wondrous Poor,
That he was obliged to haunt each Popish door,
His Hungry Belly with Bread for to fill,
Then this is a Miracle say what you will.
That after the dreadful Discovery was made,
And that Discovery was become a Trade,
He should protest he some Persons never knew,
And in a while after the same should pursue,
To the loss of their lives, as having well known,
How from time to time their Designs they went on,
To ruin three Kingdoms, and Royal Blood spill,
Yet this is a Miracle say what you will.
That he in two places should be in one day,
A Thousand miles distant, as some they did say;
Indeed't does much puzle me, unless he flew
On some swift Whirlwind, for plainly he knew
What in the same day was done here, and eke there,
And in his own Person Transactions did hear:
If this be not unusual than I have no Skill,
Nay it is a Miracle say what you will.
That he took Degrees in a place he never saw,
And to hear him dispute, did great Crowds thither draw;
And that in the Senate House he should once swear,
He nothing more had of the Plot to declare,
Yet after bethinking him, should still proceed,
To accuse some of high rank Treason indeed:
If this bea't a Miracle strange it is still,
But sure it is a Miracle say what you will.
That he with one Mouth should so frankly declare,
A man to be honest, then loudly to swear;
He Is a Jesuit Priest, and the vilest of Knaves,
Because to comply with his intrest he waves:
That one unbaptiz'd can a Christian be said,
Is both new and strange as we ever yet heard,
And must by Wise men be wondered at still,
Nay, nay, it is a Miracle say what you will.
That he should swear one was lately a Slave,
And that he of Life did his Patron bereave,
By giving him Poison, and so getting free,
But that that Patron alive yet should be,
Exceeds all the rest, and it is not gainsaid,
But it is most Miraculous to raise the Dead;
For rarely that Task can a Mortal fulfill,
Then these are all Miracles say what you will.
LONDON, Printed for A. C. over against the Cap and Feather, in
Whitecross-street, next to Old-street. 1687.


