THE SVVORD-BEARER, OR, MAGISTRATES CHARGE.

A Sermon preached in the Chapel of GUILD HALL, at the Election of, the LORD
MAYOR.

By MATHIAS MILWARD, Bachelor of Divinity, Minister of Saint HILLENS.

AUG. To. 8. Ps. 84. Justitia and pax duae amicae sunt, simul osculantur; tu
forte unam vis, alteram non facis.

LONDON, Printed by John Norton for SAMUEL MAN, dwelling at the Swan in Saint
Paul's Churchyard. 16^^.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR HENRY GARWAY KNIGHT, LORD MAJOR OF THE HONORABLE
CITY OF LONDON.
RIGHT HONORABLE:
THis Sermon of right belongs to you, being by your appointment Preached; as
therefore rivers run to the sea from whence they flow; so this returns to
your Honor from whence it sprang. Besides, It is yours (my Lord) by a due debt
for many favors received, for which, having no other way to express my
thankfulness, I commend this poor service of a verbal but hearty
acknowledgement for real courtesies. Lastly, your wise wielding of the Sword
you have borne, having drawn the hearts and voices of the best toward you,
has also induced me to this Dedication; wherein as others may see what you
have been, so your worthy Successor may see what he should be; It was once
mine, it is now yours, and so is

MY LORD, Your Honors most obliged, Mathias Milward.

THE SWORD BEARER OR MAGISTRATES CHARGE.
ROMANS 13.4. For he bears not the Sword in vain.


THe Apostle here sets down a Rule for two sorts of men; the Magistrate,
and People; teaching the one how to govern, the other how to obey. Now, the
Magistrate must be the subject of my discourse at this time; In whom two things
are considerable. 1. Honos, his Honor. 2. Onus, his Charge; his Dignity, and
his Duty. He bears the Sword, there is his honor: the Sword is a type of his
authority: not in vain, that points at his office, not only for pomp, or
state, but for use, for execution of justice. In handling whereof, I would not
be thought presumptuous, as if like old doting Phormio, I would teach Hannibal;
for I profess my self existimatorem, non magistrum, an Adviser only, no
peremptory teacher; Neither let the name of Sword in these buisie times be
prejudicious to what I shall say, and think not my Sermon the sharper for that;
for I shall handle it so tenderly, as neither to provoke any enemies, nor to
offend any friends, nor to hurt my self.

First therefore the Honor of a Magistrate stands in two things. 1. His
Ordinance. 2. His Pre-eminence.

The powers that be, are ordained of God, says the Apostle; Submit your selves
(says Saint Peter) to every ordinance of man, for the Lords sake, whether it
be to the King as supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by
him. 1 Peter 2.13. Saint Peter calls them an humane ordinance, not in regard of
the first institution of it, but for use. 1. subjectve, because it is executed
by man. 2. objective, because humane affairs are the object of it. 3. (...),
in respect of the end, because ordained for man's good: yet the Original is
from God. For as in the Creation of the world there was a spirit that formed;
so in the conservation thereof, the same spirit reformeth to this day, and
that is done by Ruling. Man being by nature a sociable creature, take away Rule
and Power, you undo man's nature; and though sin brought into the world
servitude and slavery, Genesis 9.25. Cursed be Canaan, a servant of servants shall
he be: yet God himself ordained power and order; there is order among the
blessed Angels, if not ex praecepto yet ex consilio: and in every man God has
imprinted a double jurisdiction: one of the soul over the body, that is (...)
the command of a Master: another of the reason over the appetite: petite: and
that is (...), the power of a Sovereign. God in the beginning gave unto man a
threefold power; First, over himself, by free will to govern his actions; for
God set man at first non in Tuto sed in cauto, says S. Bern. not in such
security that he could not fall, nor in such necessity that he could not choose
but fall; but left him to the liberty of his own will, not to fall if he
would not offend, nor to offend unless he would himself. God gave him posse
non peccare, but not non posse peccare; that is, it was possible for him not to
sin, but it was not impossible for him to sin. The second power was over
the creatures; for to man's multiplicamini God added dominamini. Let him have
dominion over the fish of the sea, and the fowls of the air. Genesis 1.26.
The third power was over man; which is either Oeconomicall in families, of the
husband over the wife, father over his children, master over servants; or
Political in Cities viz. Monarchical of one, Aristocraticall of many and
those the best; or Democraticall which is the popular state; All were ordained
of God either mediatly, or immediately. There is no power but of God, says the
Apostle; Non dicit, potestas est a deo, sed non est potestas nisi a deo, says
Musculus; yea that of the devil, whose will though it be ever wicked, yet his
power by Gods permission is never unjust; he is called therefore The evil
spirit from the Lord. 1 Samuel 16.23. An evil spirit, says S. Gregory, Per
desiderium voluntatis iniquae, but yet from the Lord, per licentiam potestatis
justae. Sometime perhaps, Potens the Ruler is not of God, Osee 8.4. They have
reigned, and not by me. Or the manner of getting Rule is not of God; for many
run ad Cathedram non ad Curam, to the chair, not to the cure; and Simon
Magus will give any thing to be Simon Magnus; but the power it self is of God.
The blessed Virgin Mary in her song says, deposuit potentes, He has put
down the mighty from their seat; not potestatem, power simply, but their
power, from doing further mischief. The Elders gave glory sedenti super
thronum, Revel. 4. and cast their crowns at his feet; for ego sum qui
transfero regna, says God in Daniel. All earthly power is but translated, and
God is the Original. He that said, Per me reges regnant, By me Kings reign,
said also, et domini dominantur, and Lords rule: It is the Lord that puts
the Sword into your hand. For he bears the Sword.

anointed Cherub, whom God set in honor, Ezekiel. 28.14. Deborah a Mother in
Israel Judge. 5.7. They cried before Joseph Abrech, Bow the knee, or tender
Father, Genesis 45. For as Xenophon says, (...), a good Ruler differs not from a
good father. They be called Heads, Numb. 1.16. for three causes. 1. For their
eminence above the rest. 2. For command, because the head governes all the
body; yea many times when the body is at rest, the head is most disquieted. 3.
For necessary use, because from thence flows sense and motion into all the
members of the body. And all these titles, what are they, but obligations of
greatest duties, and of greater necessity to depend upon God, both for advice
in wisdom and assistance in power? But that which transcends all, is, I said
ye are Gods; which is to be understood only representatively, because God
has given them power to speak to the people in his name, and execute his
judgments. I have made thee Pharaohs God, said God to Moses, Exodus 7.1. And
these attributes of honor instruct them how to govern, and others how to
reverence them. Them how to govern, to rule for God, reward for God, punish
for God; remembering always though they are gods of the earth, yet they are but
earthen gods; In their greatest glory they are but virtus in infirmitate; and
although by their birth or fortune they be sifted from the branne of the
vulgar, yet they are but ejusdem farinae, of the same meal. Their heads of
gold, and breasts of silver, etc. stand but upon feet of clay; the splendor of
their renown, the glory of their riches, and strength of their greatness has
but a dusty foundation; pulvis es, et in pulverem reverteris. Again, it
teaches others how to reverence them. They that rule well, are worthy of
double honor, 1 Timothy 5.17. Single honor howsoever, because of Rule, which is
Gods ordinance; but double honor, if he be a good Magistrate, because of his
diligence. (...), says Saint Chrysostom, very much honor; or double, says
Aquine, reverentiae and subsidij, reverence and maintenance, allegiance and
allowance. So tender is God for preservation of their dignities, that he gave
his people charge, Elobim lo thikkallel, Thou shall not rail upon the gods,
nor curse the Ruler of thy people, Exodus 22.28. And by an ancient Canon, a
severe Censure was imposed upon him that was contumeliosus in magistratum; if a
lay man, to excommunicate him; if in orders, to depose him; their persons
should be (...), inviolable, for they are sacred, like an Asylum, a Sanctuary
or consecrated Temple, which for the veneration of Religion might not be
violated. For this cause David would not lay hands upon Saul when occasion gave
him power over his life; for though he was wicked, yet he was the Lords
anointed; he had sanctitatem unctionis, though not vitae; an holy calling,
though not an holy carriage. S. Jude sets it down for a note of reprobate men,
to despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities. Yet such a pernicious brood
there is in the world, that bend their tongues like a bow against authority,
and shoot out their arrows, even bitter words. What learned Praelate has not
this Blatant beast bitten? what Reverend Judge has not this serpent stung?
What honest man has not been bespattered with this filthy vomit? yea, Christ
himself was not free from the aspersion of unrighteous speakers, who called
him a friend of Publicans and sinners, and ascribed their miracles to the power
of Beelzebub. But let them go; and good luck have you with your honor; ride on
because of the word of truth; remember it is that which gives you honor, and
it stands with your honor to maintain that. For you bear the sword; And so I
take my leave of your honor, and come next to your charge; for as I have
showed them how great they are, so I must needs tell them how good they should
be.

sword, whereunto three things are required: 1. Good laws, they are like the
sword in the scabbard. 2. Upright judgment according to those laws, that is
like a sword drawn. 3. Just execution, that strikes the stroke.

gain, but for public good. And when laws are made, there is no exemption of
any person from their obedience and subjection. Let every soul be subject to
the higher powers, says the Apostle. Omnis anima; anima propter voluntatem,
omnis propter universalitatem; the soul, because obedience ought to be
voluntary; every soul because it must universal. To say therefore the Clergy
is exempted, because it is not said Omnis spiritus, but omnis anima, that is,
animalis homo the laity, not spiritualis homo the Clergy, is viperina glossa,
and cates out the bowels of the text. For the soul is taken for the whole man;
every soul, that is, every man; there were eight souls in Noah's Ark, that is,
eight persons, 1 Pet. 3.20. But I grant you says Bellarmine: they are subject
obligatione directiva, non coactiva, by obligation of direction, not coercion,
which is as much as to say as far as they list themselves. Is this
subjection, or rather is it not a cunning evasion? that is no law that has
only reference to their disceretion for whom it is enacted; that very
reference loses the reverence and authority of it. Justice and right in giving
every one his due, should have the same place in the commonwealth, which faith
and religion claymeth in the Church. Now, as in religion there are some things
in substance, and some things of ceremony; so there are some points essential
in justice, and some accidental; the essential points of justice are the same
in laws of all commonwealths; for what is a law but a divine ordinance,
commanding things honest, and forbidding the contrary? The accidental parts
do and may vary according to the circumstances of times, persons, and places.
For as good remedies are occasioned from bad diseases, so ex malis moribus
bonae leges oriuntur. There was in ancient times no law against a Parricide,
whereof Solon being asked the reason, answered, He thought no man so
unnatural as to commit that sin; but when the wickedness of the times had
produced such monstrous Imps that did kill their own fathers, then a law was
provided, and a punishment set down; for the Party so offending, was to be
sowed in a leathern sack, with a Dog, a Cock, a Viper, and an Ape, four
angry creatures, and so cast into some deep water, as unworthy to reap the
benefit of any of the four elements; the reason whereof is given to be this,
Vt qui eum necasset unde ipse natus esset, careret rebus omnibus unde omnia
nascuntur, That he which killed him of whom he was borne, should be deprived of
those things whereof all things are bred. In the time of Innocence God gave
man a law; One tree he must not eat of. It was not envy as the devil would
persuade, but a type of Adams obedience, as if God should tell him, says Saint
Austin: If Adam would know the reason, Quia ego dominus, tu servus; obedientem
te volo, non contradicentem, I am thy Lord, thou my servant; I will have thee
obedient, not repugnant. Much more now are laws necessary, yea new laws
according to occasion, either for prevention to stop a mischief ensuing, or
for subvention to remedy evils past. They are like waters that receive their
tincture and tastes from the soyles through which they run, and so change
according to the regions and governments where they are planted; yet they
proceed from the same fountain of justice; They ought not by multitude of
constitutions to be snares to good minds, nor by the quirks of mercenarie wits
to be perverted to bad purposes; Laws should command, not dispute. The people
of Aegina did impose a pecuniarie mulct upon him that had occasioned a new Law.
Amongst the Athenians there was but one new Law made for an hundred years, and
that was procured by one that was monoculus, and the Law was this, That he
should lose both his eyes, who had put out his that had but one. For our part
(God be thanked) we have good Laws, no Kingdom better; and whether there be
any need of more, that must be left to the wisdom of the Estates. If I have
herein exceeded my bounds, I cry pardon of the Lawyers; I am sure the less we
have to do with their Law, the better men will like of our Divinity. Only with
old father Latimer, I hope it is no harm to wish one Law more to be made,
which might be like that of the Medes and Persians unalterable, namely for
execution of those Laws that are to be made: For Laws only made and not
executed, are like the Sword in the scabbard. I come therefore to the second
point, which is, the Sword drawn, and that is upright judgment.



Fear was Pilats fault; he sought many means to deliver Jesus, but fear of
Caesar's displeasure hindered him: If thou let this man go, thou art not
Caesar's friend, said the Jews; then he condemned Christ, John 19.12. If he had
said, Vivat Rex, and currat Lex, God bless Caesar, and let the Law have his
course, he had been a good Judge.

There is a Sign in Heaven called Virgo, betwixt Leo and Libra; Pierius in his
Hieroglyphics compares Justice to this Sign: for Justice is a pure intemerate
Virgin, never corrupted by those too shameless Sollicitors, Nimium and Parum,
Excess and Defect: she has Leo on the one side, because a just man is bold
as a Lion, Prove. 26.1. and Libra, a pair of Balances, on the other side,
weighing out to every man his right; which he cannot do equally, if he fear
any man's displeasure. He must remember Gods encouragement to Josua, Be valiant
and of a good courage. Fear is forbidden by our Savior Christ, Mat. 10. Fear
not them that can kill the Body. A threefold reason is there given; first, in
regard of man's impotence, for his power reaches no further than the Body,
which is but the Bellows of the Soul, through which she breathes. Anaxarchi
follem tundis, non Anaxarchum, said he, when he was mauled to death. Secondly,
in regard of Gods providence, which extends it self to the lives of
unreasonable creatures, without which a Sparrow falls not upon the ground. If
the life of a Sparrow be governed by Divine Providence, the price whereof is
not a farthing; shall not the life of the Just much more, the price whereof is
the blood of Christ? Thirdly, whatsoever becomes of our Bodies, not an hair
shall be missing, at the Resurrection: The hairs of your head are numbered,
says Christ. Non est timendum de majoribus ubi est cura de minimis; si sic
custodiuntur superflua tua, in quanta securitate est anima tua? If God care for
our superfluities, much more for our necessaries, the Soul especially. Fear
not therefore, says our Savior Christ. The Magistrate that bears the Sword,
must be magnanimous. Certainly, God has set such an impression of Majesty in
the face of lawful Authority, that wickedness is confounded in it self to
behold it: For, if from hence the Power that is visible, were not more feared
than the invisible God, the world would be overrun with outrage. Therefore a
good Magistrate, like a wise Physician, fears not to let out the corrupt blood
of Malefactors, to save the life of the State; for the Body of the
Commonwealth cannot live, unless her bad Members bleed: This requires
fortitude, and Fear dares not draw the Sword.

The second impediment, is Covetousness; and that will not draw the Sword. The
Prophet Osee complains, Their Rulers love to say with shame, Bring ye, Os.
4.18. It was the fault of Samuels sons, they did not walk in their fathers
ways: Why so? Dilexerunt munera, they loved Gifts, nay, Bribes, that was the
right name: What followed? Perverterunt judicium, 1 Samuel 8.3. Then God took
away the Government; the people chose Saul King, and those bribing Judges were
cast off. Aristophanes jeasting upon Cleon, as Plutarch has it, says, (...),
This man can skill of no strain but the Dorick; alluding to (...), muneribus
corrumpi, the bribing strain, rightly so called: for, a wicked man (says
Solomon) takes a gift out of the bosom, to wrest or strain the ways of
Judgment. Many a heavy Curse has God laid upon this sin: Woe be unto them
(says the Prophet Esaias) that join house to house, and field to field, till
there be no place, Es. 5.8. not speaking against honest purchasing, but wicked
compassing, till there be no place, no place for a neighbor to live by them.
Saint Ambrose complained in his time of such greedy encroachments: Rich men
cannot dwell alone upon earth, says he; beasts herd together, birds flock
together, fishes swim in sholes together, nec damnum ducunt sed commercium
vivendi, They find a kind of commerce, no damage in it; Solus tu homo
consortem excludis, includis feras, struis habitacula bestiarum, destruis
hominem, Man alone shuts out the companion of his life, and emparketh beasts.

When Alexander sent Phocion an hundred talents, he asked why amongst so many
Athenians the King sent gifts unto him? because (says the Messenger) he hears
that thou only art a just man; then Phocion; Quin igitur posthac me bonum esse
permittat, Let him suffer me to be so still, for this is the way to make me
stark naught.

What is the glory of a City? not sumptuous buildings and stately palaces,
but where the three fair daughters of Themis do flourish, Eunomia, Dice,
Eirene, Equity, Justice, and Peace. Or as Persa the Captive virgin said of
Athens, being asked, if it were not a goodly strong fenced City, answered, Si
incolae been sint morati, pulchre munitam arbitror; perfidia and peculatus ex
urbe and avaritia si exulant; if perfidiousnesse, and perjurie, and falsehood,
if ambition, and pilling, and polling were banished, it were then a goodly
City indeed.

When at a Diet in Worms in Maximilians time, the Princes there met, and upon
occasion set forth the excellency of their several Dominions;The Duke of
Saxony glorying in his Mineral veins, The Bavarian in his beautiful Cities,
The Count Palatine in his fertile soil: Only Eberhard Duke of Wittenburgh
said nothing but this, I can boast of nothing in that kind, but this I am
proud of, I can lay down my head and sleep securely in the bosom of any of
my Subjects; an unvaluable prerogative of a Prince, and no where to be found
but where the Magistrate and the people hate Covetousness. For as Fear dares
not draw the Sword, so Covetousness will not.

The third impediment is Hatred; and that must not. For the wrath of man does
not accomplish the righteousness of God, James 1.20. For although it be said
at the end of this verse, that the Magistrate is (...), must take vengeance in
wrath, or is a Revenger to execute wrath, that is, punishment upon him that
does evil; yet he must not draw the sword in anger against the Person, but
against the sin. There is a time when a man may be angry; Moses was angry
against the Israelites idolatry, Exodus 32.19. and did not offend; Jonas was
angry at Gods mercy in sparing the Ninivites, and he was reproved; Do thou
well to be angry, says God, Jon. 4.4. Christ was railed at, mocked, and
crucified; yet was not angry, but prayed for his enemies, Father forgive them,
for they know not what they do. But when he saw his Fathers House abused,
then he was angry, and whipped them out of the Temple; he had anger certainly,
though not as a passion of revenge, yet of detestation; it was zealous anger,
not vicious anger. Unbridled anger is a temporary frenzy; for there is a
twofold madness; one of the head which makes men run out of their wits;
another of the heart which turns them out of their patience, and that is anger.
This if it be of long continuance, grows to be hatred, and he that hates his
brother, is a manslayer, 1 John 3.15. Not so much because he hurts his
brother, whom he hates; but because he slays his own soul; yea, and his
brothers too, if he could; Ille vivit, says S. Augustine, and tamen tu
occidisti; he lives, yet thou have killed him as much as in thee lies.

Now, if a Magistrate be drawn into hatred of any man's person, he may be a
double Homicide; for besides the mischief he does to himself, he may be the
death of another. When Josua proceeded against Achan, he did it mildly; My
son, confess thy fault and give glory to God, Ios. 7.19. A Magistrate should
have least interest in himself. Aristides sitting in judgment upon two men
that were adversaries, One of them thinking to make his cause the better by
accusing his enemy, said, O Aristides, this man has done thee great wrong. My
friend, quoth Aristides, Tell me what wrong he has done thee: for I sit here
to do thee justice, and not my self. This sword therefore must not be drawn
against the person of the offender, but against the offense of the person; in
detestation of the fault, not of the man; for it must not be drawn in hatred.

The fourth impediment, is Partiality or favor. Jehosaphat having set Judges
in the Land, gave them this Charge; Take heed what ye do, for you judge not
for man, but for the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19. That word excludes all corruption: for
if he be pusillanimous, he will judge for man; that makes him fear his
enemies; if partial, to favor his friends; if covetous, to love himself too
much; if he be malicious, he will hate others: And then Truth must needs have a
cold Suit, when Malice is chief Juror, and Partiality the Judge. I know Pity
is the best praise of humanity, and fruit of Christian love; but in Judgment,
it may have no place: he must hear the small as well as the great, the rich
and the wretch both alike. Alexander when he sat in judgment, would with one
ear open hear the Plaintiff, and keep the other for the Defendant: it was
justly done; for, Qui statuit aliquid part inaudita altera, aequum licet
statuerit, haud aequus fuit, said the Tragedian. He that determines upon
hearing of but one party, though his judgment be true, yet he is not right
Judge. For favor being the false advocate of the gracious, is injurious to
truth; and it is required, that Judges should be men of truth, Exodus 18. Now,
there is veritas vitae, veritas justitiae, veritas doctrinae; Truth of life,
when our conversation is framed according to the rule of truth; truth of
doctrine, distinguishing truth from error, and right from wrong; truth of
justice, in giving every man his own. A Magistrate therefore must be
inflexible, unpartiall, free from passion and affection; with a sword in one
hand, and his balance in the other; Ponderat haec causas, percutit ille reos;
to ponder men's causes, and punish their offenses, without partiality.

Now having removed the impediments, I come to the drawing of the Sword, which
is upright Judgment. You will say, perhaps, it has been long in drawing: and
I answer, The blocks in the way were heavy, and not soon removed; and
besides, Nulla unquam de vita hominis cunctatio longa est, a man cannot demurre
too much upon a man's life: for, if he wrongfully miscarry, and the Sword be
drawn unjustly, what amends can be made for his unjust suffering? Upright
Judgment therefore, according to Law, is the true drawing of the Sword:
whereunto three things are required; first, Wisdom; secondly, Piety; thirdly,
Justice.

Come, says Pharaoh, let us do wisely; yet his wisdom proved folly, because
it was against Gods people: so it is with all the worldly wise, as Saint Paul
says, (...), Whilst they seemed to be wise, they became fools, Romans 1. But
mark the wisdom of Job, when he was a Magistrate; When I knew not the cause,
I sought it out diligently, Job 29.16. This was Gods own way, to teach man:
for although all things are open and manifest to his eyes, yet mark how, in
judgment, he commends deliberation. The sins of Sodom were exceeding
grievous, and their Cry was great; yet, I will go down now (says God) and
see, whether they have done altogether according to that Cry; and if not, that
I may know. Questionless, God heard and knew; but, noluit audita judicare, he
would not judge by the ear only, but by the eye: Vnus oculatus testis plus
valet quam auriti december, One ocular witness is worth ten auricular: therefore
he says, Descendam and videbo, I will go down and see; to instruct men that
are in authority. Says Saint Gregory, Magna crimina tarde credenda sunt cum
audiuntur, citius punienda cum cognoscuntur; They must be slow to believe but
upon strong evidence, and ready to punish upon just proof. For the Law
presumes every man to be good, till he be apparently bad; but when facts have
made the contrary evident, then the same Law presumes him to be semper malus
qui semel malus, in eodem genere mali, to be still naught in that kind wherein
he is once tainted.

When Adam had sinned, God proceeded against him judiciously: He came to him,
not running, but walking; not in heat, but cool of the day: not punishing, but
first expostulating in a voice audible and sensible; Adam, where art thou? So
Solomon, when he heard the women say what they could, and had sought out the
cause diligently, then bring me a sword (says he); and all Israel heard the
judgment which the King had judged, and they feared the King; for they saw
that the wisdom of God was in him, to do justice, 1 Kings 3.28. Wisdom in
the true use of the Sword, makes a just man both feared and loved; the good men
fear him lovingly, the middle sort love him fearfully: only the wicked
malefactor fears him servilely, For he bears not the Sword in vain.

wise man fears and departs from evil, says Solomon, Pro. 14.16.
Therefore when the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice; but when the
wicked comes on and rises up, the man is tried, the good hide themselves, and
the people sigh, Pro. 29.2. O how beautiful a sight it is and glorious to
behold great men to be good men, Caesar's favorite to be Christ's follower!
Religion therefore goes beyond Law; for it is but half a man's honesty to be
no better than the Law makes him, which sees but the outside, and censureth
only men's actions: but Religion cleares the conscience of evil affections, it
reformes the great ones themselves, making their eyes single, and ears
indifferent, and hands clean, and hearts upright, to do nothing without the
testimony of a good conscience.

sword, which is upright judgment, Justice is a maine requisite. And it is
thus defined by Vlpianus, Justitia est constans and perpetua voluntas jus suum
cuique tribuendi. It is 1. voluntas, and therefore must be intended. 2.
constans, therefore ought not to be corrupted; That Is constant justice, Quae
neque potentia frangi nec pecunia corrumpi, nec gratia inflecti potest. Which
neither money can wrest, nor power break, nor favor bend. 3. perpetua, That
supposes not one act only, but an habit; for justice is not to do justa,
which unjust men may do, Mic. 6. but just, and that requires three things,
1. The mind of justice in the doer. 2. The rule of justice in the thing done.
3. The end of justice in the doing. 4. Jus suum cuique tribuendi. To give every
man his own. For as every virtue has his proper object; fortitude has
perils, temperance consists in moderation of pleasures, prudence in politic
affairs, discerning good or ill; so Justice has suum cuique for it is object
and office. Of all virtues they say Justice minds alienum bonum, the good of
another, receives no benefit from men, but the praise of a just action, their
prayers and praises. And that justly. For if the Magistrate take himself from
his buisinesse, his friends, and pleasures, to interest himself in many
thanklesse labors, to compound idle strifes, to watch over our safety, to be
disturbed with outcries when we sleep, is it not just he should be honored
with an answerable estate of pomp and magnificence to express his greatness;
and this honor be it what it may be, is not humanitatis officium, but
administrationis beneficium; not at our courtesy, but Gods appointment, For
he bears not the sword in vain. And thus you see the Sword drawn, which is
upright judgment.

rigor of it; for extremity to be used always is forbidden by God himself.
Noli esse justus nimis, Eccl. 7.18. Press not justice too far, neither urge
it extremely. Lex enim quia seipsam mollire non potest, a nobis mitiganda est,
ut sint qui proficiant. Aug. The Prophet Amos complains of some that turned
judgment into gall, and the fruit of righteousness into wormwood, Amos 6.12.
There is a Court in France called the Torneilles, which is the chamber for
criminal causes, so called because the Judges of the other six chambers which
are for civil causes, sit there by turns; the reason Bodin gives (as a
learned Surveyer of France says) that it might not alter the natural
inclination of the Judges, and make them more cruel, by being always
exercised in matters of condemnations and executions. It was appointed in the
law of God, that forty stripes should be given to the offender, and not to
exceed, lest thy brother should be despised in thy sight, Deuteronomy. 25.3. Therefore
the Jews inflicted upon Paul forty stripes save one. Forty was the law, and
if they had given the summum jus of the law, they thought they had done
injury; so easy it is by a transposition of one letter to turn Jus into Vis.
There ought to be therefore a wise mixture of justice and mercy; this without
that, is foolish pity; and that without this, is cruelty. The love of mercy
does not take away the exercise, but severity of justice, the acerbity or
wormwood of it, when the mighty hunt their brother with a net, Mic. 7.2. or
dig pits (which we call plots) for the souls of others, Jer. 18. They do
not think the cup of justice bitter enough, unless it be mingled with their
gall.

The breast of the Judge should be like the Arc of the Covenant, wherein three
things were put, Virga, Manna, Tabulae; the Tables of the Law, the Rod of
Aaron, the Pot of Manna; Instruction, Unction, Consolation. Two things (says
Nazienzene) are requisite in Correction, (...) and (...), Lenity and
Severitie; but they both transgress, if not well qualified: if the one be
(...), and the other (...), implacable or indiscreet, they may do much hurt;
that loses the reins, with too much remissness; and this strangleth, with
too much straitness: There must be (...), as well as (...); humane compassion,
as well as severe indignation; and then strike on Gods name.

And now the Sword is in your hand, it were good some felt the edge of it.
Against whom then would you turn it? There are a sort of Emissaries, the
Seminaries of Sedition, that do so ply our Recusants, imprinting in them a
settled detestation of our Church, whom the Pope having fed a few years, makes
them his instruments to build up his Monarchy: And hither they come, being
bound by a blind obedience, to maintain his pomp with the expense of their
dearest lives, and are packt over by that relentlesse Merchant, that trades on
no other but the Red Sea of Blood. Should these have the Sword turned upon
them? Some perhaps may think so; the Sword of Justice, not Violence; and so
think I: or rather, if it may be, I wish them all sound-hearted in England, or
safe harbored in Rome.

Furthermore, if any Rebels or seditious persons disturb the State, Time, the
Mother of Truth, will discover them: The Sword is an edged tool; and for me,
it is not safe meddling with it: God guide the heart and hand of him that bears
it. I will be no Bickri, to blow the Trumpet. The Church and Commonwealth are
like Hippocrates Twins; they laugh and weep together, they live and die
together: and as the rending of the Veil of the Temple presaged the ruin of
the state of the Jews, which followed shortly after; so Schisms, if not
prevented, will overthrow Government, and at last bring in Anarchie and
confusion. I would (says the Apostle) that they were cut off that trouble you,
Gal. 5.12. I dare not wish so. Paul was of an extraordinary spirit; and the
reason why I dare not, is, because when a member is cut off, it is hard setting
of it on again. If it be rotten and uncurable, there is need of an Ense
recidendum est. But, I hope, there is only a dislocation, a putting out of
joint; and no more is required, but (...), a setting things right: and that
will be best done (says the Apostle) (...), in the spirit of meekness, Gal.
6.1. You that are spiritual, (...), restore such: And you that are temporal
Magistrates, and bear the Sword; you especially. For what can we do without
you? What can Aaron do without Moses? Aaron may talk, but Moses with his Rod
must work wonders. We are compared to the Teeth of the Church, Cant. 4. and
so are you: but we are only Dentes Articulati, that form the Voice; but you
are Dentes Molares, the Grinders: those whom we cannot reform by Preaching,
you must with your Authority break them.

Thus ye have heard what belongs to a Magistrate; his Honor, and his Charge.
His Honor stands in two things; His Ordinance, his Preeminence: His Charge in
the use of the Sword, whereunto three things are required, 1. Good laws, a
Sword in the scabbard. 2. Upright judgment according to those laws, a Sword
drawn. 3. Just execution, and that strikes the stroke; For he bears not the
Sword in vain.

And now, for a conclusion of all, You whom God has so highly honored; when
ye see your selves environed with Officers to attend your persons, your seat
of Justice like a throne to exalt your Honors, a number of innocent hearers
and lookers on to applaud your truth, a company of guilty offenders holding up
their hands at Bar to expect your Sentence: O then remember another day of
Doom, another supreme Judge, before whom hearts shall speak, and tongues
shall be silent, and a good conscience shall be better than a full purse, At
that day, and before that Judge, whose latitude is charity, whose longitude
aeternity, whose depth inscrutable wisdom, and whose height incomparable
glory. To this Lord in the Trinity of of persons, and unity of substance, One
God, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, be given all glory, praise and power for
evermore.

AMEN.

FINIS.
Perlegi Concionem hanc, dignamque judico quae typis mandetur.

THO. WYKES R. P. Episc. Land. Sacellanus domesticus.


