MISCELLANY POEMS AND Translations By OXFORD Hands.

-- Si Quis tamen haec quoque, si Quis
Captus amore leget --
Virg Ec. LONDON, Printed for Anthony Stephens, Bookseller near the Theater in
OXFORD, 1685.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
SInce Poetry has had the good fortune hitherto, to be much esteemed in the
world, and to become the favorite of the Age: I hope it will not now fall
short of its own end, and my design, which is to divert and please; and how far
I have consulted this, may appear from the following work: where such variety
of Subjects cannot but be grateful, and a Miscellany must needs yield more
delight then one continued Poem; for the same reason I presume, as at an
Entertainment, most People are pleased with variety of Courses, when a standing
Dish would not at all gratify their Appetites. Now, as for the several Hands
which have been so kind to obliege the world no doubt, as much as me, in
contributing to this piece; I acknowledge it beyond my capacity to commend: And
indeed could I do it, I presume it would be altogether needless; since their
own Poems will speak their praise in a more ample manner. Yet I would not have
you think I have commended these Poems so far upon my own Judgment; But that I
have relied wholly upon the Authority of able Critics, to whom I left it wholly
to approve, or disapprove of what they pleased: knowing it to be a prudent way
for any one who understands not whether a Coin be counterfeit to refer himself
to the Test of a Touchstone: Whereupon I admitted no Copy but what had stood
this Trial, and came of with reputation. Now after all this care and diligence,
there remains nothing; but that I should commit this piece to your Judgment, in
whose Power it is to make it happy; wishing that it may carry worth enough in
it to deserve your favor; and if so, assure your self the undertaking will be
very satisfactory to him, who has made it his business

To serve You, ANTH. STEPHENS.

THE CONTENTS.
OVt of Catullus Epig. the 5th to Lesbia etc. By F. Willis Fellow of New Coll.
Oxon. p. 1. The Third Elegy of the Third Book of Tibullus, to his Mistress by
F. Willis. 3. The 14th Elegy of the first Book of Propertius, To his Friend
Tullus. By ^. Willis. 6. LOVE VERSES, by the same Hand. To the God of Love p.
8. To Floriana. 10. The Wound. 11. His Death. 13. Falling in Love with a Lady
for her Wit. 15. The Unconstant. 17. The Parting. 19. The Pink to Floriana. 21.
Upon his being asked what Love was. 22. Her Retreat. 29. Farewell to Love. 25.
Two Pindarick ODES by F. Willis. ODE I. TO the Right Honorable JAMES Earl of
ABINGDON. p. 27. ODE II. Against sensual Pleasure. by F. Willis. 32.
To his Chamberfellow Mr. Tho. Creech on his Translation of Lucretius: by H.
Hody of Wad. Coll. 38. On Reason and Coyness: by another Hand. 47. Casimire Ode
the 18th Book the 4th, To the Rose with which he vowed to Crown the Virgin Mary
with every June. 50. Out of Casimire Ode 34th, Book the fourth: To Quintus
Tiberinus. 51. Casimire Ode the 25. Book the Fourth. A Dialogue between the
Child JESUS and the Virgin Mother. 53. Song set by Dr. Blow. 58. Translated by
the same hand. T. B. The Extravagant, written 1682. by Tho. Brown of Chapter Chapter
58. A Paraphrase upon the Twelfth Ode in Horace Lib. 4. Audivere Lyce etc. by
T. Brown. 61. The Thirteenth Chap. of Isaiah Paraphrased. 64. Pindarick Ode: by
another Hand. Ode the Fifteenth of the first Book of Casimire Imitated. 75. A
Fragment, out of Catullus to Lesbia. 80. Casimire Ode 23. Book 4. To the
Grass-hopper. 81. Out of Martial Book 33. Epig. 54. Imitated. 82. 83. Out of
Catullus Epig 3. 85. A Fragment out of Petronius imitated. 86. On Woman's Levity
out of Petronius. 88. To his Mistress out of Petronius. 89. Ouisquis habet
nummos, out of Petronius Imitated. 91. ^ve in a Trance. Song. 93. (...) Violet.
101. Resolved to obtain. p. 105. Several Elegies out of the first and third
Book of Ovid's Amors Imitated and Paraphrased. Elegy the Ninth, Book the
first. 108. To a Girl dehorting her from asking Money for her Love. 113. To the
Waiting Maid, that she would convey his Letter to his Mistress. 119. Elegy the
sixth, to the Porter 122. Elegy the Third, Book the first, To Pacify his
Mistress, whom in his Passion he had beaten. 131. Book the first, Elegy the
Thirteenth, to the Morning that she would not rise too soon. 137. Of his
Mistress that had perjured her self. 142. Book the Third, Elegy the Eleventh
145. Elegy the Ninth, Book the third, The Poet grieves that he is Rejected by
his Mistress 148. Ovid's Amour's Elegy the 15th, Book the first Imitated. 154.
Prologue to Perseus Satyrs Imitated. 158. Martial Epig the third, Book 18.
Imitated. 159. A Rural Complaint of the Approach of Winter. 161. Claudian
Epigr. de Sphera Archimedis. Imitated. 164. Upon the slighting of his Friends
Love. by Mr. C. S. of Wad. Coll. 165. Ovid's Amors Elegy the third, Book the
first: To his Mistress: by J. G. 168. Ovid Book 3. Elegy the seventh by the
same Hand. 170. The Golden Age by H W. 177. To Sylvia: by the same Hand. 180.
Loves Religion: by F. W. of New Coll. 184. The Union. by the same Hand. 185. To
his Honored Friend and Relation Mr. Francis Willis Merchant in Greenwich Upon
his discovery of a Weed in Virginia which is a present Remedy against the Venom
of he Rattle Snakes there, by F. Willis Fellow of New Coll. Oxon. 187. Book 1.
Ode 21. of Horace Paraphrased. by the same Hand. 189. Seneca's Hercules Furens.
Act. 1. Chorus by F.W. 192. Seneca's Agamemnon. Act. 1. Chorus. by J. Glanvil.
of Trin. Coll. 196. Song. by J. Glanvil. 199. The Bafled Swain. 200. To Sylvia.
203.
TRANSLATIONS Out of Catullus, Tibullus, and Propertius.
By Francis Willis Fellow of New Coll. Oxon.
The Vth Epigr. of Catullus, Vivamus mea Lesbia, etc.
COme, Lesbia, let us live, and love,
And all those fleeting joys improve,
Those soft delights, that fly so fast,
And like your lovely Beauty wast;
For grave men's talk what need we care,
Whom peevish age has made severe?
The Suns that set, again may rise,
And smile and wanton in the skies;
But when alas our life's short day,
On Time's soft wings has stolen away,
All joys must cease, all our delight
Be buried in eternal Night.
Come then (that I may longer live)
A Thousand vital kisses give;
Come give me now an Hundred more,
Add the other Thousand to the score,
A second Hundred will not do,
Another Thousand must ensue;
Let us kiss on; till at the last
(When many Thousands have been past)
We Bankrupt grow, nor can account
To what vast sums our joys amount:
Till no malicious spy shall know
How much (my Dear) I Am kissed by you.
The 111 Elegy of the 111 Book of Tibullus to his Mistress.
IN vain (Fair Nymph) often to the gods I prayed,
And Courting Odours on their Altars laid;
Not that I might my wanton wishes please,
And pride my self in Marble Palaces,
Or for the wealth the largest Farm can yield,
Stiling me Lord of some extended Field,
Whose fertile Glebe might bless me with a Crop,
Vast as the promise of licentious Hope:
All I entreat of Heaven's with Thee to Live,
And drain all joys Life's longest Treat can give;
That my Age too with you might melt away,
And in your Bosom pleasingly decay,
There drop its Silver Hairs, which never will vie
With Snow that on those Little Alps does ly:
Then I when Life is thus run out, must go
A naked shadow to the Realms below:
For why should I such no great blessings seek,
Or wish for all the trash a Lombard Street
Is loaded with? what pleasure can there be
In a Rich Manor's useless Luxury?
Were all Cheap Side and the Piazza's mine,
Nay should the courteous Heaven's with kind design,
Cast in the pomp of such a Grove beside,
St. James's Park might envy in its pride:
Might I enjoy in every glittering room
The freight, that an East India Fleet brings home:
Nay all the arrears of bliss mis-understood,
Which the false common Vogue has stamped for good,
'Twere trivial all: such is the play of fate,
The copious Theme for envy, and for hate;
No Care alas! is by such state controlled,
Nor Quiet bought with Treasuries of Gold:
But ah! how pleasantly should I tho poor
(May Heaven such humble blessings have in store)
Enjoy my Love; but if compelled to loose
Your Company, a Kingdom I Would resuse;
Blessed be the Day, and thrice auspicious light,
Which shall restore you to my longing sight:
But if my Vows for your return are vain,
And fondly I to the deaf Skies complain,
Whilst no complying God will lend an Ear,
To the soft Accents of a Lovers Prayer:
No promised Empire then, no wealth can please,
Or sooth the fury of my fond disease;
Let some unthinking Sots so vainly prize,
This goodly Stock of glorious Fooleries.
All I desire, is a Quiet Life,
A pleasant Cottage, and a Loving Wife;
May Juno, and the Paphian Queen combine
To grant me this, and favor my design:
Or if such blessings inconsistent be
With Fate's inevitable black decree;
May Death befriend me, and Eternal rest
Lull fast asleep the tumults of my Breast.
The XIVth. Elegy of the First Book of Propertius To his Friend Tullus.
THO you (my Friend) in some cool Arbor ly,
Where Tibur's Silver Streams glide softly by,
And quaff rich Goblets of your Lesbian Wines,
TO encourage mirth, and push on gay designs;
Or there perhaps sometimes have wondringstood,
To see the Lighters dance along the flood;
Sometimes (to please your sight) amidst the throng,
Observed tall Ships sail lazily along;
And tho your Groves make such a pompous show,
Sheltring from Storms the infant Shrubs below,
With Trees as vast as on tall Caucasus do grow:
Yet think not all this State can equal prove,
To one soft happy minute of my Love.
How mean is Greatness if compared to this,
And what are Riches to a Lovers bliss?
For whether my Dear She all over charms,
Kindly at night reposes in my Arms;
Or whether we consent to spend the day,
In easy pleasure, and in wanton play:
I fancy then Pactolus streams are rolled
Through the enriched house, methinks I swim in Gold;
Methinks I am as wealthy, and as blessed,
As if the Indies were by me possessed:
Sure proudest Monarchs would their Crowns resign,
And tiresome greatness, for delights like mine,
Which Heaven preserve till death shall change the Scene:
For who can dote on wealth, or value Crowns,
When Love's unkind, and when a Mistress frowns;
Venus can even Heroic minds enslave,
Soften the stout, and captivate the brave;
No Palaces, no Beds of Down can prove,
Strong countercharms to the great Queen of Love.
She can disturb at night a Lovers ease;
How then alas! can all our Riches please?
Who while she smiles on me, I will contemn
The trifling Glories of a Diadem;
I Will look on worlds of Wealth with generous hate,
And pity rich Alcinous's Fate.
Love-Verses by the same Hand.
To the God of Love.
I.
Well now (great Love) I plainly see,
Thy Conquests over Poetry;
The very Laurel that is from Heaven secure,
Must thy more potent Thunderbolts endure.
II.
Ah me! I feel thy pointed Smart,
(Sure Sense never Lodges in the Heart)
For yet the Knowledge of my Wound does stay,
Tho on thy Wings my Heart is fled away.
III.
It Is gone, it is gone to that bright She,
Who now is all the world to me;
To Floriana, who does proudly sit,
Upon the Throne of Beauty, and of Wit.
IV.
But pardon (Nymph) nor wonder why
My flame of Love dares aim so high;
You know alas! all Fire does upwards go,
And soars to Heaven, why should not mine do so?
To Floriana.
THrice happy day, when first I gazed on you,
And saw all Heaven exposed to mortal view.
Unjustly we of Phaethon complain,
Your Looks have set the world on fire again;
Looks so divine, so lovely bright, so pure,
Not uncompounded Essences are more;
Modest, as she that first salutes the Sky,
And blushes at the approach of Phoebus eye;
Pleasant, as Eastern flowers, while they consume,
And breathe away their Lives in rich perfume:
So like your Mind, which through the purest Skin
Displays it is Nunnery of Thoughts within.
With such a grace the precious Flies appear,
Enshrined in Crystal, or an Amber tear;
But sure you have no Matter, sure your mind
Is called in Substances of Souls refined.
Or we may guess Providence did delay,
Curious to find some nobler piece of Clay,
Whilst your impatient Form stole unarray'd away.
Or else Heaven sent you thus, to let us see
What at the Resurrection we shall be.
The Wound.
I.
NEver any Parthians Bow,
So many Painted Deaths did throw,
So many Darts; as you comprize
In the two Golden Quivers of your Eyes:
But ah! too like the cruel Parthians, you
No sooner gave the Fatal Wound but flew.
II.
Yet tho you fly, in my Mind
You Have left your kinder Self behind;
My Heart would sigh, but does not dare,
For fear it foil your pleasing Picture there;
So unseen Angels work in Fancy's Theme,
And glorious Nothings please us in a Dream.
III.
Ah how vain this Shadow is!
Can I content my self with this?
Or as the famed Pigmalion do,
And make a Mistress of thy Likeness too?
No: I in this should quite as vain appear,
As He that was supposed to court the Air.
His Death.
I.
THE wretch that stole Celestial Fire,
Never animated Clay,
With so much life as you inspire,
And in a Kiss convey:
Sure the morose, and grave-men only owe
Their Souls to Heaven, all Lovers theirs to You.
II.
Why named I Heaven, it is only She
Can true Elysium prove;
Where all departed Souls must flee
To endless joys of Love;
For as I in her kind Embraces lay,
My eager Soul stole in the bliss away.
III.
So Sweet a death befell the Be,
Rifling a Virgin Rose;
Whilst in her Golden Bosom, She
Did all her Sweets disclose;
But fond embracing leaves his life betrayed,
And in that envied Tomb her Lover laid.
Falling in Love with a Lady for her Wit.
I.
THis Love is pure, which is designed
To court the Beauty of your mind;
No Pimping dress, no fancied Air,
No Sex can bribe my judgment there:
But like the happy Spirits above,
I Am blessed in raptures of Seraphick. Love.
II.
Such chaste Amors may justly claim
Friendship, that noble, manly Name;
For without Lust I gaze on Thee,
And only wonder, it is a She:
Only our Minds are Courtiers grown,
Such Love endures when Youth, and Life are flown.
III.
Who on thy Looks has fixed his Eye,
Adores the Cafe where Jewels lie;
I Have heard such foolish Lovers say,
To you they gave their hearts away;
I willingly now part with mine,
To learn more Sense, and be informed by thine,
The Unconstant.
I.
UNconstant! that word strikes me more,
Then the bright Lightning of your Eyes,
That made my melted Heart your prize;
Could ever do before.
II.
Ah! like a cruel Murderer, You
Fly from your Lover slain;
Some other Booty to pursue,
And proudly kill again.
III.
But why should I for this despair?
Or at Inconstancy repine!
Since only Change can make you mine,
Now you Another's are:
IV.
What tho the Heaven's beauteous frame
Daily delight to move;
It still returns again the same,
And was composed of Love.
V.
(...) pity too methinks that She,
(By Beauty sure designed
To cherish all Mankind)
Should be confined to Me.
VI.
For should the Sun all is smiling light,
To his loved Rhodes display;
All other parts must mourn in Night,
And never enjoy the Day.
The Parting.
I.
SO when the beauteous Soul prepares her way,
To the far Country of Eternal day.
With such swollen, wishful eyes, the Body courts its Itay;
As I did on my parting Life, my Mistress, Look;
When she her fatal Farewell took,
And left her Turtle here alone;
Whilst with her Presence she does grace,
Some Over-happy place,
Happier then that, to which blessed Souls are (...)
II.
In vain Astrologers pretend to know,
What Accidents shall happen here below,
What Weather, what Eclipses from the Planets show;
Their Calculations for some other Country run,
Not made for Love's Meridian;
In vain, they say it is Summer here,
Now my bright Nymph is gone, it is She
My Calendar must be;
It Is She divides the Seasons of my Year.
III.
Now Storms of rainy Tears, and black Despair,
Have taken up their Winter Quarters here,
And Sighs, that chill my Heart with more then
Northern Air:
Greenland's a temperate clime, compared to frozen parts
Inhabited by Lovers hearts,
When absence does your Beams withold:
Ah! fure you will guess this Chill to be
Beyond the Eighth Degree;
When he that is all on Fire complains of Cold.
IV.
To what a Nothing am I grown and now
Scarce know I live but by the thoughts of you:
So Flowers that to the Spring their painted glories owe.
When she on Zeph'rus gales has winged her fragrant way,
In drooping withered Looks their grief betray,
But at her bright return, no more
Their Melancholy heads they hide,
But with an early pride
Start from their Buds as glorious as before.
The Pink to Floriana.
I.
AH happy Flower! pride of all
That dress the gaudy May;
What Monarch would not humbly fall,
And throw his Crown away?
His Heart like you might be a Guest,
In the fair harbor of that breast.
II.
How red thy flaming Leaves do grow!
Warmed by her neighboring Eyes:
I wish methinks they'de melt that Snow,
Which in her Bosom lies,
And keeps out love, as the cold Zone
Forbids the approaches of the Sun.
Upon his being asked what Love was.
I.
MYsterious Query! for it is strange that she
Should ign'rant be;
Who gave this knowledge first to me:
But so the less bright fire does warmth beget,
And what it wants it self, distributes Heat.
II.
Well then I am resolved, I Will boldly tell
What pains I feel,
And what I know of Love too well;
It Is that of which none ignorant can be,
Who have but had the least dear glimpse of Thee.
III.
Love is the pretty Babe that proudly plays
In your bright face;
And wounds him who presumes to gaze;
And Painters say, Poets with them agree,
He in no dress but Nakedness should be.
IV.
The Darts he uses here, and glowing Arms,
Are only Charms,
With which some meaner Beauty warms;
But when h' enflames the Gods, and burns the Skies,
He lights his Torch at Floriana's eyes.
V.
Wings are to him (I know not how) assigned,
But now I find,
He uses them in Womankind;
But when he stormed my heart he laid 'em by,
And never never from my Breast will fly.
Her Retreat.
I.
IN a flowery Myrtle Grove,
(The solitary Scene of Love)
On Beds of Vi'lets all the day,
The charming Floriana lay;
The little Cupids hovered in the Air,
They peeped, and smiled, and thought their mother there.
II.
Phoebus delayed his course a while,
Charmed with the Spell of such a smile,
Whilst weary Plowmen cursed the stay
Of the too Uxorious Day;
The little Cupids hovered in the Air,
They peeped, and smiled, and thought their Mother there.
III.
But thus the Nymph began to chide;
That Eye you owe the world beside,
You fix on me: then with a frown
She sent her drooping Lover down;
With modest blushes strait away she fled,
Painting the evening with unusual Red.
Farewell to Love.
BEgone, begone thou wheedling cheat,
Thou Enemy to all that is great;
That only were it by Heaven designed,
To be in pleasing torments kind;
Thou Lovely Paris did destroy,
In a worse flame, then Graecians T'roy;
Well may thou still delight in strife,
That to a Tempest ow'dst thy Life;
Hence all the beauteous Sex we see
Have learnt Inconstancy from Thee;
Be damned for this, to some cold Isle
Where never yet the Sun did smile;
Where thy Lascivious Ovid went,
Into deserved Banishment;
And only there exert thy power,
Where craving Seas clasp round the Shore.
I Will burn my Songs, I Will break my Lyre,
Unless it nobler thoughts inspire;
And on the Theban Swan will fly,
To view melodious worlds on high.
PINDARICK ODES By the same HAND.
ODE I.
To the Right Honorable JAMES Earl of ABINGDON.
I.
GO, go, my Muse, the winged Horse prepare;
I purpose now to take the Air;
Take solid Judgment for the Bit,
And put on the rich Ornaments of Wit;
Where Sense does shine like Dawn of Morn,
(Not dazzled by the thick,
And gaudy Flowers of Rhet'rick;)
Through Interspaces which the work adorn:
Lo! now I mount, and (Lo!) I take my flight,
And travel with immense delight,
Into the flowery Groves of never-fading light;
Lo I look down with scorn, not envy there,
On the Melancholy lands of the dull foggy Atmosphere.
II.
Hark! Hark! Sure this is Thunder's voice,
Or else Heavens Vaults echo some Heroes praise;
Hark! BARTVE is the welcome Noise;
BARTVE, that big-swoln Name,
That is become the mighty toil of unperforming Fame:
Tell me, oh! tell me where,
Shall I stick up that word, and make another Star?
A Star, that will disdain, like petty Lamps of Night,
To shine with borrowed light;
Let Honor gild over meaner Souls, and Those,
Whose Actions want a gloss;
Honor and Riches Sun to him can add no more,
Whose beamy Virtue was all bright before.
III.
Now, now, I mount uphigher,
Where great Alcides Star detains my sight,
With almost such a source of Light,
As if it still were clothed with the Oetaean fire;
That God like Child who in his Cradle lay;
And did with hissing Serpents play:
It Was He that squeezed out numerous Hydra's breath,
Whose many Lives but multiplied the death;
Thus Juno's rage conspired to make him great,
And kindly found out Dangers worthy his Defeat.
IV.
This well deserving place
Thy Golden Character shall grace;
Alcides Star as yet does dimly shine,
And wants the Neighborhood of thine;
For none, but God-descended he,
Can almost boast of his Equality;
Yet should we look on things aright,
Examine 'em by Reason's light;
His big-fam'd Acts no Miracles express,
He that was born of Heaven sure could perform no less.
V.
How much beyond our wonder's He
Derived of Earthly Pedigree
That did from no less Monsters the wild Nation free
For when Ambition, the base Ferment of the Soul,
Threw into a Calenture the Senseless All;
Which by it is cursed ill-brooding Heat,
Did in each muddy Brain a Python-plot beget:
'Twas He that bravely undertook to quell
That Legion-Ill;
And wheresoever he came,
He planted there a Monarchs name;
And with bold Sallies of Advice,
No sooner stormed, but took the Forts of Vice;
How did it grieve him then to see,
Unballast minds wrecked in Sedition's Sea,
And the small Cargo of their wit dashed by those waves away;
Whilst he in all this Hurricane
Outbrav'd the fury of the Ocean;
No thickning Clouds his Loyalty could hide,
That was the Pole Star still his course to guide;
What gaping dangers need that Pilot fear,
Who amidst threatening Storms by Heaven his course can steer?
VI.
See, see, the Scene is changed of late,
And now (my Lord) whither by Fate,
Or You; we' enjoy a Calm of State:
For by your deeds we just suspicion find,
To think your generous mind,
Is not, like some trangressing Souls, confined,
And closely imprisoned in the narrow Span
Of Earthy man:
Till they with much of toil, and much of strife,
Have drudg'd through the Probation-State of Life:
But left it is Vehicle of purer Air,
And condescended to inhabit here.
Resolved to become,
A Form assistent to this happy Throne;
Until Impatient Heaven force your remove,
To the great Triple Monarchy above.
ODE II.
Against Sensual Pleasure.
I.
A Way, away, Thou Ape of solid bliss,
Fruition of Fools Paradise;
Mistaken Man! is this the fancied All?
The Tinsell'd Nothing? that we Pleasure call;
Oh Barbarism! no figure can excuse
The gross abuse:
Pleasure is only proper to the Soul,
That can our misled faculties control;
Pleasure is that verdant Flower,
That ever blooms in Epicurus Bower;
Which neither all the nipping Frosts of fear,
Nor Sorrow's murmuring Winds with rude embraces tear.
II.
Ah! could we but with searching knowledge come,
Into some quiet Soul's withdrawing Room;
Content hemmed round with joys, we there might sind,
Content, the celebrated Sabbath of the Mind,
That builds her Halcyon Nest,
In the recesses of a calmy Breast;
There sits, and laughs at gay Appearances,
Which still the gul'd, unthinking vulgar please,
Wherever Vice has placed the painted Scene,
With the false Lights of Fortune set between:
III.
But stay (bold Fancy) stop thy flight, and stand
In prospect of this Fairy Land;
Where Ghosts of bliss wantonly stray,
Grandeur, Lust, Riches bear the Sovereign sway;
Grandeur, the hopefull'st Child, that e're had been
Trained up in the wild Nursery of Sin:
Grandeur, the first rate Vice.
Placed highest in the List of Vanities,
The Stalking Shadow we so dearly prize;
The Bristol Gem, that sets the world at strife,
And Silvers over the Great man's Dream of Life;
But at the bright approach of Reasons day,
The Airy Phantome slighly steals away.
IV.
The first Grandee that e're usurped the name,
Against the Almighty levied wars,
And led out Spirits, like gilded Hosts of Stars;
No Seas of Bliss could quench his thirst of fame;
Michael at last encamped upon the Azure plain,
Where big charg d Thunder lay,
Upon the Crystal Battlements of Day;
Which quelled the Foe, and rendered the great Project vain.
This done, he boasted of's Defeat, and proudly fell,
To reign an Emperor in Hell,
Vassal of Happiness was too low a thing
He thought it worth the loss, to be a King!
He thanked this bold Exploit, that could procure,
And bind Damnation sure;
Lest God should disobliging mercy have,
And Heaven might find out some pretense to save.
V.
Go in thy mournful Empire reign,
Over all thy palefac'd meagre-train;
Where fiery Deluges overflow,
All the sad glory Hell can show;
I Am vexed that thy condition cannot be worse,
And has forestalled a further curse;
Methinks I hear thee groaning ly
Under the heavy Tax of milery;
Begging of Heaven the Privilege to dye,
And cut of the Entail of Immortality.
VI.
Not yet (my Muse) are all thy arrows spent,
Go let the Bow again be bent,
Here thy sharp Invectives shoot,
At Riches the white glittering Butt;
Riches, that only pity can implore,
When we so many Cullies see,
Laboring in Fortunes Galley-Slavery,
Condemned to dig in Mines, and drudge for sordid Ore:
Midas was cursed enough with all the advantages
Conspiring wishes could invent,
To lure him to his punishment;
To which the well-pleased God did willingly consent,
To carry on his colored cruelties:
Ah might he still enjoy his glorious Famine, and behold
By his rich touching Alchymy,
His very Meat converted into Gold,
Whilst such insipid Luxury
Can never afford enought relief,
To furnish Nature, and defray the small expense of Life.
So fond of Death is he,
Who of the Plague could be content to dye
So he might view the gaudy Spots, and Purple bravery.
VII.
Happy Diogenes! thrice happy He!
Blessed in the humble sweets of Poverty;
Whose little Palace no rich Painting had,
No gilded Roofes but what the Sunbeams made;
Here he did out of Fortunes reach escape,
Where none, but Natures Landskapes, pleased his sight,
With all the unexpensive, green delight,
She yearly pours into the Valley's flowery Lap:
Purple was here by every Vi'let worn,
And richer Scarlet clothed the blushing Thorn;
Through Golden Fields a Silver Stream did play,
Pure as his thoughts, nor less serene then they:
Thus lived the Happiest of Mankind,
Whose uncontrolled, and freeborn mind,
Like the aspiring Lark did upwards go,
Conversed with Heaven and left its viler Tenement below.
His potent Fancy made him Lord of All,
That in Opinion lay,
Opinion, the large Empire of unbounded joy;
The great Pellean youth could never so happy be,
Tho with the vast Expense of Victory
He purchased for himself the over-rated Ball.
F. W.

TO HIS CHAMBER-FELLOW Mr. THOMAS CREECH On His Translation of LUCRETIUS.
Written immediately after the coming out of the Second Edition.
HAil sacred Friend! this comes to let thee know
That We can sing when Thou inspir'st us so.
The powerful rays of such a Rising Sun
Can influence Memnon, animate the Stone.
And to glad Peans tune its senseless Tongue:
Thy Memnon I, who never spoke before,
Speak at thy Rising, and shall speak no more.
Five Five years Chamber-fellows.
happy years I Pythag'rean was,
A silent Hearer of thy Golden Muse:
A Five years silence was the sage Decree,
I now may speak, since it is in praise of Thee.
Whilst emulous Wits thronged in to pay their Vows,
And with their Laurels crown thy sacred Brows,
In silence I and admiration lay,
I knew too much t'ave any thing to say.
Great things we praise, but infinite admire;
Lower Objects reach at, only gaze at higher.
Besides you know I never could sing, for I
Had never presumed to court, not cast an eye
On any Muse, tho Helicon was by:
I thought my self too poor, a Muse, I knew,
Scorns his address, whose Talents are but few.
But Ladies often, who scorn addresses, grace
With their free visits even the homly'st place.
So lately me a Muse a visit gave,
Kind, condescending, as to Baucis Jove.
Surpised I was; Ah lovely Maid, said I,
So great a Stranger, and yet dwell so nigh!
Come leave your Books, the smiling Muse replied,
And sing of Him, that is sung by all beside,
I Will give by Grace, what Nature has denied.
She said, and breathed, and breathing did inspire
And warm my Breast with an unusual fire.
The Muse inspired, but by experience found
Tho she breathed well, the Pipe would rough the sound,
Not smoothed by use, not yet by custom tuned.
Like thy Lucrece's World my Rhymes advance,
No artful Structure, but the work of Chance:
The little Atoms of the Alphabet
Flew up and down, and long confusedly met;
I know not how! at last there rose a Frame,
A Building sacred to thy glorious Name.
These my first Numbers, Sir, accept from me,
First Fruits we offer to some Deity.
These first and last I Sacrifice to Thee.
Whilst great rich Poets throw in their Offering
Of their abundance, I my Nothing bring,
The only Mite that in my Treasure lay,
They much, I little, yet I more then they.
But can my gift increase thy mighty store?
Can I augment thy Praise? It Is strange, yet sure,
A Cipher added makes the Figure more.
Could I deserv'dly praise, my Muse I Would prove
With Flames as strong as those wherewith We love,
I Would sing of Thee with great Lucrece's Fires,
Or such as Wallers greater Muse inspires:
That great Panegyrist, whose rapturous Lays
Speak more the Authors, then the others praise.
What he of thee, or thou of him would say;
Such thou deserve, such only I would pay.
Thou, who art praised by all, but who repine
And angry grow 'cause now they cannot shine;
Mere Touch-wood-Wits, that shine but in the dark,
And strait take fire at a rising spark.
We doubt (my Friend) to whom the most we ow,
To your divine Lucretius, or to You;
'Twas he that formed the Gem, thou made it bright;
He made the World, but Thou creat'dsh the Light.
Thou reach'st his Sense, and deepest Thoughts do see,
As if his Soul were thine, and thou wast He;
Lucretius scarce did know Lucretius so,
His own great Genius knew him less then Thou.
If I thy Language praise, then I must tell,
Lucrece his Muse could never sing so well.
Thy English Style outshines his Latin strain,
He lisp'd at Rome, but speaks in Oxford plain:
Void of hard Terms, the Jargon of the Schools,
Vain to the Wise, and only wise to Fools;
Smooth, easy, flowing, faithful, chaste, refined,
Clear as thy Judgment, pure as is thy Mind.
When e're thy Poets Muse throws of her dress,
And wantonly does show her Nakedness,
Thou clap'st thy Fig Leaves on, and hid'st her shame,
Writ'st not with hers, but with a Vestal flame.
Thou loath'st a bawdy Muse without a Veil,
That Glow-worm-like shines only at the Tail;
That fashionable Muse, whose Siren tongue
Kills all, yet all are pleased with what is sung,
So many Flies leave honey, feed on dung.
I praise thee (Friend) 'cause Subjects thou have chose,
Which honor thee as thou do honor those:
Thou scorn'st the Stage, where Poets nowadays
Write their own Characters in bawdy Plays;
Plays, that increase profaneness, lust inflame,
The Writers scandal, and the Hearers shame.
It Is this thou hat'st; and next the amorous Toys,
The scorn of Men, and the delight of Boys.
Phyllis my Goddess -- Can such Ballads please?
Can manly persons sing such Psalms as these?
Thou scorn'st to sing with such unmanly flame,
The young Ascanius runs at nobler Game.
Exalted Subjects, deep Philosophy,
Things above others, court thy Muse and Thee.
Then other Poets thou excel'st in this,
They Trade, thou only Interlop'st in Verse.
Thou love thy Muse, but (Woman's nature's such)
Thou make her kind by loving not too much.
It is the Curse of Poets, they should know
But little else but what to Wine they ow,
The Laurel's green where nothing else does grow.
They crown their ignorance with the Poets praise;
So Caesar hid his Baldness with his Bays.
Who e're does now Parnassus Hills surround,
Can nothing see but rocks and barren ground;
No fruit or green and the Muses Seats do ly,
(So Travelers tell) nay Helicon is dry.
But thou art more then Poet, thou art seen
In Arts, for which the Wise have famous been,
As Caesar Consuls, thou art learned Men.
Thou with the Sun make one continued day
In circling studies shining all the way,
With an unwearied eye do all things see,
As great a Student, and as learned as The Sun was Apollo the God of Learning.
He.
Strange Metamorphosis in Nature seen!
August in thee and youthful May combine,
Autumnal Fruits with Vernal Flowers shine.
So learned and young, as if, like Adam, thou
Did know the more for being born but now.
So learned and young you are (my Friend) that you.
Seem to have proved Medea's Art was true,
That you were old, and did your age renew.
Witness ye holy Lars, ye sacred Powers,
That with such favor bless his fruitful hours,
Witness how often charmed with learned talk,
And tied to him with Ogmian Chains I walk.
When e're the Sun withdraws his evening ray
From me untaught by him, you hear me say
With Titus, grieving, I have lost a day.
Pardon, ye Powers above, if I repine
'Cause all is dark unless that Sun does shine.
You gave me being first, first crowned my Brow,
But the younger, Jacob, first was blessed by you;
He greater far was born then I am now.
Ah partial Heaven! it is strange one Room should be
So blessed by him, and so unblessed by me:
True Emblem of the Lake of Mexico,
On that side fresh and fruitful Waters flow,
In this, that is salter, nothing good does grow.
Thirsty I languish by the Muses Well,
Like Fishes I fresh in the Ocean dwell.
Whilst all the Room is moist, and Dew does ly
On all the Floor, my Fleece alone is dry.
Ah mighty God! forgive when I implore,
Give me but this, and I will ask no more:
Since pray I cannot new Miracles may show
The Place all dry, Me only blessed with dew,
Ah! cease thy Wonders, give me moisture too.
HVMP. HODY, Coll. Wadh.

REASON.
I.
REASON thou vain impertinence,
Deluding Hippocrite begone,
And go and plague your men of Sense,
But let my Love, and me alone.
II.
In small concerns of life we'el own
Thy so much boasted Sovreingty,
But sacred Love, just like Religion,
Scorns, and throws off thy Tyranny.
III.
Illnatur'd, churlish, illbred, thing,
Who me amidst my Rapturous Joys,
Do with thy Cnecks of Conscience sting,
Whose bitter all my sweet destroys.
IV.
In vain some dreaming, thinking Fool,
Would make thee over our Senses reign,
And all our noble Passions rule,
And constitute this Creature Man.
V.
In vain some Dotard may pretend,
Thou art our Torch to Happiness,
To Happiness, which poor mankind
As little know, as Paradise.
VI.
At best, you are but a glimmering Light,
Which serves not to direct our way,
But like the Moon confounds our sight,
And only shows it is not day.
VII.
The Fool's the happiest of mankind
Whom Tyrant thou do never control,
No care disturbs his thoughtless Mind,
Like night there is rest and darkness in his Soul.
VIII.
Nay even Brutes are far more blessed
Then wretched humane kind:
For they those Joys may freely taste,
From which by Reason we are confined.
COYNESS.
I.
NAY, I confess I should despise,
A too too easy gotten prize,
Be coy, be cruel yet a while,
Nor grant one gracious look, or smile,
Then every little grace from thee,
Will seem a Heaven on Earth to me.
II.
If thou wou'd'st have me still love on
With all the Flames I first begun,
Then you must still as scornful be,
For if you once but burn like me,
My Flames will languish and be gone,
Like Fire shined on by the Sun.
III.
All things that are obtained with ease,
As soon as gotten we despise,
Scarceness does much the value raise,
For this we far fought Jewels prize,
(For which over Seas the Merchant runs,)
As worthless else as Pibble-stones.
IV.
Be Prudent then, and have a care,
Lest I surprise thee unaware,
Let Pride and Scorn thy Guardians be,
And a dissembled Modesty,
That Curse by which poor womankind
Are allways forced to hide their mind.
V.
Nor lay these arts too soon aside,
In hopes your Lover fast is tied;
For I have often an Angler seen,
With over have loose all again,
When if the Fool had longer staid,
The harmless Fish had been betrayed.
VI.
Things to perfection quickly grown,
Do still decay and die as soon,
My Love as yet imperfect is,
And Born just like an Embryo dies.
Thus early Flowers we often see,
Just blossom forth then fade and dye.
ODES out of CASIMIRE.
ODE the 18th BOOK the 4th of CASIMIRE Paraphrastically Translated.
To the ROSE with which he vowed to Crown the Virgin MARY with every June.
I.
FAir Rose, whom joyful Heaven does beget
With seminal showr's, and Bridegroom heat:
Whose shining leaves so flaming are.
Thou seem thy self a very Star;
Spring from Earth's Womb, thy lovely head display,
And blush from thy bright East a Purple day.
II.
To welcome thee even Nature now does gild
With glittering Pride, each Bush and Field.
Soft Gales from Heaven black Clouds do chase,
And Golden Smiles sit on it is face.
The Winter's rage grows calm, and flies away;
The West-winds sport, and clap their wings for Joy.
III.
Spring gentle Flower; and ask not whose bright Hair
Shall thy gay, comely Hoeours wear:
For thou whose blush speaks thee to be
The Child of Virgin Modesty,
Ought not alas! thy Beauties to bestow,
On any common, or unhallowed Brow.
IV.
Then Crown no more the profane Vulgar's Head,
You Are fit to be on Altars laid.
See how the sacred Virgins Hair
Flows loosely through the flowing Air;
She sues by thy rich Purple to be Crowned,
By thee she longs to have her Temples bound.
Out of CASIMIRE.
To QUINTUS TIBERINUS ODE the 34th BOOK the 4th.
I.
NO -- never think him truly rich, or great,
Whose fertile soil and large Estate
Far more luxurious Crops, and Har vests yields
Then the most fruitful Eastern Fields;
Tho Fortune with rich Tides his Land o'reflows,
And Golden Seeds for Grain in his bright Furrow sows.
II.
Nor him whose Birth, whose Arms, and Father's Name,
Have made the Heir to wealth, and same:
Whom Glory in her Chariot glittering bright
With Golden rays, and gemmy light,
Has born in Pomp, and a Triumphant show,
Through wondering cities, and all earth's vast kingdoms too.
III.
He Is poor that wants himself, who proud to weigh
Himself against his Vanity,
He with his Titles, ponderous Baggs and all
His massy Gold cannot turn the Scale;
And tho he adds his Lands, and whole Estate
In his own lighter Scale, he cannot make up the weight.
IV.
He scarcely knows himself, and he seems great
Only in his own vain conceit;
Who, being pufft up with the false esteem
The Giddy crow'd bestow on him,
Wonders to see his Size so monstrous made,
In the Gygantick bulk of his own stalking shade,
V.
Let no false glittering treasure cheat thy sight,
With it is deluding foolish light;
Scorn swelling Titles without solid praise,
Which nothing but Ambition raise.
Like Boys thin Bubles for a while they fly,
They shine, look big, then burst and dye:
Get thou true Wealth from Virtues of thy own,
And learn thou to be Happy from thy self alone.
CASIMIRE ODE the 25th BOOK the fourth.
A Dialogue between the Child JESUS and the Virgin Mother, taken partly out of
the First, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Chapters of the Canticles.
I.
Child. OVirgin-Mother! fairer to behold
Then Stars Heavens glittering Diamonds are,
More glorious then refulgent rays of Gold,
More bright more clear then Crystal far,
More pleasing then rich Scarlet to the sight,
More fair then Lillies clod in Virgin white.
II.
Virgin. Dear Child, then Purple Hesperus more clear,
More shining then the Midnight Moon,
Lovelier then Meadows that Springs Livery wear,
More radiant then the Sun at noon:
A Sea of Milk does all thy Limbs overflow,
And you are more pure then Beds of Winter Snow.
III.
Child. Your sparkling eyes two Silver streams surpass,
That near to Essebon do stray,
Which when they long have bubl'd over the grass,
And sported long in wanton play,
Wonder to find their wandering Streams suppressed,
To bounds confined, and hushed in calms of rest.
IV.
Vorgin. Your shining Eyes as clear, and spotless look
As two white Doves in Milk washed over,
Which sit upon the Bank of some fair Brook,
Or some transparent Rivers shore:
Yet from those Balls of Snow bright flashes fly,
More swift then Lightning darted from the Sky.
V.
Child. Your comely Locks with circling glories deck
The shaded Beauties of your Face,
They add new whiteness to your snowy Neck,
And with loose pride your Shoulders grace
Like Gileads new-washt Fleeces they appear,
But they with Sunbeams gilt are not so fair.
VI.
Virgin. As some green Palm about whose flourishing head,
It Is verdant leaves for hair does grow,
So round your Cheeks your golden Tresses spread,
And down in Waves of Curles they flow;
Like Ravens wings they shine which glissen bright,
And cast a luster from their very night.
VII.
Child. As from the Comb the Honey drops distill,
So from your Lips words gently fall,
With golden sweets the ravished Ear they fill,
And shower down blessings upon all;
Or like Brid's long vail loos't from her hair,
They dance and revel in the sportive air.
VIII.
Virgin. Within your mouth soft Accents gently glide,
And in swollen tides of Nectar swim,
Like generous Wine in a charged Bowls full tide,
Which sparkling bright o'relooks the brim:
Your words are like fair Lillies when made wet,
And all with liquid gems of Dew beset.
IX.
Child. Your two white Breasts may with twin-Roes compare,
That in sweet beds of Flowers stray;
And feeding on the Lillies, wanton there
'Till night shuts in declining day;
Which now grown old, weary and panting lies,
And all it is vital flames extinguished, dies.
X.
Virgin. Your Breasts more bright then purple Cluster show,
Clusters that fruitful Cyprus bears,
Or those that in Engaddus Vineyards grow,
When crowned with Grapes its head appears:
Those bunches of soft gems that load the Vine,
Are not so beauteous as those Breasts of thine.
XI.
Child. Who looks upon your ruddy Cheeks may see,
Such various lively Colors spread
As blushing Apples show upon the tree,
All painted gay with streakes of red:
But in your Breast there heavenly Beauties lie,
Too glorious to be seen by Mortal Eye.
XII.
Virgin. Who sees your face with wonder there shall view
Borders of Flowers in order stand;
Here Roses blow and palefac'd Lillies too,
All set by artful Nature's hand:
And he that choicest Flowers, or Spices seeks,
May have them in the Flourets of your Cheeks.
XIII.
Child. Who loves not thee his monstrous Breast is filled
With more unhumane cruelty
Then the most salvage woods and deserts yield,
Where Beasts on blood and slaughter prey:
Fierce Tigers, Serpents, Bears and Panthers seem,
All mild and gentle things compared to him.
XIV.
Virgin. Who loves not thee is more unconstant known
Then fickle Gales of veering wind;
He Is more relentless then the Marble Stone,
Deafer then Seas, and more unkind:
The craggy Mountains raging fire and Sea
Are not so rough, so mercyless as he.
SONG Set by Dr. Blow.
GO perjured man, and if thou e're return
To view the small Remainders of my Vrn,
When thou shallt laugh at my religious dust,
And ask, where is now the Color, Form and Trust
Of Women's Beauty, and perhaps with rude
Hands riffle the Flowers, which the Virgins strewn:
Know I have prayed to pity, that the Wind
May blow my Ashes up, and strike thee blind.
Translated by the same HAND.
I To exccrandis perside passibus,
Vagumque retro si tuleris pedem,
Visurus extremas pudendae
Relliquias inimicus Vrnae:
Si quando risu turbidus improbo
Recte monentem temnere pulverem
Proclivis, Ornamenta quaeres
Faemineae fugitiva formae;
Forte and, piarum munera virginum
Flores, profana disiiccies manu,
Huic sexui, Eheu! quam fugacis
Imperii monumentum, and Omen:
Vtar protervi vindiciis Noti,
Vocabo and Euros, tu cineris brevi
Ultoris insurgente nube,
Perpetuam patiere noctem.
T. B.

The Extravagant. Written 1682.
ODE.
I.
HOW quickly are Love's Pleasure's gone!
How soon are all its mighty Triumphs done!
In vain, Alas! do we the Banquet taste
Whose Sweets as swift as Thought are past.
In vain do we renew the Fight,
Whom even the first Alarms do basely put to flight.
II.
Happy great Jove! who in Alcmena's Arms
For three full Nights enjoyed Loves Charms,
Nature turned Bawd her Monarch to obey,
And pimping Darkness shut out Day;
Whilst in vast joys the half-spent God did Sweat,
Joys as his Lightning fierce, and as his Godhead great.
III.
Bravely begun! Oh had it mounted higher
Fed still with vigorous thought, and fresh desire,
Were I but Jove my boundless reign should prove
But one continued Scene of Love:
In Ecstasies would I dissolving Iye,
As long as all the mighty round of vast Eternity.
T. B.

A PARAPHRASE upon the XIIIth ODE in Horace Lib. 4. Audivere Lyce etc:
I.
LOng have my Prayers slow Heaven assailed,
But thanks to all the Powers above
That still revenge the cause of injured love,
Lyce at last they have prevailed:
Now full amends by Heaven is made,
For who can Providence upbraid
That sees thy former pride with hastened age repaid?
II.
You Are old, and yet by awkard ways do strive
The unwilling passion to revive,
Do dance, and drink, and teach thy Lyre,
And all, to set some puny heart on fire:
Alas! in Chloe's Cheeks Love basking lies,
Chloe great Beauties, fairest prize,
Chloe that charms our Ears, and ravishes our Eyes.
III.
The vigorous Boy flies over the barren Plains
Where sapless Oaks their withered Trunks extend.
(For Love like other Gods disdains
To grace the shrine that age has once profaned.)
He too laughs at thee now
Scorns thy gray Hairs, and wrinkled Brow,
How should his youthful fires agree with hoary ages snow?
IV.
In vain with wondrous art, and mighty care
You strive your ruined Beauty to repair,
No far-fetcht Silks one Minute can restore
That time has added to the endless Score,
And precious Stones, tho never so bright
They shine with their own native light.
Will but disgrace thee now, and but inhance thy night.
V.
Ah! me where is now that mien! that face!
That shape! that air! that every grace!
That color! whose enchanting red
Me to Love's Tents a Captive led:
Strange turn of Fate, that she
Who from my self so often has stolen poor me,
Now through the just revenge of time stolen from her self should be,
VI.
Time was, when Lyce's powerful face
To Phillis only gave the place,
Perfect in all those little Tricks of Love,
That charm the sense, and the quick fancy move.
But Fate to Phillis a long Reign denied,
She fell in all her blooming Beauty's pride,
She conquered whilst she lived, and triumphed as she died.
VII.
Thou (like some old Commander in disgrace.)
Surviving the past Conquests of thy face,
Now the great business of thy life is done,
Review'st with grief what Trophies thou have won:
Damm'd to be parched with Lust in frozen age,
And tho past acti'n damned to keep the Stage.
That all might laugh to see that glaring light
Which lately shone so sierce, and bright,
End with a Stink at last, and vanish into night.
By T. B. of Chapter Chapter

ODES Paraphrased and Imitated.
The XIIIth Chap. of Isaiah Paraphrased.
Pindarick ODE.
I.
BEhold, proud Babylon, with trembling fear
Thy miseries and ruin's drawing near:
Thy Sins have roused the great Almighty one;
And see the Harvest of his Fury's coming on.
Behold his bare Arm terribly stretched out;
His ponderous Sword is drawn, whose mighty weight
Can crush the World, and make it yield to Fate;
With fierce Revenge it is edged too for the fight,
And from it comes a dismal light;
Ruin and Destruction sit
In Triumph on the paint of it.
Lo! now his bloody Banner is displayed;
What numerous Armies fly now to his aid?
See how they leap for joy, and hark how terribly they shout.
II.
The Armies on the Mountains stand;
And beckon to each other with the hand:
And hark, methinks, I hear them say,
Hoe! noble Chiefs, let us march away,
Let us (Heaven's Emp'ror's Host) sit down
Before the boasted Walls of Babylon;
Before their Nobles Gates; and there
Let us consult to carry on the sacred War.
Hither the Medes and Persians all
Come at their Kings great call:
By his unutterable Name they swear;
That they no Age, no Sex, nor no Degree will spare.
III.
As some brave war-horse, when the Trumpets sound,
Eager to be amongst his Foes, does bound,
And with his Hoof paws up the ground,
Then neighs about for joy to hear
The clashing noise of Arms so near:
So they are impatient to engage,
To be the Scourges of Heaven's rage.
Not all those Worthies, whose great deeds, and name
Are Registered, that they may be
A Pattern for Posterity,
And wrote down in the Golden Rowls of Fame;
Not Saul, and David, who did come
From Helah's Plains in Triumph home;
Could ever boast of more success,
Or greater Battles to be won then these;
Armies shall be overcome by them, and they
Shall all their Thousands, and ten Thousands slay.
IV.
Those many Plagues Heaven did on Egypt bring
To punish a Proud stubborn King,
Those Plauges shall be.
Poured down on thee.
Huge Troops of Locusts over their land did pass,
Which eat up all their Corn and Grass;
But these (O Babylon) shall yet do more,
They shall thy Fruit, thy Corn, and thee and all devour.
Thick darkness to be felt was there,
And no less darkness shall be here.
The Egyptian Host was drowned too in the Flood;
And all thy Princes, all thy Pomp, and State,
With them in this shall share an equal Fate;
For they too shall be drowned in a Red Sea of Blood.
V.
What dismal shouts the affrighted Air do fill,
And from the Mountains they grow louder still,
Like those when routed Armies fly,
And all with one united voice proclaim their Victory.
Lo! the Worlds General comes, and from afar
He brings with him his mighty men, and instruments of War;
Drawn by the winds now down he flies,
More swift then his own lightning from the skies.
And in a Chariot of thick Clouds does ride,
By Angels guarded on each side;
A rapid Tempest drives along before,
A rolling Sea of Thunder, whose loud Billows roar;
All to proclaim his coming, and triumphant power.
VI.
Thus armed with the Weapons of his wrath,
And indignation he is come forth.
All to the General Muster now repair;
The Lord of Hosts commands them to be there;
And first he views their order well, and then
Draws in Batalia up his men,
Sets every Troop and File aright,
And thus prepares them for the Fight:
Before him all his Chiefs their valor try,
Their skill in Arms, and arts of Chivalry:
And what may not such Armies do,
Commanded thus by God, and by him thus instructed too?
VII.
When troubled Nature hears this dreadful noise,
And roaring Thunder of the Allmighty's voice;
With terror struck, she then shall stand aghast:
The reeling Earth for fear shall quake,
And its dear Center then forsake:
The loosned Center too it self shall shake:
Earth on all the wings of fear shall fly as fast,
(...) swift Roe, when by the Hounds he is chac't,
^d she shall think those Pangs she feels, her last.
^e Heavens startled at this dreadful show,
Shall shrink for fear and tremble too:
And strange confusions shall be hurled
Through Earth, Through Heaven, and all the world.
Blind Night shall now mistake her way,
And meet the Rising Sun half way;
And all his Purple Majesty of Morning light
Shall shrouded be in solid, and substantial night.
The Moon for want of borrowed Rays shall be out,
A blotted Orb of dark obscurity.
Those Lamps, that guild the night, shall be blown
In darkness loose their way, in darkness wander all about.
VIII.
This day of Terror now shall quickly come.
Prepare, cursed City, to receive thy Doom;
With fierce wrath burning see the Lord
Brandishes over thy head his Sword;
See how he now lifts up his hand
To ruin and destroy the guilty Land:
Each stroke of his vast slaughters shall bestow,
And swift destruction shall attend the blow.
In vain shall all thy Armies fight:
In vain shal't thou attempt thy flight,
In vain thy Stratagems shal't use,
When Vengeance, and an angry God pursues.
IX.
Thy great Gygantick Sons of pride,
Who have both Heaven and Earth defied,
Who on Ambition's towering Wings
Did soar above the height of all Earth's vassal Kings;
To whose commanding Scepters sway
The tributary World did Homage pay,
Like lesser Rivers to the boundless Sea;
Thy terrible, and men of might,
Whose names but mentioned, distant Lands could fright;
Who on the Necks of their slain Enemies,
And slaughtered Monarchs to the thrones did rise,
Shall be from all their glories tumbled down,
And on the Earth regardlesly be thrown;
But in their fall they shall be mangled so,
No one thy Kings from common Slaves shall know,
Their Royal Blood mixed with base Slaves shall undistinguisht flow.
X.
Thy' Inhabitants in every dismal Street
Triumphant Grief in sullen Pomp shall meet;
Vast Floods of Sorrow shall encompass them about,
And they in vain shall struggle to get out;
Their Souls shall melt away in fear,
And Childbed Pangs their laboring Breasts shall tear,
Their strength shall languish and decay,
And they shall swoon and faint away.
The rest fixed with amaze,
Shall on each other wildly gaze;
Their faces then shall seem to burn with shame,
And with hot glowing blushes kindle to a flame.
At these Al'arms thy Strangers all shall run
From thy cursed Walls the threatening Plagues to shun,
And the black gathering Tempests rolling on.
And those, that there behind remain,
Shall serve but to augment the number of the slain.
XI.
In vain shall neighboring Kings with them combine,
And their auxiliary Forces join,
For all by the impartial Sword shall fall,
And all the land be made one grave, and they one funeral.
The Medes to thy barred Gates shall go;
A numerous, powerful, and resentless Foe,
And thy strong Forts, thy Walls, and Bulwarks over throw.
Not those rich births the Sun did e're beget,
Hatched by his active genial heat,
Not Ophir Gold with its bewitching charms
Shall bribe them to lay down their Arms,
Or have the power to save
The meanest Vassal's Blood, or vilest slave:
They every Spring of life shall drein,
Shall suck up the last drop, and drink up every vein
Thy glittering wealth shall not delight their eyes;
They shall confound both that, and thee, and both alike despise.
XII.
Then Fate with Carcasses shall pave thy ways,
And Mountains of pil'd deaths, high as thy Towers, shall raise.
To none thy cruel Foes shall Quarter give,
Their crime deserves death now who dare to live.
Even newborn Infants shall no pity find,
Their deaf inexorable Ear
Shall not their tender cries, or Mothers Prayers hear:
If they give quick dispatch, they will think they are kind.
Their helpless Mothers shall stand by,
And see their Children on the Pavement thrown,
Battered, and mangled on the flinty Stone;
Where they drowned in their blood shall sprawling lie.
XIII.
Nor shall thy very houses be secure,
They shall their wild revengeful rage endure.
Of thy choice Riches they shall havoc make,
And all thy Wealth, as their free Plunder, take:
Thus those vast sums, for which thou long did toil,
Shall be the Soldiers cheap and easy spoil.
And after all when they rich Cates and Wines
Have with hot lust enflamed their swelling Veins.
Then to augment thy grief and fresh disgrace
Thy wives shall ravished be before their husbands face.
Yet when they have quenched their lustful fire,
Their fury still shall flame the higher;
For then they shall rip up their teeming Womb,
And cruelly paint over
The Embryo with his Mothers gore,
And expiate thus with blood, what they defiled before.
The place that should give life shall give a Tomb,
And they shall kill succeeding ages yet to come.
XIV.
Thus the proud City in which Kingdoms boast,
And Chaldee Monarchs glory most;
Which more refulgent now appear,
To lesser Towns and Cities round,
Then Cynthia amongst the vanquished Stars,
When that bright Empress of the night
Dazles in her full Orb, and rich majestic robes of light,
And with the Golden Sunbeams set with Gems of Stars she is crowned.
Even she and all her Palaces which rise so high,
They seem to touch the neighboring Sky,
Shall levelled with the Earth in their own ruins buried ly,
Like Sodom, or Gomorah's lustful Town,
When Heaven rained showers of Fire to burn it down;
An empty desolation shall embrace
The uninhabited and desert place:
An emptiness as great as that
On which old Primitive nothing brooding sat,
And all things from its fruitful Womb begat.
XV.
No gentle Shepherd here shall keep
His tender Flocks, or feed his Sheep;
No wandering Arabians here
Their numerous Streets of Tents shall rear,
Upon the unfrequented Plain;
And to a City so restor't again.
Nothing here shall ever stay
But obscene Birds and Beasts of prey.
The Lion, their stern Morarch shall possess,
And Reign in thy gilt Palaces,
Over all his salvage Subjects of the wilderness.
The Satyrs here shall dance for joy to see
The Relics of thy misery.
Fierce Dragons and Night-ravens here shall dwell;
But no ones death by dismal croaks fortel:
With hid eous scrietches the foreboding Owl
Shall fill each house, and Wolves in every street shall howl.
ODE the 15th of the First BOOK of CASIMIRE imitated, encouraging the Polish
Knights after their last Conquests to proceed in their Victory.
I.
BElieve, ye after ages yet to come,
Believe the mighty Conquest won.
Jo! the mighty Conquest's won, and we
Have purchased a triumphant Victory.
The Turks they fly now basely all,
Their scattered Troops ignobly fall;
Gasping they beg your fatal Arms to cease,
And with their Blood they bargain for a Peace.
II.
What trembling fear did through their Army spread;
And winged with fear how swift they sled,
When our great King in Honors noble race
Before him did their flying Heroes chase
Like Jove he then his Thunder threw,
And killed whole Myriads as they flew.
Terribly bright his Sword, like Lightning, kills;
And numerous deaths increase the neighboring Hills.
III.
What great amazements now the Tartars seize;
One faints for fear, another dies.
The cruel Tartars, which no pity knew,
On bended knees did now for pity sue;
When they beheld the Danube's Flood
Roll down in Tides of their own Blood;
And how the Bospher to the Ocean fled,
In blushing streams to hide his Captive head.
IV.
When they saw all their Chiefs, their men of War,
And Janissaries fly for fear;
Whilst they beneath their sheltering Arms did bow,
And strove now only to defend the blow;
They could not now their Spears command,
They dropped from their weak trembling hand.
So meaner Beasts of Prey to Lions yield,
And leave the Spoil and Trophies of the Field.
V.
When Buda, Gran, and every Fortress near
Of their inglorious flight did hear,
The noise of Arms, and groans of dying Men;
Their fresh disgrace they echoed back again.
When the sad news Byzantium knew,
The great Byzantium trembled too;
Its lofty Towers now seemed to rock with fear,
As if our King played all his Thunder there.
VI.
Shall we thus crowned with Laurels and success.
Lie all dissolved in sloth and ease?
Have we in vain with our Blood Honors bought?
In vain for future ages glories sought?
Shall our example sloth create,
And make our Sons degenerate?
Our sprightly youth useless in War become,
And sleep in peace and slavery at home.
VII.
Alas 'twill be a most upbraiding shame
(A hated truth I Would blush to name)
To see that sprightly fire and generous heat
(Which did our great Fore fathers animate)
In us to languish and decay,
In us to dye and faint away:
And all their Warlike rage in us to wast,
And every age grow worse still then the last.
VIII.
Or let us (who in all the Glories share,
Our Ancestors e're got in War)
Pull down the Trophies in our Temples hung;
(For which we lately To Paean! sung)
The Imperial Flag (which our great King
Late from the Turkish Camp did bring)
The Arms, the Swords, the Helmets and rich spoil,
The just rewards of our great Leaders toil.
IX.
Let us pull down all those bright Arms, that be
Our Monuments of Victory,
And sacred Statues, which the likeness give
Of our great Fathers, in which still they live;
And let us all their Honors raze,
And burn the Records of their praise;
Least even their Images should blush to know
A Race so much unlike themselves, as you.
X.
Or if we hope our Glories to increase,
And would not live in lazy Peace;
With sacred Oaths let us in a League combine;
With brave Lorrain and Staremburg let us join;
And let us once again act over,
Those Triumphs we obtained before;
Whilst the cursed Infidels to make it good,
Shall Seal and shall Cement it with their Blood.
XI.
O mighty Prince of everlasting Fame,
Whom Kings and Emp'rors joy to name,
Whom Glory on fwift Wings to Heaven bears,
And fixes thy bright Praise amongst the Stars:
Thou Bulwark of the German Throne,
Thou Pride and Glory of thy own:
Stop thou not here, but as thou have begun,
To greater Conquests lead thine Armies on.
XII.
March through thick Groves of Spears with thy drawn Sword,
And to quick Victory give the word,
And let thy Glutton Blade (which twice before,
Has been made drunk with Turkish Hero's gore)
Be nobly the third time embru'd
In a vast Sea of Turkish Blood;
And with thy Troops pull the proud Sultan down,
Tho Mahumet should stand to guard his Throne.
A Fragment out of Catullus to Lesbia.
HAppy the man! thrice happy he
And equal to a Deity,
He, if it sounds not too too odd,
Is greater far then any God;
Who sits and hears, and sees you, while
You sweetly speak, and sweetly smile.
As soon as I my Lesbia see
My Senses all depart from me.
Nothing about me is secure,
From Love's and Lesbia's mighty power.
My faultring Tongue now cannot speak;
My Heart swells up as it would break,
Each Vein is with her love possessed,
And gentle Flames glide through my Breast,
My Ears ring with a fancied noise,
My Soul faints with excessive joy,
My swimming Eyes grown dull of sight,
Are clouded with a double Night.
Thy Sloth has done this injury,
Catullus it has ruined thee.
Too much you wanton in soft ease,
And that, alas! too much does please.
'Twas Sloth rich Cities first o'rethrew
Destroyed both Kings and Empires too.
CASIMIRE Ode the 23d Book the 4th. To the Grasshopper.
I.
Blessed Epicure of Race Divine,
Who, drunk with Heavens dewy Wine,
On some cool shady Tree do sit,
And sing upon the top of it;
Whilst with the cheerful Music of thy voice
Thou make thy self, and silent Woods rejoice.
II.
Now since the tedious Winter's past,
And welcome Summer's come at last
(Which with swift Wheels still hurries on,
And still is eager to be gone)
Chide the Sun's have, with mirth the day prolong,
Make Phoebus stop his course to hear thy Song.
III.
As the most happy glorious day
Just brings it self, and shows us joy,
So bliss but smiles on us, and then
Snatches its self away ag'en:
Our empty joys too fleeting still appear,
But solid griefs too long and tedious are.
EPIGRAMS Imitated.
Out of MARTIAL Book the 3d Epig. 33d imitated.
FOR God's sake tell me what bold confidence
Does draw you up to Town, Dear Friend; from hence?
Let not vain hopes your better sense deceive;
If you will go, tell me how you hope to live.
O Sir, you cry, I in the Laws will trade,
And eloquent as W -- Causes plead;
Nor shall the notedst Gown with me compare
At Doctors Commons, or at Westminster,
The Courts of Chanc'ry, or the King's Bench-bar.
F -- and T -- both did Causes plead,
Yet they, you know, could scarcely get their Bread;
Now they, like common Rogues, are forced to ply
In Temple Walks and trade in Perjury.
Well Sir you say, if this thing does not hit,
I Will Poetize and be a man of Wit;
The lofty Verses which from me you hear
With wonder you will applaud your self, and swear
That they as good as L -- s or D -- s are.
Heavens Sir you rave, you talk so madly now:
Those tattered things which out at Elbows go;
Which wait for Scraps and Coach-room at White Hall,
Are Spencers, Cowleys, L -- s and D -- ns all.
Pray then advise, how I my course may Steer,
For I am now resolved to settle there.
Why, Sir, if you're that strange unheard of thing,
True to your Countries cause, your God, and King;
You by some Miracle perchance may thrive;
And by strange luck may make a shift to live.
An Epig. out of MARTIAL imitated Book the 3d, Epig. 54.
SIR Fopling, you're a man of Fashion grown;
The most accomplished Blade in all the Town:
It Is all the Ladies talk; but tell me this;
What a fine man of Mode and Fashion is.
It Is he that's all the morning at the Glass,
To put each Curle in it is most proper place,
And in affected forms to set his Face.
That smells of Essence, and the best perfume,
Which does from India or Arabia come.
That when one speaks (as if he did not hear)
Hums over some wanton Song, or modish Air.
That Legs and Arms in various postures throws;
And seems to dance at every step he goes.
That sits among the women in the Pit,
And that he may be thought a man of Wit;
He whispers to the next as to a Friend,
Then in loud laughter does his whispering end.
That reads and writes Love Letters to and fro,
And does each Gallants Wench and Mistress know.
Who, tho unbidden, is a constant guest,
At every Mask, at every Treat, and Feast,
But sits in pain for fear the next should stir,
And so displace his dress or Garniture.
Who knows New Market breed so well, that he
Can tell you Jack-a-Dandy's Pedigree;
And down from long descent pretends to trace
The samous Swallows or fleet Dragon's Race.
How Sir? what is this you say? is this Buffoon
Admired so for a Spark throughout the Town?
Believe me Sir, on Earth there cannot be
A more ridiculous trifling thing then he.
CATVLLVS EPIG. 3d.
YE Graces weep, weep all that is fair,
Ye Loves and Cupids shed a tear,
Weep every beauteous Youth and Maid;
My Lesbia's pretty Sparrow's dead,
Her joy, delight, which she did prize,
And love more dear then her own Eyes;
For 'twas a lov'ly wretch, and sweet,
As ever Woman fancied yet.
Not better knew my charming Dear
Her mother, then this Sparrow her.
Always in Lesbia's Lap it laid,
And there it hoped about and played;
Still to my Love it chirp't alone,
But now alas, alas, it is gone;
And takes its everlasting flight
To the black shades of endless Night;
Whence nothing, when by death it is slain,
Can ever make return again.
Ye cursed shades; may no weak Ray
Cheer you with dawning hopes of day.
Which devour first and prey upon
All that's lovely, fair, and young:
O cruel Fates! what have you done!
Alas poor Sparrow thou art gone;
And Lesbia's swollen Eyes look red
With weeping for thee now you are dead.
FRAGMENTS Imitated out of PETRONIVS.
A Fragment out of PETRONIUS Imitated, beginning Thus -- Non est, falleris etc.
You Are mightily deceived, I swear,
And mightily (Dear Friend) you err;
Wretched's that State, in which you guess
Alone consists life's happiness.
It Is not your proud hands to behold
Glittering with Diamonds set in Gold,
Nor, like an Emp'ror's Miss, to wear
A Nations value in your Ear,
Nor all those trifles to receive,
That the Exchange or Mint can give;
With all the shining toys, and cost,
That wealthy Lombard Street can boast;
Nor is it, like Popes, our selves to please
With Holy Luxury, and ease,
Nor stretched in sloth to lie upon,
And sink into soft Beds of Down.
Nor, in great Pomp, to sit at Meat
In an Embroidered Chair of State,
And quaff rich Wines from Golden Plate.
Nor is it to have our Tables groan
Beneath the costly load thereon
Of Foul, Ragousts, and Fricasees,
And all those French varieties,
Or Kickshaws of the noblest Feast,
By Locket, or by Lumly dressed.
Nor to possess all the rich store
That our East India Fleet brings over.
But it is to have a Conscience
Guarded with spotless Innocence;
And with bold courage to advance
Against the Shock of adverse chance;
And not, as M -- did, to go
Amongst the dirty crowd, and bow
On both sides popularly low.
And not to be with fear possessed,
Tho a Sword's drawn against your Breast.
The happy man that thus can be,
In spite of Fate, from danger free,
From fear, and mere Hypocrisy,
He may despise, and laugh in sport
At the Intregues of State, and Court;
He at command may Fortune have,
And make her serve him as his slave.
On Woman's Levity. A Fragment out of PETRONIUS.
TRust thou thy Ship to Sea, and Wind,
But not thy self to Womankind;
For the unconstant Wind, and Sea,
Are Faithfuller by far then they.
All Maids are treacherous in their love,
And if by chance one constant prove,
I know not how she e're could be
Made constant from Inconstancy.
A Fragment out of PETRONIUS imitated, beginning Candida sidereis etc.
TO his Mistress.
YOU, fair Cosmelia, have two burning Eyes,
From which as from two Stars bright slames arise;
Your Neck with odorous sweets of Roses flows;
Your shining Hair more wealth then Gold bestow's,
Your sweet delicious Lips are overspread,
Like young Aurora's, with a Purple red;
In various wantonness each branching vein
Does your white Breasts with blew Meanders stain;
Beauty it self, youth, smiles, and every Grace
Do all pay Tribute to your heavenly Face;
A dazzling Goddesses bright form you show,
The Queen of Beauty yields her self to you;
Your Hand as made with Silver, does appear;
Your graceful Fingers long, and slender are;
Your pretty Foot does ever tread upon
A shining Floor of polisht Marble Stone;
Nor should ignoble Stones, or common Street
Hurt, or profane Cosmelia's sacred Feet;
When you among the Beds of Lillies stray,
Their leaves drop down as proud to strew your way;
Whilst, like Camilla, over them you pass
Leaving no print upon the Flowers, or Grass:
Let others with rich Gemms, and Pendents deck
And Neck-laces of Pearl their head, and neck;
You only, Dearest, can attract mine Eyes
When rifled of those shining vanities.
All who view your Perfections, grant you be
As much above their Praise, as Flattery.
The Muses, and the Sirens cease their Song
At the soft Music of your charming Tongue;
From which increasing sweets do ever flow;
And my poor panting Soul you ravish so,
That to your wretched slave you cruel prove,
And dart at him a Thousand shafts of Love.
A rageing flame feeds on my wounded heart,
And it is incurable by Surgeon's art:
But one kiss from your Lips, on mine impressed,
Can banish these fierce tortures from my Breast;
This healing Medicine can my griefs control,
And cure the sad distempers of my Soul.
Let not your Face such killing fierceness wear;
Ah! do not thus my Nerves in pieces tear;
Nor let my Tomb, when I am dead, complain,
That I was by my Dear's unkindness slain.
But if you think this Boon too great to grant
To me your slave, and humble suppliant,
Yet grant me this, that when I breathless lie,
Killed with the murdering Lightning of your Eye,
You would in your white Arms embrace me then;
And so restore me to my life again.
A Fragment out of PETRONIUS imitated, beginning Thus -- Quisquis habet nummos
etc.
THE wealthy Lord through Storms at Court may sail
Into Preferment with a prosperous gale.
On Honors gilded Pinacles may stand,
And have the world, and Fortune at command;
He by his tempting Golds all mighty charms
Can bring a Queen, or Princess to his Arms;
And bribe her Father, tho a King, like Jove
With a bright shower of Gold to grant his love.
He can be Lord-Chief Justice, Counselor,
Can grace the Pulpit, and adorn the Bar,
And foil the greatest Rook at Westminster.
He with nice art the choicest Verse can write,
Can baffle D -- and the men of Wit:
The Matchless C -- ly, and Great W -- er seem
Rude, and unpolisht, when compared to him.
If you have Wealth you may do what you please,
The Judge, or Priest your awful Nod obeys,
All strait your skill, and mighty learning own
And you're a St -- t, or Pemberton.
All things obey your Gold, and you may have
What e're your wanton thoughts, or wishes crave.
You of all power, and Grandeur are possessed,
Have Heaven, and Jove himself too in your Chest.
VERSES on several Occasions.
Love in a Trance.
SONG.
I.
BEneath a dark and lonely shade,
In a remote, and silent Grove,
(A secret place by Nature made
For Novices to practice Love:)
Young Corydon brought Cloris here
To walk with him, and take the Air.
Chorus. The God of Love stood by, and saw,
And smiling laughed out Ha-Ha-Ha.
II.
But as they walked the Shepherd said
Shall I request one thing of you,
Tell me (dear Cloris! charming Maid)
Ah! tell me if you love me now;
If you say no, then know that I
Your faithful Corydon will dye.
Cho. The God of Love, etc.
III.
Quick blushes on her Cheeks did rise,
Tumultuous joys heaved up her Breast,
Her flaming Soul flash't through her Eyes,
And she in smiles her love confessed;
Says she so may you still prove true,
As I love you, and only you.
Cho. The God of Love, etc.
IV.
The Youth thus raped in hopes of bliss,
Did gently squeeze her hand, and then
He gave the willing Maid a Kiss,
Which kindly she restored again;
Then hand in hand they walked along,
And sung with mutual strife this Song.
Cho. The God of Love, etc.
V.
Corydon.
O my dear Cloris, far more fair,
Then Virgin Lillies newly blown,
More sweet then flowery Meadows are,
And softer then young Swans first Down;
More bright, more smooth then any Glass,
Thou do all Womankind surpass.
Cho. The God of Love, etc.
VI.
Cloris.
Strong as you' Mountain thou art found,
As high, and lofty is thy head,
And like the Wood, with which it is crowned,
Thy Hair does round about it spread:
Yet soft, and gentle is thy Mind,
And thou surpassest all Mankind.
Cho. The God of Love, etc.
VII.
Corydon.
My Cloris is the joy of Swains,
Her Sexes Envy, and its pride,
The prize, and contest of the Plains,
And wonder of the Towns beside:
Was fair O Enone here again,
And loved me now, she would love in vain.
Cho. The God of Love, etc.
VIII.
Cloris.
Young Corydon is sleek, and gay,
Yet makes the sturdiest She pherds quake,
Corydon's Lord of every May,
And wins the Garland every Wake;
Nor would I leave my charming Boy
For Shepherd Paris, and his Troy.
Cho. The God of Love, etc.
IX.
Corydon.
I, my fair Cloris, have for you
A pretty Lamb-kin in my Fold,
Ripe Apples, Plums, and Chestnuts too,
And Grapes, with Purple streakt, and Gold,
With Curds, and New-milk from the Cow;
And I have kept it all for you.
Cho. The God of Love, etc.
X.
Cloris.
I have a Pipe that is neatly made,
Which out of Six more was my choice,
On which sweet Lays Menalcas played,
But not so sweet as is your voice;
This, and a Crook, the Swain gave me
But I Have preserved them both for thee.
Cho. The God of Love, etc.
XI.
Scarce this the Shepherdess had said,
But the Swain clasp't her round the Wast;
Kisses sweet interruptions made,
Whilst they in eager arms embraced,
And their Lips to each others fixed
Ten Thousand, Thousand Kisses mixed,
Cho. The God of Love, etc.
XII.
Then down they sat upon the Grass,
Where Boughs did meet so thick above,
The Sun's Rays could not through them pass,
Nor with one gleam molest their love;
And here they toy'd, whilst Cloris made
A Chaplet for her Lovers head.
Cho. The God of Love, etc.
XIII.
Thus, like the two first Lovers they,
(Yet free from guilt or an offense)
On odorous Banks of Flowers lay
In their first state of Innocence,
But Love the subtle Serpent played,
And both their Innocence betrayed.
Cho. The God of Love, etc.
XIV.
Their Lips still joined, like billing Doves,
With ardent breathings of desire,
They secretly enflamed their love,
And set each others heart on fire.
Their passion's such, that you would swear
Like Doves too they would engender there.
Cho. The God of Love, etc.
XV.
Shepherd (says she) what would you do?
Ah! what a cruel kindness this is,
O Cory-Corydon I vow
You Will stifle me anon with Kisses;
O fie let go, O fie (says she)
By Pan I think you will murder me.
Cho. The God of Love, etc.
XVI.
Cease or I Will scratch, and tear your hair,
You Have bit my Lip you naughty Swain,
One balmy Kiss (says he) my Dear
Will heal't, and make it well again;
With that he pressed her Lips once more,
And cured the wound he made before.
Cho. The God of Love, etc.
XVII.
Cupid at this well pleased, crept nigher,
And whispering in his Ear, he said,
'With equal flames I Will both inspire,
'Be valiant, and attack the Maid,
And as they talked of future joy,
He grew more bold, and she less coy.
Cho. The God of Love, etc.
XVIII.
But struggling long the Nymph by chance,
Or else by mighty love o'repow'r'd,
Upon the place fell in a Trance,
Where greedy he his Prey devoured;
And now his wanton hand does rove
Through hidden Labyrinths of Love.
Cho. The God of Love, etc.
XIX.
At last, he Lov's soft Altar seized,
The Mine where endless treasures grow,
'Where Rage is tamed, and Anger pleased,
Whence Tides of living Pleasures flow;
And whilst by Love entranc't she lies
The youth performs the Sacrifice.
Cho. The God of Love, etc.
XX.
When Sense returned again (says she)
In what a Heaven of bliss I Have been,
What raptures did attend on me!
What Visionary joys I Have seen!
Heaven cannot with those joys compare,
For methoughts Corydon was there.
Cho. The God of Love, etc.
XXI.
They had not ceased from Duty long,
But they with fiercer flames did burn;
Their rising passion grew more strong,
And violent Fits of Love return;
And as their heaving Breasts they swell,
Into a Trance again she fell.
Cho. The God of Love, etc.
XXII.
Thus raped in joys, and Ecstasy,
Thrice did they raise each others Charms,
Thrice did they languish, thrice did die,
Circled in one another Arms:
And thrice more was the Nymph inclined
Had he been stout as she was kind.
Cho. The God of Love, etc.
XXIII.
But as back to their Flock they went,
A Purple Blush her Cheeks did die,
Yet both were pleased, she innocent,
For tho she blushed, she knew not why,
Then at Love's Shrine they vowed to pay
Such joyful Offerings every day.
Chorus. The God of Love stood by, and Jaw,
And smiling laughed out Ha-Ha-Ha.
The VIOLET.
I.
HAil! infant Flower! Heavens chiefest care,
Darling of all the Groves, and Woods,
More Beautiful, more sweet, more fair
Then all their gaudy Flowers, and Buds.
Thou spring's soft joy, mankinds delight,
Clothed in gay Purple Robes of light.
On whom (as Phoebus does his Progress take,
And all the Earth one painted Landscape make,
His Pencil does nice strokes impart
Of double care, and double art;
And on thee nobler Colors does bestow,
Then those with which he paints his heavenly Bow.
II.
Hail thou the Springs first Purple Morn,
Thou Bright Aurora of its East,
That do the rising year adorn,
In thy rich Princely Honors dressed;
And when thy teeming Mother Earth,
Gives thee her little Infant Birth,
She feels no Pangs tho laboring all the while,
But at the sight of thee begins to smile:
She smiles, and all the Trees around,
And Earth with Buds, and Grass are crowned,
Brooks murmur out their joy, the Birds they sing
To welcome thee, the Goddess of the Spring.
III.
Now Western Gales begin to sport,
And am'rously about thee move,
And thee with tender voice they Court,
And in soft sighs they whisper love,
Then, as they Kiss in wanton play,
Increasing Sweets they bring away;
Which thence upon their downy Wings they bear,
And all along perfume the circling Air.
And when with their sweet prize they come
On joyful Wings, in Triumph, home,
Young, new-fledg'd Winds, lured with those sweets, fly out,
And with them, to embrace thee, roam about.
IV.
Whence! Nature's Praegnant wonder whence!
Had thou these various Treasures! tell;
That thus thou should delight each sense,
The taste, the touch, the sight, and smell.
What would not Monarchs give to be
Changed to the Happy shape of thee?
When thee each Grace, and every Nypmh does wear
In Chaplets bound about their Fragrant Hair.
Fair Maids (and sure there is naught so gay
Besides thy Beauteous self, as they)
Treasure thee in their Breasts, and think they are
Never so charming, as when thou art there.
V.
Nor is it wonder this kind Flower
Should to the fair propitious prove,
That it should have a Sovreign power
Over Woman's Beauty, and our love:
For when kind Venus strove to shield
Her Son Aeneas in the Field,
She from a Grecian Spear received a wound;
And as the Purple shower dropped on the ground,
Immediately the precious Juice
This pretty Infant did produce;
And ever since upon this Flower remains,
The Noble Die she gave it from her Veins.
VI.
And as all Beauty, and each Grace;
In all their Strength, and Charms are seen
In Cytheraea's lovely Face,
And justly style her Beauty's Queen;
So in this Flower alone does meet
All that is lovely, fair, or sweet.
When Jess'mine, and the Woodbine near thee grows,
They all their Sweets, and all their Beauties loose:
That they to thee may Homage pay,
They breath their Fragant Souls away.
All Flowers to thee, all Sweets, and Perfumes yield,
The little Purple Monarch of the Field.
Resolved to Obtain.
DEar, I have suffered much, it is true,
Yet I will suffer more for you;
For what would not a Lover bear,
For one so good, so young, so fair.
Jacob served Sev'n Years Slavery
For one less Beautiful then thee;
And after all his Bondage past,
Leah was his Reward at last:
I twice Sev'n Years will be a Slave,
May I with him my Rachel have,
Often have I born (my Soul) you know
The Thunder of your angry Brow;
And ah! how often you have made me dye,
With the fierce Lightning of your Eye.
'Which like a Porcupine does dart
'A Thousand Shafts from every part.
You often, to augment my pain,
Have looked on me with cold disdain,
Nor would you my Addresses hear.
But bad me languish in despair,
But then you strait unlock't your Charms,
And took my Rival to your Arms,
And this too well you knew would be
Ten Thousand Thousand deaths to me.
If all the wracks which I have born,
If all your disrespect, and scorn,
If all I Have felt be not enough,
To make me yet deserve your love;
Dear Madam, if you can invent
Some greater witty'r punishment;
Command me what you please to do,
All wracks and plagues to undergo,
And I will suffer all for you.
Love above Sense or Reason flies,
Knows no Impossibilities.
Perhaps some dull Fools there may be,
Who could call this mere Tyranny,
Who Natures Salique Law maintain,
And speak against a Woman's Reign,
And ask me how I can endure
To fry thus in Loves Calenture.
Ignorant Fools! they little guess
This is the way to Happiness.
Thus suffering Saints to Heaven come
Through Tortures, Flames and Martyrdom.
And thus that Indian Prince is known
Best to deserve the dear bought Crown,
Who at his Tort'rings flinches least,
And bears his cruel sufferings best:
Thus I at length, in spite of Fate,
And all my Rivals will be great,
And the triumphant Monarch prove
Of the rich Empire of your Love.
Several ELEGIES out of the First and Third Book of Ovid's AMOUR'S Imitated,
and Paraphrased.
ELEGY the 9th, BOOK the 1st.
To ATTICVS: that a Lover and a Soldier ought not be Idle.
BElieve me Friend, all Lovers Soldiers are,
For Cupid has his Tents, and Lovers War.
The self same age is fit for War, and Love,
Youth does the Warrior, and Gallant approve.
The Soldier with the fumbling Lover grows,
When age comes on, alike ridiculous,
The vigorous youth, the strength, and sprightly fire
In a stout Soldier Captains would require,
A Lady does in her Gallant desire:
An equal place of rest to both is found,
Their cold uneasy Bed is on the ground;
Both rise up early, and both sit up late,
Both stand as Sentinels by equal Fate,
This at his Captain's Tent, that at his Ladies Gate.
The Soldier, if his Leader but commands,
With toil does march to the remotest Lands:
And when a Mistress from her Lover's gone,
He Will take his journey for her with the Sun;
Sad and unwearied still he will roam about,
Till he has found his dearest Treasure out.
A Lover, like Hannibal, will cut his way
Through Mountains, Alps of Snow, and deepest Sea,
Tho storms of Rain, and Wind swell up the Waves,
And all the Billows seem so many Graves;
When he a Voyage makes to see his Dear,
He does no Wind, nor Sea, nor Planet fear,
Dauntless he fights through all, tho Billows rage,
Tho Heaven, Sea, Wind against him all engage.
Lovers and Soldiers only with delight
Can bear the Tyranny of piercing night,
And carelessly with pleasure undergo
Fierce storms of Hail, of Thunder, Rain and Snow.
The Soldier slily scouts about to spy
The Wiles, and Projects of the Enemy;
With quick-ey'd jealousy the Lover too
Does still his Rival, as a Foe, pursue:
This lays a Siege before a strong fenced Town,
That armed with Flames, Love's Fireworks, lies down
Before the Threshold of his cruel Fair,
And shoots out wishes, sighs and tears at her.
This makes against City Gates his Canon roar;
With An Engine.
Bettys that assaults his Ladies door.
When a deep Sleep an Army does surprise,
Disarms their Hands, and closes up their Eyes;
It Is thought a Stratagem to stop their breath,
And change its image Sleep, to real Death.
Thus did Ulysses Rhesu's Troops destroy,
He took their Fatal Steeds, and Lives away,
And by this means alone he conquered Troy.
Thus to their sleeping Foes bold Lovers come,
They kill the Cuckold, and supply his room.
The wretched Lover, and the Soldier goes,
Where thickest Troops of dangers do oppose,
Through midnight Watches, strongest Guards they pass,
Through barracado'd Gates, and Walls of Brass.
Venus, and Mars alike uncertain are,
And the Intrigues of Love with those of War;
As conquered Slaves the Victory often regain,
And Conqu'rors fall 'midst all their Pomp and Train;
So the brisk Spark that does at once subdue
His Ladies heart, and injured Rival too;
May be cashiered of all his hopes of Love,
And the disbanded Slave the Favorite prove,
Thus he may rise again in her esteem,
And, in his turn, may triumph over him.
Now he that calls a Lover idle, lies;
He is a man laborious, bold, and wise;
And he that for the War, or Love is fit,
Must be a man of courage, sense, and wit:
Fierce flames of Love scorch't great Achilles Breast,
When of his Mistress he was dispossessed;
He and his courage did to Beauty yield,
It made him leave his Arms, and quit the Field.
Now Trojans to the Spoil, and Plunder fall,
For Love has foiled Greece in their General.
Hector from his Wives soft Embrace arose,
From thence he went to Combat with his Foes;
Early he left the Pleasures of her Bed,
And her hand placed the Helmet on his head.
Cassandra to Atrides seemed so fair;
Tho in disordered looks, and flowing hair;
That, at her form amazed, he did adore
The wretched Captive he subdued before.
Mars did with Venus melting joys repeat;
When Vulcan closed 'em in his curious Net;
All Heaven saw them in amorous Folds embrace,
And every God, and Goddess wished their place.
Nature did by my make seem to express,
That I was born to sloth, and idleness;
Cool shades, and Beds of Down could only please,
I lived debaucht in luxury and ease;
Till body, courage, strength, and all began,
To soften, and degenerate from man;
A beauteous Girl spurred up my lazy mind,
And loves brisk flame my drossy Soul refined.
Love gave command, forthwith I did obey;
The sweet of bliss, and pleasure were the pay,
Which made me fight in Loves Tents night, and day.
Hence I was taught to watch, and labor too,
Love made me bravely fight, and boldly woo.
At Loves command through midnight broils I strove.
The man that wants employment, let him love.
Book the First, ELEGY Tenth.
To a Girl dehorting her from asking Money for her Love.
ONce I confess I doated on that face,
And thought you fair as ever Helen was,
Whom Paris in his Trojan Navy brought
With the rich prize of all her Beauties fraught,
Whose sparkling Eyes did rival flames inspire,
Made Nations War, and set all Troy on fire:
Or Leda fair; to whom the Thund'rer came,
And in a Swan's soft Feathers hid his flame,
Whom he did cozen in a borrowed shape,
And in feigned innocence did steal a Rape.
Strong jealous fears did then torment my Breast,
And my suspicions with my love encreast.
Then every Bull, and Eagle I did see,
I fondly thought 'twas sent from Heaven for thee;
And all those shapes I feared, that amorous Jove
Was ever Metamorphos'd to by love.
But now those fears are vanished all away,
And all my former flames of Love decay;
Nor can that Face, which once did charm me so,
Delight my wondering eyes with pleasure now.
If you ask, why I Am changed, it is quickly known,
It is because you're Mercenary grown;
And this sole cause does raise my hatred more,
Then all thy charms could do my love before.
While thy unbiast mind was simply true,
I loved thy very Soul, and Body too:
But since thy Soul's debaucht, methinks I find
Thy Body grow deformed like thy Mind.
Cupid's a naked Boy, and scorns the vice
Of sordid Gain, and griping Avarice,
An old man's dear beloved Paradise.
He wears no garment, intimating by it
Love should be open, and without deceit.
Why do you thus the God of Love profane?
And make him turn a Prostitute for Gain?
What should he do with Gold? he is all undrest,
And cannot treasure't in his naked.
The Common-Whore for Gain does beat the Streets,
And strikes a Bargain with the next she meets;
She wearies Nature, rambles up and down,
For the poor recompense of Half-a-Crown:
Yet she too curses the imperious Bawd,
Who Avarice still makes her ply the Trade;
And what the Bawds command compels her to,
You of your own accord ignobly do.
Let Beast themselves your great example be,
Learn from unthinking Brutes Civility;
'Twill be a base, a shameful thing to find
The Beasts more generous than Womankind.
The Mare from the brave Horse no gift receives,
But all the Charms of Love she frankly gives;
The Heifer asks no Present, but does court
The Bull with amorous Lowings to the sport;
Nor does the Ram the gentle Ewe decoy
With rich alluring Presents to the joy:
Base Woman triumphs in the spoils alone,
And Trophies of the Men she has undone;
It Is she, and she alone does Gold require,
That sells Delight, and sets her self to hire;
She vends those pleasures which both jointly crave,
Those melting joys that either long to have;
And as she does the amorous Fight renew,
She has the pleasure, and the profit too.
Since the bliss does to both 'like charming prove;
And flows to both in equal Tides of Love,
Tell me (cursed Gilt) the reason? Tell me why,
One should the pleasure sell, another buy?
Why should the luscious Sweets of Venus be
To you a profit, and a loss to me?
For if you in fierce bounds give up the joy,
I push my love on and meet yours half way.
How impious is that Mercenary 'Squire.
That trades in Perjury and swears for hire?
Or the corrupted Judge, whose slavish mind
Is to the itch of Bribery inclined;
How base that Counselor, whose purchased breath
Rescues a Traitor, or a Thief from death?
Who from the Custom of the Judgment Seat,
Rises from nothing to a vast Estate,
And prostitutes his Conscience to be great.
Your crime's as great, who, by mere interest led,
Increase your Portion from the Gilting trade,
And the Revenues of an Harlots Bed,
Who sell each look (by powerful Guine'a swaid)
While your own beauties Bawds to your lusts are made.
Out of mere Gratitude our thanks are due
For Favors freely we receive from you;
But when by hire, or sale you're made my own,
Pray tell me where is the Obligation?
Who hires his Wench pays down his Cash, and he
Even from the least return of thanks is free
For her damned kindness, and Civility.
For shame leave of ye charming, beauteous train,
To bargain for Nights Joys for cursed Gain;
No good Event such Riches can attend,
They make ye but more wretched in the end.
Great were the Sabins Bribes, yet not so great
Tarpy for them should purchase her own Fate,
Or that she from their weighty Arms should have
At once her certain Murder, and her Grave.
Alcmaeon ripped up his own Mother's Womb,
Those Bowels from which he himself did come;
Because that she her Husband did betray,
And for a Necklace gave his Life away.
Yet Gold from rich Gallants you may require;
His Gold can purchase what you can desire.
From Vineyards gather Grapes, where on each Vine
Thick clust'ring Bunches hang, swol'n big with Wine;
Alcinou's Orchards Apples can bestow,
Where tempting Fruit hangs on each laboring Bough.
A poor man pay attendance, service, faith,
Each Lover gives his Mistress all he has.
My Talent is gloriously to rehearse
The kind deserving Ladies in my Verse;
Whom e're I please, by my great Art shall be
Sung like my Verse to all Eternity.
Those Rings, this dress, those gems that shine so gay,
Will crumble into Dust and fade away;
But that never dying Fame, the Muses give,
Shall be immortal, and for ever live.
Nor do I grudge to give; but I abhor
A Wench that asks me like a Common-Whore.
Cease but those impudent demands, and I
Will give you, what I did before deny.
ELEGY the 11th Book the First.
To the Waiting-Maid, that she would convey his Letter to his Mistress.
KInd Jinny, who art exquisitely read
In the soft arts to dress thy Lady's head;
Too good, and too obliging, and too fair
The servile name of Waiting-Maid to bear,
Obsequious, known to all my gay delight,
And useful to the stolen joys of Night;
Who often by signs do wittily impart
The wanton wishes of your Ladies heart:
Thou who do often kind advice bestow,
And tempts Corinna to me when she is slow;
Who still to me do true, and faithful prove,
When my Breast travels with fierce pangs of Love:
Here, here, take this, fly swift as thought away,
And to my Mistress these soft Lines convey,
With care prevent the dangers of delay.
In your kind Breast no Flint, nor Iron grows,
That gentle Land with Milk and Honey flows;
More simple truth, and faith is found in thee,
Then anyone of your mean quality,
I Have reason to believe your tender heart
Has felt the wound of Love's tyrannick Dart:
For you defend Love's Standard; which I bear,
Those Royal Ensigns, under which you war.
If she ask, how I do, this answer give,
'Say, I in hopes of one Nights Blessing live:
Tell her but this, my Letter speaks the rest,
My flame is there in dying words expressed.
But whilst I speak, deceiving time posts on,
Go bear this to my Mistress, fly, be gone:
Time well your message, give it her, when she
Is from disturbing thoughts of business free.
But see she read it strait, that she may know,
What tortures I in absence undergo:
But as she reads, I charge you, all the while,
Observe each amorous glance, each frown and smile;
From bright, or lowering Aspects you may guess
My future ills, or future happiness:
Desire her, when she has read it over, to send
A speedy answer to her dying Friend:
Let it be thronged with words, I hate to see
A Letter naught but space, and vacancy:
Let it detain my Eyes with pleasure still,
Where crowded Lines the utmost Margin fill.
Yet it is superfluous, what need is there,
With toils of writing much to weary her;
Let but in all the Letters spacious room
Be only written this kind answer: COME.
Forthwith I will, when the glad Conquest's won,
Deck it with a triumphant Laurel Crown:
And then I Will place this Relic, so divine,
In mighty Venus's most sacred Shrine;
And for its service done, besides the wreath,
It shall contain this Motto underneath.
Naso this Letter to his Flame so true,
Kind Venus, humbly dedicates to You.
What tho it lately from the Dunghill came,
Thus honored now, it may Devotion claim.
ELEGY the 6th, BOOK the First.
To the Porter.
KInd Porter, who unworthily do bear
Those servile Chains that meanest Vassals wear,
Open this Gate, and kindly thus remove
All difficulties that oppose my love.
If you grant what I ask, I Am, ever blessed,
And mine is a small and reasonable request:
Let but the Gate so small an entrance give,
As may my body side-ways just receive:
Long cares have gnawed me quite to Skin and Bone,
My Love has made me a mere Skeleton;
For such intregues my Limbs are made so thin.
I almost like a Sp'rit can enter in.
Love is my guard and conduct through the Street,
He picks my way and safely guides my feet;
Experienced Love instruct's me too, how I
May through the Midnight Watch my self convey:
But Whimsies formerly did me affright,
I wondered men could ramble in the Night:
For Fabu'lous Ghosts I feared, that foolish train
Of Phantomes, riseing from man's sickly brain.
When Love knew this, he smiled, and gently said,
No more shall cow'rdly fears thy breast invade,
Thy valor with thy love shall be encreast,
And thou shall be with dauntless courage blessed:
Love entered strait, and put base fear to flight,
No more I dread pale Ghosts that fly by night;
Nor the assaults of a lewd murdering Lord,
Nor cow'rdly stabs of blustering Bully's Sword:
It Is you I fear, who too too slow do prove,
Ah! too, too slow for my impatient love:
To thee alone I stoop, I sue to thee,
Thou have the Thunder, that can murder me!
Open for Pity's sake this cruel Gate,
And see how with my tears it is all made wet.
When you, for your offense, the other day
Naked before the lash, and trembling lay,
I to your Lady earnestly did sue,
And did prevail with her to pardon you;
But all those gentle words, which not long since
Did plead so strongly out in your defense,
Alas! woe's me! are useless now and vain,
For me they cannot the least favor gain:
My kindness with a kindness then repay,
Your wish is to be grateful, and you may;
Unlock the Gate, my love brooks no delay;
Unlock the Gate, night swiftly posts away:
So may thou from those Chains be ever free,
Drink Wine and taste the Sweets of Liberty.
Hard-hearted cruel slave, thou do not hear,
All my soft Prayers rebound from thy deaf Ear;
Thy Gates too with vast Oaks supported are,
And strongly barred, as though you dreaded War.
When Citys are besieged with Arms and men,
Strong Barracado's Gates are useful then;
In calmes of Peace why do thou vainly fear
Fierce storms of War, and clashing Armies near?
How would thou treat an Enemy, when thou
Shut'st out thy Friend, and Lady's Lover too?
Unlock the Gate, my love brooks no delay;
Unlock the Gate, night swiftly posts away:
I come not with armed Troops of Foot and Horse
To storm these Walls, and make you yield by force.
If from my Breast these raging Flames were gone,
Was Love not with me, I should be alone;
And if I would, from Love I cannot part,
For that is fixed, and grows up with my heart:
Though you this Body Limb from Limb should tear,
And stab this Heart, yet Love would still be there;
Then Love's with me, and Wine, that upward flies
With moderate fumes, which still new love supplies;
And a neat Garland with fresh Roses made,
Which lately fell from mine anointed head:
What man is there, would be a fraid to meet
These lovely Arms, so innocent and sweet.
Unlock the Gate, my love brooks no delay;
Unlock the Gate, night swiftly posts away.
Art thou thus slow, is it unkind delay,
That takes my hopes of love and life away?
Or does Sleep beat my words back from thine Ear,
And make 'em vanish in the fleeting Air?
Once I remember, when in shades of Night
I strove to hide me from thy hated sight,
Then (with a Pox) you watch't with pimping Eyes,
Till Midnight Stars did spangle over the Skies.
But yet perhaps you may be faultless too,
Perhaps your Mistress is in Bed with you,
And you glut on Love's Sweets; if so alas!
How far does your blessed fortune mine surpass.
I Will be a Porter, Skullion, Groom, or Slave,
And wear thy Chains, let me thy Blessings have:
Unlock the Gate, my love brooks no delay,
Unlock the Gate, Night swiftly posts away.
Hark; -- I Am deceived, or else I heard the sound
Of the Gates Hinges softly turning round;
With a hoarse noise the Gate sure gave the sign
For me and welcome Love to enter in:
Curse on my Fate; -- I am deceived I find,
'Twas only shaken by strong blasts of Wind;
Woe's me! that Wind does all my hopes betray,
And ah! how far 't has born those hopes away?
The City's hush't, dead silence seizes all,
And Pearls of Dew in gentle moistures fall:
The Watchmen sleep, and no one now can see
The desperate attempts designed by me.
Unlock the Gate, my love brooks no delay,
Unlock the Gate, Night swiftly posts away.
Unlock it, or by Heavens I Will make you know,
What a chaf't injured Lover dares to do;
I now more dreadful, and more powerful grown
Then fire and Sword will burn these proud walls down;
I in the house will make this Flambeux fly,
By Jove the House shall burn as well as I.
Love and brisk Wine, encouraged by the Night,
To all Extravagancies now invite;
For as those banish fear, so night does shame,
By Jove I Will enter now with Sword and Flame:
Ah! Threats and Prayers alike successless prove,
In thee they can nor fear nor pity move;
For thou still cruel and relentless art,
Thy Gate is less obdurate then thy heart:
Thou art unworthy of the noble Fate,
To stand before a beauteous Ladies Gate:
Surely a slave, so base, and so unkind,
Was for the Turn-Key of some Goal designed.
See, now bright Lucifer adorns the Skies,
The Cocks they crow, and bid poor Mortals rise,
And call, them to their daily drudgeries.
Then thou gay Crown, pulled from my pensive head,
Be thou all night on my Dears Threshold laid;
When in the morning she shall see thee thrown
Before her Gate, and all thy Beauties gone.
To her thou will it a silent witness prove
Of time ill spent, in vain persuit of Love.
Now, Porter, Fare-thee-well, such as thou art,
Yet hear the love I bear thee e're I part;
Though thou admitt'st me not, I love thee still,
Base as thou art, I must bid thee Farewell;
And Farewell Gate, thou Author of my woe,
Ah! Farewell cruel Gate, and Porter too.
ELEGY the 3d, BOOK the First.
To his Mistress.
YE Powers, my Prayer both just and equal is,
And cruel Love can never deny me this.
Grant that my Mistress, whose bright conquering Eye
Late brought my Soul into Captivity,
May ever love me, or that I my taste
Joys that may make my love for ever last.
Ah me! too much I Have ask't by praying thus,
My wisht-for Blessing's turned into a Curse,
Love cruelly at last my Prayers has heard,
And plagued me with a happiness I feared:
For she requites my passion with disdain,
I love and love, but am not loved again,
Accept me, Madam, Vassalage I crave,
I beg the liberty to be your Slave;
Accept your faithful Slave, whose constant flame
Shall ever last, and ever be the same,
One that will ever serve you, one whose Breast
Is all with love and generous faith possess't.
If my Birth, which I from a Knight derive,
Or Blood which from his Veins I did receive,
Or Ancestors (who I confess never were
Allied to Duke, Prince, King or Emperor;
If neither my endowments, or Estate
(Which is sufficient though it be not great)
Or if my virtuous Parents frugal care,
And temperance (which provide for me their Heir.
If all these cannot so inviting prove,
As to make me seem worthy of thy love;
Yet Wit and Wine (the Gods that I adore)
The Muses, and a Thousand causes more,
Almighty love, which keeps me still your Slave,
The Virtue, Honor, and the Faith I have,
My God-like Manners, and my naked Truth,
My Modesty, and inoffensive Youth;
All these conspire, and jointly all agree
To make me dare to say I Am worthy thee.
You (Madam) you shall be my care alone,
I never change, I never love but one.
I will (if there be Faith in Man) prove true
And I will ever love, and only you.
May I for those few years the Fates shall give
With thee (my Dearest) though in torments live,
And may those cares kill me that make thee greive.
Let but my Muse your wondrous Praise rehearse,
And you shall shine more glorious in my Verse;
Inspired by your great Name, I shall produce
Wit worthy you and worthy such a Muse.
By my Verse Io is immortal made,
Her everlasting Fame can never fade;
Nor can the fair Europa mortal prove,
She Is Canhoniz'd by Poetry and Love;
Nor shall our Names thus celebrated dye,
But on Fame's Wings they shall for ever fly,
The World our Praises shall together join
And yours shall spread abroad as far as mine.
ELEGY the 7th, BOOK the 1st.
To Pacify his Mistress whom in his Passion he had beaten.
WHat have I done? if any Friend be nigh,
Let him be kind, and show his cruelty:
Bind, bind these hands (they have deserved the Chain,)
Before the Fit of Madness come again.
With headlong Fury drunk, these Arms I moved
Against the only Mistress that I loved.
Wounded by me, my Dearest grieves, and sighs,
And weeps with Tears as fair as others Eyes.
But when they did in a Fanatic rage
My Royal Mistress cowardly engage;
They then would have rip't their Mother's Womb,
Cut their own Father's Throat, and robbed his Tomb;
Or wrested Thunder from Jove's vanquished hand,
And Gods themselves with impious blows profaned.
But did not Ajax, Lord o'fh' Sevenfold shield,
With a distractive rage, and madness filled,
Chase trembling Flocks, for Trojans, over the Plain,
Groaning beneath the burden of the slain?
And did not mad Orestes do yet more,
Staining his hands in his own Mothers gore?
Did he not murder her that gave him breath,
Barb'rously to revenge his Fathers death?
Did he not challenge Hell, and boldly call
For Arms to sight the Furies, Devilish, and all?
I followed where these damned Examples went,
Ruffi'us and Madmen were my president.
For my bright Mistress braided Locks I tore,
Yet still she looked as lovely as before.
The beauteous Atalanta looked like you
When she in Maenalus did Beasts pursue,
And caught the droves of men that came to view.
Aria'dnes Hair was all disheveled so,
When she beheld her perjured Theseus go;
She wep't and called aloud to make him stay,
"The Wind bore him and her soft words away.
Like you the fair Cassandra did appear,
But that a sacred Fillet bound her hair;
Yet such strong charms from her sweet face did rove,
As struck the surley Ajax mad with love;
He in the Temple seized her as his prize,
And offered there a wanton Sacrifice.
Who has not called me Turk, Barbarian, Jew?
For these I did in cruelty outdo.
Yet she did no opprobious word express,
Fear fettered up her Tongue, and made it cease;
But yet her looks her angry Soul betrayed,
There I a Thousand Murderers might read;
And all those silent showers of Tears she spilt,
Spoke loudly my rough cruelty and guilt.
Would God these Arms had dropped off, e're they would bin
Guilty of such a base, unmanly Sin.
With less concern I any Limb could spare,
And would I had e're I had wronged my Dear.
Why is my cursed Strength a plague to me?
Dearest, I wound my self in wounding thee.
Ye bloody Executioners, be gone;
I Have no more barbarous Murders to be done.
Go Sacrilegious Hands in Chains, it is just
The Irons gauld, and eat you off with rust.
Cursed Arms! they dare not strike the meanest Slave;
Shall they more priv'ledge over my Mistress have?
The cruel, damned Tydides left behind
The worst Examples of an hellish mind;
He smote a Goddess, and I wounded you
A fairer Goddess, and a greater too:
But he is much more innocent then I
I far surpass him in impiety;
For he against a Foe did cruel prove,
But I to whom I vowed eternal love.
Go, mighty Conqueror, in Triumph go,
Prepare the Royal Pomp, and Solemn Show,
Put on your Laurel Crown, and let it spread
In branching Honor round your sacred head,
Let Clouds of Incense from your Altars rise,
Pay Jove, for your success, his Sacrifice,
Let shoals of people round your Chariot crowd,
All roaring out your mighty Triumph loud,
Let it with boasting shouts of joy be said,
Lo this brave Hero did subdue a Maid.
First let your Captive go in flowing hair,
But for her battered Cheeks, all over fair,
'Twas fitter sure, and 't had bin kinder far,
Had I in amorous conflicts wounded her,
Or bruised her balmy Lips in height of bliss,
With the impression of a furious Kiss,
Or had my Teeth such kind impressions made
Upon her Neck, I there my love my read,
But yet, though raging Tempests shook my Breast,
Hurrying me on like Streams by Floods encreast,
And though blind Passion did my reason sway,
And made my Soul, and all its powers its prey;
Sure 'twas enough to chide my trembling Dear,
To thunder out my Oaths, and threats at her,
And thus ingloriously to tear her Gown,
And all those sacred Robes that she had on.
All this I did, all this -- and ten times more,
Her precious Hair, those threads of Gold, I tore,
And with my Nails plowed up her beauteous Face,
My Fingers have profaned that sacred place.
Yet she stood fixed, pale as a Marble Stone,
Or some sad Statue Carvers make to moan,
Which over a Tomb stands weeping for the dead,
Speaking its Grief in Tears it seems to shed.
Her Blood flew from her Face to guard her Heart,
Short death, and tremblings ran over every part;
So a soft gentle Western Wind does make
With numerous motions, Aspin Leaves to quake;
So shake the Reeds, fan'd by a breeze of Air,
The Reeds that seem to shake for very fear;
So tremble Rivers, on whose curling brow
With gentle gales the South-Winds softly blow.
Her Tears long doubting, where to fall or no,
At last did down her Cheeks so gently flow,
You Would swear 'twas water dropped from melting Snow,
Then first my conscience checked me for my sin,
Sighs issuing out told sorrow was within.
The Floods of Tears, that over her visage streamed,
Drops of my Blood, or something dearer seemed.
Thrice did I offer at her Feet to lie,
And there become her humble Votary,
Thrice held I up my folded hands to pray,
And thrice she put those dreadful hands away.
Dearest come on armed with revengeful rage,
That will your sufferings and your grief assuage,
Come harrow with your Nails this Face, and tear
Each hated Limb of mine, and every hair;
Make every Member your just Sacrifice,
Tear out each Eye; for if it might suffice
"I Would weep my blood for tears, from wounds, for eyes.
Let Passion raise your courage, Passion can
Give you, tho weak, the vigorous strength of man.
But least these tokens of my Crimes remain,
For Heavens sake go dress your Head again.
BOOK the First, ELEGY 13th.
To the Morning that she would not rise to soon.
AVrora now, with Rosy blushes red,
Lifting above the Eastern waves her head,
'Rose from the beauteous Morning's Purple Bed.
Stay gentle Morn, said I, your hasty flight,
You Would be more beautiful were you less bright;
Stay, gentle Morning, stay, so may you see
On every year that winged Progeny,
Which Phoenix-like from Memnon's ashes came,
Taking new life from his last Funeral flame,
With solemn Rites of blood and slaughter come,
And pay their Sacrifices at his Tomb.
Stay, gentle Morn, if you would have me blessed;
See now my Mistress huggs me to her Breast,
Struggling with joys that cannot be expressed.
And if Corinna ever did bestow.
A Blessing on me, certainly it is now.
See, lazy Sleep sits heavy on our Eyes,
The Air is cold and we are loath to rise;
The little Birds a pretty warbling keep,
And court us with soft harmony to sleep.
Curb in the winged hours, with all your might,
Nor plague the world with your officious light.
When you with your unwelcome rays appear,
Youths blush with shame, and Maids grow chaste for fear.
Why do you hurry thus your Chariot on?
Ah, gentle Morning, for Love's sake be gone.
Before you dawn the Mariner can stand,
And by the Pole Star better far command,
His certain Voyage to the wish't-for Land,
By this he steers his steady course, though he
Floats in the midst of all the boundless Sea.
When you with light embroyder over the Skies,
The weary Traveller begins to rise,
Though every limb and bone be sore,
With the long journey of the day besore.
The Country Hind now flys his dear repast,
Yokes his slow Oxen, and to the Plow does have.
And School Boys scarce awake yet rise to feel
The cruel lash of Busby or of Gill.
The spark just drawn in the Matrimonial noose,
Who to his loss for his Wives Portion sues,
Rises up early from her sweet Embrace,
To fee his Counselor to know his case,
Or that he may untangle some damned flaw,
Some Quibble, Querk, or some nice point of Law,
By break of day, when you peep from the East,
The Counselor is knocked up from his rest.
The Lawyer too, to Westminster must trudge,
To bawl out some new Cause before the Judge.
Thus you to both are more disturbing far,
Then all their restless tides of Clients are.
The watchful Huswife rises up with you,
And she, with thine, her labors does renew;
She sings to pass the time away, the while,
She draws a thread as endless as her toil;
Yet all these pains, and ten times greater too,
I could with ease and pleasure undergo.
But Gods! to rise thus from my dearest Dear,
What Stoic, what dull man, on earth can bear!
None sure but he, whom Heaven never did bless
With such a Paradise of Happiness
Often have I wished (but now I see 'twas vain)
Cynthia might over you a Conquest gain.
That she, with all her gaudy Troops of Light,
Might chase thee to the Negro Womb of night;
Or some great Tempest, might your Chariot shake,
And all its Golden Wheels in pieces break,
Or stuck in some deep Bog your Steeds might stay,
Or in some misty Cloud might loose their way.
Cursed Morning stay, nor with thy envious Face
Frighten me from my Mistress's soft Embrace.
I guess from thy Son's Ethiopian Skin,
Thy poisoned Heart is blacker far within.
There envy big with mischiefs brooding lies,
And numerous plagues to all the world conveys,
Had no adult'rous flames scorcht up your breast,
When by your Cephalus it was possessed;
Yet your wise Goddess-ship can never hide
Your Thousand amorous Intregues beside.
I would to Heaven, for my revenge that I
Might to old Tython, all your faults descry:
No Punk that gained Heaven by debauchery,
No Whetstone Whore in Sweating-Tub should be
So base, so vile, so loathed a thing as thee.
Thou fly'st his dry Trunk, sapless grown with age,
Unfit in amorous conflicts to engage;
And, as thou envy'dst us our blessed design,
Do early in malicious glory shine;
Should you enjoy your Gallants melting charms,
Whilst he lay panting in your wanton Arms,
Then would you cry, kind Stars, glide gently on,
And then you would wish that night might never be done.
Why should I suffer plagues and punishment,
Because your Fumbler is grown impotent?
Did I procurer turn, or did I spread
Baits to decoy you, to his loathsome Bed?
See, how the Queen of Night does kindly steep
Her loved Endymion's Eyes in dewy sleep;
Glorious as you, she shines in her bright Sphere,
When dazzling in full Orb of Beauty there;
Even Jove himself Father of Gods above,
When he would take a full swinge of his love,
Commanded two Nights into one to join,
'Cause he so often would not see thee shine
With that damned painted Harlot's Face of thine.
My railing done, I soon perceived she heard,
For glowing blushes on her Cheeks appeared,
Yet still she posted with swift have away,
And at her usual time called forth the day.
BOOK the 3d. ELEGY the 3d.
Of his Mistress that had perjured her self.
ARE there then Gods? Gods! I Will believed no more,
She Is perjured, yet as beauteous as before.
Her shining locks are still as long, and fair,
Since she has shamm'd the Gods, as e're they were.
On her white Cheeks, were blushing colors spread,
Like Lillies died with Rosy streakes of Red;
And all those colors, which her Cheeks did grace,
Still shine in their old luster in her face:
Her little Foot was neat, and cleanly made,
It has exactly the same shape it had;
Her slender Wast was comely to the view,
It Is still as slender, and as comely too.
She had sparkling Eyes, whose every glance could kill,
Like two bright Stars; her fair Eyes glitter still,
By which the perjured, false perfidious she,
Has often sworn Ten Thousand lies to me.
Beauty commands the Gods, and Heaven allows
Women to lie, swear false, and break their vows.
Lately she swore by her bright Eyes, and mine,
And mine were tortured strait with shooting pain.
Say, unjust Gods, was it not enough that she,
Has called your Powers, to vouch her Perjury,
And yet unpunish't has escaped, and free?
But ye must make me too (though innocent)
For her black crimes to suffer punishment?
Is It not suffic'ent that she drew you in
To be but bare Spectators of her sin,
And by no Lightning blasted, laughs to see
How she has bubled both the Gods and me?
But injured I her guilt must undergo,
And suffer by her crime, and for it too?
Tell me, ye Gods, when she has done the wrong,
How can the punishment to me belong?
Or Gods mere empty Names and Fantoms are,
Whom abject dastard Spirits vainly fear;
Who the gross vulgar easily do move
With rash belief of unseen Powers above;
Or if a God there be, his Godhead sure
Doats on fair Nymphs, and giv's them too much power:
Men are exposed to all the Bolts of War,
To Mars his Fatal Sword, and Pallas Spear,
Against us Apollo's threatening Bow is bent,
On us the Thunder from Jove's hand is sent.
But the Gods dread fair Females, they never durst
Displease that Sex, although they are injured first;
With awful fear they worship, though they,
Dauntlesly both the Gods and Heaven defy.
At woods and groves Jove's Thunderbolts are thrown,
They batter mighty Towers, and Castles down;
But Perjured Women, who Heavens rage provoke,
Still live secure and feel no Thunders stroke.
When many Women's faults did justly call
For Vengeance, Semele alone did fall,
And burnt a wretched Sacrifice for all.
And cruelty was the best thanks that Jove
Returned for all her kindness, and her love.
But why thus against Heaven do I complain?
Reproach the Gods? and impiously profane?
The Gods have sense of love, they too have hearts
That have been pierced by Love's impartial Darts.
Were I my self a God I Would freely give
Fair Ladies power my Godhead to deceive,
Let them swear what they pleased I would believe,
And I would swear whatever they swore was true,
And to clear them I would be perjured too.
Thus I, of all the Gods in Heaven, would be
The kindest, most obliging deity.
Yet, happy Maid, fair favorite of Heaven,
More gently use that power the Gods have given,
Nor swear more by mine Eyes ah! be more kind,
Least when you swear again you strike me blind.
Book the 3d, ELEGY the 11th.
The Poet grieves that his Mistress grew so noted by his Verses, that he
procured himself many Rivals.
WHat day of all my life, what hour was there,
In which some winged ill Omens of the Air
Did not with hideous croaks, and chatt'rings prove,
The sad events of my successless love?
Against what adverse Gods shall I complain,
Against what Planets inauspicious reign?
Corinna, who but now was all mine own,
Whom I at first did love, and I alone,
Will be the common Mistress of the Town.
Was she not by my Verse thus famous made?
By me encouraged she sets up the trade:
And rightly served -- for I the Hawker was,
That cried about the Beauties of her Face:
I was her Pandar, gave her Sparks a view;
Opened her doors, and introduced 'em too.
By me she first was to the world disclosed,
And by my folly was to Sale exposed.
What good I Have reap't from Verse I cannot tell,
But that 't has injured me I know too well.
My Rivals it procured, and to my cost
By Verse my property in her I lost.
When Troy's, when Theban Wars, and Caesar's fame,
The just assistance of my Pen did claim,
Corinna's Praise, her Name alone did shine
Like a bright Gem in every Page of mine.
Would God! Apollo, when those Lines I made,
And every Muse had then denied their aid!
Would my dull resty Muse had jaded been,
And left unfinish't what she did begin.
The world to Poets never did credit give,
There Is no one our mad Fictions will believe;
And I could wish my Rivals might be brought
To disbelieve those hated truths I wrote.
Of Cerberus, and his three Heads we tell,
And make him Porter to the Gates of Hell,
And all his Body over, instead of hair,
A monst'rous Coat of curling Serpents wear;
A Thousand Arms we give Enceladon,
And make an Army up of him alone,
Against all Heaven we boldly make him dare,
And Hosts of thundering Gods maintain a War;
Of Niobe we sing, who, whilst she mourned,
By grief was to a Marble Statute turned,
Which sweating still with tears seems to relent,
And thus we make her her own Monument;
Of Bulls we write, from whose sierce Nostrils came
Torrents of sire, and rapid streams of flame;
Of Orpheus too, why by his Mystic Song
Made Woods to follow and Stones dance along.
These, and whole Millions of Romantic Lies,
Of Monsters, and Impossibilities,
Of Metamorphos'd forms, and prodigies,
The fruitful License of a Poets wit,
Daily brings forth, and still does new beget.
No man's obliged to credit us at all,
His Faith needs not be here Historical:
Nor should you think her Praises more to be
Then wild fantastic tales devised by me,
I Am ruined now by your credulity.
ELEGY the 7th, BOOK the 3d.
The Poet greives that he is rejected by his Mistress.
WILL any Fop yet wed the liberal arts,
Or vainly set up for an Ass of Parts?
Or think a gifted excellence, to be
In the smooth strokes of ravishing Poetry?
Wit above Gold was valued heretofore,
But now he is ignorant alone, that is poor:
When she reads over my Poems with delight,
Kindly applauds each line, each word I write;
Though my more happy Verses please her so,
Where they are embraced, the Author dares not go:
Thus I whom she applauded so before,
Am shut out from her, or kicked out of door;
And though confessed a Wit, to her disgrace,
With love distracted rave from place to place.
A wealthy up-start Ruffian, who of late,
By cutting Throats, has purchased an Estate,
Is thought my better; 'cause'ith Field he stood,
And Knighthood gained by sucking guiltless Blood:
Then can you (foolish Woman) without fear,
Embrace this Honorable Murderer?
Can you to him yield up your melting Charms,
Or wanton all Night in his dreadful Arms?
I Would have you know that once this Head of mine,
Did gayly with a crested Helmet shine;
And this Thigh (which in Love's wars serves you now)
Was armed with a Fatal Weapon too;
His left hand (which a Worn by Romat Knights.
Ring did late adorn,
And ill becomes him now, a Shield has born;
His right too, has been cruelly smeared over
With impious stains of dead men's clotted gore.
And can you touch that hand, so often imbrued
In gaping wounds, and murdered wretches blood.
Where Is now the softness on your Soul impressed,
The tenderness that reigns in Woman's Breast?
View, in his mangled Face, dishonest Scars,
The servile Monuments of former Wars;
A Plundering Soldier he of Fortune was,
And gained by hacks and wounds whatever he has:
Perhaps himself will boast of those he has killed,
How often he has stabbed, and how much blood he has spilled.
And can you touch those hands in hopes of Pelf,
Without the fear of being stabbed your self?
Even I, the Muses and Apollo's Priest,
With sacred Wit, and Innocence blessed,
In vain Love-Verses sing before your Gate,
Since, cruel Mistress, you are as deaf as that.
Young men if you are wise be ruled by me,
Learn not our fruitless Arts of Poetry:
But to the skill in Arms and Wars attain,
Go Reformado's in the next Campaign,
Instead of rhimeing well, get to be made
Captains, or Colonels, and fierce Armies lead:
With gaudy Plumes, and Scarfs before 'em stand,
Thus you may Troops of Ladies too command.
Jove advertised us, and by Heaven we are told,
Nothing can be more powerful then Gold;
Himself turned to a bribe, the guards disarms,
And Danae yields now to his potent Charms:
E're he descended in this precious shower,
She was immured within a Brazen Tower;
Her Father did inexorable prove,
And she her self withstood the Siege of Love:
But when wise Jove, taught by Love's chymick art,
Into bright Gold his Godhead did convert,
She kindly in her Bosom did receive
The welcome Present, and consent did give:
She could not this Almighty shower withstand,
But by her Fathers, Heavens, and Golds command,
She yields the virgin-fort up to the conquerors hand.
But when old Saturn did Heavens Scepter sway,
Deep in Earths darksome Womb all Metals lay;
Then Silver, Iron, bewitching Gold, and Brass,
And every Mine in Hell's rich Kingdoms was:
No Bullion yet was found, 'till Man did sell
His Peace for Gold, and fetched it even from Hell:
On every Oak distilling sweets were found,
And every Leaf dropped Honey on the ground;
The Trees unprun'd then better Fruits did bear,
And earth brought forth without the Plow-man's care,
No Spot of ground as yet was hedged about,
Nor men's Estates by piece meal parcell'd out;
No Ditch was cut no Landmark Stones were laid,
But all the world was one vast Common made.
No Oar yet clave the Sea, no Ship did sweep
The yielding Waters of the troubled deep.
On shore (his utmost Voyage) man did stand,
And was contented to be safe at Land.
Thy subtle Nature (wretched man) has still
Been too ingenious to contrive thine ill.
Why do thou time and riches lavish out,
To fence thy Towns with Walls, and Towers about?
What need'st thou Broils create, or Wars increase,
When thou may live in safety and in peace?
Or new-sought dangers on the Sea explore?
Thou ought to be contented with the shore.
Why do thou not of Jove his Heaven require,
To fill the boundless gulf of thy desire!
Should thy Ambition urge thee to obtain
These Heavenly Kingdoms too, 'twould be in vain;
For Caesar, Bacchus, and great Hercules
Those sacred Quires in Triumph now possess.
We dig deep Mines, and vex Earth's Womb for store;
Instead of Fruits we seek for cursed Ore.
The Soldier now long-sought-for Riches gains
With the dear Blood that issues from his Veins:
For he that is poor can no admittance get
At Guild Hall, or at, Counsel-board to set:
The wealthy fools are in all places thrust
Of credit, honor, profit, and of trust;
Hence a dull Alderman that cannot write
Is chosen Burgess, and is dubbed a Knight:
Vile Canters of the Law are Judges made.
In reverent Folly, and in Ermin clad.
The Laws and Soldiery their power confess,
The worlds their Slave, and they all things possess,
They are the Engines both of War, and Peace.
Heaven grant that they may not so greedy prove
As to engross the profit of my love
Let them permission give to one that is poor
TO enjoy his Mistress, and I ask no more.
But now though she untractable appear,
And difficult as Sabine Matrons were;
Yet a rich Lover shall admittance have,
And rule her like his Captive, or a Slave.
Her Keeper thwarts my Love, she too does fear
Her Husband will surprise us when I Am there.
If I bring Cash those Bugbear tricks are done,
The necessary Rascals both are gone,
My way is clear, the house is all mine own.
If any God neglected Lovers hears,
That dares revenge their wrong, and grant their prayers;
O may he her ill-gotten wealth destroy,
And may she never one Guinea's use enjoy;
May it, like Gold enchanted, just appear,
But vanish at the touch away from her.
ELEGY the Fifteenth, BOOK the First Imitated.
To detracting Censurers, that the Fame of Poets is Eternal.
Ill-natured Censurer desist for shame
With thy malicious Tongue to stab my Fame
How durst thou think I live dissolved in ease
Or call brave Verse the effects of Idleness?
Or why do thou object with feeble hate,
I from my Ancestors degenerate?
That I, (unlike them armed with warlike rage)
Whilst in full strength and flower of my age,
Do not in blood and dust my foes engage?
Or that I plead not at the wrangling Bar,
And out-bawl W -- ton at Westminster?
And to gain Gold, damnation, and renown,
Turn a mere Prostitute to all the Town;
With Mercenary breath cant out the Laws,
And take men's Money to betray their Cause?
But all these servile things must with us dye,
The Fame, I seek, shall know Eternity:
My Wit a lasting Monument shall raise,
And all the world shall loudly sing my Praise.
Chaucer shall live, whilst this our British Land,
Or the vast Cornwall-Mount in it shall stand:
Or whilst (almost a Sea it self) the Thames
To The Ocean rowls his tributary Streams.
Sidneys great Name shall last, whilst there are Swains,
That feed their Flocks on the Arcadian Plains;
Each Nymph shall tune his Praises on her Reed,
Whilst Beasts, to hear their Songs, for get to feed:
Ecchoing Groves aloud their joys shall tell,
And praise that Swain that sung their Praise so well.
The Majesty of mighty Cowley's name,
Shall travel through the farthest Coasts of Fame;
His noble works for ever shall impart,
The height of judgment, Nature, Wit, and Art.
Dryden, great King of Verse, shall ever live,
Judicious Dryden shall himself survive:
Whilst in this Town there is a procuring Bawd,
Or a smooth flattering Whore, that plyes the trade,
A wily Servant, cruel Father known,
The Laurel shall the matchless Johnson Crown.
Shake'spear, tho rude, yet his immortal Wit
Shall never to the stroke of time submit,
And the loud thundering flights of lofty Lee;
Shall strike the Ears of all Posterity.
Creeches Sublimest Verse in God-like State,
Shall soar above the reach of humble Fate;
Nor shall he dye 'till the World's mighty Ball
Shall be dissolved, and to a Chaos fall.
Spencer's Heroic Lines no death shall fear,
His Fairy Queen, and Shepherd's Calendar,
Shall be admired, whilst to our new London.
Room
The Vassal Isle to pay their Tribute come.
As long as Flames last, Torches, Bows, and Darts,
(Love's great Artillery to conquer Hearts)
Shall witty Strephon's wanton Verse be read
By many a melting Youth, and yielding Maid.
From East to West Sucklings soft Muse shall run,
Swift as the Light, and glorious as the Sun;
Each Pole shall echo his Eternal Fame,
And the bright Mistress, he vouchsafes to name.
When solid Ir'n shall be eat up with rust,
And Marble Statues crumbl'd into dust,
To Deathless Verse times spite shall do no wrong,
For that must ever last, be ever young.
Kings, and their Triumphs, all the Pomp the boast,
In dark Oblivion would be quickly lost,
Did no blessed Poet the vast loss repair,
Making them Deathless, as his Numbers are.
Tagus to Verse must yield although it rolled
In Floods of Treasure, and a Tide of Gold.
Let the ignoble Rout vile things admire,
Let Love and Poetry my Breast inspire,
Let me Apollo, and the Muses quaff,
In full-charg'd Bowls, Castalian Rivers off:
The sacred Heliconian Streams shall be
A Tagus, and a Ganges both to me;
Our life feeds all the envy we shall have,
With us it sleeps in quiet in the Grave:
When dead, the Honors we from Verse receive
Shall guard us, and that Fame our Merits give.
So that when Nature shall dissolve this Frame,
And turn me to that Dust, from whence I came;
Even then over Death I shall a Triumph gain,
And the best part of me shall still remain.
PROLOGUE to PERSEU'S SATYRS Imitated.
I don't pretend (as some of late I Have seen)
To Have ever been drunk with the Muses Hypocrene;
Nor on Parnassus Top to have laid me down,
And there dreamt Laurels should my Temples crown
And waking find my self a Poet grown.
I Am none of those; I leave the Muses Seats,
And silent Groves, those shady blessed Retreats,
To the happier Laureats of the Age, whose Fame
Obscures the Glory of my meaner Name.
Yet though a rude, unpolished Muse I have,
A place among the rest I humbly crave.
What is it that makes the chattering Parrot learn
His Masters name, and when he calls discern?
Want makes Mute Birds an humane Accent get;
And Poets write in spite of Sense and Wit.
From Want the best supplies of Fancy grow,
To her the invention of most Arts we owe.
Should Birds but once the use of Money find,
(Money the adored hope of frail mankind!)
Then Crows and Pies would learn to course a Muse
They Would learn to dedicate and to abuse,
And all the Tricks that flattering Poets use.
MARTIAL. Epigr. 3d. of 8th. Book Imitated.
LEave off for shame; thy scribbling itch give over
The world has seen enough of thine before,
Never think to vent the gaudy Trifles more.
Nor think by writing more to raise thy Name,
Already all the world has heard thy Fame!
Nay even when those vast Marbles shall decay,
On which fond men a vain Foundation lay
For future fame; when these rich Piles shall be
Crumbled to common dust and slighted lie;
Yet then shall happy I remain alone
Admired, beloved, and read by every one
I said. -- Genius
"When strait my Rhriming thus replied.
Can thou (ungrateful) leave that pleasing fire
That does with such sweet Lays thy Breast inspire?
Tell me, what is sweeter then, when happy Ease
From business, gives the wearied Soul release,
To recreate the mind, and to compose
And in sweet Verse serener thoughts disclose?
Or does the loftier Epic Strain more please?
To write the Toils of War then Calms of Peace?
Or the Acts of fighting Heroes to display
In Verse as turbulent and rough as they?
That swelling Paedagogue with croking noise
Should bawl thee out to gaping wondering Boys?
Or that the Tragic Story thou have writ,
Should force some puling Damsel into the Fit?
Let poring, grave, dull Sots write so, whose Sense,
Hatched by Night Study's does at length commence
A pompous Nonsense, far less pure, and bright
Then the gloomy, smoking flame by which they write.
Do thou with gentile poignant Satyr write,
Such as may please, and heal, as well as bite;
And yet so Keen, that he that reads may know
His Vices touched, and blush, and mend them too.
Thus, though thy Measures soft and humble be,
Yet even Heroic Verse shall stoop to thee,
A Rural complaint of the Approach of VVinter.
Written in the Country. Oct. 28th. 1684.
A Lass he is gone! -- farewell beloved Light!
Adieu blessed Sun! nothing (alas) but Night,
Naught but corroding Cold, and gloomy Shade
Succeeds the mournful Exit thou have made!
All Natures frame exhausts its self in sighs,
And clothed in Sable mourns thy Obsequies
Careless our gay attire away we throw,
And silent sorrow rests on every Brow,
Now no fair Nymphsith' Verdant Meadows play,
And by their presence make a brighter day;
No active Shepherds bath their pliant Limbs,
No Boats of pleasure grace the smiling Streams,
There Is not one seen upon the very Thames.
Nor is it Men alone their sorrows vent;
Beasts groan their griefs, and as they can lament.
But Plants, (though the Learned Sense deny,)
Yet they the greatest grief do testify,
They do not barely Mourn, but also Dye.
This they most do; but if by chance there is one
Whose Stock of moisture don't decay so soon,
Who above the common Fate erects his head,
And's bravely green when the weaker Plants are dead,
Some cold North Wind blasts his aspiring Top,
Cr in a Grave of Snow he is swallowed up;
So forced to shrink into his warmer Urn,
There lies expecting thy long wished return.
But then as soon as thy refreshing Rays,
Warm our cold Climate and renew our days;
With joyful leaps it rends the parting ground,
And then more verdant then before is found.
But e're that happy time approach again
Winter will show a long and tedious Scene;
Winter the years old age, old age's death,
That chills all pleasure with its freezing breath!
But fond complaints, and fruitless sighs are vain,
In spite of all, the Plague must still remain;
And to bewail what cannot a voided be
Is to increase, not ease the Malady;
Then to dull Age lets pining care bequeath,
And sorrow to the fancied Ghosts beneath;
Let all but Mirth be banished quite from us,
We'll swim in pleasures, and with joys carouse,
Each day shall sprightly Wine our brains inspire,
That shall supply the want of Phoebus fire,
That raise the fancy, kindle brisk desire;
Then every night we will taste the Fruits of Love,
Through all its secret ravishing Labyrinths rove;
And melting in the Arms of some kind she,
We Will lie quite buried in Felicity.
Where eager Kisses, and a close Embrace
Shall Winters cursed Idea quite deface.
CLAVDIAN. EPIGR. de Sphaera Archimedis. Imitated.
ONce as Jove traversed over his usual rounds,
To view the world's vast face and utmost bounds;
By chance he spied, where Archimedes stood
With thought full Brain to make his Project good;
He saw his peircing, curious Eye observe
Lest any motion from his course should swerve;
But all was right; this Jove admired, and strait
Returned to Heaven, there mounts his lofty Seat,
And smiling thus the encircling Gods does treat.
To what vast heights is humane Art now grown?
They scorn to copy Earthly things alone,
But with bold Wing far above these they are flown,
And even at my hard task they bravely aim,
And cast in Glass the great Creations Frame.
For in a small, and brittle Globe we see
(That which before none ever knew but We;)
The several Motions of the Stars and Spheres,
And all the Laws of Fate to humane Eyes appear.
The hidden Spring does a sure motion give
To all the Orbs who move, and seem to live.
Here, the bright Sun his dazzling Beams displays
And guilds a feigned Zodiac with his Rays:
Whilst the pale Mistress of the guilty Night
Seems to receive from him her borrowed Light.
Nay here so lively all the Motions are
You Would think the Worlds Epitome it were.
The affrightn'd World shall now no more admire
Salmoneus feigned Thunder, or his Fire.
So small an attempts beneath his nobler Soul,
His Fancy knows no limits but the Whole.
Upon the slighting of his Friends Love.
LOve guides my hand, and shows me what to write,
That (thou) may know it is she that does Indite.
When Love's concerned to make her language known,
She does by Numbers soft, and sweet, bemoan
(Thy silence) enough to make her sigh, and groan.
She fears that thy sweet Natur's winged away,
Because not touched, by its enlivening Ray:
She doubts some Veil has overspread its Light,
Which threatens more than an Egyptian Night;
Wherein naught but sad mournful Clouds appear,
Enough to strike thee into endless fear.
When she on every side does cast an Eye,
To see (perhaps) if once she might descry
Her pleasing, looked for Object passing by.
There Is naught appears, her Vigilance in vain;
Her careful Eye is recompensed with pain.
Then down she sinks, bereaved of her sweet breath
The only sign, that now she is seized with Death.
Weep now ye Heavens; and let each pearly tear
Accompany mounting grief, and trembling fear.
For since Love's dead, the Beauty of our Isle,
Its more than madness to attempt a smile;
This rather would become some pompous, nuptial train,
Than him, whose Heart feels griefs insulting pain.
When once a Jewel's lost, how careful is each Eye,
In prying out this Author of our misery?
No less is he deprived of courting rest
When Love has left a drooping, panting Breast.
Cursed be that Person, who has chased thee hence,
Heaven, with this black crime, can never dispense!
Cursed be that time, that e're she fixed on thee,
The Mother of such unheard of Cruelty.
Cursed be that place, in which she did impart.
Her amorous smiles, her most alluring Art.
In fine, a Curse all Curses else above
On her, that dared to stab our darling Love!
May never once Loves Charms attend thee more,
Till thou attones for what is done before.
What have I said! this, this, can never be
Done by the hands of basest Treachery.
No, no: we must the Gods above implore,
Who only can the dead, to life restore.
Be propitious then, ye ruling Powers above,
And send us back our hence departed Love.
That we may see her raise a towering frame,
Adorned with luster from her radiant flame
Too great to be expressed by empty name.
Bless us but in this, and then shall we
In reverence bow, a lowly, thankful Knee,
Before the Throne of your own sacred Deity.
Our words, like well tuned Instruments shall be,
Breathing forth naught but grateful Harmony.
Our Actions, they shall pay you Tribute too,
For all is yours, when once we are blessed by you.
Some ELEGIES out of OVID's AMORS Imitated.
BOOK the 1st. ELEGY the 3d.
To his Mistress.
THou Charming kindler of my new born fires
(Just are my Prayers and modest my desires)
I do not ask precisely you would love
Give only cause that I may never remove.
Is this to much? but bear to be adored;
This sure the greatest Goddess might afford.
Receive a Slave devoted still to you
That will be constant and that can be true;
Not ushered in by Titles or Estate
The bold Encouragers of the saucy Great
My Fate in both at best's but moderate.
But yet in Wits abundantly supplied
What in those gaudy Trifles is denied;
My Manners too for my fond passion move,
Modest Sincerity does my Pleader prove,
And sure it is something also that I love,
I Am not of that Fantastic rambling race,
Whom each a while, and no one long can please,
Debauched from truth by every fresher Face;
You shall all my Amorous thoughts employ,
Be still my only care, my only joy,
With you I Would always live, with you l'de gladly dye:
Vouchsafe your self a subject for my Pen,
I Will make my Verse as Glorious as my Theme;
And Verse to Beauty lasting Fame can give,
By Verse fair Io does her self survive,
By Verse Europa yet, and Leda live.
Thus also we will share the like renown,
Through all the world both equally be known,
My Muse shall make your name as lasting as my own.
OVID Book the 3d, ELEGY the 7th.
WOuld any still neglected Arts adore?
Or fondly think that Verse has any power?
True; Wit was prized as sacred heretofore,
And held more precious than the shining Oar,
But now it is downright Nonsense to be poor:
Without success my Books my fair one please,
Whilst I the freedom want, she grants to these,
She praises, yet excludes the applauded man,
Poor witty I rove up and down in vain.
A wealthy upstart she to me prefers,
Raised by his wounds, and thus enricht with Scars:
Fool! can with him in fond Embraces join,
Receive his Dalliance or afford him thine?
The Head thou dandlest has a Helmet bore,
The side that serves thee wore a Sword before,
That Hand whose Rings now such a prospect yield,
'Stead of this Gold wore once the baser Shield;
And touch but the other that has been embru'd
In some poor slaughtered Enemies reeking Blood:
Can thou then suffer such a hand as this?
Ah where is thy former wonter Tenderness?
Behold his Scars those marks of Battles fought,
What e're he has he with his Body bought;
Perhaps he will brag himself what Foes he has slain
Can he tell this? and can he then obtain?
Can you be such a Slave to sordid Gain?
Whilst I the Vot'ry of deserving Wit
(Why should Wits Sons to those of Wars submit?)
With fruitless Numbers, unavailing Powers
Sing slighted Verses at obdurate doors.
Learn who are wise, some thriving art of Gain,
Not that which Idle we admire in vain
But that of Fights, of War, and a Campaign.
Instead of scribbling Verses lead a Troop,
This, Homer might, this should have been thy Scope.
Jove well advised of Golds Almightiness,
Transformed himself to what he knew would please,
Turned Bribe, and so subdued his greedy Miss.
Till then the Father bore a jealous Eye,
Each door was barred, and even the Nymph was coy
But when the Golden Lover wisely came,
Less nice, she kindly entertained his flame.
Not so in peacesul Saturn's Government,
When close each Metal in Earths Prison pent,
Heaven gave no Wealth, but better Blessings sent;
Corn freely springing from the teeming ground,
Fruits and in the sturdy Oak sweet Honey found.
None strove with pains to make the soil more kind,
No fence particular Estates confined.
The quiet Ocean knew no cleaving Oars
Whilst all were bounded by their utmost Shores.
Subt'^y vain man did against himself devise,
To his own hurt too witty and too wise.
What did it prosit Cities to enclose,
Weapons to frame, and thus decide by blows?
How foolish was that curiosity,
That egged us first to try the pathless Sea!
Land had sufficed a modest just desire,
But we proud things must stretch our knowledge higher,
It Is strange we don't to Heaven it self aspire.
We do as far, as in our power lies;
Thence grew the numerous pack of Deities,
Heroes made Gods and Seated in the Skies.
From Earths dark Womb we massy Treasures tear,
Which found the daring, plundring Soldiers share.
No place falls to the poor; it is an Estate
Preferment gets; the rich prove only Great.
Let 'em be so, thus may they still increase,
Transact the Affairs of War, the Employs of Peace;
But let 'em not invade Love's property;
Let even the poor enjoy his Mistress free.
But now however in Virtue she excel,
She Is taken Captive at the rich man's will.
For me she dreads her Husbands jealousy,
For me suspects a Guardians prying Eye,
Let me but give, and both shall humbly fly.
Revenge, ye Gods, for sure Revenge is just;
Consume this Wealth with everlasting rust,
And turn so ill used Treasure to its native Dust.
BOOK the 3d. ELEGY the 10th.
To his false Mistress, from whose Love he cannot get free.
MUch I Have endured, my patience long oppressed,
Tired with ill usage is overcome at last;
Begone fond Love, and leave my wearied Breast.
Freed from my Chain, I blush to think I bore,
What without shame I underwent before.
Conqu'rour I proudly spurn poor vanquished Love,
Though long first, I at last such power prove.
Go on, persist, you will never the pains repent;
The bitt'rest Physick's often convenient.
And have I then so often repulsed, refused,
The cold hard Ground for my sad Pillow used?
Have I, whilst you some Rival blessed within,
Without a waiting, slavish Servant been!
Have I seen more the happy man pass by,
Feeble with Love, and overtoyl'd with joy?
What Is worse, has he seen me too in that place?
Gods, may my worst of Foes prove such disgrace.
Have NOT I obsequiously through all the Town,
Gallanted, treated, Coach't you up and down?
Loved for my sake, whilst in my company,
Others you pleased because adored b^ver^
What should I add your perjured Treacheries,
Mock Vows, sham Promises, and jilting Lies?
Yours and your Lovers silent stolen commerce,
By purposed nods, known signs, and amorous tweers,
When my loathed prefence barred a free discourse?
'Twas said, she is sick; with eager have I flew,
And found she was not to my Rival so.
This and much else thus long l've tamely bore;
Get some new Fool; for I Will drudge on no more.
My Ship at last has gained the happy Port,
And hears now safe the roaring Waves with sport.
Cease your vain wheedles, they will no longer pass;
l'm not the fond, believing Fool I was.
Yet, ah! two thwarting passions strongly move
My doubtful Breast; hate one way, the other Love;
And Love, I fear, at last will Victor prove.
I Will hate you if I can, if not, at least
I Will love unwillingly; The Captive Beast
Likes not his Yoke, and yet is with it pressed.
Fly I your Crimes? your stronger Charms restrain;
Those I do hate, but those I would in vain.
Thus can I nor without, nor with thee live,
And scarce I know, what I my self would have.
Oh, that you were less false, or else less fair!
Such faults, su^ ^eauty too, too different are.
Your Guilt claims ^te, your Face does Love entreat,
Ah me! This still more prevalent is then that.
Spare, then by all the ties of former joy,
By all those Gods so often y' are perjured by;
And by my Deity, that face of thine,
By those bright Eyes, with Love have made me blind'
Whatever you are, you shall be ever mine.
Consider only which y' had rather have,
A willing Servant, or a murmuring Slave.
No, let me wisely improve Necessity,
Add Sails, and with the powerful Winds comply,
Since they will drive me to Love, in spite of me.
The Golden Age.
FAir Golden Age, not because Rivers purl'd
With Streams of Milk to feed the newborn world,
And Virgin Honey dropped from every Tree,
Natures own Hive for the industrious Be;
When the Earth untilled her Plenty freely gave,
And all the labor was to wish and have;
When stingless Snakes for love not fear did stray
And in the Woods securely lost there way:
Nor did above one hovering Cloud appear,
But undivided Heaven and Earth were near,
And if the Gods make Heaven, then Heaven was here:
It Was always Spring, and always like to hold,
And younger grew as Time, and years grew old,
No Storm had raised those Seas that lay beneath,
The Infant Winds as yet could hardly breath,
Too weak to sill a Sail, or conduct home
Or war or wealth, which more than War has over come,
Fair Golden Age but not alone for these
From something greater grew thy happiness!
Happy alone because that empty name
That airy Nothing, built on lighter Fame,
That Title without substance, senseless thing
The Worlds great Idol, and the Courtiers King
Falsely call d Honor (our worst Enemy)
Had not embittered Love with Cruelty.
Nor bounded with harsh Laws those Amorous fires
Which dye and languish in consigned desires.
When Laws were Golden as the Age, and free
As Natures self, Love where best pleases thee.
It Was then that to the bubling of a spring
Love first composed his voice and learned to sing,
Love that was so all over, and did not know
Himself, the use either of Torch or Bow.
Swains of themselves, and Nymphs untought did love,
And in a Thousand ways their passion prove,
Mixing with every word a softer smile,
And whispers longer Kisses did beguile.
Virgins blushed not to show their new-blown Rose,
And all their Beauties did unask't disclose,
The unripe Apples of their breast, which now
Are hid with leaves, and ripe but for one grow.
Passionate Lovers by the fountains played,
Quenching those flames there which their glances made.
Thou Honor first of all did hide that Spring
Increast's the fire, yet did no Water bring,
None to assuage the Thirst which inward turns
And on itself for want of fuel burns;
Thou first gave Laws toth' motion of the Eye
Toughtst it to frown, disdain, and Cruelty,
Did in a hood imprison that bright hair
Which was before so courted by the Air,
And have such Reins on all our Passions laid
That Words nay Looks are of thy Laws afraid;
From thee it is, O Honor, that we prove
Thieves to procure, what was the gift of Love,
and all that we by thy Achievements gain
Is that we may with greater sense complain.
But say great Power who every where do sway
Whom Love, and Nature, as we them obey,
Ruler of Kings, why waits thy greatness here
Where Pride and Luxury dare not appear?
Alas these Hutts thy Luster cannot hold
There Is Love, no honor in the Shepherds fold;
Go rather and disturb some Gallants breast
Go break the Soldiers or the Courtiers rest,
And leave us to our selves, who choose to be
As little minded by as we mind thee.
A poor neglected rout, who would retrieve
The Golden Age, and by their Pattern live!
Let Us love, for Life and Years have no long truce,
Since one hour Thousand changes can produce!
Let Us love: the Sun that every evening dies
And all night buried in the Oce^n lies,
Revives next Morn. with an Illustrious Ray
And first, renews his Age and then the Day:
But when our cloudy day of Life is done
Eternal Sleep and Night succeeds our Sun.
H. W

To SYLVIA.
J Know not whether all these miseries
Which Lovers prove, their fears, their jealousies,
Their constant Love, their Services and Prayrs,
Their Sighs, their Tears, their Hopes and their Dispairs
Can ever fully recompensed be
Should they obtain their wished felicity;
Or that a Woman when she loves at best,
Cures half the Wounds she made in the Lovers breast.
But though it be true, that the best comes at last
And that sweets, with some bitter, sweter taste,
That happiness by waiting does improve,
And frowns and sightings make us dearer love;
Yet give not me this greater Happiness
O Love I Will be contented with a less;
That on some more deserving soul bestow,
Who would its worth by former mis'ries know.
Rather let me my Love obtain
With little service and less pain,
There need no sighs, there need no tears,
Nor to increase our Love rude fears,
Let it alone such seas'ning have
As help the gust but not deprave:
A sweet Repulse or two for trial,
A little Coyness, no Denial,
An amorous War that may produce
In Hearts agre'd or peace or truce.
H. W.

To LOVE.
O Love, in what schole are thy Precepts taught,
Who has thy Art into a Method brought?
Or could hmself so great a Master prove
To give sure rules for so uncertain Love?
Or trace the mind, when with thy wings it flies,
And hides its soaring head above the skies?
This learned Athens never could declare,
Nor Aristotle's Schole when he taught there:
Apollo in Parnassus reads not love,
Like one that has't by instinct from above;
He speaks but coldly, has no voice of fire,
As those whom Love himself deigns to inspire,
Nor can his elevated Fancy rise
Equal to the height of thy grand mysteries.
It Is Thou, O Love, Thine only Master art,
Thou only thy own Precepts can impart,
Teaching unlettered souls in a fair eye
To read what thou wrot'st there, their Destiny.
It Is thou unty'st their tongues, and make them break
Not silence only, but in Numbers speak;
And, what is more strange, (O hidden Eloquence
Of Love, and its more powerful influence!)
Makst an half and unspoken word do more
Than softest strains of Rhetoric could before,
And with a sigh can greater passion move
Than a set speech from one that knows not love.
For silence has its voice, and can beseech
Coming from Love: Silence it self's a Speech.
Then let who is will turn over Philosophy,
And search for love where love did never lie,
I Will learn by rote in some fair Ladies eye:
And tho my Rural Muse cannot rehearse
Like them who clothe the Loves in lofty verse,
Yet the most losty verse shall to my strains
Stand up like barren hills to fruitful plains;
For though they are only carved on some rough-tree,
Yet growing like my love my Verse shall be.
H. W.

LOVE'S Religion.
I.
WHat fools are all we Lovers, thus to own
Thy strange unnatural Religion?
That makes us all a Sacrifice
(For 'twould be Heresy not to die,)
To some fair Idol She:
Nay we are Martyrs too for this,
And must endure the fire,
Yet to our Heaven, alas, are never the nigher!
II.
For lo! my She dislikes what'ere I say,
And chides me so, as if it were sin to pray:
Go then some milder tenants teach
Thy lovely Priesthood Womankind;
Ah, gently change their mind!
Ah! do but Repentance preach,
And thou shall quickly see
The wiser world turn Proselytes for Thee.
III.
Me thinks thy Saint should be compassionate,
To pity wrongs, and to prevent our fate:
Yet such are beauteous Women grown,
Whom all their Lovers canonize,
Or style their Deities.
But when I make my Mistress one.
With them I disagree,
And only say, that She is very She.
F. W.

The UNION.
I.
LEt dull Philosophers the ign'rant tell
That Souls are indivisible;
We find their rules do not prove always true
It Is but one Soul informs us two;
So by one Loadstone touched, as We by Love,
Two distant Needles to the same point move.
II.
Go now, and ask thy jealous kindred, why
They thee to love thy self deny.
For it is just so, our Love's a Phaenix grown,
And we are eminently one;
Such Miracles our Sympathy can do,
That I no longer am my self, but you.
III.
Then let us not talk, But Kindred disagree;
Prithee what is That to Thee and Me?
Our Love's the worm, they have tried so often to kill
By separating us, yet still
Mistaken fools! we mock your subtle art,
This, tho divided, lives in every part.
F. W.

TO HIS much Honored Friend and Relation Mr. FRANCIS WILLIS Merchant at
GREENWICH, Upon his discovery of a Weed in Virginia, which is a present Remedy
against the venom of the RATTLE-SNAKES there.
AS, when Apollo with his artfull hand
The Python slew, and cleared the infected Land;
The joyful Muses crowded round their King,
And every Poet did the mighty Triumph sing:
So, as her duty, SIR, my grateful Muse
Does such a Subject, such a Conquest choose
To celebrate: For (till you sailed away,
And to those coasts your Learning did convey,
Where Salvage Nature long unquestioned lay,
Proud of those ills, which at her dire command
Infectious Serpents scattered through the Land.)
Ten thousand Deaths in armor did appear,
As if the Fates quartered their Legions there
To kill, and tyrannize; whilst none could be
Secure from the bold glittering Enemy.
But soon at your approach these Ills did cease,
And health regained an universal peace.
For you well-vers'd in arts had quickly spied
What Medicines in this little Plant lay hid;
What Sovereign virtues in this Weed did dwell,
Like Princes forster'd in a Shepherds Cell:
Which on the Snakes imposed a rigid Law,
Constrained their rage, and kept the Fates in awe.
So that if after this they venom threw,
'Twas out of pride to be ore-power'd by You.
For this (Great SIR) such praises you may claim
As none can pay, nor shall your sacred Name
Be next to Rawleigh's in the book of Fame;
Rawleigh, who only Honor here pursued,
And the wild people, not their foes, subdued
By force of Arms; but to save lives is more,
Than 'twas to conquer the whole Land before.
By FRAN. WILLIS, Fellow of NEW-COLL.

HORACE, Book the First,
ODE the 21. Paraphrased.
I.
BEgin, begin Diana's praise,
Ye lovely Nymphs in soft Harmonious Lays,
Soft as your Sex, and charming as your eyes;
And all ye blooming Youths combine
To make the beauteous Quire:
Tune, tune the speaking Lyre,
And young Apollo with Diana join:
Next let your Hymns, that kindle Gods above,
Latona's fame declare,
Latona's, Heaven's peculiar care,
The joy, and darling of Almighty JOVE.
II.
Diana sing, ye Nymphs, Diana loves
The Crystal streams, and shady groves;
She loves the pleasant woods that grow,
And hang over Algidum's cool brow;
She in green Cragus does delight,
Or where thick Forests spread
Around dark Erymanthus head,
That yields us safe retreats from day, and pleasant scenes of Night.
III.
Ye Noble youths with equal strife rehearse,
How on green Tempe, Phoebus flowery seat,
Eternal Springs do wait:
Or in immortal verse
Fair Delos Isle applaud,
Delos the cradle of the God,
Whose shoulder's all divine,
Graced with a golden Harp, and golden Quiver shine.
IV.
He, He moved by your charming prayers,
(For what God can regardless lie,
When Youth and Beauty courts, or can their suit deny?)
Will banish far from Caesar's peaceful seat
The dismal noise of Wars;
Will make the famine, and the plague retreat,
The haughty Persians to oppose,
To tyrannize and triumph over our foes,
And do the work of Caesar's sword, the mighty work of Fate.
F. W.

SENECA's Hercules Furens. Act. 1. Chorus.
FEw are the Lights we now in Heaven can view,
And even those few are faint and dying too.
The Night overcome calls in each wandering star,
And lagging Lucifer brings up the rear.
The Constellation, that never knew the Sea,
Turns but its Chariot, and calls up the Day.
The Sun just rising over the mountains, guilds
With scattered rays of light the joyful fields,
And for a while the Moon departing yields.
Loathed Labor wakes, and rouses drowsy cares,
Unlocks each breast, and every house unbars.
The Sheep unfolded from their hurdles pass,
And on the dewy mountains straggling graze.
The soft young Heifer plays upon the Plain,
And emptied Dams recruit their Tets again.
The wanton Kid runs over the pleasant Meads,
And wildly wandering sports by turns, and feeds.
The chirping Birds on boughs their joy express,
And in each Note the welcome Day confess.
The daring Seaman boldly hoists up Sail,
And trusts a promising Sky, a gentle Gale;
Uncertain yet what after may befall.
The greedy Fisher lies upon the Cheat,
Often baulkt he still pursues the false deceit,
And still renews the unsuccessful bait.
Lucky sometimes he gazes at his prey,
Wondering at the fortune of the happy day,
Whilst trembling Lines the nibling Fish betray.
These are the Employments of the harmless life,
Blessed in sost ease, and undisturbed with strife;
Where a small house with a few fruitful fields,
The sweet'st content to its glad Owner yields.
Not so in Cities; the tumultuous Cares,
Uncertain Hopes, jealous, tormenting Fears,
Still whisk, like whirlwinds, every where about,
And find each private, secret corner out,
Here one with some Petition to his Grace
Submissive waits two hours for access,
And ten to one his aim at last may miss.
There a rich Miser's striving to attain
To greater wealth, and knows no end of Gain;
Never contented, he still aims at more,
Is ever heaping, and is ever poor.
Here a fond Ass swells bloated up with Praise,
Which the vain, empty, fickle people raise;
Values himself upon it, and strait grows proud
To be the ageant of the unthinking Crowd.
And there each Term for hire great pleading Boys
Let out their Tongues to jangling, strife, and noise.
But few, ah! few are They, who care or strive
To gain true quiet, and to happy live;
Who from a sense of Time's great preciousness,
Catch at the fleeting minutes as they pass,
And wisely to themselves secure that Now,
Which never returns, if idly once let go.
Haste then and live, no pleasing Joys delay,
But timely seize on pleasures whilst you may.
Life hurries over its short, soon finished race,
And hasty years whirl on with eager pace.
The diligent Fates still our life's thread spin on,
They never undo what they have once begun,
Nor idely e're the fatal work prolong,
Yet heedless we still search new dangers out,
Seek ways to bring an early Death about,
And our unfinished Thread by our own rashness cut.
Headlong half way our Destiny we meet,
Forestall our ruin, and prevent our Fate.
Too much the Hero to his end does haste,
Which of it self approaches but too fast.
The regular Fate^ at their due seasons come,
Each in his order must receive his doom.
None e're, when called, behind may lagging stay,
None may prolong his set, appointed day;
When once we are summoned, we must all obey.
Let others then endeavor after Fame,
And strive to purchase an eternal Name;
Let others in triumphant Chariots ride,
With gaudy Honors, and with empty Pride;
Humbly may I, free from all being Great,
Enjoy a safe, and an obscure retreat
So I gray hairs and old age may attain,
Things which the busy, restless, seldom gain,
Unless before their times they come with cares and pain.
Thus still, tho homely, the low Fortune's sure,
Whilst splendid Greatness never is secure.
SENECA's Agamemnon. Act. 1. Chorus.
FOrtune, thou Grand Impostor, what a cheat
Is (...) that good, thou seem to give the Great,
^cious show for real substance caught!
How steep's the Hight, how false on which they stand,
And yet how few the pleasures they command!
Soft, easy, quiet, sits not on a Throne,
Nor can a Monarch call one day his Own,
Care after care still harrasses his mind;
One storm blown over, another's still behind.
Not the wild Waters of the wanding Tide
Are half such various, such unsteady Things,
As are the uneven Fates of restless Kings.
They Dread at once, and to be Feared,
Even most, with what they most desire, scared.
The Night it self gives them no safe Retreat,
Business and Danger still attend the Great.
Even Sleep, the general refuge of all cares,
Calms not their Troubles, nor dispells their Fears.
Besides, What States have been so powerful known,
That have not been by cruel Wars o'rethown,
And by ambitious Monarchs strifes undone?
Faith, Justice, Shame, Truth, Honor, Chastity,
And even the least regard of any Tie,
Avoid all Courts, from every Palace fly.
Pride, Jars, and Factions in their stead appear,
And Fury, Envy, in each Breast dwells there.
These still remain, still threaten ruin nigh,
And surely still, where e're they are, destroy.
Yet should both Wars and private Treason cease,
This will not secure poor Monarchs happiness.
Each Great thing's even oppressed by its own weight;
The mighty Load's too vast for feeble Fate.
Thus when full Sails swell with a prosperous wind,
We fear the Gale because it is too kind.
The Tower, that proudly does to Heaven aspire,
Finds but thereby the rainy Tempests nigher.
And in those Groves, where thickest shades are cast,
Lightning the tallest Oaks does soonest blast.
The loftiest Mountains feel he Thunder most,
And those Gross bodies, that most bulk do boast,
Are even by that, to Sickness more exposed.
The largest Oxen we for slaughter choose,
Whilst the small Herd we let to pasture loose.
What Fate exalts, it will again undo,
And lifts but up that it may overthrow.
Whilst things are low, more mean, and moderate,
Enjoy a lasting and enduring Date.
Happy then He, who pleased with his own chance,
Seeks not too far his Fortune to advance,
Trusts not his Vessel to the faithless Deep,
But nigh the shore does more securely keep.
SONG.
I.
I Cannot sigh and wish alone,
Tho to speak may be in vain;
I never can be afraid to own
A Passion, I must entertain.
If then this Address accuse,
Blame the faulty Charms, not Me;
It Is but just they should excuse,
Since they caused this Liberty.
II.
A moderate Passion unreveal'd
Smothered in my Breast had been,
As dying Embers may concealed
Burn a while, and not be seen,
But when Wit and Beauty join,
Such a fire as mine to raise,
Who can its fierce rage confine?
It must needs burst forth, and blaze.
The Baffled SWAIN.
THE Muses Darling, Pride of all the Plains,
Daphnis the soft the sweetest of the Swains
Long reigned in Love, for every Nymph he viewed
He caught, he only looked and he subdued:
But now the melancholy Youth retires
Through shady Groves and wanders through the Briars
Sad and alone: at last beneath a Shade
Of spreading Elm and Beech supinely laid
He sighed, he shook his head, and thus he said:
When I so long, so faithfully did woe
And did what Constancy and Truth could do,
Why is my Suit refused, my Prayers in vain.
And warm Endeavors damp't by cold disdain?
Must Slights the lean rewards of Virtue prove!
Unhappy Daphnis fatal in thy Love!
Long drought the flowers and storms the laboring Be,
And unsuccessful Love has ruined Thee.
This Heaven (had I observed the Omen well)
As conscious of my Fate did often foretell;
It showed my flattering hope should disappear,
And wast like Vapors tossed in flitting Air;
Last night when careful of my Flocks I went
To see my Lambs were fed, and Folds were pent,
A Flame shone round my head, but soon the Light
Decayed, and all around stood deepest Night.
But is Urania so averse to Love!
Could none of all the Rival Shepherds move?
Ah Aegon how I envy thy success!
Thy Fortune greater, though thy Charms were less:
Without a long Fatigue, and tedious Suit
The Door was opened, and you reached the Fruit:
Oh how I pine at thy surprising joys!
Dye Daphnis, she is partial in her choice.
Yet once I hoped (what cannot Love persuade?)
More kind returns from the obligeing Maid:
Her Looks were soft, smiles on her Cheeks did lie,
No cloudy frowns obscured the pleasing Sky:
Nor could I think that e're the time would come
When constant Love should prove the Lovers doom
The Flowers I plucked, the Garlands which I wove
She took and wore as Badges of my Love:
She heard my Songs, nor did m^ Art contemn,
And sometimes she would stoop to be my Theme:
Damaetas envied, Colin tuned my Lays,
Whilst she sat by, and gladly heard her praise:
Sooner shall Dolphins over the Mountains swim,
Does graze on Floods, and Bees forget their thime,
Than I that day when with a smile she led
The joyful Aegon to her promised Bed,
With what a high disdain he marched along,
And proudly looked on the despairing throng!
Yet he never fed the Flocks, never pent the Fold,
Nor bore the Summer's heat, nor Winter's cold;
But he had Wealth, and that alone betrayed
The heedless mind of the unthinking Maid,
Cursed be the wretch that first did Gold dispense,
And robbed the happy Plains of Innocence!
Am I refused because my Suit was plain,
The artless Courtship of an humble Swain?
You know me not, nor yet the pains I took
Whilst Aegon slept to feed the weary Flock,
How often have the Nymphs beheld me sweat
Beneath the fury of the Summer's heat,
How often seen the Frost bind up my hair,
And cried, ah Daphnis worn with too much care!
But what avails my care, what boots my pain,
But only yields a larger Subject to complain.
To SYLVIA.
NAY prithee Sylvia be not coy,
My Dear, my Life, my greatest Joy;
A Thousand Kisses dearest Heart,
Unto thy Votary impart:
But yet not such as Infants give,
When they begin to love, and live:
Not like a Sisters sapless Kiss,
Which has no taste of future bliss:
But such, my Dearest, such alone
As in the Marriage Bed are known;
Oh! may they have as great a gust
As e're the Almighty power of Lust
Can give. At least such may they be
As those the young fair wanton She
Gives her beloved, when first a flame
(For which as yet she wants a Name)
She feels through every joint to run,
And inwardly does melt and burn;
Like Veins of Metals, Earth, and Stone,
With Subterran'ous fires unseen, unknown.
How sweet, how close do Virgins kiss,
At the dawning of some greater bliss!
Come now begin. -- Nay don't delay,
In kissing let us spend the Day;
And when the tell-tale Day-light's in
Afresh we will our Joys begin.
The Pimping Night alone shall know
What you, and I, my Dear, then do.
Some silly Fools I know there are
Who only love the Girl that is fair,
Are pleased with Pictures senseless Toys,
As ignorant as they of joys;
And have they one dry Kiss obtained
They think they have all the world gained:
I love an Airy, lively Lass:
It Is Life, and Action gives a Grace,
Be^ond the brightness of an Angels face.
It Is such a Lass alone can move
My Passion, she only make me love,
Who Kiss for Kiss, will love for love return,
And with a flame as pure as mine will burn;
Who when into my Arms she is come.
Makes wanton Sallies with her Tongue;
Her Passion thus, like harmless Doves,
In pleasing sighs and murmers proves;
And when moist Kisses make my flame
Wax dim, make me look pale and wan;
Her dying sighs will Life inspire,
And fan the almost extinguished Fire
Increase its heat and raise it high'r.
If thus, my Sylvia, thus you will prove,
Make such requitals of my Love;
And let me gently squeeze your Breast,
Now sport, now on those Hillocks rest:
And if by chance I lose my way
You will be kind and let me stray
Through those by Paths which Love shall show,
Unto the happy Land below.
No greater Blessings will I crave,
(Nor can I greater, would I greater have;)
Less than a King I can not be,
With such a boundless Liberty.
Kings and their Gold I will despise,
And all their gaudy Vanities,
And only Thee dear Sylvia will I prize.
FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for, and Sold by Anthony Stephens Bookseller in
Oxford.
Books in Octavo. LVcretius in six Books, done into English by Mr. Creech
Fellow of All Souls Coll. in Oxford, the Third Edition. The Idylliums of
Theocritus done out of Greek into English by Mr. Creech Odes, Satyrs, and
Epistles of Horace, done into English by Mr. Creech. Mr. Oldhams Works Comp.
The Anatomy of Human Bodies Epitomized, the Second Edition. An Account of the
Divine Right, or Original of Government. Wit against Wisdom, or a Panegyric
upon Folly. Anacreon done out of Greek into English, by Mr. Willis Fellow of
New Coll. Contra Historiam Aristeae de LXX. Interpretibus, per H. Hody A. M.
Coll. Wadhami Oxon. Dr. Tullii Enchiridion. Cor. Nepos. done into English by
several Hands in the University of Oxford. The Elements of Euclid Explained in
a plain but most easy method, Together with the use of every Proposition
throughout the Mathematics.
In Quarto. A Brief Introduction to Geography. Cluverius Geog. cum fig. Amst.
Stierii Philosophiae.
In Duodecimo. Anthologia sex Selecta quaedam Poemata Italorum qui Latin
Scripserunt. H. Grotius de veritate Relig. Christ. Am.


