OF REFORMATION Touching CHVRCH-DISCIPLINE IN ENGLAND: And the CAUSES that
hitherto have hindered it.

TWO BOOKS, Written to a FRIEND.



Printed, for Thomas Underhill 1641.

Faults escaped in the printing are here corrected.
Page 1. l. 5. at frequent must be a comma, p. 2. l. 27. sensual. p. 4. l. 31.
exorcism. p. 5. l. 9. at adoration a comna. p. 6. l. 4. in ignorance there
wants an a. l. 29. she taught. p. 7. l. 9. add in Discipline, which is the
execution. p. 19. l. 4. colleagues. l. 13. known. p. 70. l. 6. yea other
nattonsp. 72. l. 5. each other state. l. 7. at common is no period, but a comma.

OF REFORMATION IN ENGLAND, And the CAVVSES that hitherto have hindered it.
Sir,
AMidst those deep and retired thoughts, which with every man Christianly
instructed, ought to be most frequent, of God, and of his miraculons ways, and
works, amongst men, and of our Religion and Worship, to be performed to him;
after the story of our Savior Christ, suffering to the lowest bent of
weakness, in the Flesh, and presently triumphing to the highest pitch of
glory, in the Spirit, which drew up his body also, till we in both be united to
him in the Revelation of his Kingdom: I do not know of any thing more worthy
to take up the whole passion of pity, on the one side, and joy on the other,
then to consider first, the foul and sudden corruption, and then after many a
tedious age, the long-deferr'd, but much more wonderful and happy re^ormation
of the Church in these latter days. Sad it is to think how that Doctrine of
the Gospel, planted by teachers Divinely inspired, and by them winnow'd, and
sifted, from the chafe of overdated Ceremonies, and refined to such a
Spiritual height, and temper of purity, and knowledge of the Creator, that the
body, with all the circumstances of time and place, were purified by the
affections of the regenerat Soul, and nothing left impure, but sin; Faith
needing not the weak, and fallible office of the Senses, to be either the
Vshers, or Interpreters of heavenly Mysteries, save where our Lord himself in
his Sacraments ordained; that such a Doctrine should through the grossness,
and blindness, of her Professors, and the fraud of deceivable traditions, drag
so downwards, as to backslide one way into the Jewish beggary of old cast
rudiments, and stumble forward another way into the new-vomited Paganism of
sensual Idolatry, attributing purity, or impurity, to things indifferent, that
they might bring the inward acts of the Spirit to the outward, and customary
ey-Service of the body, as if they could make God earthly, and fleshly, because
they could not make themselves hea^enly, and Spiritual: they began to draw
down all the Divine intercours, betwixt God, and the Soul, yea, the very
shape of God himself, into an exterior, and bodily form, urgently pretending
a necessity, and obligement of joining the body in a formal reverence, and
Worship circumscribed, they hallowed it, they fumed it, they sprincl'd it, they
be decked it, not in robes of pure innocence, but of pure Linen, with other
deformed, and fantastic dresses in Palls, and Miters, gold, and guegaw's
fetched from Arons old wardrope, or the Flamins vestry: then was the Priest set
to con his motions, and his Postures his Liturgies, and his Lurries, till the
Soul by this means of over bodying her self, given up justly to fleshly
delights, bated her wing apace downward: and finding the ease she had from her
visible, and sensuous colleague the body in performance of Religious duties, her
pineons now broken, and flagging, shifted off from her self, the labor of
high soaring any more, forgot her heavenly flight, and left the dull, and
droyling carcas to plod on in the old rode, and d^udging Trade of outward
conformity. And here out of question from her pervers conceiting of God, and
holy things, she had fallen to believe no God at all, had not custom and the
worm of conscience nipt her incredulity hence to all the duty's of
evangelicall grace instead of the adoptive and cheerful boldness which our
new alliance with God requires, came Servile, and thrallike fear: for in very
deed, the superstitious man by his good will is an Atheist; but being ^carr'd
from thence by the pangs, and gripes of a boiling conscience, all in a pudder
shuffles up to himself such a God, and such a worship as is most agreeable to
remedy his fear, which fear of his, as also is his hope, fixed only upon the
Flesh, renders likewise the whole faculty of his apprehension, carnal, and all
the inward acts of worship issuing from the native strength of the SOVLE, run
out lavishly to the upper skin, and there harden into a crust of Formallitie.
Hence men came to scan the Scriptures, by the Letter, and in the Covenant ofour
Redemption, magnified the external signs more then the quickening power of the
Spirit, and yet looking on them through their own guiltiness with a Servile
fear, and finding as little comfort, or rather terror from them again, they
knew not how to hide their Slavish approach to Gods behests by them not
understood, nor worthily received, but by cloaking their Servile crouching to
all Religious Presentiments, sometimes lawful, sometimes Idolatrous, under the
name of humility, and terming the Py-bald frippery, and oftentation of
Ceremony's, decency.

Then was Baptism changed into a kind of exorcisme, and water Sanctified by
Christ's institute, thought little enough to wash off the original Spot without
the Scratch, or cross impression of a Priests forefinger: and that feast of
free grace, and adoption to which Christ invited his Disciples to sit as
Brethren, and coheires of the happy Covenant, which at that Table was to be
Sealed to them, even that Feast of love and heavenly-admitted fellowship, the
Seal of filial grace became the Subject of horror, and glouting adoration,
pageanted about, like a dreadful Idol: which sometimes deceve's wel-meaning
men, and beguiles them of their reward, by their voluntary humility, which
indeed, is fleshly pride, preferring a foolish Sacrifice, and the rudiments of
the world, as Saint Paul to the Colossians explaineth, before a savory
obedience to Christ's example. Such was Peter's unseasonable Humility, as then
his Knowledge was small, when Christ came to wash his feet; who at an
impertinent time would needs strain courtesy with his Master, and falling
troublesomly upon the lowly, alwise, and unexaminable intention of Christ in
what he went with resolution to do, so provoked by his interruption the meek
Lord, that he threat'nd to exclude him from his heavenly Portion, unless he
could be content to be less arrogant, and stiff neckt in his humility.

But to dwell no longer in characterizing the Depravities of the Church, and
how they sprung, and how they took increase; when I recall to mind at last,
after so many dark Ages, wherein the huge overshadowing train of Error had
almost swept all the Stars out of the Firmament of the Church; how the bright
and blissfull Reformation (by Divine Power) struck through the black and
settled Night of Ignornnce and Antichristian Tyranny, me thinks a sovereign
and reviving joy must needs rush into the bosom of him that reads or hears;
and the sweet Odor of the returning Gospel imbath his Soul with the
fragrancy of Heaven. Then was the Sacred BIBLE sought out of the dusty corners
where profane Falsehood and Neglect had thrown it, the Schools opened, Divine
and Humane Learning raked out of the embers of forgotten Tongues, the Princes
and Cities trooping apace to the new erected Banner of Salvation; the Martyrs,
with the unresistable might of Weakness, shaking the Powers of Darkness, and
scorning the fiery rage of the old red Dragon.

The pleasing pursuit of these thoughts has oft-times led me into a serious
question and debatement with my self, how it should come to pass that England
(having had this grace and honor from GOD to be the first that should set up
a Standard for the recovery of lost Truth, and blow the first Evangelick
Trumpet to the Nations, holding up, as from a Hill, the new Lamp of saving
light to all Christendom should now be last, and most unsettl'd in the
enjoyment of that Peace, whereof we taught the way to others; although indeed
our Wicklefs preaching, at which all the succeding Reformers more effectually
lighted their Tapers, was to his Contrymen but a short blaze soon dampt and
stifled by the Pope, and Prelates for six or seven Kings Reigns; yet me
thinks the Precedencie which GOD gave this Island, to be the first Restorer of
buried Truth, should have been followed with more happy success, and sooner
attained Perfection; in which, as yet we are amongst the last: for, albeit in
purity of Doctrine we agree with our Brethren; yet in execution and applying of
Doctrine home, and laying the salve to the very Orifice of the wound; yea
tenting and searching to the Core, without which Pulpit Preaching is but
shooting at Rovers; in this we are no better then a Schism, from all the
Reformation, and a sore scandal to them; for while we hold Ordination to
belong only to Bishops, as our Prelates do, we must of necessity hold also
their Ministers to be no Ministers, and shortly after their Church to be no
Church. Not to speak of those senseless Ceremonies which we only retain,
as a dangerous earnest of sliding back to Rome, and serving merely, either as
a mist to cover nakedness where true grace is extinguished; or as an Interlude
to set out the pomp of Prelatisme. Certainly it would be worth the while
therefore and the pains, to enquire more particularly, what, and how many the
che^We causes have been, that have still hindered our Uniform Con^ to the rest
of the Churches abroad, (at this time especially) when the Kingdom is in a
good propensity thereto; and all Men in Prayers, in Hopes, or in Disputes,
either for or against it.

Yet will I not insist on that which may seem to be the cause on GODS part; as
his judgment on our sins, the trial of his own, the unmasking of
Hypocrites; nor shall I stay to speak of the continual eagernes and extreme
diligence of the Pope and Papists to stop the furtherance of Reformation, which
know they have no hold or hope of England their lost Darling, longer then the
government of Bishops bolsters them out; and therefore plot all they can to
uphold them, as may be seen by the Book of Santa Clara the Popish Priest in
defense of Bishops, which came out piping hot much about the time that one of
our own Prelates out of an ominous fear had writ on the same Argnment; as if
they had joined their forces like good Confederates to support one falling
Babel.

But I shall chiefly endeavor to declare those Causes that hinder the
forwarding of true Discipline, which are among our selves. Orderly proceeding
will divide our inquiry into our Forefathers days, and into our Times. HENRY
the 8. was the first that rent this Kingdom from the Popes Subjection totally;
but his Quarrel being more about Supremacy, then other faultiness in
Religion that he regarded, it is no marvel if he stuck where he did. The next
default was in the Bishops, who though they had renounced the Pope, they still
hugged the Popedom, and shared the Authority among themselves, by their six
bloody Articles persecuting the Protestants no slacker then the Pope would have
done. And doutles, when ever the Pope shall fall, if his ruin be not like the
sudden down-come of a Tower, the Bishops, when they see him tottering, will
leave him, and fall to scrambling, catch who may, he a Patriarch-dome, and
another what comes next hand; as the French Cardinal of late, and the Sea of
Canterbury has plainly affected.

In Edward the 6. Days, why a complete Reform was not effected, to any
considerate man may appear. First, he no sooner entered into his Kingdom, but
into a War with Scotland; from whence the Protector returning with Victory
had but newly put his hand to repeal the 6. Articles, and throw the Images out
of Churches, but Rebellions on all sides stirred up by obdurate Papists, and
other Tumults with a plain War in Norfolk, holding tack against two of the
Kings Generals, made them of force content themselves with what they had
already done. Hereupon followed ambitious Contentions among the Peers, which
ceased not but with the Protectors death, who was the most zealous in this
point: and then Northumberland was he that could do most in England, who
little minding Religion, (as his Apostacy well showed at his death, bent all
his wit how to bring the Right of the Crown into his own Line. And for the
Bishops, they were so far from any such worthy Attempts, as that they suffered
themselves to be the common stales to coun tenance with their prostituted
Gravities every Politic Fe^ch that was then on foot, as often as the Potent
Statists pleased to employ them. Never do we read that they made use of their
Authority and high Place of access, to bring the jarring Nobility to Christian
peace, or to withstand their di^oyall Projects; but if a Toleration for Mass
were to be begged of the King for his Sister MARY, lest CHARLES the Fifth should
be angry; who but the grave Prelates Cranmer and Ridley must be sent to extort
it from the young King? But out of the mouth of that godly and Royal Child,
Christ himself returned such an awful repulse to those halting and
time-serving Prelates, that after much bold importunity, they went their way
not without shame and tears.

Nor was this the first time that they discovered to be followers of this
World; for when the Protectors Brother, Lord Sudley, the Admiral through
private malice and mal-engine was to lose his life, no man could be found
fitter then Bishop Latimer (like another Doctor Shaw) to divulge in his Sermon
the forged Accusations laid to his charge, thereby to defame him with the
People, who else was thought would take ill the innocent man's death; unless
the Reverend Bishop could warrant them there was no foul play. What could be
more impious then to debar the Children of the King from their right to the
Crown? To comply with the ambitious ^urpation of a Traitor; and to make void
the last Will of HENRY 8, to which the Breakers had sworn observance? Yet
Bishop Cranmer, one of the Executors, and the other Bishops none refusing,
(lest they should resist the Duke of Northumberland) could find in their
Consciences to set their hands to the disinabling and defeating not only of
Princess MARY the Papist, but of ELIZABETH the Protestant, and (by the Bishops
judgment) the Lawful Issue of King HENRY.

Who then can think, (though these Prelates had sought a further Reformation)
that the least wry face of a Politician would not have hush't them. But it will
be said, These men were Martyrs: What then? Though every true Christian will be
a Martyr when he is called to it; not presently does it follow that every one
suffering for Religion, is without exception. Saint Paul writes, that A man may
give his Body to be burnt, (meaning for Religion) and yet not have Charity: He
is not therefore above all possibility of erring, because he burns for some
Points of Truth.

Witness the Arians and Pelagians which were slain by the Heathen for Christ's
sake; yet we take both these for no true friends of Christ. If the Martyrs
(says Cyprian in his ^0. Epistle) decree one thing, and the Gospel another,
either the Martyrs must lose their Crown by not observing the Gospel for which
they are Martyrs; or the Majesty of the Gospel must be broken and lie slat, if
it can be overtopt by the novelty of any other Decree.

And heerewithall I invoke the Immortal DEITY Reveler and Judge of Secrets,
That wherever I have in this BOOK plainly and roundly (though worthily and
truly) laid open the faults and blemishes of Fathers, Martyrs, or Christian
Emperors; or have otherwise inveighed against Error and Superstition with
vehement Expressions: I have done it, neither out of malice, nor list to speak
evil, nor any vainglory; but of mere necessity, to vindicate the spotless
Truth from an ignominious bondage, whose native worth is now become of such a
low esteem, that she is like to find small credit with us for what she can
say, unless she can bring a Ticket from (...), Latimer, and Ridley; or prove
her self a retainer to Constantine, and wear his badge. More tolerable it
were for the Church of GOD that all these Names were utterly (...), like the
Brazen Serpent; then that men's fond opinion should thus idolize them, and the
Heavenly Truth be thus captivated.

Now to proceed, whatsoever the Bishops were, it seems they themselves were
unsatisfi'd in matters of Religion, as they then stood, by that Commission
granted to 8. Bishops, 8. other Divines, 8. Civilians, 8. common Lawyers, to
frame Ecclesiastical Constitutions; which no wonder if it came to nothing; for
(as Hayward relates) both their Professions and their Ends were different.
Lastly, we all know by Examples, that exact Reformation is not perfited at the
first push, and those unweildy Times of Edward 6. may hold some Plea by this
excuse: Now let any reasonable man judge whether that Kings Reign be a fit
time from whence to pattern out the Constitution of a Church Discipline, much
less that it should yield occasion from whence to foster and establish the
continuance of Imperfection with the commendatory subscriptions of Confessors
and Martyrs, to entitle and engage a glorious Name to a gross corruption. It
was not Episcopacie that wrought in them the Heavenly Fortitude of Martyrdom;
as little is it that Martyrdom can make good Episcopacie: But it was
Episcopacie that led the good and holy Men through the temptation of the
Enemy, and the snare of this present world to many blameworthy and
opprobrious Actions. And it is still Episcopacie that before all our eyes
worsens and sluggs the most learned, and seeming religious of our Ministers,
who no sooner advanced to it, but like a seething pot set to cool, sensibly
exhale and reake out the greatest part of that zeal, and those Gifts which
were formerly in them, settling in a skinny congealment of ease and sloth at
the top: and if they keep their Learning by some potent sway of Nature, it is a
rare chance; but their devotion most commonly comes to that queazy temper of
luke-warmnesse, that gives a Vomit to GOD himself.

But what do we suffer misshapen and enormous (...), as we do, thus to
blanch and varnish her (...) with the fair colors, as before of Mar^yrdome,
so now of Episcopacie? They are not (...), GOD and all good Men know they are
not, that have filled this Land with late confusion and violence; but a
Tyrannical crew and Corporation of Impostors, that have blinded and abused the
World so long under that Name. He that inabl'd with gifts from God, and the
lawful and Primitive choice of the Church assembled in convenient number,
faithfully from that time forward feeds his Parochial Flock, has his coequall
and compresbyteriall Power to ordain Ministers and Deacons by public Prayer,
and Vote of Christ's Congregation in like sort as he himself was ordained, and
is a true Apostolic Bishop. But when he steps up into the Chair of
Pontifical Pride, and changes a moderate and exemplary House, for a
mis-govern'd and haughty Palace, spiritual Dignity for carnal Precedence, and
secular high Office and employment for the high Negotiations of his Heavenly
(...), Then he degrades, then he un-Bishops himself; he that makes him
Bishop makes him no Bishop. No marvel therefore if S. Martin complained to
Sulpitius Severus that since he was Bishop he felt inwardly a sensible decay
of those virtues and graces that God had given him in great measure before;
Although the same Sulpitius write that he was nothing tainted, or altered in
his habit, diet, or personal demeanor from that simple plainness to which he
first betook himself. It was not therefore that thing alone which God took
displeasure at in the Bishops of those times, but rather an universal
rottennes, and gangrene in the whole Function.

From hence then I pass to Qu. ELIZABETH, the next Protestant Prince, in whose
Days why Religion attained not a perfect reducement in the beginning of her
Reign, I suppose the hindering Causes will be found to be common with some
formerly alleged for King EDWARD 6. the greenness of the Times, the weak
Estate which Qu. MARY left the Realm in, the great Places and Offices executed
by Papists, the Judges, the Lawyers, the Justices of Peace for the most part
Popish, the Bishops firm to Rome, from whence was to be expected the furious
(...) of Excommunications; and absolving the People from their Obedience. Next,
her private Councillors, whoever they were persuaded her (as Camden writes)
that the altering of Ecclesiastical Policy would move sedition. Then was the
(...) given to a number of moderate (...), and Sir Tho. Smith a Statesman to
be purged, and Physick't: And surely they were moderate Divines indeed,
neither hot nor cold; (...) Grindall the best of them, afterward Arch Bishop
of Canterbury lost favor in the Court, and I think was discharged the
government of his See for favoring the Ministers, though Camden seem willing
to find another Cause: therefore about her second Year in a Parliament of Men
and Minds some scarce well grounded, others belching the sour Crudities of
yesterdayes Popery, those Constitutions of EDW. 6. which as you heard before,
no way satisfied the men that made them, are now established for best, and not
to be mended. From that time followed nothing but Imprisonments, troubles,
disgraces on all those that found fault with the Decrees of the Conv^cation,
and strait were they branded with the Name of Puritans. As for the Queen her
self, she was made believe that by putting down Bishops her Prerogative
would be infringed, of which shall be spoken anon, as the course of Method
brings it in. And why the Prelates labored it should be so thought, ask not
them, but ask their Bellies. They had found a good Tabernacle, they sat under
a spreading Vine, their Lot was fallen in a fair Inheritance. And these
perhaps were the chief impeachments of a more sound rectifying the Church in
the Queens Time.

From this Period I count to begin our Times, which, because they concern us
more nearly, and our own eyes and ears can give us the ampler scope to
judge, will require a more exact search; and to effect this the speedier, I
shall distinguish such as I esteem to be the hinderers of Reformation into 3.
sorts, Antiquitarians (for so I had rather call them then Antiquaries, whose
labors are useful and laudable) 2. Libertines, 3. Politicians.

To the votarists of Antiquity I shall think to have fully answered, if I shall
be able to prove out of Antiquity, First, that if they will conform our Bishops
to the purer times, they must mew their feathers, and their pounces, and make
but curttail'd Bishops of them; and we know they hate to be dockt and clipped, as
much as to be put down outright. Secondly, that those purer times were corrupt,
and their Books corrupted soon after. Thirdly, that the best of those that then
wrote, disclaim that any man should repose on them, and send all to the
Scriptures.

First therefore, if those that over-affect Antiquity, will follow the square
thereof, their Bishops must be elected by the hands of the whole Church. The
ancientest of the extant Fathers Ignatius, writing to the Philadelphians says,
that it belongs to them as to the Church of God to choose a Bishop. Let no man
cavil, but take the Church of God as meaning the whole consistence of Orders
and Members, as S. Paul's Epistles express, and this likewise being read over:
Besides this, it is there to be marked, that those Philadelphians are exhorted
to choose a Bishop of Antioch. Whence it seems by the way that there was not
that wary limitation of Dioces in those times, which is confirmed even by a
fast friend of Episcopacie, Camden, who cannot but love Bishops, as well as old
coins, and his much lamented Monasteries for antiquities sake. He writes in his
description of Scotland, that over all the world Bishops had no certain
Dioces, till Pope Dionysius about the year 268. did cut them out, and that the
Bishops of Scotland executed their function in what place soever they came
indifferently, and without distinction till King Malcolm the third, about the
year 1070. whence may be guest what their function was: was it to go about
circl'd with a band of rooking Officials, with cloak bags full of Citations,
and Processes to be served by a corporalty of griffonlike Promooters, and
Apparitors? Did he go about to pitch down his Court, as an Empirick does his
banck, to inveigle in all the money of the Con^trey? no certainly it would not
have bin permitted him to exercise any such function indifferently wherever he
came. And verily some such matter it was as want of a fat Dioces that kept our
Britain Bishops so poor in the Primitive times, that being called to the
Council of Ariminum in the year 359. they had not wherewithal to defray the
charges of their journey, but were fed; and lodged upon the Emperors cost,
which must needs be no accidental, but usual poverty in them, for the author
Sulp. Severus in his 2 Book of Church History praises them, and avouches it
praiseworthy in a Bishop, to be so poor as to have nothing of his own. But to
return to the ancient election of Bishops that it could not lawfully be without
the consent of the people is so express in Cyprian, and so often to be met
with, that to cite each place at large, were to translate a good part of the
volume, therefore touching the chief passages, I refer the rest to whom so
list peruse the Author himself: in the 24. Epist. If a Bishop says he, be
once made and allowed by the testimony and judgment of his colleagues, and the
people, no other can be made. In the 55. When a Bishop is made by the suffrage
of all the people in peace. In the 68. mark but what he says, The people
chiefly has power, either of choosing worthy ones, or refusing unworthy: this
he there proves by authorities out of the old and new Testament, and with solid
reasons: these were his antiquities.

This voice of the people to be had ever in Episcopal elections was so well
known, before Cyprians time, even to those that were without the Church, that
the Emperor Alexander Severus desired to have his governors of Provinces
chosen in the same manner, as (...) can tell: So little thought it he offensive
to Monarchy; and if single authorities persuade not, hearken what the whole
general Council of Nicaea the first and famousest of all the rest determines,
writing a Synodal Epist. to the African Churches, to warn them of Arrianisme,
it exhorts them to choose orthodox Bishops in the place of the dead so they be
worthy, and the people choose them, whereby they seem to make the peoples
assent so necessary; that merit without their free choice were not sufficient
to make a Bishop. What would ye say now grave Fathers if you should wake and
see unworthy Bishops, or rather no Bishops, but Egyptian taskmasters of
Ceremonies thrust purposely upon the groaning Church to the affliction, and
vexation of Gods people? It was not of old that a Conspiracy of Bishops could
frustrate and fob off the right of the people, for we may read how S. Martin
soon after Constantine was made Bishop of Turon in France by the peoples
consent from all places thereabout m^ugre all the opposition that the Bishops
could make. Thus went matters of the Church almost 400. year after Christ, and
very probably far lower, for Nicephorus Phocas the Greek Emperor, whose
reign fell near the 1000. year of our Lord, having done many things
tyrannically, is said by Cedrenus to have done nothing more grievous and
displeasing to the people, then to have in-acted that no Bishop should be
chosen without his will; so long did this right remain to the people in the
midst of other palpable corruptions: Now for Episcopal dignity, what it was,
see out of Ignatius, who in his Epistle to those of Trallis confesses that the
Presbyters, are his fellow Counselors, and fellow benchers. And Cyprian in
many places, as in the 6. 41. 52. Epist. speaking of Presbyters, calls them his
Compresbyters, as if he deemed himself no other, whenas by the same place it
appears he was a Bishop, he calls them Brethren; but that will be thought his
meekness: yea, but the Presbyters and Deacons writing to him think they do
him honor enough when they phrase him no higher then Brother Cyprian, and
dear Cyprian in the 26. Epist. For their Authority it is evident not to have
bin single, but depending on the counsel of the Presbyters, as from (...) was
ere while alleged; and the same Cyprian acknowledges as much in the 6 Epist.
and adds thereto that he had determined from his entrance into the Office of
Bishop to do nothing without the consent of his people, and so in the 31.
Epist, for it were tedious to course through all his writings which are so full
of the like assertions, insomuch that even in the womb and center of Apostasy
Rome it self, there yet remains a glimps of this truth, for the Pope himself,
as a learned English writer notes well, performs all E^clesiasticall
jurisdiction as in Consistory amongst his Cardinals, which were originally but
the Parish Priests of Rome. Thus then did the Spirit of unity and meekness
inspire, and animate every joint, and sinew of the mystical body, but now the
gravest, and worthiest Minister, atrue Bishop of his fold shall be reviled, and
ruffl'd by an insulting, and only-Canon-wise Prelate, as if he were some slight
paltry companion: and the people of God redeemed, and washed with Christ's
blood, and dignified with so many glorious titles of Saints, and sons in the
Gospel, are now no better reputed then impure ethnicks, and lay dogs; stones
and Pillars, and Crucifixes have now the honor, and the alms due to Christ's
living members; the Table of Communion now become a Table of separation stands
like an exalted platform upon the brow of the quire, fortified with bulwark,
^and barricado, to keep off the profane touch of the Laics, whilst the
obscene, and surfered Priest scruples not to paw, and mammock the sacramental
bread, as familiarly as his Tavern Biscuit. And thus the people vilifi'd and
rejected by them, give over the earnest study of virtue, and godliness as a
thing of greater purity then they need, and the search of divine knowledge as a
mystery too high for their capacity's, and only for Churchmen to meddle with,
which is that the Prelates desire, that when they have brought us back to
Popish blindness we might commit to their dispose the whole managing of our
salvation, for they think it was never fair world with them since that time:
But he that will mould a modern Bishop into a primitive, must yield him to be
elected by the popular voice, undiocest, unrevenu'd, unlorded, and leave him
nothing but brotherly equality, matchles temperance, frequent fasting,
incessant prayer, and preaching, continual watchings, and labors in his
Ministry, which what a rich booty it would be, what a plump endowment to the
many-benefice-gaping mouth of a Prelate, what a relish it would give to his
canary-sucking, and swan-eating palate, let old Bishop Mountain judge for me.

How little therefore those ancient times make for modern Bishops has bin
plainly discoursed, but let them make for them as much as they will, yet why we
ought not stand to their arbitrament shall now appear by a threefold
corruption which will be found upon them. 1. The best
times were spreadingly infected. 2. The best
men of those times foully tainted. 3. The best
writings of those men dangerously adulterated. These Positions are to be made
good out of those times witnessing of themselves. First, Ignatius in his early
days testifies to the Churches of Asia, that even then Heresies were sprung
up, and rife every where, as Eusebius relates in his 3. Book, 35. chap. after
the Greek number. And Hegesippus a grave Church writer of prime Antiquity
affirms in the same Book of Eusebius. c. 32. that while the Apostles were on earth
the depravers of doctrine did but lurk, but they once gone, with open forehead
they durst preach down the truth with falsities: yea those that are reckoned
for orthodox began to make sad, and shameful rents in the Church about the
trivial celebration of Feasts, not agreeing when to keep Easter day, which
controversy grew so hot, that Victor the Bishop of Rome Excommunicated all the
Churches of Asia for no other cause, and was worthily thereof reproved by
Irenaeus. For can any sound Theologer think that these great Fathers understood
what was Gospel, or what was Excommunication? doubtless that which led the
good men into fraud and error was, that they attended more to the near
tradition of what they heard the Apostles sometimes did, then to what they had
left written, not considering that many things which they did, were by the
Apostles themselves professed to be done only for the present, and of mere
indulgence to some scrupulous converts of the Circumcision, but what they writ
was of firm decree to all future ages. Look but a century lower in the 1. cap.
of Eusebius 8. Book. What a universal tetter of impurity had envenomed every
part, order, and degree of the Church, to omit the lay herd which will be
little regarded, those that seemed to be our Pastors, says he, overturning the
Law of Gods worship, burnt in contentions one toward another, and incresing in
hatred and bitterness, outragiously sought to uphold Lordship, and command as it
were a tyranny. Stay but a little, magnanimous Bishops, suppress your aspiring
thoughts, for there is nothing wanting but Constantine to reign, and then
Tyranny her self shall give up all her cittadels into your hands, and count ye
thence forward her trustiest agents. Such were these that must be called the
ancientest, and most virgin times between Christ and Constantine. Nor was this
general contagion in their actions, and not in their writings: who is ignorant
of the foul errors, the ridiculous wresting of Scripture, the Heresies, the
vanities thick sown through the volums of Justin Mar^yr, Clemens, Origin, (...)
and others of eldest time? Who would think him fit to write an Apology for
Christian Faith to the Roman Senate, that would tell them how of the Angels,
which he must needs mean those in Genesis called the Sons of God, mixing with
Women were begotten the Devils, as good Justin Martyr in his Apology told
them. But more indignation would it move to any Christian that shall read
Tertullian terming S. Paul a novice and raw in grace, for reproving S. Peter at
Antioch, worthy to be blamed if we believe the Epistle to the Galatians:
perhaps from this hint the blasphemous Jesuits presumed in Italy to give their
judgment of S. Paul, as of a hot headed person, as Sandys in his Relations
tells us.

Now besides all this, who knows not how many surreptitious works are ingrass'd
into the legitimate writings of the Fathers, and of those Books that pass for
authentic who knows what has bin tampered withal, what has bin razed out,
what has bin inserted, besides the late legerdemain of the Papists, that which
Sulpitius writes concerning Origens Books gives us cause vehemently to suspect,
there has bin packing of old. In the third chap. of his 1. Dialogue, we may
read what wrangling the Bishops and Monks had about the reading, or not reading
of Origin, some objecting that he was corrupted by Heretics, others answering
that all such Books had bin so dealt with. How then shall I trust these times
to lead me, that restifie so ill of leading themselves, certainly of their
defects their own witness may be best received, but of the rectitude, and
sincerity of their life and doctrine to judge rightly, we must judge by that
which was to be their rule.

But it will be objected that this was an (...) state of the Church wanting the
temporal Magistrate to suppress the license of false Brethren, and the
extravagancy of still-new opinions, a time not imitable for Church government,
where the temporal and spiritual power did not close in one belief, as under
Constantine. I am not of opinion to think the Church a Vine in this respect,
because, as they take it, she cannot subsist without clasping about the Elm of
worldly strength, and felicity, as if the heavenly City could not support it
self without the props and buttresses of secular Authority. They extol
Constantine because he extolled them; as our homebred Monks in their Histories
blanch the Kings their Benefactors, and brand those that went about to be their
Correctors. If he had curbed the growing Pride, Avarice, and Luxury of the
Clergy, then every Page of his Story should have swelled with his Faults, and
that which Zozimus the Heathen writes of him should have come in to boot: we
should have heard then in every Declamation how he slew his Nephew Commodus a
worthy man, his noble and eldest Son Crispus, his Wife Fausta, besides numbers
of his Friends; then his cruel exactions, his unsoundnesse in Religion,
favoring the Arrians that had been condemned in a Counsel, of which himself
sat as it were President, his hard measure and banishment of the faithful and
invincible Athanasius, his living unbaptiz'd almost to his dying day; these
blurs are too apparent in his Life. But since he must needs be the
Lord-starre of Reformation as some men clatter, it will be good to see further
his knowledge of Religion what it was, and by that we may likewise guess at
the sincerity of his Times in those that were not Heretical, it being likely
that he would converse with the famousest Prelates (for so he had made them)
that were to be found for learning.

Of his Arianisme we heard, and for the rest, a pretty scantling of his
Knowledge may be taken by his deferring to be baptized so many years, a thing
not usual, and repugnant to the Tenor of Scripture, Philip knowing nothing
that should hinder the Eunuch to be baptized after profession of his belief.
Next, by the excessive devotion, that I may not say Superstition both of him
and his Mother Helena, to find out the Cross on which Christ suffered, that
had long lien under the rubbish of old ruins, (a thing which the Disciples and
Kindred of our Savior might with more ease have done, if they had thought it a
pious duty:) some of the nails whereof he put into his Helmet, to bear off
blows in battle, others he fastened among the studds of his bridle, to
fulfill (as he thought, or his Court Bishops persuaded him) the Prophecy of
Zachariah; And it shall be that that which is in the bridle shall be holy to
the Lord. Part of the Cross, in which he thought such Virtue to reside, as
would prove a kind of Palladium to save the City where ever it remained, he
caused to be laid up in a Pillar of Porphyrie by his Statue. How he or his
Teachers could trifle thus with half an eye open upon Saint Paul's Principles,
I know not how to imagine.

How should then the dim Taper of this Emperors age that had such need of
snuffing, extend any beam to our Times wherewith we might hope to be better
lighted, then by those Luminaries that God has set up to shine to us far
nearer hand. And what Reformation he wrought for his own time it will not be
amiss to consider, he appointed certain times for Fasts, and Feasts, built
stately Churches, gave large Immunities to the Clergy, great Riches and
Promotions to Bishops, gave and minister'd occasion to bring in a Deluge of
Ceremonies, thereby either to draw in the Heathen by a resemblance of their
rites, or to set a gloss upon the simplicity, and plainness of Christianity
which to the gorgeous solemnities of Paganism, and the sense of the Worlds
Children seemed but a homely and Yeomanly Religion, for the beauty of inward
Sanctity was not within their prospect.

So that in this manner the Prelates both then and ever since coming from a
mean, and Plebeyan Life on a sudden to be Lords of stately Palaces, rich
furniture, delicious fare, and Princely attendance, thought the plain and
homespun verity of Christ's Gospel unfit any longer to hold their Lordships
acquaintance, unless the poor threadbare Matron were put into better clothes;
her chaste and modest veil surrounded with celestial beams they overlai'd
with wanton tresses, and in a a^aring tire (...) her with all the gaudy
allurements of a Whore.

Thus flourish't the Church with Constantines wealth, and thereafter were the
effects that followed; his Son Con^antius proved a flat Arian, and his Nephew
Julian an Apostate, (...) there his Race ended; the Church that before by
insensible degrees welk't and impaired, now with large steps went down hill
decaying; at this time Antichrist began first to put forth his horn, and that
saying was common that former times had wooden Chalices and golden Priests;
but they golden Chalices and wooden Priests. Formerly (says Sulpitius)
Martyrdom by glorious death was sought more greedily, then now Bishoprics by
vile Ambition are hunted after (speaking of these Times) and in another place;
they gape after possessions, they tend Lands and Livings, they coure over their
gold, they buy and sell: and if there be any that neither possess nor
traffic, that which is worse, they sit still, and expect gifts, and
prostitute every indu^ment of grace, every holy thing to sale. And in the end
of his History thus he concludes, all things went to wrack by the faction,
wilfulness, and avarice of the Bishops, and by this means Gods people, and
every good man was had in scorn and derision; which S. Martin found truly to be
said by his friend Sulpitius; for being held in admiration of all men, he had
only the Bishops his enemies, found God less favorable to him after he was
Bishop then before, and for his last 16. years would come at no Bishops
meeting. Thus you see Sir what Constantines doings in the Church brought forth,
either in his own or in his Sons Reign.

Now lest it should be thought that something else might ayle this Author thus
to hamper the Bishops of those days; I will bring you the opinion of three the
famousest men for wit and learuing, that Italy at this day glories of, whereby
it may be concluded for a received opinion even among men professing the Romish
Faith, that Constantine marred all in the Church. Dante in his 19. Canto of
Inferno has thus, as I will render it you in English blank Verse.

Ah Constantine, of how much ill was cause
Not thy Conversion, but those rich demaines
That the first wealthy Pope received of thee.
So in his 20. Canto of Paradise he makes the like complaint, and Petrarch
seconds him in the same mind in his 108. Sonnet which is wiped out by the
Inquisitor in some Editions; speaking of the Roman Antichrist as merely bred
up by Constantine.

Founded in chaste and humble Poverty,
Against them that raised thee do thou lift thy horn,
Impudent who^e, where have thou placed thy hope?
In thy Adulterers, or thy ill got wealth?
Another Constantine comes not in have.
Ariosto of Ferrara after both these in time, but equal in fame, following the
scope of his Poem in a difficult knot how to restore Orlando his chief Hero to
his lost senses, brings Astolfe the English Knight up into the moon, where S.
John, as he feignes, met him. Cant. 34.

And to be short, at last his guide him brings
Into a goodly valley, where he sees
A mighty mass of things strangely confused,
Things that on earth were lost, or were abused.
And amongst these so abused things listen what he met withal, under the
Conduct of the Evangelist.

Then past he to a flowery Mountain green,
Which once smelt sweet, now stinks as (...);
This was that gift (if you the truth will have)
That Constantine to good Sylvestro gave.
And this was a truth well known in England before this Poet was borne, as our
Chaucers Plowman shall tell you by and by upon another occasion. By all these
circumstances laid together, I do not see how it can be disputed what good this
Emperor Constantine wrought to the Church, but rather whether ever any, though
perhaps not wittingly, set open a door to more mischief in Christendom. There
is just cause therefore that when the Prelates cry out Let the Church be
reformed according to Constantine, it should sound to a judicious ear no
otherwise, then if they should say Make us rich, make us lofty, make us
lawless, for if any under him were not so, thanks to those ancient remains of
integrity, which were not yet quite worn out, and not to his Government.

Thus finally it appears that those purer Times were no such as they are cried
up, and not to be followed without suspicion, doubt and danger. The last point
wherein the Antiquary is to be dealt with at his own weapon, is to make it
manifest, that the ancientest, and best of the Fathers have disclaimed all
sufficiency in themselves that men should rely on, and sent all comers to the
Scriptures, as all sufficient; that this is true, will not be unduly gathered
by showing what esteem they had of Antiquity themselves, and what validity
they thought in it to prove Doctrine, or Discipline. I must of necessity begin
from the second rank of Fathers, because till then Antiquity could have no
Plea. Cyprian in his 63. Epistle. If any, says he, of our Ancestors either
ignorantly or out of simplicity has not observed that which the Lord taught us
by his example (speaking of the Lords Supper) his simplicity God may pardon of
his mercy, but we cannot be excused for following him, being instructed by the
Lord. And have not we the same instructions, and will not this holy man with
all the whole Consistory of Saints and Martyrs that lived of old rise up and
stop our mouths in judgment, when we shall go about to Father our Errors,
and opinions upon their Authority? in the 73. Epist. he adds, in vain do
they oppose custom to us if they be overcome by reason; as if custom were
greater then Truth, or that in spiritual things that were not to be followed,
which is revel'd for the better by the holy Ghost. In the 74. neither ought
Custom to hinder that Truth should not prevail, for Custom without Truth is
but agednesse of Error.

Next Lactantius, he that was preferred to have the bringing up of Constantines
children in his second Book of Institutions, Chap. 7. and 8. disputes against
the vain trust in Antiquity, as being the chiefest Argument of the Heathen
against the Christians, they do not consider, says he, what Religion is, but
they are confident it is true, because the Ancients delivered it, they count it
a trespass to examine it. And in the eighth, not because they went before us
in time, therefore in wisdom, which being given alike to all Ages, cannot be
prepossest by the Ancients; wherefore seeing that to seek the Truth is inbred
to all, they bereave themselves of wisdom the gift of God who without
judgment follow the Ancients, and are led by others like bruit beasts. St.
Austin writes to Fortunatian that he counts it lawful in the books of
whomsoever to reject that which he finds otherwise then true, and so he would
have others deal by him. He neither accounted, as it seems, those Fathers that
went before, nor himself, nor others of his rank, for men of more then
ordinary spirit, that might equally deceive, and be deceived. and oftimes,
setting our servile humors aside, yea God so ordering, we may find Truth with
one man, as soon as in a Counsel, as Cyprian agrees 71. Epist. Many things,
says he, are better revealed to single persons. At (...) in the first, and
best reputed Counsel of all the world, there had gone out a Canon to divorce
married Priests, had not one old man Paphnutius stood up, and reasoned against
it.

Now remains it to show clearly that the Fathers refer all decision of
controversy to the Scriptures, as all-sufficient to direct, to resolve, and to
determine. Ignatius taking his last leave of the Asian Churches, as he went to
martyrdom exhorted them to adhere close to the written doctrine of the
Apostles, necessarily written for posterity: so far was he from unwritten
traditions, as may be read in the 36. c. of Eusebius 3. b. In the 74. Epist. Of
Cyprian against Stefan Bish. of Rome imposing upon him a tradition, whence,
quoth he, is this tradition? is it fetched from the authority of Christ in the
Gospel, or of the Apostles in their Epistles: for God testifies that thosi
things are to be done which are written: and then thus; what obstinacy, what
presumption is this to prefer humane Tradition before divine ordinance? And
in the same Epist. If we shall return to the head, and beginning of divine
tradition (which we all know he means the Bible) humane error ceases, and the
reason of heavenly mysteries unfolded, whatsoever was obscure, becomes leare.
And in the 14. Distinct. of the same Epist directly against our modern
fantasies of a still visible Chnrch, he teaches; that succession of truth may
fail, to renew which we must have (...) to the fonntaines, using this excellent
similitude, if a Channel, or Conduit pipe which brought in water plentifully
before, suddenly fail, do we not go to the fountain to know the cause,
whether the Spring affords no more, or whether the vein be stopped, or turned
aside in the midcourse: thus ought we to do, keeping Gods precepts, that if in
ought the truth shall be changed, we may repair to the Gospel, and to the
Apostles, that thence may arise the reason of our doings, from whence our
order, and beginning arose. In the 75. he inveighs bitterly against Pope
Stefanus, for that he could boast his Succession from Peter, and yet foist in
Traditions that were not Apostolical. And in his Book of the unity of the
Church he compares those that neglecting Gods Word, follow the doctrines of
men, to Corch, Dathan, and Abiram. The very first page of (...) against the
Gentiles, averres the Scriptutes to be sufficient of themselves for the
declaration of Truth; and that if his friend Macarius read other Religious
writers, it was but (...) come un virtuoso, (as the Italians say,) as a lover
of elegance: and in his 2d Tome the 39. page, after he has rekon'd up the
Canonical Books, In these only, says he, is the doctrine of godliness (...),
let us man (...) to these, or take from these; and in his (...) having again
set down all the Writers of the old and new Testament, these, says he, be the
anchors, and props of our Faith: besides these, millions of other Books have
bin written by great and wise men according to rule, and agreement with these,
of which I will not now speak, as being of infinite number, and mere dependence
on the canonical Books. Basil in his 2d Tome writing of true Faith, tells his
auditors he is bound to teach them that which he has learned out of the Bible:
and in the same Treatise, he says, That seeing the Commandments of the Lord,
are faithful and sure for ever; it is a plain falling from the Faith, and a
high pride either to make void any thing therein, or ^o introduce any thing not
there to be found: and he gives the reason for Christ says, My Sheep hear my
voice, they will not follow another, but fly from him, because they know not
his voice. But not to be endless in quotations, it may chance to be objected,
that there be many opinions in the Fathers which have no ground in Scripture;
so much the less, may I say, should we follow them, for their own words shall
condemn them, and acquit us, that lean not on them; otherwise these their words
shall acquit them, and condemn us. But it will be replied, the Scriptures are
difficult to be understood, and therefore require the explanation of the
Fathers, it is true there be some Books, and especially some places in those
Books that remain clouded; yet ever that which is most necessary to be known is
most easy; and that which is most difficult, so far expounds it self ever,
as to tell us how little it imports our saving knowledge. Hence to infer a
general obscurity over all the text, is a mere suggestion of the Devil to
dissuade men from reading it, and casts an aspersion of dishonor both upon the
mercy, truth, and wisdom of. God: We count it no gentleness, or fair dealing
in a man of Power amongst us, to require strict, and punctual obedience, and
yet give out all his commands ambiguous and obscure, we should think he had a
plot upon us, certainly such commands were no commands, but ^nares. The very
essence of Truth is plainness, and brightness; the darkness and crookedness is
our own. The wisdom of God created understanding, fit and proportionable to
Truth the object, and end of it, as the eye to the thing visible. If our
understanding have a film of ignorance over it, or be blear with gazing on
other false glisterings, what is that to Truth? If we will but purge with
sovrain eyesalve that intellectual ray which God has planted in us, then we
would believe the Scriptures protesting their own plainnes, and perspicuity,
calling to them to be instructed, not only the wise, and learned, but the
simple, the poor, the babes, foretelling an extraordinary effusion of Gods
Spirit upon every age, and sex, attributing to all men, and requiring from
them the ability of searching, trying, examining all things, and by the Spirit
discerning that which is good; and as the Scriptures themselves pronounce their
own plainnes, so do the Fathers testify of them.

I will not run into a paroxysm of citations again in this point, only instance
Athanasius in his forementioned first page; the knowledge of Truth, says he,
wants no humane lore, as being evident in it self, and by the preaching of
Christ now opens brighter then the Sun. If these Doctors who had scarce half
the light that we enjoy, who all except 2 or 3 were ignorant of the Hebrew
tongue, and many of the Greek, blundring upon the dangerous, and suspectfull
translations of the Apostat Aquila, the Heretical Theodotion, the Judaiz'd
Symmachus; the erroneous Origin; if these could yet find the Bible so easy,
why should we doubt, that have all the helps of Learning, and faithful
industry that man in this life can look for, and the assistance of God as near
now to us as ever. But let the Scriptures be hard; are they more hard, more
crabbed, more abstruse then the Fathers? He that cannot understand the sober,
plain, and unaffected style of the Scriptures, will be ten times more puzzled
with the knotty Africanisms, the pampered metafors; the intricat, and involved
sentences of the Fathers; besides the fantastic, and declamatory flashes; the
crosse-jingling periods which cannot but disturb, and come thwart a settled
devotion worse then the din of bells, and rattles.

Now Sir, for the love of holy Reformation, what can be said more against these
importunat clients of Antiquity, then she her self their patroness has said.
Whether think ye would she approve still to dote upon immeasurable,
innumerable, and therefore unnecessary, and unmercifull volumes, choosing rather
to err with the specious name of the Fathers, or to take a ^ound Truth at the
hand of a plain upright man that all his days has bin diligently reading the
holy Scriptures, and thereto imploring Gods grace, while the admire^s of
Antiquity have bin beating their brains about their Ambones, their Diptychs,
and Meniaia's? Now, he that cannot tell of Stations, and Indictions; nor has
wasted his precious howrs in the endless conferring of Councels and Conclaves
that demolish one another, although I know many of those that pretend to be
great Rabbis in these studies have scarce saluted them from the strings, and
the titlepage, or to give 'em more, have bin but the Ferrets and Moushunts of
an Index: yet what Pastor, or Minister how learned, religious, or discreet
soever does not now bring both his cheeks full blown with Ecumenical, and
Synodical, shall be counted a lank, shallow, unsufficient man, yea a dunce, and
not worthy to speak about Reformation of Church Discipline. But I trust they
for whom God has reserved the honor of Reforming this Church will easily
perceive their adversaries drift in thus calling for Antiquity, they fear the
plain field of the Scriptures; the chase is too hot; they seek the dark, the
bushie, the tangled Forest, they would imbosk: they feel themselves struck in
the transparent streams of divine Truth, they would plunge, and tumble, and
think to ly hid in the foul weeds, and muddy waters, where no plummet can
reach the bottom. But let them beat themselves like Whales, and spend their oil
till they be dradg'd ashore: though wherefore should the Ministers give them so
much line for shifts, and delays? Wherefore should they not urge only the
Gospel, and hold it ever in their faces like a mirror of Diamond, till it
dazzle, and pierce their misty ey balls? maintaining it the honor of its
absolute sufficiency, and supremacy inviolable: For if the Scripture be for
Reformation, and Antiquity to boot, it is but an advantage to the dozen, it is no
winning cast: and though Antiquity be against it, while the Scriptures be for
it, the Cause is as good as ought to be wished, Antiquity it self sitting Judge.

But to draw to an end; the second sort of those, that may be justly numbered
among the hinderers of Reformation, are Libertines, these suggest that the
Discipline sought would be intolerable: for one Bishop now in a Dioces we
should then have a Pope in every Parish. It will not be requisite to Answer
these men, but only to discover them, for reason they have none, but lust, and
licentiousnes, and therefore answer can have none. It is not any Discipline that
they could live under, it is the corruption, and remisnes of Discipline that
they seek. Episcopacy duly executed, yea the Turkish, and Jewish rigor against
whoring, and drinking; the dear, and tender Discipline of a Father; the
sociable, and loving reproof of a Brother; the bosom admonition of a Friend is
a Presbytery, and a Consistory to them. It Is only the merry Friar in Chaucer
can disple them.

Full sweetly heard he confession
And pleasant was his absolution,
He was an easy man to give penance.
And so I leave them: and refer the political discourse of Episcopacy to a
Second Book.

OF REFORMATION, etc.
The Second Book.
Sir,
IT is a work good, and prudent to be able to guide one man; of larger extended
virtue to order well one house; but to govern a Nation piously, and justly,
which only is to say happily, is for a spirit of the greatest size, and
divinest mettle. And certainly of no less a mind, nor of less excellence in
another way, were they who by writing laid the solid, and true foundations of
this Science, which being of greatest importance to the life of man, yet there
is no art that has bin more cankered in her principles, more soyl'd, and
slubber'd with aphorisming pedantry then the art of policy; and that most,
where a man would think should least be, in Christian Commonwealths. They
teach not that to govern well is to train up a Nation in true wisdom and
virtue, and that which springs from thence magnanimity, (take heed of that) and
that which is our beginning, regeneration, and happiest end, likeness to God,
which in one word we call godliness, and that this is the true flourishing of a
Land, other things follow as the shadow does the substance: to teach thus were
mere pulpitry to them. This is the masterpiece of a modern politician, how to
qualify, and mould the sufferance and subjection of the people to the length
of that foot that is to tread on their necks, how rapine may serve it self
with the fair, and honorable pretenses of public good, how the puny Law may
be brought-under the wardship, and control of lust, and will; in which attempt
if they fall short, then must a superficial color of reputation by all means
direct or indirect be gotten to wash over the unsightly bruise of honor. To make
men governable in this manner their precepts mainly tend to break a national
spirit, and courage by count'nancing open riot, luxury, and ignorance, till
having thus disfigured and made men beneath men, as Juno in the Fable of (...),
they deliver up the poor transformed heifer of the Commonwealth to be ^ung and
vexed with the breese, and goad of oppression under the custody of some Argus
with a hundred eyes of jealousy. To be plainer Sir, how to soder, how to stop
a leak, how to keep up the floting carcas of a crazie, and diseased Monarchy,
or State betwixt wind, and water, swimming still upon her own dead lees, that
now is the deep design of a politician. Alas Sir! a Common-welth ought to be
but as one huge Christian personage, one mighty growth, and stature of an
honest man, as big, and compact in virtue as in body; for look what the
grounds, and causes are of single happiness to one man, the same ye shall find
them to a whole state, as (...) both in his ethics, and politiks, from the
principles of reason lays down by consequence therefore, that which is good,
and agreeable to monarchy, will appear soonest to be so, by being good, and
agreeable to the true welfare of every Christian, and that which can be justly
proved hurtful, and offensive to every true Christian, will be evinc't to be
alike hurtful to monarchy: for God forbid, that we should separate and
distinguish the end, and good of a monarch, from the end and good of the
monarchy, or of that, from Christianity. How then this third, and last fort
that hinder reformation, will justify that it stands not with reason of state,
I much muse? For certain I am ^he Bible is shut against them, as certain that
neither Plato, nor Aristotle is for their turns, What they can bring us now
from the Schools of Loyola with his Jesuits, or their Malvezzi that can cut
Tacitus into slivers and steaks, we shall presently hear. They allege 1. That
the Church government must be conformable to the civil polity, next, that no
form of Church government is agreeable to monarchy, but that of Bishops. Must
Church government that is appointed in the Gospel, and has chief respect to the
soul, be conformable, and pliant to civil, that is arbitrary, and chiefly
conversant about the visible and external part of man? this is the very maxim
that molded the Calvs of Bethel and of Dan, this was the quintessence of
Jeroboams policy, he made Religion conform to his politic interests, and this
was the sin that watched over theIsraelites till their final captivity If this
State principle come from the Prelates, as they affect to be counted statists,
let them look back to Elutherius Bishop of Rome, and see what he thought of the
policy of England; being required by Lucius the first Christian King of this
Island to give his counsel for the founding of Religious Laws, little thought he
of this sage caution, but bids him betake himself to the old, and new
Testament, and receive direction from them how to administer both Church, and
Commonwealth; that he was Gods Vicar, and therefore to rule by Gods Laws, that
the Edicts of Caesar we may at all times disallow, but the Statutes of God for
no reason we may reject. Now certain if Church-goverment be taught in the
Gofpel, as the Bishops dare not deny, we may well conclude of what late
standing this Position is, newly calculated for the altitude of Bishop
elevation, and lettice for their lips. But by what example can they show that
the form of Church Discipline must be minted, and modeled out to secular
pretenses? The ancient Republic of the Jews is evident to have run through all
the changes of civil estate, if we survey the Story from the giving of the Law
to the Herod's, yet did one manner of Priestly government serve without
inconvenience to all these temporal mutations: it served the mild Aristocracy
of elective Dukes, and heads of Tribes joined with them; the dictatorship of
the Judges, the easy, or hard-handed Monarchy's, the domestic, or foreign
tyrannies, Lastly the Roman Senate from without, the Jewish Senate at home with
the Galilean Te^rarch, yet the Levites had some right to deal in civil affairs:
but seeing the Euangelical precept forbids Churchmen to intermeddle with
worldly employments, what interweavings, or interworkings can knit the
Minister, and the Magistrate in their several functions to the regard of any
precise correspondency? Seeing that the Churchmans office is only to teach men
the Christian Faith, to exhort all, to encourage the good, to admonish the bad,
privately the less offender, publicly the scanda lous and stubborn; to
censure, and separate from the commuuion of Christ's flock, the contagious, and
incorrigible, to receive with joy, and fatherly compassion the penitent, all
this must be don, and more then this is beyond any Church authority. What is all
this either here, or there to the temporal regiment of Wealpublick, whether it
be Popular, Princely, or Monarchical? Where does it entrench upon the temporal
governor, where does it come in his walk? where does it make inrode upon his
jurisdiction? Indeed if the Ministers part be rightly discharged, it renders
him the people more conscionable, quiet, and easy to be gov^'d, if otherwise
his life and doctrine will declare him. If therefore the Constitution of the
Church be already set down by divine prescript, as all sides confess, then can
she not be a handmaid to wait on civil commodities, and respects and if the
nature and limits of Church Discipline be such, as are either helpful to all
political estates indifferently, or have no particular relation to any, then is
there no necessity, nor indeed possibility of linking the one with the other in
a special conformation.

Now for their second (...), That no form of Church government is agreeable to
Monarchy, but that of Bishops, although it fall to pieces of it self by that
which has (...) said; yet to give them play front, and (...), it shall be my
task to prove that Episcopacy with that Authority which it challenges in England
is not only not agreeable, but tending to the destruction of Monarchy. While
the Primitive Pastors of the Church of God labored faithfully in their
Ministry, tending only their Sheep, and not seeking, but avoiding all worldly
matters as clogs, and indeed derogations, and debasements to their high
calling, little needed the Princes, and potentates of the earth, which way
soever the Gospel was spread, to study ways how to make a coherence between the
Churches politic, and theirs: therefore when Pilate heard once our Savior
Christ professing that his Kingdom was not of this world, he thought the man
could not stand much in Caesar's light, nor much indammage the Roman Empire: for
if the life of Christ be hid to this world, much more is his Scepter
unoperative, but in spiritual things. And thus lived, for 2 or 3 ages, the
Successors of the Apostles. But when through Constantines lavish Superstition
they forsook their first love, and set themselves up two Gods instead, Mammon
and their Belly, then taking advantage of the spiritual power which they had on
men's consciences, they began to cast a longing eye to get the body also, and
bodily things into their command, upon which their carnal desires, the Spirit
daily quenching and dying in them, they knew no way to keep themselves up from
falling to nothing, but by bolstering, and supporting their inward rottenes by
a carnal, and outward strength. For a while they rather privily sought
opportunity, then hastily disclosed their project, but when Constantine was
dead, and 3 or 4 Emperors more, their drift became notorious, and offensive to
the whole world: for while Theodosius the younger reigned, thus writes Socrates
the Historian in his 7th Book, 11. chap. now began an ill name to stick upon
the Bishops of Rome, and Alexandria, who beyond their Priestly bounds now long
ago had stepped into principality and this was scarce 80. years since their
raising from the meanest worldly condition. Of courtesy now let any man tell
me, if they draw to themselves a temporal strength and power out of Caesar's
Dominion, is not Caesar's Empire thereby diminisht? but this was a stolen bit,
hitherto he was but a Caterpiller secretly gnawing at Monarchy, the next time
you shall see him a Woolfe, a Lion, lifting his paw against his raiser, as
Petrarch expressed it, and finally an open enemy, and subverter of the Greek
Empire. Philippicus and Leo, with diverse other Emperors after them, not
without the advice of their Patriarchs, and at length of a whole Eastern
Counsel of 3. hundred thirty eight Bishops, threw the Images out of Churches
as being decreed idolatrous.

Upon this goodly occasion the Bishop of Rome not only seizes the City, and all
the Territory about into his own hands, and makes himself Lord thereof, which
till then was governed by a Greek Magistrate, but absolves all Italy of their
Tribute, and obedience due to the Emperor, because he obeyed Gods
Commandment in abolishing Idolatry.

Mark Sir here how the Pope came by S. Peter's Patrimony, as he feigns it, not
the donation of Constantine, but idolatry and rebellion got it him. Ye need
but read Sigonius one of his own Sect to know the Story at large. And now to
shroud himself against a storm from the Greek Continent, and provide a
Champion to bear him out in these practices, he takes upon him by Papal
sentence to unthrone Chilpericus the rightful K. of France, and gives the
Kingdom to Pepin for no other cause but that he seemed to him the more active
man. If he were a friend herein to Monarchy I know not, but to the Monarch I
need not ask what he was.

Having thus made Pepin his fast friend, he calls him into Italy against
Aistulphus the Lombard, that war^'d upon him for his late Usurpation of Rome as
belonging to Ravenna which he had newly won. Pepin, not unobedient to the Popes
call, passing into Italy, frees him out of danger, and wins for him the whole
exarchat of Ravenna, which though it had been almost immediately before, the
hereditary possession of that Monarchy which was his chief Patron, and
Benefactor, yet he takes, and keeps it to himself as lawful prize, and given
to St. Peter. What a dangerous fallacy is this, when a spiritual man may
snatch to himself any temporal Dignity, or Dominion under pretense of
receiving it for the Churches use; thus he claims Naples, Sicily, England, and
what not? To be short, under show of his zeal against the errors of the
Greek Church, he never ceast baiting, and goring the Successors of his best
Lord Constantine what by his barking curses, and Excommunications, what by his
hindering the Western Princes from ayding them against the Sarazens, and
Turks, unless when they humored him; so that it may be truly affirmed, he
was the subversion, and fall of that Monarchy, which was the hoisting of him;
this, besides Petrarch, whom I have cited, our Chaucer also has observed, and
gives from hence a caution to England to beware of her Bishops in time, for
that their ends, and aims are no more freindly to Monarchy then the Popes.

Thus he brings in the Plowman speaking, 2. Part. Stanz. 28.

The Emperor Yafe the Pope sometime
So high Lordship him about
That at last the silly Kime,
The proud Pope put him out,
So of this Realm is no doubt,
But Lords beware, and them d^fend,
For now these folks be wonders ^out
The King and Lords now this amend
And in the next Stanza which begins the third part of the tale he argues that
they ought not to be Lords.

Moses Law forbode it tho
That Priests should no Lordships welde
Christ's Gospel bids also,
That they should no Lordships held
Ne Christ's Apostles were never so bold
No such Lordships to hem embrace
But smeren her Sheep, and keep her Fold.
And so forward. Whether the Bishops of England have deserved thus to be
feared by men so wise as our Chaucer is esteemed, and how agreeable to our
Monarchy, and Monarchs their demeanor has been, he that is but meanly read in
our Chronicles needs not be instructed. Have they not been as the Canaanites,
and Philistims to this Kingdom? what Treasons, what revolts to the Pope, what
Rebellions, and those the basest, and most preten selesse have they not been
chief in? What could Monarchy think when Becket durst challenge the custody of
Rotchester-Castle, and the Tower of London, as appertaining to his Signory? To
omit his other insolences and affronts to Regal Majesty, till the Lashes
inflicted on the a^ointed body of the King washed off the holy Unction with his
blood drawn by the polluted hands of Bishops, Abbots, and Monks.

What good upholders of Royalty were the Bishops, when by their rebellious
opposition against King John, Normandy was lost, he himself deposed, and this
Kingdom made over to the Pope? When the Bishop of Winchester durst tell the
Nobles, the Pillars of the Realm, that there were no Peers in England, as in
France, but that the King might do what he pleased. What could Tyranny say
more? it would be petty now if I should insist upon the rendering up of Tournay
by Woolseyes Treason, the Excommunications, Cursings, and Interdicts upon the
whole Land. For happily I shall be cut off short by a reply, that these were the
faults of the men, and their Popish errors, not of Episcopacie, that has now
renounced the Pope, and is a Protestant. Yes sure; as wise and famous men have
suspected, and feared the Protestant Episcopacie in England, as those that have
feared the Papal.

You know Sir what was the judgment of Padre Paolo the great Venetian
Antagonist of the Pope, for it is extant in the hands of many men, whereby he
declares his fear, that when the Hierarchy of England shall light into the
hands of busy and audacious men, or shall meet with Princes tractable to the
Prelacy, then much mischief is like to ensue. And can it be nearer hand, then
when Bishops shall openly affirm that, No Bishop, no King? a trim Paradox,
and that ye may know where they have been a begging for it, I will fetch you
the Twin-brother to it out of the Jesuits Cell; they feeling the Axe of Gods
reformation hewing at the old and hollow trunk of Papacy, and finding the
Spaniard their surest friend, and safest refuge, to sooth him up in his dream
of a fifth Monarchy, and withal to uphold the decrepit Papalty have invented
this super-politick Aphorism, as one terms it, One Pope, and one King.

Surely there is not any Prince in Christendom, who hearing this rare
Sophistry can choose but smile, and if we be not blind at home we may as well
perceive that this worthy Motto, No Bishop, no King is of the same batch, and
infanted out of the same fears, a mere ague-cake coagulated of a certain
Fever they have, presaging their time to be but short: and now like those that
are sinking, they catch round at that which is likeliest to hold them up. And
would persuade Regal Power, that if they dive, he must after. But what greater
debasement can there be to Royal Dignity, whose towering, and steadfast height
rests upon the unmovable foundations of Justice, and Heroic virtue, then to
chain it in a dependence of subsisting, or ruining to the painted Battlements,
and gaudy rottenness of Prelatrie, which want but one puff of the Kings to
blow them down like a past board House built of Court-Cards. Sir the little
ado, which me thinks I find in untacking these pleasant Sophismes, puts me
into the mood to tell you a tale ere I proceed further; and Menenius Agrippa
speed us.

Upon a time the Body summoned all the Members A Tale.
to meet in the Guild for the common good (as Aesops Chronicles aver many
stranger Accidents) the head by right takes the first seat, and next to it a
huge and monstrous Wen little less then the Head it self, growing to it by a
narrower excrescency. The members amazed began to ask one another what he was
that took place next their chief; none could resolve. Whereat the Wen, though
unweildy, with much ado gets up and bespeaks the Assembly to this purpose.
That as in place he was second to the head, so by due of merit; that he was to
it an ornament, and strength, and of special near relation, and that if the
head should fail, none were fitter then himself to step into his place;
therefore he thought it for the honor of the Body, that such dignities and
rich indowments should be decreed him, as did adorn, and set out the noblest
Members. To this was answered, that it should be consulted. Then was a wise
and learned Philosopher sent for, that knew all the Charters, Laws, and
Tenures of the Body. On him it is imposed by all, as chief Committee to
examine, and discuss the claim and Petition of right put in by the Wen; who
soon perceiving the matter, and wondering at the boldness of such a swollen
Tumor, Will thou (quoth he) that art but a bottle of vicious and hardened
excrements, contend with the lawful and freeborn members, whose certain
number is set by ancient, and unrepealable Statute? head thou art none, though
thou receive this huge substance from it, what office bearst thou? What good
can thou show by thee done to the Commonweal? the Wen not easily dash't
replies, that his Office was his glory, for so often as the soul would retire
out of the head from over the steaming vapors of the lower parts to Divine
Contemplation, with him she found the purest, and quietest retreat, as being
most remote from soil, and disturbance. Lourdan, quoth the Philosopher, thy
folly is as great as thy filth; know that all the faculties of the Soul are
confined of old to their several vessels, and ventricles, from which they
cannot part without dissolution of the whole Body; and that thou containst no
good thing in thee, but a heap of hard, and loathsome uncleannes, and art to
the head a foul disfigurment and burden, when I have cut thee off, and opened
thee, as by the help of these implements I will do, all men shall see.

But to return, whence was digress't, seeing that the throne of a King, as the
wise K. Solomon often remembers us, is established in Justice, which is the
universal Justice that Aristotle so much praises, containing in it all other
virtues, it may assure us that the fall of Prelacy, whose actions are so far
distant from Justice, cannot shake the least fringe that borders the royal
canopy: but that their standing does continually oppose, and lay battery to
regal safety, shall by that which follows easily appear. Amongst many
secondary, and accessory causes that support Monarchy, these are not of least
reckning, though common to all other States: the love of the Subjects, the
multitude, and valor of the people, and store of treasure. In all these things
has the Kingdom bin of late sore weak'nd, and chiefly by the Prelates. First
let any man consider, that if any Prince shall suffer under him a commission of
authority to be exerciz'd, till all the Land groan, and cry out, as against a
whippe of Scorpions, whether this be not likely to lessen, and keel the
affections of the Subject. Next what numbers of faithful, and freeborn
Englishmen, and good Christians have bin constrained to forsake their dearest
home, their friends, and kindred, whom nothing but the wide Ocean, and the
savage de^erts of America could hide and shelter from the fury of the Bishops.
O Sir, if we could but see the shape of our dear Mother England, as Poets are
wont to give a personal form to what they please, how would she appear, think
ye, but in a mourning weed, with ashes upon her head, and tears abundantly
flowing from her eyes, to behold so many of her children exposed at once, and
thrust from things of dearest necessity, because their conscience could not
assent to things which the Bishops thought indifferent. What more binding then
Conscience? what more free then indifferency? cruel then must that indifferency
needs be, that shall violate the strict necessity of Conscience, merc^les, and
inhumane that free choice, and liberty that shall break asunder the bonds of
Religion. Let the Astrologer be dismayed at the portentous blaze of comets, and
impressions in the air as foretelling troubles and changes to states: I shall
believe there cannot be a more illboding ^gne to a Nation ( God turn the Omen
from us) then when the Inhabitants, to avoid insufferable grievances at home,
are enforced by heaps to forsake their native Country. Now whereas the only
remedy, and amends against the depopulation, and thinness of a Land within, is
the borrowed strength of firm alliance from without, these Priestly policies
of theirs having thus exhausted our domestic forces, have gone the way also to
leave us as naked of our firmest, and faithfullest neighbors abroad, by
disparaging, and alienating from us all Protestant Princes, and Commonwealths,
who are not ignorant that our Prelates, and as many as they can infect, account
them no better then a sort of sacrilegious, and puritanical Rebels, preferring
the Spaniard our deadly enemy before them, and set all orthodox writers at
naught in comparison of the Jesuits, who are indeed the only corrupters of
youth, and good learning; and I have heard many wise, and learned men in Italy
say as much. It cannot be that the strongest knot of confederacy should not
daily slak'n, when Religion which is the chief engagement of our league shall
be turned to their reproach. Hence it is that the prosperous, and prudent
states of the united Provinces, whom we ought to love, if not for themselves,
yet for our own good work in them, they having bin in a manner planted, and
erected by us, and having bin since to us the faithful watchmen, and
discoverers of many a Popish, and Austrian complotted Treason, and with us the
partners of many a bloody, and victorious battle, whom the similitude of
manners and language, the commodity of traffic, which founded the old
Burgundian league betwixt us, but chiefly Religion should bind to us
immortally, even such friends as these, out of some principles instilled into
us by the Prelates, have bin often dismissed with distasteful answers, and
sometimes unfriendly actions: nor is it to be considered to the breach of
confederate Nations whose mutual interest is of such high consequence, though
their Merchants bicker in the East Indies, neither is it safe, or wary, or
indeed Christianly, that the French King, of a different Faith, should afford
our nearest Allies as good protection as we. Sir, I persuade my self, if our
zeal to true Religion, and the brotherly usage of our truest friends were as
notorious to the world, as our Prelatical Schism, and captivity to Rotchet
Apothegmes, we had ere this seen our old Conquerours, and afterward Liege-men
the Normans, together with the Britains our proper Colony, and all the
Gascoins that are the rightful Dowry of our ancient Kings, come with cap, and
knee, desiring the shadow of the English Scepter to defend them from the hot
per^ecutions and taxes of the French. But when they come hither, and see a
Tympany of Spanioliz'd Bishops swaggering in the fore-top of the State, and
meddling to turn, and dandle the Royal Ball with unskilful and Pedantick
palms, no marvel though they think it as (...) to commit Religion, and
liberty to their arbitrating as to a Synagogue of Jesuits.

But what do I stand reckoning upon advantages, and gains lost by the
mis-rule, and turbulency of the Prelates, what do I pick up so thriftily their
scatterings and diminishings of the meaner Subject, whilst they by their
seditious practices have endangered to loose the King one third of his main
Stock; what have they not done to banish him from his own Native Country? but
to speak of this as it ought would ask a Volume by it self.

Thus as they have unpeopl'd the Kingdom by expulsion of so many thousands, as
they have endeavored to lay the skirts of it bare by disheartning and
dishonouring our loyallest Confederates abroad, so have they hamstrung the
valor of the Subject by seeking to effeminate us all at home. Well knows every
wise Nation that their Liberty consists in manly and honest labors, in
sobriety and rigorous honor to the Marriage Bed, which in both Sexes should be
bred up from chaste hopes to loyal Enjoyments; and when the people slacken, and
fall to loosenes, and riot, then do they as much as if they laid down their
necks for some wily Tyrant to get up and ride. Thus learnt Cyrus to tame the
Lydians, whom by Arms he could not, whilst they kept themselves from Luxury;
with one easy Proclamation to set up Stews, dancing, feasting, and dicing he
made them soon his slaves. I know not what drift the Prelates had, whose
Brokers they were to prepare, and supple us either for a Foreign Invasion or
Domestic oppression; but this I am sure they took the ready way to despoile us
both of manhood and grace at once, and that in the shamefullest and ungodliest
manner upon that day which Gods Law, and even our own reason has consecrated,
that we might have one day at least of seven set apart wherein to examine and
increase our knowledge of God, to meditate, and commune of our Faith, our Hope,
our eternal City in Heaven, and to quick'n, withal, the study, and exercise
of Charity; at such a time that men should be plucked from their soberest and
saddest thoughts, and by Bishops the pretended Fathers of the Church instigated
by public Edict, and with earnest endeavor push't forward to gaming,
jigging, wassailing, and mixed dancing is a horror to think. Thus did the
Reprobate hireling Priest Balaam seek to subdue the Israelites to Moab, if not
by force, then by this divellish Policy, to draw them from the Sanctuary of
God to the luxurious, and ribald feasts of Baal-peor. Thus have they trespas't
not only against the Monarchy of England, but of Heaven also, as others, I
doubt not, can prosecute against them.

I proceed within my own bounds to show you next what good Agents they are
about the Revennues and Riches of the Kingdom, which declares of what moment
they are to Monarchy, or what avail. Two Leeches they have that still suck,
and suck the Kingdom, their Ceremonies, and their Courts. If any man will
contend that Ceremonies be lawful under the Gospel, he may be answered
otherwhere. This doubtless that they ought to be many and over-costly, no
true Protestant will affirm. Now I appeal to all wise men, what an excessive
wast of Treasury has been within these few years in this Land not in the
expedient, but in the Idolatrous (...) of Temples beautified exquisitely to
outvie the Papists, the costly and deare-bought Scandals, and snares of
Images, Pictures, rich Coaps, gorgeous Altar-clothes: and by the courses they
^ooke, and the opinions they held, it was not likely any stay would be, or any
end of their madness, where a pious pretext is so ready at hand to cover their
insatlate desires. What can we suppose this will come to? What other materials
then these have built up the spiritual BABEL to the height of her
Abominations? Believe it Sir right truly it may be said, that Antichrist is
Mammons Son. The sour levin of humane Traditions mixed in one putrifi'd Masfe
with the poisonous dregs of hypocrisy in the hearts of Prelates that lie
basking in the Sunny warmth of Wealth, and Promotion, is the Serpents Egg that
will hatch an Antichrist wheresoever, and engender the same Monster as big, or
little as the Lump is which breeds him. If the splendour of Gold and Silver
begin to Lord it once again in the Church of England, we shall see Antichrist
shortly wallow here, though his chief Kennell be at Rome. If they had one
thought upon Gods glory and the advancement of Christian Faith, they would be a
means that with these expenses thus profusely thrown away in trash, rather
Churches and Schools might be built, where they cry out for want, and more
added where too few are; a moderate maintenance distributed to every painful
Minister, that now scarce sustaines his Family with Bread, while the Prelates
revell like Belshazzar with their full carouses in Goblets, and vessels of gold
snatched from Gods Temple. Which (I hope) the Worthy Men of our Land will
consider. Now then for their COURTS. What a Mass of Money is drawn from the
Veins into the Ulcers of the Kingdom this way; their Extortions, their open
Corruptions, the multitude of hungry and ravenous Harpies that swarm about
their Offices declare sufficlently. And what though all this go not oversea?
'twere better it did: better a penurious Kingdom, then where excessive wealth
flows into the (...) and injurious hands of common sponges to the
impoverishing of good and loyal men, and that by such execrable, such
irreligious courses.

If the sacred and dreadful works of holy Discipline, Censure, Penance,
Excommunication, and Absolution, where no profane thing ought to have access,
nothing to be assistant but sage and Christianly Admonition, brotherly Love,
flaming Charity, and Zeal; and then according to the Effects, Paternall
Sorrow, or Paternall Joy, mild Severity, melting Compassion, if such Divine
Ministeries as these, wherein the Angel of the Church represents the Person of
Christ Jesus, must lie prostitute to sordid Fees, and not pass to and fro
between our Savior that of free grace redeemed us, and the submissive
Penitent, without the truccage of perishing Coin, and the Burcherly execution
of Tormentors, Rooks, and Rakeshames sold to (...), then have the Babilonish
Merchants of Souls just excuse. Hitherto Sir you have heard how the Prelates
have weakened and withdrawn the external Accomplishments of Kingly
prosperity, the love of the People, their multitude, their valor, their
wealth; mining, and sapping the outworks, and redoubts of Monarchy; now hear
how they strike at the very heart, and vitals.

We know that Monarchy is made up of two parts, the Liberty of the subject, and
the supremacy of the King. I begin at the root. See what gentle, and benign
Fathers they have been to our liberty. Their trade being, by the same Alchymy
that the Pope uses, to extract heaps of gold, and silver out of the drossie
Bullion of the Peoples sins, and justly fearing that the quick-sighted
Protestants eye cleared in great part from the mist of Superstition, may at one
time or other look with a good judgment into these their deceitful
Pedleries, to gain as many associats of guiltines as they can, and to infect
the temporal Magistrate with the like lawless though not sacrilegious
extortion, see a while what they do; they engage themselves to preach, and
persuade an assertion for truth the most false, and to this Monarchy the most
pernicious and destructive that could be chosen. What more banefull to
Monarchy then a Popular Commotion, for the dissolution of Monarchy slides
aptest into a Democracy; and what stirs the Englishmen, as our wisest writers
have observed, sooner to rebellion, then violent, and heavy hands upon their
goods and purses? Yet these devout Prelates, spite of our great Charter, and
the souls of our Progenitors that wrested their liberties out of the Norman
gripe with their dearest blood and highest prowess, for these many years have
not ceas't in their Pulpits wrinching, and spraining the text, to set at naught
and trample under foot all the most sacred, and life blood Laws, Statutes, and
Acts of Parliament that are the holy Covenant of Union, and Marriage between
the King and his Realm, by proscribing, and confiscating from us all the right
we have to our own bodies, goods and liberties. What is this, but to blow a
trumpet, and proclaim a fire-crosse to a hereditary, and perpetual civil
war. Thus much against the Subjects Liberty has been assaulted by them. Now
how they have spared Supremacy, or likely are here-after to submit to it,
remains lastly to be considered.

The emulation that under the old Law was in the King toward the Priest, is now
so come about in the Gospel, that all the danger is to be feared from the
Priest to the King. Whilst the Priests Office in the Law was set out with an
exterior luster of Pomp and glory, Kings were ambitious to be Priests; now
Priests not perceiving the heavenly brightness, and inward splendour of their
more glorious Evangelick Ministry with as great ambition affect to be Kings;
as in all their courses is easy to be observed. Their eyes over imminent upon
worldly matters, their desires ever thirsting after worldly employments, in
stead of diligent and fervent study in the Bible, they covet to be expert in
Canons, and Decretals, which may enable them to judge, and interpose in
temporal Causes, however pretended (...). Do they not hord up Plefe, seek to
be porent in secular Strength, in State Affairs, in Lands, Lordships, and
Demeanes, to sway and carry all before them in high Courts, and Privy
Counsels, to bring into their grasp, the high, and principal Offices of the
Kingdom? have they not been bold of late to check the Common Law, to slight and
brave the indiminishable Majesty of our highest Court the Law-giving and
Sacred Parliament? Do they not plainly labor to exempt Churchmen from the
Magistrate? Yea, so presumptuously as to question, and menace Officers that
represent the Kings Person for using their Authority against drunken Priests?
The cause of protecting murderous Clergymen was the first heartburning that
swelled up the audacious Becket to the pestilent, and odious vexation of Henry
the second. Nay more, have not some of their devoted Scholars begun, I need
not say to nibble, but openly to argue against the Kings Supremacy? is not the
Ch^ife of them accused out of his own Book, and his late Canons to affect a
certain unquestionable Patriarchat, independent and unsubordinate to the
Crown? From whence having first brought us to a servile Estate of Religion,
and Manhood, and having predispos'd his conditions with the Pope, that lays
claim to this Land, or some Pepin of his own creating, it were all as likely
for him to aspire to the Monarchy among us, as that the Pope could find means
so on the sudden both to bereave the Emperor of the Roman Territory with the
favor of Italy, and by an unexpected friend out of France, while he was in
danger to lose his new-got Purchase, beyond hope to leap in to the fair
Exarchat of Ravenna.

A good while the Pope suttl'y acted the Lamb, writing to the Emperor, my Lord
Tiberius, my Lord Mauritius, but no sooner did this his Lord pluck at the
Images, and Idols, but he threw off his Sheep clothing, and started up a
Wolf, laying his paws upon the Emperors right, as forfeited to Peter. Why
may not we as well, having been forewarned at home by our renowned Chaucer,
and from abroad by the great and learned Padre Paolo, from the like beginnings,
as we see they are, fear the like events? Certainly a wise, and provident King
ought to suspect a Hierarchy in his Realm, being ever attended, as it is, with
two such greedy Purveyers, Ambition and (...), I say he ought to suspect a
Hierarchy to be as dangerous and derogatory from his Crown as a Tetrarchy o^ a
Hepiarchy. Yet now that the Prelates had almost attained to what their
insolent, and unbridl'd minds had hurried them; to thrust the Lai^ ^der the
despoticall rule of the Monarch, that they themselves might confine the Monarch
to a kind of Pupillag^ under their Hierarchy, observe but how their own
^inciples combat one another, and supplant each one his fellow.

Having fitted us only for peace, and that a servile peace, by lessening our
numbers, dreining our estates, enfeebling our bodies, cowing our free spirits
by those ways as you have heard, their impotent actions cannot sustain
themselves the least moment, unless they rouse us up to a War fit for Cain
to be the Leader of; an abhorred, a cursed, a Fraternall War. ENGLAND and
SCOTLAND dearest Brothers both in Natnre, and in CHRIST must be set to wade in
one another blood; and IRELAND our free Denizon upon the back of us both, as
occasion should serve: a piece of Service that the Pope and all his Factors
have been compassing to do ever since the Reformation.

But ever-blessed be he, and ever glorified that from his high Watchtower in
the Heavens discerning the crooked ways of perverse, and cruel men, has
hitherto maimed, and insatuated all their damnable inventions, and deluded
their great Wizzards with a delusion fit for fools and children: had GOD been
so minded he could have sent a Spirit of Mutiny amongst us, as he did
between Abimilech and the Sechemites, to have made our Funerals and slain
heaps more in number then the miserable surviving remnant, but he, when we
least deserved, sent out a gentle gale, and message of peace from the wings of
those his Cherubins, that fan his Mercy-seat. Nor shall the wisdom, the
moderation, the Christian Piety, the Constancy of our Nobility and Commons of
England be ever forgotten, whose calm, and temperat connivence could sit
still, and smile out the stormy bluster of men more audacious, and precipitant,
then of solid and deep reach, till their own sury had run it self out of
breath, assailing, by rash and heady approches, the impregnable situation of
our Liberty and safety, that laughed such weak enginry to scorn, such poor
drifts to make a NationallWarre of a Surplice Brabble, a Tippet-scuffle, and
engage the unattainted Honor of English Knighthood, to unfurle the streaming
Red Cross, or to rear the horrid Standard of those fatal guly Dragons for so
unworthy a purpose, as to force upon their Fellow Subjects, that which
themselves are weary of, the Skeleton of a Masse-Booke. Nor must the Pat^ence,
the Fortitude, the firm Obedience of the Nobles and People of Scotland
striving against manifold Provocations, nor must their sincere and moderate
proceedings hitherto, be unremember'd, to the shameful Conviction of all their
Detractors.

Go on both hand in hand O NATIONS never to be dis-united, be the Praise and
the Heroic Song of all POSTERITY; merit this, but seek only Virtue, not to
extend your Limits; for what needs? to win a fading triumphant Laurel out of
the tears of wretched Men, but to settle the pure worship of God in his
Church, and justice in the State. then shall the hardest difficulties smooth
out themselves before ye; envy shall sink to hell, craft and malice be
confounded, whether it be homebred mischief, or outlandish cunning: yea (...)
other Nations will then cover to serve ye, for Lordship and victory are but the
pages of justice and virtue. Commit securely to true wisdom the vanquishing
and uncasing of craft and suttlerie, which are but her two runnagates: join
your invincible might to do worthy, and Godlike deeds, and then he that seeks
to break your union, a cleaving curse be his inheritance to all generations.

Sir, you have now at length this question for the time, and as my memory would
best serve me in such a copious, and vast theme, fully handled, and you your
self may judge whether Prelacy be the only Church Government agreeable to
MONARCHY. Seeing therefore the perilous, and confused estate into which we are
fallen, and that to the certain knowledge of all men through the irreligious
pride and hateful Tyranny of Prelates (as the innumerable, and grievous
complaints of every shire cry out) if we will now resolve to settle affairs
either according to pure Religion, or sound Policy, we must first of all begin
roundly to cashier, and cut away from the public body the noysom, and diseased
tumor of Prelacie, and come from Schism to (...) with out neighbor Reformed
sister Churches, which with the blessing of peace and pure doctrine have now
long time flourished; and doubtless with all hearty joy, and gratulation, will
meet, and welcome our Christian union with them, as they have bin all this
while grieved at our strangenes and little better then separation from them.
And for the Discipline propounded, seeing that it has bin inevitably proved
that the natural, and fundamental causes of political happiness in all
governments are the same, and that this Church Discipline is taught in the Word
of God, and, as we see, agrees according to wish with all such states as have
received it, we may infallibly assure our selves that it will as well agree with
Monarchy, though all the Tribe of Aphorismers, and Politicasters would persuade
us there be secret, and misterious reasons against it. For upon the settling
hereof mark what nourishing and cordial restorements to the State will follow,
the Ministers of the Gospel attending only to the work of salvation every one
within his limited charge, besides the diffusive blessings of God upon all our
actions, the King shall sit without an old disturber, a daily incroacher, and
intruder; shall rid his Kingdom of a strong sequestered, and collateral
power; a confronting miter, whose potent wealth, and wakefull ambition he had
just cause to hold in jealousy: not to repeat the other present e^ills which
only their removal will remove. And because things simply pure are inconsistent
in the mass of nature, nor are the elements or humors in Man's Body exactly
homogeneall, and hence the best founded Commonwealths, and least barbarous
have aimed at a certain mixture and temperament, partaking the several
virtues of each other^ State, that each part drawing to it self may keep up a
steady, and eev'n uprightness in common,

There is no Civil Government that has been known, no not the Spartan, not
the Roman, though both for this respect so much praised by the wise Polybius,
more divinely and harmoniously tuned, more equally balanced as it were by the
hand and scale of Justice, then is the Commonwealth of England: where under a
free, and untutored Monarch, the noblest, worthiest, and most prudent men, with
full approbation, and suffrage of the People have in their power the supreme,
and final determination of highest Affairs. Now if Conformity of Church
Discipline to the Civil be so desired, there can be nothing more parallel,
more uniform, then when under the Sovereign Prince Christ's Vicegerent using
the Scepter of David, according to Gods Law, the godliest, the wisest, the
learnedest Ministers in their several charges have the instructing and
disciplining of Gods people by whose full and free Election they are
consecrated to that holy and equal Aristocracy. And why should not the Piety,
and Conscience of Englishmen as members of the Church be trusted in the
Election of Pastors to Functions that nothing concern a Monarch, as well as
their worldly wisdoms are priviledg'd as members of the State in suffraging
their Knights, and Burgesses to matters that concern him nearly? And if in
weighing these several Offices, their difference in time and quality be cast
in, I know they will not turn the beam of equal Judgment the moity of a
scruple. We therefore having already a kind of Apostolical, and ancient Church
Election in our State, what a perverseness would it be in us of all others to
retain sorcibly a kind of imperious, and stately Election in our Church? And
what a blindness to think that what is already Evangelicall as it were by a
happy chance in our Polity, should be repugnant to that which is the same by
divine command in the Ministry? Thus then we see that our Ecclesiall, and
Political choyses may consent and sort as well together without any rupture in
the STATE, as Christians, and Freeholders. But as for honor, that ought indeed
to be different, and distinct as either Office looks a several way, the
Minister whose Calling and end is spiritual, ought to be honored as a Father
and Physician to the Soul (if he be found to be so) with a Son-like and
Disciple-like reverence, which is indeed the dearest, and most affectionate
honor, most to be desired by a wise man, and such as will easily command a
free and plentiful provision of outward necessaries, without his further care
of this world.

The Magistrate whose Charge is to see to our Persons, and Estates, is to be
honored with a more elaborate and personal Courtship, with large Salaries and
Stipends, that he himself may abound in those things whereof his legal
justice and watchful care gives us the quiet enjoyment. And this distinction
of Honor will bring forth a seemly and graceful Uniformity over all the
Kingdom.

Then shall the Nobles possess all the Dignities and Offices of temporal
honor to themselves, sole Lords without the improper mixture of Scholastic,
and pusillanimous upstarts, the Parliament shall void her Upper House of the
same annoyances, the Common, and Civil Laws shall be both set free, the
former from the control, the other from the mere vassalage and Copy hold of
the Clergy.

And whereas temporal Laws rather punish men when they have transgress't, then
form them to be such as should transgress seldomest, we may conceive great
hopes through the showers of Divine Benediction, watering the unmolested and
watchful pains of the Ministry, that the whole Inheritance of God will grow
up so straight and blameless, that the Civil Magistrate may with far less
toil and difficulty, and far more ease and delight steare the tall and goodly
Vessel of the Commonwealth through all the gusts and tides of the Worlds
mutability.

Here I might have ended, but that some Objections, which I have heard commonly
flying about, press me to the endeavor of an answer. We must not run they
say into sudden extremes. This is a fallacious Rule, unless understood only of
the actions of Virtue about things indifferent, for if it be found that those
two extremes be Vice and Virtue, Falsehood and Truth, the greater extremity of
Virtue and superlative Truth we run into, the more virtuous, and the more wise,
we become; and he that flying from degenerate and traditionall corruption,
fears to shoot himself too far into the meeting embraces of a
Divinely-warranted Reformation, had better not have run at all. And for the
suddenness it cannot be feared. Who should oppose it? The Papists? They dare
not. The Protestants otherwise affected. They were mad. There is nothing will
be remoov'd but what to them is profess'dly indifferent. The long affection
which the People have borne to it, what for it self, what for the odiousnes of
P^elates, is evident: from the first year of Qu. Eliz^beth, it has still
been more and more propounded, desired, and beseech't, yea sometimes
favorably forwarded by the Parliaments themselves. Yet if it were sudden and
swift, provided still it be from worse to better, certainly we ought to hie us
from ^ill like a torrent, and rid our selves of corrupt Discipline, as we
would shake fire out of our bosoms.

Speedy and vehement were the Reformati^ns of all the good Kings of Juda,
though the people had been nuzzl'd in Idolatry never so long before; they
feared not the bugbear danger, nor the Lion in the way that the sluggish and
timorous Politician thinks he sees; no more did our Brethren of the Reformed
Churches abroad; they ventured (God being their guide) out of rigid POPERY,
into that which we in mockery call precise Puritanisme, and yet we see no
inconvenience befell them.

Let us not dally with God when he offers us a full blessing, to take as much
of it as we think will serve our ends, and turn him back the rest upon his
hands, lest in his anger he snatch all from us again. Next they allege the
antiquity of Episcopacy through all Ages. What it was in the Apostles time,
that questionless it must be still and therein I trust the Ministers will be
able to satisfy the Parliament. But if Episcopacie be taken for Prelacie, all
the Ages they can deduce it through, will make it no more venerable then
Papacy.

Most certain it is (as all our Stories bear witness) that ever since their
coming to the Sea of Canterbury for near twelve hundred years, to speak of
them in general, they have been in England to our Souls a sad and doleful
succession of illiterate and blind guides: to our purses, and goods a wastfull
band of robbers, a perpetual havoc, and rapine: To our state a continual
Hydra of mischief, and molestation, the forge of discord and Rebellion: This
is the Trophey of their Antiquity, and boasted Succession through so many Ages.
And for those Prelat-Martyrs they glory of, they are to be judged what they
were by the Gospel, and not the Gospel to be tried by them.

And it is to be noted that if they were for Bishoprics and Ceremonies, it was
in their prosperity, and fulness of bread, but in their persecution, which
purified them, and near their death, which was their garland, they plainly
disliked and condemned the Ceremonies, and threw away those Episcopal
ornaments wherein they were instal'd, as foolish and detestable, for so the
words of Ridley at his degradment, and his letter to Hooper expressly show.
Neither does the Author of our Church History spare to record sadly the fall
(for so he terms it) and infirmities of these Martyrs, though we would deify
them. And why should their Martyrdom more countnance corrupt doctrine, or
discipline, then their subscriptions justify their Treason to the Royal blood
of this Relm; by diverting and intaling the right of the Crown from the true
heirs, to the houses of Northumberland and Suffolk, which had it took effect,
this present King had in all likelihood never sat on this Throne, and the happy
union of this Island had bin frustrated.

Lastly, whereas they add that some the learnedest of the reformed abroad
admire our Episcopacy, it had bin more for the strength of the Argument to tell
us that some of the wisest Statesmen admire it, for thereby we might guess them
weary of the present discipline, as offensive to their State, which is the
bugge we fear; but being they are Churchmen, we may rather suspect them for
some Prelatizing-spirits that admire our Bishoprics, not Episcopacy. The next
objection vanishes of it self, propounding a doubt, whether a greater
inconvenience would not grow from the corruption of any other discipline, then
from that of Episcopacy. This seems an unseasonable foresight, and out of
order to defer, and put off the most needful constitution of one right
discipline, while we stand ballancing the discommodity's of two corrupt ones.
First constitute that which is right, and of it self it will discover, and
rectify that which swervs, and easily remedy the pretended fear of having a
Pope in every Parish, unless we call the zealous, and meek censure of the
Church, a Popedom, which who so does let him advise how he can reject the
Pastorly Rod, and Sheep-hooke of CHRIST, and those cords of love, and not fear
to fall under the iron Scepter of his anger that will dash him to pieces like a
Potsherd.

At another doubt of theirs I wonder; whether this discipline which we desire,
be such as can be put in practice within this Kingdom, they say it can not
stand with the common Law, nor with the Kings safety; the government of
Episcopacy, is now so weaved into the common Law: In Gods name let it weave out
again; let not humain quillets keep back divine authority. It Is not the common
Law, nor the civil, but piety, and justice, that are our foundresses; they
stoop not, neither change color for Aristoc^, democraty, or Monarohy, nor yet
at all interrupt their just courses, but far above the taking notice of these
inferior niceties with perfect sympathy, where ever they meet, kiss each
other. Lastly, they are fearful that the discipline which will succeed cannot
stand with the Ks. safety. Wherefore? it is but Episcopacy reduced to what it
should be, were it not that the Tyranny of Prelates under the name of Bishops
has made our ears tender, and startling, we might call every good Minister a
Bishop, as every Bishop, yea the Apostles themselves are called Ministers, and
the Angels ministering Spirits, and the Ministers again Angels. But wherein is
this propounded government so shrewd? Because the government of assemblies will
succeed. Did not the Apostles govern the Church by assemblies, how should it
else be Catholic, how should it have Communion? We count it Sacrilege to take
from the rich Prelates their Lands, and revenu's which is Sacrilege in them to
keep, using them as they do, and can we think it safe to defraude the living
Church of GOD of that right which GOD has given her in assemblies! O but the
consequence: Assemblies draw to them the Supremacy of Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction. No surely, they draw no Supremacy, but that authority which
CHRIST, and Saint Paul in his name conferrs upon them. The K. may still retain
the same Supremacy in the Assemblies, as in the Parliament, here he (...) do
nothing alone against the common Law, and there neither alone, nor with consent
against the Scriptures. But is this all? No, this Ecclesiastical Supremacy
draws to it the power to excommunicate Kings; and then follows the worst that
can be imagined. Do they hope to avoid this by keeping Prelates that have so
often don it? Not to exemplify the malapert insolence of our own Bishops in
this kind toward our Kings: I shall turn back to the Primitive, and pure
times, which the objecters would have the rule of reformation to us.

Not an assembly, but one Bishop alone, Saint AMBROSE of Millan, held
Theodosius the most Christian Emperor under excommunication above eight months
together, drove him from the Church in the presence of his Nobles, which the
good Emperor bore with heroic humility, and never ceas't by prayers, and
tears, till he was absolved, for which coming to the Bishop with Supplication
into the Salutatory, some out Porch of the Church, he was charged by him of
tyrannical madness against GOD, for coming into holy ground. At last upon
conditions absolved, and after great humiliation approaching to the Altar to
offer (as those thrice pure times then thought meet) he had scarce with-drawne
his hand, and stood a while, when a bold Archdeacon comes in the Bishops name,
and chaces him from within the railes telling him peremptorily that the place
wherein he stood, was for none but the Priests to enter, or to touch: and this
is another piece of pure Primitive Divinity. Think ye then our Bishops will
forgo the power of excommunication on whomsoever? No certainly, unless to
compass sinister ends, and then revoke when they see their time. And yet this
most mild, though withal dreadful, and inviolable Prerogative of Christ's
diadem excommunication servs for nothing with them, but to prog, and pandar for
fees, or to display their pride and sharpen their revenge, debarring men the
protection of the Law, and I remember not whether in some cases it bereave not
men all right to their worldly goods, and Inheritanees besides the denial of
Christian burial. But in the Evangelical, and reformed use of this sacred
censure, no such prostitution, no such Jscariotical drifts are to be doubted,
as that Spiritual doom, and sentence, should invade worldly possession, which
is the rightful lot and portion, even of the wicke dest men, as frankly
bestowed upon them by the al-dispensing bounty, as rain, and Sunshine. No, no,
it seeks not to bereave or destroy the body, it seeks to save the Soul by
humbling the body, not by Imprisonment, or pecuniary mulct, much less by
stripes or bonds, or disinheritance, but by Fatherly admonishment, and
Christian rebuke, to cast it into godly sorrow, whose end is joy, and ingenuous
bashfulnesse to sin: if that can not be wrought, then as a tender Mother takes
her Child and holds it over the pit with scarring words, that it may learn to
fear, where danger is, so does excommunication as deerly, and as freely
without money, use her wholesome and saving terrors, she is instant, she
beseeches, by all the dear, and sweet promises of SALVATION she entices and
woos, by all the threatenings, and thunders of the Law, and rejected Gosspel she
charges, and adjures; this is all her Armory, her munition, her Artillery, then
she awaites with long-sufferance, and yet ardent zeal. In brief, there is no
act in all the errand of Gods Ministers to mankind, wherein passes more
loverlike contestation between CHRIST and the Soul of a regenerate man
lapsing, then before, and in, and after the sentence of Excommunication. As for
the fogging proctorage of money, with such an eye as struck Gehezi with
Leprosy, and Simon Magus with a curse, so does she look, and so threaten her
fiery whip against that banking den of thieves that dare thus baffle, and buy
and sell the awful, and majestic wrincles of her brow. He that is rightly and
apostolically sped with her invisible arrow, if he ca^ be at peace in his
Soul, and not smell within him the brimstone of Hell, may have fair leave to
tell all his baggs over undiminish't of the least farding, may eat his
dainties, drink his wine, use his delights, enjoy his Lands, and liberties,
not the least skin raised, not the least hair misplac't for all that
excommunication has done: much more may a King enjoy his rights, and
Prerogatives unflowr'd, untouched, and be as absolute, and complete a King, as
all his royalties and revenu's can make him. And therefore little did
Theodosius fear a plot upon his Empire when he stood excommunicat by Saint
Ambrose, though it were done either with much hau^y pride, or ignorant zeal.
But let us rather look upon the reformed Churches beyond the seas, the Grizons
the Suisses, the Hollanders, the French, that have a Supremacy to live under as
well as we, where do the Churches in all these places strive for Supremacy,
where do they clash and justle Supremacies with the Civil Magistrate? In France
a more severe Monarchy then ours, the Protestants under this Church government
carry the name of the best Subjects the King has; and yet Presbytery, if it
must be so called, does there all that it desires to do: how easy were it, if
there be such great suspicion, to give no more scope to it in England. But let
us not for fear of a scarre-crow, or else through hatred to be reformed stand
hankering and politizing, when GOD with spread hands testifies to us, and
points us out the way to our peace.

Let us not be so overcredulous, unless GOD has blinded us, as to trust our
deer Souls into the hands of men that beg so devoutly for the pride, and
gluttony of their own backs, and bellies, that sue and solicit so eagerly,
not for the saving of Souls, the consideration of which can have here no place
at all, but for their Bishoprics, Deaneries, Prebends, and Chanonies; how can
these men not be corrup^, whose very ^se is the bribe of their own pleading;
whose mo^ cannot open without the strong breath, and l^ stench of avarice,
Simony, and Sacrilege, embe^ling the treasury of the Church on painted, (...)
gilded walls of Temples wherein GOD ^h testified to have no delight, warming
their Palace Kitchins, and from thence their (...), and epicurean paunches,
with the alms of the blind, the lame, the impotent, the ^d, the ^fn, the
widow, for with these the ^sury of CHRIST ought to be, here must be his jewels
bestowed, his rich Cabinet must be emptied here; as the constant martyr Saint
Laurence taught the Roman Praetor. Sir would you know what the remonst^ance of
these men would have, what their Petition imply's? They entreat us that we
would not be weary of those insupportable greevances that our shoulders have
hitherto (...) under, they beseech us that we would think'em fit to be our
Justices of peace, our Lords, our highest officers of State, though they come
furnished with no more experience then they learnt between the Cook, and the
manciple, or more pro foundly at the College audit, or the regent house, or to
come to their deepest insight, at their Patrons Table; they would request us to
endure still the russling of their Silken Cassocks, and that we would burst our
midriffes rather then laugh to see them under Sail in all their Lawn, and
Sarcenet their shrouds, and tackle, with a geometrical rhomboides upon their
heads: they would bear us in hand that we must of duty still appear before them
once a year in Jerusalem like good circumcizd males, and Females to be taxt by
the poul, to be scons't our head money, our tuppences in their Chaunlerly Shop
book of Easter. They pray us that it would please us to let them still hale us,
and worrey us with their band-dogs, and Pursivants; and that it would please
the Parliament that they may yet have the whipping, fleecing, and fleaing of us
in their diabolical Courts to tear the flesh from our bones, and into our wide
wounds instead of balm, to power in the oil of Tartar, vitriol, and mercury;
Surely a right reasonable, innocent, and soft-hearted Petition. O the relenting
bowels of the Fathers. Can this be granted them unless GOD have smitten us
with frenzy from above, and with a dazzling giddiness at ^oon day? Should not
those men rather be heard that come to plead against their own preferments,
their worldly advantages, their own abundance; for honor, and obedience to
Gods word, the conversion of Souls, the Christian peace of the Land, and union
of the reformed Catholic Church, the unappropriating, and unmonopolizing the
rewards of learning and industry, from the greasy clutch of ignorance, and
high feeding. We have tried already, and miserably felt what ambitio^^ worldly
glory and immoderat wealthcan do, what the boistrous and contradictional hand
of a temporal, earthly, and corporeal Spiritualty can avail to the edifying
of Christ's holy Church; were it such a desperate hazard to put to the venture
the universal Votes of Christ's Congregation, the fellowly and friendly yoke of
a teaching and laborious Ministry, the Pastorlike and Apostolic imitation of
meek and unlordly Discipline, the gentle and benevolent mediocritie of
Church-maintenance, without the ignoble Hu^sterage of pidling Tithes? Were it
such an incurable mischief to make a little trial, what all this would do to
the flourishing and growing up of Christ's mystical body? As rather to use
every poor shift, and if that serve not, to threaten uproare and combustion,
and shake the brand of Civil Discord?

O Sir, I do now feel my self inwrapt on the sudden into those mazes and
Labyrinths of dreadful and hideous thoughts, that which way to get out, or
which way to end I know not, unless I turn mine eyes, and with your help lift
up my hands to that Eternal and Propitious Throne, where nothing is readier
then grace and refuge to the distresses of mortal Suppliants: and it were a
shame to leave these serious thoughts less piously then the Heathen were wont
to conclude their graver discourses.

Thou therefore that sits's in light and glory unapprochable, Parent of Angels
and Men! next thee I implore Omnipotent King, Redeemer of that lost remnant
whose nature thou did assume, ineffable and everlasting Love! And thou the
third subsistence of Divine Infinitude, illumining Spirit, the joy and solace
of created Things! one Tri-personall GODHEAD! look upon this thy poor and
almost spent, and expiring Church, leave her not thus a prey to these
importunate Wolves, that wait and think long till they devour thy tender
Flock, these wild Boares that have broke into thy Vineyard, and left the print
of their polluting hoofs on the Souls of thy Servants. O let them not bring
about their damned designs that stand now at the entrance of the bottomless
pit expecting the Watchword to open and let out those dreadful Locusts and
Scorpions, to re-involve us in that pitchy Cloud of infernal darkness, where we
shall never more see the Sun of thy Truth again, never hope for the
cheerful dawne, never more hear the Bird of Morning sing. Be moved with pity
at the afflicted state of this our shaken Monarchy, that now lies laboring
under her throws, and struggling against the grudges of more dreaded
Calamities.

O thou that after the impetuous rage of five bloody Inundations, and the
succeeding Sword of intestine ^rre, soaking the Land in her own gore, did
pity the sad and ceasles revolution of our swift and thick-comming sorrows
when we were quite breathless, of thy free grace did motion Peace, and
terms of Co^ant with us, and having first welnigh freed us from Antichristian
thraldom, did build up this Britannick Empire to a glorious and enviable
height with all her Daughter Islands about her, stay us in this felicity, let
not the obstinacy of our half Obedlence and Will Worship bring forth that
Viper of Sedition, that for these Fourscore Years has been breeding to eat
through the entrals of our Peace; but let her cast her Abortive Spawne without
the danger of this travailling and throbbing Kingdom. That we may still
remember in our solemn Thanksgivings, how for us the Northren Ocean even to
the frozen Thule was scattered with the proud Ship-wracks of the Spanish
Armado, and the very maw of Hell ransack't, and made to give up her concealed
destruction, ere she could vent it in that horrible and damned blast.

O how much more glorious will those former Deliverances appear, when we shall
know them not only to have saved us from greatest miseries past, but to have
reserved us for greatest happiness to come. Hitherto thou have but freed us,
and that not fully, from the unjust and Tyrannous Claim of thy Foes, now unite
us entirely, and appropriate us to thy self, tie us everlastingly in willing
Homage to the Prerogative of thy eternal Throne.

And now we know, O thou our most certain hope and defense, that thine
enemies have been consulting all the Sorceries of the great Whore, and have
joined their Plots with that sad Intelligencing Tyrant that mischiefs the
World with hi^ Mines of Ophir, and lies thirsting to revenge his Navall ruins
that have larded our Seas; but let them all take Counsel together, and let it
come to naught, let them Decree, and do thou Cancel it, let them gather
themselves, and be scattered, let them embattell themselves and be broken,
let them imbattell, and be broken, for thou art with us.

Then amidst the Hymns, and Halleluiahs of Saints some one may perhaps be
heard offering at high strains in new and lofty Measures to sing and celebrate
thy divine Mercies, and marvelous Judgments in this Land throughout all AGES;
whereby this great and Warlike Nation instructed and inured to the fervent and
continual practice of Truth and Righteousness, and casting far from her the
rags of her old vices may press on hard to that high and happy emulation to be
found the soberest, (...), and most Christian People at that day when thou the
Eternal and shortly-expected King shall open the Clouds to judge the several
Kingdoms of the World, and distributing National Honors and Rewards to
Religious and just Commonwealths, shall put an end to all Earthly Tyrannies,
proclaiming thy universal and mild Monarchy through Heaven and Earth. Where
they undoubtedly that by their Labors, Counsels, and Prayers have been earnest
(...) the Common good of Religion and their Country, shall receive, above the
inferior Orders of the Blessed, the Regal addition of Principalities,
Legions, and Thrones into their glorious Titles, and in supereminence of
beatifick Vision progressing the da^^lesse and irrevoluble Circle of Eternity
shall clasp inseparable Hands with joy, and bliss in over measure sor ever.

But they contrary that by the imp^iting and diminution of the true Faith, the
distresses and servitude of their Country aspire to high Dig^, Rule and Pr^ion
here, after a shameful end in thsi Life (which God grant them) shall be thrown
down eternally in to the darkest and deepest (...) of HELL, where under the
despig^ (...), the trample and spurn of all the other D^, that in the anguish
of their Torture shall have no other case then to exercise a R^g and ^all Tyr^y
over them as their Slaves and N^, they shall remain in that plight for ever,
the ba^, the ^most, the most de^ed, most (...) and (...) V^sals of Perd^.

The End.

