A REPLY TO THE ANSWER (Printed by his Majesty's Command at OXFORD) to a
Printed Book Entitled OBSERVATIONS upon some of his MAJESTY'S late Answers
and Expresses. By J. M.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Walbancke, Anno Dom. 1642.

A reply to the Answer (printed by his Majesty's Command at Oxford) to a
printed book entitled Observations upon some of his Majesty's late Answers
and expresses.
THe Author of the Answer to the Observator (which was p^inted a^ Oxford (no
place more fit to entertain such cavils) by his (...) Command (too good a
Patron to be thus abused) Begins his dis^urse by way of Preface, and there
would tell us the Original of Regal Authority, were it not a loss of time
(he has been to profuse and prodigal of it in his Book, he does well to spare
it in the Preface) for that he sees [ it is granted to be at (...) least
mediately from God.] I shall not dispute whether God be the immediate donor of
Royalty or no* For I take it to be very clear and evident, that the Kings of
Israel were of Divine insti^tion; But that Royal Authority should be nnto us,
or the s^cceeding ages more of Divine right or Institution, then
Aristocraticall or Democraticall power, that I deny* (...) were they of Divine
institution, it must of necessity be, that all States must be fwayed and ruled
by Kings; and the execution of other power were sin, and that I hope (...)
man will dare to a^rt. Again, were they of Divine right, they ought to have
equal power and Dominion in all places; and that they have not, for as it is
well known, in some Kingdoms they have greater Authority, in some less; And
all vary according to the several Laws and Constitutions of their Countries.
Why then if they be of humane institution, it must be agreed, that no King
has at thi^ day, any special Ordinance from Heaven by which to entitle
himself to his Crown and Regal authority: And hence the consequence is just,
that Kings are bound by th^se qualifications of compact and condition that were
made with them by the people, and ought to discharge and execute their Royal
functions answerable thereunto.

But then he goes on an^ tells us that power or government [ was o^yned of God
for the good of mankind, which was not to be obtained without preservation of
order, and therefore he has commanded all to be subject to the Laws of
society, not only for wrath, but for conscience sake.] With this limitation
the Author says true, we must submitt to the Lawe^ of society, where they do
not oppose the Law of God, otherwise not, for how can a man obey for conscience
against conscience?

And he sa^es we must submit, [ not only whilst we enjoy the benefit of
Governors, but (...) whilst we d^e suffer under some accidental abuses.] I,
but what if those abus^ prov^ ^o be wilful? I know that is the Authors
meaning, though he will not express it, for if his opinion mi^ht pass as
Orthodox, the cases would be all one, I, and what if th^se abuses strike at our
Religion, at our lives, libe^ies, and estates; at all that God has entrusted
us with, and made us happy in* must we here submitt and quietly surrender up
all our happiness at once* a most strange Doctrine. Well let him Preach it at
Oxford, to those whom a foolish zeal has besotted with an unwarrantable
devotion to their Sovereign. But let us know, that good subjects may preserve
these and yet not be the less, but the more dutiful to their King; Is it any
breach of duty to deny that which the Law of God and my conscience tells me
that I ought not to grant? ot can that have the impuration of disloyalty to my
Sovereign which styles me just before God? well, to pass this (because I
shall have occasion to speak more fully to it after) those that maintain this
error, misery will be this portion here, and a just judgment hereafter.

But he tells us that [ we cannot reap the constant fruits of an establ^shed
policy, unless by comp^ct we submit our selves to some possible
inconveniences.] The Author would have done well to have explained (...) what
he means by those inconveniences; b^t (...) this is his meaning (for the whole
s^ope of his Book speaks as much) that it is possible a King may degenerate
into a Ty^ant, and make his boundless Arbitrary will to be Law, and if this
fall out, (as too commonly it does) yet we must patiently do or s^ffer what
ever (though never so unjustly and contrary to good conscience) is imposed upon
us, and which is more, we must by solemn contract bind our selves beforehand
this to do; and why so? for that otherwise there can be no constant benefit of
an established policy. A most strange and unnatural assert^on, was it ever
heard, or can it be imagined, that a people should contract to their own
ruin? there is a mutual compact betwixt King and People, the King is to
govern by a rule if he would have his people to obey; and if he swerve from
that, this dissol^es the contract, and gives the people power to (...) and
preserve themselves. And if this were not Law, what benefit could we expect to
reap of such an established destructive policy?

He has made bad premi^es, and worse conclusion, for mark what he has d^uced
from thence. Hence (says he) it follows after a people has by (...) contra^
divested it self of that power which was primarily in them, they cannot upon
what pret^ce soever witho^t manif^st breach of Divine Ordinance, and violation
of public says resume that authority which they have placed in another.)
This by the way, power (according to the Authors own (...)) was primarily in
the people (a truth ingeniously acknowledged) but the mischief (...); they
have by contract divest^d themselves of that power: how is that made good? why
thus, they chose one to be King over them, and contracted to obey him; what in
omnibus (...), in all his commissions, nothing less; for that might be to
disodey God, and whether it be lawful to obey God or man, judge you. I, but
they have given him an absolute Authority, and made him supreme, and therefore
not to be q^stioned by any inferior power; and if this were true, his
Majesty's counsel (who too (...) mal^ne ^he ha^pinesse of King and peop^, and
would work o^ their own (...) des^gnes by the ruin of both) w^ld never have
advised h^s Majesty to have inserted this into many of his Declarat^ons, that
his Royal power was committed unto him by God and the Law* in trust for the
well govern^ng and (...) of his people committ^d to his charge. And as a trust
is for the benefit and behoof of him, for whose sake the conv^yance in tr^st
was made, not of him, who is the party entrusted. So likew^se every trust does
impl^ a condit^on that the party do d^ly perf^rme and discharge the t^st, or
if h^e do not, that he be (...) so to do. Th^s th^n being thus h^w h^ve the
people tota^ly divest^d themselves of their power? I d^e not speak this to
defend the peoples (...) of their Authority, or to (...) that po^tion of
depo^ng Princes, so far I concur with the Author: but that they should have
a boundl^sse (...) power, that I deny.

Again (for he makes a second conclusion o^t of the former premises) hence
it (...) (says he) though ^he people should (...) they ^ght live more hapi^,
if the Ki^gs (...) were more (...), his revenues diminish^d, it were h^gh sin
to (...) upon his (...)* (...) in St^e, when that the Kings Prerogative does
not invade the sub^ects (...) nor their (...) entrench (...) (...); but ea^h
keep within their (...) (...) and circumference: But th^s we must ^ow, that
as the Kings Crown and (...) ^ower was committed to him in trust f^r the good
of his (...), so likewise were his (...) and Prerogatives, and if these b^
abused to the (...) of l^berty, and the (...) or the dest^uction of his people,
it is no entrenching upon Prerogative, to q^estion this ab^se, and endeavor our
own preservation.

I, but then he says, it does no way prejudice regal Authority, that God is
the Author of Aristocrat call or Democraticall power.] Does the observators
saying that God is the auhor of those powers, any way conclude against regal
authority? where the powers are various, and no way contradictory or opposite
one to another, for a man to conclude the illegality of the one, from the
legality of the other, were a very simple and fallacious kind of reasoning.

But our Author will not be thus satisfied, for he does here charge the
Observator with ^reading in the steps of Ma^iana and Buchanan sworn enemies ^o
(...).] And why so pray you? why because the Observator does show how the
infancy of the world was governed; Most Nations being ruled by their Lords and
their Arbitrary edicts, which was not (he says) in a long time digested. And
then for that he further shows the inconveniences, which in more mat^re ages
were ^onnd to accompany unconditionate Royalty, but concludes that since most
Countries have so^nd out an art for the regulating the exorbitances of Princes,
he is very unjust that will oppose this A^ and Order. And now let any wise and
indiff^rent man j^dge how falsely and maliciously this imputation of an enemy
to Monarchy is cast upon the Observator: sor does the d^monstrating and
disproving of other Governements any way strike at Monarchy? or does it not
rather propp or support it? does not the dis^llowing of other powers (if not
commend) yet tacitly allow and approve our own? Nay does he not here (as in
other places) expr^sly appla^de the order and const^tution of (...) Monarchy so
well fenced in by the Art of Parliaments? why then what color or ground is
th^re for this imputation? Is there not a wide d^fference be^wixt modification
and extirpation? had our Author cons^red this, certainly he would not have
been thus unjust in his censure; Bu^ here we may learn what Doctirine is
daily delivered to the King: That it is the Kings Crown that is aimed at, and
not only so, but even the very dethroning of him and his whole posterity, and
in truth so it is, but by his Majesty's evil C^ncellors; who to magni^ie
themselves intend the ruin of the Commonwealth* and is not that in effect a
d^throning of his Majest^? all that I shall say is but this; No Govenement more
blessed or happy, if not abused by the advice of vile and malignant Co^ellours.

After so long a Preface, the Author tells us, that he will now take i^to
consideration the Observators grounds, upon which he would overthrow so
ancient and well ^unded a Monarch^.] The false imp^tation of enmity against
this great and well established power will not be thus shaken ^ff; The truth of
it is, he that resolves to say any thing, be it never so scandalous and void of
truth, will again (...) to stand or fall upon the same principles.

But give him leave and he will show you one of the grounds that strikes at
Monarchy (p^ay observe what an unnecessary ^nference is h^re made by the
Author.) The observator says: that,

The King a^tributeth the original of his Royalty to God and the Law, making
no mention Obs.
at all of the grant consent or tr^st of man therein.]

A ground^sse cavile (s^th the Author) and why so? because when God is First
named, Ans.
under what notion can he apprehend ^aw but as an ag^eement o^ the people
deriving of their power, and committing the (...) to his trust.] Rep.


You charge the Observator with a ^avile, and you labor to ma^e it good by so
large allowance, that I could not have (...) so much from Ox^d. What an
agreement o^ the people in the (...) of a King, and a deriving of their power
unto him, and which h^s yet more, a (...) of the (...) to h^s Majesty ^n tr^st
(why then that is no absolute and (...) power) t^s much all th^s sh^ld be
granted, but yet I fear, ^is yo^* not the Observator that dea^es (...) (...)
his (...), tell^ng him that the (...) and agreement of (...) (...) is (...)
obliterated and (...) (...) (...) that it is not now to be taken notice of, or
that (...) (...) by the ^etter of the Law, so ^ ^ what else can be the meaning
(...) tha^ f^equent ^xpression in many of his (...), Declarations? that he is
responsible to God alone for his Actions, not to man. Is not this (since no
absolute power was transferred by the people, as it is here confessed, and as I
have made it good before) a denying of the consent and agreement of the people,
and a granting of a boundless Authority? And how can that and a trust stand
together? certainly a dependant and an independent government are not
Synonyma. It Is true, that if a people do erect a King over them, that this is
confirmed and ratified in Heaven; But being of humane institution this does no
way expunge those qualifications of trust and condition which are incident to,
and tacitly pass with this sacred function; and if so, we must of necessity
allow a power in some, to see the due discharge and execution of them; nor will
it derogate from the honor of God or the dignity of a Prince, that the people
exact the due execution of the Law, and the performance of that compact, trust,
and condition, that follows Sovereignty. By this time I hope our Author may
be, satisfied, that it is he that cavils, not the Observator, since it is
plain that the word (Law) though it do receive so candid an interpretation
from the Observator) may be and is denied to be the consent and agreement of
the people. But now how does this determine against Monarchy? why yes, thus, or
not at all; The King denies the people their right, therefore the people may
take away his. Is this one of the grounds upon which the Observator does intend
to overthrow Monarchy? yes, if our Author may be judge. Was ever imputation of
so great guilt laid upon any man upon such shallow grounds? Well, since he
fails here, suspends your judgment but a while, he may make good his charge
hereafter. Obs.


That Dominion which is usurped and not just, yet whilst it remains Dominion,
and till it be legally again divested, refers to God, as to its Author and
Donor, as much as that which is hereditary.] Ans.


To which our Author says, that usurpation and unjust Dominion can give no
right to the possessor. Rep.


Can it any way by the most scrutenous understanding be collected from the
Observators words, that usurpation gains a right? what probability can there
be of this inference? If this could be made good, Laws would be but Ciphers
and unlawful force upon any man's interest, the best means of living, so that
he who could steal most would be the true proprietor of most, and the
strongest prove the richest men. But does not the Observator expressly say, that
that Dominion which is usurped is not just? if so, what needs this Cavil? O
yes, for he says, that it is a flat contradiction to say, that God is the
Author and Donor of Dominion usurped and not just, as well as of that which is
hereditary; and what is his reason? why, for that God being Lord proprietary of
all, his donation transferrs a full right to him ^n whom he bestows it, and
this deed of gift being known, it is not lawful to endeavor a recovery,]
and therefore God cannot be the Author and Donor of that dominion which is
usurped and not just, for that such a Dominion does not entitle a man to a full
right, because the lawful proprietor may regaine it by Conquest, as justice
permitts, and so reestablish himself in his Dominion. Yet under favor this is
no contradiction, for does or can the revolution or Maeander of time produce
any change or alteration, either in King or State that God is not the Author
of? the evil of sin man alone is the father of, for that sin is inconsistent
with that absolute purity and holiness that is in God, but the evil of
punishment, that is Gods. Is there any evil in the City that I have not done
says the Lord? And if God, for the sin of the King or people, or both, shall
permit a stranger to usurp upon the dominion of the King, and to entrench upon
his Sovereignty* is it any contradiction to say that God is as much the Author
and Donor of this Dominion that is thus gained by usurpation, as he is of that
which is hereditary? doubtless not, for God is only the confirmer, man the
creator or institutor of both. And though God as absolute Sovereign and
Proprietor can transfer a full right in any thing unto whom he pleases; yet
it does not follow that he will always so do: For as sin may divorce a
King from his Kingdom, or a people from Gods blessing for a time, so true and
unfeigned repentance may (through Gods mercy) reestablish and unite them again
together. When our Author had said (as before) that where God is the Donor of
Dominion, that there it is not lawful to ir ^eavor a Recovery; He further
adds, that this was the case of Rehoboam, who aft^ the desect of Ten Tribes
raised an Army out of Judah and the Tribe of Benjamin in hopes to reduce them 1
King. 12.
to obedience: But was warned by Shemaiah the man of God, not to fight against
his brethren not because it was unlawful in it self, or the success
unprobable, but for that this was from the Lord.] I shall not dare to defend a
peoples revolting from their King (though their burden be great and their yoke
heavy) as here Isreal's from Reho^oam, who (when they could not obtain an
ease, or discharge of their pressures which they had suffered under Verse 8.
his father Solomon) answered the King saying, what portlon have we in David?
neither have we inheritance in the Son of Iesse; here they disavowed their
King, and not long after Verse 7.
have made Jeroboam King in his stead: for my part I do not believe this to be
a warrantable Act in Israel. And I conceive that Israel taking up of Arms to
reduce them Verse 8. 9.
to obedience was lawful, and that he might have proceeded, and have expected
a good success upon his endeavor, had he not had an express command from
God to the Verse 10.
contrary. But now on the other side, I will not justify Rehoboam in forsaking
the Council of the sage old men, who (as grave and wise counselors that seek
the good of the public, not their own) advised the King that if he would be
a servant unto this people, and serve them, and answer them, and speak good
words to them, then they would be his servants for ever; (here you may learn
the Office of good Kings and their Counselors) but the King (as most Kings
use) rejecting such rigid counsel, betook him to his young men and consulted
with them, and asked them what Counsel they would give him, (it is easy to
judge what the effect of their Counsel would be) and they answer him, thus
shall thou say unto them, my little finger shall be thicker then my fathers
loins: in stead of an ease of their present miseries, he promises them that he
will augment them for the future; no question this was a great sin in
Rehoboam, and I am confident had not Israel revolted, they might have justified
before God, the taking up of Arms against these Malignant Counselors, for the
restoring and reducing of their ancient Rights and Liberties: Kings must serve
their people by protecting and defending of them according to Law and right, as
also by easing of them of all unlawful pressures, if they expect that their
people should serve them in love and obedience.

The Author goes on, and says, Though force be not Law, yet is after
conquest, a people resign their right in part or in whole by a subsequent Act
of consent, they are obliged to stand to those conditions, which they made
perchance out of a probable sear of harder usage] Who will oppose this, our
Author needed not to have labored for instances to make this good, o^ to have
showed us the strong obligation that the Law of God and man, do impose upon
such compacts and agreements, for no doubt men ought to be fai^ull in the
discharge of their engagements, though it be to their own prejudice; besides
as we say in Law, he that disseises or disposse^es another of his ^reehold, or
other interest, has a right against all men, except the disseisee, or the
party so dispossessed* so without question it is in case of Dominion or
Royalty, he that gains a Kingdom by Conquest, (...) absolute King against
all men, except the rightful Sovereign, and therefore as our Law is, well
known, he may obliterate and utterly extirpate and abolish their old Laws and
rights, and create and introduct new, which is one strong argument of true and
absolute Sovereignty. But I hope on the other side our Author will take notice
that the right of Conquest cannot be pleaded to acquit or discharge Princes of
their duty. There is Onus as well as honos, that is, a great burden, charg and
care as well as honor and renown, that is inseperably incident to this great
function, and therefore he that gains the one, be it by descent, conquest, or
otherwise, must discharge the other.

The fountain and efficient cause of power is the people, and srom hence the
inference is Obs.
just, the King though he be singulis major, yet he is universis minor.

The author tells us: that, This inference is most weak, and that the quite
contrary may clearly be concluded; pray hear his reason, The people being the
efficient cause of power Ans.
(which can be no other way, but by deriving their divided power, and uniting
it in him,) since they cannot retain what they have parted with, nor have what
they gave away, it follows ^e which (...) their power (I may add his own
particular besides) must needs be greater and more powerful then they. The
Authors argument, to destroy the Observators R^p.
inference, is but this; that though the people be the fountain and efficient
cause of power, yet for that they have made a free Donation of all power to the
King since they cannot be owners of that they have given away; therefore it
must needs follow, that the King is greater then the people. I doubt the Author
will find it a greater difficulty to maintain this Argument then to make it;
for if it can be proved (on that hangs the strength of his argument:) that the
people have not divested themselves of all power o^t of his premises, the
consequence is just, that the universe is greater then the King. Now if trust
and condition are inseparable incidents to Sove^ty (as I have showed before) it
must follow, that the people represented by a Parliament may call in question
the breach of them for otherwise the power would be (in effect) (...), which
has been denied even by the King himself, who acknowledges that his Kingdom
is committed to him in trust: and if so (as no doubt p^dents of that nature are
not wanting to posterity, (for that no question that was one maine ground of
the constitution of Parliaments; the restraining of the exorbitancy of Princes)
why then how can it be that the people should have divested themselves of all
their power? for it must be agreed that that power which may call in question
the discharge of others is the supreme and superintendent, for no inferior
power can do it, so that by this time, I hope the Author is satisfied, that
the Obse^ors inference is just, and his reason weak and defective.

But the Observator tenders a proof of the premises, for (says he) If the
people be Obs.
the true ^ent cause of power; it is a rule in nature, quicquid efficit tale,
est magis tale.

S^ange (says the Author) that men upon such palpable sophistry, should
endeavor to Ans.
cast off Monarchy.

It is more strange to me that men against clear reason, should make Rep.
themselves so palpably ignorant, can not the Author difference a reasonable
modification or qualificatio^, from an extreme extirpation, or eradication: if
my reason fail me not, it is he that indeavoureth (what ever he pretend) the
casting off of Monarchy: for as Monarchy is never so secure, as when fenced in
by the wisdom of Parliaments, it submits to their determinations: so it is
never so much in danger, as when it exalts it self above and against them, and
endeavors an absoluteness of Sovereignty: hence it may be determined who
are the greatest enemies to Monarchs. But pray what is the sophistry the
Observator stands accused of? why, it is this; he has given you a rule that is
regularly, not generally true; that will maintain the case in question, not
all others: for instance, he tells the Observator, That he will be unwilling to
follow the consequence of this rule: and why? for that (says he) he has an
estate which no question (...) would willingly improve, let him bestow it upon
me, he will make me rich, and (...) richer: for quicquid (...) tale est magis
tale. I, this is tha^, that has made this great combustion, ma^r of ^ight and
estate, could you persuade us out of our reason, you would quickly seize upon
these: but I trust your sophistry shall not so captivate our sense, as to
betray our selves to ruin by a foolish prating with that, which God dispensed
unto our Ancestors, and they through his mercy, ^queathed unto us. If I should
tell you. that God made man, therefore God is greater than man, or that the
Ocean distributing it self into several streams or rivolets, is greater than
those rivolets, and so conclude that therefore, quicquid efficit tale, est
magis tal^, you would presently say, that this were no infallible way of
reasoning: why for you to conclude, that it does not hold in some cases,
therefore not in the case in question, is not this the same fallacy? but as
before, s now I shall make good the Axiom in our case upon his own grounds,
for he says, it does hold in those agents in whom the quality by which they
operate is ^erent, and from whom it cannot be separated: not true in those who
by way of donation d^st themselves of power or wealth. That power was origi^lly
inherent in the people, that I think will not be questioned. That the people
(...) not divested themselves of all their power, is cleared thus, (as I have
shown before) that power that is fiduciary and upon condition, must needs be
subject to a power more supreme, to see the due discharge of this trust and
condition, or oth^rwise it would in effect prove absolute, but I say the Royal
dignite and authority is fiduciary only and upon condition, therefore it must
be subject to a power more su^e, w^h can be no other than the people
represented by a Parliament* Besides, what a groundless and unnatural thing
is it to think, that a people in whom all power did orig^y reside, should so
totally and absolutely dispose that to one, which being abused, must without
hope of redress prove their own inevitable destruction.

I, but says the Author, If the King be universis minor, then the people have
p^ced a King, not over, but (...) them; and (...) do ill to (...), when they
might command, they may (...) it from the Prince their subject.

The King is universis minor, less than the Public, but he is singulis major
over and above all individuals; and therefore the Author in this does not much
mistake himself; for that undutifull and ^urable passage, of commanding of his
Majesty, and of making him our subject, I wish withal my soul, that the
Author of this book and his associates, were not more guilty of this, then his
Parliament* could ever Parliament or ^ple, with more submissivenesse, pray or
petition his Ma^estie, than we have done? or can all preceding ages produce an
example of greater humility and loyalty to their Sovereign? but to pass
this, we shall ever count it our duty to petition, and acknowledge our King,
while others, though not in words, yet in heart disclaim him.

The Author says, His Majesty does most freely acknowledge, and will
constantly maintain what ever rights the Law does give us; ^et he is not bound
to be ray his own.

Happy England if this were made good unto us. I do not question his royal
heart, I believe it to b^ ^ull of pie^y and truth: but it is you and your
Accomplices that have divided him from his people, and made him act a part clean
contrary to his p^ous (...): obtruding the rights and liberties of his (...),
in not d^fending the power and privileges of Parliament, in taking up of A^es
against his people, the^eby to enforce that, which law and right proclaims
unjust; but I pres^e this no further. Happy (...), when that prerogative and
subjects liberty do not invade each other* But let this (...) a (...)
construction: if pre^ive be abused to the endangering of the State, it is no
(...) (...) his Majesty's right, to be ruled by the Counsel of his
Parliament, for the securing (...) his people.

No dissolution ought to be (...) (...) (...) by the consent of (...), into
such and such Obs.
hands, but by the same (...) by (...) it had its (...).

The Author by a needless endeavor, would ^ne have us ri^tly (...) this,
(...) Ans.
says he, Where a man does by donation or promise part with any (...), he
(...) (...) it as his due upon (...) (...); (...) that it would (...) to the
(...) of (...): (...) (...) he, where there are ^wo parties to the contract,
as (...) case of (...) and (...), there the people cannot (...) (...)
government without this (...), (...) those few (...).

For my (...) I d^e not believe that ever (...) (...) intended to attribute
such a power Rep.
to the people, as is here (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) his (...), (...) the
(...) or (...) to (...) (...) no other power may abrogate, but that which did
(...)* (...) not in (...) ^clude, that they in all cases may do it, (...) the
author n^ght well have (...) his labor.

It were strange if the people subjecting it self to ^mmand, should (...) at
(...) thing but its Obs.
own good, in the first and last place.

After the Author had confessed this, yet says he, for that the peo^ could not
attain Ans.
this, without a common protector to admin^ster justice equally amongst them,
they found it n^ssary in a higher degree to provide for his good, in recompense
^f their (...), etc. and so concludes, that the good of either is mu^ally
involved, and that the people may be hap^, they must first provide for the
happ^nesse of their Ruler.

That the good of both has a (...) dependence upon each other no (...), but
that the Rep.
constitution of government, was (...) and principally for the good of the
people, that's as (...), and therefore that ought first to be (...).

The Author charges the Observator, with breaking out into a most scandalous
and salse invective (...) the late government, and this he counts (...) of any
(...).

(...) he give any answer we should be s^re to have it, but what he cannot
answer, h^e cannot answer, he can by some sophysticall flight evade, or else
tell you, (as ^re) that it is false, though the lie reflect upon himself; but
he may (without offense) give it to himself, as he does in the very words
following, by which he confesses, that the Subject groaned under some
grievances.

If I should have demanded of the Author before Parliament (granting he were
not one who added to the burden) whether that the Kingdom were not even ready
to sink and faint away under those heavy pressures of Monopolies, Ship-mony,
Cote and conduct money, and the like (most illegal charges, such as our
Ancestors never knew) I am confident that he would have answered me in the
affirmative, and have further added, that the body politic must die, if that a
Parliament did not interpose* for the securing of it; and are these now become
false and scandalous invectives? it is very strange that the Author should so
suddenly forget Gods goodne^e and mercy toward us, in this Parliament, as not
only to forget the blessing, but even to deny the benefit: for he says,

We owe it to the goodness of his Majesty, that we are free, even from the
fear of them for the future.

No respect at all is to be had of the Parliament, as if they were not so much
as instruments in the conveyance of this mercy: it is pity that he should share
in the blessing, that will not acknowledge the hand that conveyed it. We shall
ever with all humility acknowledg^ his Majesty's goodness and grace toward
us this Parliament, in taking off those unjust burdens that pressed our
shoulders; and yet not forget our Worthies: and by the way, let me say this; he
that lays an unjust burden upon me, and after long suffering, binds himself
to ease me of it for the future, as it is no restitution or recompense for the
evil already undergone, so he does no more then what the Law of God and an
upright conscience ties him to.

I but says the Author, Compare us to any other Nation in the Christian world,
we in our worst times, were least unhappy.

A strange reason, that because other Nations are not so happy as we,
perchance out of defect of their Government, or themselves, that therefore we
must inslave our selves to be like them: I fear this is the labor of the
time, to reduce us to their condition; and I hope this will be our care, not to
be content with a comparative happiness only, but to labor to maintain our
ancient rights and privileges.

Again the Author says, that he shall not endeavor to excuse the former
times, by comparison with our present miseries: though neither be defirable,
yet we are too sensible, which we have justest reason to complain of.

It Is certain that no evil is defirable, but yet if Fate decree it, let me
suffer under the hand of justice, rather than of wrong and oppression. Besides
desperate diseases, must have desperate cures, if these times bring greater
misery than the former, thanks be to the Author and his con^derates; the
public calamity now, is but the sad effect of that before. Had we freely
enjoyed our birthright and inheritance then, there would not have been this
civil combustion now: bad premises must have bad conclusions.

I (...) under this word (protect) the King intends not only to shield us from
all kind of evil, but to promote us also to all kind of Polyticall
happiness, according to his utmost Obs.
devoyre.

Says the Author, I never did apprehend in the word (protect) (...) large
notion. Every particular Ans.
subject has a just title, and may challenge an interest in whatsoever is
meant by the word protection: is the King therefore bo^nd to promote every
particular person to all kinds of political happiness? to advance all to
honors, offices, power, command?

I wonder how you can now apprehend this word (protect) under so large a
notion: or (...)
is it possible (were you not resolved to cavil) that these words should give
you ground for it? certainly (if my reason fail me not) political happiness
has reference only to the body politic, and that is not capable of any
advancement, to any ho^our, office, or power, and to take the words in other
sense were to make them impossible, for can it be thought or expected that his
Majesty should be bound to advance all his Subjects to places of honor or
power? since if all should be in authority they might command themselves, there
would be none left to obey. The sense of the Observator is plainly this, that
the King by this word protect is not only to intend a shielding us from all
evil, but likewise a promoting of the commo^wealth to all kind of political
happinesle: by endeavoring to enrich, not impoverish his Kingdom: by
maintaining peace, and establishing good and wholesome laws amongst his people,
and by putting of such in place of power and authority, that may see the due
execution of the same.

Though all single (...) ought to look upon the late Bills passed by the King,
as matters Obs.
of grace, with all thankfulness and humility, yet the King himself, looking
upon the whole State, ought to acknowledge that he cannot merit of it etc. all
has proceeded but from his mere duty.

It was believed heretofore (says the Author) the greatest happiness of a
Prince, that Ans.
(...) was able, and his greatest glory, to be willing to oblige his people.
But now he is made not capeable of doing any courtesy. When he has done all
he can, he ^ath discharged the duty of a trusty servant.

Whatsoever has been or could be attributed to any Prince in point of grace
or humble Rep.
acknowledgement, that we ascribe unto our gracious Sovereign, with all
humility: and we shall always account it our happiness, to have a Prince not
only able, but willing to engage his people by his grace and goodness; But
must it therefore be thought to be a dishonor or derogation from his gracious
and public favors, to say, that he does but fungi officio, discharge his
office, or duty, according as the law of God and man obliges him? certainly
had Rhehoboams Sages thought that their Council had carried the least badge of
irreverence or disrespect to their Prince, they would not have advised him in
such rough and unacceptable language, that if he would be a servant to that
people and serve them, etc. that then they would be his servants for ever. Good
Princes have acknowledged themselves servants to the common wealth. And it is the
council of young men only that suggest the contrary. But it is a certain
position, that that Prince will never discharge his trust aright, that
sacrifices too much to his Royalty. Here the Author may see, that other ages
have been guilty of the like irreverence and disrespect (as this Sycophantean
Co^tier is pleased to style it) to Princes. Obs.


Again he says, That if all single persons ought to look upon the late Bills
passed by the King, as matters of grace. Ans.


Then they truly are so, for no obligation can lie upon any man, to believe
things ^therwise than they are. Rep:


It Is true, things that are simply good, or simply evil, cannot be varied by
circumstances: and and therefore no obligation may constrain a man to believe
them otherwise. But that which is not in it self good or bad, but varies
according to its several object; in such case, for one and the same act to
produce good to one, and ill to another, is no novelty: and here the
application denominates the action. So in this case, one and the same action
may be matter of grace to one, and yet but matter of d^ty to another. As when a
Judge does Justice to a man, as to him it is grace and favor, but with reference
to the law, t^s but his duty.

I but he says, That this ground destroys the power of bene^nce in a Prince,
and the duty of gratitude in subjects.

Under favor nothing less* for as it is his Ma^esties office and duty by all
means of grace and favor, as also by justice and right, to endeavor the
happiness of the common Wealth; so it is our duty by all means of humble
acknowledgement, to be grateful, it is a great mercy for to have a Prince that
will govern his people according to Law and right. And it were a great
judgment, for the people not to be thankful.

The King ought not to account that a profit, or strength to him which is a
loss Obs.
and wasting to the people, nor ought ^ee to think that pe^sht to him, which
is gained to the people.

By the same Argument the people may share all that be has, and he is ^ound to
believe that Ans.
be has lost nothing.

All that the observator here drives at, is but this, that the Kings strength
and riches, Rep.
a^e embarked in the happiness and prosperity of h^s people; and therefore
that it is not their debilitating or impoverishing, that will any way (...), or
enrich his Majesty, but the contrary; Blessed be the King in his portion, may it
increase to nonplus Arithmeticke, and his days, time; But yet let him know,
that the misery or happiness of his people are by way of r^flection made his.

Is King an^ people have several ^ghts (says the Author) what law is there
which binds the King suo j^re cedere, and enables the people to preserve their
rights, nay to challenge his?

No do^bt the King and people have several rights (happy State, when they do
not entrench upon each other) but in this they va^y; the King, for the most
part, is seized or poss^ssed in jure (...), and the people in their own right:
so that the King has n^ that (...) of property, that the people has: And no
doubt the King at first (as it is (...) (...) by the Author) received his
demesnes from his people, as a recompense of his care, to whom they owed their
security; and therefore if it were law for (...), no question the people might
most colourably justify an incroachment. A^ the King by the Law of God and man
is bound to do justice, and to protect and de^ his people: and therefore if he
have any right or privilege that is inconsistent wi^h these, he is obliged suo
jure cedere. But again, does any one go about to take away the Kings right,
or to divest any property of his? Nay rather do they not in defect of his
(...), and in his right, employ and manage them according to the trust reposed
in him; or if they did do it, ought not the King rather to loose his right or
privilege, then that the public ^erish or be destroyed? Obs.


Regal dignity was erected to preserve the comminalty: But that which is the
end is ^arre (...) honorable and valuable in nature, and policy, then that
which is the means.

The conclusion impl^d is, therefore the commons more honorable than the
Sovereign. Ans.


It Is no dishonor to h^s Majesty, for to say, that the comminaltie or body
politic is Rep.
more honorable than he: did he not receive his dignity from them, and for
their behalf? is he not a servant to the Commonwealth? and is not the common
wealth of greater valuation and esteem? I, that the author does agree too, but
he says, it does not follow, that therefore it is more honorable. Pray what
is honor? but the estimate and repute of people, so that every man is more or
less (...), according to the greater or lesser valuation and (...), that he is
had in with the people. Honor est magis in hon^rante, quam in honorato, and no
d^ubt the public good carries the greatest price and estimate, therefore the
more honorable. l, b^t says the Author, how do you maintain your Argument:
That because the end is more honorable and valuable than the means, therefore
the comminaltie is more (...) than the king. For s^ith he, (...) are ministering
spirits for the good of men, ^ut will it therefore follow, that because the end
is more honorable than the means, that me^ are more honorable than (...)
(...). So says he, Christ is made the head of the Church, for the salvation
(...) (...), (...) (...) the end is (...) honorable and ^aluable ^an the
means, can it therefore be, that man is more ho^ble and valuable than C^st?

These cases may receive a short answer, for (...) the (...) is pleased to say,
that the highest (...) of Angels ministration, and the ob^ce of Chi^st, is the
gl^ry of God; (...) ^our it is the proximate end, and so it is not in (...),
(...) than in other humane acts or (...): so (...) these cases conclude (...)
us, n^ against us; b^t (...) that they could hold, this is a strange way (...)
(...), a (...) ad (...), that (...) a rule will not stand in one (...) case*
that therefore it will in no (...); allow me but this (...) in dispute, and I
will (...) overthrow, or maintain (...) c^e in question: as for (...), (...)
is the means of the salvation of men's (...), is not the end h^e mo^e (...) and
(...) th^n the means? So (...) and sord^d labor may raise a man to g^at
rich^s and (...), and is not the end here, more (...) and valuable than the
means. Now (...) (...) to ^clude from these cases to the case in d^bate you
would say were a very fallacious (...), turn but the s^ales the case is your
^wn.

But the Author says, that (...) rule ^h hold in such (...) (...) as are only
(...) (...) (...) (...) they (...) unto their ends, and have no proper goodnes^
of their ^wne, but a King (...) ^.

The (...) were made for man^ sustinence, and here no question, the end is more
ho^ and valuable than the means, and yet we must not (...) a (...) per (...)
in the creature. So the word of God preached is good in it self* and yet here
the end is more honorable than the means, So the King might be an honorable
person in himself which the superaddition of Royalty does not destroy, but
en^rease, and yet withal this, being but the means to preserve the (...); may
be less honorable and valuable than they who are the end of his Royalty.

This directs us to the trancendent (...) of all politiques, to the Paramount
Law that shall Obs.
give law to all humane laws whatsoever, and that is salus populi.

How many nations has this abused principle brought to ruin and confusion.
Ans.


He instances in none; but would subtly insinuate such things into your
belief, that Rep.
might make you to fear your present condition; but if phanta^mes or
chymoeraes have vainly frighted others, happily out of their wits, shall not
we therefore wisely secure ou^ selves from apparent and visible dangers? the
abuse of a good thing, does no way conclude against the lawful use. But after
he had agreed this to be the end of all government, he holds it without doubt,
that Governors proportion all their laws to that end; for (says he) who that
is wise, will not provide for their safety as well as he can, in whose
destruction his own is ^nvolved.

I wish from my very soul that this were duly pondered on, salus Regis and
populi, lie now at stake for a (...), and is like to be lost, without the King,
by the advice of his great Council, be pleased, providere salvationi regni
sui. Gracious Sovereign, suffer not your people (and in them your own honor
and happiness) to dye, who (God knows) seek nothing but the maintenance and
preservation of both.

Well, after this, the Author tells us of a crafty kind of people' (who he
means, God knows, for I believe he himself does not) who by fair glosses
and pretenses insinuate themselves into the hearts of the multitude, who pity
their sufferings, and tell them they are not so well governed as they might be;
these things if applied to our state and condition, are not bare pretenses. And
then he instances in the story of Absalon, who stole away the hearts of his
fathers subjects, under a pretense of doing o^ them justice; this Absolon, I
fear, is nearer Oxford than London: after he says, they promise (...), and to
effect this, desi^es the peopl^s assistance, unhappy people and fit to be
inslaved, that will not yield their aid for redu^ing of their ancient
liberties. Then, he says, the people full of great hopes, cry up these men, as
the only fit iustruments of state, none deserve better of the common wealth
(let the mo^th of malice suggest what it can by way of detraction) then such as
have haza^ded their lives and fortunes for reducing of its former happiness;
and no instruments so fit as these, that are chosen by public consent and
approbation. Having thus ga^ned the (...) of the people, their next work is to
pick a quarrel (...) great (...) that by (...) t^m, they make (...) for
themselves, is that to pick a quarrel with great officers to accuse them
legally for their unjust oppression and malignity to the common wealth? and if
they ^hance to be expulsed (though it seldom prove so) as justice requires,
where can you find their accusers in their room? which possibly might have
been had they desired it. Then he says, if these men will not out of their
preferments. the people are acquainted, the^e are the only ^ubs, which (...) a
^appy government; ^hese are the close enemies to the State. No wonder if the
people be so informed; those that have been (...) the oppreslers of the Common
wealth, will, rather than suffer their actions to come to the test, prove even
the destroyers (...) it. And is not salus ^uli now concerned, and the whole
Ki^gdome in danger and (to use his own words* though with more real
intention) no way to escape this imminent peril but by tearing o^ these men
from the Prince; who endeavor to rent the King from his people, and utterly to
destroy both. After all this large and dark discourse, he concludes by way of
advise; and what is that? why wholesome counsel, I warrant you. Let them
(says he) rely upon their Governors, who have (...) to (...) (es^ecially i^
they have given them great and late sig^es of their (...) to and care of (...),
this is the most (...) way of safety* I marry sir, thi^ is good doctrine
indeed: because (...) will hazard his fortune, which i^ greater; must I
therefore expose mine to ruin, which is less: but stay, has any one
individual, a greater portion than the public? or m^re to loose than the body
politic? if so, we will entrust our store with him, and run the hazard; if
otherwise, you will give us leave to secu^e the great^r, and more considerable
portion. And under the A^thors favor, it is no probable way of safety, ^r a man
to (...) himself wit^ his enemy. I but th^n hear what he says immediately
after the precedent words, if (...) should miscary (says he) which they can
have no reason to suspect) they would perish with a great deal of di^cretion.
The Law of God, of Nature, of Nations, and the Municipall Law of the Land, do
all inab'e a man to maintain his life and fortunes, though by force and
violence. And can it then be thought that a whole Kingdom and people should
be bound (under I know not what divine obligation) to yield themselves as a
pray to the malice of their enemies* It Is not the bond of Governors, that can
challenge a submission to things unlawf^ll: and for that cause, that I am not
bound to obey, it were unnatural, if I might not defend: and therefore with
the Authors favor, it were high sin and indiscretion for me to loose my life,
when I might save it. Obs.


It seems (...) all to me, that any Nation should be bound to contribute its
own inherent puissance, merely to abet tyranny, and support slavery. Ans.


The inconveniences of Tyranny conclude nothing against just Monarch^.

That is true, I but what if a just Monarch shall degenerate into a tyrant?
then I perceive Rep.
you will allow, that the inconveniences of Tyranny conclude somewhat. I but,
says the author, It is so far from being unnatural, that any nation should be
bound to contribute its power to that end, that some have made it their choice,
others their refuge. What, to be made slaves? most unreasonable, most
unnatural. All creatures (much more man) do by nature desire liberty. It Is
that we were all borne to; and as he does oppugn nature, so he waves part of
his right and inheritance, that consents to thralldome. No temporal blessing
next to life, greater than an ample freedom; No greater misery, than a vile
and sordid slavery. I but wh^t if the Authors position hold true? that some
Nations have so far degenerated as to exchange a Palace for a Prison (though
perchance that by force too) as the State of Rome, Turkey, and France; must
their examples be precidents for us? or is it any whit the less unnatural
because they do it? I but the Author says, There may be reasonable motives
why a people should consent to slavery; as if in danger of a potent enemy, they
could hire none on gentler conditions, to undertake their defense, or if
reduced to extreme want, they had not wherewith to sustain themselves, they
may very probably, like Esau, ^asse away their (...)-right, (...): and he gives
you an instance of both these, of the first, the (...) to the Children of
Israel: and of the last, the Egyptians to Pharaoh. It Is an old and true saying,
that necessity has no law; the law of nature binds every man to defend and
maintain his liberty, but necessity may untie this bond; for it is better to
be, though miserable, then not to be at all. But now to conclude from a case of
necessity, to a case out of necessity, is no good reasoning. To say that to
save my life, I may part with my liberty; and therefore like Esau with his
birthright, I may pass it away for a mess of pottage; this is a most foolish
and unreasonable argument. To conclude this, freedom, as it is a great mercy,
so it ought of temporal blessings, next to our lives, to receive the greatest
estimate; the slavery of the body is the (...) to the thraldom of conscience;
and if we foolishly surrender up this, the other will not be long after.

From the word (trust) used by his Majesty, he gathers, the King does admit
his interest i^ Obs.
the C^owne in (...) (...).

No ground for this collection: for there may be a trust, and that is so much
the greater, if Ans.
free from condition.

Under the Authors favor the collection is very natural; for (as I have
shown before) Rep
every trust implies a condition; that the party entrusted faithfully
discharge and execute that trust that is reposed in him: and did not the King
accept his crown upon the same condition? Beside^, ^ll osfices of trust and
confidence, or that concern the administration of justice (as Lawyers well
know) carry a long with them a tacit condition; and the osfice of a King, has
those qualifications in the most s^perlative degree, of anyother, and therefore
must of necessity be conditionate. But the Author says, That this is true in
some sense, and his Majesty has always acknowledged, he is bound to maintain
the rights and liberty of the Subject: yet we must not so understand it, as if
the right to his Kingdom were so conditionate, that it were capable of
forfeiture upon a not exact performance of covenant. It can never be thought
with any candid and f^ire interpretation, that the Observators intention was,
that the King might, for breach of this condition, forfeit his crown; for it
is clear that the not executing of a trust, does not forfeit the estate or
interest entrusted: besides it is regularly true in our law, that that which is
not grantable, is not forfeitable* but the crown is not grantable, e^go, etc.
^ut that which most confirms me in this is, that the Observator has in ^art
declared his judgment against the opinion o^ deposing Prin^es, which I
conc^ive he would not have done, had he thought the crown forfeitable; all that
he intends (if I may be thought fit to be his expositer) is (as I suppose) but
this, that he would not have Kings have an absolute and unquestionable power,
so that their exorbitancy might not (though with greater happiness to the
Common wealth) be regulated by a Parliament.

As for the word (elegerit) whether it be future or past it skils not much. Obs.


If he ^ake notice of the conclusion deduced thence, he may find as much
difference between the tenses; as between Democracy and Monarchy. Ans.


Give me leave to make the Premises, and do you raise what conclusion you
will. The Rep.
Observator (who knew certainly to distinguish the Tenses as well as the
Author) seems to intend only thus much, that if elegerit be taken in the future
tense, well and good; it makes for him; for then the King (according to the
very letter of his oath) is bound under the heavy sin of perjury to grant
such laws as a^e requested of him by his people; and then he can have no
negative voice. But admitting it be expounded in the preter perfect tense, and
not in the future; why yet says the Observator, it matters not: for by the
oath and the Law of the land the king is bound to do justice; and the granting
of new laws unto his people upon their request, is an act of justice, and
necessary as well as the dispencing of the old, and therefore there being the
same necessitity, the public trust must needs equally extend to both. But the
Aethor will show us, why elegerit, must of necessity be taken in the
preterrerfect, not in the future, as this case is, for says he, the word
(consuetudines) which cannot refer to the future, undenyably evinces, it was
meant of the time past.] Under favor this does not infallibly conclude that
elegerit must be taken in the preter perfect tense, for no more then the King
can grant such customs as the people shall choose, for that it must be time,
not the Kings Patent, that can create a custom; so neither can the King grant
such laws or customs unto a people, which they have already chosen, and which
have been established and ratified unto them, by all his predecessors; for
quod semel meum est ultra meum esse non potest, that which is mine own already
cannot be given unto me. So that the oath must be construed, reddendo singula
singulis, as we say in law; that is, that he will confirm their ancient
customs which they do already enjoy. and that he will grant unto them such
new laws as they shall hereafter make choice of: other reasonable construction
the oath will not admit of, and agreeing with this exposition is the first
clause of his Magisties oath, where demand is made whether his Majesty will
grant and co^firm unto his people their ancient laws and customs, who answers
that he will. And contrary to that which the Author does assert, the Parliament
have made it clear and manifest by their declaration lately published, how that
elegerit has been always rendered in the future tense, and not in the preter
perfect tense. So that I shall pass this over without any further trouble,
conceaving that the Author may (if he have not resolved to the contrary) upon
these grounds be fully convinced in this particular.

The King is bound to consent to new Laws, ^f they be necessary, as well as
defend the old. Obs.


His Majesty never thought otherwise; but he is not bound to an implicit
faith, to believe all necessary which is pretended to be so. Ans.


This is in plain terms to invert the method, for the King to choose Laws not
the Rep.
people: for if he will consent to none (be they of never so great necessity)
but such as he himself holds convenient, what then is become of the peoples
election? this is to prescribe and enforce laws upon the people, ^ot to
consent to them upon their election. Besides, who so proper a judge of the
necessity or convenience of a publi^e law as the republike? those that know
the want of the benefit, must needs be most sensible of the necessity.

The word elegerit; if it be in the preterperfect tense, yet shows, that the
peoples election Obs.
had been the ground of ancient ^a^es and customs; and why the peoples
election in Parliament should not be now of as great moment as ever, I cannot
discover.

The election there spoken of, is the election of the diffusive, no^ of any
representative body, Ans.
that with the tacit consent of the Prince, and so os much other authority.

Under favor it is of no other authority, for though it should be con^essed
that at first the diffusive body did choose their Laws, which had the tacit
consent of the Prince, and that Rep.
since the people have granted the King a negative voice in his Parliaments,
which is the representative body of the Kingdom, yet being with this
qualification, that his Majesty grant all necessary laws desired by the
people, hence it follows, that the representative body (having as great power,
and as good judgment, to discern of laws necessary, as the diffusive) have the
same power of election, which ought to be of as great moment and consequence as
ever.

For the representative, their ancient right is not denied, no law shall be
abrog^ted, none ^acted without their assen^. But there is a mean between
doing nothing, and all.

I wonder at the Author that he dare utter such palpable and known falsities.
How often have the privileges of Parliament been infringed? even to amazement
and wonder, that all foregoing ages cannot produce the like: and is there not
an illegal commission of Array, (though not enacted) yet ordained and set up
in opposition to the Parliament. But whtch is yet above all, and strikes at
their very essence, are they not (because others do neglect their duty, and
the trust reposed in them by the public) denied even the very name of a
Parliament, and therein the power and virtue of it? and whether this be not a
denying of their right,, let the world judge. The Author says true, that there
is a mean between doing nothing and all. But I would feign know how we shall
be assured of this mean if his Majesty (upon pretense of unnecessary) shall
have power to deny whatsoever is requested by the Parliament?

The result of all is, Our Kings cannot be said to have so unconditionate and
high a propriety Obs.
in all the subjects, lives, liberties, and possessions, or in any thing else
to the Crown appertaining, as subjects have in the Kings dignity.

The Author says, That what should be meant by subjects having an
unconditionate and Ans.
h^gh (...) in the Kings dignity, surpasses his understanding.

(...) not the Author loved division, he would not have thus severed the
Observators Rep.
words, thereby to pu^ a dylemma upon himself, and others: for the Observator
says before, that the King was made for the people, and not the people for the
King, and thence raises this conclusion (which under savor is very natural)
that therefore the King has not that absolute right of property in the people
and their interest, as they have in his Majesty and his possession: and now
will any man (except our Author who understands not) deny this for a truth?

I, but he sa th, it seems to s^eake this wicked doctrine, that subjects may
dispose of the Sovereignty as ^hey please.

It Is strange that our Author will pass his judgment (especially so severe an
one) upon any thing that he does not understand: because happily it may
conclude thus much, that his sacred person and his actions ought to be directed
and ruled by his great council the Part (...) it therefore thence be deduced,
that they may dispose of his Sovereignty at pleasure: this is the Authors
meaning not ours.

If the King (...) such high (...) as subjects, it were not lawful, or
natural for him to expo^e Obs.
his (...) and (...) for his (...).

(...) is it (...) for subjects then to do so? Ans.


What a strange (...) is this; is it not lawful for a man, by the hazard of
his person, (...).
to defen^ his proper^y? which cannot be maintained without the defense of his
Country. But this does no way prove that if the Kings right were as absolute
as the subjects, that he might expose h^s life and for^une for their defense:
for no doubt he that loses his life when he might have saved it is a man
slayer; and if the people had been made for the King, not the King for the
people, what Law could have warranted the hazzarding of his person, ^or (...)
(...)? But to disprove, this conclusion, he says, That the people have as
great, (...) g^eater (...) (...) of (...) (...) (...) ^or the King, and this he
makes good (...) (...) (...) of (...) (...) at the (...), which (...), that I
become your Le^ge of life (...) g^ds. etc. as (...) by ^he Pro^station and
(...) of Ligeance which are to the same effect. He is no true subject that will
not expose (...) and all that he has, for the preservation of his King an^
Sovera^e, we shall ever acknowledge that strong tie and obligation, that (...)
(...) us to do it. But yet we must (...) that the Kings oath, and the Law of
the Land (which engage the King to protect and defend his Kingdom and people)
are equal^ (...).

(...) that the Observator had shown the effic^ent cause of Parliament to wit
the people, an^ he final cause safety and liberty, he descends to this,

(...) (...) ((...) he) (...) are aimed at in Parliaments, not to be attained
to by o^ Obs.
(...) (...); (...) the (...) est of the people might be satisfied, and Kings
better counseled.

(...) (...) (...) (...) (...), (...) certainly, many Kingdoms have enjoyed a
most high de^ (...).
(...) (...) (...) (...). A (...) Monarchs, who knew no Parliaments.

Th^s possibly may be (...); but I ^ope it shall not (...) into the hearts of
English R^p.
Subjects any whit the greater affection to that kind of (...); I believe
indeed that this is that the Author would feign persuade us to; These are the
maine grounds of the sad division our Religion and our Parliaments: God enable
us to maintai^ both; for if we part with either, we shake hands and bid adue
to all happiness. The Author says that two ^her (...) might have been named
as assentiall as the former, which are to supply his (...) (...) by Subsidies,
and assent to the abrogation of old Laws, and enacting new.] The latter I
(...) agree to be so, but I never heard before, that the supplying of his
Majesty's wants by Subsidies, was one of the essential ends of the calling of
Parliament. It was accounted formerly the mai^ end of calling of a Parliament,
the ease or Releife of the subject, and the granting of Subsidies was then
esteemed but as a congratulation or thankful acknowledgment of the Kings grace
and favor toward them in that Parliament; and is it now become one of the
maine ends? I suppose the Author speaks out of a late experience; 'Twas never
happy with England since this Law was broached. And wheresoever Kings advance
their own profit, or but make it ^quall with that of the public, the people
will never enjoy true happiness.

In the Sums of Edward 1. ( ^laus. 7. in 3. dors.) We see the first end of
Parliaments expressed: Obser.
for he inserts in the writ, that whatsoeve^ affair is (...) public
concernment, ought to receive public approbation, Quod ownes tangit, (...)
omnibus app^obari debet and tractari.] The Author tells us that this must be
understood with due caution, lest we reduce our selves to our primirive
estate, by dissolving the bonds of Government; and therefore says he, the
policy of all est^tes for the avoydi^g of all confusion has been, to leave
the transaction of public affairs, to some certain number, and their
suffrages do in Law bind the rest; So says he in absolute Monarchies what
Princes do is legally the act of all; and he makes the result of all to be
this, Those things which the Law does require, shall be transacted only by
Parliament, the people A^s.
do handle and approve of by their Knights and ^rgesses: those things which
the law ^ath entrusted the King with many of which concern the good of the
who^) what be does is their act.]

I shall not with our Author dare to confine Parliaments, whose power is vaste
and incognit as my Lord Cook speaks: And yet I shall not ascribe so unlimited
a power unto them, as to (...).
give them ju^isdiction in all cases. (They themselves who best know their
power) have in their late Declaration protested against it; for they say, they
have power of jurisdiction of declaring the law in particular cases before
them; then not in all cases: But who shall be Judge of those cafes, by which
they are entitled to jurisdiction? can ther^ be any one a Competent Judge of
this, but themselves? and they having past their judgment, who ought or dare
to contradict it? no reversing of their judgment, but by the judgment of a
subsequent Parliament; why then since none can know their power, or if they
could, they are not competent Judges of it; how dare any one go about* to
dispute their power or call in question their judgment? The desire of the
Commons in the Reign of Edw. 3. was, that they might not advise in things de
queux ils nount pas cognizance, the matter in debate then concerning the
settling of intestine commotions, guarding the Marches in Scotland and the Seas;
concludes no more than this, that they thought themselves not* competent
Counselors in thi^ case (happily by reason of their unskilfulnesse in that
way, or for that the King had then more able Counselors to advise with in that
matter) which under favor is no renouncing of jurisdiction. But to give a more
full and satisfactory answer, at that time the King complied with his
Parliament, and would not be advised by others, and then there being no breach
of trust, there (...) the less reason for the Parliament to advise or
intermeddle with affairs of that nature; But if the King had then deserted the
Counsel of his Parliament, and cleaved to the advice of his young men like
Rehoboam, certainly then they would not have deserted their power in danger of
the Common-w^alth, which by their writ and their oaths, they are bound to
preserve and defend, and therefore clearly not out of their ^gnizance; for
that passage in the Diary of 1. Hen. 4. I wonder the Author should so far
forget himself, as to think that author^ty of any moment; when he does produce
the Record, I will then give him an answer. So that I take this as an
undeniable position, that where the King does duly execute the trust reposed
in him, there the (...) are bound by his act* and the Parliament in such ca^e
have no (...) or jurisdiction: B^t if on the contrary the King infring his
trust to the endangering of the Kingdom, there the Parliament may and are bound
to (...) for the securing o^ the King and (...).

The (...) will not pass over th^s r^le thus; for says he, if quod omnes
tangit, ab (...) opprob^ri debet; with what equity then may the Clergy, who
are a considerable part of this Kingdom be excluded?] Why yes, by the same
eq^ity, that the Statute of 21. Hen. 8. does excl^de them from being Farmers;
that those who have devoted themselves soly to Gods service, might not miscere
se secularibus negotijs, incumber themselves with secular affairs, for that
this would be an impediment to the execution of their sacred function; 'Twas
never happy with this Nation since pride and covetousness so possessed the
Clergy; and temporal jurisdiction was dispensed by Ecclesiastical persons:
And since they proved better Lawyers than Divines, they ^arved their flock,
and made them more like wolves, than Sheep, and Heathens than Christians. I
wish they would not desire temporal pre^erment, but keep themselves (as they
ought) in their proper Sphere, and ponder on this, that it is no small
happiness to be exempted from State (...) and molestations; and that it is the
greatest honor to be the servant of God.

The Author says that the King tells them, their writ may direct them to know
their power, which is to counsel, not to command.] I wish with all my heart,
that he and his associates could plead as clear a conscience from this, as
his Parliament can, though certainly they may make a more colorable pretense
to it, than the Cavalliers; if begging and entreating with all the submissi
venesse that possibly can be, be a commanding, then are the Parliament highly
guilty if it, otherwise not; Again says the Author, the writ runs, super
dubijs negotijs tractaturi, vestrumque consilium impensuri; So that the clear
meaning is, their advise is not law, except the Royal assent established it
into an Act.] If the Author please but to advise with the learned, he will
find that, tractare, is of a more large signication than to treat of or debate
only. But was it ever said, that their advise should be Law without the Regal
assent? They have power to declare what the law of the land is, in case of
public concernement, as now, but it was never so much as thought on, that
they could make a new law, or alter the old, without his Majesty; We must
distinguish between the declaring or adjudging of a new case by the reason of
the old law, and the making of a new law; the one they may do without his
Majesty's consent, the other they cannot.

It Is alleged that the King call^th them Counselors, not in all things, but
in quibusdam arduis, etc. and the case of Wentworth is cited by his Majesty,
who being a member of the House of Commons, was committed, by Queen Elizabeth
but for proposing, they might advise the Q^eene in a matter she thought they
had nothing to do to m^ddle with.

To which the Observator answers a mere example (though of Queen Elizabeth)
is no Law.] Obs.


It Is true says the Author, but when grounded upon Authority, I pray where is
it? and no way Ans.
excepted against by those who have been always earnest defendors of their
privileges, it may be reckoned among sound presidents.]

Happily there was never the like occasion to except against i^, as having
never been urged, ^ep
how then could it be answered? I am confident, that there was never any age
before so guilty of the judging and questioning of the power of Parliaments.
But pray hear the Parliament, and as you ought, so rest satisfied, who say,
that some Presidents ought not to be rules, this you must agree to, for that
some are not lawful; But furthey they say, that no presidents can be bounds
to the proceedings of a Parliament, because some ought not to be followed, and
all may ^all short and be different from the case in question. Obs.


The King denies the assembly of the Lords and Commons, when be withdraws
himself, to be rightly named a Parl^ament, or to have any power of any Court,
and consequen^ly to be any thing, but a mere convention of so many private
men.] Ans.


This is falsely imposed on his Majesty, his answers and massages speaks the
contrary, which are directed to both Houses of Parliament.]

Had it not been doubted that other direction might have caused some mistake
and miscarriage, (...).
or at least have deni^d them that acceptance, that his Majesti^s Messages do
d^serve, I (...) (...) other name and style would have been found out, for
does he not in these very M^ssages call them an inconsiderable number, and a
company of factious (...) persons and the lik^? (...) (...) are not the styles
of a Parliament, and for their power if they can do nothing without his
M^jesties consent, and that not to be obtained neither; what are they more th^n
a Cipher? or a mere conv^ntion of private men? And is this a falsity? But our
Authors language shall not provoke to a retaliation. (...).


The King does assert, that because the law has trusted him with a P^erogative
to discontinue P^aments, to the danger or prejudice of the Kingdom, this is no
breach of that trust, because in (...) of Law, the people may not assemble in
Parliament, but by his writ.] A^s.


(...) is gross (...), says the Author, Howev^r I am sure the language is
gros^e; I had no time to (...) for to disprove the Author, but this I am
certain of, that his M^jestie does strongly urge that prerogative and his
power and ^lection thereby, which gives a strong intimation of (...) (...) of
(...) of freedom and power therein: But why is it false? because (...) (...)
Author, if it appear to him necessary, or expedient for the Kingdom, he ac^,
he is obliged by that trust reposed in him to issue out his writts.] (...).


It Is not to be (...) that when the people granted this Prerogative to his
Majesty, that they would give him so vast a power, as to make him the sole
Judge of the necessity of a Parli^ment: for if so, upon the (...) of not
necessary, and that upon the (...) of (...) counselors, be the Kingdom in
never so imminent, never so appa^ent danger, it must be destroyed for want of a
Parliament; certainly this was never the intention of this trust: Besides, who
can be so competent a Judge of any approaching danger, or of any malignities or
pressures in the Common wealth, as they who speak out of the common sense and
(...) of (...)? However this is certain, the Kingdom cannon suffer by a
Parliament, i^ may without.

If the Parliament make any transition in other matters, than what be pleases
to propose, they Obs.
are liable to imprisonment at his pleasure.

The sense of his inference is this, that because they cannot justify the
meddling with things, A^s.
which belong not to their cognizance, therefore they may be punished, if they
meddle with those that do.

This is the Authors inference, not the Observators, He does not say, that for
executing Rep.
their due power they may be imprisoned, no, such inconsequent conclu^ious we
leave to the Author. But this he seems to speak, that it should be very hard
and unreasonable, that the power of judging of the jurisdiction and authority
of a Parliament should reside only in the Kings breast, when that none can
determine aright of them, but themselves; for if so, if the King at any time
shall say they exceed their power, they may be imprisoned at plea^ure.

The Author telling the people how far their engagement goes with the
Parliament, says That if they exceed their (...), and Vote things not
belonging to their cognizance, the people by no means is engaged in it, as
having no legal way of expressing of themselves in such cases.

This is in plain terms to tell the people, in what cases they are to submit
to, and maintain and desend the Parliament; in what not; certainly people
cannot be so (...) as to thin^ that the illegal acts of a Parliament should
bind them; but on the other side, I hope they will not be so foolish as to
believe every thing to be illegal, which the Author is pleased to (...) (...):
but rather cast themselves upon their care (as in duty they are bound) whom
they have entrusted with the public security; But I hope the Author will now
be advised, that on the contrary the people are no more engaged in the illegal
proceedings of the Prince (in those things that he is entrusted with for the
public) than of the Parliament.

It is impossible (says the King) that the same trust should be irrevocably
committed to us, and our heirs for ever, and the same trust, and a power above
that trust (for such is the power they pretend to) be committed to others.

It is true (says the Observator) Two supreames cannot be in the same sense
and respect. Obs.


This is a weak answer says the Author. Ans.


So weak that the Author cannot reply to it; for nothing is more known or
assented to Rep.
than this, that the King is singulis major, yet universis minor.

It seems (says the Author) the King has taken the Oath of Alligeance as
well as we, and we may call him (...) fellow subject.

Did we ever speak of two Kings? or can there be so in one common wealth? But
much less can there be any alligeance due from the Sovereign to the subject;
certainly the Author was not himself: But to prove his reasoning yet more
absurd, we do not say that the King is singulis minor, but that he is
universis minor, and I hope ^he universe or body politic, never swore
alligeance or supremacy to the King, neither is it possible that it should, for
that it is a body only in consideration of Law, that has neither life, nor
motion like other individuals; and therefore not capable of doing of any act in
that capacity, so that notwithstanding this shallow rea^, the King is universis
minor.

I, but says the Author, You tell us that he is greater than one, you do not
tell us that he is better than two, this is no greater supremacy, than probably
he had before he was a King. The Prince is singulis major as well as ^ee, nay,
may not any Lord in the Land chal (...) the same supremacy over all the
Knights, any Knight over all Esqui^es?

What a poor and senseless cavil is this, do not we say that he is universis
minor? and does it not then consequently follow that we allow him major to all
that is less than the universe? When you can reduce the universe to so small a
number as two, then will his Majesty be less than those two, until then he is
greater; for those slender instances to prove as great a supremacy in the
Prince, nay in every nobleman over all Knights, and in Knights over all
Esquires; I must tell him, had not his senses b^ene ravished by, and swallow^d
up in Mon^rchy, he would never have so much forgot himself; can there be any
one singulis major but the King? he that accounts himself so high, (...) to be
made lower by the head? the Prince himself is not sing^lis major, till he
survive his Father. To be short, all others are but comparatively great, the
King only is great in the superlative.

I, but to take us off these corrupt glosses (I would there were no more (...)
in him^ the Author (...) us to 24. H. 8. ca. 12. which (as he says) (...) the
King to be universis major, the preface of which statute (...) thus, that this
Kingdom has been always acknowledged to be an Empire, governed by one
supreme head and King, having the dignity and regal estate of the same, unto
whom a body politic compact of all sorts and degrees of people etc. been
bounden and owen next to God, a natural and humble obedience.

Does this prove the King universis major? under favor nothing less: for we
must not understand this, that the body politic does owe obedience, but that
the several sorts and degrees of people, of which this body is compacted and
made, that they do owe obedience, for to take it otherwise, were to make an
absurd and impossible construction. For as I have said before, how is it
possible that a body politic (which is a body only in judgment, of law or
contemplation,) that has neither life, sense, nor motion that that should owe
homage or obedience to any one? much less a natural obedience as the Statute
speaks, so that clearly this does not a^ all disprove the former position.

If there were no King at all in England, you would call this government an
Aristocracy: and why I beseech you, do you not conf^sse the name now, seeing
the thing is altogether the same? for if they give his voice, it is all one, as
if he had no voice; if their power must overruled his, it is all one as if he
were (...) of all. Certainly Monarchy has committed a Rape upon the Authors
reason and understanding, or else he could not be thus overseene. Does the
Parliament go about to take away the Kings voice, or to disrobe him of his
power: more than the known law of the land does approve of? Did they even
declare or publish such a power to be in them, that they might enact any new
laws, or abrogate the old, without his Majesty's consent? Nay, love they not
frequently prosessed the contrary? why then, what have they done that should
have the least color of intitling them to an Aristocraticall Government? O
yes; for they* have voted and published it to the world, that the power of
declaring law ( (...) Paul amento) in case of any public concernment: does
refide in them; and that though the King neither does, nor will consent, yet he
is obliged by their Votes. And is this any greater power or privilege than
every other inferior Court has? or is it more than they themselves formerly
without the least scruple have exercised? by declaring law in dubious points of
Stat^s and erroneous judgments. And is their ancient, undoubted, and
unquestionable right now become a power Aristocraticall? It Is strange that the
times should so vary the case, and that long enjoyment or possession (which
does usually confirm and strengthen a man's right) should be a means to take
it away. But before I pass this over, let me tell the Author, that it is a
most idle, scandalous and false aspersion: and if I do in all this wrong him,
let he himself judge upon his own inference, which is this, that the
defending and maintaining of the ancient ^ight and government, is a laboring
for an introducting of a new, and if he chance to blush (as he well may) at his
own inconsequent reasoning, let him mend it herea^ter.

I but says he, I dare say that all Histories and Records (except of such
Parliaments which deposed their King, which the Observ^or (...) no free one
ever did) cannot produce an example of this nature, that the two Howses should
pretend to a power which must of necessity overruled the King.

That there is not the least color of a pretense to such a power, I have
before plainly evidenced it. Kut I pray hear his reason, why this power, as to
some respects may not be greater than the King. Because (says he) since the
law has given the King a power, by dissolving of the Parliament, to take away
that power (as is pretended) greater than his own, if they had ever made
claim to superiority over him, he would quickly have put an end to that
dispute.

This is in plain terms to say, that a power that is but temporary, cannot be
greater, than that which is continuing and unalterable: a strange fallacy, why,
if the Kingmake one high Constable of England ad (...), (whom we know has a
power very extensive) shall we conclude that his dignity or authority is
inferior to others of less quality and esteem, because dissolvable at the
Kings pleasure? Or if the King confer the dignity and Office of Lord Keeper
to another, by committing of the seal unto his custody, is he therefore not
superior to the rest of the Nobility because removable at his Majesty's will
and discretion? an absurdity to think it.

Before this power be challinged, it would be fit to vote down that clause in a
law, made 2 H. 5 cited by his Majesty, That it is of the Kings regality to
grant or deny such of their petitions; as pleases himself.

For that this is said to be cited by his Majesty, I shall not question the
truth of it, though I have searched the Statutes, and I cannot find any such
clause; But admitting it to be so, did ever any one make a question whether
that there were such a Prerogative in rerum natura, as the Kings negative
voice? certainly not. The matter in debate is whether it be so absolute and
uncircumscribed that the Parliament can do nothing, no, not so much as declare
what the common law is, without his Majesty's consent, or whether it be boun ed
and limited; So that this great and most supreme Court may not be like a body
without a soul, or a numberless cipher: And for tha^ of the Statute, that he
may deny their petitions, can you thence deduce, that he may deny their rights?
their right of declaring law in ca^e of public concernment, is not involved
within the narrow compass of a pe ition.

To the most absolute ^mpire in the world, this condition is most natural and
necessary, that the Obs.
safety of the people is to be valued above any right of his.

It is against common s^nse to suppose a King that is in his ^its, who ^ll not
provide for the Ans.
safety of his people; nay, who will not part with some of his right, rather
than they should perish, because in their destruction he loses all.

I would to God that sad experience did not inform us that you speak several
languages, Rep.
one thing to us, another to his Majesty, if it were not so, the settling of the
Militia by his Parliament, by reason of the abuse of that trust, to the
endangering of the Kingdom, by ^he advise of ill affected counselors, would
not have ca^sed this great combustion. I, but then the Author says. This does
not prove a King should part with his rights, as often as they will pretend to
be in danger. Nor can it be thought rea^onable, if that a Parliament, and in
that a whole kingdom can use pretenses. Was ever age guilty of such
disrespects to a Parliament? If this were once admitted, what wild plots would
be invented? what strange (...) would be received from invisible spies.
Strange! that a Parliament should fancy and invent n^series to themselves, and
should thus frighten the public with Phantasmes or Chimaeraes. I hope the
Author will prove it by experience, that it is not so easy a m^tter to deceive
a whole Common weal^h. I (says he) and so osten as crafty men were ambitious
or covetous, so of^n the silly people were to be frighted. More strange yet!
that ambition and covetousness should at once possess a whole Parliament; and
that a whole Commonwealth should be accoun ed but a silly people, so easy to
be wrought upon. I hope this disparagement to the public will work an
answerable acceptance to the people.

Since all natural power is in those who obey, they which contract to obey to
their own ruin, or having so contracted, they which esteem suc^ a contract
before their own preservation are sellonious to themselves and rebellious to
nature.

For example (says the Author, an agreement patiently to submit themselves to
the Ordinary trial of law, and to suffer, if it should se fall out, t^ough
under an undeserved sentence. In this case be that does not make resistance,
and prerr his preservation to his contract is pronounced Felo de se, and a
rebel to nature. Ans.


And he puts other examples of the like nature, as that of the Martyrs, and of
our Savionr Christ, and demands our thoughts of them, whether they were self
murderers or no? Rep.


What a strange affected mistake is this of the Author, can there be the least
colorable inference out of what the Observator has delivered, to justify any
individual opposition and infringment of contract? or to make good an
innocents oppugning of the sword of Justice, to rescue his own life? I dare
confidently asfirme, not the least title to this purpose. No; a man ought to
discharge his Covenant though it be to his disadvantage. And ruat Coelum, fiat
(...), though heaven itself (if it were possible) should be destroyed, yet let
justice ^ourish. That were a way to open a gap for all disorder and breach of
rule and society, without which no common wealth can be of long subsistence. If
thou suffer unjustly, God will abundantly remunerate thy sufferings, and repay
it upon the head of thine enemies; wherefore much better it is for thee to
submit to thy censure by patience, than to incurr the breach of all society by
d^sobedience.

I, but says the Author, If reason will not satisfy, perhaps (...) may, Q^i
(...) potestati, ipsi sibi damnationem acquirunt, to resist the Magistrate,
(...). And he says, that answer (with which too many are deceived) cannot
excuse disobedience and Rebellion; this (...) obliges private men, but not
Magistrates, Since inferior Magistrates being opposed to the supreme power
are but as pirvate men, and in this respect the reason of obedience is common
Romans 13 ^
to (...).

It Is not usual with me to intren^h upon another man's profession, but seeing I
am here enforced to it, give me leave a little to sail out of my way to answer
the Author. First, for the taking up of Arms, or the waging of a war in
general: I never heard any man oppose the leg^timation of that war, that had
these three requisites or ingredients. A lawful authotity commanding (...), as
the ^agistrate. A just and lawf^ll end, or cause occasioning it, as the defense
of our Religion, liberties, and the like. And a good affection in following of
it, as not with rashness or temeritie but after all other means sirst
endeavored. And now I appeal to any indifferent man, whom neither fear nor
affection has engaged to the contrary, whether all these are not exactly made
good in this great ^taking of the Parliament?

I, but says the Au hor, how does this an^wer the taking up of arms against
the (...) (...) the King, for (...) all o her (...) are but as private men
compared with him? To this I ^nswer, (...) under he A^ors favor, ^he supr^am
power (as I have made it good before) is the people represented by a
Parlia^ent, and then, no doubt, that precept of the Apostle comprehending the
King as well as other persons, does (according to his own Argument) justisie he
Parliament in their proceed^s, and make good their taking up of Arms in their
own just defense.

I, but hen the Author (...) hat of the Apostle, that the Magistrate is Dei
minister nobis in bonum, Gods minister to thee (...) thy good, and though thou
suffer by him unjusty, yet there he is (...) in bonum, for that by thy patient
suffering thou shall thereby gain an eternal reward.

Cer^inly, God never made Magistrates on purpose to a^ict and (...) over their
people, that they by patient (...) might enjoy the gre^ter happin^ hereafter.
No, that they prov^ corrupt issues from hemselves, not from any divine
determination; and therefore if the M^gistrate do prove to be Minister nobis
in malum, a Minister to thee ^or thy ill, he is, not then (...) minister, Gods
Minister, for that he does transgress and go beyond his commission, and in
such case under the favor of M. Doctor Fern, conscience does not only deny
obedience, but command and justify (...). But in all this conceive me (...),
it is the magistrates, not any (...) opposition, that I justify; and this being
undertaken with the due circumstance, is not a means to destroy order and
society, but maintain them; But yet I hope our Au^hor will be here informed
that this is not our case. For do we take up arms against our Sovereign* may
he perish, who in his thoughts intends him the least ill; No, it is (as the
Parliament have often declared) against his Malignant Counselors? such who
endeavor (whatever their (...) may be to his Majesty) the subversion of our
Religion, and the destruction of the public. And I hope there is nothing in
the word of God that opposes this. O yes; in opposing h^s authority, you fight
against him; Strange! if it should, be so; when neither the law of God nor man,
do oblige obedience to commands unlawful. He that obeyes the magistrate upon
such terms, does it at his own peril; and I hope it is lawful for the
Parliament to depresse any civil or private combustion. I, but what if that
authority have the Kings person accompanying it, may you in such case make
resistance* No question we may, for it is not the person of the King that can
legitimate an action, that is in it self unlawful: nor add any greater force
or vigor to their Commission that obey. Besides the personal presence of the
King, does, or does not countermand his authority; if it do countermand his
authority, then they have no power to warrant their act^on; if it do not, yet
the act is (...). So then let them take their choice, they see their terms.
Unhappy people who having committed themselves to the government of one King
only, might not oppose the unlawful and tyrannical regiment of so many.

It being in effect objected (as appears before) That a ^emporall power
(meaning the Parliament:) cannot be greater than that which is lasting and
unalterable (intending the King.)

Is this were so, says the Observator, the Romans have done impolitickly in
creating Dictators, Obs.
when any great extremity assailed them, and yet we know it was very prosperous
to them, sometimes to change the ^orme of government.

Hence we may conclude it good policy in imminent danger; to trust to a
Monarchy, not (...) Aristoc^y, Ans.
and much less to a Democracy.

What have we to do with Aristocracy, or Democracy* God be blessed, we, nor
know, nor desire Rep.
any other government than that of Monarchy* and we shall with all h^mility
cast our selves upon his Majesty's care and providence guided by his Parliament;
But if sed^ced by malignant and destructive Counsel, we are not bound to yield
our selves as a pr^y, to the ran^ and malice of his and our enemies.

The King objects; if we allow the Lords and Commons to be more than
Counselors, we make them Comptrollers, and this is not ^ble to Royalty.

To which the Observator answers, (...) say (says he) that to co^t is more
than to counsel, Obs.
(...) yet not a^es so much as to command and comptroll.

True* (says the Author) not always, but then it is when their (...) (...)
impose a necessity A^s.
upon the (...) of (...) the like. R^p.


Does their consent impose a greater necessity or engagement upon the King,
than the consent or declaration of law in cases of public con^nt, by former
Parliaments, has done* or than the judgment of his Judges in inferior Courts
does do? who are so Counselors for the King, as that the King may not
countermand their judgments, and yet it were an harsh thing to say that they
are therefore (...) and Co^rs of the King, therefore it holds in Parliaments a
^tiori. I, but says the Author the (...) why the King cannot countermand their
judgment, is, because they (...) his person, and ^is consent is by law
involved in ^at by law they do, for that the act of a delegated power is his
act, and there would be no end if he should undo what be has done. But (says
he) in Pa^ament, the Lords (...) in a personal capacity, and the House of
Commo^s as representing the body of the Ki^me, and therefore the cases do not
agree.

Under correction of the Author I shall make the case parallel, notwithstanding
this Rep.
objection. I do agree, that in all acts of public (...), which ^e but (...)
(...) only (I hope it will not offend any one to say that they are Ministers to
the Commonwealth) as in case of making and consenting to new Laws, or
repealing of the old, or the like; there the Lo^ds sit in a personal capacity,
and the Commons as represe^ting the body of the Kingdom; But in all acts that
are judicial, as in case of reversing of (...) judgments or of declaring or
explayning the law of the Land, there they represent the person of the King;
for that he is ^ons Iustitiae, the fountain of justice, and no^e c^n (...)
such a power without it be first delegated to them by the King; and therefore
in such a case their judgments do ^ly involve the judgment of the King, and
do oblige him as strongly as the (...) o^ d^terminations of the Judges. Now
none can de^y their declaring of the law in case of the Militia to be a
judicial act, therefore the consequence is clear that the King is justly
bound by it. I, but further he says, The judges swear they will not assent to
any thing, (...) may turn the King in damage or (...), by any manner, way, or
colo^. 18. E. 3. And do not the Parl^ent ^o the same by their oath of
supremacy, and their late Prote^tion? If you seriously examine them, you will
find that their obligation is the same. And now I hope the A^thor will make
good his (...) to me; who said, that when I could make these th^nges agree to
the two Houses, I should conclude from the Judges sentence, to their votes;
wherefore I do (...) that there being the s^e reason, there o^ght to be the
same La^. I, but for a further answer (seeing his former will not hold) says
the Author, in matters of law there lies an appeal to them (a writ of error
being brought) as to the highest Court, not so in matters of State. Because
whilst they (...) sentence according to known* Laws, the State is no way
endangered thereby, but if they challenge to themselves a liberty of passing
sentence according to reason of State, they may when they please* overthrow our
laws. The counties which (...) them* look upon them as judges, ^ot Politi^s.
It Is not impossible they should be both* and whatsoever the judgment of the
Co^ties were that entrusted them, certain I am that he is not fit to occupy a
place in that great Assembly, that is not at least in some reasonable measure
so qualified; that whilst the (...) and other Sages skilled (...) that
profession, are within guiding and directing of* his great Ship (...) to ^aw,
men experienced in the Politiques, may sit at Stern to secure it from the
(...) of (...) invasion, and civil combustion. And when the Author can produce
so able a (...), so (...), so much engaged in the welfarre of the Kindome, and
so void of self respect; then will we upon his request de^ert our Parliament;
until then, I hope all faithful and true hearted people will adhereunto them.
For that empty shadow and vain dream, of a possibili^ of the^r (...) the Law;
it is a wonder to me that any (...) man's sancie should so abuse it self. To
(...) the Authors language upon himself. Can it be conceived that men in their
wits, who (...) all that they have by the benefit of the Law, and no doubt have
as great a portion to lose (...) others, should ex^te that, which is the
principal evidence of the^r (...), (...) of life or (...), and so pin
themselves and their (...) (...), upon unknown (...), it is extreme madness
and folly to think it. Obs.


We ought not to conceive that they will either counsel or consent to any
thing, but what Ans.
is publiquel^ advantageous.

When the King (...) they do not otherwise, he will (...) willingly sollow
their (...). Rep.


I dare confidently affirm, that no antiquity or Records w^ (...) are a^le to
(...) one example of this nature, where the Kings single conceit or (...) is
opposed (...) that o^ h^ whole Parliament. But it can^ be exp^ that they should
(...), while that the King by such malignant Co^nsell is kept a^ so great a
d^st (...).

By such Couns^ll and (...) we (...) (...) the King li^ (...) (...). Obser.


Such a cons^nt in which his is (...) (...), (...) his (...) not so (...)
(...), (...) (...).
(...) at all; (...) does not limit, but take it away.

Does this (...) which does ^citely (...) his (...), more (...) or (...) his
Rep.
power, than that of their (...), o^ (...) than the (...) of his (...)? The
(...) (sai h he) does not (...) to have to (...) of (...) old, or (...) (...)
(...)* (...) them. Neither do they without his (...), they (...) (...) (...)
(...), and so would he A^thor ingenio^sly acknowledge, if that he were not so
much (...)* with (...) and prejudice. But happily he does not understand the
difference b^tweene constituting new, or repealing the old Laws, and declaring
or expounding the Laws in being, how did Ship Money destroy our propriety
(says he) but by this very consequence? What a gross mistake is this? Because
the Ki^gs judgment is involved in that of his Parliaments, and of his Judges
according to law; must it therefore follow that the whole Kingdom should be
obliged by his Majesty's determination against Law; Or because legally we could
not be divested of our property without our cons^nt, must not therefore the
King be bound by the judgment of his Parliament, which does tacitly include
his cons^nt? I, but says he Ejus est velle, qui potest nolle. He only ha^^
freedom of consent or disagreement, that may at his election do either. It Is
true; But this must be understood of an actual consent, or dis^greement and
not of an implied. For in Corporations or bodies politic, wh^re the Major
part carri^s it, will you say that the residue are not bound, because that they
had not ^lection to ^ssent, or dissent, as the case falls out to be? This were
a way to open a gapp^ to all disorder and confusion. So the Kings consent is
included in that of his Judges; and yet I hope you will not say, that the King
there had freedom of dissenting, which is the very cas^ of the Parliament.

It is alleged in derogation of Parliaments, wha^soever the right of
Parliament is, to assemble Obser.
and treat in all cases of a public nature; yet without the Kings
concurrence and consent they are livelesse conventions, without all virtue and
power, the very name of Parliaments is not due to them.

I, but says the Author, you should deliver the Kings sense and words truly;
the sum of Ans.
which is only thus, The two Houses have not power of making laws and
altering the established government without him.

What a strange construction is this; This is no more than will be readily
agreed you; you Rep.
shall not need disput^ it; therefore questionless the words must import
somewhat else. The truth of it is, your mist^ke, (of which you are fr^quently
guilty) is this, that you promi^uously counfound the making of new laws and
the altering of the establish^d Government with declaring of the Common Law in
being; which is palpable sophistication; And now I would feign be resolved by
any indifferent understanding, whether if they may not do that, without the
Kings actual concurrence and agreement, and that not to be obtained, they be
not a mere livele^e convention of private men without all virtue or power? It
must be agreed that he that is act^ated and moved by another power only has
none in himself.

This allegation at one blow confounds all Parliaments, and subjects us ^o as
unbounded a regiment Obser.
of the King^ mere will, as any Nation under Heaven ever suffered under.

The Author says that there is no color of reason in this; and why? for
(says he) are we Ans.
not lef^ in the same state in which we were? His Majesty denying to bring in
a new gove^nmennt: does not take away the old.

The Author says true, that we are in the same state indeed, but it is as we
were before, and without the Parl^ament, subject to the Kings mere will and
lawless regiment. And though his Rep.
Majesty's d^nying to bring in a new government, does not take away the old,
yet his denying of the old government, is an introducting of a new.

Upon the same reason, by the Kings d^^^^tion, other Courts must needs be
vertuelesse and Obser.
void.

It were a strange consequence to conclude, that because that may be done
without the King, to Ans.
which his consent by law is not required; therefore that may be done without
him, to which his consent is by law necessary.

Under reformation, the Kings actual consent to any legal or judicial
determination in Rep.
Parliament is no more required, than it is to that of his Judges; yet, with
the Authors favor, both have the implied and tacit consent; and therefore
upon the same ground, of the Kings desertion, other C^urts must be vertul^sse,
and quietly possess a vacation in Term time, as well as his Parliament. I,
but says the Author it is against common sense to fancy; that he which
en^oyes all by the benefit of laws should hinder the due administration of
Justice according to those ^awes, and so wilfully endanger not only his
rights, but safety, by putting the Kingdom into tumults and combustion.

T^is is an argument to persuade a man; no ground to convince him, or a
probable inducing r^ason, no legal conclusion. To argue from a probability to
nec^ssity, as to sa^ it is not likely it should be so, therefore it is not so,
is a strange p^ece of Logic. administration of j^stice is delegated to the
Parliament (though in a more high and sup^reminent way) ^swell as to inferior
Judges and the King gains as much honor and benefit, nay mo^e, by the free
effl^x and current of justice in that Co^rt, than in any other: and yet we see
the stream is stopped, so that a deluge and inundation of misery has be-spread
the face of the whole Kingdom; and ^o have fancied this, not long since, would
have b^ as much opposite to common sense, as the other. Obser.


It is attempted to divide between part and part in Parliament. Ans.


Who those attempte^s are, I inquire not. I suppose, be means those who
divided the Lords into good and bad, the members of the House of Commons ^to
well and ill affected. Rep.


You need not much enquire, your Book speaks you an acquaintance with them.
But know those that are bad or ill affected, made that distinction themselves,
not others.

It is a wonderful thing that the Kings papers being ^raited scarce with any
thing ^s, but such Obser.
doctrines of division tending all to the subve^sion of our ancient ^damentall
constitutions, (...) support all our ancient liberties, and to the erection of
an (...) rule, should fi^d such applause in the world. Ans.


There is a vast difference between declaring what divisions are and causing
them to b^; to show; is not to teach division.

Far be it from me to lay the least imputation of guilt in this kind upon his
sacred person, R^p.
No; the confidence that I ever had of his goodness, pi^ty, and love to his
people, bids me silence. But this I may, without breach of charity, or stain
of loyalty, conclude, that the best Prince may be corrupted, or if not so,
seduced by those, who v^w themselves (...) servants to his Majesty, and the
public, whereas their actions, which tend to nothing but rapine and spoil,
do plainly testify the contrary. These are they that can dispense with their
breach of trust (how they will be absolved I know not) and not only sequester
themselves, but (...) the King from his Parliament, and his people, and to open
the gap more wide, and make the breach more incurable; advise His Majesty
(contrary to his pious (...)) by published declarations to traduce his
Parliament, an^ cast most strange and unheard of obliquies upon them, and to
charge them with such (...) their thoughts were never guilty of. Thereby to
render them odious unto the people; So that by destroying the mutual bond of
confi^ence and affection, we our selves might be made actors in our own ruin;
and if this be not to cause division, as well as to declare it, and to teach it,
as well as show it, let the wo^ld judge.

I, b^t (...) the Author, it is beyond (...), if the Kings a^mes are such, as
he would have the world believe, that they should fin^ such applause. I neither
d^re, nor can charge his Majesty with aims that are indirect; but if he were
guilty in this nature (which I profess my faith is not as yet strong enough to
believe) we must know that all actions o^ Kings find acceptance, and renow^e
with many; and the very worst will not want some to appla^d them. But pray
hear his reason, why it is not propable i^ the Kings intentions were such, they
should find such applause; for says he, consider the persons from w^m; men
that have much more to lose, than some who may aim at ge^ting (...) fo^unes,
by pretending they are in danger to love what they have. None are so ri^h but
they may have and desire more; and it is (...) they that have least, are best
(...). (...) young men might in all probability, have as great a portion to
expose to hazard, as the grave and sage (...), and yet you see they preferred
their vile and ambition counsel before the good of the public. I, b^t then
he sai^, they are known not to value their lives equal to their (...). Very
good, if it were true; yet for all this, they may be to choose their Religion.
Nay, which is more, they a^e (...) o^ as (...) (...) as honesty: it may be
greater; neither of which would permit them to be (...) to make themselves
miserable, and pull upon their posterity and Country perpetual slavery. Does
the Author think that his i^sinuating probabilities (which are (...) strongest
Arguments) shall evince us that the Sun shines not, though our eyes (...) the
contrary. Might not this with the sam^ strength of reason, have been urged in
the (...) (...) (...) young (...), and yet we see what wretched advise they
gave the King; (...) (...) could not but (...), that they did (...) inslave
their posterity and (...). (...) (...) of (...) (...) it, to ^cuse the King to
intend that, wh^ the world sees, how much (...) ^h s^d ^y to (...) it. What
(...) of expression is it to say we accuse the King of (...) an arbitrary rule?
(...) we labor nothing more than to (...) his Majesty; No nation that ever
enjoyed a Municipall law; ev^ (...) n^rer to an (...) (...), than we not long
since did; and did we in all our (...) in the least (...) (...) or accuse his
Majesty? No; w^ (...) his evil (...), who wrought that (...) to the (...), and
they (as (...) (...) to do^) who dare oppress his p^ple, stick not (to
di^charge themselves) to (...) (...) evil actions upon their Sovereign; and
such is the subtilty of our Author here. If you imp^ach him for any public
desservice, he knows whether to fly ^or (...).

Could our Anc^s ever have bele^ved (...) should come a King, who would plead
(...) M^na C^a, who would ^rd his C^wne in the ^nce of his S^bjects (...), and
d^ (...) (...), than the (...) of (...) (...) rule?

This (...) be the (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) So^; ^ut our (...)
(...) (...) his evil (...) pleai against Magna Char^a, and too apparently
hazard his Crown, in the destruction of his Subjects, and their liberties;
endeavoring nothing more, than the introducting of an Arbitrary rule.

If the King (...) parted from his Parliament merely because they sought his
oppression, and he Obs.
^d no (...) means to withstand their (...), let this proclayme them a void
Assembly.

His (...) never (...) (...) charge to the Parliament: the more impudent the
Author that Ans.
dare do it, when his Majesty decli^ it: For he says, it is most evident,
there was too great rea^ to (...) his (...), when not withstanding his deepest
(...) to maintain the true esta^ she, they (...) (...) to (...) (...) to (...).

I dare not charge his (...) with any thing* I have no authority for it: But
this I say; Rep.
when justice (...) be denied, and the course thereof obstructed, against such
firebrands, (...), and engines of all (...), as Jesuits, Seminary Priests and
the like; When Papists shall approach so (...) the Throne, and none admitted
into greater favor and affection than they; certainly I may conclude (without
prejudice to my King) that the Pope harbors in some of his Councels (...); And
this means being used, what alteration future necessity or (...) may impose
(...) cast upon us, is not difficult to judge. When notwithstanding (...) ut^
(...) to (...) that (...) happy (...) on in Ireland etc. and his frequent
pressing them (...) new (...); (...) the people were made (...), he was a
favourer of their bloody (...).

It must be acknowledged the King ^n (...), most wicked Council that
afterward depressed it; witness the many (...) that did intervene su^ly
manifested to the World. And which is above all, the seizing of that poor
supply that was sent unto them. Whea the baser sort of the people were (...) to
(...) (...) (...) the Parliament in clamourous and (...) able (...), etc. And
were there not many of them (having neither offensive nor de^ weapons) most
(...), inhumanely, and barbarously (...) and butchered sor their pains?
punishment sufficient for their (...), if they committed any. When seditious
Pam^ (...) (...) out, and (...) I (...) (...) day and night to abuse the King.
For my par: (...) there were any such, I was never guilty of countenancing or
abetting of them; No, not so much as by their reading. However this I am
certain of, that whatsoever, the wit of malice could (...) was daily and (...)
(...) and vented against the Parliament.

(...) (...) us (...) (...) encouraged, whilst they did cast public (...)
upon the (...), (...) (...) in (...) (...), and which if they bad (...) duly
executed, would have (...) (...) by (...) us to our (...) peace and quiet,
which we so long enjoyed, as we (...) (...) to (...).

Whom our Author may (...) wthin the compass of this notion of factious
Preachers, (...) ^now not. But I fear by the style of his book, he
comprehends all such as preach the word of God in truth and sincerity, not
fearing the face of men, that will not be wrought upon to call evil, g^d, or
good evil. Had Paul lived in these days, I doubt our Author would, ( (...)
like) have accused him for a pestilent fellow, a mover of sedition, and a (...)
of Sects, and the like, and sor my part, I think that those whom he intends,
and Paul were equally guil y of these offenses. And yet you hear what
testimony Paul gives of himself, after the way (...). (...). 5*
which (...) call (...), so (...) (...) the God of my (...). O, the (...) of
these times that we are (...) into, that (...) laboring for truth, honesty,
and a good conscience, that will no^ (...) (...) by every idle and (...)
innovation, should (...) accounted (...)! but I (...) 14.
(...) (...), (...) our Author when he speaks of faction, to reflect upon
himself, by a serious (...). But (...) us that the Laws have been (...) ed;
(...) if he had (...) an answer he would (...) showed us in what. Delosus (...)
in (...), (...) no^ (...) and (...) aling to hide your ^ders in generals: the
more (...), if (...), that the^ (...) (...) reply. The last vain fear was;
when such seditious (...) (...) (...) their (...), (...) (...) to (...) even
(...) the (...), etc. Contention with words, makes no (...) of blood, (...)
(...) (...) this should be one cause of fear, that should drive the King to so
great a di^. Well, (...) is both (...) and sedition in our Authors book, had
they (...) as sure ven^ in the (...), they would not have gone unpunished, but
I believe he can sooner wri^e sedition, (...) he can define it; But to conclude
this, it is wonderful that these Chymeraes which so (...) the King at London,
should likewise cause him to raise an Army in the North.

(...) (...) King could be (...) wisely or faithfully advised by any other
Count, o^ (...) his single (...).
(...) (...) (...) (...) before all advise whatsoever, twere not only vain,
but (...) (...) (...), that the (...) Kingdom should be troubled to make
elections, and that the (...) e^ (...) attend the public (...).

The King never refused to advise with them. Ans.


What a (...) falsitie is this, No doubt the Author can (...) London from
York; Rep.
And the Commission of Array from the Mi^; But then (...) (...) to (...) us,
that the ^all, but not the only form of the Kings answer to such (...) as
they were not (...) to (...), L'Roy (...), proves that after the advice of this
his great (...), he is yet (...) (...) to (...) further with persons or (...),
as his own (...) shall think (...).

Master Crompton in his (...) of Cou^ts ^ells us, ^at when the King did cons^ a
Bill, then he endorsed it L'Koy volt, the King will h^ it so, is ^e did not
^gree, then he indorsed it, (...) (...), which as he ^es, was an absolu^
denial, why ^hen no ground for this in^erence, that the King was at election
to advis^ further with any other Co^ll. (...) if it were so, this proves de
facto that the King has had this pow r, but does no way (...) the Obs rvators
reason; how that if this might be permitted, (...) in (...) to call
Parliaments. ^sides, they are the most supreme Council in England, and
therefore according (...) the rule of Law, in ^he presence of this Couns^ll,
all inf^riour Counc^ls ought to cease. Again, what they council or det^rmine,
is done in a legal and judicial way, and therefore not to be (...) by (...)
extra judicial advice wha^ever; No, nor by (...) judg^ment of any other Court,
but a subsequent Parliam^nt. Obser.


And the Observator adds this as a reason, why the Kings judgment only ought
not to be (...), for says he, the many eyes of so many chief Gentlemen, out
of all parts see more than sewer. A^s.


The same reason (says the Author) which denis a li^y of d^ing to the King
(that is such a number who see more, because they are more) may deny it to the
House of Peers in comparison of the House of Commons, and to that House too,
in comparison of the People, and so (...) King and Lords are voted out of
Parliament. R^.


What a poor evasion is this, and contrary to common sense, that this reason
should deny a liberty of dislenting to the House of Peers, in comparison of
the House of Commons: for that they are much the major part of the Parliament,
and to that Horse too in comparison (...) the people; For the first he may
as well argue that the major part of the Judges in the Kings Bench, should bind
the minor in the common Pleas, or (...) versa; and as soon maintain it; for
though both the Houses make but one Court, yet they are so distinct, that each
does officiate in its proper Sphere: and the conclusions of the one cannot
bind the other; and for the latt^r, that the peoples judgment, because the
greater number, should sway the House of Commons; H^e may as well reason, that
though I give away my ^t, yet the property is not altered, and as soon prove
it. When he can make (...) people to represent the House of Commons, not the
House of Commons the people, then shall the peoples judg^ment for majority
carry it. Until then, we must, as we are (...), by our election, submit to
their determinations. Besides, four hundred choice, grave and solid men, may
(...) and discover as much as f^ure hun^d thousand; It Is no (...) of number,
but (...) qualification, not the plurality of eyes, b^ the (...), that sees
most; yet as one good (...) may se^ more than many bad ones; so i^ must (...)
(...) (...) many good ones must (...) that one (...) (...) the Au (...), (...)
shows (...) (...) is no^ g^lly tru^, i^ it be (...) true, it is (...). For
((...) he) I d^ (...), (...) (...) (...) almost any Pa^ent man, he will (...)
us upon the (...) of a Bill, (...) one (...) in (...) Hou^e has found (...)
(...), and urged more exceptions than (...) hun^ would (...) (...) (...) (...)
e^. This possibly may be, but the str ng probability is on the o^r fi^le. (...)
c^ally one may se^ ^ore than (...) ^ndred, is (...) (...) either probable or
(...) that it will be (...). For my part I shall never waive a propable
certainty, for a mere (...), nor in ^quall judgemen^s prefer an Unite before
a Plurality. Th^e (...) (...) (...), (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) to (...)
(...) (...), Nay, whole Parlia^ (...) been (...) and (...) Null, ^y succeeding
Pa^liaments, and instances in many. I shall not endeavor to maintain an
infallibility in a (...), nor did I ever believe (considering them to be b^t
^n) that they could not (...) in judgment, as well as others. But for (...)
(...) (...) a (...) to an (...) to say that which ha h been, may be, and
therefore it (...): is such a piece (...) (...) a^ I never (...) o^.

The ^w (...) ends (...) (...) (...), (...) needs (...) (...) Co^lls mo^e
(...), impe^all Obser.
and (...) (...) (...) (...).

Ce^ (...) may (...) (...) (...), as any other private Subject. Ans.


What, may (...) (...), casually me^ from the several Counties* strangers to
each other; the Rep.
most (...) and (...) men for wisdom and mann^rs; and propably of the best
for^nes, intrus^d with the public, have as many bye and (...) (...), and as
soon infring their (...), as any (...) su^iect? When ever the (...) makes this
good, I will sacrifice my reason to his will; and b^ve all to be sound Doctrine
which he preaches.

They are strangly transported with the love of a pop^ state, who can so (...)
their (...), as to force themselves to think, the members of it may not be
extremely subject to am^ition, covetousness, batred and affection. And they
are as strongly ravish^ wi^ the love of Mo^rchy; who can bel^ive that all these
may not sway the Scep^er, and rule the King to the oppressing an^ i^aving of
his Subjects. But what? does the Author count this a popular State? I never
learned before, that wh^re the people had one princip^ll Governor over them, as
a King, that, that should be a Democracy. Doubtless he is no^ well read in the
Politiques, or if he be, he does much wrong himself, and dishonor his King,
so grossly to mistake a Monarchy, for a Democracy.

Then he instances in the Bishop of Durhams case, by which he says We are
told in the 3. cap. of the second Parliament held 1. Mariae, how that that
B^prick was d^lved in a form? Par^ament. 7. Ed. 6. Which was compassed and
brought to pass by the ^nister labor, great (...), and corrupt means of
certain ambit^s persons, then being in (...), ^ather to i^rich themselves and
their friends, with a great part o^ the possessions of (...) sa^d ^shopprick,
than upon just occasion or godly zeal. And then he concl^des; Let the wo^ld
judge whether this age may not be subject to the same temptation, and whether
the desire to share the means of the Church, may not have as strong operations
as ^ormerly. I did never p^ead ^or an unerring power in that great ass^bly,
that is too papisticall; for though Parliament men, yet still but men, subject
to the same infirmities with others. But as it is against law to presume any
wrong of that great body, so it is as much (...) reason to think that so many
from several places, of several consti^ and (...) should all comb^ to labor
for themselves, not the public, or ad^ that they may (which is very
improbable) yet still let us pay them that tribu^e, which former ages ha^h
done, of love and obedience, and strong presumption to the contrary. our
judgemen^s are but extrajudiciall and illegal, it is ^he succeeding Parliament
only, that can or ^th power to amend their errors, if ^hey commi^ any; it is our
duty to pr^ume (...) best, and leave their actions to the ^enning and comptrol
of their wise successors; And let us take this for a caution, that the errors
of their (...) ough^ not (ho^gh it be most (...) and maliciously endeavored)
to winn us to a belief, of the like in them. That others have transgressed the
limits of trust, is no good (...) ^o prove that they do so; nor with the leave
of the Author will the Bishop of (...) case any way impeach the age we live in;
it is one thing ^o dissolve one Bishopric, another to extirpate the function, as
h^ppily not ^ure Divino, and therefore unwarrantable; base and sordid lucre may
perchance suggest the one, it is conscience only that must promote the other.
Nothing more common in the Roman story, than the bribing of the Senate. God be
praised our stories cannot testify the like of Parliaments, neither is there
That was a P^pular (...).
any concluding from a (...) (...), to a Parliame^, Our Author well knows they
will not hold parallel; and he that should make such a comparison, deserves to
be made an everlasting monument of distoyalti^ and d^shonour to his Country.

I, but says (...), they must evidently have more private ends than the King,
who may be misled, upon wantonness, but they must struggle with solid
temptations, desire of riches, desire of honors, there being an emptiness in
them, whereas he is f^ll and satisfied. No King s^ great and honorable, bu^
may extend his dominions, and he that is circumscribed by law, would fa^ne make
his Government obsolute, and are not these strong s^ducing temptations? Nay, is
it not most frequent, that the greatest have the most vast and unlimited
desires? He that enjoyes much would yet be a Croesus, and every King an
Alexander, and he that cannot conq^er other parts of the world, would (...)
inslave his Subjects.

We have ever fo^d (...) and Antipathy betwixt the Court and the Country, Obs.
but never any till now, ^etwixt the (...), and the body of the Kingdom*
^epresented.

How, b^wixt them, and those many that entrusted them? are not they satisfied
with their carriage? If this were never till now, it may seem to be upon some
causes which never were Ans.
til^ now.

The Author says true, but let me tell him, that the grounds move from such as
he (who (...) the good and (...) of their Country in a happy reformation)
corrupt the people Rep.
by their ill exampl^, and w^rse doctrine, dividing betwixt King and
Parliament, and (...), telling of them that they are bound (by I know not what
div^ precept and injunction) to desert the (...), and adhere to the King,
though it be to the apparent destruction of both Kingand p^ple; and whether
this be true or no, let the Author and that reverend Doctor of Dr. Fern.
Cambridge witness.

Except Master Hollis ^is rich widow, I never ^eard that promotion came to any
one by serving Obs.
in Parliament.

If the (...) propo^ions ^ad passed, it would have been no news to bear of
many promoted* Ans.
etc. Nay it (...) been rare ^o have heard of any advanced out of Parliament
etc.

The greater had be^e the happiness both for King and people. Are there not
there a^l (...) Rep.
of Nobility and Gentry? men of approved integrity and ^yncerity to their God,
and of known faith and loyalty to their King and Country? And can any (let
malice it self speak) be more meri orious or capable to receive honor and
preferment than they, who have the vote both of King and people for their true
and ^aithfull service to both? Had it gone on, his Majesty had increased his
own honor, and add^d to his peoples security.

The Lords and Commons ought not to be deserted, u^sse we will allow, that the
King may Obs.
(...) whether he will admit o^ any Counsel at all, or no, in the disposing
(...) our lives, lands, and (...).

By law he cannot, he will not refuse to ^earken t^ his gr^t Couns^ll. Ans.


To be advised by them but yet to do what he li^t, is this to hearken to their
Counsel? Rep.
That is not the way to satis^ the grounds of calling Parliaments, to make the
King ^ole Arbiter of public (...).

He only s^yes, he is (...) bound (...) (...) ^is own understanding, or to
contradict his owre conscience ^or (...) Counselors sake what soe^er.

If he should do so in things ^ubious, and o^ which he ought not to be the sole
Judge, so that his single judgment must of necessity be of less cons^quence,
than that of his Parliament, twere no contradiction to conscience; But why the advice of his Parliament should be more opposite to conscience than any privy
(and at this time) unwar^ntable (...) seems a mystery.

It Is granted in things visible and (...), that Judge which is a so^e Judge, and
has com^ ^ower to see his own judgment exec^d, o^ght not to determine
against the light of (...) Ol^.
or evidence of ^act.

Sole Judge or no^ al^ers not the case, neither is there any (...) only to
visible and certain Ans.
things; in the (...) of a trust, the cons^ence must be g^ded ^y a moral
(...), or high pro^lity.

It does plainly difference the case, for where a man is a sole judge, he ought
to be (...) Rep.
by the evidence of ^act, either in certainty or (...), and cannot determine
(...) that; but where he is not the sole judge, and the matter prove very d^ous
and incertaine, there (...) may and is bound to submit to the judgment of the
majoritie, and ought not to pre^rre h^s own judgment or opinion.

The sin of Pilate was, that when (...) might ^ave saved our Savi^ur from an
unjust dea^, Obs^r.
yet upon oc^sations cont^ctory in themselves, contrary to strange revelations
from (...), (...) would suffer ^ocence to fall, and pass senten^e of death
(...) to (...) a blood-t^sty ^ultitude.

Concerning strange revelations ^o the (...), all that I meet with is this, his
wise told him Ans.
saving, have thou (...) to (...), with that just man, for I have (...) many
things this day in a M^t 27. 19
^reame because of him, what was revelation to her; was but a single tradition
to him, she was obliged to believe God speaking to her, ^e was not ^ound to
believe a woman speaking to him, etc.

I shall not descant as our A^thor does, upon this reve^ation, nor trouble my
self to show Rep.
of what validity and esteem it ought to have (...) to (...); though (...) it
ought not to have been vilipended and r^jected; and the rather for tha^ he
him^lfe could discover no fault in him, as he professes Ioh. 18* and again M^.
27. 18. he says he knew that for (...) they (...). 18.
had delivered him, wherefore it must needs aggravate his fin, who contrary to
the (...) of his wife, agreeing with his own knowledge, should thus pass
sentence of death upon an innocent. Neither were these grounds (...) in this
(...), to challenge his assent, and make him yield to their vote, which the
A^thor by way of allu^on to the Observator, h^re (...) down, ^at his single
judgment was not to be preferred before all advise. That the many eyes of all
the people s^e more than his. Besides there was a (...) gro^nded upon nature,
that a (...) can have no private ends to mislead it. No* (...) here was a sole
(...), and knew Christ to be innocent, and therefore contrary to his own
knowledge and evidence of fact; (...) ^ot to have b^ene ^wayed by the multi^de;
but where there is a joint judi^all power, this does no way conclude against a
wise concession to the majoritie in cases dubious and (...).

If one Iud^e upon the Bench (...) from thr^e, or one (...) at the (...) from
eleven, they Obsor.
may submit to the major number though perhaps less (...) than (...), (...)
^putation of guilt.

The Oa^h of the (...) is, that t^y will do r^ght bet^ixt party and par^y,
accor^g to ^vidence Ans.
given in, not their ^ellowes votes. How his Ca^uists will satisfy a man's
conscience, when he violates this Oath, I know not.

The Author mistakes, it is no v^ation of oath, in matters dubious, for the (...)
to yield to (...) Rep.
whose verdict must needs be of greater strength (...) validi^y, for though
poss^ly that one (...) (...) than the eleven; yet; it is eleven to one (ods
sufficient) that he does not. And if he does (as he ought) agree with them in
their verdict, this is no compliance in vote, but a proceeding accord^g to the
information of testimony; And therefore in this case he need not appeal to a
casu^ (...) (...) his (...), for if he do right betwixt pa^ty and party, the
oath is sufficiently (...). It Is (...) (...) many (...), there may (...) a
legal submission, but then the Law does not require (...) (...) act contrary
to conscience, but provides for the preservation of the innocence of the (...)
(...), by making the act of the major part, have the force of the whole.

A (...) ought not so to sacrifice to his own net, or to be devoted to his
own opinion, as not to (...) to the greater number of his (...). Nay, we know
(...) usual for one single Judge being (...) to the other (...), to release
his opinion; and do we think in this he does an act con^ to conscience? seeing
all men are subject (...) error, the more secure and safe way is in (...)
(...), for one to (...) to the judgment of many, and not for many to (...) to
the Vote of one.

(...) so (...) (...), much more in State, where the very satisfying a (...),
sometimes in things not other Obser.
(...) (...), may prove not only (...), but (...), (...) (...) of peace and
(...) of strife. Ans.


True, if in law, (...) otherwise. A (...) must not displease God to please the
(...).

If the Author intend in matters clear and obvious to every eye, there he is
in the right, a Rep.
Governor ought not to displease God, to please the people. But if in matters
(...) and in^, here he fails, it may be both convenient and lawful in such
case to subscribe to the (...): Many times the (...) of an unreasonable
request, does not satisfy, but increase their (...).] It Is expedient sometimes
for Governors to grant that which otherwise would not be necessary. There is a
freedom of policy they may make use of suitable to the times and occasions, and
not prejudice the law of God or their own (...). That which at another time
may be unreasonable, may now be couvenient, Better to run the hazard of an
illimited desire, than to destroy all for want of their present satisfaction.

That the (...) and Magazine of Hull etc. should be entrusted into such hands,
as were in (...) (...) good (...) me, conscience and understanding could plead
nothing against it. Obser.


The King had more (...) of some, (...) more confidence in the fidelity of
others. Ans.


The same may be verified of the Parliament, though upon better ground and
(...); our Rep.
former sufferings could not but engage our (...) the future. And how could we
trust those with this great ship of the Common wealth in an imminent storm, who
had (...) run it upon the rocks and quicksands in a calm?

If (...) could (...) been (...) (as it could not; for the contrary was true)
that this would Obser.
(...) (...) (...), and have (...) the occasion of greater danger.

What has been the cause of these unhappy (...), (...) the taking of the
Kings town Ans.
from him by (...), and the illegal (...) of the (...), upon (...) of apparent
danger.

What impudence of Malice are these times reduced to? that any private pen dare
charge (...).
the Parliament with such (...)? Is (...) the Town of Hull possessed in his
(...) behalf, for the securing of him and his (...)? and is not the (...)
thereof (...) upon the (...) (...), as the Parliament have (...) (...) it? If
his Majesty should (...) a for^ force or (...) to invade the (...), and should
surrender up a (...) (...), is (...) not lawful for his Subjects to seize his
(...); for his and (...) (...) (...)? And for the (...) (...) is said to be
(...); (...) he (...) (...) of all law, and had (...) most absolute (...) that
ever (...) (...) to; yet let me tell him, that (...) does (...) (...) the (...)
of (...) and (...) to style (...) (...), which the (...) have upon (...) (...),
(...) and (...) (...) be legal. And I (...) (...) (...) (...) can imagine his
(...) should (...) rate that of the (...); Nay, (...) (...) yet (...), for the
Part to (...) all this upon (...) of (...), and to (...) (...) where no (...)
was, etc. (...) if the (...) ((...) he) had (...) (...): it might in so many
(...) be (...) (...), etc. Does the (...) (...) all other (...) to be blind,
(...) he (...) (...)? (...), are (...) (...) the (...), or (...) a (...) the
(...) (...), because his confidence (...) (...) that the (...) danger which
(...) this (...), has not (...) (...) (...) (...); we owe it (...) (...) (...)
and vi^ of the Parliament: (...) (...) (...) (...), which (...) have (...) by
this time (...) (...) ruin and destruction. Besides there is no (...) the
cause or (...) (...) (...), (...) the (...): shall we conclude the clouds which
(...) (...) our (...), to (...) (...) (...) vapors, (...) they (...) (...)
(...) down (...) us? or that our (...) is (...) an idle (...), (...) happily
our care, or (...) (...) (...) impediment has (...) and (...) the ground and
cause of our jealousy? Obs.


The Observator having showed how that Kings are (...) to (...) the (...)
(...), says what (...) is it then in (...), when they will (...) (...) (...)
conscience and reason in things (...) (...) the people

No Man justifies pretended conscience, no man can condemn real. Ans.


It Is true but conscience (...) not to oppose or contradict that, which is good
and behoovefor Rep.
the people. I, but there is no ground of objecting of pretenses (says the
Author) and why so? because the people are deceived, and if they look upon his
actions, they will (...) unto them as (...) as the day. I am so (...) of his
(...), piety and goodness, that I (...) they (...) so? It Is his evil (...)
that causes this misunderstanding and breach (...) his sacred person, and his
(...); (...) that their (...) will prejudice his right; and that (...) (...)
with honor and a good (...) grant (...), which (...) (...) to, would injure
(...). I, but again, (...), (says he) he that has (...) so much in this.
(...) and that in a (...) (...), as put all (...) Royal (...) acts (...) grace
together, they (...) much short of his. And no wonder the (...) was sick of
many (...) (...), (...) through the long (...) of Parliaments; and all these
(which by their happy continuance might have been prevented) must now apply
(...) to the Sovereign (...) of his Royal Grace and favor, for their (...)
(...). Would not have (...) any thing which was (...), not anything (since
(...) wants (...) (...) (...) them) but (...) should (...) him into far worse
(...) than that of poverty. It Is not his Majesty's necessity that can (...) or
(...) his evil (...) (...) a compliance with his Parliament; what is his
necessity to them? if theirs find a supply, (...) Rex and (...) regnum, they
care not. But it is strange! would settling of the (...) by the advice of his
Parliament, put the King in a worse (...), than poverty? why, yes; he that
gives away part of his (...), is poorer (...) if he had divested himsefe of the
(...); (...) (...) (...) plus (...), a pretty fallacy.

The virtue of (...) (...) been denied to the Commons, and a (...) has (...)
made Obs.
betwixt the parties chosen, and the parties (...), and so that (...) (...) of
all (...); that immovable (...) of all (...) and power, whereby the (...) (...)
the (...) right of all the (...) and (...) of England, has (...) attempted to
be (...) and disturbed.

There may be a (...) in the imputation of Severance, and (...) of
representation to the Commons. Ans.
For put the (...) (...) a (...) men of a county, present a (...) to the House
against ^ed laws, and the (...) discipline of the (...); this is received and
thanks returned; if (...) another petition (modestly and (...) expressing
(...) (...), as that most excellent petition of Kent) be presented, (...) by
men more (...) then the (...) etc and this in (...) of the present government
etc. it is (...) (...), or the (...) (...) that (...) it, this by no (...) is to
be called a (...) or (...) of representation.

It Is neither number, nor (...) of persons (though I confess these may (...)
somewhat the Rep.
better gloss upon (...)) (...) can (...) a petition, either good, (...)
(...); No, (...) the (...) of it. And they that shall dare to make one (...)
against (...) (...) and (...) (...) and ^terminations of the House, it is no
(...) if they be put to make a second, for their (...); (...) in so doing, it is
they, not the House, that deny the (...) of representation. (...).


Most of our (...) (...) (...) (...) in Parliaments have proceeded (...) this;
(...) the people upon (...) (...), and (...) accusations, have been so (...)
to (...) themselves from their representatives, and (...) there can be nothing
under Heaven, (...) (...) ^cing Ans.
God, which can be (...) (...), and (...) (...) in the (...), than (...). Rep.


Here we may see the (...) of (...) (...) (...).

And (...) you may d'scover the over pouring of (...), or (...) (...) (...)
(...); for (says he) certainly we (...) (...) (...) Oath of (...), (...) of
(...) (...) (...). ^ther did ever (as I have made (...) good before) the body
(...) (...) his (...), (...) it (...) evidently follow (says (...)) that (...)
(...) a (...), (...) (...), than (...) (...) (...) (...). If one (...) can
(...) (...) (...) (...), (...) may (...) his (...), (...) ^wise, it will prove
(...).

This he grants as (...), that the (...) power of (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...).
King, and (...) in the (...), (...) (...) (...) the (...) can make a (...)
(...) (...), or Law, without the (...), (...) (...) (...) (...) the King.

This one (...), (...) constantly (...) to, would (...) prevented (...) (...);
(...) (...) (...) (...), (...).
might restore the Kingdom to (...).

(...) (...) Author never read any Law, that knows not what (...) (...), (...)
must receive an equitable and favorable (...), according as (...) and (...)
(...) (...).
of the case administers occasion; for summum jus, est (...), (...) (...) (...)
the law may (...) be unlawful.

And therefore the (...) does make a good qualification of his (...) (...),
(...) ^ing (...).
only in (...) cases; but if the safety of the people (...) (...), (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) unto them, then an extraordinary course may be
(...) (...).

This is it which has so m^serably rent this K^ngdome, and raised these sad
divisions. Ans.


Most malicious and scandalous; it is not this; but the want of its due
observance, and negl^ct Rep.
of our duty, that has raised these ^ad distrac^ions. First the People are made
believe they are in danger. Strange! that a Parliament should infringe their
trust, and so easily deceive a whole Kingdom. Then a prevention of th^se
danges is promised. Good reason ^oo; a whole Kingdom ought not to be sold to
misery and destruction upon an easy rate.

The (...) is this, in case of apparent and immi^ent danger, the peoples sasety
is not (...) be negl^cted; they ought not to be exposed as a Prey to the enemy;
therefore most ^it they should be put into a posture of defense. Well, what
could reason or malice it self object against this* I, but then none so fit
judges of this apparent and imminent danger, as the two Houses. Is any one so
fit? Or can any discover more than the r^presentative body of the whole
Kingdom* Wherefore they to order this Militia. Had on^ Author intended to have
dealt fairly and heartily, he would have shown the man* humble Petitions and
requests of the Parliament, to his Majesty, for the ordering of the Militia,
according to their advise, ^or the better security of his people: and His
Majesti^s negative return unto them; before they (according to their duty)
undertook in his Majesti^s and his people behal^e, the trust and ma^age of the
same. And now it must be in their power to command men, (...) horses, seize on
all the Ammunition, send for what supples of money, they think necessary, for
the repelling those dangers. This is but a consequence of the other, it were
but in vain to lay a foundation, if they had not power ^o raise the Structure.
I, but here we are fallen back again into (what we so much complained of)
Arbitrary power. It Is much that one, who pretends to be M^ster of his reason
should be thus mistaken.

Then belike all proceedings in cases according to equity and necessity (which
justice requires, should not be regulated by the strickt rule and severity of
law, as not being within the intention of it, for that such constructive might
prove destinction to the rule) is a prosecution of an arbitrary power. The
manage of a business in case of necessity, need not keep correspondence and
agreement with the rule, neith^r that to be stile^ Arbitrary, which necessit^
makes lawsull. Was not this the very case of Ship Money? there likewise was a
pretense of danger and necessity, and none so compelent a judge of this as the
King, and therefore for the securing of the people, money must be immediately
raised without the Subjects consent. With the Authors favor these cases do no
way run parallel, for will it therefore follow, that because the King cannot
(upon no pretense whatsoever) take away the Subjects prop^rty, without their
consent; that the Parliam^ent may not take it with their con^ent? Most
inconsequent. The Parliament represent the people, which the King does not; And
therefore their conclusions do (...) ^he people; which the Kings cannot. But
then he presles an Argument that was made against the ship money, which he
says will hold in our case.

It was then laid down as a sure (...) of reason, that it was better for the
Kingdom, though it were in real danger, in arena (...) capere, to (...) for
it self as well as it was able by a sudden desence, than that the King
should pr^vide such a remedy, which would be so easily, so ^quently abused upon
every pre^ence of d^nger, to p^event such an evil, which could extremly
seldom, o^ almost never hap^en, for an Army and Navy could not be so (...)
provided, but that we must have some intelligence of it. So (...) ^aith in case
of the Militia better suffer it in the old wa^, and the Kingdom (...) for it
self in case of (...), than to (...) the hazard of the (...) abuse of it, to
the putting of the Kingdom into a combustion, upon I know not what vain
pretenses.

I believe the Author preached a quite contrary Doctrine before the Parli^ment,
O, the power and virtue of this great Assembly* that can so Metamorphize men,
as to mak^ them sp^ak acco^ding to the dictate of reas^n, not affection. But
for his Argument the ground of the ob^ection that was laid down against the
Ship Money, was, the possible frequent abuse that might be of such a remedy,
upon every pretense of danger: which without controversy carries a great deal
of wait with it. And when our A^thor can make it good (as he h^th strongly
(...), but much failed in it) that a Communit^ man have those many private ends
to mislead it, that a King may, then shall we agree that the cases do in reason
parrallel; until then, we must ^ell him, that there is ^oure hundr^d to one
against him.

I (...) the world judge whether the (...) Sir John Ho hams act Treason, be not
contrary Obs.
to the cleare^t (...) of humane reason* and the ^trongest inclinations of
nature; for every private man may defind himself by force, if (...), though by
the force of his Majestrate, or his own (...), and (...) (...) be not, without
all confidence by fl^ght.

Sir John Hothams seizing upon the Kings Town and Ammunition, was, it seems
in his own Ans.
defense; who assaulted him? Did his Majesty drive him into Hull?

No, But his Mejesty would have driven him out, he being possessed of it by the
Authority Rep.
of Parliament, for the securing of him and his people. And though it be not
lawful for a Subject to seize a town in his own defense, yet having got it
by a lawful authority: he may defend himself, and it, against any assault by
the same power. Neither can any other extrajudiciall power or command discharge
him of that trust, which was committed to him in a legal and judicial way by
another. What can he think of the Gunpowder Traitors, was their resistance a
just defense? Then certainly every rebellion is a just war. His conclusion
is very just; For questionles there can be no war unlawful, if their
resistance were a warrantable defense. But I hope the Author will give us leave
to tell him, that the cases are more different then a Papist, and a Prot^stant;
they agree in somewhat, the cases in nothing; for they had neither lawful
cause, nor sufficient authority on their side to maintain resistance; as Sir
John Hotham had. Again they were Traitors before by their horrid unnatural
and cruel attempt; But I hope Sir John Hothams bare seizing of the Town could
not proclaim him Traitor; But enough of this in a case so manifest. He may as
soon convince a man of common sense, that black and white are the same color,
as that these cases run parallel.

Here whole Nations being exposed to enmity and hazard, being incapable of
flight, must yield Obs.
their throats, and submit to Assassinates, if their King will not allow them
defense.

There is a great difference, betwixt a Subjects defending of himself, and
offending his King. Ans.
His fea^es are over witty, if they will not permit him, to think himself
safe, except he get into one of the Kings Forts for his better security.

Without question he that may defend, may offend; for how is it possible that I
should defend Rep.
my self, if I may not offend my enemy? What a sensles thing, and void of
reason is it, to mainetaine that Subjects may take up Arms to defend
themselves, against the unlawful Tyranny of their Prince; but yet upon his
approach they must not use any hostile act, but stand like so many stocks,
immovable what is this but opposi^um in objecto, a fl^t contradiction; or a
taking up of Arms in jest, to make me capable of losing my life in earnest? If
this were all we could do, the most facile way for wicked Princes to
accomplish their ends, would be ^his, by Tyranny and oppression, to engage the
people, in this imaginary defensive war, thereby to disarme them, and force
obedience to their unjust desires: or slay them with their own weapons. But to
pass this. If a King shall take up arms to d^stroy his people, no question
law, reason and policy will warrant their seizing of any fort, or public
place of defense, for their own better security.

See if we are not left as a Prey, to the same bloody hands, as have done such
diabolical exploits Obs.
in Ireland etc. If we may not take up arms for our own safety, or if it be
possible for us to take up arms, without some ^otes or Ordinances to regulate
the Militia.

Subjects upon invasi^n, would not have wanted Commission to take up arms. Ans.


But upon a civil combustion they might; He that will give me power to fight
against his Rep.
enemy; will not give me authority to oppose himself, but doubtless this is no
rule in the Politiq^es, for a man first to receive one blow, and then to stand
upon his guard, to keep off the second, better by a vigilant providence to
prevent both; or to expect an invasion, and then be to ^eke our Commission,
enemies are more easy kept out, than they can be repelled, when they are once
in.

I, but he says, this would be of ill consequence to subjects, if they might
have power to take up arms, as often as ambitious choleric men for their own
ends shall persuade them they are in danger. For by this means, being easily
deceived, whilst they endeavor to avoid false, they would run them selves
beadlong upon true perils.

Th^se ambitious men (which he himself knows not) and these pretended dangers
(because he himself fears not) have a strong influence upon the Authors whole
book; It Is very much that the reason and senses of a whole Nation, should be so
easily captivated. But it is his only plea, and therefore you must give him
leave to make use of hi^ pr^tences, or you bid him silence. Well, to tell our
Author once for all; as no man can or will justify a pretended cause of fear
so no man can condemn a real. And without he will say, that there can be no
cause of fear, without he be privy to it; this aspersion is by no means to be
suffered; for by this we shall never know how to believe that we are in danger;
for that true fears may be blasted with the ignominy of feined and pretended
carry the visage of true. Obser.


The King says; the Parliament denies etc. to whether now in this uncertainty
(...) the subje^^ bounded to adhere?

We may consider whether the Houses, do not barely say; and whether his
Majesty does not Ans.
descend so far, as to give reasons for what ^e does, and to show the
Kingdom the ground of his actions, by particular citation of the Laws, which
justify them.

What the two Houses of Parliament barely say; then belike, if his suffrage be
of any account, Rep.
they prove or make good nothing. Was ever age guilty of so great irreverence,
or of offering so great an afforo^t an^ in ^ignity to this great Assembly? Of
whom, as the law says, we ought not to imagine a dishonorable thing, much
less to speak it. I am confident that all Histori^s that ever were, cannot
give you one example of so high disdain and presumption. What the two Ho^ses
barely say? He has a great measure of confidence that dare say it, for my part
I dare not return the contrary, but I leave it to the whole wo^ld to judge,
whether that they do not exactly prove and maintain their own assertion; and
utterly disprove and destroy the contrary objections and conclusions. I, but
says the Author, we ought to agree, whether swer^ing from law, be to be judged
by the actions, or by the au^hors; that is, if the King should ^ave done what
ever they did, and the Houses, what ever he did, whether all would not th^n
have be^n l^gall, because don by them. Certainly it is no good way of judging, to
conclude the legality or illegality of an action from the Author or Actor, it is
the applying of the rule to the action, that denominates it, eithergood, or
bad. However we ought not totally to reject these circumst^nces, of place and
persons, for no doubt that in some cases may be lawful for one, that will not
be lawf^ll for another. And it is more than probable, that the Parliament may
in many cases have a more extensive power than the King, However certain I am,
that it is but charity in our Author to grant them his belief; that they will
not approve or maintain that in themselves: which they condemn as illegal in
his Majesty. The King does not desire to captivate any man's understanding to
his authority, but is willing to make all the world the judge of his actions.
And have the Parliament withheld any thing, that might give satisfaction to the
people? Neither ^s a blind ob dienc^ a part of any man's duty to the Houses.
He, who after so great l^ght and evidence of the integrity and justice of the
Parliaments proceedings, shall say. he obeyes, he knows not upon what grounds;
may justly be conclud^d to be Non compos mentis, robbed of his senses. Some
things he says, are matter of fact, here we may be guided by sense^, and judge
as we see. With the Authors favor, this to an ordinary capacity, may be a
dangerous way of determining, for though we must always judge according to
the outward s^nse in matter of fact* yet we must have this caution, that we
g^e no further, as for instance; If I see one enter and seisea Castle, or fort
of the Kings (put the case Hull) that he did enter, that my sense directs me
to discern, but whether he keep the possession for, or against the King, that
is examinable upon other circumstances, and is matter of law, depending upon
reason and judgment, and this every ordinary capacity cannot judge of. But
says he, this every one may judge of, whether the King has seized on any
thing wherein the subject has a property? That (...) thupon the ^ower and
privileges of Parliament, the best evidence to maintain the title that we
have to ^ll that ever we enjoy; Or whether that the Subject has not seized on
something, wherein the King has a property?

That we must yield affirmative to, that the Subject has not seized on the
Kings property; but it is to his use and behoof, for the securing of him and
his people. So that the King loses nothing, but both gain protection and
safety thereby. Whether the King has raised war against the Parliament, that
is, whether his guard was an Army. A very strange and unusual guard of 15000.
or 20000. And whether Hull is now London, Very manifect it is not, but the
forces, that ^ound no b^tter success approaching London, may (for ought I
know) make a speedy retreat to York again.

We had a Maxim, and it was grounded upon nature, and never till this
Parliament, withstood, Obs.
that a community can have no private ends, to mislead it, and make it
injurious to it self.

True, in a sta^e where a collective bod^ (...): and the reason of it, is
evident, for Ans.
though every man aim at his (...) (...) interest, yet except it be agreeable
to the in^erest of the Major part, it will never pass into an act, and i^ it
be advantageous for the most, it is to be esteemed public; Now what service
this c^n do the two Houses, I cannot see, because they are a representative
body. R^p.


O, yes, very much; and let me tell you, none could have said more in their
vindication, for (...) your own language upon your self, though every man in
Parliament, aim at his (...) ^erticular interest, (...) except it be agreeable
to the interest of the Major part, it will never (...) into an act, and if it
be advantageous for the most, it is to be esteemed public. But you will say,
it is indeed to be esteemed so: and yet in truth it may be otherwise.

First, this ough^ not to be presumed; and again, I dare confidently asfirme
it, that the (...) part of 3. or 4. hundred, may carry as public Spirits, and
as free from self respects, or the persecution of Private interest, as the
Major part of the collective body. And no doubt had not our predecessors at
first, and all the succeeding ages since, been possessed with these thoughts,
two should not have satisfied every Bu^rough, nor the like number every County.
I, but he (...), the reasons why this Kingdom has seldom (...) under the
corruptions of a (...).

He does well to say seldom indeed, for he cites no example of this nature;
and had there been any such, I know the Author would not withheld them, are
First, for that it was a (...), for the most part, but of short continuance, so
that they hold not time to ^ould and fashion (...) aims; and when called
together again, the body was much altered.

The Author, no doubt, had he been so w^ll disposed, as to have done his
Country that right, could have shown us many Parliaments of long continuance;
and when he had done, (...) have been able to have charged them with the least
corruptions; But h^e is mightily carried ^ way with vain imaginations and
(...). He thinks short Parliaments, had they been long, would have been
adulterated, and donis empta corrupted with gifts, like the (...) of Rome,
which, he so much instances in. Had he ever been acquainted with charity, it
would have taught him better surmises of his private brother, much more of so
great and reverend As semblie as the Parliament, But his second and chief
reason is, ^or that the final determination (...) not in one, nor two hands,
but the joint consent of three estates is necessary. It Is true, for the making
new laws, or altering, or repealing the old; But not so in case of declaring
of the common Law of the land, for that the two Houses may do, as an ancient
right belonging to that supreme Court, without the consent of his Majesty, and
why this power should be conceived more to traduce this Parliament, (as our
Author labors to insinuate into our belief) than it has done others
formerly, (...) to me a Mystery. Obs.


The king may safely leave his highest rights to Parliaments. Obs.


If this be all the motive, he may as safely keep them.

Must the Kingdom be put to conf^ict with u^ter ruin, and (...), the sad (but
certain) Rep.
(...) of cruel war, for want of that, which (...) granted by the King,
would no way prejudice his right, and being enjoyed by the people, would bring
great happiness and security to both.

None knows better, or aff^cts more the sweetness of this so well balanced a
Mona^chy. Obs.


I bele^ve they affect Monarchy; why then does this Author endeavor to take it
away, by denying Ans.
the king power of (...), which our Ancestors inviolably pres^rved, as a most
happy r^straint of Aristocracy or D^mocracy. Rep.


It is said, that by debating or reasoning of a thing, a man shall thereby be
brought at last, to discover the true reason. Which cert^inely our Author will
never do; who labors to defend one (...) by another, ^he subverting of
Monarchy by denying of the King a negative voice. None can sp^ake more (that is
not a ravished doctor, or fauning parasite) to t^stifie his affections to th^s
admira le and well established Government than the Author does. Neither does he
througho^t his (...) book, deny the Kings Prerogative of a negative voice. All
that he undertakes; i^ but to show them their ne plus ultra, and to del neat
and demonstr^te the true cir^ and bo^ndaries of Royalty; and whether this be an
end^avour to take it away, let the weakest capacity judge. Obs.


It has be^ne often in the power of former Parliaments, to load that rule with
greater ^etters and cloggs, but they would not.

A (...) good (...), there is little reason now to do it. Ans.


Their (...) of their just rights and privileges, is no loading or settering
of (...), Rep.
but a keeping it in its equal and due (...).

The Observato^r having showed the exact and Geomet^icall distance that the
three estates Obser.
keep, one having no power to hurt or prejudice the other, but all laboring
exactly for the good whole, (...) us, not to secek to (...) this purity of
composition. Ans.


Very good council: but (...) ^e (...) in the words (...) following. Rep.


Is not a persuading of he King that his Parliament intends the divesting of
his ancient prerogatives and rights* and which is more, the diss^lution of
Monarchy; and by these (...) Obser.
insinuations, dividing him from his Parliam^nt, a mean^s to corrupt this (...)
of (...) Why then no doubt, his words following are very seasonable, That we
must not conceive that both Gent^y and Nobility, can (...) (...) (...) king.

Therefore it will be (...) for the king to leave all ^o their disposal, who
certain^ly (...) (...) Ans.
nothing but what is fitting.

This is the Authors construction and conclusion; But it is ^ery (...) that he
should (...) Rep.
it out of this text, that because the Parliament cannot combine (...) the
(...)* therefore it is fitting for the King to surrender up his power to the
(...), I (...) say that such a rule and predominancy never entr^d the thoughts
of any one, but himself. Is not the conclusion more just; that therefore this
will maintain the Parliament in defending their own rights? Doub^lesse it is.
For my part, my Vote shall always be, that the King may sway his Scep^er in
its just extent and latitude, that the people may b^ made to know their due
distance; and that the Parliament en^oy their ancient rights, that the King may
not (...) upon liberty.

The Observator having showed how that no change of Government can be
advantageous to the Lords and Common: he descends to show, how that though it
might, yet it cannot be effected,

For that their power is merely derivative, so that except we will conceive
that both King Obs.
and people will be consenting to the usurpation, nothing can be done.

Then it is confess^d, the King has a right of dissenting. Ans.


Confessed (out Author thinks he has here got a great advantage of us, out of
our own R^p.
confession) why, was it ever denied that the Kings consent was not necessary,
to the making of new laws, or to the altering or (...) of the old? Nay, has
it not be^ne agreed that his assent is so essentially necessary in such cases,
that if he will dissent (as he may) nothing can be done without him? why then
a fortiori he shall have a n^gative power, where the alteration of the form of
Government is propound^d. But he must understand, that this does noway derogate
or detract from the right of the Parliament in declaring the common law of the
land in certain cases before them, without his Majesty's consent, for that
that is a power incident to this great Court, as well as others inferior, and
in such case the King has no negative voice.

^xcept both King and people. Obser.


He^e (says he) a power is given to the people collectively beyond the Lords
C^mmons and Ans.
King.

If ever he make good this collection out of the Observators words: I Will
r^nounce my understanding. R^p.
All that he (...) to intimate unto us, is but this, that the changing of the
ancient established form, of our Government, is Casus omissus out of their
Commission; and therefore not to be accompli^ed by them, without the consent of
both King and people. (...) does not say, that the Collective body may do it,
without the consent of the (...), Lords and Commons; This happily might be a
predominant power; (...) (...) (...) consent is necessary, for the introducting
of a new frame of Government. Now, how this should be, a transferring of a
power to the people collectively, beyond the Lords, C^mmons and king; I must
confess I apprehend not; therefore the construction is either very foreign,
or my capacity extreme dull.

If the King be an affecter of true liberty, he has in Parliament a power as
^xtensive as ever Obs.
the Roman Dictators was, for the preventing of public d^resses.

He says that though the Romans could not endure a King, yet in effect they
had the same Ans.
thing, for in any immi^nt dangers, necessity of State forced them to choose a
Dictator, which (as he says) had absolute power over them) and to submit to
his Authority, which relieved them in their greatest extremities. Hence (he
says) we may make the truest judgment, what form of Government the wisest
Romans esteemed most convenient. And concludes that fince they preferred the
unbounded power of one to a popular sway, we have no reason to change the much
more happy temper of this Government. etc.

May all the blessings of Heaven and Earth-inrich and incompasse his Royal
Scepter; R^p.
May he for ever enjoy the utmost limit of his just and legal power; And may
this happy glo rious succesefull (and never sufficiently) to be encomiasted)
Government continue (wi hout the least interruption) amongst us; until time
has spent its last period, and brought a dissolution and final conclusion on
all things; And I take him to be no true and faithful member of the Common
Wealth that will not say Amen.

If the Counsel of the Parliament were directly opposite to common
understanding, and good Obs.
conscience, and the Council of the Court were evidently consonant thereunto,
there needed no such contestation.

If the Council of the Court were directly opposite to common understanding
and good conscience, Ans.
and the Council of the Parliament were evidently consonant thereunto, there
needed no such contestation.

That the Parliament and Court should be at varience, it is no news, there has
been always R^p.
a secret enmity and antipathy b^twixt them. The Court never well digesting the
happiness and freedom os (...) people, nor they the oppression, and public
disservice of the Court; the one still contending for an absoluteness of
(...); the other for the maintenance and desending of their liberty. But I
never heard before that the Counsel or advise of the Court was opposed to that
of the Parliament; or could any way balance with that: doub^lesse they are not
equ^ll competitors; the Parliament repres^nt the public, and those
counselors themselves only, the one studies to augment the Common wealth, the
other their own: wherefore he is perfidious to himself, and treacherous to
h^s country, that can be so transported with words, as to renounce the
Parliament* for my part, I shall lay it down, as one of the Articles of my
belief, that the Counsel of ^he Court is directly opposite to common
understanding, and good conscience; and the Council of the Parliament,
evidently consonant thereunto: good cause then of contestation in defense of
(...) public.

The Observator having laid it down as a ground that (...) c^nnot reasonably
be supposed, Ob^.
the greatest counsel of the Kingdom should not gi^ the most faithful
advise, adds; therefor Princes if they may not be lead by their own opinions,
rather than by the sacred and awefull counsels of whole Nations, unreasonably
complain, they are denied liberty of conscience, and (...) out of their own
unde^standings.

I appeal to any man's judgment, whether any thing can be ^ged sor the
authority of a Lay Ans.
council, that it (...) to in^orce a submission of judgment, and a performance
of duties arising from trust agreeable there^o, which may not with (at least)
equal advantages, be pressed for the same binding power in councels
Eccleciasticall; And yet the^e (he sa th (it would go hard, but a man would
find some answer (as easily he might) whereby to justify his liberty of
dissenting in some things which he says, we may with very little al^eraton
apply to civil counsels.

I confe^e this is a point more (...) to be (...) by a Divine, than a Lawyer,
but it is (...) frequent (...)
with me to trespass upon another man's profession: (...) give me ^ave a
little, that our Author may not pass u^nswered, to speak my (...) in this
particular. Now (with the favor of the Author (if my (...) (...) me not) there
is a wide (...), as to our case betwe^ne lay and (...) Counsels. For I take
this for a ^rtaine and clear truth in d^vinity, (...) (...) (...) counsel
whatsoever (be it of never so great ability or eminency) (...) oblige the
conscience of a man by their dicisions or determinations; for that the
conscience of a man, is (if I may so speak) out of their jurisdiction, it is God
alone that has power over that. Besides he that opposes the dictates of
conscience sins against God. The Apostle in the 14. to the Romans Showing how men
ought not to contemn or condemn one another for things indifferent says in the
5. verse, one man esteems one day above another, another est^emeth every day
alike; let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. By this it is manifest
I ought not to be guided by the conscience of other men. Again ver. 14 there
is nothing (says he) unclean of it self: but ^o (...) that esteems any
thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean, by this likewise, it is clear
that what my conscience persw^des me is unlawf^ll (be the judgment of other
men what it will) ought not to be enforced upon me. Again the last verse, He
that doubts is damned, if he eat, because he eats not of faith; for
whatsoever is not of faith, is finne. So that for my part I take it, as an
unquestionable truth, that no Ecclesiastical authority whatsoever has power
over a man's conscience, though it be, but in things indifferent. But now on the
other side, I take it to be as evident and as (...) an assertion, that any Lay
counsel may in (...) merely civil or moral, no way reflecting upon the word
of God, oblige the conscience (which indeed is but the bare opinion and
judgment of a man) by their conclusions, and determinations; and in such ease
it is no sin, for a man to oppose his own reason, by submission to the judgment
of others. And if this were not a truth, Justice would be but slow paid, and
the law as various as the several dispositions of men, and every man would
have power to infringe the law upon every (...) of opposition to conscience.
(...) but the Author goes on, and tells us that though amongst probable
A^guments, that drawn (...) the Authority of wise men, carry with it greatest
weight, yet it must give place to a greater reason. It Is ^rue; where the greater
or better reason is evident: but (...) are not bound to renounce our own
understanding, and to believe that to be the better reason, which you affirm
to be so. The Parliament must in strength of probability give the better
reason; and when you can prove the contrary (which as yet you fall much short
of) then shall we be of your belief, until then you must give us leave to
retain onr own. Now to every man belongs a judgment of (...), which must
decide for what concerns his particular duty. It Is true where he is sole
Arbiter, and where it co^cernes his own particular only; but where the
public is interested, there it is otherwise. So (he ^aith) in the Kings
case. The Votes, which carry in them the authority of of both Houses, shall
bear great sway, and is it be in things extremely dubious; they may turn the
Scales of the other ^ide. This truth, if firmly stood to (as it ought) would
suddenly per^d this sad contestation. But alas, how quickly it is broken. For
he says, if greater reason seem to contradict them, his Majesty will not
hoodwinke his understanding* and blindly ^ollow, whether they please to lead
him, he will walk by the greater light. greater reason, very much that the
reason of the Court, should preponderate that of the Parliament; For example
(he sa^h) (...) Majesty perceiving how much his people may suster under ar^
power, is resolved never to make use of it, and th^nks it less fitting any
other should. I would to God h^s Majestic had never been wrought upon by his
evil Counsel to break his resolution. Is it not an arbitrary way of rule for
to tak^ away men's property without their cons^nt? And is i^ not arbitrary for
the King to pre^e his own single ex^udiciall judgment, before that of his
Parliaments*

But it is told him now, the use of it will be for their good, by reason of
app^ent imminent dangers.

Has the Author thus informed his Majesty, certainly never any one else did,
it were happy both for King and people, that it were no more practiced by the
Court, than it is by the Parliamen^.

Concerning the Action at Hull, the Observator agrees, to take possession of
the Kings Obs.
Town, and shu^ the gates against him, is treason, if circumstances do not
vary the nature of the act, as in this case, he says, they do, for the first
thing to be looked on is, that the King was merely d^ed en^ance for that time,
his general right was not denied.

If then a subject take up (...): against his Sovereign in a t^mporall war,
it must not come Ans.
(...) the compass of (...).

No, whether it be temporary or co^nuing, so he has the same Commission to
justify his Rep.
action. And he may leg^lly possess (...) of the Kings (...), and maintain
them against him, so (...) (...) he has no (...) in them. It Is not his
confessing that he has no right, for that all the world can judge of, but his
doing no wrong that excuses him.

No de^ing language was given. Obs.


If a man take away my pu^se, shall he be acquitted from ^elony, because he did
not give me Ans.
ill language too?

Inventio tua nomen imponit operi (...), it is the invention (as we say in law)
that denominates Rep.
the action. And therefore though I cannot acquit him of felony that shall take
away your purse, and in exchange give you only good words; yet if he shall
rescue your purse out of the hands of Robbers, or take it from your own^ person
being in danger, for its better security; and shall again faithfully ^ore it,
when you have liberty to enjoy your own: if he be felon, (...) dye for him.

No act of violence was used. Obs.


This he may say, who has picked another pocket; but it is no sufficient plea
against the Ans.
Law.

Yes, if he can show a lawful commission for it. Rep.


(...) he used no violence, though the King for (...)* (...) together, did
stand within Musket Obs.
s^t, etc.

It is no argument of innocence, that he had (...) to be more highly guilty,
and abstained. Ans.


It Is true, had he been guilty at all. (...).


The King used terms of desyance, etc. and this makes the Act m^ely desensive,
or rather Obs.
passive.

If this were true, there was never any war, but defensive. For those who by
some great injustice (...).
o^ed provoke a nation to right it s^e, fight as well to maintain (...) (...),
as what they (...) (...).

T^ (...) (...) that offer any injustice or wrong, though they take up a^mes to
secure (...).
themselves, (...) on the offensive p^t, not the defensive. But this rests to
prove in our case.

How (...) should (...) to the King any grounds to (...) (...) (...) York,
many men won^, (...).
or (...) (...) (...) seem the same (...) to the King, as if he had been
pursued to the gates (...) ^ke.

Certainly it was a (...) ground not only to raise a guard, for his safety; but
an Army to (...).
(...) (...) (...) (...), and to right his (...).

A (...) for his safety* why Sir (...) (...) did not advance toward York; nor
ever (...).
^sed it. An army to punish that h^gh indignity. Very just it should be s^, had
there been (...) (...). And to right his (...) very reasonable* had his
Majesty been any way dishonored?

(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) of the Townsmen out of their (...).
(...).


(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) the (...) (...). (...).


(...)* (...) (...) (...) be a (...), who acts only by their (...), (...) what
are they? I but he says (...).
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...), (...) (...) (...) (...) from (...).
This is but your bare assertion which is not to be credited before the
Pa^liament. But if it had been so, that they had been turned (...) (...)
(...), be says the same law would have justified this act as well as the
(...). So* it would; had the primer seisin of their estates been of the like
con^equence and concernme^t ^o the public. But, he says, since not only the
Country about, but the inhabitants within the town have suffered in their
estates and liberties.

If any have suffered without, they may thank the unlawf^ll assaults of others:
if within, their unfaithfulness to the Common wealth.

Or if they cl^ymed any interest in it to themselves. Obs.


So much the less reason to (...) on it, if he cannot so much as pretend
title* to it. Ans.


It Is sufficient if the common Wealth claim an interest in it, though he does
not. (...).


Or have (...) the king, utterly denying his right for the future. Obs.


If any law can be produced to justify the taking away the kings goods (...) a
time, the (...) (...).
will be cleared.

If any law, or evidence can be produced to justify the town of Hull to be
the Kings goods (...).
otherwise than with reference to the common wealth, for the good of which he
is entrusted with it, then happily the case may not bt so evident.

Or have made any other ^se of their possession, but merely to prevent civil
war. Obs.


There is not any way more likely to create a civil (...), than endeavors to
prevent it, by illegal Ans.
courses.

Uery just if you could demonstrate any illegal courses that have been taken.
Rep.


If the Parliament (the shutting of the King out of Hull was not their act) if
the Act of the Ob^.
substitute, be not the Act of him that does authorize him; then I understaud
no law, be not vertually the whole kingdom it self.

The King excl^ded, it is not. Ans.


It Is certain, but if he exclude himself, then it is. Rep.


If it be not like supreme judicature, as well in matters of State, as matters
of law. O^.


Till new laws be enacted, the subject cannot justify any act, but what is
(...) (...) by Ans.
the old.

This is an unquestionable truth, if the Author do not corrupt it by this
false gloss, and interpretation; Rep.
he must know, it is one thing to declare the common law, another to ^act a new
law; the subject may justify an act, by the authority of Parliament, without
his Majesty's consent in the former, not so in the latter.

If it be not the great Counsel of the kingdom, as well as of the king, to
whom it belongs by Ob^.
the consent of all nations, to provide in all extraordinary cases, ne quid
detrimenti capiat respublica (...) the brand of treason stick upon it.

No provisions are allowed, but what are legal, least the remedies prove worse
than the Ans.
disease.

Very right, but circumstances may vary a case. And that may, and ought to be
legal at Rep*
one time, that neither will, nor can be so, at another And in extraordinary
cases, extraordinary provisions, may be made, and ought not to be^ br^nded
with injustice, or breach of Law.

Nay, if the Parliament would have used this forcible means, unless
petitioning would not Obs.
have prevailed.

It is no just cause to take away a (...) money, and said he did first desire
him to deliver it. Ans.


Clear law; and the cases will no way vary; if the Author can prove that the
King has as Rep.
absolute a property in the town of Hull, as any man has in his money.

Or if their grounds of (...) were (...) vain. Ob^.


It is against all equity, to d^e a wrong, because there is a (...) of
suffering it. A^.


Right, but I hope you will prove now, that there is a wrong done, and not
argue this by Rep.
way of admission. Besides, it is against all reason that a whole Kingdom
should be put to suffer a wrong, out of a mere possibility of doing one.

Or if the (...) of a (...) kingdom can be co^ted vain. Ob^.


Too large an expression, much the greater part of the kingdom apprehend
unjust grounds of A^.
jealousies.

Very good, is not this the Doctrine of division that I impeach our Au^hor to
be guilty of Rep*
before. The Parliament have formerly been esteemed the representative body of
the who^ Kingdom; But belike now ^is otherwise, they have (I know not how)
lost this honor and privilege; or it is unjustly taken from them. In the
easing us of these many pre^ures, which lay so heavin upon he Kingdom ((...)
which we and our whole posterity are eternally engaged unto them) there they
did represent us: and their actions for our benefi^, had an influence upon the
whole Kingdom. But if they tell us through their vigilance and great care of
us) that we are like to be reduced to a worse condition, through the malicious
couns^ll of those men that wrought our former miseries, if not timely
preven^ed; there they sit in a parsonall capacity only, and we are not bound to
believe that we (...) in danger, because they say so: No, ala^ they are a
seditious, factious and inconsid^rable number; who intend to raise t^ir own
fortunes, upon v^ine (...) of danger, out of the public d straction^. O the
wit and power of (...), that should thus work upon men, to renounce their unde
standing, neglect their duty and incur the public ruin, upon a mere
possibility tha they may be seduced by the Parliament. But it is very much ^at
the Author should dare to affirm, ^ha much the greater part of the Kingdom
appreh^nd no ground of jealousy, b^like he has travailed the w^ole Kingdom
over, and examined men by the Poles, and taken every ones suffrage, and so upon
the to ^l cast up on every side, is able to render you this account, or
otherwise he could never make good his assertion.

O^ if they cl^yme any such right of judging of dangers, and preventing of them
without the O^s.
Kings Consent as ordinary and perpetual.

As often as they have a mind to make use of such a right, it is easy ^or them
to call the case extraordinary, Ans.
and pretend public dang^rs.

If it shall be suffered that their solemn judgments and determinations
(which are of so (...).
great weight and credit, that they ought to awe us to a belief of them) shall
be blasted with the scandal of vain and pretend^d; how can it possibly be,
that there should fall out any case (...)?

I, but the event ought to be Judge; and (he says) they will never be c^nfuted
by that, if not now, for certainly apparent dang^s did never less app^e.

Admirably ingenious, were it not a pure contradiction: for doub^lesse, if
apparent dangers; they must be seen. But let me tell you, that the issue or
event is no certain de ermi^ of an imminent danger: a provident care (as now)
or an unexpected interposing providence (as in case of the Gunpowder plo^) may
prevent the blow; shall we therefore conclude it was never ofl^red?

It would more abundantly have satisfied me, if I had been frighted with
secret plots and (...) designs.

Dou^tlesse those, whom apparent and visible dangers will not frighten; secret
and concealed cannot. Obs.


The King might have prevented the same repulse by send^ng of a messenger
before hand. Ans.


That is, if he had not come to g^t in, he had not b^ene shut out, if he would
have stayed away, he would not have denied him entrance. R^p.


A very apt conclusion, and it had b^ene happy his Majesty had found so good
advise, as to have saved hi^ labor. Obs.


Or by coming without any such considerable forces. (...).


Let his forces be great, he was not to give law to his P ince. (...).


No; nor any privy Counsel to the Parliam^nt; B^t neither is it likely ^ee
would have ^ave admitted him then, for you (...) a little above, (...) offered
to enter, with twen^y Horse only unarmed. Whether his Majesty m^de any such
profer or no, I know not: nor is i^ material, for it was not the paucitie of
number, th t could excuse his breach of trust. Obs.


The Scots in England took Newcastle, but by private authority, yet there were
other qualifications in that act, sufficient to purge it of Treason. Ans.


The king and Parliament deserved so much respect from you, as not to have
instanced so frequently in their Act; you might well let that pass in silence,
which they have buried in an act of O^livion.

It Is no wrong, either to King or Parliament, for a man to say that is no
treason, which (...).
they have adjudged not to be so. Neither is that act of theirs so to be buri^d
in utter silence, as not to acquit and discharge us, if we can plead the same
innocence.

Then the Observator instances at large, in the example of ^dward the second,
misted by Obs.
(...). Ans.


It does not ^llow, because one king has hearkened to evil Couns^ll, therefore
all must be denied the liberty to hearken to good.

That is true, but it does clearly demonstrate thus much, that others may be
misled as well Rep.
as he, and when a Parliament shall declare (as now) that the King is misled by
evil Counsel, it is not your b^re (...), that can make good the contrary.

(...) p^tie was but of inconsiderable fortunes. Ob^.


He will get no advantage by putting men's estates into the scales, and
ballancing their r^putations. Ans.


What odds may be gained in point of estate, I know not (though I am (...)
there Rep.
will be nothing lost) But without controversy, their reputations cannot be
very good, whose cause and counsel is so bad.

An Aristocracy in Parliament, cannot be erected without some means, and what
this means shall Obs.
be, is yet to us altogether inscrutable.

Certainly he is quicker sighted, than not to perceive what is so obvious, deny
the King a negative, A^s.
and the thing is done. Rep.


Had the Parliament (as in truth they never did) denied the King a negative,
yet the Author (who pretends to be so quick sighted) would find it a matter of
greater weight and difficulty, than to be so easy compassed and effected.
Obser.


The power of the Parliaments is but derivative, and depending upon public
consent. and how public consent should be gained for the erection of a new
unlawful, odious tyranny a among us is not disce^able.

It is not thought this was the intent of those that entrusted them, but it may
be the abuse of power, Ans.
if the Kings authority be once swallowed up in theirs; for though their power
depend upon a public consent in the election, yet not so after they are met
together.

If the power of Parliament be merely derivative (as it cannot be denied) and
that not absolute Rep.
and illimit^d, but qualified and circumscribed (as it must be agreed) why
then the consequence is very just, that where they do exceed that power, this
does not ^gage the consent and obedience of the people; why then without ^e
shall allow that the peoples vote, and consent may be had (which is so far from
improbable, that it is almost impossible) we may here judge, what an idle
fancy and vain dream this is of their laboring to introduct an Aristocracy.
He says that He believes they would not be able to go through in that new
way. But yet they must needs have a great party; considering their several
relations, and the advantage they have in advancing the interests, whether
religious or civil, of some, which may be able to do them service, and this
would create division in the Kingdom. Our Author must vent his contumacious
and opprobrious conceits against the Parliament; though they be a
contradiction to his own reason. What are their several relations compared
with the public? or what advantage can th^r power of preferment yield them,
(since but few can attain to that) in the engaging of a whole Kingdom to
erect so unlawful and oidous a tyranny?

His Majesty expresses his indignation, that they should dare to tell their
King, they may Obs.
without want of modesty or duty depose him. To which the Observator answers,
This cannot be collected from these words, That if they should make the
highest presidents of other Parliaments their pattern there would be no cause
to complain of want of modesty and duty, because (says he,) it may justly be
denied, that free Parliaments did ever truly consent to the deposing of any
king of England.

What was there asfirmed of Parliaments, had none of his present restriction of
free in it. Ans.


What though it had not any candid and ingenious reader would supply it, by a
fair intendment; Rep.
we ought not to stand upon our captions with the Parliament, whose words and
actions ought (if we will be guided by the rule of law) to receive the most
honorable and favorable construction of us. Wh^refore we ought not so
critically and unjustly to imagine, when they do generally mention the highest
presidents of other Parliaments, that they do include forced parliaments,
because (as they well know) these are not presidents, for free Parliaments to
be guided by. And do they not by their Declaration dated the second of
November 1642. (which I make no question, the Author had a view of before the
publishing of his book) say, that in that Declaration, to which this objection
refers, they delivered, that they did never so much as suffer this to enter
into their thoughts. And further that some presidents were such, as that they
ought not to be rules for them to follow; which very reasonably and probably
might intend those of deposing Kings. How dare then the Author, (though not
expressly, yet tacitly) accuse the Parliament of being guilty of the maintaining
that position contrary to their own public profession and vindication? But I
pass itover, and leave him to his just censure. He says, that the King is
offended at their frank expressions, disguised under the charge of a malignant
party. The sense of his answer is this, they have no otherway to clear
themselves; for there being foults somewhere, not to lay them upon others, were
to take them upon themselves. Happy were our condition if his Majesty's evil
Counselors could so easily acquit themselves of any wrong done to the public,
as the Parliament can. but then he goes on and says, that his Majesty ha^h
proposed a very good way, which will fully satisfy the world in their
innocence (I hope the world is sufficiently satisfied without that) which is
not always to accuse, but some times to prove. A most unusual and illegal
way; was it ever heard of or known, that evidence should be produced against
any man for any kind of delinquency, before the party was brought to his
trial? twere very unjust to condemn a man, not see^ng his Accusers, no^
hearing their evidence; I rather believe t^is is to b^ a proposition of the
Authors coining, than to proceed from his Majesty* And if any Messenger were
sent from the Parlibe a proposition of the Authors coining, than to proceed
from h^s Majesty. And if any Messenger were s^nt from the Parliament, (as I
believe one was) to demand a delinquent accused by them; he might have been
sufficiently beaten for his pains, and have returned without him. How then
could the Parliament make their proof in a legal way, according to this
proposition?

The King demands justice for Tumults, and high indignities offered, and
complains of a prohibition, sent from the House of Commons into Southwarke, to
hinder the process against a Riot according to law. The Observators answer is,
Equa^ justice could not be obtained against Obs.
the Court Cavalliers. His Majesty never protected them from legal trial, it
was free for them to Ans.
have proved what they could against them.

It must have been behind their backs ^hen; which is a p^ece of admirable
justice; and when Rep.
they had made good their proofs; they must have sent to York, for to impeach
and d^mand them and what success that journey would have produced, your
jdgmen^ could easily inform you.

The king says it being granted by them, that their privileges do not extend
to Treason, felony, or breach of the peace, so as to exempt the members from
all manner of trial, yet if they be so privileged in the method of their
^yall, that the cause must first be brought before them, and their consent
asked, before you can proceed, then their privileges extend as far in these,
as in the most unquestioned cases, because no privileges exempt them from all
manner of trial, the House being acquainted and leave given. I take the law to
be (pardon me if I judge amiss) in all cases of a criminal nature, where the
person may be seized and sequestered: there though he may be arrested, or
detained to appear before them, yet he cannot be proceeded against in any
other Court or way than in Parliament, whereby he may he taken or detained from
the service of Parliament, without their consent, and this is no exemption from
trial, but only a privilege in the method of it. But now on the other side,
in all civil causes, if they demand their privilege, it is the frequent practice
to allow it them, and this does totally suspend the prosecution of the suit or
trial. I but he says. It was fully intended the members should have had a
legal and speedy trial. It cannot be concei, ved so, since his Majesty was
advised to make such an unusual and illegal impeachment, and prosecution
against them.

The Parliament do not deny the king a true, real interest, in any thing had
by him, either in jure Obs.
Coronae, or in jure personae, but only affirms that in the same thing the
State has an interest paramount in cases of publ^ke extremity, by virtue of
which it may justly seize and use the same for its own necessary
preservation.] The king is a part of the state, and therefore the other part
has not any Ans.
power warranted by law, to do what they think fit to his prejudice, upon
pretense of public extremity.

We shall a low your assertion, that the King is part of the State, and that
therefore the other Rep.
part cannot without him, upon any pretense whatsoever, do any thing that may
turn him in pre judice. But this does tacitly grant that they may do any thing,
in case of his diser^ion, without his consent, that is for his Majesty's and
the public advantage, and if you had meant to make good your ground, by
applying it to the case in qu^stion, you should not have reasoned thus by way
of admition of that, that will by no means be allowed you, but you ought to
have proved that the Parliament have done that which is a prejudice to his
Majesty, and then your consequence would have been very just, whereas it is
now but a mere scandalous and Libellious argument: I, but he says, this is
Ship money: in every man's lands and good the State has an interest paramount,
in cases of public extremity, by virtue of which it may justly seize and use
the same for its own necessary preservation. doubtless no man who pret^nds to
knowledge, were not his reason and understanding captivated, would go about to
persuade any man* that it is all one to be divested of his property by violence
and oppression; as to part with it by free consent and donation; why this is
all the resemblance or similitude that the Ship money and the proceedings of
Parliament have then let all the world judge how these contraries can possibly
run parallel. The head without the body was the State before; now it is a body
without an head. That's a monster of your making, it is not we. but you that
divide the head from the body. I will not turn Prophet, but know if heaven be
just, a crime of so great aggravation cannot pass unpunished. Obs.


But the kings things are still reserved for him in b^tter hands, than he would
have put them.

Though this were true, it were an ill president for the subject, who must be
bound to give up his Ans.
means, as often as they conceive. they could dispose it more wisely.

There is no concluding from the seizing of Forts, Castles and the like, things
merely of public Rep.
use and concernment, in which the King has no other interest, but in
reference to his trust, for the good of the public. To the seizing of any man's
private or particular in^erest, in which he has a sole absolute and
unquestionable property. No, why hear what the Author says, Let what will be
pretended, the subject cannot be so stupid, as not to understand thesewho
undertake to manage the paramount interest of the state, may seize on any
subjects fortunes, by the same right they take the (...).

With the Authors favor he is grossly mistaken: for though it must be agreed
that the State has an interest Paramount in every man's private property: and
so if occasion require may call for a part, for the preservation of the whole
(and upon such terms, he is unwise that will not freely disburse it) yet it
does not therefore follow, that this is seized by the same right, that the Forts
and Castles are, which are merely for the public defense and security. For
the Kingdom has a peculiar and proper interest in the one, which it has not
in the other. And though necessity may justly demand both for the Public
safety, yet it is the proper work and office of the one, not soof the other.

That* there is an Arbitrary power in every state somewhere, it is true, it is
necessary and no inconveniencefollows Obs.
upon it. If he mean by arbitrary a lagistative power, this is granted, yet not
to part but the wholebody. Ans.


But what if one part do desert the other, and refuse to concur with him,
must that (...) still Rep.
and do nothing? But he says, this speaks not to the case, for still they
give us a certain rule to live by. And do not the Parliament do the same? No
law can be all equity, nor all equity Law, for so the one would confound and
destroy the other, but there must be a certain rule upon which to make this
equitable construction. Why now I appeal to any one that know^ any thing of
the justice of their proceedings; whether that they have not often laid down
this as an unqu^ionable position, that the King by his Prerogative has the
sole ordering of the (...), of the Forts, Castles and Magazine throughout the
Kingdom (why then h^re is your certain rule to live by) only they make this
equitable qualification of it, (and I must say, that it were no just law, if it
would not admit of this construction) that in case where (...) Kingdom is in
imminent danger of for reign invasion, or civil combustion, and that the King
seduced by evil and Malignant Counselors, will not receive their advise and
Counsel for the securing of the same; in such ca^ they, who are entrusted with
the public, may seize the Forts and Magazine, and (...) the Militia for his
Ma^esties and his peoples safety and preservation. And does this any whit
destroy the rule? Nay, rather does it not mainetaine and support it? I but he
says, that he is to justify, there is such a Paramount Law, which shall make
other laws truly Oracles, that is, capable of contrary meanings: so that now
a man may be justly punished for doing such a thing, because he has disobeyed
the letter of the law; a week after he shall be justly punished too, for no^
doing of the same thing, because he has disobeyed the equity of the law. This
I shall justify, and yet let me tell the Author that this is no forcing or
st^ayning the laws to contrary meaning, but only a Declaration of the true
intention of them. The Statu^e de frangentibus prisenam does ena^t that it
shall be selony for a prisoner to break prison; the prison by accident is set
on fire, the prisoners may in such case break prison for the salvation of their
lives, and are no felons, and yet this is against the express letter of the
Statute; and shall we in such case say that this is a contrary meaning to the
law? No, we may not, it is clearly agreeable with the intention of it. Aga^ne
the sole power of ordering of the Militia does by the law reside in the King:
and if in time of peace and secur^ty, the King duly discharging of his trust,
any one shall dare to execute any other Commission, and by virtue of that shall
train, muster or discipline any (...) his Majesty's sub^ects, without his
authority there he is justly punishable as offending against the letter of the
law. But now on the other side, if in time of public distraction, and fear
of invasion from abroad, or of civil and intestine combustion within, the King
shall refuse to hearken to the Counsel of his Parliament, and shall listen to
such advise, as being followed may prove the utter ruin and destruction of the
Commonwealth: In such case, if they shall take upon them for to order the
Militia for the securing of his Majesty and people, and shall (...) (...)
Commissions to that purpose; those that in such case shall disobey, may be
punished for not submitting to the equity of the law. And yet still this is no
contradiction or contrary ^eaning to the law, but an eq^itable and just
^planation, according to the int^ntion of it. And if this will not give the
Author satifaction, for my part I think nothing will. I but then he cites us
Aristotle which says Those laws are with greatest prudence (...) shed, which
d^fine most cases, and which leave nothing which possibly may be determined,
(...) (...) breast of the judge: And the Author gives the reason of it, for
that to leave an ample and large construction according to equity unto Judges,
may be a means to satisfy corrupt ends. It Was a wise saying of Aristotle, and
no doubt it is a very admirable rule and direction, for all legistative powers;
to make such laws that might be their own expos^ours; and that might (if it
were possible) extend to all cases; that so the self respect or corrupted
judgment of their interpreters, might not through the dubious, ample or
various, sense of them be satisfied. But since it is impossible for them, so
(...) sorsee and enlarge the law, but they must of necessity l^ave some c^ses
unprovided for, and some incertaine, which must r^st upon the judgment of the
Judges of it. How does it any way oppose law or reason, where there is not for
all cases an exact provision, to allow a favorable and (...) construction? But
then covertly (...) to the condition of our times, he tells us a large Story of
the (...) in Germany, and of the Thirty Tyrants of Athens: what a (...) and
large power they had got into their hands (...) by insinuating themselves into
the hearts of the people, and how they did abuse that power by injustice and
oppression; and so concludes that upon proportionable grounds and principles
such mischeif^s being then, may be again. Could the Author have made a worse
comp^rison, (...) (...) would; was ever great^r dishonor or indignity cast
upon a Parliament, upon such (...)* such groundless and inconsequent reasons
and arguments; The Anabaptists they abused Germany, the thirty Tyrants, Athens,
and therefore the Parliament do England, the rest of His book shows this to
be his meaning, though he conclude with a (may be) though he had not regarded
his own credit and reputati^n, yet h^e should have had some respect to the
honor and fame of his Countr^y, and have studied a better resemblance, though
he had not raised a better conclusion. The bad actions or impostures of some,
are not infallible presidents for others to be judged by. But to advertise the
Author that he do not for the future thus abuse his judgment and discretion;
Let me give him this caution, when his heart shall suggest any ill of so great
and reverend a counsel (whose actions ought to awe him to a good conceit of
them) to consider well the grounds and reasons of his mistrust, and when he
has done this, ponder on the great disproportion and inequality that there is
betwixt so great a power, and himself, and this will either engage him to a
better belief, or force him to silence. And let the people take this Caveat,
that the subtle pr^ssing and urging of the ill examples of other men, ought
not (though it be most maliciously endeavored) to persuade us to a belief of
the like corruptions in the Parliament.

The things taken from the King at Hull, were arms, which are of more danger
than other kind Obs.
of Chattells.

By the same law, all that part of the Kingdom which is not confided in, may
be disarmed. Ans.


Good reason too, if in a public (...), they shall appear in opposition to
them, who Rep.
endeavor nothing but the public fafety, and preservation. Nay, why may not
their money be taken too, upon probable fear, they may buy arms with it.

If that probability can be evidenced by a sufficient proof, I see no reason
any man should be permitted to buy a sword, to help to cut his own throat,
nay more, to hasten the ruin of the Commonwealth. The Subject is in a
miserable condition, that is liable to be undone, as osten as they please to be
fearful.

We should be in a far worse condition, if we should not fear, when we have
just cause, and prevent the losing of the whole, by a wise parting with some
small and inconsiderate portion. Let Brainford evidence this truth. I, but he
says it is so far from excusing, it aggravates the fact to take away the
Kings arms, that is, the means whereby he may seize whatever else belongs
unto his Majesty. It does much extenuate the fact, to seize those things which
would be more immediate Agents or instruments in his Majesty's and the public
ruin; I, but then again he says, that the law of the land has only
entrusted the Prince with arms, so that the Subject ought not to he arrayed,
trained and mustered, but by his Commission; He says very much, and of great
consequence, had it been at another time. But as circumstances may vary a
case, so I hope the Author will learn to distinguish betwixt a case in
nece^ity, and one out of necessity, Between the Kings adhering to the advice
of his great Counsel the Parliament, and his deserting of them, and between
the due execution of his trust, and the breach of it. These laid together will
much vary the case, and justify the Parliament in their arraying, trayning and
mustering without his Majesty's Commission.

But some determination must be supreme, and therefore either the Kings power
and trust must Obs.
be guided by the directions of the Parliament, or else the Parliament and all
other Courts must be overruled by the Kings mere direction.

No necessity of either, for in cases of this nature, which is confessed to be
extraordinary, if the King and Parliament dissent things must be at a stand,
and the Subject must be obedient to the ordinary Ans.
law.

Our Author doub^lesse has a strong Minerva that could make so subtle a
decision of a matter Rep.
of so great controve^sie; But I believe this concept was as soon penned, as
it was thought on. For what is this, but in plain terms to tell the
Parliament hat they might as well have saved their labor. And that if a King
seduced by evil counsel shall endeavor the destruction of the public, yet
it lies not in the power of the Parliament any way to oppose or prevent it. A
sad conclusion, if it would hold.

But then his Majesty maintaining of his negative power, puts this case,
whether if the Papists in Ireland in truth were, or by act or accident had made
themselves the Major part of both Houses of Parliament there, and had pretended
the trust, (which the Parliament here does) from the Kingdom of Ireland, and
thereupon had voted their Religion and liberty to ^e in danger of extirpation,
from a Malignant party of Protestants and Puritanes; and therefore that they
should put themselves into a possure of defense; that the (...) and (...) of
that Kingdom were to be put into the hands of such persons as they could
confide in etc. Whether he were bound to consent to all such alterations, as
these men should propose to him, and resolve to be for the public good.

I shall not need to prove the unlikely hood of their accomplishing their
desired ends; nor go about maintain with the Observator, that there is as true
and intimate an union betwixt England and Ireland, as* betwixt England and
Wales. Neither do I think if it were so that the two Parliaments would joyn^
for transacting and concluding upon matters for both states. But to the
question I shall give this short answer; that I do not conceive the King in
such case bound to consent to their proposalls. For I never did, nor shall
allow, where their conclusions and requ^sts are evidently against l^w, reason
or Religion (if that may b^ presumed of a Parliament) that in such case the
King is bound to ye^ld to their Votes. No; far be it from any one thus to
judge; for that were to make him a ^yrant, though against his will; and to be
engaged in his peoples ruin against his conscience. But now what use or
advantage can be made of this against the cas^ in question (^he Parliaments
proposalls being not apparently either against law, reason or Religion) does
nonplus my understanding to imagine.

A faction is said to have prevailed upon a Major part by cunning, ^orce,
absence or accident. The O^s.
Observator argues thus aginst it. If by cunning we must suppose the Kings
party in Parliament, has lost all their law, policy and (...).

The reason why they are overborne may be this, not because they have less
law, but more ho^sty, A^s
which will not permit them to maintain a good cause, by ill means.

No; the reason is evidently this, that they have li^le law, and (...) Honesty,
which wi^hholds Rep.
them from promoting the public saf^ty. I but how falls it out, that after so
many reiterated scandalls of pretenses, and deceivings of the people, the
Author should now confess that the cause is good only he adds that there is an
ill prosecuting of it, which he ought to prove, if he expects we should believe
him. Certainly he did not read what he had writ^en, or not understand it, or
there is some hope now at the last (after the venting of his sple^ne) that he
will prove a convert? But I despair of convincing him by better reason; for he
is here in his very next words, fallen into a contradiction; where he sa^es,
that we all know, in how great stead these Piae frauds holy salsehoods, and
religious untruth stood, the Church of Rome etc.

And he concludes that we ought to examine, whether this policy work not (at
least in the beginning, till a discovery of their falsehoods is made, and the
people is undeceived) the same effects in a civil State; whether there are not
such things, as frauds pretended to be Reipublicae salutares

Here you have his apostasy, you may see how suddenly he has declined the
truth, for he is revolted again into his pretenses, deceipts and falsehoods.
And I wish from my very heart, that these had no greater influence upon the
Actions of this man, and such as he is, than they have upon the proceedings of
Parliament, and then I am confident our sad Divisions and distractions would
not be long lived.

I, but then the Observator says, It cannot be by force, because they have no
army visible. Obser.


A thing is said in law to be done by force, not only when men actually
suffer; if they make use of Ans.
their liberty and refuse to satisfy the passion and humors of some, but then
also, when they have just grounds of fear, for this works on the mind as
strongly, as the other on the body. R^p.


I, but with the Authors favor, this must be such a fear as may possess a
generous and settled spirit, not every idle Phantasme or Chymaera, such as they
use to bugbear^ Children withal. It remains then, we examine whether the
names of many Gentlemen were not openly read in tumults.

I marry Sir, here is on^ of the imaginary Spiri^s, that has thus forced the
understanding and reason of these men. Doubtl^sse this is not a sufficient
ground of fear (were it true, which I much question) to a resolved and settled
judgment, neither does the law t^ke hold of any such fear as thi^ is. I, but
then he goes on; whether that they were not poasted with directions to their
particular lodgings. I, here you have another of these Hobgoblins, and deformed
Images, more fit to fray children with, than men; Because (if that were true)
they were directed to their Chambers, and never intended, (as the event cleares
it) to approach them; therefore they complied or were silent, and so that
faction prevailed. I, but he goes yet further, whether the way to the House,
were not set with clamarous multitudes, that they must pass through the
midst of them, whil^st they insorme them, what is fit to be voted, and
inquire after their names, and what side they take. This is like indeed to
carry the visage of truth with it; May not men who are part of the collective
body of the Commonwealth, whom the Parliament represents considering that sua
res agitur, it is their b^sinesse that is there transacted, have recourse thy
her, with a full desire only to be informed of the proceedings of Parliament,
and how things succeed for their good, but they must be branded with those
ignominious styles of unlawful Ass^mblies and clamorous multitudes? For their
inquiring what their names were, and which s^de they took; certainly (...)
they may do without (...), and that can be no cause to make me dread a man,
because he knows my name, No; nor his being privy to my actions nei (...), if
I am conscious to my self, that they are such as are just and honorable; and
for their informing of them of what was fit to be voted, that is as like to be
true, as that they should vote, what they had informed them, For the other two
of absence and accident, he says, they may be reduced to this. I t is no
wond^r many stay away, since they must be absent, even whilst they are there.
If their wills were absent, by being a verse from the public good, whose
fault was it that they stood Ciphers? better in such case, their rome than
their company.

The Parliament requests of the King, that all great Officers of State, by whom
p^blique affairs, Obs.
shall be (...) (...) ^e chosen by (...) or nomination of the great Counsel.
Could the King (...) (...) (...) for him, etc. if all Parliaments were not
taken as deadly enemies to (...)

Is that the ^eason, why each man preserves his own right, because he takes
all the rest of mankind Ans.
for deadly enemies?

No, but had I not a strong (...) of such men's faith and loyalty; I should not
upon just occasion (...).
(...) to entrust my right with them. I, but can he with honor (...) himself
unfit to manage that (...), (...) the law has commuted to him? (...) not a
disavowing of his own ability, to be ruled by the (...) of his great Counsel
the Parliament, one may man^ge a trust well, and yet no disho^ that a whole
Kingdom may do^ it better. With equal reason (says he) they may challenge to
themselves the (...) of all Bishops, (...), Sher^ffes, (...), etc. and dispose
of all the preserments of England. For the Bishops (thou^h our sad experience
at this day does inform us) that they have been very bad) yet we shall not
speak of what necessity it might be, that they likewise should be, nominated by
the great counsel, for that it is boubtfull whether ever they shall come in
nomination again. For the Ministers likewise I shall leave them to the choice
and free elections of their Patrons. But now for the Sheriffs, Justices and
other inferior Officers of the law; I must (...) I much wonder how those can
be brought within the rank and order of great officers of State; neither can
there be the like reason possibly rendered, for the nominating of these, as for
the other; for though they may be corrupt in their way, yet that is a prejudice
only to some particular interests, no danger to the public. The truth of it
is, this Kingdom has and does still suffer under the hea^ pressures of ill
(...) and Officers of Sta^e, who instead of defending and propagating the good
of the public: have, and do most vilely and traiterously-corrode and gnaw out
the very bowels of it. Was not then their req^st and proposal very reasonable
and safe both for King and people, that they might nominate such of that known
and public trust and confidence, who by their sedulous care, honest, and
direct counsel, and which is above all, by their true and unfeigned zeal and
affection to the common wealth, might prevent the like distractions and
miseries for the future* But to pass this; had his (...) been graciously
pleased for to hearken and comply with this advise of the Parliament, the
greater had been his honor in that certain pledge of continued happiness and
security to h^s people.

If the King (...) such a man Treasurer or Keeper out of his own good liking
only, or upon recommendation Obs.
of such a (...), here (...) is (...) of no power; but if it be upon the
recommendation of the whole Kingdom in Parliament, who in all probability can
judge better and are more concerned, this is an emptying himself of Majesty,
and (...) himself of power.

Is this will cont^nt them, they shall have as much power, as be ^rants to his
Courtiers. Ans.


If this might be obtained, I am consident they need not make a second
requ^st; Nay, could Rep.
they be persuaded, that what^ they could propose, would be conceed by his
Majesty, I dare say (...) own modesty, judgment and (...), would not permit
them to be guilty of so great dishonor to their King; as to extend their
pe^itions so far for in^rease of power, as some lately (to our sad
experience) have enjoyed; I but he says, (...) must be like the outward
senses, and make a true represent at con; the (...) of reason is (...) to
(...), to make judgment therein: (...) informat^n is not always faithful;
This (...) no way (...) have deprived the King of the Office of reason; for
their (...) did not (...) away (...) Majesty's power of refusal upon just
ca^se rendered. If by his last words (...) intends the information of the Court
there he is in the right this age can (...) to him, that (...) (...) not been
always faithful; But if he do intend his great (...) the Parliament, there he
(...) (...), and (...) against common judgment and understanding, for that no
age is able to w^tnesse any unfaithfulnes or (...) in a Parliament, I, but he
(...), (...) (...) (...) (...) to their King, and a (...) (...) of his (...),
yet (...) of (...) (...) them, (...) (...) (...) of their own (...), (...)
are (...) in all (...) (...) to express their (...) of (...) (...). And why
so* pray (...) his reason, For (says he) they must (...) to suffer (...)
those (...), (...) (...) (...) (...), (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) hoped for
in a (...) divided in it (...)? This (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) a fire
in (...) (...) (...), which would (...) (...) out in (...) (...) (...), (...)
(...) the (...) of the (...) by (...) (...): For it cannot be (...), (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...), (...) (...) (...) (...), to (...) (...) or
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) to (...)* (...). Very tragically
(...), though without any (...) of (...), I (...) that if (...) Author (...),
but to make a (...), he will easily inform himself (...) that it is very
(...) to have great (...) of State of (...) (...) (...), and it will be very
difficult to (...) men (...) (...) to (...) (...). But if (...) (...) (...),
and that dan^ incurred to by (...) of such a power to the Parliament, (...)
since there can be no absolute (...) or (...) on this side heaven, but that all
humane inventions, whether of law, or whatever else will retain or contract
(either more or less) some mixture or tincture of ill in them. Why then s^uld
(...) (...) a (...) benefit, for a possible inconvenience? or reject the
unquestionable commodum, for ^are of a casual incommodum, the bread that a man
does now eat, may choke him, and his house that he now lives in falls upon his
head; shall he therefore deny himself the certain nutriment of the one, or the
secure habitation of the other? for fear of these visible dangers? twere
phanatick and rediculous. By this r^le a man should (...) and decl^ne all
terrene and sublunary happiness whatsoever, for that there is not so (...) and
(...) condition, that is not subject to a possible pollution and corruption.
Now I b^lieve it does fully appear that the Law of that Remonstrance laid down
by his Majesti by way of (...), in seven positions, is just and without
offense, ^eing such as will bring unquestionable happiness both to Church and
(...), not denying our obedience to the King, (...) our (...) and faithful
service to God.

1 That the Parliament has an absolute and (...) power of declaring Law.

This power must rest in (...) or in the king, or in (...) (...) Courts, or
(...) all suite must be Obs.
endless, and it can no where rest more safely than in Parliament.

(...) two Houses are not the Parliament, The subject of such power is the
entire body, which consists Ans.
of three estates.

If deserted by the King they are, otherwise not. I, but he says, some things
are clear and evident Rep.
in law, and want (...), if otherwise, all (...) subjects (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) of the Judge Very just, and some things are dubious in law and want
(...) (...) (such is the case between the King and Parliament) and this must
rest upon the breast of the (...), which in this case is the Parliament. I but
h^ says, If the Houses should vote you^ger brothers ought to (...) by the law
of England, could this (...) the (...) of the first (...)? A (...) (...); but
most easily answered and resolved. It is very manifest it could not, for (...)
this is a case which is evident and clear, and here the law may be its own
judge, and needs no other interpreter or declarer. Besides this is a destroying
or repealing of the old law, and an int^oduction of a new, which cannot be
done, without the three esta^es. But they may declare what the common law of
the land is, without the King, which is only a passing sen^ence, upon the (...)
and reasoning of a new case, by the old law, so that the Judges are guided by
this rule of law, (...) eadem ratio, ibi idem (...), where there is the same
reason, there ought to be the same law; pray observe, and this will correct
your mistake; though the case be new, (...) if it may be brought to the (...)
of the old law) it is idem jus, not (...), the same, no new law. The truth of it
is, that law is but a more pure and (...) reason, and as reason is always one
and the same; so of necessity must the law be.

That the Parliament are bound (...) no Presidents Statute are not binding
(...) them, why then Obs.
should Presidents? Yet there is no (...) (...) than the (...) and (...) of
(...).

This is an excellent ground to justify their own innoc^ncy against all the
world. For if they can Ans.
make it appear they are not bound ^o keep (...) law, no (...) can accuse
(...) for the breach of any.

Our Author thinks he has here got a strong hold and advantage against us. Why
we shall allow Rep.
(as without (...) the Law is) that (...) are binding to the two Houses of
Parliament, as well as others, till repealed; But does this any way disprove
(...) position, that they are not bound to Presidents? You know what they say
(who are best acquainted with the bounds and (...) of their own power) some
Presidents are not to be followed, (...) being not (...), and all may fall
short, and be different from the (...) case and condition of things, and
therefore it is no reason that they should be bounds to the proceedings of a
Parliament. 3. That they are Parliaments and may Obse^.
judge of public necessity without the King, and dispose of any thing.

They may not (...) the King, but being (...) by the King, when the Kingdom is
in (...) Ans.
they may judge of that (...), and (...) it, and are to be (...) (...) (...)
(...) of (...), as the whole body of the (...). To (...), (...) he has
granted, (...) (...) in reason be d si ed. is Rep.
not to (...) the (...). (...), but then by the rule of contraries, to dissent,
(...) he has granted whatever might in reason be (...), is a (...) of the
Houses; and this you do (...) allow. Why now the only judge in this case of
reasonable or (...) demands, is the Parliament, and they have adjudged their
request (...), wherefore it is your duty and mine ((...) we will oppose our
judgments to theirs, which will be extreme arrogance) to believe they are so:
however what their awefull authority will not do, their reason ought. But he
says; upon pretense of distress, to tak^ illegal courses, is as if they
should persuade us we are not in (...), and therefore they must break (...)
beads to forward our recovery. Right, but in case of apparent and imminent
danger (as now) if the great Physician of the commonwealth shall neglect his
patient, it may by all lawf^ll and legal courses (as it does now) endeavor
its own preservation. They represent the people to some purposes, not the King
to any, and therefore are but a part of the State. Very true, if the King do
not desert them, but if he do, then they represent the whole State.

4. That no member of Parliament, ought to be troubled for treason etc. without
leave.

This is intended of suspicions only, and when leave cannot s^asonably be ^ad,
and when Competent Obs.
accuse appear not ^n the impeachment.

If by suspicions, be meant only a bare not confiding in, this injustce cannot
be sufficient ground. (...).


No; nor if by suspicions is meant, a laboring for an Arbitrary power, for
which there is no ground, and of which the whole Parliament must needs be
equally guilty, this is as insufficient ^ cause of impeachment as the other.
But upon Articles drawn, and proofs in readiness, which it is not fit to
produce, while the accused parties are at liberty, they may be meddled with.
True if competent (...) appear in the impeachment, then they may be arrested
and detained to appear before the Parliament; but there ought to be no other
pros^cution, in any other Court or way than in Parliament, whereby they may be
deprived of a member, without their consent. I, but says, he, if the Houses
being adjourned, were not able to give consent; or upon too much confidence,
should not be willing has not the law provided in such a case for trial of
treason? For the first; no doubt, where they are not able to give consent,
there they have not power to dissent. And for the latter if upon hearing of the
cause, the accusers appear to be competent, and the cause of impeachment
legal and just; twere to much presumption and confidence in us, for to believe
them so confident, as not to be willing, to give way for a legal trial.

5. That the Sove^aigne power resides in both Houses of Parliament, the King
having no Negative voice.

This power is not claymed as ordinary, nor to any purpose; but to save the
Kingdom from ruin, in Obs
case where the King is so seduced, and that he preserres dangerous men, and
prosecu^s his loyal Subjects.

Not as ordinary; that is, they will only be Kings as long as they please, and
when they are weary of Ans.
(...) the kingdom shall be out of danger, and then it shall be his turn to
command again.

The Author might have spoken truth in better and more honorable language both
to King Rep.
and Parliament, if he had pleased. That is, they will, as of right they ought,
represent the whole State, the King deserting of them, so that, they may be
enabled to preserve the kingdom from ruin, and when that shall be out of
danger, then shall his Majesty freely enjoy his negative, according to law and
right. To save it from ruin; the law has better provided for the peoples
safety, by prohibit^ng all illegal executions of power, grounded upon what
specious, pretenses soever, (...). As illegal executions of power (such as the
Commission of Array) are not to be justified. So legal (such as the Militia)
are not to be condenmed. And in case where the King is seduced, that is, when
^e is not so wise as he should be, because he does not think as they do, and
refuses to satisfy the humors and interests of some. I dare not say that the
King is not so wise as he should be, No; such irreverend dialects I leave to
the Author. But this I may say, had not his Majesty waived the fa^full advise
of his Parliament (who seek nothing but the peace and happiness of him and his
people) and satisfied the humors and interests of others (who aim at nothing
more than the ruin of both) these s^d disasters had not fallen upon us. And
preferres ( this seems to be the cause of all; preferments do no^ go the
right way) true for none but Commissioners of Array, do now hap preferments)
dangerous men; that is, such as desire he should govern according to the known
laws of the land. were we before the Parliament governed according to the
known laws of the land? they are the same men that still labor to defend the
same rule and power. And prosecu^es his loyall^ Subjects; that is, is driven
from London to York; where be long time patiently expected the undeceiving of
the people. No, he pa^ed from London, or if you please (that I may speak
truth,) was seduced by malignant Counsel, to make so unhappy a change; And I
wish from my very soul that his sacred person were not more deceived by such,
than his people are by the Parliament.

6. That leavying of forces against the personal commands of the King (though
accompanied with his presence) is not levying war against the King: but war
against his authority, though not person, is war against the King.

If this were no^ so the Parliament seeing a seduced King, ruining himself and
the Kingdom Ol^.
could not save both, but must stand, and look on.

It is against common sense to sancy a King ruining himself and kingdom, he
can neither be willing Ans.
not able.

It Is not to be presumed that a King rightly informed will, but a King seduced
may; and upon Rep.
^reacherous and unworthy advise, for reign aid will not be wanting to do
that, which dom^stick cannot.

7. That according to some Parliaments they may depose Kings.

It Is denied that any King was deposed by a free Parliament (...) elected. Obs.


This is m^st (...), but takes not off those words upon which this proposition
is grounded. Ans.


But it does, with any fair and candid reading and interpretation: For when
the Parliament Rep.
says, that all Presidents ought not to be rules for them to be regulated by;
this position must necessarily intend those of deposing Kings; for that the
presidents of forced Parliaments ought not to be followed.

These might well have been omitted, as being more fully handled in the book,
But least he should complain any thing was past over, I chose by a short
review to be his remembrancer.

FINIS

