A Funeral Sermon PREACHED Upon the Death of the Reverend and GODLY DIVINE, Mr.
FRANCIS HOLCROFT, Late Pastor of a Congregational Church IN Cambridgeshire. Who
Deceased Jan. 6. 1691/2. Aged 63.

By T. M. Preacher of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for William Marshall, and Sold at the Bible in Newgate-Street.
1692. Where are to be had Mr. Holcroft's Elegy.

An Epistle to the Christian Readers.
THIS Province of Preaching at the Funerals of our much Reverend Brother Mr.
Francis Holcroft Deceased, was by Divine Lot devolved upon our Worthy Brother
Mr. Milway, Pastor of a Church of Christ in Bury in Suffolk: Who
(notwithstanding the rude insoleney of the absurd Scholars disturbing the whole
Assembly at that time, and therein highly affronting the present Generous
Government) was much assisted by the Lord, and performed it (by his Grace) with
great Majestic boldness and gravity, to their confusion of face, and our
expected satisfaction: The Sermon now Printed, we recommend to you as very
nervous, and much adapted to the occasion; it was to us in the hearing of it as
a very lovely Song of one that had a pleasant voice, Ezekiel. 33.32.
and could play well on an Instrument: What was said in praise of the Person,
was but a just debt, and the payment was rather under than over. Read the
Sermon, and may it be as sweet and profitable to you in reading, as to us in
hearing. One of our Prophets, and that none of the Minor Prophets, but to us a
great one in Israel, is dead, as to his Body, yet lives in his spirit in Glory.
May his words of Doctrine, Counsel, Conduct, Comfort, which already have taken
bold on the hearts of many in Cambridgeshire, and many other places, abide and
produce much fruit. Knowing assuredly, that his words of threatening which he
denounced, will overtake the scorners that ridiculed the Saints at his
Funerals, contradicting and blaspheming: And like as the Lord thought to do
unto them according to their ways and doings, Zech. 1.4, 6.
so will he deal with them, if they do not hear and hearken to the Lord, and
turn from their evil ways and doings. May the Prophets that survive, attain in
their Ministry to the height of this excellent person, who as to Gifts, as Saul
for stature among his Brethren, 1 Samuel 10.23
taller by the head and shoulders was, and to us in our day one of David's
Chieftains and mighty Warriers by the sword of the Spirit, the Word of God;
doing great and good execution. We question not but great is his reward in
Heaven, yet a reward of Grace; he sits now (and will sit both in Soul and Body)
in a high place in Glory. This Teacher shall shine as the Stars, Dan. 12.3.
and as the brightness of the Firmament, having turned many not only from sin,
but unto righteousness (i. e.) justified them, by turning them to the imputed
righteousness of Christ; a Doctrine much despised by many of the Prophets of
our Age. In fine, it pleased the Lord, that after this our small Apostle had in
the body been frequently wrapped up into Heaven in our view in Prayer and
Preaching; or rather Heaven descending into him, and upon him, in high
communion and enjoyments of God, in which he had such Illuminations, that he
was not able to utter and express; 2 Cor. 12.9, etc.
It pleased God, lest he should be exalted above measure, through the abundance
of these discoveries, that a messenger of Satan should be sent to buffet him;
and though the Lord was besought abundantly by himself, and many others; yet
would not the Lord cause it wholly to depart: He gives not account of any of
his matters, he is Sovereign Lord of all; is in one mind, who can turn does
whatever he will in Heaven and Earth, and laughs at the trial of the innocent.
Job 33.13. Job 23.13. Job 9.23.
Yet before his death, and in his dying, the Grace of God was sufficiently
manifested to him, and we may make use of that Notion some had of the death of
Moses, viz. when it is written, Deuteronomy. 34.5. That Moses died in the land of Moab
according to the word of the Lord. Deuteronomy. 34.5.
(...) Or by or upon the mouth of the Lord. That Jehovah kissed Moses when he
died, as the Mother takes the sleeping child into bed, her cheek by the Child's
cheek in her tender embraces; so may we say of this our Brother Francis,
Jehovah kissed him with the kisses of his mouth, at his departure out of this
world, Cant. 1.2.
having given him a praelibation of glory in his spirit, and he now both Soul
and Body recumbs in the everlasting arms and bosom of Infinite Love.

THOMAS TAILOR. JOSEPH HUSSY.


EPITAPH.
ENtomb his Body, consecrated dust,
Until the Resurrection of the just.
It was a temple full of the Holy Ghost,
In which the Lord did dwell, the Lord of Host.
Entomb't with highest greatest stately Glory;
And get some Fox, some Clerk to write his Story
Anoint his Hearse with sweet Perfumes of Fame:
Has any left behind more fragrant Name!
When Christ shall come with Troops of Cherubims;
And with this Glittering Winged Seraphims,
He Will raise this Temple one of the first you will see.
And the second Temple shall more Glorious be
Than was the first, in that Christ's Person will
Be present with him, and him richly fill.
WILL. HAWORTH. A Funeral Sermon.
ZECH. I. 5, 6. Your fathers, where are they? and the prophets, do they live
forever? But my words and my statutes which I commanded my servants, the
prophets, did they not take hold of your fathers? and they returned, and said,
Like as the Lord of hosts thought to do unto us, according to our ways, and
according to our doings, so has he dealt with us.


YOUR fathers, where are they? and the prophets, do they live for ever?] After
the return of this People out of the Babylonish Captivity, (that Pit in which
was no Water, in the 9th Chapter) out of which they were brought by the Blood
of the Covenant) God raised up two Prophets, Haggai, and this Zechary, to stir
them up to Build the Temple of the Lord, and to settle his Worship therein; the
Province of this Zechary was in God's Name to call the People to return to God,
Verse 3. Therefore say thou unto them, Thus says the Lord of hosts; Turn ye
unto me, says the Lord of hosts, and I will turn unto you, says the Lord of
hosts. A very great Allective and Inducement to return to him, for he will be
reconciled. The Favor of God is better than Life. And, Thus says the Lord of
hosts, Thus says the Lord of hosts, Thus says the Lord of hosts, Return; it
is the Call of that God that can arm all in Heaven and Earth against you. One
great obstacle to Conversion, is our Imitation of our Fathers. It is very
common with Persons to speak of the Dignity of their Progenitors, and yet to
imitate them in their Sins. Be ye not as your Fathers, (Verse 4.) to whom the
former prophets cried. So in the New Testament, Hebr. 3.7. To day if you will
hear his voice, harden not your hearts as your fathers did in the day of
temptation, although they saw my works, (so we should read it.) Although they saw his
works, yet they provoked him. Be ye not as your fathers, unto whom the former
prophets have cried, saying, Thus says the Lord of hosts, Turn ye now from
your evil ways, and from your evil doings; but they did not hear, nor hearken
unto me, says the Lord.

The Words, the 5th and 6th Verses, some apprehend are brought in by way of
Dialogue. God speaking by the Prophet to the People, Where are your fathers?
They are not; their Carcasses fell in the Wilderness, and they died under the
Displeasure of God in the Captivity. In the second Verse, The Lord has been
sore displeased with your fathers. Where are your fathers? Numb. 32.
Has not Moses said in another Case, You are risen up in your Fathers stead, a
Generation worse than them. They do as it were retort it upon God, And where
are the Prophets, do they live for ever? Our Fathers indeed are dead, but yet
God does not keep his Prophets alive. But says God, Tho they dye, my Word
lives, and shall have its effect, and certain accomplishment.

There are two or three things in the Words.

I. A Concession, that God's Prophets do not live for ever. The Prophets, do
they live for ever?] They are mortal Men, corruptible. So that in this case, I
may say, as in Hebr. 7.23. (...)
They truly (the priests) were many, because they were not suffered to continue
by reason of death. They were prohibited to go on in the discharge of their
Office; Death superseded them. So the Prophets of God, they were not suffered
to continue by reason of Death. Aaron was a great Man, employed of God in the
Priesthood; but ( Numb. 20.25, 26) says God to Moses, Let Aaron go up to mount
Hor, and there let him dye. A while after, the same Fate took hold on Moses,
Deuteronomy. 32.49. Get thee up into this mount, -- and dye in the mount whither thou
go up, -- as Aaron thy Brother died in Mount Hor. Yet this Moses, it is said
of him, Chap. 34.10. There arose not a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses.
If you would outdo him, turn your Eye upon Christ. There arose not a Prophet
in Israel like him. And yet both he and his Brother Aaron died under some
displeasure of God, Deuteronomy. 32.51. Because ye trespassed against me at the waters
of Meribah; -- because ye sanctified me not in the midst of the children of
Israel.

The Prophets, do they live for ever?] It Is well that they die their fair
Death. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets! how often would I
have gathered your children, and ye would not. -- Some wrest this Scripture for
the maintenance of Arminianism; but if you observe it, the Text is a plain
Text, How often would I have gathered your children, and you would not; you
Jerusalem, you great Men. I believe it has been some complaint of Jesus Christ
against this Land. And sometimes the Difficulties that attend the Service of
God's Prophets make them covet Death, 1 Kings 19. When Jezabel swear by her
Gods, that she would have the Life of Elijah, he said, Lord, let me die. He was
a Man of like Passions with us, and we with him.

II. Tho the Prophets die, and do not live for ever, yet the Word of God does
not die; the Word of God lives and abides for ever. But my word and my
statutes, which I commanded my servants, did they not take hold of your
fathers? The Prophets die, but my Word lives, faith God, and has strength, and
can apprehend you, and slay you; thou have slain them with the Word of thy
Mouth. The Apostle says, The word of the Lord is not bound; the Ministers of
it are bound; but the Word of the Lord is not bound. The Prophets die, but the
Word of the Lord retains it strength and force. Did not my words take hold on
your Fathers? The Hebrew, (...) attigit, apprehendit. Is to overtake, and
catch, as Huntsmen the Prey, or one Enemy another in flight.
Hebrew, (...). Did they not find them out? Your Sins will find you out, and so
will God's word find you out; and the Word of God pursues you at the heels, and
lays hold on you. If you do not lay hold on God's strength, and make Peace with
him, there will be a hand stretched out to apprehend you, Psalm. 40.12. where the
word is.

Did not my words take hold on your Fathers?] The Prophets die, 1 King. 13.
There came a man of God out of Judah by the word of the Lord unto Bethel; --
and cried against the Altar in the word of the Lord, and said, O Altar, Altar,
thus says the Lord, Behold a child shall be born unto the House of David,
Josiah by name, and upon thee shall he offer the Priests of the high places,
etc. Notwithstanding this Prophet was killed before he got home, the word of
God lived and took place, and took hold on him, 2 King. 23.17. Says Josiah,
Josiah by name, (God can name a man 300 years before he raises him up) says
he, What Title is this that I see? And the men of the City told him, It is the
Sepulcher of the Man of God which came from Judah, and proclaimed these things
which thou have done against the Altar of Bethel. The Word of God lives, and
has an Infallible accomplishment.

III. The Lord does extort an acknowledgment of this; (Though the Prophets die,
yet my words live and are quick and powerful, they take hold on men.) An
Acknowledgment of it: And they returned and said, Like as the Lord of Hosts
thought to do unto us according to our ways, and according to our doings, Josh.
23.14, 15.
so has he dealt with us. God will magnify his Word, 1 Samuel 2.30.
and assert the honor and reputation of his Prophets.

Now that that I would teach you, is, Observe.
Though the Prophets of God die, though the Ministers of Christ do not live for
ever, yet the Word of God dispensed by them lives, and will have its certain
infallible accomplishment, upon Nations, Churches and Persons.

Those that God calls to, and makes use of in the Ministry about Holy things,
they differ in their Gifts, in their Graces, in their Judgments, sometimes in
their service and usefulness in the Church of God* but they all agree here,
they die as others do. Ye build the Tombs of the Prophets: (The Prophets have
their Tombs, and Righteous men their Sepulchers) says Christ, Matthew. 23.
Ye build and garnish them; (and there is a Generation of men that love God's
Prophets best when when they are dead) And ye are the children of them which
killed the Prophets; that is, ye imitate them, Jer. 11.19. They devised devices
against me, saying, Let us destroy the Tree with the Fruit thereof. It is in
the Margent, Let us destroy the staff with the bread; the Prophets, the
Ministers of God bring the Bread of Life to you. Let us destroy the staff with
the bread. (Hebr. Pane) ( Perdamus culmum cum grano ejus, as Junius renders
it:) We render it, Let us destroy the Tree with the Fruit. The meaning is this,
Let us kill the Prophet, and there is an end of his Prophecy. But they were
mistaken; when they had done that, God will make his Word to take place.

There are two things I would open to you: 1. That the Prophets of God do not
live for ever; we are all sensible of it. The Lord teaches us it this day; The
Prophets do not live for ever. But, (2.) Though they do not live, yet the Word
of God lives, and will have its effect upon men for good or for evil.


(1.) The Prophets do they live for ever?] Consider two or three things.

1. The Prophets of God are subject to the same Law that others are. There is a
Stature-Law that is not reversed, and there are so few I think is never
transgressed: -- There have been some few exceptions; but it will not be
repealed till Christ has swallowed up Death in Victory. The Prophets of God
and Righteous men are obnoxious to it as well as others. Heb. 9.27. And as it
is appointed to men (...) to die, and after this the judgment. It is appointed,
(Gr. (...), it is decreed.) It is decreed to all, it is enacted, and the
Prophets have no exemption. Yea, that Man Christ Jesus the Mediator and great
High Priest, He was under this Law: He was made under the Law: He was to die:
And by one offering for ever perfected them that are dedicated to God. It is
appointed to all men once to die; and to die penally, by the force of that
threatening, Genesis 2* 17. In the day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die.
Christ died Penally, He was made a curse; and his dying so, has delivered
some, that they shall not die Penally. But to die Naturally, that continues to
all; to the Prophets, and them that fear him, as well as others, Romans 8.10. If
Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is life
because of righteousness. If Christ be in you, though there be that happy
union, yet he lets the Body be arrested by Death, the Body is dead: Believers
Bodies, the Bodies of his Ministers, of his Prophets are dead; that is,
Obnoxious to Death. I think it has reference to the second verse: The law of
the spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me free from the law of sin and
death. How from the law of sin, he had showed before; here he come to show how
from the law of Death. The Body is dead, and that is by sin. Sin brought in
death. Adam had not died if he had not sinned; and there being the relics of
sin, Sin that dwells in Believers themselves, the vitiosity and corruption of
nature, something of sin found in them, they must die; there is no help, we must
die. The spirit (I think it is the soul) is life, and capable of living with God
in a separate state, and shall be in the fruition of God; and the Body shall at
length be joined with it. And as a pledge of it this is added, The spirit is
life because of righteousness. What God does in sanctifying of his own here, is
a pledge to them that their whole man shall live with him hereafter.

2. The Prophets, do they live for ever?] They are Stewards, Ambassadors,
Laborers; and so Christ will not have them live for ever.

They shall have their Reward. They shall come and tell what is the issue of
their performing their Embassy in the world; What reception they had; How they
were used.

1. We are Stewards of the Mystery and manifold Grace of God; 1 Cor. 4.1, 2.
and Wisdom and Faithfulness are required in a Steward. A Steward should be
Wise and Faithful; the Lord make us so, who have a Stewardship from him. We
must give an account of our Stewardship, and you to whom we give a portion of
meat in due season, should take some care that we give up our accounts with
joy, and not with grief. Christ will call his Stewards to account; they must
tell what they have done with their Talents, how they have improved and gained.

2. They are Ambassadors also; 2 Cor. 5.19. (...), placed, or deposited in us.
they have the word of Reconciliation committed to them; they have it in them;
and they treat with you about the highest concerns. We pray you be ye
reconciled to God: We pray you in Christ's stead; if he had not other work to
do in Heaven, he would come and Preach to you himself; but we do it in his
stead. Now is it not your advantage to be friends with God? But we must go back
and give an account what reception we have had in the world. Ambassadors will
be called home, they will not always lie Lieger here below.

3. I might show you this also for Laborers; the day declines: 1 Cor. 3.9.
(...). Co-workers. God makes use of their labor.
and a man that has wrought hard all the heat of the day, is willing to go to
rest. A servant earnestly desires the shadow, Job 7.2. And the sleep of the
laboring man is sweet to him.

3. The Prophets do they live for ever?] Jesus Christ has Rewards for them,
small and great, Rev. 11. The time is come -- that thou should give reward
to thy servants the Prophets, and to the Saints, and them that fear thy name,
small and great, etc. which is sometimes the only relief and support we have,
when we cry out, We have labored in vain, Isa. 49 4. (...) humidum radicale.
and spent our strength for naught: The radical moisture is dried up; the
Bellows are burnt; we have no lungs to speak more to you. Well, Christ has
rewards for his Prophets and Servants in Heaven, Great is your reward in
Heaven. There Is no getting to Heaven without dying. It may be you would be
willing to be fetched in Chariots of fire, but that is not every man's lot. We
have our work to do. Jesus Christ was his Father's servant, an extraordinary
one, to do extraordinary work; he finished it, and glorified God on earth, and
then God glorified him with himself. Thus it is with Christ's servants; they
have their work to do, they are to finish it, and to glorify God here below,
and then God gathers them up, and rewards them; they have their reward; their
works follow them. They die in the Lord, and cease from their labor, and their
works follow them, ( Rev. 14.) in the Reward of them.

4. The Prophets die; and God will thereby chastise an ungrateful world, and
punish the barrenness of them that have enjoyed their Ministry. You had need
fear and tremble before him, lest he do so by you. When the Vineyard is barren,
God will either take away the hedge, and fling it up to be a prey to the beasts
of the wood; else he will take away the dresser; he shall no more dig and prune
it, no more labor shall be spent upon it, no more cost and pains shall be
taken with it. Says God, the rain came often upon it, and it brought forth
briars and thorns; such are nigh unto cursing, and their end is to be burnt.

The Prophets live not for ever.] God will teach you by it, that your season
will not always last. Know your time, as Christ said, Job. 12.35. Yet a little
while is the light with you: Walk while ye have the light, lest darkness come
upon you; For he that walks in darkness knows not whither he goes. (The
next step may be Hell.) While ye have the light, believe in the light, that ye
may be the children of light.

But I will go off that, and give a little account of the second, and so come
to the Use.

(2.) Though the Prophets live not for ever, yet the Word of God lives. Do but
consider a little:

1. The Prophets of God use to come with their Menaces, the threatening part of
God's Word; and though the threatening you think is always Conditional, and
leaves space for Repentance; (this made the Prophet Jonah refuse to go on his
Errand: I knew, says he, that thou art a gracious God, and merciful, slow to
anger, and of great kindness, and would repent thee of the evil; and so I
should have my Reputation stained: Go and preach to Niniveh, and say, Yet forty
days and Niniveh shall be destroyed; and then God repent: They will say,
There Is a lying Prophet.) Yet let me tell you, when God denounces his
Judgments, sometimes he puts his Oath to the Threatening, swears to the matter,
and then it is irreversible. As I live, says the Lord, my heart cannot be
toward this people.

And as the Ministry of the Prophets had a Minatory part, so truly the Gospel
has Threatenings, most severe ones. Mark 16.16. He that believes, and is
haptized, shall be saved; and he that believes not shall be damned. Words that
came out of the gracious mouth of the Son of God. Hebr. 2.3. How shall we
escape if we neglect so great Salvation? There Is no escaping Damnation. The
Word of God lives. The very Threatening lives. Though the prophets die, God will
take care to make good his threatening; be sure he will do it, when he swears in
wrath we shall never enter into his rest.

2. The Word of God abides too, as it comprizeth the Promises, which are a
declaration of God's Grace and good will toward men. This was part of the
Prophets Office, to publish the Promise, Luke 1.69. He has raised up an Horn
of Salvation for us, as he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets since the
world began, to perform the mercy promised to our Fathers, etc. So the Apostle
Peter, says he, The spirit of God spoke by the Prophets concerning Christ, his
Sufferings, and the Glory that should follow. So the Ministers of the New
Testament, O how they love to Preach the New Covenant, and all the Promises for
the relief of distressed sinners! It is the most pleasing part of their work, 2
Cor. 1.20. For all the Promises of God in him (in Christ) are yea, and in him
Amen, to the Glory of God by us. God glorifies himself by us; God glorifies his
faithfulness in performing his Promises by our Ministry. The Promise lives; for
God lives whose the Promise is: He cannot lie, nor cannot change. He shows by
it the Immutability of his Counsel, that the heirs of Salvation may have strong
consolation.

God's Prophets and Ministers they die; but the Word dispensed by them, that
lives; it has its fulfillment. Our work is to declare the whole counsel of God
to you that concerns your Salvation; and God does cause his Prophets to stand
in his Covenant, and the secrets of God are with them. Says the Apostle, Acts
20. I have not shunned to declare to you the whole counsel of God, and have
kept back nothing that was profitable for you, Preaching Repentance toward
God, and Faith toward the Lord Jesus. -- His Counsel shall stand. You shall
see my face no more, says he to them, verse 38. But this whole Counsel of God,
which I have declared, shall be fulfilled; and there is no Person, no Churches
that do reject the Counsel of God, but it is against themselves, i. e. to their
own ruin, Luke 7.30.

The Word of God lives; the Prophets dye, but the Word of God lives. The Word
of God dispensed by us, is as seed sown, though it seem to dye under the Clods,
yet it will live again; the Lord gives it a Body, or rather a Spirit. And so l
Peter 1.23. -- Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible;
by the word of God which lives and abides for ever. In all Productions there
is some Seed out of which the Creature is brought forth, so it is in the new
Creature. -- Born of the incorruptible seed, the word which we Preach to you;
and this Word lives and abides for ever; and if it be turned into a vital
Principle in your Souls, that will abide too; it will be the Seed of God that
remains. And though in our sowing we go forth with precious Seed, we wish it
might alike prosper; but we do not always meet with good Ground; that which
falls into good Ground, by the blessing of God brings forth Fruit, some more,
and some less. The Word of God lives, the Prophets dye, the Ministers of Christ
dye; but their Word lives and will take place.

Now I would make some Application.

The Prophets, do they live for ever?] No, they do not live for ever; they are
Mortal and Frail; they dye sooner than other Men; their Labors are great, and
that they do not live for ever, I would have you make these two or three Uses
of it.

1. Think with your selves, God's Prophets and Ministers dye. It becomes us to
have our hearts affected with it, to put our hearts to this matter, Isaiah
57.1. The righteous perish, (...) to perish here, is to dye; he is taken away,
(...) In unum collegere. He is gathered to his Fathers, and no Man, (...)
Ponens super Cor. 1. qui caret Schindler.
and no man lays it to heart. The Lord will take notice how you are affected
this day for this Prophet. The righteous perish, and no man lays it to heart,
and merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken
away from the evil to come; he shall enter into peace. Blessed be God for that
Admission into Peace, God has given his Servant. He shall enter into peace,
they shall rest in there beds; ( -- the Grave is a cold Bed; but really ever
since Christ lodged in it, it is so perfumed, that we need not be afraid to lie
down and sleep) each one walking in his uprightness. But, says he, The
righteous perish, (it is Dying, Lord we perish, says the Disciples) and no man
lays it to heart. It is the Complaint of God, that we are not duly affected
when he causes a righteous Man to perish. Now, the dying of a Prophet is more
than the perishing of a righteous Man. He that gives to a Righteous Man a Cup
of Water in the Name of a Righteous Man, shall have a Righteous Man's reward.
And he that receives a Prophet in the Name of a Prophet, shall receive a
Prophets reward. Shall a Prophet dye, and, shall not we put our heart to it? O!
to think such a one is removed, who use to give us such Instruction, such
Reproof, such Consolation; to give Milk to Babes, and strong Meat to Men; that
had the Tongue of the Learned to speak a word in Season to them that are weary,
but now we shall hear him no more; nothing will drop from his Lips any more. He
is gone into his Bed, and as to any use he can be of, is perished. Let us lay
our hearts to it.

2. If the Prophets dye, and do not live, you that have enjoyed their Ministry,
Oh! how highly does it concern you to follow their Faith, observing the end of
their Conversation, Hebr. 13.7. Remember them that have the rule over you, who
have spoken to you the word of God: whose faith follow, considering the end of
their conversation. He speaks of them that had been guides to them, and had
spoken the word of God, but they were dead and gone; the Lord had removed them,
and gathered them up to himself; they have spoken to you the Word of God. Now,
says he, whose Faith follow. That glorious Gospel of the Blessed God that they
preached to you, that Faith follow, and imitate it, that your hearts may be
established in the true Grace of the Gospel. And remember, bear in mind, how
they used to live by Faith, and vigorously to act it upon the Son of God; do
you imitate it, follow the steps of their Faith; observing the end of their
Conversation ( Gr. (...).) The end of their Conversation; (...), Signifies an
end accompanied with deliverance from, and Conquest over Difficulties and
Dangers.
what God has brought them to; what issue and period God has put to them and
their days, observing the end of their Conversation. 1 Cor. 10.13. God makes a
way of escape out of temptation. God delivers them from all their Sins and
Sufferings; wipes all Tears from their Eyes; makes a good End with them. Mark
the perfect Man, and observe the Upright, the end of that Man is Peace. This is
your Duty.

And there is one thing more, and that is, When the Prophets dye, do you take
care that when the Prophets of God are admitted into the Kingdom of Heaven,
that you be not shut out. It will be a very great Aggravation, it will
aggrandize your Misery to enjoy such Prophesy, such Preaching, and then the
Prophets dye, and go to Heaven; when you come to dye, to go to another place,
Luke 13.28. There shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth, when you shall see
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets in the kingdom of heaven,
and you your selves thrust out. O think with your selves, what will be the
anguish of those that perish from under such a Ministry! What, shall I perish
now from under such a Ministry! That Is one Use: Have a care you be not thrust
out. The Prophets come and Preach the Kingdom of God to you; and having the Key
of Knowledge, they open the Door. Come, say they, enter the kingdom, take it by
violence. And it may be many will neither go in themselves, nor suffer others
to enter in. When the prophets go to heaven, have a care lest you should be
shut out.

Use (2.) Tho the Prophets dye, yet the Word of God lives. Remember that, God
will make you to remember it. And your Business is to enquire, what has been
the quickening and enlivening Verture and Power of the word upon your Souls. We
Preach the Gospel, and we are not ashamed of it, for it is the Power of God
unto Salvation to every one that believes. Has it been productive of such a
thing as Faith in your Souls, that purifies the heart, apprehends Christ, and
all that is in Christ? Has the word come with Life and Power to you, and
caused Life in your Souls? 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. Our Gospel, says he, came not in word
only, but in power, etc. Pray inquire into that.

And if the word of God lives, tho the Minister dye, then really it will be of
some effect or other to you all; either a savor of life unto life, 2 Cor.
2.14, 15, 16.
or of death unto death. Thanks be to God, that makes us to triumph. -- The
Gospel will be of some use when we are gone; either a savor of life unto life,
or of death unto death.

Nay, let me say this, Because the Word lives, tho the Prophets dye, the Word
of God will follow you to Judgment, and there will meet you when you come up
from the dead, and it may be God's Prophets will be a Cloud of Witnesses
against you. John 12.48. He that rejects me, and receives not my words,
there is one that judges him; the word that I have spoken, the same shall judge
him in the last day. The word lives till you come to Judgment, and then will
decide your Condition, Christ will do it according to the word.

Use (3.) One thing more, [The Prophets dye.] I will speak one thing for your
Comfort, and that is, Christ lives; Ministers dye, but Christ lives. He was
once dead, but he is alive, and lives for evermore. And he lives, as the great
Prophet raised up by God. As one said of the Prophets, Who is their Father? He
that is the Father of Eternity. (Isaiah 9.) He is alive. Hebr. 7.23. They were
not suffered to continue by reason of death. (...)
But this Man, because he has an unchangeable Priesthood, lives for ever. He
has an Office that does not pass from him to another. The Prophets dye,
Ministers dye; that that is the Spring of Consolation, is, Christ lives. He
lives to reward your Faith and Perseverance. You that have believed upon
hearing the word of Truth, the Gospel of Salvation, he lives to reward that
Faith, and your persevering in that Faith. Come! hold on in Faith, in Holiness,
in the Order and Fellowship of the Gospel, (that which this Servant of Christ
so much desired in his going off.) Christ lives to reward your Constancy,
Receiving the end of your faith, the salvation of your souls, 1 Peter 1.9.

And then, that he lives too, it is to give us more Prophets, to raise up more
Prophets for us, and to make some able Ministers of the New Testament, And
truly they are only of Christ's making. We have no sufficiency of our selves
for this Work. He gives Pastors and Teachers for the Work of the Ministry. He
is ascended for it. And I would, all that meddle with that Work, were of his
giving, Amos 2.11. I raised up of your sons for Prophets. (I raised them up.)
He is alive. He can raise up Prophets for you; he can raise up your Sons to be
Prophets.

I have now but a little more to say. As for our Honored and Beloved Brother
fallen asleep in Jesus. A great man is fallen in our Israel, a Prophet; yea
more than a Prophet; an able Minister of the New Testament. 2 Cor. 4.4, 6. (...)
Consider him as to his knowledge in the Mystery of Christ, and it was rich and
great. God had so divinely irradiated his Mind and Heart, by giving him the
knowledge of his Glory in the Face of Christ, that he was well able to Preach
the unsearchable Riches of Christ to the Gentiles; and to make all Men see what
is the Fellowship of this Mystery. You that knew him, understood his knowledge
in that Mystery. As to his way of Preaching, though it seemed less methodical,
yet truly when I have sometimes considered it, it has appeared to me (at
least): Apostolical, Primitive, and Divine. He knew, (...) So to speak as Acts
14. (...). That a great multitude believed; and his words being mostly those of
the Holy Ghost, they had a quick and penetrating Power and Efficacy with them.
So that in his Ministry, he was wont to commend himself to the conscience of
every one before God. His Bow abode in strength, 2 Cor. 4.2.
and his Hands were made strong by the Hands of the Mighty God of Jacob. His
Arrows sharp in the hearts of the Kings Enemies, whereby the People fell under
Christ.

As to the discharge of his Ministry, he was much in Labors, and
Indefatigable. If it might not be an Offense, I think I might almost say, He
labored more than us all. He was, (...), (1 Timothy 5.17.) and therefore has
Honor, double, honor, and that from above. He did (...), -- labor much, and
in many things, and not in vain. He did not labor in vain, nor spend his
strength for naught, for he had great success. Christ had chosen him to be a
Vessel to bear his Name; and he brought forth Fruit that remained, which shall
be his Joy and Crown of rejoicing in the day of Christ. In the House of God he
knew how to behave himself, and was faithful to him that appointed him; and
therefore had Honor. And though sometimes he might seem to have too much of
the Spirit and Power of Elias with him, yet it was tempered with the sweetness
and gentleness of the Gospel. His Affection to the House of God, was such, that
the Zeal of it eat him up: And there was no greater rejoicing to him, than to
see Persons walk according to the Constitution, Frame, and Order of Christ in
the New Testament. Nothing more afflicting, than to see any turn aside to
crooked Paths. As for his Conversation, it was holy, it was heavenly. His
(...), his Citizenship was in Heaven, Phil. 3.20.
from whence he looked for a Savior. So that the Character that is proper to a
Bishop of the New Testament, was found with him, 1 Timothy 3. He was blameless,
vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given to hospitality, apt to teach. His
Conversation was a continual teaching. Pray! do you observe the end of it? And
as for his Sufferings, they did nothing move him, (...), says the Apostle,
Acts 20.24. I make not a word of these things. Bonds and afflictions abide me
in every place; but none of these things move me. I do not make a word of them.
He was set for the Apology and Defense of the Gospel. And as in the Course of
his Ministry (I speak as one intimately acquainted with him) as in the Course
of his Ministry he had the spirit of Power, Love, and a sound Mind; so in his
Afflictions and Persecutions the spirit of God and Glory did rest upon him. To
sum up all, You that were inwardly acquainted with him, you fully knew his
Doctrine, a Tim. 3.10, 11. You have fully known his Doctrine, manner of life,
purpose, faith, long-suffering, charity, patience, persecution, afflictions:
But out of them all the Lord has delivered him.

But you will say, What was the reason of God's dark and severe dispensation
toward him in his latter days? Truly I am not in God's stead to give you an
account of his matters; the Lord does save men upon the point of Sovereign
Grace, and God does exercise the same dominion in his Providence; and sometimes
will laugh at the very trial of the Innocent. His ways and judgments even
toward his own are unsearchable and past finding out. Let us sanctify the
Lord God of Hosts in our hearts, and fear before him. Phil. 3.10. That I may
know the fellowship of his sufferings. The Apostle discerned that the
sufferings of Christ were attended with desertion and darkness. My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? And for a time that Man so dear to his Father, being
his Eternal Son, yet he had lost that joy and delectation which the fruition of
God, and the fullness of Grace was wont to afford him. It may be thus with his
Ministers, and if it be, they have but a fellowship with him in his sufferings.
But now blessed be God that the Sun brake out of the Cloud: God did not let him
die in the dark, but brought his soul to peace and rest; and to a rejoicing in
God's Eternal love to him. The Sun of Righteousness did arise before he gave up
the Ghost. The Sun of Righteousness did arise upon him with healing under his
wings; that gave him an abundant entrance into the Heavenly Kingdom. Christ
has showed all his dealings with him for several years, (not all springing
from a Divine hand, but natural causes as Hypocondria, etc.) yet he has showed
that they were such as were consistent with the Eternal Love of God, to make
him partaker of his Holiness; and Christ having loved him as his own, and loved
him to the end, (to Perfection) has loved him into Glory. There we leave him,
till the Blessed Glorious Resurrection.

VERSES upon the Death of the Reverend Brother Mr. FRANCIS HOLCROFT, Pastor of
the Church in Cambridgeshire; Who Died at Triplow in Cambridgeshire, on
January, 1691/2.
HE none of the Minor Prophets was, he is dead:
This Age saw not a better hearted-head.
Prophet die must, Zech. 1.5.
his Preaching that takes hold
Of thousand hearts; the fruit's a hundred fold:
Round all the Coasts of Cambridge where ye come,
Romans 15.19.
You Will hear of'sTrophies to Illyricum.
Satan in's seat sang with his Antic Chore,
Rev. 2.13.
To see the Funerals of the Conqueror:
Yet Cambridge know, as he said in his days,
Zech. 1.6.
God will deal with you according to your ways.
Ever lives this Prophet, Immortal spirit,
(If ever any) I would say there is merit.
So richly holy, and Angelick Saint,
Babies and Dwarfs we are all to this Giant.
Alas a Prince, a King, great General,
Highly Anointed's fallen in Israel.
He wore out's body in these holy Wars,
'Twas bruised, wounded, full of mortal sears;
O blessed Soldier! hardship did endure,
Behooved thy Brethren all, not Sine Cure,
And wholly spent thou was, and still did spend,
Until thy Humour-radical did end.
We saw's dead Body perfect Skelliton,
Like that which's tackt up by Chyrurgeon.
His house of Clay did crumble into mould,
His Heaven-born soul no longer dwell in it could:
A Glorious House made without hands on high,
Possessed he is of unto eternity. 2 Cor. 5.1. His Dying words. Deuteronomy. 34.1, 2,
3, 4.

In this like Moses had Mount Pisgah's Ken,
A clear and perfect Landscape of Canaan:
Unlike to Moses, he soon went to it,
When as to Moses the Lord would only show it.
What Rabbis said of Moses's verified,
God kissed Francis Holcroft, Deuteronomy. 34.5.
and he di'd.
As Mother the Child dandles upon her lap,
Her Cheek by'ts Cheek until it takes a nap.
He Is but a sleep, in the morning you will him see,
Heb. 12.23. Phil. 2.20. 2 Cor. 3.7.
In The Church of the first born where he loved to be.
O for such Preachers, Lord, send thou an host,
Trebly anointed with the Holy Ghost.
That Satan lightning he from Heaven be cast,
Luke 10.18. Zech 4.11, 12.
That Cambridge Candlestick in glory last:
With Golden Oil through Golden Pipes supplied,
With two anointed ones of the left right side,
From the Olive Tree the most Anointed one;
And let the Man the Branch build Temple on:
And let him bear the Glory, Zech. 6.12.
worthy he,
God's spotless Lamb slain for Iniquity.
Father why did thy noble Child of Light
In darkness walk? Isa. 50.10.
why cried so in the night,
So long, so often? why stood'st behind the wall?
Thou knew he would importunately call, Cant. 2.9.

And give no rest, but cry Father, Abba.
More instantly did never any pray.
How was his Note changed! he had midnight Song,
A Philomele, tho pricking Thorns among.
Jayl-birds, with Silas, in Cambridge Castle sings:
But in God's Prison his Lark-like warblings
Do cease, O Jehovah! righteous Sovereign!
To all thy Matters answers not again.
Why Job, why Jeremiah, Job 33.13.
curse their Birthday shine?
Highest Reason's Sovereign Will Divine.
O deepest Depths of wisest Providence!
Jonah in the Whales Belly, Jonah 2.1.
and prays from thence,
And was preserved, cast alive of the Shore:
O blessed be Christ, O blessed for evermore.
O blessed Martyr, beautiful to see;
Conformed to the Pattern in thy Agony
Before thy Death, in strong Cries and in Tears;
And thou was heard in thy believing Fears.
Cease now, O Lord, a while, let 'lone the rest,
We are sure, of Ministers, Heb. 5.7.
thou have the best.
Some Verses made upon the Death of the Eminent and Reverend Servant of Christ
in the Ministry of the Gospel, Mr. Francis Holcraft.
ALas the Chariots and the Horsemen's gone,
How can the War be longer carried on
Against Antichrist! Jesus! let us Mantle fall,
Of Power, of Zeal, of Gifts, of Graces, all
Which clothed him upon the Infantry:
O let Paul's Spirit rest on Timothy.
We saw him long ascending far above;
His Brethren thought still that he would remove
Out of our sight to Heaven, there to view
Jerusalem, Celestial City new,
Where he was free born; when he Preaches next,
How sweetly will he Comment on that Text!
Holcraft and Oddy, they neither could
The Evangelick Mysteries unfold,
Until commenced, they had took a Degree
In the Celestial University:
Both Learning, Piety, had been withstood,
But for a Commendamus in Christ's Blood.
Lord stay thine hand, and let alone the rest;
Thou have him now, I Am sure, which loved thee best.
Luther never di'd till now; glorious free Grace
Engraven was in's heart, in's head, in's face;
In broader, fairer, deeper Characters than can
Be found in any preaching, praying Man.
Pope sings Te Deum, Oxford and Cambridge Friends,
Blind Quakers Gifts unto each other sends.
Atheists make merry. Arminians Wills are free,
Holcraft no Tomb should have, but Calumny.
Darkness that can be felt, who can but fear,
While such a sparkling Star does disappear,
As Holcroft was, dazzling the envious Eye
Of spurious Christian, Grace's enemy.
Did we not know it of Rising Sun, a sign
When all the Stars in the Sky no longer shine.
O gracious Saint, how did thy Countenance shine?
Behold Mount Sinai's Preachers; great Divine.
Thy Feet were beautiful, I could have kissed
The Soles thereof, O sweet Evangelist!
How Glorious is that Sun of Righteousness,
Whose Rays reflected, makes a Saint no less
Than an Illustrious, Conquering, Princely King?
Such Holcraft was; Israel in wrestling;
Who ever did the Spirit of Faith more bold
In Prayer with God, than in this Man behold?
Such Liberty, such Life, such Light he had;
Weak ones offended, wicked says he is mad.
Lament you Ministers of Christ; he was
For Doctrine, Paul; for Comfort, Barnabas;
He was Apollos, so mighty in the Word;
He was a John for Love unto his Lord;
A Timothy, he naturally did care
For Truth, while others minded their Affair.
Boanarges in the Law, by dreadful Thunder,
Struck down his hearers, rent their hearts asunder.
He was a Moses, in the Mount did stay,
I never heard one at that rate to pray.
Some single Gifts in others may have been,
But Constellations were in Holcroft seen:
Perfections take from one, then from another,
They all did Center in this blessed Brother.
With what great Scripture plainness did he Preach?
With what Majestic boldness did he Teach?
He Giant-like came forth to run his Race,
Being firmly girt with Apostolic Grace.
He was made of God, a fenced Brazen Wall,
Strong to recieve the Gunshot great and small.
His Doctrines Christ, his Natures, Offices,
Faith in his Blood, and then right Holiness.
Cambridge, Christ lent him for a time to thee,
A Pattern for thy Preachers he should be.
Look on this Copy fairly writ, and mend
Your hands, then Christ your Lord will you commend.
O quit your selves like Men, be clothed with Zeal;
Concern your selves with Israel's Commonweal.
Be strong in power, in Love, in Gospel-word,
Cut every Man with that two-edged Sword.
Be bold as Lions, like this Man of God;
Dash them in pieces with that powerful Rod.
O! let his People know that joyful sound,
And in their heart and lives let it abound.
Which like to Aaron's Bells, did's feet surround
In every place where he did tread the ground:
This noise of Peace did to the Saints redound.
Holcroft of Preachers, for Faith, for Zeal the best;
I Will only say, he is Dead, and weep the rest.
FINIS.

