Paradise Lost. A POEM IN TWELVE BOOKS.

The Author JOHN MILTON.

The Second Edition Revised and Augmented by the same Author.

LONDON, Printed by S. Simmons next door to the Golden Lion in
Aldersgate Street, 1674.

IN Paradisum Amissam Summi Poetae JOHANNIS MILTONI.
QVilegis Amissam Paradisum, grandia magni
Carmina Miltoni, quid nisi cuncta legis*
Res cunctas, and cunctarum primordia rerum,
Et fata, and fines continet iste liber.
Intima panduntur magni penetralia mundi,
Scribitur and toto quicquid in Orb latet.
Terraeque, tractusque maris, coelumque profundum
Sulphureumque Erebi, stammivomumque specus.
Quaeque colunt terras, Portumque and Tartara caeca,
Quaeque colunt summi lucida regna Poli.
Et quodcunque ullis conclusum est finibus usquam,
Et sine fine Chaos, and sine fine Deus:
Et sine fine magis, si quid magis est sine fine,
In Christo erga homines conciliatus amor.
Haec qui speraret quis crederet esse futurum?
Et tamen haec hodie terra Britanna legit.
O quantos in bella Duces! quae protulit arma!
Quae canit, and quanta praelia dira tuba.
Coelestes acies! atque in certamine Coelum!
Et quae Coelestes pugna deceret agros!
Quantus in aetheriis tollit se Lucifer armis!
Atque ipso graditur vix Michaele minor!
Quantis, and quam funestis concurritur iris
Dum ferus hic stellas protegit, ille rapit!
Dum vulsos Montes ceu Tela reciproca torquent,
Et non mortali desuper igne pluunt:
Stat dubious cui se parti concedat Olympus,
Et metuit pugnae non superesse suae.
At simul in clis Messiae insignia fulgent,
Et currus animes, armaque digna Deo,
Horrendumque rotae strident, and soeva rotaruns
Erumpunt torvis fulgura luminibus,
Et flammae vibrant, and vera tonitrua rauco
Admistis flammis insonuere Polo:
Excidit attonitis men's omnis, and impetus omnis
Et cassis dextris irrita Telacadunt.
Ad poenas fugiunt, and ceu foret Orcus asylum
Infernis certant condere se tenebris.
Cedite Romani Scriptores, cedite Graii
Et quos fama recens vel celebravit anus.
Haec quicunque leget tantum cecinesse putabit
Maeonidem ranas, Virgilium culices.
S. B. M. D.

ON Paradise Lost.
WHen I beheld the Poet blind, yet bold,
In slender Book his vast Design unfold,
Messiah Crowned, Gods Reconciled Decree,
Rebelling Angels, the Forbidden Tree,
Heaven, Hell, Earth, Chaos, All; the Argument
Held me a while misdoubting his Intent,
That he would ruin (for I saw him strong)
The sacred Truths to Fable and old Song
(So Sampson groap'd the Temples Posts in spite)
The World o'rewhelming to revenge his sight.
Yet as I read, soon growing less severe,
I liked his Project, the success did fear;
Through that wide Field how he his way should find
Over which lame Faith leads Understanding blind;
Lest he perplexed the things he would explain,
And what was easy he should render vain.
Or if a Work so infinite he spann'd,
Jealous I was that some less skilful hand
(Such as disquiet always what is well,
And by ill imitating would excel)
Might hence presume the whole Creations day
To change in Scenes, and show it in a Play.
Pardon me, Mighty Poet, nor despise
My causeless, yet not impious, surmise.
But I am now convinced, and none will dare
Within thy Labors to pretend a share.
Thou have not missed one thought that could be fit,
And all that was improper do omit:
So that no room is here for Writers left,
But to detect their Ignorance or Theft.
That Majesty which through thy Work does Reign
Draws the Devout, deterring the Profane.
And things divine thou treatst of in such state
As them preserves, and thee, inviolate.
At once delight and horror on us seize,
Thou singst with so much gravity and ease;
And above humane flight do soar aloft
With Plume so strong, so equal, and so soft,
The Bird named from that Paradise you sing
So never flaggs, but always keeps on Wing.
Where could thou words of such a compass, find?
Whence furnish such a vast expense of mind?
Just Heaven thee like Tiresias to requite
Rewards with Prophecy thy loss of sight.
Well might thou scorn thy Readers to allure
With tinkling Rhyme, of thy own sense secure;
While the Town-Bayes writes all the while and spells*
And like a Pack-horse tires without his Bells:
Their Fancies like our Bushy-points appear,
The Poets tag them, we for fashion wear.
I too transported by the Mode offend,
And while I meant to Praise thee must Commend.
Thy Verse created like thy Theme sublime,
In Number, Weight, and Measure, needs not Rhyme*
A. M.

THE VERSE.
THE Measure is English Heroic Verse without Rhyme, as that of Homer in Greek,
and of Virgil in Latin; Rhyme being no necessary Adjunct or true Ornament of
Poem or good Verse, in longer Works especially, but the Invention of a
barbarous Age, to set off wretched matter and lame Meeter; graced indeed since
by the use of some famous modern Poets, carried away by Custom, but much to
their own vexation, hindrance, and constraint to express many things otherwise,
and for the most part worse then else they would have expressed them. Not without
cause therefore some both Italian and Spanish Poets of prime note have rejected
Rhyme both in longer and shorter Works, as have also long since our best English
Tragedies, as a thing of it self, to all judicious ears, triveal and of no true
musical delight; which consists only in apt Numbers, fit quantity of
Syllables, and the sense variously drawn out from one Verse into another, not
in the jingling sound of like endings, a fault avoided by the learned Ancients
both in Poetry and all good Oratory. This neglect then of Rhyme so little is to
be taken for a defect, though it may seem so perhaps to vulgar Readers, that it
rather is to be esteemed an example set, the first in English, of ancient
liberty recovered to Heroic Poem from the troublesome and modern bondage, of
Rimeing.

Paradise Lost.
BOOK I.
THE ARGUMENT.
This first Book proposes, first in brief, the whole Subject, Man's
disobedience, and the loss thereupon of Paradise wherein he was placed: Then
touches the prime cause of his fall, the Serpent, or rather Satan in the
Serpent; who revolting from God, and drawing to his side many Legions of
Angels, was by the command of God driven out of Heaven with all his Crew into
the great Deep. Which action past over, the Poem hasts into the midst of
things, presenting Satan with his Angels now fallen into Hell, described here,
not in the Center (for Heaven and Earth may be supposed as yet not made,
certainly not yet accursed) but in a place of utter darkness, fitliest called
Chaos: Here Satan with his Angels lying on the burning Lake, thunderstruck and
astonished, after a certain space recovers, as from confusion, calls up him who
next in Order and Dignity lay by him; they confer of their miserable fall* Satan
awakens all his Legions, who lay till then in the same manner confounded; They
rise, their Numbers, array of Battle, their chief Leaders named, according to the
Idols known afterward in Canaan and the Countries adjoining. To these Satan
directs his Speech, comforts them with hope yet of regaining Heaven, but tells
them lastly of a new World and new kind of Creature to be created, according to
an ancient Prophecy or report in Heaven; for that Angels were long before this
visible Creation, was the opinion of many ancient Fathers. To find out the
truth of this Prophecy, and what to determine thereon he refers to a full
Council. What his Associates thence attempt. Pandemonium the Place of Satan
rises, suddenly built out of the Deep: The infernal Peers there sit in Council.

OF Man's First Disobedience, and the Fruit
Of that Forbidden Tree, whose mortal taste
Brought Death into the World, and all our woe,
With loss of Eden, till one greater Man
Restore us, and regain the blissful Seat,
Sing Heavenly Muse, that on the secret top
Of Oreb, or of Sinai, did inspire
That Shepherd, who first taught the chosen Seed,
In the Beginning how the Heavens and Earth
Rose out of Chaos: Or if Sion Hill
Delight thee more, and Siloa's Brook that flowed
Fast by the Oracle of God; I thence
Invoke thy aid to my adventrous Song,
That with no middle flight intends to soar
Above the Aonian Mount, while it pursues
Things unattempted yet in Prose or Rhyme.
And chiefly Thou O Spirit, that do prefer
Before all Temples the upright heart and pure,
Instruct me, for Thou know; Thou from the first
Wast present, and with mighty wings outspread
Dove-like satst brooding on the vast Abyss
And made it pregnant: What in me is dark
Illumin, what is low raise and support;
That to the highth of this great-Argument
I may assert Eternal Providence,
And justify the ways of God to men.
Say first, for Heaven hides nothing from thy view
Nor the deep Tract of Hell, say first what cause
Moved our Grand Parents in that happy State,
Favored of Heaven so highly, to fall off
From their Creator, and transgress his Will
For one restraint, Lords of the World besides?
Who first seduced them to that foul revolt?
The infernal Serpent; he it was, whose guile
Stird up with Envy and Revenge, deceived
The Mother of Mankind, what time his Pride
Had cast him out from Heaven, with all his Host
Of Rebel Angels, by whose aid aspiring
To set himself in Glory above his Peers,
He trusted to have equaled the most High,
If he opposed; and with ambitious aim
Against the Throne and Monarchy of God
Raised impious War in Heaven and Battle proud
With vain attempt. Him the Almighty Power
Hurld headlong flaming from the Ethereal Sky
With hideous ruin and combustion down
To bottomless perdition, there to dwell
In Adamantine Chains and penal Fire,
Who durst defy the Omnipotent to Arms.
Nine times the Space that measures Day and Night
To mortal men, he with his horrid crew
Lay vanquished, rolling in the fiery Gulf
Confounded though immortal: But his doom
Reserved him to more wrath; for now the thought
Both of lost happiness and lasting pain
Torments him; round he throws his baleful eyes
That witnessed huge affliction and dismay
Mixed with obdurate pride and steadfast hate:
At once as far as Angels kenn he views
The dismal Situation waste and wild,
A Dungeon horrible, on all sides round
As one great Furnace flamed, yet from those flames
No light, but rather darkness visible
Served only to discover sights of woe,
Regions of sorrow, doleful shades, where peace
And rest can never dwell, hope never comes
That comes to all; but torture without end
Still urges, and a fiery Deluge, fed
With ever-burning Sulphur unconsum'd:
Such place Eternal Justice had prepared
For those rebellious, here their Prison ordained
In utter darkness, and their portion set
As far removed from God and light of Heaven
As from the Center thrice to the utmost Pole.
O how unlike the place from whence they fell!
There the companions of his fall, overwhelmed
With Floods and Whirlwinds of tempestuous fire,
He soon discerns, and weltring by his side
One next himself in power, and next in crime,
Long after known in Palestine, and named
Beelzebub. To whom the Arch-Enemy,
And thence in Heaven called Satan, with bold words
Breaking the horrid silence thus began.
If thou be he; But O how fallen! how changed
From him, who in the happy Realms of Light
Clothed with transcendent brightness did outshine
Myriads though bright: If he whom mutual league,
United thoughts and counsels, equal hope
And hazard in the Glorious Enterprise,
Joynd with me once, now misery has joynd
In equal ruin: into what Pit thou see
From what highth fallen, so much the stronger proved
He with his Thunder: and till then who knew
The force of those dire Arms? yet not for those,
Nor what the Potent Victor in his rage
Can else inflict, do I repent or change,
Though changed in outward luster; that fixed mind
And high disdain, from sense of injured merit,
That with the mightiest raised me to contend,
And to the fierce contention brought along
Innumerable force of Spirits armed
That durst dislike his reign, and me preferring,
His utmost power with adverse power opposed
In dubious Battle on the Plains of Heaven,
And shook his throne. What though the field be lost?
All is not lost; the unconquerable Will,
And study of revenge, immortal hate,
And courage never to submit or yield:
And what is else not to be overcome?
That Glory never shall his wrath or might
Extort from me. To bow and sue for grace
With suppliant knee, and deifie his power,
Who from the terror of this Arm so late
Doubted his Empire, that were low indeed,
That were an ignominy and shame beneath
This downfall; since by Fate the strength of Gods
And this Empyreal substance cannot fall,
Since through experience of this great event
In Arms not worse, in foresight much advanced,
We may with more successful hope resolve
To wage by force or guile eternal War
Irreconcilable, to our grand Foe,
Who now triumphs, and in the excess of joy
Sole reigning holds the Tyranny of Heaven.
So spoke the Apostate Angel, though in pain,
Vaunting aloud, but rackt with deep despare:
And him thus answered soon his bold Compeer.
O Prince, O Chief of many Throned Powers,
That led the imbattelld Seraphim to War
Under thy conduct, and in dreadful deeds
Fearless, endangered Heavens perpetual King;
And put to proof his high Supremacy,
Whether upheld by strength, or Chance, or Fate,
Too well I see and rue the dire event,
That with sad overthrow and soul defeat
Has lost us Heaven, and all this mighty Host
In horrible destruction laid thus low,
As far as Gods and Heavenly Essences
Can perish: for the mind and spirit remains
Invincible, and vigor soon returns,
Though all our Glory extinct, and happy state
Here swallowed up in endless misery.
But what if he our Conqueror, (whom I now
Of force believe Almighty, since no less
Then such could have orepow'rd such force as ours)
Have left us this our spirit and strength entire
Strongly to suffer and support our pains,
That we may so suffice his vengeful ire,
Or do him mightier service as his thralls
By right of War, what e're his business be
Here in the heart of Hell to work in Fire,
Or do his Errands in the gloomy Deep;
What can it then avail though yet we feel
Strength undiminisht, or eternal being
To undergo eternal punishment?
Whereto with speedy words the Arch-fiend replied.
Fallen Cherube, to be weak is miserable
Doing or Suffering: but of this be sure,
To do ought good never will be our task,
But ever to do ill our sole delight,
As being the contrary to his high will
Whom we resist. If then his Providence
Out of our evil seek to bring forth good,
Our labor must be to pervert that end,
And out of good still to find means of evil;
Which often times may succeed, so as perhaps
Shall grieve him, if I fail not, and disturb
His inmost counsels from their destind aim.
But see the angry Victor has recalled
His Ministers of vengeance and pursuit
Back to the Gates of Heaven: the Sulphurous Hail
Shot after us in storm, oreblown has laid
The fiery Surge, that from the Precipice
Of Heaven received us falling, and the Thunder,
Winged with red Lightning and impetuous rage,
Perhaps has spent his shafts, and ceases now
To bellow through the vast and boundless Deep.
Let us not slip the occasion, whether scorn,
Or satiate fury yield it from our Foe.
See thou yon dreary Plain, forlorn and wild,
The seat of desolation, void of light,
Save what the glimmering of these livid flames
Casts pale and dreadful? Thither let us tend
From off the tossing of these fiery waves,
There rest, if any rest can harbor there,
And reassembling our afflicted Powers,
Consult how we may henceforth most offend
Our Enemy, our own loss how repair,
How overcome this dire Calamity,
What reinforcement we may gain from Hope,
If not what resolution from despare.
Thus Satan talking to his nearest Mate
With Head up-lift above the wave, and Eyes
That sparkling blazed, his other Parts besides
Prone on the Flood, extended long and large
Lay floating many a rood, in bulk as huge
As whom the Fables name of monstrous size,
Titanian, or Earth-born, that warred on Jove,
Briareos or Typhon, whom the Den
By ancient Tarsus held, or that Sea-beast
Leviathan, which God of all his works
Created hugest that swim the Ocean stream:
Him happily slumbring on the Norway foam
The Pilot of some small night-founder'd Skiff,
Deeming some Island, often, as Seamen tell,
With fixed Anchor in his skaly rind
Moors by his side under the Lee, while Night
Invests the Sea, and wished Morn delays:
So stretched out huge in length the Arch-fiend lay
Chained on the burning Lake, nor ever thence
Had risen or heaved his head, but that the will
And high permission of all-ruling Heaven
Left him at large to his own dark designs,
That with reiterated crimes he might
Heap on himself damnation, while he sought
Evil to others, and enraged might see
How all his malice served but to bring forth
Infinite goodness, grace and mercy shown
On Man by him seduc't, but on himself
Treble confusion, wrath and vengeance poured.
Forthwith upright he rears from off the Pool
His mighty Stature; on each hand the flames
Drivn backward slope their pointing spires, and rowld
In billows, leave in the midst a horrid Vale.
Then with expanded wings he stears his flight
A loft, incumbent on the dusky Air
That felt unusual weight, till on dry Land
He lights, if it were Land that ever burned
With solid, as the Lake with liquid fire;
And such appeared in hue, as when the force
Of subterranean wind transports a Hill
Torn from Pelorus, or the shattered side
Of thundering Aetna, whose combustible
And fewel'd entrals thence conceiving Fire,
Sublimed with Mineral fury, aid the Winds,
And leave a singed bottom all involved
With stench and smoke: Such resting found the sole
Of unblest feet. Him followed his next Mate.
Both glorying to have escaped the Stygian flood
As Gods, and by their own recovered strength,
Not by the sufferance of supernal Power.
Is this the Region, this the Soil, the Clime,
Said then the lost Archangel, this the seat
That we must change for Heaven, this mournful gloom
For that celestial light? Be it so, since he
Who now is Sovran can dispose and bid
What shall be right: fardest from him is best
Whom reason has equald, force has made supreme
Above his equals. Farewell happy Fields
Where Joy for ever dwells: Hail horrors, hail
Infernal world, and thou profoundest Hell
Receive thy new Possessor: One who brings
A mind not to be changed by Place or Time.
The mind is its own place, and in it self
Can make a Heaven of Hell, a Hell of Heaven.
What matter where, if I be still the same,
And what I should be, all but less then he
Whom Thunder has made greater? Here at least
We shall be free; the Almighty has not built
Here for his envy, will not drive us hence:
Here we may reign secure, and in my choice
To reign is worth ambition though in Hell:
Better to reign in Hell, then serve in Heaven.
But wherefore let we then our faithful friends,
The associates and copartners of our loss
Lie thus astonished on the oblivious Pool,
And call them not to share with us their part
In this unhappy Mansion, or once more
With rallied Arms to try what may be yet
Regaind in Heaven, or what more lost in Hell?
So Satan spoke, and him Beelzebub
Thus answered. Leader of those Armies bright,
Which but the Omnipotent none could have foyld,
If once they hear that voice, their liveliest pledge
Of hope in fears and dangers, heard so often
In worst extremes, and on the perilous edge
Of battle when it raged, in all assaults
Their surest signal, they will soon resume
New courage and revive, though now they lie
Grovelling and prostrate on yon Lake of Fire,
As we erewhile, astounded and amazed,
No wonder, fallen such a pernicious highth.
He scarce had ceas't when the superior Fiend
Was moving toward the shore; his ponderous shield
Ethereal temper, massy, large and round,
Behind him cast; the broad circumference
Hung on his shoulders like the Moon, whose Orb
Through Optic Glass the Tuscan Artist views
At Evening from the top of Fesole,
Or in Valdarno, to descry new Lands,
Rivers or Mountains in her spotty Globe.
His Spear, to equal which the tallest Pine
Hewn on Norwegian hills, to be the Mast
Of some great Ammiral, were but a wand,
He walked with to support uneasy steps
Over the burning Marle, not like those steps
On Heavens Azure, and the torrid Clime
Smote on him sore besides, vaulted with Fire;
Nathless he so endured, till on the Beach
Of that inflamed Sea, he stood and called
His Legions, Angel Forms, who lay intrans't
Thick as Autumnal Leaves that strew the Brooks
In Vallombrosa, where the Etrurian shades
High overarch't imbowr; or scatterd sedge
A float, when with fierce Winds Orion armed
Has vexed the Red Sea Coast, whose waves orethrew
Busiris and his Memphian Chivalry,
While with perfidious hatred they pursued
The Sojourners of Goshen, who beheld
From the safe shore their floating Carkases
And broken Chariot Wheels, so thick bestrown
Abject and lost lay these, covering the Flood,
Under amazement of their hideous change.
He called so loud, that all the hollow Deep
Of Hell resounded. Princes, Potentates,
Warriers, the Flowr of Heaven, once yours, now lost,
If such astonishment as this can sieze
Eternal spirits; or have ye chos'n this place
After the toil of Battle to repose
Your wearied virtue, for the ease you find
To slumber here, as in the Vales of Heaven?
Or in this abject posture have ye sworn
To adore the Conqueror? who now beholds
Cherube and Seraph rolling in the Flood
With scattered Arms and Ensigns, till anon
His swift pursuers from Heaven Gates discern
The advantage, and descending tread us down
Thus drooping, or with linked Thunderbolts
Transfix us to the bottom of this Gulf.
Awake, arise, or be for ever fallen.
They heard, and were abasht, and up they sprung
Upon the wing, as when men wont to watch
On duty, sleeping found by whom they dread,
Rouse and bestir themselves ere well awake.
Nor did they not perceave the evil plight
In which they were, or the fierce pains not feel;
Yet to their Generals Voice they soon obeyed
Innumerable. As when the potent Rod
Of Amrams Son in Egypts evil day
Waved round the Coast, up called a pitchy cloud
Of Locusts, warping on the Eastern Wind,
That ore the Realm of impious Pharaoh hung
Like Night, and darkened all the Land of Nile:
So numberless were those bad Angels seen
Hovering on wing under the Cope of Hell
Twixt upper, nether, and surrounding Fires;
Till, as a signal given, the uplifted Spear
Of their great Sultan waving to direct
Their course, in even balance down they light
On the firm brimstone, and fill all the Plain;
A multitude, like which the populous North
Poured never from her frozen loins, to pass
Rhene or the Danaw, when her barbarous Sons
Came like a Deluge on the South, and spread
Beneath Gibralter to the Lybian sands.
Forthwith from every Squadron and each Band
The Heads and Leaders thither have where stood
Their great Commander; Godlike shapes and forms
Excelling human, Princely Dignities,
And Powers that erst in Heaven sat on Thrones;
Though of their Names in heavenly Records now
Be no memorial blotted out and rased
By their Rebellion, from the Books of Life.
Nor had they yet among the Sons of Eve
Got them new Names, till wandering ore the Earth,
Through Gods high sufferance for the trial of man,
By falsities and lies the greatest part
Of Mankind they corrupted to forsake
God their Creator, and the invisible
Glory of him that made them, to transform
Often to the Image of a Brute, adorned
With gay Religions full of Pomp and Gold,
And Devils to adore for Deities:
Then were they known to men by various Names,
And various Idols through the Heathen World.
Say, Muse, their Names then known, who first, who last,
Roused from the slumber, on that fiery Couch,
At their great Emperors call, as next in worth
Came singly where he stood on the bare strand,
While the promiscuous crowd stood yet aloof?
The chief were those who from the Pit of Hell
Roaming to seek their prey on earth, durst fix
Their Seats long after next the Seat of God,
Their Altars by his Altar, Gods adored
Among the Nations round, and durst abide
Jehovah thundering out of Sion, throned
Between the Cherubim; yea, often placed
Within his Sanctuary it self their Shrines,
Abominations; and with cursed things
His holy Rites, and solemn Feasts profaned,
And with their darkness durst affront his light.
First Moloch, horrid King besmeared with blood
Of human sacrifice, and parents tears,
Though for the noise of Drums and Timbrels loud
Their children cries unheard, that past through fire
To his grim Idol. Him the Ammonite
Worshipped in Rabba and her watery Plain,
In Argob and in Basan, to the stream
Of utmost Anion. Nor content with such
Audacious neighborhood, the wisest heart
Of Solomon he led by fraud to build
His Temple right against the Temple of God.
On that opprobrious Hill, and made his Grove
The pleasant Valley of Hinnom, Tophet thence
And black Gehenna called, the Type of Hell.
Next Chemos, the obscene dread of Moabs Sons,
From Aroar to Nebo, and the wild.
Of Southmost Abarim; in Hesebon
And Horonaim, Seons Realm, beyond
The flowery Dale of Sibma clad with Vines,
And Eleale to the Asphaltick Pool.
Peor his other Name, when he enticed
Israel in Sittim on their march from Nile
To do him wanton rites, which cost them woe.
Yet thence his lustful Orgies he enlarged
Even to that Hill of scandal, by the Grove
Of Moloch homicide, lust hard by hate;
Till good Josiah drove them thence to Hell.
With these came they, who from the bordring flood
Of old Euphrates to the Brook that parts
Egyp from Syrian ground, had general Names
Of Baalim and Ashtaroth, those male,
These Feminine. For Spirits when they please
Can either Sex assume, or both; so soft
And uncompounded is their Essence pure,
Not ti'd or manacl'd with joint or limb,
Nor founded on the brittle strength of bones,
Like cumbrous flesh; but in what shape they choose
Dilated or condens't, bright or obscure,
Can execute their aerie purposes,
And works of love or enmity fulfill.
For those the Race of Israel often forsook
Their living strength, and unfrequented left
His righteous Altar, bowing lowly down
To bestial Gods; for which their heads as low
Bowed down in Battle, sunk before the Spear
Of despicable foes. With these in troop
Came Astoreth, whom the Phoenicians called
Astarte, Queen of Heaven, with crescent Horns;
To whose bright Image nightly by the Moon
Sidonian Virgins paid their Vows and Songs,
In Sion also not unsung, where stood
Her Temple on the offensive Mountain, built
By that uxorious King, whose heart though large,
Beguiled by fair Idolatresses, fell
To Idols foul. Thammuz, came next behind,
Whose annual wound in Lebanon allured
The Syrian Damsels to lament his fate
In amorous dittyes all a Summers day,
While smooth Adonis from his native Rock
Ran purple to the Sea, supposed with blood
Of Thammuz yearly wounded: the Love-tale
Infected Sions daughters with like heat,
Whose wanton passions in the sacred Porch
Ezekiel saw, when by the Vision led
His eye survay'd the dark Idolatries
Of alienated Judah. Next came one
Who mourned in earnest, when the Captive Ark
Maimed his brute Image, head and hands lopt off
In his own Temple, on the grunsel edge,
Where he fell flat, and shamed his Worshipers:
Dargon his Name, Sea Monster upward Man
And downward Fish: yet had his Temple high
Reared in Azotus, dreaded through the Coast
Of Palestine, in Gath and Ascalon
And Accaron and Gaza's frontier bounds.
Him followed Rimmon, whose delightful Seat
Was fair Damascus, on the fertile Banks
Of Abbana and Pharphar, lucid streams.
He also against the house of God was bold:
A Leper once he lost and gained a King,
Ahaz his fottish Conqueror, whom he drew
Gods Altar to disparage and displace
For one of Syrian mode, whereon to burn
His odious offerings, and adore the Gods
Whom he had vanquished. After these appeared
A crew who under Names of old Renown,
Osiris, Isis, Orus and their Train
With monstrous shapes and sorceries abused
Fanatic Egypt and her Priests, to seek
Their wandering Gods disguised in brutish forms
Rather then human. Nor did Israel escape
The infection when their borrowed Gold composed
The Calf in Oreb: and the Rebel King
Doubled that sin in Bethel and in Dan,
Lik'ning his Maker to the Grazed Ox,
Jehovah, who in one Night when he passed
From Egypt marching, equaled with one stroke
Both her first born and all her bleating Gods.
Belial came last, then whom a Spirit more lewd
Fell not from Heaven, or more gross to love
Vice for it self: To him no Temple stood
Or Altar smoked; yet who more often then he
In Temples and at Altars, when the Priest
Turns Atheist, as did Ely's Sons, who filled
With lust and violence the house of God.
In Courts and Palaces he also Reigns
And in luxurious Cities, where the noise
Of riot ascends above their loftiest Towrs,
And injury and outrage: And when Night
Darkens the Streets, then wander forth the Sons
Of Belial, flown with insolence and wine.
Witness the Streets of Sodom, and that night
In Gibeah, when the hospitable door
Exposed a Matron to avoid worse rape.
These were the prime in order and in might;
The rest were long to tell, though far renowned,
The Ionian Gods, of Javans' Issue held
Gods, yet confessed later then Heaven and Earth
Their boasted Parents; Titan Heavens first born
With his enormous brood, and birthright seized
By younger Saturn, he from mightier Jove
His own and Rhea's Son like measure found;
So Jove usurping reigned: these first in Creet
And Ida known, thence on the Snowy top
Of cold Olympus ruled the middle Air
Their highest Heaven; or on the Delphian Cliff,
Or in Dodona, and through all the bounds
Of Doric Land; or who with Saturn old
Fled over Adria to the Hesperian Fields,
And ore the Celtic roam'd the utmost Isles.
All these and more came flocking; but with looks
Down cast and damp, yet such wherein appeared
Obscure some glimps of joy, to have found their chief
Not in despair, to have found themselves not lost
In loss it self; which on his countenance cast
Like doubtful hue: but he his wonted pride
Soon recollecting, with high words, that bore
Semblance of worth, not substance, gently raised
Their fanting courage, and dispel'd their fears.
Then strait commands that at the warlike sound
Of Trumpets loud and Clarions be upreard
His mighty Standard; that proud honor claimed
Azazel as his right, a Cherube tall:
Who forthwith from the glittering Staff unfurld
The Imperial Ensign, which full high advanced
Shon like a Meteor streaming to the Wind
With Gemms and Golden luster rich imblaz'd,
Seraphic arms and Trophies: all the while
Sonorous metal blowing Martial sounds:
At which the universal Host upsent
A shout that tore Hells Concave, and beyond
Frighted the Reign of Chaos and old Night.
All in a moment through the gloom were seen
Ten thousand Banners rise into the Air
With Orient Colors waving: with them rose
A Forest huge of Spears: and thronging Helms
Appeared, and serried Shields in thick array
Of depth immeasurable: Anon they move
In perfect Phalanx to the Dorian mood
Of Flutes and soft Recorders; such as raised
To hight of noblest temper Hero's old
Arming to Battle, and in stead of rage
Deliberate valor breathed, firm and unmoved
With dread of death to flight or foul retreat,
Nor warning power to mitigate and swage
With solemn touches, troubled thoughts, and chase
Anguish and doubt and fear and sorrow and pain
From mortal or immortal minds. Thus they
Breathing united force with fixed thought
Moved on in silence to soft Pipes that charmed
Their painful steps over the burnt soil; and now
Advanced in view, they stand, a horrid Front
Of dreadful length and dazzling Arms, in guise
Of Warriers old with ordered Spear and Shield,
Awaiting what command their mighty Chief
Had to impose: He through the armed Files
Darts his experienced eye, and soon traverse
The whole Battalion views, their order due,
Their visages and stature as of Gods,
Their number last he sums. And now his heart
Distends with pride, and hardening in his strength
Glories: For never since created man,
Met such imbodied force, as named with these
Could merit more then that small infantry
Warred on by Cranes* though all the Giant brood
Of Phlegra with the Heroic Race were joined
That fought at Theb's and Ilium, on each side
Mixed with auxiliar Gods; and what resounds
In Fable or Romance of Vthers Son
Begirt with British and Armoric Knights;
And all who since, Baptized or Infidel
Jousted in Aspramont or Montalban,
Damasco, or Marocco, or Trebisond,
Or whom Biserta sent from Afric shore
When Charlemain with all his Peerage fell
By Fontarabbia. Thus far these beyond
Compare of mortal prowess, yet observed
Their dread commander: he above the rest
In shape and gesture proudly eminent
Stood like a Towr; his form had yet not lost
All her Original brightness, nor appeared
Less then Arch Angel ruind, and the excess
Of Glory obscured: As when the Sun new risen
Looks through the Horizontal misty Air
Shorn of his Beams, or from behind the Moon
In dim Eclips disastrous twilight sheds
On half the Nations, and with fear of change
Perplexes Monarchs. Dark'n'd so, yet shon
Above them all the Arch Angel: but his face
Deep scars of Thunder had intrencht, and care
Sat on his faded cheek, but under Brows
Of dauntless courage, and considerate Pride
Waiting revenge: cruel his eye, but cast
Signs of remorse and passion to behold
The fellows of his crime, the followers rather
(Far other once beheld in bliss) condemned
For ever now to have their lot in pain,
Millions of Spirits for his fault amerc't
Of Heaven, and from Eternal Splendors flung
For his revolt, yet faithful how they stood,
Their Glory witherd. As when Heavens Fire
Has scath'd the Forest Oaks, or Mountain Pines,
With singed top their stately growth though bare
Stands on the blasted Heath. He now prepared
To speak; whereat their doubled Ranks they bend
From wing to wing, and half enclose him round
With all his Peers: attention held them mute.
Thrice he assayd, and thrice in spite of scorn,
Tears such as Angels weep, burst forth: at last
Words interwove with sighs found out their way.
O Myriads of immortal Spirits, O Powers
Matchless, but with the Almighty, and that strife
Was not inglorious, though the event was dire,
As this place testifies, and this dire change
Hateful to utter: but what power of mind
Foreseeing or presaging, from the Depth
Of knowledge past or present, could have feared,
How such united force of Gods, how such
As stood like these, could ever know repulse?
For who can yet believe, though after loss,
That all these puissant Legions, whose exile
Has emptied Heaven* shall fail to re-ascend
Self-rais'd, and repossess their native seat?
For me be witness all the Host of Heaven,
If counsels different, or danger shunned
By me, have lost our hopes. But he who reigns
Monarch in Heaven, till then as one secure
Sat on his Throne, upheld by old repute,
Consent or custom, and his Regal State
Put forth at full, but still his strength concealed,
Which tempted our attempt, and wrought our fall.
Henceforth his might we know, and know our own
So as not either to provoke, or dread
New war, provoked; our better part remains
To work in close design, by fraud or guile
What force effected not: that he no less
At length from us may find, who overcomes
By force, has overcome but half his foe.
Space may produce new Worlds; whereof so rise
There went a fame in Heaven that he ere long
Intended to create, and therein plant
A generation, whom his choice regard
Should favor equal to the Sons of Heaven*
Thither, if but to pry, shall be perhaps
Our first eruption, thither or elsewhere:
For this Infernal Pit shall never hold
Caelestial Spirits in Bondage, nor the Abyss
Long under darkness cover. But these thoughts
Full Counsel must mature: Peace is despaird,
For who can think Submission? War then, War
Open or understood must be resolved.
He spoke: and to confirm his words, out-flew
Millions of flaming swords, drawn from the thighs
Of mighty Cherubim; the sudden blaze
Far round illumined hell: highly they raged
Against the Highest, and fierce with grasped Arms
Clash'd on their sounding Shields the din of war,
Hurling defiance toward the Vault of Heaven.
There stood a Hill not farwhose griesly top
Belched fire and rolling smoke; the rest entire
Shon with a glossie scurff, undoubted sign
That in his womb was hid metallic Ore,
The work of Sulphur. Thither winged with speed
A numerous Brigad hastened. As when Bands
Of Pioners with Spade and Pickax armed
Forerun the Royal Camp, to trench a Field,
Or cast a Rampart. Mammon led them on,
Mammon, the least erected Spirit that fell
From heaven, for even in heaven his looks and thoughts
Were always downward bent, admiring more
The riches of Heavens pavement, trod'n Gold,
Then aught divine or holy else enjoyed
In vision beatific: by him first
Men also, and by his suggestion taught,
Ransacked the Center, and with impious hands
Rifl'd the bowels of their mother Earth
For Treasures better hid. Soon had his crew
Op'nd into the Hill a spacious wound
And dig'd out ribs of Gold. Let none admire
That riches grow in Hell; that soil may best
Deserve the precious bane. And here let those
Who boast in mortal things, and wondering tell
Of Babel, and the works of Memphian Kings
Learn how their greatest Monuments of Fame,
And Strength and Art are easily outdone
By Spirits reprobate, and in an hour
What in an age they with incessant toil
And hands innumerable scarce perform.
Nigh on the Plain in many cells prepared,
That underneath had veins of liquid fire
Sluc'd from the Lake, a second multitude
With wondrous Art found out the massy Ore,
Severing each kind, and scum'd the Bullion dross:
A third as soon had formed within the ground
A various mould, and from the boiling cells
By strange conveyance filled each hollow nook,
As in an Organ from one blast of wind
To many a row of Pipes the sound-board breaths.
Anon out of the earth a Fabric huge
Rose like an Exhalation, with the sound
Of Dulcet Symphonies and voices sweet,
Built like a Temple, where Pilasters round
Were set, and Doric pillars overlaid
With Golden Architrave; nor did there want
Cornice or Freeze, with bossy Sculptures grav'n,
The Roof was fretted Gold. Not Babylon,
Nor great Alcairo such magnificence
Equaled in all their glories, to inshrine
Belus or Serapis their Gods, or seat
Their Kings, when Egypt with Assyria strove
In wealth and luxury. The ascending pile
Stood fixed her stately highth, and strait the doors
Opening their brazen foulds discover wide
Within, her ample spaces, over the smooth
And level pavement: from the arched roof
Pendant by subtle Magic many a row
Of Starry Lamps and blazing Cressets fed
With Naphtha and Asphaltus yielded light
As from a sky. The hasty multitude
Admiring entered, and the work some praise
And some the Architect: his hand was known
In Heaven by many a Towred structure high,
Where Sceptered Angels held their residence,
And sat as Princes, whom the supreme King
Exalted to such power, and gave to rule,
Each in his Hierarchy, the Orders bright,
Nor was his name unheard or unador'd
In ancient Greece; and in Ausonian land
Men called him Mulciber; and now he fell
From Heaven, they fabl'd, thrown by angry Jove
Sheer over the Crystal Battlements; from Morn
To Noon he fell, from Noon to dewy Eve,
A Summers day; and with the setting Sun
Dropped from the Zenith like a falling Star,
On Lemnos the Aegaean I Will: thus they relate,
Erring; for he with this rebellious rout
Fell long before; nor aught availed him now
To have built in Heaven high Towrs; nor did he escape
By all his Engines, but was headlong sent
With his industrious crew to build in hell.
Mean while the winged Haralds by command
Of Sovran power, with awful Ceremony
And Trumpets sound throughout the Host proclaim
A solemn Council forthwith to be held
At Pandaemonium, the high Capital
Of Satan and his Peers: their summons called
From every Band and squared Regiment
By place or choice the worthiest; they anon
With hunderds and with thousands trooping came
Attended: all access was thronged, the Gates
And Porches wide, but chief the spacious Hall
(Though like a covered field, where Champions bold
Wont ride in armed, and at the Soldans chair
Defied the best of Panim chivalry
To mortal combat or carreer with Lance)
Thick swarmed, both on the ground and in the air,
Brusht with the hiss of russling wings. As Bees
In spring time, when the Sun with Taurus rides,
Pour forth their populous youth about the Hive
In clusters; they among fresh dews and flowers
Fly to and fro, or on the smoothed Plank,
The suburb of their Straw-built Citadel,
New rubbed with Baum, expatiate and confer
Their State affairs. So thick the aerie crowd
Swarmed and were straitn'd; till the Signal given.
Behold a wonder! they but now who seemd
In bigness to surpass Earths Giant Sons
Now less then smallest Dwarfs, in narrow room
Throng numberless, like that Pigmean Race
Beyond the Indian Mount, or Faerie Elves,
Whose midnight Revels, by a Forest side
Or Fountain some belated Peasant sees,
Or dreams he sees, while over-head the Moon
Sits Arbitress, and nearer to the Earth
Wheels her pale course, they on their mirth and dance
Intent, with jocond Music charm his ear;
At once with joy and fear his heart rebounds.
Thus incorporeal Spirits to smallest forms
Reduced their shapes immense, and were at large,
Though without number still amidst the Hall
Of that infernal Court. But far within
And in their own dimensions like themselves
The great Seraphic Lords and Cherubim
In close recess and secret conclave sat
A thousand Demy-Gods on golden seat's,
Frequent and full. After short silence then
And summons read, the great consult began.
The End of the First Book.
Paradise Lost.
BOOK II.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Consultation begun, Satan debates whether another Battle be to be hazarded
for the recovery of Heaven: some advise it, others dissuade: A third proposal
is preferred, mentioned before by Satan, to search the truth of that Prophecy
or Tradition in Heaven concerning another world, and another kind of creature
equal or not much inferior to themselves, about this time to be created: Their
doubt who shall be sent on this difficult search: Satan their chief undertakes
alone the voyage, is honored and applauded. The Council thus ended, the rest
betake them several ways and to several employments, as their inclinations lead
them, to entertain the time till Satan return. He passes on his Journey to Hell
Gates, finds them shut, and who sat there to guard them, by whom at length they
are op'nd, and discover to him the great Gulf between Hell and Heaven; with
what difficulty he passes through, directed by Chaos, the Power of that place,
to the sight of this new World which he sought.

HIgh on a Throne of Royal State, which far
Outshon the wealth of Ormus and of Ind,
Or where the gorgeous East with richest hand
Showrs on her Kings Barbaric Pearl and Gold,
Satan exalted sat, by merit raised
To that bad eminence; and from despair
Thus high uplifted beyond hope, aspires
Beyond thus high, insatiate to pursue
Vain War with Heaven, and by success untaught
His proud imaginations thus displaid.
Powers and Dominions, Deities of Heaven,
For since no deep within her gulf can hold
Immortal vigor, though oppressed and fallen,
I give not Heaven for lost. From this descent
Celestial virtues rising, will appear
More glorious and more dread then from no fall,
And trust themselves to fear no second fate:
Me though just right, and the fixed Laws of Heaven
Did first create your Leader, next free choice,
With what besides, in Counsel or in Fight,
Has bin achievd of merit, yet this loss
Thus far at least recovered, has much more
Established in a safe unenvied Throne
Yielded with full consent. The happier state
In Heaven, which follows dignity, might draw
Envy from each inferior; but who here
Will envy whom the highest place exposes
For most to stand against the Thunderers aim
Your bulwark, and condemns to greatest share
Of endless pain? where there is then no good
For which to strive, no strife can grow up there
From Faction; for none sure will claim in Hell
Precedence, none, whose portion is so small
Of present pain, that with ambitious mind
Will covet more. With this advantage then
To union, and firm Faith, and firm accord,
More then can be in Heaven, we now return
To claim our just inheritance of old,
Surer to prosper then prosperity
Could have assured us; and by what best way,
Whether of open War or covert guile,
We now debate; who can advise, may speak,
He ceased, and next him Moloc, Sceptered King
Stood up, the strongest and the fiercest Spirit
That fought in Heaven; now fiercer by despair:
His trust was with the Eternal to be deemed
Equal in strength, and rather then be less
Cared not to be at all; with that care lost
Went all his fear: of God, or Hell, or worse
He reck'd not, and these words thereafter spoke.
My sentence is for open War: Of Wiles,
More unexpert, I boast not: them let those
Contrive who need, or when they need, not now
For while they sit contriving, shall the rest,
Millions that stand in Arms, and longing wait
The Signal to ascend, sit lingering here
Heavens fugitives, and for their dwelling place
Accept this dark opprobrious Den of shame,
The Prison of his Tyranny who Reigns
By our delay? no, let us rather choose
Armed with Hell flames and fury all at once
Over Heavens high Towrs to force resistless way,
Turning our Torturer into horrid Arms
Against the Torturer; when to meet the noise
Of his Almighty Engine he shall hear
Infernal Thunder, and for Lightning see
Black fire and horror shot with equal rage
Among his Angels; and his Throne it self
Mixed with Tartarean Sulphur, and strange fire,
His own invented Torments. But perhaps
The way seems difficult and steep to scale
With upright wing against a higher foe.
Let such bethink them, if the sleepy drench
Of that forgetful Lake benumm not still,
That in our proper motion we ascend
Up to our native seat: descent and fall
To us is adverse. Who but felt of late
When the fierce Foe hung on our brok'n Rear
Insulting, and pursued us through the Deep,
With what compulsion and laborious flight
We sunk thus low? The ascent is easy then;
The event is feared; should we again provoke
Our stronger, some worse way his wrath may find
To our destruction: if there be in Hell
Fear to be worse destroyed: what can be worse
Then to dwell here, driven out from bliss, condemned
In this abhorred deep to utter woe;
Where pain of unextinguishable fire
Must exercise us without hope of end
The Vassals of his anger, when the Scourge
Inexorably, and the torturing hour
Calls us to Penance? More destroyed then thus
We should be quite abolisht and expire.
What fear we then? what doubt we to incense
His utmost ire? which to the highth enraged,
Will either quite consume us, and reduce
To nothing this essential, happier far
Then miserable to have eternal being:
Or if our substance be indeed Divine,
And cannot cease to be, we are at worst
On this side nothing; and by proof we feel
Our power sufficient to disturb his Heaven,
And with perpetual inrodes to Alarm,
Though inaccessible, his fatal Throne:
Which if not Victory is yet Revenge.
He ended frowning, and his look denounced
Desperate revenge, and Battle dangerous
To less then Gods. On the other side up rose
Belial, in act more graceful and humane;
A fairer person lost not Heaven; he seemd
For dignity composed and high exploit:
But all was false and hollow; though his Tongue
Dropped Manna, and could make the worse appear
The better reason, to perplex and dash
Maturest Counsels: for his thoughts were low;
To vice industrious, but to Nobler deeds
Timorous and slothful: yet he pleased the ear,
And with persuasive accent thus began.
I should be much for open War, O Peers,
As not behind in hate; if what was urged
Main reason to persuade immediate War,
Did not dissuade me most, and seem to cast
Ominous conjecture on the whole success:
When he who most excels in fact of Arms,
In what he counsels and in what excels
Mistrustful, grounds his courage on despair
And utter dissolution, as the scope
Of all his aim, after some dire revenge.
First, what Revenge? the Towrs of Heaven are filled
With Armed watch, that render all access
Impregnable; often on the bordering Deep
Encamp their Legions, or with obscure wing
Scout far and wide into the Realm of night,
Scorning surprise. Or could we break our way
By force, and at our heels all Hell should rise
With blackest Insurrection, to confound
Heavens purest, Light, yet our great Enemy
All incorruptible would on his Throne
Sit unpolluted, and the Ethereal mould
Incapable of stain would soon expel
Her mischief, and purge off the baser fire
Victorious. Thus repulsed, our final hope
Is flat despair: we must exasperate
The Almighty Victor to spend all his rage,
And that must end us, that must be our cure,
To be no more; sad cure; for who would loose,
Though full of pain, this intellectual being,
Those thoughts that wander through Eternity,
To perish rather, swallowd up and lost
In the wide womb of uncreated night,
Devoid of sense and motion? and who knows,
Let this be good, whether our angry Foe
Can give it, or will ever? how he can
Is doubtful; that he never will is sure.
Will he, so wise, let loose at once his ire,
Belike through impotence, or unaware,
To give his Enemies their wish, and end
Them in his anger, whom his anger saves
To punish endless? wherefore cease we then?
Say they who counsel War, we are decreed,
Reserved and destined to Eternal woe;
Whatever doing, what can we suffer more,
What can we suffer worse? is this then worst,
Thus sitting, thus consulting, thus in Arms?
What when we fled amain, pursued and struck
With Heavens afflicting Thunder, and besought
The Deep to shelter us? this Hell then seemed
A refuge from those wounds: or when we lay
Chained on the burning Lake? that sure was worse.
What if the breath that kindled those grim fires
Awaked should blow them into sevenfold rage
And plunge us in the flames? or from above
Should intermitted vengeance arm again
His red right hand to plague us? what if all
Her stores were opened, and this Firmament
Of Hell should spout her Cataracts of Fire,
Impendent horrors, threatening hideous fall
One day upon our heads; while we perhaps
Designing or exhorting glorious war,
Caught in a fiery Tempest shall be hurled
Each on his rock transfixt, the sport and prey
Of racking whirlwinds, or for ever sunk
Under yon boiling Ocean, wrapped in Chains;
There to converse with everlasting groans,
Unrespited, unpitied, unrepreevd,
Ages of hopeless end; this would be worse.
War therefore, open or concealed, alike
My voice disswades; for what can force or guile
With him, or who deceive his mind, whose eye
Views all things at one view? he from heavens highth
All these our motions vain, sees and derides;
Not more Almighty to resist our might
Then wise to frustrate all our plots and wiles.
Shall we then live thus vile, the Race of Heaven
Thus trampled, thus expelled to suffer here
Chains and these Torments? better these then worse
By my advice; since fate inevitable
Subdues us, and Omnipotent Decree,
The Victors will. To suffer, as to do,
Our strength is equal, nor the Law unjust
That so ordains: this was at first resolved;
If we were wise, against so great a foe
Contending, and so doubtful what might fall.
I laugh, when those who at the Spear are bold
And venurous, if that fail them, shrink and fear
What yet they know must follow, to endure
Exile, or ignominy, or bonds, or pain,
The sentence of their Conqueror: This is now
Our doom; which if we can sustain and bear,
Our Supreme Foe in time may much remit
His anger, and perhaps thus far removed
Not mind us not offending, satisfied
With what is punished; whence these raging fires
Will slack'n, if his breath stir not their flames.
Our purer essence then will overcome
Their noxious vapor, or enured not feel,
Or changed at length, and to the place conformd
In temper and in nature, will receive
Familiar the fierce heat, and void of pain;
This horror will grow mild, this darkness light,
Besides what hope the never-ending flight
Of future days may bring, what chance, what change
VVorth waiting, since our present lot appeers
For happy though but ill, for ill not worst,
If we procure not to our selves more woe.
Thus Belial words clothed in reasons garb
Counseled ignoble ease, and peaceful sloth,
Not peace: and after him thus Mammon spoke.
Either to disinthrone the King of Heaven
We war, if war be best, or to regain
Our own right lost: him to unthrone we then
May hope when everlasting Fate shall yield
To fickle Chance, and Chaos judge the strife:
The former vain to hope argues as vain
The latter: for what place can be for us
Within Heavens bound, unless Heavens Lord supreme
We overpower? Suppose he should relent
And publish Grace to all, on promise made
Of new Subjection; with what eyes could we
Stand in his presence humble, and receive
Strict Laws imposed, to celebrate his Throne
With warbl'd Hymns, and to his Godhead sing
Forced Halleluiah's; while he Lordly sits
Our envied Sovran, and his Altar breathes
Ambrosial Odours and Ambrosial Flowers,
Our servile offerings. This must be our task
In Heaven this our delight; how wearisom
Eternity so spent in worship paid
To whom we hate. Let us not then pursue
By force impossible, by leave obtained
Unacceptable, though in Heaven, our state
Of splendid vassalage, but rather seek
Our own good from our selves, and from our own
Live to our selves, though in this vast recess,
Free, and to none accountable, preferring
Hard liberty before the easy yoke
Of servile Pomp. Our greatness will appeer
Then most conspicuous, when great things of small,
Useful of hurtful, prosperous of adverse
We can create, and in what place so e're
Thrive under evil, and work ease out of pain
Through labor and indurance. This deep world
Of darkness do we dread? How often amidst
Thick clouds and dark does Heavens all-ruling Sire
Choose to reside, his Glory unobscur'd,
And with the Majesty of darkness round
Covers his Throne; from whence deep thunders roar
Must'ring their rage, and Heaven resembles Hell?
As he our darkness, cannot we his Light
Imitate when we please? This Desert soil
Wants not her hidden luster, Gemms and Gold;
Nor want we skill or Art, from whence to raise
Magnificence; and what can Heaven show more?
Our torments also may in length of time
Become our Elements, these piercing Fires
As soft as now severe, our temper changed
Into their temper; which must needs remove
The sensible of pain. All things invite
To peaceful Counsels, and the settled State
Of order, how in safety best we may
Compose our present evils, with regard
Of what we are and were, dismissing quite
All thoughts of war: ye have what I advise.
He scarce had finished, when such murmur filld
The Assembly, as when hollow Rocks retain
The sound of blustering winds, which all night long
Had roused the Sea, now with hoarse cadence lull
Seafaring men orewatcht, whose Bark by chance
Or Pinnace anchors in a craggy Bay
After the Tempest: Such applause was heard
As Mammon ended, and his Sentence pleased,
Advising peace: for such another Field
They dreaded worse then Hell: so much the fear
Of Thunder and the Sword of Michael
Wrought still within them; and no less desire
To found this nether Empire, which might rise
By policy, and long process of time,
In emulation opposite to Heaven.
Which when Beelzebub perceived, then whom,
Satan except, none higher sat, with grave
Aspect he rose, and in his rising seemed
A Pillar of State; deep on his Front engraven
Deliberation sat and public care;
And Princely counsel in his face yet shon,
Majestic though in ruin: sage he stood
With Atlantean shoulders fit to bear
The weight of mightiest Monarchies; his look
Drew audience and attention still as Night
Or Summers Noontide air, while thus he spoke.
Thrones and Imperial Powers, offspring of heaven
Ethereal Virtues; or these Titles now
Must we renounce, and changing style be called
Princes of Hell? for so the popular vote
Inclines, here to continue, and build up here
A growing Empire; doubtless; while we dream,
And know not that the King of Heaven has doomed
This place our dungeon, not our safe retreat
Beyond his Potent arm, to live exempt
From Heavens high jurisdiction, in new League
Banded against his Throne, but to remain
In strictest bondage, though thus far removed,
Under the inevitable curb, reserved
His captive multitude: For he, be sure
In height or depth, still first and last will Reign
Sole King, and of his Kingdom loose no part
By our revolt, but over Hell extend
His Empire, and with Iron Scepter rule
Us here, as with his Golden those in Heaven.
What sit we then projecting peace and War?
War has determined us, and foild with loss
Irreparable; terms of peace yet none
Voutsaf't or sought; for what peace will be given
To us enslaved, but custody severe,
And stripes, and arbitrary punishment
Inflicted? and what peace can we return,
But to our power hostility and hate,
Untamed reluctance, and revenge though slow,
Yet ever plotting how the Conqueror least
May reap his conquest, and may least rejoice
In doing what we most in suffering feel?
Nor will occasion want, nor shall we need
With dangerous expedition to invade
Heaven, whose high walls fear no assault or Siege,
Or ambush from the Deep. What if we find
Some easier enterprise? There is a place
(if ancient and prophetic fame in Heaven
Err not) another World, the happy seat
Of some new Race called Man, about this time
To be created like to us, though less
In power and excellence, but favored more
Of him who rules above; so was his will
Pronounced among the Gods, and by an Oath,
That shook Heavens whole circumference, confirmed.
Thither let us bend all our thoughts, to learn
What creatures there inhabit, of what mould,
Or substance, how endu'd, and what their Power,
And where their weakness, how attempted best,
By force or suttlety: Though Heaven be shut,
And Heavens high Arbitrator sit secure
In his own strength, this place may lie exposed
The utmost border of his Kingdom, left
To their defense who hold it: here perhaps
Some advantageous act may be achiev'd
By sudden onset, either with Hell fire
To waste his whole Creation, or possess
All as our own, and drive as we were driven,
The punie habitants, or if not drive,
Seduce them to our Party, that their God
May prove their foe, and with repenting hand
Abolish his own works. This would surpass
Common revenge, and interrupt his joy
In our Confusion, and our Joy upraise
In his disturbance; when his darling Sons
Hurled headlong to partake with us, shall curse
Their frail Original, and faded bliss,
Faded so soon. Advise if this be worth
Attempting, or to sit in darkness here
Hatching vain Empires. Thus Beelzebub
Pleaded his devilish Counsel, first devised
By Satan, and in part proposed: for whence,
But from the Author of all ill could Spring
So deep a malice, to confound the race
Of mankind in one root, and Earth with Hell
To mingle and involve, done all to spite
The great Creator? But their spite still serves
His glory to augment. The bold design
Pleased highly those infernal States, and joy
Sparkl'd in all their eyes; with full assent
They vote: whereat his speech he thus renews.
Well have ye judged, well ended long debate,
Synod of Gods, and like to what ye are,
Great things resolved, which from the lowest deep
Will once more lift us up, in spite of Fate,
Nearer our ancient Seat; perhaps in view
Of those bright confines, whence with neighboring Arms
And opportune excursion we may chance
Re-enter Heaven; or else in some mild Zone
Dwell not unvisited of Heavens fair Light
Secure, and at the brightning Orient beam
Purge off this gloom; the soft delicious Air,
To heal the scarr of these corrosive Fires
Shall breathe her balm. But first whom shall we send
In search of this new world, whom shall we find
Sufficient? who shall tempt with wandering feet
The dark unbottom'd infinite Abyss
And through the palpable obscure find out
His uncouth way, or spread his aerie flight
Upborn with indefatigable wings
Over the vast abrupt, ere he arrive
The happy I Will; what strength, what art can then
Suffice, or what evasion bear him safe
Through the strict Senteries and Stations thick
Of Angels watching round? Here he had need
All circumspection, and we now no less
Choice in our suffrage; for on whom we send,
The weight of all and our last hope relies.
This said, he sat; and expectation held
His look suspense, awaiting who appeer'd
To second, or oppose, or undertake
The perilous attempt: but all sat mute,
Pondering the danger with deep thoughts; and each
In others countenance read his own dismay
Astonished: none among the choice and prime
Of those Heav'n-warring Champions could be found
So hardy as to proffer or accept
Alone the dreadful voyage; till at last
Satan, whom now transcendent glory raised
Above his fellows, with Monarchal pride
Conscious of highest worth, unmoved thus spoke.
O Progeny of Heaven, Empyreal Thrones,
With reason has deep silence and demurr
Seized us, though undismaid: long is the way
And hard, that opt of Hell leads up to light;
Our prison strong, this huge unequal of Fire,
Outrageous to devour, immures us round
Ninefold, and gates of burning Adamant
Barred over us prohibit all egress.
These past, if any pass, the void profound
Of unessential Night receives him next
Wide gaping, and with utter loss of being
Threatens him, plunged in that abortive gulf.
If thence he escape into whatever world,
Or unknown Region, what remains him less
Then unknown dangers and as hard escape.
But I should ill become this Throne, O Peers,
And this Imperial Sov'ranty, adorned
With splendour, armed with power, if aught proposed
And judged of public moment, in the shape
Of difficulty or danger could deterr
Me from attempting. Wherefore do I assume
These Royalties, and not refuse to Reign,
Refusing to accept as great a share
Of hazard as of honor, due alike
To him who Reigns, and so much to him due
Of hazard more, as he above the rest
High honored sits? Go therefore mighty Powers,
Terror of Heaven, though fallen; intend at home,
While here shall be our home, what best may ease
The present misery, and render Hell
More tolerable; if there be cure or charm
To respite or deceive, or slack the pain
Of this ill Mansion: intermit no watch
Against a wakeful Foe, while I abroad
Through all the Coasts of dark destruction seek
Deliverance for us all: this enterprise
None shall partake with me. Thus saying rose
The Monarch, and prevented all reply,
Prudent, least from his resolution raised
Others among the chief might offer now
(Certain to be refused) what erst they feared;
And so refused might in opinion stand
His Rivals, winning cheap the high repute
Which he through hazard huge must earn. But they
Dreaded not more the adventure then his voice
Forbidding; and at once with him they rose;
Their rising all at once was as the sound
Of Thunder heard remote. Toward him they bend
With awful reverence prone; and as a God
Extol him equal to the highest in Heaven:
Nor failed they to express how much they praised,
That for the general safety he despised
His own: for neither do the Spirits damned
Loose all her virtue; least bad men should boast
Their specious deeds on earth, which glory excites,
Or clos ambition varnisht over with zeal.
Thus they their doubtful consultations dark
Ended rejoicing in their matchless Chief:
As when from mountain tops the dusky clouds
Ascending, while the North wind sleeps, o'respread
Heavens cheerful face, the lowering Element
Scowls ore the dark'nd lantskip Snow, or shower;
If chance the radiant Sun with farewell sweet
Extend his evening beam, the fields revive,
The birds their notes renew, and bleating herds
Attest their joy, that hill and valley rings.
O shame to men! Devil with Devil damned
Firm concord holds, men only disagree
Of Creatures rational, though under hope
Of heavenly Grace: and God proclaiming peace,
Yet live in hatred, enmity, and strife
Among themselves, and levy cruel wars,
Wasting the Earth, each other to destroy:
As if (which might induce us to accord)
Man had not hellish foes a now besides,
That day and night for his destruction wait.
The Stygian Counsel thus dissolved; and forth
In order came the grand infernal Peers,
Midst came their mighty Paramount, and seemd
Alone the Antagonist of Heaven, nor less
Than Hells dread Emperor with pomp Supreme,
And God-like imitated State; him round
A Globe of fiery Seraphim enclosed
With bright imblazonrie, and horrent Arms.
Then of their Session ended they bid cry
With Trumpets regal sound the great result:
Toward the four winds four speedy Cherubim
Put to their mouths the sounding Alchymie
By Haralds voice explained: the hollow Abyss
Heard far and wide, and all the host of Hell
With deafning shout, returned them loud acclaim.
Thence more at ease their minds and somewhat raised
By false presumptuous hope, the ranged powers
Disband, and wandering, each his several way
Pursues, as inclination or sad choice
Leads him perplexed, where he may likeliest find
Truce to his restless thoughts, and entertain
The irksom hours, till this great Chief return.
Part on the Plain, or in the Air sublime
Upon the wing, or in swift Rare contend,
As at the Olympian Games or Pythian fields;
Part curb their fiery Steeds, or shun the Goal
With rapid wheels, or fronted Brigads form.
As when to warn proud Cities war appears
Waged in the troubled Sky, and Armies rush
To Battle in the Clouds, before each Van
Prick forth the Aerie Knights, and couch their Spears
Till thickest Legions close; with feats of Arms
From either end of Heaven the welkin burns.
Others with vast Typhoean rage more fell
Rend up both Rocks and Hills, and ride the Air
In whirlwind; Hell scarce holds the wild uproar.
As when Alcides from Oechalia Crowned
With conquest, felt the envenomed robe, and tore
Through pain up by the roots Thessalian Pines,
And Lichas from the top of Oeta threw
Into the Euboic Sea. Others more mild,
Retreated in a silent valley, sing
With notes Angelical to many a Harp
Their own Heroic deeds and hapless fall
By doom of Battle; and complain that Fate
Free Virtue should enthrall to Force or Chance.
Their Song was partial, but the harmony
(What could it less when Spirits immortal sing?)
Suspended Hell, and took with ravishment
The thronging audience. In discourse more sweet
(For Eloquence the Soul, Song charms the Sense,)
Others apart sat on a Hill retired,
In thoughts more elevate, and reasoned high
Of Providence, Foreknowledge, Will and Fate,
Fixed Fate, free will, foreknowledg absolute,
And found no end, in wandering mazes lost.
Of good and evil much they argued then,
Of happiness and final misery,
Passion and Apathie, and glory and shame,
Vain wisdom all, and false Philosophy:
Yet with a pleasing sorcerie could charm
Pain for a while or anguish, and excite
Fallacious hope, or arm the obdured breast
With stubborn patience as with triple steel.
Another part in Squadrons and gross Bands,
On bold adventure to discover wide
That dismal world, if any Clime perhaps
Might yield them easier habitation, bend
Four ways their flying March, along the Banks
Of four infernal Rivers that disgorge
Into the burning Lake their baleful streams;
Abhorred Styx the flood of deadly hate,
Sad Acheron of sorrow, black and deep;
Cocytus, named of lamentation loud
Heard on the ruful stream; fierce Phlegeton
Whose waves of torrent fire inflame with rage*
Far off from these a slow and silent stream,
Lethe the River of Oblivion roules
Her watrie Labyrinth, whereof who drinks,
Forthwith his former state and being forgets,
Forgets both joy and grief, pleasure and pain.
Beyond this flood a frozen Continent
Lies dark and wild, beat with perpetual storms
Of Whirlwind and dire Hail, which on firm land
Thaws not, but gathers heap, and ruin seems
Of ancient pile; all else deep snow and ice,
A gulf profound as that Serbonian Bog
Betwixt Damiata and mount Casius old,
Where Armies whole have sunk: the parching Air
Burns frore, and cold performs the effect of Fire.
Thither by harpy-footed Furies hailed,
At certain revolutions all the damned
Are brought: and feel by turns the bitter change
Of fierce extremes, extremes by change more fierce,
From Beds of raging Fire to starve in Ice
Their soft Ethereal warmth, and there to pine
Immovable, infixt, and frozen round,
Periods of time, thence hurried back to fire.
They ferry over this Lethean Sound
Both to and fro, their sorrow to augment,
And wish and struggle, as they pass, to reach
The tempting stream, with one small drop to loose
In sweet forgetfulness all pain and woe,
All in one moment, and so near the brink;
But Fate withstands, and to oppose the attempt
Medusa with Gorgonian terror guards
The Ford, and of it self the water flies
All taste of living wight, as once it fled
The lip of Tantalus. Thus roving on
In confused march forlorn, the adventrous Bands
With shuddring horror pale, and eyes aghast
Viewed first their lamentable lot, and found
No rest: through many a dark and drearie Veil
They passed* and many a Region dolorous,
Ore many a Frozen, many a fiery Alpe,
Rocks, Caves, Lakes, Fens, Bogs, Dens, and shades of deaths,
A Universe of death, which God by curse
Created evil, for evil only good,
Where all life dies, death lives, and Nature breeds,
Perverse, all monstrous, all prodigious things,
Abominable, inutterable, and worse
Than Fables yet have feigned, or fear conceived,
Gorgons and Hydra's, and Chimera's dire.
Mean while the Adversary of God and Man,
Satan with thoughts inflamed of highest design,
Puts on swift wings, and toward the Gates of Hell
Explores his solitary flight; some times
He scours the right hand coast, some times the left,
Now shaves with level wing the Deep, then soars
Up to the fiery Concave touring high.
As when far off at Sea a Fleet descri'd
Hangs in the Clouds, by Aequinoctial Winds
Close sailing from Bengala, or the Isles
Of Ternate and Tidore, whence Merchants bring
Their spicie Drugs: they on the Trading Flood
Through the wide Ethiopian to the Cape
Ply stemming nightly toward the Pole. So seemed
Far off the flying Fiend: at last appeer
Hell bounds high reaching to the horrid Roof,
And thrice threefold the Gates; three folds were Brass,
Three Iron, three of Adamantine Rock,
Impenetrable, impaled with circling fire,
Yet unconsum'd. Before the Gates there sat
On either side a formidable shape;
The one seemed Woman to the waste, and fair,
But ended foul in many a scaly fould
Voluminous and vast, a Serpent armed
With mortal sting: about her middle round
A cry of Hell Hounds never ceasing barked
With wide Cerberian mouths full loud, and rung
A hideous Peal: yet, when they list, would creep,
If aught disturbed their noise, into her woomb,
And kennel there, yet there still barked and howled,
Within unseen. Far less abhorrd than these
Vexed Scylla bathing in the Sea that parts
Calabria from the hoarce Trinacrian shore:
Nor uglier follow the Night-Hag, when called
In secret, riding through the Air she comes
Lured with the smell of infant blood, to dance
With Lapland Witches, while the laboring Moon
Eclipses at their charms. The other shape,
If shape it might be called that shape had none
Distinguishable in member, joint, or limb,
Or substance might be called that shadow seemed,
For each seemed either; black it stood as Night,
Fierce as ten Furies, terrible as Hell,
And shook a dreadful Dart; what seemed his head
The likeness of a Kingly Crown had on.
Satan was now at hand, and from his seat
The Monster moving onward came as fast
With horrid strides, Hell trembled as he strode.
The undaunted Fiend what this might be admired,
Admired, not feared; God and his Son except,
Created thing naught valued he nor shunned;
And with disdainful look thus first began.
Whence and what art thou, execrable shape*
That dare, though grim and terrible, advance
Thy miscreated Front athwart my way
To yonder Gates? through them I mean to pass,
That be assured, without leave asked of thee:
Retire, or taste thy folly, and learn by proof,
Hell-born, not to contend with Spirits of Heaven.
To whom the Goblin full of wrauth replied,
Art thou that Traitor Angel, art thou he,
Who first broke peace in Heaven and Faith, till then
Unbrok'n, and in proud rebellious Arms
Drew after him the third part of Heavens Sons
Conjured against the highest, for which both Thou
And they outcast from God, are here condemned
To waste Eternal days in woe and pain?
And reck'n'st thou thy self with Spirits of Heaven,
Hell-doom'd, and breathe defiance here and scorn
Where I reign King, and to enrage thee more,
Thy King and Lord? Back to thy punishment,
False fugitive, and to thy speed add wings,
Least with a whip of Scorpions I pursue
Thy lingering, or with one stroke of this Dart
Strange horror seize thee, and pangs unfelt before.
So spoke the grisly terror, and in shape,
So speaking and so threatening, grew tenfold
More dreadful and deform: on the other side
Incenst with indignation Satan stood
Unterrifi'd, and like a Comet burned,
That fires the length of Ophiucus huge
In the Artick Sky, and from his horrid hair
Shakes Pestilence and War. Each at the Head
Level d his deadly aim; their fatal hands
No second stroke intend, and such a frown
Each cast at the other, as when two black Clouds
With Heavens Artillery fraught, come rattling on
Over the Caspian, then stand front to front
Hovering a space, till Winds the signal blow
To join their dark Encounter in mid air:
So frownd the mighty Combatants, that Hell
Grew darker at their frown, so matched they stood;
For never but once more was either like
To meet so great a foe: and now great deeds
Had been achiev'd, whereof all Hell had rung,
Had not the Snakie Sorceress that sat
Fast by Hell Gate, and kept the fatal Key,
Risen, and with hideous outcry rushed between*
O Father, what intends thy hand, she cried,
Against thy only Son? What fury O Son,
Possesses thee to bend that mortal Dart
Against thy Fathers head? and know for whom;
For him who sits above and laughs the while
At thee ordained his drudge, to execute
What e're his wrath, which he calls Justice, bids,
His wrath which one day will destroy ye both.
She spoke, and at her words the hellish Pest
Forbore, then these to her Satan returned:
So strange thy outcry, and thy words so strange
Thou interposest, that my sudden hand
Prevented spares to tell thee yet by deeds
What it intends; till first I know of thee,
What thing thou art, thus double-form'd, and why
In this infernal Veil first met thou call'st
Me Father, and that Fantasm call'st my Son?
I know thee not, nor ever saw till now
Sight more detestable then him and thee.
TO whom thus the Portress of Hell Gate replied;
Hall thou forgot me then, and do I seem
Now in thine eye so foul, once deemd so fair
In Heaven, when at the Assembly, and in sight
Of all the Seraphim with thee combined
In bold conspiracy against Heavens King,
All on a sudden miserable pain
Surprised thee, dim thine eyes, and dizzie swumm
In darkness, while thy head flames thick and fast
Threw forth, till on the left side opening wide,
Likest to thee in shape and countenance bright,
Then shining heavenly fair, a Goddess armed
Out of thy head I sprung: amazement seized
All the Host of Heaven; back they recoild afraid
At first, and called me Sin, and for a Sign
Portentous held me; but familiar grown,
I pleased, and with attractive graces won
The most averse, thee chiefly, who full often
Thy self in me thy perfect image viewing
Becam'st enamored, and such joy thou took'st
With me in secret, that my womb conceived
A growing burden. Mean while War arose,
And fields were fought in Heaven; wherein remaind
(For what could else) to our Almighty Toe
Clear Victory, to our part loss and rout
Through all the Empyrean: down they fell
Driven headlong from the Pitch of Heaven, down
Into this Deep, and in the general fall
I also; at which time this powerful Key
Into my hand was given, with charge to keep
These Gates for ever shut, which none can pass
Without my opening. Pensive here I sat
Alone, but long I sat not, till my womb
Pregnant by thee, and now excessive grown
Prodigious motion felt and rueful throes.
At last this odious offspring whom thou see
Thine own begotten, breaking violent way
Tore through my entrails, that with fear and pain
Distorted, all my nether shape thus grew
Transformed: but he my inbred enemy
Forth issued, brandishing his fatal Dart
Made to destroy: I fled, and cried out Death;
Hell trembled at the hideous Name, and sighed
From all her Caves, and back resounded Death*
I fled, but he pursued (though more, it seems,
Inflamed with lust then rage) and swifter far,
Me overtook his mother all dismayed,
And in embraces forcible and foul
Ingendring with me, of that rape begot
These yelling Monsters that with ceasless cry
Surround me, as thou sawst, hourly conceived
And hourly born, with sorrow infinite
To me, for when they list into the womb
That bred them they return, and howl and gnaw
My Bowels, their repast; then bursting forth
A fresh with conscious terrors vex me round,
That rest or intermission none I find.
Before mine eyes in opposition sits
Grim Death my Son and foe, who sets them on,
And me his Parent would full soon devour
For want of other prey, but that he knows
His end with mine involvd; and knows that I
Should prove a bitter Morsel, and his bane,
When ever that shall be; so Fate pronounced.
But thou O Father, I forewarn thee, shun
His deadly arrow; neither vainly hope
To be invulnerable in those bright Arms,
Though tempered heavenly, for that mortal dint,
Save he who reigns above, none can resist.
She finished, and the subtle Fiend his lore
Soon learnd, now milder, and thus answered smooth.
Dear Daughter, since thou claim'st me for thy Sire,
And my fair Son here showst me, the dear pledge
Of dalliance had with thee in Heaven, and joys
Then sweet, now sad to mention, through dire change
Befalln us unforeseen, unthought of, know
I come no enemy, but to set free
From out this dark and dismal house of pain,
Both him and thee, and all the heavenly Host
Of Spirits that in our just pretenses armed
Fell with us from on high: from them I go
This uncouth errand sole, and one for all
My self expose, with lonely steps to tread
The unfounded deep, and through the void immense
To search with wandering quest a place foretold
Should be, and, by concurring signs, ere now
Created vast and round, a place of bliss
In the Pourlieues of Heaven, and therein placed
A race of upstart Creatures, to supply
Perhaps our vacant room, though more removed,
Least Heaven surcharged with potent multitude
Might hap to move new broiles: Be this or aught
Then this more secret now designed, I haste
To know, and this once known, shall soon return,
And bring ye to the place where Thou and Death
Shall dwell at ease, and up and down unseen
VVing silently the buxom Air, imbalm'd
With odours; there ye shall be fed and filled
Immeasurably, all things shall be your prey.
He ceased, for both seemd highly pleased, and Death
Grinnd horrible a gast'y smile, to hear
His famine should be filled, and blessed his mawe
Destined to that good hour: no less rejoiced
His mother bad, and thus bespake her Sire.
The key of this infernal Pit by due.
And by command of Heavens all-powerful King
I keep, by him forbidden to unlock
These Adamantine Gates; against all force
Death ready stands to interpose his dart,
Fearless to be o'rmatcht by living might.
But what ow I to his commands above
Who hates me, and has hither thrust me down
Into this gloom of Tartarus profound,
To sit in hateful Office here confined,
Inhabitant of Heaven, and heaven lie-born,
Here in perpetual agony and pain,
With terrors and with clamors compasst round
Of mine own brood, that on my bowels feed:
Thou art my Father, thou ray Author, thou
My being gav'st me, whom should I obey
But thee, whom follow? thou will bring me soon
To that new world of light and bliss, among
The Gods who live at ease, where I shall Reign
At thy right hand voluptuous, as beseems
Thy daughter and thy darling, without end.
Thus saying, from her side the fatal Key,
Sad instrument of all our woe, she took;
And toward the Gate rouling her bestial train,
Forthwith the huge Porcullis high up drew,
Which but her self not all the Stygian powers
Could once have moved; then in the keyhole turns
The intricate wards, and every Bolt and Bar
Of massy Iron or sollid Rock with ease
Unfast'ns: on a sudden open fly
With impetuous recoile and jarring sound
The infernal doors, and on their hinges grate
Harsh Thunder, that the lowest bottom shook
Of Erebus. She op'nd, but to shut
Excelled her power; the Gates wide open stood,
That with extended wings a Bannerd Host
Under spread Ensigns marching might pass through
With Horse and Chariots rankt in loose array;
So wide they stood, and like a Furnace mouth
Cast forth redounding smoke and ruddy flame.
Before their eyes in sudden view appear
The secrets of the hoarie deep, a dark
Illimitable Ocean without bound,
Without dimension, where length, breadth, and highth,
And time and place are lost; where eldest Night
And Chaos, Ancestors of Nature, hold
Eternal Anarchie, amidst the noise
Of endless Wars, and by confusion stand.
For hot, cold, moist, and dry, four Champions fierce
Strive here for Maistrie, and to Battle bring
Their embryon Atoms; they around the flag
Of each his Faction, in their several Clanns,
Light-armed or heavy, sharp, smooth, swift or slow,
Swarm populous, unnumber'd as the Sands
Of Barca or Cyrene's torrid soil,
Levied to side with warring Winds, and poise
Their lighter wings. To whom these most adhere,
He rules a moment; Chaos Umpire sits,
And by decision more imbroiles the fray
By which he Reigns: next him high Arbiter
Chance governs all. Into this wild Abyss,
The Womb of nature and perhaps her Grave,
Of neither Sea, nor Shore, nor Air, nor Fire,
But all these in their pregnant causes mixed
Confusedly, and which thus must ever fight,
Unless the Almighty Maker them ordain
His dark materials to create more Worlds,
Into this wild Abyss the wary fiend
Stood on the brink of Hell and looked a while,
Pondering his Voyage; for no narrow frith
He had to cross. Nor was his ear less peal'd
With noises loud and ruinous (to compare
Great things with small) then when Bellona storms,
With all her battering Engines bent to raze
Some Capital City; or less then if this frame
Of Heaven were falling, and these Elements
In mutiny had from her Axle torn
The steadfast Earth. At last his Sail-broad Vannes
He spreads for flight, and in the surging smoke
Uplifted spurns the ground, thence many a League
As in a cloudy Chair ascending rides
Audacious, but that seat soon failing, meets
A vast vacuitie: all unawares
Fluttring his pennons vain plumb down he drops
Ten thousand fadom deep, and to this hour
Down had been falling, had not by ill chance
The strong rebuff of some tumultuous cloud
Instinct with Fire and Nitre hurried him
As many miles aloft: that fury stayed,
Quenched in a Boggie Syrtis, neither Sea,
Nor good dry Land: nigh founderd on he fares,
Treading the crude consistence, half on foot,
Half flying; behooves him now both Oar and Sail.
As when a Gryfon through the Wilderness
With winged course ore Hill or moarie Dale,
Pursues the Arimaspian, who by stelth
Had from his wakeful custody purloind
The guarded Gold: So eagerly the fiend
Ore bog or steep, through strait, rough, dense, or rare,
With head, hands wings or feet pursues his way,
And swims or sinks, or wades, or creeps, or flies:
At length a universal hubbub wild
Of stunning sounds and voices all confused
Born through the hollow dark assaults his ear
With loudest vehemence: thither he plyes,
Undaunted to meet there what ever power
Or Spirit of the nethermost Abyss
Might in that noise reside, of whom to ask
Which way the nearest coast of darkness lies
Bordering on light; when strait behold the Throne
Of Chaos, and his dark Pavilion spread
Wide on the wasteful Deep; with him Enthroned
Sat Sable-vested Night, eldest of things,
The Consort of his Reign; and by them stood
Orcus and Ades, and the dreaded name
Of Demogorgon; Rumor next and Chance,
And Tumult and Confusion all imbroild,
And Discord with a thousand various mouths.
TO whom Satan turning boldly, thus. Ye Powers
And Spirits of this nethermost Abyss,
Chaos and ancient Night, I come no Spy,
With purpose to explore or to disturb
The secrets of your Realm, but by constraint
Wandering this darksome Desert, as my way,
Lies through your spacious Empire up to light,
Alone, and without guide, half lost, I seek
What readiest path leads where your gloomie bounds
Confine with Heaven; or if some other place
From your Dominion won, the Ethereal King
Possesses lately, thither to arrive
I travel this profound, direct my course;
Directed no mean recompense it brings
To your behoof, if I that Region lost,
All usurpation thence expelled, reduce
To her original darkness and your sway
(Which is my present journey) and once more
Erect the Standard there of ancient Night;
Yours be the advantage all, mine the revenge.
Thus Satan; and him thus the Anarch old
With faultring speech and visage incompos'd
Answered. I know thee, stranger, who thou art,
That mighty leading Angel, who of late
Made head against Heavens King, though overthrown.
I saw and heard, for such a numerous Host
Fled not in silence through the frighted deep
With ruin upon ruin, rout on rout,
Confusion worse confounded; and Heaven Gates
Pourd out by millions her victorious Bands
Pursuing. I upon my Frontieres here
Keep residence; if all I can will serve,
That little which is left so to defend,
Encroacht on still through our intestine broiles
VVeakning the Scepter of old Night: first Hell
Your dungeon stretching far and wide beneath;
Now lately Heaven and Earth, another World
Hung ore my Realm, linked in a golden Chain
To that side Heaven from whence your Legions fell:
If that way be your walk, you have not far;
So much the nearer danger; go and speed;
Havoc and spoil and ruin are my gain.
He ceased; and Satan staid not to reply,
But glad that now his Sea should find a shore,
With fresh alacrity and force renewed
Springs upward like a Pyramid of fire
Into the wild expanse, and through the shock
Of fighting Elements, on all sides round
Environed wins his way; harder beset
And more endangered, then when Argo passed
Through Bosporus betwixt the justling Rocks:
Or when Ulysses on the Larbord shunnd
Charybdis, and by the other whirlpool steard.
So he with difficulty and labor hard
Moved on, with difficulty and labor he;
But he once past, soon after when man fell,
Strange alteration! Sin and Death amain
Following his track, such was the will of Heaven,
Paved alter him a broad and beat'n way
Over the dark Abyss, whose boiling Gulf
Tamely endured a Bridge of wondrous length
From Hell continued reaching the utmost Orb
Of this frail World; by which the Spirits perverse
With easy intercourse pass to and fro
To tempt or punish mortals, except whom
God and good Angels guard by special grace.
But now at last the sacred influence
Of light appears, and from the walls of Heaven
Shoots far into the bosom of dim Night
A glimmering dawn; here Nature first begins
Her fardest verge, and Chaos to retire
As from her outmost works a brok'd foe
With tumult less and with less hostile din,
That Satan with less toil, and now with ease
VVafts on the calmer wave by dubious light
And like a weather-beaten Vessel holds
Gladly the Port, though Shrouds and Tackle torn;
Or in the emptier waste, resembling Air,
VVeighs his spread wings, at leisure to behold
Far off the Empyreal Heaven, extended wide
In circuit, undetermind square or round,
With Opal Towrs and Battlements adorned
Of living Sapphire, once his native Seat;
And fast by hanging in a golden Chain
This pendant world, in bigness as a Starr
Of smallest Magnitude close by the Moon*
Thither full fraught with mischievous revenge,
Accursed, and in a cursed hour he hies.
The End of the Second Book.
Paradise Lost.
BOOK III.
THE ARGUMENT.
God sitting on his Throne sees Satan flying toward this world, then newly
created; shows him to the Son who sat at his right hand; foretells the success
of Satan in perverting mankind; clears his own Justice and Wisdom from all
imputation, having created Man free and able enough to have withstood his
Tempter; yet declares his purpose of grace toward him, in regard he fell not
of his own malice, as did Satan, but by him seduc't. The Son of God renders
praises to his Father for the manifestation of his gracious purpose toward
Man; but God again declares, that Grace cannot be extended toward Man without
the satisfaction of divine Justice; Man has offended the majesty of God by
aspiring to Godhead, and therefore with all his Progeny devoted to death must
dye, unless some one can be found sufficient to answer for his offense, and
undergo his Punishment. The Son of God freely offers himself a Ransom for Man:
the Father accepts hint, ordains his incarnation, pronounces his exaltation
above all Names in Heaven and Earth; commands all the Angels to adore him; they
obey, and hymning to their Harps in full Quire, celebrate the Father and the
Son. Mean while Satan alights upon the bare Unequal of this Worlds outermost
Orb; where wandering he first finds a place since called The Lymbo of Vanity;
what persons and things fly up thither; thence comes to the Gate of Heaven,
described ascending by stairs, and the waters above the Firmament that flow
about it: His passage thence to the Orb of the Sun; he finds there Uriel the
Regient of that Orb, but first changes himself into the shape of a meaner
Angel; and pretending a zealous desire to behold the new Creation and Man whom
God had placed here, inquires of him the place of his habitation, and is
directed; alights first on Mount Niphates.

HAil holy Light, of spring of Heaven firstborn,
Or of the Eternal Coeternal beam
May I express thee unblam'd? since God is light,
And never but in unapproached light
Dwelt from Eternity, dwelt then in thee,
Bright effluence of bright essence increate.
Or hear'st thou rather pure Ethereal stream,
Whose Fountain who shall tell? before the Sun,
Before the Heavens thou were, and at the voice
Of God, as with a Mantle did invest
The rising world of waters dark and deep,
Won from the void and formless infinite.
Thee I re-visit now with bolder wing,
Escaped the Stygian Pool, though long detained
In that obscure so journ, while in my flight
Through utter and through middle darkness borne
With other notes then to the Orphean Lyre
I sung of Chaos and Eternal Night,
Taught by the heavenly Muse to venture down
The dark descent, and up to reascend,
Though hard and rare: thee I revisit safe,
And feel thy sovran vital Lamp; but thou
Revisit'st not these eyes, that roll in vain
To find thy piercing ray, and find no dawn;
So thick a drop serene has quenched their Orbs,
Or dim suffusion veild. Yet not the more
Cease I to wander where the Muses haunt
Clear Spring, or shadie Grove, or Sunnie Hill,
Smit with the love of sacred Song; but chief
Thee Sion and the flowrie Brooks beneath
That wash thy hallowd feet, and warbling flow,
Nightly I visit: nor sometimes forget
Those other two equaled with me in Fate,
So were I equaled with them in renown,
Blind Thamyris and blind Maeonides,
And Tiresias and Phineus Prophets old.
Then feed on thoughts, that voluntary move
Harmonious numbers; as the wakeful Bird
Sings darkling, and in shadiest Covert hid
Tunes her nocturnal Note. Thus with the Year
Seasons return, but not to me returns
Day, or the sweet approach of Even or Morn,
Or sight of vernal bloom, or Summers Rose,
Or flocks, or herds, or human face divine;
But cloud in stead, and ever-during dark
Surrounds me, from the cheerful ways of men
Cut off, and for the Book of knowledge fair
Presented with a Universal blanc
Of Natures works to me expunged and rased,
And wisdom at one entrance quite shut out.
So much the rather thou Celestial light
Shine inward, and the mind through all her powers
Irradiate, there plane eyes, all mist from thence
Purge and disperse, that I may see and tell
Of things invisible to mortal sight.
Now had the Almighty Father from above,
From the pure Empyrean where he sits
High Throned above all highth, bent down his eye,
His own works and their works at once to view:
About him all the Sanctities of Heaven
Stood thick as Stars, and from his sight received
Beatitude past utterance; on his right
The radiant image of his Glory sat,
His only Son; On Earth he first beheld
Our two first Parents, yet the only two
Of mankind, in the happy Garden placed,
Reaping immortal fruits of joy and love,
Uninterrupted joy, unrivald love
In blissful solitude; he then surveyed
Hell and the Gulf between, and Satan there
Coasting the wall of Heaven on this side Night
In the dun Air sublime, and ready now
To stoop with wearied wings, and willing feet
On the bare outside of this World, that seemed
Firm land imbosom'd without Firmament,
Uncertain which, in Ocean or in Air.
Him God beholding from his prospect high,
Wherein past, present, future he beholds,
Thus to his only Son foreseeing spoke.
Only begotten Son, see thou what rage
Transports our adversary, whom no bounds
Prescribed, no bars of Hell, nor all the chains
Heapt on him there, nor yet the main Abyss
Wide interrupt can hold; so bent he seems
On desparate reveng, that shall redound
Upon his own rebellious head. And now
Through all restraint broke loose he wings his way
Not far off Heaven, in the Precincts of light,
Directly toward the new created World,
And Man there placed, with purpose to assay
If him by force he can destroy, or worse,
By some false guile pervert; and shall pervert
For man will hark'n to his glozing lies,
And easily transgress the sole Command,
Sole pledge of his obedience: So will fall,
He and his faithless Progeny: whose fault?
Whose but his own? ingrate, he had of me
All he could have; I made him just and right,
Sufficient to have stood, though free to fall.
Such I created all the Ethereal Powers
And Spirits, both them who stood and them who faild;
Freely they stood who stood, and fell who fell.
Not free, what proof could they have givn sincere
Of true allegiance, constant Faith or Love,
Where only what they needs must do, appeard,
Not what they would? what praise could they receive?
What pleasure I from such obedience paid,
When Will and Reason (Reason also is choice)
Useless and vain, of freedom both despoild,
Made passive both, had servd necessity,
Not me. They therefore as to right belongd,
So were created, nor can justly accuse
Their maker, or their making, or their Fate,
As if predestination overruled
Their will, disposed by absolute Decree
Or high foreknowledge; they themselves decreed
Their own revolt, not I: if I foreknew,
Foreknowledge had no influence on their fault,
Which had no less proved certain unforeknown.
So without least impulse or shadow of Fate,
Or aught by me immutablie foreseen,
They trespass, Authors to themselves in all
Both what they judge and what they choose; for so
I formd them free, and free they must remain,
Till they enthrall themselves: I else must change
Their nature, and revoke the high Decree
Unchangeable, Eternal, which ordained
Their freedom, they themselves ordained their fall*
The first sort by their own suggestion fell,
Self-tempted, self-deprav'd: Man falls deceived
By the other first: Man therefore shall find grace,
The other none: in Mercy and Justice both,
Through Heaven and Earth, so shall my glory excel,
But Mercy first and last shall brightest shine.
Thus while God spoke, ambrosial fragrance filled
All Heaven, and in the blessed Spirits elect
Sense of new joy ineffable diffused:
Beyond compare the Son of God was seen
Most glorious, in him all his Father shon
Substantially expressed, and in his face
Divine compassion visibly appeerd,
Love without end, and without measure Grace,
Which uttering thus he to his Father spoke.
O Father, gracious was that word which closed
Thy sovran sentence, that Man should find grace;
For which both Heaven and Earth shall high extol
Thy praises, with the innumerable sound
Of Hymns and sacred Songs, wherewith thy Throne
Encompassed shall resound thee ever blessed.
For should Man finally be lost, should Man
Thy creature late so loved, thy youngest Son
Fall circumvented thus by fraud, though joynd
With his own folly? that be from thee far,
That far be from thee, Father, who art Judge
Of all things made, and judge only right.
Or shall the Adversary thus obtain
His end, and frustrate thine, shall he fulfill
His malice, and thy goodness bring to naught,
Or proud return though to his heavier doom,
Yet with revenge accomplished and to Hell
Draw after him the whole Race of mankind,
By him corrupted? or will thou thy self
Abolish thy Creation, and unmake,
For him, what for thy glory thou have made?
So should thy goodness and thy greatness both
Be questiond and blaspheam'd without defense.
To whom the great Creator thus replied.
O Son, in whom my Soul has chief delight,
Son of my bosom, Son who art alone
My word, my wisdom, and effectual might,
All haft thou spok'n as my thoughts are, all
As my Eternal purpose has decreed:
Man shall not quite be lost, but saved who will,
Yet not of will in him, but grace in me
Freely voutsaft; once more I will renew
His lapsed powers, though forfeit and enthralled
By sin to foul exorbitant desires;
Upheld by me, yet once more he shall stand
On even ground against his mortal foe,
By me upheld, that he may know how frail
H^s fallen condition is, and to me ow
All his deliverance, and to none but me.
Some I have chosen of peculiar grace
Elect above the rest; so is my will:
The rest shall hear me call, and often be warnd
Their sinful date, and to appease betimes
The incensed Deity, while offered grace
Invites; for I will clear their senses dark,
What may suffice, and soft'n stony hearts
To pray, repent, and bring obedience due.
To Prayer, repentance, and obedience due,
Though but endevord with sincere intent,
Mine ear shall not be slow, mine eye not shut.
And I will place within them as a guide
My Umpire Conscience, whom if they will hear,
Light after light well used they shall attain,
And to the end persisting, safe arrive.
This my long sufferance and my day of grace
They who neglect and scorn, shall never taste;
But hard be hard'nd, blind be blinded more,
That they may stumble on, and deeper fall;
And none but such from mercy I exclude.
But yet all is not don; Man disobeying,
Disloyal breaks his fealty, and sins
Against the high Supremacy of Heaven,
Affecting Godhead, and so loosing all,
To expiate his Treason has naught left,
But to destruction sacred and devote,
He with his whole posterity must dye,
Dye he or Justice must; unless for him
Some other able, and as willing, pay
The rigid satisfaction, death for death.
Say Heavenly powers, where shall we find such love,
Which of ye will be mortal to redeem
Man's mortal crime, and just the unjust to save,
Dwells in all Heaven charity so dear?
He asked, but all the Heavenly Quire stood mute,
And silence was in Heaven: on man's behalf
Patron or Intercessor none appeerd,
Much less that durst upon his own head draw
The deadly forfeiture, and ransom set.
And now without redemption all mankind
Must have bin lost, adjudg'd to Death and Hell
By doom severe, had not the Son of God,
In whom the fullness dwells of love divine,
His dearest mediation thus renewd.
Father, thy word is past, man shall find grace;
And shall grace not find means, that finds her way,
The speediest of thy winged messengers,
To visit all thy creatures, and to all
Comes unprevented, unimplor'd, unsought,
Happy for man, so coming; he her aid
Can never seek, once dead in sins and lost;
Atonement for himself or offering meet,
Indebted and undon, has none to bring:
Behold me then, me for him, life for life
I offer, on me let thine anger fall;
Account me man; I for his sake will leave
Thy bosom, and this glory next to thee
Freely put off, and for him lastly dye
Well pleased, on me let Death wreck all his rage;
Under his gloomie power I shall not long
Lie vanquished; thou have givn me to possess
Life in my self for ever, by thee I live,
Though now to Death I yield, and am his due
All that of me can die, yet that debt paid,
Thou will not leave me in the loathsome grave
His prey, nor suffer my unspotted Soul
For ever with corruption there to dwell;
But I shall rise Victorious, and subdue
My vanquisher, spoild of his vanted spoil;
Death his deaths wound shall then receive, and stoop
Inglorious, of his mortal sting disarmed.
I through the ample Air in Triumph high
Shall lead Hell Captive maugre Hell, and show
The powers of darkness bound. Thou at the sight
Pleased, out of Heaven shall look down and smile,
While by thee raised I ruin all my Foes,
Death last, and with his Carcass glut the Grave:
Then with the multitude of my redeemd
Shall enter Heaven long absent, and return,
Father, to see thy face, wherein no cloud
Of anger shall remain, but peace assured,
And reconcilement; wrauth shall be no more
Thenceforth, but in thy presence Joy entire.
His words here ended, but his meek aspect
Silent yet spoke, and breathed immortal love
To mortal men, above which only shon
Filial obedience: as a sacrifice
Glad to be offered, he attends the will
Of his great Father. Admiration seized
All Heaven, what this might mean, and whither tend
Wondering; but soon the Almighty thus replied:
O thou in Heaven and Earth the only peace
Found out for mankind under wrauth, O thou
My sole complacence! well thou know how dear,
To me are all my works, nor Man the least
Though last created, that for him I spare
Thee from my bosom and right hand, to save,
By loosing thee a while, the whole Race lost.
Thou therefore whom thou only can redeem,
Their Nature also to thy Nature join;
And be thy self Man among men on Earth,
Made flesh, when time shall be, of Virgin seed.
By wondrous birth: Be thou in Adams room
The Head of all mankind, though Adams Son.
As in him perish all men, so in thee
As from a second root shall be restored,
As many as are restored, without thee none.
His crime makes guilty all his Sons, thy merit
Imputed shall absolve them who renounce
Their own both righteous and unrighteous deeds,
And live in thee transplanted, and from thee
Receive new life. So Man, as is most just,
Shall satisfy for Man, be judged and die,
And dying rise, and rising with him raise
His Brethren, ransomd with his own dear life.
So Heavenly love shall outdoo Hellish hate
Giving to death, and dying to redeem,
So dearly to redeem what Hellish hate
So easily destroyed, and still destroys
In those who, when they may, accept not grace.
Nor shall thou by descending to assume
Man's Nature, less'n or degrade thine own.
Because thou have, though Throned in highest bliss
Equal to God, and equally enjoying
God-like fruition, quitted all to save
A World from utter loss, and have been found
By Merit more then Birthright Son of God,
Found worthiest to be so by being Good,
Far more then Great or High; because in thee
Love has abounded more then Glory abounds,
Therefore thy Humiliation shall exalt
With thee thy Manhood also to this Throne*
Here shall thou sit incarnate, here shall Reign
Both God and Man, Son both of God and Man,
Anointed universal King, all Power
I give thee, reign for ever, and assume
Thy Merits; under thee as Head Supreme
Thrones, Princedoms, Powers, Dominions I reduce:
All knees to thee shall bow, of them that bide
In Heaven, or Earth, or under Earth in Hell;
When thou attended gloriously from Heaven
Shall in the Sky appeer, and from thee send
The summoning Archangels to proclaim
Thy dread Tribunal: forthwith from all Winds
The living, and forthwith the cited dead
Of all past Ages to the general Doom
Shall hast'n, such a peal shall rouse their sleep.
Then all thy Saints assembled, thou shall judge
Bad men and Angels, they arraignd shall sink
Beneath thy Sentence; Hell her numbers full,
Thenceforth shall be for ever shut. Mean while
The World shall burn, and from her ashes spring
New Heaven and Earth, wherein the just shall dwell,
And after all their tribulations long
See golden days, fruitful of golden deeds,
With Joy and Love triumphing, and fair Truth.
Then thou thy regal Scepter shall lay by,
For regal Scepter then no more shall need,
God shall be All in All. But all ye Gods,
Adore him, who to compass all this dies,
Adore the Son, and honor him as me.
No sooner had the Almighty ceas't, but all
The multitude of Angels with a shout
Loud as from numbers without number, sweet
As from blessed voices, uttering joy, Heaven rung
With Jubilee, and loud Hosanna's filld
The eternal Regions: lowly reverent
Toward either Throne they bow, and to the ground
With solemn adoration down they cast
Their Crowns inwove with Amarant and Gold,
Immortal Amarant, a Flour which once
In Paradise, fast by the Tree of Life
Began to bloom, but soon for man's offense
To Heaven removed where first it grew, there grows,
And flours aloft shading the Fount of Life,
And where the river of Bliss through midst of Heaven
Rowls over Elisian Flours her Amber stream;
With these that never fade the Spirits elect
Bind their resplendent locks inwreath'd with beams,
Now in loose Garlands thick thrown off, the bright
Pavement that like a Sea of Jasper shon
Impurpl'd with Celestial Roses smiled.
Then Crowned again their gold'n Harps they took,
Harps ever tuned, that glittering by their side
Like Quivers hung, and with Praeamble sweet
Of charming symphonie they introduce
Their sacred Song, and waken raptures high;
No voice exempt, no voice but well could join
Melodious part, such concord is in Heaven.
Thee Father first they sung Omnipotent,
Immutable, Immortal, Infinite,
Eternal King; thee Author of all being,
Fountain of Light, thy self invisible
Amidst the glorious brightness where thou sit'st
Throned inaccessible, but when thou shad'st
The full blaze of thy beams, and through a cloud
Drawn round about thee like a radiant Shrine,
Dark with excessive bright thy skirts appeer,
Yet dazzle Heaven, that brightest Seraphim
Approach not, but with both wings veil their eyes,
Thee next they sang of all Creation first,
Begotten Son, Divine Similitude,
In whose conspicuous countenance, without cloud
Made visible, the Almighty Father shines,
Whom else no Creature can behold; on thee
Impresst the effulgence of his Glory abides,
Transfused on thee his ample Spirit rests.
He Heaven of Heavens and all the Powers therein
By thee created, and by thee threw down
The aspiring Dominations: thou that day
Thy Fathers dreadful Thunder did not spare,
Nor stop thy flaming Chariot wheels, that shook
Heavens everlasting Frame, while over the necks
Thou drov'st of warring Angels disarraid.
Back from pursuit thy Powers with loud acclaime
Thee only extolled, Son of thy Fathers might,
To execute fierce vengeance on his foes,
Not so on Man; him. through their malice fallen,
Father of Mercy and Grace, thou did not doom
So strictly, but much more to pity incline:
No sooner did thy dear and only Son
Perceive thee purposed not to doom frail Man
So strictly, but much more to pity inclined,
He to appease thy wrauth, and end the strife
Of Mercy and Justice in thy face discerned,
Regardless of the Bliss wherein he sat
Second to thee, offered himself to die
For man's offense. O unexampl'd love,
Love no where to be found less then Divine!
Hail Son of God, Savior of Men, thy Name
Shall be the copious matter of my Song
Henceforth, and never shall my Harp thy praise
Forget, nor from thy Fathers praise disjoine.
Thus they in Heaven, above the starry Sphere,
Their happy hours in joy and hymning spent.
Mean while upon the firm opacous Globe
Of this round World, whose first unequal divides
The luminous inferior Orbs, enclosed
From Chaos and the inroad of Darkness old,
Satan alighted walks: a Globe far off
It seemed, now seems a boundless Continent
Dark, waste, and wild, under the frown of Night
Starless exposed, and ever-threatning storms
Of Chaos blustering round, inclement sky;
Save on that side which from the wall of Heaven
Though distant far some small reflection gains
Of glimmering air less vexed with tempest loud:
Here walked the Fiend at large in spacious field.
As when a Vultur on Imaus bred,
Whose snowie ridge the roving Tartar bounds,
Dislodging from a Region scarce of prey
To gorge the flesh of Lambs or yeanling Kids
O^ Hills where Flocks are fed, flies toward the Springs
Of Ganges or Hydaspes, Indian streams;
But in his way lights on the barren Plains
Of Sericana, where Chinese drive
With Sails and Wind their canie Wagons light:
So on this windy Sea of Land, the Fiend
Walked up and down alone bent on his prey,
Alone, for other Creature in this place
Living or liveless to be found was none,
None yet, but store hereafter from the earth
Up hither like Aereal vapors flew
Of all things transitory and vain, when Sin
With vanity had filld the works of men:
Both all things vain, and all who in vain things
Built their fond hopes of Glory or lasting fame,
Or happiness in this or the other life;
All who have their reward on Earth, the fruits
Of painful Superstition and blind Zeal,
Naught seeking but the praise of men, here find
Fit retribution, empty as their deeds;
All the unaccompisht works of Natures hand,
Abortive, monstrous, or unkindly mixed,
Dissolvd on Earth, fleet hither, and in vain,
Till final dissolution, wander here,
Not in the neighboring Moon, as some have dreamd;
Those argent Fields more likely habitants,
Translated Saints, or middle Spirits hold
Betwixt the Angelical and Human kind:
Hither of ill-joynd Sons and Daughters born
First from the ancient World those Giants came
With many a vain exploit, though then renownd:
The builders next of Babel on the Plain
Of Sennaar, and still with vain design
New Babels, had they wherewithal, would build:
Others came single; he who to be deemd
A God, leaped fondly into Aetna flames,
Empedocles, and he who to enjoy
Plito's Elysium, leaped into the Sea,
Cleombrotus, and many more too long,
Embryo's and Idiots, Eremits and Friars
White, Black and Gray, with all their trumperie.
Here Pilgrims roam, that strayed so far to seek
In Golgotha him dead, who lives in Heaven;
And they who to be sure of Paradise
Dying put on the weeds of Dominic,
Or in Franciscan think to pass disguised;
They pass the Planets seven, and pass the fixed,
And that Crystalline Sphere whose balance weighs
The Trepidation talked, and that first moved;
And now Saint Peter at Heavens Wicket seems
To wait them with his Keys, and now at foot
Of Heavens ascent they lift their Feet, when lo
A violent cross wind from either Coast
Blows them transverse ten thousand Leagues awry
Into the devious Air; then might ye see
Cowles, Hoods and Habits with their wearers tossed
And flutterd (...) Rags, then Relics, Beads,
Indulgences, Dispenses, Pardons, Bulls,
The sport of Winds: all these upwhirld aloft
Fly over the backside of the World far off
Into a Limbo large and broad, since called
The Paradise of Fools, to few unknown
Long after, now unpeopl'd, and uncrod;
All this dark Globe the Fiend found as he passed,
And long he wanderd, till at last a gleame
Of dawning light turned thither-ward in haste
His traveled steps; far distant he descries
Ascending by degrees magnificent
Up to the wall of Heaven a Structure high,
At top whereof, but far more rich appeerd
The work as of a Kingly Palace Gate
With Frontispice of Diamond and Gold
Imbellisht, thick with sparkling orient Gemmes
The Portal shon, inimitable on Earth
By Model, or by shading Pencil drawn*
The Stairs were such as whereon Jacob saw
Angels ascending and descending, bands
Of Guardians bright, when he from Esau fled
To Padan-Aram in the field of Luz,
Dreaming by night under the open Sky,
And waking cried, This is the Gate of Heaven
Each Stair mysteriously was meant, nor stood
There always, but drawn up to Heaven sometimes
Viewless, and underneath a bright Sea flowed
Of Jasper, or of liquid Pearl, whereon
Who after came from Earth, sailing arrived,
Wafted by Angels, or flew over the Lake
Rapt in a Chariot drawn by fiery Steeds.
The Stairs were then let down, whether to dare
The Fiend by easy ascent, or aggravate
His sad exclusion from the doors of (...).
Direct against which op'nd from beneath,
Just over the blissful seat of Paradise,
A passage down to the Earth, a passage wide,
Wider by far then that of aftertimes
Over Mount Sion, and, though that were large,
Over the Promised Land to God so dear,
By which, to visit often those happy Tribes,
On high behests his Angels to and fro
Passed frequent, and his eye with choice regard
From Paneas the fount of Jordans flood
To Beersaba, where the Holy Land
Borders on Egypt and the Arabian shore;
So wide the opening seemd, where bounds were set
To darkness, such as bound the Ocean wave.
Satan from hence now on the lower stair
That scaled by steps of Gold to Heaven Gate
Looks down with wonder at the sudden view
Of all this World at once. As when a Scout
Through dark and desert ways with peril gone
All night; at last by break of cheerful dawne
Obtains the brow of some high-climbing Hill,
Which to his eye discovers unaware
The goodly prospect of some foreign land
First-seen, or some renowned Metropolis
With glistering Spires and Pinnacles adornd,
Which now the Rising Sun guilds with his beams,
Such wonder seized, though after Heaven seen,
The Spirit malign, but much more envy seized
At sight of all this World beheld so fair.
Round he surveys, and well might, where he stood
So high above the circling Canopie
Of Nights extended shade; from Eastern Point
Of Libra to the fleecie Starr that bears
Andromeda far off Atlantic Seas
Beyond the Horizon; then from Pole to Pole
He views in breadth, and without longer pause
Down right into the Worlds first Region throws
His flight precipitant, and winds with ease
Through the pure marble Air his oblique way
Amongst innumerable Stars, that shon
Stars distant, but nigh hand seemd other Worlds,
Or other Worlds they seemd, or happy Isles,
Like those Hesperian Gardens famed of old,
Fortunate Fields, and Groves and flourie Vales,
Thrice happy Isles, but who dwelt happy there
He stayed not to enquire: above them all
The golden Sun in splendour likest Heaven
Allured his eye: Thither his course he bends
Through the calm Firmament; but up or down
By center, or eccentric, hard to tell,
Or Longitude, where the great Luminarie
A looff the vulgar Constellations thick,
That from his Lordly eye keep distance due,
Dispenses Light from far; they as they move
Their Starry dance in numbers that compute
Days, months, and years, toward his all-chearing Lamp
Turn swift their various motions, or are turned
By his Magnetic beam, that gently warms
The Univers, and to each inward part
With gentle penetration, though unseen,
Shoots invisible venue even to the deep:
So wondrously was set his Station bright.
There lands the Fiend, a spot like which perhaps
Astronomer in the Sun's lucent Orb
Through his glazed Optic Tube yet never saw.
The place he found beyond expression bright,
Compared with aught on Earth, Medal or Stone;
Not all parts like, but all alike informd
With radiant light, as glowing Iron with fire;
If metal, part seemd Gold, part Silver clear;
If stone, Carbuncle most or Chrysolite,
Rubie or Topaz, to the Twelve that shon
In Aarons Breast Plate, and a stone besides
Imagind rather often then elsewhere seen,
That stone, or like to that which here below
Philosophers in vain so long have sought,
In vain, though by their powerful Art they bind
Volatile Hermes, and call up unbound
In various shape old Proteus from the Sea,
Draind through a Limbec to his Native form.
What wonder then if fields and regions here
Breathe forth Elixir pure, and Rivers run
Potable Gold, when with one virtuous touch
The Arch-chimic Sun so far from us remote
Produces with Terrestrial Humor mixed
Here in the dark so many precious things
Of color glorious and effect so rare?
Here matter new to gaze the Devil met
Undazl'd, far and wide his eye commands,
For sight no obstacle found here, nor shade,
But all Sunshine, as when his Beams at Noon
Culminate from the Equator, as they now
Shot upward still direct, whence no way round
Shadow from body opaque can fall, and the Air,
No where so clear, sharp'nd his visual ray
To objects distant far, whereby he soon
Saw within kenn a glorious Angel stand,
The same whom John saw also in the Sun:
His back was turned, but not his brightness hid;
Of beaming sunnie Rays, a golden tiar
Circl'd his Head, nor less his Locks behind
Illustrious on his Shoulders fledge with wings
Lay waving round; on some great charge employed
He seemd, of fixed in cogitation deep.
Glad was the Spirit impure as now in hope
To find who might direct his wandering flight
To Paradise the happy seat of Man,
His journies end and our beginning woe.
But first he casts to change his proper shape,
Which else might work him danger or delay:
And now a stripling Cherube he appeers,
Not of the prime, yet such as in his face
Youth smiled Celestial, and to every Limb
Suitable grace diffused, so well he feignd,
Under a Coronet his flowing hair
In curles on either cheek played, wings he wore
Of many a colored plume sprinkled with Gold,
His habit fit for speed succinct, and held
Before his decent steps a Silver wand.
He drew not nigh unheard, the Angel bright,
Ere he drew nigh, his radiant visage turned,
Admonisht by his ear, and strait was known
The Archangel Vriel, one of the seav'n
Who in Gods presence, nearest to his Throne
Stand ready at command, and are his Eyes
That run through all the Heavens, or down to the Earth
Bear his swift errands over moist and dry,
Over Sea and Land: him Satan thus accostes;
Vriel, for thou of those seav'n Spirits that stand
In sight of God's high Throne, gloriously bright,
The first art wont his great authentic will
Interpreter through highest Heaven to bring,
Where all his Sons thy Embassy attend;
And here art likeliest by supreme decree
Like honor to obtain, and as his Eye
To visit often this new Creation round;
Unspeakable desire to see, and know
All these his wondrous works, but chiefly Man,
His chief delight and favor, him for whom
All these his works so wondrous he ordaind,
Has brought me from the Quires of Cherubim
Alone thus wandering. Brightest Seraph tell
In which of all these shining Orbs has Man
His fixed seat, or fixed seat has none,
But all these shining Orbs his choice to dwell;
That I may find him, and with secret gaze,
Or open admiration him behold
On whom the great Creator has bestowd
Worlds, and on whom has all these graces powrd*
That both in him and all things, as is meet,
The Universal Maker we may praise;
Who justly has drivn out his Rebel Foes
To deepest Hell, and to repair that loss
Created this new happy Race of Men
To serve him better: wise are all his ways.
So spoke the false dissembler unperceivd;
For neither Man nor Angel can discern
Hypocrisy, the only evil that walks
Invisible, except to God alone,
By his permissive will, through Heaven and Earth:
And often though wisdom wake, suspicion sleeps
At wisdoms Gate, and to simplicity
Resigns her charge, while goodness thinks no ill
Where no ill seems: Which now for once beguiled
Vriel* though Regent of the Sun, and held
The sharpest sighted Spirit of all in Heaven;
Who to the fraudulent Impostor foul
In his uprightness answer thus returned.
Fair Angel, thy desire which tends to know
The works of God, thereby to gforifie
The great Work-Maister, leads to no excess
That reaches blame, but rather merits praise
The more it seems excess, that led thee hither
From thy Empyreal Mansion thus alone,
To witness with thine eyes what some perhaps
Contented with report hear only in heaven:
For wonderful indeed are all his works,
Pleasant to know, and worthiest to be all
Had in remembrance always with delight;
But what created mind can comprehend
Their number, or the wisdom infinite
That brought them forth, but hid their causes deep.
I saw when at his Word the formless Mass,
This worlds material mould, came to a heap:
Confusion heard his voice, and wild uproar
Stood ruled, stood vast infinitude confined;
Till at his second bidding darkness fled,
Light shon, and order from disorder sprung:
Swift to their several Quarters hasted then
The cumbrous Elements, Earth, Flood, Air, Fire,
And this Ethereal quintessence of Heaven
Hew upward, spirited with various forms,
That rowld orbicular, and turned to Stars
Numberless, as thou see, and how they move;
Each had his place appointed, each his course,
The rest in circuit walls this Universe.
Look downward on that Globe whose hither side
With light from hence, though but reflected, shines;
That place is Earth the seat of Man, that light
His day, which else as the other Hemisphere
Night would invade, but there the neighboring Moon
(So call that opposite fair Starr) her aid
Timely interposes, and her monthly round
Still ending, still renewing, through mid Heaven;
With borrowd light her countenance triform
Hence fills and empties to enlighten the Earth,
And in her pale dominion checks the night.
That spot to which I point is Paradise,
Adams abode, those lofty shades his Bower.
Thy way thou can not miss, me mine requires.
Thus said, he turned, and Satan bowing low,
As to superior Spirits is wont in Heaven,
Where honor due and reverence none neglects,
Took leave, and toward the coast of Earth beneath,
Down from the Ecliptic, sped with hoped success,
Throws his steep flight in many an Aerie wheel,
Nor staid, till on Niphates top he lights.
The End of the Third Book.
Paradise Lost.
BOOK IV.
THE ARGUMENT.
Satan now in prospect of Eden* and nigh the place where he must now attempt
the bold enterprise which he undertook alone against God and Man, falls into
many doubts with himself, and many passions, fear, envy, and despare; but at
length confirms himself in evil, journeys on to Paradise, whose outward
prospect and situation is discribed, overleaps the bounds, sits in the shape
of a Cormorant on the Tree of life, as highest in the Garden to look about him.
The Garden described; Satan's first sight of Adam and Eve; his wonder at their
excellent form and happy state, but with resolution to work their fall;
overhears their discourse, thence gathers that the Tree of knowledge was
forbidden them to eat of, under penalty of death; and thereon intends to found
his Temptation, by seducing them to transgress: then leaves them a while, to
know further of their state by some other means. Mean while Uriel descending on
a Sunbeam warns Gabriel, who had in charge the Gate of Paradise, that some
evil spirit had escaped the Deep, and past at Noon by his Sphere in the shape
of a good Angel down to Paradise, discovered after by his furious gestures in
the Mount. Gabriel promises to find him ere morning. Night coming on, Adam and
Eve, discourse of going to their rest: their Bower described; their Evening
worship. Gabriel drawing forth his Bands of Night-watch to walk the round of
Paradise, appoints two strong Angels to Adams Bower, least the evil spirit
should be there doing some harm to Adam or Eve sleeping; there they find him at
the ear of Eve, tempting her in a dream, and bring him, though unwilling, to
Gabriel; by whom questioned, he scornfully answers, prepares resistance, but
hindered by a Sign from Heaven, flies out of Paradise.

O For that warning voice, which he who saw
The Apocalypse, heard cry in Heaven aloud,
Then when the Dragon, put to second rout,
Came furious down to be revenged on men,
Woe to the inhabitants on Earth! that now,
While time was, our first-Parents had bin warnd
The coming of their secret foe, and escaped
Happily so escaped his mortal snare; for now
Satan, now first inflamed with rage, came down,
The Tempter ere the Accuser of mankind,
To wreck on innocent frail man his loss
Of that first Battle, and his flight to Hell:
Yet not rejoicing in his speed, though bold,
Far off and fearless, nor with cause to boast,
Begins his dire attempt, which nigh the birth
Now rolling, boiles in his tumultuous breast,
And like a devilish Engine back recoiles
Upon himself; horror and doubt distract
His troubled thoughts, and from the bottom stir
The Hell within him, for within him Hell
He brings, and round about him, nor from Hell
One step no more then from himself can fly
By change of place: Now conscience wakes despair
That slumberd, wakes the bitter memory
Of what he was, what is, and what must be
Worse; of worse deeds worse sufferings must ensue.
Sometimes toward Eden which now in his view
Lay pleasant, his grievd look he fixes sad,
Sometimes toward Heaven and the full-blazing Sun,
Which now sat high in his Meridian Tower:
Then much revolving, thus in sighs began.
O thou that with surpassing Glory crowned,
Look from thy sole Dominion like the God
Of this new World; at whose sight all the Stars
Hide their diminisht heads; to thee I call,
But with no friendly voice, and add thy name
O Sun, to tell thee how I hate thy beams
That bring to my remembrance from what state
I fell, how glorious once above thy Sphere;
Till Pride and worse Ambition threw me down
Warring in Heaven against Heavens matchless King:
Ah wherefore! he deservd no such return
From me, whom he created what I was
In that bright eminence, and with his good
Upbraided none; nor was his service hard.
What could be less then to afford him praise,
The easiest recompense, and pay him thanks,
How due! yet all his good proved ill in me,
And wrought but malice; lifted up so high
I sdeind subjection, and thought one step higher
Would set me highest, and in a moment quit
The debt immense of endless gratitude,
So burdensome still paying, still to ow;
Forgetful what from him I still receivd,
And understood not that a grateful mind
By owing owes not, but still pays, at once
Indebted and dischargd; what burden then?
O had his powerful Destiny ordaind
Me some inferior Angel, I had stood
Then happy; no unbounded hope had raised
Ambition. Yet why not? some other Power
As great might have aspired, and me though mean
Drawn to his part? but other Powers as great
Fell not, but stand unshak'n, from within
Or from without, to all temptations armed.
Had thou the same free Will and Power to stand?
Thou had: whom have thou then or what to accuse,
But Heavens free Love dealt equally to all?
Be then his Love accursed, since love or hate,
To me alike, it deals eternal woe.
Nay cursed be thou; since against his thy will
Chose freely what it now so justly rues*
Me miserable! which way shall I fly
Infinite wrauth, and infinite despair?
which way I fly is Hell; my self am Hell;
And in the lowest deep a lower deep
Still threatening to devour me opens wide,
To which the Hell I suffer seems a Heaven.
O then at last relent: is there no place
Left for Repentance, none for Pardon left?
None left but by submission; and that word
Disdain forbids me, and my dread of shame
Among the spirits beneath, whom I seduced
With other promises and other vaunts
Then to submit, boasting I could subdue
The Omnipotent. Ay me, they little know
How dearly I abide that boast so vain,
Under what torments inwardly I groan;
While they adore me on the Throne of Hell,
With Diadem and Scepter high advanced
The lower still I fall, only Supreme
In misery; such joy Ambition finds.
But say I could repent and could obtain
By Act of Grace my former state; how soon
Would higth recall high thoughts, how soon unsay
What feigned submission swore: ease would recant
Vows made in pain, as violent and void.
For never can true reconcilement grow
Where wounds of deadly hate have pierced so deep:
Which would but lead me to a worse relapse
And heavier fall: so should I purchase dear
Short intermission bought with double smart.
This knows my punisher; therefore as far
From granting he, as I from begging peace
All hope excluded thus, behold in stead
Of us outcast, exiled, his new delight,
Mankind created, and for him this World.
So farwell Hope, and with Hope farwell Fear,
Farwell Remorse: all Good to me is lost;
Evil be thou my Good; by thee at least
Divided Empire with Heavens King I hold
By thee, and more then half perhaps will reign;
As Man ere long, and this new World shall know.
Thus while he spoke, each passion dimmed his face
Thrice changed with pale, ire, envy and despair,
Which marrd his borrowed visage, and betrayed
Him counterset, if any eye beheld.
For heavenly minds from such distempers foul
Are ever clear. Whereof he soon aware,
Each perturbation smooth^d with outward calm,
Artificer of fraud; and was the first
That practisd falsehood under saintly show,
Deep malice to conceal, couch't with revenge:
Yet not anough had practisd to deceive
Vriel once warnd; whose eye pursued him down
The way he went, and on the Assyrian mount
Saw him disfigured, more then could befall
Spirit of happy sort: his gestures fierce
He markd and mad demeanor, then alone,
As he supposed, all unobserved, unseen.
So on he fares, and to the border comes,
Of Eden, where delicious Paradise,
Now nearer, Crowns with her enclosure green,
As with a rural mound the champain head
Of a steep wilderness, whose hairie sides
With thicket overgrown, gottesque and wild,
Access denied; and over head up grew
Insuperable highth of loftiest shade,
Cedar, and Pine, and Firr, and branching Palm,
A Silvan Scene, and as the ranks ascend
Shade above shade, a woodie Theater
Of stateliest view. Yet higher then their tops
The verdurous wall of paradise up sprung:
Which to our general Sire gave prospect large
Into ^is nether Empire neighboring round.
And ^igher then that Wall a circling row
Of goodliest Trees laden with fairest Fruit,
Blossoms and Fruits at once of golden hue
Appe^rd, with gay enameld colors mixed:
On which the Sun more glad impressed his beams
Then ^n fair Evening Cloud, or humid Bow,
When God has showrd the earth; so lovely seemd
That ^antskip: And of pure now purer air
Meets his approach, and to the heart inspires
Vernal delight and joy, able to drive
All sadness but despair: now gentle gales
Fanning their odoriferous wings dispense
Native perfumes, and whisper whence they stole
Those balmie spoils. As when to them who sail
Beyond the Cape of Hope, and now are past
Mozambic, off at Sea North-East winds blow
Sabean Odours from the spicie shore
Of Arabie the blessed, with such delay
Well pleased they slack their course, and many a League
Cheered with the grateful smell old Ocean smiles.
So entertaind those odorous sweets the Fiend
Who came their bane, though with them better pleased
Then Asmodeus with the fishie fume,
That drove him, though enamourd, from the Spouse
Of Tobits Son, and with a vengeance sent
From Media post to Egypt, there fast bound.
Now to the ascent of that steep savage Hill
Satan had journied on, pensive and slow;
But further way found none, so thick entwined,
As one continued brake, the undergrowth
Of shrubs and tangling bushes had perplexed
All path of Man or Beast that past that way:
One Gate there only was, and that looked East
On the other side: which when the arch-fellon saw
Due entrance he disdaind, and in contempt,
At one slight bound high over leaped all bound
Of Hill or highest Wall, and sheer within
Lights on his feet. As when a prowling Wolf,
Whom hunger drives to seek new haunt for pray,
Watching where Shepherds pen their Flocks at eve
In hurdl'd Cotes amid the field secure,
Leaps over the fence with ease into the Fould:
Or as a Thief bent to unhoord the cash
Of some rich Burgher, whose substantial doors,
Cross-barrd and bolted fast, fear no assault,
In at the window climbs, or over the tiles;
So clomb this first grand Thief into Gods Fould:
So since into his Church lewd Hirelings climb.
Thence up he flew, and on the Tree of Life
The middle Tree and highest there that grew,
Sat like a Cormorant; yet not true Life
Thereby regaind, but sat devising Death
To them who lived; nor on the virtue thought
Of that life-giving Plant, but only used
For prospect, what well used had bin the pledge
Of immortality. So little knows
Any, but God alone, to value right
The good before him, but perverts best things
To worst abuse, or to their meanest use.
Beneath him with new wonder now he views
To all delight of human sense exposed
In narrow room Natures whole wealth, yea more,
A Heaven on Earth, for blissful Paradise
Of God the Garden was, by him in the East
Of Eden planted; Eden stretchd her Line
From Auran Eastward to the Royal Towrs
Of great Seleucia, built by Grecian Kings,
Or where the Sons of Eden long before
Dwelt in Telassar: in this pleasant soil
His far more pleasant Garden God ordaind;
Out of the fertile ground he caused to grow
All Trees of noblest kind for sight, smell, taste;
And all amid them stood, the Tree of Life,
High eminent, blooming Ambrosial Fruit
Of vegetable Gold; and next to Life
Our Death the Tree of knowledge grew fast by,
Knowledge of Good bought dear by knowing ill.
Southward through Eden went a River large,
Nor changed his course, but through the shaggie hill
Passed underneath ingulft, for God had thrown
That Mountain as his Garden mould high raised
Upon the rapid current, which through veins
Of porous Earth with kindly thirst up drawn,
Rose a fresh Fountain, and with many a rill
Waterd the Garden; thence united fell
Down the steep glade, and met the nether Flood,
Which from his darksom passage now appeers,
And now divided into four main Streams,
Runs diverse, wandering many a famous Realm
And Country whereof here needs no account,
But rather to tell how, if Art could tell,
How from that Sapphire Fount the crisped Brooks,
Rolling on Orient Pearl and sands of Gold,
With mazie error under pendant shades
Ran Nectar, visiting each plant, and fed
Flours worthy of Paradise which not nice Art
In Beds and curious Knots, but Nature boon
Powrd forth profuse on Hill and Dale and Plain,
Both where the morning Sun first warmly smote
The open field, and where the unpierc't shade
Imbround the noontide Bowrs: Thus was this place, Balm,
A happy rural seat of various view;
Groves whose rich Trees wept odorous Gumms and
Others whose fruit burnisht with Golden Rind
Hung amiable, Hesperian Fables true,
If true, here only, and of delicious taste:
Betwixt them Lawns, or level Downs, and Flocks
Grasing the tender herb, were interposed,
Or palmie hilloc, or the flourie lap
Of some irriguous Valley spread her store,
Flours of all hue, and without Thorn the Rose:
Another side, umbrageous Grots and Caves
Of cool recess, over which the mantling vine
Lays forth her purple Grape, and gently creeps
Luxuriant; mean while murmuring waters fall
Down the slope hills, dispersed, or in a Lake,
That to the fringed Bank with Myrtle crowned,
Her crystal mirror holds, unite their streams.
The Birds their quire apply; aires, vernal aires,
Breathing the smell of field and grove, attune
The trembling leaves, while Universal Pan
Knit with the Graces and the Hours in dance
Led on the Eternal Spring. Not that fair field
Of Enna, where Proserpin gathering flours
Her self a fairer Flower by gloomie Dis
Was gatherd, which cost Ceres all that pain
To seek her through the world; nor that sweet Grove
Of Daphne by Orontes, and the inspired
Castalian Spring, might with this Paradise
Of Eden strive; nor that Nyscian I Will
Girt with the River Triton, where old Cham,
Whom Gentiles Ammon call and Lybian Jove,
Hid Amalthea and her Florid Son
Young Bacchus from his Stepdame Rhea's eye;
Nor where Abassin Kings their issue Guard,
Mount Amara, though this by some supposed
True Paradise under the Ethiop Line
By Nilus head, enclosd with shining Rock,
A whole days journey high, but wide remote
From this Assyrian Garden, where the Fiend
Saw undelighted all delight, all kind
Of living Creatures new to sight and strange:
Two of far nobler shape erect and tall,
Godlike erect, with native Honor clad
In naked Majesty seemd Lords of all,
And worthy seemd, for in their looks Divine
The image of their glorious Maker shon,
Truth, wisdom, Sanctitude severe and pure,
Severe but in true filial freedom placed;
Whence true authority in men; though both
Not equal, as their sex not equal seemd;
For contemplation he and valor formd,
For softness she and sweet attractive Grace,
He for God only, she for God in him:
His fair large Front and Eye sublime dedar'd
Absolute rule; and Hyacinthin Locks
Round from his parted forelock manly hung
Clustring, but not beneath his shoulders broad:
She as a vail down to the slender waste
Her unadorned golden tresses wore
Dissheveld, but in wanton ringlets waved
As the Vine curles her tendrils, which impli'd
Subjection, but required with gentle sway,
And by her yielded, by him best receivd,
Yielded with coy submission, modest pride,
And sweet reluctant amorous delay.
Nor those mysterious parts were then conceald,
Then was not guilty shame, dishonest shame
Of natures works, honor dishonorable,
Sin-bred, how have ye troubled all mankind
With shows instead, mere shows of seeming pure,
And banished from man's life his happiest life,
Simplicity and spotless innocence.
So passd they naked on, nor shund the sight
Of God or Angel, for they thought no ill:
So hand in hand they passd, the lovliest pair
That ever since in loves embraces met,
Adam the goodliest man of men since borne
His Sons, the fairest of her Daughters Eve.
Under a tuft of shade that on a green
Stood whispering soft, by a fresh Fountain side
They sat them down, and after no more toil
Of their sweet Gardning labor then sufficed
To recommend cool Zephyr, and made ease
More easy, wholesome thirst and appetite
More grateful, to their Supper Fruits they fell,
Nectarine Fruits which the compliant boughs
Yielded them, side-long as they sat recline
On the soft downie Bank damaskt with flours:
The favourie pulp they chew, and in the rind
Still as they thirsted scoop the brimming stream;
Nor gentle purpose, nor endearing smiles
Wanted, nor youthful dalliance as beseems
Fair couple, linkt in happy nuptial League,
Alone as they. About them frisking played
All Beasts of the Earth, since wild, and of all chase
In Wood or Wilderness, Forest or Den;
Sporting the Lion rampd, and in his paw
Dandl'd the Kid; Bears, Tigers, Ounces, Pards,
Gambold before them, the unwieldy Elephant
To make them mirth used all his might, and wreathd
His Lithe Proboscis; close the Serpent sly
Insinuating, wove with Gordian twine
His breaded train, and of his fatal guile
Gave proof unheeded; others on the grass
Coucht, and now filled with pasture gazing sat,
Or Bedward ruminating: for the Sun
Declined was hasting now with prone carreer
To the Ocean Isles, and in the ascending Scale
Of Heaven the Stars that usher Evening rose*
When Satan still in gaze, as first he stood,
Scarce thus at length faild speech recoverd sad.
O Hell! what do mine eyes with grief behold,
Into our room of bliss thus high advanced
Creatures of other mould, earth-born perhaps,
Not Spirits, yet to heavenly Spirits bright
Little inferior; whom my thoughts pursue
With wonder, and could love, so lively shines
In them Divine resemblance, and such grace
The hand that formd them on their shape has pourd.
Ah gentle pair, ye little think how nigh
Your change approaches, when all these delights
Will vanish and deliver ye to woe;
More woe, the more your taste is now of joy;
Happy, but for so happy ill secured
Long to continue, and this high seat your Heaven
Ill senc't for Heaven to keep out such a foe
As now is enterd; yet no purposed foe
To you whom I could pity thus forlorn
Though I unpittied: League with you I seek,
And mutual amity so straight, so close,
That I with you must dwell, or you with me
Henceforth; my dwelling happily may not please
Like this fair Paradise, your sense, yet such
Accept your Makers work; he gave it me,
Which I as freely give; Hell shall unfold,
To entertain you two, her widest Gates,
And send forth all her Kings; there will be room,
Not like these narrow limits, to receive
Your numerous of spring; if no better place,
Thank him who puts me loath to this revenge
On you who wrong me not for him who wronged.
And should I at your harmless innocence
Melt, as I do, yet public reason just,
Honor and Empire with revenge enlarged,
By conquering this new World, compels me now
To do what else though damnd I should abhor.
So spoke the Fiend, and with necessity,
The Tyrants plea, excused his devilish deeds.
Then from his lofty stand on that high Tree
Down he alights among the sportful Herd
Of those fourfooted kinds, himself now one,
Now other, as their shape servd best his end
Nearer to view his prey, and unespi'd
To mark what of their state he more might learn
By word or action marked: about them round
A Lion now he stalks with fiery glare,
Then as a Tiger, who by chance has spied
In some Purlieu two gentle Fawnes at play,
Strait couches close, then rising changes often
His couchant watch, as one who chose his ground
Whence rushing he might surest seize them both
Grip't in each paw: When Adam first of men
To first of women Eve thus moving speech,
Turned him all ear to hear new utterance flow.
Sole partner and sole part of all these joys,
Bearer thy self then all; needs must the power
That made us, and for us this ample World
Be infinitely good, and of his good
As liberal and free as infinite,
That raised us from the dust and placed us here
In all this happiness, who at his hand
Have nothing merited, nor can perform
Aught whereof he has need, he who requires
From us no other service then to keep
This one, this easy charge, of all the Trees
In Paradise that bear delicious fruit
So various, not to taste that only Tree
Of knowledge, planted by the Tree of Life,
So near grows Death to Life, what ere Death is,
Some dreadful thing no doubt; for well thou know
God has pronounced it death to taste that Tree,
The only sign of our obedience left
Among so many signs of power and rule
Conferrd upon us, and Dominion given
Over all other Creatures that possess
Earth, Air, and Sea. Then let us not think hard
One easy prohibition, who enjoy
Free leave so large to all things else, and choice
Unlimited of manifold delights:
But let us ever praise him and extol
His bounty, following our delightful task
To prune these growing Plants, and tend these Flours,
Which were it toilsom, yet with thee were sweet.
To whom thus Eve replied. O thou for whom
And from whom I was formd flesh of thy flesh,
And without whom am to no end, my Guide
And Head, what thou have said is just and right.
For we to him indeed all praises owe,
And daily thanks, I chiefly who enjoy
So far the happier Lot, enjoying thee
Praeminent by so much odds, while thou
Like consort to thy self can no where find.
That day I often remember, when from sleep
I first awak't, and found my self reposed
Under a shade of flours, much wondering where
And what I was, whence thither brought, and how.
Not distant far from thence a murmuring sound
Of waters issued from a Cave and spread
Into a liquid Plain, then stood unmoved
Pure as the expanse of Heaven; I thither went
With unexperienc't thought, and laid me down
On the green bank, to look into the clear
Smooth Lake, that to me seemd another Sky.
As I bent down to look, just opposite,
A Shape within the watery gleam appeerd
Bending to look on me, I started back,
It started back, but pleased I soon returned,
Pleased it returned as soon with answering looks
Of sympathy and love; there I had fixed
Mine eyes till now, and pined with vain desire,
Had not a voice thus warnd me, What thou see,
What there thou see fair Creature is thy self,
With thee it came and goes: but follow me,
And I will bring thee where no shadow stays
Thy coming, and thy soft embraces, he
Whose image thou art, him thou shall enjoy
Inseparably thine, to him shall bear
Multitudes like thy self, and thence be called
Mother of human Race: what could I do,
But follow strait, invisibly thus led?
Till I espied thee, fair indeed and tall,
Under a Platan, yet methought less fair,
Less winning soft, less amiablie mild,
Then that smooth watery image; back I turned,
Thou following cryd'st aloud, Return fair Eve,
Whom fli'st thou? whom thou fli'st, of him thou art,
His flesh, his bone; to give thee being I lent
Out of my side to thee, nearest my heart
Substantial Life, to have thee by my side
Henceforth an individual solace dear;
Part of nay Soul I seek thee, and thee claim
My other half: with that thy gentle hand
Seisd mine, I yielded, and from that time see
How beauty is excelld by manly grace
And wisdom, which alone is truly fair.
So spoke our general Mother, and with eyes
Of conjugal attraction unreprov'd,
And meek surrender, half Embracing leand
On our first Father, half her swelling Breast
Naked met his under the flowing Gold
Of her loose tresses hid: he in delight
Both of her Beauty and submissive Charms
Smiled with superior Love, as Jupiter
On Juno smiles, when he impregns the Clouds
That shed May Flowers; and pressed her Matron lip
With kisses pure: aside the Devil turned
For envy, yet with jealous leer malign
Eyed them askance, and to himself thus plaind.
Sight hateful, sight tormenting! thus these two
Imparadis't in one another arms
The happier Eden, shall enjoy their fill
Of bliss on bliss, while I to Hell am thrust,
Where neither joy nor love, but fierce desire,
Among our other torments not the least,
Still unfulfill'd with pain of longing pines;
Yet let me not forget what I have gained
From their own mouths; all is not theirs it seems:
One fatal Tree there stands of Knowledge called,
Forbidden them to taste: Knowledge forbidd'n?
Suspicious, reasonless. Why should their Lord
Envy them that? can it be sin to know,
Can it be death? and do they only stand
By Ignorance, is that their happy state,
The proof of their obedience and their faith?
O fair foundation laid whereon to build
Their ruin! Hence I will excite their minds
With more desire to know, and to reject
Envious commands, invented with design
To keep them low whom knowledge might exalt
Equal with Gods; aspiring to be such,
They taste and die: what likelier can ensue?
But first with narrow search I must walk round
This Garden, and no corner leave unspi'd;
A chance but chance may lead where I may meet
Some wandering Spirit of Heaven, by Fountain side,
Or in thick shade retired, from him to draw
What further would be learnt. Live while ye may,
Yet happy pair; enjoy, till I return,
Short pleasures, for long woes are to succeed.
So saying, his proud step he scornful turned,
But with sly circumspection, and began
Through wood, through waste, over hill, over dale his roam.
Mean while in utmost Longitude, where Heaven
With Earth and Ocean meets, the setting Sun
Slowly descended, and with right aspect
Against the eastern Gate of Paradise
Leveld his eevning Rays: it was a Rock
Of Alablaster, pil'd up to the Clouds,
Conspicuous far, winding with one ascent
Accessible from Earth, one entrance high;
The rest was craggie cliff, that overhung
Still as it rose, impossible to climb.
Betwixt these rockie Pillars Gabriel sat
Chief of the Angelic Guards, awaiting night;
About him exercised Heroic Games
The unarmed Youth of Heaven, but nigh at hand
Celestial Armourie, Shields, Helmes, and Spears,
Hung high with Diamond flaming, and with Gold.
Thither came Vriel, gliding through the Eeven
On a Sun beam, swift as a shooting Starr
In Autumn thwarts the night, when vapors fired
Impress the Air, and shows the Mariner
From what point of his Compass to beware
Impetuous winds: he thus began in haste.
Gabriel, to thee thy course by Lot has given
Charge and strict watch that to this happy Place
No evil thing approach or enter in;
This day at highth of Noon came to my Sphere
A Spirit, zealous, as he seemed, to know
More of the Almighties works, and chiefly Man
Gods latest Image: I described his way
Bent all on speed, and marked his Aerie Gate;
But in the Mount that lies from Eden North,
Where he first lighted, soon discernd his looks
Alien from Heaven, with passions foul obscured:
Mine eye pursued him still, but under shade
Lost sight of him; one of the banished crew
I fear, has ventured from the deep, to raise
New troubles; him thy care must be to find.
To whom the winged Warrior thus returned:
Vriel, no wonder if thy perfet sight,
Amid the Suns bright circle where thou first,
See far and wide: in at this Gate none pass
The vigilance here placed, but such as come
Well known from Heaven; and since Meridian hour
No Creature thence: if Spirit of other sort,
So minded, have ore leapt these earthie bounds
On purpose, hard thou know it to exclude
Spiritual substance with corporeal bar.
But if within the circuit of these walks,
In whatsoever shape he lurk, of whom
Thou tellst, by morrow dawning I shall know.
So promised he, and Vriel to his charge
Returned on that bright beam, whose point now raisd
Bore him slope downward to the Sun now fallen
Beneath the Azores; whither the prime Orb,
Incredible how swift, had thither rolled
Diurnal, or this less volubil Earth
By shorter flight to the East, had left him there
Arraying with reflected Purple and Gold
The Clouds that on his Western Throne attend:
Now came still Eevning on, and Twilight gray
Had in her sober Liverie all things clad;
Silence accompanied, for Beast and Bird,
They to their grassie Couch, these to their Nests
Were slunk, all but the wakeful Nightingale;
She all night long her amorous descant sung;
Silence was pleased: now glowed the Firmament
With living Saphirs: Hesperus that led
The starrie Host, rode brightest, till the Moon
Rising in clouded Majesty, at length
Apparent Queen unvaild her peerless light,
And over the dark her Silver Mantle threw.
When Adam thus to Eve: Fair Consort, the hour
Of night, and all things now retired to rest
Mind us of like repose, since God has set
Labor and rest, as day and night to men
Successive, and the timely dew of sleep
Now falling with soft slumbrous weight inclines
Our eyelids; other Creatures all day long
Rove idle unimploid, and less need rest;
Man has his daily work of body or mind
Appointed, which declares his Dignity,
And the regard of Heaven on all his ways;
While other Animals unactive range,
And of their doings God takes no account.
To morrow ere fresh Morning streak the East
With first approach of light, we must be risen,
And at our pleasant labor, to reform
Yon flourie Arbors, yonder Allies green,
Our walk at noon, with branches overgrown,
That mock our scant manuring, and require
More hands then ours to lop their wanton growth:
Those Blossoms also, and those dropping Gumms,
That lie bestrowne unsightly and unsmooth,
Ask riddance, if we mean to tread with ease;
Mean while, as Nature wills, Night bids us rest.
To whom thus Eve with perfet beauty adornd.
My Author and Disposer, what thou bidst
Unargu'd I obey; so God ordains,
God is thy Law, thou mine: to know no more
Is woman's happiest knowledge and her praise.
With thee conversing I forget all time,
All seasons and their change, all please alike.
Sweet is the breath of morn, her rising sweet,
With charm of earliest Birds; pleasant the Sun
When first on this delightful Land he spreads
His orient Beams, on herb, tree, fruit, and flour,
Glistring with dew; fragrant the fertile earth
After soft showers; and sweet the coming on
Of grateful Eevning mild, then silent Night
With this her solemn Bird and this fair Moon,
And these the Gemms of Heaven, her starrie train:
But neither breath of Morn when she ascends
With charm of earliest Birds, nor rising Sun
On this delightful land, nor herb, fruit, flower,
Glistring with dew, nor fragrance after showers,
Nor grateful Eevning mild, nor silent Night
With this her solemn Bird, nor walk by Moon,
Or glittering Starr-light without thee is sweet.
But wherefore all night long shine these, for whom
This glorious sight, when sleep has shut all eyes?
To whom our general Ancestor replied.
Daughter of God and Man* accomplished Eve,
Thole have their course to finish, round the Earth,
By morrow Eevning, and from Land to Land
In order, though to Nations yet unborn,
Ministering light prepared, they set and rise;
Least total darkness should by Night regaine
Her old possession, and extinguish life
In Nature and all things, which these soft fires
Not only enlighten, but with kindly heat
Of various influence foment and warm,
Temper or nourish, or in part shed down
Their stellar virtue on all kinds that grow
On Earth, made hereby apter to receive
Perfection from the Suns more potent Ray.
These then, though unbeheld in deep of night,
Shine not in vain, nor think, though men were none,
That heaven would want spectators, God want praise;
Millions of spiritual Creatures walk the Earth
Unseen, both when we wake, and when we sleep:
All these with ceasless praise his works behold
Both day and night: how often from the steep
Of echoing Hill or Thicket have we heard
Celestial voices to the midnight air,
Sole, or responsive each to others note
Singing their great Creator: often in bands
While they keep watch, or nightly rounding walk
With Heavenly touch of instrumental sounds
In full harmonic number joind, their songs
Divide the night, and lift our thoughts to Heaven.
Thus talking hand in hand alone they passed
On to their blissful Bower; it was a place
Chos'n by the sovran Planter, when he framed
All things to man's delightful use; the roof
Of thickest covert was inwoven shade
Laurel and Myrtle, and what higher grew
Of firm and fragrant leaf; on either side
Acanthus, and each odorous bushie shrub
Fenced up the verdant wall; each beauteous flour,
Iris all hues, Roses, and Gessamin
Reared high their flourisht heads between, and wrought
Mosaic; underfoot the Violet,
Crocus, and Hyacinth with rich inlay
Broiderd the ground, more colored then with stone
Of costliest Emblem: other Creature here
Beast, Bird, Insect, or Worm durst enter none;
Such was their awe of Man. In shadie Bower
More sacred and sequesterd, though but feignd,
Pan or Silvanus never slept, nor Nymph,
Nor Faunus haunted. Here in close recess
With Flowers, Garlands, and sweet smelling Herbs
Espoused Eve decked first her nuptial Bed,
And heavenly Quires the Hymenaean sung,
What day the genial Angel to our Sire
Brought her in naked beauty more adorned,
More lovely then Pandora, whom the Gods
Endowd with all their gifts, and O too like
In sad event, when to the unwiser Son
Of Japhet brought by Hermes, she ensnared
Mankind with her fair looks, to be avenge^d
On him who had stole Joves authentic fire.
Thus at their shadie Lodge arrived, both stood
Both turned, and under open Sky adored
The God that made both Sky, Air, Earth and Heaven
Which they beheld, the Moons resplendent Globe
And starrie Pole: Thou also made the Night,
Maker Omnipotent, and thou the Day,
Which we in our appointed work imployd
Have finished happy in our mutual help
And mutual love, the Crown of all our bliss
Ordaind by thee, and this delicious place
For us too large, where thy abundance wants
Partakers, and uncropt falls to the ground.
But thou have promised from us two a Race
To fill the Earth, who shall with us extol
Thy goodness infinite, both when we wake,
And when we seek, as now, thy gift of sleep.
This said unanimous, and other Rites
Observing none, but adoration pure
Which God likes best, into their inmost bower
Handed they went; and eased the purting off
These troublesome disguises which we wear,
Strait side by side were laid, nor turned I ween
Adam from his fair Spouse, nor Eve the Rites
Mysterious of connubial Love refused:
Whatever Hypocrites austerely talk
Of purity and place and innocence,
Defaming as impure what God declares
Pure, and commands to some, leaves free to all.
Our Maker bids increase, who bids abstain
But our destroyer, foe to God and Man?
Hail wedded Love, mysterious Law, true source
Of human ofsspring, sole propriety,
In Paradise of all things common else.
By thee adulterous lust was driven from men
Among the bestial herds to raunge, by thee
Founded in Reason, Loyal, Just, and Pure,
Relations dear, and all the Charities
Of Father, Son, and Brother first were known.
Far be it, that I should write thee sin or blame,
Or think thee unbefitting holiest place,
Perpetual Fountain of Domestic sweets,
Whose bed is undefiled and chaste pronounced,
Present, or past, as Saints and Patriarchs used.
Here Love his golden shafts imploies, here lights
His constant Lamp, and waves his purple wings,
Reigns here and revels; not in the bought smile
Of Harlots, loveless, joyless, unindeard,
Casual fruition, nor in Court Amors
Mixed Dance, or wanton Mask, or Midnight Bal,
Or Serenate, which the starved Lover sings
To his proud fair, best quitted with disdain.
These lulld by Nightingales imbraceing slept,
And on their naked limbs the flourie roof
Showrd Roses, which the Morn repaired. Sleep on
Blessed pair; and O yet happiest if ye seek
No happier state, and know to know no more.
Now had night measured with her shaddowie Cone
Half way up Hill this vast Sublunar Vault,
And from their Ivorie Port the Cherubim
Forth issuing at the accustomd hour stood armd
To their night watches in warlike Parade,
When Gabriel to his next in power thus spoke.
Vzziel, half these draw off, and coast the South
With strictest watch; these other wheel he North,
Our circuit meets full West. As flame they part
Half wheeling to the Shield, half to the Spear.
From these, two strong and subtle Spirits he called
That near him stood, and gave them thus in charge.
Ithuriel and Zephon, with wingd speed
Search through this Garden, leave unsearcht no nook,
But chiefly where those two fair Creatures Lodge,
Now laid perhaps asleep secure of harm.
This Eevning from the Sun's decline arrived
Who tells of some infernal Spirit seen
Hitherward bent (who could have thought?) escaped
The bars of Hell, on errand bad no doubt:
Such where ye find, seize fast, and hither bring.
So saying, on he led his radiant Files,
Daz'ling the Moon; these to the Bower direct
In search of whom they sought: him there they found
Squat like a Toad, close at the ear of Eve*
Assaying by his Devilish art to reach
The Organs of her Fancy, and with them forge
Illusions as he list, Phantasms and Dreams,
Or if, inspiring venom, he might taint
The animal Spirits that from pure blood arise
Like gentle breaths from Rivers pure, thence raise
At least distemperd, discontented thoughts,
Vain hopes, vain aims, inordinate desires
Blown up with high conceits ingendring pride.
Him thus intent Ithuriel with his Spear
Touched lightly; for no falsehood can endure
Touch of Celestial temper, but returns
Of force to its own likeness: up he starts
Discoverd and surpised. As when a spark
Lights on a heap of nitrous Powder, laid
Fit for the Tun some Magazin to store
Against a rumord War, the Smuttie grain
With sudden blaze diffused, inflames the Air:
So started up in his own shape the Fiend.
Back stepped those two fair Angels half amazed
So sudden to behold the grieflie King;
Yet thus, unmovd with fear, accost him soon.
Which of those rebel Spirits adjudg'd to Hell
Come thou, escaped thy prison, and transformed,
Why satst thou like an enemy in wait
Here watching at the head of these that sleep?
Know ye not then said Satan, filled with scorn,
Know ye not me? ye knew me once no mate
For you, there sitting where ye durst not soar;
Not to know me argues your selves unknown,
The lowest of your throng; or if ye know,
Why ask ye, and superfluous begin
Your message, like to end as much in vain?
To whom thus Zephon, answering scorn with scorn.
Think not, revolted Spirit, thy shape the same,
Or undiminisht brightness, to be known
As when thou stoodst in Heaven upright and pure;
That Glory then, when thou no more wast good,
Departed from thee, and thou resembl'st now
Thy sin and place of doom obscure and foul.
But come, for thou, besure, shall give account
To him who sent us, whose charge is to keep
This place inviolable, and these from harm.
So spoke the Cherube, and his grave rebuke
Severe in youthful beauty, added grace
Invincible: abasht the Devil stood,
And felt how awful goodness is, and saw
Virtue in her shape how lovly, saw, and pined
His loss; but chiefly to find here observd
His luster visibly impar'd; yet seemd
Undaunted. If I must contend, said he,
Best with the best, the Sender not the sent,
Or all at once; more glory will be wonn,
Or less be lost. Thy fear, said Zephon bold,
Will save us trial what the least can do
Single against thee wicked, and thence weak.
The Fiend replied not, overcome with rage;
But like a proud Steed reind, went hautie on,
Chaumping his iron curb: to strive or fly
He held it vain; awe from above had quelld
His heart, not else dismayed. Now drew they nigh
The western Point, where those half-rounding guards
Just met, and closing stood in squadron joind
Awaiting next command. To whom their Chief
Gabriel from the Front thus called aloud.
O friends, I hear the tread of nimble feet
Hasting this way, and now by glimps discern
Ithuriel and Zephon through the shade,
And with them comes a third of Regal port,
But faded splendour wan; who by his gate
And fierce demeanor seems the Prince of Hell,
Not likely to part hence without contest;
Stand firm, for in his look defiance lours.
He scarce had ended, when those two approachd
And brief related whom they brought, where found,
How busied, in what form and posture coucht.
To whom with stern regard thus Gabriel spoke.
Why have thou, Satan, broke the bounds prescribed
To thy transgressions, and disturbd the charge
Of others, who approve not to transgress
By thy example, but have power and right
To question thy bold entrance on this place;
Imploi'd it seems to violate sleep, and those
Whose dwelling God has planted here in bliss?
To whom thus Satan, with contemptuous brow.
Gabriel, thou had in Heaven the esteem of wise,
And such I held thee; but this question asked
Puts me in doubt. Lives there who loves his pain?
Who would not, finding way, break loose from Hell,
Though thither doomd? Thou would thy self, no doubt,
And boldly venture to whatever plate
Farthest from pain, where thou might hope to change
Torment with ease, and soonest recompense
Dole with delight, which in this place I sought;
To thee no reason; who know only good,
But evil have not tried: and wilt object
His will who bound us? let him surer bar
His Iron Gates, if he intends our stay
In that dark durance: thus much what was asked.
The rest is true, they found me where they say;
But that implies not violence or harm.
Thus he in scorn. The warlike Angel moved,
Disdainfully half smiling thus replied.
O loss of one in Heaven to judge of wise,
Since Satan fell, whom folly overthrew,
And now returns him from his prison escaped,
Gravely in doubt whether to hold them wise
Or not, who ask what boldness brought him hither
Unlicenc't from his bounds in Hell prescribed;
So wise he judges it to fly from pain
However, and to escape his punishment.
So judge thou still, presumptuous, till the wrauth,
Which thou incurr'st by flying, meet thy flight
Seavenfold, and scourge that wisdom back to Hell,
Which taught thee yet no better, that no pain
Can equal anger infinite provoked.
But wherefore thou alone? wherefore with thee
Came not all Hell broke loose? is pain to them
Less pain, less to be fled, or thou then they
Less hardy to endure? courageous Chief,
The first in flight from pain, had thou alleged
To thy deserted host this cause of flight,
Thou surely had not come sole fugitive.
To which the Fiend thus answered frowning stern.
Not that I less endure, or shrink from pain,
Insulting Angel, well thou know I stood
Thy fiercest, when in Battle to thy aid
Thy blasting volied Thunder made all speed
And seconded thy else not dreaded Spear.
But still thy words at random, as before,
Argue thy inexperience what behooves
From hard assaies and ill successes past
A faithful Leader, not to hazard all
Through ways of danger by himself untri'd,
I therefore, I alone first undertook
To wing the desolate Abyss, and spy
This new created World, whereof in Hell
Fame is not silent, here in hope to find
Better abode, and my afflicted Powers
To settle here on Earth, or in mid Air;
Though for possession put to try once more
What thou and thy gay Legions dare against;
Whose easier business were to serve their Lord
High up in Heaven, with songs to hymn his Throne,
And practiced distances to cringe, not fight.
To whom the warrior Angel, soon replied.
To say and strait unsay, pretending first
Wise to fly pain, professing next the Spy,
Argues no Leader but a liar trac't,
Satan, and could thou faithful add? O name,
O sacred name of faithfulness profaned!
Faithful to whom? to thy rebellious crew?
Army of Fiends, fit body to fit head;
Was this your discipline and faith engaged,
Your military obedience, to dissolve
Allegiance to the acknowldg'd Power supreme?
And thou sly hypocrite, who now would seem
Patron of liberty, who more then thou
Once fawned, and cring'd, and servilly adored
Heavens awful Monarch? wherefore but in hope
To dispossess him, and thy self to reign?
But mark what I arreede thee now, avaunt;
Fly thither whence thou fledst: if from this hour
Within these hallowd limits thou appeer,
Back to the infernal pit I drag thee chaind,
And Scale thee so, as henceforth not to scorn
The facil gates of hell too slightly barrd.
So threatened he, but Satan to no threats
Gave heed, but waxing more in rage replied.
Then when I am thy captive talk of chains,
Proud limitarie Cherube, but ere then
Far heavier load thy self expect to feel
From my prevailing arm, though Heavens King
Ride on thy wings, and thou with thy Compeers,
Used to the yoke, draw'st his triumphant wheels
In progress through the rode of Heaven Star-pav'd.
While thus he spoke, the Angelic Squadron bright
Turned fiery red, sharpning in mooned horns
Their Phalanx, and began to hemm him round
With ported Spears, as thick as when a field
Of Ceres ripe for harvest waving bends
Her bearded Grove of ears, which way the wind
Swayes them; the careful Plowman doubting stands
Least on the threshing floor his hopeful sheaves
Prove chaff. On the other side Satan alarmed
Collecting all his might dilated stood,
Like Teneriff or Atlas unremov'd:
His stature reached the Sky, and on his Crest
Sat horror Plumed; nor wanted in his graspe
What seemd both Spear and Shield: now dreadful deeds
Might have ensued, nor only Paradise
In this commotion, but the Starrie Cope
Of Heaven perhaps, or all the Elements
At least had gone to rack, disturbd and torn
With violence of this conflict, had not soon
The Eternal to prevent such horrid fray
Hung forth in Heaven his golden Scales, yet seen
Betwixt Astrea and the Scorpion sign,
Wherein all things created first he weighd,
The pendulous round Earth with ballanc't Air
In counterpoise, now ponders all events,
Battles and Realms: in these he put two weights
The sequel each of parting and of fight*
The latter quick up flew, and kicked the beam;
Which Gabriel spying, thus bespake the Fiend.
Satan, I know thy strength, and thou know mine*
Neither our own but given; what folly then
To boast what Arms can do, since thine no more
Then Heaven permits, nor mine, though doubld now
To trample thee as mire: for proof look up,
And read thy Lot in yon celestial Sign
Where thou art weighed, and shown how light, how weak,
If thou resist. The Fiend looked up and knew
His mounted scale aloft: nor more; but fled
Murmuring, and with him fled the shades of night.
The End of the Fourth Book.
Paradise Lost.
BOOK V.
THE ARGUMENT.
Morning approach't, Eve relates to Adam her troublesome dream; he likes it
not, yet comforts her: They come forth to their day labors: Their Morning Hymn
at the Door of their Bower. God to render Man inexcusable sends Raphael to
admonish him of his obedience, of his free estate, of his enemy near at hand;
who he is, and why his enemy, and whatever else may avail Adam to know. Raphael
comes down to Paradise, his appearance described, his coming discerned by Adam
afar off sitting at the door of his Bower; he goes out to meet him, brings him
to his lodge, entertains him with the choycest fruits of Paradise got together
by Eve; their discourse at Table: Raphael performs his message, minds Adam of
his state and of his enemy; relates at Adams request who that enemy is, and how
he came to be so, beginning from his first revolt in Heaven, and the occasion
thereof; how he drew his Legions after him to the parts of the North, and there
incited them to rebel with him, persuading all but only Abdiel a Seraph, who in
Argument diswades and opposes him, then forsakes him.

NOw Morn her rosy steps in the Eastern Clime
Advancing, sowed the earth with Orient Pearl,
When Adam wak't, so customd, for his sleep
Was Aerie light from pure digestion bred,
And temperat vapors bland, which the only sound
Of leaves and fuming rills, Aurora's fan,
Lightly dispersed, and the shrill Matin Song
Of Birds on every bough; so much the more
His wonder was to find unwak'nd Eve
With Tresses discomposed, and glowing Cheek,
As through unquiet rest: he on his side
Leaning half-rais'd, with looks of cordial Love
Hung over her enamored, and beheld
Beauty, which whether waking or asleep,
Shot forth peculiar Graces; then with voice
Mild, as when Zephyrus on Flora breathes,
Her hand soft touching, whisperd thus. Awake
My fairest, my espoused, my latest found,
Heavens last best gift, my ever new delight,
Awake, the morning shines, and the fresh field
Calls us, we lose the prime, to mark how spring
Our tended Plants, how blows the Citron Grove,
What drops the Myrrh, and what the balmie Reed,
How Nature paints her colors, how the Be
Sits on the Bloom extracting liquid sweet.
Such whispering waked her, but with startled eye
On Adam, whom embracing, thus she spoke.
O Sole in whom my thoughts find all repose,
My Glory, my Perfection, glad I see
Thy face, and Morn returned, for I this Night,
Such night till this I never passed, have dreamed,
If dreamed, not as I often am wont, of thee,
Works of day passed, or morrows next design,
But of offense and trouble, which ray mind
Knew never till this irksom night; methought
Close at mine ear one called me forth to walk
With gentle voice, I thought it thine; it said,
Why sleepst thou Eve? now is the pleasant time,
The cool, the silent, save where silence yields
To the night-warbling Bird, that now awake
Tunes sweetest his love-labor'd song; now reigns
Full Orb'd the Moon, and with more pleasing light
Shadowie sets off the face of things; in vain,
If none regard; Heaven wakes with all his eyes,
Whom to behold but thee, Natures desire,
In whose sight all things joy, with ravishment
Attracted by thy beauty still to gaze.
I rose as at thy call, but found thee not;
To find thee I directed then my walk;
And on, methought, alone I passed through ways
That brought me on a sudden to the Tree
Of interdicted Knowledge: fair it seemed,
Much fairer to my Fancy then by day:
And as I wondering looked* beside it stood
One shap^d and winged like one of those from Heaven
By us often seen; his dewie locks distilled
Ambrosia; on that Tree he also gazed;
And O fair Plant, said he, with fruit surcharged,
Deigns none to ease thy load and taste thy sweet,
Nor God, nor Man; is Knowledge so despised?
Or envy, or what reserve forbids to taste?
Forbid who will, none shall from me withhold
Longer thy offered good, why else set here?
This said he paused not, but with ventrous Arm
He plucked, he tasted; me damp horror chil'd
At such bold words voucht with a deed so bold:
But he thus overjoyed, O Fruit Divine,
Sweet of thy self, but much more sweet thus cropped,
Forbidd'n here, it seems, as only fit
For God's, yet able to make Gods of Men:
And why not Gods of Men, since good, the more
Communicated, more abundant grows,
The Author not impaired, but honored more?
Here, happy Creature, fair Angelic Eve,
Partake thou also; happy though thou art,
Happier thou may be, worthier can not be:
Taste this, and be henceforth among the Gods
Thy self a Goddess, not to Earth confind,
But sometimes in the Air, as we, sometimes
Ascend to Heaven, by merit thine, and see
What life the Gods live there, and such live thou.
So saying, he drew nigh, and to me held,
Even to my mouth of that same fruit held part
Which he had plucked; the pleasant savourie smell
So quick'nd appetite, that I, methought,
Could not but taste. Forthwith up to the Clouds
With him I flew, and underneath beheld
The Earth outstretcht immense, a prospect wide
And various: wondering at my flight and change
To this high exaltation; suddenly.
My Guide was gone, and I, me thought, sunk down,
And fell asleep; but O how glad I waked
To find this but a dream! Thus Eve her Night
Related, and thus Adam answered sad.
Best Image of my self and dearer half,
The trouble of thy thoughts this night in sleep
Affects me equally; nor ran I like
This uncouth dream, of evil sprung I fear;
Yet evil whence? in thee can harbor none,
Created pure. But know that in the Soul
Are many lesser Faculties that serve
Reason as chief; among these Fancy next
Her office holds; of all external things,
Which the five watchful Senses represent,
She forms Imaginations, Aerie shapes,
Which Reason joining or disjoyning, frames
All what we affirm or what deny, and call
Our knowledge or opinion; then retires
Into her private Cell when Nature rests.
Often in her absence mimic Fancy wakes
To imitare her; but misjoyning shapes,
Wild work produces often, and most in dreams,
Ill matching words and deeds long past or late.
Some such resemblances methinks I find
Of our last Eevnings talk, in this thy dream,
But with addition strange: yet be not sad.
Evil into the mind of God or Man
May come and go, so unapprov'd, and leave
No spot or blame behind: Which gives me hope
That what in sleep thou did abhor to dream,
Waking thou never wilt consent to do.
Be not disheart'nd then, nor cloud those looks
That wont to be more cheerful and serene
Then when fair Morning first smiles on the World,
And let us to our fresh employments rise
Among the Groves, the Fountains, and the Flours
That open now their choicest bosomed smells
Reservd from night, and kept for thee in store.
So cheard he his fair Spouse, and she was cheard,
But silently a gentle tear let fall
From either eye, and wiped them with her hair;
Two other precious drops that ready stood,
Each in their Crystal sluice, he ere they fell
Kissed as the gracious signs of sweet remorse
And pious awe, that feared to have offended.
So all was cleard, and to the Field they haste.
But first from under shadie arborous roof,
Soon as they forth were come to open sight
Of dayspring, and the Sun, who scarce up risen
With wheels yet hovering over the Ocean brim,
Shot parallel to the earth his dewie ray,
Discovering in wide Lantskip all the East
Of Paradise and Edens happy Plains,
Lowly they bowed adoring, and began
Their Orisons, each Morning duly paid
In various style, for neither various style
Nor holy rapture wanted they to praise
Their Maker, in fit strains pronounced or sung
Unmeditated, such prompt eloquence
Flowd from their lips, in Prose or numerous Verse,
More tuneable then needed Lute or Harp,
To add more sweetness, and they thus began.
These are thy glorious works, Parent of good,
Almighty, thine this universal Frame,
Thus wondrous fair; thy self how wondrous then!
Unspeakable, who first above these Heavens
To us invisible or dimly seen
In these thy lowest works, yet these declare
Thy goodness beyond thought, and Power Divine:
Speak ye who best can tell, ye Sons of light,
Angels, for ye behold him, and with songs
And choral symphonies, Day without Night,
Circle his Throne rejoicing, ye in Heaven,
On Earth join all ye Creatures to extol
Him first, him last, him midst, and without end.
Fairest of Stars, last in the train of Night,
If better thou belong not to the dawn,
Sure pledge of day, that crownst the smiling Morn
With thy bright Circlet, praise him in thy Sphere
While day arises, that sweet hour of Prime.
Thou Sun, of this great World both Eye and Soul.
Acknowledge him thy Greater, sound his praise
In thy eternal course, both when thou climb^st,
And when high Noon have gaind, and when thou fallst.
Moon, that now meetst the orient Sun, now fli'st
With the fixed Stars, fixed in their Orb that flies,
And ye five other wandering Fires that move
In mystic Dance not without Song, resound
His praise, who out of Darkness called up Light.
Air, and ye Elements the eldest birth
Of Natures Womb, that in quaternion run
Perpetual Circle, multiform; and mix
And nourish all things, let your ceasless change
Vary to our great Maker still new praise.
Ye Mists and Exhalations that now rise
From Hill or steaming Lake, duskie or gray,
Till the Sun paint your fleecie skirts with Gold,
In honor to the Worlds great Author rise,
Whether to deck with Clouds the uncolourd sky,
Or wet the thirsty Earth with falling showers,
Rising or falling still advance his praise.
His praise ye Winds, that from four Quarters blow,
Breathe soft or loud; and wave your tops, ye Pines,
With every Plant, in sign of Worship wave.
Fountains and ye, that warble, as ye flow,
Melodious murmurs, warbling tune his praise.
Join voices all ye living Souls, ye Birds,
That singing up to Heaven Gate ascend,
Bear on your wings and in your notes his praise;
Ye that in Waters glide, and ye that walk
The Earth, and stately tread, or lowly creep;
Witness if I be silent, Morn or Eeven,
To Hell, or Valley, Fountain, or fresh shade
Made vocal by my Song, and taught his praise.
Hail universal Lord, be bounteous still
To give us only good; and if the night
Have gathered aught of evil or conceald,
Disperse it, as now light dispels the dark.
So prayed they innocent, and to their thoughts
Firm peace recoverd soon and wonted calm.
On to their mornings rural work they haste
Among sweet dewes and flours; where any row
Of Fruit Trees overwoodie reachd too far
Their pamperd boughs, and needed hands to check
Fruitless embraces: or they led the Vine
To wed her Elm; she spous'd about him twines
Her mariageable arms, and with her brings
Her dowr the adopted Clusters, to adorn
His barren leaves. Them thus imploid beheld
With pity Heavens high King, and to him called
Raphael, the sociable Spirit, that deigned
To travel with Tobias, and secured
His marriage with the seaventimes-wedded Maid.
Raphael, said he, thou hear'st what stir on Earth
Satan from Hell escaped through the darksom Gulf
Has raisd in Paradise, and how disturbd
This night the human pair, how he designs
In them at once to ruin all mankind.
Go therefore, half this day as friend with friend
Converse with Adam, in what Bower or shade
Thou find'st him from the heat of Noon retired,
To respit his day-labour with repast,
Or with repose; and such discourse bring on,
As may advise him of his happy state,
Happiness in his power left free to will,
Left to his own free Will, his Will though free,
Yet mutable; whence warn him to beware
He swerve not too secure: tell him withal
His danger, and from whom, what enemy
Late falln himself from Heaven, is plotting now
The fall of others from like state or bliss;
By violence, no, for that shall be withstood,
But by deceit and lies; this let him know,
Least wilfully transgressing he pretend
Surprisal, unadmonisht, unforewarnd.
So spoke the Eternal Father, and fulfilld
All Justice: nor delaid the winged Saint
After his charge receivd; but from among
Thousand Celestial Ardors, where he stood
Vaild with his gorgeous wings, up springing light
Flew through the midst of Heaven; the angelic Quires
On each hand parting, to his speed gave way
Through all the Empyreal road; till at the Gate
Of Heaven arrived, the gate self-opend wide
On golden Hinges turning, as by work
Divine the sov'ran Architect had framed.
From hence, no cloud, or, to obstruct his sight,
Starr interposed, however small he sees,
Not unconform to other shining Globes,
Earth and the Gard'n of God, with Cedars crowned
Above all Hills. As when by night the Glass
Of Galileo, less assured, observes
Imagind Lands and Regions in the Moon:
Or Pilot from amidst the Cyclades
Delos or Samos first appeering kenns
A cloudy spot. Down thither prone in flight
He speeds, and through the vast Ethereal Sky
Sails between worlds and worlds, with steddie wing
Now on the polar winds, then with quick Fann
Winnows the buxom Air; till within soar
Of Towering Eagles, to all the Fowls he seems
A Phaenix, gazed by all, as that sole Bird
When to enshrine his relics in the Sun's
Bright Temple, to Egyptian Theb's he flies.
At once on the Eastern cliff of Paradise
He lights, and to his proper shape returns
A Seraph wingd; six wings he wore, to shade
His lineaments Divine; the pair that clad
Each shoulder broad, came mantling over his breast
With regal Ornament; the middle pair;
Girt like a Starrie Zone his waste, and round
Skirted his loins and thighs with downie Gold
And colors dipped in Heaven; the third his feet
Shaddowd from either heel with featherd maile
Skie-tinctur'd grain. Like Maia's son he stood,
And shook his Plumes, that Heavenly fragrance filld
The circuit wide. Strait knew him all the Bands
Of Angels under watch; and to his state,
And to his message high in honor rise;
For on some message high they guessd him bound.
Their glittering Tents he passd, and now is come
Into the blissful field, through Groves of Myrrh,
And flouring Odours, Cassia, Nard, and Balm;
A Wilderness of sweets; for Nature here
Wantond as in her prime, and played at will
Her Virgin Fancies, pouring forth more sweet,
Wild above Rule or Art; enormous bliss.
Him through the spicie Forest onward com
Adam discernd, as in the door he sat
Of his cool Bower, while now the mounted Sun
Shot down direct his servid Rays to warm
Earths inmost womb, more warmth then Adam needs;
And Eve within, due at her hour prepared
For dinner savourie fruits, of taste to please
True appetite, and not disrelish thirst
Of nectarous draughts between, from milkie stream,
Berrie or Grape: to whom thus Adam called.
Haste hither Eve, and worth thy sight behold
Eastward among those Trees, what glorious shape
Comes this way moving; seems another Morn
Risen on mid-noon; some great behest from Heaven
To us perhaps he brings, and will voutsafe
This day to be our Guest. But go with speed,
And what thy stores contain, bring forth and pour
Abundance, fit to honor and receive
Our Heavenly stranger; well we may afford
Our givers their own gifts, and large bestow
From large bestowd, where Nature multiplies
Her fertile growth, and by disburd'ning grows
More fruitful, which instructs us not to spare.
To whom thus Eve. Adam, earths hallowd mould,
Of God inspired, small store will serve, where store,
All seasons, ripe for use hangs on the stalk;
Save what by frugal storing firmness gains
To nourish, and superfluous moist consumes:
But I will haste and from each bough and break,
Each Plant and juciest Gourd will pluck such choice
To entertain our Angel guest, as he
Beholding shall confess that here on Earth
God has dispenst his bounties as in Heaven.
So saying, with dispatchful looks in haste
She turns, on hospitable thoughts intent
What choice to choose for delicacie best,
What order, so contrived as not to mix
Tastes, not well joynd, inelegant, but bring
Taste after taste upheld with kindliest change,
Bestirs her then, and from each tender stalk
Whatever Earth all-bearing Mother yields
In India East or West, or middle shore
In Pontus or the Punic Coast, or where
Alcinous reigned, fruit of all kinds, in coat,
Rough, or smooth rin'd, or bearded husk, or shell
She gathers, Tribute large, and on the board
Heaps with unsparing hand; for drink the Grape
She crushes, inoffensive moust, and meathes
From many a berrie, and from sweet kernels preft
She tempers dulcet creams, nor these to hold
Wants her fit vessels pure, then strews the ground
With Rose and Odours from the shrub unfum'd.
Mean while our Primitive great Sire, to meet
His god-like Guest, walks forth, without more train
Accompanied then with his own complete
Perfections, in himself was all his state,
More solemn then the tedious pomp that waits
On Princes, when their rich Retinue long
Of Horses led, and Grooms besmeard with Gold
Dazles the crowd, and sets them all agape.
Nearer his presence Adam though not awd,
Yet with submiss approach and reverence meek,
As to a superior Nature, bowing low,
Thus said. Native of Heaven, for other place
None can then Heaven such glorious shape contain;
Since by descending from the Thrones above,
Those happy places thou have deignd a while
To want, and honor these, voutsafe with us
Two only, who yet by sov'ran gift possess
This spacious ground, in yonder shadie Bower
To rest, and what the Garden choicest bears
To sit and taste, till this meridian heat
Be over, and the Sun more cool decline.
Whom thus the Angelic Virtue answered mild.
Adam, I therefore came, nor art thou such
Created, or such place have here to dwell,
As may not often invite, though Spirits of Heaven
To visit thee; lead on then where thy Bower
Oreshades; for these mid-hours, till Eevning rise
I have at will. So to the Silvan Lodge
They came, that like Pomona's Arbor smiled
With flourets decked and fragrant smells; but Eve
Undeckt, save with her self more lovely fair
Then Wood-Nymph, or the fairest Goddess feigned
Of three that in Mount Ida naked strove,
Stood to entertain her guest from Heaven; no veil
She needed, Venue-proof, no thought infirm
Alterd her cheek. On whom the Angel Hail
Bestowd, the holy salutation used
Long after to blessed Marie, second Eve.
Hail Mother of Mankind, whose fruitful Womb
Shall fill the World more numerous with thy Sons
Then with these various fruits the Trees of God
Have heaped this Table. Raised of grassie terf
Their Table was, and mossile seats had round,
And on her ample Square from side to side
All Autumn pil'd, though Spring and Autumn here
Danced hand in hand. A while discourse they hold;
No fear lest Dinner cool; when thus began
Our Author. Heavenly stranger, please to taste
These bounties which our Nourisher, from whom
All perfet good unmeasured out, descends,
To us for food and for delight has caused
The Earth to yield; unsavourie food perhaps
To spiritual Natures; only this I know,
That one Celestial Father gives to all.
To whom the Angel. Therefore what he gives
(Whose praise be ever sung) to man in part
Spiritual, may of purest Spirits be found
No ungrateful food: and food alike those pure
Intelligential substances require
As does your Rational; and both contain
Within them every lower faculty
Of sense, whereby they hear, see, smell, touch, taste,
Tasting concoct, digest, assimilate,
And corporeal to incorporeal turn.
For know, whatever was created, needs
To be sustaind and fed; of Elements
The grosser feeds the purer, Earth the Sea,
Earth and the Sea feed Air, the Air those Fires
Ethereal, and as lowest first the Moon;
Whence in her visage round those spots, unpurg'd
Vapors not yet into her substance turned.
Nor does the Moon no nourishment exhale
From her moist Continent to higher Orbs.
The Sun that light imparts to all, receives
From all his alimental recompense
In humid exhalations, and at Even
Sups with the Ocean: though in Heaven the Trees
Of life ambrosial frutage bear, and vines
Yield Nectar, though from off the boughs each Morn
We brush mellifluous Dewes, and find the ground
Covered with pearly grain: yet God has here
Varied his bounty so with new delights,
As may compare with Heaven; and to taste
Think not I shall be nice. So down they sat,
And to their viands fell, nor seemingly
The Angel, nor in mist, the common gloss
Of Theologians, but with keen dispatch
Of real hunger, and concoctive heat
To transubstantiate; what redounds, transpires
Through Spirits with ease; nor wonder; if by fire
Of sooty coal the Empiric Alchimist
Can turn, or holds it possible to turn
Metals of drossiest Ore to perfet Gold
As from the Mine. Mean while at Table Eve
Ministerd naked, and their flowing cups
With pleasant liquors crowned: O innocence
Deserving Paradise: if ever, then,
Then had the Sons of God excuse to have bin
Enamored at that sight, but in those hearts
Love unlibidinous reigned, nor jealousy
Was understood, the injured Lovers Hell.
Thus when with meats and drinks they had sufficed,
Not burd'nd Nature, sudden mind arose
In Adam, not to let the occasion pass
Given him by this great Conference to know
Of things above his World, and of their being
Who dwell in Heaven, whose excellence he saw
Transcend his own so far, whose radiant forms
Divine effulgence, whose high Power so far
Exceeded human, and his wary speech
Thus to the Empyreal Minister he framed.
Inhabitant with God, now know I well
Thy favor, in this honor done to man,
Under whose lowly roof thou have voutsaf't
To enter, and these earthly fruits to taste,
Food not of Angels, yet accepted so,
As that more willingly thou could not seem
At Heavens high feasts to have fed: yet what compare?
To whom the winged Hierarch replied.
O Adam, one Almighty is, from whom
All things proceed, and up to him return,
If not depraved from good, created all
Such to perfection, one first matter all,
Indu'd with various forms, various degrees
Of substance, and in things that live, of life;
But more refined, more spiritous, and pure,
As nearer to him placed or nearer tending
Each in their several active Spears assignd,
Till body up to spirit work, in bounds
Proportiond to each kind. So from the root
Springs lighter the green stalk, from thence the leaves
More aerie, last the bright consummate flower
Spirits odorous breathes: flours and their fruit
Man's nourishment, by gradual scale sublimed
To vital Spirits aspire, to animal,
To intellectual, give both life and sense,
Fancy and undemanding, whence the Soul
Reason receives, and reason is her being,
Discursive, or Intuitive; discourse
Is oftest yours, the latter most is ours,
Differing but in degree, of kind the same.
Wonder not then, what God for you saw good
If I refuse not, but convert, as you,
To proper substance, time may come when men
With Angels may participate, and find
No inconvenient Diet, nor too light Fare:
And from these corporal nutriments perhaps
Your bodies may at last turn all to Spirit,
Improved by tract of time, and wingd ascend
Ethereal, as we, or may at choice
Here or in Heavenly Paradises dwell;
If ye be found obedient, and retain
Unalterably firm his love entire
Whose progeny you are. Mean while enjoy
Your fill what happiness this happy state
Can comprehend, incapable of more.
To whom the Patriarch of mankind replied,
O favorable spirit, propitious guest,
Well have thou taught the way that might direct
Our knowledge, and the scale of Nature set
From center to circumference, whereon
In contemplation of created things
By steps we may ascend to God. But say,
What meant that caution joind, if ye be found
Obedient? can we want obedience then
To him, or possibly his love desert
Who formd us from the dust, and placed us here
Full to the utmost measure of what bliss
Human desires can seek or apprehend?
To whom the Angel. Son of Heaven and Earth,
Attend: That thou art happy, owe to God;
That thou continu'st such, owe to thy self,
That is, to thy obedience; therein stand.
This was that caution given thee; be advised.
God made thee perfet, not immutable;
And good he made thee, but to persevere
He left it in thy power, ordaind thy will
By nature free, not overruled by Fate
Inextricable, or strict necessity;
Our voluntary service he requires,
Not our necessitated, such with him
Finds no acceptance, nor can find, for how
Can hearts, not free, be tried whether they serve
Willing or no, who will but what they must
By Destiny, and can no other choose?
My self and all the Angelic Host that stand
In sight of God enthroned, our happy state
Hold, as you yours, while our obedience holds;
On other surety none; freely we serve,
Because we freely love, as in our will
To love or not; in this we stand or fall:
And some are fallen, to disobedience fallen,
And so from Heaven to deepest Hell; O fall
From what high state of bliss into what woe!
To whom our great Progenitor. Thy words
Attentive, and with more delighted ear,
Divine instructor, I have heard, then when
Cherubic Songs by night from neighboring Hills
Aereal Music send: nor knew I not
To be both will and deed created free;
Yet that we never shall forget to love
Our maker, and obey him whose command
Single, is yet so just, my constant thoughts
Assured me, and still assure: though what thou tellst
Has past in Heaven, some doubt within me move,
But more desire to hear, if thou consent,
The full relation, which must needs be strange,
Worthy of Sacred silence to be heard;
And we have yet large day, for scarce the Sun
Has finished half his journey, and scarce begins
His other half in the great Zone of Heaven.
Thus Adam made request, and Raphael
After short pause assenting, thus began.
High matter thou injoinst me, O prime of men,
Sad task and hard, for how shall I relate
To human sense the invisible exploits
Of warring Spirits; how without remorse
The ruin of so many glorious once
And perfet while they stood; how last unfould
The secrets of another world, perhaps
Not lawful to reveal? yet for thy good
This is dispenc't, and what surmounts the reach
Of human sense, I shall delineate so,
By lik'ning spiritual to corporal forms
As may express them best, though what if Earth
Be but the shadow of Heaven, and things therein
Each to other like, more then on earth is thought?
As yet this world was not, and Chaos wild
Reignd where these Heavens now roll, where Earth now rests
Upon her Center poised, when on a day
(For time, though in Eternity, applied
To motion, measures all things durable
By present, past, and future) on such day
As Heavens great Year brings forth, the Empyreal Host
Of Angels by Imperial summons called,
Innumerable before the Almighties Throne
Forthwith from all the ends of Heaven appeerd
Under their Hierarchs in orders bright
Ten thousand thousand Ensigns high advanced,
Standards, and Gonfalons twixt Van and Rear
Stream in the Air, and for distinction serve
Of Hierarchies, of Orders, and Degrees;
Or in their glittering Tissues bear imblaz'd
Holy Memorials, acts of Zeal and Love
Recorded eminent. Thus when in Orbs
Of circuit inexpressible they stood,
Orb within Orb, the Father infinite,
By whom in bliss imbosom'd sat the Son,
Amidst as from a flaming Mount, whose top
Brightness had made invisible, thus spoke.
Hear all ye Angels, Progeny of Light,
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers,
Hear my Decree, which unrevok't shall stand.
This day I have begot whom I declare
My only Son, and on this holy Hill
Him have anointed, whom ye now behold
At my right hand; your Head I him appoint;
And by my Self have sworn to him shall bow
All knees in Heaven, and shall confess him Lord:
Under his great Vicegerent Reign abide
United as one individual Soul
For ever happy: him who disobeyes
Me disobeyes, breaks union, and that day
Cast out from God and blessed vision, falls
Into utter darkness, deep ingulft, his place
Ordaind without redemption, without end.
So spoke the Omnipotent, and with his words
All seemd well pleased, all seemed, but were not all
That day, as other solemn days, they spent
In song and dance about the sacred Hill,
Mystical dance, which yonder starrie Sphere
Of Planets and of fixed in all her Wheels
Resembles nearest, mazes intricate,
Eccentric, intervolv'd, yet regular
Then most, when most irregular they seem,
And in their motions harmonic Divine
So smooths her charming tones, that Gods own ear
Listens delighted. Eevning now approached
(For we have also our Eevning and our Morn,
We ours for change delectable, not need)
Forthwith from dance to sweet repast they turn
Desirous; all in Circles as they stood,
Tables are set, and on a sudden pil'd
With Angels Food, and rubied Nectar flows
In Pearl, in Diamond, and massy Gold,
Fruit of delicious Vines, the growth of Heaven.
On flours reposed, and with fresh flourets crowned.
They eat, they drink, and in communion sweet
Quaff immortality and joy, secure
Of surfeit where full measure only bounds
Excess, before the all bounteous King, who showrd
With copious hand, rejoicing in their joy.
Now when ambrosial Night with Clouds exhaled
From that high mount of God, whence light and shade
Spring both, the face of brightest Heaven had changd
To grateful Twilight (for Night comes not there
In darker veil) and roseat Dews disposed
All but the unsleeping eyes of God to rest,
Wide over all the Plain, and wider far
Then all this globous Earth in Plain out spread,
(Such are the Courts of God) The Angelic throng
Dispersed in Bands and Files their Camp extend
By living Streams among the Trees of Life,
Pavilions numberless, and sudden reard,
Celestial Tabernacles, where they slept,
Fannd with cool Winds, save those who in their course
Melodious Hymns about the sovran Throne
Alternate all night long: but not so waked
Satan, so call him now, his former name
Is heard no more in Heaven; he of the first,
If not the first Archangel, great in Power,
In favor and praeeminence, yet fraught
With envy against the Son of God, that day
Honored by his great Father, and proclaimd
Messiah King anointed, could not bear
Through pride that sight, and thought himself impaird.
Deep malice thence conceiving and disdain,
Soon as midnight brought on the duskie hour
Friendliest to sleep and silence, he resolved
With all his Legions to dislodge, and leave
Unworshipt, unobey'd the Throne supreme
Contemptuous, and his next subordinate
Awak'ning, thus to him in secret spoke.
Sleepst thou Companion dear, what sleep can close
Thy eye lids? and remembrest what Decree
Of yesterday, so late has past the lips
Of Heavens Almighty. Thou to me thy thoughts
Wast wont, I mine to thee was wont to impart;
Both waking we were one; how then can now
Thy sleep dissent? new Laws thou see imposed;
New Laws from him who reigns, new minds may raise
In us who serve, new Counsels, to debate
What doubtful may ensue, more in this place
To utter is not safe. Assemble thou
Of all those Myriads which we lead the chief;
Tell them that by command, ere yet dim Night
Her shadowie Cloud withdraws, I am to haste,
And all who under me their Banners wave,
Homeward with flying march where we possess
The Quarters of the North, there to prepare
Fit entertainment to receive our King
The great Messiah, and his new commands,
Who speedily through all the Hierarchies
Intends to pass triumphant, and give Laws.
So spoke the false Archangel, and infused
Bad influence into the unwarie breast
Of his Associate; he together calls,
Or several one by one, the Regent Powers,
Under him Regent, tells, as he was taught,
That the most High commanding, now ere Night,
Now ere dim Night had disincumberd Heaven,
The great Hierarchal Standard was to move;
Tells the suggested cause, and casts between
Ambiguous words and jealousies, to sound
Or taint integrity; but all obeyed
The wonted signal, and superior voice
Of their great Potentate; for great indeed
His name, and high was his degree in Heaven;
His countenance, as the Morning Starr that guides
The starrie flock, allured them, and with lies
Drew after him the third part of Heavens Host:
Mean while the Eternal eye, whose sight discernes
Abstrusest thoughts, from forth his holy Mount
And from within the golden Lamps that burn
Nightly before him, saw without their light
Rebellion rising, saw in whom, how spread
Among the sons of Morn, what multitudes
Were banded to oppose his high Decree;
And smiling to his only Son thus said.
Son, thou in whom my glory I behold
In full resplendence, Heir of all my might,
Nearly it now concerns us to be sure
Of our Omnipotence, and with what Arms
We mean to hold what anciently we claim
Of Deity or Empire, such a foe
Is rising, who intends to erect his Throne
Equal to ours, throughout the spacious North;
Nor so content, has in his thought to try
In battle, what our Power is, or our right.
Let us advise, and to this hazard draw
With speed what force is left, and all employ
In our defense, lest unawares we lose
This our high place, our Sanctuary, our Hill.
To whom the Son with calm aspect and clear
Lightning Divine, ineffable, serene,
Made answer. Mighty Father, thou thy foes
Justly have in derision, and secure
Laugh'st at their vain designs and tumults vain,
Matter to me of Glory, whom their hate
Illustrates, when they see all Regal Power
Given me to quell their pride, and in event
Know whether I be dextrous to subdue
Thy Rebels, or be found the worst in Heaven.
So spoke the Son, but Satan with his Powers
Far was advanced on winged speed, an Host
Innumerable as the Stars of Night,
Or Stars of Morning, Dew-drops, which the Sun
Impearls on every leaf and every flouer.
Regions they passed, the mighty Regencies
Of Seraphim and Potentates and Thrones
In their triple Degrees, Regions to which
All thy Dominion, Adam, is no more
Then what this Garden is to all the Earth,
And all the Sea, from one entire globose
Stretched into Longitude; which having passed
At length into the limits of the North
They came, and Satan to his Royal seat
High on a Hill, far blazing, as a Mount
Raised on a Mount, with Pyramids and Towrs
From Diamond Quarries hew'n, and Rocks of Gold*
The Palace of great Lucifer, (so call
That Structure in the Dialect of men
Interpreted) which not long after, he
Affecting all equality with God,
In imitation of that Mount whereon
Messiah was declared in sight of Heaven,
The Mountain of the Congregation called;
For thither he assembled all his Train,
Pretending so commanded to consult
About the great reception of their King,
Thither to come, and with calumnious Art
Of counterfeted truth thus held their ears.
Thrones, Dominations, Princedomes, Venues, Powers
If these magnific Titles yet remain
Not merely titular, since by Decree
Another now has to himself ingross't
All Power, and us eclipst under the name
Of King anointed, for whom all this haste
Of midnight march, and hurried meeting here,
This only to consult how we may best
With what may be devised of honors new
Receive him coming to receive from us
Knee-tribute yet unpaid, prostration vile,
Too much to one, but double how endured
To one and to his image now proclaimed?
But what if better counsels might erect
Our minds and teach us to cast off this Yoke?
Will ye submit your necks, and choose to bend
The supple knee? ye will not, if I trust
To know ye right, or if ye know your selves
Natives and Sons of Heaven possessed before
By none, and if not equal all, yet free,
Equally free; for Orders and Degrees
Jarr not with liberty, but well consist.
Who can in reason then or right assume
Monarchy over such as live by right
His equals, if in power and splendour less,
In freedom equal? or can introduce
Law and Edict on us, who without law
Err not, much less for this to be our Lord,
And look for adoration to the abuse
Of those Imperial Titles which assert
Our being ordained to govern, not to serve?
Thus far his bold discourse without control
Had audience, when among the Seraphim
Abdiel, then whom none with more zeal adored
The Deity, and divine commands obeid,
Stood up, and in a flame of zeal severe
The current of his fury thus opposed.
O argument blasphemous, false and proud!
Words which no ear ever to hear in Heaven
Expected, least of all from thee, ingrate
In place thy self so high above thy Peers.
Can thou with impious obloquie condemn
The just Decree of God, pronounced and sworn,
That to his only Son by right endu'd
With Regal Scepter, every Soul in Heaven
Shall bend the knee, and in that honor due
Confess him rightful King? unjust thou say
Flatly unjust, to bind with Laws the free,
And equal over equals to let Reign,
One over all with unsucceeded power.
Shall thou give Law to God, shall thou dispute
With him the points of liberty, who made
Thee what thou art, and formd the Powers of Heaven
Such as he pleased, and circumscribed their being?
Yet by experience taught we know how good,
And of our good, and of our dignity
How provident he is, how far from thought
To make us less, bent rather to exalt
Our happy state under one Head more near
United. But to grant it thee unjust,
That equal over equals Monarch Reign:
Thy self though great and glorious do thou count,
Or all Angelic Nature joind in one,
Equal to him begotten Son, by whom
As by his Word the mighty Father made
All things, even thee, and all the Spirits of Heaven
By him created in their bright degrees,
Crowned them with Glory, and to their Glory named
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers,
Essential Powers, nor by his Reign obscured,
But more illustrious made, since he the Head
One of our number thus reduced becomes,
His Laws our Laws; all honor to him done
Returns our own. Cease then this impious rage,
And tempt not these; but hast'n to appease
The incensed Father, and the incensed Son,
While Pardon may be found in time besought.
So spoke the fervent Angel, but his zeal
None seconded, as out of season judged,
Or singular and rash, whereat rejoiced
The Apostat, and more haughty thus replied.
That we were formd then say thou? and the work
Of secondarie hands, by task transferd
From Father to his Son? strange point and new!
Doctrine which we would know whence learnt: who saw
When this creation was? rememberst thou
Thy making, while the Maker gave thee being?
We know no time when we were not as now;
Know none before us, self-begot, self-rais'd
By our own quickening power, when fatal course
Had circl'd his full Orb, the birth mature
Of this our native Heaven, Ethereal Sons.
Our puissance is our own, our own right hand
Shall teach us highest deeds, by proof to try
Who is our equal: then thou shall behold
Whether by supplication we intend
Address, and to begirt the Almighty Throne
Beseeching or besieging. This report,
These tidings carry to the anointed King;
And fly, ere evil intercept thy flight.
He said, and as the sound of waters deep
Hoarce murmur echoed to his words applause
Through the infinite Host, nor less for that
The flaming Seraph fearless, though alone
Encompassed round with foes, thus answered bold.
O alienate from God, O spirit accursed,
Forsak'n of all good; I see thy fall
Determind, and thy hapless crew involved
In this perfidious fraud, contagion spread
Both of thy crime and punishment: henceforth
No more be troubled how to quit the yoke
Of Gods Messiah; those indulgent Laws
Will not be now voutsaf't, other Decrees
Against thee are gone forth without recall;
That Golden Scepter which thou did reject
Is now an Iron Rod to bruise and break
Thy disobedience. Well thou did advise,
Yet not for thy advise or threats I fly
These wicked Tents devoted, least the wrauth
Impendent, raging into sudden flame
Distinguish not: for soon expect to feel
His Thunder on thy head, devouring fire.
Then who created thee lamenting learn,
When who can uncreate thee thou shall know.
So spoke the Seraph Abdiel faithful found,
Among the faithless, faithful only he;
Among innumerable false, unmoved,
Unshak'n, unseduc'd, unterrifi'd
His Loyalty he kept, his Love, his Zeal;
Nor number, nor example with him wrought
To swerve from truth, or change his constant mind
Though single. From amidst them forth he passd,
Long way through hostile scorn, which he susteind
Superior, nor of violence feared aught;
And with retorted scorn his back he turned
On those proud Towrs to swift destruction doomed.
The End of the Fifth Book.
Paradise Lost.
BOOK VI.
THE ARGUMENT.
Raphael continues to relate how Michael and Gabriel were sent forth to battle
against Satan and his Angels. The first Fight described: Satan and his Powers
retire under Night: He calls a Council, invents devilish Engines, which in the
second days Fight put Michael and his Angels to some disorder; but they at
length pulling up Mountains overwhelmed both the force and Machins of Satan:
Yet the Tumult not so ending, God on the third day sends Messiah his Son, for
whom he had reserved the glory of that Victory: He in the Power of his Father
coming to the place, and causing all his Legions to stand still on either side,
with his Chariot and Thunder driving into the midst of his Enemies, pursues
them unable to resist toward the wall of Heaven; which opening, they leap down
with horror and confusion into the place of punishment prepared for them in
the Deep: Messiah returns with triumph to his Father.

ALL night the dreadless Angel unpursu'd
Through Heavens wide Champain held his way, till Morn,
Wak't by the circling Hours, with rosy hand
Unbarr'd the gates of Light. There is a Cave
Within the Mount of God, fast by his Throne,
Where light and darkness in perpetual round
Lodge and dislodge by turns, which makes through Heaven
Grateful vicissitude, like Day and Night;
Light issues forth, and at the other door
Obsequious darkness enters, till her hour
To veil the Heaven, though darkness there might well
Seem twilight here; and now went forth the Morn
Such as in highest Heaven, arrayd in Gold
Empyreal, from before her vanished Night,
Shot through with orient Beams: when all the Plain
Coverd with thick embatteld Squadrons bright,
Chariots and flaming Arms, and fiery Steeds
Reflecting blaze on blaze, first met his view:
War he perceav'd, war in procinct, and found
Already known what he for news had thought
To have reported: gladly then he mixed
Among those friendly Powers who him received
With joy and acclamations loud, that one
That of so many Myriads fallen, yet one
Returned not lost: On to the sacred hill
They led him high applauded, and present
Before the seat supreme; from whence a voice
From midst a Golden Cloud thus mild was heard.
Servant of God, well done, well have thou fought
The better sight, who single have maintaind
Against revolted multitudes the Cause
Of Truth, in word mightier then they in Arms;
And for the testimony of Truth have born
Universal reproach, far worse to bear
Then violence: for this was all thy care
To stand approved in sight of God, though Worlds
Judged thee perverse: the easier conquest now
Remains thee, alded by this host of friends,
Back on thy foes more glorious to return
Then scornd thou did depart, and to subdue
By force, who reason for their Law refuse,
Right reason for their Law, and for their King
Messiah, who by right of merit Reigns.
Go Michael of Celestial Armies Prince,
And thou in Military prowess next
Gabriel, lead forth to Battle these my Sons
Invincible, lead forth my armed Saints
By Thousands and by Millions ranged for fight;
Equal in number to that Godless crew
Rebellious, them with Fire and hostile Arms
Fearless assault, and to the brow of Heaven
Pursuing drive them out from God and bliss,
Into their place of punishment, the Gulf
Of Tartarus, which ready opens wide
His fiery Chaos to receave their fall.
So spoke the Sovran voice, and Clouds began
To darken all the Hill, and smoke to roll
In duskie wreathes, reluctant flames, the sign
Of wrauth awak't: nor with less dread the loud
Ethereal Trumpet from on high began blow:
At which command the Powers Militant,
That stood for Heaven, in mighty Quadrate joined
Of Union irresistible, moved on
In silence their bright Legions, to the sound
Of instrumental Harmony that breathed
Heroic Ardor to adventurous deeds
Under their God-like Leaders, in the Cause
Of God and his Messiah. On they move
Indissolubly firm; nor obvious Hill,
Nor streit'ning Vale, nor Wood, nor Stream divides
Their perfet ranks; for high above the ground
Their march was, and the passive Air upbore
Their nimble tread, as when the total kind
Of Birds in orderly array on wing
Came summond over Eden to receive
Their names of thee; so over many a tract
Of Heaven they marched, and many a Province wide
Tenfold the length of this terrene: at last
Far in the Horizon to the North appeer'd
From skirt to skirt a fiery Region, stretched
In battailous aspect, and nearer view
Bristl'd with upright beams innumerable
Of rigid Spears, and Helmets thronged, and Shields
Various, with boastful Argument portraid,
The banded Powers of Satan hasting on
With furious expedition; for they weend
That self same day by fight, or by surprise
To win the Mount of God, and on his Throne
To set the envier of his State, the proud
Aspirer, but their thoughts proved fond and vain
In the mid way: though strange to us it seemd
At first, that Angel should with Angel war,
And in fierce hosting meet, who wont to meet
So often in Festivals of joy and love
Unanimous, as sons of one great Sire
Hymning the Eternal Father: but the shout
Of Battle now began, and rushing sound
Of onset ended soon each milder thought.
High in the midst exalted as a God
The Apostat in his Sun-bright Chariot sat
Idol of Majesty Divine, enclosed
With Flaming Cherubim, and golden Shields;
Then lighted from his gorgeous Throne, for now
'Twixt Host and Host but narrow space was left,
A dreadful intervall, and Front to Front
Presented stood in terrible array
Of hideous length: before the cloudie Van,
On the rough edge of battle ere it joined,
Satan with vast and haughty strides advanced,
Came towering, armd in Adamant and Gold;
Abdiel that sight endured not, where he stood
Among the mightiest, bent on highest deeds,
And thus his own undaunted heart explores.'
O Heaven! that such resemblance of the Highest
Should yet remain, where faith and realtie
Remain not; wherefore should not strength and might
There fail where Virtue fails, or weakest prove
Where boldest; though to sight unconquerable?
His puissance, trusting in the Almightie's aid,
I mean to try, whose Reason I have tried
Unsound and false; nor is it aught but just,
That he who in debate of Truth has won,
Should win in Arms, in both disputes alike
Victor; though brutish that contest and foul,
When Reason has to deal with force, yet so
Most reason is that Reason overcome.
So pondering, and from his armed Peers
Forth stepping opposite, half way he met
His daring foe, at this prevention more
Incens't, and thus securely him defied.
Proud, art thou met? thy hope was to have reached
The highth of thy aspiring unoppos'd,
The Throne of God unguarded, and his side
Abandond at the terror of thy Power
Or potent tongue; fool, not to think how vain
Against the Omnipotent to rise in Arms;
Who out of smallest things could without end
Have raised incessant Armies to defeat
Thy folly; or with solitary hand
Reaching beyond all limit at one blow
Unaided could have finished thee, and whelmd
Thy Legions under darkness; but thou see
All are not of thy Train; there be who Faith
Prefer, and Piety to God, though then
To thee not visible, when I alone
Seemd in thy World erroneous to dissent
From all: my Sect thou see, now learn too late
How few sometimes may know, when thousands err.
Whom the grand foe with scornful eye askance
Thus answered. Ill for thee, but in wished hour
Of my revenge, first sought for thou returnst
From flight, seditious Angel, to receave
Thy merited reward, the first assay
Of this right hand provoked, since first that tongue
Inspired with contradiction durst oppose
A third part of the Gods, in Synod met
Their Deities to assert, who while they feel
Vigor Divine within them, can allow
Omnipotence to none. But well thou comst
Before thy fellows, ambitious to win
From me some Plume, that thy success may show
Destruction to the rest: this pause between
(Unanswerd least thou boast) to let thee know;
At first I thought that Liberty and Heaven
To heavenly Souls had bin all one; but now
I see that most through sloth had rather serve,
Ministering Spirits, traind up in Feast and Song;
Such have thou armed, the Minstrelfie of Heaven,
Servilitie with freedom to contend,
As both their deeds compared this day shall prove.
To whom in brief thus Abdiel stern replied.
Apostat, still thou errst, nor end wilt find
Of erring, from the path of truth remote:
Unjustly thou deprav'st it with the name
Of Servitude to serve whom God ordains,
Or Nature; God and Nature bid the same,
When he who rules is worthiest, and excells
Them whom he governs. This is servitude,
To serve the unwise, or him who has rebelld
Against his worthier, as thine now serve thee,
Thy self not free, but to thy self enthralled;
Yet leudly dare our ministering upbraid.
Reign thou in Hell thy Kingdom, let me serve
In Heaven God ever blessed, and his Divine
Behests obey, worthiest to be obeyed,
Yet Chains in Hell, not Realms expect: mean while
From me returned, as erst thou said, from flight,
This greeting on thy impious Crest receive.
So saying, a noble stroke he lifted high,
Which hung not, but so swift with tempest fell
On the proud Crest of Satan, that no sight,
Nor motion of swift thought, less could his Shield
Such ruin intercept: ten paces huge
He back recoild; the tenth on bended knee
His massy Spear upstaid; as if on Earth
Winds under ground or waters forcing way
Sidelong, had push't a Mountain from his feat
Half sunk with all his Pines. Amazement seized
The Rebel Thrones, but greater rage to see
Thus foiled their mightiest, ours joy filld, and shout,
Presage of Victory and fierce desire
Of Battle: whereat Michael bid sound
The Archangel trumpet; through the vast of Heaven
It sounded, and the faithful Armies rung
Hosanna to the Highest: nor stood at gaze
The adverse Lgions, nor less hideous joined
The horrid shock: now storming fury rose,
And clamor such as heard in Heaven till now
Was never, Arms on Armor clashing brayed
Horrible discord, and the madding Wheels
Of brazen Chariots raged; dire was the noise
Of conflict; over head the dismal hiss
Of fiery Darts in flaming volies flew,
And flying vaulted either Host with fire.
So under fiery Cope together rushed
Both Battles maine, with ruinous assault
And inextinguishable rage; all Heaven
Resounded, and had Earth bin then, all Earth
Had to her Center shook. What wonder? when
Millions of fierce encountering Angels fought
On either side, the least of whom could weild
These Elements, and arm him with the force
Of all their Regions: how much more of Power
Army against Army number less to raise
Dreadful combustion warring, and disturb,
Though not destroy, their happy Native seat;
Had not the Eternal King Omnipotent
From his strong hold of Heaven high overruled
And limited their might; though numberd such
As each divided Legion might have seemd
A numerous Host, in strength each armed hand
A Legion, led in fight, yet Leader seemd
Each Warrior single as in Chief, expert
When to advance, or stand, or turn the sway
Of Battle, open when, and when to close
The ridges of grim War; no thought of flight,
None of retreat, no unbecoming deed
That argued fear; each on himself reli'd,
As only in his arm the moment lay
Of victory; deeds of eternal fame
Were don, but infinite: for wide was spread
That War and various; sometimes on firm ground
A standing fight, then soaring on main wing
Tormented all the Air; all Air seemd then
Conflicting Fire: long time in eeven scale
The Battle hung; till Satan, who that day
Prodigious power had shown, and met in Arms
No equal, raunging through the dire attack
Of fighting Seraphim confused, at length
Saw where the Sword of Michael smote, and felled
Squadrons at once, with huge two-handed sway
Brandisht aloft the horrid edge came down
Wide wasting; such destruction to withstand
He hasted, and opposed the rockie Orb
Of tenfold Adamant, his ample Shield
A vast circumference: At his approach
The great Archangel from his warlike toil
Surceas'd, and glad as hoping here to end
Intestine War in Heaven, the arch foe subdued
Or Captive dragged in Chains, with hostile frown
And visage all enflamed first thus began.
Author of evil, unknown till thy revolt,
Unnam'd in Heaven, now plenteous, as thou see
These Acts of hateful strife, hateful to all,
Though heaviest by just measure on thy self
And thy adherents: how have thou disturbed
Heavens blessed peace* and into Nature brought
Misery, uncreated till the crime
Of thy Rebellion? how have thou instilled
Thy malice into thousands, once upright
And faithful, now proved false. But think not here
To trouble Holy Rest; Heaven casts thee out
From all her Confines. Heaven the seat of bliss
Brooks not the works of violence and War.
Hence then, and evil go with thee along
Thy offspring, to the place of evil, Hell,
Thou and thy wicked crew; there mingle broiles,
Ere this avenging Sword begin thy doom,
Or some more sudden vengeance winged from God
Precipitate thee with augmented pain.
So spoke the Prince of Angels; to whom thus
The Adversary. Nor think thou with wind
Of airie threats to aw whom yet with deeds
Thou can not. Have thou turned the least of these
To flight, or if to fall, but that they rise
Unvanquisht, easier to transact with me
That thou should hope, imperious, and with threats
To chase me hence? err not that so shall end
The strife which thou call'st evil, but we style
The strife of Glory: which we mean to win,
Or turn this Heaven it self into the Hell
Thou fablest, here however to dwell free,
If not to reign: mean while thy utmost force,
And join him named Almighty to thy aid*
I fly not, but have sought thee far and nigh.
They ended parle, and both add rest for fight
Unspeakable; for who, though with the tongue
Of Angels, can relate, or to what things
Liken on Earth conspicuous, that may lift
Human imagination to such highth
Of Godlike Power: for likest Gods they seemd,
Stood they or moved, in stature, motion, arms
Fit to decide the Empire of great Heaven.
Now waved their fiery Swords, and in the Air
Made horrid Circles; two broad Suns their Shields
Blazed opposite, while expedition stood
In horror; from each hand with speed retired
Where erst was thickest fight, the Angelic throng,
And left large field, unsafe within the wind
Of such commotion, such as to set forth
Great things by small, If Natures concord broke,
Among the Constellations war were sprung,
Two Planets rushing from aspect malign
Of fiercest opposition in mid Sky,
Should combat, and their jarring Spears confound.
Together both with next to Almighty Arm,
Uplifted imminent one stroke they aimed
That might determine, and not need repeat,
As not of power, at once; nor odds appeerd
In might or swift prevention; but the sword
Of Michael from the Armorie of God
Was given him temperd so, that neither keen
Nor solid might resist that edge: it met
The sword of Satan with steep force to smite
Descending, and in half cut sheere, nor staid,
But with swift wheel reverse, deep entering shared
All his right side; then Satan first knew pain,
And writhed him to and fro convolv'd; so sore
The griding sword with discontinuous wound
Passed through him, but the Ethereal substance closed
Not long divisible, and from the gash
A stream of Nectarous humor issuing flowed
Sanguin, such as Celestial Spirits may bleed,
And all his Armor staind ere while so bright.
Forthwith on all sides to his aid was run
By Angels many and strong who interposed
Defense, while others bore him on their Shields
Back to his Chariot; where it stood retired
From off the files of war; there they him laid
Gnashing for anguish and despite and shame
To find himself not matchless, and his pride
Humbl'd by such rebuke, so far beneath
His confidence to equal God in power.
Yet soon he healed; for Spirits that live throughout*
Vital in every part, not as frail man
In Entrails, Heart or Head, Liver or Reins,
Cannot but by annihilating die;
Nor in their liquid texture mortal wound
Receive, no more then can the fluid Air:
All Heart they live, all Head, all Eye, all Ear,
All Intellect, all Sense, and as they please,
They Limb themselves, and color, shape or size
Assume, as likes them best, condense or rare.
Mean while in other parts like deeds deservd
Memorial, where the might of Gabriel fought,
And with fierce Ensigns pierced the deep array
Of Moloc furious King who him defied,
And at his Chariot wheels to drag him bound
Threatened, nor from the Holy One of Heaven
Refrein'd his tongue blasphemous; but anon
Down clov'n to the waste, with shatterd Arms
And uncouth pain fled bellowing. On each wing
Vriel and Raphael his vaunting foe,
Though huge, and in a Rock of Diamond Armd,
Vanquished Adraenelec, and Asmadai,
Two potent Thrones, that to be less then Gods
Disdained, but meaner thoughts learnd in their flight,
Mangled with ghastly wounds through Plate and Maile,
Nor stood unmindful Abdiel to annoy
The Atheist crew, but with redoubled blow
Ariel and Arioc, and the violence
Of Ramiel scorcht and blasted overthrew.
I might relate of thousands, and their names
Eternize here on Earth; but those elect
Angels contented with their fame in Heaven
Seek not the praise of men: the other sort
In might though wondrous and in Acts of War,
Nor of Renown less eager, yet by doom
Canceld from Heaven and sacred memory,
Nameless in dark oblivion let them dwell.
For strength from Truth divided and from Just,
Illaudable, naught merits but dispraise
And ignominy, yet to glory aspires
Vain glorious, and through infamy seeks fame:
Therefore Eternal silence be their doom.
And now their Mightiest quelld, the battle swerved,
With many an inrode gored; deformed rout
Entered, and foul disorder; all the ground
With shiverd armor strow'n, and on a heap
Chariot and Charioter lay overturnd
And fiery foaming Steeds; what stood, recoyld
Ore wearied, through the faint Satanic Host
Defensive scarce, or with pale fear surprised,
Then first with fear surprised and sense of pain
Fled ignominious, to such evil brought
By sin of disobedience, till that hour
Not liable to fear or flight or pain.
Far otherwise the inviolable Saints
In Cubic Phalanx firm advanced entire,
Invulnerable, impenitrably armed:
Such high advantages their innocence
Gave them above their foes, not to have sinnd,
Not to have disobei'd; in fight they stood
Unwearied, unobnoxious to be pained
By wound, though from their place by violence moved.
Now Night her course began, and over Heaven
Inducing darkness, grateful truce imposed,
And silence on the odious dinn of War:
Under her Cloudie covert both retired,
Victor and Vanquished: on the foughten field
Michael and his Angels prevalent
Encamping, placed in Guard their Watches round,
Cherubic waving fires: on the other part
Satan with his rebellious disappeerd,
Far in the dark dislodged, and void of rest,
His Potentates to Council called by night;
And in the midst thus undismai'd began.
O now in danger tried, now known in Arms
Not to be overpowerd, Companions dear,
Found worthy not of Liberty alone,
Too mean pretense, but what we more affect,
Honor, Dominion, Glory, and renown,
Who have sustaind one day in doubtful fight
(And if one day, why not Eternal days?)
What Heavens Lord had powerfullest to send
Against us from about his Throne, and judged
Sufficient to subdue us to his will,
But proves not so; then fallible, it seems,
Of future we may deem him, though till now
Omniscient thought. True is, less firmly armed,
Some disadvantage we endured and pain,
Till now not known, but known as soon contemnd,
Since now we find this our Empyreal form
Incapable of mortal injury
Imperishable, and though pierced with wound,
Soon closing and by native vigor healed.
Of evil then so small as easy think
The remedy; perhaps more valid Arms,
Weapons more violent, when next we meet,
May serve to better us, and worse our foes,
Or equal what between us made the odds,
In Nature none: if other hidden cause
Left them Superior, while we can preserve
Unhurt our minds, and understanding sound,
Due search and consultation will disclose.
He sat; and in the assembly next upstood
Nisroc, of Principalities the prime;
As one he stood escaped from cruel fight,
Sore toild, his riv'n Arms to havoc hewn,
And cloudie in aspect thus answering spoke.
Deliverer from new Lords, leader to free
Enjoyment of our right as Gods; yet hard
For Gods, and too unequal work we find
Against unequal arms to fight in pain,
Against unpaind, impassive; from which evil
Ruin must needs ensue; for what availes
Valor or strength, though matchless, quelld with pain
Which all subdues, and makes remiss the hands
Of Mightiest. Sense of pleasure we may well
Spare out of life perhaps, and not repine,
But live content, which is the calmest life:
But pain is perfet misery, the worst
Of evils, and excessive, overturnes
All patience. He who therefore can invent
With what more forcible we may offend
Our yet unwounded Enemies, or arm
Our selves with like defense, to me deserves
No less then for deliverance what we owe.
Whereto with look composed Satan replied*
Not uninvented that, which thou aright
Believst so main to our success, I bring;
Which of us who beholds the bright surface
Of this Ethereous mould whereon we stand,
This continent of spacious Heaven, adornd
With Plant, Fruit, Flour Ambrosial, Gemms and Gold,
Whose Eye so superficially surveyes
These things, as not to mind from whence they grow
Deep under ground, materials dark and crude,
Of spiritous and fiery spume, till touched
With Heavens ray, and temperd they shoot forth
So beauteous, opening to the ambient light.
These in their dark Nativitie the Deep
Shall yield us pregnant with infernal flame,
Which into hallow Engines long and round
Thick-rammd, at the other bore with touch of fire
Dilated and infuriate shall send forth
From far with thundering noise among our foes
Such implements of mischief as shall dash
To pieces, and orewhelm whatever stands
Adverse, that they shall fear we have disarmd
The Thunderer of his only dreaded bolt.
Nor long shall be our labor, yet ere dawne,
Effect shall end our wish. Mean while revive;
Abandon fear; to strength and counsel joind
Think nothing hard, much less to be despaird.
He ended, and his words their drooping chere
Enlightn'd, and their languisht hope revived.
The invention all admired, and each, how he
To be the inventer missed, so easy it seemd
Once found, which yet unfound most would have thought
Impossible: yet happily of thy Race
In future days, if Malice should abound,
Some o^^ intent on mischief, or inspired
With devilish machination might devise
Like instrument to plague the Sons of men
For sin, on war and mutual slaughter bent.
Forthwith from Council to the work they flew,
None arguing stood, innumerable hands
Were ready, in a moment up they turned
Wide the Celestial soil, and saw beneath
The originals of Nature in their crude
Conception; Sulphurous and Nitrous Foame
They found, they mingled, and with subtle Art,
Concocted and adusted they reduced
To blackest grain, and into store conveyed:
Part hidd'n veins diggd up (nor has this Earth
Entrails unlike) of Mineral and Stone,
Whereof to found their Engines and their Balls
Of missive ruin; part incentive reed
Provide, pernicious with one touch to fire.
So all ere dayspring, under conscious Night
Secret they finished, and in order set,
With silent circumspection unespi'd.
Now when fair Morn Orient in Heaven appeerd
Up rose the Victor Angels, and to Arms
The matin Trumpet Sung: in Arms they stood
Of Golden Panoplie, refulgent Host,
Soon banded; others from the dawning Hills
Lookd round, and Scouts each Coast light-armed scour,
Each quarter, to descrie the distant foe,
Where lodged, or whither fled, or if for fight,
In motion or in alt: him soon they met
Under spread Ensigns moving nigh, in slow
But firm Battalion; back with speediest Sail
Zophiel, of Cherubim the swiftest wing,
Came flying, and in mid Air aloud thus cried.
Arm, Warriors, Arm for fight, the foe at hand,
Whom fled we thought, will save us long pursuit
This day, fear not his flight; so thick a Cloud
He comes, and settled in his face I see
Sad resolution and secure: let each
His Adamantine coat gird well, and each
Fit well his Helm, gripe first his orbed Shield,
Born eevn or high, for this day will poor down,
If I conjecture aught, no drizling shower,
But rattling storm of Arrows barbd with fire.
So warnd he them aware themselves, and soon
In order, quit of all impediment;
Instant without disturb they took Allarm,
And onward move Embattelld; when behold
Not distant far with heavy pace the Foe
Approaching gross and huge; in hollow Cube
Training his devilish Enginrie, impaled
On every side with shaddowing Squadrons Deep,
To hide the fraud. At interview both stood
A while, but suddenly at head appeerd
Satan: And thus was heard Commanding loud.
Vanguard, to Right and Left the Front unfould;
That all may see who hate us, how we seek;
Peace and composure, and with open breast
Stand ready to receive them, if they like
Our overture, and turn not back perverse;
But that I doubt, however witness Heaven,
Heaven witness thou anon, while we discharge
Freely our part; ye who appointed stand
Do as you have in charge, and briefly touch
What we propound, and loud that all may hear.
So scoffing in ambiguous words he scarce,
Had ended; when to Right and Left the Front
Divided, and to either Flank retired.
Which to our eyes discoverd new and strange,
A triple mounted row of Pillars laid
On Wheels (for like to Pillars most they seemed
Or hollowed bodies made of Oak or Firr
With branches lopt, in Wood or Mountain felled)
Brass, Iron, Stony mould, had not their mouths
With hideous orifice gap't on us wide,
Portending hollow truce; at each behind
A Seraph stood, and in his hand a Reed
Stood waving tipped with fire; while we suspense;
Collected stood within our thoughts amused,
Not long, for sudden all at once their Reeds
Put forth, and to a narrow vent applied
With nicest touch. Immediate in a flame,
But soon obscured with smoke, all Heaven appeerd,
From those deep throated Engines belcht, whose roar
Emboweld with outrageous noise the Air,
And all her entrails tore, disgorging foul
Their devilish glut, chaind Thunderbolts and Hail
Of Iron Globes, which on the Victor Host
Levelled, with such impetuous fury smote,
That whom they hit, none on their feet might stand,'
Though standing else as Rocks, but down they fell
By thousands, Angel on Archangel rolled;
The sooner for their Arms, unarmed they might
Have easily as Spirits evaded swift
By quick contraction or remove; but now
Foul dissipation followed and forced rout;
Nor served it to relax their serried files.
What should they do? if on they rusht, repulse
Repeated, and indecent overthrow
Doubled, would render them yet more despised,
And to their foes a laughter; for in view
Stood rankt of Seraphim another row
In posture to displode their second tire
Of Thunder: back defeated to return
They worse abhorred. Satan beheld their plight,
And to his Mates thus in derision called.
O Friends, why come not on these Victors proud?
Ere while they fierce were coming, and when we,
To entertain them fair with open Front
And Breast, (what could we more?) propounded terms
Of composition, strait they changed their minds,
Flew off, and into strange vagaries fell,
As they would dance, yet for a dance they seemd
Somewhat extravagant and wild, perhaps
For joy of offered peace: but I suppose
If our proposals once again were heard
We should compel them to a quick result.
To whom thus Belial in like gamesom mood,
Leader, the terms we sent were terms of weight,
Of hard contents, and full of force urged home,
Such as we might perceive amused them all,
And stumbl'd many, who receives them right,
Had need from head to foot well understand;
Not understood, this gift they have besides,
They show us when our foes walk not upright.
So they among themselves in pleasant vein
Stood scoffing, highthn'd in their thoughts beyond
All doubt of Victory, eternal might
To match with their inventions they presumed
So easy, and of his Thunder made a scorn,
And all his Host derided, while they stood
A while in trouble; but they stood not long,
Rage prompted them at length, and found them arms
Against such hellish mischief fit to oppose.
Forthwith (behold the excellence, the power
Which God has in his mighty Angels placed)
Their Arms away they threw, and to the Hills
(For Earth has this variety from Heaven
Of pleasure situate in Hill and Dale)
Light as the Lightning glimps they ran, they flew,
From their foundations loosning to and fro
They plucked the seated Hills with all their load,
Rocks, Waters, Woods, and by the shaggie tops
Up lifting bore them in their hands: Amaze,
Be sure, and terror seized the rebel Host,
When coming toward them so dread they saw
The bottom of the Mountains upward turned,
Till on those cursed Engines triple-row
They saw them whelmed, and all their confidence
Under the weight of Mountains buried deep,
Themselves invaded next, and on their heads
Main Promontories flung, which in the Air
Came shadowing, and oppressed whole Legions armed,
Their armor helped their harm, crush't in and bruised
Into their substance pent, which wrought them pain
Implacable, and many a dolorous groan,
Long struggling underneath, ere they could wind
Out of such prison, though Spirits of purest light,
Purest at first, now gross by sinning grown.
The rest in imitation to like Arms
Betook them, and the neighboring Hills uptore;
So Hills amid the Air encounterd Hills
Hurled to and fro with jaculation dire,
That under ground, they fought in dismal shade;
Infernal noise; War seemed a civil Game
To this uproar; horrid confusion heapt
Upon confusion rose: and now all Heaven
Had gone to wrack, with ruin overspred,
Had not the Almighty Father where he sits
Shrin'd in his Sanctuary of Heaven secure,
Consulting on the sum of things, foreseen
This tumult, and permitted all, advised:
That his great purpose he might so fulfill,
To honor his Anointed Son avenged
Upon his enemies, and to declare
All power on him transferred: whence to his Son
The Assessor of his Throne he thus began.
Effulgence of my Glory, Son beloved,
Son in whose face invisible is beheld
Visibly, what by Deity I am,
And in whose hand what by Decree I do,
Second Omnipotence, two days are past,
Two days, as we compute the days of Heaven,
Since Michael and his Powers went forth to tame
These disobedient; sore has been their fight,
As likeliest was, when two such Foes met armed;
For to themselves I left them, and thou know,
Equal in their Creation they were formed,
Save what sin has impaird, which yet has wrought
Insensibly, for I suspend their doom;
Whence in perpetual fight they needs must last
Endless, and no solution will be found:
War wearied has performed what War can do,
And to disordered rage let loose the reins,
With Mountains as with Weapons armed, which makes
Wild work in Heaven, and dangerous to the maine.
Two days are therefore past, the third is thine;
For thee I have ordained it, and thus far
Have sufferd, that the Glory may be thine
Of ending this great War, since none but Thou
Can end it. Into thee such Virtue and Grace
Immense I have transfused, that all may know
In Heaven and Hell thy Power above compare,
And this perverse Commotion governd thus,
To manifest thee worthiest to be Heir
Of all things, to be Heir and to be King
By Sacred Unction, thy deserved right.
Go then thou Mightiest in thy Fathers might,
Ascend my Chariot* guide the rapid Wheels
That shake Heavens basis, bring forth all my War,
My Bow and Thunder, my Almighty Arms
Gird on, and Sword upon thy puissant Thigh;
Pursue these sons of Darkness, drive them out
From all Heavens bounds into the utter Deep:
There let them learn, as likes them, to despise
God and Messiah his anointed King.
He said, and on his Son with Rays direct
Shon full, he all his Father full expressed
Ineffably into his face received,
And thus the filial Godhead answering spoke.
O Father, O Supreme of heavenly Thrones,
First, Highest, Holiest, Best, thou always seekst
To glorify thy Son, I always thee,
As is most just; this I my Glory account,
My exaltation, and my whole delight,
That thou in me well pleased, declarst thy will
Fulfilled, which to fulfill is all my bliss.
Scepter and Power, thy giving, I assume,
And gladlier shall resign, when in the end
Thou shall be All in All, and I in thee
For ever, and in me all whom thou love:
But whom thou hat'st, I hate, and can put on
Thy terrors, as I put thy mildness on,
Image of thee in all things; and shall soon,
Armd with thy might, rid heaven of these rebelled,
To their prepared ill Mansion driven down
To chains of darkness, and the undying Worm,
That from thy just obedience could revolt,
Whom to obey is happiness entire.
Then shall thy Saints unmixt, and from the impure
Far separate, circling thy holy Mount
Unfeigned Halleluiahs to thee sing,
Hymns of high praise, and I among them chief.
So said, he over his Scepter bowing, rose
From the right hand of Glory where he sat,
And the third sacred Morn began to shine
Dawning through Heaven: forth rushed with whirlwind sound
The Chariot of Paternal Deity,
Flashing thick flames, Wheel within Wheel undrawn,
It self instinct with Spirit, but convoyd
By four Cherubic shapes, four Faces each
Had wondrous, as with Stars their bodies all
And Wings were set with Eyes, with Eyes the wheels
Of Beril, and careering Fires between;
Over their heads a crystal Firmament,
Whereon a Saphir Throne, inlaid with pure
Amber, and colors of the showrie Arch.
He in Celestial Panoplie all armd
Of radiant Vrim, work divinely wrought,
Ascended, at his right hand Victory
Sat Eagle-wing'd, beside him hung his Bow
And Quiver with three-bolted Thunder stored,
And from about him fierce Effusion rowld
Of smoke and bickering flame, and sparkles dire;
Attended with ten thousand thousand Saints,
He onward came, far off his coming shon,
And twenty thousand (I their number heard)
Chariots of God, half on each hand were seen:
He on the wings of Cherub rode sublime
On the Chrystallin Sky, in Saphir Throned.
Illustrious far and wide, but by his own
First seen, them unexpected joy surpised,
When the great Ensign of Messiah blazed
Aloft by Angels born, his Sign in Heaven:
Under whose conduct Michael soon reduced
His Army, circumfus'd on either Wing,
Under their Head imbodied all in one.
Before him Power Divine his way prepared;
At his command the uprooted Hills retired
Each to his place, they heard his voice and went
Obsequious, Heaven his wonted face renewd,
And with fresh Flourets Hill and Valley smiled.
This saw his hapless Foes but stood obdur'd,
And to rebellious fight rallied their Powers
Insensate, hope conceiving from despair.
In heavenly Spirits could such perverseness dwell?
But to convince the proud what Signs avail,
Or Wonders move the obdurate to relent?
They hard'nd more by what might most reclame,
Grieving to see his Glory, at the sight
Took envy, and aspiring to his highth,
Stood reimbattell'd fierce, by force or fraud
Weening to prosper, and at length prevail
Against God and Messiah, or to fall
In universal ruin last, and now
To final Battle drew, disdaining flight,
Or faint retreat; when the great Son of God
To all his Host on either hand thus spoke.
Stand still in bright array ye Saints, here stand
Ye Angels armed, this day from Battle rest;
Faithful has been your warfare, and of God
Accepted, fearless in his righteous Cause,
And as ye have receivd, so have ye don
Invincibly; but of this cursed crew
The punishment to other hand belongs,
Vengeance is his, or whose he sole appoints;
Number to this days work is not ordained
Nor multitude, stand only and behold
Gods indignation on these Godless pourd
By me, not you but me they have despised,
Yet envied; against me is all their rage,
Because the Father, to whom in Heaven supreme
Kingdom and Power and Glory appertains,
Has honored me according to his will.
Therefore to me their doom he has assig'n'd;
That they may have their wish, to try with me
In Battle which the stronger proves, they all,
Or I alone against them, since by strength
They measure all, of other excellence
Not emulous, nor care who them excells;
Nor other strife with them do I voutsafe.
So spoke the Son, and into terror changed
His countenance too severe to be beheld
And full of wrauth bent on his Enemies.
At once the Four spread out their Starrie wings
With dreadful shade contiguous, and the Orbs
Of his fierce Chariot rowld, as with the sound
Of torrent Floods, or of a numerous Host.
He on his impious Foes right onward drove,
Gloomie as Night; under his burning Wheels
The steadfast Empyrean shook throughout,
All but the Throne it self of God. Full soon
Among them he arrived; in his right hand
Grasping ten thousand Thunders, which he sent
Before him, such as in their Souls infix'd
Plagues; they astonished all resistance lost,
All courage; down their idle weapons dropped;
Over Shields and Helmes, and helmed heads he rode
Of Thrones and mighty Seraphim prostrate,
That wished the Mountains now might be again
Thrown on them as a shelter from his ire.
Nor less on either side tempestuous fell
His arrows, from the fourfold-visag'd Four,
Distinct with eyes, and from the living Wheels
Distinct alike with multitude of eyes,
One Spirit in them ruled, and every eye
Glar'd lightning, and shot forth pernicious fire
Among the accursed, that witherd all their strength,
And of their wonted vigor lest them draind,
Exhausted, spiritless, afflicted, fallen.
Yet half his strength he put not forth, but checked
His Thunder in mid Volie, for he meant
Not to destroy, but root them out of Heaven:
The overthrown he raised, and as a Heard
Of Goats or timorous flock together throngd
Drove them before him Thunderstruck, pursued
With terrors and with furies to the bounds
And Crystal wall of Heaven, which opening wide,
Rowld inward, and a spacious Gap disclosed
Into the wastful Deep; the monstrous sight
Struck them with horror backward, but far worse
Urged them behind; headlong themselves they threw
Down from the verge of Heaven, Eternal wrauth
Burnt after them to the bottomless pit.
Hell heard the unsufferable noise, Hell saw
Heaven ruining from Heaven and would have fled
Affrighted; but strict Fate had cast too deep
Her dark foundations, and too fast had bound.
Nine days they fell; confounded Chaos roard,
And felt tenfold confusion in their fall
Through his wild Anarchie, so huge a rout
Incumberd him with ruin: Hell at last
Yawning receavd them whole, and on them closed,
Hell their fit habitation fraught with fire
Unquenchable, the house of woe and pain.
Disburd'nd Heaven rejoiced, and soon repaird
Her mural breach, returning whence it rowld.
Sole Victor from the expulsion of his Foes
Messiah his triumphal Chariot turned:
To meet him all his Saints, who silent stood
Eye witnesses of his Almighty Acts,
With Jubilie advanced; and as they went,
Shaded with branching Palm, each order bright,
Sung Triumph, and him sung Victorious King,
Son, Heir, and Lord, to him Dominion given,
Worthiest to Reign: he celebrated rode
Triumphant through mid Heaven, into the Courts
And Temple of his mighty Father Throned
On high: who into Glory him received,
Where now he sits at the right hand of bliss.
Thus measuring things in Heaven by things on Earth
At thy request, and that thou may beware
By what is past, to thee I have revealed
What might have else to human Race bin hid;
The discord which befell, and War in Heaven
Among the Angelic Powers, and the deep fall
Of those too high aspiring, who rebelld
With Satan, he who envies now thy state,
Who now is plotting how he may seduce
Thee also from obedience, that with him
Bereavd of happiness thou may partake
His punishment, Eternal misery;
Which would be all his solace and revenge,
As a despite don against the most High,
Thee once to gain Companion of his woe.
But list'n not to his Temptations, warn
Thy weaker; let it profit thee to have heard
By terrible Example the reward
Of disobedience; firm they might have stood,
Yet fell; remember, and fear to transgress.
The End of the Sixth Book.
Paradise Lost.
BOOK VII.
THE ARGUMENT.
Raphael at the request of Adam relates how and wherefore this world was first
created; that God, after the expelling of Satan and his Angels out of Heaven,
declared his pleasure to create another World and other Creatures to dwell
therein; sends his Son with Glory and attendance of Angels to perform the work
of Creation in six days: the Angels celebrate with Hymns the performance
thereof, and his reascention into Heaven.

DEscend from Heaven Urania, by that name
If rightly thou art called, whose Voice divine
Following, above the Olympian Hill I soar,
Above the flight of Pegasean wing.
The meaning, not the Name I call: for thou
Nor of the Muses nine, nor on the top
Of old Olympus dwell'st, but Heav'nlie borne,
Before the Hills appeerd, or Fountain flowed,
Thou with Eternal wisdom did converse,
Wisdom thy Sister, and with her did play
In presence of the Almighty Father, pleased
With thy Celestial Song. Up led by thee
Into the Heaven of Heavens I have presumed,
An Earthly Guest, and drawn Empyreal Air,
Thy tempring; with like safety guided down
Return me to my Native Element:
Least from this flying Steed unrein'd, (as once
Bellerophon, though from a lower Clime)
Dismounted, on the Aleian Field I fall
Erroneous there to wander and forlorn.
Half yet remains unsung* but narrower bound
Within the visible Diurnal Sphere;
Standing on Earth, not rapt above the Pole,
More safe I Sing with mortal voice, unchanged
To hoarce or mute, though fallen on evil days,
On evil days though fallen, and evil tongues;
In darkness, and with dangers compast round,
And solitude; yet not alone, while thou
Visit'st my slumbers Nightly, or when Morn
Purples the East: still govern thou my Song,
Urania, and fit audience find, though few.
But drive far off the barbarous dissonance
Of Bacchus and his revellers, the Race
Of that wild Rout that tore the Thracian Bard
In Rhodope, where Woods and Rocks had Ears
To rapture, till the savage clamor dround
Both Harp and Voice; nor could the Muse defend
Her Son. So fail not thou, who thee implores:
For thou art Heav'nlie, she an empty dream.
Say Goddess, what ensued when Raphael,
The affable Archangel, had forewarned
Adam by dire example to beware
Apostasy, by what befell in Heaven
To those Apostates, least the like befall
In Paradise to Adam or his Race,
Charged not to touch the interdicted Tree,
If they transgress, and slight that sole command,
So easily obeyed amid the choice
Of all tastes else to please their appetite,
Though wandering. He with his consorted Eve
The story heard attentive, and was filled
With admiration, and deep Muse to hear
Of things so high and strange, things to their thought
So unimaginable as hate in Heaven,
And War so near the Peace of God in bliss
With such confusion: but the evil soon
Driven back redounded as a flood on those
From whom it sprung, impossible to mix
With Blessedness. Whence Adam soon repealed
The doubts that in his heart arose: and now
Led on, yet sinless, with desire to know
What nearer might concern him, how this World
Of Heaven and Earth conspicious first began,
When, and whereof created, for what cause,
What within Eden or without was done
Before his memory, as one whose drouth
Yet scarce allayed still eyes the current stream,
Whose liquid murmur heard new thirst excites,
Proceeded thus to ask his Heavenly Guest.
Great things, and full of wonder in our ears,
Far differing from this World, thou have revealed
Divine interpreter, by favor sent
Down from the Empyrean to forewarne
Us timely of what might else have bin our loss,
Unknown, which human knowledge could not reach:
For which to the infinitely Good we owe
Immortal thanks, and his admonishment
Receave with solemn purpose to observe
Immutably his sovran will, the end
Of what we are. But since thou have voutsaf't
Gently for our instruction to impart
Things above Earthly thought, which yet concernd
Our knowing, as to highest wisdom seemd,
Deign to descend now lower, and relate
What may no less perhaps avail us known,
How first began this Heaven which we behold
Distant so high, with moving Fires adornd
Innumerable, and this which yields or fills
All space, the ambient Air wide interfus'd
Embracing round this florid Earth, what cause
Moved the Creator in his holy Rest
Through all Eternity so late to build
In Chaos, and the work begun, how soon
Absolved, if unforbid thou may unfould
What we, not to explore the secrets ask
Of his Eternal Empire, but the more*
To magnify his works, the more we know.
And the great Light of Day yet wants to run
Much of his Race though steep, suspens in Heaven
Held by thy voice, thy potent voice he hears,
And longer will delay to hear thee tell
His Generation, and the rising Birth
Of Nature from the unapparent Deep:
Or if the Starr of Eevning and the Moon
Haste to thy audience, Night with her will bring
Silence, and Sleep listening to thee will watch,
Or we can bid his absence, till thy Song
End, and dismiss thee ere the Morning shine*
Thus Adam his illustrious Guest besought:
And thus the Godlike Angel answered mild.
This also thy request with caution asked
Obtain: thought to recount Almighty works
What words or tongue of Seraph can suffice,
Or heart of man suffice to comprehend?
Yet what thou can attain, which best may serve
To glorify the Maker, and infer
Thee also happier, shall not be withheld
Thy hearing, such Commission from above
I have received, to answer thy desire
Of knowledge within bounds; beyond abstain
To ask, nor let thine own inventions hope
Things not revealed, which the invisible King,
Only Omniscient, has suppressed in Night,
To none communicable in Earth or Heaven:
Anough is left besides to search and know.
But Knowledge is as food, and needs no less
Her Temperance over Appetite, to know
In measure what the mind may well contain,
Oppresses else with Surfeit, and soon turns
Wisdom to Folly, as Nourishment to Wind.
Know then, that after Lucifer from Heaven
(So call him, brighter once amidst the Host
Of Angels, then that Starr the Stars among)
Fell with his flaming Legions through the Deep
Into his place, and the great Son returned
Victorious with his Saints, the Omnipotent
Eternal Father from his Throne beheld
Their multitude, and to his Son thus spoke.
At least our envious Foe has failed, who thought
All like himself rebellious, by whose aid
This inaccessible high strength, the seat
Of Deity supreme, us dispossessed,
He trusted to have seized, and into fraud
Drew many, whom their place knows here no more;
Yet far the greater part have kept, I see,
Their station, Heaven yet populous retains
Number sufficient to possess her Realms
Though wide, and this high Temple to frequent
With Ministeries due and solemn Rites:
But least his heart exalt him in the harm
Already done, to have dispeopl'd Heaven
My damage fondly deemed, I can repair
That detriment, if such it be to lose
Self-lost, and in a moment will create
Another World, out of one man a Race
Of men innumerable, there to dwell,
Not here, till by degrees of merit raised
They open to themselves at length the way
Up hither, under long obedience tried,
And Earth be changed to Heaven, and Heaven to Earth,
One Kingdom, Joy and Union without end.
Mean while inhabit laxe, ye Powers of Heaven,
And thou my Word, begotten Son, by thee
This I perform, speak thou, and be it don:
My overshadowing Spirit and might with thee
I send along, ride forth, and bid the Deep
Within appointed bounds be Heaven and Earth,
Boundless the Deep, because I am who fill
Infinitude, nor vacuous the space.
Though I uncircumscrib'd ray self retire,
And put not forth my goodness, which is free
To act or not, Necessity and Chance
Approach not me, and what I will is Fate.
So spoke the Almighty, and to what he spoke
His Word, the filial Godhead, gave effect.
Immediate are the Acts of God, more swift
Then time or motion, but to human ears
Cannot without process of speech be told,
So told as earthly notion can receave.
Great triumph and rejoicing was in Heaven
When such was heard declared the Almightie's will;
Glory they sung to the most High, good will
To future men, and in their dwellings peace:
Glory to him whose just avenging ire
Had driven out the ungodly from his sight
And the habitations of the just; to him
Glory and praise, whose wisdom had ordained
Good out of evil to create, in stead
Of Spirits malign a better Race to bring
Into their vacant room, and thence diffuse
His good to Worlds and Ages infinite.
So sang the Hierarchies: Mean while the Son
On his great Expedition now appeer'd,
Girt with Omnipotence, with Radiance crowned
Of Majesty Divine, Sapience and Love
Immense, and all his Father in him shon.
About his Chariot numberless were poured
Cherub and Seraph, Potentates and Thrones,
And Virtues, winged Spirits, and Chariots winged,
From the Armoury of God, where stand of old
Myriads between two brazen Mountains lodged
Against a solemn day, harnest at hand,
Celestial Equipage; and now came forth
Spontaneous, for within them Spirit livd,
Attendant on their Lord: Heaven op'nd wide
Her ever during Gates, Harmonious sound
On golden Hinges moving, to let forth
The King of Glory in his powerful Word
And Spirit coming to create new Worlds.
On heavenly ground they stood, and from the shore
They viewed the vast immeasurable Abyss
Outrageous as a Sea, dark, wasteful, wild,
Up from the bottom turned by furious winds
And surging waves, as Mountains to assault
Heavens highth, and with the Center mix the Pole.
Silence, ye troubled waves, and thou Deep, peace,
Said then the Omnific Word, your discord end:
Nor staid, but on the Wings of Cherubim
Uplifted, in Paternal Glory rode
Far into Chaos, and the World unborn;
For Chaos heard his voice: him all his Train
Followed in bright procession to behold
Creation, and the wonders of his might.
Then staid the fervid Wheels, and in his hand
He took the golden Compasses, prepared
In Gods Eternal store, to circumscribe
This Universe, and all created things:
One foot he centered, and the other turned
Round through the vast profunditie obscure,
And said, thus far extend, thus far thy bounds,
This be thy just Circumference, O World.
Thus God the Heaven created, thus the Earth,
Matter unformed and void: Darkness profound
Covered the Abyss: but on the watrie calm
His brooding wings the Spirit of God outspred,
And vital virtue infused, and vital warmth
Throughout the fluid Mass, but downward purged
The black tartareous cold Infernal dregs
Adverse to life: then founded, then conglob'd
Like things to like, the rest to several place
Disparted, and between spun out the Air,
And Earth self ballanc't on her Center hung.
Let there be Light, said God, and forthwith Light
Ethereal first of things, quintessence pure
Sprung from the Deep, and from her Native East
To journie through the airie gloom began,
Sphear'd in a radiant Cloud, for yet the Sun
Was not; she in a cloudie Tabernacle
So journ'd the while. God saw the Light was good;
And light from darkness by the Hemisphere
Divided: Light the Day, and Darkness Night
He named. Thus was the first Day Eev'n and Morn:
Nor past uncelebrated, nor unsung
By the Celestial Quires, when Orient Light
Exhaling first from Darkness they beheld;
Birthday of Heaven and Earth; with joy and shout
The hollow Universal Orb they filled,
And touched their Golden Harps, and hymning praised
God and his works, Creator him they sung,
Both when first Eevning was, and when first Morn.
Again, God said, let there be Firmament
Amid the Waters, and let it divide
The Waters from the Waters: and God made
The Firmament, expanse of liquid, pure,
Transparent, Elemental Air, diffused
In circuit to the uttermost unequal
Of this great Round: partition firm and sure,
The Waters underneath from those above
Dividing: for as Earth, so he the World
Built on circumfluous Waters calm, in wide
Crystallin Ocean, and the loud misrule
Of Chaos far removed, least fierce extremes
Contiguous might distemper the whole frame:
And Heaven he named the Firmament: So Eev'n
And Morning Chorus sung the second Day.
The Earth was formed, but in the Womb as yet
Of Waters, Embryon immature involved,
Appeer'd not: over all the face of Earth
Main Ocean flowed, not idle, but with warm
Prolific humor softening all her Globe,
Fermented the great Mother to conceave,
Satiate with genial moisture, when God said
Be gathered now ye Warers under Heaven
Into one place, and let dry Land appeer.
Immediately the Mountain huge appeer
Emergent, and their broad bare backs upheave
Into the Clouds, their tops ascend the Sky:
So high as heaved the tumid Hills, so low
Down sunk a hollow bottom broad and deep,
Capacious bed of Waters: thither they
Hasted with glad precipitance, uprowld
As drops on dust conglobing from the dry;
Part rise in crystal Wall, or ridge direct,
For haste; such flight the great command impressed
On the swift floods: as Armies at the call
Of Trumpet (for of Armies thou have heard)
Troop to their Standard, so the watrie throng,
Wave rolling after Wave, where way they found,
If steep, with torrent rapture, if through Plain,
Soft-ebbing; nor withstood them Rock or Hill,
But they, or under ground, or circuit wide
With Serpent error wandering, found their way,
And on the washie Oose deep Channels wore;
Easy, e're God had bid the ground be dry,
All but within whose banks, where Rivers now
Stream, and perpetual draw their humid train.
The dry Land, Earth, and the great receptacle
Of congregated Waters he called Seas:
And saw that it was good, and said, Let the Earth
Put forth the verdant Grass, Herb yielding Seed,
And Fruit Tree yielding Fruit after her kind;
Whose Seed is in her self upon the Earth.
He scarce had said, when the bate Earth, till then
Desert and bare, unsightly, unadornd,
Brought forth the tender Grass, whose verdure clad
Her Universal Face with pleasant green,
Then Herbs of every leaf, that sudden flour'd
Opening their various colors, and made gay
Her bosom smelling sweet: and these scarce blown,
Forth flourish't thick the clustring Vine, forth crept
The smelling Gourd, up stood the cornie Reed
Embattell'd in her field: and the humble Shrub,
And Bush with frizl'd hair implicit: last
Rose as in Dance the stately Trees, and spread
Their branches hung with copious Fruit; or gemm'd
Their blossoms: with high woods the hills were crowned,
With tufts the valleys and each fountain side,
With borders long the Rivers. That Earth now
Seemd like to Heaven, a seat where Gods might dwell,
Or wander with delight, and love to haunt
Her sacred shades: though God had yet not rained
Upon the Earth, and man to till the ground
None was, but from the Earth a dewie Mist
Went up and waterd all the ground, and each
Plant of the field, which e're it was in the Earth
God made, and every Herb, before it grew
On the green stemm; God saw that it was good.
So Eev'n and Morn recorded the Third Day.
Again the Almighty spoke: Let there be Lights
High in the expanse of Heaven to divide
The Day from Night; and let them be for Signs,
For Seasons, and for Days, and circling Years,
And let them be for Lights as I ordain
Their Office in the Firmament of Heaven
To give Light on the Earth; and it was so.
And God made two great Lights, great for their use
To Man, the greater to have rule by Day,
The less by Night alterne: and made the Stars,
And set them in the Firmament of Heaven
To illuminate the Earth, and rule the Day
In their vicissitude, and rule the Night,
And Light from Darkness to divide. God saw,
Surveying his great Work, that it was good:
For of Celestial Bodies first the Sun
A mighty Sphere he framed, unlightsom first,
Though of Ethereal Mould: then formed the Moon
Globose, and every magnitude of Stars,
And sowd with Stars the Heaven thick as a field:
Of Light by far the greater part he took,
Transplanted from her cloudie Shrine, and placed
In the Suns Orb, made porous to receive
And drink the liquid Light, firm to retain
Her gathered beams, great Palace now of Light.
Hither as to their Fountain other Stars
Repairing, in their gold'n Urns draw Light,
And hence the Morning Planet guilds her horns;
By tincture or reflection they augment
Their small peculiar, though from human sight
So far remote, with diminution seen,
First in his East the glorious Lamp was seen*
Regent of Day, and all the Horizon round
Invested with bright Rays, jocond to run
His Longitude through Heavens high rode: the gray
Dawn, and the Pleiades before him danced
Shedding sweet influence: less bright the Moon,
But opposite in leveld West was set
His mirror, with full face borrowing her Light
From him, for other light she needed none
In that aspect, and still that distance keeps
Till night, then in the East her turn she shines,
Revolvd on Heavens great Axle, and her Reign
With thousand lesser Lights dividual holds,
With thousand thousand Stars, that then appeer'd
Spangling the Hemisphere: then first adornd
With their bright Luminaries that Set and Rose,
Glad Eevning and glad Morn crowned the fourth day.
And God said, let the Waters generate
Reptil with Spawn abundant, living Soul:
And let Foul fly above the Earth, with wings
Displayed on the open Firmament of Heaven.
And God created the great Whales, and each
Soul living, each that crept, which plenteously
The waters generated by their kinds,
And every Bird of wing after his kind;
And saw that it was good, and blessed them, saying,
Be fruitful, multiply, and in the Seas
And Lakes and running Streams the waters fill;
And let the Foul be multiplied on the Earth.
Forthwith the Sounds and Seas, each Creek and Bay
With Fry innumerable swarm, and Shoales
Of Fish that with their Finns and shining Scales
Glide under the green Wave, in Sculles that often
Bank the mid Sea: part single or with mate
Graze the Sea weed their pasture, and through Groves
Of Coral stray, or sporting with quick glance
Show to the Sun their waved coats dropped with Gold,
Or in their Pearlie shells at ease, attend
Moist nutriment, or under Rocks their food
In jointed Armor watch: on smooth the Seal,
And bended Dolphins play: part huge of bulk
Wallowing unweildie, enormous in their Gate
Tempest the Ocean: there Leviathan
Hugest, of living Creatures, on the Deep
Stretched like a Promontorie sleeps or swimmes,
And seems a moving Land, and at his Gilles
Draws in, and at his Trunck spouts our a Sea.
Mean while the tepid Caves, and Fens and shoares
Their Brood as numerous hatch, from the Egg that soon
Bursting with kindly rupture forth disclosed
Their callow young, but featherd soon and fledge
They summed their Penns, and soaring the air sublime
With clang despised the ground, under a cloud
In prospect; there the Eagle and the Stork
On Cliffs and Cedar tops their Eyries build:
Part loosly wing the Region, part more wise
In common, ranged in figure wedge their way,
Intelligent of seasons, and set forth
Their Aierie Caravan high over Sea's
Flying, and over Lands with mutual wing
Easing their flight; so stears the prudent Crane^
Her annual Voyage, born on Winds; the Air
Floats, as they pass, fanned with unnumber'd plumes:
From Branch to Branch the smaller Birds with song
Solac'd the Woods, and spread their painted wings
Till Even, nor then the solemn Nightingal
Ceased warbling, but all night tuned her soft lays:
Others on Silver Lakes and Rivers Bathed
Their downie Breast; the Swan with Arched neck
Between her white wings mantling proudly, Rows
Her state with Oarie feet; yet often they quit
The Dank, and rising on stiff Pennons, tower
The mid Aereal Sky: Others on ground
Walked firm; the crested Cock whose clarion sounds
The silent hours, and the other whose gay Train
Adorns him, colored with the Florid hue
Of Rainbows and Starrie Eyes. The Waters thus
With Fish replenisht, and the Air with Foul,
Evening and Morn solemnized the Fifth day.
The Sixth, and of Creation last arose
With Eevning Harps and Martin, when God said,
Let the Earth bring forth Foul living in her kind,
Cattle and Creeping things, and Beast of the Earth,
Each in their kind. The Earth obeyed, and strait
Opening her fertile Woomb teemed at a Birth
Innumerous living Creatures, perfet forms,
Limbed and full grown: out of the ground up rose
As from his Laire the wild Beast where he wonns
In Forest wild, in Thicket, Brake, or Den;
Among the Trees in Pairs they rose, they walked:
The Cattle in the Fields and Meddowes green:
Those rare and solitary, these in flocks
Pasturing at once, and in broad Herds upsprung.
The grassie Clods now Calv'd, now half appeer'd
The Tawnie Lion, pawing to get free
His hinder parts, then springs as broke from Bonds,
And Rampant shakes his Brinded main; the Ounce,
The Libbard, and the Tiger, as the Moale
Rising, the crumbl'd Earth above them threw
In Hillocks; the swift Stag from under ground
Bore up his branching head: scarce from his mould
Behemoth biggest born of Earth upheav'd
His vastness: Fleec't the Flocks and bleating rose,
As Plants: ambiguous between Sea and Land
The River Horse and scaly Crocodile.
At once came forth whatever creeps the ground,
Insect or Worm; those waved their limber fans
For wings, and smallest Lineaments exact
In all the Liveries dect of Summers pride
With spots of Gold and Purple, azure and green:
These as a line their long dimension drew,
Streaking the ground with sinuous trace; not all
Minims of Nature; some of Serpent kind
Wondrous in length and corpulence involved
Their Snakie foulds, and added wings. First crept
The Parsimonious Emmet, provident
Of future, in small room large heart enclosed,
Pattern of just equality perhaps
Hereafter, joined in her popular Tribes
Of Commonaltie: swarming next appeer'd
The Female Be that feeds her Husband Drone
Deliciously, and builds her waxen Cells
With Honey stored: the rest are numberless,
And thou their Natures know, and gav'st them Names,
Needlest to thee repeated; nor unknown
The Serpent suttl'st Beast of all the field,
Of huge extent sometimes, with brazen Eyes
And hairie Main terrific, though to thee
Not noxious, but obedient at thy call.
Now Heaven in all her Glory shon, and rowld
Her motions, as the great first-Movers hand
First wheeld their course; Earth in her rich attire
Consummate lovly smiled; Air, Water, Earth,
By Fowl, Fish, Beast, was flown, was swum, was walked
Frequent; and of the Sixth: day yet remained;
There wanted yet the Master work, the end
Of all yet don; a Creature who not prone
And Brute as other Creatures, but endu'd
With Sanctity of Reason, might erect
His Stature, and upright with Front serene
Govern the rest, self-knowing, and from thence
Magnanimous to correspond with Heaven,
But grateful to acknowledge whence his good
Descends, thither with heart and voice and eyes
Directed in Devotion, to adore
And worship God Supreme, who made him chief
Of all his works: therefore the Omnipotent
Eternal Father (For where is not he
Present) thus to his Son audibly spoke.
Let us make now Man in our image, Man
In our similitude, and let them rule
Over the Fish and Foul of Sea and Air,
Beast of the Field, and over all the Earth,
And every creeping thing that creeps the ground.
This said, he formd thee, Adam, thee O Man
Dust of the ground, and in thy nostrils breathed
The breath of Life; in his own Image he
Created thee, in the Image of God
Express, and thou becam'st a living Soul.
Male he created thee, but thy consort
Female for Race; then blessed Mankind, and said,
Be fruitful, multiply, and fill the Earth,
Subdue it, and throughout Dominion hold
Over Fish of the Sea, and Foul of the Air,
And every living thing that moves on the Earth.
Wherever thus created, for no place
Is yet distinct by name, thence, as thou know
He brought thee into this delicious Grove,
This Garden, planted with the Trees of God,
Delectable both to behold and taste;
And freely all their pleasant fruit for food
Gave thee, all sorts are here that all the Earth yields,
Variety without end; but of the Tree
Which tasted works knowledge of Good and Evil*
Thou mai'st not; in the day thou eat'st, thou di'st;
Death is the penalty imposed, beware,
And govern well thy appetite, least sin
Surprise thee, and her black attendant Death.
Here finished he, and all that he had made
Viewed, and behold all was entirely good;
So Even and Morn accomplished the Sixth day:
Yet not till the Creator from his work
Desisting, though unwearied, up returned
Up to the Heaven of Heavens his high abode,
Thence to behold this new created World
The addition of his Empire, how it showed
In prospect from his Throne, how good, how fair,
Answering his great Idea. Up he rode
Followd with acclamation and the sound
Symphonious of ten thousand Harpes that tuned
Angelic harmonies: the Earth, the Air
Resounded, (thou remember'st, for thou heardst)
The Heavens and all the Constellations rung,
The Planets in their station list'-ning stood,
While the bright Pomp ascended jubilant.
Open, ye everlasting Gates, they sung,
Open, ye Heavens, your living doors; let in
The great Creator from his work returned
Magnificent, his Six days work, a World;
Open, and henceforth often; for God will deigne
To visit often the dwellings of just Men
Delighted, and with frequent intercourse
Thither will send his winged Messengers
On errands of supernal Grace. So sung
The glorious Train ascending: He through Heaven,
That opened wide her blazing Portals, led
To Gods Eternal house direct the way,
A broad and ample rode, whose dust is Gold
And pavement Stars, as Stars to thee appeer,
Seen in the Galaxie, that Milkie way
Which nightly as a circling Zone thou see
Pouderd with Stars. And now on Earth the Seventh
Eev'ning arose in Eden, for the Sun
Was set, and twilight from the East came on,
Forerunning Night; when at the holy mount
Of Heavens high-seated top, the Impereal Throne
Of Godhead, fixed for ever firm and sure,
The Filial Power arrived, and sat him down
With his great Father (for be also went
Invisible, yet staid (such privilege
Has Omnipresence) and the work ordained*
Author and end of all things, and from work
Now resting, blessed and hallowd the Seav'nth day*
As resting on that day from all his work,
But not in silence holy kept; the Harp
Had work and rested not, the solemn Pipe,
And Dulcimer, all Organs of sweet stop,
All sounds on Fret by String or Golden Wire
Tempered soft Tunings, intermixed with Voice
Choral or Unison: of incense Clouds
Fuming from Golden Censers hid the Mount.
Creation and the Six days acts they sung,
Great are thy works, Jehovah, infinite
Thy power; what thought can measure thee or tongue
Relate thee; greater now in thy return
Then from the Giant Angels; thee that day
Thy Thunders magnified; but to create
Is greater then created to destroy.
Who can impair thee, mighty King, or bound
Thy Empire? easily the proud attempt
Of Spirits apostat and their Counsels vain
Thou have repeld, while impiously they thought
Thee to diminish, and from thee withdraw
The number of thy worshippers. Who seeks
To lessen thee, against his purpose serves
To manifest the more thy might: his evil
Thou usest, and from thence creat'st more good.
Witness this new-made World, another Heaven
From Heaven Gate not far, founded in view
On the clear Hyaline, the Glassie Sea;
Of amplitude almost immense, with Starr's
Numerous, and every Starr perhaps a World
Of destind habitation; but thou know
Their seasons: among these the seat of men,
Earth with her nether Ocean circumfus'd,
Their pleasant dwelling place. Thrice happy men,
And sons of men, whom God has thus advanced,
Created in his Image, there to dwell
And worship him, and in reward to rule
Over his Works, on Earth, in Sea, or Air,
And multiply a Race of Worshippers
Holy and just: thrice happy if they know
Their happiness, and persevere upright.
So sung they, and the Empyrean rung,
With Halleluiahs: Thus was Sabbath kept.
And thy request think now fulfilled, that asked
How first this World and face of things began,
And what before thy memory was don
From the beginning, that posterity
Informd by thee might know; if else thou seekst
Aught, not surpassing human measure, say.
The End of the Seventh Book.
Paradise Lost.
BOOK VIII.
THE ARGUMENT.
Adam inquires concerning celestial Motions, is doubtfully answered, and
exhorted to search rather things more worthy of knowledge: Adam assents, and
still desirous to detain Raphael, relates to him what he remembered since his
own Creation, his placing in Paradise, his talk with God concerning solitude
and fit society, his first meeting and Nuptials with Eve, his discourse with
the Angel thereupon; who after admonitions repeated departs.

THE Angel ended, and in Adams Ear
So Charming left his voice, that he a while
Thought him still speaking, still stood fixed to hear;
Then as new wak't thus gratefully replied.
What thanks sufficient, or what recompense
Equal have I to render thee, Divine
Hystorian, who thus largely have allayd
The thirst I had of knowledge, and voutsaf't
This friendly condescension to relate
Things else by me unsearchable, now heard
With wonder, but delight, and, as is due,
With glory attributed to the high
Creator; something yet of doubt remains,
Which only thy solution can resolve.
When I behold this goodly Frame, this World
Of Heaven and Earth consisting, and compute,
Their magnitudes, this Earth a spot, a grain,
An Atom, with the Firmament compared
And all her numberd Stars, that seem to roll
Spaces incomprehensible (for such
Their distance argues and their swift return
Diurnal) merely to officiate light
Round this opacous Earth, this punctual spot,
One day and night; in all their vast survey
Useless besides, reasoning I often admire,
How Nature wise and frugal could commit
Such disproportions, with superfluous hand
So many nobler Bodies to create,
Greater so manifold to this one use,
For aught appeers, and on their Orbs impose
Such restless revolution day by day
Repeated, while the sedentarie Earth,
That better might with far less compass move,
Served by more noble then her self, attaines
Her end without least motion, and receaves,
As Tribute such a sumless journey brought
Of incorporeal speed, her warmth and light;
Speed, to describe whose swiftness Number fails.
So spoke our Sire, and by his countenance seemd
Entering on studious thoughts abstruse, which Eve
Perceaving where she sat retired in sight,
With lowliness Majestic from her seat,
And Grace that won who saw to wish her stay,
Rose, and with forth among her Fruits and Flours,
To visit how they prosper'd, bud and bloom,
Her Nurserie* they at her coming sprung
And touched by her fair tendance gladlier grew.
Yet went she not, as not with such discourse
Delighted, or not capable her ear
Of what was high: such pleasure she reserved,
Adam relating, she sole Auditress;
Her Husband the Relater she preferred
Before the Angel, and of him to ask
Chose rather; he, she knew would intermit
Grateful digressions, and solve high dispute
With conjugal Caresses, from his Lip
Not Words alone pleased her. O when meet now
Such pairs, in Love and mutual Honor joined?
With Goddess-like demeanor forth she went;
Not unatrended, for on her as Queen
A pomp of winning Graces waited still,
And from about her shot Darts of desire
Into all Eyes to wish her still in sight.
And Raphael now to Adam's doubt proposed
Benevolent and facil thus replied.
To ask or search I blame thee not, for Heaven
Is as the Book of God before thee set,
Wherein to read his wondrous Works, and learn
His Seasons, Hours, or Days, or Months, or Years:
This to attain, whether Heaven move or Earth,
Imports not, if thou reck'n right, the rest
From Man or Angel the great Architect
Did wisely to conceal, and not divulge
His secrets to be scanned by them who ought
Rather admire; or if they list to try
Conjecture, he his Fabric of the Heavens
Has left to their disputes, perhaps to move
His laughter at their quaint Opinions wide
Hereafter, when they come to model Heaven
And calculate the Stars, how they will weild
The mighty frame, how build, unbuild, contrive
To save appeerances, how gird the Sphere
With Centric and Eccentric scribl'd over,
Cycle and Epicycle, Orb in Orb:
Already by thy reasoning this I guess,
Who art to lead thy offspring, and supposest
That bodies bright and greater should not serve
The less not bright, nor Heaven such journies run,
Earth sitting still, when she alone receaves
The benefit: consider first, that Great
Or Bright inferrs not Excellence: the Earth
Though, in comparison of Heaven, so small,
Nor glistering, may of solid good contain
More plenty then the Sun that barren shines,
Whose virtue on it self works no effect,
But in the fruitful Earth; there first receavd
His beams, unactive else, their vigor find.
Yet not to Earth are those bright Luminaries
Officious, but to thee Earths habitant.
And for the Heavens wide Circuit, let it speak
The Makers high magnificence, who built
So spacious, and his Line stretched out so far;
That Man may know he dwells not in his own;
An Edifice too large for him to fill,
Lodged in a small partition, and the rest
Ordained for uses to his Lord best known.
The swiftness of those Circles attribute,
Though numberless, to his Omnipotence,
That to corporeal substances could add
Speed almost Spiritual; me thou think not slow,
Who since the Morning hour set out from Heaven
Where God resides, and eremid-day arrived
In Eden, distance inexpressible
By Numbers that have name. But this I urge,
Admitting Motion in the Heavens, to show
Invalid that which thee to doubt it moved;
Not that I so affirm, though so it seem
To thee who have thy dwelling here on Earth.
God to remove his ways from human sense,
Placed Heaven from Earth so far, that earthly sight,
If it presume, might err in things too high,
And no advantage gain. What if the Sun
Be Center to the World, and other Stars
By his attractive virtue and their own
Incited, dance about him various rounds?
Their wandering course now high, now low, then hid,
Progressive, retrograde, or standing still,
In six thou see, and what if sev'nth to these
The Planet Earth, so steadfast though she seem,
Insensibly three different Motions move?
Which else to several Spears thou must ascribe,
Moved contrary with thwart obliquities,
Or save the Sun his labor, and that swift
Nocturnal and Diurnal rhomb supposed,
Invisible else above all Stars, the Wheel
Of Day and Night; which needs not thy belief,
If Earth industrious of her self fetch Day
Traveling East, and with her part averse
From the Suns beam meet Night, her other part
Still luminous by his ray. What if that light
Sent from her through the wide transpicuous air,
To the terrestrial Moon be as a Starr
Enlightening her by Day, as she by Night
This Earth? reciprocal, if Land be there,
Feilds and Inhabitants: Her spots thou see
As Clouds, and Clouds may rain, and Rain produce
Fruits in her soft'nd Soil, for some to eat
Allotted there; another Suns perhaps
With their attendant Moons thou will descrie
Communicating Male and Femal Light,
Which two great Sexes animate the World,
Stored in each Orb perhaps with some that live.
For such vast room in Nature unpossest
By living Soul, desert and desolate,
Only to shine, yet scarce to contribute
Each Orb a glimps of Light, conveyed so far
Down to this habitable, which returns
Light back to them, is obvious to dispute.
But whether thus these things, or whether not,
Whether the Sun predominant in Heaven
Rise on the Earth, or Earth rise on the Sun,
He from the East his flaming rode begin,
Or She from West her silent course advance
With inoffensive pace that spinning sleeps
On her soft Axle, while she paces Eev'n,
And bears thee soft with the smooth Air along,
Solicit not thy thoughts with matters hid,
Leave them to God above, him serve and fear;
Of other Creatures, as him pleases best,
Wherever placed, let him dispose: joy thou
In what he gives to thee, this Paradise
And thy fair Eve; Heaven is for thee too high
To know what passes there; be lowly wise:
Think only what concerns thee and thy being;
Dream not of other Worlds, what Creatures there
Live, in what state, condition or degree,
Contented that thus far has been revealed
Not of Earth only but of highest Heaven.
To whom thus Adam cleerd of doubt, replied.
How fully have thou satisfied me, pure
Intelligence of Heaven, Angel serene,
And freed from intricacies, taught to live,
The easiest way, nor with perplexing thoughts
To interrupt the sweet of Life, from which
God has bid dwell far off all anxious cares,
And not molest us, unless we our selves
Seek them with wandering thoughts, and notions vain.
But apt the Mind or Fancy is to roave
Uncheckt, and of her roaving is no end;
Till warned, or by experience taught, she learn,
That not to know at large of things remote
From use, obscure and subtle, but to know
That which before us lies in daily life,
Is the prime Wisdom, what is more, is fume,
Or emptiness, or fond impertinence,
And renders us in things that most concern
Unpracticed, unprepared, and still to seek.
Therefore from this high pitch let us descend
A lower flight, and speak of things at hand
Useful, whence happily mention may arise
Of something not unseasonable to ask
By sufferance, and thy wonted favor deigned.
Thee I have heard relating what was don
Ere my remembrance: now hear me relate
My Story, which perhaps thou have not heard;
And Day is yet not spent; till then thou see
How suttly to detain thee I devise,
Inviting thee to hear while I relate,
Fond, were it not in hope of thy reply:
For while I sit with thee, I seem in Heaven,
And sweeter thy discourse is to my ear
Then Fruits of Palm Tree pleasantest to thirst
And hunger both, from labor, at the hour
Of sweet repast; they satiate, and soon fill,
Though pleasant, but thy words with Grace Divine
Imbued, bring to their sweetness no satietie.
To whom thus Raphael answered heavenly meek,
Nor are thy lips ungraceful, Sire of men,
Nor tongue ineloquent; for God on thee
Abandantly his gifts has also poured
Inward and outward both, his image fair:
Speaking or mute all comeliness and grace
Attends thee, and each word, each motion forms,
Nor less think we in Heaven of thee on Earth
Then of our fellow servant, and inquire
Gladly into the ways of God with Man:
For God we see has honored thee, and set
On Man his Equal Love: say therefore on;
For I that Day was absent, as befell,
Bound on a voyage uncouth and obscure,
Far on excursion toward the Gates of Hell;
Squared in full Legion (such command we had)
To see that none thence issued forth a spy,
Or enemy, while God was in his work,
Least he incenst at such eruption bold,
Destruction with Creation might have mixed.
Not that they durst without his leave attempt,
But us he sends upon his high behests
For state, as Sovran King, and to enure
Our prompt obedience. Fast we found, fast shut
The dismal Gates, and barricado'd strong;
But long ere our approaching heard within
Noise, other then the sound of Dance or Song,
Torment, and loud lament, and surious rage.
Glad we returned up to the coasts of Light
Ere Sabbath Eev'ning: so we had in charge.
But thy relation now; for I attend,
Pleased with thy words no less then thou with mine.
So spoke the Godlike Power, and thus our Sire.
For Man to tell how human Life began
Is hard; for who himself beginning knew?
Desire with thee still longer to converse
Induced me. As new wak't from soundest sleep
Soft on the flourie herb I found me laid
In Balmie Sweat, which with his Beams the Sun
Soon dried, and on the reaking moisture fed.
Strait toward Heaven my wondering Eyes I turned,
And gazed a while the ample Sky, till raised
By quick instinctive motion up I sprung,
As thitherward endevoring, and upright
Stood on my feet; about me round I saw
Hill, Dale, and shadie Woods, and sunnie Plains,
And liquid Lapse of murmuring Streams; by these,
Creatures that livd, and movd, and walked, or flew,
Birds on the branches warbling; all things smiled,
With fragrance and with joy my heart oreflow'd.
My self I then perused, and Limb by Limb
Surveyed, and sometimes went, and sometimes ran
With supple joints, and lively vigor led:
But who I was, or where, or from what cause,
Knew not; to speak I tried, and forthwith spoke,
My Tongue obeyed and readily could name
What e're I saw. Thou Sun, said I, fair Light,
And thou enlight'nd Earth, so fresh and gay,
Ye Hills and Dales, ye Rivers, Woods, and Plains,
And ye that live and move, fair Creatures, tell,
Tell, if ye saw, how came I thus, how here?
Not of my self; by some great Maker then,
In goodness and in power praeeminent;
Tell me, how may I know him, how adore,
From whom I have that thus I move and live,
And feel that I am happier then I know.
While thus I called, and strayed I knew not whither,
From where I first drew Air, and first beheld
This happy Light, when answer none returned,
On a green shadie Bank profuse of Flours
Pensive I sat me down; there gentle sleep
First found me, and with soft oppression seized
My droused sense, untroubl'd, though I thought
I then was passing to my former state
Insensible, and forthwith to dissolve:
When suddenly stood at my Head a dream,
Whose inward apparition gently moved
My fancy to believe I yet had being,
And livd: One came, methought, of shape Divine,
And said, thy Mansion wants thee, Adam, rise,
First Man, of Men innumerable ordained
First Father, called by thee I come thy Guide
To the Garden of bliss, thy seat prepared.
So saying, by the hand he took me raised,
And over Fields and Waters, as in Air
Smooth sliding without step, last led me up
A woodie Mountain; whose high top was plain,
A Circuit wide, enclosed, with goodliest Trees
Planted, with Walks, and Bowers, that what I saw
Of Earth before scarce pleasant seemd. Each Tree
Load'n with fairest Fruit that hung to the Eye
Tempting, stirred in me sudden appetite
To pluck and eat; whereat I waked, and found
Before mine Eyes all real, as the dream
Had lively shadowd: Here had new begun
My wandering, had not he who was my Guide
Up hither, from among the Trees appeer'd
Presence Divine, Rejoicing but with aw
In adoration at his feet I fell
Submiss: he reared me, and Whom thou soughtst I am,
Said mildely, Author of all this thou see
Above, or round about thee or beneath.
This Paradise I give thee, count it thine
To Till and keep, and of the Fruit to eat:
Of every Tree that in the Garden grows
Eat freely with glad heart; fear here no dearth:
But of the Tree whose operation brings
Knowledge of good and ill, which I have set
The Pledge of thy Obedience and thy Faith,
Amid the Garden by the Tree of Life,
Remember what I warn thee, shun to taste,
And shun the bitter consequence: for know,
The day thou eat'st thereof, my sole command
Transgrest, inevitably thou shall dye;
From that day mortal, and this happy State
Shall loose, expelled from hence into a World
Of woe and sorrow. Sternly he pronounced
The rigid interdiction, which resounds
Yet dreadful in mine ear, though in my choice
Not to incur; but soon his clear aspect
Returned and gracious purpose thus renewed.
Not only these fair bounds, but all the Earth
To thee and to thy Race I give; as Lords
Possess it, and all things that therein live,
Or live in Sea, or Air, Beast, Fish, and Foul.
In sign whereof each Bird and Beast behold
After their kinds; I bring them to receave
From thee their Names, and pay thee fealty
With low subjection; understand the same
Of Fish within their watery residence,
Not hither summond, since they cannot change
Their Element to draw the thinner Air.
As thus he spoke, each Bird and Beast behold
Approaching two and two, These cowring low
With blandishment, each Bird stooped on his wing.
I named them, as they passed, and understood
Their Nature, with such knowledge God endu'd
My sudden apprehension: but in these
I found not what me thought I wanted still;
And to the Heavenly vision thus presumed.
O by what Name, for thou above all these,
Above mankind, or aught then mankind higher,
Surpassest far my naming, how may I
Adore thee, Author of this Universe,
And all this good to man, for whose well being
So amply, and with hands so liberal
Thou have provided all things: but with me
I see not who partakes. In solitude
What happiness, who can enjoy alone,
Or all enjoying, what contentment find?
Thus I presumptuous; and the vision bright,
As with a smile more bright'nd, thus replied.
What call'st thou solitude, is not the Earth
With various living creatures, and the Air
Replenisht, and all these at thy command
To come and play before thee, know thou not
Their language and their ways, they also know,
And reason not contemptibly; with these
Find pastime, and bear rule; thy Realm is large.
So spoke the Universal Lord, and seemed
So ordering. I with leave of speech implored,
And humble deprecation thus replied.
Let not my words offend thee, Heavenly Power,
My Maker, be propitious while I speak.
Have thou not made me here thy substitute,
And these inferior far beneath me set?
Among unequals what society
Can sort, what harmony or true delight?
Which must be mutual, in proportion due
Given and received; but in disparitie
The one intense, the other still remiss
Cannot well suite with either, but soon prove
Tedious alike: Of fellowship I speak
Such as I seek, fit to participate
All rational delight, wherein the brute
Cannot be human consort; they rejoice
Each with their kind, Lion with Lioness;
So fitly them in pairs thou have combined;
Much less can Bird with Beast, or Fish with Foul
So well converse, nor with the Ox the Ape;
Wors then can Man with Beast, and least of all.
Whereto the Almighty answered, not displeased.
A nice and subtle happiness I see
Thou to thy self proposest, in the choice
Of thy Associates, Adam, and wilt taste
No pleasure, though in pleasure, solitary.
What think thou then of me, and this my State,
Seem I to thee sufficiently possessed
Of happiness, or not? who am alone
From all Eternity, for none I know
Second to me or like, equal much less.
How have I then with whom to hold converse
Save with the Creatures which I made, and those
To me inferior, infinite descents
Beneath what other Creatures are to thee?
He ceased, I lowly answered. To attain
The highth and depth of thy Eternal ways
All human thoughts come short, Supreme of things;
Thou in thy selt art perfet, and in thee
Is no deficience found; not so is Man,
But in degree, the cause of his desire
By conversation with his like to help,
Or solace his defects. No need that thou
Should propagat, already infinite;
And through all numbers absolute, though One;
But Man by number is to manifest
His single imperfection, and beget
Like of his like, his Image multiplied,
In unity defective, which requires
Collateral love, and dearest amity.
Thou in thy secrecy although alone,
Best with thy self accompanied; seek'st not
Social communication, yet so pleased,
Can raise thy Creature to what highth thou will
Of Union or Communion, deifi'd;
I by conversing cannot these erect
From prone, nor in their ways complacence find.
Thus I embold'nd spoke, and freedom used
Permissive, and acceptance found, which gained
This answer from the gracious voice Divine.
Thus far to try thee, Adam, I was pleased,
And find thee knowing not of Beasts alone,
Which thou have rightly named, but of thy self,
Expressing well the spirit within thee free,
My Image, not imparted to the Brute,
Whose fellowship therefore unmeet for thee
Good reason was thou freely should dislike,
And be so minded still; I, ere thou spak'st,
Knew it not good for Man to be alone,
And no such company as then thou saw
Intended thee for trial only brought,
To see how thou could judge of fit and meet?
What next I bring shall please thee, be assured,
Thy likeness, thy fit help, thy other self,
Thy wish exactly to thy hearts desire.
He ended, or I heard no more, for now
My earthly by his Heavenly overpowerd,
Which it had long stood under, streind to the highth
In that celestial Colloquie sublime,
As with an object that excels the sense,
Dazzled and spent, sunk down, and sought repair
Of sleep, which instantly fell on me, called
By Nature as in aid, and closed mine eyes.
Mine eyes he closed, but open left the Cell
Of Fancy my internal sight, by which
Abstract as in a transe methought I saw,
Though sleeping, where I lay, and saw the shape
Still glorious before whom awake I stood;
Who stooping op'nd my left side, and took
From thence a Rib, with cordial spirits warm,
And Lifeblood streaming fresh; wide was the wound,
But suddenly with flesh filled up and healed:
The Rib he formd and fashond with his hands;
Under his forming hands a Creature grew,
Manlike, but different Sex, so lovly fair,
That what seemd fair in all the World, seemd now
Mean, or in her summd up, in her containd
And in her looks, which from that time infused
Sweetness into my heart, unfelt before,
And into all things from her Air inspired
The spirit of love and amorous delight.
She disappeerd, and left me dark, I waked
To find her, or for ever to deplore
Her loss, and other pleasures all abjure:
When out of hope, behold her, not far off,
Such as I saw her in my dream, adornd
With what all Earth or Heaven could bestow
To make her amiable: On she came,
Led by her Heavenly Maker, though unseen,
And guided by his voice nor uninformd
Of nuptial Sanctity and marriage Rites:
Grace was in all her steps, Heaven in her Eye,
In every gesture dignity and love.
I overjoyed could not forbear aloud.
This turn has made amends; thou have fulfilled
Thy words, Creator bounteous and benign,
Giver of all things fair, but fairest this
Of all thy gifts; nor enviest. I now see
Bone of my Bone, Flesh of my Flesh, my Self
Before me; Woman is her Name, of Man
Extracted; for this cause he shall forgo
Father and Mother, and to his Wife adhere;
And they shall be one Flesh, one Heart, one Soul.
She heard me thus, and though divinely brought,
Yet Innocence and Virgin Modesty,
Her virtue and the conscience of her worth,
That would be wooed, and not unsought be won,
Not obvious, not obtrusive, but retired,
The more desirable, or to say all,
Nature her self, though pure of sinful thought,
Wrought in her so, that seeing me, she turned;
I followed her, she what was Honor knew,
And with obsequious Majesty approved
My pleaded reason. To the Nuptial Bower
I led her blushing like the Morn: all Heaven,
And happy Constellations on that hour
Shed their selectest influence; the Earth
Gave sign of gratulation, and each Hill;
Joyous the Birds; fresh Gales and gentle Aires
Whispered it to the Woods, and from their wings
Flung Rose, flung Odours from the spicie Shrub,
Disporting, till the amorous Bird of Night
Sung Spousal, and bid haste the Eevning Starr
On his Hill top, to light the bridal Lamp.
Thus I have told thee all ray State, and brought
My Story to the sum of earthly bliss
Which I enjoy, and must confess to find
In all things else delight indeed, but such
As used or not, works in the mind no change,
Nor vehement desire, these delicacies
I mean of Taste, Sight, Smell, Herbs, Fruits, and Flours,
Walks, and the melody of Birds; but here
Fair otherwise, transported I behold,
Transported touch; here passion first I felt,
Commotion strange, in all enjoyments else
Superior and unmoved, here only weak
Against the charm of Beauties powerful glance.
Or Nature faild in me, and left some part
Not proof enough such Object to sustain,
Or from my side subducting, took perhaps
More then enough; at least on her bestowed
Too much of Ornament, in outward show
Elaborate, of inward less exact.
For well I understand in the prime end
Of Nature her the inferior, in the mind
And inward Faculties, which most excel,
In outward also her resembling less
His Image who made both, and less expressing
The character of that Dominion given
Over other Creatures; yet when I approach
Her loveliness, so absolute she seems
And in her self complete, so well to know
Her own, that what she wills to do or say,
Seems wisest, vertuousest, discreetest, best;
All higher knowledge in her presence falls
Degraded, Wisdom in discourse with her
Looses discount'nanc't, and like folly shows;
Authority and Reason on her wait,
As one intended first, not after made
Occasionally; and to consummate all,
Greatness of mind and nobleness their seat
Build in her loveliest, and create an awe
About her, as a guard Angelic placed.
To whom the Angel with contracted brow.
Accuse not Nature, she has don her part;
Do thou but thine, and be not diffident
Of Wisdom, she deserts thee not, if thou
Dismiss not her, when most thou needst her nigh,
By attributing overmuch to things
Less excellent, as thou thy self perceav'st.
For what admir'st thou, what transports thee so,
An outside? fair no doubt, and worthy well
Thy cherishing, thy honoring, and thy love,
Not thy subjection: weigh with her thy self;
Then value: Often times nothing profits more
Then self esteem, grounded on just and right
Well managed; of that skill the more thou know,
The more she will acknowledge thee her Head,
And to realities yield all her shows:
Made so adorn for thy delight the more,
So awful, that with honor thou may love
Thy mate, who sees when thou art seen least wise,
But if the sense of touch whereby mankind
Is propagated seem such dear delight
Beyond all other, think the same voutsaf't
To Cattle and each Beast; which would not be
To them made common and divulged, if aught
Therein enjoyed were worthy to subdue
The Soul of Man, or passion in him move.
What higher in her society thou findst
Attractive, human, rational, love still;
In loving thou do well, in passion not,
Wherein true Love consists not; love refines
The thoughts, and heart enlarges, has his seat
In Reason, and is judicious, is the scale
By which to heavenly Love thou may ascend,
Not sunk in carnal pleasure, for which cause
Among the Beasts no Mate for thee was found.
To whom thus half abash't Adam replied.
Neither her outside formd so fair, nor aught
In procreation common to all kinds
(Though higher of the genial Bed by far,
And with mysterious reverence I deem)
So much delights me as those graceful acts,
Those thousand decencies that daily flow
From all her words and actions mixed with Love
And sweet compliance, which declare unfeigned
Union of Mind, or in us both one Soul;
Harmony to behold in wedded pair
More grateful then harmonious sound to the ear.
Yet these subject not; I to thee disclose
What inward thence I feel, not therefore foild,
Who meet with various objects, from the sense
Variously representing; yet still free
Approve the best, and follow what I approve.
To love thou blam'st me not, for love thou say
Leads up to Heaven, is both the way and guide;
Bear with me then, if lawful what I ask;
Love not the heavenly Spirits, and how their Love
Express they, by looks only, or do they mix
Irradiance, virtual or immediate touch?
To whom the Angel with a smile that glowed
Celestial rosy red, Loves proper hue,
Answered. Let it suffice thee that thou know
Us happy, and without Love no happiness.
Whatever pure thou in the body enjoy'st
(And pure thou were created) we enjoy
In eminence, and obstacle find none
Of membrane, joint, or limb, exclusive bars:
Easier then Air with Air, if Spirits embrace,
Total they mix, Union of Pure with Pure
Desiring; nor restrained conveyance need
As Flesh to mix with Flesh, or Soul with Soul.
But I can now no more; the parting Sun
Beyond the Earths green Cape and verdant Isles
Hesperean sets, my Signal to depart.
Be strong, live happy, and love, but first of all
Him whom to love is to obey, and keep
His great command; take heed least Passion sway
Thy Judgment to do aught, which else free Will
Would not admit; thine and of all thy Sons
The weal or woe in thee is placed; beware.
I in thy persevering shall rejoice,
And all the Blessed: stand fast; to stand or fall
Free in thine own Arbitrament it lies.
Perfet within, no outward aid require;
And all temptation to transgress repel.
So saying, he arose; whom Adam thus
Followed with benediction. Since to part,
Go heavenly Guest, Ethereal Messenger,
Sent from whose sovran goodness I adore.
Gentle to me and affable has been
Thy condescension, and shall be honored ever
With grateful Memory: thou to mankind
Be good and friendly still, and often return.
So parted they, the Angel up to Heaven
From the thick shade, and Adam to his Bower.
The End of the Eighth Book.
Paradise Lost.
BOOK IX.
THE ARGUMENT.
Satan having compast the Earth, with meditated guile returns as a mist by
Night into Paradise, enters into the Serpent sleeping. Adam and Eve in the
Morning go forth to their labors, which Eve proposes to divide in several
places, each laboring apart: Adam consents not, alleging the danger, lest
that Enemy, of whom they were forewarned, should attempt her found alone: Eve
loath to be thought not circumspect or firm enough, urges her going apart, the
rather desirous to make trial of her strength; Adam at last yields: The Serpent
finds her alone; his subtle approach, first gazing, then speaking, with much
flattery extolling Eve above all other Creatures. Eve wondering to hear the
Serpent speaks, asks how he attained to human speech and such understanding not
till now; the Serpent answers, that by tasting of a certain Tree in the Garden
he attained both to Speech and Reason, till then void of both: Eve requires him
to bring her to that Tree, and finds it to be the Tree of Knowledge forbidden:
The Serpent now grown bolder, with many wiles and arguments induces her at
length to eat; she pleased with the taste deliberates a while whether to impart
thereof to Adam or not, at last brings him of the Fruit, relates what persuaded
her to eat thereof: Adam at first amazed, but perceiving her lost, resolves
through vehemence of love to perish with her; and extenuating the trespass,
cats also of the Fruit: The Effects thereof in them both; they seek to cover
their nakedness; then fall to variance and accusation of one anotther.

NO more of talk where God or Angel Guest
With Man, as with his Friend, familiar used
To sit indulgent, and with him partake
Rural repast, permitting him the while
Venial discourse unblam'd: I now must change
Those Notes to Tragic; foul distrust, and breach
Disloyal on the part of Man, revolt,
And disobedience: On the part of Heaven
Now alienated, distance and distaste,
Anger and just rebuke, and judgment given,
That brought into this World a world of woe,
Sin and her shadow Death, and Misery
Deaths Harbinger: Sad task, yet argument
Not less but more Heroic then the wrauth
Of stern Achilles on his Foe pursued
Thrice Fugitive about Troy Wall; or rage
Of Turnus for Lavinia disespous'd,
Or Neptun's ire or Juno's, that so long
Perplexed the Greek and Cytherea's Son;
If answerable style I can obtain
Of my Celestial Patroness, who deignes
Her nightly visitation unimplor'd,
And dictates to me slumbring, or inspires
Easy my unpremeditated Verse:
Since first this Subject for Heroic Song
Pleased me long choosing, and beginning late;
Not sedulous by Nature to indite
Wars, hitherto the only Argument
Heroic deemed, chief maistrie to dissect
With long and tedious havoc fabl'd Knights
In Battles feigned; the better fortitude
Of Patience and Heroic Martyrdom
Unsung; or to describe Races and Games,
Or tilting Furniture, emblazon'd Shields,
Impreses quaint, Caparisons and Steeds;
Bases and tinsel Trappings, gorgious Knights
At Joust and Torneament; then marshaled Feast
Served up in Hall with Sewers, and Seneshals;
The skill of Artifice or Office mean,
Not that which justly gives Heroic name
To Person or to Poem. Me of these
Nor skilld nor studious, higher Argument
Remains, sufficient of it self to raise
That name, unless an age too late, or cold
Climat, or Years damp my intended wing
Deprest, and much they may, if all be mine,
Not Hers who brings it nightly to my Ear.
The Sun was sunk, and after him the Starr
Of Hesperus, whose Office is to bring
Twilight upon the Earth, short Arbiter
Twixt Day and Night, and now from end to end
Nights Hemisphere had veild the Horizon round:
When Satan who late fled before the threats
Of Gabriel out of Eden, now improved
In meditated fraud and malice, bent
On man's destruction, maugre what might hap
Of heavier on himself, fearless returned.
By Night he fled, and at Midnight returned
From compassing the Earth, cautious of day,
Since Vriel Regent of the Sun descri'd
His entrance, and forewarnd the Cherubim
That kept their watch; thence full of anguish driven,
The space of seven continued Nights he rode
With darkness, thrice the Equinoctial Line
He circl'd, four times crossed the Carr of Night
From Pole to Pole, traversing each Colure;
On the eighth returned, and on the Coast averse
From entrance or Cherubic Watch, by stealth
Found unsuspected way. There was a place,
Now not, though Sin, not Time, first wraught the change,
Where Tigris at the foot of Paradise
Into a Gulf shot under ground, till part
Rose up a Fountain by the Tree of Life;
In with the River sunk, and with it rose
Satan involved in rising Mist, then sought
Where to lie hid; Sea he had searched and Land
From Eden over Pontus, and the Poole
Maeotis, up beyond the River Ob;
Downward as far Antartic; and in length
West from Orontes to the Ocean barred
At Darien, thence to the Land where flows
Ganges and Indus: thus the Orb he roam'd
With narrow search; and with inspection deep
Considered every Creature, which of all
Most opportune might serve his Wiles, and found
The Serpent suttlest Beast of all the Field.
Him after long debate, irresolute
Of thoughts revolved, his final sentence chose
Fit Vessel, fittest Imp of fraud, in whom
To enter, and his; dark suggestions hide
From sharpest sight: for in the wily Snake,
Whatever sleights none would suspicious mark,
As from his wit and native suttletie
Proceeding, which in other Beasts observed
Doubt might beget of Diabolic power
Active within beyond the sense of brute.
Thus he resolved, but first from inward grief
His bursting passion into plaints thus poured:
O Earth, how like to Heaven, if not preferred
More justly, Seat worthier of Gods, as built
With second thoughts, reforming what was old!
For what God after better worse would build?
Terrestrial Heaven, danced round by other Heavens
That shine, yet bear their bright officious Lamps,
Light above Light, for thee alone, as seems,
In thee concentring all their precious beams
Of sacred influence: As God in Heaven
Is Center* yet extends to all, so thou
Centring receav'st from all those Orbs; in thee,
Not in themselves, all their known virtue appeers
Productive in Herb, Plant, and nobler birth
Of Creatures animate with gradual life
Of Growth, Sense, Reason, all summed up in Man.
With what delight could I have walked thee round,
If I could joy in aught, sweet interchange
Of Hill, and Vallie, Rivers, Woods and Plains,
Now Land, now Sea, and Shores with Forest crowned,
Rocks, Dens, and Caves; but I in none of these
Find place or refuge; and the more I see
Pleasures about me, so much more I feel
Torment within me, as from the hateful siege
Of contraries; all good to me becomes
Bane, and in Heaven much worse would be my state.
But neither here seek I, no nor in Heaven
To dwell, unless by maistring Heavens Supreme;
Nor hope to be my self less miserable
By what I seek, but others to make such
As I, though thereby worse to me redound:
For only in destroying I find ease.
To my relentless thoughts; and him destroyed,
Or won to what may work his utter loss,
For whom all this was made, all this will soon
Follow, as to him linkt in weal or woe,
In woe then; that destruction wide may range:
To me shall be the glory sole among
The infernal Powers, in one day to have marred
What he Almighty styled, six Nights and Days
Continued making, and who knows how long
Before had bin contriving, though perhaps
Not longer then since I in one Night freed
From servitude inglorious welnigh half
The Angelic Name, and thinner left the throng
Of his adorers* he to be avenged,
And to repair his numbers thus impaired,
Whether such virtue spent of old now faild
More Angels to Create, if they at least
Are his Created, or to spite us more,
Determined to advance into our room
A Creature formed of Earth, and him endow,
Exalted from so base original,
With Heavenly spoils, our spoils: What he decreed*
He effected; Man he made, and for him built
Magnificent this World, and Earth his seat,
Him Lord pronounced, and, O indignity!
Subjected to his service Angel wings,
And flaming Ministers to watch and tend
Their earthy Charge: Of these the vigilance
I dread, and to elude, thus wrapped in mist
Of midnight vapor glide obscure, and pry
In every Bush and Brake, where hap may find
The Serpent sleeping, in whose mazie foulds
To hide me, and the dark intent I bring.
O foul descent! that I who erst contended
With Gods to sit the highest, am now constraind
Into a Beast, and mixed with bestial slime,
This essence to incarnate and imbrute,
That to the hight of Deity aspired;
But what will not Ambition and Revenge
Descend to? who aspires must down as low
As high he soard, obnoxious first or last
To basest things. Revenge, at first though sweet,
Bitter ere long back on it self recoiles;
Let it; I reck not, so it light well aimed,
Since higher I fall short, on him who next
Provokes my envy, this new Favorite
Of Heaven, this Man of Clay, Son of despite,
Whom us the more to spite his Maker raised
From dust: spite then with spite is best repaid.
So saying, through each Thicket Danck or Dry,
Like a black mist low creeping, he held on
His midnight search, where soonest he might find
The Serpent: him fast sleeping soon he found
In Labyrinth of many a round self-rowld,
His head the midst, well stored with subtle wiles:
Not yet in horrid Shade or dismal Den,
Nor nocent yet, but on the grassie Herb
Fearless unfeard he slept: in at his Mouth
The Devil enterd, and his brutal sense,
In heart or head, possessing soon inspired
With act intelligential; but his sleep
Disturbd not, waiting close the approach of Morn.
Now when as sacred Light began to dawne
In Eden on the humid Flours, that breathd
Their morning incense, when all things that breath,
From the Earths great Altar send up silent praise
To the Creator, and his Nostrils fill
With grateful Smell, forth came the human pair
And joind their vocal Worship to the Quire
Of Creatures wanting voice, that done, partake
The season, prime for sweetest Sents and Aires:
Then commune how that day they best may ply
Their growing work: for much their work outgrew
The hands dispatch of two Gardning so wide.
And Eve first to her Husband thus began.
Adam, well may we labor still to dress
This Garden, still to tend Plant, Herb and Flour,
Our pleasant task enjoined, but till more hands
Aid us, the work under our labor grows,
Luxurious by restraint* what we by day
Lop overgrown, or prune, or prop, or bind,
One night or two with wanton growth derides
Tending to wild. Thou therefore now advise,
Or bear what to my mind first thoughts present,
Let us divide our labors, thou where choice
Leads thee, or where most needs, whether to wind
The Woodbine round this Arbor, or direct
The clasping Ivy where to climb, while I
In yonder Spring of Roses intermixed
With Myrtle, find what to redress till Noon:
For while so near each other thus all day
Our task we choose, what wonder if so near
Looks intervene and smiles, or object new
Casual discourse draw on, which intermits
Our days work brought to little, though begun
Early, and the hour of Supper comes unearn'd.
To whom mild answer Adam thus returned.
Sold Eve, Associate sole, to me beyond
Compare above all living Creatures dear,
Well have thou motion'd, well thy thoughts employed
How we might best fulfill the work which here
God has assigned us, nor of me shall pass
Unprais'd: for nothing lovelier can be found
In Woman, then to study household good,
And good works in her Husband to promote.
Yet not so strictly has our Lord imposed
Labor* as to debarr us when we need
Refreshment, whether food, or talk between,
Food of the mind, or this sweet intercourse
Of looks and smiles, for smiles from Reason flow,
To brute denied, and are of Love the food,
Love not the lowest end of human life.
For not to irksom toil, but to delight
He made us, and delight to Reason joined.
These paths and Bowers doubt not but our joint hands
Will keep from Wilderness with ease, as wide
As we need walk, till younger hands ere long
Assist us: But if much converse perhaps
Thee satiate, to short absence I could yield.
For solitude sometimes is best society,
And short retirement urge sweet return.
But other doubt possesses me, least harm
Befall thee severed from me; for thou know
What has bin warned us, what malicious Foe
Envying our happiness, and of his own
Despairing, seeks to work us woe and shame
By sly assault; and somwhere nigh at hand
Watches, no doubt, with greedy hope to find
His wish and best advantage, us asunder,
Hopeless to circumvent us joynd, where each
To other speedy aid might lend at need;
Whether his first design be to withdraw
Our fealty from God, or to disturb
Conjugal Love, then which perhaps no bliss
Enjoyed by us excites his envy more;
Or this, or worse, leave not the faithful side
That gave thee being, still shades thee and protects.
The Wife, where danger or dishonor lurks,
Safest and seemliest by her Husband stays,
Who guards her, or with her the worst endures.
To whom the Virgin Majesty of Eve,
As one who loves, and some unkindness meets,
With sweet austeer composure thus replied,
Offspring of Heaven and Earth, and all Earths Lord,
That such an Enemy we have, who seeks
Our ruin, both by thee informd I learn,
And from the parting Angel overheard
As in a shadie nook I stood behind,
Just then returned at shut of Evening Flours.
But that thou should my firmness therefore doubt
To God or thee, because we have a foe
May tempt it, I expected nor to hear.
His violence thou fearst not, being such,
As we, not capable of death or pain,
Can either not receave, or can repel.
His fraud is then thy fear, which plain inferrs
Thy equal fear that my firm Faith and Love
Can by his fraud be shak'n or seduc't;
Thoughts, which how found they harbor in thy breast
Adam, missthought of her to thee so dear?
To whom with healing words Adam replied.
Daughter of God and Man, immortal Eve,
For such thou art, from sin and blame entire:
Not diffident of thee do I dissuade
Thy absence from my sight, but to avoid
The attempt it self, intended by our Foe.
For he who tempts, though in vain, at least asperses
The tempted with dishonor foul, supposed
Not incorruptible of Faith, not prooff
Against temptation: thou thy self with scorn
And anger would resent the offered wrong,
Though ineffectual found: misdeem not then,
If such affront I labor to avert
From thee alone, which on us both at once
The Enemy, though bold, will hardly dare,
Or daring, first on me the assault shall light.
Nor thou his malice and false guile contemn;
Subtle he needs must be, who could seduce
Angels, nor think superfluous others aid.
I from the influence of thy looks receave
Access in every Virtue, in thy sight
More wise, more watchful, stronger, if need were
Of outward strength; while shame, thou looking on,
Shame to be overcome or over-reacht
Would utmost vigor raise, and raised unite.
Why should not thou like sense within thee feel
When I am present, and thy trial choose
With me, best witness of thy Virtue tried.
So spoke domestic Adam in his care
And Matrimonial Love; but Eve, who thought
Less attributed to her Faith sincere,
Thus her reply with accent sweet renewd.
If this be our condition, thus to dwell
In narrow circuit strait'nd by a Foe,
Subtle or violent, we not endu'd
Single with like defense, wherever met,
How are we happy, still in fear of harm?
But harm precedes not sin: only our Foe
Tempting affronts us with his foul esteem
Of our integrity: his foul esteem
Sticks no dishonor on our Front, but turns
Foul on himself; then wherefore shund or feared
By us? who rather double honor gain
From his surmise proved false, find peace within,
Favor from Heaven, our witness from the event,
And what is Faith, Love, Virtue, unassaid
Alone, without exterior help sustaind?
Let us not then suspect our happy State
Left so imperfet by the Maker wise,
As not secure to single or combined,
Frail is our happiness, if this be so,
And Eden were no Eden thus exposed.
To whom thus Adam fervently replied.
O Woman, best are all things as the will
Of God ordained them, his creating hand
Nothing imperfet or deficient left
Of all that he Created, much less Man,
Or aught that might his happy State secure,
Secure from outward force; within himself
The danger lies, yet lies within his power:
Against his will he can receave no harm.
But God left free the Will, for what obeyes
Reason, is free, and Reason he made right,
But bid her well beware, and still erect,
Least by some fair appeering good surprised
She dictate false, and missinforme the Will
To do what God expressly has forbid,
Not then mistrust, but tender love enjoynes,
That I should mind thee often, and mind thou me.
Firm we subsist, yet possible to swerve,
Since Reason not impossibly may meet
Some specious object by the Fee subornd,
And fall into deception unaware,
Not keeping strictest watch, as she was warnd.
Seek not temptation then, which to avoid
Were better, and most like lie if from me
Thou sever not: Trial will come unsought.
Would thou approve thy constancy, approve
First thy obedience; the other who can know,
Not seeing thee attempted, who attest?
But if thou think, trial unsought may find
Us both securer then thus warnd thou seemst,
Go; for thy stay, not free, absents thee more;
Go in thy native innocence, rely
On what thou have of virtue, summon all,
For God toward thee has done his part, do thine.
So spoke the Patriarch of Mankind, but Eve
Persisted, yet submiss, though last, replied.
With thy permission then, and thus forewarnd
Chiefly by what thy own last reasoning words
Touchd only, that our trial, when least sought,
May find us both perhaps far less prepared,
The willinger I go, nor much expect
A Foe so proud will first the weaker seek;
So bent, the more shall shame him his repulse.
Thus saying, from her Husbands hand her hand
Soft she withdrew, and like a Wood-Nymph light
Oread or Dryad, or of Delia's Train,
Betook her to the Groves, but Delia's self
In gate surpassed and Goddess-like deport,
Though not as she with Bow and Quiver armd,
But with such Gardning Tools as Art yet rude,
Guiltless of fire had formd, or Angels brought.
To Pales, or Pomona thus adornd,
Likeliest she seemd, Pomona when she fled
Vertumnus, or to Ceres in her Prime,
Yet Virgin of Proserpina from Jove.
Her long with ardent look his Eye pursued
Delighted, but desiring more her stay.
Often he to her his charge of quick return
Repeated, she to him as often engaged
To be returned by Noon amid the Bower,
And all things in best order to invite
Noontide repast, or Afternoons repose.
O much deceav'd, much failing, hapless Eve,
Of thy presumed return! event perverse!
Thou never from that hour in Paradise
Foundst either sweet repast, or sound repose;
Such ambush hid among sweet Flours and Shades
Waited with hellish rancour imminent
To intercept thy way, or send thee back
Despoild of Innocence, of Faith, of Bliss.
For now, and since first break of dawne the Fiend,
Mere Serpent in appearance, forth was come,
And on his Quest, where likeliest he might find
The only two of Mankind, but in them
The whole included Race, his purposd prey.
In Bower and Field he sought, where any tuft
Of Grove or Garden-Plot more pleasant lay,
Their tendance or Plantation for delight,
By Fountain or by shadie Rivulet
He sought them both, but wished his hap might find
Eve separate, he wished, but not with hope
Of what so seldom chanced, when to his wish,
Beyond his hope, Eve separate he spies,
Veild in a Cloud of Fragrance, where she stood,
Half spied, so thick the Roses bushing round
About her glowd, often stooping to support
Each Flour of slender stalk, whose head though gay
Carnation, Purple, Azure, or spect with Gold,
Hung drooping unsustaind, them she upstaies
Gently with Myrtle band, mindless the while,
Her self, though fairest unsupported Flour,
From her best prop so far, and storm so nigh.
Nearer he drew, and many a walk traversed
Of stateliest Covert, Cedar, Pine, or Palm,
Then voluble and bold, now hid, now seen
Among thick-wov'n Arborets and Flours
Imborderd on each Bank, the hand of Eve:
Spot more delicious then those Gardens feigned
Or of revived Adonis, or renownd
Alcinous, host of old Laertes Son,
Or that, not Mystic, where the Sapient King
Held dalliance with his fair Egyptian Spouse.
Much he the Place admired, the Person more.
As one who long in populous City pent,
Where Houses thick and Sewers annoy the Air,
Forth issuing on a Summers Morn to breathe
Among the pleasant Villages and Farms
Adjoynd, from each thing met conceaves delight,
The smell of Grain, or tedded Grass, or Kine,
Or Dairie, each rural sight, each rural sound;
If chance with Nymphlike step fair Virgin pass,
What pleasing seemd, for her now pleases more,
She most, and in her look sums all Delight.
Such Pleasure took the Serpent to behold
This Flourie Plat, the sweet recess of Eve
Thus early, thus alone; her Heavenly form
Angelic, but more soft, and Feminine,
Her graceful Innocence, her every Air
Of gesture or lest action overawd
His Malice, and with rapine sweet bereaved
His fierceness of the fierce intent it brought:
That space the Evil one abstracted stood
From his own evil, and for the time remaind
Stupidly good, of enmity disarmed,
Of guile, of hate, of envy, of revenge;
But the hot Hell that always in him burns,
Though in mid Heaven, soon ended his delight,
And tortures him now more, the more he sees
Of pleasure not for him ordained: then soon
Fierce hate he recollects, and all his thoughts
Of mischief, gratulating, thus excites.
Thoughts, whither have ye led me, with what sweet
Compulsion thus transported to forget
What hither brought us, hate, not love, nor hope
Of Paradise for Hell, hope here to taste
Of pleasure, but all pleasure to destroy,
Save what is in destroying, other joy
To me is lost. Then let me not let pass
Occasion which now smiles, behold alone
The Woman, opportune to all attempts,
Her Husband, for I view far round, not nigh,
Whose higher intellectual more I shun,
And strength, of courage hautie, and of limb
Heroic built, though of terrestrial mould,
Foe not informidable, exempt from wound,
I not; so much has Hell debased, and pain
Infeebl'd me, to what I was in Heaven.
She fair, divinely fair, fit Love for Gods,
Not terrible, though terror be in Love
And beauty* not approacht by stronger hate,
Hate stronger, under show of Love well feigned,
The way which to her ruin now I tend.
So spoke the Enemy of Mankind, enclosed
In Serpent, Inmate bad, and toward Eve
Addressed his way, not with indented wave,
Prone on the ground, as since, but on his rear,
Circular base of rising foulds, that tour'd
Fould above fould a surging Maze, his Head
Crested aloft, and Carbuncle his Eyes;
With burnisht Neck of verdant Gold, erect
Amidst his circling Spires, that on the grass
Floted redundant: pleasing was his shape,
And lovely, never since of Serpent kind
Lovelier, not those that in Illyria changed
Hermione and Cadmus, or the God
In Epidaurus; nor to which transformd
Ammonian Jove, or Capitoline was seen,
He with Olympias, this with her who bore
Scipio the highth of Rome. With tract oblique
At first, as one who sought access, but feared
To interrupt, side-long he works his way.
As when a Ship by skilful Stearsman wrought
Nigh Rivers mouth or Foreland, where the Wind
Veres often, as often so steers, and shifts her Sail;
So varied he, and of his tortuous Train
Curld many a wanton wreath in sight of Eve,
To lure her Eye; she busied heard the sound
Of rusling Leaves, but minded not, as used
To such disport before her through the Field,
From every Beast, more duteous at her call,
Then at Circean call the Herd disguised.
He boulder now, uncalled before her stood;
But as in gaze admiring: Often he bowd
His turret Crest, and sleek enameled Neck,
Fawning, and licked the ground whereon she trod.
His gentle dumb expression turned at length
The Eye of Eve to mark his play; he glad
Of her attention gaind, with Serpent Tongue
Organic, or impulse of vocal Air,
His fraudulent temptation thus began.
Wonder not, sovran Mistress, if perhaps
Thou can, who art sole Wonder, much less arm
Thy looks, the Heaven of mildness, with disdain,
Displeased that I approach thee thus, and gaze
Infatiate, I thus single, nor have feared
Thy awful brow, more awful thus, retired.
Fairest resemblance of thy Maker fair,
Thee all things living gaze on, all things thine
By gift, and thy Celestial Beauty adore
With ravishment beheld, there best beheld
Where universally admired; but here
In this enclosure wild, these Beasts among,
Beholders rude, and shallow to discern
Half what in thee is fair, one man except,
Who sees thee? (and what is one?) who should be seen
A Goddess among Gods, adored and served
By Angels numberless, thy daily Train.
So gloz'd the Tempter, and his Proem tuned;
Into the Heart of Eve his words made way,
Though at the voice much marveling; at length
Not unamaz'd she thus in answer spoke.
What may this mean? Language of Man pronounced
By Tongue of Brute, and human sense expressed?
The first at lest of these I thought deni^d
To Beasts, whom God on their Creation-Day
Created mute to all articulat sound;
The latter I demurre, for in their looks
Much reason, and in their actions often appeers.
Thee, Serpent, suttlest beast of all the field
I knew, but not with human voice endu'd;
Redouble then this miracle, and say,
How came thou speakable of mute, and how
To me so friendly grown above the rest
Of brutal kind, that daily are in sight?
Say, for such wonder claims attention due,
To whom the guileful Tempter thus replied.
Empress of this fair World, resplendent Eve,
Easy to me it is to tell thee all
What thou commandst, and right thou should be obeyed:
I was at first as other Beasts that graze
The trodden Herb, of abject thoughts and low,
As was my food, nor aught but food discerned
Or Sex, and apprehended nothing high:
Till on a day roaving the field, I chanced
A goodly Tree far distant to behold
Laden with fruit of fairest colors mixed,
Ruddie and Gold: I nearer drew to gaze;
When from the boughs a savorie odor blow'n,
Grateful to appetite, more pleased my sense
Then smell of sweetest Fenel or the Teats
Of Ewe or Goat dropping with Milk at Eevn,
Unsuckt of Lamb or Kid, that tend their play.
To satisfy the sharp desire I had
Of tasting those fair Apples, I resolved
Not to deferr; hunger and thirst at once,
Powerful perswaders, quick'nd at the scent
Of that alluring fruit, urged me so keen.
About the mossie Trunk I wound me soon,
For high from ground the branches would require
Thy utmost reach or Adams: Round the Tree
All other Beasts that saw, with like desire
Longing and envying stood, but could not reach.
Amid the Tree now got, where plenty hung
Tempting so nigh, to pluck and eat my fill
I spared not, for such pleasure till that hour
At Feed or Fountain never had I found.
Sated at length, ere long I might perceave
Strange alteration in me, to degree
Of Reason in my inward Powers, and Speech
Wanted not long, though to this shape retained.
Thenceforth to Speculations high or deep
I turned my thoughts, and with capacious mind
Considerd all things visible in Heaven,
Or Earth, or Middle, all things fair and good;
But all that fair and good in thy Divine
Semblance, and in thy Beauties heavenly Ray
United I beheld; no Fair to thine
Equivalent or second, which compelled
Me thus, though importune perhaps, to come
And gaze, and worship thee of right declared
Sovran of Creatures., universal Dame.
So talked the spirited sly Snake; and Eve
Yet more amazed unwarie thus replied.
Serpent, thy overpraising leaves in doubt
The virtue of that Fruit, in thee first proved:
But say, where grows the Tree, from hence how far?
For many are the Trees of God that grow
In Paradise, and various, yet unknown
To us, in such abundance lies our choice,
As leaves a greater store of Fruit untoucht,
Still hanging incorruptible, till men
Grow up to their provision, and more hands
Help to disburden Nature of her Bearth.
To whom the wily Adder, blithe and glad.
Empress, the way is ready, and not long,
Beyond a row of Myrtles, on a Flat,
Fast by a Fountain, one small Thicket past
Of blowing Myrrh and Balm; if thou accept
My conduct, I can bring thee thither soon.
Lead then, said Eve. He leading swiftly rowld
In tangles, and made intricate seem strait,
To mischief swift. Hope elevates, and joy
Bright'ns his Crest, as when a wandering Fire,
Compact of unctuous vapor, which the Night
Condenses, and the cold invirons round,
Kindled through agitation to a Flame,
Which often, they say, some evil Spirit attends
Hovering and blazing with delusive Light,
Misleads the amazed Night-wanderer from his way
To Boggs and Mires, and often through Pond or Poole,
There swallowed up and lost, from succor far.
So glister'd the dire Snake, and into fraud
Led Eve our credulous Mother, to the Tree
Of prohibition, root of all our woe;
Which when she saw, thus to her guide she spoke.
Serpent, we might have spared our coming hither,
Fruitless to me, though Fruit be here to excess,
The credit of whose virtue rest with thee,
Wondrous indeed, if cause of such effects.
But of this Tree we may not taste nor touch;
God so commanded, and left that Command
Sole Daughter of his voice; the rest, we live
Law to our selves, our Reason is our Law.
To whom the Tempter guilefully replied.
Indeed? has God then said that of the Fruit
Of all these Garden Trees ye shall not eat,
Yet Lords declared of all in Earth or Air?
To whom thus Eve yet sinless. Of the Fruit
Of each Tree in the Garden we may eat,
But of the Fruit of this fair Tree amidst
The Garden, God has said, Ye shall not eat
Thereof, nor shall ye touch it, least ye die.
She scarce had said, though brief, when now more
The Tempter, but with show of Zeal and Love
To Man, and indignation at his wrong,
New part puts on, and as to passion moved,
Fluctuats disturbd, yet comely and in act
Raised, as of some great matter to begin.
As when of old some Orator renound
In Athens or free Rome, where Eloquence
Flourishd, since mute, to some great cause addressed,
Stood in himself collected, while each part,
Motion, each act won audience ere the tongue,
Sometimes in highth began, as no delay
Of Preface brooking through his Zeal of Right.
So standing, moving, or to highth upgrown
The Tempter all impassiond thus began.
O Sacred, Wise, and Wisdom-giving Plant,
Mother of Science, Now I feel thy Power
Within me clear, not only to discern
Things in their Causes, but to trace the ways
Of highest Agents, deemd however wise.
Queen of this Universe, do not believe
Those rigid threats of Death; ye shall not Die:
How should ye? by the Fruit? it gives you Life
To Knowledge? By the Threatner, look on me,
Me who have touched and tasted, yet both live,
And life more perfet have attaind then Fate
Meant me, by vending higher then my Lot.
Shall that be shut to Man, which to the Beast
Is open? or will God incense his ire
For such a petty Trespass, and not praise
Rather your dauntless virtue, whom the pain
Of Death denounc't, whatever thing Death be,
Deterrd not from atchieving what might lead
To happier life, knowledge of Good and Evil;
Of good, how just? of evil, if what is evil
Be real, why not known, since easier shunnd?
God therefore cannot hurt ye, and be just;
Not just, not God; not feared then, nor obeyed:
Your fear it self of Death removes the fear.
Why then was this forbid? Why but to awe,
Why but to keep ye low and ignorant,
His worshippers; he knows that in the day
Ye Eat thereof, your Eyes that seem so clear,
Yet are but dim, shall perfetly be then
Op'nd and cleerd, and ye shall be as Gods,
Knowing both Good and Evil as they know.
That ye should be as Gods, since I as Man,
Internal Man, is but proportion meet,
I of brute human, ye of human Gods.
So ye shall die perhaps, by putting off
Human, to put on Gods, death to be wished,
Though threat'nd, which no worse then this can bring.
And what are Gods that Man may not become
As they, participating God-like food?
The Gods are first, and that advantage use
On our belief, that all from them proceeds;
I question it, for this fair Earth I see,
Warmed by the Sun, producing every kind,
Them nothing: If they all things, who enclosed
Knowledge of Good and Evil in this Tree,
That whosoever eats thereof, forthwith attains
Wisdom without their leave? and wherein lies
The offense, that Man should thus attain to know?
What can your knowledge hurt him, or this Tree
Impart against his will it all be his?
Or is it envy, and can envy dwell
In heavenly breasts? these, these and many more
Causes import your need of this fair Fruit.
Goddess humane, reach then, and freely taste.
He ended, and his words replete with guile
Into her heart too easy entrance won:
Fixed on the Fruit she gazed, which to behold
Might tempt alone, and in her cars the sound
Yet rung of his persuasive words, impregn'd
With Reason, to her seeming, and with Truth;
Mean while the hour of Noon drew on, and waked
An eager appetite, raised by the smell
So savorie of that Fruit, which with desire,
Inclinable now grown to touch or taste,
Solicited her longing eye; yet first
Pausing a while, thus to her self she mused.
Great are thy Virtues, doubtless, best of Fruits.
Though kept from Man, and worthy to be admired,
Whose taste, too long forborne, at first assay
Gave elocution to the mute, and taught
The Tongue not made for Speech to speak thy praise:
Thy praise he also who forbids thy use,
Conceales not from us, naming thee the Tree
Of Knowledge, knowledge both of good and evil;
Forbids us then to taste, but his forbidding
Commends thee more, while it inferrs the good
By thee communicated, and our want:
For good unknown, sure is not had, or had
And yet unknown, is as not had at all.
In plain then, what forbids he but to know,
Forbids us good, forbids us to be wise?
Such prohibitions bind not. But if Death
Bind us with after-bands, what profits then
Our inward freedom? In the day we eat
Of this fair Fruit, our doom is, we shall die.
How dies the Serpent? he has eat'n and lives,
And knows, and speaks, and reasons, and discerns,
Irrational till then. For us alone
Was death invented? or to us denied
This intellectual food, for beasts reserved?
For Beasts it seems: yet that one Beast which first
Has tasted, envies not, but brings with joy
The good befallen him, Author unsuspect,
Friendly to man, far from deceit or guile.
What fear I then, rather what know to fear
Under this ignorance of good and Evil,
Of God or Death, of Law or Penalty?
Here grows the Cure of all, this Fruit Divine,
Fair to the Eye, inviting to the Taste,
Of virtue to make wise: what hinders then
To reach, and feed at once both Body and Mind?
So saying, her rash hand in evil hour
Forth reaching to the Fruit, she plucked, she eat:
Earth felt the wound, and Nature from her seat
Sighing through all her Works gave signs of woe,
That all was lost. Back to the Thicket slunk
The guilty Serpent, and well might, for Eve
Intern now wholly on her taste, naught else
Regarded, such delight till then, as seemd,
In Fruit she never tasted, whether true
Or fansied so, through expectation high
Of knowledge, nor was Godhead from her thought.
Greedily she ingorg'd without restraint,
And knew not eating Death: Satiate at length.
And hight'nd as with Wine, jocond and boon,
Thus to her self she pleasingly began.
O Sovran, virtuous, precious of all Trees
In Paradise, of operation blessed
To Sapience, hitherto obscured, infam'd,
And thy fair Fruit let hang, as to no end
Created; but henceforth my early care,
Not without Song, each Morning, and due praise
Shall tend thee, and the fertile burden ease
Of thy full branches offered free to all;
Till dieted by thee I grow mature
In knowledge, as the Gods who all things know;
Though others envy what they cannot give;
For had the gift bin theirs, it had not here
Thus grown. Experience, next to thee I owe,
Best guide; not following thee, I had remaind
In ignorance, thou op'nst Wisdoms way,
And giv'st access, though secret she retire.
And I perhaps am secret; Heaven is high,
High and remote to see from thence distinct
Each thing on Earth; and other care perhaps
May have diverted from continual watch
Our great Forbidder, safe with all his Spies
About him. But to Adam in what sort
Shall I appeer? shall I to him make known
As yet my change, and give him to partake
Full happiness with me, or rather not,
But keep the odds of Knowledge in my power
Without Copartner? so to add what wants
In Femal Sex, the more to draw his Love,
And render me more equal, and perhaps,
A thing not undesireable, sometime
Superior; for inferior who is free?
This may be well: but what if God have seen,
And Death ensue? then I shall be no more,
And Adam wedded to another Eve,
Shall live with her enjoying, I extinct;
A death to think. Confirmed then I resolve,
Adam shall share with me in bliss or woe:
So dear I love him, that with him all deaths
I could endure, without him Five no life.
So saying, from the Tree her step she turned,
But first low Reverence don, as to the power
That dwelt within, whose presence had infused
Into the plant sciential sap, derived
From Nectar, drink of Gods. Adam the while
Waiting desirous her return, had wove
Of choicest Flours a Garland to adorn
Her Tresses, and her rural labors crown,
As Reapers often are wont their Harvest Queen.
Great joy he promised to his thoughts, and new
Solace in her return, so long delayed;
Yet often his heart, divine of something ill,
Misgave him; he the faultring measure felt;
And forth to meet her went, the way she took
That Morn when first they parted; by the Tree
Of Knowledge he must pass, there he her met,
Scarce from the Tree returning; in her hand
A bough of fairest fruit that downie smiled,
New gatherd, and ambrosial smell diffused.
To him she hasted, in her face excuse
Came Prologue, and Apology to prompt,
Which with bland words at will she thus addressed.
Have thou not wonderd, Adam, at my stay?
Thee I have misst, and thought it long, deprived
Thy presence, agony of love till now
Not felt, nor shall be twice, for never more
Mean I to try, what rash untri'd I sought,
The pain of absence from thy sight. But strange
Has bin the cause, and wonderful to hear:
This Tree is not as we are told, a Tree
Of danger tasted, nor to evil unknown
Opening the way, but of Divine effect
To open Eyes, and make them Gods who taste;
And has bin tasted such: the Serpent wise,
Or not restraind as we, or not obeying,
Has eat'n of the fruit, and is become,
Not dead, as we are threatened, but thenceforth
Endu'd with human voice and human sense,
Reasoning to admiration, and with me
Perswasively has so prevaild, that I
Have also tasted, and have also found
The effects to correspond, opener mine Eyes,
Dimm erst, dilated Spirits, ampler Heart,
And growing up to Godhead; which for thee
Chiefly I sought, without thee can despise.
For bliss, as thou have part, to me is bliss,
Tedious, unshar'd with thee, and odious soon.
Thou therefore also taste, that equal Lot
May join us, equal Joy, as equal Love;
Least thou not tasting, different degree
Disjoyne us, and I then too late renounce
Deity for thee, when Fate will not permit.
Thus Eve with Countnance blithe her story told;
But in her Cheek distemper flushing glowd.
On the other side, Adam, soon as he heard
The fatal Trespass don by Eve, amazed,
Astonished stood and Blank, while horror chill
Ran through his veins, and all his joints relaxed;
From his slack hand the Garland wreathed for Eve
Down dropped, and all the faded Roses shed:
Speechless he stood and pale, till thus at length
First to himself he inward silence broke.
O fairest of Creation, last and best
Of all Gods works, Creature in whom excelled
Whatever can to sight or thought be formd,
Holy, divine, good, amiable, or sweet!
How art thou lost, how on a sudden lost,
Defaced, deflourd, and now to Death devote?
Rather how have thou yielded to transgress
The strict forbiddance, how to violate
The sacred Fruit forbidd'n! some cursed fraud
Of Enemy has be guil'd thee, yet unknown,
And me with thee has ruind, for with thee
Certain my resolution is to Die;
How can I live without thee, how forgo
Thy sweet Converse and Love so dearly joined,
To live again in these wild Woods forlorn?
Should God create another Eve, and I
Another Rib afford, yet loss of thee
Would never from my heart; no no, I feel
The Link of Nature draw me: Flesh of Flesh,
Bone of my Bone thou art, and from thy State
Mine never shall be parted, bliss or woe.
So having said, as one from sad dismay
Recomforted, and after thoughts disturbd
Submitting to what seemd remediless,
Thus in calm mood his Words to Eve he turned.
Bold deed thou have presumed, adventrous Eve,
And peril great provoked, who thus has dared
Had it been only coveting to Eye
That sacred Fruit, sacred to abstinence,
Much more to taste it under banne to touch.
But past who can recall, or don undo?
Not God Omnipotent, nor Fate, yet so
Perhaps thou shall not Die, perhaps the Fact
Is not so heinous now, foretasted Fruit,
Profaned first by the Serpent, by him first
Made common and unhallowd ere our taste;
Nor yet on him found deadly, he yet lives,
Lives, as thou said, and gains to live as Man
Higher degree of Life, inducement strong
To us, as likely tasting to attain
Proportional ascent, which cannot be
But to be Gods, or Angels Demigods.
Nor can I think that God, Creator wise,
Though threatening, will in earnest so destroy
Us his prime Creatures, dignified so high,
Set over all his Works, which in our Fall,
For us created, needs with us must fail,
Dependent made; so God shall uncreate,
Be frustrate, do, undo, and labor loose,
Not well conceav'd of God, who though his Power
Creation could repeat, yet would be loath
Us to abolish, least the Adversary
Triumph and say; Fickle their State whom God
Most Favors, who can please him long; Me first
He ruind, now Mankind; whom will he next?
Matter of scorn, not to be given the Foe,
However I with thee have fixed my Lot,
Certain to undergo like doom, if Death
Consort with thee, Death is to me as Life;
So forcible within my heart I feel
The Bond of Nature draw me to my own,
My own in thee, for what thou art is mine;
Our State cannot be severd, we are one,
One Flesh; to loose thee were to loose my self.
So Adam, and thus Eve to him replied.
O glorious trial of exceeding Love,
Illustrious evidence, example high I
Engaging me to emulate, but short
Of thy perfection, how shall I attain,
Adam, from whose dear side I boast me sprung,
And gladly of our Union hear thee speak,
One Heart, one Soul in both; whereof good prooff
This day affords, declaring thee resolvd,
Rather then Death or aught then Death more dread
Shall separate us, linkt in Love so dear,
To undergo with me one Guilt, one Crime,
If any be, of tasting this fair Fruit,
Whole virtue, for of good still good proceeds,
Direct, or by occasion has presented
This happy trial of thy Love, which else
So eminently never had bin known.
Were it I thought Death menac't would ensue
This my attempt, I would sustain alone
The worst, and not persuade thee rather die
Deserted, then oblige thee with a fact
Pernicious to thy Peace, chiefly assured
Remarkably so late of thy so true,
So faithful Love unequald; but I feel
Far otherwise the event, not Death, but Life
Augmented, op'nd Eyes, new Hopes, new Joys,
Taste so Divine, that what of sweet before
Has touched my sense, flat seems to this, and harsh.
On my experience, Adam, freely taste,
And fear of Death deliver to the Winds.
So saying, she embraced him, and for joy
Tenderly wept, much won that he his Love
Had so enobl'd, as of choice to incurr
Divine displeasure for her sake, or Death.
In recompense (for such compliance bad
Such recompen^^ best merits) from the bough
She gave him of that fair enticing Fruit
With liberal hand: he scrupled not to eat
Against his better knowledge, not deceav'd,
But fondly overcome with Femal charm.
Earth trembled from her entrails, as again
In pangs, and Nature gave a second groan,
Sky lowr'd and muttering Thunder, some sad drops
Wept at completing of the mortal Sin
Original; while Adam took no thought,
Eating his fill, nor Eve to iterate
Her former trespass feared, the more to soothe
Him with her loved society, that now
As with new Wine intoxicated both
They swim in mirth, and fancy that they feel
Divinity, within them breeding wings
Wherewith to scorn the Earth: but that false Fruit
Far other operation first displaid,
Carnal desire enflaming, he on Eve
Began to cast lascivious Eyes, she him
As wantonly repaid; in Lust they burn:
Till Adam thus 'gan Eve to dalliance move,
Eve, now I see thou art exact of taste,
And elegant, of Sapience no small part,
Since to each meaning savor me apply,
And Palate call judicious; I the praise
Yield thee; so well this day thou have purvey'd.
Much pleasure we have lost, while we abstained
From this delightful Fruit, nor known till now
True relish, tasting; if such pleasure be
In things to us forbidden, it might be wished,
For this one Tree had bin forbidden ten.
But come, so well refresh't, now let us play,
As me is, after such delicious Fare;
For never did thy Beauty since the d^y
I saw thee first and wedded thee, adorned
With all perfections, so inflame my sense
With ardor to enjoy thee, fairer now
Then ever, bounty of this virtuous Tree.
So said he, and forbore not glance or toy
Of amorous intent, well understood
Of Eve, whose Eye darted contagious Fire.
Her hand he seized, and to a shadie bank,
Thick overhead with verdant roof imbowr'd
He led her nothing loath; Flours were the Couch,
Pansies, and Violets, and Asphodel,
And Hyacinth, Earths freshest softest lap.
There they their fill of love and Loves disport
Took largely, of their mutual guilt the Scale,
The solace of their sin, till dewie sleep
Oppressed them, wearied with their amorous play.
Soon as the force of that fallacious Fruit,
That with exhilerating vapor bland
About their spirits had played, and inmost powers
Made err, was now exhaled, and grosser sleep
Bred of unkindly fumes, with conscious dreams
Encumberd, now had left them, up they rose
As from unrest, and each the other viewing,
Soon found their Eyes how op'nd, and their minds
How dark'nd; innocence, that as a veil
Had shadowed them from knowing ill, was gone,
Just confidence, and native righteousness
And honor from about them, naked left,
To guilty shame he covered, but his Robe
Uncovered more, so rose the Danite strong
Herculean Samson from the Harlot-lap
Of Philistean Dalilah, and waked
Shorn of his strength, They destitute and bare
Of all their virtue: silent, and in face
Confounded long they sat, as struck'n mute,
Till Adam, though not less then Eve abash't,
At length gave utterance to these words constraind.
O Eve, in evil hour thou did give ear
To that false Worm, of whomsoever taught
To counterfeit Man's voice, true in our Fall,
False in our promised Rising; since our Eyes
Op'nd we find indeed, and find we know
Both Good and Evil, Good lost, and Evil got,
Bad Fruit of Knowledge, if this be to know,
Which leaves us naked thus, of Honor void,
Of Innocence, of Faith, of Purity,
Our wonted Ornaments now soild and staind,
And in our Faces evident the signs
Of foul concupiscence; whence evil store;
Even shame, the last of evils; of the first
Be sure then. How shall I behold the face
Henceforth of God or Angel, erst with joy
And rapture so often beheld? those heavenly shapes
Will dazzle now this earthly, with their blaze
Insufferably bright. O might I here
In solitude live savage, in some glade
Obscured, where highest Woods impenetrable
To Starr or Sun-light, spread their umbrage broad
And brown as Evening: Cover me ye Pines,
Ye Cedars, with innumerable boughs
Hide me, where I may never see them more.
But let us now, as in bad plight, devise
What best may from the present serve to hide
The Parts of each for other, that seem most
To shame obnoxious, and unseemliest seen,
Some Tree whose broad smooth Leaves together sowd,
And girded on our loins, may cover round
Those middle parts, that this new commer, Shame,
There sit not, and reproach us as unclean,
So counseled he, and both together went
Into the thickest Wood, there soon they chose
The Figtree, not that kind for Fruit renowned,
But such as at this day to Indians known
In Malabar or Decan spreds her Arms
Braunching so broad and long, that in the ground
The bended Twigs take root, and Daughters grow
About the Mother Tree, a Pillard shade
High overarch't, and echoing Walks between;
There often the Indian Herdsman shunning heat
Shelters in cool, and tends his pasturing Herds
At Loopholes cut through; thiekest shade: Those Leaves
They gatherd, broad as Amazonian Targe,
And with what skill they had, together sowd,
To gird their waste, vain Covering if to hide
Their guilt and dreaded shame; O how unlike
To that first naked Glory. Such of late
Columbus found the American so girt
With featherd Cincture, naked else and wild
Among the Trees on lies and woodie Shores.
Thus fenc't, and as they thought, their shame in part
Coverd, but not at rest or ease of Mind,
They sat them down to weep, nor only Tears
Raind at their Eyes, but high Winds worse within
Began to rise, high Passions, Anger, Hate,
Mistrust, Suspicion, Discord, and shook sore
Their inward State of Mind, calm Region once
And full of Peace, now tossed and turbulent:
For Understanding ruled not, and the Will
Heard not her lore, both in subjection now
To sensual Appetite, who from beneathe
Usurping over sovran Reason claimd
Superior sway: from thus distemperd breast,
Adam, estranged in look and alterd style,
Speech intermitted thus to Eve renewd.
Would thou had heark'nd to my words, and stayed
With me, as I besought thee, when that strange
Desire of wandering this unhappie Morn,
I know not whence possessd thee; we had then
Remaind still happy, not as now, despoild
Of all our good, shamed, naked, miserable.
Let none henceforth seek needless cause to approve
The Faith they owe; when earnestly they seek
Such proof, conclude, they then begin to fail.
To whom soon moved with touch of blame thus Eve.
What words have past thy Lips, Adam severe,
Imput'st thou that to my default, or will
Of wandering, as thou call'st it, which who knows
But might as ill have happ'nd thou being by,
Or to thy self perhaps: had thou been there,
Or here the attempt, thou could not have discernd
Fraud in the Serpent, speaking as he spoke;
No ground of enmity between us known,
Why he should mean me ill, or seek to harm.
Was I to have never parted from thy side?
As good have grown there still a liveless Rib.
Being as I am, why did not thou the Head
Command me absolutely not to go,
Going into such danger as thou said?
Too facil then thou did not much gainsay,
Nay did permit, approve, and fair dismiss.
Had thou bin firm and fixed in thy dissent,
Neither had I transgressed, nor thou with me.
To whom then first incenst Adam replied,
Is this the Love, is this the recompense
Of mine to thee, ungrateful Eve, expressed
Immutable when thou were lost, not I,
Who might have lived and joyd immortal bliss,
Yet willingly chose rather Death with thee:
And am I now upbraided, as the cause
Of thy transgressing? not enough severe,
It seems, in thy restraint: what could I more?
I warned thee, I admonished thee, foretold
The danger, and the lurking Enemy
That lay in wait; beyond this had bin force,
And force upon free will bath here no place.
But confidence then bore thee on, secure
Either to meet no danger, or to find
Matter of glorious trial; and perhaps
I also erred in overmuch admiring
What seemd in thee so perfet, that I thought
No evil durst attempt thee, but I rue
That error now, which is become my crime,
And thou the accuser. Thus it shall befall
Him who to worth in Women overtrusting
Lets her will rule; restraint she will not brook,
And left to her self, if evil thence ensue,
She first his weak indulgence will accuse.
Thus they in mutual accusation spent
The fruitless hours, but neither self-condemning,
And of their vain contest appeer'd no end.
The End of the Ninth Book.
Paradise Lost.
BOOK X.
THE ARGUMENT.
Man's transgression known, the Guardian Angels forsake Paradise, and return up
to Heaven to approve their vigilance, and are approved, God declaring that The
entrance of Satan could not be by them prevented. He sends his Son to judge the
Transgressors, who descends and gives Sentence accordingly; then in pity
clothes them both, and reascends. Sin and Death sitting till then at the Gates
of Hell, by wondrous sympathy feeling the success of Satan in this new World,
and the sin by Man there committed, resolve to sit no longer confined in Hell,
but to follow Satan their Sire up to the place of Man: To make the way easier
from Hell to this World to and fro, they pave a broad Highway or Bridge over
Chaos, according to the Track that Satan first made; then preparing for Earth,
they meet him proud of his success returning to Hell; their mutual gratulation.
Satan arrives at Pandemonium, in full of assembly relates with boasting his
success against Man; instead of applause is entertained with a general hiss by
all his audience, transformed with himself also suddenly into Serpents,
according to his doom given in Paradise; then deluded with a show of the
forbidden Tree springing up before them, they greedily reaching to take of the
Fruit, chew dust and bitter ashes. The proceedings of Sin and Death; God
foretells the final Victory of his Son over them, and the renewing of all
things; but for the present commands his Angels to make several alterations in
the Heavens and Elements. Adam more and more perceiving his fallen condition
heavily bewailes, rejects the condolement of Eve; she persists and at length
appeases him: then to evade the Curse likely to fall on their Offspring, proposes
to Adam violent ways which he approves not, but conceiving better hope, puts
her in mind of the late Promise made them, that her Seed should be revenged on
the Serpent, and exhorts her with him to seek Peace of the offended Deity, by
repentance and supplication.

MEanwhile the heinous and despightfull act
Of Satan done in Paradise, and how
He in the Serpent, had perverted Eve,
Her Husband she, to taste the fatal fruit,
Was known in Heaven; for what can escape the Eye
Of God All-seeing, or deceave his Heart
Omniscient, who in all things wise and just,
Hindered not Satan to attempt the mind
Of Man, with strength entire, and free will armed,
Complete to have discovered and repulst
Whatever wiles of Foe or seeming Friend.
For still they knew, and ought to have still remembered
The high Injunction not to taste that Fruit,
Whoever tempted; which they not obeying,
Incurred, what could they less, the penalty,
And manifold in sin, deserved to fall.
Up into Heaven from Paradise in haste
The Angelic Guards ascended, mute and sad
For Man, for of his state by this they knew,
Much wondering how the subtle Fiend had stolen
Entrance unseen. Soon as the unwelcome news
From Earth arrived at Heaven Gate, displeased
All were who heard, dim sadness did not spare
That time Celestial visages, yet mixed
With pity, violated not their bliss.
About the new-arriv'd, in multitudes
The ethereal People ran, to hear and know
How all befell: they toward the Throne Supreme
Accountable made haste to make appear
With righteous plea, their utmost vigilance,
And easily approved; when the most High
Eternal Father from his secret Cloud,
Amidst in Thunder uttered thus his voice.
Assembled Angels, and ye Powers returned
From unsuccessful charge, be not dismayed,
Nor troubled at these tidings from the Earth,
Which your sincerest care could not prevent,
Foretold so lately what would come to pass,
When first this Tempter crossed the Gulf from Hell.
I told ye then he should prevail and speed
On his bad Errand, Man should be seduc't
And flattered out of all, believing lies
Against his Maker; no Decree of mine
Concurring to necessitate his Fall,
Or touch with lightest moment of impulse
His free Will, to her own inclining left
In eevn scale. But fallen he is, and now
What rests but that the mortal Sentence pass
On his transgression Death denounc't that day,
Which he presumes already vain and void,
Because not yet inflicted, as he feared,
By some immediate stroke; but soon shall find
Forbearance no acquittance ere day end.
Justice shall not return as bounty scorned.
But whom send I to judge them? whom but thee
Vicegerent Son, to thee I have transferred
All Judgment whether in Heaven, or Earth, or Hell.
Easy it might be seen that I intend
Mercy colleague with Justice, sending thee
Man's Friend, his Mediator, his designed
Both Ransom and Redeemer voluntary,
And destined Man himself to judge Man fallen.
So spoke the Father, and unfoulding bright
Toward the right hand his Glory, on the Son
Blazed forth unclouded Deity; he full
Resplendent all his Father manifest
Expressed, and thus divinely answered mild.
Father Eternal, thine is to decree,
Mine both in Heaven and Earth to do thy will
Supreme, that thou in me thy Son beloved
May ever rest well pleased. I go to judge
On Earth these thy transgressors, but thou know,
Whoever judged, the worst on me must light,
When time shall be, for so I undertook
Before thee; and not repenting, this obtain
Of right, that I may mitigate their doom
On me derived yet I shall temper so
Justice with Mercy, as may illustrate most
Them fully satisfied, and thee appease.
Attendance none shall need, nor Train, where none
Are to behold the Judgment, but the judged,
Those two; the third best absent is condemned,
Convict by flight, and Rebel to all Law
Conviction to the Serpent none belongs.
Thus saying, from his radiant Seat he rose
Of high collateral glory: him Thrones and Powers,
Princedoms, and Dominations ministrant
Accompanied to Heaven Gate, from whence
Eden and all the Coast in prospect lay.
Down he descended strait; the speed of Gods
Time counts not, though with swiftest minutes winged.
Now was the Sun in Western cadence low
From Noon, and gentle Aires due at their hour
To fan the Earth now waked, and usher in
The Eevning cool when he from wrauth more cool
Came the mild Judge and Intercessor both
To sentence Man: the voice of God they heard
Now walking in the Garden, by soft winds
Brought to their Ears, while day declined, they heard,
And from his presence hid themselves among
The thickest Trees, both Man and Wife, till God
Approaching, thus to Adam called aloud.
Where art thou Adam, wont with joy to meet
My coming seen far off? I miss thee here.
Not pleased, thus entertaind with solitude,
Where obvious duty erewhile appeared unsaught:
Or come I less conspicuous, or what change
Absents thee, or what chance detains? Come forth.
He came, and with him Eve, more loath, though first
To offend, discount'nanc't both, and discomposed;
Love was not in their looks, either to God
Or to each other, but apparent guilt,
And shame, and perturbation, and despair,
Anger, and obstinacy, and hate, and guile.
Whence Adam faultring long, thus answered brief.
I heard thee in the Garden, and of thy voice
Afraid, being naked, hid my self. To whom
The gracious Judge without revile replied.
My voice thou often have heard, and have not feared,
But still rejoyc't, how is it now become
So dreadful to thee? that thou art naked, who
Has told thee? have thou eaten of the Tree
Whereof I gave thee charge thou should not eat?
To whom thus Adam sore beset replied.
O Heaven! in evil strait this day I stand
Before my Judge, either to undergo
My self the total Crime, or to accuse
My other self, the partner of my life;
Whose failing, while her Faith to me remains,
I should conceal, and not expose to blame
By my complaint; but strict necessity
Subdues me; and calamitous constraint
Least on my head both sin and punishment,
However insupportable, be all
Devolved; though should I hold my peace, yet thou
Would easily detect what I conccale.
This Woman whom thou made to be my help,
And gav'st me as thy perfet gift, so good,
So fit, so acceptable, so Divine,
That from her hand I could suspect no ill,
And what she did, whatever in it self,
Her doing seemed to justify the deed;
She gave me of the Tree, and I did eat.
To whom the sovran Presence thus replied.
Was she thy God, that her thou did obey
Before his voice, or was she made thy guide,
Superior, or but equal, that to her
Thou did resign thy Manhood, and the Place
Wherein God set thee above her made of thee,
And for thee, whose perfection far excelled
Hers in all real dignity: Adornd
She was indeed, and lovely to attract
Thy Love, not thy Subjection, and her Gifts
Were such as under Government well seemed,
Unseemly to bear rule, which was thy part
And person, had thou known thy self aright.
So having said, he thus to Eve in few:
Say Woman, what is this which thou have done?
To whom sad Eve with shame nigh overwhelmed,
Confessing soon, yet not before her Judge
Bold or loquacious, thus abasht replied.
The Serpent me beguiled and I did eat.
Which when the Lord God heard, without delay
To Judgment he proceeded on the accused
Serpent though brute, unable to transfer
The Guilt on him who made him instrument
Of mischief, and polluted from the end
Of his Creation; justly then accursed,
As vitiated in Nature: more to know
Concerned not Man (since he no further knew)
Nor altered his offense; yet God at last
To Satan first in sin his doom applied,
Though in mysterious terms, judged as then best:
And on the Serpent thus his curse let fall.
Because thou have done this, thou art accursed
Above all Cattle, each Beast of the Field;
Upon thy Belly grovelling thou shall go,
And dust shall eat all the days of thy Life.
Between Thee and the Woman I will put
Enmity, and between thine and her Seed;
Her Seed shall bruise thy head, thou bruise his heel.
So spoke this Oracle, then verified
When Jesus son of Mary second Eve,
Saw Satan fall like Lightning down from Heaven,
Prince of the Air; then rising from his Grave
Spoild Principalities and Powers, triumphed
In open show, and with ascension bright
Captivity led captive through the Air,
The Realm it self of Satan long usurpt,
Whom he shall tread at last under our feet;
Eevn he who now foretold his fatal bruise,
And to the Woman thus his Sentence turned.
Thy sorrow I will greatly multiply
By thy Conception; Children thou shall bring
In sorrow forth, and to thy Husbands will
Thine shall submit, he over thee shall rule.
On Adam last thus judgment he pronounced.
Because thou have heark'nd to the voice of thy Wife,
And eaten of the Tree concerning which
I charged thee, saying: Thou shall not eat thereof,
Cursed is the ground for thy sake, thou in sorrow
Shall eat thereof all the days of thy Life;
Thorns also and Thistles it shall bring thee forth
Unbid, and thou shall eat the Herb of the Field,
In the sweat of thy Face shall thou eat Bread,
Till thou return unto the ground, for thou
Out of the ground wast taken, know thy Birth,
For dust thou art, and shall to dust return.
So judged he Man, both Judge and Savior sent,
And the instant stroke of Death denounc't that day
Removed far off, then pitying how they stood
Before him naked to the air, that now
Must suffer change, disdained not to begin
Thenceforth the form of servant to assume,
As when he washed his servants feet so now
As Father of his Family he clad
Their nakedness with Skins of Beasts, or slain,
Or as the Snake with youthful Coat repaid;
And thought not much to cloth his Enemies:
Nor he their outward only with the Skins
Of Beasts, but inward nakedness, much more
Opprobrious, with his Robe of righteousness,
Araying covered from his Fathers sight.
To him with swift ascent he up returned,
Into his blissful bosom reassumed
In glory as of old, to him appeased
All, though all-knowing, what had past with Man
Recounted, mixing intercession sweet.
Meanwhile ere thus was sinned and judged on Earth,
Within the Gates of Hell sat Sin and Death,
In counterview within the Gates, that now
Stood open wide, belching outrageous flame
Far into Chaos, since the Fiend passed through,
Sin opening, who thus now to Death began.
O Son, why sit we here each other viewing
Idly, while Satan our great Author thrives
In other Worlds, and happier Seat provides
For us his offspring dear? It cannot be
But that success attends him; if mishap,
Ere this he had returned, with fury driven
By his Avengers, since no place like this
Can fit his punishment, or their revenge.
Methinks I feel new strength within me rise,
Wings growing, and Dominion given me large
Beyond this Deep; whatever draws me on,
Or sympathy, or some connatural force
Powerful at greatest distance to unite
With secret amiry things of like kind
By secretest conveyance. Thou my Shade
Inseparable must with me along:
For Death from Sin no power can separate.
But least the difficulty of passing back
Stay his return perhaps over this Gulf
Impassable, Impervious, let us try
Adventrous work, yet to thy power and mine
Not unagreeable, to found a path
Over this Maine from Hell to that new World
Where Satan now prevails, a Monument
Of merit high to all the infernal Host,
Easing their passage hence, for intercourse,
Or transmigration, as their lot shall lead.
Nor can I miss the way, so strongly drawn
By this new felt attraction and instinct.
Whom thus the meager Shadow answered soon.
Go whither Fate and inclination strong
Leads thee, I shall not lag behind, nor err
The way, thou leading, suth a sent I draw
Of carnage, prey innumerable, and taste
The savor of Death from all things there that live:
Nor shall I to the work thou enterprisest
Be wanting, but afford thee equal aid,
So saying, with delight he snuff'd the smell
Of mortal change on Earth. As when a flock
Of ravenous Fowl, though many a League remote,
Against the day of Battle, to a Field,
Where Armies lie encampt, come flying, lured
With sent of living Carcasses designed
For death, the following day, in bloody fight.
So sented the grim Feature, and upturn'd
His Nostril wide into the murkie Air,
Sagacious of his Quarry from so far.
Then Both from out Hell Gates into the waste
Wide Anarchie of Chaos damp and dark
Flew diverse, and with Power (their Power was great)
Hovering upon the Waters; what they met
Solid or slimie, as in raging Sea
Tossed up and down, together crowded drove
From each side shoaling toward the mouth of Hell.
As when two Polar Winds blowing adverse
Upon the Cronian Sea, together drive
Mountains of Ice, that stop the imagined way
Beyond Petsora Eastward, to the rich
Cathaian Coast. The aggregated Soil
Death with his Mace petrific, cold and dry,
As with a Trident smote, and fixed as firm
As Delos floating once; the rest his look
Bound with Gorgonian rigor not to move,
And with Asphaltic slime, broad as the Gate,
Deep to the Roots of Hell the gathered beach
They fastened, and the Mole immense wraught on
Over the foaming deep high Archt, a Bridge
Of length prodigious joying to the Wall
Immovable of this now fenceless world
Forfeit to Death from hence a passage broad,
Smooth, easy, inoffensive down to Hell.
So, if great thing to small may be compared,
Xerxes; the Liberty of Greece to yoke,
From Susa his Momronian Palace high
Came to the Sea, and over Hellespont
Bridging his way Europe with Asia joined,
And scourged with many a stroke the indignant waves.
Now had they brought the work by wondrous Art
Pontifical, a ridge of pendent Rock
Over the vexed Abyss, following the track
Of Satan* to the self same place where he
First lighted from his Wing, and landed safe
From out of Chaos to the out side bare
Of this round World: with Pinns of Adamant
And Chains they made all fast, too fast they made
And durable; and now in little space
The confines met of Empyrean Heaven
And of this World, and on the left hand Hell
With long reach interposed; three several ways
In sight, to each of these three places led.
And now their way to Earth they had descri'd,
To Paradise first tending; when behold
Satan in likeness of an Angel bright
Betwixt the Centaure and the Scorpion stearing
His Zenith, while the Sun in Aries rose:
Disguised he came, but those his Children dear
Their Parent soon discerned, though in disguise.
He after Eve seduc't, unminded slunk
Into the Wood fast by, and changing shape
To observe the sequel, saw his guileful act
By Eve, though all unweeting, seconded
Upon her Husband, saw their shame that sought
Vain covertures; but when he saw descend
The Son of God to judge them terrified
He fled, not hoping to escape, but shun
The present, fearing guilty what his wrauth
Might suddenly inflict; that past, returned
By Night, and listening where the hapless Pair
Sat in their sad discourse, and various plaint,
Thence gatherd his own doom, which understood
Not instant, but of future time. With joy
And tidings fraught, to Hell he now returned,
And at the brink of Chaos, near the foot
Of this new wondrous Pontifice, unhop't
Met who to meet him came, his Offspring dear.
Great joy was at their meeting, and at sight
Of that stupendous Bridge his joy increased.
Long he admiring stood, till Sin, his fair
Enchanting Daughter, thus the silence broke.
O Parent, these are thy magnific deeds,
Thy Trophies, which thou view'st as not thine own,
Thou art their Author and prime Architect:
For I no sooner in my Heart divined,
My Heart, which by a secret harmony
Still moves with thine, joined in connection sweet,
That thou on Earth had prosper'd, which thy looks
Now also evidence, but straight I felt
Though distant from thee Worlds between, yet felt
That I must after thee with this thy Son;
Such fatal consequence unites us three:
Hell could no longer hold us in her bounds,
Nor this unvoyageable Gulf obscure
Detain from following thy illustrious track.
Thou have achieved our liberty, confined
Within Hell Gates till now, thou us impow'rd
To fortify thus far, and overlay
With this portentous Bridge the dark Abyss.
Thine now is an this World, thy virtue has won
What thy hands builded not, thy Wisdom gained
With odds what War has lost, and fully avenged
Our foil in Heaven; here thou shall Monarch reign,
There did not; there let him still Victor sway,
As Battle has adjudg'd, from this new World
Retiring, by his own doom alienated,
And henceforth Monarchy with thee divide
Of all things parted by the Empyreal bounds,
His Quadrature, from thy Orbicular World,
Or try thee now more dangerous to his Throne.
Whom thus the Prince of Darkness answered glad.
Fair Daughter, and thou Son and Grandchild both,
High proof ye now have given to be the Race
Of Satan (for I glory in the name,
Antagonist of Heavens Almighty King)
Amply have merited of me, of all
The infernal Empire, that so near Heavens door
Triumphal with triumphal act have met,
Mine with this glorious Work, and made one Realm
Hell and this World, one Realm, one Continent
Of easy thorough-fare. Therefore while I
Descend through Darkness, on your Rode with ease
To my associate Powers, them to acquaint
With these successes, and with them rejoice,
You two this way, among these numerous Orbs
All yours, right down to Paradise descend;
There dwell and Reign in bliss, thence on the Earth
Dominion exercise and in the Air,
Chiefly on Man, sole Lord of all declared,
Him first make sure your thrall, and lastly kill.
My Substitutes I send ye, and Create
Plenipotent on Earth, of matchless might
Issuing from me: on your joint vigor now
My hold of this new Kingdom all depends,
Through Sin to Death exposed by my exploit.
If your joint power prevails, the affairs of Hell
No detriment need fear, go and be strong.
So saying he dismissed them, they with speed
Their course through thickest Constellations held
Spreading their bane; the blasted Stars looked wan,
And Planets, Planet-strook, real Eclips
Then sufferd. The other way Satan went down
The Causey to Hell Gate; on either side
Disparted Chaos over built exclaimd,
And with rebounding surge the bars assaild,
That scorned his indignation: through the Gate,
Wide open and unguarded, Satan passed,
And all about found desolate; for those
Appointed to sit there, had left their charge,
Flown to the upper World; the rest were all
Far to the inland retired, about the walls
Of Pandaemonium, City and proud seat
Of Lucifer, so by allusion called,
Of that bright Starr to Satan paragond.
There kept their Watch the Legions, while the Grand
In Council sat, sollicitous what chance
Might intercept their Emperor sent, so he
Departing gave command, and they observed.
As when the Tartar from his Russian Foe
By Astracan over the Snowie Plains
Retires, or Bactri^^ Sophi from the horns
Of Turkish Crescent, leaves all waste beyond
The Realm of Aladule, in his retreat
To Tauris or Casbeen. So these the late
Heav'n-banisht Host, left desert utmost Hell
Many a dark League, reduced in careful Watch
Round their Metropolis, and now expecting
Each hour their great adventurer from the search
Of Foreign Worlds: he through the midst unmarkt,
In show Plebeian Angel militant
Of lowest order, past; and from the door
Of that Plutonian Hall, invisible
Ascended his high Throne, which under state
Of richest texture spread, at the upper end
Was placed in regal luster. Down a while
He sat, and round about him saw unseen:
At last as from a Cloud his fulgent head
And shape Starr bright appeer'd, or brighter, clad
With what permissive glory since his fall
Was left him, or false glitter: All amazed
At that so sudden blaze the Stygian throng
Bent their aspect, and whom they wished beheld,
Their mighty Chief returned: loud was the acclaime:
Forth rushed in haste the great consulting Peers,
Raised from their Dark Divan, and with like joy
Congratulant approached him, who with hand
Silence, and with these words attention won.
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers,
For in possession such, not only of right,
I call ye and declare ye now, returned
Successful beyond hope, to lead ye forth
Triumphant out of this infernal Pit
Abominable, accursed, the house of woe,
And Dungeon of our Tyrant: Now possess*
As Lords, a spacious World, to our native Heaven
Little inferior, by my adventure hard
With peril great achieved. Long were to tell
What I have don, what sufferd, with what pain
Voyag'd the unreal, vast, unbounded deep
Of horrible confusion, over which
By Sin and Death a broad way now is paved
To expedite your glorious march; but I
Toild out my uncouth passage, forced to ride
The untraceable Abyss, plunged in the womb
Of unoriginal Night and Chaos wild,
That jealous of their secrets fiercely opposed
My journey strange, with clamorous uproare
Protesting Fate supreme; thence how I found
The new created World, which same in Heaven
Long had foretold, a Fabric wonderful
Of absolute perfection, therein Man
Placed in a Paradise, by our exile
Made happy: Him by fraud I have seduced
From his Creator, and the more to increase
Your wonder, with an Apple; he thereat
Offended, worth your laughter, has given up
Both his beloved Man and all his World,
To Sin and Death a prey, and so to us,
Without our hazard, labor, or alarm,
To range in, and to dwell, and over Man
To rule, as over all he should have ruled.
True is, me also he has judged, or rather
Me not, but the brute Serpent in whose shape
Man I deceav'd: that which to me belongs,
Is enmity, which he will put between
Me and Mankind; I am to bruise his heel;
His Seed, when is not set, shall bruise my head:
A World who would not purchase with a bruise,
Or much more grievous pain? Ye have the account
Of my performance: What remains, ye Gods,
But up and enter now into full bliss.
So having said, a while he stood, expecting
Their universal shout and high applause
To fill his ear, when contrary he hears
On all sides, from innumerable tongues
A dismal universal hiss, the sound
Of public scorn; he wonderd, but not long
Had leisure, wondering at himself now more;
His Visage drawn he felt to sharp and spare,
His Arms clung to his Ribs, his Legs entwining
Each other, till supplanted down he fell
A monstrous Serpent on his Belly prone,
Reluctant, but in vain, a greater power
Now ruled him, punished in the shape he sinned,
According to his doom: he would have spoke,
But hiss for hiss returned with forked tongue
To forked tongue, for now were all transformed
Alike, to Serpents all as accessories
To his bold Riot: dreadful was the din
Of hissing through the Hall, thick swarming now
With complicated monsters head and tail,
Scorpion and Asp, and Amphisbaena dire,
Cerastes hornd, Hydrus, and Ellops drear,
And Dipsas (not so thick swarmed once the Soil
Bedropt with blood of Gorgon, or the Isle
Ophiusa) but still greatest he the midst,
Now Dragon grown, larger then whom the Sun
Ingenderd in the Pythian Vale on slime,
Huge Python, and his Power no less he seemed
Above the rest still to retain; they all
Him followed issuing forth to the open Field,
Where all yet left of that revolted Rout
Heav'n-fall'n, in station stood or just array,
Sublime with expectation when to see
In Triumph issuing forth their glorious Chief;
They saw, but other sight instead, a crowd
Of ugly Serpents; horror on them fell,
And horrid sympathy; for what they saw,
They felt themselves now changing; down their arms,
Down fell both Spear and Shield, down they as fast,
And the dire hiss renewed, and the dire form
Caught by Contagion, like in punishment,
As in their crime. Thus was the applause they meant,
Turned to exploding hiss, triumph to shame
Cast on themselves from their own mouths. There stood
A Grove hard by, sprung up with this their change,
His will who reigns above, to aggravate
Their penance, laden with Fruit like that
Which grew in Paradise, the bait of Eve
Used by the Tempter: on that prospect strange
Their earnest eyes they fixed, imagining
For one forbidden Tree a multitude
Now risen, to work them further woe or shame;
Yet parcht with scalding thurst and hunger fierce,
Though to delude them sent, could not abstain,
But on thy rould in heaps, and up the Trees
Climbing, sat thicker then the snakie locks
That curld Megaera: greedily they plucked
The Frutage fair to sight, like that which grew
Near that bituminous Lake where Sodom flamed;
This more delusive, not the touch, but taste
Deceav'd; they fondly thinking to allay
Their appetite with gust, instead of Fruit
Chewd bitter Ashes, which the offended taste
With spattering noise rejected: often they assayd,
Hunger and thirst constraining, drugd as often,
With hatefullest disrelish writhed their jaws
With soot and cinders filled; so often they fell
Into the same illusion, not as Man
Whom they triumphed once lapst. Thus were they plagued
And worn with Famine, long and ceasless hiss,
Till their lost shape, permitted, they resumed,
Yearly enjoynd, some say, to undergo
This annual humbling certain numbered days,
To dash their pride, and joy for Man seduc't.
However some tradition they dispersed
Among the Heathen of their purchase got,
And Fabl'd how the Serpent, whom they called
Ophion with Eurynome, the wide
Encroaching Eve perhaps, had first the rule
Of high Olympus, thence by Saturn driven
And Ops, ere yet Dictaen Jove was born.
Mean while in Paradise the hellish pair
Too soon arrived, Sin there in power before,
Once actual, now in body, and to dwell
Habitual habitant; behind her Death
Close following pace for pace, not mounted yet
On his pale Horse: to whom Sin thus began.
Second of Satan sprung, all conquering Death,
What think thou of our Empire now, though earnd
With travail difficult, not better far
Then still at Hels dark threshold to have sat watch,
Unnam'd, undreaded, and thy self half starved?
Whom thus the Sin-born Monster answered soon.
To me, who with eternal Famine pine,
Alike is Hell, or Paradise, or Heaven,
There best, where most with ravin I may meet;
Which here, though plenteous, all too little seems
To stuff this Maw, this vast unhide-bound Corpse.
To whom the incestuous Mother thus replied.
Thou therefore on these Herbs, and Fruits, and Flours
Feed first, on each Beast next, and Fish, and Foul,
No homely morsels, and whatever thing
The Sith of Time mowes down, devour unspar'd,
Till I in Man residing through the Race,
His thoughts, his looks, words, actions all infect,
And season him thy last and sweetest prey.
This said, they both betook them several ways,
Both to destroy, or unimmortal make
All kinds, and for destruction to mature
Sooner or later; which the Almighty seeing,
From his transcendent Seat the Saints among,
To those bright Orders utterd thus his voice.
See with what heat these Dogs of Hell advance
To waste and havoc yonder World, which I
So fair and good created, and had still
Kept in that State, had not the folly of Man
Let in these wastful Furies, who impute
Folly to me, so does the Prince of Hell
And his Adherents, that with so much ease
I suffer them to enter and possess
A place so heavenly, and conniving seem
To gratify my scornful Enemie^,
That laugh, as if transported with some fit
Of Passion, I to them had quitted all,
At random yielded up to their misrule;
And know not that I called and drew them thither
My Hell Hounds, to lick up the draff and filth
Which man's polluting Sin with taint has shed
On what was pure, till crammed and gorged, nigh burst
With sucked and glutted offal, at one sling
Of thy victorious Arm, well-pleasing Son,
Both Sin, and Death, and yawning Grave at last
Through Chaos hurld, obstruct the mouth of Hell
For ever, and seal up his ravenous Jaws.
Then Heaven and Earth renewd shall be made pure
To sanctity that shall receive no stain:
Till then the Curse pronounced on both precedes.
He ended, and the heavenly Audience loud
Sung Halleluia, as the sound of Seas,
Through multitude that sung: Just are thy ways,
Righteous are thy Decrees on all thy Works;
Who can extenuate thee? Next, to the Son,
Destined restorer of Mankind, by whom
New Heaven and Earth shall to the Ages rise,
Or down from Heaven descend. Such was their song,
While the Creator calling forth by name
His mighty Angels gave them several charge,
As sorted best with present things. The Sun
Had first his precept so to move, so shine,
As might affect the Earth with cold and heat
Scarce tolerable, and from the North to call
Decrepit Winter, from the South to bring
Solstitial summers heat. To the blanc Moon
Her office they prescribed, to the other five
Their planetarie motions and aspects
In Sextile, Square, and Trine, and Opposite,
Of noxious efficacy, and when to join
In Synod unbenigne, and taught the fixed
Their influence malignant when to shower,
Which of them rising with the Sun, or falling,
Should prove tempestuous: To the Winds they set
Their corners, when with bluster to confound
Sea, Air, and Shore, the Thunder when to roll
With terror through the dark Aereal Hall.
Some say he bid his Angels turn ascanse
The Poles of Earth twice ten degrees and more
From the Suns Axle; they with labor pushed
Oblique the Centric Globe: Some say the Sun
Was bid turn Reins from the Equinoctial Rode
Like distant breadth to Taurus with the Seav'n
Atlantic Sisters, and the Spartan Twins
Up to the Tropic Crab; thence down amain
By Leo and the Virgin and the Scales,
A deep as Capricorn, to bring in change
Of Seasons to each Clime; else had the Spring
Perpetual smiled on Earth with vernant Flours,
Equal in Days and Nights, except to those
Beyond the Polar Circles; to them Day
Had unbenighted shon, while the low Sun
To recompense his distance, in their sight
Had rounded still the Horizon, and not known
Or East or West* which had forbid the Snow
From cold Estotiland, and South as far
Beneath Magellan. At that tasted Fruit
The Sun, as from Thyestean Banquet, turned
His course intended; else how had the World
Inhabited, though sinless, more then now,
Avoided pinching cold and scorching heat?
These changes in the Heavens, though slow, produced
Like change on Sea and Land, sideral blast,
Vapor, and Mist, and Exhalation hot,
Corrupt and Pestilent: Now from the North
Of Normbega, and the Samoed shore
Bursting their brazen Dungeon, armd with ice
And snow and hail and stormy gust and flaw,
Boreas and Caecias and Argestes loud
And Thrascias rend the Woods and Seas upturn;
With adverse blast up-turns them from the South
Notus and Afer black with thundrous Clouds
From Serraliona; thwart of these as fierce
Forth rush the Levant and the Ponent Winds
Eurus and Zephir with their lateral noise,
Sirocco, and Libecchio, Thus began
Outrage from liveless things; but Discord first
Daughter of Sin, among the irrational,
Death introduced through fierce antipathie:
Beast now with Bead began war, and Foul with Foul,
And Fish with Fish; to graze the Herb all leaving,
Devourd each other; nor stood much in awe
Of Man, but fled him, or with countenance grim
Glar'd on him passing: these were from without
The growing miseries, which Adam saw
Already in part, though hid in gloomiest shade,
To sorrow abandond, but worse felt within,
And in a troubled Sea of passion tossed,
Thus to disburd'n sought with sad complaint.
O miserable of happy! is this the end
Of this new glorious World, and me so late
The Glory of that Glory, who now become
Accursed of blessed, hide me from the face
Of God, whom to behold was then my highth
Of happiness: yet well, if here would end
The misery, I deserved it, and would bear
My own deservings; but this will nor serve;
All that I eat or drink, or shall beget,
Is propagated curse. O voice once heard
Delightfully, Increase and multiply,
Now death to hear! for what can I increase
Or multiply, but curses on my head?
Who of all Ages to succeed, but feeling
The evil on him brought by me, will curse
My Head, Ill fare our Ancestor impure,
For this we may thank Adam; but his thanks
Shall be the execration; so besides
Mine own that bide upon me, all from me
Shall with a fierce reflux on me redound,
On me as on their natural center light
Heavy, though in their place. O fleeting joys
Of Paradise, dear bought with lasting woes!
Did I request thee, Maker, from my Clay
To mould me Man, did I solicit thee
From darkness to promote me, or here place
In this delicious Garden? as my Will
Concurd not to my being, it were but right
And equal to reduce me to my dust,
Desirous to resign, and render back
All I received, unable to perform
Thy terms too hard, by which I was to hold
The good I sought not. To the loss of that,
Sufficient penalty, why have thou added
The sense of endless woes? inexplicable
Thy Justice seems; yet to say truth, too late,
I thus contest; then should have been refusd
Those terms whatever, when they were proposed:
Thou did accept them; will thou enjoy the good,
Then cavil the conditions? and though God
Made thee without thy leave, what if thy Son
Prove disobedient, and reproved, retort,
Wherefore did thou beget me? I sought it not
Would thou admit for his contempt of thee
That proud excuse? yet him not thy election,
But Natural necessity begot.
God made thee of choice his own, and of his own
To serve him, thy reward was of his grace,
Thy punishment then justly is at his Will.
Be it so, for I submit, his doom is fair,
That dust I am, and shall to dust return:
O welcome hour whenever! why delays
His hand to execute what his Decree
Fixd on this day? why do I overlive,
Why am I mocked with death, and length'nd out
To deathless pain? how gladly would I meet
Mortality my sentence, and be Earth*
Insensible, how glad would lay me down
As in my Mothers lap? there I should test
And sleep secure; his dreadful voice no more
Would Thunder in my ears, no fear of worse
To me and to my offspring would torment me
With cruel expectation. Yet one doubt
Pursues me still, least all I cannot die,
Least that pure breath of Life, the Spirit of Man
Which God inspired, cannot together perish
With this corporeal Clod; then in the Grave,
Or in some other dismal place who knows
But I shall die a living Death? O thought
Horrid, if true! yet why? it was but breath
Of Life that sinned; what dies but what had life
And sin? the Body properly has neither.
All of me then shall die: let this appease
The doubt since humane reach no further knows,
For though the Lord of all be infinite,
Is his wrauth also? be it, man is not so,
But mortal doomed. How can he exercise
Wrath without end on Man whom Death must end?
Can he make deathless Death? that were to make
Strange contradiction, which to God himself
Impossible is held, as Argument
Of weakness, not of Power. Will he, draw out,
For angers sake, finite to infinite
In punished man, to satisfy his rigor
Satisfied never; that were to extend
His Sentence beyond dust and Natures Law,
By which all Causes else according still
To the reception of their matter act,
Not to the extent of their own Sphere. But say
That Death be not one stroke, as I supposed,
Bereaving sense, but endless misery
From this day onward, which I feel begun
Both in me, and without me, and so last
To perpetuity; Ay me, that fear
Comes thundering back with dreadful revolution
On my defensless head; both Death and I
Am sound Eternal, and incorporate both,
Nor I on my part single, in me all
Posterity stands cursed: Fair Patrimony
That I must leave ye, Sons; O were I able
To waste it all my self, and leave ye none!
So disinherited how would ye bless
Me now your curse! Ah, why should all mankind
For one man's fault thus guiltless be condemned,
If guiltless? But from me what can proceed,
But all corrupt, both Mind and Will depraved,
Not to do only, but to will the same
With me? how can they then acquitted stand
In sight of God? Him after all Disputes
Forced I absolve: all my evasions vain,
And reasonings, though through Mazes, lead me still
But to my own conviction: first and last
On me, me only, as the fourse and spring
Of all corruption, all the blame lights due;
So might the wrauth. Fond wish! could thou support
That burden heavier then the Earth to bear
Then all the World much heavier, though divided
With that bad Woman? Thus what thou desir'st
And what thou fearst, alike destroys all hope
Of refuge, and concludes thee miserable
Beyond all past example and future,
To Satan only like both crime and doom.
O Conscience, into what Abyss of fears
And horrors have thou driven me; out of which
I find no way, from deep to deeper plunged!
Thus Adam to himself lamented loud
Through the still Night, not now, as ere man fell,
Wholesome and cool, and mild, but with black Air
Accompanied, with damps and dreadful gloom,
Which to his evil Conscience represented
All things with double terror: On the Ground
Outstretcht he lay, on the cold ground, and often
Cursed his Creation, Death as often accused
Of tardie execution, since denounc't
The day of his offense. Why comes not Death,
Said he, with one thrice acceptable stroke
To end me? Shall Truth fail to keep her word,
Justice Divine not hast'n to be just?
But Death comes not at call, Justice Divine
Mends not her slowest pace for prayers or cries.
O Woods, O Fountains, Hillocks, Dales and Bowrs,
With other echo late I taught your Shades
To answer, and resound far other Song.
Whom thus afflicted when sad Eve beheld,
Desolate where she sat, approaching nigh,
Soft words to his fierce passion she assayed:
But her with stern regard he thus repelled.
Out of my sight, thou Serpent, that name best
Befits thee with him leagued, thy self as false
And hateful; nothing wants, but that thy shape,
Like his, and color Serpentine may show
Thy inward fraud, to warn all Creatures from thee
Henceforth; least that too heavenly form, pretended
To hellish falsehood, snare them. But for thee
I had persisted happy, had not thy pride
And wandering vanity, when lest was safe,
Rejected my forewarning, and disdained
Not to be trusted, longing to be seen
Though by the Devil himself, him overweening
To overreach, but with the Serpent meeting
Fooled and beguiled, by him thou, I by thee,
To trust thee from my side, imagined wise,
Constant, mature, proof against all assaults,
And understood not all was but a show
Rather then solid virtue, all but a Rib
Crooked by nature, bent, as now appears,
More to the part sinister from me drawn,
Well if thrown out, as supernumerarie
To my just number found. O why did God,
Creator wise, that peopled highest Heaven
With Spirits Masculine, create at last
This noveltie on Earth, this fair defect
Of Nature, and not fill the World at once
With Men as Angels without Feminine,
Or find some other way to generate
Mankind? this mischief had not then befallen,
And more that shall befall, innumerable
Disturbances on Earth through Femal snares,
And straight conjunction with this Sex: for either
He never shall find out fit Mate, but such
As some misfortune brings him, or mistake,
Or whom he wishes mod shall seldom gain
Through her perverseness, but shall see her gaind
By a far worse, or if she love, withheld
By Parents, or his happiest choice too late
Shall meet, already linkt and Wedlock-bound
To a fell Adversary, his hate or shame:
Which infinite calamine shall cause
To Humane life, and household peace confound.
He added not, and from her turned, but Eve
Not so repulst, with Tears that ceased not flowing,
And tresses all disorderd, at his feet
Fell humble, and embracing them, besaught
His peace, and thus proceeded in her plaint.
Forsake me not thus, Adam, witness Heaven
What love sincere, and reverence in my heart
I bear thee, and unweeting have offended,
Unhappilie deceav'd; thy suppliant
I beg, and clasp thy knees; bereave me not,
Whereon I live, thy gentle looks, thy aid,
Thy counsel in this uttermost distress,
My only strength and stay: forlorn of thee,
Whither shall I betake me, where subsist?
While yet we live, scarce one short hour perhaps,
Between us two let there be peace, both joining,
As joined in injuries, one enmity
Against a Foe by doom express assigned us,
That cruel Serpent: On me exercise not
Thy hatred for this misery befallen,
On me already lost, me then thy self
More miserable; both have sinned, but thou
Against God only, I against God and thee,
And to the place of judgment will return,
There with my cries importune Heaven, that all
The sentence from thy head removed may ligh.
On me, sole cause to thee of all this woe,
Me me only just object of his ire.
She ended weeping, and her lowly plight,
Immovable till peace obtained from fault
Acknowledged and deplored, in Adam wraught
Commiseration; soon his heart relented
Toward her, his life so late and sole delight,
Now at his feet submissive in distress,
Creature so fair his reconcilement seeking,
His counsel whom she had displeased, his aid;
As one disarmed, his anger all he lost,
And thus with peaceful words uprais'd her soon.
Unwarie, and too desirous, as before,
So now of what thou know not, who desir'st
The punishment all on thy self; alas,
Bear thine own first, ill able to sustain
His full wrauth whose thou feelst as yet lest part,
And my displeasure bearst so ill. If Prayers
Could alter high Decrees, I to that place
Would speed before thee, and be louder heard,
That on my head all might be visited,
Thy frailty and infirmer Sex forgiven,
To me committed and by me exposed.
But rise, let us no more contend, nor blame
Each other, blamed enough elsewhere, but strive
In offices of Love, how we may light'n
Each others burden in our share of woe;
Since this days Death denounc't, if ought I see,
Will prove no sudden, but a slow pac't evil,
A long days dying to augment our pain,
And to our Seed (O hapless Seed!) derived.
To whom thus Eve, recovering heart, replied.
Adam, by sad experiment I know
How little weight my words with thee can find,
Found so erroneous, thence by just event
Found so unfortunate; nevertheless,
Restored by thee, vile as I am, to place
Of new acceptance, hopeful to regaine
Thy Love, the sole contentment of my heart
Living or dying, from thee I will not hide
What thoughts in my unquiet breast are risen,
Tending to some relief of our extremes,
Or end, though sharp and sad, yet tolerable,
As in our evils, and of easier choice.
If care of our descent perplex us most,
Which must be born to certain woe, devourd
By Death at last, and miserable it is
To be to others cause of misery,
Our own begotten, and of our Loins to bring
Into this cursed World a woeful Race,
That after wretched Life must be at last
Food for so foul a Monster, in thy power
It lies, yet ere Conception to prevent
The Race unblest, to being yet unbegot.
Childless thou art, Childless remain:
So Death shall be deceav'd his glut, and with us two
Be forced to satisfy his Ravenous Maw.
But if thou judge it hard and difficult,
Conversing, looking, loving, to abstain
From Loves due Rites, Nuptial embraces sweet,
And with desire to languish without hope,
Before the present object languishing
With like desire, which would be meserie
And torment less then none of what we dread,
Then both our selves and Seed at once to free
From what we fear for both, let us make short,
Let us seek Death, or he not found, supply
With our own hands his Office on our selves;
Why stand we longer shivering under fears,
That show no end but Death, and have the power,
Of many ways to die the shortest choosing,
Destruction with destruction to destroy.
She ended here, or vehement despair
Broke off the rest; so much of Death her thoughts
Had entertaind, as di'd her Checks with pale.
But Adam with such counsel nothing swayed,
To better hopes his more attentive mind
Laboring had raised, and thus to Eve replied.
Eve, thy contempt of life and pleasure seems
To argue in thee something more sublime
And excellent then what thy mind contemnes;
But self-destruction therefore saught, refutes
That excellence thought in thee, and implies,
Not thy contempt, but anguish and regret
For loss of life and pleasure overlov'd.
Or if thou covet death, as utmost end
Of misery, so thinking to evade
The penalty pronounced, doubt not but God
Has wiselier armed his vengeful ire then so
To be forestalled; much more I fear least Death
So snatched will not exempt us from the pain
We are by doom to pay; rather such acts
Of contumacie will provoke the highest
To make death in us live: Then let us seek
Some safer resolution, which methinks
I have in view, calling to mind with heed
Part of our Sentence, that thy Seed shall bruise
The Serpents head; piteous amends, unless
Be meant, whom I conjecture, our grand Foe
Satan, who in the Serpent has contrived
Against us this deceit: to crush his head
Would be revenge indeed; which will be lost
By death brought on our selves, or childless days
Resolved, as thou proposest; so our Foe
Shall escape his punishment ordained, and we
Instead shall double ours upon our heads.
No more be mentioned then of violence
Against our selves, and wilful barrenness,
That cuts us off from hope, and savours only
Rancor and pride, impatience and despite,
Reluctance against God and his just yoke
Laid on our Necks. Remember with what mild
And gracious temper he both heard and judged
Without wrauth or reviling; we expected
Immediate dissolution, which we thought
Was meant by Death that day, when lo, to thee
Pains only in Childbearing were foretold,
And bringing forth, soon recompenc't with joy,
Fruit of thy Womb: On me the Curse aslope
Glanced on the ground, with labor I must earne
My bread; what harm? Idleness had bin worse;
My labor will sustain me; and least Cold
Or Heat should injure us, his timely care
Has unbesaught provided, and his hands
Clothed us unworthie, pitying while he judged;
How much more, if we pray him, will his ear
Be open, and his heart to pity incline,
And teach us further by what means to shun
The inclement Seasons, Rain, Ice, Hail and Snow,
Which now the Sky with various Face begins
To show us in this Mountain, while the Winds
Blow moist and keen, shattering the graceful locks
Of these fair spreading Trees; which bids us seek
Some better shroud, some better warmth to cherish
Our Limbs benumbed, ere this diurnal Starr
Leave cold the Night, how we his gathered beams
Reflected, may with matter sere foment,
Or by collision of two bodies grind
The Air attrite to Fire, as late the Clouds
Justling or pusht with Winds rude in their shock
Tine the slant Lightning, whose thwart flame driven down
Kindles the gummie bark of Firr or Pine,
And sends a comfortable heat from far,
Which might supply the Sun: such Fire to use,
And what may else be remedy or cure
To evils which our own misdeeds have wrought,
He will instruct us praying, and of Grace
Beseeching him, so as we need not fear
To pass commodiously this life, sustained
By him with many comforts, till we end
In dust, our final rest and native home.
What better can we do, then to the place
Repairing where he judged us, prostrate fall
Before him reverent, and there confess
Humbly our faults, and pardon beg, with tears
Watering the ground, and with our sighs the Air
Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign
Of sorrow unfeigned, and humiliation meek.
Undoubtedly he will relent and turn
From his displeasure; in whose look serene,
When angry most he seemed and most severe,
What else but favor, grace, and mercy shon?
So spoke our Father penitent, nor Eve
Felt less remorse: they forthwith to the place
Repairing where he judged them prostrate fell
Before him reverent, and both confessed
Humbly their faults, and pardon begged, with tears
Watering the ground, and with their sighs the Air
Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign
Of sorrow unfeigned, and humiliation meek.
The End of the Tenth Book.
Paradise Lost.
BOOK XI.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Son of God presents to his Father the Prayers of our first Parents now
repenting, and intercedes for them: God accepts them, but declares that they
must no longer abide in Paradise; sends Michael with a Band of Cherubim to
dispossess them; but first to reveal to Adam future things: Michaels coming
down. Adam shows to Eve certain ominous signs; he discerns Michaels approach,
goes out to meet him: the Angel denounces their departure. Eve's Lamentation.
Adam pleads, but submits: The Angel leads him up to a high Hill, sets before
him in vision what shall happ'n till the Flood.

THus they in lowliest plight repentant stood
Praying, for from the Mercie-seat above
Prevenient Grace descending had removed
The stony from their hearts, and made new flesh
Regenerate grow instead, that signs now breathed
Unutterable, which the Spirit of prayer
Inspired, and winged for Heaven with speedier flight
Then loudest Oratorie: yet their port
Not of mean suitors, nor important less
Seemed their Petition, then when the ancient Pair
In Fables old, less ancient yet then these,
Deucalion and chaste Pyrtha to restore
The Race of Mankind drowned, before the Shrine
Of Themis stood devout. To Heaven their prayers
Flew up, nor missd the way, by envious winds
Blow'n vagabond or frustrate: in they passd
Dimentionless through Heavenly doors; then clad
With incense, where the Golden Altar fumed,
By their great Intercessor, came in sight
Before the Fathers Throne: Them the glad Son
Presenting, thus to intercede began.
See Father, what first fruits on Earth are sprung
From thy implanted Grace in Man, these Sighs
And Prayers, which in this Golden Censer, mixed
With Incense, I thy Priest before thee bring,
Fruits of more pleasing favor from thy seed
Sow'n with contrition in his heart, then those
Which his own hand manuring all the Trees
Of Paradise could have produced, ere fallen
From innocence. Now therefore bend thine ear
To supplication, hear his sighs though mute;
Unskilful with what words to pray, let me
Interpret for him, me his Advocate
And propitiation, all his works on me
Good or not good ingraft, my Merit those
Shall perfet, and for these my Death shall pay.
Accept me, and in me from these receave
The smell of peace toward Mankind, let him live
Before thee reconciled, at least his days
Numberd, though sad, till Death, his doom (which I
To mitigate thus plead, not to reverse)
To better life shall yield him, where with me
All my redeemd may dwell in joy and bliss,
Made one with me as I with thee am one.
To whom the Father, without Cloud, serene.
All thy request for Man, accepted Son,
Obtain, all thy request was my Decree:
But longer in that Paradise to dwell,
The Law I gave to Nature him forbids:
Those pure immortal Elements that know
No gross, no unharmoneous mixture foul,
Eject him tainted now, and purge him off
As a distemper, gross to air as gross,
And mortal food, as may dispose him best
For dissolution wrought by Sin, that first
Distemperd all things, and of incorrupt
Corrupted. I at first with two fair gifts
Created him endowd, with Happiness
And Immortality: that fondly lost,
This other served but to eternize woe;
Till I provided Death; so Death becomes
His final remedy, and after Life
Tried in sharp tribulation, and refined
By Faith and faithful works, to second Life,
Wak't in the renovation of the just,
Resignes him up with Heaven and Earth renewd.
But let us call to Synod all the Blessed
Through Heavens wide bounds; from them I will not hide
My judgments, how with Mankind I proceed,
As how with peccant Angels late they saw;
And in their state, though firm, stood more confirmd.
He ended, and the Son gave signal high
To the bright Minister that watchd, he blew
His Trumpet, heard in Oreb since perhaps
When God descended, and perhaps once more
To sound at general Doom. The Angelic blast
Filld all the Regions: from their blissful Bowrs
Of Amarantin Shade, Fountain or Spring,
By the waters of Life, where ere they sat
In fellowships of joy: the Sons of Light
Hasted, resorting to the Summons high,
And took their Seats; till from his Throne supreme
The Almighty thus pronouncd his sovran Will.
O Sons, like one of us Man is become
To know both Good and Evil, since his taste
Of that defended Fruit; but let him boast
His knowledge of Good lost, and Evil got,
Happier, had it sufficed him to have known
Good by it self, and Evil not at all.
He sorrows now, repents, and prays contrite,
My motions in him, longer then they move,
His heart I know, how variable and vain
Self-left. Least therefore his now bolder hand
Reach also of the Tree of Life, and eat,
And live for ever, dream at least to live
For ever, to remove him I decree,
And send him from the Garden forth to Till
The Ground whence he was taken, fitter soil.
Michael, this my behest have thou in charge,
Take to thee from among the Cherubim
Thy choice of flaming Warriors, least the Fiend
Or in behalf of Man, or to invade
Vacant possession some new trouble raise:
Have thee, and from the Paradise of God
Without remorse drive out the sinful Pair,
From hallowd ground the unholie, and denounce
To them and to their Progeny from thence
Perpetual banishment. Yet least they faint
At the sad Sentence rigorously urged,
For I behold them softn'd and with tears
Bewailing their excess, all terror hide.
If patiently thy bidding they obey,
Dismiss them not disconsolate; reveal
To Adam what shall come in future days,
As I shall thee enlighten, intermix
My Covenant in the woman's seed renewd;
So send them forth, though sorrowing, yet in peace*
And on the East side of the Garden place,
Where entrance up from Eden easiest climbes,
Cherubic watch, and of a Sword the flame
Wide waving, all approach far off to fright,
And guard all passage to the Tree of Life:
Least Paradise a receptacle prove
To Spirits foul, and all my Trees their prey,
With whose stolen Fruit Man once more to delude.
He ceased; and the Archangelic Power prepared
For swift descent, with him the Cohort bright
Of watchful Cherubim; four faces each
Had, like a double Janus, all their shape
Spangl'd with eyes more numerous then those
Of Argus, and more wakeful then to drouze,
Charmed with Arcadian Pipe, the Pastoral Reed
Of Hermes, or his opiate Rod. Mean while
To resalute the World with sacred Light
Leucothea waked, and with fresh dews imbalmd
The Earth, when Adam and first Matron Eve
Had ended now their Orisons, and found
Strength added from above, new hope to spring
Out of despair, joy, but with fear yet linkt;
Which thus to Eve his welcome words renewd.
Eve, easily may Faith admit, that all
The good which we enjoy, from Heaven descends;
But that from us ought should ascend to Heaven
So prevalent as to concern the mind
Of God high-blest, or to incline his will,
Hard to belief may seem; yet this will Prayer,
Or one short sigh of humane breath, up-borne
Even to the Seat of God. For since I saught
By Prayer the offended Deity to appease,
Kneeled and before him humbl'd all my heart,
Methought I saw him placable and mild,
Bending his ear; persuasion in me grew
That I was heard with favor; peace returned
Home to my Breast, and to my memory
His promise, that thy Seed shall bruise our Foe;
Which then not minded in dismay, yet now
Assures me that the bitterness of death
Is past, and we shall live. Whence Hail to thee,
Eve rightly called, Mother of all Mankind,
Mother of all things living, since by thee
Man is to live, and all things live for Man.
To whom thus Eve with sad demeanor meek.
Ill worthy I such title should belong
To me transgressour, who for thee ordaind
A help, became thy snare; to me reproach
Rather belongs, distrust and all dispraise:
But infinite in pardon was my Judge,
That I who first brought Death on all, am graced
The sourse of life; next favorable thou,
Who highly thus to entitle me voutsaf'st,
Far other name deserving. But the Field
To labor calls us now with sweat imposed,
Though after sleepless Night; for see the Morn,
All unconcerned with our unrest, begins
Her rosy progress smiling; let us forth,
I never from thy side henceforth to stray,
Wherere our days work lies, though now enjoind
Laborious, till day droop; while here we dwell,
What can be toilsom in these pleasant Walks?
Here let us live, though in fallen state, content.
So spoke, so wished much-humbl^d Eve, but Fate
Subscribed not; Nature first gave Signs, impressed
On Bird, Beast, Air, Air suddenly eclipsed
After short blush of Morn; nigh in her sight
The Bird of Jove, stoopt from his aerie tour,
Two Birds of gayest plume before him drove:
Down from a Hill the Beast that reigns in Woods,
First hunter then, pursued a gentle brace,
Goodliest of all the Forest, Heart and Hind;
Direct to the Eastern Gate was bent their flight.
Adam observed, and with his Eye the chase
Pursuing, not unmoved to Eve thus spoke.
O Eve, some further change awaits us nigh,
Which Heaven by these mute signs in Nature shows
Forerunners of his purpose, or to warn
Us happily too secure of our discharge
From penalty, because from death releast
Some days; how long, and what till then our life,
Who knows, or more then this, that we are dust,
And thither must return and be no more.
Why else this double object in our sight
Of flight pursued in the Air and ore the ground
One way the self-same hour? why in the East
Darkness ere Days mid course, and Morning light
More orient in yon Western Cloud that draws
Over the blew Firmament a radiant white,
And slow descends, with something heavenly fraught.
He erred not, for by this the heavenly Bands
Down from a Sky of Jasper lighted now
In Paradise, and on a Hill made alt,
A glorious Apparition, had not doubt
And carnal fear that day dimmed Adams eye.
Not that more glorious, when the Angels met
Jacob in Mahanaim, where he saw
The field Pavilion'd with his Guardians bright;
Nor that which on the flaming Mount appeerd
In Dothan, covered with a Camp of Fire,
Against the Syrian King, who to surprise
One man, Assassin-like had levied War,
War unproclam'd. The Princely Hierarch
In their bright stand, there left his Powers to seize
Possession of the Garden; he alone,
To find where Adam shelterd, took his way,
Not unperceav'd of Adam, who to Eve,
While the great Visitant approachd, thus spoke.
Eve, now expect great tidings, which perhaps
Of us will soon determine, or impose
New Laws to be observed; for I descrie
From yonder blazing Cloud that veils the Hill
One of the heavenly Host, and by his Gate
None of the meanest, some great Potentate
Or of the Thrones above, such Majesty
Invests him coming? yet not terrible,
That I should fear, nor sociably mild,
As Raphael, that I should much confide,
But solemn and sublime, whom not to offend,
With reverence I must meet, and thou retire.
He ended; and the Archangel soon drew nigh,
Not in his shape Celestial, but as Man
Clad to meet Man; over his lucid Arms
A military Vest of purple flowd
Livelier then Meliboean, or the grain
Of Sarra, worn by Kings and Hero's old
In time of Truce; Iris had dipped the wooff;
His starrie Helm unbuckl'd showed him prime
In Manhood where Youth ended; by his side
As in a glistering Zodiac hung the Sword,
Satan's dire dread, and in his hand the Spear.
Adam bowd low, he Kingly from his State
Inclined not, but his coming thus declared.
Adam, Heavens high behest no Preface needs:
Sufficient that thy Prayers are heard, and Death,
Then due by sentence when thou did transgress,
Defeated of his seizure many days
Given thee of Grace, wherein thou may repent,
And one bad act with many deeds well done
May cover: well may then thy Lord appeased
Redeem thee quite from Deaths rapacious claim;
But longer in this Paradise to dwell
Permits not; to remove thee I am come,
And send thee from the Garden forth to till
The ground whence thou wast taken, fitter Soil.
He added not, for Adam at the news
Heart-strook with chilling gripe of sorrow stood,
That all his senses bound; Eve, who unseen
Yet all had heard, with audible lament
Discovered soon the place of her retire.
O unexpected stroke, worse then of Death!
Must I thus leave thee Paradise? thus leave
Thee Native Soil, these happy Walks and Shades,
Fit haunt of Gods? where I had hope to spend,
Quiet though sad, the respit of that day
That must be mortal to us both. O flours,
That never will in other Climate grow,
My early visitation, and my last
At Eev'n, which I bred up with tender hand
From the first opening bud, and gave ye Names,
Who now shall rear ye to the Sun, or rank
Your Tribes, and water from the ambrosial Fount?
Thee lastly nuptial Bower, by me adornd
With what to sight or smell was sweet; from thee
How shall I part, and whither wander down
Into a lower World, to this obscure
And wild, how shall we breath in other Air
Less pure, accustomd to immortal Fruits?
Whom thus the Angel interrupted mild.
Lament not Eve, but patiently resign
What justly thou have lost; nor set thy heart,
Thus over-fond, on that which is not thine;
Thy going is not lonely, with thee goes
Thy Husband, him to follow thou art bound;
Where he abides, think there thy native soil.
Adam by this from the cold sudden damp
Recovering, and his scatterd spirits returned.
To Michael thus his humble words addressd.
Celestial, whether among the Thrones, or named
Of them the Highest, for such of shape may seem
Prince above Princes, gently have thou told
Thy message, which might else in telling wound,
And in performing end us; what besides
Of sorrow and dejection and despair
Our frailty can sustain, thy tidings bring,
Departure from this happy place, our sweet
Recess, and only consolation left
Familiar to our eyes, all places else
Inhospitable appeer and desolate,
Nor knowing us nor known: and if by prayer
Incessant I could hope to change the will
Of him who all things can, I would not cease
To weary him with my assiduous cries:
But prayer against his absolute Decree
No more availes then breath against the wind,
Blown stifling back on him that breaths it forth:
Therefore to his great bidding I submit.
This most afflicts me, that departing hence,
As from his face I shall be hid, deprivd
His blessed countenance; here I could frequent,
With worship, place by place where he voutsaf 'd
Presence Divine, and to my Sons relate;
On this Mount he appeerd, under this Tree
Stood visible, among these Pines his voice
I heard, here with him at this Fountain talked:
So many grateful Altars I would rear
Of grassie Terfe, and pile up every Stone
Of luster from the brook, in memory,
Or monument to Ages, and thereon
Offer sweet smelling Gumms and Fruits and Flours:
In yonder nether World where shall I seek
His bright appearances, or foot step-trace?
For though I fled him angry, yet recalled
To life prolongd and promisd Race, I now
Gladly behold though but his utmost skirts
Of glory, and far off his steps adore.
To whom thus Michael with regard benign.
Adam, thou know Heaven his, and all the Earth.
Not this Rock only; his Omnipresence fills
Land, Sea, and Air, and every kind that lives,
Fomented by his virtual power and warmd:
All the Earth he gave thee to possess and rule,
No despicable gift; surmise not then
His presence to these narrow bounds confined
Of Paradise or Eden: this had been
Perhaps thy Capital Sear, from whence had spread
All generations, and had hither come
From all the ends of the Earth, to celebrate
And reverence thee their great Progenitor.
But this praeeminence thou have lost, brought down
To dwell on eeven ground now with thy Sons:
Yet doubt not but in Vallie and in plain
God is as here, and will be found alike
Present, and of his presence many a sign
Still following thee, still compassing thee round
With goodness and paternal Love, his Face
Express, and of his steps the track Divine.
Which that thou may believe, and be confirmd
Ere thou from hence depart, know I am sent
To show thee what shall come in future days
To thee and to thy Offspring; good with bad
Expect to hear, supernal Grace contending
With sinfulness of Men; thereby to learn
True patience, and to temper joy with fear
And pious sorrow, equally enured
By moderation either state to bear,
Prosperous or adverse: so shall thou lead
Safest thy life, and best prepared endure
Thy mortal passage when it comes. Ascend
This Hill; let Eve (for I have drencht her eyes)
Here sleep below while thou to foresight wak'st,
As once thou slepst, while She to life was formd.
To whom thus Adam gratefully replied.
Ascend, I follow thee, safe Guide, the path
Thou lead'st me, and to the hand of Heaven submit,
However chast'ning, to the evil turn
My obvious breast, arming to overcom
By suffering, and earne rest from labor won,
If so I may attain. So both ascend
In the Visions of God: It was a Hill
Of Paradise the highest, from whose top
The Hemisphere of Earth in cleerest Ken
Stretched out to the amplest reach of prospect lay.
Not higher that Hill nor wider looking round,
Whereon for different cause the Tempter set
Our second Adam in the Wilderness,
To show him all Earths Kingdoms and their Glory.
His Eye might there command wherever stood
City of old or modern Fame, the Seat
Of mightiest Empire, from the destind Walls
Of Cambalu, seat of Cathaian Can
And Samarchand by Oxus, Temirs Throne,
To Paquin of Sinaean Kings, and thence
To Agra and Lahor of great Mogul
Down to the golden Chersonese, or where
The Persian in Ecbatan sat, or since
In Hispahan, or where the Russian Kfar
In Mosco, or the Sultan in Bizance,
Turchestan-born; nor could his eye not ken
The Empire of Negus to his utmost Port
Ercoco and the less Maritim Kings
Mombaza, and Quiloa, and Melind,
And Sofala thought Ophir, to the Realm
Of Congo, and Angola fardest South;
Or thence from Niger Flood to Atlas Mount
The Kingdoms of Almansor, Fez and Sus,
Marocco and Algiers, and Tremisen;
On Europe thence, and where Rome was to sway
The World: in Spirit perhaps he also saw
Rich Mexico the seat of Motezume,
And Cusco in Peru, the richer seat
Of Atabalipa, and yet unspoil'd
Guiana, whose great City Geryons Sons
Call El Dorado: but to nobler sights
Michael from Adams eyes the Filme removed
Which that false Fruit that promised clearer sight
Had bred; then purged with Euphrasie and Rue
The visual Nerve, for he had much to see;
And from the Well of Life three drops instilled.
So deep the power of these Ingredients pierced,
Eevn to the inmost seat of mental sight,
That Adam now enforced to close his eyes,
Sunk down and all his Spirits became intranst:
But him the gentle Angel by the hand
Soon raised, and his attention thus recalled.
Adam, now open thine eyes, and first behold
The effects which thy original crime has wrought
In some to spring from thee, who never touched
The excepted Tree, nor with the Snake conspired,
Nor sinned thy sin, yet from that derive
Corruption to bring forth more violent deeds.
His eyes he op'nd, and beheld a field,
Part arable and tilth, whereon were Sheaves
New reapt, the other part sheep-walks and foulds;
In The midst an Altar as the Landmark stood
Rustic, of grassie sord; thither anon
A sweatie Reaper from his Tillage brought
First Fruits, the green Ear, and the yellow Sheaf,
Uncull'd, as came to hand; a Shepherd next
More meek came with the Firstlings of his Flock
Choicest and best; then sacrificing, laid
The Inwards and their Fat, with Incense strewn,
On the cleft Wood, and all due Rites performed.
His Offering soon propitious Fire from Heaven
Consumed with nimble glance, and grateful steame;
The others not, for his was not sincere;
Whereat he inlie raged, and as they talked,
Smote him into the Midriff with a stone
That beat out life; he fell, and deadly pale
Groand out his Soul with gushing blood effus'd.
Much at that sight was Adam in his heart
Dismayed, and thus in haste to the Angel cried.
O Teacher, some great mischief has befallen
To that meek man, who well had sacrificed;
Is Piety thus and pure Devotion paid?
TO whom Michael thus, he also moved, replied.
These two are Brethren, Adam, and to come
Out of thy loins; the unjust the just has slain,
For envy that his Brothers Offering found
From Heaven acceptance; but the bloody Fact
Will be avenged, and the others Faith approved
Loose no reward, though here thou see him die,
Rolling in dust and gore. To which our Sire.
Alas, both for the deed and for the cause!
But have I now seen Death? Is this the way
I must return to native dust? O sight
Of terror, foul and ugly to behold,
Horrid to think, how horrible to feel!
To whom thus Michael. Death thou have seen
In his first shape on man; but many shapes
Of Death, and many are the ways that lead
To his grim Cave, all dismal; yet to sense
More terrible at the entrance then within.
Some, as thou saw, by violent stroke shall die,
By Fire, Flood, Famine, by Intemperance more
In Meats and Drinks which on the Earth shall bring
Diseases dire, of which a monstrous crew
Before thee shall appear; that thou may know
What misery the inabstinence of Eve
Shall bring on men. Immediately a place
Before his eyes appeard, sad, noysom, dark,
A Lazar-house it seemd, wherein were laid
Numbers of all diseased, all maladies
Of ghastly Spasm, or racking torture, qualmes
Of heart-sick Agonic, all feavorous kinds,
Convulsions, Epilepsies, fierce Catarrhs,
Intestin Stone and Ulcer, Colic pangs,
Daemoniac Phrenzie, moaping Melancholy
And Moon-struck madness, pining Atrophie,
Marasmus, and wide-wasting Pestilence,
Dropsies, and Asthma's, and Joint-racking Rheums.
Dire was the tossing, deep the groans, despair
Tended the sick busiest from Couch to Couch;
And over them triumphant Death his Dart
Shook, but delaid to strike, though often invok't
With vows, as their chief good, and final hope.
Sight so deform what heart of Rock could long
Drie-ey'd behold? Adam could not, but wept,
Though not of Woman born; compassion quelled
His best of Man, and gave him up to tears
A space, till firmer thoughts restraind excess,
And scarce recovering words his plaint renewed,
O miserable Mankind, to what fall
Degraded, to what wretched state reserved!
Better end here unborn. Why is life given
To be thus wrested from us? rather why
Obtruded on us thus? who if we knew
What we receive, would either not accept
Life offered, or soon beg to lay it down,
Glad to be so dismissed in peace. Can thus
The Image of God in man created once
So goodly and erect, though faulty since,
To such unsightly sufferings be debas't
Under inhuman pains? Why should not Man,
Retaining still Divine similitude
In part, from such deformities be free,
And for his Makers Image sake exempt?
Their Makers Image, answered Michael then
Forsook them, when themselves they villifi'd
To serve ungoverned appetite, and took
His Image whom they served, a brutish vice,
Inductive mainly to the sin of Eve.
Therefore so abject is their punishment,
Disfiguring not Gods likeness, but their own,
Or if his likeness, by themselves defaced
While they pervert pure Natures healthful rules
To loathsome sickness, worthily, since they
Gods Image did not reverence in themselves.
I yield it just, said Adam, and submit.
But is there yet no other way, besides
These painful passages, how we may come
To Death, and mix with our connatural dust?
There is, said Michael, if thou well observe
The rule of not too much, by temperance taught
In what thou eatst and drinkst, seeking from thence
Due nourishment, not gluttonous delight,
Till many years over thy head return:
So may thou live, till like ripe Fruit thou drop
Into thy Mothers lap, or be with ease
Gatherd, not harshly plucked, for death mature:
This is old age; but then thou must outlive
Thy youth, thy strength, thy beauty, which will change
To witherd weak and gray; thy Senses then
Obtuse, all taste of pleasure must forgo,
To what thou have, and for the Air of youth
Hopeful and cheerful, in thy blood will reign
A melancholy damp of cold and dry
To weigh thy Spirits down, and last consume
The Balm of Life. To whom our Ancestor.
Henceforth I fly not Death, nor would prolong
Life much, bent rather how I may be quit
Fairest and easiest of this combrous charge,
Which I must keep till my appointed day
Of rendering up, and patiently attend
My dissolution. Michael replied,
Nor love thy Life, nor hate; but what thou livst
Live well, how long or short permit to Heaven:
And now prepare thee for another sight.
He lookd and faw a spacious Plain, whereon
Were Tents of various hue; by some were herds
Of Cattle grazing: others, whence the sound
Of Instruments that made melodious chime
Was heard, of Harp and Organ; and who moovd
Their stops and chords was seen: his volant touch
Instinct through all proportions low and high
Fled and pursued transverse the resonant fugue.
In other part stood one who at the Forge
Laboring, two massy clods of Iron and Brass
Had melted (whether found where casual fire
Had wasted woods on Mountain or in Vale,
Down to the veins of Earth, thence gliding hot
To some Caves mouth, or whether washed by stream
From underground) the liquid Ore he dreind
Into fit moulds prepared; from which he formd
First his own Tools; then, what might else be wrought
Fusil or grav'n in mettle. After these,
But on the hither side a different sort
From the high neighboring Hills, which was their Seat,
Down to the Plain descended: by their guise
Just men they seemd, and all their study bent
To worship God aright, and know his works
Not hid, nor those things last which might preserve
Freedom and Peace to men: they on the Plain
Long had not walked, when from the Tents behold
A Beavie of fair Women, richly gay
In Gems and wanton dress; to the Harp they sung
Soft amorous Ditties, and in dance came on:
The Men though grave, eyed them, and let their eyes
Rove without rein, till in the amorous Net
Fast caught, they liked, and each his liking chose;
And now of love they treat till the Eevning Star
Loves Harbinger appeerd; then all in heat
They light the Nuptial Torch, and bid invoke
Hymen, then first to marriage Rites invok't;
With Feast and Music all the Tents resound.
Such happy interview and fair event
Of love and youth not lost, Songs, Garlands, Flours,
And charming Symphonies attached the heart
Of Adam, soon inclined to admit delight,
The bent of Nature; which he thus expressed.
True opener of mine eyes, prime Angel blessed,
Much better seems this Vision, and more hope
Of peaceful days portends, then those two past;
Those were of hate and death, or pain much worse,
Here Nature seems fulfilld in all her ends.
To whom thus Michael. Judge not what is best
By pleasure, though to Nature seeming meet,
Created, as thou art, to nobler end
Holy and pure, conformity divine.
Those Tents thou sawst so pleasant, were the Tents
Of wickedness, wherein shall dwell his Race
Who slew his Brother; studious they appear
Of Arts that polish Life, Inventers rare,
Unmindful of their Maker, though his Spirit
Taught them, but they his gifts acknowledged none.
Yet they abeauteous offspring shall beget;
For that fair femal Troop thou sawst, that seemd
Of Goddesses, so blithe, so smooth, so gay,
Yet empty of all good wherein consists
Woman's domestic honor and chief praise;
Bred only and completed to the taste
Of lustful appetence, to sing, to dance,
To dress, and troule the Tongue, and roll the Eye.
To these that sober Race of Men, whose lives
Religious titl'd them the Sons of God,
Shall yield up all their virtue, all their fame
Ignobly, to the trains and to the smiles
Of these fair Atheists, and now swim in joy,
(Erelong to swim at large) and laugh; for which
The world erelong a world of tears must weep.
To whom thus Adam of short joy bereft.
O pity and shame, that they who to live well
Enterd so fair, should turn aside to tread
Paths indirect, or in the mid way faint!
But still I see the tenor of Man's woe
Holds on the same, from Woman to begin.
From Man's effeminate slackness it begins,
Said the Angel, who should better hold his place
By wisdom, and superior gifts received.
But now prepare thee for another Scene.
He lookd and saw wide Territory spread
Before him, Towns, and rural works between,
Cities of Men with lofty Gates and Towrs,
Concours in Arms, fierce Faces threatening War,
Giants of mighty Bone, and bold emprise;
Part wield their Arms, part courb the foaming Steed,
Single or in Array of Battle ranged
Both Horse and Foot, nor idely mustring stood;
One way a Band select from forage drives
A herd of Beeves, fair Oxen and fair Kine
From a sat Meddow ground; or fleecy Flock,
Ewes and their bleating Lambs over the Plain,
Their Booty; scarce with Life the Shepherds fly,
But callin aid, which makes a bloody Fray;
With cruel Tournament the Squadrons join;
Where Cattle pastur'd late, now scatterd lies
With Carcasses and Arms the ensanguind Field
Deserted: Others to a City strong
Lay Seige, encampt; by Battery, Scale, and Mine,
Assaulting; others from the wall defend
With Dart and Javelin, Stones and sulfurous Fire;
On each hand slaughter and gigantic deeds.
In other part the sceptered Haralds call
To Council in the City Gates: anon
Grey-headed men and grave, with Warriors mixed,
Assemble, and Harangues are heard, but soon
In factious opposition, till at last
Of middle Age one rising, eminent
In wise deport, spoke much of Right and Wrong,
Of Justice, of Religion, Truth and Peace,
And Judgment from above: him old and young
Exploded and had seized with violent hands,
Had not a Cloud descending snatched him thence
Unseen amid the throng: so violence
Proceeded, and Oppression, and Sword-Law
Through all the Plain, and refuge none was found.
Adam was all in tears, and to his guide
Lamenting turned full sad; O what are these,
Deaths Ministers, not Men, who thus deal Death
Inhumanly to men, and multiply
Ten thousand fould the sin of him who slew
His Brother; for of whom such massacher
Make they but of their Brethren, men of men?
But who was that Just Man, whom had not Heaven
Rescued, had in his Righteousness bin lost?
To whom thus Michael. These are the product
Of those ill mated Marriages thou saw:
Where good with bad were matched, who of themselves
Abhor to join; and by imprudence mixed,
Produce prodigious Births of body or mind.
Such were these Giants, men of high renown;
For in those days Might only shall be admired,
And Valor and Heroic Virtue called;
To overcome in Battle, and subdue
Nations, and bring home spoils with infinite
Manslaughter, shall be held the highest pitch
Of human Glory, and for Glory done
Of triumph, to be styled great Conquerours,
Patrons of Mankind, Gods, and Sons of Gods,
Destroyers rightlier called and Plagues of men.
Thus Fame shall be achieved, renown on Earth,
And what most merits fame in silence hid.
But he the seventh from thee, whom thou beheldst
The only righteous in a World perverse,
And therefore hared, therefore so beset
With Foes for daring single to be just,
And utter odious Truth, that God would come
To judge them with his Saints: Him the most High
Rapt in a balmie Cloud with winged Steeds
Did, as thou sawst, receave, to walk with God
High in Salvation and the Climes of bliss,
Exempt from Death; to show thee what reward
Awaits the good, the rest what punishment?
Which now direct thine eyes and soon behold.
He looked, and saw the face of things quite changed,
The brazen Throat of War had ceast to roar,
All now was turned to jollitie and game,
To luxury and riot, feast and dance,
Marrying or prostituting, as befell,
Rape or Adultery, where passing fair
Allurd them; thence from Cups to civil Broiles.
At length a Reverend Sire among them came,
And of their doings great dislike declared,
And testified against their ways; he often
Frequented their Assemblies, where so met,
Triumphs or Festivals, and to them preachd
Conversion and Repentance, as to Souls.
In Prison under Judgments imminent:
But all in vain: which when he saw, he ceased
Contending, and removed his Tents far off;
Then from the Mountain hewing Timber tall,
Began to build a Vessel of huge bulk,
Measured by Cubit, length, and breadth, and highth,
Smeard round with Pitch, and in the side a door
Contrived, and of provisions laid in large
For Man and Beast: when lo a wonder strange I
Of every Beast, and Bird, and Insect small
Came seavens, and pairs, and enterd in, as taught
Their order: last the Sire, and his three Sons
With their four Wives; and God made fast the door.
Meanwhile the Southwind rose, and with black wings
Wide hovering, all the Clouds together drove
From under Heaven; the Hills to their supply
Vapor, and Exhalation dusk and moist,
Sent up amain; and now the thick'nd Sky
Like a dark Ceeling stood; down rushed the Rain
Impetuous, and continued till the Earth
No more was seen; the floating Vessel swum
Uplifted; and secure with beaked prow
Rode tilting over the Waves, all dwellings else
Flood overwhelmd, and them with all their pomp
Deep under water rould; Sea covered Sea,
Sea without shore; and in their Palaces
Where luxury late reigned, Sea Monsters whelp'd
And stabl'd; of Mankind, so numerous late,
All left, in one small bottom swum imbark't.
How did thou grieve then, Adam, to behold
The end of all thy Offspring, end so sad,
Depopulation; thee another Flood,
Of tears and sorrow a Flood thee also drowned,
And sunk thee as thy Sons; till gently reard
By the Angel, on thy feet thou stoodst at last,
Though comfortless, as when a Father mourns
His Children, all in view destroyed at once;
And scarce to the Angel utterdst thus thy plaint.
O Visions ill foreseen! better had I
Lived ignorant of future, so had borne
My part of evil only, each days lot
Anough to bear; those now, that were dispenst
The burd'n of many Ages, on me light
At once, by my foreknowledge gaining Birth
Abortive, to torment me ere their being,
With thought that they must be. Let no man seek
Henceforth to be foretold what shall befall
Him or his Childern, evil he may be sure,
Which neither his foreknowing can prevent,
And he the future evil shall no less
In apprehension then in substance feel
Grievous to bear: but that care now is past,
Man is not whom to warn: those few escaped
Famine and anguish will at last consume
Wandering that watrie Desert: I had hope
When violence was ceas't, and War on Earth,
All would have then gone well, peace would have crowned
With length of happy days the race of man;
But I was far deceav'd; for now I see
Peace to corrupt no less then War to waste.
How comes it thus? unfould, Celestial Guide,
And whether here the Race of man will end.
To whom thus Michael. Those whom last thou sawst
In Triumph and luxurious wealth, are they
First seen in acts of prowess eminent
And great exploits, but of true virtue void;
Who having spilt much blood, and don much waste
Subduing Nations, and achievd thereby
Fame in the World, high titles, and rich prey,
Shall change their course to pleasure, ease, and sloth,
Surfeit, and lust, till wantonness and pride
Raise out of friendship hostil deeds in Peace.
The conquered also, and enslaved by War
Shall with their freedom lost all virtue loose
And fear of God, from whom their piety feigned
In sharp contest of Battle found no aid
Against invaders; therefore coold in zeal
Thenceforth shall practice how to live secure,
Worldly or dissolute, on what their Lords
Shall leave them to enjoy; for the Earth shall bear
More then anough, that temperance may be tried:
So all shall turn degenerate, all depraved,
Justice and Temperance, Truth and Faith forgot;
One Man except, the only Son of light
In a dark Age, against example good,
Against allurement, custom, and a World
Offended; fearless of reproach and scorn,
Or violence, he of their wicked ways
Shall them admonish, and before them set
The paths of righteousness, how much more safe,
And full of peace, denouncing wrauth to come
On their impenitence; and shall return
Of them derided, but of God observd
The one just Man alive; by his command
Shall build a wondrous Ark, as thou beheldst,
To save himself and household from amidst
A World devote to universal rack.
No sooner he with them of Man and Beast
Select for life shall in the Ark be lodged,
And shelterd round, but all the Cataracts
Of Heaven set open on the Earth shall power
Rain day and night, all fountains of the Deep
Broke up, shall heave the Ocean to usurp
Beyond all bounds, till inundation rise
Above the highest Hills: then shall this Mount
Of Paradise by might of Waves be moovd
Out of his place, pushd by the horned flood,
With all his verdure spoiled, and Trees adrift
Down the great River to the opening Gulf,
And there take root an Island salt and bare,
The haunt of Seals and Orcs, and Sea-mews clang.
To teach thee that God attributes to place
No sanctity, if none be thither brought
By Men who there frequent, or therein dwell.
And now what further shall ensue, behold.
He lookd, and saw the Ark hull on the flood,
Which now abated, for the Clouds were fled,
Drivn by a keen North-winde, that blowing dry
Wrinkl'd the face of Deluge, as decai'd;
And the deer Sun on his wide watrie Glass
Gazed hot, and of the fresh Wave largely drew,
As after thirst, which made their flowing shrink
From standing lake to tripping ebb, that stole
With soft foot toward the deep, who now had stopped
His Sluices, as the Heaven his windows shut.
The Ark no more now flotes, but seems on ground
Fast on the top of some high mountain fixed.
And now the tops of Hills as Rocks appeer;
With clamor thence the rapid Currents drive
Toward the retreating Sea their furious tide.
Forthwith from out the Arc a Raven flies,
And after him, the furer messenger,
A Dove sent forth once and again to spy
Green Tree or ground whereon his foot may light;
The second time returning, in his Bill
An Olive leaf he brings, pacific sign:
Anon dry ground appeers, and from his Arc
The ancient Sire descends with all his Train;
Then with uplifted hands, and eyes devout,
Grateful to Heaven, over his head beholds
A dewie Cloud, and in the Cloud a Bow
Conspicuous with three listed colors gay,
Betok'ning peace from God, and Covenant new.
Whereat the heart of Adam erst so sad
Greatly rejoiced, and thus his joy broke forth.
O thou who future things can represent
As present, Heavenly instructor, I revive
At this last sight, assured that Man shall live
With all the Creatures, and their seed preserve.
Far less I now lament for one whole World
Of wicked Sons destroyed, then I rejoice
For one Man found so perfet and so just,
That God voutsafes to raise another World
From him, and all his anger to forget.
But say, what mean those colored streaks in Heaven,
Distended as the Brow of God appeased,
Or serve they as a flourie verge to bind
The fluid skirts of that same watrie Cloud.
Least it again dissolve and shower the Earth?
To whom the Archangel. Dexterously thou aim'st;
So willingly does God remit his Ire,
Though late repenting him of Mandeprav'd,
Grieved at his heart, when looking down he saw
The whole Earth filled with violence, and all flesh
Corrupting each their way; yet those remoov'd,
Such grace shall one just Man find in his sight,
That he relents, nor to blot out mankind,
And makes a Covenant never to destroy
The Earth again by flood, nor let the Sea
Surpass his bounds, nor Rain to drown the World
With Man therein or Beast; but when he brings
Over the Earth a Cloud, will therein set
His triple-colour'd Bow, whereon to look
And call to mind his Covenant: Day and Night,
Seed time and Harvest, Heat and hoary Frost
Shall hold their course, till fire purge all things new.
Both Heaven and Earth, wherein the just shall dwell.
The End of the Eleventh Book,
Paradise Lost.
BOOK XII.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Angel Michael continues from the Flood to relate what shall succeed; then,
in the mention of Abraham, comes by degrees to explain, who that Seed of the
Woman shall be, which was promised Adam and Eve in the Fall; his Incarnation,
Death, Resurrection, and Ascension; the state of the Church till his second
Coming. Adam greatly satisfied and recomforted by these Relations and Promises
descends the Hill with Michael; wakens Eve, who all this while had slept, but
with gentle dreams composed to quietness of mind and submission. Michael in
either hand leads them out of Paradise, the fiery Sword waving behind them, and
the Cherubim taking their Stations to guard the Place,

AS one who in his journey bates at Noone,
Though bent on speed, so here the Archangel paused
Betwixt the world destroyed and world restored,
If Adam aught perhaps might interpose;
Then with transition sweet new Speech resumes.
Thus thou have seen one World begin and end;
And Man as from a second stock proceed.
Much thou have yet to see, but I perceave
Thy mortal sight to fail; objects divine
Must needs impair and weary human sense:
Henceforth what is to com I will relate,
Thou therefore give due audience, and attend.
This second sours of Men, while yet but few;
And while the dread of judgment past remains
Fresh in their minds, fearing the Deity,
With some regard to what is just and right
Shall lead their lives, and multiply apace,
Laboring the soil, and reaping plenteous crop,
Corn wine and oil; and from the herd or flock,
Often sacrificing Bullock, Lamb, or Kid,
With large Wine-offerings poured, and sacred Feast,
Shall spend their days in joy unblam'd, and dwell
Long time in peace by Families and Tribes
Under paternal rule; till one shall rise
Of proud ambitious heart, who nor content
With fair equality, fraternal state,
Will arrogate Dominion undeserved
Over his brethren, and quite dispossess
Concord and law of Nature from the Earth,
Hunting (and Men not Beasts shall be his game)
With War and hostile snare such as refuse
Subjection to his Empire tyrannous:
A mighty Hunter thence he shall be styled
Before the Lord, as in despite of Heaven,
Or from Heaven claming second Sovrantie;
And from Rebellion shall derive his name,
Though of Rebellion others he accuse.
He with a crew, whom like Ambition joins
With him or under him to tyrannize,
Marching from Eden toward the West, shall find
The Plain, wherein a black bituminous gurge
Boiles out from under ground, the mouth of Hell;
Of Brick, and of that stuff they cast to build
A City and Tower, whose top may reach to Heaven;
And get themselves a name, least far dispersed
In foraign Lands their memory be lost
Regardless whether good or evil fame.
But God who often descends to visit men
Unseen, and through their habitations walks
To mark their doings, them beholding soon,
Comes down to see their City, ere the Tower
Obstruct Heaven Towrs, and in derision sets
Upon their Tongues a various Spirit to raze
Quite out their Native Language, and instead
To sow a jangling noise of words unknown:
Forthwith a hideous gabble rises loud
Among the Builders; each to other calls
Not understood, till hoarse, and all in rage,
As mocked they storm; great laughter was in Heaven
And looking down, to see the hubbub strange
And hear the din; thus was the building left
Ridiculous, and the work Confusion named.
Whereto thus Adam fatherly displeased.
O execrable Son so to aspire
Above his Brethren, to himself assuming
Authority usurpt, from God not given:
He gave us only over Beast, Fish, Fowl
Dominion absolute; that right we hold
By his donation; but Man over men
He made not Lord; such title to himself
Reserving, human left from human free.
But this Usurper his encroachment proud
Stays nor on Man; to God his Tower intends
Siege and defiance: Wretched man! what food
Will he convey up thither to sustain
Himself and his rash Army, where thin Air
Above the Clouds will pine his entrails gross,
And famish him of Breath, if not of Bread?
To whom thus Michael. Justly thou abhorr'st
That Son, who on the quiet state of men
Such trouble brought, affecting to subdue
Rational Liberty; yet know withal,
Since thy original lapse, true Liberty
Is lost, which always with right Reason dwells
Twinn'd, and from her has no dividual being:
Reason in man obscured, or not obeyed,.
Immediately inordinate desires
And upstart Passions catch the Government
From Reason, and to servitude reduce
Man till then free. Therefore since he permits
Within himself unworthie Powers to reign
Over free Reason, God in Judgment just
Subjects him from without to violent Lords;
Who often as undeservedly enthrall
His outward freedom: Tyranny must be,
Though to the Tyrant thereby no excuse.
Yet sometimes Nations will decline so low
From virtue, which is reason, that no wrong
But Justice, and some fatal curse annexed
Deprives them of their outward liberty,
Their inward lost: Witness the irreverent Son
Of him who built the Ark, who for the shame
Don to his Father, heard this heavy curse,
Servant of Servants, on his vicious Race.
Thus will this latter, as the former World,
Still tend from bad to worse, till God at last
Wearied with their iniquities, withdraw
His presence from among them, and avert
His holy Eyes; resolving from thenceforth
To leave them to their own polluted ways;
And one peculiar Nation to select
From all the rest, of whom to be invoked,
A Nation from one faithful man to spring:
Him on this side Euphrates yet residing,
Bred up in Idol-worship; O that men
(Can thou believe?) should be so stupid grown,
While yet the Patriark lived, who escaped the Flood,
As to forsake the living God, and fall
To worship their own work in Wood and Stone
For Gods! yet him God the most High voutsafes
To call by Vision from his Fathers house,
His kindred and false Gods, into a Land
Which he will show him, and from him will raise
A mighty Nation, and upon him shower
His benediction so, that in his Seed
All Nations shall be blessed; he straight obeys,
Not knowing to what Land, yet firm believes:
I see him, but thou can not, with what Faith
He leaves his Gods, his Friends, and native Soil
Vr of Chaldaea, passing now the Ford
To Haran, after him a cumbrous Train
Of Herds and Flocks, and numerous servitude;
Not wandering poor, but trusting all his wealth
With God, who called him, in a land unknown.
Canaan he now attains, I see his Tents
Pitched about Sechem, and the neighboring Plain
Of Moreh; there by promise he receaves
Gift to his Progeny of all that Land;
From Hamath Northward to the Desert South
(Things by their names I call, though yet unnam'd)
From Hermon East to the great Western Sea,
Mount Hermon, yonder Sea, each place behold
In prospect, as I point them; on the shore
Mount Carmel; here the double-founted stream
Jordan, true limit Eastward; but his Sons
Shall dwell to Senir, that long ridge of Hills.
This ponder, that all Nations of the Earth
Shall in his Seed be blessed; by that Seed
Is meant thy great deliverer, who shall bruise
The Serpents head; whereof to thee anon
Plainlier shall be reveald. This Patriarch blessed,
Whom faithful Abraham due time shall call,
A Son, and of his Son a Grandchild leaves,
Like him in faith, in wisdom, and renown;
The Grand child with twelve Sons increast, departs
From Canaan, to a Land hereafter called
Egypt, divided by the River Nile;
See where it flows, disgorging at seven mouths
Into the Sea: to sojourn in that Land
He comes invited by a younger Son
In time of dearth, a Son whose worthy deeds
Raise him to be the second in that Realm
Of Pharao: there he dies, and leaves his Race
Growing into a Nation, and now grown
Suspected to a sequent King, who seeks
To stop their overgrowth, as inmate guests
Too numerous; whence of guests he makes them slaves
Inhospitably, and kills their infant Males:
Till by two brethren (those two brethren call
Moses and Aaron) sent from God to claim
His people from enthralment, they return
With glory and spoil back to their promised Land.
But first the lawless Tyrant, who denies
To know their God, or message to regard,
Must be compelld by Signs and Judgments dire;
To blood unshed the Rivers must be turned,
Frogs, Lice and Flies must all his Palace fill
With loathed intrusion, and fill all the land;
His Cattle must of Rot and Murren die,
Botches and blaines must all his flesh imboss,
And all his people; Thunder mixed with Hail,
Hail mixed with fire must rend the Egyptian Sky
And wheel on the Earth, devouring where it rouls;
What it devours not, Herb, or Fruit, or Grain,
A darksom Cloud of Locusts swarming down
Must eat, and on the ground leave nothing green:
Darkness must overshadow all his bounds,
Palpable darkness, and blot out three days;
Last with one midnight stroke all the firstborn
Of Egypt must lie dead. Thus with ten wounds
The River-dragon tamed at length submits
To let his sojourners depart, and often
Humbles his stubborn heart, but still as Ice
More hard'nd after thaw, till in his rage
Pursuing whom he late dismissd, the Sea
Swallows him with his Host, but them lets pass
As on dry land between two crystal walls,
Awed by the rod of Moses so to stand
Divided, till his rescued gain their shore:
Such wondrous power God to his Saint will lend,
Though present in his Angel, who shall go
Before them in a Cloud, and Pillar of Fire,
By day a Cloud, by night a Pillar of Fire,
To guide them in their journey, and remove
Behind them, while the obdurat King pursues:
All night he will pursue, but his approach
Darkness defends between till morning Watch;
Then through the Firey Pillar and the Cloud
God looking forth will trouble all his Host
And craze their Chariot wheels: when by command
Moses once more his potent Rod extends
Over the Sea; the Sea his Rod obeys;
On their imbattelld ranks the Waves return,
And overwhelm their War: the Race elect
Safe toward Canaan from the shore advance
Through the wild Desert, not the readiest way,
Least entering on the Canaanite allarmd
War terrify them inexpert, and fear
Return them back to Egypt, choosing rather
Inglorious life with servitude; for life
To noble and ignoble is more sweet
Untraind in Arms, where rashness leads not on.
This also shall they gain by their delay
In the wide Wilderness, there they shall found
Their government, and their great Senate choose
Through the twelve Tribes, to rule by Laws ordaind:
God from the Mount of Sinai, whose gray top
Shall tremble, he descending, will himself
In Thunder Lightning and loud Trumpets sound
Ordain them Laws; part such as appertain
To civil Justice, part religious Rites
Of sacrifice, informing them, by types
And shadows, of that destind Seed to bruise
The Serpent, by what means he shall achieve
Mankinds deliverance. But the voice of God
To mortal ear is dreadful; they beseech
That Moses might report to them his will,
And terror cease; he grants what they besaught
Instructed that to God is no access
Without Mediator, whose high Office now
Moses in figure bears, to introduce
One greater, of whose day he shall foretell,
And all the Prophets in their Age the times
Of great Messiah shall sing. Thus Laws and Rites
Established, such delight has God in Men
Obedient to his will, that he voutsafes
Among them to set up his Tabernacle,
The holy One with mortal Men to dwell:
By his prescript a Sanctuary is framed
Of Cedar, overlaid with Gold, therein
An Ark, and in the Ark his Testimony,
The Records of his Covenant, over these
A Mercie-seat of Gold between the wings
Of two bright Cherubim, before him burn
Seven Lamps as in a Zodiac representing
The Heavenly fires; over the Tent a Cloud
Shall rest by Day, a fiery gleame by Night,
Save when they journie, and at length they come,
Conducted by his Angel to the Land
Promisd to Abraham and his Seed: the rest
Were long to tell, how many Battles fought,
How many Kings destroyed, and Kingdoms won,
Or how the Sun shall in mid Heaven stand still
A day entire, and Nights due course adjourne,
Man's voice commanding, Sun in Gibeon stand,
And thou Moon in the vale of Aialon,
Till Israel overcome; so call the third
From Abraham, Son of Isaac, and from him
His whole descent, who thus shall Canaan win.
Here Adam interposed. O sent from Heaven,
Enlightner of my darkness, gracious things
Thou have reveald, those chiefly which concern
Just Abraham and his Seed: now first I find
Mine eyes true opening, and my heart much eased,
Erwhile perplexed with thoughts what would become
Of me and all Mankind; but now I see
His day, in whom all Nations shall be blessed,
Favor unmerited by me, who sought
Forbidd'n knowledge by forbidd'n means.
This yet I apprehend not, why to those
Among whom God will deigne to dwell on Earth
So many and so various Laws are given;
So many Laws argue so many sins
Among them; how can God with such reside?
To whom thus Michael. Doubt not but that sin
Will reign among them, as of thee begot;
And therefore was Law given them to evince
Their natural pravitie, by stirring up
Sin against Law to fight; that when they see
Law can discover sin, but not remove,
Save by those shadowie expiations weak,
The blood of Bulls and Goats, they may conclude
Some blood more precious must be paid for Man,
Just for unjust, that in such righteousness
To them by Faith imputed, they may find
Justification toward God, and peace
Of Conscience, which the Law by Ceremonies
Cannot appease, nor Man the moral part
Perform, and not performing cannot live.
So law appears imperfet, and but given
With purpose to resign them in full time
Up to a better Covenant, disciplined
From shadowie Types to Truth, from Flesh to Spirit,
From imposition of strict Laws, to free
Acceptance of large Grace, from servil fear
To filial, works of Law to works of Faith.
And therefore shall not Moses, though of God
Highly beloved, being but the Minister
Of Law, his people into Canaan lead;
But Joshua whom the Gentiles Jesus call,
His Name and Office bearing, who shall quell
The adversary Serpent, and bring back
Through the worlds wilderness long wanderd man
Safe to eternal Paradise of rest.
Meanwhile they in their earthly Canaan placed
Long time shall dwell and prosper, but when sins
National interrupt their public peace,
Provoking God to raise them enemies:
From whom as often he saves them penitent
By Judges first, then under Kings; of whom
The second, both for piety renownd
And puissant deeds, a promise shall receive
Irrevocable, that his Regal Throne
For ever shall endure; the like shall sing
All Prophecy, That of the Royal Stock
Of David (so I name this King) shall rise
A Son, the Woman's Seed to thee foretold,
Foretold to Abraham, as in whom shall trust
All Nations, and to Kings foretold, of Kings
The last, for of his Reign shall be no end.
But first a long succession must ensue,
And his next Son for Wealth and Wisdom famed,
The clouded Ark of God till then in Tents
Wandering, shall in a glorious Temple enshrine.
Such follow him, as shall be registerd
Part good, part bad, of bad the longer scrowle,
Whose foul Idolatries, and other faults
Heapt to the popular sum, will so incense
God, as to leave them, and expose their Land,
Their City, his Temple, and his holy Ark
With all his sacred things, a scorn and prey
To that proud City, whose high Walls thou saw
Left in confusion, Babylon thence called.
There in captivity he lets them dwell
The space of seventie years, then brings them back,
Remembering mercy, and his Covenant sworn
To David, stablisht as the days of Heaven.
Returned from Babylon by leave of Kings
Their Lords, whom God disposed, the house of God
They first re-edifie, and for a while
In mean estate live moderate, till grown
In wealth and multitude, factious they grow;
But first among the Priests dissension springs,
Men who attend the Altar, and should most
Endeavor Peace: their strife pollution brings
Upon the Temple it self: at last they seize
The Scepter, and regard not David's Sons,
Then loose it to a stranger, that the true
Anointed King Messiah might be born
Barred of his right; yet at his Birth a Starr
Unseen before in Heaven proclaims him com,
And guides the Eastern Sages, who enquire
His place, to offer Incense, Myrrh, and Gold;
His place of birth a solemn Angel tells
To simple Shepherds, keeping watch by night;
They gladly thither haste, and by a Quire
Of squadrond Angels hear his Carol sung.
A Virgin is his Mother, but his Sire
The Power of the most High; he shall ascend
The Throne hereditarie, and bound his Reign
With earths wide bounds, his glory with the Heavens.
He ceased, discerning Adam with such joy
Surcharged, as had like grief bin dew'd in tears,
Without the vent of words, which these he breathd.
O Prophet of glad tidings, finisher
Of utmost hope! now clear I understand
What often my steddiest thoughts have searched in vain,
Why our great expectation should be called
The seed of Woman: Virgin Mother, Hail,
High in the love of Heaven, yet from my Loins
Thou shall proceed, and from thy Womb the Son
Of God most High; So God with man unites.
Needs must the Serpent now his capital bruise
Expect with mortal pain: say where and when
Their fight, what stroke shall bruise the Victors heel.
To whom thus Michael. Dream not of their fight,
As of a Duel, or the local wounds
Of head or heel: not therefore joins the Son
Manhood to Godhead, with more strength to foil
Thy enemy; nor so is overcome
Satan, whose fall from Heaven, a deadlier bruise,
Disabl'd not to give thee thy deaths wound:
Which he, who comes thy Savior, shall recure,
Not by destroying Satan, but his works
In thee and in thy Seed: nor can this be,
But by fulfilling that which thou did want,
Obedience to the Law of God, imposed
On penalty of death, and suffering death,
The penalty to thy transgression due,
And due to theirs which out of thine will grow:
So only can high Justice rest appaid.
The Law of God exact he shall fulfill
Both by obedience and by love, though love
Alone fulfill the Law; thy punishment
He shall endure by coming in the Flesh
To a reproachful life and cursed death,
Proclaiming Life to all who shall believe
In his redemption, and that his obedience
Imputed becomes theirs by Faith, his merits
To save them, not their own, though legal works.
For this he shall live hated, be blasphemed,
Seized on by force, judged, and to death condemnd
A shameful and accursed, naild to the Cross
By his own Nation, slain for bringing Life;
Bur to the Cross he nails thy Enemies,
The Law that is against thee, and the sins
Of all mankind, with him there crucified,
Never to hurt them more who rightly trust
In this his satisfaction; so he dies,
But soon revives, Death over him no power
Shall long usurp; ere the third dawning light
Return, the Stars of Morn shall see him rise
Out of his grave, fresh as the dawning light,
Thy ransom paid, which Man from death redeems,
His death for Man, as many as offered Life
Neglect not, and the benefit embrace
By Faith not void of works: this God-like act
Annuls thy doom, the death thou should have died,
In sin for ever lost from life; this act
Shall bruise the head of Satan, crush his strength
Defeating Sin and Death, his two maine arms,
And fix far deeper in his head their stings
Then temporal death shall bruise the Victors heel,
Or theirs whom he redeems, a death like sleep,
A gentle wafting to immortal Life.
Nor after resurrection shall he stay
Longer on Earth then certain times to appeer
To his Disciples, Men who in his Life
Still followed him; to them shall leave in charge
To teach all nations what of him they learned
And his Salvation, them who shall believe
Baptizing in the profluent stream, the sign
Of washing them from guilt of sin to Life
Pure, and in mind prepared, if so befall,
For death, like that which the redeemer died.
All Nations they shall teach; for from that day
Not only to the Sons of Abraham's Loins
Salvation shall be Preached, but to the Sons
Of Abraham's Faith wherever through the world;
So in his seed all Nations shall be blessed.
Then to the Heaven of Heavens he shall ascend
With victory, triumphing through the air
Over his foes and thine; there shall surprise
The Serpent, Prince of air, and drag in Chains
Through all his Realm, and there confounded leave;
Then enter into glory, and resume
His Seat at Gods right hand, exalted high
Above all names in Heaven; and thence shall come,
When this worlds disolution shall be ripe,
With glory and power to judge both quick and dead,
To judge the unfaithful dead, but to reward
His faithful, and receave them into bliss,
Whether in Heaven or Earth, for then the Earth
Shall all be Paradise, far happier place
Then this of Eden, and far happier days.
So spoke the Archangel Michael, then paused,
As at the Worlds great period; and our Sire
Replete with joy and wonder thus replied.
O goodness infinite, goodness immense!
That all this good of evil shall produce,
And evil turn to good; more wonderful
Then that which by creation first brought forth
Light out of darkness! full of doubt I stand,
Whether I should repent me now of sin
By me done and occasiond, or rejoice
Much more, that much more good thereof shall spring,
To God more glory, more good will to Men
From God, and over wrauth grace shall abound.
Bu^ say, if our deliverer up to Heaven
Must reascend, what will betide the few
His faithful, left among the unfaithful herd,
The enemies of truth; who then shall guide
His people, who defend? will they not deal
Wors with his followers then with him they dealt?
Be sure they will, said the Angel; but from Heaven
He to his own a Comforter will send,
The promise of the Father, who shall dwell
His Spirit within them, and the Law of Faith
Working through love, upon their hearts shall write,
To guide them in all truth, and also arm
With spiritual Armor, able to resist
Satan's assaults, and quench his fiery darts,
What man can do against them, not afraid,
Though to the death, against such cruelties
With inward consolations recompenc't,
And often supported so as shall amaze
Their proudest persecuters: for the Spirit
Powrd first on his Apostles, whom he sends
To evangelize the Nations, then on all
Baptized, shall them with wondrous gifts endue
To speak all Tongues, and do all Miracles,
As did their Lord before them. Thus they win
Great numbers of each Nation to receave
With joy the tidings brought from Heaven: at length
Their Ministry performed, and race well run,
Their doctrine and their story written left,
They die; but in their room, as they forewarne,
Wolves shall succeed for teachers, grievous Wolves,
Who all the sacred mysteries of Heaven
To their own vile advantages shall turn
Of lucre and ambition, and the truth
With superstitions and traditions taint,
Left only in those written Records pure,
Though not but by the Spirit understood.
Then shall they seek to avail themselves of names,
Places and titles, and with these to join
Secular power, though feigning still to act
By spiritual, to themselves appropriating
The Spirit of God, promisd alike and given
To all Believers; and from that pretense,
Spiritual Laws by carnal power shall force
On every conscience; Laws which none shall find
Left them inrould, or what the Spirit within
Shall on the heart engrave. What will they then
But force the Spirit of Grace it self, and bind
His consort Liberty; what, but unbuild
His living Temples, built by Faith to stand,
Their own Faith not another: for on Earth
Who against Faith and Conscience can be heard
Infallible? yet many will presume:
Whence heavy persecution shall arise
On all who in the worship persevere
Of Spirit and Truth; the rest, far greater part,
Well deem in outward Rites and specious forms
Religion satisfied; Truth shall retire
Bestuck with slandrous darts, and works of Faith
Rarely be found: so shall the World go on,
To good malignant, to bad men benign,
Under her own weight groaning till the day
Appeer of respiration to the just,
And vengeance to the wicked, at return
Of him so lately promiss'd to thy aid
The Woman's seed, obscurely then foretold,
Now amplier known thy Savior and thy Lord,
Last in the Clouds from Heaven to be reveald
In glory of the Father, to dissolve
Satan with his perverted World, then raise
From the conflagrant mass, purged and refined,
New Heavens, new Earth, Ages of endless date
Founded in righteousness and peace and love
To bring forth fruits Joy and eternal Bliss.
He ended; and thus Adam last replied.
How soon has thy prediction, Seer blessed,
Measured this transient World, the Race of time,
Till time stand fixed: beyond is all abyss,
Eternity, whose end no eye can reach.
Greatly instructed I shall hence depart,
Greatly in peace of thought, and have my fill
Of knowledge, what this Vessel can contain;
Beyond which was my folly to aspire.
Henceforth I learn, that to obey is best,
And love with fear the only God, to walk
As in his presence, ever to observe
His providence, and on him sole depend,
Merciful over all his works, with good
Still overcoming evil, and by small
Accomplishing great things, by things deemd weak
Subverting worldly strong, and worldly wise
By simply meek; that suffering for Truths sake
Is fortitude to highest victory,
And to the faithful Death the Gate of Life;
Taught this by his example whom I now
Acknowledge my Redeemer ever blessed.
To whom thus also the Angel last replied:
This having learnt, thou have attaind the sum
Of wisdom; hope no higher, though all the Stars
Thou knewst by name, and all the ethereal Powers,
All secrets of the deep, all Natures works,
Or works of God in Heaven, Air, Earth, or Sea,
And all the riches of this World enjoydst,
And all the rule, one Empire; only add
Deeds to thy knowledge answerable, add Faith,
Add virtue, Patience, Temperance, add Love,
By name to come called Charity, the soul
Of all the rest: then will thou not be loath
To leave this Paradise, but shall possess
A paradise within thee, happier far.
Let us descend now therefore from this top
Of Speculation; for the hour precise
Exacts our parting hence; and see the Guards,
By me encampt on yonder Hill, expect
Their motion, at whose Front a flaming Sword,
In signal of remove, waves fiercely round;
We may no longer stay: go, waken Eve;
Her also I with gentle Dreams have calmed
Portending good, and all her spirits composed
To meek submission: thou at season fit
Let her with thee partake what thou have heard,
Chiefly what may concern her Faith to know,
The great deliverance by her Seed to come
(For by the Woman's Seed) on all Mankind.
That ye may live, which will be many days,
Both in one Faith unanimous though sad,
With cause for evils past, yet much more cheered
With meditation on the happy end.
He ended, and they both descend the Hill;
Descended, Adam to the Bower where Eve
Lay sleeping ran before, but found her wak't;
And thus with words not sad she him received.
Whence thou returnst, and whither wentst, I know;
For God is also in sleep, and Dreams advise,
Which he has sent propitious, some great good
Presaging, since with sorrow and hearts distress
Wearied I fell asleep: but now lead on;
In me is no delay; with thee to go,
Is to stay here; without thee here to stay,
Is to go hence unwilling; thou to me
Art all things under Heaven, all places thou,
Who for my wilful crime art banished hence.
This further consolation yet secure
I carry hence; though all by me is lost,
Such favor I unworthie am voutsaft,
By me the Promised Seed shall all restore.
So spoke our Mother Eve, and Adam heard
Well pleased, but answered not; for now too nigh
The Archangel stood, and from the other Hill
To their sixth Station, all in bright array
The Cherubim descended; on the ground
Gliding meteorous, as Evening Mist
Risen from a River over the marish glides,
And gathers ground fast at the Laborers heel
Homeward returning. High in Front advanced,
The brandisht Sword of God before them blazed
Fierce as a Comet; which with torrid heat,
And vapor as the Libyan Air adust,
Began to parch that temperate Clime; whereat.
In either hand the hastening Angel caught
Our lingering Parents, and to the Eastern Gate
Led them direct, and down the Cliff as fast
To the subjected Plain; then disappeer'd.
They looking back, all the Eastern side beheld
Of Paradise, so late their happy seat,
Waved over by that flaming Brand, the Gate
With dreadful Faces thronged and fiery Arms:
Some natural tears they dropped, but wiped them soon;
The World was all before them, where to choose
Their place of rest, and Providence their guide:
They hand in hand with wandering steps and slow,
Through Eden took their solitary way.
THE END.

