A MISCELLANEOUS CATALOG OF MEAN, VULGAR, CHEAP and SIMPLE EXPERIMENTS.
I. THE Weight of a Cubical foot of Seawater, fresh River-water, Spring Water
and Rainwater; as also of Ale, French Wine, Brandy, Metheglin and Spanish
Wine, Oil-Olive, Rape-Oil and Train-Oil? II. The Weight of a Cubical foot of
Wheat, Barley, Peace, Oats? etc. III. The Quantity and Weight of Juice that ten
pound of Apples, Pears, Goosberries, Mulberries, Peaches, and Grapes will yield
in order to make Drink? IV. The Weight of a Cubical foot of Oak, Ash, Elm, Fir,
Willow, Alder, Birch, Yew, Pear Tree and Box-timber, and the difference between
the weight of the said timbers, extremely green and extremely dry? V. The
Weight of the Shell, White and Yelk of an Egg, viz. of Pigeons, Hens, Ducks,
Geese and Turkies, and the proportion between the weight of the Egg and the
Hen? etc. VI. The Weight of a Cubical foot of Wool, Tow, Feathers, Hey, etc.
pressed down with several weights? VII. The Weight of several Bottles and Cask
which are in common use? VIII. The Weight of a Cubical foot of Lime, Sand and
Mold? IX. The Weight of Apples, Pears, Nuts and other fruits; as also their
correspondent Numbers and Magnitudes? X. Comparative weight of a hundred Apples
born upon the same Tree in several years? XI. Let there be a Bag of Wool, and
Shot made thereinto by a Musket, Carbine and Pistol, and let it be observed
how far each Bullet pierces the same? XII. What space several sorts of Animals
will run in a minute, viz. a Horse, Greyhound, Hare, Fox, Rabbit, even to a
Louse, and other creeping Animals? XIII. The difference of Flight of several
sorts of Birds within the same time? XIV. What Proportion of each sort of
Letters are in the English, Latin and French Tongues, etc. XV. Forasmuch as all
Printers Letters are of the same height, quoere the Weight of an Alphabet of
the several usual sizes? XVI. Quoere how many of each sort of Letters will
stand in ten inches square? XVII. Quoere how many Letters may be composed and
distributed in an hour? XVIII. What difference in the Duration of a Light made
with Tallow, Beeswax and Oil, and in Tallow of several ages and sorts? XIX.
The Duration of Candles of the same Weight, and Week of several bignesses? XX.
The difference of Duration of the same weight of several sorts of Pit-Coles,
and the several weight of their Ashes, and of the several quantities of Water
that the same will make to boil in the same sort of Furnace and Vessels? XXI.
Of the Duration of several Matches and Coals, and of the time that several
Woods will keep fire raked up in Ashes. XXII. Of the Strength of the same Fires
on the several Blasts, and their different durations? XXIII. The proportions of
Nitre, Brimstone and Cole in the several sorts of Gunpowder? XXIV. The
proportions of Oil, Tallow, Salt and Ly in the several sorts of Soap? XXV. What
proportion of Pitch and Tallow for the use of a Ship? XXVI. What quantity of
Tar goes for paying a yard square upon a Ship? XXVII. What are the proportions
of Brimstone and Rosin for graving a Ship? XXVIII. What the proportion of Lime
and Sand for Brick-mortar? XXIX. What the proportion of Lime and Hair for
Plaistering? XXX. What the proportion of Linseed oil and Oker for Coloring and
Priming? XXXI. What the proportion of Lead and Pewter for Soder? XXXII. What
the weight of Wool and length of Thread in a yard square of the several sorts of
Woolen Manufactures? XXXIII. The same for the Manufacture of Hemp, Flax,
Cotton, Hair and Silk? XXXIV. The proportion of Meal, Water and Yeast in Bread,
in Dow new baked and stale? XXXV. The Proportion of Increase between Dow and
the same fermented; between Barley and the same malted? XXXVI. The Proportion of
Hemp and Tar in a well-made Rope? XXXVII. The quantity of Stuff in any Garment
propounded, and the length of the several Seams, and the Sewing Thread, and
number of Stitches in the same? XXXVIII. The proportion between the Weight and
the Extent of the several Leathers in a Shoo? XXXIX. How many Shoes of a
certain size, a Shoemaker can make up in a time given? XL. What length of Thread
can be spun in ten hours, from Cable-yarn to Tailors brown Thread? XLI. What is
the length of an Ounce of all fine Threads? XLII. To what extent may an Ounce of
fine Gold, Silver, Tin and Copper be beaten, and to what lengths the same may
be drawn into Wire? XLIII. What is the Weight of an Ox of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6
years old, in ten several degrees of Pasture in Ireland? XLIV. How do several
sorts of Trees increase in weight and height per annum? XLV. To how many does
each sort of Seed multiply? XLVI. What proportion does the Kernel of an Apple
bear to the Apple it self; with the same for other Fruits and Plants? XLVII.
What is the difference between the weight of Hysop and Wormwood, or of any
other Herbs, upon the same square of Ground for one years Growth? XLVIII. What
is the difference of the Worth of plowing the same quantity of Ground in ten
several sorts of Land in Ireland? XLIX. The quantities of Rain that fall in an
hour upon the same scope of Land? L. The several weights of a Fleece of Wool at
sheering, kept dry, and in a moist place? LI. What difference in the weight of
Hides of Cattle of the same weight? LII. What difference in the way of Ships
per hour in all varieties of cases? LIII. At a certain Point in the Sea, to
observe the depth of the Water every hour of the year, with the swiftness and
slowness of ebbing and flowing water between any two Points assigned? LIVE. What
are the differences of Illuminations from one to a hundred equal Candles in a
parallel-sided Room? LV. The different effects of the Wind, upon the Sound of a
Bell? LVI. The different distances of time between the Sound and Fire of a Gun,
and the measuring of the distance of Thunder thereby? LVII. The difference of
the weight of Animals by Transpiration, ordinary and extraordinary? LVIII. The
different proportions of the times of sleeping and waking in several Animals,
particularly in Fishes? LIX. The proportion between the length, weight and
thickness of the best Bows and Arrows? LX. The different effects of Bows at
several bents upon the same Arrow? LXI. The different weights of Indico,
Madder, Cocheoneel, Weld, Fustick and Logwood, that will die the same quantity
of the same Stuff to a degree assigned? LXII. How much of each of the said
dying stuff will produce black? LXIII. What is the proportion of Copperas and
Gauls for the dying of Wool into a black color?
With infinite more Experiments of this kind.

Printed by JOSEPH RAY, at College-Green, Printer to the DUBLIN-SOCIETY.


