MISCELLANY POEMS.

Mutavit mentem populus levis, and calet uno
Scribendi studio. Pueri Patresque severi
Fronde comas vincti caenant and Carmina dictant.
Hor. Epist. 1ma. Lib. 2dus. LONDON: Printed for Will. Rogers at the Sun
against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet; and Fr. Hicks in Cambridge. 1697.

TO THE Honored LADY, THE Lady LANGLEY: THESE POEMS Are humbly Dedicated.

Miscellany Poems.
Mortality.
BEneath the Covert of a Grove,
Frequented much by men in Love,
Careless and supinely laid,
I took my Lute and on it played:
Of Love's soft Passion did I Sing,
And Cupid, Love's Almighty King;
When lo! a String that would have spoke,
Of The sudden cracked, and sighing broke;
It broke, and said, (methoughts) to me,
Think of thy own Mortality. --
A Morning Thought, occasioned by the early Singing of a Lark.
HArk! hark! my Soul! -- Let the early Birds inspire
Thy grovelling Thoughts with pure Celestial Fire,
Who from their temperate Sleep awake, and pay
Their thankful Anthems for the newborn Day.
See, how the tuneful Lark is mounted high!
And Poet-like salutes the Eastern Sky;
Aurora's Beauties in his Song does praise,
And calls the blushing Dame to hear his Lays.
But Man (more void of Gratitude) awakes,
And gives no thanks for that sweet Rest he takes;
Looks on the cheerful Sun's new-kindled Flame,
Without one thought of Him, from whom it came.
Thus does the unhallowed Wretch the Day begin;
Shakes off his Sleep, but shakes not off his Sin!
Seeing Her with her Hair loose.
SUch was fair Eve, when first by Adam's side
The kind Creator laid his new-form'd Bride;
And like him, I with Love and Wonder struck,
On Maia's unaffected Beauties look;
Which gain Lfresh ustre from this careless Air,
Her naked Breasts, and her dishevelled Hair;
Whose winding Tresses down her Bosom flow,
As gentle Streams in flowery Valleys do.
A finished Beauty needs no studi'd Arts,
No costly Ornaments to conquer Hearts;
Those only take the Eye, but never can move
The inward Soul to Ecstasy and Love.
The Sun himself appears but half Divine,
Nor does with such prevailing Luster shine,
When compassed round with all his Robes of State,
The pompous Train of Clouds that on him wait.
The Rose. Anacreon Ode 5th, Lib. 1.
SWeet Roses now my Friends prepare,
Roses which so lovely are,
Which Venus loves; to her let us join
The jolly Bacchus, God of Wine;
Of Wine, which Beauty does improve,
And add new Vigor to our Love*
Fresh Roses 'bout our Temples bind,
For harmless Mirth our Life's designed.
The Roses smile, and bid us too
Drink Wine, as they drink Pearly Dew.
The Rose is sure the fairest Thing,
That does adorn the gaudy Spring*
The Gods themselves the Rose do prize,
The Pride and Glory of the Skies;
For all their Gardens cannot show
A Flower that does beyond it go.
And Cupid, when he would be fine,
To sport among the amorous Nine,
Garlands made of blowing Roses
TO adorn his Head, the Boy composes.
Hither then my Maia bring,
With Roses crown me, and I Will sing,
Great Bacchus, thy eternal Praise,
In fitting Numbers, sprightly Lays.
Lying at her Feet.
THis Posture, and these Tears, which Heaven would move,
In vain I use in favor of my Love:
For whilst thus prostrate at her Feet I lie,
Like some fair Rock she stands, which placed on high,
Seems deaf to those sad Murmurs, which below
The Plaintive Riv'lets utter as they flow.
Melancholy.
I.
WElcome thou manly Passion of the Mind;
Welcome thou only Parent of sound Sense,
In whom alone we solid Pleasures find,
Accompanied with peaceful Innocence:
Welcome thou private Darling of my Breast,
In whose soft Arms my harassed Soul may rest.
II.
Thou Mistress of delightsome Poesy;
Thou real (not imaginary) Muse,
That do such Strains of solemn Melody
Into the thoughtful Writer's heart infuse.
Thou genuine Offspring of pale Saturn's Ray,
That bring'st to our dark Minds a welcome Day.
III.
The Man that shall attempt to paint Thee right,
Must have a Fancy by thy self inspired.
The Vulgar place Thee in so false a Light,
Which makes thy Beauties by so few admired.
How very much mistaken they, that call
Thee but a Madness Enthusiastical!
IV.
As well right Sterling-wit they may define
To be a Farce of Words Atheistical;
Or the wild Fancies of intemp'rate Wine:
And solid Wisdom they as well may call
Stupidity: Or a sad dejected Face,
The certain Token of Celestial Grace.
V.
With Thee the wisest of all Ages dwell,
Rapt with the Transports of thy Company,
And in the dark Recesses of a Cell,
Draw Mental Light from deep Philosophy.
Thou modest (therefore wise) Companion,
That never yet in busy Crowds was known!
VI.
Thy Lovers thou do so entirely bless,
That, having thee, they nothing seem to want;
The Soul that thou do with thy self possess,
Can make no Wishes so extravagant*
But what thy own rich Bounty can bestow;
For thence it is very Thoughts and Wishes flow.
VII.
O that I might whole Ages thee enjoy!
Spend all my Life in thy sweet Golden Dreams,
Feed on thy Charms, whose Blessing never can cloy,
And sooth my sullen Soul with pleasing Themes;
Lulled in thy downy Bosom sleep away
This Life's Fatigue, and wait a better Day!
VIII.
So when the rough unruly Ocean roars,
And fighting Winds disturb both Sea and Sky;
Aloft the weary Mast-boy sitting snores,
Senseless of all the many Dangers nigh;
Waking at last from his diverting Sleep,
Finds all things smile, and calmness on the Deep.
To Mr. T -- playing a Voluntary.
THis Organ T -- skilful Hand
Does with such seeming ease command;
His Fingers decently advance,
And to their own sweet Music dance:
So charming, and so fine the whole,
As though each Finger had a Soul,
And ready Wit, so fluently
TO express it self in Harmony.
Thus Sages speak, and with due Grace,
Give to each Word its proper place.
But Music speaks such wondrous Sense,
Such lofty Strains of Eloquence:
No words its Meaning can contain,
One Note the other must explain.
The Request.
I.
FOR Heavens sake, Madam, let me crave,
That you my dying Heart would save!
For other Remedies are all in vain,
Vain as my Love, unequal to my Pain.
II.
Often by Disdain, often by Despair,
I tried to overcome my Care;
But, ah! the Wound too tender was for these,
And did require some gentler Remedies.
III.
Then pensively I went to one,
That wondrous Cures in Love had done,
Who knew what to prescribe for each Disease,
And how to give a hopeless Lover ease.
IV.
My Heart I showed him, told my Grief,
And begged for Love's sake some Relief:
Then he with pity moved, told me, that I
Must to my Wound this costly Balm apply.
V.
Go to the fair One speedily,
And from her beg a hearty Sigh;
Then ask a dimpled Smile, and briny Tear,
All which into a Mystic Salve prepare:
VI.
And gently do the Balsam pour
Into each Gash and bleeding Pore.
And this, with Faith and ardent Prayers to Love,
May heal your Wound, and deadly Pain remove.
VII.
Then cruel fair One don't deny
To give me one poor parting Sigh;
A Smile too, and a pitying Tear bestow;
What Love denies, at least let Mercy do.
Masking her self when she smiled.
SO when the Sun with his Meridian Light,
Too fiercely darts upon our feeble Sight;
We thank the officious Cloud, by whose kind aid
We view his Glory, lessened in a shade.
For Constacy. A Song.
I.
THus to a lovely youthful Swain,
That long had sighed for many a Nymph in vain,
Experienced Damon did complain.
II.
Alas! you can no Pleasure prove,
Whilst thus you wander in your Love,
And wantonly over all the Valleys rove.
III.
Fix then the Aim of your Desire,
And to some one fair Nymph aspire;
Tho Chaste, shell melt with constant Fire.
Primitive Love.
I.
O That we could the Golden Age retrieve!
That Scene of purest Innocence:
Then might I ask, and she consenting give
My constant Love a recompense.
II.
When all gave ear to Nature's kind advice,
Their Love was simple as their Dress;
No long delays the Lovers used, no forced disguise,
But glori'd in their Nakedness.
III.
No precious Time in idle Courtship spent;
The Youth looked kindly on the Dame,
And she too thought it far more innocent
To own, than to conceal her Flame.
IV.
Each Virgin gay, like our great Parent Earth,
Grew pregnant without tedious Art,
When Seeds of Love with such an easy Birth,
Sprung up in every tender Heart.
V.
New uncouth ways to Love and Death we find,
Ah! fruitless Curiosity;
When both by wiser Nature were designed
Man's Blessing, not his Misery.
On the Eleventh Verse of the Second Chapter of Ecclesiastes.
Then I looked on all the works that my hands had wrought, and on the labor
that I had labored to do, and behold all was vanity and vexation of spirit;
and there was no profit under the sun.


ARE these the Effects? Is this then all I gain
In recompense for all my tedious Pain?
Have I for this toiled out a tiresome Age,
And played the Drudge upon this busy Stage?
Is my expected Bliss but Misery?
And all my Labor studi'd Vanity?
Honor and Wealth I always did disdain,
But never dreamed my Learning too was vain!
Many a silent Night and lonesome Day,
In quest of Knowledge have I thrown away:
Far, wondrous far I cast my curious Eye
Back on past Ages of Antiquity;
Much of our Predecessors had I read;
Was well acquainted with the mighty Dead.
Deep into Nature's Secrets did I pry,
Solved her dark Riddles; often have I told her why
The drudging and laborious Sun
Does round his Annual Circle run,
How to this Globe of Earth he does convey
Alternately the Course of Night and Day;
Here I make bold to contradict the Ancient Mythology; for I never saw the Sun
and Moon any way else related than as Brother and Sister in the Greek and Latin
Poets.
How Is Concubine the Moon brings to his Bed,
By constant Change a Monthly Maidenhead;
How all their bright innum'rous Progeny
Keep their due Order in the vaulted Sky,
The Younger crouding up the Galaxy.
Then did I cast my Eyes on things below,
Learnt why the Ocean's Waves should ebb and flow;
And for what noble End, that glorious Use
The Almighty did the vast ^^^iathan produce.
The Nature of each vari^us ^lant I found,
Knew well each Flow'r^^at be^utifies the Ground.
With care I searched the Earth's (...) pregnant Womb,
Saw how the inliven'^ Seeds to nature come;
And how bright P^^ebus with ^ gilded Ray,
Turned into pre^^^us Oar the ^ordid Clay;
In short, whatever was in the reach of Man,
All that I knew, and is all that but vain?
No! it is but Vanity in a high degree,
But trifling, foolish Curiosity;
And lo, the end thereof is Misery!
From all my Folly this sad truth I know,
What ignorantly we call Bliss below,
Is certainly a Curse, by Heaven designed
To punish insolent pragmatical Mankind.
Wealth, Power, Honor, Knowledge; what are these?
Mere childish Toys, that the Infant-Soul may please;
But when she does reflect, and let in Day,
The trifling Phantoms dwindle quite away;
Straight the Chimera's vanish, swift they fly,
Like empty Clouds before bright Reason's Eye.
For Riches, when considered, are but Cares,
And Powers high Throne is tossed with constant Fears;
Fame's but a Bubble, swelled with the Breath of Man,
Dashed by an adverse Blast to Naught again.
Knowledge; -- oh that's the greatest Curse of all!
Of mortal Plagues the grand Original:
None climb the fatal Tree without a fall.
In vain, alas! we build our Babel high;
In vain from Seas of Ignorance we fly;
For with a scornful smile just Heaven looks down,
Strikes the learned Builders with Confusion.
As Life to Death inevitably flows,
So all our Knowledge terminates in Woes.
Well then -- upon the whole what do we see
Beneath the Cope of Heaven, but Vanity?
What is this Miscellany Scene of Life,
Crowded with such variety of Grief?
It Is all one jarring heap of Misery,
Which the first Chaos did but Typify.
THE Cure of Love. A POEM.

Virginibus Puerisque canto.
Hor. Ode 1. Lib. 3. THE CURE of LOVE.
WHAT Naso, Love's great Prophet and his Slave,
To Rome in smooth harmonious Verses gave,
In British Numbers (that abruptly flow
As Albion's Streams down craggy Mountains do)
Lo, I attempt. And thou propitious Muse,
That did the wondrous Secret first infuse
Into his Breast, vouchsafe now to inspire
My youthful Song with the same heavenly Fire.
Say what may tame the impetuous force of Love;
What powerful Charm the smiling Ill remove.
Say how the Captive Youth himself may free,
And dying Maid regain her Liberty;
Or how the untainted, ever it be too late,
May arm himself against a Lover's fate.
But now, methinks, the fair Ones of our Isle
Mock my vain Labor with a scornful Smile.
It Is true indeed, such powerful Charms they have,
As would the most averse to Love inslave;
Make the cold Hermit glow with inward Fire,
And in his Cell transporting Joys desire.
More finished Beauties never were designed
By Painter's Pencil, or rich Poet's Mind;
So deeply skilled in the enchanting Arts
Of kindling Love, and captivating Hearts.
Not that I would their Empire quite destroy,
Or take from Beauty all its promised Joy:
I only would suppress its Tyranny,
And have it conquer without Cruelty.
Beauty should like a blazing Comet rise,
Excite our Wonder, and attract our Eyes;
But then its Luster never should dispense
Over every Heart a baneful Influence.
It grieves me when I see the unwary Young,
By Nature formed all healthy, gay, and strong,
Nourish a Viper in their tortured Breast,
Which with incessant Gnawings break their Rest;
See the fresh Roses from their Cheeks decay,
And all their youthful Vigor pine away.
Nay, the most daring, most Heroic Mind,
Entangled in Love's Snares too often we find:
Whether it is caused by that more sprightly Heat,
That does his boiling Spirits animate;
Or whether Cupid takes more Pride to inslave
The generous Souls and Courage of the Brave.
When therefore the first Symptoms in your Breast
Begin your wonted Quiet to molest,
When Infant-sighs, like Unfledged winds, begin
With gentle Breath to kindle Fire within;
When springing warmth around your Heart does play,
And a new Motion through your Blood convey;
Then straight the Undermining-Foe surprise,
And quell him, e're he can have time to rise.
Destroy the shapeless Embrio, e're it be
Endu'd with Form and full Maturity.
Call sober Reason timely to your Aid,
And rest not till you have the Spirit laid.
Had this been done by the Phoenician Queen,
Aeneas never had her Ruin been.
But whilst she with her Sister does debate,
And with her Husband's Shades expostulate,
Her growing Passions like thick Mists arise.
Delude her Soul, and dance before her Eyes.
See, now she is lost, bewildered in her way;
She takes no Sleep by Night, nor Rest by Day;
But thinks it tedious vital Air to Breathe,
And there appears no present Ease but Death;
Death in the form of Love, all over Fire,
Is what her raging Fury does require,
Where Life and Love together may expire.
But if by thoughtless Inadvertency,
The first and best Occasion you pass by,
And the Disease has taken now firm hold
Of all within, and grown by use more bold:
'Twill cost you then much Diligence and Art
To ease the Throbbings of your sickly Heart.
By slow degrees you must your Peace secure;
And time, which made the Wound, must bring the Cure.
Stop not your Tide of Love with sudden force,
But for a while give way unto its Course:
For Rage resisted does unruly grow,
And scorns beneath the servile Yoke to bow*
Often have I seen a Flood, expanded wide,
Over down-hill Meads with even Waters glide;
When with a Mound if we but urge its stay,
Proudly it swells, and sweeps all clean away.
Give then the Reins, if fierce your Passion prove;
Nor with cool Reason combat burning Love;
Like disagreeing Elements they jar,
When e're they meet, proclaiming open War.
Wait then a fitter opportunity,
And in due time these Remedies apply.
Of all those Ills, that from unlucky Fate
Have power the strongest Souls to emasculate,
None worse than slothful Ease, which to avoid,
Intent on Business, keep your self employed;
Business! the greatest Enemy to Love:
Business! that does all wanton Thoughts remove;
But Oil the Flame, and Fuel feeds the Fire,
And Laziness increases fond Desire.
Since then the World affords variety,
Your self to some diverting Task apply.
If that your Soul be filled with Martial Rage,
And boldly dares in the open Field engage,
Oh! leave your Mistress, and your Native Soil,
And in bright Arms sustain Heroic Toil;
Inflamed with Honor to the Camp be gone,
And follow where great Nassau leads you on.
There on the dusty Plain with Labor sweat,
Patient of Winter's Cold, and Summer's Heat;
For Englands Peace undauntedly advance,
And teach Subjection to Aspiring France.
Oh! who would think of amorous foolish Toys,
Amidst the heat of Fight and Warlike Noise!
When the fierce Steed does from his Eyes dart Fire,
And from his furious Nostrils smoke expire!
When rattling Drums and ecchoing Trumpets sound,
Rouse Courage up, and baser Fears confound.
The Tempest past, appears fair Victory
Like Venus, rising from a stormy Sea:
On the English Standard see she does alight,
And gladly fixes there her doubtful I light.
Io Britania, Io Poean sing!
Whole Groves of Verdan Laurel hither bring,
Crown thy brave Youth, and thy victorious King*
But if you dread the War's tempestuous Breath,
And care not for the bloody Trade of Death;
Perhaps ingenious Curiosity
May tempt you over the Limits of our Sea;
Since wisest Men by foreign Converse find
Their Knowledge, and their Manners too, refined,
By reading Men they sounder Learning gain,
Than those, who musty Volumes entertain.
Besides, what Satisfaction it is, to see
The Monuments of famed Antiquity!
Here a vast Pyramid (through roiling Years,
Free from the injurious hand of Time) appears:
Inscribed with Antique Characters, to tell
What mighty Monarch raised the Miracle:
Deep in the Earth its firm Foundation lies,
Its Head does seem to prop the impending Skies*
Who could but view with Wonder and Delight,
The most stupendous Babel's impious Height!
Or huge Colossus, whose Gigantick Stride
Pressed down the aspiring Rocks, and awed the impetuous Tide!
Each day affords new Objects to the Eye,
Delighting Fancy with variety:
New Earth appears, suspended in new Skies,
And different Stars in different Countries rise.
The change of Scenes sets off the tedious Play,
And takes the dull Fatigue of Life away.
But you perhaps may think the Advice severe,
Not suiting with a dying Lover's Care.
I must confess, from what one loves, to part,
Would almost break the most obdurate Heart;
But yet at first some Pain you must endure;
A sore Disease demands no easy Cure.
You must tug hard before you break the Chain,
That does the freedom of your Soul restrain;
For Love will thousand fair Pretenses make,
And for your stay will all occasions take;
The Weather's bad, the Wind is very high;
Who knows what dangers in the Sea may lie?
Your very Feet will treacherous to you prove,
Unwilling from the Threshold to remove;
And now at parting, the expiring Flame
Will larger grow --
But break the Enchantment with a firm resolve,
And Sampson-like the slavish Ties dissolve.
When going, turn not back your longing Eyes
On the fair Object, which your Heart does prize,
For in a farewel-glance strong Magic lies.
Though the relenting Dame should kinder prove,
And promise to reward your suffering Love;
Nay, though she beat her snowy Breasts, and spread her Arms,
And practice all the cunning Sexes Charms,
Regard her not; though Virgins Tears (they say)
Have power the Rage of Tigers to allay.
Alas, despairing Circe! all thy Art
And powerful Magic could not keep the Heart
Of wise Ulysses; deaf to all thy Cries,
He quits the Shore, and ploughs the watery Skies.
Oh! whither (said she) whither would so fast?
Why from these eager Arms do make such haste?
Stay but one moment -- and I Will charm the Seas,
And by my skill the outrageous Winds appease.
But rather trust to the tempestuous Main,
Then undergo a Lover's racking Pain:
And though there is dread in every yawning Wave,
Yet raging Flames not half their Mercy have;
Nor Lightning, darted by an angry Jove,
Has power of scorching like the Fire of Love.
But if Affairs of greater weight demand,
You should not leave your Home or Native Land;
Within the Circuit of this Isle there are
Employments may divert a Lover's care.
Some to the famed Augusta's Inns withdraw,
Delighted with the Knowledge of the Law;
It Is fine to learn the Rules of Equity,
And study Justice most impartially;
To plead the Orphan's Cause with Eloquence,
And right the Tears of injured Innocence.
But if your Soul to Wisdom does aspire,
And universal Knowledge you desire;
To venerable Cham's learned Streams resort*
Where Phoebus with the Sacred Nine keeps Court.
There within peaceful College-walls reside,
Forget that e're you served a Woman's Pride,
Or vainly for a haughty Beauty sighed.
Here no Intriegues of busy Love are known,
No foolish Cares molest the studious Gown.
All Nature's Works, and Nature's Deity,
Employ our Thoughts and Curiosity.
How very pleasant, Learning, are thy ways!
Much lighter than a Crown are Wreaths of Bays.
But here take care of Charming Poetry;
For if your Mind be not from Passion free,
The Muses softning Language will increase
The Dying-rage, and nourish the Disease.
Avoid the inspired Cowley's amorous Lines,
And read not easy Waller's gentle Rhymes:
From Dryden's Moving-Tragedies abstain,
And Lee's and Otway's more pathetick Strain.
But above all things, you should never choose
To write, or tamper with a Lovesick Muse;
She Will lead you out to Groves and purling Streams,
And entertain your Fancy with gay Theams.
Most Poets are by some strange Destiny
Condemned to Love, as well as Poverty.
If then your Genius bent, should lead you on
To visit the clear Streams of Helicon;
Stifle the Flame at first, or else, like Love,
By kind Indulgence 'twill more vigorous prove.
Perhaps in Rural Sports you would spend your Days,
Preferring Quiet to the City's Noise:
The Country most agreeing Past-time yields,
When the gay Spring paints over the smiling Fields,
Or when rough Winter, envious of their Pride,
With chilling Snow does all their Glories hide.
The Woods, the Meadows, and the Crystal Streams,
For every Season have their proper Gains.
To chase the Forest-Deer affords delight,
And with swift Dogs to urge their swifter Flight;
What brave, what manlike Music is there found,
When Hills, and ecchoing Valleys do resound
With the loud Op'nings of a deep-mouthed Hound!
They that have followed this diverting Game,
Were never troubled with a Cupid's Flame:
For rough Hypolitus never felt Love's Fire;
Diana knew no fond unchaste Desire;
The Virgin Daphne from Apollo runs,
And with disdain his fierce Embraces shuns;
The God pursues, and in his longing Arms
A Laurel clasps, instead of Beauty's Charms.
But now my Muse refresh thy weari'd flight,
And take a view, so pleasing to thy sight!
So grateful to thy self! so innocent!
So full of solid Pleasure, true Content!
Of Paradise's lovely Bosom sing,
And what Diversions fertile Gardens bring,
Inamel'd by the curious hand of Spring.
When Heaven its Image did in Man express,
To make his Life complete with Happiness,
Fair Eden then it added to his store;
So great the Gift, that it could give no more.
With daily care to Cultivate the Earth,
To watch the pretty Flowers fragrant Birth,
To shade 'em from the scorching Eye of day,
And with refrshing Water make 'em gay;
In time to prune the too-luxuriant Vine,
Round the tall Elm her spreading Arms to twine,
When Autumn comes, her burdened Boughs to ease,
And from the Grape its Racy Juice to squeeze:
These are Employments may divert your Pain,
And all your wonted Liberty regain.
Your Garden love, of that your Mistress make,
And every Flower for a Beauty take;
Court 'em each morn, when they their Sweets disclose,
And ravish Kisses from the blushing Rose;
How fresh its Color! naturally Fair!
Its Breath divine, perfumes the ambient Air!
But here one Caution take, else lingering Love
Will never from your anxious Breast remove:
If pleasant Walks, and private Grottoes, made
To cool the raging Dog-stars heat with shade,
Add to your Gardens costly Ornament,
And seem to be so full of sweet Content;
Shun their alluring Flatteries, for there
Black Melancholy dwells, and deep Despair,
Love's direful Furies. Oh! you're quite undone,
If they accost you thoughtful and alone!
From Solitude, when tired with Labor, fly;
And seek Diversion from good Company.
When Time draws on, that weary Mortals steep
Their fainting Spirits in refreshing Sleep,
Repair not to your Bed before the Nod,
And drowsy Summons of the Midnight God:
Within the Curtains are a numerous Train
Of Thoughts, that rack a wakeful Lover's Brain.
When fair Aurora smiles on the Eastern Skies,
Shake off your Sloth, and from your Pillow rise;
Nor basking on your Bed at Noonday lie,
For busy Cupid then stands laughing by,
And with a thousand wanton gay Desires.
Revives the Flame, and blows the dying Fires.
What has been said already may release
Your Mind perhaps, and by degrees give ease.
But if your Passion does so highly rage,
That no Diversion can the Heat assuage;
Look on your Mistress with a Critick's Eye,
And narrowly into her Failings pry;
Whether kind Nature does to her impart
Her Charms, or if she borrows them from Art.
But yet suppose all Graces should combine
To make your Lady's outward Form divine;
Think what unseemly Passions may control
The hidden Temper of her inmost Soul.
Few can the fair One's Inclinations see,
Till Hymen's Torch reveal the Mystery.
And oh! that Man, the stately Lord of all,
Should down before a gaudy outside fall!
Reverse of Nature! shall I whine and sigh,
And for a faithless senseless Woman dye?
With Arguments like these be resolute,
And sly insinuating Love confute.
But now when to unty the Knot you come,
Let it not be in Heat and Anger done,
But in a mild and gentle Calmness part;
For Rage but shows the Anguish of your Heart.
And if you grieve, be sure your Grief beguile,
And clear your Countenance with a seeming Smile.
O Antony! had thou this cunning known,
And not thy Weakness to a Woman shown!
By brave Ventidius see the Enchantments broke,
The General throws off his Servile Yoke;
Well-mounted now the Veterane Troops he heads,
And fired with Courage to the Battle leads.
But see, cursed Fate! -- The Charming Queen appears,
Graceful in Sorrow, beautiful in Tears:
Oh, my loved Lord, (said she) my Antony!
Why from your Cleopatra do you fly?
Are you so bent to follow loud Alarms?
Sure War could never boast of Beauty's Charms!
Are these soft Arms too weak to keep you here?
Or has my Fondness made you so severe?
Go then. -- At that his conquered Courage reels,
And panting Heart pathetick Motion feels;
Stern Mars must to the Suit of Venus yield,
And for her Bosom leave the dusty Field.
All the fair Sex have learnt that Eloquence,
To make themselves appear all Innocence:
When e're they please, their Eyes dissolve in Tears,
And wash away the jealous Lover's fears.
And now you think your Mind is disengaged
From that fierce Passion that within it raged.
Though all things seem well settled in a Peace,
And all Intestine Broils and Discords cease;
Of a Relapse amidst this Calm beware;
'Twill make your State more desperate by far.
If the Disease return, you may despair
Of perfect Health, no Physic can repair
A second Breach; then with due Caution arm
Against the Invasion of so great a harm.
Keep always out of sight, avoid the place
Which your fair Foe does with her Presence grace;
For Love will through the Eye its entrance find,
Into the dark Recesses of the Mind.
No pledges of your former Vows detain,
But to the Virgin send 'em back again.
Burn all your kinder Letters from the Dame,
For every Line will your Desire inflame.
On Pleasures past you must not ruminate,
Lest that to more should Appetite create;
Love, like habitual Sin, will fainter grow,
The longer you refuse its Joys to know.
Yet all this Counsel is of little use,
And hardly can a perfect Cure produce
Without a Diet too, which to rehearse,
Shall be the last performance of my Verse:
Deny your self of all luxurious Food,
That with prolifick Heat inflames the Blood;
The Body pampered will at length control
The chaster Resolutions of the Soul.
Taste not the tempting Liquor of the Vine,
But bid adieu to the free Joys of Wine.
What though it sparkle in the Glass, and smile?
Like faithless Woman it destroys the while!
To quench your Thirst, and Nature satisfy,
To Crystal Streams and living Fountains fly.
Some vainly think that they may use a mean,
And not from Bacchus totally abstain;
But (credit me) the sober Glass will prove
The most prevailing Argument to Love:
For he, that with immod'rate Wine destroys
His Vigor, seldom thinks of Beauty's Joys.
A little moves, but too much slakes Desire,
As Piles of Fuel quite put out the Fire.
My Task is ended, and methinks I see
The awakened Youth shake off their Lethargy
Of Love. And now each Lady wonders whence
Proceeds the cause of this indifference;
Consults her Glass, and questions if her Face
Retains its Features, and its wonted Grace.
Love's Empire falls, no more do we invoke
His Deity, and make his Altars smoke.
See what tormenting Fears disturb the Boy,
What racking Cares the vanquished God annoy:
With folded Arms he stands, and drooping Wings,
And wide his Bow and useless Arrows flings
No fev'rish Sighs now swell the Virgin's Breasts,
No dire Despair the lovely Youth molests;
But both from powerful Verse receive their mutual Rest.
So the young Prophet with his tuneful Lyre,
Did raging Saul with gentle Thoughts inspire;
The angry Demon listened as he played,
Grew wondrous mild, and his soft Notes obeyed.
A REFLECTION ON OUR Modern Poesy. AN ESSAY.

The Second Edition.

-- Fuit haec Sapientia quondam,
Publica privatis secernere, sacra profanis;
Concubitu prohibere vago; dare jura maritis;
Oppida moliri; legis incidere ligno;
Sic honor and nomen divinis Vatibus atque
Carminibus venit. --
Hor. de Art Poet. TO MY Honored Friend and School-Fellow, Mr. A. OWEN.
SIR,
THE way of Dedicating now most in fashion, seems to me to stand in as great
need of a Reformation, as does our Poetry. For, as we take nothing to be True
and Genuine Poetry, but what is Light* Frothy, and has a wanton Air throughout
it; so the generality seem to stand persuaded, That an Epistle Dedicatory loses
its End quite, if not stuffed up with gross and open Flattery, sufficient to
call a Blush into any modest Reader's Cheek. But here it is a hard matter to
judge Whether the Impudence of the Author* or the Vanity of the Patron (who
believes all true that is said of him) does contribute most to carry on this
notorious piece of Folly

Now, (Sir) though our Early Friendship, and Intimate Acquaintance was the
Reason that prevaild most upon me in presenting this small Essay to You; yet,
to speak truth, there was another Motive too, which made me the more desirous
of it, and that was merely upon the account of running counter to the
generality of Dedicating Poets, to try if a particular Example might have any
small Influence in correcting the Poetical License they take upon such like
occasions: For here I was satisfied that I might come off without the least
flattering Glance, with one who (though young) has Experience enough to
understand, that Personal Respect is not to be estimated by the fine
Complements and Flourishes of a Fanciful Pen. And for my part, I think if our
Poets go on at their old Rate but a little longer, we shall be apt to interpret
Epistles of this sort as we do Dreams, by the contrary.

The great Scandal that Poetry has of late been subject to, together with the
respect I always had for it, gave occasion for the following Reflection. For as
I was considering how much this Art was esteemed amongst our Forefathers, and
how Venerable, nay, almost Sacre^, the Name of a Poet was then; Surely (thought
I) the Former Honor, and the Present Disgrace the Muses lie under, could never
depend on the different Capricio's of two diverse Ages, but there must be some
more reasonable Ground for this matter, which if once discovered, will give a
very fair opportunity of restoring Verse to its Primitive Dignity. Some there
are who suspect, That the want of Genius in our Age has given Poetry this
deadly Wound: But they will soon find their Mistake, if (laying aside the blind
Veneration we have for Antiquity) they compare the Ancients and Moderns in any
sort of Poetry, excepting the Epic. So that we must seek out for some other
Cause more probable than the former. And what others may spy, I know not; but I
think the great Difference lies here, That Poetry is now no longer the Fountain
of Wisdom, the School of Virtue; it is no longer a fit Trainer up of Youth, a
Bridler of the Passions and exorbitant Desires: But on the contrary, he is
reckoned the Ablest Poet, that is most dextrous at conjuring up these Evil
Spirits, to disturb the Calm and Quiet of the Soul. And this (if I mistake not)
is that which has deformed so great a Beauty, and cast an Odium on that most
excellent Art, which was once the Pride of Conquerors, and Envy of Philosophers.

What I have transiently remarked in the following Verses, will I doubt not) be
disliked by many of our Rhiming Sparks; for take but the Liberty of Writing
Immodestly from 'em, and you have quite dismounted them off their Pegasus; they
are quite Tongue-tid; it is with them, as Horace says it was (...) the Reign of
the old Comedy, Chorusque, Turpiter, obticuit, sublato jure nocendi.

What I have said against Love upon the Stage, I would not have apprehended so,
as if I would have that Passion quite exploded; for I think it one of the
fittest Passions for Poetry, and capable of very great Ornaments; but then I
would have it very nicely and delicately handled; and what might give the least
Offense to the severest Modesty, always cast in Shades; for it is then only
that this Passion is not to be allowed, when it goes beyond its bounds; and
that is, when the Poet's Strokes are too bold, and his Colors too glaring.

I was told (which I my self afterward found to be true) that a great Part of
my Design was already performd in the Preface to Prince Arthur. However, that
did not trouble me in the least, for I was very glad to see my self of the same
Opinion with so eminent an Author; since I had laid a Rude Draught of my
Reflection the last Summer, which I then showed several of my Acquaintaince.
However, the World may think this a Sham, and I am very willing to be thought
indebted to so creditable a Person for what I have said.

I shall make no Apology for the Tediousness of my Epistle, since you are too
often guilty of the Contrary Vice in writing to

your Real Friend, and very Humble Servant.

A REFLECTION ON OUR Modern Poesy.
IF Poets be (as they pretend) inspired
With Heat Divine, and Sacred Fury fired;
How comes it then, that each Poetic Piece
Gives nowadays Encouragement to Vice?
Each Line (or else we think it will not do)
With wanton Love, and Flames unchaste must glow.
That scribbling Fop that would a Poet be,
First bids adieu to all his Modesty:
Invokes not Phoebus, but the God of Wine;
Crowns his hot Temples with the inspiring Vine:
The Glass (Dull Sot!) must make his Thoughts subblime,
For in a Sober Mood what Bard can Rhyme?
But sure Great Homer got not thus a Name:
Nor Greater Maro his Eternal Fame;
Maro whose lofty Soul now animates
Our Blackmore's Breast with true Poetic Heats!
Thrice Happy Man! whom too indulgent Fate
Resolves to make, in spite of Envy, Great;
Thou never had writ, had William never fought;
The Hero's Deeds enlarge the Poet's Thought.
These Muses chaste as Vestal Virgins are;
Stately, not Proud; Reserved, but not Severe.
The Flame that through their Works so bright does shine,
Was surely kindled by a Breath Divine,
No Cupid's Puff, nor Frenzy caused by Wine.
But that our Follies we at large may see,
Let Us closely view our Modern Poesy.
What place so much debauched as our Stage,
Which next the Pulpit, should correct the Age?
What anciently Devotion did begin,
Is now converted to the use of Sin;
And on our Theaters we daily see
Vice triumph over dejected Honesty.
But happy Athens! whose more decent Stage
Was moraliz'd by Sophocles wise Rage:
Who e're he did pretend to Poetry,
Searched the grave Precepts of Philosophy;
Hence 'twas he taught those Truths he learnt before,
And practiced those sound Rules his Writings bore:
He doubly charmed his Modest Audience,
By good Example, and wise Eloquence.
Philosophers far short in teaching came;
Their Naked Virtues maimed were, and lame.
The Pearl they represented to the View
Unpolished, as It naturally grew.
But Poets put a Gloss on it, made it shine;
Then 'twas embraced as somewhat more Divine.
What er'st to the Rude People seemed severe,
In soothing Verse all-charming does appear;
Gently it glides into their ravished Minds,
For Pleasure still an easy Entrance finds;
Few can the Suit, of what they like, remove,
Or be averse, when Beauty wooe's, from Love.
And now what weak Excuse, what vain Pretense,
Can Christian Poets bring in their Defense?
Shall Heathens teach by Nature's Glowworm Light,
What they neglect when Faith directs their Sight?
Or are our Palates vitiated, and we
Can relish naught but Vice in Poetry?
Must They indulge the Ill, and sooth our Fate,
Or else prevent it e're it be too late?
If We are led away by strong Desire,
Must They add Fuel to the raging Fire?
Not so did Orpheus; but with tuneful Voice,
Taught Salvage Men that followed Nature's Choice,
That wildly strayed in shrubby Brakes all day,
And herded with the common Beasts of Prey;
Even These he taught their Passions to subdue,
Through Error's Maze to follow Reason's Clue,
Their Mossy Caves and Grotto's to forsake,
And fitter Dwellings for themselves to make;
And that in Learning Greece did so aspire,
Was wholly owing to his Sacred Lyre.
Then let some Champion for the Muses rise.
Who dares be obstinately Good, and Wise;
Let him but turn the Stream of Helicon,
And make It in its proper Channel run.
He needs not fear his Bays shall withered lie;
Or that We shall despise his Poetry;
For genuine Virtue, when adorned with Grace,
Has surely Charms so lovely in her Face,
We all should Vice forsake, and only Her embrace.
But He must then take a peculiar care,
No Wanton Scenes have in his Poem share:
A Plot and Moral let him choose, that is free
From all the Allays of fulsome Ribaldry,
Which in our Modern Plays too often we see.
Let not Immodest Love debauch his Rhimes;
Which to excuse, our Poets oftentimes
Reply, They bring such Objects into view,
To make us loathe those Passions we pursue.
But this is False; They always raise Desire,
Fan by degrees in us Unlawful Fire:
For here the Poet's Warm Expressions move
The Vnthinking Herd such Passions to approve.
The Wiser Ancients did this Fault decline,
And made their Tragedies more Masculine.
Each nervous Scene some Manlike Virtue taught,
Untainted with the least Immodest Thought.
Their Heroes were more Stern, and fit for Wars,
Scorned whining Love, and Jealousy's fond Jars:
Not but that soft Humanity did rest,
And generous Love in great Aeneas Breast.
But Ours, more fit for Cupid's Childish Arms,
Are Women's Fools, and Captives to their Charms.
The Stage, which Terror should with Pity move,
With us is wholly taken up in Love.
In this (as well as other Follies) we
Too much affect the Gallick Levity:
Thence our Romantic Heroes first we drew,
Unlike our Arthur, and our William too*
In vain it is, that Heaven's Wise Providence
Has by a Sea divided us from Fance,
If still their Fopperies we Imitate,
And their vain Customs to our Isle Translate.
We want not Genius for the Buskin Muse,
Would Britain but all Foreign Aids refuse;
Nor of our Language need we to complain;
It Is Pompous, Bold, and fits the Tragic Strain.
Our Poets too that have wrote Comedy,
Have Wit enough, but fail in Modesty.
They still forget the End for which they write,
And mind not Profit, so they can Delight.
But he that wears the Sock, should carefully
Purge all his Writings from Obscenity:
And though the Age's Humor he expose,
Yet no Unseemly things should be disclose.
His Plays should be a Glass, where All might see
How to correct their own Deformity.
Terence in this might justly claim the Bays,
Whose Lively Draughts succeeding Ages praise:
By him were taught upon the Roman Stage,
The Duties proper to each State and Age.
But here with us, in a whole Comedy
One Virtuous Character you cannot see:
Rather than want for Vice, we choose to draw
Strange Monsters, contrary to Nature's Law.
True Innocence the Poet ridicules,
And Honesty reserves for none but Fools.
His Gentleman he makes a Wondrous Sage,
That Is deeply read in Vices of the Age:
His Mistress and his Clothes employ his Care;
Of all his Thoughts Religion claims no share.
The Damsel too, ever Fifteen Years expire,
Is all over Love, and Wanton with Desire;
Then strait all Filial Duty's laid aside,
And naught will please her, but the Name of Bride:
Which once obtaind, does soon uneasy prove,
And still she trafficks in Forbidden Love;
Her Husband's Kisses lose their wonted Taste,
And stolen Pleasures always Relish best.
These Characters with Wit and Language joined,
Must needs Instruct a Youthful Readers Mind!
These Ills, though great, yet are but light, to Crimes
Whose Horror shall amaze succeeding Times!
See now the Poet's Bold in Mischief grown,
And turns to Ridicule the Sacred Gown!
The Grave Divine a Laughing Stock he makes;
And the firm Basis of Religion shakes:
High Heaven's Ambassador within the Scene
Lays by his awful and becoming Mien,
And takes upon him there (O Monstrous sight!)
To play the Pimp, or Canting Hypocrite.
Happy the Heathens! whose Impiety
Never mounted yet to such a high degree.
Due Reverence to their Priests was always shown,
And Distance kept from the Mysterious Gown.
Tiresias to the Thebans was a God,
Him they consulted, and revered his Nod.
But hear, O hear! how mighty was the Hand
Of Moses, and how powerful the Wand,
That wrought such Wonders in Proud Pharoah's Land!
Revolve the amazing History, and learn
The Dignity of Priesthood to discern.
Satyr, which was a wholesome Remedy,
Prescribed to cure a People's Malady,
When prudently applied does Good produce;
But as all Goods are subject to abuse,
So this of Late no Public Cure intends,
But only serves to black Malicious ends.
We dip our Pens in Gall when ever we Write,
And all our Inspiration is but Spite.
But Horace, free from Prejudice and Rage,
With Honey did the smarting Sting assuage:
His Satyr grinn'd not as it bit, but Smiled,
Both Cured the Reader, and his Care beguiled.
Had Dryden never Writ, then Britain still
Had with Despair admired the Roman Skill:
But now, by his Example taught, we know,
That Finest Satyr in our Soil will grow.
Our Songs and Little Poems, for most part,
Have much degraded the Poetic Art.
On Trifling Subjects all our Wit we drain;
Which little Credit to the Writer gain.
When these small Rills united in one Stream,
Would serve to buoy up some more weighty Theme,
And over the World spread wide the Poet's Fame.
Turn over every Late Miscellany,
You hardly can a Modest Copy see.
Broad Words, and fulsome Thoughts we now admit,
And praise the Nauseous Author for a Wit.
But sure by Men of Sense and Quality,
The Wretch is Pitied for his Ribaldry;
And here the Petty Scribler's Blasted Bays
Is propt, but by the silly Vulgar's Praise.
But if you would Respect or Love express,
And show your Passion in a Comely Dress,
Learn how from Courtly Waller's Deathless Lays
Chastely to Love, with Modesty to Praise;
Whose Pen never did the Virgins Cheek with Red,
Nor friendly Ears with undue Praise misled.
Were I designed by Kinder Destiny
To Court a Muse, and follow Poetry,
My early care should be to raise a Fence
To guard All-Pure my Native Innocence;
My Infant Genius should strict Virtue learn,
And Modesty should be its great Concern:
Nor Popular Applause, nor hopes of Gain,
The unspotted Brightness of the Pearl should stain.
For Reputation, if it once be lost,
Can never be regained by any Cost;
It Is Bright like Crystal, -- but it is Brittle too,
Easy to Crack, but hard for to Renew.
Then closely would I watch m' untainted Muse,
That She no Meretricious Arts should use;
No Unbecoming Words, nor Wanton Sound,
The Niceness of her Virgin Ear should wound.
So should my Writings with the Eneid strive,
And my Chaste Verse to endless Ages live:
Whilst all my Readers say, Lo! This is He,
That from long Bondage set the Muses Free.
FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
MOrtality. Page 1 A Morning Thought, occasioned by the early Singing of a
Lark. ibid. Seeing Her with her Hair loose. 2 The Rose. Anacreon Ode 5th, Lib.
1. 3 Lying at her Feet. 4 Melancholy. ibid. To Mr T -- playing a Voluntary. 6
The Request. 7 Masking her self when she smiled. 8 For Constancy. A Song. ibid.
Primitive Love. 9 On the Eleventh Verse of the Second Chapter of Ecclesiastes.
10 The Cure of Love. 15 A Reflection on our Modern Poesy. 35
BOOKS Printed for, and are to be Sold by W. Rogers.
MAusolaeum: A Funeral Poem on our late Gracious Sovereign Queen Mary of
Blessed Memory: Folio. An Elegy on his Grace, John late Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury. Folio. Both by N. Tate, Servant to His Majesty. Ovid's
Metamorphosis, Translated by Several Hands. Vol. 1. Containing the first Five
Books. Octavo The Original, Nature, and Immortality of the Soul. A Poem. With
an Introduction concerning Humane Knowledge. Written by Sir John Davies,
Attorney General to Q. Elizabeth. With a Prefatory Account concerning the
Author and Poem. Octavo. Mr. Dryden 's Translation of C. A. Du Fresnoy 's Art
of Painting, with Remarks. Translated into English. Together with an Original
Preface, containing a Parallel betwixt Painting and Poetry: As also an Account
of the most Eminent Painters. Quarto. The Knowledge of Medals, or Instructions
for those who apply themselves to the Study of Medals, both Ancient and Modern;
from the French. Octavo.

